Somebody said, "Let us have a motto," and everybody agreed that they should have one, but nobody could coin that which was accep­table to all who lived with Baba in the Manzil-e-Meem during 1922. A special session of their parliament, the gutta, almost ended in rejecting nearly a dozen suggestions brought forward by those in the group who had spent hours in hunting out the happiest phrase that was likely to live in history. 
It was Baba who, on the spur of the moment, provided the motto that was at once acclaimed with one voice as the most suitable one, and thus Mastery in Servitude was adopt­ed there and then. 
The present machine age is about to collapse. Those who believe to be living in a civilized world are apt to feel shocked or to smile at this suggestion according to relative temperaments. But the antique though ever present fact remains staring us through age-old relics, that just at such 
moments, when the world at large begins to take pride in feeling itself civilized enough, that the so imagined pinnacle of its pride tumbles down all of a sudden for one reason or the other. A civilization which is built with ages of industry, sacrifice and pioneering is nullified in no time once it outgrows its humanity, and for all its railways and radios, the world is, today, poor indeed in this respect. 
The best example is the present servitude of the masses. It is worse than slavery. It is slavery en masse, The slaves of the old world were treated honestly in as much as they were plainly called slaves. The "civilized" slaves these days, although supposed to be ruling themselves, are treated worse than slaves in one shape or the other and under one pretext or another. 
The worst aspect of modern servitude is that, while in the days of darkness, the life of many slaves was not worth an ordinary insurance risk, in the present all effulgence of electricity, millions have been massacred, are being killed and may die a dog's death at the mere signal from a handful of masters in the world for whom mastery lies in mastery alone. 

From its very birth, civilization has been rightly ashamed of slavery. But in course of time, slavery in spirit has lost its sting. It is more out of shame than for itself that slavery is abhorred. It required the moral courage of the Arabian Prophet to confront the otherwise necessary evil and provide means for its amel­ioration. But the mechanized civilization marched on mechani­cally, multiplying slavery in the spirit, although it succeeded in practically wiping slavery off the map of the world in its naked form. 
Like a beacon in the raging sea of servitude all around, this new definition of mastery has inspired many to try to live up to the ideal by following its originator who can and doth interpret words into actions. 
Masters often use a few words in summing up the aim and object of life both here and in the hereafter. 
The spiritual nightingale of Shiraz Khawja Hafiz sums up the song of life in just two words: 
Peace in both the worlds 
lies in but two words: 
Forgive all enemies, 
forget no single friend. 
It is the depth of an idea that tells and the breadth of vision that speaks, provided of course there is the spirit that responds and the will that works. Otherwise sages speak for ages and scriptures scream in volumes, but truth remains beyond words for those who search for it in words alone. 
Mastery in Servitude, originally meant to be the motto of the mandali (Baba's group), is now rightly looked upon as also the motto of the Master, since it has now been amply demonstrated through deeds to represent completely his philo­sophy and teachings. 
Fine words can be framed by many, but few can also live upto the idealistic phraseology. Masters invariably do what they say. 
When Hazrat Mansoor Bin Hallaj thought it fit to assert his unquestionable Godhood, he lived right unto death with his assertion, in spite of the fact that his own Self in the shape of so many other selves in the imaginary domain of duality opposed him to the length of the hangman's noose. 

The Arabian Prophet did not only deprecate worldly possessions, but he remained a commoner to the end, instead of proclaiming himself the King of the new Muslim world which could have been his merely for the asking. The King of kings that he was, he perferred to milk the camels, and loved to play the cobbler, and went about in tattered garments in keeping with his simple teachings which have now de­generated into a wrangle of worth­less words divorced from the true spirit and timely actions that were once upon a time collectively known as Islam. 
Servitude is not only meant to be the means of achieving Mastery, but the culmination of Mastery itself lies in true servitude. Real service is that which does not seek anything in return in any shape or form, and as such a selfless Master alone can render such completely pure selfless service. 
The Lord Christ did not gain any­thing by way of personal advance­ment or enlightenment when he was divinely pleased to allow himself to be nailed on the Cross. He was as much God-conscious before as after the crucifixion. The crucifixion was purely a selfless service for the whole of the mankind, and neither for himself, nor, as the Christians fondly believe, for the Christians alone. This hopeless and meaning­less claim over a Master in return of mere lip-service is not restricted to the Christians alone. Unfortunately every other man in all religions considers a particular Master as a monopoly of divine mercy and guidance for himself. The present day Mussalmans are the greatest defaulters in this respect in adopting the Mulla-made belief of heaven for the Muslims and hell for the rest, in spite of the two most outstanding factors of Islam that God is the God of all beings and Mohamed is the mercy for the whole of the universe! 
This is the inevitable result of losing grip over the substance and running after shadows by playing with words 

instead of doing things. Shorn of actions, mere words change the whole perspective of any religion and philosophy. A false sense of importance and un-importance creeps into words, and actions and deeds get into the background. In short duality gets the upper-hand and Divinity is unconsciously held at a discount. The Infinite is brought down to the level of the finite, perhaps with the mistaken but good intentioned idea, to show that it is entirely different and aloof from the latter, but with such bad result that people jump at each other's throat on un-important and trivial grounds. The fact is that although everything finite is nothing, the Infinite does in­clude the finite as such, and the nothing is to be appreciated in its spiritual significance to avoid sacrificing true principles for the sake of forms and formalities. 
Just as in the case of a world-renowned personality, the announ­cement about an attack of cold spells big news setting telegraph lines and radio wave-lengths to throb with life, small things and big things, permanent achive­
ments and momentary actions all leave a life-long impression on the mind when one has an eye on the Infinite. Had I been a painter, in­stead of penning these lines, I would have reproduced a remarkable picture of Mastery in Servitude which flits across my eyes now and then for the last fifteen years in all its details. 
It is a fine landscape of rich green fields and brownish little hills, here and there kissing the bright blue sky overhead. A rivulet or two are danc­ing through the waving grass, singing a peaceful tune which is so characteristic of such rustic surroun­dings. Amidst this vast expanse of smiling nature the only sign of animation is a few birds gliding peacefully across the blushing hori­zon, and two silent figures following each other in single file. As if to make it more realistic of the present age, science has laid down a pair of shining railway lines winding through the heart of the scene with telegraph wires hanging parallel in deep curves between slender looking poles at regular intervals. The pair is going along down the footpath touching 

the railway lines. The leading figure in a flowing robe of white appears every inch to be the Master with his golden curls playing about his shoulders aflame with the rays of the setting sun. As could be expected under the circumstances the follower is keeping pace with the leader at a respectable distance, but the astounding feature of the whole picture is an oblong cane basket about 3' x 2' which forms the focal point, in as much as it is the Master who is carrying it on his head with as much ease and grace as a king would carry the crown. 
But for the five feet ten of the healthy robust follower, the slender but commanding figure of the leader could well have been imagined to be a loving father leading his little child, bearing all the burden himself. The fact was that the leader of this ever living scene was Baba, and the follower the writer. Let me tell you how did this happen and where this remark­able tramp led us to. 
Once while going to Bombay via Manmad we found a III class com­partment all to ourselves at the Manmad junction. For all the fat salaries that the supervising staff gets in the Great Indian Peninsula Railway, none took care to warn passengers that the carriage in question was meant to be detached at Deolali, a military station enroute to Bombay. The result was a great confusion. We were compelled to change at this station where the mail train stops but for a few minutes. The rest of the III class carriages in the train were too crowded to accomodate our party of five and a small mountain of luggage that we had had to carry, because our final destination was the northwest frontier of India. 
It was decided to split the party and squeeze in as best as we could in different carriages with whatever luggage each could carry. I followed Baba into a II class com­partment with the cane basket just before the signal went down and the guard blew his warning whistle. Baba asked me to look out if the others had succeeded in getting in. I saw them still struggling at the far end near the engine. Hearing this Baba decided that we should leave the train, and I had to jump after Baba 

out of the moving train, hugging the cane basket as best as I could. 
When the platform was clear of the train, we found to our surprise that all the others had somehow managed to get into the train at the last moment, leaving the two of us there to provide a "curiosity shop" for the lot of pozuls (inquisitive people) there. 
After ascertaining that the next train was due after some hours, and being a slow one was stopping at all stations, it was decided to reach the next way-side little station of Lahvit about, five miles from here. 
A tonga (horse-drawn vehicle) was engaged to carry us there. The driver, in spite of his profuse assurances to the contrary, somehow lost his way and landed us in no man's land; but luckily he gave it up near a point from where we could easily locate the railway lines. Instead of taking the man to task, Baba asked me to tip him besides paying the full fare agreed, 

. 
and we began to walk alongside the railway lines. Throughout the distance of about two miles Baba insisted upon sharing the burden of the blessed cane basket with me equally, and we carried it on our heads by turns every few furlongs. 
Arriving at Lahvit we found that the weather-beaten old man of a station-master there was an ardent devotee of Hazrat Sai Baba, very eager to have a contact with the Master. 
Mastery in Servitude has in this way been practically demonstrated on numerous such occasions when Baba invariably insists upon doing all that he expects his followers to do, however lowly or hard the task may be. During those days about the year 1926, when all who lived with him were under orders to work the chakki (stone rollers) daily for a couple of hours, Baba did the same regularly, and produced an equal share with the others of fine flour every day. 
