
Shri Meher Baba passes in and out these cities escorted by his own people like a king. No one has to know that He is the king of life in Resurrec­tion—that He is the furious strife of this world—that conscious creates the force, the show in opposition; that He is here to manifest the One-in All-Reaction in life that is Love Divine. He appears to us who follow Him everywhere, as the Dictator of Life in disguise as man of life. 
Christ-life He is in practice. 
He professes the divine exe­cutive resurrection in life in spirit and that is the New Dispensation. 
One afternoon in Benares, Baba invited a few of us to join Him on a particular errant to bless someone, who is called a saint...so He said. That day I saw Shri Meher Baba's divine work in Spark-Reaction. Divine Life in human form as every man, He walks along the Holy River to give new Impetus to Faith. 
"They are good in faith—but they owe fear, which makes them attached to the pheno­mena of the water that has to heal. I shall bestow the Divine Grace to them in Me. I shall show them the courage to abandon forms, ceremonies and to react in direct way in Me.” This Baba stating, He passes the lines of the pilgrims of all castes who in self-sacri­fice and devotion pay their last savings to the intermediary that performs the rites of their creeds. He looks at the many lying about, all the seekers of good fortune, the unworthy bad, those who have to do worse than others, and the good ones who have not always been good; and the many that one has to pity— men, women, children of all tribes. 
He has come to strengthen their spirit condition. 
The shrewd ones who take advantage of the simple ones —these He marks, knowingly smiling with love—as bad. 

He does the cure unseen. No one sees Him stab those He wants to forsake. 
Suddenly Baba steps in front of a man. That man, to us, appeared like any other man, but, when Baba takes the initiative to react, it is for some important reason. In fact, He orders one of us to give to that man four annas. The alms was handed, but the real Giver remained unseen. Baba in His light manner explains, that the man had been promoted from the first to the second plane on the Path. This significant inter­lude was short. 
A sudden change in rhythm of His pace makes it almost impossible for us to follow. When we reach the outer end of the river bank, Baba in His quick manner points to a boat. We see a sort of floating platfrom anchored near the shore. The scene that we were able to discover was simple— plain. A man, appearing gigantic in stature, was seated in attitude of worship in the centre of a barren place holding communion with God. A few younger men and also a woman were joining in the silent ritual. The stately 
figure seemed to permeate the secular Calm that is yearned in lives in self-sacrifice in self-denial of life and "I". "This man is revered as a saint by many," stated Baba. 
The Self in realizing self-sacrifice is one-in-all effort throughout the life of one like this saint, who that day had to be promoted. Baba, seeing our interest arid the natural curi­osity, said further: "There is one of my own agents stationed at either end of the river. Go to this one and mention to him my name." This order was given to one of the men disciples who accompany the Master on such occasions. 
Baba standing motionless on the same spot wherefrom He has sent us to deliver the holy order reclining in I Infinite— He performs the divine Act in Grace. We realized the motion of the divine "I" when standing in front of the holy man as the name of good fortune was experienced in reaction unfa­thomable. Three times the name that gave in vibration the strong impetus to realize deeper, higher, was uttered by the saint. He repeated "Meher, Meher, Meher "—Baba's name. 

    "What is the impetus to grow in Me who in 'I' Infinite is reaction infinite? It is divine experience. It is divine realiz­ation. It is the making of the 'I', as Infinite real order of my direct will. That man is the agent in Benares that in the plane in which I reacted him is my own direct winning will. Those who in my own direct order react, I, here, now owe to promote. This man I have promoted to the high plane when in 'I' Infinite is no other 'I' but Me— as the direct order—which I do react." This when we had left the boat and reached Him again, He said in His all-knowing way as the ever reacting Mind Infinite." What did it to you to see the saintly man? " He asked us. "The saintly man is you, and the unconscious ordinary one is never more than the un­conscious ordinary life, that you will in one or the other way realize. I see the difference. You see the difference the show of ‘I’. I see in one-in-all-Life Infinite, the show in One." This was His answer to His own question. That day whatever we had experienced, it was the eternal cycle in life in martyrdom in self-delusion,  that in this or that intuition-state in knowing, in seeing, in feeling is One-in-All and the same, till one is in One-in-All in Him who is the Divine Intuition accepted. The strife is the old experience. It is the romance with God. To see Him here in His Real Form as divine Man is to find in us Him real, To see in us Him as life reaction in intuition infinite, in life in self-delusion in mind, 
is a dream.
 To have in our life here, now—Him as Truth personi­fied, to know in life in Experi­ence that He is One—is to have the Realization-order in us of Him in life infinite as real experience. We realized in that excursion along the shore of the holy Ganges the extreme benefit of Him, here, alive and Human—giving, doing, react­ing in all, in any that what we have to realize. 
That what we have to realize is One-All-Life that in consci­ous reaction is One as "I" as Love in Life in practice of its own expiation infinite. In love in Him will we realize in Being, Truth as Existence—as Him as the One—Him the Beloved One—the "I" divine. He says, "Love Me and sow in Me— ‘One', by being in love with love in on in and all in life. you have to give and react and Love and give in, live and love do in practice in life as you as in Me. I in all am One as the human creature. Truth—as 'I' as the Beloved Love and sing in, love life's One that you have to realize in use in praise in loving Me in all you and realizing in you, in any." 

