

Some      who      came     had     been	acknowledge    Him  as   their   supreme seekers      for      many     years,     and	spiritual   Guide.   Other more  sophis-­‐ previously    met    other    well-­‐known	ticated   souls   wrapped  in  orthodox teachers    from    the    East,  and   were	creeds   were   brought   to   Him in  the greatly     influenced     by    them.    Still	enthusiasm    of   our   early   efforts   to many  difficulties  remained   for  them,	spread    the    good    news    of    Baba's and  in  seeking  Baba's  Grace they had	coming     to     all     and    sundry.    The to   acknowledge   how    He   awakened	inevitable    result    followed   in   some the  inner  life  still  more  within  them,	such    cases    after    the   first   passing enabling them  to face up  with greater	impressions    of    meeting    Baba;    for power  to  the  difficulties  in   life.  This	then    the    power    of    the  old   creed happened    to    several    who  did   not	would  reassert  itself  and   darken  the accept     Him     as     Avatar   or    even	mind  again,  obliterating  for  the   time
being the effect of meeting Baba. But
His inner work would proceed steadily in such a case, bringing out a clear, deeper  appreciation of the spiritual Truths behind the person's creed, cutting away much that was unessential and misleading in its creed and ceremonial.
This change was not always confined to the party who met Baba, but penetrated through  Him to the friends and relatives who knew nothing of Baba, harmonizing and transforming their lives, after even fifty years  of discord.
Some instances of bodily  healing occurred through contact with Baba at the office—on those two occasions when He met the people  in  large  numbers.  One little lad had had, at least, ten serious operations and could not stand alone. His parents were determined that no more oper-­‐ ations should be  done  and  brought him to Baba for His blessing without thought of any physical results. Baba  embraced the child, and  then  gave  me  simple instructions to see the  lad on a certain date in about nine months, which  happened  to  be  his birthday, unknown  to  me.  I was to take him a rose  leaf  for  him to eat.
 
The child felt His presence, and on reaching home for the  first time stretched out his lower limbs, by their own power, on his little bed, and slept soundly for some hours. His improvement continued gradually, so that he was able to go to school, play  with his own ball and mount the stairs to his bedroom by himself. This improvement has been permanent.
There was another  case  where the parents had been greatly troubled with their son's ill health and weakness which did not yield to the best medical treatment. Baba gave them His Grace at Mary's request, and they went home and touched the lad, thinking of Baba as He had told them. They assured me afterwards that they had done what they were told and really touched the child, although they said they had forgotten they had done it and the details of the incident. The child's condition gradually improved, and after eight months, we learned from them, that he was playing rugby, and his physical and mental development were above the average.  The curious point here  is that they
had forgotten Baba's original instruction to touch the boy and to think of Him while doing so, but nevertheless they were sure they had done so. Evidently the cure did not impress their minds, and they did not associate the subsequent change in his  health to Baba's inner working.
How clearly Baba saw the past was illustrated in my own case by His harmonizing me with an old friend whom I had not seen for nearly thirty years. We had  parted on principle owing to religious differences. After returning from Baba I just happened to catch the eye of my old friend on a very crowded railway  station.  Something passed between us in that look, bridging the gulf of thirty years in a moment. Subsequently I  got into closer touch to tell my old friend of Baba who gave His  Grace to both of us, clearing away the differences upon which our original friendship had been wrecked, and giving deep meaning to all that was happening now.
Thus did Baba clear away the
 

sanskaras that remained from that earlier period of my life.
Baba received details of our activities at the office by weekly letter, which we knew He used as a link between us and Himself, and in His replies He would often send individual messages to correspondents and  callers. These messages, channels of his Grace, were marvels of gentle-­‐ ness, love, understanding and power. They witnessed to Baba's contact with each separate  person apart from what had been conveyed in our London  letters, so individual was their character for each distinct person con-­‐ cerned.
The opportunity to live with Baba in India and meet his devotees there and watch His work so closely has brought me nearer to the inner object of His work for me, to realize and experience the Divine Love which He ever radiates. That  Love which He forever pours forth to all is beyond words to convey,  and involves complete surrender of all else, so that no obstacle may remain to impede the outflow of His Grace.
