





Spiritual Anecdote 

By DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Once there was a famous King, by name Janak, who was also a Sadguru. Outwardly he was a great monarch. He never let it be known generally that he was a Sadguru. Only those who could recognize him inwardly knew him to be such. 

In his kingdom there was a man who had an intense spiritual longing. He was as restless as a fish out of water. He could not sleep, he could not eat, he had grown very lean; but still he had an ego. He attempted to see Janak, but the guard would not let him. The King, however, heard him, and asked from inside the palace, "What do you want?" The man told the guard, "Tell the King that I am so and so, and I have come to see him." Again Janak heard him from inside, and called out to him: "Come when you have left yourself behind." The man could not understand. He repeated who he was, and why he had come. Once more Janak replied: "Leave yourself behind and then come. " Still he could not understand. Finally he fell at the feet of the guard and asked him to explain the meaning of the King 's mes≠sage. The watchman explained it: "Drop your 'I'," he said, "throw it off and say, 'your slave has come to see you.' Keep your 'I' aside. " This the man did, and the King allowed him to enter. He found Janak fully attired in his royal robes, with his crown upon his head, seated with his courtiers at a state banquet with much merry-making go≠ing on about him. The man who, be≠cause of his spiritual advancement, had gone for so long without food and sleep, thought, at the sight of the luxury about him, 'How can Janak who is dwelling in the midst of such enjoy≠ment be a Sadguru? ' Janak, who read his thoughts, ordered a cup of milk and filled it to the brim. Then he called his ministers and ordered that throughout the town a great celebration should be held, with music, drums and merry≠making everywhere. After this, he 



'  

called for two executioners. When they  on. But the man s mind was so concen≠ 

arrived, he turned to the man, handed  trated on the cup of milk that he did not  

him the cup full of milk, and ordered  know what was going on around him.  

him to carry it through the town with- He did not even hear the noise.  

out spilling any of it. "If you spill as much as one drop, " he said, "these two  Finally, they returned to the palace. The King asked the executioners if the  

executioners will cut your head off at " man had spilled any milk. They said  

once, and he ordered the executioners  not. Then he asked the man, "What did  

accordingly.  you see all around you?" The man  

So they set out, the man with the cup of milk, and the two executioners, one  replied, "I saw nothing, I heard nothing, I saw only the cup of milk. " Then the  

on his right and one on his left.  King said, "So am I all the time en- 

Through the town they made their way, and all around them there were crowds  grossed in the Infinite, and pay no attention to outer things. " 

of people celebrating. Bands were play≠     Later the King became known as a  

ing, drums were beating, people were  Sadguru and made this man realize  

shouting, noises of all kinds were going  God. The King, who was a Sadguru,  

revealed himself as a Sadguru.  

.