

Human	Personality
VI
THE  STATUS  OF  THE  FINITE    INDIVIDUAL
BY   DR.   C.D.  DESHMUKH,   M.A., Ph.D.

“Unity appears as plurality to those who are intoxicated with the wine of egoism.”
 


THE problem of the nature of human personality is compli- cated by the fact that although from the point of view of bodily existence it has, like other organisms, an appearance of independence and completeness, from the point of view of his consciousness or his values, his life is seen to be woven with the social and the cosmic life very intimately. It is, therefore, neces- sary to study his nature in the light of the interpretation of his experience.
 
—Shri  Meher Baba

very nature entirely incommun- icable to any one else. But from the logical and axiological point of view, the meaning and significance of his experience are communicable. And this raises the question as to whether human beings can be adequately described as walled monads with- out any windows.
It is characteristic of plural- istic philosophies to look upon  the finite individual as a unique existent characterised by imperv- iousness, independence and privacy, and    to    insist    upon    the   full
 
His  experience  is,  in a very	recognition of the reality and the important   sense,  shareable  by	importance  of  his   freedom  of others. It is true  that considered	will and of his initiative. It is not from  the  psychological point of	uncommon that in this endeavour view,    as    constituting    some	to preserve the status of the finite
events in the  mental life-history	individual  in  his  own right the of  an  individual the experience	implications    of   the   concrete of  a  man  is  strictly  private  to	contents
himself and is, as such, in its
 

 
of the life of the individual tend  to be ignored. But a careful examination of the contents  of  the life of the finite individual brings out the intertwining of his life with that of others. It is, therefore, necessary to consider not only the "linear" but also the ''lateral'' life of the finite individual, in order to estimate  his real status, and "to make at least as much of  co-existent  being as of continuous succes- sion".*
But when we examine critical- ly the ''lateral'' life of the finite individual, it is found that the apparent isolation, which  seems to belong to him is not only illusory but  deceptive.  The simple fact of the sharing of  ideas, purposes or experiences would be quite impossible in a world where the individuals did not, in some way, enter as elements into a genuine whole.
The inter-relation implied in any sharing of  "spiritual  goods'' is not primarily a matter of external and mechanical contact. It is not possible to explain such sharing on any purely physio- logical or naturalistic theory. Sharing is a unique phenomenon rooted in the structure of the world of spiritual membership. All the paraphernalia of psycho-physical apparatus,  (the   stimulus,   lang-
 
uage, nervous impulses, images, etc.) is at best only a part of the conditions of there being any such sharing in "spiritual goods''. 'I'he most important condtion of there being any such sharing by the different finite individuals is that they should not only have a similar spiritual nature and a common. world, but that they must also be parts of a spiritual unity which includes them in itself.
Even apart from the implica- tions of sharing, the further examination of the nature of the purposes which they share also points to the same conclusion.  We have seen that the supreme good of the finite individual is a common good and as such is essentially trans-subjective and that in religious consciousness,  the finite individual, recognises his fundamental unity with that infinite spiritual reality which includes all other finite individuals. Not only does the  finite  individual recognise his unity  with this reality but he has, as against it, no personal claims and finds that his own reality and worth are, in some sense, derived from it. It is, therefore, necessary to determine the precise sense in which we may recognise the independence of the finite indivi- dual.
Owing to this impersonality
 

 
and universality of the content of human consciousness, some monistic philosophies regard the separateness of selves as unreal and unimportant. In Bosanquet's well-known Gifford Lectures, for instance, the numerical difference between the various finite individuals is regarded as being rooted in their "impotence" only. The "impotence" which keeps them apart is apparent in the self-contradictory and fragmentary nature of their experience; but these features are, at least theoretically, capable of being removed. But for this "impotence," then, they might ''coalesce'' with each other or even with the Absolute, which is the only perfect Individual. He, therefore, insists upon "the precarious and superficial nature of their distinctness'' and holds that ''there are indications that something deeper and more real underlies them."* It is only  in their formal aspect that they are distinct and different; but from the point of view of the "concrete content of their experience there is in them a growing tendency to come to share a common experience. It is, therefore, not very helpful to attach too much importance to the distinctness of their bodies and interpret their nature on the
 
analogy of "things". As pointed out by Prof. Hocking, their existence is spent not behind the walls of their bodies, "fraternising with chemical processes," but in front of them in a common world. ''They, therefore, meet and  share their identity not through ineffable depths (alone) but here through the foregrounds of common expereience.”†
It is, therefore, suggested that the finite individual is only "adjectival" to the Reality of which he is a part. By using the term "adjectival " Bosanquet does not wish to suggest a relationship similar to that of the attributes to an existent. But what he means to indicate by that phrase is that the inter- relatedness of the finite individuals is not an instance of "co-ordinate relatedness" between existents which might be what they are even prior to this relation, but on the contrary implies "the plain fact" of "super and subordinnate reals".‡ The finite individual dues not exist in his own right when taken in abstraction from the superior whole of which he is a part. He is, therefore, "adjectival" to that whole.
As against such a monistic view which tends to swallow the reality of the finite individual
 

 
pluralism tries to defend the independence of the finite individual. It takes its stand on the fact that the  content of experience of the finite individual is as much of an abstraction when taken apart from the centre in which "it comes alive" as this centre would be when taken apart from the contents. Besides, it is a mistake to look upon this centre as a kind of passive receptacle into which the content of common experience pours itself. The unity of the self is not to be looked upon as being the same kind of unity which might belong to any object of consciousness. The self exists for itself and, when viewed from within, has an inalienable integrity, in spite of the fragmentary character of its contents. The finite individual is an active centre of consciouences with a genuine  freedom and creativeness with regard to his acts, for which he is in a real sense responsible. He is not merely a vehicle  of the superior life of the Absolute, but has a will of his own. The numerical difference of the finite individuals, therefore, is not a merely superficial feature of the
We thus get two types of theories about the nature and the
 
status of the finite individual. The monistic trend of thought leads to a form of Absolutism in which the reality of the Absolute leaves no room for any independent reality and status of the finite individual. The pluralistic trend of thought leads to a world in which the finite individuals have relative indepen- dence of existence and action as against each other and to a certain extent even against God. ''Our wills are ours to make them thine." But this offer itself is taken to imply the prior possession of our wills by ourselves.
Both pluralism and monism appeal to the same experiences of life and take these as their starting point. For plural- ism the existence of a common purpose and the common good, the facts of love and self-sacrifice, and the religious experience of God's all-embra-cing love and reality imply a real differentiation of the Absolute into a number of finite centres. But for Monism such experiences indicate the existence of the Absolute in which all the mundane differences vanish. The monistic philosophy is a nearer ap-proach to the Truth because it bases its conclusion upon the higher and the deeper experiences in which the disap-pearance of the ego clarifies perception.


 
On the one hand, it seems that the individual has real freedom which consists in his genuine authorship of his own acts. Things do not simply happen in him in spite of him and, so to say, without his active co-operation. He is a  genuine centre of initiative, action and creative response to his natural, social and spiritual environment. He is not a "telephone wire" along which the Absolute acts or thinks.¶ In this sense he is a real agent with his own relative independence. The system of distinct and separate centres of finite experience is from this point of view not a merely accidental or superficial feature of the world of manifestation but is the very condition of its being what it is.
But, on the other hand, the freedom or independence of the finite individual is not absolute and unqualified but only relative and limited. Even in the domain of duality, he would be nothing apart from the social and the spiritual environment, which gives him the very substance of his own life. His activity does not exist in a kind of vacuum but is conditioned by his natural and spiritual environment. He gains his active life only in and through the participation of an objective content which, in some sense,
 
is independent of him. He is reduced to the bare potentiality of activity unless he is confronted  with a determinate situation requiring a specific response or solution. Not only is his action thus conditioned by his circumstances, but the very nature of his action is, so to say, dictated by them.  Nor can we escape from this position  on the ground that his concrete action is always a resultant of the nature of the circumstances as well as his own nature (including his ideals); for his own nature (including his ideals) is in a sense ultimately not a creation of his  own, but is rooted in the nature of the universe. Thus even within the domain. of duality the individual must be looked upon as being a part and parcel of the greater whole which is the universe.
From the point of view of the Unmanifest there is, of course, no multiplicity. We cannot carry our personalities or even  the personality of God into the Eternal. It is not possible to look upon them as eternal differentiations of the unmanifest. The psychic basis of the appearance of multiplicity is  the ignorance constituted by egoism. The multiplicity of the different individuals seems to be an inalienable feature of the world of manifestation. But multiplicity cannot be
 

 
present in reality, in its eternal aspect, as distinguished from its temporal aspect, which is charactcrstic of the world of manifestation.
However, within the universe, the conscious bearers of  values  are		only		individuals.		The individuals—the human and the non-human,  the  subhuman  and the	super-human—are		in		a genuine sense the  end  or  the raison d'etre of the universe. Mere conservation of abstract  values,  as such, is inconceivable apart from the centres of consciousness. It is only when they are realised   in concrete and actual existents, who are capable of appreciating them,		that	they	even	become values at all. It is true that the individual, as he actually is, may be very imperfect; but what he actually is now is only a fragment
 
of his possibilities. And the worth of the life of the individual is to be estimated by the entire span of his life and the final attainment of his endeavours, which is conscious Godhood.
The perfect individuals are them- selves, the end of the universe. But as seen in the last article, the ultimate purpose of the life of the individual is the realisation of the Eternal Reality which embraces in the unity of its life all the individuals. This position does not in any way involve any contradiction, and it does not involve moving in a circle. It only brings out the Reciprocity which is fundamental to the structure of the manifested Universe, although in the Truth there is neither reciprocity nor duality        but        only        unity.
