 
How often it is told in the New Testament that Christ stayed in a home of one of His disciples! The life of a Master in the very nature of his high calling is one of transient while on this earth. The love in the heart of a disciple and the spiritual need of humanity are two of the strongest drawing powers that bring a Master towards a longing soul.
    Shri Meher Baba’s next place of stay on our uncharted journey was in a home of one of his disciples at Jubbulpore (Central Provinces). The arrangements were impromptu as all thought that the Master would remain for a considerable period in Hyderabad (Nizam's Dominions) and none knew the route of the six months' motor tour, except that Baba with his disciples would visit the spiritual centres of India. Yet with a shortest notice everything was made ready at Jubbulpore by a disciple there 


for an indefinite stay of such a large number—for "with love all things are possible".    On the way north a stopover was made at Nagpur, also in the home of a disciple. Those who chanced to hear of the Master's presence in Nagpur came for his darshana to lay their heads on his sacred feet. This hallowed custom in the East dates from time immemorial, just as the age-old blessing by the laying on of hands was known in the Near East long before the advent of Christ. The act of blessing which was adopted by the Western Churches signifies two meanings in one, "the bestowal of divine favour" and "to make happy", while darshana implies the absolving of one's sanskaras or impressions which veil the mind and keep the soul from seeing God. If the presence of a Sadguru or Perfect Master is known in 
*ContinuefroMa193issue

India, his Grace is eagerly sought, and during the short stay at Nagpur a crowd gathered outside the gate of the compound for the chance of Baba's darshana. In this regard. Baba has once said: "Many come but very rare are the real lovers of God." Yet this implies that they do exist. An incident did not escape my notice that while Baba was receiving some devotees who had known him for years, a constantly repeated sacred chant which always ended in Meher Baba ki Jai was being sung by some ascetic outside the gate. Even during the night before, the distant sound of this refrain had come to our ears through the stillness of the night air. As our party left for Jubbulpore, Baba gave all the assembled crowd an oppor­tunity to take his darshana, and, as a tall ascetic with very bright eyes came forward, I recognized him as the same one whom I had seen on the day of Babas birthday at Ahmednagar. On this occasion last February one of the disciples from Nagpur told me then that she had just spoken to this man, as he was the one who had come to the door of her family home at Nagpur where Baba had been staying two months before, but had arrived after the Master's departure. When told that Baba had left for Ahmednagar, the tall ascetic stood transfixed. Hours afterwards she chanced to glance out of her window and she saw the same man, who looked as if he had searched years and missed the chance of his life-time, stand­ing in the same spot with tears in his eyes. Then after two months she chanced again to see him in distant "Meherabad", and upon questioning the ascetic informed her that he had left Nagpur the very day of being told of the Master's departure, on foot, for Ahmed­nagar, arriving, as good fortune would have it, on the very day of Baba’s birthday. The asce­tic's face clearly showed the bliss of the encounter with the Master. To those who truly seek with steadfastness, patience and a song in the heart, how small a moment it takes in the presence of a Master to rea­lize the divine reality which has been the search of years! 
From the 19th December 1938 to the 15th January 1939 Baba remained in Jubbulpore, and it might be termed a period of outward activity. The house of the magistrate, together with another house directly near, where the Master and his disciples were staying, became at that time a spiritual centre, for so many came and went as to a place of pilgrimage. Two entire days Baba devoted to giving public darshana. During this period the seeds seemed to take root for the Master's Universal Ashram. The initial actuality came about in a surprising way, that is, to all except the Master himself. At the close of the year Baba and his group went to Mandia, 60 miles from Jubbulpore, for three days sojourn. It was austentively an outing in the hills at this place where two holy rivers meet. Although a small place, it has the ancient tradition of being the exact centre of India, and has always been known for its spiritual atmosphere. The fact that one of the holy rivers of this continent, the Narbada, takes its source there and that great sages and rishis in the past had their seats of meditation by its banks, has made it a place of annual pilgrimage for the masses, and any day of 

the year one can see ascetics and other pilgrims along the waters edge. During the short stay of our party the entire town seemed to become aware of the presence of Shri Meher Baba, and many sought a meeting with him. Those who came declared that since long they have waited for one such as he, for they believed that some day a great soul would again have his abode there. Several days after our return to Mandla from Jubbulpore a motor drove up to the second bungalow, in which it happened that Baba was not himself residing, and a gentleman declaring himself from Mandla was insistent to see the Master. The disciples suggested that it was too late at night. The stranger returned early the next morning, and urged that he had important business with the Master, but still for some unaccountable reason, even then he was put off until a later hour. I cannot but believe that Baba foreknew his arrival, and it was the strength of the man's impulse that was being tested by these delays, for I remember Baba had declared before leav­ing Hyderabad that he was
going to Jubbulpore especially for one man. When meeting Baba this gentleman stated that he was absent from Mandla at the time of the visit, but that upon returning home had heard of the advent of the Master there. He was seized with the idea to present "a tract of land to Baba suitable for the Uni­versal Ashram", and hastened at once by motor to Jubbulpore. He now entreated Baba to accept the property at Mandla and to open the Spiritual Centre there. The heart impulse of sincerity always has much weight with the Master, and subsequently a gift-deed has been drawn up and plans are maturing for the buildings. The fact that this spot on the face of the earth is unheard of outside of India and will become the centre for the future universal work of the Master, makes me to think of the sentence that Baba once stated: "You wilI always find the power-house in a more isolated place, but it gives light all around—Baba is the power-house." We know that a Sadguru or Perfect Master, having continuous experience of God, draws his spiritual powers from Divinity itself, and 
transmits them to mankind.
    Through the active occupa­tions and experiences of every­day life, the constant training of Baba's disciples goes on, while at Jubbulpore as elsewhere. Rarely does the Master give what might be termed a discourse or lecture. All this the institutions and learned books of the world can give in abundance, but it is on example of life itself that Baba makes one aware of the higher values and meanings behind even the petty happenings that otherwise daily tend to obscure the vision of God. It is easy to be infused through sermons and inspira­tional talks once or twice a week and return home elevated in mind and spirit—then some­thing happens, perhaps a very small incident of mundane life which causes annoyance, and one becomes irritated or angry. One's inspired mood is spoilt, and one sinks again to the level of week-day living, waiting for the Sabbath day to again restore holier thoughts and elevate one's spirit. Under Baba's guid­ance, however, there is no let up in the training of spirituality as applied to everyday life itself. 

Christ's own way of teaching His disciples was by making the smallest happening a vital awakening to life's spiritual meanings. He drew His examples from the ordinary things which occurred along the daily path He trod, such as "a grain of mustard seeds", "a house built upon the sands" or "the lost sheep". Such a wakening to spiritual values behind the common things of life is ever the way of teaching of Masters. Their own example of perfected living on this earth was more potent than scrip­tures, the writings of which they left to others. Baba once told his disciples, making objective use of a dispute which had occurred between two persons: "All the medita­tions, yogas, concentrations do not teach what Baba teaches you through everyday living, that is, to be kind to those who ill-treat you and to love those whom you dislike. This is the highest practice of yoga. When Christ was mocked, spat upon and beaten, He did not use His powers, but He retaliated with Love. You should he glad of an opportunity to be mistreated by others, you 
should thank them for the opportunity of suffering and loving. The purpose of your being with Baba is to eliminate the ego." 
An interesting event took place at the beginning of the year 1939. Upasani Maharaj, Baba's second Master who was touring with his disciples at practically the same time in the same general directions, crossed through Jubbulpore on his return to Sakori. No meeting between these two Masters was necessary, for they are one in the realms of higher consciousness, but Maharaj sent one of his disciples to Baba's disciples with the message: "Tell Merwan that this day I passed through his house." The exact meaning of this mystical phrase is best known to Baba himself. The event, however, of the paths of the two Masters' crossing makes one ponder upon the fact that these two currents of spirituality should fuse at such a materialistic time in the world. Perhaps the period for spiritual re-ascen­dency may be near! 
The next place of our stay was Benares, one of the most
ancient of spiritual centres in this age-old land. To be with the Master under such circum­stances is indeed to wonder at one's own privilege! India I have seen before, any traveller can see India, but few can feel it, still less can perceive its spiritua1 currents or understand anything of their trend, for I believe India is the spiritual "barometer" for the world's religious currents. It was twelve years ago that I origin­ally went to Benares, that holy city where the Ganges flows, and with other passengers from a round-the-world cruise, we saw the principal places of interest. At Benares thousands upon thousands of pilgrims from every corner of India came to bathe in the sacred waters. It was a cross-section of life in its aspect of devotion—rogues wished to be absolved from their sins, and seekers wished to find God. Of all this picturesque multitude, one incident remains most vividly in my memory. It was the look in the eyes of an old woman of over eighty years, when she first saw the holy Ganges. Poverty and paralysis could not daunt her  spirit, and  her grandson, a young man, carried her on his back for four hundred miles—to fulfil her life's desire. That look of rapture, oblivious of all else save the sacred waters, was unforgettable. But was it the river itself, or perhaps had God entered her soul at that moment, who knows? Whatever it was which caused the sight of the Ganges to bring such extra­ordinary rapture to her ancient eyes, at the same time brought to my traveller's sense the knowledge that what I saw was only external—how much I was missing! I thought that if ever I did come to India again, it must be to see what to me was now unseen, yet to the earnest pilgrims was so tan­gible and real. 
My second visit to Benares just now with the Master was the fulfilment of that wish, and it has made me perceive that it is not the waters but the spiritual atmosphere of the locality. Those in the West who have stayed at Assisi (Italy) will understand some­thing of what I mean by spiritual atmosphere, for the life of St. Francis has left vibrations and a rarified purity that one actually experiences. Baba told his disciples: "What there is about Benares, or Kashi as it was earlier called, is the atmosphere of great souls. Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Christ, Shankara—all were here for a period in their lives." The spiritual history of Benares dates back at least three thousand years, probably longer, and the indelible im­prints of these founders of religions can be the greater apprehended as one proceeds along the spiritual path. Also Kabir, the great mystic and poet, drew his inspiration from these parts. 

When we were riding with Baba upon the Ganges, he seemed preoccupied with spiri­tual working. Later he remark­ed: "There never was a time when this ancient place did not have true saints. Even though the priests of all castes may be there like vultures to take materially from the pilgrims, they cannot despoil the spiri­tual atmosphere." One of his disciples inquired, "How about the believers who come in search of God and are like sheep shorn by those who are false priests? Is it better to have faith and be disillusioned, or have no faith?" Baba replied: "Any faith with the idea of Truth behind it is better than no faith at all. It is better to walk the wrong road and return to the right way, than not to walk at all. What matters spiritually is faith. When faith becomes Love, then there is no need for faith any longer." 
At either end of the ghats or steep steps leading down the waters' edge which extend for several miles, there lives today an advanced soul who for years has remained there. These "soldiers of God", as Baba calls them, are the silent sentry. The torch of spirituality is kept burning through their pure existence. They live in places almost inaccessible, and few can know them. The time has come, the Master remarked, for him to marshal these and other "soldiers of God", so that is why he personally came to contact them. Someone asked Baba: "Why, as you are a Mas­ter and they are so advanced or saints, need you trouble to contact them in person?" The Master explained: "They already know me, but it is for my Work that it is needed." 

An account of Shri Baba’s encounter with one of these saints is being told in a separate article by an eye witness, under the title, "A Stroll with the Master along the Holy Ganges". 
Buddha was the Ruler in his epoch and he resigned his throne to seek God. After many years of wandering in the jungles and mountains he reached the spiritual Goal and received Enlightenment (God­realization). It was near Benares where he gathered his first disciples and commenced his teachings. Today there is remaining at Sarnath, eight miles back from the Ganges, interesting architectural and sculptural remains of the spi­ritual centre which grew up around his abode. A gigantic stupa looms up against the sky which contains, as all Buddhistic stupas contain, a relic of the Master. This great dome-like edifice evidently was built by his disciples after his passing away. The beautiful statues of Buddha, now pre­served by the Government, all belong to a later period, for it is generally believed that the use of idols in worship came into the religion at a much 
later date. This experience of visiting the holy place in com­pany with the Master of this epoch made the scene very living and real. Baba remarked in passing: "I remember every detail." 
Our next sojourn on this spiritual journey was Agra, the city of the Taj Mahal. Our party stayed in bungalows almost in the shadow of the Taj, and could compare the tangible beauty inspired by human love against the background of Love Divine which is intangible but eternal. 
Visiting the country-side twenty miles away from Agra one day, towards the end of January, the first unusual being that we all saw in company with the Master was at Brindaban. Here several thousands of years before, the Shepherd Boy, nephew of the King, played with his cowherds, and it was he who later became the great Krishna of the Hindu religion. We went to Brindaban and Muttra seemingly to see the interesting ancient places so filled with tradition and where once a year the drama of Krishna's boyhood is re-enacted in its original settings. Although the various buildings are pro­bably reconstructed several times over, during this great length of time, no doubt they are accurate reproductions which in themselves are very old. The quaint town of Brinda­ban seems in harmony with ancient pastoral times, and even today cowherds are plentiful, while the traditional monkeys roam the streets. As we approached the place along the river where Krishna had played with his gopis, a youngish man wearing what resembled a fool's cap sat on the steps playing his flute. So sweetly he played that one was attracted to this court's jester, and the ancient "Flute Song of Krishna" i one of the most beautiful in India which he was rendering. It is said that when Krishna played his flute, all left whatever they were doing and followed him, even the cow-herds were drawn by his sweet music. The moment the man noticed Baba, he stopped his playing, and in a voice loud enough for those with the Master to hear, he said, "Here comes the Flute Player," which is the other name for Krishna. All the time we went around 

the small town, this mendicant followed Baba or ran ahead and, just around the bend of the street, we would hear his flute sounds. It was like a haunting melody. He didn't want money, he didn't want anything, and when he passed, several people smiled thinking him to be a "fool", with his dancing steps and flute. Towards the end, he seemed to become almost ecstatic, and the attendant with us thinking he was annoying us, tried to drive him away with his stick. Upon this Baba immed­iately protected the flute player and gave the attendant to under­stand that he liked it. Baba informed us that this was the man for whom he had come that day and that he was a highly evolved soul. There are "fools of God" who often take this guise, so the world will pass them by, in order to accomplish freely their spiritual work. Just before returning to the bus, extraordinary greetings, or, how to describe it, signals went on between Baba and this mendi­cant. I caught one snapshot which, if one is intuitive, one perceives the phenomena of communication exactly. What is also interesting is that 

the man's face, with the quick  and waving his flute in the  
eye of the Kodak, shows him to  most rapturous manner. Some  
have the fine features like a  old stern-faced priests standing  
coin, rather than those of the  near the temple looked at him  
so-called "fool". The rapid  scornfully, and then the conta­ 
movements of Baba's sensitive,  gion of joy was so great, that  
expressive hands speak—what  even they too smiled. This man  
they say, one can see, is per- who recognized the Master,  
fectly understood by the men- though with the name of his  
dicant through his flashing  own traditional Saviour, is now  
response. As Baba drove away  prepared and ready when the  
in the bus, we saw the ecstatic  great "Flute Player" of this age  
figure dancing on tiptop, like  calls. 
the "Pied Piper of Hamlin", 
