

AVATAR	
 †MEHER	
 †BABKJAI



Reprint -Talk Given by Mrs. Rhoda Adi Dubash at Jamshed Memorial Hall, Karachi ñ July 12, 1969. 

THE SILENT MASTER 

Meher Baba,as many of you know,is no longer in human body amidst ussince January 31st this year. Today weare celebrating, His Silence Anniver≠sary-the first since the dropping of Hisphysical body and the 44th since the commencement of His unique Silenceon July 10, 1925. For you who have come tonight to hear and know of The Silent Master, Meher Baba, I now ask the question, "why is His Silence Anniversary still being; observed, nowthat Meher Baba has dropped Hisbody? "lt is, but natural that at thisstage many of you are skeptical andyet would want to know the answer.You well remember that during His 74th Birthday celebration on February25th this year, we told you dearly thatthe Silence of Meher Baba continues and will continue until His Glorious Universal Manifestation, which will definitely replace the present passing phase of His Self-imposed Humiliationwith the breaking of His Silence anduttering THE WORD.

Today, we shall accordingly endeavor to enlighten you further on this most astounding fact which isincomprehensible and unbelievable.

Meher Baba, irrespective of HisSpiritual Statusówhatever one maytake it to beóis definitely not anordinary human being. Those of youwho have heard us before., and those of you who have read of His life, know,that from absolute normality Heascended to Perfect Super-normality ata relatively early age .. According to His repeated assertions, He is THEANCIENT ONE óTHE HIGHEST OF THE HIGH. For the last well over fortyyears, Meher Baba has carried on with His multiple activities under His ownworded "MASTERY IN SERVITUDE" and throughout His life He has alwaysbeen the supreme example. His main activity has been His Universal Workfor the benefit of humanity irrespectiveof caste, creed or country. No one knows exactly what this Universal Work has been which He has carried out in absolute silence and during periodical seclusions, culminating in the last spiritually most significantSeclusion. Soon after this last Seclusion terminated, Meher Baba dropped His physical body. HisUniversal Work and His Great Suf≠fering are evidently interconnected.Together with these, is also directlylinked His unique Silence of well over forty years. In regard to His Silence,Meher Baba has said,. "My outwardSilence is no spiritual exercise. It hasbeen undertaken and maintained for the good of others." Silence, therefore, has been His mighty spiritual weapon for His mighty Universal Work. 

The dropping of His physical body,as we have just said. was soon after His intense Universal Work which according to Meher Baba, was com≠pleted 100% to His satisfaction on July 30th, 1968. Before His very few intimateones staying day and night with Him, Meher Baba said so very recently as on May 28,1968, "Now. I will have to decide when and how to give Darshan in view of THE GREAT EVENT that is: to happen very soon.î Thus Meher Baba has pronounced the dropping of Hisphysical body as THE GREAT EVENT. Why has Meher Balla said that the incident of merely dropping His physical body is a great Event? ls not death ,a daily occurrence in life? Have not saints and sages died and even Prophetsdropped Their physical bodies? It is because, what is to happen is that which will be of a magnitude beyond the scope of human imagination and in a manner never before witnessed by humanity. And such a pronouncement has beenmade by One who is the Perfect Personification of Knowledge Infinite. In this context. we shall tell you of an identical spiritual episode, so very unique, that it can be ranked as the 'top mirade' of out age. Humanity is totallyunaware of it ,except just a few. Even an incident of such magnitude as this,. Will give you but a very faint idea, of that which IS to happen very soon. 

Gul Rukh was a beautifuI young daughter of a dignitary in Afghanistan.On the night of her marriage, she ran away ,in her wedding garments as she was not an ordinary girl who cared or craved for marriage, but who. in fact was desperately and madly in love with God. Years later in Rawalpindi, she was heard to utter "ANAL HUQ." This infuriated some military personnel to such an extent that they buried her alive and took good care to see that she was not dug out alive. Twenty five years later, the same military unit wastransferred to Poona, where to their amazement they saw the very same person, in the very same physical body, sitting absolutely unconcerned under a neem tree, hundreds of miles away from where She had been buried alive. Realizing what they had done and to whom, they bowed down to her and asked her forgiveness. Until then, she was known as 'the mad woman of the city' but thereafter, she began to be revered as a saint under the renowned name of HAZRAT BABAJAN. Years later, it was Meher Baba who revealed the fact that she was not only a saint but a QUTUBóA PERFECT MASTER of Her time. She continued to live in the same physical body for a number ofyears after that most memorable incident, until at Will, she finally dropped Her physical body at a ripe age of over 120 years. Now let us see why this Lady per∑ ormed this 'top≠miracle' of our time. The answer is, because She knewó being the Perfect Personification of Knowledge Infinite that She had to complete Her Mission of giving God-Realization to the God-Man of our ageóMeher Babaóby implanting a kiss on His forehead, and this, as we know, She did and thus completed Her Mission many years after the incident of being buried alive. 

This episode leads us to a spiritual fact of prime importance in the realm of Truth, as revealed by all Perfect Masters and Prophets of the past and about which Meher Baba has also said that the Perfect Masters, as also the Prophets, Messiahs and God-Men take human form for a definite Mission and DO NOT drop Their physical bodies until the Mission is completed by Them. The Mission includes every single activity of Theirs including the Universal Work and relates to both humanity and the Circle of disciples. So, from this unique Spiritual incident in the life of Hazrat Baba Jan, we have to ask ourselves, that if a Qutubóa Perfect Masterócould and actually did perform such a miracle for the completion of Her Mission and then dropped Her physical body, what cannot and will not Meher Baba do in His present Advent for the completion of His Mission? We repeat, according to Meher Baba, His Universal Work was completed 100% to His satis≠faction. But that does not mean that His Mission is completed. Meher Baba has amply testified to this by His declaration: "I WI LL break My Silence and Manifest when on one hand science reaches its highest level and on the other hand anti-God elements rise to their peak. Accordingly, My spiritual Manifestation will also be of The Highest. When I break My Silence, the world will be shaken into realization of WHO I AM. When I break My Silence, the impact will jolt the world out of its spiritual lethargy and will push open the hearts of all who love Me and are connected with Me. WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN I BREAK MY SILENCE, IS WHAT HAS NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE." 

The present is therefore a passing phase. The dropping of His physical body, according to Meher Baba, is the height of His silent Suffering for humanity, His Crucifixion and Humiliation. Meher Baba has thus triggered off willfully His Self-imposed Humiliation which heralds the dawn of His Glorious Manifestation. Before the occurrence of The event i.e., the dropping of His physical body, Meher Baba said, "The long expected Humiliation is near at hand. The stage of Glorification to follow My Self-imposed Humiliation WILL BE when I break My Silence with The Divine Wordó 

THE WORD." So, what we have now, is a NEW LI FE PHASE on an unprecedental scale by The Silent Master of our age. As Mr. Max Hafliger, one of the devotees ofMeher Baba from Switzerland, has said so aptly, "Meher Baba's (physical) death is an outer reality but not a closed event, rathera most important happening in a chain ofevents ..... What we have now is a 'suspense' of one phase into another, theone of His "Coming Back." .... One thing iscertain sheer patience and watching thefurther course of time is the only attitude tofollow. The suspense wiII run its courseand confirm the Godness of Baba and His Avataric function. It cannot be otherwise, because the part of Meher Baba has been to the most materialistic philosophy ofman, record of service for the good ofothers of suffering for man, of decency oflife: and since the morning is the pro≠longation and transmutation of the night asmidday is of the morning, so must time reveal the transmutation of Meher Baba's life into the future. This is a chain reaction which cannot faiI to happen, since it isboth physical and spiritual law ..... And theonly way out for us is to keep awake, to beready to further awakening to come, sureto come." 

In conclusion, that which is to hap≠pen will be of a magnitude beyond the scope of human imagination. For, from the depth of His Silence during His last stupendous Seclusion Meher Baba said, "THAT WHICH IS TO HAPPEN WILL BE SOMETHING GREAT. SOMETHING THAT HAS NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE; SOMETHING THAT WILL NOT HAPPEN AGAIN FOR BILLIONS AND BILLIONS OF YEARS." Soon thereafter Meher Baba further declared, "THAT SOMETHING GREAT WILL HAPPEN ALL OF A SUDDEN, NOT IN DEVELOPING STAGES. PEOPLE WILL GO ABOUT THEIR DAILY AFFAIRS UNAWARE TILL THE MOMENT OF ITS HAPPEN≠ING! In this memorable utterance, Meher Baba has made very clear the extent of the impact on mankind which will obviously be terrific. But in the same breath Meher Baba has assured us, "I know what I am doing and what I have to do. DON'T WORRY. BE HAPPY. I AM WITH YOU." Such an assurance Meher Baba, the Person≠ification of Divine Love, has given to mankind because He knows The Divine Role He has to play and which He will play for the redemption of mankind by His Glorious Universal Manifestation. But, when will this be is the natural question in the minds of all. And the answer we have just had in the very words of Meher Baba is, that it will be when on one hand science reaches its highest level, and on the other hand anti-God elements rise to their peak. And so, whatever is to happen and whatever mankind has to experience under the Divine Will of God, will never≠the-Iess be a Blessing for mankind who stands today on the threshold of witness-sing Universal Brotherhood and peace. This is in the offing in our very own age through the Universal Spiritual Resur≠rection by The Silent Master, Meher Baba. 

