 1 2006-5-21   Freedom is not a Present 

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to welcome, to bless, to praise 

which is our free worship 

and also the power of our day-to-day life. 

Song, silence, solidarity and spirit 

gather us now into fresh community 

and invite us to say: 

 



?
?ˆ??

?????


Naming Ceremony / Welcome of New Members
  
Sequence
  
Rain falls. I breathe. 

Sun shines. I breathe. 

News arrives. I breathe. 

Roses open. I breathe. 

Songs thrill. I breathe. 

Loss hurts. I breathe. 

Love surprises. I breathe. 

Thoughts spin. I breathe. 

Change bewilders. I breathe. 

Fear strains. I breathe. 

Joy knocks. I breathe. 

Quiet comes. I breathe. 

 
silence 

 
Lives matter. I breathe. Names proclaim. I breathe.
 All together. We breathe.  The circle of our 
larger breathes in the circle of this gathering. 

Remembering breathes. Breathing strengthens. 

We name aloud, or in silence, 

the people who hold the circle of 

this place in the hand of their lives,  

their memories, 

their joys and their sorrows. 

 
naming 

 
 2 Memory matters. Hope matters. Love matters. Poetry 
matters. Being here matters. Singing 
matters a lot. 

 
Choir Anthem
  
Readings
  
The First Reading
 comes from Walter Wink™s amazing book, The Powers 
That Be: Theology for 
a New Millennium.
 He is dealing with a controversial New Testament t
ext that you often either 
find criticized, ridiculed or ignored in both moder
n conservative pop religious life, and also by 
many liberal folks like Unitarian Universalists. Wi
nk is trying to put the brief passage he quotes 
from Jesus into a social light. I have culled this 
from a much longer reading. 
 
Jesus says in Matthew 5:39: ?If anyone strikes you 
on the right cheek, turn the other also.?  You 
are probably imagining a blow with the right hand. 
But such a blow would fall on the left cheek.  
To hit the right cheek would require the left hand.
 But the left hand in those days could be used 
only for unclean tasks. No, the only feasible blow 
would be a backhand.  
 
The backhand was not a blow to injure, but to insul
t, humiliate, degrade. It was not administered 
to an equal, but to an inferior. Masters backhanded
 slaves; husbands, wives; parents, children; 
Romans, Jews.  The whole point of the blow was to f
orce someone who was out of line back into 
place.  

 
When you turn the left cheek, it now offers a perfe
ct target for a blow with the right hand; but 
only 
equals
 fought with such blows, as we know from Jewish sou
rces; and the last thing the 
master wishes to do is to establish this underling™
s equality. So this act of defiance renders the 
master incapable of asserting his dominance in this
 relationship.  He can have the slave beaten, 
but he can no longer cow him.  

 
By turning the cheek, then, the ?inferior? is sayin
g: ?I™m a human being, just like you.  I refuse 
to be humiliated any longer. I am your equal. I won
™t take it anymore.? 
 
In that world of honor and shaming, the ?superior? 
has been rendered impotent to install shame 
in a subordinate. He has been stripped of his power
 to dehumanize the other. As Gandhi taught, 
?The first principle of nonviolent action is that o
f non-cooperation with everything humiliating.?  
 
How different this is from the usual view, that thi
s passage teaches us to turn the other cheek so 
our batterer can simply clobber us again!  How ofte
n that interpretation has been fed to battered 
wives and children. And it was never what Jesus int
ended in the least. No, he only advises, 
?Defy your masters, assert your humanity; but don™t
 answer the oppressor in kind. Find a new, 
third way that is neither cowardly submission nor v
iolent reprisal.?  
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the great writer, novelist and woman of
 letters from the South, 
Toni Cade Bambara. This is from her own essay in a 
book she edited, called Black Women, an 
Anthology.
   
We are involved in a struggle for liberation: liber
ation from the exploitive and dehumanizing 
system of racism, from the manipulative control of 
a corporate society; liberation from the 

 3 constrictive norms of ?mainstream? cultures, from t
he synthetic myths that encourage us to 
fashion ourselves rashly from without (which is rea
ction) rather than from within (which is 
creation). 

 
Sermon
  
When I was in seminary, I took some time to acquain
t myself with modern Italian culture. Not 
Italian American culture, mind you; being Italian A
merican, I know about that. But I am talking 
about purer European Italian culture. So, without a
ny overarching plan or discipline, I began to 
dip into the culture. I read novelists like Moravia
 and Eco. I watched Italian films by Luchino 
Visconti and Pasolini. I savored all their Nobel La
ureate poets, like Eugenio Montale and 
Quasimodo. One day, despite my haphazard approach, 
I stumbled upon the truly great novel by 
Ignazio Silone, one of the most popular of Italian 
novelists, even in translation. The novel was 
Pane e Vino,(Bread and Wine). 
I opened it up at the used book store, just to get 
a sense of the 
story. The first words, by chance, I fell upon were
 these: ?Freedom is not something you get as a 
present,? said Pietro. ?You can live in a dictators
hip and be free Œ on one condition: that you 
fight the dictatorship. If you think with your own 
mind, and keep it uncorrupted, you are free.   
But you can live in the most democratic country on 
earth, and if you™re lazy, obtuse or servile 
within yourself, you™re not free. Even without any 
violent coercion, you™re a slave. You can™t 
beg your freedom from someone. You have to grab it 
Œ everyone as much as he or she can.?  
 
I have meditated on that brilliant soliloquy every 
day since. Not by sitting still. Not that kind of 
meditation. I meditate on that passage by letting t
he discordant events of my life teach me 
something about being free in an un-free situation,
 reluctant as I often am to learn. 
 
One of the events that really helped me with this p
assage occurred two years ago, and some of 
you at least have heard me tell a version of this s
tory one on one, but for different reasons.  
 
Here it is. 

 
When I was in Hawaii, a couple of years ago, to off
iciate at the wedding of the son of a former 
parishioner, I had the chance to taste real chocola
te. I mean, chocolate that had been made from a 
pod that grew on a tree about twenty steps away fro
m where I actually bought the chocolate. 
Local, handmade chocolate. It was expensive, but I 
had to try some. As soon as I tasted it, I 
realized that I had probably rarely ever had real c
hocolate before. I realized that the great 
companies and chocolate industries had added so man
y extra ingredients, had adulterated it™s 
purity so many times, that most of what I had been 
savoring all my life was probably more 
sweetened shoe wax than the real thing. I was simpl
y amazed that anything could taste that good, 
that dazzling. 

 
On the day I was to leave the Kona Coast for Ohio, 
I chanced to find a farmer™s market in 
Kailua. I found they actually were selling cacao po
ds from the local chocolate orchards. I asked 
myself, ?How cool would it be if I brought these ho
me with me, and actually made chocolate 
myself– from scratch??  I thought this, of course, 
not having a clue as to what ?making 
chocolate from scratch? meant. So I purchased two p
ods of differing varieties. For the record, if 
you have not seen one, they look like late summer s
quash, quite large, except with a lot more 
festive coloring. 

 
 4 When I got to the airport, however, there were sign
s everywhere saying, ?Don™t even think of 
bringing any fruits or vegetables from the Island t
o the Mainland. Especially cacao pods.? 
 
Seeing that sign really bummed me out, but I have t
o admit I gave serious thought to sneaking 
them on board. Except, I noticed that the warning s
ign clearly promised prosecution and huge 
fines if you did that. And worse, I noticed that al
l of us had to pass our carry-on™s through one 
extra super machine, a green behemoth which apparen
tly could detect fruits and pods through 
solid lead. 

 
So I gave in and told the woman running the machine
 I had some pods. She immediately grabbed 
my cacao pods and put them in some sort of contraba
nd bin. Oh, I tried to argue with her, of 
course. I told her that a cacao pod could not possi
bly be classified as either a fruit or a vegetable,
 
but that didn™t matter. They were forbidden, whatev
er they were. Had to do with possible pests 
that might burrow into the skin of the pod and get 
loose here in Ohio. 
 
I was very sad. Yes, and mad. And immediately I fou
nd my petty side. I don™t trot it out very 
often, but believe me, it™s there, just under the s
urface. Especially when I get tired, and I was 
tired that evening. I went to wait for the plane wi
th my now empty sack, and made sure I was in 
the line of sight of this woman at the green machin
e. Then, I just glared at her. I pouted, groused, 
and made Picasso faces. I slouched, folding my arms
 with menace. I skewed up my face. I 
frowned the most guilt-provoking frown I could frow
n. 
 
To my complete surprise, about ten minutes into my 
infantile display, the woman came over to 
me. I hadn™t even noticed her looking at me that mu
ch, but she marched up to me and said, ?You 
really wanted to make chocolate from scratch, didn™
t you.? ?Why yes,? I said. ?That™s the only 
thing you can do with those pods, right?? 

 
That was a terrible sarcastic thing to say. I was m
ean. She didn™t make the rule after all, and it 
was a perfectly rational rule anyways. 

 
But she said, ?Well, to make chocolate you don™t ne
ed the pod. You just need what™s inside the 
pod. How about if I go get a knife, cut these thing
s open, and then give you their contents inside 
a plastic bag? That way you can make the chocolate 
you want to make.? 
 
Well, first I was dumbfounded. Then I felt ashamed 
of my behavior, though she in no manner 
shamed me. But I was even more surprised at how thi
s woman did not let my misbehavior keep 
her from doing something gracious for me. She did n
ot let my pettiness manipulate her into 
expressing pettiness herself. She did not allow her
self to be shamed by my petulance into 
vengeful feelings. She was free from responding to 
me reactively, which would have been to 
treat me just as I had treated her. 

 
Instead, she created a new way, a third way. The ru
le was kept, yes, and strictly; and my desire to 
make chocolate, which was not irrational or foolish
, was also met. In the words of Toni 
Bombara, she participated in creation; she didn™t  
merely react. I, however, to use a modern 
colloquialism, was behaving like a jerk. She didn™t
 see the jerk, however. She saw a human 
being. 

 
I say this woman was far more free than I was 

at the time. Free from coercion by my mood. 

 5 Free from manipulation by my bad behavior. 

Free from thinking she had to balance 

things out by returning my petulance. 

 
This is exactly what the ancient teacher 

Jesus was talking about when he uttered 

his famous suggestion of turning the other cheek. ?
When someone slaps you on the right cheek, 
turn your other cheek.? As 

Walter Wink so brilliantly points out, the 

whole purpose of this saying has been wildly 

misunderstood by modern folks who have 

suggested that it should be applied to battered wom
en and children.  Of course this is not true. 
Wink gets it right when he quotes Gandhi to succinc
tly interpret what the teacher said: ?The first 
principle of nonviolent action is that of non-coope
ration with everything humiliating.?  
 
Now we who live here in the United States don™t liv
e in culture where brute chattel slavery is 
accepted anymore. We™re post Lincoln, we tell ourse
lves. We don™t live in a culture overrun by 
an occupying army from a foreign land. The British 
left centuries ago. Jesus may have lived in 
such a land; but we do not.  

 
Instead, we live in a free country. We live in a cu
lture, we tell ourselves, upheld by the noble 
language of the Declaration of Independence, tellin
g us we are each free to pursue happiness, as 
we will. We live in a land where the words ?with li
berty and justice for all? ring in our ears, 
liberty being a fine, elegant synonym for ?freedom.
?  
 
But Toni Bombara joins Ignazio Silone, and  Jesus, 
in cautioning us not to imagine that these 
noble phrases echoing in our hearts are somehow the
 guarantee that we have been given the gift 
of freedom, once and for all. Bombara seems to thin
k there are different kinds of slavery besides 
the chattel kind. She speaks of racialization first
, which I™ve addressed many times this year from 
this pulpit. She says we are still not free from th
at approach. I agree. And certainly, when I saw 
at least a dozen raggy men, homeless and reeking wi
th alcohol, dressed in tattered, tarry layers, 
hovering about while I was buying gas at a BP on Br
oad yesterday, I had a hard time imagining 
what they could possibly understand by the idea of 
?liberty and justice for all? we claim to hold 
so dear. Clearly, we are not a culture liberated fr
om unaddressed addiction, systemic poverty, or 
the systemic results of poverty and addiction, like
 the street drug industry, organized crime etc. 
 
But Toni Bombara goes further. She tells us that we
 still need to claim our liberation from ?the 
manipulative control of a corporate society; libera
tion from the constrictive norms of 
‚mainstream™ cultures, from the synthetic myths tha
t encourage us to fashion ourselves rashly.? 
 
These are powerful words. What do they mean? 

 
First, ?the manipulative control of a corporate soc
iety? What™s that about? Let me quote an essay 
by Chicago cultural critic Stephen Lendman, written
 just this last April; he answers that question 
with considerable force. 

 
?Large transnational corporations are clearly the d
ominant institution of our time. They're 
preeminent throughout the world, but especially in 
the Global North and its epicenter in the US. 
They control or greatly influence what we eat and d
rink, where we live, what we wear, how we 

 6 get most of our essential services, like health car
e and even what we're taught in schools up to 
the highest levels. They create and control our sou
rces of information and greatly influence how 
we think, and our view of the world, and them. They
 now even own patents on our genetic code, 
the most basic elements of human life, and are like
ly planning to manipulate and control them as 
just another commodity to exploit for profit in the
ir brave new world. That should concern 
everyone. They also carefully craft their image, an
d use catchy slogans to convince us of their 
benefit to society and the world, like: "better thi
ngs for better living through chemistry" (if you 
don't mind toxic air, water and soil), "we bring go
od things to life" (for them, not us), and "all the
 
news that's fit to print" (only if you love state a
nd corporate- friendly disinformation and 
propaganda). The slogans are clever, but the truth 
is ugly. 
 
Does that sound a little paranoid to you? Exaggerat
ed? Scary? Maybe to some. But this is not 
some conspiracy theory baloney, like grand theories
 about who really shot John Kennedy or who 
St. Mary the Magdalene really was. My friend M.H. i
n Massachusetts is married to a man who 
has been dealing with this business of the corporat
e patenting of the genetic code for over ten 
years. The documents, articles and testimonies I™ve
 seen through his agency have been 
chilling–and this is a cool, rational and moral Uni
tarian Universalist man, not some crackpot. 
And like Stephen Lendmen, he can support his claims
 soundly. 
 
Second, Bambara says that we, in this ?free country
,? still have to claim liberation from the 
?constrictive norms of mainstream cultures.? In Sus
an B. Anthony™s day, the ?constrictive norm? 
of mainstream male culture was that women could hav
e no vote in matters that concerned them. 
As both a Quaker from birth and a Unitarian by choi
ce, Anthony was raised with a great respect 
for freedom. But the male-centered culture didn™t o
ffer her freedom as a present. Still, she was, I 
have to affirm, a free woman. Why? Because in Silon
e™s words, she was free because she fought 
for her freedom. Or in Jesus™ understanding, she si
mply refused to be humiliated by the 
constrictive culture, and lived in clear resistance
, her whole life through.  
 
What people, in our own day, come to mind who have 
to struggle to be free since they™ve never 
received it as a present? Who do you think is ?cons
tricted? by mainstream culture today? 
 
Third and last, Bombara proclaims we are still not 
free from the ?synthetic myths that encourage 
us to fashion ourselves rashly.? The synthetic myth
s–stories–are ones that claim that good and 
evil are as clear as black and white, as distinct a
s blue and orange. Whether it™s the whacky 
us/them interpretation of the Book of Revelation, o
r a simplistic understanding of the Star Wars 
myth, we see today people ?fashioning themselves ra
shly? based on the myth, the story, that 
whoever ?we? are, ?we? are good, and evil is whatev
er is done to us by others. Evil 
is
 otherness. 
This is the source of the culture of entitlement. T
his is the source of Muslim bashing, gay 
bashing, and the demonization of both the scientifi
c method and the virtue of tolerance. Last 
Sunday, the media darling Rev. Jerry Falwell preach
ed his Sunday sermon against tolerance in 
any form. Again, you don™t have to take my word for
 it. You can order the tape from Liberty 
Baptist Church, and watch it yourselves. 

 
No, after reviewing Toni Bombara™s great words, and
 the teaching of Jesus understood rationally 
and spiritually by Wink, and after returning to my 
life-long meditation text of Ignazio Silone, I 
have to conclude that struggling for freedom is the
 best, and maybe the only, freedom there is. 
It™s not a gift. It™s not a guarantee or a grace. I
t™s a struggle. A resistance to being humiliated. I
t™s 
keeping oneself uncorrupted by the seductions of th
e modern age, proclaiming that freedom is a 

 7 gift already won, and that all we need to do now is
 to pat ourselves on the back, and buy the first 
thing the commercial jingle suggests we buy. 

 
By the way, making chocolate is tough. It requires 
long fermenting of the beans, a lot of heat, 
cold, and endless grinding and processing. I have n
o idea how anyone every came up with the 
idea, back in Aztec days. It™s a messy process, it 
requires surprising patience and even a level of 
commitment. But, in the end, you get to taste somet
hing so sweet and perfect that you 
almost float into the air with joy. 

 
Funny. Making chocolate sounds a lot like grabbing 
for freedom. Ferment. Heat. Coolness. 
Processing. Patience. Commitment. But how much swee
ter is a single taste of freedom than all 
the chocolate in the world? 

 
Offering
  
Freedom may not be a gift, but gifts support this h
ouse of life that supports, encourages and 
challenges us to be free. Pledges and gifts are wel
come now, as a sign of our free covenant with 
each other to dwell together in peace. 

 
Prayer
  
 East. South. West. North. 
Let this be a circle for the encouragement of freed
om-personal, psychological, spiritual, social. 
Sun. Moon. Planets. Stars. 

Let this be a circle for deep gratitude 

that we live at all in this marvelous universe. 

Earth. Air. Fire. Water. 

Let this be a house of basic elements: 

safety and devotion, patience and courtesy. 

O Love, be with us in our meeting and in our 

leaving, and dare us to be more free tomorrow 

than we are today. Encircle us with your peace. Ame
n. 

