  April 6, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
  "CONSIDER EACH OTHER  HOW TO STIR UP LOVE" (Hebrews 10:23-25)  
  Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, forHe who  promised is faithful;   24 and let us consider how to stimulate one another to love andgood deeds,  25 not forsaking our own assembling together, as is the habit ofsome, but  encouraging one another; and all the more, as you see the daydrawing near.  
  What Are You Doing With Your Life?  
  When you get up in the morning and you face a day, what do you sayto  yourself about your hopes for the day?   When you look from thebeginning of  the day to the end of the day, what do you want to happen becauseyou have  lived?  What difference do you want your life to make?    
  If you say, I don’t even think like that, I just get up and dowhat I’ve got  to do, then you are cutting yourself off from a basic means ofgrace and a  source of guidance and strength and fruitfulness and joy.  It iscrystal  clear in the Bible, including this text, that God means for us toaim  consciously at something significant in our days.  God’s revealedwill for  you is that when you get up in the morning, you don’t driftaimlessly through  the day letting mere circumstances alone dictate what you do, butthat you  aim at something - that you focus on a certain kind of purpose. I’m talking  about children here, and teenagers, and adults - single, married,widowed,  moms, and every trade.   
  Aimlessness is akin to lifelessness.  Dead leaves in the back yardmay move  around more than anything else - more than the dog, more than thechildren.   The wind blows this way, they go this way.  The wind blows thatway, they go  that way.   They tumble, they bounce, they skip, they pressagainst a fence,  but they have no aim whatsoever.  They are full of motion andempty of life.   God did not create humans in his image to be aimless, likelifeless leaves  blown around in the backyard of life.  He created us to bepurposeful - to  have a focus and an aim for all our days.  
   And this is not oppressive.  It’s not slavery.  It’s notdepleting.  To find  what we were made for and to do it with all God’s might(Colossians 1:29), is  freeing (Galatians 5:13) and energizing.  Jesus said, "My food isto do the  will of Him who sent Me" (John 4:34).  Food!  Aiming day by day todo what  you were meant to do, is like eating: it gives life and energy,rather than  taking it away.  You will eventually die if you do what you weremeant to do.   You may be young or you may be old.  That is God’s choice, notyours.  But  when you die doing what you were meant to do, you die well andfull.  
  The Aim and Focus of our Lives as Christians  
  1. Embrace Your Hope  
  Would you consider with me what these three verses teach us aboutthe aim and  focus of our lives as Christians?  God may use them to bringcrystal-clear  focus to your life.  He may use them to blow away all theconfusion and fog,  and give a lucid, bright, crisp, spring-morning clarity to the aimof your  days.  
  First, verse 23 says, "Let us hold fast the confession of our hopewithout  wavering, for He who promised is faithful."  Now that is notsomething you do  with your hands or your feet.  You don’t go to the kitchen to dothis, or to  the den or across the street or to the office or to school.  Thisis not done  where anyone can see.  This is an affair of the heart.  Embraceyour hope.   Hold fast to your hope.  Be a hope-filled person.  Hope in God. Because God  has made promises to you and he is faithful.  He has promised towrite the  law on your heart (10:16) and work in you what is pleasing in hissight  (13:21); he has promised to remember your sins no more (10:17); hehas  promised that we will be perfected for all time by a singlesacrifice  (10:14); he has promised never to leave us or forsake us (13:59);and he has  promised to bring good from all our pain (12:10).  And so he keepshis word.  
  But that does not provide you with a sufficient focus for the day. God did  not create you to curl up under the covers and hope in God all dayin bed.    Without some effect on your life, hope in God would be invisibleand bring  no public glory to God’s power and wisdom and goodness andtrustworthiness.   If the act of hoping in God were all that he created you to aimat, then  verse 24 would be wasted words.  But they are not.  God createdyou first to  hope in him, and then to make that hope visible by the effect thatit has on  your life.  And that effect is given in verse 24, and it is to bethe aim of  your daily life.  This why you get up in the morning.              2.  Stir Up Each Other to Love and Good Deeds  
  Let’s read it.  Verse 24: "Let us consider how to stimulate oneanother to  love and good deeds."  Here is the focus for your life.   Here iswhat you  aim at from morning till night as a Christian.  Notice carefully:it is not  what you might expect.  It is not: consider how to love each otherand do  good deeds.  That would be Biblical and right.  But it’sdifferent: "Consider  how to stimulate each other to love and good deeds."  Focus onhelping others  become loving people.  Aim at stirring up others to do good deeds. And of  course the implication would also be that if others need help andstirring,  we do too, and so we would be aiming at what sorts of ways we canthink and  feel and talk and act that will stir each other up to love and todo good  deeds.  The aim of our lives is not just loving and doing gooddeeds, but  helping to stir up others to love and to good deeds.  
  3.  Consider Each Other  
  But let’s be more precise.  There is something in this text thatis very hard  to bring over into English.  The word "consider," ("Let usconsider how to .  . .") is used one other time in the book, namely, Hebrews 3:1,where the  writer say says, "Consider Jesus."  That is, look at him; thinkabout him,  focus on him, study him, let your mind be occupied with him. "Jesus" is the  direct object of the verb "consider."  "Consider Jesus."  Considerwhat?   Consider Jesus.  
  Well, in Hebrews 10:24 the grammar is the same: the direct objectof the word  "consider" is "one another."  Literally, it says, "Consider oneanother."   Consider what?  Consider one another.  But this is almostimpossible to  bring over into English with the rest of the sentence, because itwould be so  awkward.  It would have to go something like this: "Consider oneanother  toward the stimulating of love and good works." Now that isterrible English  - good Greek word order but terrible English.  The best we can do,it seems,  is to say, "Consider how to stimulate one another to love and gooddeeds."  
  But I want you to get this nuance of the original so you can feelthe force  of this as a daily aim and focus for your life.  Literally this isGod’s call  on us to consider one another, that is, to look at one another,think about  one another, focus on one another, study one another, let yourmind be  occupied with one another.  And the goal of this focus on othersis to think  of ways of stimulating them to love and good deeds.     Let’s take teenagers, for example.  There are a lot of teens atBethlehem who  are alive to God.  You have tasted his love for you andexperienced the power  of his forgiveness.  And you want to do his will.  But, like mosteverybody  else, you get up many days, and feel aimless.  What’s the point? Why school?   Why work?  And you slump through the day trying to feel good withmusic and  food and friends.  But it doesn’t feel like there is any point toit all, or  any focus.    
  I urge you to hear God’s word in Hebrews 10:24.  When you get upin the  morning, "Consider - think about, ponder, deliberate, meditate,mull over -  other people, with this conscious goal: what can I do today sothat they will  be stirred up to love and to good deeds?  Now there is a reason tolive and a  focus for every day that will never be boring.  Every day is newand  different.  People change.  Their circumstances change.  Youchange.  But the  call remains the same: consider, consider, consider these peopleyou will be  around today.  What are they like?  What am I like?  What will thesituation  be like?  What helps a person become loving?  What is the originof genuine  good deeds?  This is a reason for living that is focused enough tobe  practical and big enough to last a lifetime.  
  Get Together and Encourage One Another  
  So let’s look at the text to find the answer to how we go aboutthis.  Verse  24 gives the focus and aim: "Let us consider how to stimulate oneanother to  love and good deeds."  Then verse 25 gives us instructions how. It says, " .  . . not forsaking our own assembling together, as is the habit ofsome, but  encouraging one another."  Two things.  First, don’t neglect toget together.   Second, encourage one another.  
  When I was growing up I heard this text referred to most often asan argument  for regular attendance at worship services.  "Do not forsake theassembling  of yourselves together - come to church regularly."  And that isnot a wrong  application of the text since one of the most important kinds of  encouragements and exhortations that we get is from the preachingof God’s  word in the power of God’s Spirit.  (Hebrews 13:22 calls the bookof Hebrews  a "word of encouragement.")  
  But in the context, the kind of coming together in view seems tobe one where  the members "encourage one another."  Verse 25 is explicit: cometogether and  encourage one another.  The "one another" implies that there issomething  mutual going on.  One is encouraging another and another isencouraging one.   Each is doing or saying something that encourages.  
  If you ask what that corresponds to in our church, I would say theclosest  thing is the small groups - which is why I regard this ministry asso utterly  crucial.  I am a great believer in preaching.  There is somethingabout the  Word of God that begs to be heralded and trumpeted and exultedover - as well  as discussed and taught.  But I have no illusions that preachingis enough in  the life of a believer.  The New Testament - and especially thisbook of  Hebrews calls us again and again to a kind of mutual ministry thatinvolves  all the believers in encouraging others.  
  So I ask you to take stock of your life: where are you in verse25?  There  are two groups: those who gather to encourage each other, andthose who have  formed the habit of not gathering.  See that little phrase inverse 25: "Not  forsaking our own assembling together, as is the habit of some."   Non-participation in a small group can be habit-forming.  How areyou doing?   David Livingston is listed on the back of the worship folder as"Pastor for  Cell and Adult Ministries."  That means he is there to help youbreak the  habit of non-participation in small groups.  
  God is calling you, through this word, to break a habit ofnon-participation  and to strengthen a habit of participation in small grouptogetherness where  you encourage each other.  It’s not the only way to stimulateothers to love  and good deeds, but it’s the way emphasized in this text.  
  What Kind of Encouragement?  
  Which leaves one last question:  What kind of encouragementstimulates others  to love and good deeds?  It’s not obvious to some that thisquestion has  anything to do with God.  Lots of people think that love and gooddeeds are a  good thing to seek after, and many would say that encouragingothers is the  way to do it - and they might not even be Christians.  Or theymight be  Christians who put little focus on God.  For example, inyesterday’s  newspaper, one church was described like this: "While [the pastor]spoke of  sending out missionaries, the feeling was that his congregationexisted to  heighten the self-esteem of its members."  
  Whether or not that’s an accurate description of that church, thepoint is  this: a lot of churches would try to stimulate love and good deedsthat way.   But it’s not the Biblical way.  The key to encouraging loveBiblically is  given in verse 23: "Let us hold fast the confession of our hopewithout  wavering, for He who promised is faithful."  The key to love, inthe New  Testament - the kind of love that magnifies God and not man - ishope rooted  in the faithfulness of God.  Embrace your hope!  Cherish yourhope!  Because  God is faithful.  He keeps his promises.  Without this kind ofhope,  sustaining you day by day through all the dishearteningfrustrations and  crushing disappointments, you would not have any strength orenergy or joy to  stir anybody up to love and good deeds.  But if you bank on God,not on  yourself, you always have something encouraging and hope-giving tosay,  namely, "God can be trusted, God can be trusted.  I have nostrength, but God  can be trusted."  
  Resources for a Difficult Situation  
  Let me close with an illustration that comes nine verses later.  How would  you try to encourage and sustain the love of your small group ifsome of them  were thrown in jail in a hostile environment?  That’s whathappened here.   And the rest of the group knew that if they went to visit them -a small  group meeting in the jail - they all would be in big trouble. Where would  you get the resources - the courage and grace to risk your lifeand  possessions - to go encourage your brothers and sisters in prison?  
  Look at verses 34-35 for the answer:  "You showed sympathy to theprisoners,  and accepted joyfully the seizure of your property."   So they didgo to  visit them and did get in big trouble.  Where did they get thatcourage to  love and encourage love?  Next phrase: " . . . knowing that youhave for  yourselves a better possession and an abiding one."  That is,because you  held fast to the confession of your hope.  You embraced your hope. You  cherished your hope in God above the present value of home andthings, and  even life.  "Therefore," verse 35 says, repeating verse 23, "donot throw  away your confidence, which has a great reward."  This is whatencourages you  to risk your life, and this is the message to take to them.  Itwill  stimulate love in them because it did in you.  
  In summary then:   
  1)      Make the aim of your life to consider others - study them,know them,  figure them out - to the end that you stimulate them to love andgood deeds.  
  2)      Be sure that you do this by getting together often withother believers  for the specific purpose of encouraging each other.    
  3)      And let the heart of that encouragement be reminders ofhow great our hope  is in Christ and that God can be trusted.  
  And as you see the end of the age drawing near, verse 25 says, dothis all  the more, not less.  Why?  As Jesus said, "Because lawlessness isincreased,  most people’s love will grow cold.  But the one who endures to theend, he  shall be saved" (Matthew 24:12).  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  Return to Piper's Notes - The 1997Index  Return to Piper's Notes - Front Page   
  
  
