
 
Parallels	Between	the	Teachings of
Lord	Buddha	and	Shri	Baba
Part I
BY  DR. C.D. DESHMUKH, M.A., Ph.  D.

 
IT is one of the most tragic ironies  of history that Buddhism  should have been all but extirpated  from  the land where it first came into existence. It is needless for us to go into the various causes of the decay  of Buddhism in India. But we may  be sure that the causes of the decay  of Buddhism  were  mostly connected with the vast and compli- cated superstructure of Buddhistic society and the network of beliefs which came to be built  up  during  the centuries that followed the original Teachings of Lord Buddha. Every religion tends to become corrupt and gets mixed up with a heap of irrelevant and inessential details as time rolls on until at last the  followers lose their grip upon the original vision of its founder.
 
The truth contained in  the  original Teachings of Lord Buddha  is eternal and therefore incapable of being shaken by the storms  which the course of time brings in its train. It will be my endeavour to disen- tangle the truth in Buddhism from the various inessentials with which it got mixed up during the centuries that followed, and to draw parallels be- tween the Teaching of Lord Buddha and the new dispensation of the  Truth which we are having through the Teaching of Shri Meher  Baba.
It is not possible for us to appreciate the full significance of the Teachings of Lord Buddha except in the light of the wonderful life which he led. Those critics of Buddhism, who describe it as the philosophy of those who have failed in this life will do well to remember
 

 
that Lord Buddha came from a royal family and was in his youth surrounded by every pleasure which this world can give. He had around him all the power and prestige, wealth and fame, comforts and luxuries, which a prince could command; and he was very happily married to Yashodhara who was one of the finest flowers of humanity. In his palace he was all the time surrounded by music and dance. But one day when he was going to his pleasure garden, in his chariot,  for the first time in his life,  he  came  into contact with the sufferings of this life. He saw an  old  man  crippled with age. He was on the  way to death and the sight of this person was enough to set him thinking about the sufferings of life. Again on another occasion he saw a sick man who was coursing his way to death with slow but sure steps. And on the third occasion he  actually saw a dead  body,  which  was being carried for funeral on a bier. These sights of sufferings impressed upon him very strongly two stern truths about life: (l)  Sarvam Knashikamóeverything is transitory, and (2) Sarvam  Dukkham
 
óeverywhere there is suffering. He therefore set his mind to the discovery of the cause of suffering and to the search after the real meaning of life. It became now impossible for him to lull his mind into stupor by drowning it in the delights of his palace and one day (in his 29th year) he quietly renounced his abode of pleasure at midnight in order to go out in the world in search of understanding.
After leaving his home he made many experiments with life in order to have the final solution of the problems of life. He tried all the existing systems, not excluding extreme asceticism. But he found all these methods futile. Then he turned back upon his own inner resources and spent years in the earnest search for the Truth. Before attaining understanding he had to conquer all the temptations of Mara (who symbolises the forces of darkness) who opposed him with his three sons: (1) Confusion, (2) Gaiety, and
(3) Pride; and his three   daughters:
(1) Lust, (2) Delight, and (3) Thirst. But he resolutely freed his mind from the influence of Mara and ultimately attained,
 

 
in his highest state of meditationó Enlightenment.
Enlightenment attained, he came back to the world and began to turn the wheel of Dharma (Law). And the years of his ministry are one of the most marvellous periods, which the world's history has seen. It is said of Napoleon that wherever he went crowns and thrones came crashing down. The same was the case with Lord Buddha. Wherever he went to announce his Noble Teaching, not only the vast multitude of common people but even kings and princes as well as, the most learned people came to his feet in order to receive the dispensation of the Truth.
Before we can fully appreciate the significance of the Teachings of Lord Buddha it is necessary for us to understand the atmosphere which was prevalent in his time. The intellectual atmosphere of his time, as in our own, was full of barren Metaphysical quibbles. The Great Pandits of his day were pre- occupied with fruitless wranglings and hair-splitting debates about things that did not matter, for that was the legacy which
 
currupt Brahmanism had left for his age. The Pandits of his day were more concerned with the interpretation of the sacred scriptures than with the search after the Truth. For them the most vital question was not life but the interpretation of the Shastras. It was therefore no wonder that a multitude of Schools of Philosophy came into existence in order to afford for these Pandits opportun- ities to display their extensive learning and intellectual skill. These schools always identified themselves with a set of unrelated and unimportant beliefs and dogmas. And they tried to secure following not so much by any appeal to their intrinsic claims for our acceptance, as by drawing upon strings of quotations from the Shastras. And as a result of the conflict of the diverse traditional systems of philosophy the spirit of general scepticism was in the air.
As in our own time, the social atmosphere which was prevalent at the time of Lord Buddha was also full of confusion. The Hindu society was, as it is to-day, divided into numberless castes and creeds. And religion was mostly a
 

 
matter of observing certain prescribed ceremonials and per- forming superstitious rituals with the hope of gaining some reward in the life after death. One of the most wicked rituals was the practice of sacrificing animals in religious functions. And the mind of the age had been so much deadened by the weight of age-long tradition that people had become incapable of realising the appalling cruelty and stupidity involved in such religious practices.
It was in such an intellectual and social atmosphere that Lord Buddha made his appearance in the world, and he became a great and an unsurpassed reformer in both fields. He vehemently denounced the existing caste-system and showed to the people how the distinctions based upon birth alone are not only ridiculous but pernicious. He equally vehemently denounced distinctions based upon race and the pride which was usually associated with it. When after his enlightenment he came back to the city of his father in the garb of a Monk, with a begging bowl in his hand his father reminded him that he belonged to the
 
SoIar race in order to put him to shame. But his answer was that he refused to take any pride in his race or extraction because he now be- longed to the race of the Buddhas. Nor did he recognise any  superiority of one sex over the other. The traditional Hinduism did not recognise any salvation for women and as a rule convention prevented them from reading the scriptures or taking to renunciation. The privilege of becoming a Sanyasin was reserved only for men. As against this unfare discrimination Lord Buddha stood for the emancipation of women and threw his order open to them. He fully recognised their right to attain the highest spiritual value.
Like Lord Buddha, Shri Meher Baba is a great  reformer  who  throws an uncompromising challenge to the entire existing social order. And on the whole he takes a similar atti- tude with regard to the intellectual tendencies of our age. He is never tired of proclaiming the futility of barren metaphysical discussions divorced from life and experience. He throws the whole weight of his magnetic personality against the tendency to separate Philosophy
 

 
from life and invites the attention of our age to the vital issues of  life.
Lord Buddha's general attitude to barren Metaphysical problems may be illustrated by his attitude to the problems of (i) the existence of God and (ii) the existence of the individual soul. He is said to have refused to answer the question: 'Does God exist or not?' Even when he was repeatedly asked that question, he scrupulously maintained inviolable silence on that point, because for the Pandits of his age God was merely an idea to play with. They had encountered upon some descriptions of God in their extensive study and they had turned these descriptions into tools for carrying on their unending controversies. God was for them not a living reality, but merely a possible hypothesis. And although they played with the idea they did not have any genuine desire for knowing Him. It is true that the Upanishads had declared that God was unapproachable through the intellect alone. In spite of these declarations these Pandits wanted to prove or disprove the existence of God merely through intellectual
 
debates. Whenever therefore Lord Buddha was invited to give his opinion about God he emphatically said that the belief or disbelief in the existence of God is of very little importance so long as the everyday life of man remains unchanged.
The mind of our age is similarly caught up in the craving .for intellectual gymnastics from which it has to be emancipated before it can be pursuaded to seek the Truth. Shri Meher Baba once asked one of his Mandali the question, 'Where is God?' And when he said, that "One should first form a conception of God and then reply", He gave the following discourse: "All these talks are cut and dry. Pandits babble it everywhere, for years, without finding any clue, till they die babbling. The orthodox section of all communities listens to these innumerable dissertations by reli- gious students and scriptural scholars, and forms various pet beliefs about God and His existence somewhere in the skies or in the best things, and not in others, and clings to these erroneous ideas tenaciously without the least effort at enlightenment or to go beyond
 

 
the four walls. They refuse even to talk or listen to the fact of having actual experience, and consider it blasphemy even to think of it. It is only these talks and philosophies that appeal to them, and they are quite satisfied with these. That is why I say it is all philosophy and of no use without experience. One must try not only to learn and know, but to feel and experience."*
With regard to the existence of the individual soul Lord Buddha took a definite attitude. He emphatically declared that the soul as an entity does not exist. By common acceptance the term soul had come to signify the Ego or the self- conscious individual entity. And he denied the existence of any such entity which would justify belief in a separate and isolated conscious- ness. For him, the Ego is only a convenient way of referring to a bundle of memories or Sankharas (Sanskaras). Shri Meher Baba also exhibits this true nature of the Ego when he, in one of his messages says, that it is ìComposed of fulfilled and unfulfilled desires".
 
Egoism expresses itself in various self-centred cravings and the col- lection of these cravings is for the sake of convenience referred to as the Ego. But the Ego is not any permanent entity, because cons- ciousness can be free from Egoism or the idea of a separate ' I '. In short, according to him the ' I '-conscious- ness is born of ignorance and is completely annihilated with the attainment of understanding.
In so far as the very reality of the separate soul was denied by Lord Buddha the question about its continuation after death naturally became comparatively unimportant. He, therefore, strongly discouraged the craving for knowing something about the nature of the soul, its pre- existence or survival, as expressed in the following queries, "Have I verily been in bygone times or have I not been? What have I been in those bygone times? How have I been in bygone times? .... Shall I verily be in far-off days to come or shall I not be? What shall I be in those far-off days to come? .... Am I now  or  am  I  not?  And  if  I   am,
 

 
what am I and in what way?î According to him all such ponderings express craving for existence and no amount of such ponderings will be really helpful for attaining Nibbana which is the highest fulfilment of life. It is true that he proclaimed the doctrine of Reincarnation; but he denounced uncompromisingly all craving for continued existence as a separate self.    And   above   everything he
 
discouraged		idle	speculation	and invited transformation of practical life. Like Lord Buddha, Shri Meher Baba ignores purely metaphysical problems and emphasises the need for seeking the Truth not through arm- chair Philosophies or unending in- tellectual	debates			but		through practical   life.   And		this	intensely practical search for the Truth is the dominant   note   of   the   teaching   of
Shri Meher Baba.
 


 

