  August 17, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
  RUNNING WITH THE WITNESSES  Hebrews 11:39-12:2   And all these, having gained approval through their faith, did notreceive what was promised, 40 because God had provided somethingbetter for us, so that apart from us they should not be made perfect.12:1 Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of witnessessurrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance, and the sinwhich so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the racethat is set before us, 2 fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author andperfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross,despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throneof God.  Running - not Meandering  The book of Hebrews was written to a church that was getting oldand was settling into the world and losing its wartime mentality andstarting to drift through life without focus, without vigilance, andwithout energy. Their hands were growing weak, their knees werefeeble. It was just easier to meander in the crowd of life than torun the marathon.  We have seen this over and over along the trail through this book.For example, in Hebrews 2:1 and 3, the writer says that "we must paymuch closer attention to what we have heard, lest we drift away fromit. . . . How shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation?" Sointo the church has crept the disease of drifting and neglecting.People are growing careless and spiritually lazy and negligent.  Then in Hebrews 3:12-13 he warns again, "Take care, brethren, lestthere should be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart, infalling away from the living God. But encourage one another day afterday, as long as it is still called 'Today,' lest any one of you behardened by the deceitfulness of sin." He has heard that some are nolonger "taking care." They have begun to have a kind of lazy sense ofsecurity. A false notion that nothing really huge is at stake intheir small group meetings or whether they meditate on the Bible ortake time alone to pray or fight sin. They assume all will be well.Hebrews is written to teach them otherwise.  In Hebrews 5:12 the writer says, "Though by this time you ought tobe teachers, you have need again for someone to teach you theelementary principles of the oracles of God, and you have come toneed milk and not solid food." They made a profession of faith andwent into a passive, coasting mode. This is utterly wrong. God meansevery saint to be moving forward to new gains of strength and wisdomand holiness and courage and joy. From getters to givers. From beingtaught to teaching.  One more illustration: in Hebrews 12:12-13 the writer says,"Strengthen the hands that are weak and the knees that are feeble,and make straight paths for your feet, so that the limb which is lamemay not be put out of joint, but rather be healed." He is talking inimages here of their spiritual condition: weak hands, feeble knees,crooked paths.  Laying Aside Every Encumbrance  That's the condition of the church. That is the background ofHebrews 12:1b, "Let us also lay aside every encumbrance, and the sinwhich so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the racethat is set before us." This command does not come out of the blue.This is the point of the whole book. Endure, persevere, run, fight,be alert, be strengthened, don't drift, don't neglect, don't besluggish, don't take your eternal security for granted. Fight thefight of faith on the basis of Christ's spectacular death andresurrection. And show your faith the way the saints of Hebrews 11did - not by coasting through life, but by counting reproach forChrist greater riches than the treasures of Egypt (11:26).  So the main point of this text is the one imperative: RUN! (12:1).Everything else supports this - explains it or gives motivation forit. Run the race set before you! Don't stroll, don't meander, don'twander about aimlessly. Run as in a race with a finish line and witheverything hanging on it.  To this end, verse 1 says, "lay aside every encumbrance, and sinwhich so easily entangles us." I remember the effect this verse hadon me as a boy when I heard someone explain that we must lay asidenot only entangling sins, but "every encumbrance." That is, everyweight or obstacle. Things that in themselves may not be sins.  This was revolutionary. What it did (and I hope it does the samefor you) was show me that the fight of faith - the race of theChristian life - is not fought well or run well by asking, "what'swrong with this or that?" but by asking, "is it in the way of greaterfaith and greater love and greater purity and greater courage andgreater humility and greater patience and greater self-control? Not ;Is it a sin? But: Does it help me run! Is it in the way?  As a boy I was mightily helped by having my very categorieschanged in the way I lived my life. I commend it to you young peopleespecially. Don't ask about your music, your movies, your parties,your habits: What's wrong with it? Ask: Does it help me RUN therace!? Does it help me RUN - for Jesus?  Hebrews 12:1 is a command to look at your life, think hard aboutwhat you are doing, and get ruthless about what stays and what goes.  "But That's Just the Way I Am"  One of the criticisms I have of some forms of Psychology (not all)is the tendency to neutralize texts like this by labeling people withpersonality types that have no value judgments attached. For example,if a person tends to be passive you give them one label, and if theytend to be aggressive, you give them another label. No type is betterthan another type. Then along comes a text like this which says thatpassivity and coasting and drifting are mortally dangerous. The racemight not be finished if we don't become vigilant and lay aside notonly sins, but also weights and hindrances. If we are not careful, wecan be so psychologically fatalistic that we read over a text likethis and say, "O that's not for me, that's for Type A people, orINTJ's." That would be a tragic mistake.  I know that there are personality differences, some more passiveand some more aggressive. Each has its weaknesses and strengths. Thepassive people are in danger of coasting and neglecting and driftingand the many enslavements that result. The aggressive people are indanger of impatience and self-reliance and judgmentalism. And thereare strengths: the passive people are less prone to murmur andcomplain and retaliate. And the aggressive people are more given tobring about needed change.  But when it comes to the Book of Hebrews, and Hebrews 12:1 inparticular, it is a great mistake for any of us to say: this commandto run is not for me. This command to lay aside entangling sins isnot for me. Or this command to lay aside weights and encumbrances isjust not the way I am wired.  Plan Your Run with Jesus  Rather, all of us should listen and obey. Here's what I wouldsuggest. Between now and Labor Day, pick a day or a half day and getaway by yourself - away from the house, the phone, the beeper, theTV, the radio and all other people. Take a Bible and a pad of paperand plan your fall run with Jesus.  On that pad of paper note the entangling sins. Note the seeminglyinnocent weights and encumbrances that are not condemned explicitlyin the Bible, but which you know are holding you back in the race forfaith and love and strength and holiness and courage and freedom.Note the ways you subtly make provision for these hindrances (Romans13:14): the computer games, the hidden alcohol or candy, thetelevision, the videos, the pull-tab stop on the way home, themagazines, the novels. In addition, note the people that weaken you.Note the times that are wasted, thrown away.  When you have made all these notations, pray your way through to aresolve and a pattern of dismantling these encumbrances, andresisting these sins, and breaking old, old habits. And don't rise upagainst the Bible at this point and say, "I can't change." It is anassault on God if you read Hebrews 12:1 and go away saying: "It can'thappen. Hindrances can't be removed. Sins can't be laid aside." Godhas not spoken this command for nothing. And this entire book iswritten to undergird these practical commands. So go back and readthe book and ask God to take all the glorious truth that is here(about the superiority of Christ, and the power of his death andresurrection, and the effectiveness of his intercession for you) andmake this truth explosive with life-changing power. Carry some of thestory to your small group and get them to pray for you. Find someoneyou trust and ask them to check in with you and support you. That iswhat Hebrews 3:12-13 says we should do. Don't drift from this momentinto this Sunday afternoon. Before this day is over choose a day or ahalf-day and get away to plan your fall run with Jesus.  Motivation: A Cloud of Witnesses  Now what about motivation? That's what the rest of this text is.First, let's look back and then forward from this command to run.  Verse 1 says, "Since we have so great a cloud of witnessessurrounding us, let us . . . run . . ." So the first motivation Iwant us to see is this cloud of witnesses. Who are they and what doestheir witnessing mean? They are the saints that have lived and diedso valiantly by faith in chapter 11. Abel and Enoch and Noah andAbraham and Sarah and Moses and all those who suffered and died, "ofwhom the world was not worthy."  But what does their "witnessing" refer to? Does it refer to theirwatching us from heaven? Or does it refer their witnessing to us bytheir lives? The word "witness" can have either meaning: the act ofseeing something, or the act of telling something. Which is it here?I think it is the act of telling. The verb form of this word"witness" (martureo) is used five times in Hebrews 11 (2, 4 [twice],5, 39) and always refers to the giving of a (confirming) testimonyrather than the mere watching of an event. So I take the witnesses ofHebrews 12:1 to be the saints who have run the race before us, andhave gathered, as it were, along the marathon route to say, throughthe testimony of their lives, "By faith I finished, you can too!"  The best way to illustrate this, I think, is with Hebrews 11:4,where the writer speaks of Abel and says, "Through faith, though heis dead, he still speaks." So Abel is in the cloud of witnesses, andhe is witnessing to us by his life through the Scriptures. This isthe way all the witnesses of Hebrews 11 are helping us. They havegathered along the sidelines of our race and they hold out theirwounds and their joys and give us the best high-fives we ever got:"Go for it! You can do it. By faith you can finish. You can lay theweights down and the sins. By faith, by the assurance of betterthings hoped for, you can do it. I did it. And I know it can be done.Run. RUN!"  So be encouraged when you plan your fall run with Jesus. There aredozens and hundreds and thousands of those who have gone before andwho have finished the race by faith and surround us like a greatcloud of witnesses who say: "It can be done! By faith it can bedone."  Motivation: History Is Waiting for You to Finish Your Race  Then there is another motivation in verses 39-40. It says, "Andall these, having gained approval through their faith, did notreceive what was promised, (40) because God had provided somethingbetter for us, so that apart from us they should not be madeperfect." This is followed in 12:1 by "Therefore . . . run." The"therefore" means that verses 39-40 are a motivation for our running.Since this is true, run! How is it a motive?  I take verse 39 to mean that when the believers in the OldTestament died, their spirits were made whole and perfect (as 12:23says), but that they do not receive the full blessing of God'spromise, which is resurrection with new bodies in a glorious new agewith all God's enemies removed and righteousness holding sway and theearth filled with the glory of God. They did not receive that promiseyet.  Why not? Why must the saints wait, without their new resurrectionbodies? The answer is given in verse 40: "Because God had providedsomething better for us, so that apart from us they should not bemade perfect." In other words, God's purpose is that all his people -all the redeemed - be gathered in before any of them enjoys thefullness of his promise. His purpose is that we all come into thefullness of our inheritance together.  So the motivation is this: when you go away to plan your fall runwith Jesus, think on the fact that your life counts to God and tothem. Your finishing the race is what history is waiting for. Theentire consummation of the plan of the universe waits until everysingle one of God's elect are gathered in. All history waits and allthose who have lived by faith crowd the marathon route to urge youon, because they will not be perfected without you. Nor you withoutthem.  Motivation: Jesus Creates and Perfects Our Faith  Perhaps two more very brief motivations from Hebrews 12:2. Thefirst is that the fight of faith is not done in our own strength.When you go away to plan your fall run with Jesus, verse 2 says,"Look to Jesus the author and perfecter of your faith." Don't look toyour own resources and say, "I've tried before. It won't work." Fixyour eyes on him. The battle is a battle of faith: will you believethat the things he promises are better than the bad habits that youuse to cover your sadness?  But more than that, Jesus doesn't just respond to faith with hishelp. He works to author faith and perfect faith. He works to beginit and he works to complete it. Faith lays hold on Jesus for help,because Jesus laid hold on the heart for faith. Hebrews 13:21 saysthat God works in us what is pleasing in his sight through Jesus. Heis the author and the perfecter of our faith and we should sit withour Bible and our tablet in the park overwhelmed with the stunningtruth that, behind every good resolve and plan of attack for thisfall, God is at work in us to will and to do his good pleasure(Philippians 2:12-13) - to sustain and perfect our faith.  Motivation: The Joy of the Triumph at the End  Finally, this writer wants us to be motivated to endure in our runwith Jesus this fall the same way Jesus was sustained his painfulrun. Verse 2: ". . . fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author andperfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured thecross.." It is not a morally defective thing to be sustained in themarathon of life by the joy of triumph at the end. The reward ofseeing God and being free from all sin is the greatest incentive ofall.  So if it seems that there are going to be some temporary losseswhen you run this race with Jesus, you are right. That is why Jesussaid to count the cost (Luke 14:25-33) before you sign on. But themarathon of the Christian life is not mainly loss. It is mainly gain."For the joy that was set before him he endured the cross." It isonly a matter of timing. If you see things with the eyes of God,there is a vapor's breath of loss and pain, and then everlasting joy(2 Corinthians 4:17).  When you take your day away, with Bible and tablet, to plan yourfall run with Jesus, think on this; think on this: the sufferings ofthis present age are not worth comparing to the glory that will berevealed to the children of God (Romans 8:18).  So let us lay aside every encumbrance, and the sin which so easilyentangles us, and let us run with Jesus.  
