  May 29, 1994    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor       SLAVES OF GOD: FREE FROM ALL TO HONOR ALL    (1 Peter 2:13-17)        Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake toevery human      institution, whether to a king as the one in authority, or to      governors as sent by him for the punishment of evildoers and      the praise of those who do right. For such is the will of God      that by doing right you may silence the ignorance of foolish      men. Act as free men, and do not use your freedom as a covering      for evil, but use it as bondslaves of God. Honor all men; love      the brotherhood, fear God, honor theking.         Through this text this morning God has something to say to us   about calling our president "Slick Willy". He has something to say   about Rush Limbaugh. He has something to say about a spirit of   anti-authoritarian rebellion prevalent in our society and in the   church. He has something to say about the moral foundations of   civil law. And, most importantly has something to say about the   way God relates to all these things and the what it means to be a   God-centered Christian in a pagan or neo-pagan culture. It is full   and overflowing with relevance for us. So let's start with the   most important -- the central -- and then work our way out to   these other practical matters of Christian living today.       Live to God: social and political life in relation to God       The most important thing this text does is put all of our   social and political life into relation to God. The Bible is not a   book about how to get along in the world. It is a book inspired by   God about how to live to God. I love that phrase "live to God."   It's not mine. It's Paul's. He said in Galatians 2:19, "Through   the law I died to the law that I might live to God." The aim of   life -- including our social and political life -- is to live to   God. To live with God in view. To live under his authority. To   live on him like we live on air and food and water. To live for   his good reputation.       So the most important thing these five verses do is put our   social and political life into relation to God, so we can live to   God even in this seemingly secular part of our lives.       Let me simply take each verse just as each comes and point at   this Godwardness in Peter's dealing with these social matters.   Each verse mentions God explicitly except one (v. 14) and that one   implies God's work and purpose. We start with verse 13:        Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake toevery human      institution, whether to a king as the one in authority, (14a)      or to governors.         The key phrase in this verse is "for the Lord's sake." If you   miss that, you miss the most important thing. There is a kind of   allegiance to human institutions that is not for the Lord's sake,   and that is not what Peter is interested in. It may resemble   Christian submission on the outside, but it is radically   different.       Christians do not submit to human institutions simply because   they feel like it, or because they have compliant personalities or   because the institutions have coercive powers. We do not look   first at ourselves to see what we feel like doing, nor do we look   first at the institution (like government) to see if it there are   consequences for not submitting. We look first to God. We consult   God about the institution. And we submit for his sake.       What makes this issue so urgent for Peter that he brings it up   right here is what he has said in the previous four verses. In   verse 9 he said that Christians are "a chosen race, a holy nation   and a people of God's own possession." In verse 10 he said that we   are "the people of God." In verse 11 he said that we are therefore   aliens and strangers here among the social and political   institutions of this world.       All that raises the question whether we have any allegiance to   the institutions of this world at all. If we are a separate "holy   nation" and if we are "God's people" and if we are "aliens and   strangers" perhaps then we should withdraw into our own Christian   ghettos and communities and enclaves and have nothing to do with   the powers and institutions of the world. Peter's answer to that   is NO.       While you are in this world, you are (in different senses)   citizens of two orders, two systems. This world with its necessary   institutions, and the order of the kingdom of God with its   necessary values. This is not because the two orders have equal   authority, but because God is the ruler and owner of both, and   when you belong first to him and his kingdom, you can be sent by   him, for his sake, for his purposes, for his glory into the   kingdom of this world.       In this way Christian submission to the institutions of this   world becomes an act of tribute to God's authority over the   institutions of the world. You look a king or a governor in the   eye and say, "I submit to you, I honor you -- but not for your   sake. I honor you for God's sake. I honor you because God owns you   and rules over you and has sovereignly raised you up for a limited   season and given you the leadership that you have. For his sake   and for his glory and because of his rightful authority over you I   honor you.       So verse 13 subordinates all submission on earth to a higher   submission to God when it says, "submit for the Lord's sake." We   keep the speed limit for God's sake, not because we might get a   ticket. And all our driving becomes an act of worship.       Next . . .verse 14:        &#91;Submit to kings and governors&#93;as sent by him      for the punishment of evildoers and the praise of those who do      right.         This is the one verse in the text that does not mention God.   But he is here. When Peter tells us that the purpose of kings and   governors is to punish evil and praise good he is giving God's   purpose for them. We know this from Romans 13:4 where Paul says,   that civil authority "is a minister of God to you for good . . .   &#91;and&#93; it is a minister of God, an avenger who brings wrath   upon the one who practices evil."       So what verse 14 expresses is not necessarily what Nero and his   provincial governors aimed to do. It expresses what God designed   government for. Nero, in fact beheaded Paul and crucified Peter   upside down. The proper aim of government is to dam up the river   of evil that flows from the heart of man so that it does not flood   the world with anarchy (as, for example, in Rwanda and Somalia).   Governments do not save, they are to maintain external order in a   world seething with evil so the saving message of the gospel can   run and triumph on its own power. That is why Paul urged us in 1   Timothy 2:1-4 to pray for kings and those in authority -- because   he desires that the Gospel not be hindered by upheaval, so that   more people can be saved.       Next . . .verse 15:        For such is the will of God that by doingright you      may silence the ignorance of foolishmen.         We are to get our bearings in a pagan culture from the will of   God (1 Pet. 4:2). We are aliens and strangers. We consult our true   Sovereign how to live. He tells us what is right and what is wrong   through his book -- our ultimate charter and constitution.       His aim for us -- just like it was last week in verse 12 -- is   that we live out such a joyful, sacrificial, humble, fearless life   of goodness to others that their slander of Christianity will   finally be silenced. "By doing good you may silence the ignorance   of foolish men."       We get this strategy and the strength and guidance to live it   from God.       Next . . .verse 16:        Act as free men, and do not use yourfreedom as a      covering for evil, but use it as bondslaves ofGod.         What this verse teaches is that we belong to God and not the   American government. We are slaves of God and not man (1 Cor.   7:22-23). We do not submit to human institutions as slaves to   those institutions but as God's free people. We submit in freedom   for his sake. Not in bondage for the king's sake.       God has transferred us in one profound sense from this age to   the kingdom of his Son. We have passed from death to life. But   then for a season he sends us back into this age, as it were, not   as we were once -- as slaves to sin and guilt and the whims of   this age and its institutions -- but as free people, as aliens who   live by other values and other standards and goals and priorities.   We do submit. But we submit freely, not cowering before human   authorities, but gladly obeying our one true King -- God.       Our whole disposition of freedom and joy and fearlessness and   radical otherness from this world is rooted in our belonging to   God -- which in one sense is slavery (because his authority over   us is absolute) but in another sense is glorious freedom (because   he changes our hearts so that we love doing what he gives us to   do).       As Martin Luther said in his wonderful little treatise called   "The Freedom of a Christian:"        A Christian is a perfectly free lord ofall, subject      to none. A Christian is a perfectly dutiful servant of all,      subject to all.         The key to that paradox is God. Freed by God from slavery to   all human institutions; and sent by God freely and submissively   into those institutions -- for his sake!       Finally . . .verse 17:        Honor all men; love the brotherhood, fearGod, honor      the king.         There is a progression here I think. First give to all human   beings (good and bad) a basic respect and honor. The way you   respect a scoundrel like Judas and the way you respect a saint   like John will be different. But there is a way. And we are to   look for it and find it. It probably will not mean that the word   scoundrel should drop out of existence. But how you use it will be   profoundly changed.       Then beyond that common respect and honor of all humanity,   there is a special love that is to be given to "the brotherhood,"   that is, to fellow Christians.       Then beyond that common respect for all and that special love   for Christians there is a special fear appropriate to God, and no   one else. We are not slaves of men, and so we do not fear men. We   give them honor freely. And we love Christians freely. And we bow   to God's absolute authority reverently.       "Honor all, love the brotherhood, fear God . . ."       Then, back to the basic honor -- "Honor the king." Include him   in the honor and respect given to all. He is not to be feared and   he need not be loved as Christians are loved. But he must be   honored. First comes our absolute allegiance to God. Next comes   our affectionate love for other believers. Then comes our honor to   the king and other unbelievers. The king is not God. Only God is   God.       That is the main message of this text. But now look at a few of   the implications for our life today. I mentioned four at the   beginning of this message.       Application       







1. Honoring the   President       First, I said it has something to say about calling the   President of the United States "Slick Willy". Now it almost goes   without saying that I find myself more out of tune with this   president than any president in my life time. The month he was   inaugurated I preached a sermon called, "How do pro-life   Christians honor a Pro-Choice President?" It wasn't easy then and   it has gotten harder since.       But the fact is we must find a way to express our dismay at   some of his views and some of his behavior while also   communicating a basic respect for him has a person and a respect   for his office which is ordained by God. "Honor all men...honor   the king."       One way to do this is to let sorrow temper indignation. This   doesn't mean you will only talk when you agree with him. It means   that when you disagree with him you will let the moral and social   seriousness of the issue guard you from cheap, careless, insolent   cynicism.       







2. Rush   Limbaugh       This relates directly to the second implication I mentioned at   the beginning. The text has something to say about Rush Limbaugh.       I have no comment on Limbaugh's politics. But I can't help but   think this text has a bearing on the spirit he exudes. I only want   to ask you if you believe his prevailing attitude and spirit and   tone (and the key word here is prevailing, since there may be   times when satire has a place in the rough and tumble public   forum) is one that you hope will be more prevalent in our social   discourse or in the life of our church? Is it the spirit of one   who honors all men and honors in a special way the king -- the   president? From show to show does sorrow balance indignation and   disdain? Are there tears for terrible consequences? Is there a   heartfelt earnestness and concern that goes beyond cynicism? I'm   not sure about the answer since I have not heard or watched   enough. But be alert that these questions matter, not just his   political views.    
    







3.   Anti-authoritarian rebellion       Third, I said that this text has something to say about a   spirit of anti-authoritarian rebellion prevalent in our society   and in the church.       There is an inborn dislike for authority in all human beings.   We are rebels by nature. Adam and Eve chose to eat the forbidden   fruit in order that they might be like God and determine for   themselves what is good and evil. That has been our nature ever   since. It's what we need to be saved from by the cross of Christ   and the power of the Holy Spirit.       Some cultures foster this rebellious spirit more than others.   Ours fosters it profoundly. Driving through Chicago I saw a huge   billboard that said on the one side: "Image is everything" and on   the other side in huge red letters, "Rebel!" The two go hand in   hand. The one says that truth and inner reality do not matter. In   fact they may not even exist. What matters is what you can get by   the image you project. So it follows: "Rebel!" against anyone who   tries to limit you by saying there is some standard for your inner   life -- anyone who says that image is not everything. Especially   rebel against God because in God's eyes image is not anything --   except a micro-thin cellophane wrapping around nothing -- or   around a pouting adult child stuck at the immature stage of the   "terrible two's."       This text, with the whole Bible, calls us to humble ourselves   first before God, who has absolute authority and absolute rights   over us, as the potter over the clay, and then, for his sake to   humble ourselves before any institution that God tells us to. In   short, the one remedy to rebellion is the grace of God making us   submissive to authority of God so that we can enjoy the   all-satisfying fellowship of God and submit in freedom to   institutions designed by God.       







4. Moral   foundations of civil law       Finally, I said that this text has something to say about the   moral foundations of civil law.       Verse 14 says that civil authority exists for the punishing of   wrong and the praising of good. I can't do justice to a huge   issue. But I can point. And what this points to is that the   reality of wrong and right are foundations of law. If the civil   authorities are to punish wrong and reward right, then there must   be wrong and right.       I suggest that one of our tasks as Christians -- not the only   one, or even the main one -- is to keep saying that. Laws (and   their proper enforcement) rest on the reality of right and wrong.   If we do away with right and wrong, laws will be without   foundation and will crumble and all that will be left is anarchy.       It is not our job to save America from anarchy. Our job is to   live to God in all of life -- including the social and political   parts of life -- so that others may turn to him and be saved and   give him glory. But in that process leaders are honored, and civil   discourse is purged of cynicism and the rebellious spirit is   humbled and the moral foundation of law is strengthened. And this   in turn reveals, for those who have eyes to see, that living unto   God is good for the world.       Copyright 1994 John Piper     Piper'sNotes   
