Page 1 of 8 Sermon to the Saints of God assembled at Topeka, KS: Sunday, March 22, 2015 Several weeks ago, my Sunday morning picket team was picketing at the Community Church on 21st, by Washburn. Pastor Tim came out to contend with us about why we would choose to picket at his church. He couldn't understand, because he claims that they preach STRONGLY against homosexuals, so what could we possibly have against them? Well, Pastor Tim, do you preach free will? Do you preach that people can accept Jesus as their very own personal savior and bell boy to carry their luggage to heaven? Why yes, Pastor Tim does preach that Jesus is a traveling insurance salesman, and that he'll have your back at the pearly gates, if you'll just pay the small monthly premium, by exercising your free will, believing on him, and sprinkling in a few good works here and there, and stuffing a few dollars in the box! I commenced to laying some good stuff on him, including Romans 8:29,30: "¶ For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified." Timmy's well-rehearsed, silver-tongued, Satan inspired response to those powerful words: "Foreknow just means that he foresaw whether someone would exercise their free will to be good or bad". Really!?! So now you've got God the Father (with his very own 1-900 number) hunkered over a crystal ball, and reading palms, tea leaves and tarot cards to discern which souls will buy in to the great pyramid scheme proffered by hippy, Birkenstock wearing, bell-boy Jesus. Absolute blasphemy! The context of the verse shows Timmy's argument (that foreknow = foresaw) to be utter folly! If he foresaw that it was going to happen, then what is he predestinating? No need to predestinate something that is already going to happen! In this context, the word "foreknow" means to fore-love; to elect. THOSE people (whom he fore-loved) are the ones that he predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son, and THOSE people are the ones he called, justified and glorified! Romans 9:10-13 "And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac; (For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;) It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." The "purpose of God according to election" ­ it is HIS PURPOSE - not his prescient foresight ­ HIS PURPOSE, to elect, to call, to love, to hate, etc.  Page 2 of 8 Now, we have heard the question that Pastor Tim posed, more times than I can count over these many years that we have been crying aloud at these whorehouses, masquerading as churches ­ "why are you picketing US?", We have given many answers to that question: You've got proud fags / adulterers / fornicators, etc in your membership; you've got proud fags / adulterers / fornicators, etc in your pulpit; you've got crop headed Jezebels in your pulpit; you marry fags; your women have their hair cropped off; you worship idols; your priests rape children, etc. While all of those answers are good answers, and true, I submit to you that each of those things is a symptom of the real problem: these Anti-Christian churches have removed the Sovereign King from his throne! Romans 1:21-23 "Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things." Herein is the root of depravity ­ beginning with the lying hiss of the serpent in the Garden of Eden ­ from which all other sin flows: to subjugate God to the will of the creature. When you take away God's sovereignty, then God is NO LONGER GOD! When man's will trumps God's will, then God is NO LONGER GOD! This matter of the sovereignty of God is fundamental to everything that God is, everything that the Bible teaches, and therefore everything that we believe. Without it, God is human, and humans are God! What folly! God is the only Sovereign, the blessed and only Potentate (Sovereign Prince): 1Timothy 6:13-16 "¶I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: Which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen." These are deep waters, but we only have time to skim over the top of them today. Specifically, I'd like to focus on this Anti-Christian notion that you can "accept Jesus". To that end, let's focus on the encounter that Joshua had with the Lord, in Joshua Chapter 5. Here's some quick context for that event:  God delivered the Jews from 400 years of bondage in Egypt; leading them out with a high hand, including the devastating plagues of Egypt, the parting of the Red Sea, and the utter destruction of the Egyptian army.  Page 3 of 8  The Jews ­ thankless for that great deliverance, and the daily miracles that poured out upon them (manna, pillar of cloud / fire, etc.) ­ murmured against God in the wilderness and provoked him to anger.  When it was time to take the promised land, the Jews again showed themselves to be thankless and faithless, and so the Lord caused them to wander in the wilderness until all of those who were over 20 years old had died (save for Joshua and Caleb).  After the 40 years of wandering, it was now time to conquer and inherit the land of Canaan. Now the Lord performs another wondrous work, by parting the waters of the Jordan River, such that the Jews passed over the Jordan, into the promised land, on dry ground.  After crossing the Jordan, the first major opponent in their path is this great walled city of Jericho. This is a crucial moment. These people were not soldiers in the first place, and they had spent the past 40 years wandering in the wilderness, watching their relatives die, according to the chastening of the Lord. Now they are up against a great stronghold, the likes of which had terrified their fathers into a faithless retreat.  On the eve of the assault on Jericho, Joshua is walking about the camp, where he is met by the Lord, who comes with words of instruction, and encouragement, at this critical moment: Joshua 5:13-15 "¶And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant? And the captain of the LORD'S host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so." Who is this man speaking to Joshua?  I believe that this was a Christophany, meaning that the man who appears to Joshua here is the Lord Jesus Christ. o He styles himself as the captain of the Lord's host. "Lord of Hosts" and "God of Hosts" are descriptive names of God used 235 and 39 times respectively, throughout the Bible. o The man accepts prostrate worship from Joshua ­ The Lord is the only one to whom such worship is due; angels or prophets would certainly not accept that worship: Revelation 22:8,9 ­ "And I John saw these  Page 4 of 8 things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which shewed me these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God."  The Lord is the captain of his people in the earth ­ leading them ­ and he is the captain of the host of heaven (the angelic host, and the spirits of just men made perfect), who were now present to participate in the great victory that their captain was going to win; they are ALWAYS present and involved in the victories of the Lord, and the preservation of the saints! (Genesis 32:2; 2Kings 6:17; Hebrews 12:1)  The Lord is the "captain of [our] salvation" (Hebrews 2:10). The captain leading the children to glory!  Daniel 4:35 "And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" What are we to learn from the Lord's words here?  Joshua (not knowing to whom he spoke) asks if the Lord is for them or against them. He asks the wrong question! The Lord declares that I am the captain of the host ­ I called you to fight ­ you fight for ME!  The question is not, never has been, and never will be, whether you will "accept Jesus". The question is: Has Jesus chosen and called you? o The captain chooses his soldiers:  2Timothy 2:3,4 "Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier."  John 15:16,19 "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you ... If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." o The captain chooses based upon his own will ­ you have no say in the matter. It seems arbitrary to the prideful human heart, which is hard wired to think itself worthy based upon its own work. Consider the events of Judges 7, when the Lord chose Gideon's soldiers, based solely upon the manner in which they drank water.  Page 5 of 8 o We're talking about a conscription; a draft. When you are drafted for war, you have NO CHOICE in that matter. When the Sovereign commands you to war: pack your bags. Some interesting detail about the U.S. draft:  Civil War ­ 186,364 Union soldiers drafted  There was violent opposition to a draft in the Confederate states, because it was "forced slavery".  WWI ­ 3 Million soldiers drafted  WWII ­ 10 Million soldiers drafted  Vietnam ­ 2.2 Million soldiers drafted  Selective Service System is still in force ­ men between 18 and 25 must be registered, so that the draft can be re-instated if necessary.  Draft Dodging comes with penalties ranging from prison, to execution. o If you have been called to service by the Lord, there's no escaping that call. Consider how well that worked out for Jonah.  Why take off his shoes? What is this "holy ground"? o Shoes are the most basic and fundamental piece of armor for a soldier. You can be armor plated from head to ankle, but if your feet are bare, you're worthless in a fight! Going into battle without shoes means that you are looking down for your next careful step, rather than engaging the enemy; one wrong step, and you're on the ground. We see that importance reflected in the description of the Armor of God (Ephesians 6), seeing that we are to have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. o Given the importance of the shoes to a soldier (particularly one that is about to go into battle), the Lord commands Joshua to remove them, as an acknowledgement ­ a bold confession of faith ­ that he believes that he is utterly dependent upon God for ALL things! There will be no winning that battle at Jericho, there will be no winning ANY battle, there will be no taking your next breath, there will be no getting to heaven, by your own strength! So, just set your human means, and human thinking aside! As long as the Lord is with you, you have life! Without him, you have death! o Very similar circumstances and language are found in Exodus 3, when Moses is about to go to war with Pharaoh, and God speaks to him out of the burning bush: "I AM THAT I AM"; "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where thou standest is holy ground." The message being that he is everything that was, is, and is to come; the alpha and omega, the first and the last. I AM what I shall be, and I shall be what I AM! I AM EVERYTHING! o Therein lies the "holy ground" ­ that the Lord's people sanctify God in their hearts, in their words, and in their lives, because we have been given to see God as he is ­ a Sovereign King, upon whom we rely for everything that we  Page 6 of 8 have, and everything that we are, and everything that we desire ­ rather than seeing him as the flesh desires him to be. God's people are the ONLY ones who see him, and acknowledge him ON HIS THRONE ­ HOLY, while Satan and his legion minions constantly seek to dethrone him, and to steal his glory. o There is a strong warning for us here! 1Corinthians 10:11,12 "Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." Even for God's people, the flesh will continually war against our spirit, and tend to lift us up in pride against our King. While we grind along, tending to the business that the Lord has put in front of us, we can easily take our eye off of the prize, and become puffed up, thinking that we have the privilege of serving the King because we deserve it, rather than continually remembering what manner of worthless, unprofitable worms we are, and therefore laying prostrate before the Mercy Seat. Consider a stalwart of the faith such as Moses, and the chastening that he endured because he was lifted up in pride, and didn't give God the glory when he took credit for bringing water from the rock at the waters of Meribah. The notion that humans can "accept Jesus" is the ultimate form of works righteousness; it is the ultimate "work". These lying phony Christians say that they need Christ for "everything", except for that one work, which they can do on their own. So there they are, dead in their sins, and yet they are going to quicken themselves (make themselves alive), and THEN rely on Christ. If you can quicken yourself, then WHY do you need to rely on Christ for anything? This lie, this Gospel of Satan, is the foundation for all of modern Christianity! They have made Christ a traveling salesman with a pitch, rather than a great king who has commanded your presence before his throne! Their Christ IS NO CHRIST! HE IS NO GOD! THEY ARE NOT CHRISTIANS! They are in fact traitors against the King! Ultimately, that's the reason why we preach to these false churches, regardless of their particular variety of sin. I'm sick of hearing from these phony "Pastor Tim" types about how much they can't stand fags, while denying the sovereignty of God ­ We don't care what you think! You've long ago lost that war! Putting fags back in the closet, because YOU think they're yucky isn't going to fix this mess! If you have ears to hear, then the only place to start is to take off your shoes at this holy ground; put God back on his throne! Lord willing, there will be some sheep in the midst of these wolf-infested, ear-tickling whore houses, who will hear the voice of the Great Shepherd by the appointed means of our preaching. Acts 13:48 "And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed."  Page 7 of 8 I leave you with these words of the Lord Jesus, that are fitting for this topic, and for the Lord's Supper which we will shortly take: John 6:28-71 "28 ¶ Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God? 29 Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. 30 They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work? 31 Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. 32 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven. 33 For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. 34 Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. 35 And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. 36 But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not. 37 All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. 38 For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. 39 And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. 40 And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. 41 The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven. 42 And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? 43 Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves. 44 No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. 45 It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. 46 Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father. 47 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. 48 I am that bread of life. 49 Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.  Page 8 of 8 50 This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. 51 I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. 52 The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? 53 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. 54 Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. 55 For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. 56 He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. 58 This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. 59 These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. 60 ¶ Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it? 61 When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you? 62 What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? 63 It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. 64 But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. 65 And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. 66 From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him. 67 Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? 68 Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. 69 And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. 70 Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? 71 He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve." I love you all. Amen.  
