

Meher Baba: The ìDivine Belovedî* 
BY DANE RUDHYAR 
Part IIÜ 

ASTROLOGICAL data, it should be clear to anyone, can in no way furnish proofs of the veracity of claims such as Meher Baba makes. It is obvious that quite a number of people were born, in India alone, with birth charts so closely similar to his that they could not be diff≠erentiated in the type of analysis made by modern Western astrologers. It is even probable that at least a handful of people in the world were born with charts identical to this. All that astrology can do is to study the physio-psychological structure and development of personalities and their destinies. It can never perceive purely transcendent fac≠tors or discover whether or not these physio-psychological char≠acteristics can or will be the outer bases of a divine  Incarnationó 
total or partial as the case may be. 
Thus what we are discussing now is not Meher Baba, the possible "Incarnate God", but only Meher Baba, the human being or personality. Likewise should we study the birthchart of a pope or an emperor we cannot see in it papacy or imperial majesty, but only the character and destiny, the strength and weaknesses of a human person who became invested with super-personal power and attributes. However, the interesting thing is that one can deduce from the birth-chart of this ''human, too human" person the fate of the office he held while be held it. This is ordinary astrological practice. The chart of the Kaiser told significant things about the German Empire while he was emperor; 


because the fate of the man-emperor could be taken as a symbol and "signature" of the fate of the empire, while he was emperor. 
If, then, Meher Baba should be what he claimsóeither wholly or within certain limitsóhe would thus be, as a human person, the symbol of the era of which he could be consideredóas a divine Incarnationóthe Spiritual Centre. Thus to study the chart of such a significant Personage, while invested with such a cosmic function, would be to study the character and destiny of an era. Readers of this magazine may remember my analysis of the Victorian Era in terms of Queen Victoria's birth-chart. We find ourselves facing a similar though not identicalósituation. Only we have no way of knowing as yetó at least I have notówhether or not Meher Baba is right in claiming to be a spiritual Personage of world-significance, a total and all-encompassing Divine Manifestation. The fact that the claim is being made by other contemporary figures, that it was madeówith much greater historical significance as far as we can see to-day by Baha'u'llah last century, makes the matter a very obscure one. AstrologyóI must repeatócan be of no value in deciding it. 
What, nevertheless, could be the personal, psychological char≠acteristics in Baba's birth-chart which could show him ready to assume, or to be invested with, such an exalted part? We might find an answer by studying first the main factors of the chart taken singlyóthen the most important aspects. 
The Sun is in Pisces 6.22' on a degree symbolized (in the Sabian system which I use exclusively) as follows: ''Fog hides the shore; but on a clear rock a cross rests. Concentration of values amidst the chaos of outer living. Clear light of high realization. Acceptance of life's limits (negative meaning)." 
This symbol is very interesting as it may mean various important things. It may substantiateóif taken in its highest symbolical meaningóa claim to divine emb≠odiment; the "cross on the clear rock" representing symbolically the "Incarnation", the Christ-like being. The cross rises above 

the fog; that is, the divine Entity manifests and pierces through the confusions of the emanations of the collective Unconscious (the symbolical ''sea"). While the race is thus clouded in mist, in delu≠sion, in psychic veils, the Christ-being stands clear, based upon the "rock'' of truth and divinity. 
Let us not forget, however, that in Meher Baba, as a strictly human person, we may thus expect to find both the fog and the cross. A divine Incarnation is human as well as divine. He is the racial need as well as the di≠vine answer to that need. If he is to save mankind he must assume the character, DESTINY and limitations of the human raceó and particularly of the nation or racial group in which he is born. Jesus was born a Jew, because the Jewish race needed most the Christ spirit and Christ's message. But the Jewish limitations were in Him, until He fulfilled and thus overcame them, releasing the Christ spirit to bring a new Gospel to the Jews and to all mankind. 
Thus we may say that the symbol of Mehor Baba's natal Sun indicates an inherent and 
basic life-dualism. If the Sun represents the operation of the Life-force and of the integrating Self within the individual man, then we may realize that Baba's life is one of overcoming of the "fog" which so well characterizes the psychic atmosphere of India filled with the emanations of a particularly active collective Unconscious. He is the cross shining through the fog, and thus may well be considered as an Avatar, that is, as a divine Manifestation to his raceóand possibly to the human race. More strictly speaking, what is indicated here in the Sun symbol is the tendency in Baba to assume or to be invested with such a function. 
If the exact rising degree I have chosen for his birth is correct, the symbol for the Ascendant corroborates the above statements: It reads: ''A world-leader is seen guided by his ancesters' spirits.'' Here is Babaís dharma, that is, the power which he is to use in fulfilling his true destiny. He is shown as the fruition of a long ancestral tradition; possibly thus an Avatar fulfilling the spiritual destiny of the ancient Iranian race. 

The Mid-Heaven's degree-symbol is also significant: "A woman, fecundated by her spirit, 'is great with child'. Fullness of Self- reliance and individual destiny. Co-operation between spiritual and material agencies. Pure self-revelation." It is a symbol of "immaculate conception,'' and as the Mid-Heaven refers to the public destiny, as moreover it is in conjunction with Uranus (ruler of the chart), one might find in these points another corroboration of Baba's ''sense of destiny''. 
The symbol for the Nadir point and the Descendant are also significant as they show respec≠tively a spiritual struggle for righteousness associated with all divine Manifestations and a sense of relationship based on the realization of permanent and all-enduring values. 
The Moon, trine the Sun (a fine symbol of personal integration and spiritual vision) is in Scorpio and in the ninth house. Its symbol is also revealing: ''A high mountain lake is bathed in the full moonlight. Illumination of the soul by transcendent wisdom. Quiet touch with cosmic strength; or 
wayward, moody efforts at great≠ness.'' The Moon is the synthesis of the past of the individual, the symbol of the psychic nature, of the mother, of the life of feelings, etc. Its closeness to Uranus in the ninth house stresses the regene≠ration of the nature of feeling through spiritual understanding. It shows the influence of a spiritual "mother"óin this case Hazrat Babajan, whose kiss opened to him a new life, 
If we take together the symbols and positions of Sun, Ascendant, Moon and the mutual relation≠ships they form we get thus a very suggestive picture, full indeed of spiritual implications. Another factóor at least a possibilityóis worth mentioning. It refers to the position of the vernal equinox according to the cycle of precession of the equinoxes. Such a position is a much discussed matter and no consensus of opinion can be found; Ncver≠theless there are many astrologers who claim that the point Aries 0 degree (vernal equinox) is now to be found approximately on the ninth degree of the constellation Pisces. I believe Hindu astrologers concur more or less 

with this view, and thus, as Meher Baba is born in India, the matter is even more significant. 
If Aries 0 degree corresponds to the ninth degree of the constel≠lation Pisces, this means that Pisces 6.22' (Meher Babaís Sun) corsesponds approximately to the fifteenth degree of the constel≠lation Aquariusóthe difference between the two zodiacs (of signs and of constellations) being about twenty one degrees. Now the fifteenth degree of Aquarius is a very .significant degree. It is so at least in the zodiac of signs, and if the reader reads what I wrote in the first ''Meditations at the Gates of Light" (July 1937, issue of American Astrology) concerning the ìAvatar in Aquariusî he will realize the meaning of this mid-point of Aquarius: a point of descent of spiritual power, an "Avataric Gate" symbolized by "Man" in the fourfold symbolism of the Gospels (Bull, Lion, Eagle, Man)óMan pouring himself out; and, in a more universal sense, Power flowing from a higher to a lower potential, from Sky to Earth. 
In reading the above one must not, however, forget two impor≠tant things; first, that the Aquarius considered here is not the zodiacal sign, but the constellation; therefore, that whatever is meant by this "Avatar in Aquarius" does not refer to the usual personal realm of life (represented by the surface of the earth and the things living on and from it) but to the planetary cosmic realm (repre≠sented by the polar axis of the earth, the gyration of which causes the precessional movement of the equinoxes). In other words where zodiacal signs are considered we deal with earthly man and his physio-psychological rhythm as a personality; whereas if zodiacal constellations are meant planetary and divine factors are considered, either within the spiritual part of individual man or in terms of cosmic organization. An important point, which it is unfortunately not possible to develop in this articleóand with which, I know, some astrologers will not agree . 
The second important thing to remember is that not everyone born with his or her Sun in Aquarius 15 degrees (whether reckoning by sign or by 

constellation) can be, even to the slightest degree, an ìAvatarî! The point is obvious, yet I want to make sure that my readers with such a natal Sun will not all jump to the conclusion that they should begin to feel themselves being "divine Manifestations". That would be just too tragic for words! 
I do not know, even in the least, who or what Meher Baba is. All that is evident to me, from numerations relations which have been made to me of his activities by close associates and from my own impressions received during brief contacts, is that here is a most unusual personageóat least from our Western point of view. His psychological gifts and technique are amazing and the manner in which he has become for many a living symbol of Deity and an integrating force (at least from an external point of view) must command in any case the attention even of the most critical mind. Whether the ultimate spiritual results of his methods and of his dominations over nearly every detail of his disciples' lives are good or evil, whether through him these disciples will reach the highest that they could possibly reach, considering what they were when they met him or they will be led to illusory atonements with but temporary gods; that, I cannot tellóand astrology cannot tell. 
I must also leave every astrologer and student free to make his or her own interpretation of such natal aspects as a square of the Sun in Pisces to Pluto and Neptune conjunct in Gimini. Some may say that the aspect is nefarious and leads to illusions, dangerous psychism, and all sorts of glam≠orous self-intoxication. The cross formed by Uranus opposing Jupiter and squared by Venus in the fixed signs Scorpio, Aquarius and Taur≠us, and very close to the angles of the chart may seem also to enhance the possibility of great emotional upsets and of peculiar types of human relationship. It symbolizes, at any rate quite accurately, the emotional tensions of our age. 
All this, I believe, can hardly be denied. But then if one studies Meher Babaís life and behaviour with his disciples, it is evident that they are utterly fantastic (accor≠ding to 

rational standards) and bewildering. It is evident that he not only makes use of emotional tensions in others, and in the relations between him≠self and others, but that he deliberately plans in the most subtle manner situations which will produce emotional psychic, spiritual tensions. His psycho≠logical techinique, I repeat, is amazing; but he undoubtedly seems to know at every moment what he is doing and to what precise end. And who could expect a "divine Manifestation'' to act according to our earthly standards! 
Moreover, this mystic of mys≠tics who according to all Western standards, was for years out of his mind (as many yogis, of course, are for more or less lengthy periodsówitness Ramakrishna and countless others)óthis God-intox≠icated man, is most meticulous in practical details of household, of individual diet, of financial matters; not only meticulous, but most perspicacious. He asks of all his disciples almost the impossibleó but they do it. He puts them often in conditions where they reveal their worst, but that is an old occult technique: a kind of Eastern psycho-analysis which C. G. Jung is emulating in a way adapted to our modern conditions of living. 
H. P. Blavatsky used somewhat similar methods with her disciples, forcing them to face themselves to face their unconscious depths, their failings, their evilóto the end that (this being done under her super≠vision) they could overcome fear and ignorance . . . . and become whole. 
It is true that Baba demands absolute obedience from the disciples; but in this he also follows the old Hindu tradition. It is true that he becomes the center of integration of the disciple, who seems to be controlled from outside, to rejoice or be depressed at the bidding of Baba. But perhaps no integration or discipline would attained in any other way. We are in an era of dictators, order being imposed upon chaotic masses from the outside. Yet what appears to be outside, from the point of view of the individual may also be considered as innermost from the point of the larger group or whole. A Mussolini, if he be considered as an Avatar of the national spirit 

of Italy according to the imperial image of ancient Rome, is not ''outside'' of Italy, of which he is the center of integration; though, of course, he is outside of any particular Italian individual consi≠dered in his capacity of human individuals. 
Who knows, Baba may be this, a "divine Dictator" moulding the human race, or a portion of it specially ''belonging" to him, according to a divine Image. Or he may be self-deluded. If the first hypothesis is true, some may think that such a method belongs to the past, together with Fascism on the political plane. They may stand for spiritual democracy, as well as political democracy. There is room for mny opinions and I am not presenting here my opinion, but merely trying to understand facts and interpret claims in the light of astrology. The square of Sun to the conjunction Pluto-Neptune may be taken in its positive higher meaningóas the incarnation of a universal Spirit represented by the Pluto-Neptune pair. The symbol for the degree of Pluto denotes extreme readiness for conquering action on the basis of training; the one connected with Neptune refers to a "Newly opened real estate subdivision," to the opening of a new domain of life to be organised by the will and intelligence of the pioneer. If Meher Baba is, as he claims, a manifestation of the Universal Spirit, then the new field of activity symbolized might be a new human and planetary era. 
The great square formed by Uranus, Venus and Jupiter represents well his peculiar psychological technique, based on extreme emotional release. Many people, even of strongly intellec≠tual type, men as well as women, have crises of weeping for hours or days after they come close to him. He is indeed a strong catalyst to psychological combus≠tions. What he demands of all is: love. Any type of love, he says, can be used by him in his great and mysterious "work"ófrom the most personal to the most sublime. He has the gift to appear to each disciple as if he loved him specially and particularly. Yet he does this for every disciple in turn. He brings them to extreme emotional pitch, then he goesóand they are bereft of happiness. They must raise themselves up painfully, under most exacting psychological conditions imposed by him. 

The astrological student will note the square by Uranus to Venus risingóboth retrogade. He will study the symbols for each of these planets (cf. my book Astrology of Personality) and try to read for himself the deeper meanings of the way in which these planetary factors operate. Obviously, the Western world is bound to misinterpret the emo≠tional technique of this "Divine Beloved". It has done so. We are not used to this handling of the power of love; at best we can correlate it with the mystic ecstasies of Christian Saints. 
But to think of a Jesus in the flesh leading modern St. Terasas from emotional pitch to higher emotional pitch seems rather too fantastic. Perhaps it is. It is certainly irrational. But so was the faith of early Christian martyrs, the amazing Crusade of the Children in the Middle Ages, the devotion of Bahai martyrs in nineteenth century Islamóand so are modern political religions leading millions to horrible deaths while giving their nation inte≠gration and prestige. 
Yet the birth-chart of Meher Baba presents most constructive and integrative aspect Trines (symbols of vision and expansion) are conspicuous: Sun to Moon and Uranus, Saturn to Venus, Mercury to Uranus. Sextiles strengthen all these trines. An interesting septile of Saturn to Mars may suggest a striking spiritual message. Mars, ruler of the house of public activities, is very well aspected; placed also on a degree of happiness through integration. The degree-symbol for Mercury suggests the religious reformer's mind; that for Jupiter, a soul deeply rooted in the achievement of a racial past, the fruition of a spiritual and cultural tradition. 
For every aspect of tension there is a balancing aspect of harmony and integration. Espec≠ially if the degree-symbols are deeply studied, in the general picture they reveal, the chart is a striking one. It shows struggle and the possibility of self-deceit, but the struggle which Baba had coming back to earth-conscious≠ness after the mystic kiss 

of his old woman-teacher, is said to have been terrific indeed. We may call the experience madness; but Baba to-day is too conscious and deliberate in his use of psychological forces to be called mad. In a peculiar way, his self≠lessness is evident. Whatever he is, his physical, rational being is assuredly only a portion of his total being. What is the unknown, unrevealed part? Who knows? Many swear that they ìknowî by direct experience that he is indeed the Supreme Spirit. What they mean, however, is rather that they have felt it to be so. Proofs? Who can tell what are the proofs by which we can ascertain the divine contents of a human personality? 
The curious facts, however, areóI must repeatóthat several persons to-day claim at the same time to be each the only manifestation of God; that they have convinced many followers of the truth of their statements by ''direct experience," that they offer significant "proofs" of their claimsósignificant in varying ways to varied groups of people; that each seems to fulfil something very real in the unconscious experience of his own race or group, and at the same time attracts devotees from many lands and conditions. 
Can they all be right, and all be wrong at the same time? May the ''Divine Manifestation'' be so far beyond our comprehensions and standards that it may have to be sought beyond, yet at the core, of each and all these particular "revelations"? Can it be multi≠dimensional, yet reflect itself in the many personalities in which it takes single dimensions which appear to be the whole whereas they are only the parts? Can the irrational be ever susceptible of adequate rational formulation? 
Puzzling questions these are. Our age is indeed much like the centuries that followed the beginning of the Christian era. Has then the World-Saviour or World-Teacher for the future era already appeared? Or has he appeared in part, and this appearance be yet not complete, so that a new phase of it is now operating or about to operate? 

