 
 2009-01-04 Resistance/Discernment  

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words 

 
We are here 

on the fourth day of the new year 

to worship, to celebrate that we are, 

to resist anything that diminishes us, 

and lift up all that helps us choose, 

decide, accept, discern and bless. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence 

 
All the music!  

The four movements of the great symphony 

winter, spring, summer, fall, 

and the morning sonata of the sparrow 

flickering on the fencepost. 

The heavy metal pound  

of a factory making leaf-springs for trucks, 

and the jazz-combo of 

nurses and doctors on their rounds, 

syncopated, improvising, lyrical–. 

the trumpet and beat 

of marchers protesting violence, 

the requiem of mourners at bedside, 

and bluegrass of grandpa remembering the war, 

the folksong of the grandmother cooking goulash for
 her Athens-bound grandson, 
the Mass in Bminor of the Jewish social worker 

getting food for a struggling family 

with growling stomachs right here under amidst Colu
mbus™s shining glass towers; 
the ambient music of computer keyboards 

clicking softly to the descant breathing of 

the furnace heat coming up the flue, 

and even the composer John Cage 

writing down nothing but rests 

on his musical score, giving us this 

minuet of silence. 

 
silence 

 
 All the music! 

The trios and quartets of families 

circling for the holidays, 

the duets of friends sitting at the table, 

the dissonance and resolve, 

the blues and the solos, the warm waltzes: 

this music we play by naming their names: 

the loved, hard to love, and the remembered: 

 
naming 

 
All the music, 

the seasons and cities, the loves and losses, 

and this too, the skillful bow gliding on the cello
 strings, and the practiced fingers on the 
keys. 

 
The First Reading this morning comes from Voyna I M
ir/ War and Peace, by Count Lev 
Nikolayevitch Tolstoi, written over seven years and
 finished in 1869. It is considered one 
of the greatest novels in the world™s literary hist
ory. Book Ten, Chapter 17 
 
At the approach of danger there are always two voic
es that speak with equal force in the 
human heart: one very reasonably tells us to consid
er the nature of the danger and the 
means of avoiding it; the other even more reasonabl
e says that it is too painful and 
troubling to think of the danger, since it is not w
ithin our human power to provide for 
everything and escape from the general march of eve
nts; and that it is therefore better to 
turn aside from the painful subject till it has pas
sed, and to think of what is pleasant. In 
solitude a person will generally yield to the first
 voice; in society, to the second. 
 
The Second Reading is the piece called Instead of a
 Preface by the great poet of 
resistance and love from the Soviet era in Russia, 
Anna Akhmatova. The Great Terror she 
refers to was one of the horrible purges of the Sta
lin era, when tens of thousands of 
people were simply executed to get them out of the 
way. 1957 
 
In the awful days of the Great Terror, I spent seve
nteen months in the outer waiting line 
of the prison lines in Leningrad. Once, somebody ‚r
ecognized™ me there as a poet. Then a 
woman with bluish lips, standing behind me in the l
ine, a woman of course who had 
never heard my name, woke up from the stupor so typ
ical for us all in those days, and 
asked me, whispering into my ear (all spoke only in
 a whisper there): ?And do you think 
you can describe this?? 

And I answered: 

?Yes, I can.? 

Then something that almost looked like a smile glid
ed over what had once been her face. 
 
Sermon 

 
 
 ?We begin these meetings with the Serenity Prayer,?
 said the woman on the other side of 
the round table. She bowed her head. My father did 
not and remained silent, since he did 
not know the words of the prayer. ?God grant us the
 courage to change the things we can 
change, the serenity to accept the things we cannot
 change, and the wisdom to know the 
difference.? 

 
So began the first Al-Anon meeting my father ever a
ttended. Last Tuesday. Ten AM. The 
parish hall of St. Ephrem™s in Sterling Heights MI.
 It took a lot to get him there, like my 
alcoholic brother being in the hospital for five da
ys with delirium tremens, but I am glad 
he finally went. 

 
My father listened to stories equal to his own in i
ntensity and drama. Stories of how 
alcoholism can penetrate into the center of any fam
ily system any one can think of, no 
matter the ethnicity or culture of it. And then des
troy it.  
 
Al-Anon is a 12 step group for folks whose lives ar
e affected by alcoholism. Spouse, 
parent, sib, child. Friend, relative, boss, co-work
er. The point of the meetings, basically, 
is to help people who attend to understand that alc
oholism per se is not their problem. 
Alcoholism is the alcoholic™s problem. The issue fo
r those who attend Al-Anon meetings, 
however, is their own personal reaction to the alco
holic. After all, the spouse of an 
alcoholic cannot change the  alcoholic. The daughte
r of an alcoholic cannot change the 
mother alcoholic. And the father of an alcoholic ca
nnot change the son alcoholic. So 
learning what you can change, and what you can™t, i
s pretty important if you want life to 
go forward, not backward. 

 
We can™t change each other, but we can look at our 
own attitudes, and our own 
misinformation and stereotypes and begin to change 
them. We can™t change an alcoholic, 
but we can examine our own responses and begin to c
hange them. We can™t restore health 
in another already lost due to alcohol™s ravishment
s, but we can strive to change our own 
approach and be more and more honest about ourselve
s.  We can change some things, but 
not others.  

 
This is a hard lesson for folks, like my father, wh
o have spent a lifetime in electrical 
engineering, where things can be changed: wires can
 be changed, outlets can be fixed, 
panels can be rewired, and plugs can be unplugged f
rom sockets. The results of these 
changes? Always clear. Clean. And reliable.  His wh
ole lifetime of work experience, he is 
often heard to say, was about such simplicity and r
eliability; namely, that 2 plus 2 always 
equals 4, and that there is a fix to every problem.
  
But human beings are not made of wire. Oh sure, I™v
e heard the metaphor that comes out 
of electrical engineering which we now use for many
 behavioral issues: ?hard-wiring.?  
We hear talk that the brain is ?hard-wired? for cer
tain things, including alcoholism. But, 
as of now, we can™t change the metaphorical wires i
n a human brain. And human beings 
cannot be unplugged from their addictions just like
 that. 
 
 
 For the alcoholic, recovery is not a rewiring, but 
growing self-awareness. It™s a slow 
move from exploitative and dependent relationships 
into honest, non-co-dependent 
relationships. And most usually, it involves a supp
ortive social network–whether at first 
a thirty or sixty day treatment program at a specia
lized hospital, or frequent visits to 
Alcoholics Anonymous or other such circles, like SO
S for example, the Secular 
Organization for Sobriety. 

 
Recovery is a slow, not a fast change; it™s life-lo
ng change, not instantaneous change. But 
the thing is, no one has a magic wand to change any
one else. We ourselves can make 
changes over time in our own attitudes and response
s, but we cannot force anyone else to 
change anything by any method–by shame, by scolding
, by guilt, by anger, by pleading, 
by threats, by sarcasm or even by logical persuasio
n. It simply is a delusion to think so. 
 
But in a world where we can help ailing people acro
ss the street, feed people antibiotics 
to help their healing process, make casts for broke
n bones, offer people plastic surgery, 
and give them medication for their depression, the 
idea that you cannot change people 
may seem, like it is to my father, somewhat contrar
y to experience. And indeed, because 
that is so, resisting the habit of thinking that yo
u can do something that will change others 
for the better is hard work. The hardest work aroun
d in some ways. 
 
But today I say (as we begin a month of sermons add
ressing this topic of resistance), 
today I say that the work of resistance is one of t
he things we are called to do as human 
beings:  human beings who insist on depth, not supe
rficiality–human beings who insist 
on truthfulness, not denial.  

 
I say we are called to resist distortion, humiliati
on, violence and cruelty. We are called to 
resist the imposition of injustice, and the systemi
c insinuation of prejudice into the human 
heart. We are called to resist many things which se
em quite insurmountable at the time.  
 
But I think we are also called to discern when it™s
 time to resist, and when it™s time not to 
resist.  For there are things that can only be acce
pted, not resisted. Your old boss, or your 
old principal, or your old rabbi or priest or minis
ter moves on to another venue, and they 
hire a new young whippersnapper with different idea
s. You resist every single one of 
these new ideas. To what end? Your doctor or dentis
t or mechanic or hair-stylist retires. 
Or moves away. Or dies, even. And you have to find 
another. You resist doing so, 
because your life-long dentist was the best. So you
 resist by not finding a new dentist. To 
what end?  

 
Some changes are simply inevitable. 

 
Sadly, I know a little about this subject from emba
rrassing personal experiences dating 
from my more, what shall we call them, immature yea
rs. I do indeed remember a time 
when I resisted something that could not be resiste
d. 
 
 
 When I went to college, my school required that we 
learn two different languages. They 
don™t any more, but back in the late sixties, they 
demanded a lot of their students. So I 
took French, and then I took Russian. 

 
I found all kinds of things to drive me batty and e
ngage my resistance while studying 
Russian. After 18 years of seeing the letter P and 
sounding it ?p,? I all of a sudden had to 
start pronouncing it like a ?r.? My lips resisted. 
My teeth resisted. My tongue resisted. 
But the Russians have been pronouncing the letter ?
p? like ?r? for as long as we have 
been pronouncing it like ?p.?  It was silly to spen
d so much time resenting and resisting 
the differences in the Russian alphabet. But boy, w
as it a tough fight. It took me six 
months to accept it and finally get it. 

 
My next discovery was that Russians use two verbs f
or every action where English uses 
one verb.  For example, ?skazat? and ?govorit? both
 mean ?to speak.?  But the first refers 
to any time I say something once, as in the sentenc
e, ?I said that yesterday.?  The second 
verb refers to continuous speaking, as in the sente
nce: ?It™s like you always used to say.?  
But me, I resisted the idea of two verbs for every 
one in English. What a waste of words! 
I said. It took me a year to admit that I was willi
ng to speak Russian the Russian way, and 
to learn to distinguish between the verbs.  

 
Finally, my professor introduced verbs of motion. G
oing to the store, coming home from 
work etc.  Now, my professor told me, I needed two 
more verbs for every action. In 
Russian, I cannot just ?go? to the store. I have to
 decide whether I am going to the store 
on foot, or in a vehicle. On foot is one verb. On t
he streetcar is a totally different verb. 
Plus, the regular distinction between the two verbs
 still applies. That means four verbs I 
have to choose from anytime I want to go anyplace. 
If I go to a specialty store to buy 
some rare item, it™s one verb. If I go to my regula
r Kroger™s to buy a week™s worth of 
food, it™s another verb. If walk, it™s a third. If 
I take my bicycle, still another. 
 
I tried for six months to understand this complex a
pproach and to work with it. But I 
found myself resisting, resisting, resisting. Until
 finally I just dropped the class. 
 
My professor was irked. She kept saying, ?I know th
is way of saying things is difficult 
for English speakers. But it™s the way it is. You, 
all by yourself, cannot change the entire 
Russian language because it is something that drive
s you crazy. Your opinions really 
don™t count here.  You have to just give in and stu
dy harder.? 
 
She was right, of course. I can resist Russian gram
mar all I want, and it will still be 
Russian grammar. Unchanged. Unmodified.  

 
I was a fool then, and I am happy only that I learn
ed something from that foolish 
experience in hindsight. 

 
Not all resistance is sensible, you see. Some of it
 is downright foolish. Like mine. Or like 
the tribe in the story this morning that rejected t
he opportunity for better nourishment 

 
 because they were used to what they were getting an
d had settled for it. Their resistance 
was foolish too. 

 
And sometimes resistance is dangerous, and you are 
a fool not to take that into account. 
Anna Akhmatova was a resistance poet in Soviet Russ
ia during the bloody days of Josef 
Stalin. 

She wrote resistance poetry to buoy up herself and 
her friends in an era when Stalin was 
signing so many death warrants and prison sentences
 that it™s a wonder he didn™t have 
bandaged hands. It was an age of terror and horror 
unlike anything we have known in our 
lifetimes, at least in this country.  So Akhmatova 
wrote the greatest poem of her poetic 
career, which she eventually called Requiem. It was
 one of her longest poems too. But 
she didn™t let the writing stay written. It could h
ave gotten her executed or imprisoned, 
had anyone seen it. So she started writing in 1940,
 on paper napkins. Then she would 
give it to a friend of hers who had a very fine mem
ory, and who would then memorize 
the verses. Once she had memorized them, she would 
burn the napkin.  This went on for 
decades. Finally, Akhmatova was able to let the wom
an write it all down. Thus her great 
words survived to be printed and extolled. But for 
over 25 years, they were recited only 
privately and most carefully, and never by the poet
 herself, but by her friend. 
 
She had a choice, Akhmatova did. She couldn™t chang
e Stalin. She couldn™t change the 
state system. She couldn™t eradicate informers or p
arty hacks with some line of 
magnificent verse. No, none of that. But she wisely
 chose to live despite all the things she 
couldn™t change. She chose not to be martyr or vict
im of Stalin™s insane violence. She 
discerned that it was better to continue writing wi
th all the imposed limitations than to 
give up entirely on her own country. Akhmatova, you
 see, resisted giving in to either 
Stalin™s craziness or the purist path of martyrdom.
 She chose a middle path. She survived 
to be hailed as one of the greatest poets of the tw
entieth century in either language, 
Russian or English. She survived by discerning what
 she could resist, and what she could 
not resist. What she could change, and what she cou
ld not change. 
 
Another Russian, the great Tolstoi, suggests that o
ur discernment about resistance often 
depends on our situation. When we are alone, he say
s, we sometimes face difficulties 
honestly, and begin to make lists of what we can do
 to prevail against the danger coming 
towards us. But when we are part of a larger social
 situation, we often become fatalists, 
thinking that there is nothing we can do for oursel
ves or others, because the forces of 
history and calamity cannot be swerved merely by op
timism or positive thinking. ?It™s the 
way things are,? people say, ?you just have to be r
ealistic about it.? 
 
Perhaps. Personally, I think Tolstoi is a bit too s
implistic here, but I get his point. Still, in 
some ways, I think, Tolstoi has inadvertently refle
cted on the ideas embedded in the 
Serenity Prayer. You have to choose your path, he s
ays. Resistance or acceptance. There 
is always a choice. 

 
Akhmatova™s choices also are an inadvertent comment
ary on the discernment invoked by 
the Serenity Prayer.  She makes it clear that her c
hief way of resisting is to describe with 
clarity the actual nature of the suffering imposed 
by Stalin. No excuses or explanations. 

 
 No politics or suggestions of expediency. No denial
s or closed eyes. Simply the 
painstaking description of the vile prisons, endles
s executions, and injustice at every turn. 
Not letting it be forgotten. Not letting it be glos
sed over or retold with the horror simply 
removed. ?Then a woman with bluish lips,? she write
s in her Requiem, ?standing behind 
me in the line, a woman of course who had never hea
rd my name, woke up from the 
stupor so typical for us all in those days, and ask
ed me, whispering into my ear (all spoke 
only in a whisper there): ?And do you think you can
 you describe this?? 
And I answered: 

?Yes, I can.? 

Then something that almost looked like a smile glid
ed over what had once been her 
face.? 

 
Akhmatova™s descriptions, cool and precise, are a w
ell-chosen form of resistance. 
 
And so, I might add, was that bare smile spreading 
on that woman™s face. 
 
And so it comes back to the Serenity Prayer and my 
alcoholic brother™s misery. I am not 
going to say I can change my brother. I can™t. He m
ay even be permanently damaged, 
physically, and unresponsive to any medical treatme
nt. But, like Akhmatova, I can 
describe what I really see. His body, his face, the
 ones so affected by alcoholism. He is 
now in his tenth day in the hospital with the DT™s,
 the Delirium Tremens. His psychotic 
hallucinations and sense of grandiosity are still w
ith him. His once remarkably handsome 
face is now pitiable and bloated. His once fit body
 is a wreckage. He shakes and curses 
and grapples with the nurses violently. He has to b
e restrained four-point. It™s a terrible 
picture. But unless it™s painted clearly, and with 
Akhmatova™s precision, I am improperly 
resisting the actual reality of his condition. If I
 pretend his DT™s are anything else but 
what they are, I can only respond to a fantasy cond
ition, not to reality, and frankly, that™s 
no good for anyone, my brother or myself. 

 
So I will continue to resist thinking that I can sa
ve my brother by some act, some good 
will, some clever turn of phrase. I will continue t
o resist thinking that my brother™s 
problem is my problem. 

 
I will not resist, that is, I will accept, that the
 disease he has is terrible, and maybe even 
could prove fatal. And I will accept that, despite 
that awful sentence, I have no capacity 
to control, save, fix or annul the situation. I can
 only profitably spend time exploring 
myself and my attitudes, and taking responsibility 
for the only life I can take 
responsibility for–my own. 

 
My father did not know the words of the Serenity Pr
ayer. I hope he will learn it. It may 
offer him some solace. His path will be different f
rom mine, of course. Not because I 
know the words of the prayer, but because our life 
experiences have been so different. He 
will be resisting different things than I am, and w
ill have to discern not as he discerns, but 
as I discern. But the idea of discernment lifted in
 the prayer seems to promise a benefit 
for both of us, no matter how different our views m
ight be of God or prayer. 
 
 
 I know.  There are several versions of the so-calle
d ?original? prayer. And there are folks 
who claim that some versions of the prayer pre-date
 Niebuhr, the guy who claimed 
authorship of it, by three-hundred years. 

 
All of that is interesting to my scholarly self, bu
t of no use at all to my soul. The fact is, I 
do need courage to change what I can change. And I 
do need serenity to accept the things 
I cannot change. And I do need wisdom to know the d
ifference between what I can 
change, and what I can™t. 

 
As a human being, as I said earlier, I am called to
 resist. I am called to resist distortion, 
humiliation, violence and cruelty. I am called to r
esist the imposition of injustice, and the 
systemic insinuation of prejudice into the human he
art. I am called to resist many things 
which seem insurmountable at the time.  

 
But I am also called, just as much, to accept the r
ealities of my life which I can™t change, 
and have no power to resist or deny. 

 
May I indeed have the wisdom to discern the differe
nce. 
 
Offering  

 
For heat in the room, light through clear glass, mu
sic in our hearts, stories linking 
to our own stories; for the circle of our community
 and its thriving even in hard times, we 
give and receive the offering.  If you have brought
 Guest at Your Table boxes, feel free to 
bring them up to the front and put them in this bas
ket near the pulpit. 
Thank you. 

 
Prayer for the New Year 

 
One day at a time.  

Not tomorrow™s excitement, 

nor yesterday™s disappointments, 

but today. 

One day at a time. 

Not yesterday™s moon and stars, 

but today™s sun. 

One day at a time. 

Not tomorrow™s golden city with silver turrets 

but these streets radiating out from this place 

to our homes of wood and glass and brick. 

One day at a time. 

Not resolutions to fulfill in coming days, 

just mindfulness, reason and compassion today. 

One day at a time. Today.  

One amen. Our present moment. 

 
