  2008-9-28 Humility/Hospitality  

Rev. Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

after a week of temperate weather 

and fearful and confusing news 

to worship. Now we are free  

to leave certainty for perspective, 

abandon gloom for love™s radiance, 

and replace panic with attentive patience. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may differ, 
we agree to journey together, side by side, face to
 face. Within this circle of strong spirit, 
mutual care, and ethical vision, may we ourselves r
emain open to being transformed by a 
welcoming heart and emerging justice. 

Sequence 

 
O Love, not the easiest week. 

No. Not easy at all, 

despite the lovely mild air. 

Plenty of bewilderment. 

Extra helpings of anxiety. 

Our great and ordinarily useful words   

like ?peace? and ?love? and ?truth?  

seem to sound rather softly now 

amidst the blaring commotion of blame. 

But I maintain that the contrast  

is temporary. Deceptive. 

Like the feeling you get on a roller coaster 

when you think you feel weightless.  

It™s deceptive. Gravity is still in effect. 

It hasn™t ebbed at all. 

And so, Love, is this not true here as well? 

Isn™t there Peace in this room of attentive people?
 Love enough in this room of breathing people? 

Truth itself in hands dancing on a keyboard? 

Peace in the harmonies of word and wonder? 

Love in the hospitality of this community? 

And truth in the struggle for understanding? 

 
silence 

 
O Love, not the easiest week.  

But our week, in the end, is not defined 

by the extraordinary but by the ordinary. 

The ordinary relationships of love, memory, 

struggle and gratitude that pulse 

  like the heart-beat of the universe 

within us. 

Setting aside a moment now to note  

to feel that heartbeat,  

we name those whose lives live inside us, 

far away, nearby, or remembered. 

 
naming 

 
Both: O Love, not the easiest week. 

9 AM But there is enough music and spirit 

and love in this room to make all the difference. 

11 AM But peace still begins with us, nevertheless,
 and is not a gift of either church or state. Let 
there be peace on earth–. 

  

The First Reading
 is Edward Hirsch™s excruciatingly appropriate poem 
Mergers and 
Acquisitions. 

Beyond junk bonds and oil spills,  

beyond the collapse of Savings and Loans,  

beyond liquidations and options on futures,  

beyond basket trading and expanding foreign markets
, the Dow Jones industrial average, the 
Standard & Poor™s stock index, mutual funds, commod
ities,  
beyond the rising tide of debits and credits,  

opinion polls, falling currencies, the signs  

for L. A. Gear and Coca Cola Classic,  

the signs for U.S. Steel and General Motors,  

hi-grade copper, municipal bonds, domestic sugar,  

beyond fax it and collateral buildups,  

beyond mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts,
 hostile takeovers, beyond the official policy 
on inflation and the consensus on happiness,  

beyond the national trends in buying and selling,  

getting and spending, the market stalled  

and the cost passed on to consumers,  

beyond the statistical charts on prices,  

there is something else that drives us, some  

rage or hunger, some absence smoldering  

like a childhood fever vaguely remembered  

or half-perceived, some unprotected desire,  

greed that is both wound and knife,  

a failed grief, a lost radiance.  

 
The Second Reading
 is a poem from Linda Hirshfield™s book After.
 The Title: A Day Comes 
  

A day comes 

when the mouth grows tired 

of saying ?I.? 

 
Yet, it is occupied still  

by a self which must speak, 

  which still desires, is curious. 

Which believes it has also a right. 

 
What to do? 

The tongue consults with the teeth 

(which) it knows will survive  

both mouth 
and
 self; 
They grin Œ it is their natural pose Œ 

and say nothing. 

Sermon 

 
My friend Babar was naturalized this week. Became a
 citizen of the US of A. I had never seen 
such a ceremony, although I had long ago heard my g
randparents moving stories about their 
citizenship ceremony. 

 
The ritual took place at Veterans™ Memorial, in the
 smaller of the two auditoriums. Over three 
hundred people claimed their new citizenship, 

people from all over the world–from Lagos Nigeria, 
Lahore, Pakistan, Manila in the 
Philippines, and Mexico City, Mexico. Different clo
thes, headdresses, accents, languages, ways 
of expression. It was a magnificent site. 

 
One of the judges talked about his Lebanese and Iri
sh past. He talked about the wisdom of our 
founders in offering hospitality to those from othe
r nations. He mentioned that this hospitality 
was there from the beginning, with Italians like Fi
lippo Mazzei and Poles like Thaddeus 
Kosciuszko helping with our revolution. He pointed 
out that the oath administered to Babar and 
the others that day was composed all the way back i
n 1789, and the Abraham Lincoln had added 
the only word of that oath that ever changed that c
omposition during the Civil War. He pointed 
out that this hospitality was based on an authentic
ally humble faith that a great nation could gain 
strength from a variety of civilizations, enriching
 the mosaic of its diversity with the beauty and 
culture of all the nations. 

 
I have to say that I wept a bit as Babar raised his
 right hand and recited the very same words 
which, I learned that day, my own grandparents had 
recited so many decades ago. And believe 
me, that judge was speaking the sober truth about t
he gifts immigrants can bring. Babar, who 12 
years ago came alone to this country with only 300 
hundred dollars to his name, has truly made a 
national impact so far via his education, his art, 
his social skills, his understanding of mainframe 
computers and his stunning generosity, which among 
his friends has become legendary. 
 
Afterward, we went to a brief lunch, since all of u
s had to get back to work. I knew most of 
Babar™s other friends, but I met Tom for the first 
time. A lawyer who had helped Babar with his 
flashcards, Tom and I exchanged stories. Come to fi
nd out that his mother™s side of the family 
had all immigrated from Emilia in Northern Italy, j
ust as my grandparents had. ?What town did 
they hail from?? I asked, hoping I might recognize 
it from among the thousands of villages 
dotting the Appennine Mountains.  ?Fanano,? he said
. I almost fell over. It™s the exact same 
small town where my father™s parents hailed from. W
e were both amazed that both of our 
families even shared names–the Bonuccis and the Gui
derinis. We weren™t exactly cousins, mind 
you–but, I have to say, we both came away from our 
meeting with a realization of how small 
the world is, how interrelated we all are, and how 
the phrases ?We are all family? or ?We are all 
sisters and brothers? are not just metaphors, but s
ober biological facts.  

   
The ancient Near Eastern peoples started proclaimin
g such notions 5000 years ago with their 
stories of the creation of humankind. The late samp
le of such stories which we find in the 
Hebrew Scriptures is actually very moving, if a per
son can tear himself or herself away from the 
foolishly concrete readings of these stories that s
o sting modern religious conversation.  
 
The actual Hebrew text in the story is, typically, 
crammed with puns and wordplays worthy of an 
Grammy-winning Rap song. The best we can do in Engl
ish to imitate those word plays is this: 
 
?The Eternal took some earth and molded it into an 
earthling.? Or, even better ?The Eternal 
shaped some humus into a human being.? (And not a m
an, mind you, sorry. It doesn™t say that at 
all. The human being is, later in the story, clumsi
ly split in two, and only then does gender 
begin.) 

 
And indeed, this word play humus/human is the sourc
e of our English word ?humility.? In other 
words, humility is the awareness that we are all ma
de of the same stuff. In ancient days, they said 
we were crafted from dirt in the garden. Today we m
ight say the exact same thing with reference 
to the Periodic Table of the Elements, or by going 
along with the assertions used by 
cosmologists, namely, that we are all made of stard
ust flung from distant supernovae. 
 
The point is, if we are all made of the same stuff,
 then all of the ancient affirmations about 
human equality and dignity are simply true. I have 
never heard of anyone who was ever able to 
make a case for saying that one handful of humus is
 worth 700 billion times more than the 
handful of humus right next to it. 

 
And yet that is the story of the human history, as 
I read it. Ages and ages of one clump of earth 
saying to the other ?I™m rich, rich soil. And I kno
w for a fact that you are merely a chunk of dirt. 
Go away.? 

 
Unfortunately for us, many chapters in this sad sto
ry of human history unfolded this week. 
Chapter One: the economy of our nation teeters on t
he brink, and everyone seems 
to know
, oh 
yes, 
to know
, exactly who is to blame. NOT themselves. Someone 
else. Radio pundit Rush 
Limbaugh is sure it is all Barney Frank™s fault. Ot
hers say it™s the greed associated with Wall 
Street, or the CEO™s of huge, avaricious corporatio
ns who feel they are entitled to something for 
nothing and simply took it.  Of course (fasten you 
seat belts), others are sure that it™s the fault of
 
the working class and the urban poor who, for some 
reason, had the temerity to want low-cost 
housing. It™s the Democrats™ fault. It™s the Republ
icans™ fault. It™s China™s fault. 
 
I™ve been paying as close attention as I can stand,
 and so far, I have yet to hear a single voice 
asking ?I wonder. Do I have a part in all this?? Or
 in the words of Hirsch™s perfect poem: 
is 
something else that drives us, some  

rage or hunger, some absence smoldering  

like a childhood fever vaguely remembered  

or half-perceived, some unprotected desire,  

greed that is both wound and knife,  

a failed grief? 

 
If I heard such a voice, I would begin to suspect 

  I was actually in the presence of a humble person. 
Someone who rests in the awareness that they 
are made of the same stuff as everyone else. 

Someone who doesn™t ?know? who is at fault, 

but who recognizes that it™s a lot more complicated
 than simple blame. 
 
But so far, no takers.  

 
Oh, I know the objections to the word ?humble.? 

People confuse it with ?humiliation,? either from s
ome implanted inner voice which harps on 
saying ?What a worthless fool you are! You can™t do
 anything right,? or from some swaggering 
voice outside of us who says the same thing.  Sorry
, humiliation, being beaten 
into the ground
, is 
not humility. Humility is just the attentive and pa
tient awareness that we are all made of the same 
elements, the same earth. 

 
Others point out that as soon as you try and ?be? h
umble, like some saint kissing the sores of a 
leper for God, you automatically become conscious o
f being more saintly than the person next to 
you, and that your humility is only a sham. That mi
ght be true. Perhaps. I can also think of a few 
reasons why it might be presumptuous on someone™s p
art for thinking so. But I am not talking 
about specific humble acts here. I am talking about
 an awareness, a consciousness, an 
attentiveness which might pour into every act, and 
not specific selected acts. 
 
But now I want to get back to the story of human hi
story, as I read it. Remember what I said? 
Ages and ages of one clump of earth saying to the o
ther, ?I™m rich, rich soil. And I know for a 
fact that you are merely a chunk of dirt. Go away.?
  
The blame frenzy surrounding the stock market 

debacle is Chapter One in this week™s story. Chapte
r Two is the ridiculously wide distribution of 
a dvd called 
Obsession
 in all the election swing states. The mere fact th
at these dvds were 
distributed for free ONLY in the swing states sugge
st very clearly to me that there is a political 
angle in there somewhere. They were tucked into new
spapers, including our own Columbus 
Dispatch. (The Columbus Dispatch, which didn™t have
 the sense of the St. Louis newspaper, 
which, in a remarkable expression of ethical courag
e, refused to allow such an outrage. 
 
What was in the dvd?  A devious depiction of Muslim
s as cruel savages who would as soon kill 
as pray. The producers of the dvd vainly protest th
at they start the dvd off with a statement that 
?Most Muslims are not like this.? But the dvd under
mines that little sop to their conscience 
within a minute or two. The clear purpose of the vi
deo is to let non-Muslims ?know? that they 
simply don™t know enough about the evils of Islam. 
  
The producers of this video ?know? the truth. You a
nd I do not. My friend Babar, and all of his 
Muslim friends, they will tell you, may not be terr
orists; but their 
religion
 IS the source of all 
terror and evil, nonetheless, implying that my frie
nd Babar must be a pretty bad Muslim. And to 
be open to welcoming Muslims into our own nation is
 tantamount to destroying it. 
 
They ?know? this is true. And they want you to bow 
to their authority, to say ?I now know what 
you know. I will tar every Muslim with the brush yo
u put in my hand. I will be swayed by your 
violent images. I will be afraid and will base all 
of my decisions on that fear.? 
 
  I cannot tell you how disgusted I was when I watche
d this propaganda. Already there is reason to 
believe that the chemical irritant sprayed into a D
ayton Mosque on Friday may have been an act 
stirred up by such hateful nonsense. Time will tell
. 
 
Look, many religious groups and many political move
ments attract and even help shape hateful 
and destructive people. This has been true since an
cient times, and frankly, I don™t expect 
anything to change about that in my life time. 

 
But really, Pol Pot is not the typical Cambodian, S
talin not the prime sample of the Georgian or 
Russian Communist, Goering not the exemplary German
, Cardinal Law not the portrait of all 
Catholic priests, and neither James Dobson nor R. J
. Rushdoony are the preeminent and 
symbolic Protestant Christians.  

 
Nor are the yelling proponents calling for narrow i
nterpretations of Muslim Sharia law to 
become the law of our nation the spokespersons for 
all Muslims nor even typical Muslims. 
 
All of these people I™ve named were, or are, 

immoderate people, people at the edge, not the cent
er.   
 
But the makers of the dvd 
know
 the truth, they say, and we don™t. 
 
I think that the authoritarian claim of such invinc
ible knowledge closes the door to human 
redemption, and the creation of any kind of coopera
ting world community. It abolishes rational 
hope, and every possibility for communication excep
t violence. I don™t see any goodness buried 
within its assertions.  

 
In the first poem, Hirsch suggests at the end that 
this whole present difficulty with the economy 
stems, perhaps, not from the acts of this or that p
erson, this or that party, this or that corporation
, 
but from ?a lost radiance.? 

 
Yes, a lost radiance. The same lost radiance which 
was not afraid, once upon a time, to say, ?I 
don™t know.? I don™t know anything about Muslim his
tory and culture. Can you tell me how you 
understand it?  

 
A lost radiance. A lost radiance which was not afra
id, once upon a time, of welcoming a 
stranger, or offering hospitality to a foreigner wi
th a different religion or different accent. 
Not just technical citizenship, but real welcome, a
ppreciation, you know, hospitality.  
 
A lost radiance that was open-hearted and cooperati
ve, about me and you working together for 
the common good, not about me working for my good a
nd to hell with you–you can be satisfied 
with what trickles down, if anything. 

 
A radiance that welcomed new ideas, fresh insight a
nd still had faith in cooperation. 
 
In Jane Hirshfield™s poem, she notes that we might 
recognize and remember that radiance when 
we find ourselves tired of saying ?I? all the time,
 when we realize that we are in necessary 
relationship with every other creature of earth, ma
de of same stuff. The elements. Humus. The 
root of humility. The root of our common humanity. 

 
  She then says that this ?I? we are tired of, does h
ave something to say.  
 
Suddenly we™re in a pickle. If we are self-centered
 all the time, we end up making a shambles of 
it, as this week has revealed with great clarity. B
ut if we try and give up our singular focus on the 
self and live in constant community with others, wi
thout the insights of uniqueness and passion 
which are the provenance of the individual, we migh
t lose just as much radiance. 
 
But when consulted, the teeth in our mouth, she pla
yfully concludes, just sit there and grin.  
 
They grin because the answer has never been ?either
/or?, but always ?both/and.? The heartbeat 
needs the 
lub
 and 
dub
, the breath, the 
in
 and 
out
, the soul, the 
you 
and the 
me
. 
 
So in conclusion, I say this: my friend Babar bring
s his unique skills and wisdom to this nation. 
And he brings those individual skills and that deep
 wisdom in service of this nation™s aliveness 
and solvency, AND, as well as to keep himself alive
 and solvent. 
 
He does not come here to build a castle, as in our 
children™s story this morning, to keep the next 
arriving stranger out, but to welcome him or her wi
th open arms, into a community based 
on the humility signed by an open door. Into a nati
on with a wealth built, not on mergers and 
acquisitions and hostile takeovers, but consisting 
of people in communities of radiance which 
work for the common good, to make our days, all of 
them, and each of them, for each of us, glad. 
Oh may we live to see this vision made real! 

Offering 

 
The offering is a sign that our congregation 

is not in service of the government, state or natio
nal, nor in service of a strict hierarchical body. 
The offering is a sign of our liberty. 

We are not our own, mind you–we are all children of
 the earth, made of its elements, 
and subject to its forces and whims. 

But we as a congregation in the midst of that 

reality, we are free. 

The offering will now be given and received. 

 
Prayer 

 
Let this be a house of welcome. 

To those who have been here for forty years, 

as much as to those who have just walked in the doo
r. 
To those who think with their hearts 

and those who feel with their brains. 

To those who have a past to overcome, 

and to those who have a future to negotiate. 

To those who have been wounded, 

and to those who are bent on healing. 

To those who know how much they don™t know,  

and to those who don™t know how much they do know. 

To those who find our community wanting, 

and to those who find it just right. 

Let this be a house of welcome, 

  O Love, that all our days might be glad. 

