Remembering Josseline 
March 4, 2012 
Reverend Eric Meter  
 Welcome 

Centering  

Kindling 

Opening Words 

We are here 

as our days vacillate between spring and winter  

as we mourn Monday™s senseless school shooting outs
ide Cleveland  
and look ahead to this week™s Super Tuesday primary
 elections  
we draw upon all the energies that are ours  

to make our place in this world more worthy of our 
deepest longings   
a place where justice and beauty are at home to sta
y  
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for our 
own sakes, and for the sake of our children and eve
ryone with whom we share the earth. We 
would engage our mission wholeheartedly, with coura
ge, self-questioning, compassion, 
vulnerability and honesty. 

Praising    #1010   
We Give Thanks
 Ingathering  
Stitches
 by Kevin Morrison  
Affirming    by Kendyl Gibbons  

The doors to injustice open wide whenever we start 
to believe that there are certain people who 
need not be treated in the ways we have agreed we m
ust treat each other. 
Singing     #95    
There Is More Love Somewhere
 
 Sequence  
A more personal reflection to help guide us into a 
time of stillness and reflection this 
morning. I hope you will hear in these words univer
sal chords as well.  
We sing, 
there is more love somewhere
, an ancient call of faith if there ever was one. B
ut 
where? Where, in the midst of so much that is not a
s it should be, is that love?  
At least that™s what I™ve been asking myself this w
eek, when my customary February blues 
chose to pay a visit.  
And then I hear of a man I know who has just plante
d his seeds for the year in the garden he 
so diligently cares for. And I hear of the woman tr
avelling across country once or twice a 
month to visit a friend in hospice care, who has ou
tlived the prognosis her doctors gave her 
several years ago.  
And there right in front of me is the card I™ve bee
n looking for for several days. An elderly 
friend back in California has had a hard time of it
 over the past weeks. Her condition is making 
it hard for her to talk, so, after the last phone c
all, it is time to write a letter. Here is a card, 
here 
is blank paper and a pen. Maybe I should have paid 
more attention to those early lessons in 
penmanship after all.  
The love is there as it has always been, going abou
t its business.  Waiting patiently.  Waiting 
for us to notice it.  Waiting for us to remember to
 practice giving it the gift of our attention. The 
attention that will bring our love, once again, to 
life.  
 bell  
From the stillness, names emerge. The names of thos
e whose lives have most shaped our 
own. Those whom we have loved and who have loved us
.  Those with whom we have 
struggled. Those we miss. The sound of these names,
 woven together, either softly into the 
space we share this morning, or raised silently in 
the quiet of our hearts, form a mosaic of love.  
 names  
Breath and note. Pitch and tempo. Such simple thing
s. Yet where or who would we be 
without the inspiration they bestow?  
Readings  
Our theme this month is brokenness. And brokenness,
 as you know, is more than just a few 
mis-made stitches.  

This reading, a longer one than usual, is an excerp
t from Margaret Regan™s account of the death 
of fourteen-year-old Josseline Hernandez. Regan, a 
reporter with the 
Tucson Weekly,
 pieced 

 together this story of the El Salvadoran girl™s dea
th from interviews with many people 
associated with the case.  

It is a tragic story, but emblematic of many others
 along the US-Mexican border. 
 ?Josseline shivered as she stepped over stones and 
ducked under mesquites. She was in 
Arizona, land of heat and sun, but on this late-Jan
uary day in 2008, it was cold and damp. The 
temperature was in the 50s, and the night before it
 had dropped to near freezing. A winter rain 
had fallen, [making the trail] even more treacherou
s.  
Josseline was seven miles north of the Mexican bord
er, in prime Sonoran Desert. It was a 
wonderland of cactus and mesquite, beautiful but da
ngerous. At fourteen, she had an important 
responsibility: it was her job to bring her little 
brother, age ten, safely to their mother in Los 
Angeles. The [children] had never been away from ho
me before, and already they™d been 
traveling for weeks. Now they were almost there, ju
st days from their mother™s embrace.  
The family hadn™t been together in a long time. Bac
k home in El Salvador, the kids lived with 
relatives, and in the years their mom was gone, Jos
seline had become a little mother to her 
brother. Finally, [their mother] had worked long en
ough to save up the money to send for the 
children. She™d arranged for Josseline and her brot
her to come north with adults they knew 
from home, people she trusted.  
But, here in the borderlands, they were in the hand
s of a professional. Like thousands of other 
undocumented migrants pouring into Arizona, their g
roup had contracted with a coyote, a 
smuggler paid to spirit them over the international
 line. So far, everything had gone according 
to plan. They had slipped over the border from Mexi
co, twenty miles [away], and had spent a 
couple days picking their way through this strange 
desert, where spiky cacti clawed at the skin 
and the rocky trail blistered their feet. The coyot
e insisted on a fast pace. They still had a hike 
of twenty miles ahead of them, out to Interstate 19
, where their ride would meet them, and take 
them deep into the United States.  
Josseline pulled her two jackets closer in the cold
. She was wearing everything she had 
brought with her from home. Underneath the jackets,
 she had on a tank top, better suited to 
Arizona™s searing summers than its chilly winters, 
and she™d pulled a pair of sweatpants over 
her jeans. Her clothes betrayed her girly tastes. H
er sneakers were a wild bright green, a totally 
cool pair of shoes that were turning out to be not 
even close to adequate for the difficult path 
she was walking. Best of all were her sweats [which
 had] the word HOLLYWOOD 
emblazoned on the rear. Josseline planned to have t
hem on when she arrived in the land of 
movie stars.  
She tried to pay attention to the twists and turns 
in the footpath, to obey the guide, to keep up 
with the group. But by the time they got to Cedar C
anyon, she was lagging. She was beginning 
to feel sick. She™d been on the road for weeks and 
out in the open for days, sleeping on the 
damp ground. Maybe she™d skimped on drinking water,
 giving what she had to her little 
brother. Maybe she™d swallowed some of the slimy gr
een water that pools in the cow ponds 
dotting this ranch country. Whatever the reason, Jo
sseline started vomiting. She crouched down 

 and emptied her belly, then lay back on the ground.
 Resting didn™t help. She was too weak to 
stand up, let alone hike this roller-coaster trail 
out to the road.  
It was a problem. The group was on a strict schedul
e. They had a ride to catch, and the longer 
they lingered the more likely they™d be caught. The
 coyote had a decision to make, and this is 
the one he made: he would leave the young girl behi
nd. He told her not to worry. The Border 
Patrol would soon find her, and they would take car
e of her. Her brother cried and begged to 
stay with her. But Josseline was his big sister, an
d Josseline insisted that he go. As he recounted 
later, she told him, ‚You have to keep going and ge
t to Mom.™  
The other travelers grabbed the boy and walked on, 
leaving [Josseline] alone in the cold and 
dark. She had only her clothes to keep her warm. On
 her first night alone, the temperature 
dropped below freezing, to 29 degrees. By the weeke
nd, when her brother arrived safely in Los 
Angeles and sounded the alarm, [it] had warmed up Š
 to 37.?  
Our second reading this morning is from a fabulous 
address by the Rev Victoria Safford titled 
How Does Our Faith Hold Brokenness? 
which was recently republished in 
Quest
, the newsletter 
of our Church of the Larger Fellowship.  
On those occasions when the weight of the world is 
closing in and the evidence against hope 
mounts as I read the news, when I start confusing c
ynicism with pragmatism, and I sigh, ?I™m 
so tired, I™m so discouraged,? Œ [my husband Ross] 
will say, in the kindest way, ?What kind of 
entitled grandiosity of privilege is this, to think
 that you or I or anyone has the right to sever the
 bright thread of hope, the tradition of dedication 
to the common good and faith in people™s 
power to imagine great change and great risks and t
hen to take them? [We have a] beautiful, 
proud history of work for human rights and freedom.
 We™re only here to pass it on,? he™ll say. 
?All you have to do is keep the fire burning for a 
little while, and pass it on. You have no right 
to put it out.?  
Not in so many words, but that™s about what Ross wo
uld say.  
Sermon  
Fourteen years old. Fourteen. Who were you, and wha
t were you doing at fourteen?  
When I was fourteen I would never have dreamed of a
nyone wearing sweat pants with the 
word Hollywood printed on the rear, but in some way
s my dreams were not all that far from 
Josseline™s. The movie 
Star Wars
 had come out not long before, and I was still drea
ming of 
becoming a Jedi knight like Luke Skywalker when my 
family took a trip to Eagle River in 
northern Wisconsin to learn canoeing. When the rive
r™s namesake, a bald eagle, the first I had 
ever seen outside of a zoo, flew over us, it took m
y breath away. I gave the majestic bird the 
highest honor I could think of, naming it Obi Wan K
enobi.  
But our time in the wild was nothing like what Joss
eline would face. We were equipped, 
safety was primary, we had a bunkhouse and blankets
 to return to each night and there was 
always a back up plan.  

 Josseline had none of those.  It is no rush to judg
ment along any political lines to say that 
Josseline shouldn™t have be out there where she was
, where she died.  But out there she was, 
like so many others before and since.  
The truth is that people will go to any length poss
ible to provide for their families.  
In my time with you this morning, I want to bring J
osseline™s story to you as an example, 
among countless others, of the brokenness that is p
art of our world today, and ask what this 
may mean for us.  
We can™t fix everything. Have you noticed that we d
on™t even talk about compassion fatigue 
any more? It™s all we can do just to keep our job o
r jobs, and keep the kids fed. What we™re 
experiencing isn™t so much compassion fatigue as wh
at it means to live in a culture in which 
fatigue is now the norm.  
And still we are called to address what is in our p
ower to address, to do what we can.  
As you may remember, or not, it has been the practi
ce of our denomination to meet once a 
year, each year in a different city, for what we ca
ll our General Assembly. Columbus was one 
of several cities being looked at to host the Gener
al Assembly (GA) that will meet toward the 
end of this June. Instead, our planning group chose
 Phoenix, Arizona. (Just so you know, we 
are once again among cities being chosen to host ei
ther the 2016 or 2018 GA.)  
But Phoenix was chosen for this year. That was befo
re SB1070, the Arizona law that required 
their police to detain folks who looked like they m
ight be undocumented immigrants, the so-
called illegals.  
As soon as we heard of SB1070, we saw a train wreck
 heading our way. See it™s not only this 
congregation that is sensitive to the numbers of pe
ople of color in our midst. We have been 
making strides, and real progress, toward becoming 
congregations that work toward a more 
culturally pluralistic future. We™re training white
 folks like me to be better allies in the cause of 
dismantling practices that keep power and privilege
 the property only of certain folks.  
And we have been aware for some time that we need t
o make GA more accessible to folks 
across a wider spectrum of those who take part in w
hat we do, and who we are becoming.   
What would happen if those of us of color faced the
 very real possibility of being stopped and 
detained on their way to our annual meeting?  
So the cries went out: Boycott GA 2012!  No, we nee
d to change the venue! Can we get our 
deposit back?  
All of this took place in the months leading up to 
the annual meeting almost two years ago 
now in Minneapolis. We were anticipating a very liv
ely gathering there, like something we had 
not experienced in a long time.  

 But our folks in Arizona did something very smart. 
They asked migrant rights groups there, 
folks who served, literally, in the trenches, what 
they thought we should do.  
And do you know what they said? They said come. Com
e and listen. Come and witness. 
Come and bring the power of your attention, and mak
e sure you invite the national press along 
with you.  
So that™s what we™re doing. This June our annual as
sembly will be different from any other. 
Justice GA it™s being called.  
That™s why Jolinda Stephens and I, along with many 
parents of our youth, have been working 
to get a team of youth together to join us in going
 to Phoenix. That™s why we continue to ask 
you to help us raise funds to get everyone there.  
When Jolinda and I met with the youth early this ch
urch year to ask them what they most 
wanted to do, and what their next Justice Trip migh
t look like, they considered several 
opportunities, and chose Justice GA as their projec
t. They want to be part of something 
important. Let me repeat that: They want to be part
 of something important.  
I™ve been asked, and understandably so, why we are 
a faith taking up the issue of 
immigration? It seems such a faraway concern from u
s here in central Ohio. Don™t we have 
more pressing concerns closer to home?  
Yes and no.  

First of all, we may think immigration is not somet
hing that affects us here in Columbus, but 
we™d be wrong. And I™m not talking only about our l
arge Somali population. Our local 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (or ICE, what u
sed to be called the INS) keeps very 
active deporting undocumented migrants out of Port 
Columbus, often breaking up families in 
the process.  
And furthermore, this is an increasingly large conc
ern for all us. As of two years ago, over 
625 miles of our border with Mexico is fenced off. 
We™ve militarized much of that border with 
our neighbor to the south at a tremendous cost. The
 Government Accounting Office in 
Washington calculates that the border fence, as it™
s called, cost an average of $3.9 million per 
mile. That™s 2 -1/2 billion dollars. That kind of m
oney can buy you a stealth bomber with 
significant change left over, or a whole lot of sch
ools. And we paid for it, you and I.  
I know immigration is complex. I know different peo
ple of intelligence and heart will 
disagree on what our immigration policies should be
.  I also know that migration has been part 
of the human story for as long as there has been a 
human story.  
If a village had outgrown what the lands around it 
were able to support, people had to try 
their luck someplace new.  

 As a woman told Margaret Regan, when she was interv
iewing folks for the book on Josseline, 
?How far would you walk to feed your children??   B
efore we pass judgment on anyone 
crossing the border, I think that™s a fair question
 to ask. But it™s not the only one.  
Others might include why we are targeting undocumen
ted workers of low paying jobs rather 
than the firms that routinely, even systematically,
 hire them. Which raises a much larger 
conversation about the role of low wage workers in 
our economy.  
Also, what can be done to help prevent people from 
leaving their homes in the first place. 
Regan gives an example of a village coffee co-op in
 Mexico that has been instrumental in 
keeping villagers working in their home towns. Some
 who had previously made the trip to the 
US have returned to work for the co-op. That™s what
 Fair Trade coffee can do, and why we sell 
and serve it here.  
What is also good is what we™re doing to educate ou
rselves here at First UU. Jolinda™s been 
teaching a class on immigration issues, and this Fr
iday night we™re hosting one of our 
denomination™s leaders on dismantling racism, Paula
 Cole Jones, who will engage us in a 
exploration of history by listening to immigrant vo
ices.  
I don™t pretend to have all the answers to this, or
 to have a position paper for you on what our 
immigration policies should be.  
What I do know are three things:  

The first is that, in the words of Robert Bellah, ?
democracy begins with paying attention.?  
I never met Josseline. It™s not hazarding much of a
 guess to say that none of us did. But she is 
still worthy of our notice. Of course, you don™t ha
ve to look to the far reaches of the Sonoran 
desert to find her. She, and others much like her, 
are everywhere.  
The second thing I know is that even the highest, s
trongest walls will erode in time.  
When I was in South Africa nine years ago, I had ne
ver seen so much barbed and razor wire 
in my life. And along a well traveled road that str
etched north of Johannesburg into the cities 
more wealthy suburbs, there was a stretch of whitew
ashed wall topped with razor wire. Below 
the wire, someone had spray-painted the words you™l
l find at the top of your program today, 
those famous ones from Robert Frost, ?Something the
re is that doesn™t love a wall.? Who ever 
said that graffiti can™t be literate?  
And the third thing I know is that all of us have m
igration stories to tell, and the ones that 
don™t involve a helping hand often end in tragedy. 
As far as my family has figured out, Louie 
Meter, who brought our name to this country, establ
ished himself here in the US only after 
being helped by a farmer from Illinois. From what w
e™ve pieced together, his family ran the 
mill in a small village not far from Strasbourg, Fr
ance. When the communists took over the 
local council in the 1850s, the family was worried 
that the local farmers were going to be 
taking more of their profits for themselves, so Lou
ie was sent to the new world so that they 

 would have one less mouth to feed. Soon after he ar
rived here, though, he was given a gun and 
told to fight for the Union. Thankfully, he survive
d his time in our Civil War. After his fighting 
days were done (and we know little about the how™s 
and why™s of this), the farmer set him up 
on some land which allowed Louie to begin to make a
 name for himself, and start a family of 
his own. I wouldn™t be here if it hadn™t been for t
hat farmer™s generosity.?  
So: democracy begins with paying attention, walls e
rode in time, and most of us are here 
thanks to helping hands. That™s what I know.  
But immigration is also an issue of faith, and here
 I am given pause.  You see, I like to 
believe that it is in our places of imperfection th
at we find our gateway to truest humanity. Or 
in the words of Leonard Cohen, that there are crack
s in everything, and that™s how the light gets 
in.  
But then as I™ve been reading about Josseline and a
lso about those who are staunchly in favor 
of the Border Wall, the cracks threaten to overwhel
m. Sometimes they become all I can see. 
It™s hard to see good coming from all this: Folks o
n the border feel threatened, so they get a 
wall built, which does not deter those coming north
 (in fact the only thing that decreased the 
rate of those crossing the border was the downturn 
in our economy). The border wall only 
forced those coming north to do so in much more rem
ote areas, making their attempts all the 
more dangerous.  
I™m left asking what good is getting in through all
 the cracks in the current state of 
immigration in our nation?   One good thing that is
 coming out of this is that our youth are 
taking an interest and are using this as a way of l
earning to see their lives as part of a much 
larger context.  And hopefully, our presence in Pho
enix this June will help keep the 
conversation on comprehensive immigration reform on
 more of a front burner.  
Ironically, perhaps, the more I read up on these is
sues, I still can™t shake President Ronald 
Reagan™s voice as he spoke at the Brandenburg Gate 
in Berlin back in 1987, as he admonished, 
?Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!?  Maybe he kne
w something we™d be wise to remember. 
The more we try to fix something so that it will la
st the way we want it, the more likely it will 
end up slipping through our fingers.  
And I think of Josseline, with the word HOLLYWOOD o
n the rear of her sweats, displaying 
a youthful dream of a future she longed to be part 
of, there with her mother in Los Angeles.  
We all had our youthful dreams, dreams that held ou
r ideals as we navigated our way in a 
world full of challenges and wondered if there woul
d be a place in that world for who we hoped 
to become.   Josseline had a mother and other famil
y and friends who loved her. Tragically, that 
wasn™t enough in her case.  
What can be done to protect what needs to be protec
ted? What can be done to protect who 
needs to be protected?  Well, that™s what we™re goi
ng to Phoenix to help answer. I hope you™ll 
consider coming along as well.  

 Thank you.  

Offering 

In gratitude for all that went into making this con
gregation as truly vital as it is, we pause 
now for a moment of both appreciation and generosit
y.  
Together we support such a community as best we can
, in many ways, through our human 
presence, our gifts behind the scenes, and through 
this ancient and thoughtful way of 
supporting what we love.  
Our ushers will now come forward. The offering will
 be given and gratefully received.  
Returning  

Singing    #1064   
Blue Boat Home
 Blessing  

 
