 June 18, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    MANHOOD, WOMANHOOD AND THE FREEDOM TO MINISTER    (1 Timothy 2:8-15)    
    I desire then that in every place the men should pray, lifting   holy hands without anger or quarreling; also that women should   adorn themselves modestly and sensibly in seemly apparel, not with   braided hair or gold or pearls or costly attire but by good deeds,   as befits women who profess religion. Let a woman learn in silence   with all submissiveness. I permit no woman to teach or to have   authority over men; she is to keep silent. For Adam was formed   first, then Eve; and Adam was not deceived, but the woman was   deceived and became a transgressor. Yet woman will be saved   through bearing children, if she continues in faith and love and   holiness, with modesty.    
    
    
    What we saw last week from Ephesians 5:32 was that marriage is a   mystery. God gave it a meaning at the beginning of creation that   was not fully revealed for a long time. But now it's made plain in   the New Testament. And the mystery is this: marriage is an image   or picture of Christ's relationship to his bride the church. A   husband and a wife are meant by God to be living images of Christ   and the Church in relationship to each other.    
    So when God created man and woman he made us the way we are &#151;   with the differences of manhood and womanhood &#151; so that we   would be suited for these complementary roles (and for the other   expressions of complementarity outside marriage). In this drama   man was meant to play the role of Christ, and the woman was meant   to play the role of his bride the church.    
    And we have stressed for five weeks now that these differences are   not the result of sin. Sin didn't create manhood and womanhood.   God did. And sin did not bring diversified, complementary roles   into existence. God did. Before sin ever entered the world God   ordained and fitted Adam to be a loving, caring, strong leader for   his wife Eve. And before sin entered the world God ordained and   fitted Eve to be a partner who supports and honors that leadership   and helps carry it through. Both in the image of God. Both equal   in their God-like personhood. But also different in their manhood   and womanhood. The pattern was beautiful. They respected each   other and served each other and complemented each other and   enjoyed each other.    
    What sin did was ruin this harmony. Sin made men abandon   servant-leadership and become passive or harsh and insensitive and   uncaring, or some other distortion of Biblical headship. And sin   distorted the woman's support and honor into manipulation or   defiance or helplessness or some other distortion of true Biblical   submission.    
    So what Paul did in Ephesians 5 (as we saw last week) is call for   a recovery of God's original idea. He doesn't abolish what God   created at the beginning. He wants to get back to it: true   Biblical headship and true Biblical submission. Here's the way we   defined these two realities from our study last week:    
    Headship is the divine calling of a husband to take primary   responsibility for Christ-like, servant-leadership, protection and   provision in the home.    
    Submission is the divine calling of a wife to honor and affirm her   husband's leadership and help carry it through according to her   gifts.    
    When a husband leads like Christ and a wife responds like the   bride of Christ, there is a harmony and mutuality that is more   beautiful and more satisfying and more fruitful than any pattern   of marriage created by man. God loves His people and He loves His   glory. And therefore when we follow His idea of marriage we are   most satisfied and He is most glorified.    
    Now the real test I think of whether we have grasped the Biblical   essence of manhood and womanhood and affirm it as true and   beautiful &#151; the real test is whether Paul's application of it   to the life of the church surprises and offends us or not. If the   New Testament roles for man and woman in marriage are rooted not   in sinful pride and not in cultural expectations, but in God's   original design for creation, then how would you expect this   original design to express itself in the life of the church?   That's what we have before us today in 1 Timothy 2:11-14.    
    Let's seat ourselves before these unpopular verses and listen for   a few minutes, and see if the story they tell is really as   unattractive as so many think it is.    
    Let a woman learn in silence with all submissiveness. I permit no   woman to teach or to have authority over men; she is to keep   silent. For Adam was formed first, then Eve; and Adam was not   deceived, but the woman was deceived and became a   transgressor.    
    I think what we need to do in order to understand the   submissiveness in this text is patiently think through the meaning   of "silence" ("Let a woman learn in silence.") and the meaning of   "teaching" ("I do not permit a woman to teach.") and the meaning   of "authority" ("or to have authority over men.") So let's take   these one at time.    
    
    l) First "silence." Verse 11: "Let a woman learn in silence."   Notice that the word "silence" is used two other times in nearby   verses.    
    The word for silence here (hesuchia) is used earlier in verse 2 of   this chapter (hesuchion). But there it refers to the "quiet" life   which all godly people should lead. "Pray . . . that we may lead a   quiet and peaceable life, godly and respectful in every way." This   gives you the tone and the extent of the word. It doesn't refer to   absolute silence: a "quiet" and peaceable life is not a life of   total silence. It's a life untroubled and serene and content. So   the silence doesn't seem to be total. It's more like what we would   call "quietness."    
    You can see this especially at the end of verse 12. The same word   is used again. But this time you can tell what Paul has in mind by   its opposite. He says, "I do not permit a woman to teach or to   have authority over men, (literally:) but to be silent." "Not to   have authority over men, but to be silent." In other words this   quietness is the opposite of exercising authority over men. "Don't   exercise authority over men, instead be silent."    
    So what sort of quietness does Paul have in mind? It's the kind of   quietness that respects and honors the leadership of the men God   has called to oversee the church. Verse 11 says that the quietness   is "in all submissiveness," and verse 12 says the quietness is the   opposite of "authority over men," and so the point is not whether   a woman says nothing, but whether she is submissive and whether   she supports the authority of the men God has called to oversee   the church. Quietness means not speaking in a way that compromises   that authority.    
    We'll come back in a minute and be more specific about just what   this submission is.    
    2) The second thing we need to look at is the reference to   teaching in verse 12. How extensive is Paul's prohibition when he   says, "I permit no woman to teach"?    
    To answer this, one thing we can do is look at other places where   Paul and others talk about women teaching. For example in   Titus&yuml;2:3 he says that the older women are to teach the   younger women: (at the end of the verse:) "they are to teach what   is good, and so train the younger women to love their husbands and   children&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;."    
    Another example is 2 Timothy 3:14 where Paul tells Timothy to   remember from whom he learned the scriptures. And the persons he   has in mind (we can tell from 2 Tim. 1:5) are Eunice and Lois,   Timothy's mother and grandmother. (His father was not a believer   or even a Jew, Acts 16:3).    
    One other example is Priscilla. It says in Acts 18:26, "When   Priscilla and Aquila heard Apollos, they took him and expounded to   him the way of God more accurately."    
    So, it's not likely that Paul is saying in 1 Timothy 2:12 that   every kind of teaching is forbidden to women. There are examples   of them teaching younger women, teaching children, and in some way   teaming up with their husbands to give private instruction when   someone is confused or uninformed like Apollos. Those are just   some examples.    Is it possible to generalize then about what Paul does have in   mind here when he says, "I do not permit a woman to teach" ?I   think the safest thing to do is let the next phrase guide us. The   next phrase is, " . . . or exercise authority over men." "I do not   permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over men."    
    Instead of letting the word "teach" mean anything we want it to   mean or think it might mean, it's safer to say, it probably means   a kind of teaching that somehow relates to authority. Teach and   exercise authority go together. So at least one general thing we   can say about women teaching is that Paul forbids it when it is   part of the exercise of authority over men.    
    That leads us to the third question, namely, what is this   "authority" referred to in verse 12?    
    3) The key that unlocks this door is a very interesting   observation. When you read the rest of 1 Timothy about the role of   elders in the church what you find is that the elders had two   basic responsibilities: they were to govern and they were to   teach. You can see this in the qualifications of 3:1-7, but the   easiest place to see it is in 5:17, "Let the elders who rule (or   govern) well be considered worthy of double honor, especially   those who labor in preaching and teaching."    
    Elders rule or govern, and elders teach or preach. Back in Acts   20:28, you may recall, the elders in the church at Ephesus were   called by the Holy Spirit and made "overseers" and charged with   "pasturing" or feeding the flock, that is teaching the whole   counsel of God.    
    I don't think it's coincidental that what Paul says in 1 Timothy   2:12 is that he does not permit a woman to teach and exercise   authority over men. He is saying in essence: I do not permit women   to fill the office of elder in the church. The elders are charged   with the leadership and instruction of the church. That's a   summary of their job. So when Paul puts those two things together   and says, "I do not permit a woman to teach or exercise   authority," the most natural sense is, "I do not permit a woman to   assume the office of elder in the church."    
    So the authority Paul has in mind in 1 Timothy 2:12 is the   authority of elders. And what is that supposed to look like? Well   we saw already from Jesus in Luke 22:26 what it's supposed to look   like: "Let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the   leader as one who serves." Paul said in 2 Corinthians 10:8 and   13:10 that God gave him authority in the church not for tearing   down or destroying but for building up. And Peter said to the   elders of the churches (1 Peter 5:3) "Do not domineer over those   in your charge, but be examples to the flock."    
    In other words, elder-authority is servant-authority.   Elder-leadership is servant-leadership. That's why teaching is at   the heart of this calling. Elder-authority leads by persuasion   &#151; by teaching &#151; not by coercion or political   maneuvering. Elder-authority is always subordinate to Biblical   texts. It can always be called to account by Scripture. Therefore   teaching is the primary instrument of leadership in the   church.    
    I think it would be helpful to step back here and try to do for   the concepts of authority and submission in the church what we did   for the concepts of headship and submission in the home, namely   give a crisp definition of each.    
    "Authority" refers to the divine calling of spiritual, gifted men   to take primary responsibility as elders for Christ-like,   servant-leadership, and teaching in the church.    
    "Submission" refers to the divine calling of the rest of the   church, both men and women, to honor and affirm the leadership of   the elders and to be equipped by it for the hundreds and hundreds   of various ministries available to men and women in the service of   Christ.    
    And that last point is very important. For men and women who have   a heart to minister &#151; to save souls and heal broken lives and   resist evil and meet needs &#151; there are fields of opportunity   that are simply endless. God intends for the entire church to be   mobilized in ministry, male and female. Nobody is to be at home   watching soaps and reruns while the world burns. And God intends   to equip and mobilize the saints through a company of spiritual   men who take primary responsibility for leadership and teaching in   the church.    
    There are many voices today who claim to know a better way to   equip and mobilize the men and women of the church for ministry.   But I commend to you this morning with all my heart the plain   meaning of these verses:    
    &#151; that manhood and womanhood mesh better in ministry when men   take primary responsibility for leadership and teaching in the   church.    
    &#151; that manhood and womanhood are better preserved and better   nurtured and more fulfilled and more fruitful in this church order   than in any other.    
    I commend this to you for your belief and for your behavior,   because    
    - this is the way the Scriptures teach us to order the church,    and God inspired the Scriptures    and God is good.    My hope next Sunday, in the last of this series, is to pick up   verses 13 and 14, and then paint the big picture of what it means   to be man and woman in all of life.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
