 1 2007-3-11 Identity Problems   MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

poised on the brink of springôs fresh light 

to worship, to consider what is 

through the lens of what can be; 

to find the music flowing in silence  

and the silence flowing in the word 

to the end that we grow deeperñtogether. So 

 
As we move through this year of transition and joy,
 we remember with gratitude the 
power of our living heritage, which moves through t
ime like a clear running creek; 
refreshing us with the sweet draughts of courage, h
ope, justice-making, peaceful 
living, ever deeper honesty, and more truthful lovi
ng. And so we kindle this light in 
thanksgiving. 

  

Sequence
  
(in Honor of International Womenôs Day---a litany: 
each of these women 
were either Unitarian or Universalist. )
  
Mary Wollstonecraft who wrote Vindication of the Ri
ghts of Women 1792 and 
mother to Mary Shelley, author of Frankenstein. ---
-- 
Judith Sargent Murray, author of ?On the Equality o
f the Sexes? 1790 ----- 
Eliza Follen, who set up the first Christmas tree i
n North America----- 
Lydia Maria Child, abolitionist, author of 
Over the River and Through the Woods
----- 
Louisa May Alcott, author of Little Women----- 

Dorothea Dix, revolutionary of mental health care i
n the United States----- 
Clara Barton, founder of the Red Cross----- 

Lucy Stone, suffragist----- 

Margaret Fuller, transcendentalist----- 

Fannie Farmer, cookbook author----- 

Maria Mitchell, astronomer----- 

Julia Ward Howe, abolitionist, author of Battle Hym
n of the Republic, creator of 
Motherôs Day for Peace------ 

Susan B. Anthony, reformer, suffragist------ 

Emily and Elizabeth Blackwell, physicians----- 

Beatrix Potter, author of childrenôs books----- 

Frances Ellen Watkin Harper, poet----- 

Amy Lowell, poet----- 

May Sarton, poet------ 

Sophia Fahs, religious educator----- 

Lillian Frank, artist----- 

 2 let our silence be the form of our thanksgiving 

 
Silence 

 
The names of many other women float inside of our h
earts, and men too, people who 
populate not our shared history, but our own person
al history. These let us make 
present in this place, as we name them aloud or in 
the sanctuary of our hearts. 
 
Naming 

 
Every composer has a name. Every musician. Every si
nger. Every note. Every song. 
Every melody. Every movement of every symphony. Eve
n the rests have names. 
These names pour themselves into this present momen
t, and become no longer 
names, but the relationship we call music. 

 
Readings 

The First Reading
 comes from the prose writings of the poet Adrienne 
Rich, whom I 
have always admired: 

When those who have the power to name and to social
ly construct reality choose not 
to see you or hear youñwhen someone with the author
ity of a teacher, say, describes 
the world and you are not in it, there is a moment 
of disequilibrium, as if you looked 
in the mirror and saw nothing. It takes some streng
th of souläand not just individual 
strength, but collective understanding, to resist t
his void, this non-being, into which 
you are thrust, and to stand up, demanding to be se
en and heard.  
The Second Reading
 comes from Jamison Green, who is a man who was once
 a 
woman; his book, 
Becoming A Visible Man
, is one of the best books on the 
transsexual experience I have read. I met him at ou
r annual Unitarian Universalist 
conference called General Assembly, last year when 
it was in St. Louis. 
Identity has often been a powerful organizing tool,
 but it should not be mistaken for the ideal model 
of community. Identity is not a rigid, monolithic p
sychosocial box into which we can each place 
ourselves, where weôll permanently remain. We are a
ll 
becoming
 something, and we can strongly 
identify with different aspects of our lives at dif
ferent times, or new elements may be introduced 
into our lives that we must integrate into our iden
tity, such as parenthood, chronic illness or sudden
 
disability, falling in love with a person we wouldn
ôt have imagined being with, or finding a new 
career. These evolutionary events often draw us int
o new communities and new identities. The 
tendency to ?fix? peopleôs identities as encompassi
ng only one aspect of themselves, or as being 
unchanging in their various aspects, is equivalent 
to expecting a person to only eat apples because 
he or she was eating an apple when you met.  

Sermon
 
 3  
When I was a little boy, my mother wasnôt so hot on
 me reading comic books. She 
looked upon them and their relationship to my mind,
 I think, the way she looked upon 
candy bars in relationship to my teethñbrimming wit
h the dread capacity to 
encourage decay.  Of course, now I can tease her ab
out the sad truthñthat if she 
hadnôt
 thrown them all away back then, weôd all be on ext
ended vacations to Tahiti, 
since I owned first editions of 
Spiderman 
and 
Fantastic Four
, which are worth the 
proverbial zillions now to collectors.  But the oth
er thing I told her then, and still 
believe, was that I 
learned
 a lot from comic books as a kid. I learned to read
 better, 
for one. I learned the names of the planets, and ab
out the real complexities of good 
and evil without reference to religious language. I
 learned about the non-fairy tale 
quality of life, like the idea non-requited love, s
ince Lois Lane   never does get to 
marry Superman, whom she loves. And, for a 3rd grad
er, I think I had a pretty good 
vocabulary because of those comic books. After all,
 I knew big fancy words like 
?invulnerable? and especially ?identity,? which was
 a very grown up word. 
Superman, after all, was actually Clark Kent, Clark
 being Supermanôs ?secret 
identity.? 

 
As I grew older, I began to realize that these comi
c book heroes were rather 
emblematic. I began to notice that many of us have 
secret identities. Parts of us that 
are hidden, parts of us that are both invisible and
 unsupported by the outside world. 
One pretty obvious and powerful example of this is 
Jamison Green, the author of our 
second reading. He certainly felt that his 
real
 identity was male, despite the womanôs 
body of his birth. And he was right. Scientists in 
several countries have discovered 
ample evidence in the last ten years that men and w
omen who desire to change their 
gender do so because of a clear sense of identity i
n their brain, in a place near the 
hypothalamus, certain women really identifying as m
ale, certain men clearly feeling 
they are female. They are 
not
 at all confused about their identity. They are pay
ing 
very close attention to what is going on inside the
m. The outside world IS confused 
about their identity, however, and often tells them
 they are wrong. This city council 
man in Florida I just read about, who just got fire
d for taking hormone treatments in 
preparation to become a woman was accosted by a ver
y haughty minister who told 
him point blank ?If Jesus was here, he would want y
ou fired, too.? I have to admit, I 
spent a long time yesterday trying to figure out ho
w I could rather fire that minister, 
and pronto. 

 
There are other examples. When a man finds himself 
attracted to other men in a 
world where the word ?fag? is tossed about in locke
r rooms like a curse, you soon 
learn that secret identities are best kept just tha
tñsecret. When a woman is raped by 
her boyfriend, and both the interpreters of the law
 and common social discourseñ
 again, often in locker roomsñ suggest that her pain
 and whole experience is not 
genuine, and was actually invited by her, you learn
 that secret identities are best 
keptñ secret.  When you yourself know that you are 
partially of African heritage, 

 4 partially of European heritage, and partially of Na
tive American heritage, but that no 
one outside you sees anything but the African herit
age, you learn to keep secret 
identities secret, and to play the horrible game of
 either/or demanded of us all by our 
overarching culture.  

 
The childrenôs story underscores the real complexit
y of the search for authentic 
identity, and how it has become a very different ga
me than once it was because of 
fearful culture. And this business of keeping oneôs
 identity secret goes far beyond the 
obvious situations, especially in some spiritual re
alms. The single most popular 
television minister now, a good-looking, warmly gri
nning young man whoôs written 
best-selling books, begins all of his services with
 the following ritual. Everyone of 
the 35,000 people gathered for worship in their rem
ade stadium churchñ thatôs right, 
I said 35,000ñlifts their bibles and then say in un
ison: ?This is my bible. I am who it 
says I am.? Here a personôs secret identity is disc
laimed from the get go---?There is 
only one identity for you, and that comes entirely 
from outside of you. ?Donôt feel,? 
this culture says. ?And keep your real inside hidde
n for good.? 
 
No wonder Adrienne Rich says: ?When those who have 
the power to name and to 
socially construct reality choose not to see you or
 hear youñ there is a moment ofñ 
disequilibrium, as if you looked in the mirror and 
saw nothing.? 
 
Those are powerful words, soundly disturbing, invit
ing us to grapple with our 
identities both as individual persons, and as peopl
e who are part of a covenanted 
community like this one. After all, she insists, ?i
t takes collective understanding to 
resist such a world? not just ?individual strength.
? She is inviting us to look in the 
mirror of the world and 
insist
 upon seeing ourselves. Our whole lives. Individual
ly, 
but 
in
 community. 
 
Identity questions have always been part of Unitari
an and Universalist history. For 
example, Warren Ross, an historian of our movement,
 writes that ?When Frederick 
May Elliot assumed the presidency of the American U
nitarian Association in 1937, ? 
the institution ?had been badly hurt, not only by t
he depression, but by a loss of 
mission, even of identity.? 

 
Makes sense. Institutions need money to thrive, and
 there wasnôt much during the 
Great Depression. Furthermore, the Humanist Controv
ersy of the 1920ôs and 1930ôs 
had changed the way some people in the pew viewed t
heir religious home. Many of 
the words and phrases that had featured in our cong
regations for some two hundred 
some years on these shores simply fell by the waysi
de over the years from 1880 to 
1935ñthings like Jesus the Messiah, God our Father,
 holy communion, sin and the 
authority of scripture. New songs hadnôt been creat
ed yet, so going to church in those 
days caused an identity crisis in many long time Un
itariansñand Universalists. The 
sermons were full of modern language, but the hymn 
texts were still largely lifted 

 5 from the Protestant tradition. Some of the so-calle
d ?old-timers? discovered that the 
people sitting in the pews next to them were not as
 much like them any more. Some 
of them questioned all traditional theology openly.
 Others were espousing 
agnosticism, or an utterly scientific approach to r
eligionñif any religious statement 
canôt be tested by a clear scientific test, dump it
. Others were quoting from the Hindu 
Scriptures instead of from the Sermon on the Mount,
 or even quoting from ordinary 
books on psychology right off the library shelves. 
The once radical 16
th
 century word 
tolerance
 was slowly giving way to a new word, 
diversity
. People simply werenôt 
mostly the same
 anymore in our congregations. They didnôt share id
entity. 
 
And indeed, identity comes from the Latin word ?ide
m? which means ?same.?  So 
itôs easy to understand why people confuse sameness
 with identity. But Jameson 
Greenôs words from the second reading are insightfu
l here: ?Identity has often been a 
powerful organizing tool, but it should not be mist
aken for the ideal model of 
community.? 

 
And it was precisely 
this
 insight that began to restore a sense of identity 
to the 
Unitarians and the Universalists after the great De
pression, especially after they 
merged in the sixties to form the Unitarian Univers
alist Association, of which this 
congregation is part.  

 
But what sort of identity can we authentically clai
m as Unitarian Universalists? This 
at first seems like a hard question to answer, beca
use, since Frederick May Elliot was 
fretting about his Unitarian identity crises back i
n 1937, things have grown only more 
complex, not less, more diverse, not more uniform. 
Women, for instance, in the 
1970ôs suddenly realized the insight of Adrienne Ri
ch:  ?When someone with the 
authority of a teacher, say, describes the world an
d you are not in it,? 
thatôs
 when 
there is that ?moment ofñ.disequilibrium,? I mentio
ned earlier, ?as if you looked in 
the mirror and saw nothing.?  Unitarian Universalis
t women looked in the mirror of 
Unitarian Universalist history and did not see them
selvesñ
 just Mr.Emerson, Mr. 
Parker, Mr. Channing and Mr.Ballou. They didnôt see
 Susan B. Anthony, or Mary 
Wollstonecraft. When they sang our songs, they didn
ôt sing about  themselves, but 
about Man and Him and Father. They didnôt see minis
ters who were women in the 
pulpitñor board members around the tableñin those d
ays, there were hardly any. 
And no one saw open lesbians, bisexuals, gay men or
 transgendered persons in the 
pulpit eitherñor in the pewsñor in our case, purple
 chairs. Or as board chairs. Or 
teachers. 

 
The Vietnam war changed things too. Originally, bac
k during the first World War 
era, when certain ministers like John Haynes Holmes
 in New York criticized that 
particular European war, they were condemned by the
ir fellow clergy and most lay 
people in the pews. But by the time of Vietnam, mos
t of our ministers and most folks 
in the pews had clearly moved toward questioning th
e reasons of government leaders 

 6 for espousing certain wars. Had our identity as a m
ovement changed? Developed? 
Shifted? Transformed? Were we no longer us? 

 
This question of identity is not trivial. When I in
terview candidates for our ministry 
while sitting on our Unitarian Universalist credent
ialing body, the Ministerial 
Fellowship Committee, this issue comes up a lot. 

 
Why? Because to attend one of our churches is not n
ecessarily the same thing as 
having a Unitarian Universalist identity. Some folk
s come to our congregations and 
are so excited by the openness they find here that 
they immediately make plans to 
become one of our ministers, within a year of joini
ng the congregation. 
 
But because we do not have either a creed or a bapt
ism, because we do not offer folks 
any equivalent emotional experience to the evangeli
cal acceptance of Christ as 
Savior, the idea of identifying oneself as a Unitar
ian Universalist may take some 
time. Itôs not enough to say ?I think I was a Unita
rian Universalist before I came 
here.?  No, before you came here, you may have been
 a freethinker, or a free spirit or 
a spiritual progressive, or whatever, but to become
 a Unitarian Universalist usually 
takes some time.  

 
And it takes making at least two significant commit
ments. 
 
One, it means committing to make oneself vulnerable
 over the years to our history, 
our culture, and our particular manner of self-gove
rnment. 
 
And second, it means committing to engage deeply wi
th others within the 
congregation and association. It means listening to
 others carefully, and really getting 
how your individual spiritual outlook cannot reason
ably be born in isolation, but only 
in engaged community. 

 
And in some ways, number oneñfamiliarity with Unita
rian Universalist culture and 
history, 
informs
 number two, deep engagement in the community; even
 if that means 
real conflict. For example, back in the late ninete
en sixties, many denominations 
joined together to confront racism, and the deeply 
disturbing violence in Selma and 
other places. We were not alone. 

 
Our small associationôs member congregations sent a
 large proportion of their 
ministers to Selma, and the Board of Trustees of th
e Unitarian Universalist 
Association recessed their meeting in Boston, and e
ach member flew down to Selma 
and reconvened the meeting there, a very moving ges
ture, to be sure. 
 
But painful racialized views of the world are hardl
y confined to small cities like 
Selma or areas like the American South. So, black U
nitarian Universalists tried to 

 7 form a group to address these issues within our own
 ranks. Their goal was ?black 
empowerment? and therefore, it was only to be circl
e of African American Unitarian 
Universalists. This didnôt fly with other Unitarian
 Universalists, who formed another 
group, composed of both black and white Unitarian U
niversalists.  The conflict 
between these two groups was fierce. It was a diffi
cult time in our history. But it was 
our history, no one elseôs.  And in hindsight, each
 group had good arguments, both of 
them rooted in Unitarian Universalist principles of
 justice and fairness. In this 
particular case, no one was able to find a way to r
esolve the conflict, and that has 
been a hard lesson in our history. And so I now con
vinced that the process of growing 
a Unitarian Universalist identity needs to incorpor
ate such divergent opinions in a 
wide embrace, to recognize that blame and hurt can 
have no final place among us, 
and that people who honestly see the world differen
tly from you can equally share 
Unitarian Universalist identity. 

 
In other words, there is no singular Unitarian Univ
ersalist identity that all can share 
as far as how we approach the world, the spirit and
 the ultimate. But even if we are 
not like-minded, we are all called to be open-heart
ed, never offering each other that 
raised superior eyebrow used by people who think th
ey and they alone are right. Our 
best practice can only be to encourage each other t
o deeper spiritual growth. Growth 
that continues to our dying day. Aliveness. Unfinis
hedness. We are all called to enter 
into an identity of openness and real give and take
, counting community as our 
refuge.  Hey, weôre are not even called to be rigid
ly consistent. Our spiritual 
grounding, for some of us, might change, or know di
fferent stresses from day to day, 
from hour to hour. When I was first called to this 
congregation, someone asked me to 
talk about my personally theology. And this is what
 I said. Iôve told this story before, 
but it bears repeating this morning. I said, ?When 
I wake up in the morning, and I see 
the sunlight streaming over my skin, and I am surpr
ised that I am alive, or that 
anything is alive, I am filled with all the ancient
 praises Holy Holy Holy. Thank You. 
Amen. Amen.?  By noon, when I have read the paper a
nd have heard of a thousand 
horrible deaths, read of lies, deceit and greed, an
d seen photos of terrified children, I 
join the ranks of those who say ?There is no meanin
g, there is no hope, there is no 
Love on high or below.? By evening, when I have tal
ked with those I love, or heard 
stories from the lips of church members of their st
ruggles, their hopes, their 
successes, their grief and their generosity, I no l
onger claim such certainty, and move 
into the circle of those who say they really and ho
nestly ?donôt know.? I am more 
buoyant, more willing to imagine things not yet see
n. And late at night, once my eyes 
are hauled up to the stars that are quiet, bright a
nd impossible, I return more to my 
morning theologyñexcept this time, I leave all the 
words off, and am as silent as the 
mute stars.  

 
So my personal Unitarian Universalist identity is m
oving and alive. Itôs not consistent 
from moment to moment. And, I no longer claim my id
entity in reaction to my past, 
although I used to. I am no longer an ex-member of 
another religious group, but Iôm 

 8 entirely becoming a Unitarian Universalist. My iden
tity is not to BE a Unitarian 
Universalist, but to BECOME one. Every day. Every h
our. Till, I have to imagine, 
my dying day. As Mr. Green said so excellently in t
he second reading: 
?We are all 
becoming
 something, and we can strongly identify with diffe
rent aspects 
of our lives at different times, or new elements ma
y be introduced into our lives that 
we must integrate into our identity, such as parent
hood, chronic illness or sudden 
disability, falling in love with a person we wouldn
ôt have imagined being with, or 
finding a new career.?  

Exactly. Or in short, becoming trumps being. Butter
flies look best flying in the air, 
not pinned into specimen cases. Unitarian Universal
ists are those people who try to 
live in such a way that were Mr. Clark Kent to join
 the congregation, and start on that 
path of becoming a Unitarian Universalist, he could
, at last, pay growing attention to 
what his real identity was, and live that out here 
among us, without fear of anyone 
telling him to put his glasses back on and pretend 
to be someone he his not. He could 
look in the mirror and actually see himselfñand beh
ind him, 675 strong people, 
every other member of this supportive, welcoming, a
nd becoming congregation. 
Offering
 Remembering that every brick and bill that allows t
his place to thrive was offered by 
some member or some friend, we offer this opportuni
ty to let our own lives flow into 
the history of this place, in our time, in our way.
 The morning offering for the health 
of this congregation and its shelter will now be gi
ven and received.  
 
Psalm of Life 

 
Spirit of Life 

you music rising from the trumpet 

of my breathing, you castanet of my heart, 

you ligament that is the tight guarantee of all sis
terhood, all brotherhood, 
you deep well offering clear water that quenches 

thirst of anyone looking for something behind metap
hor, something that isnôt even 
something, 

something luminous in every stone and star 

and childôs eye, 

you sun of love that shines through the windows 

of our lives, you moon of constant changesñ
 you, spirit of life. Come. Come unto me. 

Come unto us. Come. 

