
In a simple house in London last September, I met a man who is acclaimed in the East as a Master of Masters. This man has not come to the West to perform miracles, but to open men's hearts, to give illumin­ation. He is a miracle with one exception. I have never met a human being who gives such certainty of inner light so easily, so purely and so naturally, as does this wise and child-like man. Psychic gifts he exercises with the natural­ness of perfection; but one realizes in his presence that these are merely the gifts which are added to the seekers of the Kingdom, and to be with him is like being with a King in his Kingdom, for this man has attained. 
I shall now tell of what happened after my visit, only to testify to one aspect of this man's greatness. It would be, to him, an insignificant happening, for one who has attained 

M. M. 
“all these things are added,” —“all 
the siddhis stand ready to serve the 
man who has conquered self,” says 
a Hindu scripture. But to us who as 
yet are in prison and seeking liber­
ation, it is good to record the glory 
and the power of man made perfect. 
It is in this spirit that I write. 
I was utter stranger to him, but 
the first two words he gave me told 
me of a lifelong besetting weakness! 
I was with him only for thirty-five 
minutes and I did not ask him to 
heal me. Nevertheless I had got to 
him with difficulty that evening, as I 
was suffering from asthma which 
had attacked me unexpectedly a few 
weeks before, and which threatened 
to ruin my work. I was indeed a sick 
woman. 
When I got home that night, I 
retired to bed, but could not sleep. I 
was gasping for breath. I was really 
ill. At last, about 3 a.m., I fell 
asleep exhausted. 

At about 3-20 a.m., I was awak­ened out of a deep sleep by a strong indescribably beautiful Eastern perfume. I arose, realizing that this Master had projected this perfume and was probably present in a subtle body. There was an almost frightening sense of power in the room. I sat down, cross-legged on the floor, and hardly had I seated myself, when this power—like a mighty rushing wind, is the nearest of description I can give, or like cold, fire, and wind combined— possessed my physical body, which was bent and stiff with suffering. Now suddenly, it would seem that the hands of a surgeon were operating on my lungs, spine, etc., inside my body. Definitely I was put through by pressure from within, forced through a series of exercises which it would take too long to describe. These included breathing on lines I had already practised for many years, adding more to what I already knew. 
All the time I was conscious of terrific power, as I say, almost frightening in its greatness which had got right inside my bones and tissues and was changing my body as I sat there. The thing was 
definitely physical. 
After about five minutes, the asthma had completely gone. After twenty minutes or so, it was impressed upon me to go to my bath-room and drink a large quantity of cold water. This I did, and returned shivering, for the night was cold and my room fireless. The perfume greeted me. I sat down again and asked the Master to make me warm. I was soon glowing. The exercises were resumed. I felt the shape of my body changing under the manip­ulations of the unseen "hands". (I mean this quite Iiterally. I was being reshaped. Friends noticed this afterwards.) 
Then, suddenly, I saw for an instance a figure standing before me in white light. At this point my eyes began to look up as it were into my head and a white flame began to dart through my forehead and hand. I had no power of myself to do this. It was being done to me. I began to lose consciousness, and must here confess that I foolishly feared to let myself go, and deliberately, with all reverence and gratitude, told the Master that I 

would rather not go on. I see now how silly that was. But one lives and learns! 
When I got back to bed, I was exhausted from the sheer physical changes which had been produced, but I slept blissfully, and awoke as if from heaven. 
The following night a similar experience occurred, but with additional exercises. The next day, I saw the holy one for a few minutes in the flesh. We "talked" of what had occurred, and I could tell by these remarks that he was fully cognisant of it all. (I write "talk", but he has not spoken for seven years. One is not aware, however, of the silence.) 
For six or seven consecutive nights he came  like this.  Once or twice a lady doctor friend, who is in my house, smelt the perfume. He would announce his presence by perfume—several kinds—and by music. Always the physical body was helped. The doctor confirmed this, as also the general definite changes (such as straightening the spine) which had been wrought. 
I am told that in India he heals lepers. I can quite believe it. I am told that he heals men's souls too. I can believe that, after what even I experienced; and for the sake of those who suffer, who are in darkness and deadness of spirit, who are hungering and thirsting for reality, and for the sight of God's glory, I humbly put this on record. Shri Meher Baba is a Master indeed.  
