WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH I recently heard an interview of our beloved Brother Tim on a radio program out of Rhode Island. It was excellent explication of God's sovereign power bringing this nation down to the sides of hell as God has promised for their hatred of and rebellion against Him and their love of themselves and their sins. [See e.g., Psalm 9:17.] The Lord opened that door of utterance apparently in connection to our Gospel preaching at the World Series. The interviewer began with this quote: "The Westboro Baptist Church (WBC) of Topeka, Kansas, is an Old School (or, Primitive) Baptist Church. We adhere to the teachings of the Bible, preach against all form of sin (e.g., fornication, adultery [including divorce and remarriage], sodomy), and insist that the sovereignty of God and the doctrines of grace be taught and expounded publicly to all men." He got that from our web page: www.godhatesfags.com, from our FAQ Page: "Who are you, what do you do, and why do you do it?" The theme of all my sermons in this pulpit I pray will be to adhere to the teachings of the Bible, preach against all forms of sin and insist that the sovereignty of God and the doctrines of grace be taught and expounded publicly to all men. To that end I lay down this proposition: (2 Timothy 3:16-17): "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works." So, open the Bible in any place and read: jumping out at you will be preaching against sin and the instruction on the sovereignty of God and the doctrines of grace. And, one such place is Psalm 119. Psalm 119 consists of twenty two parts, according to the number of the letters in the Hebrew alphabet; the names of which letters stand between each part; and every part consists of eight 1  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH verses, all of which begin with the same letter of the Hebrew alphabet. "This Psalm is called the Alphabet of Divine Love, the Paradise of all the Doctrines, the Storehouse of the Holy Spirit, the School of Truth, also the deep mystery of the Scriptures, where the whole moral discipline of all the virtues shines brightly." --Johannes Paulus Palanterius, 1600. "In our German version it has the appropriate inscription, `The Christian's golden A B C of the praise, love, power, and use of the Word of God.'" Franz Delitzsch, 1871. In Matthew Henry's "Account of the Life and Death of his father, Philip Henry," he says: "Once, pressing the study of the Scriptures, he advised us to take a verse of this Psalm every morning to meditate upon, and so go over the Psalm twice in the year; and that, saith he, will bring you to be in love with all the rest of the Scriptures." Some say David, the "Sweet Psalmist of Israel" [2 Samuel 23:1], composed Psalm 119 throughout his life from young age to old age in order. Listen to the Holy Spirit at the mouth of David from when he was young to when he was old: 1  ALEPH. [ah-lehf]. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the LORD. 2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart. 3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways. 4  Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. 2  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! 6 Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. 7  I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments. 8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly. 9  BETH. [b EH th]. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word. 10  With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. 11  Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. 12  Blessed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes. 13  With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. 14 I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. 15 I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways. 16 I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word. 17  GIMEL. [g ih m ehl]. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word. 18  Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. 3  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 19  I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me. 20  My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times. 21  Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy commandments. 22  Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy testimonies. 23  Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. 24  Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors. 25  DALETH. [Dah leth]. My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word. 26  I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes. 27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. 28  My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy word. 29 Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously. 30  I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me. 4  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame. 32 I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. 33  HE. [hey]. Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto the end. 34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. 35  Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I delight. 36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. 37  Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy way. 38  Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. 39  Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good. 40  Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness. 41  VAU. [vahv]. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD, even thy salvation, according to thy word. 42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word. 43  And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments. 5  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 44 So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever. 45  And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts. 46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed. 47 And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved. 48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes. 49  ZAIN. [zah-yeen]. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. 50  This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickened me. 51  The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law. 52  I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD; and have comforted myself. 53  Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy law. 54  Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. 55  I have remembered thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have kept thy law. 56 This I had, because I kept thy precepts. 6  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 57  CHETH. [kheht]. Thou art my portion, O LORD: I have said that I would keep thy words. 58  I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according to thy word. 59  I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. 61  The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law. 62  At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous judgments. 63  I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts. 64  The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes. 65  TETH. [teht]. Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O LORD, according unto thy word. 66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments. 67  Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. 68  Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes. 69  The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. 7  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 70 Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law. 71  It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes. 72  The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver. 73  JOD. [YOOD]. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments. 74  They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have hoped in thy word. 75  I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me. 76  Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to thy word unto thy servant. 77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight. 78  Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts. 79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known thy testimonies. 80  Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed. 81  CAPH. [kahf]. My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word. 82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me? 8  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 83  For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy statutes. 84  How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me? 85  The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law. 86 All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully; help thou me. 87 They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy precepts. 88  Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth. 89  LAMED. [LAH-mehd]. For ever, O LORD, thy word is settled in heaven. 90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established the earth, and it abideth. 91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy servants. 92  Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction. 93  I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened me. 94  I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts. 9  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 95  The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies. 96  I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding broad. 97  MEM. [MEHM]. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day. 98  Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with me. 99 I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. 100 I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts. 101  I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word. 102  I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me. 103  How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth! 104 Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way. 105  NUN. [NOON]. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. 106  I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. 10  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 107  I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according unto thy word. 108  Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me thy judgments. 109  My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts. 111  Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. 112 I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end. 113  SAMECH. [SAH-mehkh]. I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love. 114  Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word. 115  Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments of my God. 116  Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope. 117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. 118  Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehood. 119 Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies. 11  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 120 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments. 121  AIN. [AH-yeen]. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors. 122 Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me. 123  Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness. 124  Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes. 125 I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies. 126  It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they have made void thy law. 127  Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold. 128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. 129  PE. [PEH]. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them. 130  The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple. 131  I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments. 12  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 132  Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name. 133  Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 134  Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts. 135  Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes. 136  Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. 137  TZADDI. [TSAH-dee]. Righteous art thou, O LORD, and upright are thy judgments. 138 Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very faithful. 139  My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. 140  Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it. 141  I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts. 142  Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the truth. 143  Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my delights. 144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding, and I shall live. 13  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 145  KOPH. [KOOF]. I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O LORD: I will keep thy statutes. 146 I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies. 147  I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. 148 Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word. 149  Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness: O LORD, quicken me according to thy judgment. 150  They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law. 151 Thou art near, O LORD; and all thy commandments are truth. 152  Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever. 153  RESH. [REHSH]. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law. 154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word. 155  Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes. 156  Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me according to thy judgments. 157  Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies. 14  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 158  I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not thy word. 159  Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O LORD, according to thy lovingkindness. 160  Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever. 161  SCHIN. [SEEN]. Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word. 162  I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil. 163  I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love. 164  Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments. 165  Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them. 166  LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments. 167  My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly. 168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee. 169  TAU. [TAHV]. Let my cry come near before thee, O LORD: give me understanding according to thy word. 170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word. 15  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH 171  My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes. 172  My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteousness. 173  Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts. 174 I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD; and thy law is my delight. 175  Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments help me. 176  I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy commandments. With the exception of verses 90, 122, and 132 there appears in each verse of Psalm 119 one of the following words: law, testimonies, precepts, statutes, commandments, judgments, word, saying, and "way." These are all designations of the Divine Law; but each has a significantly different meaning. I direct you to the full outline for those meanings which has been provided to you here or can be found on our web page. [1. "Law". This word is formed from a verb which means to direct, to guide, to aim, to shoot forwards. Its etymological meaning, then, would be a rule of conduct. It means God's law in general, whether it be that universal rule called the law of nature, or that which was revealed to his Church by Moses, and perfected by Christ. 2. "Testimonies" are derived from a word which signifies to bear witness to testify. The ark of the tabernacle is so called as are the 16  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH two tables of stone, and the tabernacle; the earnests and witnesses of God's inhabitation among his people. Testimonies are more particularly God's revealed law; the witnesses and confirmation of his promises made to his people, and earnests of his future salvation. 3. "Precepts," from a word which means to place in trust, mean something entrusted to man, "that is committed to thee"; appointments of God, which consequently have to do with the conscience, for which man is responsible, as an intelligent being. 4. "Statutes." The verb from which this word is formed means to engrave or inscribe. The word means a definite, prescribed, written law--that moral law of God which is engraven on the fleshy tables of the heart; the in most and spiritual apprehension of his will: not so obvious as the law and testimonies, and a matter of more direct spiritual communication than his precepts; the latter being more elaborated by the efforts of the mind itself, divinely guided. 5. "Commandments," derived from a verb signifying to command or ordain. Such was God's command to Adam about the tree; to Noah about constructing the ark. 6. "Judgments," derived from a word signifying to govern, to judge or determine, mean judicial ordinances and decisions; legal sanctions. 7. "Word". There are two terms, quite distinct in the Hebrew, but both rendered "word." The latter of these is rendered "saying." They are closely connected: since out of twenty-two passages in which "word" occurs, in fourteen it is parallel to it, or in connection with, "saying". From this very circumstance it is evident they are not synonymous. 17  WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH SERMON OF NOVEMBER 3, 2013 PSALM 119--PARADISE OF ALL DOCTRINES AND SCHOOL OF TRUTH The term here rendered "word" seems the logos, or Word of God, in its most divine sense; the announcement of God's revealed will; his command; his oracle; at times, the special communication to the prophets. The ten commandments are called by this term in Exodus. In this psalm it may be considered as, -- (1) God's revealed commandments in general. (2) As a revealed promise of certain blessings to the righteous. (3) As a thing committed to him as the minister of God. (4) As a rule of conduct; a channel of illumination. 8. As to the remaining word "way," that occurs but twice as a characteristic word, and the places in which it occurs must be considered a plain rule of conduct; in its higher sense, the assisting grace of God through Christ our Lord, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Taken from John Jebb's exposition in 1846] Each of these 176 verses in Psalm 119 could form the basis of a complete sermon. Each of these verses could be provided as examples proving Hebrews 4:12: "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." Read, study, and meditate upon these verses daily, for your learning, instruction and comfort. "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" [Romans 11:33] I love you. Amen. 18  
