Sunday, January 13, 2008 pg. 1  Sermon Outline  "A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote" (Jer. 50:36)  This describes in part the condition of things in Babylon (i.e., America) just before their utter and final destruction in June, 538 B.C., at the hands of Darius I and Cyrus the Great. "A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote" (Jer. 50:36). Following ancient authorities, and the Targum, Gill thinks these "doting liars" of Babylon are the so-called wise men or religious leaders of the east (Mat. 2:1) ­ priests of the temples of idols ­ of which Babylon was filled from one end to the other ­ just as the United States is filled to the overflowing with hundreds of thousands of preachers and priests and rabbis and religious leaders of every kind ­ from coast to coast, and at all 700 military bases in 134 foreign lands ­ and on all the ships at sea ­ all leading in idolatrous worship of the flag ­ the idolatrous stars and stripes "forever" ­ and the idolatrous nation for which that flag stands. Gill says, "who were a lying set of men, who imposed upon and deceived the people; these with their divinations and soothsayings could not save the land, nor themselves, from the devouring sword of the Lord; nay, (these false prophets ­ these lying preachers) were the ruin of (the nation; to wit)": "But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they thall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments" (Isa. 47:9).  "Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the heretics, (the Arminians), the astrologers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee." (Isa. 47:13) "And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee; for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; FOR BY THY SORCERIES (FALSE TEACHING AND PREACHING AND PROPHESYING) WERE ALL NATIONS DECEIVED." (Rev. 18:23) Beloved, this set of men are "doting liars"; to wit: "A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote" (Jer. 50:36). Gill says that they are "foolishly acting a mad part, and be at their wits end; not knowing what course to take for their own safety, and much less be able to give direction and advice to others." And this be the sad meaning of, "and they shall dote." Doting liars, indeed. At any hour of the day and night, you may see and hear a sampling of them on TV and radio. Loud-mouth preachers and back-slapping, hand-shaking politicians ­ doting liars ­ look you square in the eyes ­ and lie through their teeth. An international incident took place this week on the high seas in the Persian Gulf ­ half-way around the world ­ where we are poking our big, fat nose in other nations' business. The lying, servile American media reported that it was "an Iranian-U.S. faceoff in the Persian Gulf, which the U.S. Navy called Iran's most provocative act to date."  Sunday, January 13, 2008 pg. 2  Sermon Outline  Three powerful U.S. warships were heading into the Gulf ­ which is completely bordered on the  east by Iran, and completely bordered on the west by Saudi Arabia. The U.S. is on the other side  of the world. The commander of our convoy ­ (Vice Admiral Kevin Cosgriff, commander of the  U.S. 5th fleet) ­ said he was "steaming toward the gulf as part of standard maritime operations,  when five little Iranian speedboats ­ holding two or three sailors each, ­ approached us much  more provocatively than usual."  THEY ARE ALL DOTING LIARS  The Iranians, of course, have a much different story to tell. They say the huge, powerful U.S. warships were trespassing in Iranian waters ­ thousands of miles away from American waters ­ flexing their muscles in a threatening way just a short distance from their country in the Strait of Hormuz where the waterway of the Arabian Sea narrows. We are likely never to know the truth, because we live in a nation filled with "doting liars." Mom said, has Iran got nuclear weapons now, and so it is trying to start something? I said, it's hard to tell, because it's hard to believe anything our media says, and even harder to believe anything our government says.  They are all, DOTING LIARS. Based on our extensive experience, I would sooner believe what Iran says than what our government says or what our media say. When our government says in a loud voice for all the world to hear, that Westboro Baptist Church is a freak show and a traveling circus, it is abundantly clear that the curse of God is on this country.  "I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee." (Gen. 12:3) "For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned." (Mat. 12:37)  "Behold, the Lord cometh with (myriads) of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their HARD SPEECHES WHICH UNGODLY SINNERS have spoken against him." (Jude 1:14, 15) Make no mistake, Beloved. Listen carefully to this sentence; to wit: The destruction of Babylon was/is/will be, nothing more and nothing less than God's vengeance upon her because of the vile way she treated us ­ the Elect, the spokesmen and representatives of God on earth at any given time. "And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for IN ONE HOUR IS SHE MADE DESOLATE. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; FOR GOD HATH AVENGED YOU ON HER." (Rev. 18:19, 20)  Sunday, January 13, 2008 pg. 3  Sermon Outline  THE GREAT WHORE OF REV. 17 IS BABYLON THE GREAT  God is not taking vengeance in the abstract. He is avenging "his own elect, which cry day and night unto him" (Lk. 18:7) for vengeance. "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" (Rev. 6:10). Without any question, the Great Whore of Rev. 17 is Babylon the Great, because she wears that name proudly, blatantly, brazenly on her forehead; to wit: "And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication: And upon her forehead was a name written (gr., grapho, to engrave, to tatoo, at a minimum), MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And I saw the woman drunken with the BLOOD OF THE SAINTS, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration ­ (stupendous and horrific and mysterious and awesome in the extreme). And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel (stand in awe, to be struck with awe at a sight so dreadful and so mysterious)?" (Rev. 17:4-7)  Gill says about John's marvel here; to wit: "But, above all, (John might marvel) at her drunkenness with the blood of the saints; at her inhumanity and cruelty, being as savage as the beast she rode upon; and also, at God's forbearance of her, that he, who is a pure and holy Being, a lover of his saints, an avenger of his elect, should suffer such a brutish, barbarous, and bloodthirsty creature, to live upon earth." Well, Beloved, maybe Dr. Gill never met up with this filthy, whorish woman, riding this beast ­ and for that matter, maybe John never met up with her before, either. But we at Westboro Baptist Church have done battle with her many times, and we are not one bit surprised at her vicious inhumanity and cruelty, and we know her to be MORE SAVAGE than the bloody beast she rode upon. We understand this to be the conflict of the ages, told by prophets and by sages, and its fury is upon us, is upon us today ­ even the "wars of the Lord" (Num. 21:14), and the "quarrel of the covenant" (Lev. 26:25), and, "the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple" (Jer. 51:11). Remember the sentence I read earlier in the sermon, upon which, "as a nail fastened in a sure place" (Isa. 22:23), the sermon hangs. Please listen carefully to the sentence again; to wit: Make no mistake; the destruction of Babylon was/is/will be, nothing more and nothing less than God's vengeance upon her because of the vile way she treated us ­ the Elect of God, even the spokesmen and the representatives of God on the earth at any given time. The vengeance of God ­ one of the holiest attributes of the Diety ­ even that attribute which God will employ in a most active manner throughout eternity ­ does not exist in a vacuum, or in the  Sunday, January 13, 2008 pg. 4  Sermon Outline  abstract. Sprinkled throughout the 110 verses proclaiming Babylon's doom at Jer. chapters 50 &  5l are repeated declarations of the reason for her doom; to wit:  "And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord." (Jer. 51:24)  "The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitants of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and TAKE VENGEANCE FOR THEE." (Jer. 51:35, 36)  "RASE IT, RASE IT!" Psa. 137 is a beautiful and pitiful poetic picture of all God's mourning pilgrims as they make their sorrowful way through cruel afflictions and bitter persecutions ­ and crying out all along the way for God's vengeance upon their blood-thirsty persecutors ­ i.e., for God to avenge them; to wit:  "Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem ­ (note: "the day of Jerusalem" is the substantial equivalent of "the day of the Lord" or "the day of His wrath", as in "For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" [Rev. 6:17]) ­ Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof." (Psa. 137:7)  Note here: The primary persecutor was Babylon. The secondary persecutor was Edom. Edom was the cheerleader, urging Babylon on in the bloody destruction of Jerusalem. "Rase it, rase it," they cried. Words they will remember throughout eternity, as the vengeance of God punishes them in Hell, forever. "Rase it, rase it!" their present day Edomite counterparts cry about Westboro Baptist Church. Yes. Beloved. "For it must needs be" (Mat. 18:7). Deep within the all-wise counsels of the all-wise God ­ "It must needs be." ­ "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, THE ONLY WISE GOD, be honor and glory for ever and ever." (1 Timothy 1:17) ­ "It must needs be." ­ the Lord Jesus said it: "Woe unto the world because of offences! for IT MUST NEEDS BE THAT OFFENCES COME; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!" (Mat. 18:7) "By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof...Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof. ­ (So go the prayers of God's persecuted Elect: "Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom") ­ O daughter of Babylon, WHO ART TO BE DESTROYED; happy shall  Sunday, January 13, 2008 pg. 5  Sermon Outline  he be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. Happy shall he be, that  taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones" (Psa. 137:1, 2, 7, 8).  "A NAIL FASTENED IN A SURE PLACE" Beloved, there will soon be a great meeting of "the general assembly and church of the firstborn which are written in heaven," (Heb. 12:23) and the subject of that great meeting is described at Rev. 19:1-3; to wit:  "And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God: FOR true and righteous are his judgments: FOR he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, AND HATH AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS AT HER HAND. And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up FOR EVER AND EVER" (Rev. 19:1-3).  The scene described here is the "time of the restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21). The end of the world has come at last. This is no intermediate historical event. This is it, as they say. The great white throne is set up, all mankind not written in the book of life are present, and judged out of those things written in certain open books. From deep space comes the "great voice of much people in heaven," even all the redeemed, praising "the Lord our God" for His:  "True and righteous judgments: FOR HE HATH JUDGED THE GREAT WHORE...AND HATH AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS AT HER HAND...FOR EVER AND EVER." (Rev. 19:1-3)  The Great Whore represents all of lost mankind in the aggregate, and the "blood of his servants," is put, by a synecdoche, for every act of persecution committed against any, each and every one of God's Elect ­ all of which is recorded in the open books, out of which the damned are judged, which adjudicatory process ­ (including punishment ­ "And these shall go away into everlasting punishment" [Mat. 25:46]) ­ I say, which adjudicatory process continues, "FOR EVER AND EVER." And so, you see, Beloved, the sermon hangs on "a nail fastened in a sure place" (Isa. 22:23). Make no mistake; the destruction of Babylon was/is/will be, nothing more and nothing less than God's vengeance upon her because of the vile way she treated us ­ the Elect of God, even the spokesmen and the representatives of God on the earth at any given time. In a way, the Lord Jesus described heaven's entire judicial system when He said:  "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily" (Lk. 18:7,8)  Amen.  
