  Great ideas are a powerful means of shaping lives. Ask not what your country can do for you, but what youcan do for your country, was a great idea.  And it has shapedmany lives.  But there is something even more powerful than agreat idea, namely, a person who embodies that idea.  John Kennedy'sideas had power because people not only listened to the ideas,they also looked at the man.  In the Christian faith great doctrines are a powerfulmeans of shaping lives.  But even more powerful is a great doctrinelived out by a real person.  This means that books about Biblicaldoctrine are important.  But many of us have found again and againthat the story of a person who lived and died by that doctrinemakes the truth more powerful in our lives.  The story may be old and contained in a Christianbiography.  Or the story may be contemporary and contained, forexample, in a letter.  received a letter last week from a manin Elyria, Ohio, who had been reading Desiring God.  He told mea little about himself in his letter.  And in the process becamea powerful inspiration to me.  Here is what he said,    I have a maintenance business and I found that inthe manual labor I perform, [there is] time that my mind is freeto meditate on the Word of God.  And I have found myself enjoying,as you write, hedonistically, the Glories and beauties of Godin the face of the Lord Jesus Christ.  In the process I have memorized15 books of the New Testament, and I have found the scriptureto be increasing sweet and real and precious as the Holy Spirittakes them and makes the things of Christ real to me.    Now it is one thing to know the Biblical teachingthat we should hide the Word of God in our hearts.  But it isanother to get a letter from a janitor who so loves the Word ofGod that he has memorized 15 books of the New Testament.  We arerebuked and guided and inspired.  If he can do it, so will I,we say.  So we are looking at Barnabas for three weeks togetherin these Sunday morning messages.  And my prayer is that the portraitof this remarkable man will inspire you, as Hebrews 13:7 says,to consider the outcome of his life and imitate his faith.  Last week we focused on Acts 11:24, where Luke tellsus that Barnabas was good man and full of the Holy Spiritand of faith.  We studied six aspects of his goodness andnoticed how each of them came from his faith.  Today we will focus on one of Barnabas' remarkableaccomplishments, namely, his making of a great leader, in facthis making of two great leaders.  Barnabas was a maker of leaders,and my goal today is to stir you up to be as much of a leader-makeras you can.  Let's begin with a definition.  What is a Christianleader?   Broadly speaking, a person is more or less a Christianleader as that person exerts more or less Christian influencein Christian ways.  Or to put it another way, to the degree thatyou shape others toward the image of Christ you are a Christianleader.  That's a very broad definition of Christian leadership,and should include every obedient Christian, because we shouldall be influencing someone to be more like Christ.  But if weget more specific, what we usually mean by a good Christian leaderis someone who is really good at influencing others toward Christlikeness. They have personal strengths that draw others into the sway oftheir influence and lead them to the ways of Christ.  My experience in Cameroon and Liberia two years ago,and in the Philippines and Singapore several weeks ago, has confirmedthe words of Patrick Johnstone in OPERATION WORLD,  Leadership is the key. . . There is a worldwide lackof men and women truly called of God and deeply taught in theScriptures to lead the churches -- people willing to suffer scorn,poverty and the shame of the Cross for the sake of the Saviourwho redeemed them.  Those who accurately and effectively expoundthe Scriptures are few, especially in areas where the churchesare growing rapidly (p. 37).  There are people who oppose leadership wherever itbegins to emerge.  But if we had time I would love to test thefollowing claim by the Scriptures: Opposition to Christian leadership(or an anti-leadership mentality) is not born out of great vision,but out of little resentments.  A church without strong leadersis not a democracy of giants.  Johnstone's diagnosis is right,because it is Biblical:  what the church needs worldwide is Spirit-filled,Bible-saturated, Christ-exalting, self-abasing, untiring, perseveringleaders who exert deep, broad, life-changing influence for JesusChrist.  And to get them we need hundreds and thousands ofBarnabas-like leader-makers.  I am not talking mainly today aboutleaders.  I am talking about leader-makers.  Are you one? Couldyou be one?  Don't rule yourself out too quickly.    Charles Spurgeon was the greatest preacher of the19th century.  Listen to what he says about Mary King, the housekeeperat the school he attended as a teenager in Newmarket:  She liked something very sweet indeed, good strongCalvinistic doctrine, but she lived strongly as well as fed strongly. Many a time we have gone over the covenant of grace together,and talked of the personal election of the saints, their unionto Christ, their final perseverance and what vital godliness meant;and I do believe that I learnt more from her than I should havelearned from any six doctors of divinity of the sort we have nowadays.  The most important thing you may ever do for thecause of Christ may go unnoticed for 30 years.  Don't quench theSpirit of God this morning.  He may be calling you to be a leader-maker.  What are the marks of a Biblical leader-maker?  That'stoday's question.  There are at least five that I see in the lifeof Barnabas.    Under the providence of God in the life of the earlychurch we owe the ministry of two leaders to the initiative andadvocacy of Barnabas.  The two leaders are Paul and John Mark. As far as we know, Barnabas wrote none of the New Testament. But the men he nurtured wrote a third of it: Paul wrote 13 ofthe Epistles of the New Testament and Mark wrote one of our fourGospels.    Let's look at the marks of a Biblical leader-makerin the life of Barnabas -- the man whom the apostles nicknamed,son of encouragement (Acts 4:36).   1.  A Biblical leader-maker takes risks to supporthopeful leaders.   Acts 9:26 says that some time after Saul's conversionhe came to Jerusalem and tried to join the disciples.  You rememberhe had previously persecuted Christians.  He was the High Priest'shatchet man, you might say.  Now here he is claiming to be a Christian convert. The last part of Acts 9:26 says, They were all afraid ofhim, for they did not believe that he was a disciple.  Is there anyone who will take a risk for Saul?  Isthere anyone who can see in him the making of a great leader? One man came forward.  One man stuck his neck out when everyoneelse was afraid to give Saul a chance to prove himself -- Barnabas. Verse 27:   Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles.. .   Barnabas became his advocate.  The result?  The churchaccepted him and his ministry flourished in Jerusalem.  And Barnabaswatched, and made note.  This would not be the last time he supportedPaul's ministry.  So the first mark of a Biblical leader-maker is thewillingness to take risks on behalf of potential leaders.  Allthe other disciples were afraid.  But the leader-maker had thecourage to give this remarkable young man Saul a chance.  Whata pay-off!   2.  A Biblical leader-maker has a good eye and aglad heart for the potential of grace.   This is a recap of one of last week's points fromActs 11:23.  When the church in Jerusalem heard that a churchhad been planted in Antioch the one man that they thought wouldbe a good encourager for the new Gentile believers was Barnabas. Barnabas could always find something good to encourage in people!  So Acts 11:23 says, When he came and saw thegrace of God, he was glad.  He had a good eye and a gladheart for the potential of grace.  The church was new and imperfect,but Barnabas saw the work of grace and it made him glad.  Thatis the mark of a leader-maker, or a son of encouragement, as theapostles called him.  Leader-makers have their heat sensors adjusted andalert for embers of grace that they can fan, while the other kindof people, it seems, have their buckets of criticism ready topour on the ashes of imperfection.  So a leader-maker has a goodeye and a glad heart for the potential of grace.    One of the most gifted persons in this regard thatI know of is Barb Espland, one of our missionaries to the Philippines. Noel and I marveled, as we spoke with her for several days howshe spoke of all unbelievers as more or less on the way to Christ. She could see signs of hope in almost everyone.    She doesn't seem to have that static, crisis mentalitythat sees people as fixed in their alienation from God and stationaryuntil some crisis crashes in and converts them.  Instead she hasa more dynamic view that sees people, to be sure, as really cutoff from God and in need of conversion, but not as static.  Peopleare in motion spiritually.  God is at work in a hundred ways toinfluence them, and she has an eagle eye and a glad heart forthese signs of grace.   3.  Biblical leader-makers are humble and self-effacing.   That means that they have the beautiful gift of fadinginto the background while pushing others into prominence.  Theyare not addicted to the praise of men and do not crave the limelight.  Where do we see this in Barnabas?  It starts in Acts11:25-26.  Barnabas' ministry in Antioch had been so successfulthat the converts were everywhere.  Now there is one kind of personwho would say at this point: I am now a respected leader.  I haveearned a good reputation for my work.  It is now time to consolidatemy gains and establish myself as a prominent preacher in thispart of Syria.  But what does Barnabas do?  Instead of maneuveringfor his own exaltation, he leaves town to look for an associate-- an associate that he knows good and well is a more dynamicleader and a better preacher than he is, namely Saul.  Verse 25-26:   So Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul; andwhen he had found him, he brought him to Antioch.  For a wholeyear they met with the church, and taught a large company of people.. .   With this strategic investment in Saul's life andcareer Barnabas secured forever his secondary status in churchhistory -- and I love him for it.  Watch what happens as Barnabas fades into Paul'sshadow, like an aircraft mechanic fades into the shadow of thesoaring pilot.  In Acts 13:1-3 the Holy Spirit sets Barnabas andSaul apart for a missionary journey to the unreached cities ofCyprus and Galatia.  Notice the order of the names in verse 2:it is still Barnabas first and Saul second, the way it has beenback in Acts 11:30 and 12:25.  When they get to the city of Paphos on the islandof Cyprus the proconsul invites them to speak to him, and in Acts13:7 Barnabas still has the honor of first place: he summonedBarnabas and Saul and sought to hear the word of God.  But when Elymas the magician tried to turn the proconsulaway from the faith, it was Saul who exploded with the Holy Spiritin verse 10:    You son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness,full of all deceit and villainy, will you not stop making crookedthe straight paths of the Lord?   This is probably not the way Barnabas would havesaid it.  But from this point on, Saul (now called Paul for thefirst time in verse 9) is in charge.  We see this immediately in verse 13.  Luke says,Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos.  Barnabasis not even mentioned.  In verse 16 it is Paul not Barnabas whodelivers the sermon in Antioch of Pisidia.  When both of themare mentioned it is now Paul and Barnabas not Barnabasand Paul (13:43, 46, 50; 15:2, 22, 35; except in Jerusalemwhere Barnabas is on his home turf, 15:12, 25; and in Lystra whereBarnabas is called Zeus and Paul Hermes.)  In chapter 14 we get a glimpse of what their partnershiplooked like.  They have come to Lystra and a man has been healedthrough the hand of Paul.  In verses 11 and 12 look at how thelocal people describe the relationship between Barnabas and Paul:  When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they liftedup their voices, saying in Lycaonian, The gods have comedown to us in the likeness of men!  Barnabas they calledZeus, and Paul, because he was the chief speaker, they calledHermes.  Zeus of course is the father of the Greek gods. His Roman name is Jupiter.  And Hermes is his son and is the fleetfooted messenger of the gods.  His Roman name is Mercury.  So evidently Barnabas is perceived as older and morevenerable and dignified than Paul.  But Paul is the one who speakswith amazing force.  Barnabas keeps a consistent strategy: putthis young leader forward.  Let him have the word.    And so behind the emergence of the greatest missionaryand the greatest theologian is the aging Barnabas, humbly givingway to the explosive young leader named Paul.  Sons of encouragementare less likely to be stoned than sons of thunder.  These two roles have their different costs.  Barnabaspays the price of self-effacement and eventual obscurity.  Paulpays the price here in Lystra of being stoned.  Acts 14:19 describeshow Paul, not Barnabas, bears the wrath of the cities where hehas been the spokesman.  A Biblical leader-maker is humble and self-effacing. He looks for people with better gifts than his own and pushesthem forward.   4. A Biblical leader-maker is patient with the failuresof others.   This will be clear from the way Barnabas handlesthe desertion of John Mark.  But this is the lead in to next week'smessage.  So I am going to save it for next week and go finallyto the fifth mark of a Biblical leader-maker, and end on the samenote we ended on last week.   5. A Biblical leader-maker is free from materialism.   In Acts 4:36 Luke tells us that the apostles gaveJoseph the name Barnabas because it meant son of encouragement. The very next verse says, He sold a field which belongedto him, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet. Why did he do this?  Verse 34 says that it was to meet the needsof the poor in the Christian community.  This is what Luke associateswith Barnabas' being a son of encouragement.  So I conclude that Barnabas does not love money andthings, he loves people.  This is essential for being a Biblicalleader-maker.  Twenty years later Paul writes to the church inCorinth (1 Cor. 9:4-6) like this:    Do we not have the right to our food and drink? Do we not have the right to be accompanied by a wife, as the otherapostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas?   Or is it onlyBarnabas and I who have no right to refrain from working for aliving?   Twenty years have passed and here is the old Zeusand the younger Hermes keeping themselves lean for the Lord, workingwith their hands, refusing to take gifts from Corinth.  Why? In order to make perfectly clear that they do not minister formoney.  They minister for people.  If you want to be a Biblical leader-maker, ask yourselfthis: when my mind is free to dream do I dream of clothes or carsor houses or lake property or sports or profits or stereos orvideos or computers or vacations or food or movies or investments.. .?  In other words, am I materialistic in the moments when Idream about what I would like to do and to have?  Does my mindnaturally fill up with possessions?  That is not what fills the mind of a Biblical leader-maker.  When leader-makers lie awake at night their mindsturn to people -- people potentials and people strategies.  Theydream about how to maximize their influence on people for thesake of Christ.      I could invite that 11 year old boy to spend thenight in the International House. . .    we could get behind that 14 year old missionary withour 20:20 group. . .    we could ask that student over for Thanksgiving dinner.. .     we could give an anonymous gift to that strugglingseminary student. . .    we could pay her way to Urbana. . .     I could send him a note of thanks for that pastoralprayer. . .    I could read my children a series of missionary biographies.. .     I could write that short-termer a letter of encouragement.. .    The list is endless for Biblical leader-makers --people who are free from the heart-deadening mentality of materialism.  Well, there is Barnabas, the maker of a great leader.    He took a risk to support a dangerous new convert.. He had a good eye and a glad heart for the potentialof grace. He was humble and self-effacing and let himselffade behind the rising star of the apostle Paul. He was patient with the failures of others. And he was free from materialism and filled withthoughts and dreams of how to make leaders for theLord of glory.   May the Lord fill this church with leader-makersfor the cause of Christ here and around the world.  
