  September 7, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    YOU HAVE COME TO MOUNT ZION  Hebrews 12:18-29  
  The more I reflected on today's text (12:18-24) the more it seemedwise to put it together with next week's (12:25-29) and treat it alltogether. This means we will look at fewer individual statements, butwe will, I hope, get a better sense of the flow of the whole unitfrom Hebrews 12:18-29. I think you will see that this is a unit thathangs together and should be read as a whole. In fact it connectswith last week's text, as you see in the word "for" at the beginningof verse 18 (omitted in the NIV).  For you have not come to a mountain that may be touched and to ablazing fire, and to darkness and gloom and whirlwind, 19 and to theblast of a trumpet and the sound of words which sound was such thatthose who heard begged that no further word should be spoken to them.20 For they could not bear the command, "IF EVEN A BEAST TOUCHES THEMOUNTAIN, IT WILL BE STONED." 21 And so terrible was the sight, thatMoses said, "I AM FULL OF FEAR AND TREMBLING." 22 But you have cometo Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenlyJerusalem, and to myriads of angels, 23 to the general assembly andchurch of the first-born who are enrolled in heaven, and to God, theJudge of all, and to the spirits of righteous men made perfect, 24and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkledblood, which speaks better than the blood of Abel. 25 See to it thatyou do not refuse Him who is speaking. For if those did not escapewhen they refused him who warned them on earth, much less shall weescape who turn away from Him who warns from heaven. 26 And His voiceshook the earth then, but now He has promised, saying, "YET ONCE MOREI WILL SHAKE NOT ONLY THE EARTH, BUT ALSO THE HEAVEN." 27 And thisexpression, "Yet once more," denotes the removing of those thingswhich can be shaken, as of created things, in order that those thingswhich cannot be shaken may remain. 28 Therefore, since we receive akingdom which cannot be shaken, let us show gratitude, by which wemay offer to God an acceptable service with reverence and awe; 29 forour God is a consuming fire.  The Way You Act When You Trust that God is Acting for You  Last week we saw that verses 12-17 were an exhortation to bestrong (verse 12) and run a straight race (verse 13) and pursue peaceand holiness (verse 14) and by all means not to be like Esau, wholooked at his birthright and gave it up for a single meal (verses16-17). We saw that these commands were based on what God was alreadydoing in us and for us by his loving discipline in verses 4-11.Because God is at work for our holiness (verse 10) and our peace(verse 11) therefore don't fail to obtain this grace (verse 15), but"submit" (verse 9) to God and pursue the very peace and holiness andstrength he is working in you and for you by his loving discipline.  So the exhortations are not ways of getting God to act, but waysyou act when you trust that God is already acting for you. So verses4-11 (God's action for us) are the basis for verses 12-17 (ouractions in pursuit of peace and holiness). This is so important foryour everyday life. It means that the Biblical way to be stirred upto do what you ought to do is to think or consider things about Godand his action for you - past, present and especially future. Thisentire book of Hebrews is written to give you truth about God tothink about so that you will not be like Esau who failed topersevere, and did not obtain the grace of God, but was lured intothe death trap of short term pleasure - a single meal.  Few things could make it clearer that right-knowing is a key toright-doing. Hebrews 12:4-11 describes right-knowing about God andhow he works for us in our adversities. Hebrews 12:12-17 describesright-doing. And the relationship between the two is thatright-knowing is the basis of right-doing.  Don't Be Like Esau  Now when we move into verse 18, what we see is the same thing.Verses 18-24 are another basis for the practical warning not to belike Esau. It starts in verse 18 with "For you have not come to amountain that may be touched . . ." Verses 16-17: "Don't be like Esauwho sold his inheritance for a single meal . . . (verse 18) For youhave not come to a mountain that may be touched . . ." Then comeseven verses of more right-thinking or right-knowing about what istrue of you if you are a Christian - all of it intended to help younot be like Esau.  We'll come back to the content of these verses in just a minute,but let's get the whole structure in front of us. At the end of thissection (verses 18-24), the writer repeats the warning in differentwords: "See to it that you do not refuse Him who is speaking" (verse25). That's what Esau did: he considered what God promised and whatthe life of faith would be like, and he said, "No deal. Give me thesingle meal. You can have the inheritance of God." So verse 16 andverse 25 say, "Don't be like that. Don't refuse God's voice ofpromise and grace.  Then in verses 25b-28 comes another basis for this exhortation.Verse 25b: "For (omitted in the NIV) if those did not escape whenthey refused him who warned them on earth, much less shall we escapewho turn away from Him who warns from heaven." And this descriptionof right-knowing continues through verse 27. Then, after this basis,verse 28 gives another exhortation, "Therefore, since we receive akingdom which cannot be shaken, let us show gratitude, by which wemay offer to God an acceptable service with reverence and awe." Inother words, instead of being like Esau who spurned the offer ofgrace for the sake of short-term pleasure, be thankful for God'sgrace and worship him with reverence and awe. And then comes thefinal basis in verse 29, "For our God is a consuming fire."  Peaks of Exhortation and Valleys of Motivation  Now let me try to paint this big picture again in broad strokes.If you look at the whole chapter, there are what you might call fourpeaks and four valleys. The peaks are exhortation (or right-doing),and the valleys are motivation (or right-knowing) - reasons to actthis way. Let me summarize the four peaks of exhortation. Exhortationpeak #1 (verse 1): Throw off everything that hinders and . . . runwith perseverance the race marked out for you. Then comes the valleyof motivation in verses 2-11. Exhortation peak #2 (verses 12-17): Bestrong, make a straight path, pursue peace and holiness, and don't belike Esau who sold his inheritance for a single meal. Then comes thesecond valley of motivation in verses 18-24. Exhortation peak #3(verse 25a): See to it that you do not refuse Him who is speaking.That's what Esau did. Don't do it. Trust God. Don't spurn his grace.Then comes the third valley of motivation in verses 25b-27. Finally,exhortation peak #4 (verse 28): Be thankful for God's promise of anunshakable kingdom and in that grateful hope worship God - serve God- with reverence and awe. Because - and this is the last small butexplosive valley of motivation, verse 29 - because our God is aconsuming fire.  So everything written in this chapter is aimed at changing yourlife. The whole book is built this way - weighty, lengthy sections ofdoctrine (right-knowing), all aimed at motivating the peaks ofexhortation: strip off weights and sins and run the straight way;pursue peace and holiness; don't fail to obtain the grace of God asEsau did, who traded it for a single meal; don't refuse the voice ofthe one who speaks from heaven; but be thankful for the stunningpromises of God for an unshakable kingdom, and worship in reverenceand awe.  Now if that's the aim of the chapter and the book, then let's seeif we can summarize the three valleys of motivation in today's text.Pray that as I do this, God might give them the power in your lifethat they are designed to have.  Motivation #1: The Love of a Great Savior  The first one is verses 18-24. Don't be like Esau (verses 16-17),"because . . . " Then the writer contrasts Christian reality on thisside of the cross of Christ with Old Testament reality at Mount Sinai(verses 18-21).  . . . because you have not come to a mountain that may be touchedand to a blazing fire, and to darkness and gloom and whirlwind, andto the blast of a trumpet and the sound of words which sound was suchthat those who heard begged that no further word should be spoken tothem. For they could not bear the command, "IF EVEN A BEAST TOUCHESTHE MOUNTAIN, IT WILL BE STONED." And so terrible was the sight, thatMoses said, "I AM FULL OF FEAR AND TREMBLING."  In other words, the experience there was one of fearful, divineholiness without a mediator and with a voice so terrible that thepeople begged that the voice would stop. Then he goes on andcontrasts the Christian reality since the cross (verse 22-24):  But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God,the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, to the generalassembly and church of the first-born who are enrolled in heaven, andto God, the Judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous men madeperfect, and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to thesprinkled blood, which speaks better than the blood of Abel.  Christians, at conversion, do not come to an earthly mountain tomeet God. Christianity has no geographic center! We come to aheavenly city, a heavenly assembly (the great cloud of witnesses(verse 1), a divine Judge, but most importantly to a Mediator (verse24) whose blood shed for our sins is the main voice we hear. Allinvisible, all spiritual, and therefore accessible anywhere.  The most explicit contrast between these two experiences is thatat Mount Sinai (verses 19-20) the speaking of God was such that theysaid, "No more. No more" (verse 19). But in the Christian experiencethe voice we hear (see verse 24) is the voice of the sprinkled bloodof a Mediator. We come to Jesus, "the mediator of a new covenant, andto the sprinkled blood, which speaks . . ." And what it says is: "Ilove. I forgive you. I purchase you. I cleanse you. I protect you. Ikeep you. I will always be there for you." That's the first valley ofmotivation in today's text.  Therefore (verse 25), "See to it that you do not refuse Him who isspeaking." That is, don't be like Esau. Don't fail to obtain thisprecious grace that speaks to you in the blood of Christ.  So this valley of motivation in verses 18-24 is that thefearsomeness of God is not the main message of the new covenant. Themotivation not to be an Esau is not just fear. It is the preciousnessof a suffering substitute, and the love of a great Savior and thesweetness of forgiveness. I mentioned last week a letter I got fromone who feared he may be an Esau. I wrote him. And one line from hisresponse said, "I wept as I read your letter . . . in gratitude foryour prayers that God would speak 'sweetness and life' into me again. . ." This is the sweetness of the motivation in verse 24.  Motivation #2: Fear and a Promise  The next valley of motivation is in verses 25-27. First the peakof verse 25a, "See to it that you do not refuse Him who is speaking(as Esau did)." Then the motivation - in two forms, a threat and apromise. The threat of verse 25 says, "For if those did not escapewhen they refused him who warned them on earth, much less shall weescape who turn away from Him who warns from heaven." In other words,even though fear is not a tender, winsome motive to melt the heartwith love, it is very important that we know what a fearful thing itis to spurn those tender, winsome words that the blood of Jesusspeaks to the heart. Fear may not awaken faith and love directly, butit may so shake us from our love affair with things that we can lookinto the eyes of the One who can.  The motivation of promise - the other part of this valley - is inverses 26-27,  And His voice shook the earth then, but now He has promised,saying, "YET ONCE MORE I WILL SHAKE NOT ONLY THE EARTH, BUT ALSO THEHEAVEN" [Haggai 2:6]. And this expression, "Yet once more," denotesthe removing of those things which can be shaken, as of createdthings, in order that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.Therefore, since we receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken . . .  Then comes the peak of exhortation: be grateful for this promiseand serve God with reverence and awe. The motivation is that one dayeverything that is unstable and precarious and dangerously volatile -anything that makes us feel insecure - will be removed. And all thatwill be left will be the rock-solid unshakable kingdom of God. O howfragile we are in this life! We are fragile against disease, fragileagainst flood and tornado and lightening, fragile against violence,fragile against mental failure, fragile against Satan, fragileagainst economic collapse. Life is very fragile. But God promisesthat all that shakes will be removed and the great unshakable kingdomof God will remain.  Therefore, don't spurn the voice of God as Esau did (verse 25),but be thankful for this promise (verse 28), be filled withunwavering hope, and worship God with reverence and awe.  Motivation #3: God Is a Consuming Fire  "Because" - and this is the last valley of motivation, verse 29,"Our God is a consuming fire." Is this a final motivation with fear?  It depends. If you trust the promise of his unshakable kingdom,and set your heart on it, and lay up treasure in the unshakablekingdom, then the fire of God will consume your adversaries andrefine your gold (2 Thessalonians 1:6-9). But if you reject the onewho speaks from heaven and, like Esau, prefer the fragile, shakykingdom of this world, then you will meet the consuming fire of Godas destruction and not deliverance.  So listen to the voice of God who speaks by the blood of Jesus: "Iwill forgive you, I will cleanse you. I will accept you. I protectyou. I keep you. I will give you an unshakable home. And I willalways be there for you - if you trust me. Trust me."  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
