ON THIS ROCK I STANDII Timothy 1:12 ?I know whom I have believed, and am convinced that He is able to guard what I have entrusted to Him for that day.?INTRO.-  ILL.- Two politicians decided to have a friendly wager on the subject of religion.  One of them bet the other that he couldn?t repeat the Lord?s prayer.  He said, ?I?ll take that bet.?  The first politician said, ?Ok, let me hear you quote it.?He said, ?Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep....?The other politician interrupted and said, ?Well, if that don?t beat all.  I DIDN?T THINK YOU COULD DO IT.?What can we say?  Ignorance abounds in our world.ILL.- One time a NEWSWEEK article was entitled ?No Allusions in the Classroom.?  The article told about 26 people in the college classroom, ranging in age from 18 to 54.  All of these people had completed at least one-quarter of their college work.  They were given 86 questions to answer, which centered around simple facts about the world.  Here is what some of those people said in answer to those questions.- Ralph Nader was a baseball player.- Christ was born in the 16th century.- J. Edgar Hoover was a 19th century president.- Sid Caesar was an early Roman emperor.- Dwight D. Eisenhower was a president in the 17th century.If you think this is bad, listen to this.ILL.- A group of high school juniors and seniors in one of our better schools in the nation who wereheaded for college were given a quiz on the Bible.  Here are the results of that quiz.- Sodom and Gomorrah were lovers.- The N.T. was written by Matthew, Mark, Luther, and John.- Eve was created from an apple.- Jesus was baptized by Moses.- Golgotha was the name of the giant who slew the apostle David.Talk about Biblical ignorance!  Would you like for me to give you a Bible quiz today?  II Timothy 1:12 Paul said, ?I know whom I have believed.?Not only did Paul know whom he believed, he also knew what he believed.ILL.- A man was asked what he believed about God.  He replied, ?I believe what my church believes.?  ?What does your church believe??  He said, ?My church believes what I believe.?  ?What do you and your church believe??  He said, ?We both believe the same thing.?Is that what you believe?  That answer will not be sufficient in this evil world.  It will not convertanybody to Christ and it won?t keep you from evil.ILL.- American humorist Josh Billings said one time, ?I?d rather know a few things for certain than be sure of a lot of things that ain?t so.?  ILL.- Vance Havner said: ?I believe the Bible is the Word of God.   I don?t understand it all, but I stand on it.  I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.  I believe that Jesus died for my sins.  I believe that Jesus rose bodily from the grave.  I believe there is a heaven and a hell.  I believe that Jesus is the answer to every problem - past, present and future.?  Amen!Brethren, what do you believe?  What do you know for certain?  On this rock I stand.  We need to stand on the solid rock of our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.PROP.- I want to consider this faith upon which we stand. 1- The belief of our faith2- The basis of our faith3- The building of our faith4- The boldness of our faithI. THE BELIEF OF OUR FAITHHebrews 13:9 ?Do not be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings...?Brothers and sisters, some people believe in some very strange things, some very strange teachings.  Or they believe in some very strange doctrines.ILL.- Here?s an example.  Some people believe in and teach that we humans can be reincarnated.  It is the idea that we can come back in another bodily form and this process can be repeated over thousands of years until perfection is reached and union with God is achieved.Well, let?s see then.  Who or what would I like to be when I come back next time?  Richard Gere or perhaps Mel Gibson would be all right.  WELL, IT AIN?T GONNA HAPPEN, AS YOU ALL KNOW VERY WELL!  Who in the world believes in this crazy, reincarnation business anyway?  MILLIONS OF PEOPLE DO.  This is one of the basic teachings of the Hindu religion.  And reincarnation is not found in the Word of God.I don?t want to make this sound bad, BUT ONCE SHE?S OVER, SHE?S OVER!  Hebrews 9:27 ?Just as man is destined to die once (not many times), and after that to face judgment.?ILL.- Here?s another.  David Reagan of LAMB AND LION MINISTRIES wrote, ?During a recent trip to Israel, I ran into a fine young Christian man in Jerusalem whom I knew from the U.S.  I asked him what he was doing in Israel and he said that he was on an archeological dig with a man named Vendyl Jones.?I WAS THUNDERSTRUCK.  Jones is a former Baptist Minister who has renounced the Christian faith and has formed a new religious group called the Noahides.  They believe that one can be saved by following the rules of the covenant that God made with Noah.?Let me say again with the certainty of God?s Word: IT AIN?T GONNA HAPPEN!  No one is going to be saved by following rainbows in the sky!  Some people believe in some of the strangest teachings!Now I want us to think of this belief business in another way.  Some people believe in some good things, but those good things will never save them!ILL.- For example, how many of you have ever watched any of those bass fishing shows on TV, like Roland Martin, Jimmy Houston, etc.?  Well, let me say that bass fishing isn?t bad!  I like to do it myself.   Can?t wait for this spring to come to catch a few largemouth.  BUT THAT?S ALL SOME PEOPLE KNOW AND BELIEVE IN AND FOLLOW!  It?s like it is the only religion they have.Did you ever watch Jimmy Houston from Oklahoma catch a bass?  What?s the first thing he does after catching one?  HE KISSES IT!  Can you imagine?  He kisses a dumb bass.  I can think of a lot better things to kiss than a bass, can?t you?If all some people do is live to fish, then that is what they believe in.  That is their religion.  And that is worshipping and serving the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever!  Amen?  Romans 1:25Brethren, I believe in the many good things that God has given us to enjoy.  But these good things cannot save us!  They cannot save us from sin and the second death!  There is only one thing that we believe in that can save us!  Amen?!The most important belief we have is in Jesus as the Christ, the Son of the living God and Savior of the world!  ILL.- C. S. Lewis hit the nail on the head when he wrote, ?I am trying to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people often say about Christ: ?I?m ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I don?t accept His claim to be God.?  That is the one thing we must not say. ?A man who was merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great moral teacher.  He would either be a lunatic - on a level with the man who says he is a poached egg - or else he would be the Devil of Hell.  ?You must make the choice.  Either this man was, and is, the Son of God or else a madman or something worse.  You can shut Him up for a fool, you can spit at Him and kill Him as a demon, or you can fall at His feet and call Him Lord and God.?Brethren, I believe I will fall at His feet and call Him Lord and God.  What about you?1- The belief of our faith is Jesus as the Son of God.II. THE BASIS OF OUR FAITHWhy do you believe what you believe?  Or what makes you believe what you do in life?ILL.- As some of you know, I like speed.  I have always liked cars, fast cars and particularly drag racing. In 1968 I purchased a new Pontiac Firebird, 400 cubic inches, 300 horsepower, with a 4-speed transmission.  I took that car to Pittsburgh, KS, which is only about 30 miles from Joplin, MO, and raced it.  It would do a 100 miles-per-hour in a quarter mile and do it in 14 seconds flat.  I LIKED SPEED. STILL DO.Why did/do I like speed, fast cars, etc.?  BLAME IT ON MY OLDER BROTHER!  Don?t blame it on me!  It?s his fault.  (You know, the old Adam and Eve syndrome of ?blame-it-on-the-other -guy.?)He used to sit around, reading ?Hot Rod Magazine? and would talk about fast cars all the time.  And then when he got his old 1952 six-cylinder Chevy, I?d ride around town with him and he?d cram that shifter through those gears and wind up that old motor.  IT DIDN?T GO VERY FAST, BUT IT SURE SOUNDED LIKE IT WAS!  But my interest in speed is all his fault.  One other illustration about the basis of our belief.ILL.- This is something I?m not very happy about, but I think it?s very important to share with you.  If my faith were based on what my father did and taught me, do you know what I would believe in and do?  I would smoke cigarettes, drink beer, cuss, and watch baseball on TV.  I realize that watching baseball on TV is not a bad thing, but it still won?t save anybody from their sins.Brothers and sisters, I loved my father and love him still (and would give my soul for his), but I have no remembrance of him going to church, praying around the meal table or any other time.  I have no remembrance of him reading the Bible or performing any type of Christian service.This is why it is so important that we parents give it our best shot when it comes to training and teaching our children.  And when it comes to our example.  WHY?  BECAUSE CHILDREN DO TEND TO FOLLOW THE EXAMPLE OF THEIR PARENTS IN MANY THINGS!  Be it good or evil things.And if our faith is strong enough and important enough, our kids will see this and follow us.  MAY IT EVER BE! What is the basis of our belief?ILL.- One time a little boy proudly announced to his mother that he was 8 feet tall and she immediately questioned his accuracy.  And he said, ?I am 8 feet tall, because I just measured myself with this little ruler that I made.?Brethren, everyone has a ruler by which they measure themselves in life.  What?s your ruler in life?  Is it what your mommy and daddy said to you when you were little?  What?s your ruler in life?  Everybody has a ruler or a basis for what they believe and practice.II Timothy 3:16-17 ?All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting, and training in righteousness, so that the man of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.?The ruler by which we govern our lives is the Word of God.  The basis of our faith is the Word of God, because where else do we hear about Jesus Christ?Jesus said, ?Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.?  Mark 13:31.  The Word of God endures forever!The basis of our faith in Jesus Christ is the Bible as the Word of God.III. THE BUILDING OF OUR FAITHILL.- Many years ago when I was about 18 or 19 years old, I bought an old 1935 Ford, 5-window coup. I worked on the engine occasionally because I wanted to make it into a hot rod of sorts.   And it seemed like in no time, I quit working on it.   AND IT SOON BECAME A WORTHLESS PIECE OF JUNK.Brethren, when you leave something alone, don?t work at it, just let it set idle, it can become a worthless piece of junk.  Many people have garages full of that stuff.THAT CAN HAPPEN TO CARS, HOUSES, AND IN A SENSE, IT CAN HAPPEN TO A PERSON?S SOUL!If you don?t work at building your faith, you may eventually not have any faith!  Anything can deteriorate if left alone.  USE IT OR LOSE IT.How can we build our faith in Christ?  It?s really quite simple.  Romans 10:17 ?Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the Word of God."Our faith is built up when we read the Word of God and/or material relating to the Word of God, such as good Christian reading material.Proverbs 23:7 ?As a man thinketh, so is he.?What you think is what you are.  And what you think is what you are reading, that is, if you are reading at all!  IF YOU ARE NOT A READER, THEN GET WITH THE PROGRAM, THE READING PROGRAM!  How can you expect to build your faith if you don?t read about your faith?And if you are not excited about reading the Bible, the Word of God, then get a Bible that you can read with some excitement.  For example, here is a good one.  It?s called the CONTEMPORARY ENGLISH VERSION.  ILL.- Here?s an example.  Proverbs 3:5-6 NIV ?Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not on your own understanding.  In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make your paths straight.?CEV reads ?With all your heart you must trust the Lord and not your own judgment. Always let him lead you, and he will clear the road for you to follow.?The Living Bible has also always been a favorite with many people.  Reading it is better than no reading at all.I also encourage people to read good Christian materials or books, such as those by Max Lucado.  He?s one of the best Christian writers there is, in my book.  He writes in such a way as to build people in their faith!ILL.- Here?s an example of what I mean.  Here is an excerpt from his book JUST LIKE JESUS.  Max wrote, ?God?s plan for you is nothing short of a new heart.  If you were a car, God would want control of your engine.  If you were a computer, God would claim the software and the hard drive.  If you were an airplane, he?d take his seat in the cockpit.  But you are a person, so God wants to change your heart.?God loves you just the way you are, but he refuses to leave you that way.  He wants you to be just likeJesus.?God loves you just the way you are.  If you think his love for you would be stronger if your faith were, you are wrong.  If you think his love would be deeper if your thoughts were, wrong again.  Don?t confuse God?s love with the love of people.  The love of people often increases with performance and decreases with mistakes.  Not so with God?s love.  He loves you right where you are.?  Excellent words and wording.  SEE HOW HIS WORDS CAN BUILD YOU IN THE FAITH?Now, there is another way to build up your faith.  JUST BECOME A TEACHER, A SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHER, A YOUTH GROUP TEACHER OR EVEN A PREACHER!  I?ll guarantee you that you will have to study then and you will be built up in the faith!ILL.- The story is told that Henry Ford once hired an efficiency expert to evaluate his company.  After several weeks, the expert made his report, which was highly favorable except for one thing.He said to Ford, ?There?s a man down the hall and every time I go by his office he?s just sitting there with his feet on his desk.  He?s wasting your money.?Ford replied, ?That man once had an idea that saved us millions of dollars.  At the time, I believe his feet were planted right where they are now.?Brethren, perhaps you need to put your feet up and save yourself a million dollars or save your soul a lot of heartaches by reading and meditating on the Word of God.Jude 20 ?But you, dear friends, build yourselves up in your most holy faith....?1- The belief of our faith is Jesus Christ.2- The basis of our faith is the Word of God.3- The building of our faith comes from reading the Word of God.IV. THE BOLDNESS OF OUR FAITHILL.- Some years ago, after the Rodney King beating and right during the middle of the L.A. riots a lady on the street was interviewed by a national TV network.  I don?t remember what the reporter asked the lady, but I remember her response very well.  She said, ?WHAT?S THE MATTER WITH ALL THESE CRAZY PEOPLE?  DON?T THEY BELIEVE IN JESUS??Right on, lady.  Keep on preaching it! That blessed lady boldly proclaimed her faith in Jesus Christ.  And she was exactly right about her comment.  If those people had truly believed in Jesus Christ they would not have been rioting!We need to boldly proclaim our faith in Jesus Christ!I Peter 3:15 ?In your hearts set apart Christ as Lord.  Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have.  But do this with gentleness and respect.?We must always be prepared to boldly proclaim our faith in Jesus Christ!ILL.- A preacher was passing by a department store one day and followed a sudden impulse to go in and talk to the manager.  He said to him, ?I?ve talked carpets and furniture with you, but I have never talked to you about my business.  Will you give me a few minutes of your time??The manager took him into his office and sat down.  The preacher pulled out his New Testament and shared a few passages about Christ and how to become a Christian.  Finally, tears began to roll down the man?s cheeks.He said, ?You know, I?m seventy years old.  I was born in this town and I?ve known more than a hundred preachers and church leaders in a business way.  BUT YOU ARE THE ONLY MAN WHO HAS EVER TALKED TO ME ABOUT MY SOUL.?Brethren, why is it that so many people are never witnessed to about Jesus Christ?  It?s because of us!   We have the message but we are keeping it to ourselves.  And we have no right to keep this blessed message to ourselves.As one preacher said it, ?If our religion isn?t true then we must give it up.  IF IT IS TRUE THEN WE MUST GIVE IT AWAY.?ILL.- Last Friday morning as I was walking out of the Hucks Service State on 6th street, the young male attendant said, ?Well, this is the last day you?ll see me here.  I?ve got a new job in Champaign.?And I thought, ?This is his last day.  I need to say something to him about the Lord.?  Because, you see, I had said very little to him in the past.  So I said, ?You need to look up.  The Lord is the only one who can make things right in life.?Now, even if you think that was a weak witness, it was still a witness.  And we all need to witness for Christ, weak or not.  We all need to be bolder in witnessing, because Jesus Christ is the truth, the truth of all truths, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth!CONCLUSION-------------------------------------------
ILL.- Several years ago, I heard the story of Larry Walters, a 33-year-old man who decided he wanted to see his neighborhood from a new perspective. He went down to the local army surplus store one morning and bought forty-five used weather balloons. That afternoon he strapped himself into a lawn chair, to which several of his friends tied the now helium-filled balloons. He took along a six-pack of beer, a peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich, and a BB gun, figuring he could shoot the balloons one at a time when he was ready to land. Walters, who assumed the balloons would lift him about 100 feet in the air, was caught off guard when the chair soared more than 11,000 feet into the sky -- smack into the middle of the air traffic pattern at Los Angeles International Airport. Too frightened to shoot any of the balloons, he stayed airborne for more than two hours, forcing the airport to shut down its runways for much of the afternoon, causing long delays in flights from across the country. Soon after he was safely grounded and cited by the police, reporters asked him three questions: "Where you scared?" "Yes." "Would you do it again?" "No." "Why did you do it?" "Because," he said, "you can?t just sit there." Brethren, that?s what I think when it comes to our faith in Jesus Christ.  We can?t just sit here!  We have to do something with it.  Build ourselves up and share the faith with others.  On Christ the solid rock I stand.  All other ground is sinking sand.