
The Christmas Spirit

  Newsletters from other churches arrive in the mail every day. So I read them,
  and they get me to thinking. For example:
  
  Ministers' columns at this time of the year say one of two things: "The holiday
  season is a happy time," or "The holidays are depressing." The "happy time"
  school of thought makes a case for generosity, good cheer, and a deepening
  spirituality, whereas the "depression" advocates cite studies that prove
  the winter holidays are difficult. At the moment, the "happy holidays" group
  has a slight edge, the freshest crop of Ph.D.s having studied our December
  moods and found them to be merry after all.
  
  I beg to differ. With no empirical work at all to back me up. I'd like to
  make a case for people being regular people even when December rolls around.
  Sure, Mom is frantic after Thanksgiving, but she is a frantic person in general.
  Brother John is nonchalant about the holidays, but he's always been the laid-back
  type. Aunt Martha gears up for a family squabble, but remember, she set up
  a round or two in July. Uncle John is a natural Santa, but he's a sweetie
  all year long.
  
  In our family, we will incessantly exclaim, "Where's your Christmas spirit?"
  from Thanksgiving until the twenty-fifth. This phrase, at our house, has
  always been an obnoxious code for "Lighten up, it's Christmastime, act merry,
  not human."
  
  I'm changing the code. This year "Christmas spirit" will refer to the fact
  that we are who we are, merry or depressed, and we love each other anyway.

  Twice in my life I have experienced deep depression. Both times various friends
  tried to rescue me with well-intended encouragement and advice?
  
  In the midst of my depression I had a friend who took a different tack. Every
  afternoon at around four o'clock he came to me, sat me in a chair, removed
  my shoes, and massaged my feet. He hardly said a word, but he was there,
  he was with me. He was a lifeline for me, a link to the human community and
  thus to my own humanity. He had no need to "fix" me. He knew the meaning
  of compassion.
