Sunday, January 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "All these things spake Jesus unto the multitudes in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world. Then Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into the house; and his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;" ­ (i.e., Isa. 61:1-3; to wit: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek; he  hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the  captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim  the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to  comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto  them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for  the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that He might be glorified.") ­ "He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom (Gods Elect); but the tares are the children of the wicked one (,,Ye are of your father the Devil, Jn. 8:44) The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Matt. 13:34-43.)  Beloved, how could words and phrases be plainer, or the subject matter be more serious or important? "The harvest is the end of the world," Indeed; to wit: Matt. 13:39. In his book of famous sermons, entitled `The World to Come,' Isaac Watts said that when a man dies, THAT moment of THAT day is the end of the world for THAT man! How true!  And should we not live in light of that solemn fact? When those that truly believed in Christ are forever separated from the rest, and that hypocritical generation of men are utterly destroyed; the day of wrath and vengeance; the day of judgment, the great and last day; when the heavens and the earth, and all that is therein, shall be burnt up, when the righteous will enter into life; and the wicked go into everlasting punishment. "And the reapers are the angels." The holy and elect angels, who are the ministers of Christ, and ministering servants to them, who are the heirs of salvation; and OPPOSITE TO ALL SECRET AND OPEN ENEMIES OF CHRIST, AND HIS PEOPLE; and will be employed in the end of time, against the wicked, and for the righteous.  Beloved, the parabolic ministry of the dear Lord Jesus (i.e., teaching was prolific and precious to the elect.) It is largely through such parabolic teaching that the righteous are introduced to the wondrous help of the elect angels now and to come. To wit: The reapers are the angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them (then and only then) into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then (and only then) shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the  Sunday, January 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear (i.e., these marvelous things about the elect angels  and their holy ministrations to the Father and the Son and the saints), let him hear. Now here more  about the eschatological (doctrines) of last things and the angels; to wit:  "Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind. Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world; the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord." (Matt. 13:49-51) The Son of man shall send forth His angels. How powerful. How majestic. They wait upon Him, "an innumerable company of angels" ­ are at His beck and call ­ even the thousand thousands, that fly to do His bidding. These will be sent forth by his orders, into the several parts of the world and the earth, where He has any churches, or any interest. The heavenly orders include gathering up and casting into eternal fire (sometimes called Hell-fire) all that offend and do iniquity; who are scandals to Christ, His church, and His Gospel, by their wicked principles, and infamous practices; and who give offence, not only to God, and His righteous law, but lay stumbling-blocks in the way of the children of God, and are the authors of divisions and offences among them. "And shall cast them into a furnace of fire." Probably here not a material furnace of fire, but a metaphorical one; denoting the wrath of God, which shall fall upon all wicked men, and abide upon them through all eternity, which is sometimes called a lake which burns with fire and brimstone; and here a furnace of fire expressing the vehemency and intenseness of divine wrath, which will be intolerable; in allusion either to Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace, or, as some think, to the custom of burning persons alive in some countries to this day; or, rather to the burning of chaff and stubble, and the stalks of any unprofitable things that grow in the field, for the heating of furnaces, and is the very language of the Jews, who used to compare Hell to a furnace; to wit: "And behold the sun set, and there was darkness; and lo' Abraham saw until the seats were set, and the thrones cast down; lo' Hell, which is prepared for the wicked in the world to come, as a furnace, which sparks and flames of fire surrounded; in the midst of which, the wicked fall, because they rebelled against the Law, in their lifetime."  Which is expressed in much the same language, and conveys much the same ideas as here; and no wonder is it that it follows, "There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth," declaring the remorse of conscience, the tortures of mind, the sense of inexpressible pain, and punishment, the wicked shall feel; also, their furious rage and black despair. That, Beloved, is Hell. "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." (Mat. 13:43) Glorious things are said of the beautiful, powerful, agile, and impassible bodies of the saints in Heaven. Much the same images, here made use of, to set forth the glory of the saints, both in soul and body, in the world to come, are expressed by the Jews. "The faces of the righteous," they say, in time to come, shall be like to the sun, and moon, to the stars and planets, and lightnings, and lilies, and to the lamp of the sanctuary. And elsewhere, they observe, that God in time to come, will beautify the body of the righteous, as the beauty of the first man, when he entered into Paradise, according to Isa. 58:11, and that the soul, whilst in its dignity, shall be sustained with the superior  Sunday, January 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  light, and be clothed with it; and when it shall enter into the body hereafter, it shall enter with that  light; and then shall the body shine, as the brightness of the firmament; as is said in Dan. 12:3. And a little after "tis said, that when the soul goes out, the body is left, which shall be there built again as the light of the sun, and as the light of the firmament." "Who hath ears to hear; let him hear;"  (Mat. 13:43) and seriously consider of the several things said in this parable, concerning the wheat  and tares, the righteous and the wicked, as being matters of the greatest moment and importance.  "Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field." (Mat. 13:44)  Beloved, that blessed "treasure hid in a field" is nothing less than the Gospel ­ which is a treasure consisting of rich truths, comparable to gold, silver, and precious stones; of the most valuable blessings, of exceeding great and precious promises; and reveals the riches of God, of Christ, and of the other world. It is a treasure unsearchable, solid, satisfying, and lasting, and this is said to be hid in a field, which is not to be understood in an ill sense, as the man hid his talent in a napkin, and in the earth; but in a good sense, and designs his care of it; his laying it up in his heart, that he might not lose it, and that it might not be taken from him; and for joy thereof. For the Gospel, when rightly understood, brings good tidings of great joy, to sensible sinners.  Next, let me speak of the worth and value of the Bible, because the man in our parable ­ out of pure joy of heart ­ unhesitatingly sells all that he has and buys the field where the treasure is hid. Simply put: Any man that knows the worth and value of the Bible, rather than be without one, would part with all his worldly substances for one. Such souls ­ and Westboro Baptist Church is blessed with many such ­ who are led into the glory, fulness, and excellency of the Word of God, the Scriptures of Truth, and of the immense treasure of the Gospel therein, to part with all that has been, or is dear unto them; with their sins, and self-righteousness; with their good names and characters; their worldly substance, AND LIFE ITSELF, for the sake of the Gospel, and their profession of it; all to attain to a larger degree of light and knowledge in the Gospel, as found in all Scripture. "Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls; Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it." (Matt. 13:45,46)  These two parables portray Christ seeking, finding, purchasing His elect. For it is certain that He has sought after them; which implies that they were lost and going astray; and that He herein expresses His great love for them; His exceeding great value for them; and His desire after them. Beloved, it is impossible to over-state the love and value which our dear Lord Jesus places upon each and every one of us, His elect. And, in seeking each one, it is also certain that He used much diligence and found them as their Mighty Goel in redemption; and, in effectual calling; and that they are to Him, indeed, a pearl of great price; as very precious to God, so highly esteemed by Christ, as His portion, His inheritance, His jewels. He has also parted with all He had for the sake of these persons; He became poor, emptied Himself of every thing, even gave Himself a ransom for them, and so made a purchase of them; with the price of His own blood. NOR DOES HE SEEK AFTER ANY OTHER THAN HIS ELECT. Nor is Christ's finding His elect a chance business (!) ; A more beautiful example of predestination can scarcely be found than the seeking out and effectually calling to salvation of each of God's elect. And, one more exposition of this verse deserves attention, I believe; to wit:  Sunday, January 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it." (Matt. 13:46)  For such as seek after wisdom and knowledge after a godly desire to labor in the Word and doctrine, who study to rightly divide the word of truth, and to seek that wisdom which is from above; and to know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding, justice and judgment and equity (Prov. 1:3,4.) In short, God's elect, as identified in 1 Jn. 1:7; to wit: "But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 Jn. 1:7)  These, under divine direction, find in the Scriptures, by prayer and study, the Truths of the everlasting Gospel, respecting Christ, His blessed person, office, grace and righteousness; which are equal to, yea transcend a pearl of the highest price, for their original, come from a far country, from Heaven; for their brightness, clearness and purity and perspicuity; for their ornament and glory; for their firmness and solidity; for their virtue and value, to them that know the worth of them; and such will buy, but not sell them; reckon all things but loss and dung, in comparison to them; and will contend for them, and stand fast in them. Beloved, God has called us and commissioned us as the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; to wit: "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christs stead, Be ye reconciled to God." (2 Cor. 5:20)  We have not the least doubt, that God, through and by the Scriptures and Providence, day by day, is speaking to this evil nation and world through this humble church (i.e., ambassador = inspired speaker, pertaining to a foreteller of prophesy). When we at Westboro Baptist Church warn you from the streets and parks and airwaves that you have turned your governments and all your societal functions over to the sodomites ­ lock, stock and barrel ­ and that same-sex marriage triggered the Flood of Noah in 2340 BC; destroying the entire then-existing population of earth by water; and God has sworn to totally destroy the world by fire when similar conditions with sodomites recur. I say, when we warn you, that your doom at the hands of the sodomites is imminent; Wisdom is crying out to you by WBC from your streets and your chief places of concourse; to wit:  "Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets: She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh; When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil." (Proverbs 1:20-33)  I love you. Amen.  
