 1 2007-9-16 Technology and the Spirit 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to worship   

which is a way of setting aside 

our fears and hesitations 

so as to greet the world of our lives  

with honesty, and a welcoming spirit. 

 
This we do with others in beloved community. 

saying, as we begin in peace: 

 




???
ˆ
?

Doug Zelinski™s Sending Forth 

 
Minister:   

It is a rare and wonderful gift when one of our own
 goes forth from the nurture and strength of 
this place to serve the wider movement. 

 
Board Chair: 

Having served this congregation for many years, in 
many roles, both behind the scenes and in 
public leadership, Doug Zelinski has demonstrated a
 love for the spirit of Unitarian Universalist 
congregations, and expressed a desire to share in s
haping the future of our Association of free 
churches. I am glad to affirm his vision, while tha
nking him for all that he has done among and 
for us, who make up his home congregation. 

 
Doug Zelinski, you have been shaped by this communi
ty, and over the years have been 
empowered by it. You have also been a shaper of thi
s congregation and one who has gladly 
empowered others. Now you have been called to serve
 as a leader at the District Level, as Acting 
Program Consultant for Growth and Leadership in Met
ropolitan New York. We send you forth 
to this work with joy and with thanks. 

 
Words by Doug 

 
Minister
: As much as we will miss your presence among us th
is coming year, we are also 
overjoyed that you will bring your gifts to the lar
ger Association. As a congregation we bless 
you on your way with these sung verses: 

 
The Tune Woodland was written by the Unitarian Univ
ersalist composer Tom Benjamin. 
The words by the late Carl Seaburg bless every form
 of ministry among us, and were commission 
by our committee. 

 
Sequence 

 
The Equinox comes at the end of this week, 

 2 early next Sunday morning. 

On our side of the world, autumn. 

In Sydney Australia, spring. 

But equal day and equal night. 

A balance that exists for but a moment,  

and then is no more until the first moment 

of spring for us, autumn for Australians. 

I wonder. 

Where do I find my balance? 

How long does it last? 

Do I wait for it to come, 

or do I make it? Or both? 

Ramadam comes this week,  

a month of fasting for Muslims. 

Letting go of the tyranny of false hunger  

for hours each day. 

I wonder.  

Can I fast too?  

Can I give up nostalgia for the past, 

so I can grow nostalgic for the future? 

Can I fast from worrying needlessly, 

or refuse to consume rumors and hearsay? 

The Jewish New Year began this week. 

Shana tova umetukah!  

A New Year good and sweet! Like honey. 

I wonder. Can I too celebrate the new year? 

Or even the new hour?  

Let the silence come now, sweet as honey, 

that you and I may celebrate this good and fresh ne
w minute in peace. 
 
silence 

 
I wonder. How is it possible to be me without commu
nity around me? Friends and family, loved 
ones, living and dead, specific faces, specific sto
ries, specific memories, specific names.  Let 
them rise to my mind™s eye right now that I might s
ee them, or rise to my lips that I might speak 
them in thanksgiving.     

 
naming 

 
I wonder. Is autumn a joyful game the world plays w
ith us? Or is it a kind of music? 
 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 comes from the year 1846, 
when a Quaker artist named Edward Hicks 

wrote the following note in his memoirs. 

The William Penn he mentions, of course, 

is the man for whom our neighbor state of  

Pennsylvania is named, a radical Quaker 

of great brilliance. 

 3  
Today I think I have been edified and encouraged by
 reading two of dear William Penn™s 
sermons, preached more than one hundred and fifty y
ears ago–.One of the sermons was 
preached at a wedding, when a Quaker wedding was a 
serious thing, a solemn religious 
institution.  But now our excellent discipline is t
oo much changed–and I fear is too much like 
the labor-saving and money-saving machinery of the 
day. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by the great Ruth Stone, who in 2004, pub
lished this beautiful 
poem on what she names ?the quiet authority of cult
ure.? The poem is called Borders. 
 
Driving through Indiana, 

creeks wriggle alongside the highway, 

incidental, 

like, ?Oh Yes, 

someone used to wade there.? 

A knot of deformed trees, 

almost too old-fashioned, 

remnants of a farm, discontinued merchandise. 

But it™s mostly lost streams, 

weed-trees, and a loneliness that hints 

of automatic two-car-garage doors  

and zoysia grass; 

small well kept lawns and sudden streets, 

and identical houses around a factory 

that sprawls the way small colleges  

use to spread themselves out: 

lawns, flower beds,  

groundsmen with mowing machines. 

The quiet authority of culture. 

 
Sermon 

 
On Thursday this week, Joe Pierce, son of Kelly Hop
kins, Joe Pierce, who™s taught in our 
Sunday School, came to tell me that he was leaving 
on Saturday for his Peace Corps assignment. 
Ghana. Working on water issues. In a nation with so
me of the most polluted water on the planet. 
He had long told me of his desire to serve others i
n this way. He had mentioned the Peace Corps 
to me as long as two years ago.  

 
He left yesterday. To get his health shots in Phila
delphia, and then fly, by way of Frankfort and 
Lagos, to Accra, the Ghanian capital, where he woul
d spend ten weeks learning Twi 
(pronounced ?chwee?), the version of the Ashanti la
nguage spoken there by many. 
 
Joe and I talked about his hopes, visions and expec
tations. Then I said, ?You know, I have no 
idea what Ghana looks like. I have no mental pictur
e of Accra in my head like I have a picture of 
Paris or Rio de Janeiro or New York.? 

 
Immediately, we got up and went to my comp-uter scr
een. Within ten seconds, we saw vistas of 
Accra, portraits of local citizens, a description o
f the tough tonal language he was going to have 
to learn, and a presentation about the peanut soup 
and palm-oil greens he™ll be eating there. We 

 4 saw long, bustling streets, and sleek glass sky-scr
apers downtown. We learned that Accra is 
about twice as big as Columbus– but just as flat. 

 
Only a few short decades ago, such rich infor-matio
n would have required a trip to the library, 
and a hunt-and-search session with the catalogue ca
rds in an old wooden file with a hundred 
narrow drawers. It would™ve taken hours. 

 
It took 
us
 just ten seconds. Internet technology, you see, is
 darn close to magic. The two of us 
were delighted by what we learned. 

 
Of course, last Saturday, while I was working on th
at very same magic screen of technological 
perfection, a thunderstorm above this building mana
ged to suck the electrical power right out of 
walls, and the computer went blank. Went blank with
 the complex text of my whole Water Cere-
mony, which I had been crafting for six hours. Lost
, behind the coy grey face of my screen. 
 
Oh, the power came back on in a short time. But the
 fool text didn™t come back quite right, and I 
lost sections of it I could not tell that I had los
t. And had you been here, you would have seen 
one of your ministers, entirely deranged, pacing up
 and down the hall, waving his hands wildly 
in the air and cursing modern technology with a cho
ice vocabulary. There he is, yearning for the 
days of his old Underwood mechanical type-writer wh
ich didn™t flinch at thunderstorms and 
never failed him once.   

 
And there you have it. All of modern technology in 
simple summary. Something wonderful 
and
 something exasperating. Something useful 
and
 something destructive. A wonder 
and
 a curse. 
 
Sort of like religion, I™d say. A wonder 
and
 a curse. That™s right. Religion seems wondrous to 
me 
if it convenes folks for an interfaith social justi
ce gathering, demanding a fairer world; or when it 
offers the redemption of poetry and metaphor to liv
es crushed under the Paris Hilton banalities of 
modern so-called civilization. Religion seems wondr
ous to me when it articulates reasonable and 
compassionate approaches to difficult problems, or 
urges the violent to reconsider their methods;  
or when it is critical of the horrific wastes of th
e human spirit called warfare, terrorism and 
oppression. Religion seems wondrous to me when it r
eminds me that neither you or I are 
ultimate, that defending our little ego fiefdoms is
 a waste of time, and that the evolution of life, 
both our biological lives and our spiritual lives, 
is the very pulse of the universe. I love that kind
 
of religion. 

 
But there are other kinds of religion too. Religion
 that exasperates. Religion that destroys. 
Religion that causes my wonder to recoil.  

 
Look, although I am called by our tradition to open
 my heart in a tolerant way toward all the 
varieties of religious life and teaching in this wo
rld, I am also invited by that same tradition to be
 
critical of destructive and devious tendencies in a
ny religious proclamation. To be tolerant is not 
to be uncritical. Sorry if you thought otherwise.  

 
One of the voices I have publicly called to account
 for years, because of his way of twisting the 
truth, was the urgent religious message of Dr. D. J
ames Kennedy of the Coral Ridge Presbyterian 
Church in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. To the grief of
 his loving family and congregation, he died 
last week at age 75 after a long, influential caree
r as a pulpit orator, and as an effective fundraise
r 
for his favorite causes. Although I rejoice in the 
death of no man or woman, I also do not let the 
mere fact of death lead me to some placating evasio
n of direct criticism. 

 5  
Now to his credit, Dr. Kennedy was always clear abo
ut his religious beliefs. For example, he 
taught that the earth is young, not ancient; that a
nyone who teaches evolution is really no 
different than the cruelest of Nazis who believed i
n eugenics, and that Darwin bears personal 
responsibility for Auschwitz; that any seated judge
 in this country who does not come from a 
God-fearing biblical perspective is unworthy of off
ice, and that conservative evangelical forms 
of Christianity are the primary inspirations drivin
g our founding forebears to establish our great 
and, he said, 
undeniably
 Christian nation.   
 
I have been critical of all these affirmations thro
ughout my career.  I am convinced they are both 
wrong and hurtful to any culture that reveres hones
ty in presenting evidence, and any culture that 
embraces the many, not the few. 

 
But I am not a member of his congregation. I do not
 go to Florida. So how can I know his 
theology so well? Because of technology. Just as te
chnology reduced the distance from Ghana to 
Columbus to almost nothing, so technology erases th
e distance from Coral Ridge to First 
Unitarian Universalist here in Columbus. I™ve watch
ed Dr. Kennedy on TV for years, every 
Sunday, while getting ready to lead worship. I™ve a
lways wanted, you see, to preach my sermons 
in the context of the real world of America, the wo
rld where a majority in this nation are critical 
of the idea of evolution because of the influence o
f such technology-supported preaching. I 
watched Dr. Kennedy™s satellite-powered broadcasts 
on television, and checked out his website 
on the computer. 

 
And, because of his use of modern technology, Dr. K
ennedy influenced a lot more folks than I 
have. Or you have. Not just because his congregatio
n is ten times the size of this one. But 
because he reached tens of millions of people throu
gh the distance-destroying power of 
technology.  And most of the more influential relig
ious groups in this nation are 
very
 savvy 
about technology. They even use technological terms
 in their worship. For example, television 
evangelists of all types routinely send out pieces 
of cloth to their followers. These they refer to as
 
a ?point of contact? so that the healing energies o
f the spirit can bring their folks relief from 
illness or even bankruptcy. But ?point of contact? 
is a term from electrical circuit boards, not a 
Biblical word. Technology not only supports religio
us teachings which I find problematic, but 
has fused itself to religious metaphor and ritual o
ver many centuries. 
 
Now some of you might say to me: technology in the 
way you are describing it is recent, not 
centuries old. Satellite transmission, the chaos of
 YouTube, thousand-channel flat screen, high 
definition television, video games like Super Mario
 Brothers, the almost infinite Internet: all of 
this left 19
th
 century ministers like Ralph Waldo Emerson untouch
ed. There was no technology 
back then. He didn™t even have a telephone. If some
one wanted to talk with him, they had to 
come up to his door and knock. And hope he wasn™t o
ut taking a walk with Thoreau in the 
woods. He didn™t know what spam was. Either the kin
d of dreck that pollutes email accounts to 
the tune of 500 messages per day, or even the origi
nal canned-meat version of spam, only made 
possible by machine technology, developed fifty yea
rs after Emerson was dead. Emerson hand-
wrote his sermons. With a pen he had to dip in an i
nkwell. He walked to the store. He strolled to 
visit friends.  He never once saw a Honda, nor coul
d he imagine one. He never once saw 
helicopters overhead, shining their police spotligh
ts on neighborhoods looking for drug dens that 
offer street meds, also made possible by modern tec
hnology–i.e. cocaine flown in from 
Columbia. 

 
 6 All very true. But technology is not to be confused
 with something shiny, silvery or powered by 
electricity. Technology goes back to the first whee
l, the first hammer, the first saw. The word 
technology is a Greek word, which has come through 
two thousand years almost untouched. It 
meant then and means now: ?systematic treatment of 
the natural.? When the gospel of Mark, also 
written in Greek, calls Jesus a ?tekton,? poorly tr
anslated as ?carpenter,? it™s using the root 
portion of that word ?techne? which means to build 
or craft. Jesus was probably a builder, 
someone who built houses or even a stonemason who w
orked on city walls. He took raw 
nature–a tree trunk or a found rock, and crafted it
, shaped it, systematically treating it until it 
was useful. Useful to build something. Like a house
 to shelter a family.   
 
And from very early in religious history, technolog
y has offered its support to religion. 
The earliest religious metaphors spoke of the earth
 as if it were a goddess™s body, her hips the 
hills, her eyes the lakes. But as early as the 5
th
 century BCE, when the Book of Job was first 
recited, technological metaphors have pushed their 
way into religion:   
Then the Eternal 
answered Job out of the whirlwind. Where were you w
hen I was laying the foundations of the 
earth? Who do you think was determining the measure
ments? Or who was using the plumb line, 
in order to place the cornerstone? 
Here God is also portrayed as a builder, a being 
who used the technology of plumb lines to build the
 universe.  
 
And, as technology became more complex, it all the 
more impacted on religion. There would 
have been no Protestant Reformation, I assure you, 
without the printing press.  The printing press 
made possible new forms of worship, and new afforda
ble translations of the Bible. Later, when 
folks like Adams or Jefferson spoke of God, they wo
uld use the metaphor of the watchmaker. 
The universe is like a watch which great Providence
 once wound up so that it all ticks and tocks 
with order and precision. This is entirely a techno
logical metaphor. The machine as something 
spiritual.  And when scientists discovered microbes
 using their new-fangled microscopes, many 
Protestant Christians feared drinking from the comm
on communion cup. So Mr. Welch, riding 
on the coattails of the nineteenth century temperan
ce movement, used technology to invent a 
machine which would fill hundreds of little individ
ual cups with his Welch™s grape juice without 
spilling a drop. 

 
Mr. Hicks, in the first reading, recalled a time wh
en there was great preaching at Quaker 
weddings. Mr. Penn would go on elegantly for a long
 time. But now, he laments, Quaker 
worship has changed. ?Our excellent discipline, he 
writes, is too much changed–and I fear is 
too much like the labor-saving and money-saving mac
hinery of the day.? 
 
Worship, he said, had been affected like everything
 else had been affected–by the technology of 
the day. Machinery was labor saving. Technology was
 saving time. Now folks wanted their 
worship to save time too. Everything was becoming q
uick. Instant. Sound-byte brief. Not the 
helpful collapse of the distance from Ghana to Amer
ica, but the frenetic, pressured collapse of 
the distance from one hour to the next. Only 3.5 mi
nutes to the next commercial and a snack 
break. Stop the movie while I check my blackberry. 
Let me leave the intimacy of a lovely 
candlelight dinner for four, so I can go outside to
 talk on my cell. 
 
Yes, the world has changed drastically in these las
t twenty years. This is not the world of 
Emerson any more. As Ruth Stone puts it, when she w
rites of abandoned farms and their nearby 
ponds: ?Oh Yes, someone 
used to
 wade there.?   
But now, she says, ?it™s automatic two-car garages 
and well-kept lawns and identical houses that 
sprawl.?  The whole landscape has changed. And us w
ith it.  And our religion with it. And this 
unconscious forced change she names most elegantly 
as ?The quiet authority of culture.?   

 7  
But don™t you see? This has always been true. The y
ounger culture has an authority the older 
cultures simply do not have any longer. Thirteen-ye
ar olds can do a thousand things which many 
80-year-olds can™t do–not on skateboards, but on th
e computer. Facebook. YouTube. All of it. 
 
But maybe in twenty years, technology will have lef
t those 13-year-olds bewildered too. 
Computer chips in the brain to help us learn a whol
e language in an hour. Small robots the size 
of a grain of sand performing operations. What will
 happen to religious language then? Will we 
allow our souls to be downloaded into a computer, s
o that everlasting life is not a religious 
affirmation but a cybernetic reality? 

 
The thing I want to say this morning is this: techn
ology itself is neutral. Like religion, it can do 
good things or terrible things. It can support a li
fe of compassion and justice or hew down both 
science and history in the name of an idolatrous bi
blical certainty.  
 
But technology does raise religious questions. The 
destruction of distance that Joe Pierce and I 
experienced is just as new and strange to me as the
 telescope-enhanced technology of Galileo™s 
moving satellites was to the ordinary citizen of Eu
rope five hundred years ago. The power of 
technology will always require a religious response
 or a probing ethical question. Just because 
we can do something technologically does not mean i
t is a good thing to do. Even immortality. 
One twentieth-century physicist even suggested remo
ving the technological metaphors that have 
crept into religion, and return joyously to the old
 pre-technological vocabulary of myth, 
suggesting the best metaphor for our quantum univer
se was simply to call it a big green dragon. 
 
I don™t know. Maybe. All I know is that it is ultim
ately up to us to use both technology and 
religion for good, not for destruction. It is up to
 us, as religious people, to encourage a humble 
search for truth, not promote party lines and parti
san zealotry. The distance between Accra 
and Columbus may be reduced by computer technology,
 but the distance between a religion that 
excludes and damns, and a religion that welcomes an
d encourages, needs to remain, and for our 
own spiritual safety. 

 
Offering
  
This is the time in our flow of morning celebration
 when members and friends 
offer their pledges and gifts to the circle of our 
mutual benefit, for the church is the congregation 
of the people who agree to make it, not some abstra
ction far away. If you are a guest this 
morning, a visitor, let the basket pass you  by in 
peace. You are welcome here, and 
do not have to pay to be here. Those who have made 
a commitment to this circle of 
life and love sometimes use this moment to present 
an expression of their commitment 
to the life of this, their spiritual home. The morn
ing offering will now be given and received. 
 
September Laud 

 
Praise leaves that glow gold and turn crisp. Praise
 evening haze, and street lamps glowing 
early. Praise red. Praise maroon. Praise the sage s
cent of mums, and the tentacl™d tangle of 
pumpkin vines. Praise the early star pulsing in a p
uddle™s broken mirror.  Praise steady 
commitments, and quiet reason and seasonal wistfuln
ess sweet as cider, as honey. Praise for 
walking in the evening to sort out life™s prioritie
s, letting dried leaves fall, fall, fall from our 
branches. Praise sunflowers. Praise life. Amen. 

  

