Meher Baba comes to us at a time when the whole of humanity is passing through one of the darkest periods which it has hitherto known. The fate of the whole human race seems to be at stake in the midst of ungovernable forces of greed and hate. The world crisis through which we are going has perhaps no parallel in the entire history of humanity. It is ultimately rooted in deep ignorance concerning spiritual values and the helplessness of our age is augmented by the fact that there are very few persons who really know where to look for Light. Many of those who are learned and who might be expected to give the lead to humanity are themselves fettered by the new superstitions which derive their inspiration from science. Modern science has given us unexpected measure of control over the unknown forces of nature. Being hypnotised by the great successes of science, people are naturally turning to it for Light; 
and in their enthusiasm for the scientific method they are sceptical or contemptuous of the spiritual experience of humanity. 
Science, however, can in no way bring real fulfilment of life, though it has brought certain material comforts and amenities of life. The persons who happen to be favoured with material prosperity are often the very persons who suffer from agonising discontent and mental conflict. Material progress is a questionable boon since it can be and often is turned to work havoc to humanity and destroy all the cherished values of civilization. Man can use his power over nature for good or for evil; but whether he makes good or bad use of this power will depend upon his spiritual advancement. Man’s future on this earth will be very gloomy unless his spiritual advancement can keep pace with his scientific attainments. 
For securing the spiritual advancement of humanity some 

people depend upon principles rather than personalities. Prin­ciples have surely a great value of their own; but by themselves they cannot guarantee any spiritual advancement of humanity. There is no dearth of codified principles in our civilization. Our libraries are full of beautiful enunciations of the highest principles; but we remain where we are in spite of these theoretical principles because we lack the power to translate them in everyday life. The great strides in spiritual prog­ress which humanity has made in the past have never been merely through the enunciation of principles; and the progress which it has time and again achieved in the past has always come from the Avatars and the Prophets who in the abundance of their Life in Eternity released great spiritual energy through personal example and brought about a radical transformation of the human mind by infusing it with new faith, enthusiasm and vision. Such change in consciousness can only be effected through the inner awakening brought about by the Masters of Wisdom. 
In Shri Meher Baba we have the Avatar of our age for he not 
only brings with him the Truth of realization but has the power of imparting it to others. A man who is really thirsty does not want a description of water but wants to drink water for himself, in the same manner man who is desperately in search of Light is not content with dry theories and learned guess-work but wants to have the direct experience of final fulfilment. Such personal exper­ience is always a gift of the Masters who have broken through the bonds of time and who are securely grounded in the heart of Eternity. One part of the Mission of Shri Meher Baba is to help men in attaining God-realization. God-realization is not a cheap thing of the market and one has to be prepared for it through the continued endeavour of innum­erable lives. Shri Meher Baba will bestow this highest spiritual treasure on those who are ready. 
Another important part of the Mission of Shri Meher Baba is to help men to establish a real and a lasting brotherhood. The best of our leaders and thinkers have been overtaken by a mood of despair concerning the possibility of co-operative and harmonious working in the 

economic, cultural and political spheres of life; and they are getting settled in the conviction that there is no real hope for humanity. When the nations fighting over frontiers of their imagination it seems futile to dream of a real brotherhood. But Shri Meher Baba has such indomitable certainty in the future of humanity as can belong only to one who knows the beginning and the end of the world, whose perception penetrates into the hidden potentialities of life and who can rouse them into creative functioning. 
Real and lasting brotherhood can be attained not by talking of love but by practising it. The most dire need of the world is therefore that of real love—not the love of which we read in romantic literature, nor the love which is born of philosophical speculation, but love which will take stock of realities, which will be selfless and pure, strong and steady, which will know of no corruption or limitation and which will stand the test of practical life. Such love can never be born of desperate effort; it is a spontaneous un­foldment of the spirit. There are no schools where love can be 
taught; it has to be caught from those who have it. Shri Meher Baba through his own example, releases in us an unfailing love and arouses an unassailable sense for the Unity of all lives. 
Shri Meher Baba's method of working for his spiritual cause is strikingly different from the usual method of rushing to the platforms with a programme of lectures. In fact, he does not speak by word of mouth even in private. He has been observing complete and unbroken silence since the 10th tof July 1925. (Only when the time is ripe for the spiritual word to be released will he break his silence.) He entered into this long and continued period of silence, after God-realization, and therefore his silence is not of the nature of sadhana or penance. It is grounded in spiritual reasons connected with the work which he has to do; and it is certainly very significant in our times when we find so much psychic energy being dissipated in nothing but volumes of words. We have too much talking and very little practice. We may be sure that in our present crisis the loudest of speakers would not be able to make 

himself heard in the midst of the roaring of cannons; but the silence of Shri Meher Baba shall be heard. 
Shri Meher Baba awakens the spirit through direct experience. He appeals to something which is far deeper than the intellect. Our age is spiritually dwarfed by the weight of learning. God has to be sought by serious experimenting in the laboratory of the human heart and not through the play of the intellect. The spiritual realities are inaccessible to the intellect alone. Shri Meher Baba's primary appeal is, therefore, to the heart. But he does not despise or ignore the intellect. For communication of ideas he uses an alphabetical board to spell out his thoughts, and through this medium he often gives beautiful and effective explanations about spiritual matters. 
Shri Meher Baba does not ask people to leave the world and go to the mountains in search of God. According to him God can be realized while performing daily duties in the right spirit; and he is himself an example of untiring activity for the spiritual good of humanity. Through his several world-
tours he has already prepared the ground for his work. The chief medium for his work will now be the 
Meher Baba Universal Spiritual Centre which is being established near Byramangala Reservoir, two miles from Bidadi, which is on the Bangalore-Mysore route. Among the many-sided activities of this Universal Centre will be a Spiritual Academy, provision for transmission of such rare spiritual experiences as have been the privilege of the great mystics and saints of all countries; instruction in meditation; and training in selfless and effective service. All these activities will be under the direct guidance of Shri Meher Baba and they will be the early manifestations of a great outpouring of force which will ultimately bring about a spiritual upheaval and regeneration. By his vision and power as well as by the universality of his irresistable appeal Shri Meher Baba will make his creative contribution as the World Teacher; and the signs of our age unequivocally point out that he has come just in time to save the world from disaster. 
Shri Meher Baba makes no attempt to found a new religion 

for achieving his world task. All the great religions of history, he says, are revelations of Divinity and what is needed is not a new sect or religion but the direct perception of the Truth which the Prophets have spoken. The integral vision which we so much need can be imparted through the living example of the Master. 
Shri Meher Baba vibrates the Truth. The Divine Love and the pure blessings which constantly radiate from him sink deep in the heart and heal the bruises which it has received while facing the opposites of life. At his touch, all bitterness of heart is swept away, prejudice melts, narrowness and impurities disappear and the psychic being of man is lifted out of the muddle of ignorance to receive a spiritual tone. He is constantly performing this miracle of miracles of strengthening and gladdening the human heart and filling it with infinite sweetness and unfading joy. He restores to man the spiritual dignity which is latent in him and elevates his consciousness so as to bring it in tune with the Infinite. 
The kind of task which he effortlessly achieves in the realm of the spirit is in some ways like that of Orpheus, the great musician of Ancient Greece. It is said of Orpheus that he used to play such wonderful tunes that while listen­ing to them even the wild animals forgot their ferocity and mingled with the lambs in perfect harmony. When we are confronted by the personal presence of Shri Meher Baba, his spiritual grandeur comes home to us and we lose ourselves in spontaneous adoration; and when we thus forget our very selves we cannot remember our differences. He raises us from our mundane plane of differences and shortcomings to the plane of Unity and Completeness: and when we have once had this new vision of true divinity we can never completely reconcile ourselves to the old life of pettiness and jealousies. To meet him is to enter a new life and become a pliant medium for the creative release of Divinity. We have only to open ourselves to his new dispensation of the Truth and be prepared to in­herit the Light which he brings. 
