Sunday, June 12, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee. And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me. And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee unto the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me; they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day. For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them. And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house. And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most rebellious. But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house; open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee. And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein. And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without; AND THERE WAS WRITTEN THEREIN LAMENTATIONS, AND MOURNING, AND WOE." Ez. 2:1-10.  "And I saw another mighty angel (i.e., the Lord Jesus Christ) come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud; and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire; and he had in his hand a little book open; and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth, and cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth; and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices. And when the seven thunders uttered their voices, I was about to write; and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, And sware by him that liveth for ever and for ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer; But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets. And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey. And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings." (Rev. 10:1-11)  Many lessons may be drawn from these books that figure prominently in the ministries of some of the holiest of God's ambassadors. For example, Ezekiel's "roll of a book" was expressly sent to Ezekiel HELD BY THE HAND OF GOD; to wit: "And when I looked, behold, AN HAND WAS SENT UNTO ME; AND, LO, A ROLL OF A BOOK WAS THEREIN;" (Ez. 2:9) signifying the  Sunday, June 12, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  immediacy of the fulfillment of the threatened wrath of God; which, in turn, was signified by the  dreadful contents of the book; to wit:  "And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without LAMENTATIONS, AND MOURNING, AND WOE." (Ez. 2:10)  Not unlike another such writing of doom in the days of Belshazzar, when he defied God presumptuously at a magnificent and opulent banquet and feast for the wild entertainment of a thousand of his top-ranking bureaucrats; to wit: "Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand. Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines might drink therein. Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them. They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone. In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace; AND THE KING SAW THE PART OF THE HAND THAT WROTE. Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another." Dan. 5:1-6.  Thereupon the terrified king sought desperately for help throughout his empire, from someone to interpret the mysterious hand and its ominous message ­ all to no avail. Finally, Daniel came, who first chastised the king for his blasphemy, saying, "and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified; Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE, God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. ...In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old." Dan. 5:23-31. And so, you see, the great and mighty Babylonian empire was about to come crashing to the ground, never to rise again; and to be superceded by the super-powerful kingdom of the Medes and Persians.  Beloved, does it not meet the general rule for such world-shaking events, as announced by Ezekiel? To wit: "But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house; open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee. And when I looked, behold, AN HAND WAS SENT UNTO ME; AND, LO, A ROLE OF A BOOK WAS THEREIN. And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without; AND THERE WAS WRITTEN THEREIN LAMENTATIONS, AND MOURNING, AND WOE." Ezek. 2:8-10. Some powerful generalizations present themselves to those whose eyes have been divinely touched to see them ­ ("But blessed are your eyes, for they see. ...for verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them." Mat. 13:16,17). When God would visit a people in His wrath to punish them for their accumulated sins and blasphemies, the right hand of His power is often implicated metaphorically; as is a mysterious book, or roll with writings thereon, signifying carefully-kept records of accumulated transgressions. And, Beloved, in nearly all cases, the writings are devastatingly bad; e.g.:  "And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein. And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without; AND THERE WAS WRITTEN THEREIN LAMENTATIONS, AND MOURNING, AND WOE." (Ez. 2:9-10)  Sunday, June 12, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  And, as in the case of Zechariah's Flying Roll, the sheer size of the roll or the book does powerfully signify the greatness of the ensuing outpoured wrath and curses of God; to wit: "Then I turned,  and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll. And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits (c. 30 feet), and the  breadth thereof ten cubits (c. 15 feet). Then said he unto me, THIS IS THE CURSE THAT  GOETH FORTH OVER THE FACE OF THE WHOLE EARTH; for every one that stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it." Zech. 5:1-3.  The great size of the roll was uncommon, ­ c. 15'x30,' ­ being the exact size of the porch of the  Temple, so that the ancient Jewish writers concluded that the great roll went forth from the Temple  on its mission of condemnation, spreading the unmitigated wrath and curses of God throughout the land. Gill gives the following comments; to wit: "It may design either the roll or book in which the sins of men are written, which is very large, and will quickly be brought into judgment, when it will be opened, and men will be judged according to it; which shows the notice God takes of the sins of men; the exact knowledge he has of them; his strict remembrance of them; and the certain account men must give of them another day; and, the book of God's judgments upon sinners, such as was Ezekiel's roll, Ezek. 2:10,11, which are many and great; are rolled up, and not at present to be searched into, but are flying, coming on, and will be speedily executed."  Beloved. This great universal curse does indeed reach unto the whole world, and the inhabitants of it, who lie in abject wickedness in the bosom of Satan ­ ("And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness." 1 John 5:19.) ­ "Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest (ere) I come and smite the earth with a curse." Mal. 4:4-6. The fact that the roll of death and curses is written on both sides signifies that the curse of the law reaches to all mankind, to all sorts of sin and sinners; to all who do not keep it in every respect; and, indeed, to all but those who are redeemed from it by the precious blood of Christ; to wit:  "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot." (1 Pet. 1:18,19) "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree." (Gal. 3:13) "Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed." (1 Pet. 2:24) "But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 Jn. 1:7) "And whosoever was NOT FOUND WRITTEN in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:15)  Well, Beloved. The roll of horrendous curses is aloft and flying in midair, while our glorious King selects which curses go forth, when, and where, as it pleaseth Him ­ the sole fixed guiding principle for the selecting process being this: Only God's Elect are spared and escape everlasting punishment in the lake of fire; "For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Thes. 5:9).  Sunday, June 12, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. What are these WBC GodSmacks but selections from God Almighty's flying roll of  curses? Talk about your multimillion dollar drones dealing out death and fierce destruction on every third-world country we don't like. Pitiful. Drones can't hold a candle to our Father's amazing  flying roll ! Notice how this passage ends; to wit:  "I will bring it forth (i.e., the flying roll), saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into THE house of THE thief, and into the house of HIM that sweareth falsely by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of HIS house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof." (Zech. 5:4)  I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts. Thus the roll was come forth ­ by the direct and immediate hand and power of God ­ and was flying abroad throughout the whole world ­ dealing out death and destruction in a most sophisticated and selective manner ­ unto what few of the  doomed sons of Adam remain yet alive on the earth.  O, look up, Beloved. God would now bring forth out of His armory the most amazing killing machine ever conceived. Think, angelic snipers, picking off satanic targets from the vantage point of a flying gun-boat (i.e., the mighty flying roll, signifying what God would bring forth out of His treasures, according to his purposes and declarations, and execute upon sinners; which shows the certainty of it, and that there is no escaping it. In particular at this hour, Heaven's cross-hairs appear fixed upon THE THIEF and THE FALSE SWEARER. Zech. 5:4. Not "A thief," but "THE THIEF." Not in the abstract, but with pin-point specificity. We do not have to look very far to discover who the thief and the false swearer is. And, nobody should be surprised to find that ­ as in every other area of life ­ the Father's tender love and vindication of His Elect people holds the answer. Simply put, the thief has stolen most grievously and destructively from God's Elect people ­ JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE GOD'S ELECT PEOPLE. And, the false swearer slanders and defames God's chosen ones ­ JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE GOD'S ELECT ONES. Remember the words of the Lord Jesus; to wit: "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth? (Lk. 18:7,8)  King David the prophet, speaking as the mouth of God, denounced the human judiciary as being unalterably corrupt "from the womb; they go astray as soon as they be born, SPEAKING LIES. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent; they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ears," (Psa. 58:3-4) thus triggering fervent imprecatory prayers; to wit: "Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth; break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Lord. Let them melt away as waters which run continually; when he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. As a snail which melteth, LET EVERY ONE OF THEM PASS AWAY; like the untimely birth of a woman, THAT THEY MAY NOT SEE THE SUN. Before your pots can feel the thorns (i.e., instantly), He shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath." (Psa. 58:6-9)  Beloved, King David, the Prophet/King of Israel, under divine inspiration, has just described the outpoured wrath and vengeance of God upon the judges ­ (i.e., all the relatively so-called "great men" on earth) ­ I say, God's condign (i.e., well-deserved), vengeance will soon be visited upon the masses of mankind because of their ill treatment of God's Elect. Ergo. "The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance. He shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth." (Psa. 58:10-11) I love you. Amen.  
