Sunday, April 4, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; Who will render to every man according to his deeds; To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, ­ ETERNAL LIFE. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, ­ INDIGNATION AND WRATH, TRIBULATION AND ANGUISH ­ upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; BUT GLORY, HONOR, AND PEACE, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no respect of persons with God." Rom. 2:5-11. "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." Heb. 10:26,27.  Beloved, first please take note, that so far in this sermon, I have quoted nowhere but the New Testament. Recall how many zillions of times the adversaries ­ (i.e., the fags and fag-enablers, in other words, all mankind and the demons that possess them) ­ I say, please recall how many KAZILLIONS of times the adversaries to our souls have accused us of preaching only from the Old Testament. In the first place, what if we did preach only from the Old Testament? Our dear Lord Jesus and His disciples, while He dwelt on earth, had nothing but the Old Testament to preach from, and they got along very well, thank you; to wit:  "And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee; and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about. And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and, AS HIS CUSTOM WAS, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read. And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Isaiah. (Note: 100% Old Testament [!][!]). And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him." (Lk. 4:14-20)  This is a fair example of how the Lord Jesus and His disciples preached ­ and preached powerfully ­ from the Old Testament. And you see that this Old Testament preaching by Christ evoked the same murderous response as the New Testament preaching by the martyr Stephen at Acts, chapters 6 & 7; to wit: "And he (i.e., Christ Jesus in the synagogue at Nazareth) began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears. And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son? And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself; whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country. And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; But unto none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Zidon, unto a woman that was a widow. (Note, here, that another Old Testament passage is woven into the Savior's sermon). And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. (More Old Testament sermonizing). And all they in the synagogue, when they heard  Sunday, April 4, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  these things, were filled with wrath, And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him  unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.  But he passing through the midst of them went his way." Lk. 4:21-30. And so it is, that  whenever and wherever God's holy word is preached in demonstration of the Holy Ghost and  power, ­ ("And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but  in DEMONSTRATION OF THE SPIRIT AND OF POWER," 1 Cor. 2:4) ­ it has the same  effect upon the adversaries (i.e., fags and fag-enablers, or all mankind whose names are not  written in the Lamb's Book of Life).  All of which reprobate population, from Adam to the end, being characterized by our gracious Savior as being, predominantly, MURDERERS and LIARS; to wit: "Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me;" ­ (beloved, has it dawned on you yet that we are living in a filthy sea of murderers and liars [Jn. 8:44]? also, a crooked and perverse nation [Phil. 2:15]? also, an adulterous and sinful generation [Mk. 8:38],? also, "this wicked generation" [Matt. 12:45]?) ­ It is from the collective mouths of this little WBC Island in the midst of a sea of human corruption that the Savior preaches in the same blistering words of condemnation today as He did 2,000 years ago; to wit: "Jesus said unto them (i.e., to His murderous adversaries then and now), If God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word." (Jn. 8:42,43.) ­ "The Brotherhood of Man and The Fatherhood of God" is the Satanic religion/theology of fallen mankind. Sometimes called an Ecumenical Movement; sometimes, called Interdenominationalism, but always identifiable instantly by God's Elect.  Beloved, nothing is clearer in Scripture. Nothing is more blessedly plain, clear and simple. The great overwhelming majority of mankind from Adam to the end are NOT the children or Sons of God ­ they should not be called the Sons of God in any sense. That title is reserved as an honor reserved for that relatively small group of people whose names are written in Heaven, God's Elect, who are, on that account, hated, vilified, and murderously persecuted by the Hell-bound earthdwellers; to wit: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, THAT WE SHOULD BE CALLED THE SONS OF GOD; therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, NOW ARE WE THE SONS OF GOD, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, EVEN AS HE IS PURE." (1 Jn. 3:1-3)  Thus it is, by word and deed, that the Sons of God identify themselves as such. And they wear afflictions and invidious, hostile discrimination as a badge of honor; to wit: "If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified." (1 Pet. 4:14.) A good example of God's Elect who exemplified His suffering saints in word and deed, is found in Acts, chapter 5, where, having falsely arrested and imprisoned Peter and the other apostles, the council of the Pharisees and elders determined to release them, but not before beating them and ordering them not to speak or preach anymore in the Name of Jesus Christ. Whereupon we read: "And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ." (Acts 5:41,42)  Sunday, April 4, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  The Holy Ghost also refers to God's Elect as "a PECULIAR PEOPLE," and says that they are  easily identifiable among all other people, in that they are "ZEALOUS OF GOOD WORKS;" to  wit:  "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, AND PURIFY UNTO HIMSELF A PECULIAR PEOPLE, ZEALOUS OF GOOD WORKS. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee." (Titus 2:11-15)  Beloved, as John Wesley once said, "The world is my parish;" meaning that every man, woman, boy and girl alive with him in the world was the legitimate object of his prayers and his preaching. The Arminian Wesley, of course, had self-righteous, will-worship proselytizing ­ ala Methodist church style ­ in mind; and we know the end of all such activity; to wit: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves." Mat. 23:15.  Nevertheless the Lord's watchmen and prophets are commissioned to preach the Gospel to every creature, publishing the true message of God, as it is said in our text; to wit; "And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ." Acts 5:42. And again, "And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publickly, and from house to house, Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ...Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God...Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to WARN EVERY ONE NIGHT AND DAY WITH TEARS." Acts 20:20-31. And, again: "Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God; Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints; To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory; Whom we preach, WARNING EVERY MAN, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily." (Col. 1:25-29)  And thus it came about, that in the process of time this working of the grace of God in the lives of His PUBLISHERS ­ ("The Lord gave the word; great was the company of those that published it." Psa. 68:11) ­ I say, the grace of God appeared to all men, teaching all mankind what is the heart of the Gospel, distinct from all other ways espoused by all other philosophies, religions, and systems of moralities, ­ beginning with a ZERO TOLERANCE FOR SIN; to wit: "Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts." Titus 2:12(a). Right off the bat, as they say. The word, "denying" here, means RESISTING. It's a grim battle, 24/7, until we get our new bodies. ("For I know that in me [that is, in my flesh,] dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do." Rom. 7:18,19.)  The 25-year-old fag on the Ricky Lake TV Show, sitting between his supportive parents, each of whom was a psychiatrist, after I had laid out the requirements of total abstinence of all fag-sex ­ and every other kind of sinful extra-marital sex, ­ fairly screamed his defiance of God. "BUT I  Sunday, April 4, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  COULD NEVER LIVE THAT WAY!" he said. (Bro. Charles Hockenbarger was with me on that  TV Show in New York.) Whereupon, I fairly screamed back at him: "YOU BETTER LIVE  THAT WAY, BUDDY, OR YOU'LL NEVER GET TO HEAVEN (!)"  Beloved, our text says that the grace of God "that bringeth salvation," ­ THAT GRACE BY WHICH WE ARE SAVED ­ (which is the only grace I'm interested in, and which is specifically said to save the soul; to wit: "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of HIS GRACE in his kindness to us through Christ Jesus. For BY GRACE ARE YE SAVED through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God; Not of works, lest any man should boast." Eph. 2:7-9.) I say, the grace that saves is a teaching grace; to wit: "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation has appeared ...Teaching us that ...WE SHOULD LIVE SOBERLY, RIGHTEOUSLY, AND GODLY IN THIS PRESENT WORLD." Titus 2:12(b).  Further, this teaching grace affirmatively requires us to constantly be on the lookout ­ with a high degree of expectancy ­ for the imminent return of our dear Savior to gather His Elect to honor and reward them; to wit: "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ." Titus 2:13. If we assume that the "blessed hope" and the "glorious appearing" are two separate and distinct gifts from our Father ­ which seems to be the case ­ then the "blessed hope" is described and defined for us by the Holy Spirit in such passages as Romans, chapter 8, ("For we are saved by hope," verse 24); and Hebrews, chapter 6, ("Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul," verse 19).  And, the Holy Ghost has scarcely used more beautiful language than that which He used in speaking of our "hope;" the meaning of which word ­ as nearly always used in the Scriptures ­ is, TO CONFIDENTLY ANTICIPATE, USUALLY WITH PLEASURE; to wit: "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. For the earnest expectation of the (whole creation) waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the (whole creation) was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same IN HOPE (i.e., CONFIDENT PLEASURABLE ANTICIPATION). Because the (whole creation) itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. FOR WE ARE SAVED BY HOPE." (Rom. 8:18-24)  Beloved, the fact that we often think of and speak of the confidence and pleasurable anticipation of being put into actual possession of our Heavenly inheritance ­ a huge part of which is our new and glorified bodies ­ is powerful evidence that our calling and election is sure. "For we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it." (Rom. 8:25)  Beloved, this blessed hope ­ this confident, pleasurable anticipation of Heaven, eternal bliss, and joy unspeakable ­ was supernaturally set before each saint as he journeyed through life. Whereupon, he was supernaturally caused to possess it: "WHICH HOPE WE HAVE as an anchor of the soul." (Heb. 6:19)  I love you.  Amen.  
