 1 2007-10-14 Association 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to nurture our spirit, 

as we return again to help heal our world
,  
and find some measure of wholeness
  
for ourselves, who are of that world. 

 
Song and silence, word and wonder, come, 

and begin to liberate us,
 as we say: 
 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of  
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of 
spirit may illumine our way, we have kindled this l
ight as the sign of our circle of life 
and love.
  
Sequence 

 
Birds I do not know by name, 

brown, compact. I saw them! 

A thousand of them. Two thousand!  

They rose. They flocked. 

They leapt into the air  

with all their sisters and brothers. 

Freed for a time from the confines of the soil, 

and the tangle of willows, they dreamed in air. 

Making great sail-like shapes in heaven, 

sweeping and swooping and dancing 

and lifting up my own eyes from the earth 

to wonder and marvel and yearn for such liberty. 

 
People, many of whose names I do not know. 

Leaping from their comfort. I saw them. 

Speaking out against the death of children 

and young men and women in the land of the Tigris a
nd Euphrates. Fasting and weeping.  
A thousand of them. Two thousand.  

A million. Ten million. 

Liberated from lethargy and the tangle of despair. 

Making great sail-like shapes in the heart, 

inviting us to tack toward hope and healing. 

Rising, rising, sister and brother birds, sister an
d brother humans!  
Rising to exaltation!  

Rising to the glory of grief!  

Rising to liberation and freedom!  

Freedom from addiction to violence. 

Freedom from the demonic tendency  

of dividing all the creatures of earth  

into them and us. 

 2 Freedom, finally,  

from most every other silence  

but this long breath  

of honest solace, rest and safety. 

 
silence 

 
Arise, arise, hearts.  Know the ligaments of 

spirit that bind you to every soul on earth. Rise 

together, harmonious forces of remembrance. 

Let songs of love and understanding resound 

across all separateness (from Jim Scott™s anthem). 
We greet those we love, those we 
remember, those with whom we struggle,  

those who have loved us with their names, 

in silence or whispered, and with our love. 

 
naming 

 
Oh Freedom long dreamed, come.  

Let the music offer us the promise of peace, blosso
ming  
like irises of spring surprising  

the dry autumn. 

 
The First Reading 
this morning comes from theologian Richard Cleaver™
s powerful 
book 
Know My Name
, written some 12 years ago. He is making an intere
sting 
connection between the story of Jesus as it has com
e down to us, and the interestingly 
enough, people of mixed ethnic heritage, and homoph
obia as well. The word 
Mestizo
 refers to the single largest population in Latin Am
erican countries, namely, people who 
are both Native Americans and Euro-Americans. 

  

In his book, 
The Future is Mestizo
, the Texan priest Virgil Elizondo puts Jesus™ 
marginality at the center of his ministry.  To begi
n with, Elizondo notes, all Galileans had 
a mixed or 
mestizo
, heritage.  This reality would have struck Jesus™ 
hearers and, later, 
those who heard his Galilean companions preaching. 
 After all, Peter™s Galilean accent 
betrayed his lie when he denied Jesus. Elizondo mak
es this generalized ethnic impurity 
personal to Jesus: 

 
?Was not the father of Jesus a Roman soldier?? 
he writes.
  This would certainly have 
been suspected by those who knew Mary. Early rumors
 to this effect persisted during the 
first three hundred years of the Christian movement
. It must have been painful for Mary, 
and later on for Jesus, to have to deal with these 
stories.  It is not what we really are that 
we have to live with, but with what people around u
s say that we are.? 
 
This last point is especially relevant to the worki
ngs of homophobia, from which no one 
is immune.  It is not whether we 
are
 really lesbian or gay that matters to a gay basher
, or 
a military investigator, or a bigoted employer, or 
a landlord; it is what people around us 
say, or suspect, or guess; or even deduce from our 
clothes. 
 
 3 The Second Reading
 is a pretty direct and sassy poem by one of my fav
orite poets, Ruth 
Stone. It™s called ?Words.?   (The Wallace Stevens,
 she mentions, by the way, was a great 
American poet.) 

 
Wallace Stevens says, 

?A poet looks at the world 

as a man looks at a woman.? 

I can never know what a man sees  

when he looks at a woman. 

That is a sealed universe. 

On the outside of that bubble  

everything is stretched to infinity. 

Along the blacktop,  

trees are bearded as old men,  

like rows of nodding gray-bearded mandarins. 

Their second beards were spun  

by female gypsy moths. 

All mandarins are trapped in their images. 

A poet looks at the world  

as a woman looks at a man. 

 
Sermon 

 
So, let™s start with a riddle. I™ve asked approxima
tely 60 people a version of this riddle 
during this past week, both here in Columbus, and i
n other states, by phone. I™ve even 
already asked it of members of this church. (But if
 you know the answer because of that, 
keep quiet, OK?) 

 
One sunny day, a young father is walking along when
 he sees his eldest son speeding past 
on his bike. A car goes through a red light and hit
s the poor kid on the bike, knocking him 
off and breaking his leg. The father, of course, is
 horrified. But he is at least thankful he 
can be there with his son as he faces the ambulance
 ride and goes to the emergency 
room. He holds his son™s hand as he is wheeled into
 the surgery unit, the door pushed 
open by the gurney. The surgeon inside the unit the
y enter takes one look at the boy on 
the gurney and cries out, ?Oh my God! It™s my son!?
  
 
How can this be?  (pause) 

 
The answer?  The surgeon is the child™s mother. But
 the vast majority, 80%, of folks who 
heard this riddle this week, didn™t guess that answ
er. 
 
Why? I think because the images associated with the
 words:  surgeon, doctor, clergy, 
CEO, dentist, lawyer, university professor, bank pr
esidentŠare almost always male. And 
that is true, even if your dentist is named Jane, a
nd one of your ministers is Wendy, and 
someone named Gladys removed your gall bladder. 

 
Of course 30 years ago, there really were very few 
women among our clergy. You could 
count them on one hand. Same thing in the circles o
f dentistry or surgery. For decades 
you would hear  people wrestling with this rarity b
y referring to any woman they 
did
 see 
occupying these professions as ?a woman doctor,? ?a
 woman surgeon,? ?a woman 

 4 dentist,? ?a woman minister.? Never, not once, did 
any of us ever hear ?We have a man-
minister speaking in our pulpit this week.?  Or, ?I
 go to a male-dentist I really trust.? 
There was no need for a gender modifier. Men were c
ommon in these fields. Women 
were not. But where women WERE a common sight, such
 as in the nursing profession, 
you did indeed hear gender modifiers, like  ?male n
urse.? 
 
Things have changed a lot in 30 years. About half o
f all UU ministers are women. And 
the only surgery I personally ever had to undergo w
as performed–most excellently by a 
woman. Yet it is still hard for a large percentage 
of folks to immediately think of the 
words ?mother? and ?surgeon? as going naturally tog
ether. Because our work, you see, 
isn™t done yet. 

 
What work? Our spiritual work! The work of changing
 our hearts, deepening our spirit.  
 
But how can hearts change? Especially when you cons
ider what our poet Ruth Stone 
writes in her poem reflecting on the differences be
tween how some men and some 
women see things. 

   

?I can never know what a man sees when he looks at 
a woman,? she confesses. ?That is a 
sealed universe.?  But she adds the following inter
esting line: ?All mandarins are trapped 
in their images.?  That is, even those men who once
 ruled the culture and dominated all 
the professions and fields were trapped in ?their i
mages.? In other words, in a world of 
gender imbalance, women suffer, but so do men, who 
have to maintain the image of their 
power to their own detriment. 

 
Thus, the purpose of a good liberal religious commu
nity, it seems to me, is to help people 
shatter all those corrosive inner images of pulpits
 or operation tables with men only, no 
women. All genders are affected by this unjust imag
ery. And consciousness of false 
images is the beginning of any good spiritual work,
 whether we are dealing with God or 
humanity. 

 
Let me tell you how we began to do this work 30 yea
rs ago in the Unitarian Universalist 
Association of Free Congregations. Let me tell you 
how we got to where we are now.  
 
Lucille Longview of our Lexington MA congregation w
as almost 60 years old when she 
began to stir up a call to religious self-examinati
on in the area of gender justice. She had 
been studying this issue for some time, but in the 
mid-seventies of the last century, she 
challenged her own congregation on these issues. Bu
t wisely, passionately, she also knew 
that her congregation was just one among many, and 
that her vision was larger than that. 
So she rolled her sleeves up, and did the complex w
ork of getting the entire Unitarian 
Universalist Association to get involved. She did t
his by going through the demanding, 
but fair, institutional process that brings a resol
ution on to the floor of the General 
Assembly (our annual meeting of elected delegates a
nd ministers, which conducts the 
major business of the Association).  In 1977, due t
o the excellent work of Lucille and her 
supportive circles, the delegates to the Assembly u
nanimously passed (a sublimely rare 
event in those days!) the following resolution, now
 called the 
Woman and Religion 
Resolution.
 Since it is very long, I offer it to you edited do
wn some: 
 



 5 ??ˆˆˆ??ˆˆ??
???
ˆ?ˆ??ˆ??

?˜ˆ


??ˆ???
???
???ˆ?
ˆ
??ˆ?????
 !ˆ
ˆ?ˆ?ˆ˜ˆ


ˆ??ˆˆ?"ˆ

???ˆ ?ˆ??
#?ˆ
ˆ??˜


$%&'($&)*+,$-.//0
? ?
?

1?????? 
ˆ1?
 ?1#??
??˜
ˆ


'($%$&)*+,$0? ??
?
'ˆ$?

??ˆ
?
ˆˆ??

?ˆ?
ˆ
?!?ˆ1??ˆ
???
??2


'($%$&)*+,$0? ??
?
3ˆ
ˆ
?ˆ??1?
?1?
ˆ??????
?2

Now did you notice what the resolution does over an
d over again? It calls on the 
President of the Unitarian Universalist Association
 to hold the whole movement to 
accountability. It calls on the Board of Trustees o
f the Association, the officers and staff 
to reconsider the very language they speak, and to 
help the congregations of the 
Association implement the resolution. The resolutio
n, quite clearly, recognizes that a lot 
of this business of changing cultural models and st
ereotypes has to be inward work, 
because these models and stereotypes are, it was wi
sely said, ?internalized.?  But, 
powerfully, the whole resolution is grounded in the
 sensible and reasonable use of 
institutional savvy to get things done. To reconsid
er gender inequality in Lexington is one 
thing. To lift up this concern across the continent
 is more to the point. And that requires 
leadership and organization. It requires the UUA, t
he Unitarian Universalist Association. 
 
The UUA did good work, and everything was implement
ed. As a result, the Association 
has changed much in 30 years, with women in every l
eadership position in our 
congregations, at our Association headquarters in B
oston, and in our schools. Even the 
hymnbook we use came out of this resolution, ultima
tely, because the Board of the 

 6 Association charged us to put together an ?inclusiv
e hymnbook,? with both gender 
balance and gender neutrality anchoring our choices
 of texts and poetry. 
 
You may have noticed that our poet, Ruth Stone, mak
es a heterosexual assumption in her 
poem. ?I can never know what a man sees when he loo
ks at a woman.? She does not say 
?heterosexual man? but that is clearly her point. L
ike the mother surgeon, gay folks in 
our congregations were invisible too, unseen, even 
though they had been part of our 
congregations for ages. Heterosexual assumptions li
ke Ruth Stone™s were the only ones 
made in our congregations in those days. Our Associ
ation has changed a lot in this regard 
this last thirty years. Thirty years ago, lesbian a
nd gay issues were not even on the radar 
very much among Unitarian Universalists, including 
many of the most radical. The 
seminaries routinely told gay and lesbian applicant
s that they would never get placed. 
There was no office in the UUA for sexual minority 
concerns like there is today. Those 
of us who did enter seminary anyway were pretty qui
et about our lives. Silent even. 
 
But then something amazing happened. And this time,
 it did not spring from the 
congregations, but from some leaders at 25 Beacon S
treet, the UUA.  You see, as those of 
us who were gay or lesbian graduated, and went out 
in search, we were summarily turned 
down on that issue alone, stated clearly and cleanl
y: ?We™re just not ready to have people 
like you with same-sex partners serve people like u
s who are not that way.?  These 
responses broke our hearts. I even eventually wrote
 a poem about my frustration in this 
regard, which has earned me some notoriety on the W
eb because of the clearly bitter state 
in which I wrote it. Here it is.  

 
It™s called 
Because: Gay and Lesbian Studies 101
  
And so one of the members 

 of the search committee asks me, 

 " But why do you people " 

 he really said that, " you people, " 

 " have to talk about it ? " 

 Right. 

 Well, because: 

 Because, if I fell in love, 

 you know, with sonnets and everything, 

 and wanted to name all the stars of heaven, 

 one at a time, with a goofy smile on my face 

 I'd like to be able to. 

 Because, if I didn't fall in love, 

 I'd like to grouse a bit, 

 or work up a bitter Theory 

 to explain it. 

 Because, if my lover got run over 

 by a drunk driver 

 (it happens, you know, 

 remember blue-eyed Stewart?), 

 I'd like to be able to take a few days off work 

 to cry and stuff, OK? 

 Because, if my partner-in-life 

 whom I can't really legally marry because 

 7  it upsets someone's stomach or something, 

 suddenly developed an infection 

 and got Job's sores all over his body 

 and had to go to the hospital, 

 (you know, just like my friend Stephen) 

 I'd like to take him there, 

 and hold his hand for a few days, 

 and still get paid on family emergency leave, 

 so I could eat food and pay rent and all. 

 Because if my lover left me 

 after fifteen years, I'd like to be able to sob 

 without consolation, 

 and feel suitable depressions, 

 and not have to smile a lot, 

 or have to pretend not to be stunned for months. 

 Because lying all the time is still wrong,  

 isn't it? 

 Oh, and because, 

 whether you believe it or not, 

 my life is just as important to me 

 as yours is to you. 

 
Leaders at the UUA, like David Pohl, and Chuck Gain
es, and Leon Hopper saw us. Saw 
our tears. They began to feel for those of us who w
ere going out there and getting 
creamed by our congregations. They had room enough 
in their hearts to allow us in, and 
enough compassion to let their hearts break with ou
rs. They knew that something had to 
be done. And they knew that 
they
 had to get it going–it was not likely to come from
 the 
congregations. And so, without our knowing it, they
 began to go to district meetings and 
ministers' gatherings, and talk this issue up. They
 spoke up on our behalf. They asked 
other ministers to speak up too. They created a sys
tem of sending a whole diversity of 
preachers out to congregations looking to bring on 
a new minister, to get them to see that 
all well-trained human beings, gay or straight, men
 or women, of any color or physical 
ability, can be ministers. The image of minister as
 a white haired man, with a wife 
teaching in the Sunday School, simply had to be giv
en up. 
 
Finally, the UUA budgeted money, the main way any s
erious institution gets anything 
done. It created the Welcoming Congregation program
, an education course to help 
people do the work of changing their hearts and min
ds and becoming educated about real 
people leading real lives. Little by little, congre
gations, including this one, engaged with 
this program.  Students, ministers, lay people, alm
ost all of us in most of our 
congregations. Hearts, minds and spirits grew, and 
deepened. We encountered each other, 
saw each other, heard each other. Today, 30 years a
fter our tears, gay, lesbian, bi and 
trans ministers are everywhere in our movement. Man
y of us serve our larger 
congregations, and some, like very lucky me, serve 
on influential committees, like the 
Ministerial Fellowship Committee, or the Hymnbook C
ommission.  
 
But, still, a few years ago, at a General Assembly,
 Barbara Pescan, the minister at our 
church in Evanston Illinois, and I were talking abo
ut our lives and our careers. She, like 
me, was there at the beginning of all these changes
, 30 years ago. And all of a sudden, we 
realized that we had some thanking to do. So we fou
nd David Pohl, and we found Chuck 

 8 Gaines, who worked on their own hearts and minds fi
rst so they could ask others to work 
on theirs with power and sincerity. We stopped both
 of them in the hallways where we 
found them, and with tears in our eyes, we thanked 
them.  We thanked them for our 
livelihoods. Our work. Our lives. 

 
We had been turned down once for who we were. Now, 
we could come to the table, 
because these leaders understood, as Lucille Longvi
ew did, that in order for religion to be 
significant, it had to provide more than the comfor
ts of community. It also had to provide 
opportunities for deepening, for what I call spirit
ual growth, and for the casting down of 
false images of stereotype, which hurt us all. A go
od religion has to open us to the real 
diversity of our modern world. For our work as libe
ral religious people is not to be 
competitive with others, and to find ways to superc
ede others, but rather to find ways to 
supercede ourselves, to grow beyond our limitations
 and our constrictive boundaries, 
each and every one of us. Diversity, you see, must 
not end up being some sort of feel 
good slogan, a word we keep in our back pocket to m
ake us 
feel
 like we™re broad minded. 
Diversity is a gift. 
But it cannot be a gift
 –.unless it is received. It is only received when 
there are hands and hearts open enough to receive i
t. And the opening of fists into 
welcoming hands and welcoming hearts is our spiritu
al work, as I see it.  
 
Richard Cleaver talks about diversity in a most int
eresting way in his book 
Know My 
Name.
 He realizes that today, just as in the days of Jes
us, diversity is all around us, 
whether we welcome it or not–
and also within us. We are, many of us, 
mixtures
/mestizos
 of ethnicity, culture, sexuality, gender, temperam
ent, and looks. But 
even so, it™s still not what we are in our larger c
ulture. 
It™s what people 
think
 we are. 
People thought Mary, the mother of Jesus, had been 
raped by a Roman soldier, he boldly 
states. Or maybe she fell in love with the oppresso
r enemy, and conceived a child that 
way. Maybe such things are true. Maybe they aren™t.
 We™ll never know. But, as he says, 
rumor and gossip, which are almost always based on 
a fear of diversity, 
make
 things real. 
And thus his point is this:  in those days–as well 
as in ours–a woman who is raped can 
be silenced, ignored, or even blamed–in short, dism
issed.  Such a woman can become 
even more invisible than the woman in my initial ri
ddle who was the surgeon. And then 
Cleaver makes the amazing statement that 
you don™t have to be gay to be gay bashed
– 
you only have to be 
thought
 to be gay. I have a straight friend who was hit ov
er the head 
with a brick while a group of teenagers called him 
faggot. This last summer, I was hit in 
the side of the head by a bottle wielded by one of 
a group of 12-year-olds making anti-
gay cracks at me. They walked past me on a rather c
rowded street this summer while I 
was simply walking down the sidewalk making plans w
ith my friend Dan on my cell 
phone. I wasn™t doing anything particularly gay, I™
d wager, nor wearing a gay slogan on 
my shirt. But the kid clocked me good. Both my frie
nd and I were hit for the same 
reason. They imagined we were gay, no matter whethe
r we were or no.  
 
But my point this morning is that this kid wouldn™t
 have done such a thing, I™d wager, 
had he been fortunate enough to have been offered  
the Welcoming Congregation course 
in his own Sunday school or church. Because the onl
y way anyone changes and grows is 
with real effort, real vulnerability, real openness
, real faithful commitment. Sort of like 
that hungry crocodile in the story this morning who
 had to be reminded over and over 
again that he was related to everyone around him. 

 
The Unitarian Universalist Association has asked us
 to take up our Offering this morning 
for them, on what they call, rather inelegantly, As
sociation Sunday. They do this so that 

 9 they can distribute this money to the districts to 
help get us known in the world, to help 
us open our doors, and open our hearts. And, to com
e up with more programs for our 
growth, so that we might take our proper leadership
 place in this wildly diverse, yet 
warring, world. 

 
In all honesty, folks, the liberal church has been 
hiding out for a long time. Keeping our 
?women and religion? resolutions to ourselves, hold
ing back on the Welcoming 
Congregation and our various anti-racist initiative
s by worrying about what growth 
means, and more about what we might lose than being
 excited by what we all might gain. 
But frankly, our  movement has not grown much since
 I first entered one of our 
congregations some 37 years ago. In fact, we™ve sta
yed about steady, while the 
population of the US has gone up almost a third.  

 
Still the evidence is clear. Our hope right now see
ms to be congregations like this one, 
large, vibrant, alive. Open. We are 20
th
 among the 25 largest congregations right now. 
And because we are so alive and thriving, we are ma
king a difference in the UUA, as 
well as in this community. We larger congregations 
are the ones leading the way to a 
wider vision that can make a difference. Just like 
the UUA itself has made a difference in 
these last thirty years with its committed leadersh
ip and vision of a welcoming, diverse, 
thriving and growing movement that matters in this 
nation and in the world. 
 
During the Offering that follows, I urge you to be 
as generous as you can. If you would 
rather think about it more, and read up on the init
iative on UUA.org, go ahead. Send your 
check in later. You can also pay your pledge to thi
s local and thriving congregation in the 
offering basket, but make sure it is well marked. I
 intend to give $100 dollars today to the 
UUA. I invite your generosity as well. 

 
I started this sermon with a riddle. Let me end it 
with a joke, since I am asking for your 
generosity, and laughter always adds an extra joy t
o such an ask.  A man is in desperate 
financial straits and prays to God to save him by l
etting him win the State Lottery. Days 
go by, then weeks, and he fails to win anything. Fi
nally, he cries out to God and says, 
?You tell us you™ll answer our prayers, but I am go
ing down the tubes here, and I still 
haven™t won the lottery.?  A voice from above answe
rs, ?Look, you™ve got to meet me 
half-way, bubbeleh. Buy a ticket.? 

 
This is your opportunity to buy a ticket and to go 
half-way. The UUA will meet you in 
the middle. It certainly did that to me. 

 
Offering  

 
The Offering this morning is for the Unitarian Univ
ersalist Association. You are also 
welcome to bring your pledges for this local congre
gation if you brought them. If you 
write checks, make them out to the UUA. There are a
 few envelopes  
if you wish to take one home and mail it in later. 
They may be found in the Offering 
baskets. If you are guest, just visiting for the fi
rst time, you may let the basket pass; 
should you one day become a member, we will welcome
 your generosity with joy. Let 
the Offering be received and given. 

 
 
 
 10
 Veda Still Being Written 

 
Come, sing a song of praise 

to the one who refuses even 

the gift of steady existence, 

who burns and dances like Agni™s fire, 

ever moving, slipping through the fingers 

of our praise and singing us lullabies  of stars. 

Come, sing a song that also burns like 

Agni™s fire, a canticle that sings of the many as o
ne, and the one as the many, and which 
transcends winning and losing, being 

right and being wrong, this and that, 

you and me, song and no-song. 

Come, for here in the garden, we are all together. 
Doff your cultures like you doff your 
hat, and trade your familiar words for ones that de
mand more than comfort. Come, sing. 

