Sunday, January 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  This sermon might be titled, "The Fag in Noah's Ark." In my 10-year-old Compendium, entitled, "The True Origin, Nature, and Final Doom Of All Sodomites," I began my paper with Genesis 13:13 ­ ("But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.") ­ because it seemed to me to be the first appearance on the national and historical scene of Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites, all as they negatively impacted Abraham, standing for the Elect of God in the earth. Also, the context demonstrates dramatically how the sovereignty of God influences our lives in every least detail of them.  How did it come to pass that Lot and his family were living in Sodom at the exact time the Lord God purposed to utterly destroy that wicked city in 1898 BC? In the providence of God, trouble arose between Abraham and his nephew Lot, although the two of them had always theretofore lived together, worked together, grew rich together, and worshipped the living and true God (Jehovah) together.  The story is told, simply and pithily, in the 13th chapter of Genesis; to wit: "And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai; Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first; and there Abram called on the name of the Lord. AND LOT ALSO, WHICH WENT WITH ABRAM, HAD FLOCKS, AND HERDS, AND TENTS. And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together; for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together. And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle; and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land." ­ (Note here the multitudinous acts of divine providence maneuvering Lot to unconscious but inevitable choices affecting Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites.) ­ "And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren. Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me; if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east; and they separated themselves the one from the other. Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. BUT THE MEN OF SODOM WERE WICKED AND SINNERS BEFORE THE LORD EXCEEDINGLY." Gen. 13:1-13.  Shortly thereafter, the Lord rained fire and brimstone from heaven upon Sodom, utterly and completely destroying that wicked city and killing every man, woman, child and infant; to wit: "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven; And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground ...And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt." (Gen. 19:24,25,29)  This all happened in 1898 BC, some 450 years after the Flood which killed all living creatures except the eight members of Noah's family ­ (including Ham the faggot son of Noah!!!) ­ in 2349 BC. Thus the entire antediluvian world ­ the population of several billion souls ­ was swept into Hell without mercy.  Sunday, January 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  It now appears very evident to me that we must push the Bible parameters of sodomitical activity much earlier than Gen.13:13 and the destruction of Sodom in 1898 BC ­ (as in my paper entitled, "The True Origin, Nature and Final Doom Of All Sodomites").  It now appears that the Fag In Noah's Ark ­ (i.e., Ham, who, I like to think, deceived Noah and kept his sexual orientation to himself, at least until the naked drunken-Noah-in-the-tent episode), ­ I say the fag in Noah's ark was the tiny remnant of a filthy antediluvian society wholly given over to the fag lifestyle; and that Ham had no sooner left the ark than he began plotting and planning for how he would teach "men to live as before the flood, to lie with mothers, sisters, daughters, MALES and BRUTES, and creatures of all sorts; and that HE ACTUALLY DID SO HIMSELF, and therefore was cast out by his father Noah." (Gill). We learn from this short passage from Gill's Exposition of the Old Testament at Gen. 9:22, as follows: "Ham is represented by many writers [here Gill gives several ancient Jewish authorities as proof] as a very wicked, immodest, and profligate creature: Berosus makes him a magician, and to be the same with Zoroaster, and speaks of him as the public corrupter of mankind; and says that he taught men to live as before the Flood, i.e., as unclean practitioners of sodomy, incest, and bestiality, AND THAT HE ACTUALLY DID SO HIMSELF." Hence the title proposed for this sermon, "The Fag In Noah's Ark."  Notice also, that even though Canaan was Ham's youngest son of four ­ (i.e., "Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan," Gen. 10:6) ­ he nevertheless was twice mentioned as though he was not only the firstborn, but the only son of Ham, and a famous one at that; to wit: "And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: AND HAM IS THE FATHER OF CANAAN," Gen. 9:18; then see the second occasion that only Canaan is mentioned as a son of Ham; to wit: "And Ham, THE FATHER OF CANAAN, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without." (Gen. 9:22)  There appears to be a sordid and profoundly evil connection between Ham (the middle-born of Noah) and Canaan, the last-born of Ham. This is very important to us as we seek to read and discern the signs of the times in these last of the last days, and simultaneously to rightly divide the word of truth to these signs. We are guided by such passages as tell us the last days will be like the days of Noah and his Flood where same-sex marriage was flourishing world-wide; and that evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; and that the fullness of the Gentiles will have come in, hard on the heels of a great falling-away (the Great Apostasy); etc.  The ancient scene that played itself out when Noah got drunk and lay naked and unconscious in a deep drunken stupor in his tent, must be rightly-divided and applied to a spiritual and accurate discernment of the signs of our times; to wit: "And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth; and HAM IS THE FATHER OF CANAAN" ­ (an important key to understanding the passage). "These are the three sons of Noah; and of them was the whole earth overspread. And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard; And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent. And Ham, THE FATHER OF CANAAN." ­ (these two, father and son, appear to be veritable alter egos in evil; like fag father, like fag son; both angry with God for destroying the same-sex-marriage antediluvian world, and determined to teach the post-Flood world to be as same-sex-marriage sodomitical as the antediluvial world; with such success that within 450 years after beginning the re-population of an empty world, God found it necessary to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah as a fresh example and adumbration of the coming doom of this present world.)  Sunday, January 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  I say, "And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without. And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness. And Noah awoke from his wine, and KNEW WHAT HIS YOUNGER SON" ­ [I.E., CANAAN, HIS YOUNGEST GRANDSON, IN CRIMINAL COLLUSION WITH HIS MIDDLE-BORN SON] ­ I say, "Noah awoke from his wine and knew what [Canaan and Ham] had done unto him."  I think it is probable that those authorities referred to by Gill as follows, "and some say (e.g., Jarchi), that Canaan first saw it, and told his father (Ham) of it; and some say, that he or Ham committed an unnatural crime with him (Noah)" ­ I say that I think that it is probable that those ancient authorities are correct. The rapid and devastating response of Noah is further evidence to me that those two jackasses ­ Canaan and Ham ­ suborned by (Ham), and committed by (Canaan) ­ I say that those two jackasses committed incest and sodomy upon the grand old Patriarch Noah. "And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant." (Gen. 9:18-27)  Beloved, this is that same Noah who, in his antediluvian years, "found grace in the eyes of the Lord" (Gen. 6:8, to wit: "But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. These are the generations of Noah; Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God... And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence" ­ [i.e., violence against God's holy institution of marriage, and against those like Noah who strictly adhered thereto] ­ "through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch." Gen. 6:8-14. (And in one of those rooms was the filthy faggot son of Noah ­ even Ham, the vile reprobate ­ who "taught men to live as before the flood, to lie with mothers, sisters, daughters, males and brutes, and creatures of all sorts; AND THAT HE ACTUALLY DID SO HIMSELF.")  Those, Beloved, were the awful signs of the times before the Flood, which Noah no doubt was able to discern. "Marrying and giving in marriage," (Matt. 24:38,39; to wit: "For as in the days that were before the flood they were...marrying and giving in marriage," [i.e., same-sex marriage] ­"until the day that Noah entered into the ark. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.").  "For as in the days that were before the flood they were...marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:38,39)  According to the Babylonian Talmud, these were included among the signs of the times before the Flood, which Noah was obliged to discern, and which Ham was determined to again overspread the earth with AFTER the Flood. This vile Hamitic, sodomite, and same-sex marriage agenda has hounded and bedeviled mankind from the antediluvian days of Adam's seed until now. More than 10 years ago, by discerning the signs of the times, I began to opine that same-sex marriage was a done deal ­ a fait accompli. And I began to warn all mankind of the great evil of such a crime against God.  Sunday, January 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  A direct and personal insult to the Great God, who in the beginning had created woman as the exclusive help meet for man, in accomplishing the Heaven-ordered mandate of being fruitful and replenishing (populating) the earth; to wit: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it." (Gen. 1:27,28)  A blasphemous and insolent attack ­ a frontal assault ­ upon God and His prerogatives in creating and governing His universe. Moreover, it appears that the Flood itself was precipitated immediately and in direct holy retaliation for this greatest of all sins that mankind is capable of committing; to wit: SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. Beloved, the Flood adumbrated the end of the world; and the same-sex marriage trigger of the Flood is now being prophetically replicated today as the trigger of the Great Day of Judgment. "As it was in the days of Noah," indeed. Lk. 17:26.  The signs of the times say so. The signs of the times include the same-sex marriage laws that have swept the European Union and the rest of the so-called civilized and developed world ­ and are now the law in many states of the United States, and threatening the rest. A kind of Satanic frenzy has changed the zeitgeist of the whole world in favor of the same-sex marriage fags.  You remember that last Dec. 16, 2009, a short, pithy letter from Australia appeared in the Topeka Capital-Journal, largely agreeing with our theological position ­ a very strange and unusual thing for anybody to write such a letter, and an even stranger and more unusual thing for the CapitalJournal to print. These are remarkable signs of the times. Since Dec. 16, 2009, (today is Jan. 24, 2010), many more articles agreeing with our theological position have appeared on the Internet ­ most in the category of unclean ravens feeding the prophets of God by the brook. These are even more ­ and more remarkable ­ signs of the times. Here is the Dec. 16 letter; to wit:  "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track after all, although gay marriage, not just homosexuality, could be the catalyst for the consummation. With several states ratifying gay marriage, and movements afoot to extend it elsewhere, it could become general. The Babylonian Talmud reveals that until now only one society in all of history practiced it, the Antediluvian. The Babylonian Talmud also says the practice was the reason for Noah's flood. The risk of retribution is real. Interestingly, Jesus said the time of His coming would resemble those far-off days. He even mentioned `marriage and giving in marriage.' We in Australia have just had our first such wedding. It's a worry."  Another unclean raven wrote: "The only other time in history where there was widespread homosexual marriage was just before the Flood when God saw that He had to destroy the world. He considered it that much of an abomination. We are clearly in a time that is `as in the days of Noah,' with mankind everywhere clamoring for same-sex marriage, with official approvals. The clock is rapidly running out. Official societal sanction of homosexual `marriage' is truly very recent and unprecedented development, EXCEPT apparently for ONE other time in the very, very distant past: The ancient Antediluvian world." Another unclean bird wrote: "I was surprised to learn that in the Talmud which was written not that long after the Flood, those rabbis explained that the `marrying and giving in marriage' included men `marrying' men. By linking this historical rabbinical commentary of Gen. 6 on the Flood, with Jesus' prophesy on His second coming in Mat. 24, to the unique historical circumstances of the degenerate legal creation of fag `marriage' in our time."  Indeed, we should anticipate the soon return of Jesus Christ. I love you. Amen.  
