
  We are here
on a day that teeters on the threshold of spring
  to worship, to offer our praise and thanks,
and to ask the sort of questions of our hearts
  which call from us courage and commitment.
We celebrate knowing this great truth
  we are sisters and brothers to all human beings 
who live upon this earth,
  and kin to every bird, fish, reptile and deer.
  
And at celebration's end, may our reason and our passion keep us true
  to ourselves, true to each other, and true to those shared visions of what
  we can together become.

Rainbows by Carole Pruiksma

  The rain is falling. Falling on the flowers, on the grass, and on the trees.
  Water trickles down the window panes into the puddles on the pavement below.
  The clouds are empty. The rain is stopping. Look up! There is a rainbow slung
  across the sky, soft, lovely. The sun is peeking from behind the clouds.
  It's beautiful!
  
  But, did you know that once upon a long time ago there were no rainbows?
  
  The colors lived apart, separate. They were of different places, had different
  responsibilities, and they looked different. They were not alike. They were
  not the same.
  
  Yellow lived in the sunflowers and the Daisies. Yellow was happy and soft.
  
  Red was bright and bold. Red lived in the roses, the strawberries, and in
  the apples hanging from the trees.
  
  Blue was quiet in the lakes and in the ponds. Blue was calm and shimmering.
  
  Purple was deep and exciting. Purple was in the Crocuses of Spring and the
  darkening sky of twilight.
  
  They lived apart.
  
  One day it began to rain. It rained, it rained, and it rained. The lakes
  were full, the flowers were drooping, and the tree's branches hung low.
  
  Yellow shouted to the clouds, "STOP! Stop sending your water down." But,
  the rain continued.
  
  Red yelled to the clouds. " Enough! Enough of your drips and drops." But,
  the rain continued.
  
  Blue gurgled to the clouds," NO!. No more rain." But, the rain continued.
  
  Purple cried to the clouds, "PLEASE! Please no more rain." But, the rain
  continued.
  
  Yellow, red, blue , and purple lifted their voices again. Their voices joined.
  Together they pleaded to the clouds to stop the rain. Now, the clouds heard
  them and listened. The rain stopped and the sun shone its soft light. The
  colors thanked the clouds by reaching across the sky in an arc of quiet color.
  It was a rainbow, the first rainbow.
  
  The next time it rains, and you see a rainbow, remember how it came to be,
  once upon a long time ago.
  
  We are like the colors of a rainbow. We come from different places. We are
  of different colors. We are of different beliefs. Yet we come together, splashing
  across the sky, joining our voices to become something together that we were
  not when we were separate. We too, are a rainbow, the rainbow of life.

  It is six PM right now in Benin (Africa), where Mawula is telling her children
  the story of the creator spirit Da, symbolized by the circle of the rainbow.
  They are part of the Fon religion, and she is glad her family lives near
  the temple. Mawula has gone to school, but she has never heard the word Ohio
  in her whole life.
  
  It is midnight right now in Kargil in Ladakh. A young boy named Jammu, whose
  family is of the Sikh religion, listens to his grandfather recite the scriptures
  about Guru Nanak who proclaimed the holiness of the Name of God, the Circle
  of being without end or beginning. Jammu is in school now, but he has never
  once heard the word Iraq in his whole life.
  
  It is early morning right now in Okayama. A young girl named Aterasu is lying
  awake on the circular pillows of her futon thinking of how best to practice
  the teachings of her religion, Kurozumikyo, in her Monday classroom today.
  Maybe she will ask to lay her hands upon her teacher, who has a terrible
  cold, so that she might heal her, just as the founder was able to do with
  suffering people. She is not worrying about Korea this morning, like her
  parents always seem to do, only her teacher.
  
  It is only an hour earlier in Columbia than it is here. Diego is speaking
  in the Chibcha language to his teacher, who sits in the center of the sacred
  circle. Diego is in his 17th year of training, studying how to be a priest
  in the Kogi religion. He is upset that his uncle in the United States still
  has not sent the letter he owes him. His mother tells him that there is trouble
  in the United States, but he does not know what kind.
  
  It is the present moment here in Columbus. A man named Heath waits for the
  phone call that will whisk his lover, who is in the Reserves, off to the
  Middle East, half way round the circle of the earth. Heath doesn't go to
  Mass much anymore, but he lies in bed this morning thinking he would like
  to remember how to pray.
  
  O Love, the circle of the world 
  is many circles.
  
  Sometimes they overlap,
  sometimes they do not.
  
  Together they make a world, though,
  billions of human hearts all beating
  
  "I am. I am. I am."
  
  Each heart counts its own life
  as important as anyone in this room
  counts his or her own life.
  
  All know they are mortal.
  All know many questions and few real answers.
  All know fear, fragments of love, and wonder.
  
  Before the grandeur of such reality,
  of which we are part, 
  let us keep an honoring silence for a time.
  
(silence)

  Knowing the circle of our own personal lives
  to overlap with so many others,
  we express our communion with our larger lives
  by naming those to whom our lives are 
  joined by love, by worry, by challenge or
  by remembrance. This we do aloud in this place, or in the echoing chambers
  of our inmost heart.
  
(naming)

  Like a circle dance in the countryside celebrating spring, 
  like the circle of the stars that marks the seasons, like the circle of the
  human eye which opens onto the grandeur of the world, 
  may the circle of this community offer us some ground for joy even in these
  troubled times.
  

  Theologians have always pointed to the story
  but it is the scientists who found her|
  unexpectedly, hidden in the shows
  of pre-history mother of generations
  to the world they recognized her
  she already had a name, she is
  Eve, daughter of the apish Lucy 
  our eldest progenitrix mater Africana
  she was waiting, so to speak
  all these long ages wanting to be found
  wishing to embrace both past and future
  the great parentheses of life
  she left her signature, love letter to
  all her grand-daughters deep in their cells
  each time-travelling mitochondrion
  is her keepsake, passed down on the X
  she has borne female offspring
  in every generation for the last two hundred
  thousand years she lives on
  in every continent today
  what this means is rather complex biologically
  but simple in every other way
  we are all related to her
  we stem from her great trunk, the tree
  of homo sapiens back in the days
  before nationality, geography, race
  before we diverged, multiplied
  and peopled the earth it means this:
  
  I am related to you, we are
  all siblings in the eyes of
  time scientists have just proven it
  we are all children of the same
  old story the theologians nod and smile
  

  Because longing for a better world is one of the deepest realities for human
  beings, visions are generated. Because visions are generated, humans are
  inspired to actualize them. Religions come into existence as a result of
  a mystical inspiration. Buddha getting enlightened; Muhammed, hearing the
  voice of Allah; and Jesus, during his forty nights in the wilderness, are
  all examples of this. What commonly goes wrong is that the religion is then
  appropriated and developed by people who do not have access to this vision.
  This is a bit like builders not having access to the plans. Something gets
  built, but it may only be a distant approximation to the original intention.
  True mysticism gives inspiration for action. Mysticism and action need each
  other. After his enlightenment, Buddha did not retire to a cave. He went
  forth and lived out his vision that had come to him. Religion in its true
  sense is precisely that---the living out of vision in the real world.
  
  When people hear the word vision, they are often inclined to think that something
  escapist or fantastic is being described. The Buddha, however, had his feet
  on the ground. The guts of Buddha's message is this: the deepest experience
  of life is not escaping from concrete reality but entering more deeply into
  it.

  Before I did my internship in Rockford Illinois, back in 1977, I flew out
  and met with the minister and my internship committee. Right away they took
  me to see the church building, of which they were extremely proud. Designed
  by the late, great American architect, Pietro Belluschi, the huge concrete
  structure crowned a hill in town. It was brightly lit at night like the Parthenon
  in Athens, or the Nationwide Building in Columbus, Ohio. The details of the
  entrance garden were charming, the lines of the sanctuary were serene and
  cool, and the narthex, or vestibule, was spacious and very welcoming. The
  most striking thing that greeted you, when you entered this narthex, was
  a wood-framed, circular stained glass window hanging freely in front of a
  huge clear glass window. The colors in the glass were muted earth tones.
  At the center of the circle was a flaming chalice. Then, in circles around
  that inner circle, there were the symbols of the larger religions of the
  world?the cross of Christendom, the Mogen David or Six Pointed Star
  of Judaism, the word OM written in Sanskrit, etc. Symbols for Islam, Buddhism
  and Taoism completed the circle of six.
  
  I always liked this design. I found it compelling and beautiful, tastefully
  designed, not too busy. Others in the church were not so sure about this
  window, which had been added some time after the building had been completed,
  and without Belluschi's OK. Some felt that it gave the wrong impression,
  suggesting that all these religions were basically the same. Others were
  upset that the flaming chalice, symbol of our own religious tradition, was
  in the center of the circle. "It's not as if we are the one true religion,
  or that all the other religions of world revolve around us," they would exclaim.
  I used to think they were reading too much into it, but who's to say, eh?
  
  Certainly not me. After all, I was raised in a most confusing environment
  about this idea of "world religions." In my Catholic grade school I was taught
  that our religion was the only true religion on earth. Those poor Protestants
  couldn't get anything right. On the other hand, my beloved grandfather Umberto,
  who was an atheist and a socialist, didn't think "truth" and "religion" belonged
  in the same sentence. He told me that if he was forced to join a religion,
  he would become a Confucianist (I learned about the Chinese teacher very
  early indeed!) because with that non-supernatural religion, at least he wouldn't
  have to deal with all of that "God baloney." Lots of my grandfather's male
  Italian friends felt the same way.
  
  My Baptist friends on the other side of the block didn't agree with the nuns
  in grade school. Oh, they thought that Catholicism was a religion all right,
  but one of the worst ones possible. In fact, my friend Gaither told me that
  their Baptist church didn't really belong to a "religion" at all. No, they
  had "the truth" not mere religion. "Religion," he would pronounce solemnly,
  "is humanity's vain search for God. In our religionless church, just the
  opposite is true. God has searched for us, and found us and chosen us. Religion
  is just no good."
  
  Then in my high school sociology class, we were sent out to interview religious
  leaders from other traditions, having then to come back and report to the
  class. My team interviewed a local pastor of a certain Baptist denomination
  who told us, with a solemn smile that everything in the Book of Revelation
  was going to come true right before our eyes very soon. I'm ashamed to say
  that the three of us all snickered under our breath, because we had been
  taught by the priests that anyone who took the Book of Revelation seriously
  probably had something wrong with them. We wished instead we had gone with
  our friend Mike's team. They got to drive all the way over to the West Side
  and interview the rabbi over at Sha'ary Zedek, which turned out to be just
  one week before he was shot to death in his office by a local anti-Semite.
  Their electrifying report about the tragic event made Judaism seem very different
  than what we had been told it was in our religion classes? simply a
  preparation for Christianity.
  
  On top of Catholicism, Protestantism, Judaism and Confucianism, I was acquainted
  with Hinduism a bit. That's right, I practiced yoga in High School. This
  was after reading a book about it from the library. I fasted, twisted myself
  into difficult shapes, meditated and otherwise upset my incredulous mother,
  who spent a great deal of her time rolling her eyes because of my unusual
  interests. But yoga wasn't just postures, it was a religious practice, and
  I meditated on the meanings of the Sanskrit words kundalini and samadhi in
  the same way as I meditated on the Latin words at church "Tantum Ergo
  Sacramentum." They were like magic spells that whisked me off to some other
  land, if for but a moment. In those days, the Detroit River flowed into the
  Ganges as I flirted with the practices associated with Hinduism.
  
  As I grew older, I read more, and discovered that religions the world over
  all had fascinating forms and odd practices?odd at least to me. I read
  about the stories and legends, the rituals and fasts of these religions.
  I read about those who hated religion too, people a lot like my grandfather.
  I read the anarchist works of Bakunin and Emma Goldman, the criticism of
  religion offered by Engels and Marx and Feuerbach, and the psychological
  barbs of Freud and Jung.
  
  By the time I was 21, I decided that my grandfather was right, and that all
  religion was bunk. Religion in Asia no less than religion in America. Highly
  ritualized religion no less than deeply meditative religion. And no one in
  those days was going on and on about "being spiritual but not religious."
  That was hardly an option. I just gave it all up, wiping my hands of the
  whole mess.
  
  But as I went through my university, and afterward too, I read more and more
  about the religions of the world for various classes or just out of curiosity,
  and I ceased to be so sure about things. I began to see how religion and
  culture blended and changed each other. I began to see that, like most things
  worth studying, the religions of the world were complex, almost infinite
  in number, and very important for reasons other than their failures. By the
  time I was 22, my anti-religious fervor had abated enough that I could associate
  myself with a church again, in this case, the Universalist Unitarian Church
  of Farmington, Michigan.
  
  There I delved more into the world religions. I discovered exactly what our
  second reading makes so clear?that the original mystical experiences
  of the so-called founders of many religions were not experienced by their
  students and followers. The visions of a better world, a world of peace and
  justice that seized the original thinkers behind so many religious movements,
  got lost in interpretations and scriptures which put out the initial flame
  that got it all started. Founders were worshipped, instead of their dreams
  being put into practice.
  
  I began to realize that there were religions, and there were religions. It
  was silly, I realized, to talk of Christianity as if it were a single religion,
  when there were such differences between the ceremonies of Russian Orthodoxy
  and the non-ceremonial simplicity of the Society of Friends (the Quakers).
  Both of these religions came out of the Christian tradition, but both are
  as different from each other as blue is from red. It was even silly to say
  the word Baptist as if it implied anything universal?after all, Harvard's
  Harvey Cox is a Baptist, and he is as wildly progressive in his social thought
  as Baptist Jerry Falwell is harsh and retrograde. Which one of them is the
  "real" Baptist? Is the radical Daniel Berrigan the true Roman Catholic, or
  the more socially conservative Karol Wotyla, the present Bishop of Rome and
  Pope? Is Pema Chodron, with her broad psychological vision of Buddhism, the
  representative Buddhist, or is it Hakuin Yasutani, who considered the kamakaze
  suicides during the war as deeply religious expressions of the Dharma, and
  who openly proclaimed his hatred of Jews? I began to understand that you
  could interpret your own religion in a self-serving way, or in a world-serving
  way, in a cruel way or a loving way. I learned that the various religions
  of the world themselves were so roomy that they had plenty of space for both
  knaves and saints, both fools and exemplars. I began to realize that my youthful
  statement, "I hate all religion," made no real sense unless I qualified what
  I meant a thousand times. Did I hate Martin Luther King's teachings and actions
  of love? Did I hate Mother Waddle's centers for the homeless in Detroit?
  Did I hate Sr. Jean Prejean's work for Death Row prisoners? Did I hate the
  work of Habitat for Humanity? Did I hate the religious actions of Unitarian
  Universalists who have taken their children out of coveted schools which
  were unfortunately steered by leaders who have openly expressed bigoted and
  hurtful attitudes toward minorities?
  
  Besides realizing that all the worlds religions share a mixture of the kind
  and the hateful, the glorious and tawdry, the brilliant and the stupid, I
  also began to realize that there were hundreds of religions in the world
  I had never even heard of. Some had no founders, some had no temples or
  scriptures, some barely resembled the religions I knew from that stained
  glass window. That round window in Rockford, lovely as it was on the eye,
  was only the beginning of the story. I realized how parochial my education
  about the world was, as a citizen of the United State. I realized how parochial
  almost everyone's education is, no matter where they are on earth, for the
  earth is large and we are smaller than ants. Sure there were people in the
  world who had never heard of Unitarian Universalism, or even the state of
  Ohio, for that matter. But, though I claimed a long history of education,
  I had never heard of hundreds of religions or cultures myself. Take the
  Kimbanguist Church of Zaire, for example, with ten times more members than
  the Unitarian Universalist Association. And I had never heard of Konko-kyo
  in Japan, the Harrist Church in Ivory Coast, the Radasoami, or Lingayat,
  or even the Loka-yata religious movements in India, whose adherents do not
  worship images of any sort, and totally deny reincarnation. Then there is
  the Lovedu religion of South Africa, the Mende religion in Liberia, the
  neo-Muslim Mirghani of the Sudan, or the Mapuche religion of Chile. I didn't
  even know there were over thirty kinds of Baptist Churches, ranging from
  the fundamentalist, like Thomas Road Church in Lynchburg Virginia, to the
  radically liberal like First Baptist in Charlotte, which is the chief rival
  of the Unitarian Universalists there.
  
  Sometimes I hear folks telling me that all the world's religions are all
  basically alike, that they are all saying the same thing, if you really look
  carefully. I don't think that makes a lot of sense on the surface of things.
  To me, it's like saying that in the rainbow, green is really red, and red
  is really blue if you look carefully. No, they are different. Differences
  have to be respected, not imagined away. But these various religions do fit
  nicely together into a particular set of human practices, and they can be
  studied as a singular human phenomenon, somewhat, even if they have no founder
  or scripture or temple.
  
  During my class on the world's religions earlier this year, I came to the
  following provisional conclusion. All the world's religions express some
  opinion about three things. They each speak of Ultimacy. They each speak
  of Authority. They each speak of Boundaries.
  
  First, there is that sense of Ultimacy. Some use God language as ultimate,
  others do not. Some speak of Nature as ultimate, or many Gods, or even many
  Spirits as ultimate. Some speak of the Dharma (or Teaching) as ultimate,
  others talk more generically of "the Holy," or, like the Plains Indians,
  the Great Holy. Others are more doctrinally specific, preferring Goddess
  to God, or Trinity to Unity. But all of these, no matter what we think of
  them, are meditations on Ultimacy?what is Ultimate in our lives?
  
  And secondly, each religion meditates on the concept of Authority. Are the
  scriptures authoritative? A gospel, a sutra, the Granth of the Sikhs, or
  the Qur'an of the Muslims? Or is it the human self which has the final authority,
  as we Unitarian Universalists tend to say? How about tradition? Or a recording
  of multiple opinions, like the Jewish Talmud or Muslim Hadith? Or is it leaders,
  or personal gurus who pass down authoritative traditions? Or mystical rapture
  and first hand ecstatic experience? Or Spirit possession among the Siberian
  Shamans, or trance-Channeling among the suburban white people of Los Angeles
  or Seattle? All of these ideas are religious responses to the question of
  authority.
  
  And thirdly, all religions I can think of express their teachings in the
  form of boundaries. There are all the thou shalt nots, and all the thou shalts.
  Boundaries. You have the kashrut or Kosher rules of the Jews, the no-pork
  law of the Muslims, the fasting and feasting paradigm of Christians, Sikhs
  and Buddhists. Boundaries. You have ceremonial dress, and special vestments,
  i.e. this is sacred time, this is secular time, depending on what you wear.
  Then there are the rules of mixture and purity?can a Christian marry
  a Jew? A Muslim marry a Jew? Can a Protestant marry a Catholic, a Buddhist
  take holy communion, a Lutheran meditate and practice yoga? Some will say
  "yes" to these questions as an expression of their religion, others will
  say "no." Still others, "maybe." Then there are the boundaries of holy days
  and holidays, the seasons of celebration and remembrance. These are found
  in every religion I can think of, even our own. And then there is the boundary
  separating life from death. One religion suggests that when you die, you
  die; another promises paradise, still another says you come back, and a fourth
  calls death a mystery beyond human ken. These are all reflections on boundaries,
  and all religions reflect about the world in this way. What is ultimate for
  you? What final authority do you accept? What boundaries do you draw in your
  life? These are all essentially religious questions.
  
  So for me, all religions are not the same in form or content, any more than
  red is blue or blue is red. They are like a rainbow, however. They are similar
  in their parallels to the colors in that sacred arc, in terms of the human
  questions they field, questions of ultimacy, questions of authority and questions
  of boundary.
  
  And this should not be surprising. Because, after all, we are children of
  a common ancestor, call her Lucy, call her Eve, call her mater africana,
  call her nothing at all. But as Deborah Godin, our poet this morning, reminds
  us, "Scientists have just proven it?I am related to you, and we are
  all siblings in the eyes of time. We are all children of the same old story,"
  the story of life developing on earth over eons, the story of life rising
  out of the African mud to choose between love and hate, war or peace, life
  or death. And the theologians only smile, the poet says.
  
  Today I wish they would do more than smile. Today I have a vision for something
  else they might do.
  
  I find myself wishing these days that the religions of the earth might try
  and make a difference in this present situation. Why not have the Pope, the
  Dalai Lama, the well-loved Rabbi Kushner, a few significant and respected
  Imams from several nations, Bishop Tutu and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
  and, for all I care Billy Graham, all go over and have a conference in Bagdhad
  for a few days?or just camp there for a few months? It's probably not
  going to happen, but I wish it would, since we are indeed children of that
  same old story, children who have before us significant choices of spirit
  that determine our future. And, as the author of the Hebrew scripture Devarim
  (Deuteronomy), says wisely, simply and plainly, "Choose life, therefore,
  choose life, that you and your children might live."

  Blest is our free religious tradition which asks nothing of the government,
  nothing of the state, nothing from anything outside of our circle, but which
  only asks that we might freely give of our selves on the model of the generosity
  of the spring.

  O Light of Life, I am a child of the universe, a tiny circle within the great
  circle of this earth. I decry violence and hate, yet I know these things
  are in my heart too, that they step aside just for a moment, but can surface
  for small things.
  
(hymn #117 vs. 1)

  Love, I am a human being, but that means I am sometimes wounded and always
  fallible. I need a vision of wholeness, of the greater circle of which I
  am a part. This is the beginning of my salvation. Let that be my vision.
  A world cared for and loved. People cared for and loved. The mystery of the
  world accepted with thanksgiving, not posturing.
  
(hymn #117 vs. 2)

  Sorrow and joy, sorrow and joy. I cannot pry them apart. I have to live within
  their woven beauty, knowing that I cannot work outside the world, but only
  from within it. I long for wholeness of spirit. I long for peace within me
  as well as in the world. Come, saving love. Come.
  
(hymn #117 vs. 3)

  Oh, may I remain faithful to my ideals, even in these hard days. May my strength
  not fail me, and may my hope neither flag nor fail. Amen.
  
(hymn #117 vs. 4)
