Religions, Families and War 
Memorial Day Service 
May 26, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
We are here 

on a lovely morning in May,  

to remember and learn, and celebrate peace, 

together,  in this unique community  

within a neighborhood, a city, a state, a nation, 

a world, a universe which we call home. 

  (so) 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming 
deepening wisdom as our authority, and daring to en
gage joy, burden, loss 
and insight in a deliberate community of many ways 
and ages, the flame 
summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to open, to serve
. 
 
Singing #83 Winds Be Still 
in solidarity with those who survived the Oklahoma 
tornado. 
 
Story 

 
Maybe some of you heard your parents or teachers ta
lking about the powerful storm that did a lot 
of damage to a city in the state of Oklahoma.  A wh
ole school building was blown down by the 
wind, and many houses and trees were simply blown a
way. 
 
It was sad time. Today I want to tell you a story a
bout another storm (called a tornado, by the 
way) which hit a town in another state, Massachuset
ts, a town called Brimfield. It was June 1st, 
two years ago. Many houses were blown away by the w
ind. Many trees were lifted out of the 
ground, and thrown down by the wind. 

 
A man in a fire truck was trying to find a way to g
et rid of one of the fallen trees that was 
blocking the road. He heard a little sound, very we
ak, and went to see what it was. It was a little 
kitten, only two weeks old.  It was very, very smal
l. It weighed only six ounces, or as they would 
say, in Canada or Mexico, 170 grams. How small is t
hat? This jar, with this much water in it, 
weighs exactly 6 ounces, exactly 170 grams.  The ca
t was very weak because the tree had fallen 
on it. So they took it to a place that cares for si
ck animals. They named the cat Toto, after the 
famous dog in the story of the Wizard of Oz, who al
so was affected by a tornado. 
 
Soon Toto was OK, and then very OK. The wife of the
 firefighter who found Toto in the tree 
branches  

brought him home, where Toto lives to this very day
, a happy cat who purrs in the lap of the 
family who adopted him. 

 
When things like storms happen, some are affected b
y it, and some are not. It doesn't seem fair to 
many of us. But sometimes we have to say, it may no
t seem fair that a storm touches one place 
and leaves other places alone, but it is still impo
rtant to help even the littlest creatures that live
d 
through the power of the strong wind. Little things
 are often just as important as big things in this 
life. 

 
Announcements and Caring Cards 

 
Affirmation #399 Vine and Fig Tree 

 
Communing 

 
The finger of the wind comes down, and trees and bu
ildings and people fly away, never to be 
seen again; but some survive to weep and rebuild, a
nd all we can do is witness from afar. Tanks 
roll into Budapest in 1956, and destroy a protest b
y killing 3000 people. Julius Caesar strides into 
Gaul 58 years before the beginning of our era, to f
ind a way to pay off his large debt, and to do 
so, his legions kill almost a million people. A nat
ion divided in 1860 over the issue of chattel 
slavery, and 600,000 perish on stony battlefields. 
All we can do is witness from afar, reading of 
life and death in the pages of book. Yet, I say it:
 ?May we indeed witness. May we always say, 
‚This has been, and something like this is happenin
g now too.™ May we always say, ‚I see, and 
with clarity.™ May we always say, ‚No matter the re
asons for fighting, no matter whether thinkers 
deem that a war is just or unjust, war is hell stil
l.™ May we always remember that being a witness 
is the beginning of the path to peace that is more 
real than a mere truce or resentful ceasefire. 
May we always remember that fighting for justice is
 
always
 something to do, that Gandhi and 
King and Dolci fought fiercely, but yes, in a diffe
rent way, without guns. May we always 
remember that the silence that follows the end of a
 war, or the passing of a tornado is not exactly 
like the silence that will follow these words, but 
that it is not unrelated either.?   
(silence)
  
In witness of our own lives, their joy and sorrow, 
their deep grief and hard struggle, may we 
name, either inside the sanctuary of hearts, or whi
spered aloud in our congregational home, the 
names of those who embody our loves and losses and 
worries. And may we do so in peace.           
(Naming) 

 
In witness of our shared history of war and peace, 
this offering of reflective music.     
(Nathan) 
  

The First Reading
 this morning is from Neil Shister's article in the 
UU house organ, UU World, 
from the summer issue of 2003.  It will be read by 
our retiring Director of Religious Education, 
Jolinda Stephens, and our incoming Director of Reli
gious Education, Lane Campbell.
 The 
reading mentions Eric's and my beloved colleague Ro
b Hardies, who serves our All Souls 
Church in Washington D. C. There is an article abou
t him and his partner and child in the latest 
Atlantic Magazine, which I recommend to you. 

 
The Naval Surface Warfare Center, at Indian Head, M
aryland, is where smokeless gunpowder 
was invented a century ago, a landmark event that t
ransformed ?fog of war? from the literal 
description of a battlefield to a strategic metapho
r.  But on the morning after the war in Iraq 
began, it was worship that brought together some hu
ndred members of the base community. And 
it was a Unitarian Universalist Navy chaplain, the 
Rev. Cynthia Kane, leading them. 
The occasion was the National Prayer Breakfast, an 
annual armed forces event that traces its 
origins to the Continental Congress™s call for a da
y of ?public humiliation, fasting, and prayer? 
in the early days of the American Revolution. For K
ane, presiding in the dress uniform of a Navy 
lieutenant, the setting was replete with special sy
mbolism. The guest of honor was the Rev. 
William G. Sinkford, president of the Unitarian Uni
versalist Association, invited at her behest. 
The presence of the UUA™s ?top brass? impressed the
 rank-conscious audience, especially when 
Sinkford announced that, besides being a minister, 
he was also the father of an Army Ranger in 
the elite 82nd Airborne Division, recently returned
 from Afghanistan. 
Rising to speak after pancakes and scrambled eggs, 
Sinkford embodied the dual and, for many, 
contradictory strains that characterize the relatio
nship between Unitarian Universalists and, if not 
the military itself, then the exercise of military 
power. ?I come here with a great sense of 
gratitude,? he began. ?Thanks for the work you do, 
the protection you afford us, the democracy 
that you help us preserve.? But, he continued, he w
as also ?one who stood the peace vigil,? one 
whose fervent position was that ?the United States 
should operate only with the blessing of the 
international community,? which, at that moment, it
 clearly did not have. 
Sinkford celebrated the United States as ?a work in
 progress? built around the dream of a 
community of equality. For the sake of promoting su
ch a dream, he concluded, many Unitarian 
Universalists, himself included, were willing to go
 to war. He qualified his stance with a somber 
proviso, given the events that were just beginning 
to unfold: ?War is not our first choice and, in 
some sense, it always represents a failure.? 

Most Unitarian Universalists would likely resonate 
with Sinkford™s words, as well as the 
emotionally charged paradox he finds himself living
: troubled by his government™s actions, and 
fearful for his son, yet supportive of the troops. 
In the first weeks after the Iraq campaign began, 
the dominant sentiments I heard in my conversations
 with other Unitarian Universalists were 
variations on a theme of resigned ambivalence.  

There were, to be sure, voices of unqualified disse
nt, like that of the Rev. Robert Hardies. ?I will 
not allow myself to be counted among the coalition 
of the willing,? he told his congregation at 
Washington™s All Souls Church, Unitarian, on the fi
rst Sunday of the war. ?I will not allow 
myself to be counted among those in whose name inno
cent lives are taken. I will not allow myself 
to be counted among those who call the loss of inno
cent life ‚collateral damage.™ . . . I will not 
allow myself to be counted among those who fall in 
line just because hostilities have begun.? But 
even Hardies, like so many others opposed to the po
litics of the war, said he respected the men 
and women charged to wage it, and prayed for their 
safe return.  
 
The Second Reading
 this morning comes from the writings of 19th centur
y Unitarian and 
Abolitionist Julia Ward Howe, who wrote contradicto
ry things about war: First, her great 
patriotic hymn, first published in Atlantic Monthly
 in 1862, lyrics set to the tune. John Brown's 
Body Lies A'Mouldering in the Grave."  The second t
ext, also by the same Unitarian, Julia Ward 
Howe, sounds a different tune." This is from her pr
oclamation of the first Mother's Day for 
Peace, 1870
 A.  (sung) "
Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the 
Lord;
    
He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of
 wrath are stored;
  
   
He hath loosed the fateful lightning of His terribl
e swift sword:
  
   
His truth is marching on.  
 Glory, glory, hallelujah
  






?
?ˆ??
?
????
???
ˆ?˜? ? 
!
    

Sermon 

 
It was December 1st, 1969.  Here is the context of 
what I am about to tell you.  I was a third-year 
student at Oakland University in Rochester Michigan
. The war, which we who lived in the States 
called the Vietnam war, and which the Vietnamese ca
lled the American war, was in full swing.  
The television newscasts spilled sounds none of us 
had heard before, every single night, like 
DMZ and Ho Chi Minh.  

 
December 1st, 1969. On that cold late fall evening,
 the USA held its first draft lottery. Who 
would be drafted and sent to Vietnam? Who would go 
to fight a war that many at my university, 
and at many universities around the country, railed
 against regularly? And who would get to 
stay? 

 
Now, some of us had already lost brothers or cousin
s in the war, so the war meant more than the 
trusted voice of Walter Cronkite on CBS news. Some 
among us had already enlisted, seeing it as 
our duty. Others were talking openly about their fu
ture life in Toronto. And still others were 
suddenly joining the Society of Friends (Quakers) o
r the Mennonites.  Members of both these 
religious traditions will not fight violently in an
y war by virtue of their radical Christian 
principles, modeled on the early Christian communit
ies in the Roman Empire, communities 
which, for almost 200 years, also rejected both the
 military and the very idea of war. 
 
Me, I avoided the whole topic. I lived in a state o
f denial about 
all
 the issues.  
 
Until December 1st 1969, that is. 

 
On that night, some man on television stuck his han
d into a jar which had plastic capsules in it, 
366 of them in fact, one for each day of the year, 
including a leap day. Those of us born between 

1945 and 1950 Œ that is, most every male student at
 my university Œ were the subjects of the 
drawing.  Hundreds of us watched the event on the c
ommon black and white television in the 
dorm lounge. 

 
First number drawn. September 14th. A man in the ba
ck screamed in disbelief. It was his 
birthday. The numbers kept coming out...muffled wee
ping now and then. An intense and very 
tense silence in between the outcries. Lots of numb
ers to draw; it took some time.  
 
The tension in my own heart broke when my number wa
s called out. June 16th was #274. This 
most likely meant that I would not be drafted to fi
ght in the war.  
 
But I will assure you...that night, more alcohol wa
s consumed in the USA than on New Year™s 
Eve, and St. Patrick's Day and Cinco de Mayo combin
ed. Those whose birthdates fell under the 
100 mark drank because they knew their future would
 be different than they had imagined a few 
minutes earlier. Those who were somewhere in the mi
ddle drank because they could not be sure 
one way or the other, and their future was going to
 marked with a peculiar anxiety. And most of 
those who had numbers higher than 260 drank in reli
ef. It was a most difficult night. The sheer 
randomness of the lottery gave it an even creepier 
air. 
 
Sort of like the randomness of a tornado, in Oklaho
ma, Massachusetts, Xenia Ohio... or 
anywhere. Hits some houses, leaves others alone. Ki
lls some family members, spares others. 
Kills some pets, whereas others, like Toto in the s
tory earlier, are found and restored to health 
and families. 

 
Such randomness raises religious and philosophical 
questions for almost everyone I talk to. And 
right there we find where spiritual questions and m
ilitary concepts begin to overlap. And by 
religious thought, I am talking about conservative,
 liberal, Catholic, Evangelical, Jewish, 
Muslim, Buddhist and Unitarian Universalist. How do
 you respond to the reality that some die in 
a war, and some come home? 

 
Unitarians, and Universalists have been serving in 
the military from their beginnings. And have 
been thinking about war and its meanings from the b
eginning. 
 
And there has been ambivalence in many of us, both 
now and throughout our history. 
Bill Sinkford, the former president of the Unitaria
n Universalist Association, makes clear in the 
reading you heard earlier that, as a father, he wor
ries about his son, who was then stationed in 
Afghanistan. As a religious leader, he had many eth
ical doubts about the reasons we were in 
Afghanistan (or Iraq) in the first place, questioni
ng the very justness of the war. And yet, as a 
citizen, he had to, as the saying goes, "support th
e troops," that is, not lecture them on the 
meaning of war, or raise himself up as morally supe
rior to them, and to honestly hope and pray 
that they all come home. This did not stop him from
 telling the very troops he was supporting: 
?War is not our first choice and, in some sense, it
 always represents a failure.? 
There have been many Unitarians and Universalists i
n history who have differed drastically on 
this subject. The 19th century Universalist ministe
r Adin Ballou, for example, thought the 

Mennonites and Quakers were right, and he practiced
 a strict pacifism all of his life. He's always 
been one of my favorite figures from our history. E
ven Gandhi knew about him.  
 
The Unitarian Abolitionist Robert Gould Shaw, on th
e other hand, joined the military during the 
Civil War because he felt it was his ethical duty, 
and served as the Colonel leading an all-African 
American troop, as celebrated in the well-made film
 
Glory
, which at least some of you surely 
saw a couple of decades ago. Colonel Shaw didn't ca
rry the New Testament around with him 
during the battles, but his copy of the 
Essays
 by fellow Unitarian, Waldo Emerson. 
 
Emerson figures in a story about another Unitarian 
military chaplain, namely Jack Hayward, who 
was the minister of this congregation between 1949 
and 1953. In the coming June Discoverer, 
our now monthly newsletter, I offer my eulogy for t
his amazing man, which includes this story.  
Hayward was stationed on Iwo Jima...yes, the famous
 Iwo Jima of the great statue in Washington 
D.C. He was helping to dig a trench at the beach th
ere, when his spade hit, of all things, a book.  
And even more "of all things," it was a copy of Eme
rson's essays! He had no idea how it got 
there, but he did write that those essays comforted
 him in the difficult days on that island. 
 
I am wondering now if he may have been the military
 chaplain who comforted my friend and 
colleague Farley Wheelright. Farley and his best fr
iend from childhood were in the Marines too, 
like Jack was. In the same platoon. And, on Iwo Jim
a.  
 
As Farley and his friend were climbing the famous h
ill, his friend was hit by a grenade directly 
and was killed right next to Farley. What would Jac
k have said, as a Unitarian chaplain, to 
Farley, about the awful randomness of that awful de
ath? What theology or philosophy would 
have comforted Farley? UU Military Chaplains seem t
he ideal people with which to face such 
deep and moving questions. 

 
And, of course, both of these two types of events c
an indeed happen during wartime. And they 
have. Wonderstories, like finding a book of Emerson
 in the sand, or singing 
Silent Night
 together 
with the German troops during a Christmas midnight.
  And the death of best friends, their blood 
on your cuffs...but also in your heart, forever. 

 
Many Unitarian Universalists have lived in between 
things, as President Sinkford expressed of 
himself. Julia Ward Howe, a Unitarian, could write 
the 
Battle Hymn of the Republic
 during the 
Civil War, and only a few years later write this. 
"Our sons shall not be taken from us to unlearn 
what we have taught them of charity, mercy and pati
ence. We, the women of one country, will be 
too tender of those of another to allow our sons to
 be trained to injure theirs. From the bosom of 
the devastated earth, a voice goes up with our own.
 It says, "Disarm, Disarm!" 
Her words echo Rob Hardies' words on the first Sund
ay after the war in Iraq began. 
?I will not 
allow myself to be counted among the coalition of t
he willing, I will not allow myself to be 
counted among those in whose name innocent lives ar
e taken. I will not allow myself to be 
counted among those who call the loss of innocent l
ife ‚collateral damage.™ . . . I will not allow 
myself to be counted among those who fall in line j
ust because hostilities have begun.?  

He sounds like our Socinian, that is, Unitarian, an
cestors in Poland, who would have said the 
same thing about ANY war...except for the Socinians
 who lived further east, closer to the 
frontiers of wars being fought nearby during that c
entury. They offered some exceptions in their 
pacifist teaching.  

This alone tells me that circumstances can shift pa
ssionate ideals for some folks, i.e. "I am 
against war until someone sets their foot on my thr
eshold. Then, I will take up arms." 
I can understand that. Even Gandhi, the most influe
ntial pacifist of the last century, told his sons 
that, if they was physically attacked by a violent 
person on the streets, they should use every 
forceful means available to get the attack off of h
im. 
Unitarians and Universalists, like the Jews, have a
lways avoided strict theological agreement, but 
turn to conversations about our differences instead
. Rabbi Hillel and Rabbi Shammai disagreed 
about almost everything, but still they were Jews i
n good standing, honored in the Talmud.  
In a similar way, John Haynes Holmes, a Unitarian m
inister, who was one of the founders of the 
NAACP and the ACLU, took a firm stand against all w
ar, as a pacifist, even though many 
Unitarians were for the war. But the Unitarians at 
the time, tragically, were not as enlightened as 
the Jews.  

William Howard Taft of Ohio, a Unitarian who, besid
es being President of the United State and a 
Supreme Court Justice, also served as the vice pres
ident of the American Unitarian Association, 
believed in the necessity of war with all of his he
art, despite the undeniable mustard gas horrors 
of the First World War. He was so passionate about 
this, and spoke about it so frequently and 
fiercely, that Unitarian ministers who WERE pacifis
ts were dismissed by their congregations, the 
ones at least who had sided with Taft. Holmes was s
o disgusted that he left the Unitarian 
Association with his whole congregation. 

Since those days, the congregation has returned to 
the Association, but it was a rough time in our 
history. 

During the following decades, while many Unitarians
 and Universalists, like my mentor Harry 
Scholefield, and Columbus minister Jack Hayward wer
e Unitarian military chaplains during the 
European war, and had gladly enlisted to fight agai
nst the Nazis, others Unitarians, like John 
Abbot of Canoga Park California, refused to fight e
ven in that war. Nancy McDonald sent me a 
wonderful testimony from John Abbot describing the 
difficulties of being a Unitarian, not 
Mennonite, during the Second World War, as he sough
t conscientious objection status. In my 
former congregation, I also knew a few other men wh
o had refused to fight in that war. 
Still, that war, for many, was different from an Ir
aq or a Vietnam War. Many who would have 
preferred peace went to fight willingly because of 
the Nazi threat to both Europe and the globe 
itself. Later, in the Vietnam era, many others saw 
nothing about the war that even seemed 
ethical. The My Lai massacre confirmed that for man
y people. 

Just wars, unjust wars, no wars at all. The convers
ation is a good one. Let's have it. Warriors of 
pacifism and warriors in the troops? The conversati
on is a good one. Let's begin it. The 
randomness with which wars destroy, taking one life
, sparing another? Certainly worthy of our 
time to contemplate conversationally.  

I need to make clear that my own experience as a mi
nister for 35 years has taught me that the 
real cost of war is not just in the loss of human l
ives, the destruction of cities and culture, but in
 
the severe stress syndromes and depression found in
 many, even most, survivors of a war. 
Soldiers and civilians both.   

That reality at least, is not as much worthy of jus
t our conversation, but as an invitation of our 
solemn witness, our fiercest honesty and our deepes
t wellsprings of compassion. For although 
peace is not necessarily heaven, (peace being a mos
t difficult state to achieve and keep, since its 
a lot more than the cessation of war), I neverthele
ss hope we can agree, as Civil War General 
William Tecumseh Sherman affirmed right here in Fra
nklin Park in Columbus back in 1880, 
most certainly "war is hell." 

Offering 

 
The offering goes to support the health of the cong
regation, our support of justice and fairness 
outside these walls, and the pleasure of giving its
elf. The offering will now be given and 
received. 

 
Closing Prayer for Peace
                
  
O Love, let there be peace; not merely a truce. Pea
ce, not merely disarming and going home. 
But peace, O Love, sitting high on the broad should
ers of understanding, compassion and 
ruthless self-honesty. Peace that restores and heal
s jagged hearts and frayed nerves, and electric 
stress in the bones, peace that is the kind of lett
ing go that some call self-forgiveness, but which I
 
call deeper self-awareness. That peace, no less, wi
thin our congregation, our families, our circles, 
our neighborhoods, our cities, our nation and the w
orld of all nations, which is the whole 
spinning earth, the home of us all. That peace. No 
less. That peace. No more. That peace which 
is the best praise, the best devotion, the best for
 our common lot. Amen 

