


Meeting 

BY MANI DESAI

     To realize God, to know Hi m and to have knowledge of His Divine Power is the aim, the chief aim of every human being; therefore in our search for the Light we m ust come in contact with a Perfect Master. For example: a stud ent wants to learn the French language; he searches for that p erson who has complete knowledge and mastery of the language to instruct him ; so if one wants to obtain knowledge of God it is necessary to search for that Master who, through His experience of the Light, has attained knowledge of God. 

    It depends upon the intensity of our desire for Divine knowledge that will eventually lead us to the Master. To crave, to yearn, to long, to feel the union with one who ha s perfect under≠standing leads us to the experience of Oneness and is the first s tep of a student of spirituality in attain ing his chief aim in life. 

This is a sign that the time of 'meeting' is near. 

   Often a scholar is not pleased to meet  a spiritual Master, because the poor soul is not yet ready to do so. If a soul is ready for 'meeting' and if its time is near, the soul goes automatically to the Master. Again we find the soul, al≠though fit f or the 'm eeting', is careless and procrastinates in postponem ent to procure this Divine knowledge. 

I will no w try to inf orm my readers how the soul draws near to God. Even though the soul is care less, it is the Su≠preme Light which, regardless of every≠thing, eventually draws the soul to the ultimate Goal. 

    I will explain through a very inter≠esting incident. Some of m y readers may have been acquainted with the late Sorabji Muncherji Desai, the devotee of Shreeji Meher Baba S ahib, who was most fortunate in having the holy visit of Shreeji in his last m oments on earth. From early youth he w as a seeker of Truth and always s earching for a Master. In this era it is not easy to find a Perfect M aster, as so m any claim to be; so this quest became the problem of his life. 



And just as I have said before, if the time of 'meeting' is n ear, then a uto≠matically the soul finds the right Path. 

    Sorabji Desai had never seen Baba or even heard the nam e "Meher Baba". But always in his heart was th is keen desire that the knowledge of God would be unfolded to him, and now his answer was already on its way. 

    One day Shri Meher Baba sent His disciples to see Sorab ji Desai w ith definite instructions that he was to write a book about the life of Shreeji Upasni Maharaj of Sakori, and Shri Baba had provided him with the necessary information for this work. 

When the discip les first went to Navsari, to the hom e of Sorabji De sai, he answered them rudely: "Why should I trouble m yself for him whom I have never known? Go back with all your papers and tell your Master that I do not want to do this and I am not bound to do his work."

   Reluctantly the disciples returned to the Master and related what had happened. Thereupon the Master again sent them to Mr. Desai with His strict orders, "Go  and tell him that he must do my work and only he, himself, can do this. If he refuses again, do not return to tell m e, but leave the pap ers with him. "

 Once more the disciples went to Sorabji Desai and gave him the Master's order. This time he agreed to do the work but quite unwillingly. 

The disciples then described the mission of their Master and exemplified the strange ways of Saints which, they said, he must not impute nor be wrath≠ful against. Saints always have their reasons for the neces sity and con≠formity of their comm ands, and w hen the Master reprim ands or chides anyone, it is always to im prove their ignorant souls. Mr. Desai replied: "If he is a Master, he is yours and not m ine; so why must I bear a stranger 's pre≠sumptuous tyranny? If he would write me one ins ult (offence) I would use four words for it! "Finally it became his good fortune to write the fa mous book entitled "Sakorina Sadguru" (Saint of Sakori), and all this was due to the Beloved Babaji. 

    It is a fact that whenever Mr. D esai found difficulty in writing the book he would always receive help fro m Shri Meher Baba: either in le tters, or Baba would send his disciples to him on the sam e day when his difficulty would be most severe. Gradually through his earnest≠ness he gained the understanding of the Divine Power of Shreeji Meher B aba Sahib. Since this tim e Mr. Desai and his family have had m any wonderful experiences which th ey attribute to their Beloved Babaji in sweet remem ≠brance. 



    It is a truth that in the beginning Mr. Desai found difficulty in writing. One day while he sat concentrating over his manuscript, a huge crow (the largest he had ever seen in hi s life) came into his room. Mr. Desai stared at the crow quite unconsciously, being oblivious of all except his work. The crow advanced dancing and jum ping into the room , utterly without fear, and soon began to dance on his bed. Mr. Desai tried to make the crow go out, but the fearless crow continued his dancing steps and then flew away. The sam e moment as the crow disappeared Mr. Desai felt it was no ordinary crow, and there must be  some motive  for its call. Later he was told that if a huge crow, such as the one who went to Mr. Desai, should come into a house, it is certain that good luck will follow and bring to that home the august visit of Sainath Baba (the Master of Shreeji Upasni Maharaj). 

From now on all dif ficulties con≠cerning the work of Mr. Desai were removed, and the way was m ade clear for his pen. 

   Here let me persuade all my wise and prudent readers to wake up and prepare their soul f or the 'meeting' , the everlasting meeting with our Lord whom we have forgotten in our eager≠ness for the false pleasures and joys of the world. Do not follow the shadow, but find the reality which casts the shadow of your hope fulfilled. Forget the dreamland and go into your own unexplored land. Polish up yourself, your inner self, for within lies the value of this priceless jewelóyour soul. As the goldsmith knows how to polish gold and a blacksm ith to clean iron, so the soul needs th e cleansing and purifying of a Perfect Master. May S hri Meher Baba help us to see His Divine Light. 


