 1  
2006-5-7 Authority Problems 

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as May flowers create a universe of color 

under a sky of wheeling spring stars, 

to worship, to take up the power of reason 

and the gift of awe and song as our own, 

and to celebrate the depth and mercies of life. 

 
And so we say together: 

 



?
?ˆ??

?????


The Sequence
  
The temple bell is silent 

until it is struck. * 

If a butterfly lands on the bell, 

it will fly away when the bell sounds. 

I see tulips, dark as night,  

and shaped like this bell. 

I see peonies the color of claret. 

A petal from one of them falls.  

It strikes the earth. 

And the earth sounds like a bell, * 

and now I am like that butterfly, aflight. 

I talked with my friend Mary on Friday.  

She was diagnosed with Lou Gehrig™s  

a few weeks ago. Not good.  No good at all.  

And as we talked, I was struck as if I were a bell,
 * and I sounded for a long time afterward. 
I™ll never get used to it, 

this astonishing mystery of life and death, 

love and loss. I am clear about that, at least. 

I™ll always be surprised. Always. * 

And so, I too am a temple bell, 

waiting to get struck by life mysteries. 

And in that striking, something like a prayer cours
es through me, whether bid by the shaman of a 
butterfly, the magician of a morning star, the prop
het of a deep purple tulip, the love of a friend, 
or the tone of a bell. It™s a prayer to thee, O Lov
e, not that I pray, but which, as it were, the 
universe prays through me, the universe, of which I
 am but one small, small part.*                
 
 2 silence 

 
A small part with so many others that make up this 
miracle–others who make up my family 
of blood and spirit, of love and loss, of joy and 

sorrow, work and play. I name the others that 

hit the bell of my life, making this moment echo in
side and out with their names, a holy 
incantation.    

 
naming 

 
A holy incantation: Gate, Gate, Rama, Rama! 

Wakan Tanka, Inyin Hawe. Kadosh, Kadosh, Mi Komokho
? La illaha, il Allah hu! In excelsis, et 
in terra! Voice and bell and drum. Amen.*  

(Text of anthem: Gate gate paragate parasamgate bod
hi svaha: Gone from suffering. Gone from 
forgetfulness, all the way to other shore. Such Joy
!) 
 
Readings:
  
The First Reading
 comes from the Gospel of Mark, written by an anonym
ous author we have 
called Mark for 1900 years. It was written in the f
irst years after the destruction of the Jerusalem 
Temple in the year 70. The author of Mark often 

writes in present tense, as in this case. 

 
 
So once again they come to Jerusalem. As he is walk
ing about in the Temple courtyards, some of 
the ranking priests and elders come up to him, and 
start questioning him.  Questions like, ?What 
right do you have to do the things you do?? and ?By
 what authority 
do you do these things?? 

 
Jesus says to them: ?OK. I™ll ask you a question as
 well, and if you answer it, I will be glad to 
tell you by what authority I do what I do. So, tell
 me, sirs: the ritual immersion of John the 
Baptist: Was he doing what God wanted him to do, or
 did he just make it up himself, a purely 
human invention? 

 
Immediately, they conferred together: ?If we answer
 ‚He was doing what God wanted him to 
do,™ then he will ask us, ‚So why didn™t you trust 
him?™ But, if we say, ‚He just made it up 
himself–.™?  They looked around with fear at the ga
thered crowd, since just about everyone 
back then considered John to be a genuine prophet. 
So they answered Jesus by saying, ?We 
simply cannot tell you.?  So Jesus says back to the
m, ?Well, then, I™m not going to tell you by 
what authority I do what I do, either.? 

 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by Lisel Mueller, whose poems always seem
 to move me deeply. 
It™s called ?What is Left to Say? 

 
The self steps out of the circle; 

it stops wanting to be  

the farmer, the wife, and the child. 

It stops trying to please  

by learning everyone™s dialect; 

 3 it finds it can live, after all,  

in a world of strangers. 

 
It sends itself fewer flowers. 

It stops preserving its tears in amber. 

 
How splendidly arrogant it was 

when it believed the gold-filled tomb 

of language awaited its raids! 

Now it frequents the junkyards, 

knowing all words are secondhand. 

 
It has not chosen its poverty, 

this new frugality. 

It did not want to fall out of love 

with itself. Young, it celebrated 

itself and richly sang itself, 

seeing only itself  

in the mirror of the world. 

 
It cannot return. It assumes its place 

in a universe of stars that do not see it. 

Even the dead no longer need it  

to be at peace. 

Its function is to applaud. 

 
The Sermon 

 
In preparation for this sermon, I asked several peo
ple this week what or whom they trusted as an 
authority in their lives. My friend Tim, for exampl
e, answered that he trusts the authority of his 
inner voice, first. He also finds the external worl
d of trees, flowers, fields and stars authoritative
, 
especially when he sits still in a park and just li
stens. But most everyone else told me first about 
their inner voice, like Tim. I realized as I talked
 to people that it wasn™t really that inner authori
ty 
I wanted to explore, but rather, how we respond to 
authority when it lies outside, beyond our 
inner voice. And that is when this story sprang to 
mind.  
 
So, once upon a time, I attended a single-gender pa
rochial high school. In suburban Detroit. It 
was long, low one-story affair with lots of glass, 
built in the shape of a letter E. There were about 
a thousand of us altogether, attending the four-yea
r institution. Marist priests and a few lay 
teachers taught us during those years. The famous p
arochial discipline was real. Required 
devotions every day, a mass or a rosary. Prayers be
fore every class. Even in French classes, 
where we prayed, 
Je vous salue, Marie
, 
pleine de grâce–
We wore coats and ties. Kept hair 
short. Kept silence while walking between classroom
s. 
 
The teachers had full authority to make decisions a
bout our daily lives, and the parents all 
seemed to want it that way. If there was a conflict
 between a student and a teacher, in general, 
the parents supported the teacher, and the student 
got creamed when he got home. 
 
 4 But, long before we ever heard the famous teaching:
 ?Question Authority,? we were living it out, 
questioning the right of anyone to tell us what to 
do. 
 
Now I™ve never smoked cigarettes, but there were pl
enty in my high school who did. Call it 
symbolic rebellion, or whatever you please, a surpr
ising number of my classmates tucked packs 
of Lucky Strike in their shirt pockets. 

 
And of course, modeled on the media giants of that 
generation, Lucille Ball, Dean Martin and 
even Rod Serling (who entered that industry from th
is very congregation), many of the priests 
and lay teachers also smoked. Like chimneys. They e
ven had a smoking lounge in the school to 
which they retired several times each day. And of c
ourse, Fr. DeRosiers in Second Year French 
had to teach us the verb ?fumer? (to smoke) every s
ingle day, by lighting up in class and then 
conjugating: 
?Je fume, vous fumez, ils fument.? 
 
Well, one day, someone, I forget who, got all riled
 about this injustice. If the priests could smoke 
in their lounge, then the students who smoked shoul
d have 
their
 smoking lounge. 
It was only fair. So what if the priests were the s
upreme authority? We would challenge them. 
 
So someone, I forget who, devised a plan. 

And we were all in on it, non-smokers as well.   

 
First, of course, we went through proper channels. 
We began by simply asking the principle, Fr. 
Kiley, if the senior class could have a smoking lou
nge. His eyebrows went up way past his 
forehead, veins popped in his temple, and so we lef
t his office  
pronto. Second, we tried to get smoking priests lik
e Fr. DesRosiers, to support us. Of course, 
they couldn™t. So then the plan was this. All senio
rs agreed that, on such and such a day and 
time, we would get up, leave classes, assemble in t
he hall, march to the senior bathroom, each 
with a cigarette in his hand, whether we were smoke
rs or not.  Then all 250 of us would pile into 
the bathroom, claiming it as a lounge by smoking th
ere in a crowded protest, even those of us 
who would turn green by doing so. 

 
Of course, it didn™t work. Parents were called. The
 yelling started. ?You did WHAT?? And that 
was the end of it. Challenging authorities about su
ch a patently foolish thing didn™t have much of 
chance to begin with. But I confess, I liked the gi
ddiness I felt while 
questioning
 external 
authority in this manner. 

 
But now I want to ask you a question: when you now 
see the popular bumper-sticker ?Question 
Authority!? do you imagine a radical is driving tha
t car, a screaming progressive, ready and 
willing to stand at the barricades and denounce pre
sidents and generals, CEOs and bishops? 
 
I 
used to imagine that. But today I am beginning to w
onder. Because the folks who are really 
?questioning authority? in our time are, as often a
s not, the cultural reactionaries of our day, not 
the old-time liberals. 

 
Look. I have never personally dug up a fossil stego
saurus, nor calculated the age of a trilobite. 
But my inner voice trusts the massed evidence suppo
rting the evolution of life over hundreds of 
millions of years as conclusive of an established t
ruth. A truth, in fact, which stands at the center,
 
not at the edge, of all science. I respect the peer
-reviewed scientific method. Therefore I trust the 
authority of this body of work. 

 5  
Yet you and I both know that, in this country espec
ially, the authority of such work is being 
questioned. And questioned in organized, funded, an
d clearly politicized ways. 
 
Another example: for years, faithful scholars have 
painstakingly worked through the ancient 
texts of both the traditional scriptures and the Gn
ostic gospels, using the exacting methods of 
sociology, cross-cultural studies, historical criti
cism and archeology. Again, I have come to trust 
these authorities. Their honest humility convinces 
me. But today, religious conservatives insist 
that such authority is empty, and that the only aut
hority is the scripture itself, 
as selectively 
interpreted by their pre-existing and unbending pre
judices. 
  
 
Worse, on the other side this coin you™ll find folk
s who have so 
romanticized
 anti-authoritarian 
stances, that they have come to a place where only 
conspiratorial and fanciful notions have any 
real authority: the furor over Dan Brown™s DaVinci 
Code
 is a case in point. As I have said 
before, recently, authoritative scholarship knows, 
and only provisionally,  three things about 
Mary Magdalene: one, that she was 
not 
a prostitute but a Galilean woman of means, probabl
y a 
widow; two, she was a student of Jesus whom he both
 liked and apparently helped to heal of 
some problem, and three, she seems to have been con
sidered an authority herself in the early 
church until some authoritarian men decided that wo
men couldn™t have any authority, based on 
their gender. 

 
But today, for those who gleefully question the aut
hority of a hundred years of unglamorous 
scholarly work, Magdalene is the Holy Grail itself,
 the mother of a whole group of people who 
have the blood of Jesus in their veins, 
as if that was somehow important anyway.
  And so 
important that vast conspiracies, involving half of
 the geniuses of western history, were created 
to protect this somehow upsetting information from 
discovery. I weep when I realize that for 
many, a work of fiction is now sober history. 

 
No, I tell you, the folks who go around ?questionin
g authority? today are not the disturbing 
radicals anymore, the Gandhi™s, Kings, Harvey Milks
 and Susan B. Anthony™s, but rather those 
who specifically hope to keep their own power and p
osition un-assailed, whether it™s a 
reactionary stance, 
or
 a romanticized anti-authoritarian stance.  I tell 
you truly, when the 
authority of the scientific method, and the authori
ty of patient, peer-reviewed historical methods, 
can be tossed into the trash bin with such ease and
 confidence as we have seen it done in our 
days, then the more brittle authority of documents 
like the US Constitution will be coming up for 
question and twisting, too. James Luther Adams, a g
reat Unitarian Universalist thinker, 
predicted, over thirty years ago, that a full-out a
ssault against science, differing sexualities, and 
critical scholarship would one day be made by sweet
ly smiling faces on the spiritual right. He 
said it would take place at exactly this time in Am
erican history, and by God, he was right, down 
to the last detail.  

 
Interestingly, the gospel of Mark depicts Jesus as 
stubbornly refusing to play this futile authority 
game with the religious right of his own day. The r
ight-wing elites back then are depicted as 
questioning his authority. So he lets them get tang
led by their own deviousness, revealing their 
motivations–namely, to get through life without eve
r being questioned themselves.   
 
In other words, the religious right of that day tho
ught that their authority was their entitlement. It
 
was their safe hideout. They did not think of autho
rity that only comes with covenant, patience, 
character, evident skill and real relationship. 

 6  
Now, correct me if I™m wrong, but we Unitarian Univ
ersalists often seem to describe ourselves 
as having lots of problems with authority. God know
s I™ve said so, with exasperation on some 
days. But it 
is 
true that throughout history, Unitarians and Univer
salists always questioned the 
authority of anyone who would impose their own reli
gious doctrines, like hellfire, onto others. 
Fair enough. I can see why authority might be an is
sue for us. 
 
But, in every congregation I have ever served, ther
e have been other, less theological, issues 
described as ?authority problems.? For example, in 
every church where I™ve served, the authority 
of elected members to establish policies for what t
hey feel is the good of the institution comes to 
question frequently. The claim is made that the ele
cted don™t really know what the good of the 
institution is. The elected members, on the other h
and, wonder why it™s their ?authority? itself 
which is questioned, instead of questions being put
 to them directly, as fellow members of the 
same congregation. Another example. In every congre
gation I™ve ever served, some question the 
authority of people to make rules about eating food
 or drinking coffee in certain places, claiming 
that their personal freedom is curtailed by such ru
les. One Unitarian Universalist church I know 
proudly proclaims that coffee drinking is encourage
d during worship, to show how welcoming 
they are. But then others have to ask if it™s the f
reedom of the support staff which is being 
curtailed, since they have to spend hours on their 
hands and knees each week scrubbing the 
carpet of stubborn stains from the coffee spilled b
y all those free, but apparently amazingly 
clumsy, people. 

 
And, in every church I have served, the authority o
f organizational documents and covenants 
comes under question. Some question whether rules n
eed to be written at all.  Instead, they 
believe, free hearts need to be changed by persuasi
on and kindness.  ?After all, you cannot 
legislate
 a cooperative trusting community,? they say. ?Rule
s restrict, not welcome.? Others 
retort, ?Yeah, but you can™t sit around waiting for
 everyone to form honest community by 
appealing to such romantic thinking. You have to ag
ree on clear expectations, or there is no 
congregation, just an accidental group, with the bo
ld and boundry-less deciding everything with 
their verbal skill and extroverted confidence.  Int
roverts, you can just keep being quiet!? 
 
And then, there is the authority to speak out on co
ntroversial subjects. During the Vietnam War, 
for example, when some ministers expressed their mo
ral dismay at the vile carnage of My Lai, 
others questioned their right to speak about things
 that were merely reported in the untrustworthy 
newspaper. One of the early ministers of this churc
h, John Evans, also served my former 
congregation, and I remember that at least in my fo
rmer congregation, his authority to express 
his moral disgust was often questioned with some fu
ry. 
  

But as I see it, there™s a serious problem with 
all 
these authority problems I™ve mentioned. If one 
group in a congregation has a clear idea as to what
 the ?real deal? is, they might assume that 
everyone else feels–or should feel– the same way. B
ut clearly, since Unitarian Universalists 
openly claim diversity as their reality, this is no
t even possible to begin with. I cannot wear your 
face, nor you, mine. We are each and every one of u
s probably going to have differing ideas as to 
what the ‚real deal™ is around here. Is it organiza
tional fairness and integrity? Is it worship and 
spiritual growth? Is it service to the unfortunate?
 Is it the strengthening of supportive 
community? Is it pastoral attentiveness? Is it the 
free exchange of ideas unto wisdom? Is it 
learning that wisdom? Is it the tearing down of unj
ust oppressive systems in the world, and the 
offering of a counter vision of wholeness and healt
h? And I say, based on the authority I™ve 
earned by serving many congregations over 30 years,
 that our claimed diversity 
itself
 has the 

 7 authority to insist that we talk with each other, a
nd ask each other questions about what we think 
the real deal is, before we question anything. And,
 to that end, I am going to take up my own 
authority again and ?suggest? a rule: 
When we Unitarian Universalists are in conversation
 with 
each other, no one gets to say ?After all, this is 
what Unitarian Universalism has always meant? 
as part of their argument!  

 
Why do I make such a rule? Because I say that no on
e, in any UU congregation, has the authority 
to determine for anyone else, or everyone else, wha
t the ?essence? of our tradition is.  All of the 
?real deals? I just mentioned–integrity, spirituali
ty, service, education, community, the pastoral, 
the free idea, the social justice vision–
are each and every one rooted deeply in our history
.
 Each of them has a clear place in our heritage. And
, yes, each of them will clearly appeal to some 
folks, more than others. I understand that. But I™d
 like to suggest that we do need 
all
 of these 
touchstones. Not one of them is expendable. 

 
Did I just say I™ve served in churches for thirty y
ears? Wow. That™s a long time. And God help 
me, it™s been forty years since that silly smoking 
stunt in High School. Perhaps this is why Lisel 
Mueller™s poem called out to me this week. I saw it
 as a deliciously joyful conclusion to this 
nerve-wracking sermon on authority problems. The po
et too has lived a long time. I™d gladly 
wager she went round and round with authority issue
s herself. But age is changing her. She says 
her ?self? is now stepping out of the circle. What 
circle? The circular trap of authority problems. 
The same circle Jesus is depicted as stepping out o
f when he refused to argue with the religious 
right of his day, who questioned his authority beca
use he refused to see their face when he 
looked at his own in the mirror. 

 
And I don™t want to see my own face in the world an
ymore, in Mueller™s phrase, and a lot of my 
own authority problems really have to do with exact
ly that. Wanting to have my own prejudices 
massaged, my preferences approved, my needs authori
zed.  I am going to stop trying to learn to 
speak everyone™s dialect, and remember that all lan
guage really 
is
 second-hand. My function, 
suggests Mueller, at this stage in life is to appla
ud. To praise. To love. To understand. To affirm 
what I can affirm. To question even questioning whe
n it™s become a species of aggression, 
instead of a summons to applause, and praise, laud,
 reverence and loving-kindness. 
 
The Offering
  
 
The Herakleitan Prayer   
(Rhythmically snap fingers 
  
Buddha said it on his birthday, 

Life™s a river, flowing river. 

Herakleitos also said it, 

Life™s a stream that flows forever. 

Never did your foot step in it 

that it wasn™t wholly different. 

So said Kwan Yin as she chose to 

live her life in flowing service. 

So said Mira in her singing, 

flowing flowing, change unceasing. 

Moments, moments, always flashing 

fresh as stars that bloom in evening 

 8 setting soon below the fields, 

rising new unseen in daytime. 

Fresh as flowers, seed to blossom! 

Holding fast but e™er illusion. 

Gold will melt, and jade will soften. 

Only thou, o flowing Love art 

loving, loving, loving, love. 

 
 
