Sunday, May 4, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "And of some have compassion, making a  difference: And others save with fear, pulling  them out of the fire; hating even the garment  spotted by the flesh." Jude 22,23.  This passage, consisting of two verses, (22 & 23), would seem ­ by its position ­ to suggest some means whereby we might obey ­ or encouragement to obey ­ verse 21; to wit: "Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life." Jude 21. Does the passage suggest a certain activity which ­ while we are busily engaged therein ­ will, rather automatically, and rather simultaneously, cause us to keep ourselves in the love of God, and also cause us to be looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life? Beloved, I think it will. Jude 22,23. Let us carefully examine the passage, and measure our own activities thereby. "And of some have compassion." This implies that we are dealing and interacting with lots and lots of people on a daily basis. And it suggests confrontation and disputation with virtually every person we meet. In fact, Trapp says that some ancient copies translate verse 22 of this passage as follows; to wit: "Refell (i.e., refute or disprove) their false reasonings, and dispute them out of their errors." It sounds like Titus 1:13: "Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith." (Titus 1:13) But our King James, 1611, version makes a whole lot more sense to me. Let's stick with it, and expound it in a straightforward way. Briefly put, if we find somebody who is genuinely sincere, humble, sorrowful and in mourning for his sins ­ and above all, genuinely penitent ­ we must SHOW THAT SINNER COMPASSION GALORE ­ and spare no pains "to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." 2 Cor. 1:4. But these devils that we find ourselves dealing with every day, in every place ­ from one end of this country to the other ­ are not the least bit interested in repenting of their sins. They mock and scoff at the very idea of repenting of their filthy sins and getting right with God. And they are ready to kill you for daring to suggest that they need to repent at all. They are proud of their filthy lifestyle, and demand that they be accepted just as they are ­ into the fellowship of the church! Without making any pretense of repenting.  GOD'S COMPASSION IS ONLY FOR THE PENITENT  Jude says, "Making a difference!" Yes, A huge difference! These oily, kissy-pooh preachers who are today filling their churches with vile, abominable, impenitent perverts; I say, they are disobediently ignoring that divine order ­ that Holy Command: to wit: "Making a difference!" Jude 22(b). Right here is where the "Wars of the Lord" are fought and raging. Num. 21:14. These are a people like those "that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field," where God's faithful soldiers are to be found; to wit:  Sunday, May 4, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "They handle the pen of the writer...they (have) great thoughts of heart, and great searchings of heart...and they were a people that jeoparded (i.e., put in jeopardy) their lives unto the death in the high places of the field." (Judges 5:14-18)  These reflect the attributes of God's Elect that equip them to obey the Holy Commandment that they at all times shall be "MAKING A DIFFERENCE" between how they deal with God's compassion toward a person, and how they deal with God's wrath toward a person. Beloved, we have no duty to be compassionate toward the arrogant, impenitent sinner ­ especially when that filthy sodomite sinner impudently insists that he is NOT A SINNER! In fact, we have a positive duty NOT to deal with him in God's COMPASSION, and we have a concurrently positive duty to deal with him ONLY in God's WRATH! And I will go further. It is sin and rebellion against God to show God's compassion when dealing with an impenitent sinner. And it is likewise a grievous sin and rebellion against God NOT to deal ONLY in God's wrath when dealing with an impenitent sodomite sinner ­ or any other kind of impenitent sinner. God's commandment is plain and short and simple; to wit: "Making a Difference!" You must be at all times and in all circumstances: "Making a Difference!" in how you deal with people; in compassion, or in wrath. Holding out to them either God's COMPASSION, or God's WRATH. Beloved. That's what it means to rightly divide the word of truth; to wit:  "Study (i.e., give all due diligence) to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing (i.e., portioning out) the word of truth." (2 Tim. 2:15)  The meaning is that we must carefully and diligently read and discern the signs of the times ­ (current events in light of the Bible) ­ have understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do [1 Chron. 12:32]­ and then diligently determine and apply the appropriate Scripture to the situation. 2 Tim. 2:15. The so-called "gay" community held two of their typical nationwide events this month, and, of course, pushed their filthy agenda down everybody's throat as a concomitant part of each event ­ also attended with their usual fag ultimatum; to wit: cooperate with us in each of our events, or else we will blackball you and mark you secretly for silent destruction.  These two fag events illustrate the exceeding sinfulness of ignoring God's Command to Make a Difference. Jude 22(b). The two separate annual fag events are: 1) the "Golden Rule Pledge;" and, 2) the "Day of Silence." Both are national events. The "Golden Rule Pledge" is a national event where students on their campuses are urged to sign pledge cards that they will not engage in the name-calling, bullying, and harassment of others simply because of their sexuality; because, 1) Christ said, "And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise;" Lk. 6:31; and, 2) because all people are created in the image of God and therefore deserve love and respect. Remember, these people doing the talking on behalf of these two fag events are, naturally ­ fags.  Sunday, May 4, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  They call themselves the LGBT Community; and the acronym LGBT stands for, Lesbian, Gay,  Bisexual, Transgender students. They are demanding "LOVE AND RESPECT" solely because  they say, (erroneously), that "all people are created in the image of God and therefore deserve  LOVE AND RESPECT" ­ elsewhere in their literature they say that "all people have been created  in the image of God and therefore have INFINITE WORTH AND DIGNITY").  Note that nowhere do they ever say, "Love and respect us because God loves us, BECAUSE WE HAVE REPENTED OF OUR SINS AND ARE NOW LIVING HOLY LIVES IN THE FEAR OF GOD!" Beloved, repenting is the last thing in the world these beasts would ever do. They want us to have compassion on them IN THEIR SINS. They want us to disobey God, who has commanded us to Make a Difference, and preach Hell fire and damnation to them, "hating even the garment spotted ­ (LEPROSY! "This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment." Lev. 13:47-59.) ­ hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Jude 23(b).  The Law of Leprosy was a long and intricate and complicated Law, comprising two lengthy chapters in Leviticus ­ 59 verses in Lev. 13, and 57 verses in Lev. 14. Leprosy could be very, very serious, as when the leprosy was in the head; to the least serious, as when leprosy was only in the garment; to wit:  "He is a leprous man! he is unclean; the priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague is in his head...he shall cry, Unclean, unclean. All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean; he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be." (Lev. 13:44-46)  "Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh," seems to be a most elegant way of saying that just as the lowest kind of leprosy is still leprosy and is therefore deadly, and a thing not only not to be desired, but a thing to be feared and avoided at all costs ­ even so, sodomy is the most deadly of all sins, in that, its practitioners are too judicially blind to recognize it as sin, but are deluded into believing it to be a thing of pride ­ gay-pride week, gay-pride parade, etc. ­ rendering these beasts unable to repent ­ (it is axiomatic that one cannot repent of something that is a matter of pride). Deadly sin.  SODOMY IS THE DEADLIEST OF ALL SINS  By its nature ­ by definition ­ the sin of buggery (as the British say) can never be absolved, because it can never be repented of ­ a precondition to absolution. And these beasts do not even make the claim that they have repented. No. They come in all their LGBT impudence and arrogance ­ having just spent the night in filthy, sodomite anal copulation (or worse ­ think "scat" and "golden showers", etc.) ­ and demand love, respect, and acceptance, because they say they "are created in the image of God and therefore have infinite worth and dignity." Wrong! Turkey. You were created in the image of sinful, fallen, depraved, unregenerate Adam. Only one man was created in the image of God, and that was Adam, who shortly fell from, and forever marred, that glorious image. See, Gen. 5:3; to wit:  Sunday, May 4, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  "And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son IN HIS  OWN LIKENESS, AFTER HIS IMAGE; and called his name Seth. And the  days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years; and  he begat sons and daughters. And all the days that Adam lived were  nine hundred and thirty years; and he died." (Gen. 5:3-5)  The fag's so-called Day of Silence, when they wear a strip of duct tape over their mouths to call everybody's attention to their complaint that the LGBT Community "has been daily silenced by the name-calling, bullying and harassment simply because of their sexuality." Examine this claim closely, and you will find that what these smelly fornicators refer to as "name-calling, bullying and harassment" is nothing more than WBC's Gospel preaching. We carry signs saying, "God Hates Fags!" In the literature announcing their "Day of Silence," they bewail their plight like this: Quote: "But when Christians hold signs on campus that read, "God Hates Fags," and "Fags Burn in Hell," the LGBT Community associates that with Christianity." These Mud-Packers have got it all wrong. They are upset because we at WBC choose to obey the Lord our God when he issues His Commandment; to wit: "Making A Difference." That Commandment, when amplified for expounding purposes, reads like this; to wit: "Don't preach COMPASSION to these impenitent queers. Make a difference. Preach only Hell-fire and damnation to them. It would be major sinfulness for us to preach love and compassion to impenitent sodomites" ­ and we are not going to do it. We are now preaching to the thousands of kissy-pooh preachers, priests and rabbis in America and around the world.  GOD'S COMMAND: MAKE A DIFFERENCE!  WBC has a message from God to you and each of you. We no longer say, Shame on you, for not preaching Hell-fire and brimstone to the millions of fags and fag-enablers. We are now saying to you, Mr. Preacher, Yes, You! You, sir, are on your way to Hell just as surely as the fags and fagenablers that you preached love and compassion to, thereby rebelling against God who gave you a direct Command; to wit: "Make a Difference!" "Rightly divide the Word of truth!" Guess who joined the fags in their "Golden Rule Pledge" and their "Day of Silence" events. You will not be surprised if some of our leading so-called fundamentalists and evangelicals joined the fags in preaching love and compassion to them, and in assuring them that they were created in the image of God, and therefore have infinite worth and dignity.  Dr. Warren Throckmorton of Grove City College, a leading so-called fundamentalist college in the category of Bob Jones University, is taking a leading role in helping the fags and opposing us. Likewise are the nationwide ministries of Campus Crusade for Christ and Intervarsity Christian Fellowship ­ which I have known since the early days of my ministry, and which I have known to be leading evangelical power houses. I believe that in this matter, all of these well-known and socalled evangelical ministries, and anybody and everybody associated with them, ­ are going to Hell. They have forsaken the Lord and rebelled against His plain Command; to wit: "Make a Difference." And God's plain Derivative Commands; to wit: 1) DON'T preach God's compassion to impenitent fags; and, 2) DO preach God's FEAR (Hell-fire & damnation) to impenitent fags.  Sunday, May 4, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  Call the names of these rebels and picket them; to wit: Dr. Warren Throckmorton, Grove City  College (60 miles north of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania), Appalachian State Univ., Boone, North  Carolina, Campus Crusade for Christ, and Intervarsity Christian Fellowship.  Specifically, these traitors are publicly joining out-and-out fags in pleading for rebellion against God's Commands. They are making a plea for compassion toward impenitent fags (i.e., that all fags, ­ though impenitent and cursed of God ­ deserve love and respect, because they have infinite worth and dignity, because they are created in the image of God). Wrong, Turkey! See, Gen. 5:3. Simultaneously, they are joining out-and-out fags in pleading ­ (via their gimmicks called "Golden Rule Pledge" and "Day of Silence") ­ this Derivative Plea; to wit: Whatever you do, don't preach the FEAR of God (Hell-fire & brimstone) to impenitent fags.  MANTON: "BUT WHO ARE THESE `OTHERS'?" Manton said, "But who are these `others' in Jude 23 (`And others save with fear') who must be dealt with roughly? I answer: 1)Those that are hardened, and grown perverse and stubborn; softer strains would but harden these more; and, 2) Those that are secure libertines, wallowing in sin and pleasure. It is not a friend that dealeth mannerly with you when you are in the fire. God's wrath and vindicative justice is the proper object of fear, and so it must be looked upon. There is but a step between them and Hell, and they mind it not. Tell them of their danger, and they scorn it. But we must tell them anyway. It is a duty that Christ enjoineth upon us. `Fear him, saith Christ, who is able to cast body and soul into Hell-fire. Mat. 10:28.'"  Jonathan Edwards said: "The God that holds you over the pit of Hell, much as one holds a spider, or some loathsome insect, over the fire, ABHORS you, and is dreadfully provoked; his wrath towards you burns like fire; he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else, but to be cast into the fire; he is of purer eyes than to bear to have you in his sight; you are ten thousand times more abominable in his eyes, than the most hateful venomous serpent is in ours. You have offended him infinitely more than ever a stubborn rebel did his prince; and yet, it is nothing but his hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment. It is to be ascribed to nothing else, that you did not go to Hell the last night; that you were suffered to awake again in this world, after you closed your eyes to sleep...O sinner! consider the fearful danger you are in; it is a great furnace of wrath, a wide and bottomless pit, full of the fire of wrath, that you are held over in the hand of that God, whose wrath is provoked and incensed as much against you, as against many of the damned already in Hell. You hang by a slender thread, with the flames of divine wrath, flashing about it, ready every moment to singe it, and burn it asunder!"  That, Beloved, is the kind of preaching to the sodomite damned that God Commands us to preach to the "others" of Jude 23 ­ i.e., "And OTHERS save with FEAR, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Jude 23. And, we are simultaneously commanded NOT to preach about COMPASSION to impenitent fags; to wit: "And of some have COMPASSION, making a DIFFERENCE: And others save with FEAR, pulling them out of the fire (i.e., burning, flaming FAGGOTS); hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Jude 22,23. At their eternal peril do these modern preachers and ministries NEGLECT, FAIL, AND REFUSE to rightly divide the word of truth at Jude 22,23. 2 Tim. 2:15. Amen.  
