SWADHARMA is one's own duty. It is the philosophy of conduct. It tells at once what to do and what not to do. India is a land of heredity. We believe in heredity. The several occupations of the several classes and communities tend towards perfection thereby bringing about individual perfec­tion which in its turn directs man to lose himself in the service of humanity. To us humanity is the concrete expression of Divinity and we serve God when we serve man. Again this service is diverse, each according to one's own taste, and credentials. In a land where hundreds of castes exist, hundreds of occupations are exclusively attended to. There is no confusion in the Ideal, viz., individual perfec­tion that each man has to acquire for himself through his respective calling. In a word, every man's occupation is taken to be a selfless service of mankind inspired by the love of God. Philosophically this view-point is quite correct. If a man can dedicate all that he does to the service of humanity practically he becomes selfless and self­lessness is the greatest virtue that crowns humanity. God is seen only in "love and service'' and in order to make love and service most efficient, one has to lead the most selfless life. This was Ancient India and this was the caste system. 
To-day we are in a transition. All transitions are so many ghosts throttling human progress leaving behind slavish mentality and bestial imitation. That society alone prevails which does not fall a prey to transitional ups and downs and thanks to the constructive genius seen in our social standards, in spite of all slavish mentality and sheepish imitations, the germ of our culture and genius presents itself now and again in some aggressive form or other and shakes the society to its pristine purity. At a point when it seems that everything individualistic about our society has completely vanished, this germ, call it cons­tructive genius or the prevailing spirit of the society, shoots forth, demolishes all the unnecessary accrustations and challenges the thinking world with its majestic grandeur and all-embracing characteristics. History has repeated itself times without number in all our social adjustments. The Hero holds the torch and proclaims the Eternal Verity. The masses run after him. Social revolution which began with the transition, ends in social evolution and whoever cannot adjust himself to the reformed standard will be left alone to die a miserable death. 

Mahabharata war is a typical instance in point. When the Pandavas were driven out, social revolutions began everywhere and people developed such a slavish mentality and imitative attitude that even the greatest men of the time like Bheeshma and Drona were no exceptions. Sweet are the uses of adversity. The Pandavas under the close guidance of Sri Krishna, the God-man, and Vyasa, the Sage, went through all the ordeals to develop in themselves the construc­tive genius of the Nation which was in the form of a germ in them and we see clearly that the success of the Pandavas in the Mahabharata war was really the success of social adjustment over the cataclysmal revolutions. It is here that we see and realize the great effects that the Teachings of the Gita produced in a society which had sunk under a barbarous revolution and which was crying for a panacea for all her social evils. The first stanza in the Immortal Gita is as follows: 

(Oh Sanjaya, in the holy field of 
battle known as Kurukshetra, What did they My sons and Pandavas Gathered together and eager for 
battle?) 

This stanza is put into the mouth of the blind King. Dhritarashtra was not only blind in the physical eye but he was blind even in the internal eye, the eye of discrimination. The words that he uses are inconsistent, incongruous and denote rank self­ishness. Dharma-Kshetra means the land where Dharma or the Divine Code prevails. The Vedic Revelations say again and again that injustice cannot prevail. The blind King knows that his sons ever revelled in acts of injustice and there was no other go for his sons but to die in the field of war. Knowing as he did this great truth, he did not prevent his sons indulging in moral, social and religious crimes and yielded to the natural paternal cravings. The result was that he lived to see the complete annhilation of the Kauravas. Though Pandavas were to him the same as Kauravas, because the former were his brother's sons, he made a distinction between ''My sons and Pandavas" which struck at the root of all moral codes—cosmic code and specially the Divine Code, because it is here he abused the Divine Right of man, viz., "Love and Service". The result we all know. The evil days were over, Pandavas with the help of Sri Krishna founded the Empire of Humanity on the basis of the inner virtues of man. 
Why has Shri Meher Baba come to Mysore? To found a Spiritual Centre for mankind at Byra­mangala which at once aims at destroying the selfishness of man, the root-cause of all our evils— social, moral, religious, economic, national and even international. Shri Meher Baba's Ashram is an epitome of the world. There are the English, the Americans, the Hindus, the Mohomedans, etc., all living together in perfect love and brotherhood there. The seed sown at Byramangala may grow into a mighty tree giving shade to all the thinking minds of both the East and the West and help surely in bringing out the much needed social adjustment on the conquest of aggressive individualism by Universal Spirituality.
