The	Spark	that	Kindled	the	Flame
BY  DR. ABDUL  GHANI MUNSIFF

 
THE mythological lore of different religions furnishes many instances of people suddenly turning away from the world for a spiritual life and later achieving a recognized status in the spiritual hierarchy of the time. The turning point (tauba) in their life very often is the result of what seems an insignificant and trivial cause; but nevertheless the spiritual outcome of such a situation is invariably too amazing to be true.
Such cases baffle ordinary minds and true enough, the effect in good many cases is quite out of proportion to the exciting cause. The explanation for what is apparently an anomalous situation is not far to seek.
Just as a person possessing a rheumatic diathesis, seems none the worse for it for a good part of his life; all the same a sudden exposure to chill very often precipitates the whole crisis and the latent disease comes up to the surface with full fury.
 
Similarly in the life of a saint prior to realization, the spiritual pre- paredness of past lives lies dormant all the time, only waiting for a moral spark to kindle it into a spiritual flame, thereby confirming the spiritual fact that nothing ever goes to the undeserving. The following will bear out the point under discussion:ó
Hazrat	Fariduddin	Attar	(513
A.H. to 620 A.H.) owned a drug- gist's shop in the suburbs of Nishapur. One morning while engaged in dusting and arranging the shop as usual a mendicant approached him saying, "Give me something in the way of God.''
Pre-occupied as he was with the routine work in his shop, Fariduddin Attar paid no heed  to the repeated cries of the mendicant for alms. Whereupon the latter got very exasperated and said, ''What a queer creature you are! I do not know how you will meet your death!"
This  cutting  remark arrested
 

 
the attention of Fariduddin Attar who retorted saying, "What's going to be strange about my death? I will die just the way you will die". The mendicant inquired whether he would be able to meet death like him. On getting an affirmative reply, heóthe incognite saint accepting  the challenge, laid aside his begging bowl and stretching himself bodily on the ground breathed his last with the words on his lips 'God is great'.
This	unexpected	reply	to	his
 
challenge greatly moved Farid- uddin Attar who was immediately seized with a strong desire to achieve mastery over life and death like the saint in the garb of a mendicant. He immediately dis- posed off all his worldy belongings amongst the poor and dedicating himself to a life of renunciation, ultimately came to be known as the spiritual chargeman of Baghdad.
 

 
