

Shri Meher Baba on the Beginning and the End of Creation 

As long as the human mind does not directly experience Ultimate Reality as it is, it is baffled in every attempt to explain the origin and the purpose of crea≠tion. The ancient past seems  to be shrouded in inscru-

table mystery, and the future seems WHENCE? AND to be a completely sealed book. The WHITHER? 

human mind can at best make brilliant conjectures about the past and the future of the universe, because it is bound by the spell of Maya. It can neither arrive at final knowledge on these points, nor can 

'' 

it remain content with ignorance about them. Whence ? 

'' 

and Whither ? are the two everlasting and poignant queries which make the human mind divinely restless. The human mind  cannot reconcile  itself with infinite regress in its search for the origin of the world, nor can it reconcile itself with endless change 



without a goal. Evolution is unin-
 

telligible if it has no initial cause, and it is deprived 

of all direction and meaning if it all does not lead to a terminus. The very questions 'Whence'? and 'Whither'? presuppose the beginning and the end of this evolving creation. The beginning of evolution is the beginning of time, and the end of evolution is the end of time. 

Evolution has both beginning and end, because time has both beginning and end. 

    Between the beginning and the end of this changing world there are many cycles, but there is, in and through these cycles, a continuity of cosmic evolution. The real termination of the evolutionary process is called Mahapralaya or the final annihilation of the world, when the world becomes what it was in the beginning, namely nothing. The Mahapralaya of the world may be compared with the sleep of a man. Just as the varied world of experience completely disappears in the case of the man who is in deep sleep, the entire objective cosmos which is the creation of Maya vanishes into nothingness at the time of the Mahapralaya. It is as if the universe had never existed at all. 

Even during the evolutionary period the universe is in itself nothing but imagination. There is in fact only one indivisible and eternal Reality, and  it has neither begin-

ning nor end. It is beyond time. 

  From the point of view of thisTIMELESS AND timeless Reality the whole time-ABSOLUTE 

process is purely imaginary, and billions of years which have passed and billions of years which are 

to pass do not have even the value of a second. They are like not having existed at all. 

    So the manifold and evolving universe cannot be said to be a real outcome of this one Reality. If it were an out≠come of this one Reality, Reality would be either a relative term or a composite being, which it is not. The one Reality is absolute. 

The one Reality includes in itself all existence. It is everything, but it has nothing as its shadow. The idea of all-inclusive  existence implies  that  it leaves no- 

thing outside its being. When you REALITY AND analyse the idea of Being, you arriveNOTHING 

by implication at the idea of that which does not exist. This idea of non-existence or 'Nothing' helps you to define clearly our notion of Being. The complementary aspect of Being is thus Non-being or Nothing. But 'Nothing' cannot be looked upon as having its own separate and independent existence. It is nothing in itself. Nor can it, in itself, be a cause of anything. The manifold and evolving universe cannot be the outcome of 

''

Nothing  taken by itself. And you have seen that it cannot also be the outcome of the one Reality. How then does the manifold and evolving universe arise? 

The manifold and evolving universe arises owing to the mixing  up of the one Reality and 'Nothing'.  It springs out of 'Nothing' when this 

 'Nothing' is taken against the back-UNIVERSE 

ground of the one Reality. But this should not be taken to mean that the universe is partly the outcome of 

the one Reality, or that it has an element of Reality. It is an outcome of 'Nothing ' and is nothing. It only seems to have existence. And its apparent existence is due to the one Reality which is, as it were, behind 'Nothing'. When 'Nothing' gets added to the one Reality, you get the manifold and evolving universe. 

But the one Reality which is infinite and absolute does not thereby suffer any modification. It is absolute and is as such entirely unaffected by any addition or subtraction. The one Reality remains what it was, complete and absolute in itself and unconcerned and unconnected with the panorama of creation, springing out of 'Nothing'. 'Nothing' might be compared to the value of 'zero' in mathematics. In itself it has no positive value; but when it is added to another number it gives rise to the many. In the same way the manifold and evolving universe springs out of 'Nothing' when it is combined with the one Reality. 

    The whole evolutionary process is within the domain of imagination. When in imagination the one ocean of Reality gets  apparently  disturbed, there  arises  the mani- 

fold world of separate centres ofTHE IMAGINED consciousness. This involves theDIVISION BET-basic division of life into theWEEN THE SELF self and not-self or the 'I' and itsAND ITS ENVIRON- environment. And owing to the MENT LEADS TO falseness and the incomplete-AN EVOLVING ness of this limited self (which DUALITY 

is only an imagined part of a really indivisible totality), 

consciousness cannot remain content with eternal ident≠ification with it. Thus consciousness is trapped in ceaseless restlessness forcing it to attempt identification with the not-self. That portion of the not-self or the environment with which consciousness succeeds in identifying itself gets affiliated to the self in the form of 'mine'; and that portion of the not-self with which it does not succeed in identifying itself becomes the irreducible environment which inevitably creates a limit and an opposition to the self. 

Thus consciousness arrives not at the termination of its limiting duality but at its transformation. As long as consciousness is subject to the working of vitiating imag≠ination, it cannot successfully put an end to this duality, and all the varied attempts which it makes for the assim≠ilation of the not-self (or the environment) result merely in the replacement of the initial duality by other innumerable novel forms of the same duality. The acceptance and the rejection of certain portions of the environment respectively express themselves as 'wanting' and 'not-wanting', thus giving rise to the opposites of pleasure and pain, good and bad, etc. But neither acceptance nor rejection can lead to freedom from duality, and consciousness, therefore, finds itself engaged in ceaseless and alternate oscillation from one opposite to the other. The entire process of the evolution of the individual is characterised by this oscillation between the opposites. 

    The evolution of the limited individual is completely 

determined by the Sanskaras accumulated by him through  ages, and though it is all part of

imagination, the determinism isDETERMINISM thorough and automatic. EveryOF SANSKARAS 

action and experience, howsoever ephemeral, leaves behind it an impression in the mental body. This impression is an objective modification of the mental body; and as the mental body remains the same through several lives, the impressions accumulated by the individual are also capable of persisting through several lives. When the Sanskaras, thus accumulated, begin to express themselves (instead of merely lying latent in the mental body), they are experienced as desires, i.e., they are apprehended as being subjective. The subjective and the objective are the two aspects of the Sanskaras; the former is the passive state of latency, and the latter is the active state of manifestation. 

Through the active phase the accumulated Sanskaras determine each experience and action of the limited self. Just as in the cinema several feet of film have to pass for exhibiting a small action on the screen, many Sanskaras are often involved in determining a single action of the limited self. And through such expression and fulfilment in experience the Sanskaras get spent up. The weak Sanskaras get themselves spent up mentally; the stronger ones get themselves spent up subtly in the form of desires and imaginative experience; and those Sanskaras which are powerful get them- 

selves spent up physically by expressing themselves through bodily action. 

    But though this spending up of Sanskaras is going on continually, it does not end in freedom from the Sans≠karas, because new Sanskaras are being inevitably created not only through fresh actions but even through the very process of spending up. So the heap of Sanskaras goes on increasing, and the individual finds himself helpless in the problem of throwing off the burden. 

The Sanskaras deposited by specific actions and experiences render the mind susceptible to similar actions  and experiences; but after a certain

 point is reached, this tendency is THROUGH THE checked and counteracted by a nat-OPPOSIT 

ural reaction consisting in a com≠plete change over to its direct opposite, making room for the operation of opposite Sanskaras. 

    Very often the two opposites form parts of one and the same chain of imagination. For example, a person might first experience that he is a famous writer, with wealth, fame, wife and all the agreeable things of life, and may, later in the same life, experience that he had lost his wealth, fame, wife and all the agreeable things of life. Sometimes it seems that a chain of imagination does not contain both the opposites. For example, a person might experience throughout his life that he is a powerful king always victorious in battles. In this case he has to balance this experience by the experience 

of defeats or the like in the next life, taking one more life to complete his chain of imagination. The purely psycho≠logical compulsion of the Sanskaras is thus subject to the deeper teleological need of the soul.

    Suppose a man has killed some one in this life. This deposited in his mental body  the Sanskaras  of killing. And if consciousness were to be



solely and simply determined by this initial tendency created by these Sanskaras, he would go on killing others again and again ad infinitum, every time gathering further momentum from subsequent acts of the same kind. And there would be no escape from this recurring determinism had it not been for the fact that the logic of experience provides the necessary check to it. The person soon realizes the incompleteness of the experience of one opposite, and he unconsciously seeks to restore the lost balance by going over to the other opposite. Thus the person who has had the experience of killing will develop the psychological need and the susceptibility for getting killed. In killing another person he has appreciated only one portion of the total situation in which he is a party, namely, the part of killing. The other complementary half of the total situation, namely, the role of being killed, remains for him non-understood and foreign datum, which, nevertheless, has introduced itself in his experience. There thus arises the need to complete experience by attracting on oneself the opposite of that through which one has personally gone, and 

consciousness has a tendency to fulfil this new and pressing need. In the above example of a person who has had the experience of killing, he will soon develop a tendency to get himself killed in order to cover the entire situation by personal experience. 

The question which crops up here is "who would arise to kill him in the next life?" It may be the same person who in the previous life got killed, or it may be some other person with similar Sanskaras. As a result of action and interaction between individuals, there come into existence Sanskaric links or ties; and when the individual takes a new physical body, it may be among those who have previous Sanskaric ties or among those who have similar Sanskaras. But the adjustment of life is such as to make possible the free play of evolving duality. 

Like the shuttle of the weaver's loom, the human mind moves within two extremes developing the warp and  the woof of the cloth of life. To use 

 a geometrical metaphor, the dev-ON THROUGH THE 

elopment of the psychic life is 


best represented not as a


straight line but as a zig-zag

 

course. The function of the two banks of the river. If there are no banks there would be dispersion of the waters of the river sideways making it impossible for the river to reach its destination. In the same way the life-force would have dissipated itself in endless 

and innumerable ways, had it not been confined between the two poles of the opposites. But these banks of the river of life are best looked upon not as two parallel lines but as two converging lines which meet at the point of liberation. The amount of oscillation becomes less and less as the individual approaches the goal, and it completely subsides when he realizes it. It is like the movement of the doll which has its centre of gravity at the base, with the result that it has a gradual tendency to become steady in the sitting posture. If it is shaken it continues to swing from one side to another for some time, but the movement covers an increasingly shorter span, and in the end the doll becomes stationary. In the case of cosmic evolution such subsiding of alternation between the opposites means Mahapralaya, and in the case of the spiritual evolution of the individual it means 

Liberation. 

The step from duality to non-duality is, however, merely a matter of difference in degree. As the two are qualitatively different, the difference between them is in- 

finite. The former is a not-God PLANES OF state and the latter is the God CONSCIOUSNESS 

state. This infinite difference cons≠titutes the abyss between the sixth plane of consciousness and the seventh plane of consciousness. All the lower six planes of consciousness are also separated from each other by a kind of a valley or distance. But though the difference between them is great, it is not infinite, because they are all 

equally subject to the bi-polarity of limited experience, 

consisting in the alternation between the opposites. The difference between the first plane and the second, the second and the third, and so on up to the sixth plane, is great but not infinite. It follows that strictly speaking none of the six planes of duality can be said to be really nearer to the seventh plane than any others. The difference between any of the six planes and the seventh plane is infinite, just in the same way as the difference between the sixth and the seventh plane is infinite. The progress through the six planes is a progress in imagination. But the realization of the seventh plane is the cessation of imagination, and, therefore, the awakening of the individual into Truth-consciousness. 

The illusory progress through the six planes cannot, however, be altogether avoided. Imagination has to be completely  exhausted before a person  can realize the 

Truth. When a disciple has a Master PROGRESS he has to cross all the six planes. TheTHROUGH THE Master may take his disciple through PLANES 

the planes, either with open eyes or under veil. If the disciple is taken under cover and is not conscious of the planes which he is crossing, desires persist till the sixth plane; but if he is taken with open eyes and is conscious of the planes which he is crossing, no desires are left after the fifth plane. If the Master comes for work he often chooses to take his disciples under cover, for he is 

likely to be more actively useful for his work if he is blind-folded than if he is taken with open eyes. 

    The crossing of the planes is throughout characterised by the unwinding of the Sanskaras. This process of unwinding should be carefully distinguished from the spending up. In the process of spending up, the Sanskaras become dynamic and release themselves into action or experience. This does not lead to final emancipation from Sanskaras as the never-ceasing fresh accumulation of Sanskaras more than replaces the Sanskaras which are spent up, and the spending up itself is responsible for further Sanskaras. In the process of the unwinding of the Sanskaras, however, the Sanskaras get weakened and annihilated by the flame of the longing for the Infinite. 

The longing for the Infinite may be the cause of much spiritual suffering. There is no comparison between the acuteness of ordinary suffering and the poignancy of spiritual suffering which a person has to go through while crossing the planes. The former is the effect of Sanskaras and the latter is the effect of their unwinding. When physical suffering reaches its climax a person becomes unconscious and so gets relief from it; but there is no such automatic relief for spiritual suffering. The spiritual suf≠fering, however, does not become boring, because there is also intermingled with it a kind of pleasure. 

The longing for the Infinite gets accentuated and acute until it arrives at its climax, and then gradually begins to cool down. But while cooling down 

consciousness does not altogether give up the longing for the Infinite, but it continues to stick to the aim of realizing the Infinite. This state of cooled but latent longing is preliminary to the realization of the Infinite. It has at this stage been the instrument of annihilating all other desires, and is itself ready to be quenched by the unfathomable stillness of the Infinite. 

    Before the longing for the Infinite is fulfilled through the realization of the Infinite, consciousness has  to pass from the sixth to the seventh plane. It has to pass from 

duality to non-duality. Instead ofTHE PEACE wandering in imagination it has to REALIZATION 

arrive at the ending of imagination. The Master understands the one Reality as being the only Reality and the 'Nothing ' as being merely its shadow. For him time is swallowed up in eternity. As he has realized the timeless aspect of Reality, he is beyond time, and holds within his being both the beginning and the end of time. He remains unmoved by the temporal process consisting of the action and interaction of the many. Ordinary man neither knows the beginning nor the end of creation. He is, therefore, overpowered by the march of the events which seem to be beyond his control or com≠prehension. They loom large in his estimate because of lack of proper perspective. He is caught up in time. He looks upon everything in terms of possible fulfilment or non-fulfilment of his Sanskaras. He is, therefore, pro≠foundly 

disturbed by the happenings of this world. The whole objective universe comes to him as an unwelcome limitation which has either to be overcome or tolerated. 

The Master, on the other hand, is free from duality and the Sanskaras characteristic of duality. He is, therefore, free from all limitation. The storm and the stress of the universe do not affect his being. All the bustle of the world with its constructive and destructive processes can for him have no special importance, for he has entered into the Sanctuary of Truth which is the abode of that eternal significance which is at best only partially and faintly reflected in the fleeting values of the phanta≠smagoria of creation. He comprehends within his being all existence, and looks upon the entire play of manifestation as merely a game. 

. 