St. Teresa Of Spain 

Adapted by Will Backett (London)

 "Shri Meher Baba visited the birthplace of St. Teresa, in 1933, as he had a very special work to do there. He and His disciples all fasted for twenty-four hours, and during that time they were not to touch Him, and together they walked over the hills. The next day they saw many of the treasures of the cathedral and were very exalted; the spiritual atmosphere was not unlike that of St. Marks in Venice or the one at Assisi. After visiting the shrine of the Saint, on the sight of her former home, they walked to a hill behind the town, looking back at Avila, as they climbed up a dusty donkey track, just the same as Teresa had travelled during the thousands of miles she journeyed in Spain. Baba had been there long ago. They came to a small plain between two rocky summits and strangely shaped boulders. Twenty miles away were the snow topped peaks of the Sierra Gredes. They reached the memorable  place, a sandy  lonely rock carpeted with thyme basil and other herbs... Time seemed to roll away, and it was wonderful to be with Baba there. The fast was broken on their return. Baba explained that in Europe, as in other countries, there are Saints and advanced Souls whom He calls His dear ones; and to manifest externally His expression of love for His dear ones, He abstains from eating when blessing their places. There are many holy places connected with spiritual workings in Europe. The four in EuropeóSt. Marks in Venice, a place on the Ligurian Coast, Assisi and Avila had now all been visited with Baba... Baba arranged that one of the party should visit this spot in ten days every day for seven days in succession."* 

    "From her earliest years Teresa had heard of saints and lived in the atmosphere of romance and chivalry, which her nature strove to express in action. When only six years old, she was fired to emulate 


the martyrs, and left her home with her little brother, a few years older, and with provisions for their journey set out to seek the Meers and suffer death at their hands. But they had to content themselves by building tiny monas≠teries in the garden, as a chance meeting with a relative on the outskirts of the town cut their journey short. Despite the opposition of her father whom she dearly loved, she vowed her life to the Church. "I do not think that when I die, the wrench will be greater than when I left my father's house, for it seems to me that every bone was rent asunder, and there was no love of God to take the place of the love of father and kinsman. The struggle was so great that if the Lord had not helped me, my own resolution would not have been enough to carry me through."* 

At that time she was not conscious of the Divine Love within, and the picture of hell which religion then presented, preyed on her imagination as she felt her unworthiness. The rigorous convent life affected her health and she returned home to be nursed. She sub-mitted to the barbarious treat-ment of the village Curandera, as medical science of the time proved ineffectual. Her limbs were stretched until they cracked and life was almost extinct. Teresa adds that touch humour which sometimes gleamed through her darkest experiences, "With this gain, that life was almost extinct. " At her own request she returned to the Convent, when a profound trance came over her; so she remained four days; the others thought she was dead. Neighbouring friars sang for her soul, her grave was dug and funeral arrangements proceeded, but her father watching by her side, opposed her burial saying, "This my daughter is not yet for the grave." 

She was his favourite daughter, and since his wife's death and the marriage of his other daughter, the bond between them had deepened. On returning to consciousness, she was too weak to do anything, but move her little finger. The wax from the tapers was taken from her eyelids, and for eight months she lay helpless and paralysed. She was the wonder 


of the nuns during her illness, sustaining them in spiritual matters and comforting them in spite of her own sufferings and weakness. She had the gift of awakening others to higher consciousness. During her father's last illness when he was convulsed with pain in his back, he groaned in his agony despite his natural fortitude. To her outer events were seen in their relation to her Lord, whose divine humanity reached out to all. Thus she reminded her father of the agony of Christ when bearing the cross of the Calvary and showed him that. "The Lord had willed him to understand something of what he had suffered when he bore the cross on his own back to Calvary." The old knight never uttered a sound again of his sufferings, his own sense of it lost in the contem≠plation of the Supreme Sacrifice. 

How Teresa shared the inner struggles of others and awakened them to their higher self, is shown when during the illness described, she met a local priest at confessional, as she was away from the convent. "He became deeply attached to meóhis disposition and understanding were good enough, but it might have been purer and was not without danger since if God had not been present, there were opportunities when he might have offended more gravely. For seven years he had carried on illicit connection with a woman of the place which had destroyed his reputationónone bold enough amongst his flock to censure. I was able to speak to him much of God, and this must have done him good, though I believe what touched him most was his great affection for me. " He wore copper ornaments from his mistress, and Teresa had the intuition to persuade him to throw them away, not because she felt that there was any real power in chance; they formed a physical link between them so long as retained. "He was then," she adds, "like a man aroused from a deep sleep and began to consider all that he had done in those years, lamenting his ruinous state. " Her simplicity is revealed as she adds, "I love him much, for so frivolous and blind was I that it seemed to me a virtue to prove my gratitude and loyalty to anyone who loved me. " 



She prayed for him through-out, often with agony which affected her physically and the nuns were greatly distressed. Sometimes she was partly stifled by the astral emanations, when praying for him, gasping for breath. Through her inner vision she saw the repellent element or astral form assail≠ing her, produced by his impure desires. It is not given to all to awaken the soul of another to its real state, but her description of the effect prayer had upon her consciousness shows how much greater must be the influence when the soul consciously uplifts the human relations, for no form of hyp≠notism or psychic influence was used. 

In prayer, she writes, "The soul is suspended in such a way that it seems utterly beside itself. The will loves. The memory is as it were lost. Under≠standing makes no reflections but is not lost, it is not at work It is as it were amazed." 

    Memory and reflection being in abeyance, time merges into time≠lessness, freeing the will entirely to energize the love divine, resulting in complete  elimination  of personal desires in full consecration of the whole nature of God, which the understanding recognizes. 

Thus consciousness receives, when will, memory and understanding are passive and the soul upraised. 

A Master can expound the laws of the subtle world in which Teresa and the saints and seers move. Baba ex≠plains. 

"Nature is much bigger than what a man can perceive through the ordinary senses of the physical body. The hidden aspects of nature consist of finer matter and forces that interpenetrate and exist together with the physical. There is no unbridgable gulf separating the finer aspects of nature from its gross aspects. The finer aspects of nature are not perceptible to man, but they are never≠theless continuous with the gross aspects. They are remote, and yet they are inaccessible to his consciousness. This is due to the fact that his consciousness is functioning through the physical senses which are not adopted for perceiving these aspects of nature which are finer than the gross aspects. He is unconscious of these inner planes  just as a deaf 



man is unconscious of sounds; and naturally he cannot also deal with them consciously. For practical purposes they are ether worlds to him.

"The pathway of a man through the divisions of nature's hidden part, is called gnosis; the object of the various systems of religious ceremonial and doctrine is to prepare for it. It is be≠lieved by some that this was the aim of the mystery religions of the ancient world in their original purity, when there were spiritual initiates to guide neophytes. The veiled allusions scat≠tered through mystic and gnostic literature, and the vast ruins of the places where, hidden from the world, these arcane secrets were demonstrated, have left traces to show that the Path is One through all ages. Gnosis is: 'The internal but actual pathway inside a human being though it is not exactly like a material road, yet it is distinctly perceptible to the internal eye of a real mystic or gnostic, who actually feels traveling along it. "' 



(to be continued) 