
The Spiritual Path 
BY DR. WILLIAM DONKIN, M. B. B. S. 
SHOULD those embarking upon the Spiritual Path serve at the feet of a Master, or should they, by their own efforts, advance upon a solitary pilgrimage of personal spiritual development? 
There is a room for a multi≠tude of tastes in this varied world, and in this matter also there can be more than one opinion. But in most cases the contact of a Master is necessary not only in the worldly achievements of art and science, but also, and indeed especially so, in that most perilous and uncertain of all adventures, the search for God. 
Every unit of creation is so inter-dependent, that it is less a matter of hitting a solitary trail through the spiritual realms than the problem of joining without fellow-men in an effort to achieve spiritual progress, not for one's self alone, but for humanity at large. 
Even those who stress that progress is achieved only by solitary efforts, cannot advance 
without feeling and thinking deeply about life as they have contacted it. And does not life include our felllow-men and their opinions and advice, and there≠fore also those who are spiritully perfect, or at least more advanced than ourselves? 
It is principally those who eschew the personal guidance of a Master, who are in fact the most careful students of scriptures and writings of the philosophers. But what are books save the husk of wisdom compared to the living example of a Master? A man is unlikely to become proficient in medicine unless he studies not only from books and from the patients themselves, but also submits himself to the sympa≠thetic guidance of an expert clinician. And in the art of music, can a man move us to ecstacy by his mastery of an instrument unless he has practised under the relentless eye of a personal teacher? In spiritual matters it is the Master who kindles that real 

enthusiasm which is so valuable to the disciple's progress. The flaming heart of the devotee gives a greater impulse towards Truth than any intellectual meditation upon divine themes culled from a printed page. 
Let those who insist upon carving their own path in spiritual matters bear in mind that they are not in any degree the masters of their fate, but are limited unceasingly by the laws of body, emotion and thought, which are thrust upon them whether they wish it or not. In order to reinforce this remark we may quote the following limerick : 
ì There was an old man of Siam, Said it seems to me now that  
I am, Just a being that moves, in deter≠
minate grooves,  Not a bus, not a bus, but a tram.î 
Only those can help us who have realized Truth, and freed them≠selves from the grooves of Maya. Out of their infinite love for us they enable us to become free as they are. 
Our indwelling souls, screened from sight by creation, should welcome the guiding light of one who is free from all bindings. Such a one lives vicariously in us, and knows, because of his universal consciousness, all that we experi≠ence. When the Master helps humanity it is one part of life which is free, rendering help to another part which is bound. Thus does the Saviour help creation to realize itself. 
Let us therefore show our gratitude to the Spiritual Guides of mankind for the work they do for us, and submit ourselves to their guidance, in all humility of heart, until we become liberated as they are. 

___________ 