Sunday, February 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But he said, Yea, RATHER, BLESSED ARE THEY THAT HEAR THE WORD OF GOD, AND KEEP IT. And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is an evil generation." (Lk. 11:27-29.)  "While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee. BUT he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! FOR WHOSOEVER SHALL DO THE WILL OF MY FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN, THE SAME IS MY BROTHER, AND SISTER, AND MOTHER." (Mat. 12:46-50.)  These remarkable passages teach us that however blessed among women Mary was by virtue of the fact that she gave physical birth to the Lord Jesus, the humblest Christian who hears the word of God and keeps it may be equally or more blessed. This may strike the death blow to the Roman Catholic lies about Mary being without sin, the so-called immaculate conception, and now even that Mary herself was conceived and born without sin, thus making MARY'S MOTHER without sin; that Mary is the mother of God, thus making her equal with God in every way, thereby making Mary MANKIND'S CO-REDEEMER WITH THE LORD JESUS CHRIST (!)(!)(!)  These are the same jolly Arminian idiots that conveniently created Purgatory ­ a place intermediate between Heaven and Hell ­ a money-making gimmick ­ so that really, really rich sinners can literally buy their way out of future suffering in the after-life, by arranging for handsome sums to be given to the Roman Catholic Church. I mean, super-rich people like the Kennedy family. Live like the Devil himself, mocking and scoffing at the truth of God, persecuting the righteous ­ and then die, put in a little time in Purgatory, and then slip quietly into Heaven, there to spend eternity with the saints and angels. Time off from more fiery punishment and suffering is in direct proportion to money contributed to the Catholic Church on earth ­ to money actually had and received.  Beloved. It is all very Satanically complicated, unlike the humble simplicity that attends the workings of the Lord Jesus and His church militant on earth; to wit: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service" ­ (i.e., your rational service; rational means, of sound mind, sane, consistent with or based on reason, logical; the sense being that those who do NOT present their bodies a living sacrifice such as is holy and acceptable unto God, in this evil, Hell-bound world, are irrational creatures of unsound mind, insane, really; living lives that are not based on reason, and lives that are not logical for eternity-bound, Judgment-Day-accountable-toGod human beings; to live). Romans 12:1.  Beloved. I do not care what anybody else says or thinks: these people are crazy. God's word for it: they are insane, and we are living in an insane asylum where the inmates are in charge; to wit: "We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. AND WE KNOW THAT WE ARE OF GOD, AND THE WHOLE WORLD LIETH IN WICKEDNESS." [Or, more accurately, I am told, that the last claim should read, "And we know that we alone are of God, and the whole world lies in the lap of the wicked one (Satan)."] "And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given  Sunday, February 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in  his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life." 1 Jn. 5:18-20.  Did you catch that language of BOLD EXCLUSIVITY, Beloved? "And we know that we, (exclusively) are of God; and we know that the Son of God has come and has given to us (exclusively) an understanding, that we (exclusively) may know Him that is true; and that we (exclusively) know that the whole world lieth in wickedness." 1 Jn. 5:19. Beloved, how often have the mockers and scoffers hurled some form of the following rhetorical question at us in a "gotcha" kind of way?; to wit: So, do you have to join Westboro Baptist Church to be saved and get to Heaven? It is not a new question. The clumsy challenge goes to the heart of the Gospel and the doctrines of grace.  Presbyterianism's founder, John Knox, in the 16th Century, gave the following answer; to wit: "We ought not to think, that our God bears less love to his church this day, than what he has done from the beginning; for as our God in his own nature is immutable, so his love towards his elect remains always unchangeable. For as in Christ Jesus he hath chosen his church, before the beginning of all ages; so by him will he maintain and preserve the same unto the end. And, therefore, let wicked men rage as they list, we will not be ashamed to confess always, that GRACE ONLY MAKES DIFFERENCE BETWIXT US AND THE REST OF THE WORLD." "And be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God. For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every (Elect) man the measure of faith. For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office; So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; Or...he that GIVETH, let him do it with SIMPLICITY." (Rom. 12:2-8)  There you have it, Beloved. Humble SIMPLICITY attends all the workings of the true church of the Lord Jesus Christ. As with giving, so with all other aspects of the church militant on earth. It is the Great Whore ­ (i.e., false religious systems, as Roman Catholicism) ­ who flaunts her complicated system of gathering wealth and riches ­ (e.g., selling early exits from Purgatory) ­ and brags that she is no poverty-ridden widow like the true church; to wit: "How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow," ­ (i.e., a standing symbol of the true church) ­ "and shall see no sorrow" ­ (thereby conceding that she is hopelessly lost and undone and headed for Hell; because the true church evermore joins the Christian poet, William Cowper, who wrote, "The path of Sorrow, and that path alone; leads to the Land where sorrow is unknown.") Rev. 18:7.  "Blessed are they that mourn;" said the Savior, "for they shall be comforted." Mat. 5:4. Not for me, quoth the Roman Catholic whore. "And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color," ­ (the magnificent clothing of grand royalty) ­ "and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication." Rev. 17:4.  Beloved, let us strive for HUMBLE SIMPLICITY. Only God's beloved SIMPLE ones are truly wise in truly good things, and truly SIMPLE concerning evil. They alone know the peace and grace of God within; and they alone are victorious in the Wars of the Lord and in the Quarrel of the Covenant; and they alone are used of God to crush Satan under their feet, being strong in the  Sunday, February 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Lord and in the power of His might; to wit: "For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I  am glad therefore on your behalf; but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil. And the God of peace shall bruise" ­ (i.e., crush to smithereens) ­  "Satan under your feet shortly" (the allusion is to the encouraging words and promises to Joshua after the death of Moses and on the eve of the invasion of, and leading to Israel's conquest of, Canaan; to wit:  "Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying, Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, AS I SAID UNTO MOSES." (Josh. 1:1-3)  (This points us to Deut. 11:22-25; to wit: "For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him; Then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than yourselves. EVERY PLACE WHEREON THE SOLES OF YOUR FEET SHALL TREAD SHALL BE YOURS; from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be. THERE SHALL NO MAN BE ABLE TO STAND BEFORE YOU; for the Lord your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you." Deut. 11:22-25.) These blessed words of encouragement and comfort are reiterated and enlarged upon to Joshua; to wit: "There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage ... Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee withersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:5-9)  Beloved, that Heavenly torch has now been passed to us ­ to use an Olympics metaphor. Think about it. Either these exceeding great and precious promises (2 Pet. 1:4) are intended directly and expressly for us, at this hour, in this humble church ­ or they are no longer intended for anybody, except for mildly interested ancient history professors. Moses is dead. Joshua is dead. All the kings and priests and prophets and apostles are dead. The great medieval reformers such as Luther and Calvin and Knox are all dead. Even the feisty old-time fundamentalist preachers of my boyhood are nearly all dead ­ and I fear that even those who might be still alive have long ago surrendered and abandoned the field of conflict.  The signs of the times, properly discerned, point to the end of the world. As it was in the days of Noah ­ i.e., the Antediluvian world, the same-sex marriage society, the times of the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, the budding of Israel's fig tree, etc. ­ harbingering the imminent return of Jesus Christ in great power and glory; to wit:  Sunday, February 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power  and glory. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect  from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of  heaven. Now learn a parable of the fig tree." (Mk. 13:26-28)  Beloved, here sits little Westboro Baptist Church ­ with clear heads and righteous hearts, with each member marveling that he is here: "Why was I made to hear His voice, and enter while there's room? While others make a wretched choice, and rather starve than come. `Twas the same love that spread the feast, that sweetly forced me in; else I had still refused to taste, and perished in my sin."  Beloved, remember our text: "And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But he said, Yea, RATHER, BLESSED ARE THEY THAT HEAR THE WORD OF GOD, AND KEEP IT." Lk. 11:27,28. A similar verse is found in John 14; to wit: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him... If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." (Jn. 14:21-23)  "And who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Cor. 2:16. Discerning the signs of the times in the light of rightly dividing and portioning out relevant Scripture passages, all as considered in the context of 20 action-packed years of 50,000+ open air street-preaching services on a daily basis on the mean streets of America ­ all this has led us to believe that the Gospel Torch has been passed to the saints of God of the Westboro Baptist Church. "And who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Cor. 2:16. The Savior said of all mankind generally, "For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they shall see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear." Mat. 13:15,16.  All the evidence points to WBC as the only such blessed ones on earth at this hour who have such supernatural eyes that see and ears that hear. "And who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Cor. 2:16. Who are those alive on earth today of whom the Savior said, "Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it?" Lk. 11:28. Answer: Westboro Baptist Church. "And who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Cor. 2:16. And who are those alive on earth today of whom our Lord Jesus spoke when He said, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me?" Jn. 14:21. Answer: The Members of Westboro Baptist Church. "And who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Cor. 2:16. Paul said that true Christians give off ­ by their very presence ­ the savour of the true knowledge of God everywhere they go.  "For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish." (2 Cor.2:15)  We smell like death to the one, and life to the other ­ but to God, both are a sweet savour of Christ (!) Meaning that God is glorified by those who are eternally damned in Hell, as much as by those who are eternally blessed in Heaven. "And who is sufficient for these things?" Meaning, that only God's Elect can handle such heavy, true, Calvinistic doctrine as this ­ but it is the only truth of God. And the answer is: Only Westboro Baptist Church is sufficient for these things, because we are not as the multitudes who corrupt the Word of God. 2 Cor. 2:17.  I love you. Amen.  
