A New Year Prayer 
December 29, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
We are here,
 as the last days of year flow forward 

to be renewed for another lease, 

to worship, to dive deep and fly high 

on sturdy wings of honesty and compassion, 

so we can receive the coming year as a gift. 

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would 
claim that vision of a just world in our own lives.
 And because of a growing sense of kinship 
with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin 
in this celebration to engage our mission 
with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
   
Singing:  1000
 Morning Has Come 
 
Ingathering: 
 Zomo the Rabbit 
 
Zomo the Rabbit is not very big. He is not very str
ong. But he is very, very smart. But Zomo 
wanted to be more than smart. He wanted to be wise.
 So he went to the oldest woman in the 
nearby village, the woman who was revered for her w
isdom. "Good morning, grandmother," said 
Zomo. "I want to be wise like you are. How do I do 
that?" "Oh Zomo, it™s not that easy. You 
have earn wisdom." "How do I earn wisdom, grandmoth
er?" "By doing three impossible things." 
"Three impossible things, yes. First, bring me the 
scales of the biggest fish in the lake. Second, 
bring me the milk of the Angry Wild Cow. Third, bri
ng me the tooth of a leopard." 
 
"Ok," said Zomo. ?I will try and do all three thing
s." 
 
Zomo went to the edge of the lake. He began to play
 a drum. He played so loud, the music went 
to the bottom of the lake, and the Biggest Fish hea
rd. The Biggest Fish came out on the land, and 
started dancing. Dancing and dancing. Zomo played f
aster. And Biggest Fish danced so fast his 
scales fell off. "Oh my goodness, I am naked!" crie
d Biggest Fish, who then dove back into the 
lake, quite embarrassed. Zomo gathered all the scal
es and put them in his hat. 
 
Then he went to the forest and climbed a large tree
. He looked around and saw Angry Wild Cow. 
Zomo said, "Hahaha! You are not so great, Angry Wil
d Cow. You are not very strong." "Are you 
laughing at me?" snorted Angry Wild Cow. "Yep, it™s
 me!" laughed Zomo. "You are so weak, I 
bet you cannot even knock down this tree." Angry Wi
ld Cow turned red with rage. Smoke came 
out of her ears. She cried out and started to charg
e the tree to knock it down. But Zomo had 
fooled her. The wood of the tree trunk was soft. An
d Angry Wild Cow got her horns stuck right 
in the tree. Zomo climbed down, and while Angry Wil
d Cow was stuck, Zomo milked the cow 

and put the milk in his upside down drum. Then Zomo
 ran away before Angry Wild Cow got 
free and came after him. 

 
Then Zomo went up a high hill, where the leopard wa
lked every day.  He scattered a few of the 
fish scales on the down slope of the hill, and spil
led just a few splashes of milk on the path. Then 
Zomo hid behind a big rock at the bottom of the hil
l. Sure enough, Leopard came strolling along, 
and suddenly slipped on the scales and milk and rol
led down the hill. Leopard bumped into the 
rock, and one of his teeth fell out.  

 
Zomo grabbed the tooth and ran back to the Wise Old
 Woman with the milk, the scales and the 
tooth. She smiled at him and said, "You are smart e
nough to have done three impossible things, 
Zomo. Now I shall offer you wisdom."  Zomo listened
.   "Three things in this world make you 
wise: courage, good sense, and thinking things thro
ugh. Little Rabbit, Zomo," she said, "you 
have plenty of courage, a bit of good sense, but yo
u don't think things through very well at all. 
So, next time you see Biggest Fish, Angry Wild Cow,
 or Leopard, you'll be wise if you choose to 
run very, very fast!"    

 
And so it was; Zomo was not very big. He wasn't ver
y strong, but now, Zomo has at least a little 
wisdom. And he learned to run very, very fast when 
they came chasing after him.     
 
Greeting
    News of the Congregation 
 
Affirming :  The spirit sings, the bottom drops out
 of my soul. And from the center, Love, 
louder than thunder, opens a heaven.  New eyes wake
n, I send Love's name into the world 
with wings.        
Thomas Merton 1968
           
  
Singing #1024 When the Spirit Says Do  

 
Communing   
the Sequence 
(mixture of song that follows and my own commentary
) 
 
Send up the fireworks!  

Life is a short embrace. 

Celebrate that heaven is in this place, 

and that every day a new year begins. 

Scatter your seeds of risk, 

for hope is the ground we till. 

Make each day what you will. 

Really, there is nothing to fear. 

No judgment day drawing near. 

No trumpet will blow 

No throne will glow 

To send you down 

To grovel and groan. 

Put on your wings 

and rise up, then 

Cut off the strings 

that move your limbs. 

And start to love 

the one you are, 

so you can practice loving 

all who are not you. 

Live in the mystery, 

Find your own harmony, 

Live in the world 

which offers you 

the simple faith that 

heaven, oh, yes heaven, 

is not later, later, later, 

but has already begun, 

as this silence now 

reveals... 

 
silence 

 
Remember that you are 

who you are because of others, 

who loved you, and still do, 

whom you love, from whom 

you learned by both yes and no, 

those who you dearly miss 

with each heartbeat, those whom 

you cradle in your heart forever. 

Name them inside the temple within, 

or sound their names aloud, 

for we would not be who we are 

without all who now rise up within us. 

 
naming 

 
Ours is a simple faith 

of heart and mind, 

join to the land 

on which we stand 

with trust, and where 

we sing with joy. 

Send up the fireworks! 

     

A Simple Faith 
by David Tamulevich, Victoria Parks and Peggy McKee
, soloists 
CHORUS: 
(2X-1st Peg and I, 2nd with congregation)
 Ours is a simple faith. Life is a short embrace, 

Heaven is in this place, everyday. 

Hope is the ground we till.  

Make each day what you will. 

Thankful for dreams fulfilled, everyday. 

 
Verse 1: 

No room in this heart for fear.  

No judgment day drawing near. 

Trust that inner voice you hear, everyday. 

Life's not a goal or race. It's about heart and fai
th, 
And living a life of grace. Everyday. 

 
CHORUS: 

 
Verse 2: 

Trust is an open hand, making an honest stand. 

Rooted here, in the land–everyday. 

Live in the mystery, seeking the harmony 

Here, between you and me–everyday. 

 
CHORUS:  

 
The First Reading 
is from Alice Walker's book Hard Times Require Furi
ous Dancing, 2010. 
She won the Pulitzer for The Color Purple, a novel 
now banned in many schools, even though a 
well-praised movie was based upon it. 

 
I will not deny my lips their smile. 

I will not deny my heart its sorrow. 

I will not deny my eyes their tears. 

I will not deny my hair the wildness of my age. 

It is profound selfishness. 

I will deny me nothing of myself. 

 
The Second Reading
 is from Lawrence Rabb's 2009 book, The History of F
orgetting. It™s 
called, "The Great Poem" 

The great poem is always possible. 

Think of Keats and his odes. 

But we shouldn't have to be dying, 

 
What I'm writing now is not 

the great poem. After a few lines 

I could tell. It may not even be 

 
a particularly good poem, although 

it's too early to decide about that. 

Keep going, I say. See what happens. 

 
But trying hard is one of the problems. 

since it shows in the lines as a strain 

or struggle that reminds the reader 

 
too much of the writer, whereas 

most readers want to listen alone. 

The great poem, I think, will arrive 

 
when I no longer care. Perhaps 

I'll have abandoned art altogether, 

and I won't even want to write 

 
the poem down. But then I'll remember 

what I once would have given 

for this moment, and I'll go back 

 
to my desk. And I'll write the poem 

as though I were another person, 

someone I will never be again. 
 Preaching 

 
What's that phrase about the elephant in the room t
hat no one is talking about? I think I have to 
begin my talk this morning by pointing out somethin
g much bigger than an elephant, namely, the 
great labyrinth that takes up almost half the usabl
e space in this room. 
 
It™s an old design, the labyrinth, going back to th
e island of Crete before the golden age of 
Athens, hundreds of years later. We think the Creta
n civilization which produced the idea of the 
labyrinth was destroyed because of a volcanic erupt
ion, and that the survivors who emigrated 
away from the disaster were refused settlement by t
he Egyptians, and eventually settled on the 
coast of Canaan, becoming after a while the people 
known to the Bible as the P'li'stim, or the 
Philistines. 

 
Despite the volcanic destruction, the image of the 
labyrinth survived into the Christian era, and 
its pattern, found on many ancient coins, including
 those found in Crete, was much like the one 
in this room now, although it™s fair to say that th
is design can be either compacted much smaller, 
or expanded very much larger. For centuries during 
the middle ages, this exact pattern was found 
in the floors of many a great cathedral. I walked t
he labyrinth myself in the stunningly beautiful 
Chartres Cathedral some 30 years ago. It™s an indel
ible and saving memory for me. 
 
Let me be clear. The labyrinth is 
not
 a maze, even though some folks use both of these w
ords 
loosely to mean each other.  

 
But they are visibly different.  

 
In a maze there are false starts and blockages, and
 you often have to retrace your steps in order to 
get out. But in a labyrinth there is only one path 
to follow. You follow it into the center, then you 
follow it out to the edge.  A maze can be aggravati
ng. A labyrinth is more of a meditative walk, 
something more soothing than a maze, even though it
 looks almost as complex. 
 
A maze is an image of life lived without reflection
, without deep self-questioning, without real 
focused consciousness. A maze speaks of a way of li
fe where we make decisions, not out of 
reason or thoughtfulness, but because they remind u
s of our best friend, or grandmother whom 
we loved; or the maze of life is where we reject id
eas believed by abusive family members or 
neighbors. Our choices, the maze tells us, are not 
to be based on reason, but on reaction. A maze 
is designed to confuse us by offering promising pat
hs that dead end, and unpromising paths that 
can either lead us out, or leave us in endless circ
les from which we have no clue how to exit... 
endless circles: addictions, unforgiving grudges, h
abits that are clearly not supportive of our 
health.  

 
A maze keeps us reactive and panicked...am I stylis
h enough? Do I have the most desired game 
to play, or tablet to use? Madison Avenue often con
structs this maze, aided by knot-like 
bureaucracies that feel like dead ends because they
 slow us down in our path.  
 
A thousand charities doing good in the world need u
s...which do we choose? How do we make 
that choice? The maze tries to speak to us by its b
affling path to tell us we can't make that 
decision. We are not equipped to do so. We don't ha
ve all the data. We will 
never
 have all the 
data. So why choose any charity. Pay for a new what
ever instead.  
 
A thousand injustices call out to us, from homeless
 children, to assaulted women, to the denial of 
long term benefits to those who still have not foun
d work after vainly paddling in the deep end of 
the recession for years. The maze tells us to block
 our ears from the voices crying out to us...after 
all, if you listen to everyone, says the maze, you'
ll lose the chance to get lost in dead ends within 
me, and you will then never figure how to get out o
f me. 
 
The labyrinth, however, offers us a different theor
y for living life than the maze does. You know 
right off the bat the basic reality of the labyrint
h...that you will go in and come out. There is 
nothing to panic about. Oh, there are sharp curves,
 sure, but like Buddha or Jesus suggested, such 
curves are a part of life, not some punishment for 
you being a bad person. The labyrinth does not 
have dead ends...you just keep going, even though y
ou may want to stop now and then to grieve, 
or remember, or go deeper into your own grounding h
opes and loves. The labyrinth does not 
offer you indispensible trinkets  and communication
 devices you simply cannot live without. The 
labyrinth offers you time with yourself that is not
 impinged by urgencies or calls. The labyrinth 
ask us to join Alice Walker in accepting the fullne
ss of who we are...our emotions, our age, our 
whole lives: 

I will not deny my lips their smile. 

I will not deny my heart its sorrow. 

I will not deny my eyes their tears. 

I will not deny my hair the wildness of my age. 

I will deny me nothing of myself
. 
 
The labyrinth is like the wise grandmother in the A
frican story of Zomo the Rabbit. Life asks us 
to do impossible things all the time, and the maze 
theory of life suggests that life is just that...a 
series of clever moves. The labyrinth reminds us, h
owever, that you need to pause to reflect on 
your life, and your clever moves, to think things t
hrough all the way to possible consequences, to 
wear your seatbelt and get a check up at your docto
r's, to take time for yourself, and not think it 
something lazy or shameful (as the maze suggests it
 is), but central to the living of a great and 
good life.  

 
Lawrence Raab compares a great and good life to a g
reat and good poem. 
A great poem is 
always possible,
 he says without hesitation. A poem that is not jus
t a list of words, one after the 
other, randomly, but a work of tight beauty, crafte
d from somewhere deep inside you, a set of 
words...or in the case of life, a set of days...whi
ch enlightens, moves and teaches rather than self-
destructs. Raab uses the idea of the poem to talk a
bout our lives: 
 
What I'm writing now is not 

the great poem. After a few lines 

I could tell. It may not even be 

a particularly good poem, although 

it's too early to decide about that. 

Keep going, I say. See what happens. 

But trying hard is one of the problems. 

 
Yes, great lives like great poems don't start off g
reat. There are a lot of mistakes on the way. But 
it™s important to keep going no matter what. Howeve
r, says the poet, trying 
too
 hard, as the maze 
theory of life suggests that we do, only leads to p
anic and an unwarranted sense of failure. The 
maze always is making sure we take time to dump on 
ourselves for not doing enough, for not 
folding in all the loose ends, for not taking on so
meone else's idea of what perfection and 
greatness looks like. 

 
But Raab is not worried. He writes: 
The great poem, I think, 
will
 arrive."  "
When?" you and I 
may ask. And he answers in a surprising way: "when 
I no longer care."   
 
Wow. That seems counter intuitive, doesn't it? Aren
't we supposed to care a lot? About love and 
life and truthfulness yes. About what Madison Ave t
hinks we should be buying to make them 
happy? No. And again no. 

 
I'll have abandoned art altogether, and I won't eve
n want to write the poem down, 
he continues. 
Even the word "art" makes it sound too structured, 
too judged, he's afraid. 
But,
 he then realizes, 
I'll remember what I once would have given for this
 moment, and I'll go back to my desk.  
 
What is this "moment" he would have given everythin
g for? What gets him to go back to his 
desk, to keep going forward with either poem or lif
e?  The very creative moment when he 
decides he is free to live his own life, not have h
is life be lived by some template of perfection, 
drive, guilt, shame and rage installed in his soul 
by someone else. 
That
 moment.  
 
Come to think of it, I would give everything for th
at moment myself. The poet concludes: 

 
And I'll write the poem 

as though I were another person, 

someone I will never be again.  

 
There, he clinches it. The good life, the great lif
e, is the one where we not only remember that 
we don't have to care what Madison Ave thinks, but 
we have to remember that we are not even 
going to be the same person tomorrow that we are to
day. New experiences will change us a bit. 
We are not permanent, but flowing; not rigid, but g
rowing; not ignorant, but knowing. 
 
However, the maze theory of life counters by tellin
g  us that we only "flow" on New Year™s Day, 
January 1st, when we make resolutions to change our
 diet, our exercise plan, our spending habits 
etc. As every comedian I know suspects, these resol
utions last about two weeks tops. Why? 
Because, I think, they are not based on who we are,
 but on clock time, determined entirely 
arbitrarily. These resolutions do not rise out of w
ho we actually 
are
, and 
are becoming
, with all 
of our emotions and knowledge and experience. Becau
se if that were true, we would begin to 
look at our diet and exercise habits today, Decembe
r 29th, not this coming Wednesday. I mean, 
the very idea that New Year™s Day begins at midnigh
t this coming Wednesday is also absolutely 
arbitrary. New Year™s Day used to be on the Spring 
Equinox here in the West. Iulius Caesar 
changed it to the first of January to honor the god
 with two faces, Ianus, or, as we say in English, 
Janus, giving us our name for that month. But none 
of us offer sacrifices to Janus, anymore, as 
far as I know. For the Chinese, New Year's begins o
n the second new moon after the Winter 
Solstice. Why the second new moon and not the first
? All arbitrary. 
 
The labyrinth offers us something that the maze ref
uses to offer us.... namely, ourselves as we 
are, and are becoming, not as others are trying to 
create us. The labyrinth offers us a chance to 
respect our own deeper selves, not to wear masks to
 satisfy someone else's need to control who 
we are for profit's sake. 

 
See. The elephant in the room is quite amazing. Won
derful, I mean. Astonishing. And the word 
amazing is not at all related to the word "maze," w
hich is a word that originally meant 
"confusing" or "baffling." Amazement just means 
wonder. 
 
I'd rather live my life in amazement, not in a maze
. I'd rather reflect on my life, and come to 
know some heartbeats of wisdom, than have my life l
ived for me by others for whom the heart is 
not quite as important. I'd rather go in deep and c
ome out deeper. This is my New Year™s Prayer 
for myself, and for you. 

 
Offering
 Because our community encourages personal spiritual
 growth with events like the labyrinth, 
or various circle groups; because so many find a wa
y to impact the world around us regarding 
women's health issues, insufficient wages, corporat
e irresponsibility through the organizational 
connection to this congregation, we now give and re
ceive the morning offering, sharing the 
responsibility for this place and its gifts to us. 
 
If you give in other ways, electronically, for exam
ple, thank you. And thanks for your generosity 
this morning. If you write a check, and want it to 
go to the Holiday Appeal, please enter that 
word on your check. Thanks. 

 
Returning  #544 

 
Singing #1057           Blessing 

 
 
