 1 2006-6 11      Gay Pride Sermon  

 
Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here  

to celebrate that we are, 

that we have gifts to share, 

and that we hold such promise, 

and to know that though we may be wounded, 

we are powerful and worthy,  

blest to be different, blest to be together. So 

 
Mindful of the responsibility our freedom presses i
nto us, blest by the beauty of the world, 
and drawn by a vision of a community known for its 
honesty, generosity, depth, 
love, and justice-work, we focus our time together 
by the kindling of light. 
 
Sequence
  
What is it like to be a 22 year old woman, with Afr
ican and Cherokee roots, hair braided, body 
athletic, to be the first from her family to gradua
te from medical school?  What is it like to be a 
19 year old man, with almost forgotten Appalachian 
roots, wiry body, tattooed, who broods over 
a Budweiser      after a fight with his girlfriend?
  What is it like to be a 92 year old woman, with 
Portuguese ancestry, hair combed and perfumed, as s
he holds her great, great grandson for the 
first time?  What™s it like to be a 30 year old man
 with Chinese and Korean ancestry, body thick-
muscled  and pierced, who just lost his boyfriend o
f five years to a rare cancer that strikes only 
one in ten million?  What™s it like to be 52 year o
ld woman with Polish ancestry, jovial in spirit, 
energetic, who loves nothing better than to talk of
 her kids and grandchildren while playing 
bridge at the synagogue?  What™s it like to be a 75
 year old man of Lakota ancestry, face crinkled 
and golden, still playing jazz piano after all thos
e years at that bar in Jackson, Missisippi?  
What™s it like to be a 40 year old women, sleek and
 bright eyed, telling her lover of five years, 
Fatima Chitral, that the artificial insemination wo
rked, and that they are pregnant? 
What™s it like to be you?  What™s it like to be me?
 I say any answer not held in the heart of 
silence for a time is too soon, too soon. 

 
silence 

 
What™s it like to be you? What™s it like to be me? 
Who do we remember, mourn, celebrate and 
struggle with? Held in the safe arms of this silenc
e, held in the heart of the world, we remember 
them here, aloud or hold them in the sturdy crook o
f our inner silence. 
 
naming 

 
What is it like to know peace deep within? What is 
it like to be strong to love? What is it like to 
be held in the heart of the world? What is it like 
to sing? 
 
The First Reading
 comes from a very recent article in the journal See
d, which has the subtitle 
?Science is Culture.?  The article, by Johan Lehrer
, is called The Effeminate Sheep, and it deals 

 2 with the 450 species of vertebrate and invertebrate
 animals in which ample same-sex behavior 
has been catalogued and studied. I urge you to read
 the whole article if you can find it at a good 
magazine store. 

 
The biologist Joan Roughgarden insists that given t
he pervasive presence of homosexuality 
throughout the animal kingdom, same sex partnering 
must be an adaptive trait that™s been 
carefully preserved by natural selection.  So how m
ight homosexuality be good for us as a 
human species? 

 
Well any concept of sexual selection that emphasize
s the selfish propagation of genes and sperm 
won™t be able to account for the abundance of non-h
eterosexual sex. Members of 450 species 
including homo-sapiens have been well documented en
gaging in frequent same-sex affection. 
But if traditional (that is heterosexual) readings 
of evolutionary science are true, all those gay 
penguins and persons will remain inexplicable. Howe
ver, if one looks at homo-sexuality from 
the perspective of community, one can begin to see 
why nature might foster a variety of sexual 
interactions. 

 
According to Roughgarden, gayness is a necessary si
de-effect to getting along. Homosexuality 
evolved in tandem with vertebrate societies, in whi
ch a motley group of individuals has to either 
live together or die alone. Indeed, Roughgarden eve
n argues that homosexuality is a defining 
feature of all advanced animal communities, which r
equire communal bonds in order to function. 
 
 
The Second Reading
 is from the new book by Jane Hirshfield, a poet eve
n my favorite poet 
Wislawa Szymborska admires. The book is called Afte
r, and the poem™s title it its first line: It 
Was Like This: You Were Happy 

  

It was like this: 

you were happy, then you were sad, 

then happy again, then not. 

It went on. 

You were innocent or you were guilty. 

Actions were taken, or not. At times you spoke,  

at other times you were silent. Mostly, it seems yo
u were silent -- what could you say? 
  

Now it is almost over. Like a lover, your life bend
s down and kisses your life. 
  

It does this not in forgiveness --between you, ther
e is nothing to forgive --but with the simple 
nod of a baker at the moment he sees the bread is f
inished with transformation. Eating, too, is 
now a thing only for others. It doesn't matter what
 they will make of you or your days: they will 
be wrong, they will miss the wrong woman, miss the 
wrong man, all the stories they tell will be 
tales of their own invention.  Your story was this:
 you were happy, then you were sad, you slept, 
you awakened.   Sometimes you ate roasted chestnuts
, sometimes persimmons. 
 
Sermon: 

 
Well, it™s my turn, after eight years, to offer a s
ermon in June close to what™s called gay pride 
Sunday. The lay services all these years have been 
terrific. But now I want to say something. 
 
 3 And first off, I want you to know that I know. I kn
ow something about what it might mean for 
you to know one of your ministers is a gay man. A m
ember of a minority of people in this nation 
against whom legislatures like to pass laws. I know
 something about what it means when you go 
out into the world, only to hear strutting preacher
s and politicos defame who I am. I™m sure it 
doesn™t feel any better to you than it does to me. 

 
So yes, I know. How do I know?  Many ways. Take for
 example a14 year old teen in the 
congregation I used to serve. She didn™t tell me th
is story herself, but her proud mother sure did. 
Seems this girl was at her middle school in Castro 
Valley, a town near the church, when a 
number of fellow students started to make loud, obn
oxious cracks about gay and lesbian people. 
Apparently she walked right up to them and said ?Yo
u are not telling the truth. My minister is a 
gay man, and I like him, and he has always been kin
d to me. I trust him, and he™s not at all like 
you say.? They apparently dismissed her with typica
l taunts, as folks who swagger tend to do, 
implying she was a lesbian by association, but she 
stood her ground.  And though they taunted 
her, she was not taunted. Understand? And so they t
urned off their little cock-of-the-walk 
display, and went on to other things. The mother wa
s proud of her daughter. We both wept a bit. 
And I was so proud and thankful. 

 
So, yes, I do know something of what it means for m
e to be in this pulpit. So thanks for sticking 
with me as you hear mean-spirited voices out in the
 world offering their theories about who I am, 
and who you are, for electing me to do this, no mat
ter how you or I define ourselves sexually.   
 
But as I have said before, me telling you I™m gay g
ives you very little information about who I 
am or what I do. Almost none at all, actually. Reme
mber, the word ?gay? is a political word 
only. It does not tell you anything about my sexual
 life, my ways of affection, my style of living 
at all. You may think it does, but believe me, ever
yone in this room, including me, have had 
ideas put in our heads by the vast army of remarkab
ly ignorant people who claim to run this 
globe of ours. Ideas that even with study, experien
ce and reading don™t entirely leave us.  I assure 
you, these ignorant people are wrong. This is how J
ane Hirshberg puts it:  
 
It doesn't matter what they will make of you or you
r days: they will be wrong, they will miss the 
wrong woman, miss the wrong man, all the stories th
ey tell will be tales of their own invention. 
 
Can™t be clearer than that. ?They will be wrong.?  
All of my experience from childhood on 
confirms that. Nothing said by any negative cleric,
 politico or pundit has ever had the slightest 
thing to do with my experience. They are inventing 
everything. For the words gay, lesbian, 
bisexual in particular are political words, not exp
erience words. Politics is a provisional joining 
together of folks to interpret experience generally
, but it is not in any way individual experience, 
which remains sacred and inviolate and entirely par
ticular. For all that the political words gay, 
lesbian and bisexual 
can
 mean is that the genders to whom people are attrac
ted may not always 
be the genders to which the majority of human being
s are attracted. What people do about that 
attraction however, is different, or particular, fo
r everyone. Just as with men and women 
together. 
Everyone™s
 sexual expressions are different. Oh, they may ove
rlap a lot, sure, but also, 
they remain clearly distinct, like our faces are di
stinct. And me making the assumption that my 
personal experience of affection is a clean match f
or yours makes me a fool, and you a chump, 
and that™s no way to live life as far as I know. 

 
Or, in the wonderful metaphor of the poet, sometime
s we eat persimmons, and sometimes,  
chestnuts. They are similar–sort of round, sweet, n
ourishing. But they ARE different. 

 4  
And difference 
means
 relationship. If we were all the same, we would no
t 
have
 relationships, just 
shared instincts, like bees or ants. We would relat
e to the world in the same way, we would have 
no questions for each other, and I™m not even sure 
love would have any power or sway, since 
everyone would be the same. 

 
No, difference 
is necessary.
 And wonderful. 
 
But for some reason, the whole concept of differenc
e really upsets some human beings.  People 
seem to feel that they have more control if they ca
n lump everyone into some category, good or 
bad, self or others. So they come up with distinct 
categories which claim to circle human 
experiences. The category of ?Homo-sexual? was inve
nted by an Hungarian physician named 
Karoly Benkert in 1869, not a very long time ago. ?
Gay? dates from the 1920™s we think. 
Lesbian goes back further, to the 1700™s. There wer
e categorical words like Urning, and Uranian 
and Tribadist, which once applied to sexual minorit
ies, but which have dropped out of sight. 
?Sodomy? was used from the fifth century to mean bo
th a particular kind of sexual action 
between any two people, and to refer to same-sex se
xuality.  But before the invention of these 
categorical words, would you have me believe that n
o variant sexuality existed?  When Leonardo 
DaVinci, the great artist and scientist, for exampl
e, embraced his partner in life of thirty years, 
Francesco Melzi, he did not think of himself as a ?
gay man? or a ?homosexual.?  Nor did 
Eleanor Roosevelt seem categorize herself as a Lesb
ian or Tribad when she wrote love letters to 
Lorena Hickok. All these words are relatively new t
o the vocabulary of difference. Oh, I am sure 
that Eleanor had heard demeaning words applied to w
omen who loved women. And I am sure 
that Leonardo knew that some church people thought 
of him as a sodomite, but both of these 
folks knew themselves from the inside as tender, lo
ving human beings. Nowhere in their vast 
collections of surviving expressions do either of t
hem define themselves by how they are 
different, but rather, by 
that 
they loved. 
 
And the word 
sodomy
, itself, for example, has nothing at all to do wit
h the biblical Sodom story, 
which had to do, as competent and unbigoted scholar
s have demonstrated, with the crime of 
inhospitality. Nor does the word 
sodomy
 have to do with the definition of same-sex sexual 
expression, since most gay people engage with each 
other in other ways. It™s an almost useless 
word, actually, unless you want to authentically ap
ply the word to Monsignor Applegate at St. 
Agnes Church in Roeland Park Kansas, who, according
 to an article in Friday™s dispatch, fired 
his long time music director this week for continui
ng to sing in the local Gay Men™s Chorus, and 
for refusing to be both celibate, and to admit he i
s ?disordered.? How inhospitable is it to fire 
someone for refusing to lie, for refusing to refuse
 to love? That™s pretty darn inhospitable, it 
seems to me  Where is the fire & brimstone when you
 need it? 
 
But still, there is this tension between difference
 and sameness that we all seem to wrestle with.  
Hirshfield, in her poem, stresses our similarities.
 How beautifully, how simply she states it! 
 
It was like this: 

you were happy, then you were sad, 

then happy again, then not. It went on. 

You were innocent or you were guilty. 

Actions were taken, or not. At times you spoke,  

at other times you were silent. 

 
 5 And, she adds, ?its almost over.? These lives of ou
rs are short. When I talked with Ed Slowter 
not long ago, he commented on how fast his life see
med to go by. This from a man born in 1912. 
Long life, that! But our lives 
are 
brief, compared to the wearing away of mountains, o
r the rise 
and fall of generations or species. 

 
But however brief, our lives share a certain rhythm
, the rhythm of life and heart and spirit which 
makes us all human. Whether people categorize thems
elves as gay or straight or bisexual, 
whether they categorize themselves as men or women 
or some other gender identity, no matter 
their height, weight, ability, ethnicity, or temper
ament, cannot we all say to some extent ?we 
were happy, then we were not, then happy again, the
n not?? You, me, Leonardo, Eleanor, have 
we not known both?   

 
So that™s the easy part. But what about the differe
nces? It becomes more difficult then. That™s 
when you find out how lazy and merely political all
 these labels are, gay, straight, bisexual or 
even transgender. I know men who had two or three e
xperiences with another man when they 
were young, and have had a happy marriage to a wife
 ever since. Are they gay, or bisexual or 
straight? I know a man who was married for 38 years
, had five children with his wife, and who 
for the last twenty years considers himself a gay m
an. Is he?  I know a woman who was married 
for a time to a man, then married for decades to a 
woman. What is she now? I know a woman 
who had a crush on her best female friend, but marr
ied a man who turned out to be gay. Who are 
these people? What category can we stuff them into?
  
It™s messy, folks, and it will stay messy. Experien
ce is never easy or neat. In the same way, 
happiness will never be able to divorce itself from
 unhappiness. It™s all there together forever. 
 
But the homosexual revolution of the last 30 some y
ears, is 
not
 messy. It™s clear and clean. What 
does it proclaim? Everyone is a human being, no mat
ter their differences. Amen. Everyone gets 
to come to the table, no matter who they are. Amen.
 Everyone has worth, dignity, and power, 
and the right to love whosoever they love, but with
 tenderness, not coercion. Amen. The rioters 
at the bar called Stonewall in Manhattan thirty-fiv
e years ago were saying just that. Stop 
harassing us. Leave us alone, law. Leave us alone, 
police! We are not hurting anyone. We are 
simply a minority. Like the Amish. Or nuns. Or left
-handed folks. Or people with red-hair. Or 
Albanians. A minority, a small amount mixed in with
 a large amount. Yeast in the flour, if you 
will. Different, but clearly important to the whole
.  
 
Historically, the so-called gay-pride movement bega
n at Stonewall on June 28
th
, 1969. I was a 
sophomore in college. I didn™t hear a thing about i
t. My folks knew I was interested in same-sex 
love because I told them in hysterical tears when I
 was 16. This was one of those days when both 
they and I would have quoted the poet: ?We were hap
py, then we were not.? It was a very 
difficult time for them and for me. And the culture
, the legislature, the church, the school, nor the 
psychological establishment helped me one bit in th
ose days. Not one single bit. They all failed 
me utterly. I was, effectively, if not really, alon
e. And so for years, I was terrified when I met 
other gay or lesbian people, because who wants to b
e drawn into deeper aloneness? And I was 
sure that if I accepted myself, that™s what would h
appen. I would lose my family, my friends, my 
culture, and finally my life, beaten up in some Sto
newall bar with a night-stick just for reaching 
out to others, just for breathing. 

 
But though no one else helped me, I didn™t lose my 
friends. I told my friends in high school, and 
they didn™t think anything the less of me, even tho
ugh they were just as ignorant culturally about 

 6 homosexuality as I was. But they loved me, and noth
ing could swerve that. 
 
So, having heard this, do you who have known me a w
hile wonder now why I address my 
prayers to Love so often on Sunday morning? I mean,
 Wendell Berry does that, May Sarton, & 
Rumi, and so many others, but do you ever wonder wh
y 
I do it? Will you wonder anymore why I 
think the wisest sentence in the whole of Western S
cripture is this: ?God 
is
 Love??  Do you 
wonder why it is I cultivate so many friends, and a
dore them all, and visit them, and call them 
daily, and rejoice when they visit me?  You™ve seen
 the statistics, (provided, somewhat 
amazingly, by our own fearful government.) Teens co
mmit suicide in overwhelming number 
because they don™t want to grow up gay in a world t
hat will do its best to punish them for that. 
So, yes, I had to get through my suicidal phase, li
ke all the rest, except the few lucky ones who 
were supported by liberal islands in the larger cul
ture.     
 
But my friends–were they straight? Were they gay? B
isexual? You don™t know, do you?  But 
they got me through. They got me to read. About Leo
nardo and Eleanor. About Sokrates and 
Sappho. I read about Stonewall. I read about others
 who were as alone as I was, and even more 
so, because they lived earlier than I.  

 
It™s not pride marches that made me proud to be who
 I am. It was Love that did it. It was the 
welcoming of my differences. It was hospitality. It
 was blessing, not fear and inhospitality. It 
was the heart™s religion, not bigotry™s idolatrous 
cult. 
 
For I assure you, those who read the Bible or other
 scriptures to condemn me read from the point 
of view of bigotry, not 
literalism
. Maybe they were abused when they were kids. Horri
ble. 
By a same gender parent. Maybe they engaged in a fe
w omosexual acts when they were young, 
but because they lived in an oppressive society or 
belonged to a cruel church, they learned to 
hate people like me as a way of pushing away their 
own memories.   
 
All I know is that when some joker tells me that I 
?chose? to be gay, they are telling me some-
thing about themselves, and saying absolutely nothi
ng about me. 
 
But why do these differences between us exist anywa
y? It™s a fair question. The heterosexual 
Darwin didn™t know what to do with that question. S
o he simply left it as some sort of 
inexplicable human social anomaly, since he thought
 evolution clearly profits when there are 
offspring, but not so much otherwise. But we have d
ocumented things Darwin didn™t know. Like 
that same-sex relationships, and sexuality, and bon
ding, are rampant throughout the so- called 
animal kingdom. So we know now that same-sex relati
onships have evolutionary meaning. And, 
we can look at how we ourselves look at things. Dar
win looked through the lens individuality. 
Today we can look through the lens of community. Do
ing that, the biologist Roughgarden 
affirms that ?gayness is a necessary side-effect to
 getting along in community.? 
?Homosexuality? she writes, ?evolved in tandem with
 vertebrate societies, in which a motley 
group of individuals has to either live together or
 die alone. Indeed, Rough-garden even argues 
that homosexuality is a defining feature of all adv
anced communities, which require communal 
bonds in order to function. Clergy, teachers, godpa
rents, parents, uncles, aunts, community 
organizers, and so many other ways of being in the 
world invite the evolutionary necessity of 
loving same-gender experience. 

 
And thus, on this Sunday celebrating pride, I am pr
oud, not to be part of a culture, for there is no 
singular gay or lesbian culture, really. I am proud
 rather, to be an essential and joyful part of the 

 7 great community called the human species, which des
pite our brief individual lives, has shown 
such promise, such power and courage in the face of
 all the real defeats and disillusions, so many 
death camps and crosses, so many oppressions and li
es. For love is more powerful than all of 
these realities, and blessing transcends aloneness.
 What™s it like to be me? I asked in the prayer 
before the silence. You don™t know everything, but 
you know a bit more now, and I hope that 
what you take away from this sermon is sometimes I,
 like you, am happy. And sometimes I am 
not. Again happy, again not. And that in the midst 
of it all, I am thankful and proud. I hope you 
are proud of yourselves too. Thanks for listening. 

 
Offering:
  To celebrate our community, we give to each other
 in support of our pride, our 
gratitude and our joys. Different from each other y
es, but if we were all the same, why would we 
give? The offering will be now given and received f
or the healthy life of this our community. 
 
Tributes to Myra and Les
  
