Sunday, March 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you." Jn. 14:15-18. "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid...If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father; for my Father is greater than I." Jn. 14:26-28. "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also...But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me." Jn. 15:18-26. "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you...Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." Jn. 16:7,13,14.  The Holy Spirit was called the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of Adoption, the Comforter or the Spirit of Comfort, the Spirit of Prophesy, the Spirit of Promise, the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, etc. There are other names of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, but let us consider His name and function as the "Holy Spirit of Promise;" to wit: "In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that HOLY SPIRIT OF PROMISE, Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory." Eph. 1:13,14.  Many times the dear Lord Jesus made PROMISE to his disciples, to the effect, that after His departure, He would ask the Father and they would send the Holy Spirit to comfort them; fill them to overflowing with all necessaries for the task before them; empower them specifically for their holy preaching ministry; educate them further in the affairs of the Kingdom; serve as a kind of divine memory bank, recalling the words of Christ on earth at all appropriate times for the apostles' instant usage as needed, addressing all pertinent passages of prophetic Messianiccentered Old Testament; etc. And these oft-repeated HOLY PROMISES made about the coming Holy Spirit, I say PROMISES made by Christ, to His disciples ­ (called, "the promise of the Father" at Acts 1:4) ­ were another reason that the Holy Ghost was called the Spirit of Promise; to wit: "And, being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the PROMISE OF THE FATHER, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but YE SHALL BE BAPTIZED WITH THE HOLY GHOST not many days hence." (Acts 1:4,5)  Sunday, March 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Now, Beloved, it is crystal clear that the Lord Jesus repeatedly promised the coming of the Holy Ghost for the supernatural assistance of His disciples, in much the same vein as when He promised to be with them to the end of the world and pledged His almighty power to their aid; to wit: All power is given to me in heaven and in earth; go ye THEREFORE and preach the Gospel worldwide; "and, lo, I am with you alway," ­ (i.e., by implication, I am with you with my endless resources, pledged to the success of your mission), ­ "even unto the end of the world." Mat. 28:18-20. Rollin: "The power granted to the Lord Jesus Christ, the founder of this empire," ­ (i.e., the Kingdom of God) ­ "is without bounds, measure, or end. The kings of the earth, who glory so much in their might, have nothing which approaches, in the slightest degree, to that of Jesus Christ. They do not reign over the will of man, which alone is real dominion. Their subjects can think as they please, independently of them. But, `ALL POWER is given unto Christ, both in heaven and on earth;' and He exercises it principally on the hearts and minds of men." ­ ("The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he will." Prov. 21:1.) ­ "The Lord has ALL men's hearts in His hands, but kings are singled out, as to turn their hearts seems especially difficult, because of their eminence and majesty, and because they are borne along impulsively to whatever they are inclined, arbitrarily and capriciously." So, e.g., "the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia" to invite the Jews to rebuild the temple (Ezra 1:1-4). The Bible has many such instances of God's manifestation of His sovereignty. He also turns the hearts of bad kings "to fulfill His will" (Rev. 17:16,17; to wit: "And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. (And what is the reason assigned for this violent and deadly assault upon the whore?) FOR GOD HATH PUT IN THEIR HEARTS TO FULFIL HIS WILL, AND TO AGREE, AND GIVE THEIR KINGDOM UNTO THE BEAST, UNTIL THE WORDS OF GOD SHALL BE FULFILLED." Rev. 17:16,17.) This is a most comforting doctrine, Beloved. It is in the nature of a powerful PROMISE to the Elect of God, that no tyrant will prevail against them. See the wording of Prov. 21:1 again; to wit: "The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he will." Gill says the sense of the passage is that God is able to stay the raging torrent of the king's unreasonable wrath coming with great force and impetus ­ as deadly, out-of-bounds, killer flood waters. And so, the Septuagint renders it "THE FORCE OF WATERS, bearing all before it, as do the wills of despotic kings; and yet these the Lord can stop and bound, and rule and overrule." Trapp: "Be kings never so absolute and unaccountable to any, yet are they ruled and overruled by Him `that is higher than the highest,'(Eccles. 5:8). `The king's heart,' that is, his will, desires, devices, resolutions, are God's to dispose of. He turneth them this way or that way with as much ease as the ploughman does the watercourse with his paddle, or the gardener with his hand." Beloved, nothing is done without His order or permission (which is the same thing); every thing is disposed by His wisdom and power; every thing co-operates, directly or indirectly, to the perfect accomplishment of His designs. "And we know that all things" ­ (all things whatsoever, that is) ­ "work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose." Rom. 8:28. "He, in the thickest darkness dwells, Performs His work, the cause conceals; But, though His methods are unknown, Judgment and truth sustain His throne. In Heaven, and earth, and air, and seas, He executes His firm decrees; And by His saints it stands confess'd, That what He does is always best. Pains and deaths around us fly ­ But till He bids we  Sunday, March 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  cannot die; Not a single shaft can hit, Unless the God of love see fit. This vain race of flesh and  blood, Contend with their Creator, God; When mortal man presumes to be, More holy, wise, and  just than He." (Benjamin Beddome).  Beloved, the Holy Spirit is spoken of as the Spirit of Promise and we are referred to as the Heirs of Promise; to wit: "Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the HEIRS OF PROMISE the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation," ­ (i.e., strong COMFORT, think COMFORTER, HOLY SPIRIT) ­ "who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; Wither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec." Heb. 6:17-20.  Brooks said that "The giving of the Holy Ghost is the great PROMISE which Christ, through the Father, hath made unto US." (Note, "hath made unto US" ­ not only to the church members on the day of Pentecost in Jerusalem, all as related in Acts 2); to wit: "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." (Acts 2:1-2)  Now this, Beloved, was "the promise of the Father, which saith he, ye have heard of me." Acts 1:4. Not only are we the gracious beneficiaries of "the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me" (Acts 1:4); but much more is included in the blessings which flow to us daily by virtue of the Spirit of Promise. They touch upon all the holy attributes of God, as though our Father should say, My grace, saith God shall be yours to pardon you, and my power shall be yours to protect you, and my wisdom shall be yours to direct you, and my goodness shall be yours to relieve you, and my mercy shall be yours to supply you, and my glory shall be yours to crown you. This is a great comprehensive PROMISE for God to be OUR GOD (!)(!). First, take the traditional blessednesses of the coming of the Holy Ghost; to wit: "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth." (Jn. 14:16, 17)  How wonderful, that we should have "ANOTHER comforter;" to wit: The Holy Ghost. This is probably an allusion to the fact that God the Father, the First Member of the Trinity, is also called, "THE GOD OF ALL COMFORT;" to wit: "Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and THE GOD OF ALL COMFORT; Who COMFORTETH us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to COMFORT them which are in any trouble, by the COMFORT wherewith we ourselves are COMFORTED of God." (2 Cor. 1:3,4)  Furthermore, every true believer in Christ is said here to be indwelt by the Holy Ghost as the Spirit of Truth, "that he may abide with you FOR EVER (!)" Jn. 14:16. The Holy Ghost also functions as a kind of super, lightning-fast, infallible, exhaustive SEARCH ENGINE, connected to an infinite memory bank eternally expanding; to wit: "But the COMFORTER, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and BRING ALL THINGS TO YOUR REMEMBRANCE, WHATSOEVER I HAVE SAID UNTO YOU." (Jn. 14:26)  Sunday, March 14, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  The Strong's Exhaustive Concordance, with its Appendix, Topical Index, Dictionary of the Hebrew Bible, and Dictionary of the Greek Testament ­ by James Strong ­ is truly a massive masterpiece of helpful Bible study tools. But, with due respect to Bro. Strong, ­ who worked for many years on his truly great Concordance ­ it does not hold a candle, as they say, to the work of the ever-present, ever-Comforting Holy Spirit.  Moreover, the very fact that He is speaking in his capacity and nomenclature as "Comforter" when it is said that He will teach us all things, and bring all things to our remembrance, all things whatsoever the Lord Jesus Christ said to His disciples on earth ­ I say, that very fact is dispositive proof that Spirit-led Bible study is always a source of great COMFORT in every case and condition. Item #3 of the categories of blessing flowing from the Holy Spirit of Promise: "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." (Jn. 16:13,14)  "He will guide you into all truth," even the whole counsel of God; ­ (the free-will, Arminian heretic shortly shows to all the world that he has no Spirit of Truth dwelling in him) ­ what relates to worship, the nature, form, and spirituality of it, as well as doctrine ­ (e.g., if you walk into a church pretending to celebrate the Lord's Supper with grape juice and crackers instead of real wine and unleavened bread, you may conclude without further argumentation that the Holy Spirit of Truth has no dwelling there).  Every true church has the blessed Holy Spirit as a guide. He goes before, leads the way, removes obstructions, opens the understanding, makes things plain and clear, teaches to spiritual profit and benefit and not formality, and leads the way men should go, without turning to the right hand or left, which, without such a guide, they would be apt to do. "But whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak," Jn. 16:13, as Christ Himself did ­ ("but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you." Jn. 15:15.).  And these holy "things" are such "things" as ear has not heard besides; what were secretly transacted in the Council Halls of eternity and in the Covenant of Grace, and agreed upon by all three Persons in the Godhead; things which concern the salvation of men, the Gospel churchmilitant state, and the business of the Kingdom, and the omnipotent power and glory of King Jesus walking amidst the seven golden candlesticks.  "And he will show you things to come;" such as the Holy Spirit of prophecy in the apostles, who showed many things to come in the after-ages; as the rise of Antichrist, the man of sin, the great apostacy or falling away from the faith once and for all delivered to the saints, the general and universal decline of all godliness, the calling home of the Jews, the final destruction of the Beast, the Dragon, and the False Prophet in the lake of fire, the burning of the world, and the making of new heavens and a new earth; and, to be short in eschatology, the Lord Jesus will show what would be the state of the church of Christ, and religion, in all the several periods of time, quite down to the coming of Christ, when dead saints shall be raised, and living ones changed, as is declared throughout the book of the Revelation. Item #5 of the categories of blessing flowing from the Holy Spirit of Promises: "For he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." (Jn. 16:14)  Brooks: "It is the Spirit that REVEALS the promises, that APPLIES the promises, and that helps the soul to LIVE UPON the promises." Like a heat-seeking missile, the "Holy Spirit of promise" scans the whole Bible for the right passage. I love you. Amen.  
