
.  







As I Saw It 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI 

In 1938, Shri Meher Baba gave the following statement when interviewed about the newly organized institution of the so-called God-mad men at Rahuri: "I am now undertaking the last stage of preparation. As the surgeon's knife cuts the matured cataract and restores sight, so, when the world is ripe, my blessing shall restore the drooping spirit of the world." 

The establishment of the Mad Ash≠ram at Rahuri, since 1937, has been shifted to "Meherabad" where the general activities of Shri Meher Baba have been reunited in separate small settlements. 

On the twenty-fifth of September of this year, Shri Meher Baba organized a theatrical performance of the God-mad men in their Ashram in "Meherabad". The extraordinary spectacle of God-mad men was acted in perfect order on a regular stage with real theatrical props and original costumes suited to the well-known Indian spiritual drama entitled "Gopichand". These mad men were trained to memorize the text of their roles which they repeated, keeping perfect sequence of the spoken senten≠ces. They were directed like marion≠ettes and obeyed unconsciously as di≠vine instruments. 

At a certain moment, one of these phantom-like creatures seemed to open up within a wider space in feeling, when, suddenly breaking away from the learned text, he released in loud words the urge of life for liberation. We heard the cry of the soul in bondage in the unconscious mind. The cry came spontaneous from the inner source of life aware in deeper intuition. His words said: "I fall at your feet; I give you my lifeóI die for you." Another mad man standing near, as his partner in the play, was carried into the mo≠mentum of the exalted soul, and, with the imitative gesture of a child, but using senseless words, automatically followed the executive control within, without resistance, exposing uncon≠sciously his 



  

self-defence pleading for mercy. This wonder of deep reaction I shall in no further way describe than in repeating Shri Meher Baba's own words: "He saw me as the Light in the darkness of his existence. In mind, in Being he was alight. He was sure of my Oneness in him. He saw my Being in him in full≠ness." 

All this was unfathomable and al≠most impossible to realize. I felt as one dreaming. I was as though looking through a nightmare of life unreal, confused, false, and see the divine mind react in its finite existence in ignorance. I saw Shri Meher Baba's universal mind evolve through the subjective work in mind in expiation, the objective state of mind in spirit existence. Shri Meher Baba is the divine constructive reaction in mind finite that results universally. The Christ show in life in Being is pure self use of life and it is real, pure work; it is one all work in Existence. 

The Master Himself made the fol≠lowing statement as explanation of the subtle order of His external work: "What does my work in mind exper≠ience; what does the Truth in mind ex≠erience; what does mind in expression in life and in spirit experience? Mind impersonal and mind individual I react in man conscious or unconscious. I am the extra order in mind ... give in, bring in, do, act, react. Mind as pure intuition is a work individual in man. Man reacts in himself as individual to the operation in mind. That is to say, man gives his life in expansion within new conscious order as 'I' in intuition. I do the indi≠visible reaction in reaction. It is the impulse of life impersonal in mind personal ... The expiation in mind of man is individual, impersonal, impure, pure, good, bad, in extra show in One, as life in free order in existence. It is the state of mind indivisible in the finite mind. It is 'two in one' the triangle order as fact, that one is and has to bring in and out, in order to live in and out, the secular order in expan≠sion in conscious order in I." 

The divine mind has descended into its own finite order in human existence to speed the happy ending through the reactive show in every degree in con≠scious life in mind. May the external effect be war or 


peace, both ends will bring to fulfil- Divine Executor. They have given an  

ment the supreme conclusion. The real  example which will remain a lesson to  

and only worthy result of it all is to  all. Their selfless love performed a true  

realize within the state of life conscious  miracle. Shri Meher Baba made it  

of the yet dormant Divine Existence.  possible that these God-mad men be- 

The selfless crew of individuals be≠ came instrumental for His divine plan;  

longing to the old stock of the mandali  and those 'good helpers' who served to  

who, for over twenty years, have served  bring to realization the external exper≠ 

unafraid and are staunch in the hard  iment He has transformed throughout  

game of discipleship to the Perfect  the many years of selfless dedication of  

Master, have given an extraordinary  their lives to Him, to become perfect  

demonstration of selfless service of  agents of His directing will.'  

unflinching endeavour and patience to  Shri Meher Baba s Will is Divine  

put through the difficult scheme of the  Love that can resurrect.  