You Must Believe It 

BY Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

    Thirty-six years fast, penance and solitude by Hazrat Baba Farid Shaker≠ganj found him nowhere nearer the goal 

i. e. Realization. He, therefore, came to Ajmere (Central India) to seek disciple≠ship of Khawja Moenuddin Chisti, the Perfect Master of the time. When Baba Farid approached the Master, he saw the latter seated on the ground leaning against a tree which was dry and denuded of all foliage. His psychic ego protested against the phenomena and wanted the tree, against which the Master of the age Khawja Moenuddin was resting, to be exuberantly green and leafy. He cast a glance at the tree, and with the pychic power made the tree verdant and green. The Master looked up at the tree and made it dry again. Again Baba Farid turned it green, and again Khawja restored it to its early state. 

    After this thaumaturgic duel, the Master pulled up the well meaning but misguided  visitor, saying: "Farid, have you come to learn perfection or to de≠monstrate cheap powers born of long asceticism? Divine nature wants the tree to be dry and leafless; who are you to interfere? Go straight to Delhi where Kutubuddin, my disciple, will teach you a lesson." 

Baba Farid went to Delhi as ordered and sought out Khawja Kutubuddin, whom he found playing with children. Baba Farid was very advanced in age, at the time, and he thought the Master Khawja Kutubuddin looked very much younger. In a flash this thought was read by the Master who immediately left the children playing and retired. After a time the Master emerged from his house completely transformed, robed, white-bearded and leaning on a long rod, and addressed the visitor thus: "Tell me, Farid, do I now look old enough to be your Master?" The utter≠ance of these words instantaneously imparted to Baba Farid God-conscious≠ness. 

    After a period, the master 



bestowed upon Baba Farid the robe of discipleship and allowed him to depart. The above historical episode brings into prominence two points often emphasized by Hazrat Meher Baba. The first is, that however long and severe one's self-imposed asceticism or yoga may be, the goal of Self-realization cannot be achieved without the Grace of a living Master. The second point is the question of con≠nection or spiritual relation-ship, the result of past preparation. Now here, in the above episode, is a Perfect Master Khawja Moenuddin of Ajmere quite capable of giving Realization to Baba Farid. Instead he directs the latter to Khawja Kutubuddin of Delhi. The 

reason is this. Baba Farid had spiritual connection with the Master of Delhi and not Ajmere. Hazrat Meher Baba 's experience is somewhat parallel to the above. After achieving and experien≠cing God ( Mushahida ) from Hazarat Babajan of Poona, he was spiritually directed by the latter to seek another Master for the completion of the exper≠ience by knowledge (Gnyan-Taleem). Hazarat Meher Baba there-after met Baba Tajuddin of Nagpur, Sai Baba of Shirdi and Narayan Maharaj of Kedgaon, all Perfect Masters of the time. But it was Upasani Maharaj of Sakori who received him and helped him to Perfection. This is what Hazarat Meher Baba means when he speaks of spiritual connection with a Master. 

(to be continued) 