Sunday, July 29, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  A Voice Crying in the Wilderness: "God Hates Ireland."  GodHatesIreland.com is the new Website launched by WBC this week to expose Ireland as the Emerald (now Pink) Isle of the Sodomite Damned, ­ saturated with fags and dykes at every level of society and government ­ where they have laws that criminalize Gospel preaching. Like the laws that arrested and then decapitated our hero ­ John the Baptist ­ aka, the Voice Crying in the Wilderness. Beloved, in these last of the last days, God has honored us by raising us up and giving us hearts like the heart of John the Baptist.  Here's an e-mail ­ one of thousands ­ mostly hostile ­ we get every week: He says: "When I saw this Web page, when I heard the sermon, despite the public outcry, despite the horror and ridicule that precedes Pastor Phelps, that have reached me before hearing his voice personally...I SAW the man screaming in the wilderness. I have never bothered to deal with sin and sodomy of the western nations too much, but when I heard the Pastor speak, I was shaken to the bottom of my soul. This surely is a man, this surely is a tool brought with the thunder of God Almighty ­ pronounced unto us."  Now listen to these words: "In those days came John the Baptist, PREACHING in the wilderness of Judea, And SAYING, Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, saying, The voice of one CRYING in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." Mat. 3:1-3.  Notice: John came "PREACHING," "SAYING," and then, "CRYING!" (Crying, per S#994 = to halloo!, i.e., shout for help or in a tumultuous way.) (Incidentally, the word "halloo, or halloa" means: Yell! to gain someone's attention; or to urge on the hounds in a hunt; a loud shout or call.) The e-mail guy said he heard my sermon and, "I SAW the man screaming in the wilderness." I'll take, "SCREAMING." It's close enough to, "CRYING." And it "gains someone's attention." "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression." (Isaiah 58:1) "And the same John had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey." (Matthew 3:4)  In other words, John was a rough and austere man, with a stern and uncompromising message, dressed in coarse clothing, living off the land on a sparse diet of free but nutritious food ­ all of which means that John the Baptist could satisfy the basic needs of life without depending on anybody's help ­ and being, as the saying goes, as independent as a hog on ice. Much like WBC today.  Sunday, July 29, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  GodHatesIreland.com  And now, back to our new Website, ­ God Hates Ireland.com. Back on March 10, 2003, we warned America about Ireland's sad, sick, sodomite culture and fag Irish Senator David Norris's case before the European Court of Human (i.e., Fag) Rights. (Incidentally, the "Openly-Gay" fag Irish Senator Norris was represented before that Strasbourg European Fag Court, by the famous Dyke-Enabler and Irish President, Mary Robinson.) Because we in America had a similar case ­ Lawrence v. Texas ­ pending before the Supreme Court of the U.S.  At oral arguments ­ March 26, 2003 ­ we picketed the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., in religious protest and warning ­ warning those 9 black-robed heretics NOT to follow the Satanic, fag-dominated courts of Europe ­ all now dominated by ONE Super-Supreme Fag Court sitting like the Great Whore of Rev. 17 on the "Many Waters" in Strasbourg, France ­ and in particular NOT to follow the filthy fag law generated by sodomite Ireland, via Irish fag Sen. David Norris and Irish pro-dyke Pres. Mary Robinson; to wit: Norris vs. Ireland. (I personally participated in picketing the U.S. Supreme Court on that cold day of Mar. 26, 2007, at the Supreme Court Building, in Washington, D.C., 1,500 miles from our church.)  We did not know at the time, that our own Supreme Court of the United States as they sat in their warm building furnished lavishly by us Americans ­ I say they were sitting there with a brief amicus curiae supporting the fag position by Irish Pres. Mary Robinson and Irish Fag Senator David Norris ­ which our own Supreme Court cited by name as authority in their own blasphemous, pro-fag landmark opinion in Lawrence v. Texas. Get the timing, Beloved. Get the remarkable timing! Read and "DISCERN THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES." Mat. 16:3.  First, on March 10, 2003, we published a detailed warning to America about sodomite Ireland and the threat of the fag-run EU (European Union). A copy of that warning is in today's handouts. We warned specifically that Ireland is now saturated with fags and dykes at every level, such that Ireland is no longer Emerald ­ but Pink ­ the world-wide fag color. We warned that Fr. Charles O'Byrne (Kennedy Family's priest) told Newsday that some 70% of American Catholic priests are practicing homosexuals; and, if so, then Ireland's sin-sick faggot priest population must be nearer 90% of the whole.  We warned that WBC has had lots of experience with Ireland's militant sodomite citizenry, steeped for many decades in ignorant, blind, idolatrous Catholicism, belching out their vile fagspeak, slander, and blasphemy against God and His Word ­ cursing WBC members as guests on Dublin talk-radio shows.  Remember, Martin Luther said Catholic churches, seminaries and monasteries are nothing but sodomite whorehouses filled with unnatural brute beasts and devils. We warned that the very leprechauns of Ireland are likely to be fags! Which is to say, Ireland is a land of sodomites ­ warp and woof! And, in this thing, Ireland is a symbol of all Europe, with the sodomite EU (European Union) leading the way to Hell, and the fag-run Strasbourg Court beating the drums. It is economically advantageous to join the European Union, but in order to do so, countries must submit to and yield their sovereignty to the godless fag agenda.  Sunday, July 29, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  WBC's Solemn Warnings  That Satanic, lawless fag agenda includes same-sex marriage, decriminalization of all sodomy and age-of-consent laws, and laws making it a serious crime to preach God's Word about sodomites. 27 countries with 500 million souls now belong to the Fag-Dominated EU.  Notwithstanding our solemn warnings of March 10, 2003 (flyer/press release) and March 26, 2003 (picket D.C. at U.S. Sup. Ct. oral arguments in Lawrence v. Texas), ­ I say, in spite of WBC's solemn warnings, America's highest court went full steam ahead, adopting the Strasbourg Fag Court case of Norris v. Ireland and Mary Robinson briefs, ­ even citing the Norris v. Ireland case and Mary Robinson's briefs ­ by name ­ as authority, in the U.S. Supreme Court opinion handed down June 26, 2003. See, Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, at pg. 576.  Get it? On June 26, 2003, the Supreme Court of the U.S. ­ the official conscience of this nation ­ coughed up a glob of filthy, fag spit, ­ commingled with a small dollop of diseased Irish fag feces ­ and spat it in the Face of God Almighty.  On that date ­ June 26, 2003, the Supreme Court of the U.S. ­ the determiner, the framer, and the keeper of the morals and the mores of America ­ crossed an eternal and invisible line ­ from which there is no turning back.  From that date, America has been finally and irreversibly doomed and damned by God: "The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God." Psa. 9:17.  Lawrence v. Texas is the landmark of America's irrevocable doom ­ supported and egged on by Norris v. Ireland, the landmark of Ireland's irrevocable doom.  "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?" Jer. 5:29.  "But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction; truth is perished, and is cut of from their mouth." Jer. 7:28. I have no doubt, Beloved, that Psalm 2 was written about 3000 years ago as a direct, prophetic revelation of this apostate Irish, EU, and American fatal folly we are experiencing right here, right now, on the ground. Listen to the words: "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?" Psa. 2:1. In short, the Western World (and more and more the East) is raging mad at WBC for preaching God's Truth about fags ­ and they vainly imagine that they can pass enough stupid laws to trump the Word of God.  Sunday, July 29, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain  thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers  take counsel together, against the LORD, and against his  anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast  away their cords from us." (Psalm 2:1-3)  Continuing to quote Psalm 2 at verse 2: "The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed." Psa. 2:2. The kings of the earth are the heads of state by any name or title; e.g., kings, presidents, prime ministers, etc. The heads of state have all conspired together and set their feet in concrete; saying, 1) It's OK to be gay; and, 2) anybody who says otherwise ­ and make no mistake, they all mean WBC! ­ will be prosecuted for the crime of hate speech. And now continuing to give the meaning of Psalm 2 at the last half of verse 2: These heads of state and inferior rulers at every level of government in America, Europe and elsewhere ­ are continuously holding meetings to take counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed ­ (note: the only way they can get at the Lord is by plotting to ­ and acting to ­ destroy His anointed servants on earth; i.e., WBC).  And the subject of all their conferences, plots, and schemes against WBC is found, succinctly, at verse 3; to wit: "Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." The bands and cords whereby WBC afflicts and "torments" ­ (see, "These two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth." Rev. 11:10.) ­ I say, whereby WBC afflicts and torments all mankind, are nothing other than plain, sharp, ringing Anglo-Saxon Bible doctrines, faithfully preached. For example, all fags and fag-enablers writhe in pain and agony when WBC quotes and expounds ­ in the context of relevant current events on the ground ­ such Bible passages as Lev. 18:22; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination." The Bible portrays sodomites as the most abominable beasts on earth. And their consciences bear witness to the truth of what the Bible says.  So, when the Truth is preached about them, these beasts smell brimstone & feel heat from rapidly-approaching fires of eternal Hell. That kind of preaching torments them. Hence their mad drive to have laws saying: 1) It's OK to be gay, and 2) Anybody saying otherwise must be silenced by force of the criminal law. And my, how they cringe and howl when their vile sex practices are held up to Bible light; as Christ said, "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil." Jn. 3:19.  My, how they cringe and scamper when God's light is shined on these hiding cockroaches. When it is widely told and exposed on a regular basis: Fags eat each other's feces, don't forget, and call it "Scat;" lick each other's anus, and call it "Rimming;" drink each other's semen, and call it "Priapus Cocktail;" urinate on each other and call it "Golden Showers." "Every one that doeth evil hateth the light ­ (real haters) ­ neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." Jn. 3:20. Amen.  
