Sunday, November 30, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain:  and when he was set, his disciples came unto him: And he  opened his mouth, and taught them, saying.... YE ARE THE  LIGHT OF THE WORLD. A city that is set on an hill cannot  be hid.... Let your light so shine before men, that they may  see your good works (i.e., holy picketing), and glorify your  Father which is in heaven." Mat. 5:1,2,14,16.  President Ronald Reagan used to say that this country ­ America ­ is a shining city on a hill that the whole world wants to be like and be a part of. Obama is making some of the same sounds in our day. Obama says a new wind is blowing, wonderful changes are coming. Obama says all we need to do is work together, and we can solve all our problems with the economy, with our broken foreign relations, with our wars all ended and world peace everywhere, and with first class health care, free, for everybody, a first class college education, free, for everybody, etc. Obama says that our glorious new society will abolish hate crimes and "HATE SPEECH," (say what?), so that everybody will be accepted and respected for what and who they are; including, Obama says, ­ and I mean he says it over and over again, with all the fervor and evangelistic zeal of an arm-waving Pentecostal revivalist preacher ­ including (Obama says) respect for rich and poor, old and young, black and white, "GAY AND STRAIGHT," (say what?).  And Obama says he gets his goofy ideas out of the Sermon on the Mount, and that the Sermon on the Mount ­ Obama says! ­ TRUMPS whatever the Bible says condemnatory of Sodomy and Sodomites. More particularly, Obama says, the Sermon on the Mount TRUMPS such Bible passages as Lev. 18:22, Gen. 19:1-26, Rom. 1:14-32, and Lk. 17:20-30.  Thus you see, Beloved, that Obama's brave new world ­ Obama's idea about America becoming again a shining city on a hill for all the world to long after ­ is contingent upon Obama turning the country over to the hordes of vile Sodomites that have so far flown beneath the radar ­ and to do that, Obama must begin by eradicating great portions of God's Holy Word, by the neat device of pretending that the Sermon on the Mount TRUMPS ALL THOSE VITAL PORTIONS OF GOD'S HOLY WORD. Beloved. Think of it.  Here is a man, who, driven by blind ambition to be a big world leader, is willing to butcher the Bible. He is smart. He knows better. But he is banking on the proposition that America's religious masses are too dumb, or just plain too indifferent, to care. It is breathtaking. Obama knows that millions of hypocritical Americans still pay lip-service to believing that the Bible is the Word of God. Obama knows that the Bible plainly condemns Sodomy and all Sodomites as abominable and sinful; and that millions of Americans pay lip-service to that proposition also. Obama also knows that millions of Americans are totally, irreconcilably opposed to abortion, as being plainly and simply, the BLOODY MURDER of millions of infants. "Thou shalt not kill !" thunders God's Word. Ex. 20:13.  How in the world can Antichrist Obama get around that? Not to worry. Obama hides behind his own specialized, perverted version of the "Sermon on the Mount." In an October 19, 2008, issue of "Christianity Today," Obama cited the Sermon on the Mount for his support of same-sex  Sunday, November 30, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  marriage and for his support of abortion; to wit: Obama said, "I think what you may be referring  to, when you say controversies, probably has more to do with two issues, which is abortion and  gay marriage, which has become, I think, how people measure faith in the evangelical  community. If people find that (my position) controversial, then I would just refer them to the  Sermon on the Mount, which I think is, in my mind, for my faith, more central than an OBSCURE  PASSAGE IN ROMANS (Chapter one)."  Antichrist Obama thus uses the Sermon on the Mount to TRUMP the condemnatory language of God's Word about Sodomy and Sodomites. As though, one passage of the Bible could cancel out another passage altogether ­ which is the sin against the Holy Ghost, Who is the Author of both passages, and, indeed, of the whole Bible, and every jot and tittle of it. Mat. 12:31,32. "For the prophecy" ­ (i.e., `all Scripture,' 2 Tim. 3:16.) ­ "came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake AS THEY WERE MOVED BY THE HOLY GHOST." (2 Pet. 1:21)  Beloved. Make no mistake. Nobody, but NOBODY ­ EXCEPT ANTICHRIST ­ would dare to pit one passage of Holy Writ against another ­ exactly as Obama has done. Ergo, here is more compelling proof: OBAMA IS ANTICHRIST ­ the BEAST, of Rev. 13, who arises out of the sea of restless mankind ­ even the second person of Hell's unholy trinity, that counterfeits the Holy Trinity, consisting of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28:19; to wit: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Mat. 28:19)  Hell's unholy trinity, ­ to be identified in the last days of the last days, ­ consists of the dragon (Satan), the beast (Antichrist, Obama), and the false prophet (the Pope of Rome) ­ and these three are heavily identified throughout the Book of Revelation ­ and more particularly identified as the Book of Revelation draws near its close; to wit: "And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet." (Rev. 16:13)  Beloved, this exceedingly elegant and fearsome metaphor has somewhat baffled expositors through the ages. But they labored without the benefit of the amazing "signs of the times" that we are blessed with. How could our spiritual ancestors have imagined ­ in their wildest dreams ­ such a Satanic phenomenon as the Antichrist, Barack Obama? Listen to these inner struggles of Seiss, one of the very finest of Bible expositors of the Book of Revelation, titled, "The Apocalypse;" to wit: "By these demon spirits the cause of the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet, IS FURNISHED WITH A UNIVERSAL MINISTRY !" Seiss goes on to call it the "hellish gospel of the Infernal Trinity," and capitalizes "the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet."  Typically, the largest newspaper in Kenya, Africa, where black Obama's roots are, called the Daily Nation, ran an editorial and a cartoon prodding Americans to elect the candidate that "the rest of the world wants." A Satanic, demonic, "Universal Ministry," indeed.  Sunday, November 30, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  They continued, "Black people the world over, and Kenyans in particular, are happy that one  who traces his ancestry from the African Continent leads America, and will, therefore, BE IN A  POSITION TO INFLUENCE THE DESTINY OF THE WORLD !"  Think of it, Beloved. Obama is now the sole Commander in Chief of all the armed services and military resources of the United States of America ­ including thousands of nuclear warheads with their delivery systems sufficient to destroy ­ by blowing up ­ the whole world ! Which is a thing unprecedented in the entire history of the world ! I say, Bible expositors, prophets, and preachers from the beginning of the world, have never before been blessed with our wealth of "the signs of the times." Mat. 16:3. Mammoth billboards bearing pictures of a smiling Antichrist Obama DOT THE LANDSCAPES OF THE WORLD. "For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and the WHOLE WORLD, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty." (Rev. 16:14)  That's the ultimate mission of Antichrist and his Hellish Trinitarians ­ however they start out. Seiss: "By these demon spirits the cause of the Dragon, the Beast (Obama), and the False Prophet, is furnished with a universal ministry. They are sent out by this infernal Trinity, issue from it, do its bidding, act for it and in its interest. They have the power of working miracles, Satanic miracles, by which they offset everything divinely supernatural, and persuade by their preaching, oracles, and lying wonders, stirring up all the powers that be to unite in one universal movement to suppress and exterminate the incoming kingdom and power of the Lamb."  And a major part of that Antichristic movement to suppress and exterminate the incoming kingdom and power of the Lamb, is to suppress and exterminate the Word of God ­ via: 1) perverting the Scriptures, Jer. 23:36; 2) handling the Scriptures deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4:2; 3) corrupting the Scriptures, 2 Cor. 2:17; 4) wresting or twisting the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3:16; 5) hiding the Scriptures, 2 Kgs. 22:8; and/or 6) cutting with a penknife and burning the Scriptures, Jer. 36:23.  And, by suggesting that the Sermon on the Mount (Mat. chapters 5,6, & 7) somehow trumps Ex. 20:13 ("Thou shalt not kill.") so as to make abortion OK, and somehow trumps Lev. 18:22 ("Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination.") so as to make Sodomy OK ­ I say, that by suggesting such tomfoolery, renders Antichrist Obama guilty of perverting the Scriptures, handling the Scriptures deceitfully, corrupting the Scriptures, wresting or twisting the Scriptures, hiding the Scriptures, and cutting with a penknife and burning the Scriptures.  All of which identifies Obama as the Beast aka the Antichrist ­ when added to the other compelling evidence on the ground, as they say ­ and none of which was available to Seiss and his predecessors. But such examples or symbols as wicked king Jehoiakim WERE available to Seiss and his predecessors ­ and they are available no less to us, and THEY SYMBOLIZE ANTICHRIST (OBAMA) ­ and his collaborative thugs ­ to come, in the last of the last days; to wit: "So the king (Jehoiakim) sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of Elishama the scribe's chambers. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king. Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and  Sunday, November 30, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  there was a fire on the hearth burning before him. And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had  read three or four leaves, he (i.e., the king) cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that  was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth." Jer.  36:21-23.  Now, Beloved, let us cut to the chase, as they say. In slicing the Word of God into little pieces and burning it up completely in the fire, king Jehoiakim was epitomizing, or symbolizing, ANTICHRIST OBAMA. Put another way, when Obama said that the Sermon on the Mount trumped "Thou shalt not kill," and "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination," so that it's now OK to kill babies, and it's now OK to commit sodomy, ANTICHRIST OBAMA THEREBY TOOK HIS PENKNIFE AND SLICED THE WORD OF GOD INTO LITTLE PIECES AND BURNED IT UP COMPLETELY IN THE FIRE. Woe unto Antichrist Obama ! Woe unto his henchmen comprising his campaign team, his so-called transition team, his administration, and the doomed nation that elected him ! Beloved. The historical event, as related by the Holy Ghost in the 36th Chapter of Jeremiah, is so appropriate to our situation at this hour, that I urge you to study and discuss it, until it becomes a very familiar part of your reading of "the signs of the times." Mat. 16:3.  For example, immediately following the recitation of king Jehoiakim's blasphemous and breathtakingly profane act of cutting up and burning God's Word, we read words that are more startling still; to wit: "YET THEY WERE NOT AFRAID !" Gill: "They were not struck with horror at such an impious action as the burning of the roll; nor afraid of the judgments and wrath of God threatened in it; nor did they rend their garments in token of sorrow and mourning on account of either, as used to be when any thing blasphemous was said or done, or any bad news were brought. The Jews from hence conclude, that whenever a man sees the law torn or cut to pieces, he should rend his garments. What the king had done was enough to make them fear and tremble; but they were hardened in their sins; and by the hardness and impenitence of their hearts treasured up wrath against the day of wrath."  Beloved. What Antichrist Obama has said and done is enough to make all in this nation fear and tremble. Surely nobody in this evil nation fears and trembles, because, as the Scripture has said, "There is no fear of God in this place." Gen. 20:11. Israel was doomed. America is doomed. Another lesson for us from the Holy Ghost, in recounting this valuable segment of sacred history, is seen in the aftermath of burning God's Word. Not satisfied with his Satanic desecration, the evil king ordered the arrest and execution of Jeremiah and his amanuensis (super secretary) Baruch, for daring to publish God's Word, as specifically ordered by the Lord; to wit: "Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces." (Jer. 1:17) "But the king commanded... to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: BUT THE LORD HID THEM." (Jer. 36:26)  Gill: "There was no doubt a special providence concerned for them; but by what means this preservation was, is not known. Kimchi suggests that these messengers sought for them in the very place where they were, and could not find them; and conjectures that the Lord set darkness  Sunday, November 30, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  about them, or weakened the visive faculty" ­ (VISIVE means, pertaining to the power of seeing)  ­ "of those that searched for them, that they could not see them."  All the while the Antichrist Obama runs his lying, blasphemous mouth about "which passages of Scripture should guide our public policy" ­ (say, what?) (See this heretic's so-called "Call to Renewal Address," June 28, 2006.) ­ I say, all the while Obama is violating the Constitution, prating like an American Pope about what we will be officially permitted to believe about the Bible, once he takes office! ­ he, in the next breath is talking about arresting and criminalizing anybody who preaches "hate speech" from the Bible or anywhere else. It appears that Antichrist Obama defines "hate speech" as any passage of Scripture the Beast has not authorized, such as Lev. 18:22, Rom. 1:14-32, and Deut. 23:17,18.  Next, Beloved, is God's holy reaction to the king's conduct in burning His Word, and in ordering His servants to be arrested and killed; to wit: "And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the Lord; Thou hast burned this roll... Therefore thus saith the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and HIS DEAD BODY SHALL BE CAST OUT IN THE DAY TO THE HEAT, AND IN THE NIGHT TO THE FROST (i.e., rendered carrion, or rotting, putrefied, and stinking human-body meat). AND I WILL PUNISH HIM and his seed and his servants for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not." Jer. 36:29-31.  Notice, Beloved, the intensity and the scope of the promised punishment for cutting and burning the Word of God. Note the ripple effect, the ever-widening concentric circles of devastating pain and punishment, centering in Antichrist Obama, thence rippling out to his seed or posterity, then his servants, then to all the inhabitants of Washington DC, and then to all the inhabitants of the doomed and cursed United States of America, who elected this Antichrist to run this Sodomite country by a landslide. Beloved. It was a most dastardly and unforgivable thing that Jehoiakim did in cutting up and burning God's Word; and it prophetically symbolized what Antichrist Obama was to do ­ AND DID DO ­ centuries later, when he, as President-elect of the world's only super-power, used the Sermon on the Mount of our Lord Jesus Christ, to profanely and blasphemously TRUMP VITAL PORTIONS OF GOD'S WORD.  Beloved. It would be impossible to overstate the evil which Antichrist Obama has done, or to overstate the punishment coming upon him from the hands of an outraged God; to wit: "Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim (symbolizing Obama) the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory! He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem (symbolizing Chicago, or Honolulu, Hawaii, or, etc.)." Jer. 22:18,19.  "And the BEAST (Antichrist Obama) was taken, and with him the false prophet... These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone." (Rev. 19:20)  Amen.  
