Sunday, July 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And as we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. ... Behold, I show you a mystery, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be CHANGED," ­ (i.e., "All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my CHANGE come." - Job 14:14), ­ "In a moment, in the  twinkling of an eye, at the last TRUMP; for the TRUMPET shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be CHANGED. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, So, when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and  this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory  through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." 1 Cor. 15:49,51-58.  Beloved, the certainty of the resurrection of the human body, simultaneously with a glorious transformation (CHANGE) of that body from a corrupt organism to an incorrupt AND INCORRUPTIBLE one ("and the dead shall be raised incorruptible." 1 Cor. 15:52.) ­ all to be momentarily accomplished at the first thrilling blast of the last TRUMP ­ I say, the certainty of these glorious things shortly coming to pass is heralded and argued by the apostle as the all-sufficient reason for us to be "stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord." 1 Cor. 15:58. "And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in DUE SEASON we shall reap, if we faint not." Gal. 6:9.  Beloved, let us take stock. Let us look diligently and be sure that no man shall take our crown (Rev. 3:11); to wit: "I know thy works; behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name." Rev. 3:8. Between these two passages is a somewhat stunning prophesy and warning that we should take to heart; to wit: "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." Rev. 3:10. Beloved, for many years now we have gone forth daily ­ weeping ­ bearing precious seed; the Lord of the harvest saw and heard and promised us a harvest; to wit: "He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, SHALL DOUBTLESS COME AGAIN WITH REJOICING, BRINGING HIS SHEAVES WITH HIM." (Psa. 126:6)  The last day WILL come. The last TRUMP, WILL sound. "The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might;" ­ (i.e., all mankind will be totally stunned at their utter powerlessness in the teeth of God's wrath at last poured out upon them) ­ "they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf. They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth; they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee." ­ (i.e., God's elect, who are assisting the King in His punishment of all impenitent rebels) Mic. 7:16,17.  That day is also called: The Day of the Lord, A Day of Wrath, A Day of Trouble, A Day of Distress, A Day of Wasteness, A Day of Desolation, A Day of Darkness, A Day of Gloominess, A Day of Clouds, A Day of Thick Darkness, A Day of Alarm, and, A DAY OF THE TRUMPET; to wit: "The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, A DAY OF THE TRUMPET and alarm against the fenced cities," ­ (i.e., those locations of man's  Sunday, July 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  military fortifications, touted as being absolutely impregnable, but totally annihilated by a wave of the  hand of the Almighty God) ­ "and against the high towers. And I will bring distress upon men, that  they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord; and their blood shall be  poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to  deliver them in the day of the Lord's wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his  jealousy; for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land." Zeph. 1:14-18.  It is called THE DAY OF THE TRUMPET AND ALARM because the TRUMPET has played such a prominent part in the history of redemption, and is destined to play a prominent part in the winding up of mankind's affairs and history on earth. The story line runs like this; to wit: It has pleased the Lord to maneuver His people through the vicissitudes of life, oftentimes by the mysterious and selective use of silver TRUMPETS blasting thrillingly in their souls ­ and such that only they, oftentimes, can hear them. And those blessed TRUMPETS never give an uncertain sound; to wit:  "For if the TRUMPET give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?" (1 Cor. 14:8)  The precious doctrine of the Silver Trumpets has its genesis in the book of Numbers, chapter 10; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Make thee two TRUMPETS OF SILVER; of a whole piece shalt thou make them; that thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps." Num. 10:2. Thus you see that the first use given for a thrilling blast of the Silver Trumpet of God, was for the calling of the assembly, consistent with the same encouragement in the language of the New Testament; to wit: "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching." (Heb. 10:25)  Think of it, Beloved. The humble act of assembling of ourselves together with the most nondescript of a genuine New Testament church is so important in the economy of Heaven as to call for a supernatural blast from the Silver Trumpet of God. What made you organize your affairs and arrange your schedule so as to plant your little sheep's feet in a sure course and path from your house to the church each time the holy church assembles to worship? I tell you, it was the Silver Trumpet of God? I tell you, it shows you how important it is to our Heavenly Father that each time the church assembles, with a few exceptions, each member has a solemn obligation to be there and worship, and encourage his loved ones. I tell you, it is a mighty dangerous thing to forsake the assembling and ignore the thrilling call of the Silver Trumpet of God. What if God neglects to give you a Silver Trumpet call to the Rapture? For it is a certainty that the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is heralded by a thrilling blast of that old-familiar trumpet sound; to wit: "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; FOR THE TRUMPET SHALL SOUND, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed." (1 Cor. 15:52)  I have been thinking much of late about those words that immediately follow the passage about not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together; to wit: "And so much the more, as ye see the day approaching. (Bang!) For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." Heb. 11:26,27. Is the apostle saying that forsaking the assembly in willful disregard of the Silver Trumpet call thereto, is a serious, if not a deadly, sin?. The second use of the Blast from the Trumpet was "for the journeyings of the camps." Num. 10:2. It was a complex arrangement for the skillful use of the Trumpets; to wit:  Sunday, July 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to  thee at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. And if they blow but with one  TRUMPET, then the princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather  themselves unto thee. When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east  parts shall go forward. When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that  lie on the south side shall take their journey; they shall blow an alarm for their  journeys." (Num. 10:3-6)  Notice here, Beloved, that when the saints of God are taking their various journeys, it is a precarious time; ­ Yes, a potentially dangerous time ­ hence, "They shall blow an alarm for their journeys." "But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, BUT YE SHALL NOT SOUND AN ALARM." Num. 10:7. Thus you see the level of sophistication of the Silver Trumpets of God. There is nothing dangerous about the genuine congregation of God's holy saints; hence, there is no need to sound an alarm. But when the saints of God are to prepare for spiritual warfare, "then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets;" to wit: "And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, THEN YE SHALL BLOW AN ALARM WITH THE TRUMPETS; and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies." Num. 10:9. How precious! Somehow it appears that the call to war via the blast of alarm of these Trumpets is associated with victory in warfare; to wit:  "My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, BECAUSE THOU HAST HEARD, O MY SOUL, THE SOUND OF THE TRUMPET, THE ALARM OF WAR. Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is spoiled; suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment. How long shall I see the standard, AND HEAR THE SOUND OF THE TRUMPET?" (Jer. 4:19-21)  Moreover, the trumpet blast has a thrill to it; thrill meaning it has the capacity to excite the intensest of emotions. Thus the VOICE of the TRUMPET was associated with the presence of God on Mt. Sinai; to wit:  "And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their clothes, and be ready against the third day; for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon Mt. Sinai. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death. There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live; WHEN THE TRUMPET SOUNDETH LONG, THEY SHALL COME UP TO THE MOUNT. ... And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, AND THE VOICE OF THE TRUMPET EXCEEDING LOUD; SO THAT ALL THE PEOPLE THAT WAS IN THE CAMP TREMBLED. And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount. And Mt. Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. AND WHEN THE VOICE OF THE TRUMPET SOUNDED LONG, AND WAXED LOUDER AND LOUDER, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount; and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount, and Moses went up." (Ex, 19:10-13, 16-21)  Sunday, July 18, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. It would be difficult imagining that scenario on Mt. Sinai without the thrilling blast of the  Trumpet (here called the VOICE of the Trumpet) waxing longer and longer and louder and louder to a  grand climax consisting of the holy conversation between the Lord and Moses.  Of equal importance is the necessary presence of these holy silver trumpets at times of gladness and solemnity and religious vows, memorials, offerings, and sacrifices; to wit:  "Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, YE SHALL BLOW WITH THE TRUMPETS OVER YOUR BURNT OFFERINGS, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God; I am the Lord your God." (Num. 10:10)  The management of what might be called the Law of the Silver Trumpets of God was assigned to the Aaronic Priesthood in perpetuity; to wit: "And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an ordinance (Law) for ever throughout your generations." Num. 10:8. Trumpets enjoy prominent positions when our dear Lord Jesus Christ begins in the last days to set about in earnest to wrapping up the miserable affairs of the doomed Adamic race. For instance, there are no grander or more comforting words in all the world ­ religious or secular ­ than those of the apostle in the fourth chapter of 1st Thessalonians; to wit: "But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, AND WITH THE TRUMP OF GOD; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words." (1 Thes. 4:13-18)  Thereupon ensues the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world began. See, Acts 3:19-21. It is the consummation of all things, the management of which is handled in large part by the now-glorified saints, including the seven mighty so-called Presence Angels and their fearful TRUMPETS; to wit:  "And I saw the seven angels which stood before God, and to them were given seven TRUMPETS; ... And the seven angels which had the seven TRUMPETS prepared themselves to sound. ... And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth by reason of the other VOICES of the TRUMPET of the three angels, which are yet to sound!" (Rev. 8:2,6,13)  Like the horse that is trained for battle, the soldiers of the Lord smell the battle afar off, and run to the thunder and shouting ­ led on by the sound of the TRUMPET which the horse cannot hear; to wit: "He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage; neither believeth he (i.e., the horse) that it is the sound of the TRUMPET. He (i.e., the saint) saith among the TRUMPETS, HA, HA; and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting." (Job 39:24,25)  From the cradle to eternity God's elect thrill to the blast of God's Silver Trumpet leading them.  I love you. Amen.  
