INTRO.- We need to learn how to avoid certain pitfalls and even disasters in life.ILL.- One time I was driving home around 10 p.m.  I had worked all day in a retail store and was tired and sleepy.  I was driving about 55 to 60 mph when I suddenly started to fall asleep.  I didn’t even realize it.  My eyes closed and my head dropped. I suspect that some have had that same experience.I don’t how it happened, but for some reason I woke up, I looked up and there was a car directly in front of me with its left turning signal on.  There was an oncoming car from the other direction so the car in front of me couldn’t turn yet.  And I was very close to that car in front of me, driving nearly 60 mph.  It looked like I was going to hit that car in the rear and at that speed it would be a disaster.  Someone, including me, could get killed.  I only had a second or two to react.  I didn’t want to hit that car and killed that driver, for sure.  I quickly jerked the steering wheel to the right and went off the pavement, on the side of the road.  There was gravel and felt my car sliding a bit.  There was also a road sign and I just knew I was going to hit it but that was better hitting that car. Instead of hitting my brakes at that speed, I floored the accelerator.  I felt the back end of the end sliding and the wheels spinning in that gravel, but I did not take out that road sign.  But I heard a noise and figured I hit a portion of that sign with the right rear side of my car.My house was just a few miles up the road.  As soon as I pulled in, I got out and inspected my car.  To my surprise, I saw no damage to my car.  I had avoided hitting that car and that sign. And I just knew that if I’d hit that car one or both of us would have been killed or greatly injured.  I don’t recall what I said at that time but I’m pretty sure I said something like, “Thank you, Lord!”Was it the Lord who saved me or was it me who saved me and that other driver?  I would like to give myself some credit but I really think it was the Lord who saved us both.  I think He suddenly woke me or maybe it was that angel who didn’t like riding with me.  And I think it was the Lord who gave me the quick thought to drive off the side of the road and it was the Lord who kept me from hitting that road sign as well.Don’t you think it’s better that I give the Lord the credit for saving me rather than taking the credit myself?I Corinthians 10:31 “So whether you eat or drink, of what you do, do it all to the glory of God.”  So if you are saved from an accident, you should glorify God by giving Him the credit and the praise.I Thessalonians 5:18 “Give thanks in all circumstances, for this is the will of God for you in Christ Jesus.”  Give thanks and praise in all circumstances, including bad or scary circumstances.Life is full of difficult and/or disastrous situations or situations that could be disastrous.  And it’s not just car accidents or mishaps.  It’s people relationships and many other things.  Some people relationships fall apart and become a big disaster unless the Lord somehow intervenes.We need to look to the Lord always!  We need His wisdom and counsel always!  We need His protection and security in life.  He is bigger than life itself and bigger than us.  He’s the only one who can save us, protect us, and make us secure in life and in eternity.  Matthew 11:28-29 "Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.  Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.”  And He will give us even more than rest. He will give us wisdom discernment, strength, and grace.Hebrews 4:15-16  “For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are--yet was without sin.  Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.” In this text, Paul advised Titus on how to avoid certain trouble in life by looking to the Lord and listening to His word. PROP.-  Avoid various things in life and you’ll avoid trouble.1- Avoid religious arguments2- Avoid selfishnessI. AVOID RELIGIOUS ARGUMENTS9 But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and arguments and quarrels about the law, because these are unprofitable and useless. 10 Warn a divisive person once, and then warn him a second time. After that, have nothing to do with him. 11 You may be sure that such a man is warped and sinful; he is self-condemned.Religion and politics.  Which do you think causes the most arguments?  Considering our present political situation, it’s probably politics right now.I’ve often said that humorist, Will Rogers, would have a hey-day today if he were alive.  He would have more political jokes than you could shake a stick at.  He was in some ways, a prophet before his time.  And while he would be making jokes he might be crying on inside because the sad shape of our country.Religious arguments.  Have you ever had any?  I have and none that I am proud of.ILL.- I accepted Christ as my savior and was baptized into Christ when I was about 20 years old. At that time I was working at Safeway and I wanted to tell everybody what I’d done in making my decision for Christ.  Most were willing to listen and most rejoiced with me.  I was excited about having my sins forgiven and knowing that I was a new person in Christ.  I wanted to share this with everyone.  In the process of witnessing I ran into one fellow employee who was of a completely different faith but claimed to believe in Jesus Christ.  He had some strange ideas about some things.  One day we were in the back room and we actually got into an argument over some issue which I tried to answer with scripture.  I don’t even remember what it was but both of us were angry and about to land blows.Finally, we both separated and went back to work.  I was in the back room stacking some stock when suddenly I felt a rush of cold water go over my head and body.  I stood there shivering.  It was that fellow employee with whom I had argued so strongly. I guess he thought I needed to cool off and it did the trick. He poured a bucket of cold water over my head.  I don’t think we ever argued after that.  BUT WHAT A SHAME THAT IT HAPPENED IN THE FIRST PLACE.Most religious arguments are unprofitable and useless.  They are a waste of time and energy and often, we just run people off from the truth of the gospel.James 1:19-21 “My dear brothers, take note of this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to become angry, for man's anger does not bring about the righteous life that God desires. Therefore, get rid of all moral filth and the evil that is so prevalent and humbly accept the word planted in you, which can save you.”  Getting angry, even religiously angry, generally does no good in this world.  Anger often seems to open the door to Satan.Ephesians 4:26-27 “In your anger do not sin”: Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry, and do not give the devil a foothold.” Philippians 1:27 “Whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ.  Then, whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, I will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel.”We are to contend for the faith of the gospel.  To contend is to fight for the faith of the gospel but that doesn’t mean that we should literally fight with people.  It does no good at all.ILL.- I was sitting the barber’s chair one time, getting my hair cut when a man walked in and started to talk to the men waiting to get their hair cut.  He was talking to them about Christianity and the Bible.  And frankly, he was not nice about it.  He was very contentious in what he said, trying to challenge any of them to prove him wrong.  I just hoped that he didn’t want to argue with me.  The barber and I both just listened.Finally, that man left the barber shop and you should have heard what those guys said about that man.  I can tell you for sure that man who tried to witness for Christ had ruined his witness with those men.I Peter 3:15 “But in your hearts set apart Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have. But do this with gentleness and respect.”  In our witnessing and contending for the faith, we must be gentle with people and respectful toward them.  If we don’t show courtesy, kindness and love, how can we expect to do any good?ILL.- Maxwell Perkins, the famous book editor, once wrote, "One of my deepest convictions is that the terrible harms that are done in this world are not done by deliberately evil people, who are not numerous and are soon found out.  They are done by the good--by those who are so sure that God is with them.  Nothing can stop them, for they are certain that they are right.”  10 Warn a divisive person once, and then warn him a second time. After that, have nothing to do with him. 11 You may be sure that such a man is warped and sinful; he is self-condemned.Warn a divisive person.  It sounds like to me that if someone is causing trouble in the church to the point where there could be a division then that person should be warned!  Once, twice and the third time, you’re out.  That is, we leave them alone with the hope that they will wake up.No one enjoys warning others, but there are times when it must be done.  Generally, I would think that job should be left to the elders or the leaders of the church.  Hebrews 13:17 “Obey your leaders and submit to their authority. They keep watch over you as men who must give an account. Obey them so that their work will be a joy, not a burden, for that would be of no advantage to you.”II. AVOID SELFISHNESS13 Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need. 14 Our people must learn to devote themselves to doing what is good, in order that they may provide for daily necessities and not live unproductive lives. 15 Everyone with me sends you greetings. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all.Preacher John Wesley of the 1700s is quoted as saying: “Do all the good you can.  By all the means you can.  In all the ways you can.  In all the places you can.  At all the times you can.  To all the people you can.  As long as ever you can.”  That covers a lot of territory. I would say that is a pretty good code to live by.  It sounds like Jesus.Acts 10:38 “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and power, and how he went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.”  Jesus went about doing good, all kinds of good: providing food, teaching God’s Word, healing from diseases, casting out demons, etc.We need to do the same, although we are somewhat limited in comparison to what Jesus did.  I don’t know of  anyone who has healed those who were under the power of the devil even there are those who claim to cast out demons.The only way any of us could do that is by leading people to faith in Christ.  And when they surrender their lives to Christ then they will indeed be healed from the power of the devil.  II Corinthians 5:17 “Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has gone, the new has come!”Beyond casting out demons or healing people who are under the power of the devil, what can we do?  What must we do?  Anything we can.  Teach, preach, give, share, listen, love, etc. We must not be selfish with our lives and with what God has given us.We are to avoid selfishness by being quick to see needs and respond to those needs.13 Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need.  14 Our people must learn to devote themselves to doing what is good.  We avoid selfishness by doing good toward others in any form.ILL.- When a distinguished foreigner paid his only visit to America in 1950, a committee of prominent Chicagoans lined up at the railway station to offer official greetings. But the committee noticed that his eyes were not wholly fixed on them.  Those penetrating eyes were wandering beyond the encircling committee.  Something on the station platform caught his eye amid the crowd of travelers.With politeness but firmness the great man said to the committee, “Excusez-moi,” and literally dashed past the receptionists.  Diving into the crowd, he stopped beside an elderly woman who was staggering under her load of heavy suitcases and extra bundles.With his big, sensitive hands he grabbed the old woman’s suitcases and bundles and, beckoning her to follow him, he threaded a way through the throngs.  He led the woman to the coach she wanted to take, lifted up her suitcases into the overhead rack, and bowing in a courtly manner, wished her, “Bon voyage.”Then he rushed back to the astounded committee with apologies for keeping them waiting.  This is the way Dr. Albert L. Schweitzer arrived in America!Did Albert Schweitzer know something that we don’t?  Did he have a heart within him that is different than ours or most of our generation?  He is quoted as saying: “Life becomes harder for us when we live for others, but it also becomes richer and happier.”Philippians 2:3-4 “Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves. Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.”We must avoid selfishness at all cost.  In humility we must serve one another as best we can and in any form.CONCLUSION--------------------ILL.- A man who was known to like liquor, explained that he drank only to drown his troubles.  “After you drown them, why do you continue to drink?” he was asked. “You don’t know my troubles,” he sighed.  “My troubles are excellent swimmers.  I try to drown them, but they swim right up again!”Those troubles sound like the sins that we have to deal with throughout all our lives.I Corinthians 10:13 “No temptation has seized you except what is common to man. And God is faithful; he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. But when you are tempted, he will also provide a way out so that you can stand up under it.”Temptation to sin in various ways will always come our way.  Temptation to do evil, to fight, to argue, to be selfish, etc. and there is only one escape!   The Lord Himself is our escape from sin and self.  In order to avoid the evil pitfalls of this life we must always look to the Lord and to His Word.Psalm 119:9 “How can a young man keep his way pure? By living according to your word.”  And this holds true for people of all ages, both male and female.Steve Shepherd, Cape Girardeau, MOshepherd111@hotmail.com