    This is a list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1964. The following singles achieved the highest chart positions in 1964. Hot 100 No. 1 Hits of 1964, 1963 in music, other events of 1964, 1965 in music and the list of 'years in music' Day Album Artist Notes 1 Before I'm Over You Loretta Lynn The Hits of Jo Stafford Jo Stafford 10 The Rolling Stones The Rolling Stones 13 The Times They Are a-Changin' Bob Dylan 20 Meet the Beatles! The Beatles US - Folk Singer Muddy Waters A Lettermen Kind of Love The Lettermen Living a Lie Al Martino Stay with The Hollies The Hollies Debut Day Album Artist Notes 7 Born to Wander The Four Seasons 18 Unforgettable: A Tribute to Dinah Washington Aretha Franklin - Anyone Who Had a Heart Dionne Warwick The Many Moods of Tony Tony Bennett Pure Dynamite! Live at the Royal James Brown Live The Third Album Barbra Streisand Tom Jones John Addison Soundtrack to 1963 film Day Album Artist Notes 1 Ain't That Good News Sam Cooke 2 Shut Down Volume 2 The Beach Boys 20 Meet The Temptations The Temptations - The Astounding 12-String Guitar of Glen Campbell Glen Campbell Dawn (Go Away) and 11 Other Great Songs The Four Seasons Getz/Gilberto Stan Getz and João Gilberto Glad All Over The Dave Clark Five The Italian Voice of Al Martino Al Martino Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? Jimmy Smith Day Album Artist Notes 1 When I'm Alone I Cry Marvin Gaye 2 Kissin' Cousins Elvis Presley Soundtrack 10 The Beatles' Second Album The Beatles US 15 Together Marvin Gaye and Mary Wells 16 The Rolling Stones The Rolling Stones 17 A Girl Called Dusty Dusty Springfield 20 The Believer John Coltrane When Lights Are Low Tony Bennett - America, I Hear You Singing Frank Sinatra with Bing Crosby and Fred Waring Black Orchid The Three Sounds Funny Girl Barbra Streisand Original Broadway Cast Day Album Artist Notes 11 The Beatles' Long Tall Sally The Beatles Canada 18 By Request Brenda Lee - Bewitched Jack Jones Dance with The Shadows The Shadows The Dave Clark Five Return! The Dave Clark Five US I Walk the Line Johnny Cash The Lettermen Look at Love The Lettermen Mary Wells Sings My Guy Mary Wells Stay & Other Great Hits The Four Seasons Viva Las Vegas Elvis Presley Soundtrack EP Day Album Artist Notes 19 Long Tall Sally The Beatles EP - Back in Town The Kingston Trio Live Don't Let the Sun Catch You Crying Gerry & the Pacemakers US The Fabulous Ventures The Ventures I Love You More and More Every Day/Tears and Roses Al Martino Robin and the 7 Hoods Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Bing Crosby and Sammy Davis, Jr. Soundtrack Stay Awhile/I Only Want to Be with You Dusty Springfield A World Without Love Peter and Gordon Day Album Artist Notes 1 More of Roy Orbison's Greatest Hits Roy Orbison Compilation 10 A Hard Day's Night The Beatles Soundtrack 13 All Summer Long The Beach Boys I Don't Want to Be Hurt Anymore Nat King Cole - The Body & the Soul Freddie Hubbard Hello, Dolly! Ella Fitzgerald The Judy Collins Concert Judy Collins Live Keep on Pushing The Impressions Looking For Love Connie Francis Rag Doll The Four Seasons Wonderful Life Cliff Richard and The Shadows Soundtrack Day Album Artist Notes 8 Another Side of Bob Dylan Bob Dylan 14 Five by Five The Rolling Stones EP 31 Make Way for Dionne Warwick Dionne Warwick Where Did Our Love Go The Supremes - American Tour The Dave Clark Five US Black Pearls John Coltrane Dream With Dean Dean Martin It Might as Well Be Swing Frank Sinatra with Count Basie Two Great Guitars Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry Walk, Don't Run, Vol. 2 The Ventures Where Love Has Gone Jack Jones Day Album Artist Notes 11 The Five Faces of Manfred Mann Manfred Mann 14 The Doris Day Christmas Album Doris Day Christmas - The Animals The Animals US version The Cat Jimmy Smith In the Name of Love Peggy Lee People Barbra Streisand Day Album Artist Notes 1 Bitter Tears: Ballads of the American Indian Johnny Cash Early Orbison Roy Orbison Compilation 2 Kinks The Kinks 16 A Bit of Liverpool The Supremes British Invasion tribute LP 17 12 X 5 The Rolling Stones 19 Beach Boys Concert The Beach Boys Live Wednesday Morning, 3 AM Simon & Garfunkel With a Smile and a Song Doris Day 20 Roustabout Elvis Presley Soundtrack - The Animals The Animals UK version The Door Is Still Open to My Heart Dean Martin Dusty Dusty Springfield US Gerry & the Pacemakers Second Album Gerry & the Pacemakers US Joan Baez/5 Joan Baez Oscar Peterson Trio + One The Oscar Peterson trio with Clark Terry Day Album Artist Notes 9 The Beach Boys' Christmas Album The Beach Boys Christmas 12 Hello Broadway Marvin Gaye 16 Who Can I Turn To Tony Bennett 23 The Beatles' Story The Beatles US - 12 Songs of Christmas Bing Crosby with Frank Sinatra Christmas Blue Jeans a'Swinging Swinging Blue Jeans In The Hollies Style The Hollies The Jack Jones Christmas Album Jack Jones Christmas A Merry Christmas Al Martino Christmas A New Kind of Connie... Connie Francis St. Louis to Liverpool Chuck Berry Softly, as I Leave You Frank Sinatra Day Album Artist Notes 4 Beatles for Sale The Beatles Five Live Yardbirds The Yardbirds Live 7 The Kingston Trio (Nick Bob John) The Kingston Trio 15 Beatles '65 The Beatles US 21 Autobiography Nat Adderley - Coast to Coast The Dave Clark Five US Verlaine et Rimbaud Léo Ferré France # Artist Title Year Country Chart Entries 1 The Beatles I Want to Hold Your Hand 1964 UK 1 – Dec 1963, US BB 1 – Jan 1964, US CashBox 1 of 1964, Canada 1 – Jan 1964, Norway 1 – Jan 1964, Germany 1 – Feb 1964, Australia 1 for 5 weeks Jul 1963, Australia 2 of 1963, RYM 2 of 1964, DDD 4 of 1963, South Africa 6 of 1963, US BB 7 of 1964, Global 7 (10 M sold) – 1963, POP 7 of 1964, Rolling Stone 16, RIAA 28, Scrobulate 29 of oldies, Acclaimed 30, Germany 40 of the 1960s, WXPN 350 2 Roy Orbison Oh, Pretty Woman 1964 UK 1 – Sep 1964, US BB 1 – Sep 1964, Canada 1 – Aug 1964, Norway 1 – Oct 1964, Germany 1 – Jan 1965, Éire 1 – Oct 1964, Netherlands 3 – Jan 1965, US CashBox 4 of 1964, DDD 8 of 1964, RYM 13 of 1964, South Africa 15 of 1964, 16 in 2FM list, US BB 17 of 1964, POP 17 of 1964, Australia 20 of 1964, RIAA 43, OzNet 62, Germany 64 of the 1960s, Acclaimed 77, Europe 83 of the 1960s, Party 147 of 2007, Rolling Stone 222, Belgium 234 of all time, WXPN 655 3 The Animals House of the Rising Sun 1964 UK 1 – Jun 1964, US BB 1 – Aug 1964, Canada 1 – Aug 1964, Australia 1 for 5 weeks Apr 1964, France 4 – Oct 1972, DDD 4 of 1964, RYM 5 of 1964, Netherlands 3 1964, Poland 6 – Oct 1982, Europe 7 of the 1960s, Germany 9 – Jan 1965, US BB 38 of 1964, POP 38 of 1964, US CashBox 53 of 1964, Acclaimed 55, Italy 66 of 1965, Scrobulate 80 of oldies, 89 in 2FM list, Rolling Stone 122, Belgium 124 of all time, TheQ 227, RIAA 240, OzNet 275, Germany 296 of the 1960s 4 The Beatles A Hard Day's Night 1964 UK 1 – Jul 1964, US BB 1 – Jul 1964, Canada 1 – Jul 1964, Norway 1 – Aug 1964, Éire 1 – Aug 1964, Australia 1 for 4 weeks Mar 1964, Germany 2 – Sep 1964, Australia 3 of 1964, RYM 6 of 1964, DDD 11 of 1964, South Africa 14 of 1964, US CashBox 18 of 1964, Scrobulate 39 of oldies, Europe 96 of the 1960s, Rolling Stone 153, Germany 254 of the 1960s, Acclaimed 411, OzNet 815 5 The Beatles I Feel Fine 1964 UK 1 – Dec 1964, US BB 1 – Dec 1964, Canada 1 – Nov 1964, Netherlands 1 – Jan 1965, Norway 1 – Dec 1964, Éire 1 – Dec 1964, Australia 1 for 6 weeks Jul 1964, Germany 3 – Jan 1965, Australia 8 of 1964, RYM 8 of 1964, DDD 9 of 1964, US CashBox 19 of 1965, Scrobulate 40 of oldies, Germany 207 of the 1960s Composer !! Composition !! Date !! Location !! Performers Birtwistle, Harrison Entr'actes and Sappho Fragments 1964-07-12  Cheltenham (Festival) Thomas / Virtuoso Ensemble, Carewe Birtwistle, Harrison Three Movements with Fanfares 1964-07-08  London (Guildhall) English Chamber Orchestra, PritchardAnon., "New Work Still Needs a Fair Hearing", Times (9 July 1964): 7. Davies, Peter Maxwell Veni sancte spiritus 1964-07-10  Cheltenham (Festival Princeton High School Choir, [orchestra unknown], HilbishAnon., "U.S. Choir in New Work", Times (11 July 1964): 5. Hoddinott, Alun Harp Sonata 1964-07-12  Cheltenham (Festival) Ellis Maderna, Bruno Dimensioni IV for chamber ensemble 1964-07-23  Darmstadt (Ferienkurse) Internationales Kammerensemble Darmstadt – MadernaImke Misch and Marcus Bandur (eds.), Karlheinz Stockhausen bei den Internationalen Ferienkursen für Neue Musik in Darmstadt 1951–1996: Dokumente und Briefe (Kürten: Stockhausen-Stiftung für Musik, 2001): 356. ISBN 3-00-007290-X. Rawsthorne, Alan Symphony No. 3 1964-07-08  Cheltenham (Festival) BBC Northern Orchestra, HurstAnon., "New Symphony at Cheltenham Festival", Times (9 July 1964): 7. Searle, Humphrey The Sun, cantata for a cappella choir, Op. 42 1964-07-07  Cheltenham (Festival) BBC Chorus, Melville"New Searle Cantata: Poet's Mysticism Captured", Times (8 July 1964): 7. Sherlaw Johnson Robert Piano Sonata 1964-07-11  Cheltenham (Festival) Sherlaw JohnsonAnon., "A Pianist-Composer's First Sonata", Times (13 July 1964): 7. Stockhausen, Karlheinz Mikrophonie I 1964-12-09  Brussels Aloys Kontarsky, Caskel, Fritsch, Bernhard Kontarsky, Davies, Spek, StockhausenMichael Kurtz, Stockhausen: A Biography, translated by Richard Toop (London and Boston: Faber and Faber, 1992): 135, 137, 252. ISBN 0-571-14323-7 (cloth); ISBN 978-0-571-17146-0 (pbk). Stockhausen, Karlheinz Plus-Minus 1964-06-14  Rome Cardew, RzewskiMichael Kurtz, Stockhausen: A Biography, translated by Richard Toop (London and Boston: Faber and Faber, 1992): 252. ISBN 0-571-14323-7 (cloth); ISBN 978-0-571-17146-0 (pbk). Wilks, John Beata l'alma 1964-07-06  Cheltenham {Festival) Nendick / BBC Northern Orchestra, HurstAnon., "Cheltenham's Thread of New Music", Times (7 July 1964): 15. January 1 – Top of the Pops is broadcast for the first time, on BBC television in the U.K. January 3 – Footage of the Beatles performing a concert in Bournemouth, England is shown on The Jack Paar Show. January 13 – Bob Dylan's The Times They Are a-Changin' is released on Columbia Records. January 15 – Vee Jay Records files a lawsuit against Capitol Records and Swan Records over manufacturing and distribution rights to Beatles albums. On April 9, Capitol Records is granted an injunction restraining Vee Jay Records from further manufacturing, distributing or advertising recordings by the Beatles. January 18 – The Beatles appear on the Billboard magazine charts for the first time. January 25 - The late John F. Kennedy becomes the first President credited with a Top 10 album after Dickie Goodman released John F. Kennedy: The Presidential Years 1960-1963. The following week a second album, credited to the late President, would also hit the Top 10 giving Kennedy two posthumous albums simultaneously in the Top 10. February 1 – Indiana Governor Matthew E. Welsh declares the song "Louie Louie" by The Kingsmen pornographic. He requests that the Indiana Broadcasters Association ban the record. Governor Welsh claimed that hearing the song made his "ears tingle." Publisher Max Firetag offers $1,000 to anyone that can find anything "suggestive" in the song's lyrics. February 7 – The Beatles arrive in the United States and are greeted by thousands of screaming fans at New York's Kennedy Airport. February 9 – The Beatles perform on The Ed Sullivan Show, which breaks television ratings records. February 12 – Anna Moffo collapses onstage at Covent Garden in the first act of Rigoletto, and her part is taken over, after a delay of 45 minutes, by Welsh soprano Elizabeth Vaughan. February 16 – The Beatles appear on The Ed Sullivan Show. February 22 – Plácido Domingo makes his international breakthrough at the première of Ginastera's Don Rodrigo in New York City. February 23 The Beatles appear on The Ed Sullivan Show. João Carlos Martins suddenly breaks off a performance in the middle of the second movement of Beethoven's Third Piano Concerto with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra at Birmingham Town Hall due to an attack of appendicitis. March 1 Capitol Records is bombarded with requests for heavyweight boxing champion Cassius Clay's album, I Am the Greatest, following Clay's defeat of Sonny Liston on February 25 and his announcement two days later that he had converted to Islam. (On March 6 would come the announcement that he would adopt the name Muhammad Ali.) American premiere of Karlheinz Stockhausen's Momente, by Martina Arroyo (soprano), the Crane Collegiate Singers of SUNY Potsdam (Brock McElheran, chorus master), and members of the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra (Lukas Foss, music director), conducted by the composer, in Kleinhans Music Hall in Buffalo, New York. March 6 – Elvis Presley's 14th motion picture, Kissin' Cousins is released to theaters. March 14 – Billboard Magazine reports that sales of Beatles records make up 60% of the entire singles market. March 16 – Disc jockey Alan Freed is charged with tax evasion. March 21 – Italy wins the 9th Eurovision Song Contest, held in the Tivoli Concert Hall, Copenhagen, with the song "Non ho l'età", sung by 16-year-old Gigliola Cinquetti. March 24 – John Lennon's first book, In His Own Write is published. March 27 – The Beatles occupy the top six spots on the Australian pop chart. March 28 – Wax likenesses of The Beatles are put on display in London's Madame Tussauds Wax Museum. The Beatles are the first pop stars to be displayed at the museum. April – Drummer Keith Moon joins The Who. April 4 – The Beatles occupy all five top positions on Billboard's Hot 100 with their singles "Can't Buy Me Love", "Twist and Shout", "She Loves You", "I Want to Hold Your Hand", and "Please Please Me". April 11 – The Beatles hold 14 positions on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Previously, the highest number of concurrent singles by one artist on the Hot 100 was nine by Elvis Presley, December 19, 1956. April 16 – The Rolling Stones release their eponymous début album. May 2 – In the United States, The Beatles' Second Album climbs to the #1 spot on the LP charts in only its second week of release. May 20 - Judy Garland makes headlines after a disastrous concert in Melbourne, Australia June - During a performance at the Railway, Pete Townshend of The Who accidentally breaks the head of his guitar on the low ceiling above the stage. This incident marks the start of auto-destructive art by destroying guitars and drums on stage. June 5 – The Rolling Stones start their first U.S. tour. July 3 - With their new manager Peter Meaden, The Who release their first single "Zoot Suit"/"I'm the Face" under the name The High Numbers in an attempt to appeal to a mod audience. It fails to reach the top 50 and the band reverts to calling themselves The Who. July 6 - The Beatles' first film, A Hard Day's Night, is released. July 10 The album of A Hard Day's Night is released in the U.K. All tracks are written by Lennon and McCartney. More than 300 people are injured in Liverpool when a crowd of some 150,000 people welcome The Beatles back to their home city. August 2 – The wreckage of the plane piloted by Jim Reeves is found near Brentwood, Tennessee, 42 hours after it crashed.  There are no survivors. August 8 – Bob Dylan releases his fourth album, Another Side of Bob Dylan. August 17 – Indiana University Opera Theater presents Turandot at the NY World's Fair featuring newly retired Metropolitan Opera soprano Margaret Harshaw, a member of the voice faculty, in the title role. August 22 – The Supremes reach #1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart with the first of five successive number one hits, "Where Did Our Love Go". August 26 – The Kinks release their iconic single "You Really Got Me". September 8 – The American premiere of Karlheinz Stockhausen's Originale at Judson Hall in New York City is picketed by a group calling themselves Action Against Cultural Imperialism. September 16 – Shindig! premieres on ABC. September 22 – Fiddler on the Roof opens on Broadway. October 19 – Simon & Garfunkel release Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M., which is initially a total flop upon first release. After release of their second album, Sounds of Silence, in 1966, it hits #30 on the Billboard charts. October 24 – The Rolling Stones start their second US tour. October 25 – The Rolling Stones perform on The Ed Sullivan Show for the first time. October 29 – The T.A.M.I. Show is filmed. October 31 – The Supremes reach #1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart with the second of five successive number one hits, "Baby Love". November - A deal with U.K. impresario W. H. Miller lands the Anita Kerr Quartette on Capitol Records for North America. December 11 – Sam Cooke is killed under mysterious circumstances in Los Angeles, California. Shortly thereafter, "A Change Is Gonna Come", a song considered by many to be his best, is released. December 19 - The Supremes reach #1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart with the third of five successive number one hits, "Come See About Me". December 24  - The Beatles gain the Christmas number one in the United Kingdom for the second year running with I Feel Fine, which has topped the singles charts for the third week running. The Beatles have now had six number ones in the U.K. alone. Simon & Garfunkel make their first recording for Columbia Records. Dalida is the first star to receive a Platinum Disc in Europe. 11-year-old Keith Green becomes the youngest person ever to sign a contract with the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) after publishing, recording and releasing the song "The Way I Used to Be". Marianne Faithfull's musical career begins. Sonny and Cher begin performing together as "Caesar and Cleo". The National Institute of Kathak Dance is established in New Delhi. The China Conservatory of Music is established in Beijing. See 442 Glenwood Avenue - The Pixies Three The Academy Award-Winning "Call Me Irresponsible" and Other Hit Songs from the Movies - Andy Williams Allan in Wonderland - Allan Sherman Alexandria the Great - Lorez Alexandria Amore Scusami – Dalida Ballads, Blues and Boasters - Harry Belafonte Basie Land - Count Basie Beauty and the Beard - Al Hirt Bebop Revisited! - Charles McPherson Black Fire - Andrew Hill Blue Gene – Gene Pitney Blue Spoon - Jimmy Witherspoon Blue Around the Clock - Jimmy Witherspoon Bo Diddley's 16 All-Time Greatest Hits – Bo Diddley Bread & Butter - The Newbeats Brown Sugar - Freddie Roach Christmas Cookin' – Jimmy Smith Coltrane's Sound - John Coltrane Cotton Candy - Al Hirt Crescent - John Coltrane Cuddlebug – The Simon Sisters The Dealers – John Coltrane & Mal Waldron Donna The Prima Donna – Dion DiMucci The Door Is Still Open to My Heart - Dean Martin The Dubliners – The Dubliners (debut) Ella at Juan-Les-Pins – Ella Fitzgerald Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Johnny Mercer Song Book – Ella Fitzgerald Etta James Rocks the House - Etta James The Exciting Voice of Sergio Franchi - Sergio Franchi Expressions East - John Berberian For Swingin' Livers Only! - Allan Sherman The Great Songs from "My Fair Lady" and Other Broadway Hits - Andy Williams The Great Years - Johnny Mathis Here I Go Again – The Hollies (US) Hey, Brother, Pour the Wine – Dean Martin Hide and Seekers – The Seekers How My Heart Sings! – Bill Evans I'll Search My Heart and Other Great Hits - Johnny Mathis In Europe - Miles Davis In Love Again! - Peggy Lee In Person at the Americana – Julie London It Hurts to Be in Love – Gene Pitney It's Monk's Time – Thelonious Monk Johnny Horton's Greatest Hits – Johnny Horton Joyful Season – Jo Stafford Live at Birdland – John Coltrane Love After Midnight – Patti Page The Manfred Mann Album – Manfred Mann Meet The Simon Sisters – The Simon Sisters The Never Ending Impressions - The Impressions Out to Lunch! – Eric Dolphy Quincy Jones Explores the Music of Henry Mancini – Quincy Jones Rock Around the Clock King – Bill Haley & His Comets Runnin' Out of Fools – Aretha Franklin Said I To Shostakovitch – Tupper Saussy Sammy Davis Jr. Salutes the Stars of the London Palladium - Sammy Davis, Jr. The Seekers – The Seekers A Session with The Dave Clark Five - The Dave Clark Five The Shelter of Your Arms - Sammy Davis, Jr. Sinatra Sings Days of Wine and Roses, Moon River, and Other Academy Award Winners - Frank Sinatra Só Danço Samba – Clare Fischer Stevie at the Beach - Stevie Wonder Sugar Lips - Al Hirt Surf Surf Surf – Bill Haley & His Comets The Swinger's Guide to Mary Poppins – The Tupper Saussy Quartet with Charlie McCoy Tears for Dolphy – Ted Curson Tender Is the Night - Johnny Mathis This Is Love - Johnny Mathis Today, Tomorrow, Forever - Nancy Wilson The Ventures in Space - The Ventures We Get Requests – The Oscar Peterson trio Women in My Life - Sergio Franchi The Wonderful World of Andy Williams - Andy Williams The Wonderful World of Make Believe - Johnny Mathis "All Cried Out"- Dusty Springfield "All Day and All of the Night" – The Kinks "Almost There" - Andy Williams "Alone with You" - Brenda Lee "Anyone Who Had a Heart" – Cilla Black "As Tears Go By" – Marianne Faithfull "Baby I Need Your Loving" – The Four Tops "Baby Let Me Take You Home" – The Animals "Baby Love" – The Supremes "Baby Please Don't Go" – Them "Because" – The Dave Clark Five "Bread and Butter" - The Newbeats "Come See About Me" – The Supremes "Cotton Candy" - Al Hirt "Can't Buy Me Love" – The Beatles "Constantly" – Cliff Richard "Dancing In The Street" – Martha and The Vandellas "Dear Heart" - Andy Williams "Do Wah Diddy Diddy" – Manfred Mann "Do You Want to Know a Secret" – The Beatles "Dream Baby"- Cher "Everything's Alright" - The Newbeats "Ferry Cross the Mersey" – Gerry & the Pacemakers "Fever" – Helen Shapiro "A Fool Never Learns" - Andy Williams "Gator Tails And Monkey Ribs" - The Spats "Genie With the Light Brown Lamp" – The Shadows "Girl Don't Come" – Sandie Shaw "Gloria" – Them "Goldfinger" – Shirley Bassey "Happiness" – Ken Dodd "Hello, Dolly! – Louis Armstrong "Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh (A Letter from Camp) (1964 Version)" - Allan Sherman "Hey Now"- Lesley Gore "I Could Easily Fall (In Love With You)" – Cliff Richard and The Shadows "I Don't Wanna Be a Loser" - Lesley Gore "I Get Around" – The Beach Boys "I Just Don't Know What To Do With Myself" – Dusty Springfield "I Never Dreamed"- The Cookies "I Understand" – Freddie & the Dreamers "I'm Crying" – The Animals "I'm Into Something Good" – Herman's Hermits "I'm the Lonely One" – Cliff Richard and The Shadows "It's All Over Now" – The Rolling Stones "It's for You" – Cilla Black "Java" - Al Hirt "Just One Look" – The Hollies "Komm, Gib Mir Deine Hand / Sie Liebt Dich" – The Beatles "Let's Lock the Door (And Throw Away the Key)" - Jay and the Americans "Little Children" – Billy J. Kramer and The Dakotas "A Little Loving" – The Fourmost "Little Old Lady from Pasadena" – Jan and Dean "Little Red Rooster" – The Rolling Stones "Losing You" – Dusty Springfield "Maybe I Know" - Lesley Gore "A Message To Martha" – Adam Faith "My Boy Lollipop" – Millie "My Guy" – Mary Wells "Needle In A Haystack"- The Velvelettes "Non Ho L'Età (Per Amarti)" – Gigliola Cinquetti "One Way Love" – Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers "On the Beach" – Cliff Richard and The Shadows "On the Street Where You Live" - Andy Williams Peter and the Commissar - Allan Sherman "Rag Doll" – The Four Seasons "Rhythm and Greens" – The Shadows "Ringo" – Lorne Greene "The Rise and Fall of Flingle Bunt" – The Shadows "Share Your Love with Me" - Bobby Bland "She's Not There" – The Zombies "Shout" – Lulu & The Luvvers "Show Me Girl" - Herman's Hermits "Sugar Lips" - Al Hirt "Suspicion" - Terry Stafford "T'ain't Nothin' To Me" - The Coasters "Terry" – Twinkle "Theme for Young Lovers" – The Shadows "(There's) Always Something There To Remind Me" – Sandie Shaw "Twist and Shout" – The Beatles "(They Call Her) La Bamba" – The Crickets "There's a Place" – The Beatles "Think" - Brenda Lee "Thou Shalt Not Steal" - Dick and Dee Dee "Tobacco Road" – The Nashville Teens "The Twelfth of Never" – Cliff Richard "Up Above My Head (I Hear Music in the Air)" - Al Hirt "Walk Away" – Matt Monro "Walking in the Rain" - The Ronettes "The Way You Do The Things You Do" -The Temptations "We Love You Beatles" – The Carefrees "We'll Sing in the Sunshine"- Gale Garnett "The Wedding" – Julie Rogers "When Joanna Loved Me" – Tony Bennett "When You Loved Me" - Brenda Lee "Where Did Our Love Go?" – The Supremes "The World of Lonely People" – Anita Bryant "A World Without Love" – Peter & Gordon "Wrong for Each Other" - Andy Williams "You're My World" – Cilla Black "You're No Good" – The Swinging Blue Jeans "You Really Got Me" – The Kinks "Zoot Suit" – The Who "The Addams Family theme song" w.m. Vic Mizzy "Baby, I Need Your Loving w.m. Edward Holland, Brian Holland & Lamont Dozier "The Ballad of Gilligan's Island" w.m. Frank DeVol and Sherwood Schwartz "Before the Parade Passes By" w.m. Jerry Herman, from the musical Hello, Dolly! "Bewitched theme song" w.m. Howard Greenfield and Jack Keller "Chapel Of Love" w.m. Phil Spector, Ellie Greenwich & Jeff Barry "Chim Chim Cher-ee"  w.m. Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman "Cryin' Time" w.m. Buck Owens "Dear Heart" w. Jay Livingston & Ray Evans m. Henry Mancini "Feed the Birds" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Mary Poppins "Gimme Some" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse "Glad All Over" w.m. Dave Clark & Mike Smith "Goin' Out of My Head" w.m. Teddy Randazzo & Bobby Weinstein "Golden Boy" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse "Hang on Sloopy" w.m. Bert Russell & Wes Farrell "Have I the Right?" w.m. Ken Howard & Alan Blaikley "Hush, Hush Sweet Charlotte", m. Frank DeVol from the film of the same name "I Will Wait For You" m. Michel Legrand.  From the film musical The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" "If I Were a Rich Man"  w. Sheldon Harnick m. Jerry Bock. Introduced in the musical Fiddler on the Roof by Zero Mostel. Performed by Chaim Topol in the 1971 film version. "Invisible Tears" w.m. Ned Miller and Sue Miller "It's Over"  w.m. Roy Orbison & Bill Dees "Let's Go Fly a Kite" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Mary Poppins "Oh, Pretty Woman" w.m. Roy Orbison & Bill Dees "Pass Me By" w. Carolyn Leigh m. Cy Coleman. Introduced by Digby Wolfe in the film Father Goose "Put On Your Sunday Clothes" w.m. Jerry Herman, from the musical Hello, Dolly! "Sister Suffragette" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman.  Introduced by Glynis Johns in the film Mary Poppins. "So Long, Dearie" w.m. Jerry Herman, from the musical Hello, Dolly! "A Spoonful of Sugar" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Mary Poppins "Style" w. Sammy Cahn m. Jimmy Van Heusen from the film Robin And The Seven Hoods "Sunrise, Sunset" w. Sheldon Harnick m. Jerry Bock "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Mary Poppins "That's Life" w.m. Dean Kay & Kelly Gordon "Tradition" w. Sheldon Harnick m. Jerry Bock "Where Did Our Love Go?" w.m. Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland and Edward Holland "A World Without Love" w.m. John Lennon and Paul McCartney "Zorbas" (Zorba's Dance) m. Mikis Theodorakis "Dahil Sa Iyo" w.m. Tom Spinosa and Mike Velarde, Jr. "I miei pensieri" w. Sanzio Chiesa m. Giovanni Pelli "Laisse tomber les filles" w.m. Serge Gainsbourg "L'Orange" w.m. Gilbert Bécaud and Pierre Delanoë "Mon Pays" w.m. Gilles Vigneault "There's a Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow" w.m. Sherman Brothers (for Walt Disney's Carousel of Progress) "Que C'est Triste Venise" w.m. Françoise Dorin Gilbert Amy Alpha-beth, for flute, oboe, clarinet, bass clarinet, bassoon, and horn Cahiers d'épigrammes, for piano Eyvin Andersen – Concerto for violin and orchestra Jurriaan Andriessen – After the Fall, incidental music Louis Andriessen A Flower Song II, for oboe A Flower Song III, for cello Ittrospezione III, for two pianos and three instrumental groups, Sweet, for alto recorder Malcolm Arnold Pieces (5), for violin and piano, Op. 84 Sinfonietta No. 3, for orchestra, Op. 81 A Sunshine Overture, for orchestra, Op. 83 Water Music, for winds and percussion, Op. 82 Milton Babbitt Ensembles for Synthesizer, for four-track tape Philomel, for soprano and four-track tape Samuel Barber Chorale for Ascension Day, for chorus, brass, timpani, and organ (ad lib.) Night Flight, for orchestra, Op.19a, Luciano Berio Chemins I on Sequenza II, for harp and orchestra Folk Songs, for soprano and seven instruments Rounds, for voice and harpsichord (subsequently withdrawn) Traces, for soprano, mezzo-soprano, two actors, chorus, and orchestra (subsequently withdrawn) Harrison Birtwistle Entr’actes and Sappho Fragments, for soprano, flute, oboe, violin, viola, harp, and percussion Three Movements with Fanfares, for chamber orchestra Rob du Bois Deuxième série de rondeaux, for piano four-hands and optional percussion Just Like a Little Sonata, for piano Pastorale VI, for piano Pastorale VII, for alto recorder Quartet, for oboe, violin, violin, and cello (revised version) Benjamin Britten Cadenza for Haydn's Cello Concerto in C major Suite No. 1 for cello solo, Op. 72 Symphony for Cello and Orchestra, op. 68 (revised version) Earle Brown – Corroboree, for three or two pianos Carlos Chávez Concerto for four horns and orchestra (revision) Fuga HAGC, for violin, viola, cello, and contrabass Resonancias, for orchestra Tambuco, for six percussionists Aaron Copland Down a Country Lane, for school orchestra Emblems, for symphonic band Music for a Great City George Crumb – Four Nocturnes (Night Music II) for violin and piano Luigi Dallapiccola Parole di San Paolo, for mezzo-soprano or boy's voice and 11 instruments Quattro liriche di Antonio Machado, version for soprano and chamber orchestra Mario Davidovsky Electronic Study No. 3 Synchronisms No. 2 for flute, clarinet, violin, cello and tape Synchronisms No. 3 for cello and electronic sound Peter Maxwell Davies Little Pieces (5), for piano Second Fantasia on John Taverner's In Nomine, for orchestra Shakespeare Music, for 11 instruments Michel Decoust – Horizon remarquable (lyrics by René Char) David Diamond The Martyr for male choir (revised version) "My Papa's Waltz", for voice and piano "Prayer", for voice and piano String Quartet No. 8 Symphony No. 5 We Two, song cycle, voice and piano Andrzej Dobrowolski – Music for Strings and Four Groups of Wind Instruments Henri Dutilleux – Métaboles Morton Feldman The King of Denmark, for percussion solo Numbers, for flute, horn, trombone, tuba, percussion, celesta, piano, violin, and contrabass Piano Piece Vertical Thoughts IV, for piano Wolfgang Fortner Epigramme, for piano Minne, cantata for tenor and guitar Zyklus, for cello and piano Gara Garayev Symphony No. 3 Roberto Gerhard The Anger of Achilles, incidental music Macbeth, incidental music Alberto Ginastera Bomarzo cantata, for tenor or baritone, narrator, and chamber orchestra, Op. 32 Don Rodrigo Symphony, for soprano and orchestra, Op. 31a Alexander Goehr Five Poems and an Epigram of William Blake, for chorus and trumpet, Op. 17 Pieces (3), for piano, Op. 18 Karel Goeyvaerts – Stuk voor piano en tape Fernando Lopes Graça Canciones (4), for voice and chamber orchestra (revised version) Prelúdio, capricho e galope, for violin and piano (second revision) Romances, for voice and piano Sonnets (4), for voice and piano String Quartet No. 1 Ferde Grofé – World's Fair Suite Alois Hába String Quartet No. no.15, Op. 95, in ⅕-tones Suite, for bass clarinet solo, Op. 96 Roy Harris Epilogue to Profiles in Courage–JFK, for orchestra Etudes for Pedals, for organ Fantasy, for organ, brass, and timpani Horn of Plenty, for orchestra Jubilate for Worship (Alleluia), for SATB choir, brass, piano, and percussion Salute to Youth, for orchestra Sonata, for cello and piano Hans Werner Henze Chor gefangener Trojer, for chorus and orchestra (revised version) Divertimenti, for two pianos Der Frieden, incidental music Ein Landarzt, monodrama, for baritone and orchestra Lieder von einer Insel, for chamber chorus, trombone, two cellos, contrabass, chamber organ, percussion, and timpani Sinfonische Etüden (3), for orchestra (revised version) Tancredi, ballet, for orchestra Zwischenspiele (from Der junge Lord), for orchestra Alan Hovhaness Bagatelles (4), for string quartet, Op. 30 Floating World "Ukiyo", for orchestra, Op. 209 Haiku (3), for piano, op. 113 Meditation on Zeami, for orchestra, Op. 207 Sonata, for flute solo, Op. 118 Sonata, for 2 oboes and organ, Op. 130 (revised version) String Quartet no.3, Op. 208, No. 1 String Quartet no. 4, Op. 208, No. 2 Variations and Fugue, for orchestra, Op. 18 Kan Ishii – Otokonoko ga umareta, for chorus Maki Ishii – Galgenlieder Włodzimierz Kotoński Monochromia, for oboe solo Pezzo, for flute and piano Wind Quintet György Ligeti – Fragment, for ten instruments (revised version) David Lumsdaine – Annotations of Auschwitz (cantata with words by Peter Porter) Witold Lutosławski – String Quartet Bruno Maderna Aria da ‘'Hyperion’, for soprano, flute, and orchestra Dimensioni IV, for flute, picccolo, alto flute, bass flute, and chamber orchestra Yoritsune Matsudaira Chamber Concerto, for harpsichord and harp Concerto No. 1 for piano and orchestra Toshirō Mayuzumi Campanology Olympica, electronic music Ongaku no tanjō, for orchestra Raihai jokyoku, for orchestra Olivier Messiaen Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum, for 34 wind instruments and 3 percussionists Prélude, for piano Darius Milhaud Adam, for soprano, 2 tenors, and 2 baritones, Op. 411 Adieu (cantata), for voice, flute, viola, and harp, Op. 410 L’amour chanté, for voice and piano, Op. 409 Concerto for harpsichord and orchestra, Op. 407 Septet, for 2 violins, 2 violas, 2 cellos, and contrabass, Op. 408 Makoto Moroi Pieces (5), for shakuhachi Toccata, Sarabande, and Tarantella, for piano and two string orchestras Bo Nilsson – La bran, for chorus and orchestra Luigi Nono Da un diario italiano, for two choruses La fabbrica illuminata, for mezzo-soprano and tape Juan Orrego-Salas Concerto, for winds, Op. 53 Sonata, for violin and piano, op. 9 (revised version) Sonata a 4 (Edgewood Sonata), for flute, oboe, harpsichord, and contrabass, Op.  55 Luis de Pablo – Escena, for SATB choir, strings, and percussion Arvo Pärt Collage über B-A-C-H, oboe, harpsichord, piano, and strings Diagramme, for piano, Op.11 Musica sillabica, for 12 instruments, Op. 12 Quintettino, for wind quintet Juan Carlos Paz Concreción 1964, for flute, clarinet, bassoon, horn, trumpet, trombone, and tuba Galaxia 64, for organ Música para piano y orquesta Krzysztof Penderecki Cantata in honorem Almae Matris Universitatis Iagellonicae sescentos abhinc annos fundatae, for 2 choruses, contrabassoon, brass, percussion, piano, and organ Pieśń żałobna ku czci B. Rutkowskiego, for chorus Sonata, for cello and orchestra Vincent Persichetti Cummings Choruses (4), for two voices and piano, Op. 98 Introit, for string orchestra, Op. 96 Winter Cantata (11 Haiku), for four-part women's choir, flute, and marimba, Op. 97 Goffredo Petrassi Concerto for Orchestra No. 7 Sesto non-senso, for a cappella choir Tre per sette, for piccolo (+ flute + alto flute), oboe (+ English horn), E clarinet (+ clarinet) Walter Piston Quartet for violin, viola, cello, and piano Sextet for strings Terry Riley – In C Hilding Rosenberg – Sönerna (Cain and Abel), ballet, for orchestra Ahmed Adnan Saygun –  Ten Etudes on "Aksak" Rhythms, for piano R. Murray Schafer – Statement in Blue, for youth orchestra Dieter Schnebel Compositio, for orchestra (revised version) Concert sans orchestre (réactions 2), for piano and audience William Schuman – Amaryllis Variations, for string trio Dmitri Shostakovich String Quartet No. 9 in E-flat major, Op. 117 String Quartet No. 10 in A-flat major, Op. 118 Karlheinz Stockhausen Mikrophonie I Mixtur for five orchestra groups, sine-wave generators, and ring modulators Igor Stravinsky Elegy for J.F.K., for baritone or mezzo-soprano and 3 clarinets Fanfare for a New Theatre, for two trumpets Tōru Takemitsu Blue Aurora for Toshi Ichiyanagi, theatre piece Ichinotani monogatari, incidental music Natsukashino San Francisco, for tape James Tenney – Music for Player Piano Mikis Theodorakis – Axion Esti Virgil Thomson Autumn, concertino for harp, strings, and percussion Auvergnat Folk Songs (5), for SATB choir and orchestra The Feast of Love, for baritone and orchestra Pilgrims and Pioneers, for band When I Survey the Bright Celestial Sphere, for unison voices and organ or piano Iannis Xenakis Eonta, for two trumpets, three trombones, and piano Hiketides: les suppliates d'Eschyle, for 50 female voices and 10 instruments or orchestra La Monte Young Bowed Mortar Relays, action work, realization of Composition 1960 no. 9 Eat (music for the film by Andy Warhol), for tape Haircut (music for the film by Andy Warhol), for tape Kiss (music for the film by Andy Warhol), for tape Prelude to The Tortoise, for voices, various instruments, and electronic drones Sleep (music for the film by Andy Warhol), for tape The Tortoise Droning Selected Pitches from The Holy Numbers for The Two Black Tigers, The Green Tiger and The Hermit, for voices, various instruments, and electronic drones The Tortoise Recalling The Drone of The Holy Numbers as They Were Revealed in the Dreams of The Whirlwind and The Obsidian Gong and Illuminated by The Sawmill, The Green Sawtooth Ocelot and The High-Tension Line Stepdown Transformer, for voices, various instruments, and electronic drones The Well-Tuned Piano Joji Yuasa – Projection Esemplastic with White Noise, electronic music Bernd Alois Zimmermann Monologue, for two pianos Un petit rien, for small orchestra Jurriaan Andriessen – Het zwarte blondje Samuel Barber – Vanessa (revised version) Benjamin Britten – Curlew River (church parable) Alberto Ginastera – Don Rodrigo, op. 31 Bruno Maderna – Hyperion Gian Carlo Menotti – Martin's Lie Joaquín Rodrigo – El hijo fingido (zarzuela) Robert Ward – The Lady from Colorado Hello, Dolly! (Jerry Herman) – Broadway production opened at the St. James Theatre on January 16 and ran for 2844 performances What Makes Sammy Run? – Broadway production opened at the 54th Street Theater on February 27 and ran for 540 performances Funny Girl (Jule Styne and Bob Merrill) – Broadway production opened at the Winter Garden Theatre on March 26 and ran for 1348 performances Anyone Can Whistle – Broadway production opened at the Majestic Theatre on April 4 and ran for 9 performances Fiddler on the Roof (Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick) – Broadway production opened at the Imperial Theatre on September 22 and ran for 3242 performances Foxy Book: Ian McLellan Hunter & Ring Lardner, Jr. Lyrics: Johnny Mercer Music: Robert Emmett Dolan.  Broadway production opened on February 16 and ran for 72 performances. Starring Bert Lahr, Larry Blyden, Cathryn Damon and Julienne Marie. Golden Boy – Broadway production opened at the Majestic Theatre on October 20 and ran for 569 performances She Loves Me – London production opened at the Lyric Theatre on April 29 and ran for 189 performances Maggie May London production opened at the Adelphi Theatre on September 22 and ran for 501 performances Robert and Elizabeth – London production opened at the Lyric Theatre on October 20 and ran for 948 performances Little Me, the musical – London production opened at the Cambridge Theatre on November 18 and ran for 334 performances Salad Days (Julian Slade) – London revival Ayee Milan Ki Bela, with music by Shankar Jaikishan Dosti, starring Sanjay Khan, with music by Laxmikant-Pyarelal A Hard Day's Night starring The Beatles Mary Poppins starring Julie Andrews, Dick Van Dyke, Glynis Johns and David Tomlinson My Fair Lady starring Rex Harrison and Audrey Hepburn Robin and the 7 Hoods starring Frank Sinatra, Bing Crosby, Dean Martin and Sammy Davis, Jr. The Umbrellas of Cherbourg (Les Parapluies de Cherbourg) The Unsinkable Molly Brown starring Debbie Reynolds and Harve Presnell Viva Las Vegas starring Elvis Presley and Ann-Margret January 5 – Grant Young (Soul Asylum) January 10 – Brad Roberts (Crash Test Dummies) January 11 – Torstein Aagaard-Nilsen, composer January 15 – Osmo Tapio Räihälä, composer January 29 – Roddy Frame (Aztec Camera) January 30 – Marcel Jacob, Swedish rock bassist (d. 2009) January 31 – Jeff Hanneman, American rock guitarist (Slayer) (d. 2013) February 1 – Jani Lane, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Warrant and Saints of the Underground) (d. 2011) February 4 – Noodles of The Offspring February 5 – Duff McKagan (Guns N' Roses) February 23 – John Norum, Europe guitarist March 1 – Clinton Gregory, American musician March 11 – Vinnie Paul, drummer (Pantera, Damageplan) March 18 – Rozalla, Zambian singer March 19 – Yoko Kanno, composer March 20 – Natacha Atlas, Belgian singer March 30 – Tracy Chapman, singer-songwriter April 5 – Princess Erika, French singer April 11 – Steve Azar, American country music singer-songwriter April 12 – Amy Ray (Indigo Girls) April 16 Dave Pirner (Soul Asylum) Esbjörn Svensson Swiss jazz pianist (d. 2008) April 17 – Maynard James Keenan (Tool) April 18 – Bez, British dancer April 25 Andy Bell, singer (Erasure) Kenji Yamamoto, Japanese video game composer April 30 – Kent James, American singer-songwriter May 26 – Lenny Kravitz, guitarist May 30 Wynonna Judd, American country singer Tom Morello, American rock guitarist (Rage Against the Machine, Audioslave, The Nightwatchman) May 31 Darryl McDaniels (Run-D.M.C.) Frost June 3 – Kerry King, American rock guitarist (Slayer) June 6 – Jay Bentley (Bad Religion) June 10 – Jimmy Chamberlin, American rock musician (The Smashing Pumpkins) June 13 – Robbie Merrill (Godsmack) June 22 Dicky Barrett (The Mighty Mighty Bosstones) Mike Edwards (Jesus Jones) June 29 – Stedman Pearson, British R&B singer (Five Star) June 19 – Brian Vander Ark, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor (The Verve Pipe) July 13 Brent Fischer, American composer, arranger, bandleader, bass guitarist and percussionist Paul Thorn, American singer-songwriter and guitarist July 17 – Craig Morgan, American singer-songwriter and guitarist July 19 – Masahiko Kondō, Japanese singer July 20 – Chris Cornell (Soundgarden & Audioslave) July 22 - Will Calhoun (Living Colour) July 23 - Nick Menza, German drummer and songwriter (Megadeth and Memorain) July 31 – Jim Corr, Irish singer and musician (The Corrs) August 1 – Adam Duritz (Counting Crows) August 3 – Lucky Dube, South African reggae musician (d. 2007) August 5 – Adam Yauch (Beastie Boys) (d. 2012) August 17 – Colin James, Canadian singer-songwriter September 7 – Eazy-E (NWA) (d. 1995) September 11 – Victor Wooten, American bassist September 23 – Koshi Inaba, Japanese rock singer (B'z) September 26 – Nicki French, British singer September 27 – Stephan Jenkins, American rock singer (Third Eye Blind) September 30 Trey Anastasio, American musician Robby Takac, Goo Goo Dolls October 4 – Francis Magalona, Filipino rapper (d. 2009) October 5 – Dave Dededer, Presidents of the United States of America October 6 – Matthew Sweet, rock musician October 7 – Sam Brown, singer, daughter of Joe Brown October 10 – Neneh Cherry, singer October 20 Frederic Chiu, pianist Luciano, reggae singer Jim Sonefeld (Hootie & The Blowfish) October 22 – Toby McKeehan, American musician October 23 – Robert Trujillo (Metallica) October 30 - Silvano Monasterios, pianist and composer November 6 Corey Glover (Living Colour) Greg Graffin (Bad Religion) November 12 Vic Chesnutt, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (brute. and The Undertow Orchestra) (d. 2009) David Ellefson, American bass player and songwriter (Megadeth, Avian, and F5) November 14 Joseph Simmons (Run-D.M.C.) Nic Dalton (The Lemonheads) November 16 – Diana Krall, Canadian jazz pianist and singer November 24 – Tony Rambola (Godsmack) November 25 – Mark Lanegan, American rock singer (Screaming Trees) December 9 – Paul Landers, German rock musician (Rammstein) December 11 Justin Currie, Scottish singer-songwriter and guitarist (Del Amitri and The Uncle Devil Show) Dave Schools, American singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (Widespread Panic, Stockholm Syndrome, and J Mascis + The Fog) Cosy Sheridan, American singer-songwriter December 13 – Hideto Matsumoto (Hide), Japanese rock musician (d. 1998) December 23 – Eddie Vedder, American rock singer (Pearl Jam) December 28 – Malcolm Gets, American actor and dancer date unknown - Kyaw Kyaw Naing, Burmese traditional musician January 7 – Colin McPhee, Canadian composer and musicologist, 63 January 9 – Big Boy Goudie, jazz saxophonist, January 15 – Jack Teagarden, jazz trombonist and vocalist, 58 (pneumonia/heart attack) January 22 – Marc Blitzstein, composer, 58 January 27 - Leib Glantz, musicologist, 65 February 25 – Johnny Burke, lyricist, 55 March 8 – Renata Borgatti, Italian pianist, 69 or 70 March 27 – Emil Reesen, Danish composer, conductor and pianist, 76 April 4 – Georgia Caine, Broadway star, 87 May 10 – Carol Haney, dancer and choreographer, 39 (pneumonia) May 24 – Gali Penchala Narasimha Rao, film composer June 10 – Louis Gruenberg, pianist and composer, 79 June 29 – Eric Dolphy, American jazz saxophonist, flautist and bass clarinettist, 36 (diabetic coma) July 1 – Pierre Monteux, French conductor, 89 July 10 – Joe Haymes, bandleader and arranger, 57 (heart failure) July 31 – Jim Reeves, American country singer, 40 (plane crash) August 9 - Chucho Monge, Mexican songwriter, 53 August 14 – Johnny Burnette, rockabilly singer, 30 (drowned) September 20 – Lazare Lévy, French pianist and teacher, 82 September 28 Nacio Herb Brown, songwriter and film/TV composer, 68 George Dyson, English composer, 81 Harpo Marx, American comedian and musician, 75 October 10 Eddie Cantor, comedian, singer and songwriter, 72 Heinrich Neuhaus, Soviet (of German extraction) pianist and teacher, 76 October 15 – Cole Porter, songwriter and composer, 73 October 29 – Vasily Agapkin, Soviet composer November 5 – Buddy Cole, jazz pianist and orchestra leader, 45 (heart attack) November 30 – Don Redman, US arranger, bandleader and saxophonist December 2 – Sam H. Stept, Russian-born US songwriter, pianist and conductor, 67 December 9 – Edith Sitwell, poet and collaborator of William Walton December 11 Alma Mahler, songwriter and widow of Gustav Mahler Sam Cooke, singer, 33 (shot) December 14 – Francisco Canaro, Uruguayan violinist and tango orchestra leader, 76 December 21 – Theodor Blumer, composer and conductor, 83 Grammy Awards of 1964 Eurovision Song Contest 1964
