    The year 1965 in film involved some significant events, with The Sound of Music topping the U.S. box office. (*) After theatrical re-issue(s) Academy Awards: Best Picture: The Sound of Music - Argyle Enterprises, Twentieth Century-Fox Best Director: Robert Wise - The Sound of Music Best Actor: Lee Marvin - Cat Ballou Best Actress: Julie Christie - Darling Best Supporting Actor: Martin Balsam - A Thousand Clowns Best Supporting Actress: Shelley Winters - A Patch of Blue Best Foreign Language Film: The Shop on Main Street (Obchod na korze), directed by Ján Kadár and Elmar Klos, Czechoslovakia BAFTA Film Awards: Best Film from Any Source: My Fair Lady Best British Film: The IPCRESS File Golden Globe Awards: Drama: Best Picture: Doctor Zhivago Best Actor: Omar Sharif - Doctor Zhivago Best Actress: Samantha Eggar - The Collector Musical or comedy: Best Picture: The Sound of Music Best Actor: Lee Marvin - Cat Ballou Best Actress: Julie Andrews - The Sound of Music Other Best Director: David Lean - Doctor Zhivago Palme d'Or (Cannes Film Festival): The Knack ...and How to Get It, directed by Richard Lester, United Kingdom Golden Lion (Venice Film Festival): Vaghe stelle dell'Orsa (Sandra of a Thousand Delights), directed by Luchino Visconti, Italy Golden Bear (Berlin Film Festival): Alphaville, directed by Jean-Luc Godard, France / Italy U.S.A. unless stated U.S.A. unless stated # A B C D E-F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U V W Y Rank Title Studio Director Actors Gross 1. The Sound of Music* 20th Century Fox Robert Wise Julie Andrews, Christopher Plummer, Charmian Carr, Nicholas Hammond, Heather Menzies, Duane Chase, Angela Cartwright, Debbie Turner, Kym Karath, Richard Haydn, Peggy Wood, Eleanor Parker, Anna Lee, Portia Nelson, Marni Nixon, Daniel Truhitte, Ben Wright $163,214,286 2. Doctor Zhivago* Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer David Lean Omar Sharif, Julie Christie, Rod Steiger, Geraldine Chaplin, Alec Guinness, Ralph Richardson, Tom Courtenay, Siobhán McKenna, Rita Tushingham $111,721,910 3. Thunderball United Artists Terence Young Sean Connery, Claudine Auger, Adolfo Celi, Luciana Paluzzi, Rik Van Nutter, Desmond Llewelyn, Bernard Lee $63,595,658 4. Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines 20th Century Fox Ken Annakin Stuart Whitman, Sarah Miles, James Fox, Terry-Thomas, Robert Morley, Alberto Sordi, Gert Fröbe, Jean-Pierre Cassel, Irina Demick, Red Skelton, Yujiro Ishihara, Karl Michael Vogler, Dame Flora Robson, Sam Wanamaker, Gordon Jackson $31,111,111 5. That Darn Cat! Walt Disney Productions Robert Stevenson Hayley Mills, Dean Jones, Dorothy Provine, Roddy McDowall, Neville Brand, Frank Gorshin, Grayson Hall, Elsa Lanchester, William Demarest, Ed Wynn $28,068,222 6. The Great Race Warner Bros. Blake Edwards Tony Curtis, Jack Lemmon, Natalie Wood, Peter Falk, Keenan Wynn, Larry Storch, Dorothy Provine, Arthur O'Connell, Vivian Vance, Ross Martin, George Macready $25,333,333 7. Cat Ballou Columbia Pictures Elliot Silverstein Jane Fonda, Lee Marvin, Michael Callan, Dwayne Hickman, Nat King Cole, Stubby Kaye $20,666,667 8. What's New Pussycat? United Artists Clive Donner Peter Sellers, Peter O'Toole, Ursula Andress, Romy Schneider, Capucine, Woody Allen, Paula Prentiss $18,820,000 9. Shenandoah Universal Pictures Andrew V. McLaglen James Stewart, Doug McClure, Glenn Corbett, Patrick Wayne, Katharine Ross, Rosemary Forsyth $17,268,889 10. Von Ryan's Express 20th Century Fox Mark Robson Frank Sinatra, Trevor Howard, Raffaella Carrà, Brad Dexter, Sergio Fantoni, John Leyton, Edward Mulhare, Wolfgang Preiss, James Brolin, John van Dreelen, Adolfo Celi $17,111,111 11. The Greatest Story Ever Told United Artists George Stevens Max von Sydow, José Ferrer, Van Heflin, Charlton Heston, David McCallum, Roddy McDowall, Dorothy McGuire, Sal Mineo, Donald Pleasence, Sidney Poitier, Claude Rains, Telly Savalas, John Wayne, Shelley Winters, Ed Wynn, Carroll Baker, Martin Landau, Angela Lansbury $15,473,333 12. For a Few Dollars More United Artists Sergio Leone Clint Eastwood, Lee Van Cleef, Gian Maria Volontè, Mario Brega, Luigi Pistilli, Aldo Sambrell, Klaus Kinski $15,000,000 13. The Sandpiper Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Vincente Minnelli Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, Eva Marie Saint, Charles Bronson, Robert Webber $13,691,111 14. A Patch of Blue Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Guy Green Sidney Poitier, Shelley Winters, Elizabeth Hartman, Wallace Ford, Ivan Dixon $13,500,000"Big Rental Pictures of 1966", Variety, 4 January 1967 p 8 15. The Sons of Katie Elder Paramount Pictures Henry Hathaway John Wayne, Dean Martin, Martha Hyer, Michael Anderson, Jr., Earl Holliman, Jeremy Slate, George Kennedy, Dennis Hopper $13,333,333 16. Help! United Artists Richard Lester John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, Ringo Starr, Leo McKern, Eleanor Bron, John Bluthal $12,066,667 17. How to Murder Your Wife United Artists Richard Quine Jack Lemmon, Virna Lisi, Terry-Thomas, Claire Trevor $12,000,000 18. Darling Embassy Pictures John Schlesinger Julie Christie, Laurence Harvey, Dirk Bogarde, José Luis de Vilallonga, Roland Curram, Basil Henson $12,000,000Darling, Box Office Information. IMDb. May 19, 2013 19. The Agony and the Ecstasy 20th Century Fox Carol Reed Charlton Heston, Rex Harrison, Diane Cilento, Harry Andrews, Alberto Lupo, Adolfo Celi, Venantino Venantini $8,000,000 20. Do Not Disturb 20th Century Fox Ralph Levy, George Marshall Doris Day, Rod Taylor, Hermione Baddeley, Sergio Fantoni, Reginald Gardiner $8,000,000 21. The Spy Who Came in from the Cold Paramount Martin Ritt Richard Burton, Claire Bloom, Oskar Werner, Sam Wanamaker $7,600,000 22. Ship of Fools Columbia Stanley Kramer Vivien Leigh, Simone Signoret, Oskar Werner, Lee Marvin, Elizabeth Ashley, George Segal, José Greco, Michael Dunn $7,000,000"Top Grossers of 1965", Variety, 5 January 1966 p 36 23. The Collector Columbia William Wyler Terence Stamp, Samantha Eggar, Mona Washbourne $7,000,000"Top Grossers of 1965", Variety, 5 January 1966 p 36 24. The Train United Artists John Frankenheimer Burt Lancaster, Paul Scofield, Jeanne Moreau, Michel Simon $6,800,000 February 15 - George Stevens' production of The Greatest Story Ever Told, a retelling of the account of Jesus Christ, premieres in New York City, New York. It was a flop with critics and audiences and it discouraged production of religious epics for many years. It's notable today for its impressive landscapes, powerful and provocative cinematography, Max von Sydow's American film debut performance, and final film performance of Claude Rains. March 2 - The Rodgers and Hammerstein film adaptation of The Sound of Music, directed by Robert Wise and starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer, premieres. It quickly became a worldwide phenomenon and an instant classic. It successfully displaced Gone with the Wind to become, at the time, the highest-grossing film of all-time. The Sound of Music is credited as the film that saved and restored Twentieth Century-Fox from bankruptcy after suffering from ridiculously high production costs and low revenue of Cleopatra, two years prior. July 1 - Blake Edwards's epic comedy The Great Race, starring Tony Curtis, Jack Lemmon, Natalie Wood, Peter Falk, and Keenan Wynn, premieres. Initially a flop with critics and audiences, some do admire Edwards' direction, the acting by its ensemble cast, Henry Mancini's music and its climactic pie fight. December 22 - David Lean's film adaptation of Boris Pasternak's Doctor Zhivago, starring Omar Sharif, Julie Christie, Rod Steiger, and Alec Guinness, premieres and, like The Sound of Music, quickly became a worldwide phenomenon. Its moral story and message of a love and the human spirit that defied against the communist Soviet Union have made the film a true classic by the critics and audiences and, later, the American Film Institute. In a decade of very difficult times for its studio, Zhivago became the most successful and acclaimed Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film since How the West Was Won and the greatest MGM film since Ben-Hur. January 1965 8 January Dear Brigitte 15 January Baby the Rain Must Fall 28 January 36 Hours February 1965 10 February Strange Bedfellows Sylvia 15 February Lord Jim 23 February Dr. Terror's House of Horrors 24 February Love Has Many Faces March 1965 2 March The Sound of Music 5 March The Rounders 6 March Nightmare in the Sun 15 March Major Dundee 21 March Die! Die! My Darling! 24 March John Goldfarb, Please Come Home! 31 March The Truth About Spring April 1965 3 April The Man from Button Willow 6 April In Harm's Way 7 April Bus Riley's Back in Town Girl Happy 8 April The World of Abbott and Costello 9 April The Greatest Story Ever Told 14 April Beach Blanket Bingo The Satan Bug May 1965 5 May Alphaville Brainstorm 7 May Joy in the Morning 14 May Harlow 26 May Mirage June 1965 2 June What's New Pussycat? 3 June Shenandoah 9 June Up from the Beach 18 June I'll Take Sweden 23 June Genghis Khan (1965 film) The Hallelujah Trail Harlow Von Ryan's Express Willy McBean and his Magic Machine 24 June Cat Ballou 30 June Ski Party Tickle Me July 1965 1 July The Family Jewels The Great Race The Sons of Katie Elder 14 July How to Stuff a Wild Bikini 21 July I Saw What You Did 29 July Ship of Fools August 1965 1 August Voyage to the Prehistoric Planet 3 August You Must Be Joking! (U.K.) 9 August The Brigand of Kandahar 14 August A Very Special Favor 18 August Catch Us If You Can The Monkey's Uncle Sergeant Deadhead 23 August Dr. Who and the Daleks (U.K.) 25 August Morituri That Funny Feeling Wild on the Beach September 1965 1 September Billie 3 September The Battle of the Villa Fiorita 8 September Operation C.I.A. 20 September How to Murder Your Wife 24 September Marriage on the Rocks 27 September Mickey One October 1965 7 October The Agony and the Ecstasy 11 October The Bedford Incident (U.S.A./U.K.) 13 October Situation Hopeless... But Not Serious 15 October The Cincinnati Kid 17 October Sting of Death 27 October King Rat November 1965 4 November Never Too Late 6 November Dr. Goldfoot and the Bikini Machine 17 November The War Lord 18 November For a Few Dollars More (Italy) 19 November Return from the Ashes 24 November Harum Scarum 25 November Lady L December 1965 2 December That Darn Cat! 10 December A Patch of Blue 13 December A Thousand Clowns 15 December The Flight of the Phoenix 16 December Battle of the Bulge 19 December Invasion of Astro-Monster 22 December Doctor Zhivago (U.K.) 23 December The Slender Thread 24 December Bad Girls Go to Hell 29 December Thunderball (U.K.) The 10th Victim (La decima vittima), starring Marcello Mastroianni and Ursula Andress - (Italy/France) 36 Hours, starring James Garner, Rod Taylor and Eva Marie Saint The 317th Platoon (La 317e Section) - (France) Abashiri Prison (Abashiri Bangaichi), starring Ken Takakura - (Japan) Adventures of a Dentist (Pokhozhdyeniya zubnovo vracha), directed by Elem Klimov - (U.S.S.R.) The Adventures of the Smurfs (Les Aventures des Schtroumpfs) - (Belgium) The Agony and the Ecstasy, directed by Carol Reed, starring Charlton Heston and Rex Harrison The Alphabet Murders, directed by Frank Tashlin, starring Tony Randall and Anita Ekberg Alphaville (Alphaville, une étrange aventure de Lemmy Caution), directed by Jean-Luc Godard, starring Eddie Constantine - Golden Bear winner - (France) Always Further On (Tarahumara (Cada vez más lejos)) - (Mexico) The Amorous Adventures of Moll Flanders, starring Kim Novak, Richard Johnson, Angela Lansbury The Art of Love, directed by Norman Jewison, starring James Garner, Angie Dickinson, Elke Sommer, Dick Van Dyke Arzoo (Wish), starring Sadhana - (India) The Ashes (Popioły), directed by Andrzej Wajda - (Poland) Baby the Rain Must Fall, starring Steve McQueen and Lee Remick Bad Girls Go to Hell, directed by Doris Wishman Battle of the Bulge, starring Henry Fonda, Robert Shaw, Robert Ryan, Charles Bronson, Ty Hardin, Pier Angeli The Battle of the Villa Fiorita, directed by Delmer Daves, starring Maureen O'Hara, Rossano Brazzi, Olivia Hussey Beach Blanket Bingo, directed by William Asher, starring Annette Funicello, Frankie Avalon, Deborah Walley, Don Rickles The Bedford Incident, starring Richard Widmark and Sidney Poitier - (U.S.A./U.K.) Billie, starring Patty Duke Black Wind (Viento negro) - (Mexico) Boeing Boeing, starring Jerry Lewis and Tony Curtis La Bohème - (West Germany) Brainstorm, directed by William Conrad, starring Anne Francis and Jeffrey Hunter The Brigand of Kandahar, starring Oliver Reed and Yvonne Romain Bunny Lake Is Missing, directed by Otto Preminger, starring Laurence Olivier and Carol Lynley - (U.K.) Bus Riley's Back in Town, starring Ann-Margret and Michael Parks The Camp Followers (Le soldatesse), starring Anna Karina - (Italy) Carry On Cowboy, starring Sid James, Kenneth Williams, Jim Dale - (U.K.) Casanova 70, starring Marcello Mastroianni and Virna Lisi - (Italy) Cat Ballou, starring Jane Fonda and Lee Marvin Catch Us If You Can, a.k.a. Having a Wild Weekend, starring The Dave Clark Five Chronicle of a Boy Alone (Crónica de un niño solo) - (Argentina) The Cincinnati Kid, directed by Norman Jewison, starring Steve McQueen, Edward G. Robinson, Ann-Margret, Karl Malden, Tuesday Weld, Joan Blondell City Under the Sea (aka War-Gods of the Deep), starring Vincent Price and Tab Hunter Clarence, the Cross-Eyed Lion, starring Marshall Thompson and Betsy Drake The Collector, directed by William Wyler, starring Terence Stamp and Samantha Eggar - (U.K./U.S.A.) Cup Fever, starring Bernard Cribbins - (U.K.) Curse of the Fly, starring Brian Donlevy, George Baker, Carole Gray Darling, directed by John Schlesinger, starring Laurence Harvey, Dirk Bogarde, Julie Christie - (U.K.) Dear Brigitte, starring James Stewart, Bill Mumy, Glynis Johns, Ed Wynn, Brigitte Bardot A Devilish Homicide (Salinma) - (South Korea) Die! Die! My Darling! (aka Fanatic), starring Tallulah Bankhead and Stefanie Powers Dingaka, starring Stanley Baker - (South Africa) Doctor Zhivago, directed by David Lean, starring Omar Sharif, Julie Christie, Geraldine Chaplin, Rod Steiger, Alec Guinness—winner of 5 Academy Awards - (U.K.) Dr. Goldfoot and the Bikini Machine, starring Vincent Price and Frankie Avalon Dr. Terror's House of Horrors, starring Peter Cushing and Christopher Lee - (U.K.) Dr. Who and the Daleks, starring Peter Cushing - (U.K.) The Early Bird, starring Norman Wisdom - (U.K.) The Family Jewels, starring Jerry Lewis Fantômas se déchaîne (Fantômas Unleashed), starring Jean Marais - (France) Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!, directed by Russ Meyer Ferry Cross the Mersey, starring Gerry and the Pacemakers - (U.K.) Fists in the Pocket (I pugni in tasca) - (Italy) The Flight of the Phoenix, directed by Robert Aldrich, starring James Stewart, Richard Attenborough, Hardy Krüger, Ernest Borgnine, Peter Finch For a Few Dollars More, directed by Sergio Leone, starring Clint Eastwood - (Italy) Funny Things Happen Down Under, starring Olivia Newton-John - (Australia) Il Gaucho, starring Vittorio Gassman and Nino Manfredi - (Italy/Argentina) Genghis Khan (1965 film), starring Omar Sharif, Stephen Boyd, James Mason Girl Happy, starring Elvis Presley The Glory Guys, directed by Arnold Laven, starring Tom Tryon and Harve Presnell Goldstein, comedy ensemble film, with actors from The Second City, including Severn Darden The Great Race, directed by Blake Edwards, starring Tony Curtis, Jack Lemmon, Natalie Wood, Peter Falk, Ross Martin The Greatest Story Ever Told, directed by George Stevens, starring Max von Sydow, Charlton Heston, Dorothy McGuire, David McCallum, Martin Landau, Telly Savalas Guide, directed by Vijay Anand, starring Dev Anand - (India) Gumnaam (Unknown), starring Manoj Kumar - (India) The Hallelujah Trail, directed by John Sturges, starring Burt Lancaster, Lee Remick, Jim Hutton, Pamela Tiffin Happiness (Le bonheur), directed by Agnès Varda - (France) Harlow, starring Carroll Baker, Peter Lawford, Red Buttons, Mike Connors, Leslie Nielsen, Angela Lansbury Harlow, starring Carol Lynley, Efrem Zimbalist, Jr., Barry Sullivan, Hurd Hatfield, Ginger Rogers Harum Scarum, aka Harem Holiday, starring Elvis Presley, Mary Ann Mobley, Fran Jeffries Help!, directed by Richard Lester, starring The Beatles - (U.K.) The Heroes of Telemark, starring Kirk Douglas and Richard Harris A High Wind in Jamaica, starring Anthony Quinn and James Coburn - (U.K.) The Hill, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring Sean Connery, Ian Bannen, Ossie Davis - (U.K.) The Hour and Turn of Augusto Matraga (A Hora e a Vez de Augusto Matraga) - (Brazil) How to Murder Your Wife, starring Jack Lemmon and Virna Lisi How to Stuff a Wild Bikini, starring Annette Funicello, Dwayne Hickman, Buster Keaton, Beverly Adams, Mickey Rooney I Knew Her Well (Io la conoscevo bene), starring Stefania Sandrelli, Nino Manfredi, Franco Nero - (Italy) I'll Take Sweden, starring Bob Hope, Dina Merrill, Frankie Avalon, Tuesday Weld Impossible on Saturday (Pas question le samedi) - (Italy/France/Israel) In Harm's Way, directed by Otto Preminger, starring John Wayne, Kirk Douglas, Patricia Neal, Brandon deWilde, Paula Prentiss, Henry Fonda Inside Daisy Clover, starring Natalie Wood, Robert Redford, Christopher Plummer Inside the Forbidden City (Song gong mi shi) - (Hong Kong) Intimate Lighting (Intimní osvětlení), directed by Ivan Passer - (Czechoslovakia) Invasion of Astro-Monster (Kaijû daisensô), directed by Ishirō Honda - (Japan) The Ipcress File, directed by Sidney J. Furie, starring Michael Caine - BAFTA Award for Best British Film - (U.K.) I Saw What You Did, starring Joan Crawford John Goldfarb, Please Come Home!, starring Shirley MacLaine, Richard Crenna, Peter Ustinov Joy in the Morning, starring Richard Chamberlain and Yvette Mimieux Juliet of the Spirits (Giulietta degli spiriti), directed by Federico Fellini - (Italy/France) King Rat, starring George Segal, Tom Courtenay, James Fox The Knack ...and How to Get It, directed by Richard Lester, starring Ray Brooks, Rita Tushingham, Michael Crawford - Cannes Grand Prize - (U.K.) Lady L, directed by Peter Ustinov, starring Sophia Loren, Paul Newman, David Niven Licensed to Kill, starring Tom Adams- (U.K.) Life at the Top, starring Laurence Harvey and Jean Simmons - (U.K.) The Liquidator, directed by Jack Cardiff and starring Rod Taylor and Trevor Howard (U.K.) La Loba (The She-Wolf) - (Mexico) Lord Jim, starring Peter O'Toole - (U.K./U.S.A.) Love Has Many Faces, starring Lana Turner, Hugh O'Brian, Cliff Robertson, Ruth Roman, Stefanie Powers The Loved One, directed by Tony Richardson, starring Robert Morse, Anjanette Comer, Jonathan Winters, Rod Steiger, Paul Williams, Liberace Loves of a Blonde (Lásky jedné plavovlásky), directed by Miloš Forman - (Czechoslovakia) Major Dundee, directed by Sam Peckinpah, starring Charlton Heston, Richard Harris, James Coburn, Jim Hutton The Man from Button Willow Man Is Not a Bird (Čovek nije tica) - (Yugoslavia) Marriage on the Rocks, starring Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin and Deborah Kerr McHale's Navy Joins the Air Force Mickey One, directed by Arthur Penn, starring Warren Beatty Mirage, directed by Edward Dmytryk, starring Gregory Peck, Diane Baker and Walter Matthau The Money Trap, starring Glenn Ford, Rita Hayworth, Ricardo Montalbán, Joseph Cotten, Elke Sommer The Monkey's Uncle, starring Annette Funicello and Tommy Kirk Morituri, starring Marlon Brando and Yul Brynner The Nanny, starring Bette Davis - (U.K.) The Naked Prey, directed by and starring Cornel Wilde - (U.S./South Africa) Never Too Late, starring Paul Ford, Maureen O'Sullivan, Connie Stevens, Jim Hutton Nightmare Castle, starring Barbara Steele - (Italy) Nightmare in the Sun, starring Ursula Andress, John Derek, Aldo Ray, Sammy Davis, Jr. None but the Brave, directed by and starring Frank Sinatra, with Clint Walker, Tommy Sands Once a Thief, starring Alain Delon and Ann-Margret - (U.S.A./France) Operation C.I.A., starring Burt Reynolds and Danielle Aubry Operation Crossbow, starring Sophia Loren - (U.K.) Operation Y and Shurik's Other Adventures (Operatsiya „Y“ i drugie priklyucheniya Shurika), starring Aleksandr Demyanenko - (U.S.S.R.) Othello, directed by Stuart Burge, starring Laurence Olivier, Maggie Smith, Frank Finlay - (U.K.) A Patch of Blue, starring Sidney Poitier, Elizabeth Hartman, Shelley Winters Pierrot le Fou, directed by Jean-Luc Godard, starring Jean-Paul Belmondo and Anna Karina - (France) Planet of the Vampires (Terrore nello spazio), directed by Mario Bava - (Italy/Spain) Promise Her Anything, directed by Arthur Hiller, starring Warren Beatty and Leslie Caron The Rabbit Is Me (Das Kaninchen bin ich) - (East Germany) The Railrodder, a comedy short starring Buster Keaton in his last film - (Canada) Răscoala - (Romania) Red Beard (Akahige), directed by Akira Kurosawa, starring Toshiro Mifune - (Japan) Repulsion, directed by Roman Polanski, starring Catherine Deneuve - (U.K.) Return from the Ashes, starring Maximilian Schell and Samantha Eggar The Return of Mr. Moto, starring Henry Silva - (U.K.) The Round-Up (Szegénylegények), directed by Miklós Jancsó - (Hungary) The Rounders, directed by Burt Kennedy, starring Glenn Ford and Henry Fonda Samurai Spy (Ibun Sarutobi Sasuke) - (Japan) Sandra (Vaghe stelle dell'Orsa), directed by Luchino Visconti, starring Claudia Cardinale - (Italy) São Paulo, Sociedade Anônima (São Paulo, the Anonymous Town) - (Brazil) The Saragossa Manuscript (Rekopis znaleziony w Saragossie), starring Zbigniew Cybulski - (Poland) The Sandpiper, directed by Vincente Minnelli, starring Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton and Eva Marie Saint Sands of the Kalahari, starring Stuart Whitman, Stanley Baker, Susannah York - (U.K.) The Satan Bug, starring George Maharis and Anne Francis Secrets Behind the Wall (Kabe no naka no himegoto) - (Japan) Sergeant Deadhead, starring Frankie Avalon and Deborah Walley Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors (Tini zabutykh predkiv) - (U.S.S.R.) Shakespeare Wallah, directed by James Ivory, starring Shashi Kapoor, Felicity Kendal, Madhur Jaffrey She, starring Ursula Andress and Peter Cushing - (U.K.) Shenandoah, starring James Stewart, Doug McClure, Rosemary Forsyth, Katharine Ross Ship of Fools, directed by Stanley Kramer, starring Vivien Leigh, Simone Signoret, Lee Marvin, Michael Dunn, José Ferrer The Shop on Main Street (Obchod na korze), directed by Ján Kadár and Elmar Klos - Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film - (Czechoslovakia) Simon of the Desert (Simón del desierto), directed by Luis Buñuel - (Mexico) The Sin (Al Haram) - (Egypt) Situation Hopeless... But Not Serious, starring Alec Guinness, Mike Connors, Robert Redford Ski Party, starring Frankie Avalon and Yvonne Craig The Skull, starring Peter Cushing, Christopher Lee, Patrick Wymark - (U.K.) Slalom, starring Vittorio Gassman, Adolfo Celi, Beba Lončar, Daniela Bianchi - (Italy) The Sleeping Car Murders (Compartiment tueurs), directed by Costa-Gavras, starring Yves Montand and Simone Signoret - (France) The Slender Thread, directed by Sydney Pollack, starring Sidney Poitier, Anne Bancroft, Telly Savalas, Ed Asner The Sons of Katie Elder, directed by Henry Hathaway, starring John Wayne and Dean Martin The Sound of Music, directed by Robert Wise, starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer—winner of 5 Oscars and 2 Golden Globes The Spy Who Came in from the Cold, directed by Martin Ritt, starring Richard Burton and Claire Bloom - (U.K.) Sting of Death, directed by William Grefe Story of a Prostitute (Shunpuden), directed by Seijun Suzuki - (Japan) Strange Bedfellows, starring Rock Hudson and Gina Lollobrigida A Study in Terror, starring  John Neville, Donald Houston and Anthony Quayle- (U.K.) A Swingin' Summer, starring James Stacy and Raquel Welch Sword of the Beast (Kedamono no ken), directed by Hideo Gosha - (Japan) Sylvia, starring Carroll Baker and George Maharis Synanon, directed by Richard Quine, starring Edmond O'Brien, Chuck Connors, Stella Stevens Tattooed Life (Irezumi ichidai), directed by Seijun Suzuki - (Japan) Ten Little Indians, starring Shirley Eaton, Hugh O'Brian, Daliah Lavi, Stanley Holloway, Wilfred Hyde-White, Fabian Forte - (U.K.) That Darn Cat! starring Dean Jones That Funny Feeling, starring  Bobby Darin and Sandra Dee The Third Day, starring George Peppard and Elizabeth Ashley Thirty Three (Tridtsat tri) - (U.S.S.R.) Those Magnificent Men in Their Flying Machines, directed by Ken Annakin, starring Stuart Whitman, Sarah Miles, Robert Morley, Gert Fröbe - (U.K.) A Thousand Clowns, starring Jason Robards, Barry Gordon, Martin Balsam, Barbara Harris Thunderball, starring Sean Connery (as James Bond), with Claudine Auger, Luciana Paluzzi, Adolfo Celi - (U.K.) Tickle Me, starring Elvis Presley Tokyo Olympiad, a documentary directed by Kon Ichikawa - (Japan) The Truth About Spring, directed by Richard Thorpe, starring Hayley Mills and John Mills The Uninhibited (Los pianos mecánicos), directed by Juan Antonio Bardem, starring Melina Mercouri and James Mason - (Spain) Up from the Beach, starring Cliff Robertson Up to His Ears A Very Special Favor, starring Rock Hudson and Leslie Caron Viva Maria!, directed by Louis Malle, starring Brigitte Bardot and Jeanne Moreau - (France) Von Ryan's Express, directed by Mark Robson, starring Frank Sinatra, Trevor Howard, Edward Mulhare, Adolfo Celi Voyage to the Prehistoric Planet, starring Basil Rathbone Waqt, starring Sunil Dutt and Sadhana - (India) The War Game, a TV docudrama directed by Peter Watkins - (U.K.) The War Lord, starring Charlton Heston, Richard Boone, Rosemary Forsyth What's New Pussycat?, directed by Clive Donner, starring Peter Sellers, Peter O'Toole, Woody Allen, Romy Schneider, Paula Prentiss, Capucine Wild on the Beach, starring Sherry Jackson, Frankie Randall, Sonny & Cher Willy McBean and his Magic Machine Winter Kept Us Warm, directed by David Secter - (Canada) The World of Abbott and Costello, starring Bud Abbott and Lou Costello You Must Be Joking!, starring Lionel Jeffries, Denholm Elliott, Michael Callan - (U.K.) Young Dillinger, starring Nick Adams and Mary Ann Mobley Yo Yo, directed by and starring Pierre Étaix - (France) Looney Tunes (1930–1969) Merrie Melodies (1931–1969) Speedy Gonzales (1953–1968) Goofy (1965) January 9 - Joely Richardson, English actress January 22 - Diane Lane, American actress January 27 - Alan Cumming, Scottish actor February 1 - Brandon Lee, American actor (d. 1993) February 7 - Chris Rock, American stand up comic and actor February 11 - Stephen Gregory, American actor February 18 - Dr. Dre, American music producer February 24 - Kristin Davis, American actress Sex in the City March 25 - Sarah Jessica Parker, American actress April 4 - Robert Downey, Jr., American actor May 31 - Brooke Shields, American actress and model June 10 - Elizabeth Hurley, English model and actress June 19 - Sean Marshall, American child actor and singer June 28 - Sonny Strait, American voice actor July 3 - Connie Nielsen, Danish actress July 25 - Illeana Douglas, American actress July 26 - Jeremy Piven, American actor August 11 - Viola Davis, American actress August 19 - Kyra Sedgwick, American actress September 3 - Charlie Sheen, American actor October 11 - Lennie James, English actor November 2 - Shah Rukh Khan, Indian actor November 21 - Alexander Siddig, Sudanese-English actor November 24 - Shirley Henderson, Scottish actress November 30 - Ben Stiller, American actor December 7 - Jeffrey Wright, American actor Unknown - Lisa Roberts Gillan, American actress January 14 - Jeanette MacDonald, 61, American actress, singer, San Francisco, One Hour with You February 10 - Arnold Manoff, 50, American screenwriter, The Big Break, Casbah (film) February 15 - Nat King Cole, 45, American singer and actor, St. Louis Blues, Istanbul February 23 - Stan Laurel, 74, British actor, The Flying Deuces, Sons of the Desert March 1 - Fred Immler, 84, German actor, Madame Du Barry, Zapata's Gang March 6 - Margaret Dumont, 82, American actress, Duck Soup, A Night at the Opera March 23 - Mae Murray, 75, American actress, The Merry Widow, The Delicious Little Devil March 28 - Jack Hoxie, 80, American Western actor, Trouble Busters April 8 - Lars Hanson, 78, Swedish actor, The Wind, Flesh and the Devil April 10 - Linda Darnell, 41, American actress, My Darling Clementine, The Mark of Zorro April 30 - Helen Chandler, 59, American actress, Dracula, The Last Flight May 5 - John Waters, 71, screenwriter and director, The Big Country, The Desperate Hours June 6 - Lech Owron, 71, Polish actor, Vampires of Warsaw, The Little Eagle June 7 - Judy Holliday, 43, American actress, Born Yesterday, Adam's Rib June 15 - Steve Cochran, 48, American actor, The Best Years of Our Lives, White Heat June 22 - David O. Selznick, 63, American producer, Gone with the Wind, Rebecca June 23 - Mary Boland, 85, American stage and film actress, The Women, Ruggles of Red Gap July 11 - Ray Collins, 78, American actor, Citizen Kane, The Kid from Left Field July 24 - Constance Bennett, 60, American actress, Topper, Merrily We Live July 28 - Minor Watson, 75, American actor, Woman of the Year, The Jackie Robinson Story August 6 Everett Sloane, 55, American actor, Citizen Kane, The Lady from Shanghai Nancy Carroll, 61, American actress, The Devil's Holiday September 2 - Felix E. Feist, 55, American director, This Woman Is Dangerous, The Big Trees September 8 - Dorothy Dandridge, 42, American actress, singer, Carmen Jones, Porgy and Bess September 27 - Clara Bow, 60, American actress, Wings, It October 3 - Zachary Scott, 51, American actor, Mildred Pierce, The Southerner October 18 - Henry Travers, 91, British actor, It's a Wonderful Life, Shadow of a Doubt October 21 - Marie McDonald, 42, American actress, The Geisha Boy, Living in a Big Way October 31 - Rita Johnson, 52, American actress, Here Comes Mr. Jordan, The Major and the Minor Woody Allen - What's New Pussycat Robert De Niro - Encounter Sonny & Cher - Wild on the Beach Michael Gambon - Othello Derek Jacobi - Othello George Lucas - director - Look at Life Philip Kaufman - director - Goldstein
