   The year 1967 in film involved some significant events. It is widely considered as one of the most ground-breaking years in film. Academy Awards: Best Picture: In the Heat of the Night - Mirisch, United Artists Best Director: Mike Nichols - The Graduate Best Actor: Rod Steiger - In the Heat of the Night Best Actress: Katharine Hepburn - Guess Who's Coming to Dinner Best Supporting Actor: George Kennedy - Cool Hand Luke Best Supporting Actress: Estelle Parsons - Bonnie and Clyde Best Foreign Language Film: Closely Watched Trains (Ostře sledované vlaky), directed by Jiří Menzel, Czechoslovakia Golden Globe Awards: Drama: Best Picture: In the Heat of the Night Best Actor: Rod Steiger – In the Heat of the Night Best Actress: Edith Evans – The Whisperers Musical or comedy: Best Picture: The Graduate Best Actor: Richard Harris – Camelot Best Actress: Anne Bancroft – The Graduate Other Best Director: Mike Nichols – The Graduate Best English Language Foreign Film: The Fox, United Kingdom Best Foreign Film: Live for Life (Vivre pour vivre), France Palme d'Or (Cannes Film Festival): Blowup, directed by Michelangelo Antonioni, Italy Golden Lion (Venice Film Festival): Belle de jour, directed by Luis Buñuel, France / Italy Golden Bear (Berlin Film Festival): Le départ, directed by Jerzy Skolimowski, Belgium U.S.A. unless stated U.S.A. unless stated # A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W Y Rank Title Studio Director Actors Gross 1. The Graduate AVCO Embassy / United Artists Mike Nichols Dustin Hoffman, Anne Bancroft, Katharine Ross, William Daniels, Murray Hamilton, Elizabeth Wilson, Norman Fell $104,901,839 2. The Jungle Book Walt Disney Productions / Walt Disney Feature Animation Wolfgang Reitherman Bruce Reitherman, Phil Harris, Sebastian Cabot, George Sanders, Louis Prima, Darleen Carr, Verna Felton, J. Pat O'Malley $73,741,048 3. Guess Who's Coming to Dinner Columbia Pictures Stanley Kramer Spencer Tracy, Sidney Poitier, Katharine Hepburn, Katharine Houghton, Beah Richards, Roy Glenn, Cecil Kellaway, Isabel Sanford $56,666,667 4. Bonnie and Clyde Warner Bros.-Seven Arts Arthur Penn Warren Beatty, Faye Dunaway, Gene Hackman, Estelle Parsons, Michael J. Pollard, Gene Wilder $50,700,000 5. The Dirty Dozen Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Robert Aldrich Lee Marvin, Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine, Charles Bronson, John Cassavetes, Telly Savalas, Donald Sutherland, Clint Walker $45,300,000 6. Valley of the Dolls 20th Century Fox Mark Robson Sharon Tate, Patty Duke, Barbara Parkins, Susan Hayward, Martin Milner, Paul Burke $44,432,255 7. You Only Live Twice United Artists Lewis Gilbert Sean Connery, Akiko Wakabayashi, Mie Hama, Charles Gray, Bernard Lee $43,084,787 8. To Sir, with Love Columbia Pictures James Clavell Sidney Poitier, Judy Geeson, Suzy Kendall $42,432,803 9. The Born Losers American International Pictures T.C. Frank Tom Laughlin, Elizabeth James, Jane Russell $36,000,000 10. Thoroughly Modern Millie Universal Pictures George Roy Hill Julie Andrews, Mary Tyler Moore, James Fox, Carol Channing, Beatrice Lillie $34,335,025 11. Camelot Warner Bros.-Seven Arts Joshua Logan Richard Harris, Vanessa Redgrave, Franco Nero, David Hemmings, Lionel Jeffries $31,102,578 12. In the Heat of the Night United Artists Norman Jewison Sidney Poitier, Rod Steiger, Warren Oates, Lee Grant, Beah Richards, Larry Gates $24,379,978 13. Casino Royale Columbia Pictures Ken Hughes David Niven, Peter Sellers, Ursula Andress, Orson Welles, Woody Allen $22,744,718 14. I Am Curious (Yellow) Janus Films Vilgot Sjöman Vilgot Sjöman, Lena Nyman $20,238,100 15. Barefoot in the Park Paramount Pictures Gene Saks Robert Redford, Jane Fonda, Charles Boyer $19,994,515 16. Wait Until Dark Warner Bros.-Seven Arts Terrence Young Audrey Hepburn, Alan Arkin, Richard Crenna, Jack Weston, Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. $17,550,741 17. Cool Hand Luke Warner Bros.-Seven Arts Stuart Rosenberg Paul Newman, George Kennedy, Strother Martin, Jo Van Fleet, Clifton James $16,217,773 18. In Cold Blood Columbia Pictures Richard Brooks Robert Blake, John Forsythe, Scott Wilson, Paul Stewart, Jeff Corey, Charles McGraw $13,000,000 19. Hombre 20th Century Fox Martin Ritt Paul Newman, Fredric March, Diane Cilento, Richard Boone, Martin Balsam, Barbara Rush $12,000,000 20. Divorce American Style Columbia Pictures Bud Yorkin Dick Van Dyke, Debbie Reynolds, Jean Simmons, Jason Robards, Van Johnson $12,000,000 21. Two for the Road 20th Century Fox Stanley Donen Albert Finney, Audrey Hepburn $12,000,000 22. In Like Flint 20th Century Fox Gordon Douglas James Coburn, Lee J. Cobb, Jean Hale $11,000,000 23. The Trip American International Pictures Roger Corman Peter Fonda, Dennis Hopper $10,000,000 24. Doctor Dolittle 20th Century Fox Richard Fleischer Rex Harrison, Samantha Eggar, Anthony Newley, Geoffrey Holder, Richard Attenborough $9,000,000 25. The Taming of the Shrew Columbia Pictures Franco Zeffirelli Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton $8,000,000 The prototype for the IMAX large-format-film acquisition and screening system is exhibited at Expo 67 in Montreal, Canada The MPAA uses a new logo and is still used today. May 13 — A catastrophic electrical fire at MGM Vault #7 in Culver City, California destroys hundreds of silent and early sound films, leaving many of them lost. August 13 — Bonnie and Clyde, starring Warren Beatty, Faye Dunaway, and Gene Hackman, premieres. It broke many taboos that had been controversial, at its time, over the film's glorification of violence. In spite of that, it has been considered a landmark film in Hollywood filmmaking with its groundbreaking and ingenious filmmaking styles and because of that, Bonnie and Clyde brought forth the New Hollywood era, a period of artistic and commercial revival. October 18 — Walt Disney's production of Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book premieres. It was the last animated feature film to be personally supervised by Disney himself before his untimely death, the year prior. It was also the one of the last Disney films to be personally supervised by him, the others being The Happiest Millionaire and Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day. The story's moral message of friendship, love, and trust have embraced critics and audiences worldwide, as they needed all that during the very difficult and troubled times of the 1960s. The Jungle Book is very famous for its groundbreaking achievements in realistic character animation, voice acting, and choice of voice casting. The film's soundtrack, which includes songs like the Academy Award-nominated "The Bare Necessities", '"I Wan'na Be Like You", "Trust in Me", and "My Own Home", have also contributed to the film's enormous success, as well. It would the last acclaimed and successful animated film to be made by Disney until The Rescuers, ten years later. December 21 — The Graduate, starring Dustin Hoffman (in his acting film debut), Anne Bancroft, and Katharine Ross, premieres. Its story of a man with a no-aimed in life, seduced and betrayed by an older woman, and fell in love with her daughter who seemed to help him to find the right path to follow in his life with the strength and will of his own, resonated and embraced Americans as they needed a new hope and direction in life after when President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 and America was divided into two. The Graduate was one of some films released in 1967 that broke many taboos that had not been shown previously in American cinema, and more significantly, it represents as the bridge between traditional (pre-1967) and groundbreaking (1967 and onward) achievements filmmaking. December 26 — The Beatles' Magical Mystery Tour airs on British television. January 1967 18 January Born Losers Come Spy with Me The Venetian Affair Warning Shot 19 January Hotel February 1967 1 February The Ballad of Josie 7 February Tobruk 9 February Hurry Sundown March 1967 8 March Mad Monster Party? The Taming of the Shrew (Italy/U.S.) 9 March How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying' 12 March The Busy Body 14 March Ulysses 15 March Frankenstein Created Woman (U.K.) In Like Flint 21 March Hombre Thoroughly Modern Millie 22 March Easy Come, Easy Go April 1967 5 April Double Trouble 13 April Casino Royale (U.K.) 14 April It's a Bikini World 18 April Caprice May 1967 1 May 40 Guns to Apache Pass Welcome to Hard Times 12 May Good Times 17 May Dont Look Back 22 May The Honey Pot 24 May The Way West 25 May Barefoot in the Park A Guide for the Married Man The Vengeance of Fu Manchu 27 May The War Wagon June 1967 13 June You Only Live Twice 15 June The Dirty Dozen 16 June The Reluctant Astronaut 21 June Divorce American Style 23 June The Happiest Millionaire 27 June The Shuttered Room 28 June Gunn 30 June The St. Valentine's Day Massacre July 1967 12 July The Big Mouth 19 July Up the Down Staircase 22 July King Kong Escapes (Japan/U.S.) 23 July Chuka August 1967 1 August Rough Night in Jericho 2 August In the Heat of the Night 13 August Bonnie and Clyde 22 August The Flim-Flam Man 30 August Point Blank September 1967 1 September The Fastest Guitar Alive 17 September Games 18 September The Tiger Makes Out 26 September Who's Minding the Mint? October 1967 3 October Titicut Follies 13 October Reflections in a Golden Eye 18 October Clambake The Jungle Book 25 October Camelot 26 October Wait Until Dark 31 October The Comedians November 1967 1 November Cool Hand Luke Hour of the Gun 5 November The Incident 9 November Quatermass and the Pit (U.K.) 10 November Tony Rome 15 November Who's That Knocking at My Door 22 November Rosie! December 1967 1 December Hells Angels on Wheels 12 December Guess Who's Coming to Dinner 14 December In Cold Blood 15 December Valley of the Dolls 16 December Son of Godzilla (Japan) 18 December I'll Never Forget What's'isname 19 December Doctor Dolittle 20 December Fitzwilly 21 December The Graduate The President's Analyst 29 December Weekend 40 Guns to Apache Pass, starring Audie Murphy Two or Three Things I Know About Her (2 ou 3 choses que je sais d'elle), directed by Jean-Luc Godard - (France) The 25th Hour, starring Anthony Quinn and Virna Lisi - (France/Italy/Romania) Accident, directed by Joseph Losey, starring Dirk Bogarde and Stanley Baker - (U.K.) The Ambushers, starring Dean Martin (as Matt Helm) The Andromeda Nebula - (U.S.S.R.) Anna Karenina - (U.S.S.R.) The Ballad of Josie, starring Doris Day Banning, starring Robert Wagner, Jill St. John, Susan Clark, Gene Hackman Barefoot in the Park, starring Robert Redford and Jane Fonda Battle Beneath the Earth, starring Kerwin Mathews and Peter Arne - (U.K.) Beach Red, starring Cornel Wilde and Rip Torn Bedazzled, directed by Stanley Donen, starring Peter Cook, Dudley Moore, Raquel Welch - (U.K.) Belle de jour, directed by Luis Buñuel, starring Catherine Deneuve - winner of Golden Lion - (France) Bewitched Love (El amor brujo) - (Spain) The Big Mouth, directed by and starring Jerry Lewis Billion Dollar Brain, directed by Ken Russell, starring Michael Caine - (U.K.) The Bobo, starring Peter Sellers, Britt Ekland, Adolfo Celi, Rossano Brazzi, Al Lettieri - (U.K.) Bonnie and Clyde, directed by Arthur Penn, starring Warren Beatty, Faye Dunaway, Gene Hackman, Estelle Parsons, Michael J. Pollard Born Losers, directed by and starring Tom Laughlin Branded to Kill (Koroshi no rakuin), directed by Seijun Suzuki - (Japan) The Busy Body, starring Sid Caesar, Robert Ryan, Jan Murray, Arlene Golonka, Richard Pryor Camelot, a musical directed by Joshua Logan, starring Richard Harris, Vanessa Redgrave, Franco Nero, with songs by Lerner and Loewe The Cape Town Affair, starring James Brolin and Jacqueline Bisset Caprice, starring Doris Day and Richard Harris Carry On Doctor, starring Frankie Howerd and Sid James - (U.K.) Case of the Naves Brothers (O Caso dos Irmãos Naves) - (Brazil) Casino Royale, starring David Niven, Peter Sellers, Ursula Andress, Woody Allen, Daliah Lavi, Barbara Bouchet - (U.K.) Catalina Caper, starring Tommy Kirk Cervantes, starring Horst Buchholz and Gina Lollobrigida - (Spain/France/Italy) Charlie Bubbles, directed by and starring Albert Finney with Billie Whitelaw and Liza Minnelli - (U.K.) China is Near (La Cina è vicina) - (Italy) La Chinoise, directed by Jean-Luc Godard - (France) Chuka, starring Rod Taylor, Ernest Borgnine, John Mills Clambake, starring Elvis Presley and Shelley Fabares La Collectionneuse (The Collector), directed by Éric Rohmer - (France) A Colt Is My Passport (Koruto wa ore no pasupoto), starring Joe Shishido - (Japan) Come Spy with Me, starring Troy Donahue The Comedians, starring Richard Burton, Elizabeth Taylor, Alec Guinness Commissar - (U.S.S.R.) Cool Hand Luke, directed by Stuart Rosenberg, starring Paul Newman and George Kennedy Counterpoint, starring Charlton Heston A Countess from Hong Kong, directed by Charlie Chaplin, starring Marlon Brando and Sophia Loren - (U.K.) Custer of the West, starring Robert Shaw, Mary Ure, Robert Ryan Day of Anger (I giorni dell'ira), starring Lee Van Cleef - (Italy) A Degree of Murder (Mord und Totschlag), directed by Volker Schlöndorff, starring Anita Pallenberg - (West Germany) Le départ (The Departure), directed by Jerzy Skolimowski, starring Jean-Pierre Léaud - winner of Golden Bear - (Belgium) Deadlier Than the Male, starring Richard Johnson and Elke Sommer - (U.K.) The Deadly Affair, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring James Mason and Simone Signoret Death Rides a Horse (Da uomo a uomo), starring Lee Van Cleef and John Phillip Law - (Italy) The Dirty Dozen, directed by Robert Aldrich, starring Lee Marvin, John Cassavetes, Charles Bronson, Telly Savalas, Jim Brown, Ernest Borgnine, Robert Ryan, Clint Walker, Donald Sutherland, Richard Jaeckel, Ralph Meeker, Trini Lopez Divorce American Style, starring Dick Van Dyke, Debbie Reynolds, Jason Robards, Jean Simmons Doctor Dolittle, a musical directed by Richard Fleischer, starring Rex Harrison, Samantha Eggar, Anthony Newley Doctor, You've Got to Be Kidding!, starring Sandra Dee and George Hamilton Dont Look Back, a documentary by D. A. Pennebaker, featuring Bob Dylan Don't Make Waves, starring Tony Curtis, Claudia Cardinale, Sharon Tate Double Trouble, starring Elvis Presley Dragon Gate Inn (Lóng mén kè zhàn) (international release), directed by King Hu - (Taiwan) Easy Come, Easy Go, starring Elvis Presley Eight on the Lam, starring Bob Hope, Jonathan Winters, Shirley Eaton, Jill St. John Elvira Madigan, directed by Bo Widerberg - (Sweden) Entranced Earth (Terra em Transe), directed by Glauber Rocha - (Brazil) An Evening in Paris, starring Shammi Kapoor - (India) Faccia a faccia (Face to Face), starring Gian Maria Volontè - (Italy) Far from the Madding Crowd, directed by John Schlesinger, starring Julie Christie, Terence Stamp, Peter Finch, Alan Bates - (U.K.) The Fastest Guitar Alive, starring Roy Orbison Fathom, starring Raquel Welch - (U.K.) The Fearless Vampire Killers, directed by Roman Polanski, starring Sharon Tate - (U.K./U.S.) Festival, a documentary about Newport Folk Festival The Firemen's Ball (Hoří, má panenko), directed by Miloš Forman - (Czechoslovakia) Fitzwilly, starring Dick Van Dyke and Barbara Feldon The Flim-Flam Man, starring George C. Scott, Michael Sarrazin Follow That Camel (a.k.a. Carry On...Follow That Camel), starring Phil Silvers and Kenneth Williams - (U.K.) Fort Utah, starring John Ireland and Virginia Mayo The Fox, starring Sandy Dennis, Anne Heywood, Keir Dullea Frankenstein Created Woman, starring Peter Cushing - (U.K.) The Frozen Dead, starring Dana Andrews, Anna Palk Games, starring Simone Signoret, Katharine Ross, James Caan The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, directed by Sergio Leone, starring Clint Eastwood, Lee Van Cleef, Eli Wallach - (Italy) Good Times, starring Sonny & Cher The Graduate, premiered in Los Angeles on December 8, directed by Mike Nichols, starring Dustin Hoffman, Anne Bancroft, Katharine Ross Grand Slam, starring Janet Leigh and Edward G. Robinson - (Italy/Spain/West Germany) Guess Who's Coming to Dinner, directed by Stanley Kramer, starring Spencer Tracy, Katharine Hepburn, Sidney Poitier, Katharine Houghton A Guide for the Married Man, directed by Gene Kelly, starring Walter Matthau, Inger Stevens, Sue Ane Langdon, Robert Morse Gunn, starring Craig Stevens Half a Sixpence, starring Tommy Steele - (U.K.) Hatey Bazarey (The Market Place), starring Ashok Kumar and Vyjayanthimala - (India) Hamraaz, starring Sunil Dutt and Raaj Kumar - (India) The Happening, starring Anthony Quinn, Michael Parks, Faye Dunaway The Happiest Millionaire, starring Fred MacMurray, Greer Garson, Tommy Steele, Lesley Ann Warren, John Davidson Die Heiden von Kummerow und ihre lustigen Streiche (The Heathens of Kummerow), the first co-production between East Germany and West Germany Hell on Wheels, starring Marty Robbins Hells Angels on Wheels, starring Jack Nicholson Hombre, directed by Martin Ritt, starring Paul Newman, Fredric March, Diane Cilento, Richard Boone, Martin Balsam, Barbara Rush The Honey Pot, starring Rex Harrison, Cliff Robertson, Susan Hayward, Edie Adams Hotel, directed by Richard Quine, starring Rod Taylor, Melvyn Douglas, Karl Malden, Catherine Spaak, Merle Oberon Hour of the Gun, directed by John Sturges, starring James Garner, Jason Robards, Robert Ryan How I Won The War, directed by Richard Lester, starring Michael Crawford, John Lennon Michael Hordern- (U.K.) How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying, starring Robert Morse, Michele Lee, Rudy Vallée, Maureen Arthur Hurry Sundown, directed by Otto Preminger, starring Jane Fonda, Michael Caine, Diahann Carroll, Beah Richards, Faye Dunaway I, a Man, directed by Andy Warhol I Am Curious (Yellow) (Jag är nyfiken – en film i gult) - (Sweden) I Even Met Happy Gypsies (Skupljači perja) - (Yugoslavia) In Cold Blood, directed by Richard Brooks, starring Robert Blake, Scott Wilson, Paul Stewart, John Forsythe I'll Never Forget What's'isname, directed by Michael Winner, starring Oliver Reed and Orson Welles In Like Flint, starring James Coburn, Lee J. Cobb, Jean Hale In the Heat of the Night, directed by Norman Jewison, starring Sidney Poitier and Rod Steiger—winner of 5 Academy Awards including best picture The Incident, starring Beau Bridges It's a Bikini World, starring Deborah Walley and Tommy Kirk Jewel Thief, starring Dev Anand, Vyjayanthimala and Ashok Kumar - (India) The Jokers, directed by Michael Winner, starring Oliver Reed and Michael Crawford - (U.K.) Journey to the Center of Time Jules Verne's Rocket to the Moon The Jungle Book, a musical animated film from Disney Animation Studios Kidnapping, Caucasian Style (Kavkazskaya plennitsa, ili Novie priklucheniya Shurika) - (U.S.S.R.) King Kong Escapes (Kingu Kongu no gyakushû) - (Japan/U.S.) The King's Pirate, starring Doug McClure and Jill St. John Kinoautomat - (Czechoslovakia) Kyu-chan no Dekkai Yume - (Japan) A Long Journey (Largo viaje) - (Chile) The Long Duel, starring Yul Brynner, Trevor Howard, Harry Andrews, Charlotte Rampling Love Affair, or the Case of the Missing Switchboard Operator (Ljubavni slučaj ili tragedija službenice P.T.T.) - (Yugoslavia) Mad Monster Party?, animated film featuring Boris Karloff Magical Mystery Tour - TV film with The Beatles - (U.K.) A Man Vanishes (Ningen Johatsu), directed by Shohei Imamura - (Japan) Marat/Sade, directed by Peter Brook - (U.K.) Marketa Lazarová - (Czechoslovakia) The Million Eyes of Sumuru, starring George Nader, Frankie Avalon and Shirley Eaton- (U.K.) The Mitten (Varezhka) - (U.S.S.R.) Mouchette, directed by Robert Bresson - (France) The Mummy's Shroud, starring André Morell and John Phillips - (U.K.) The Naked Runner, directed by Sidney J. Furie, starring Frank Sinatra - (U.K.) The Night of the Generals, starring Peter O'Toole, Omar Sharif, Tom Courtenay - (U.K./France) Oedipus Rex (Edipo Re), directed by Pier Paolo Pasolini, starring Silvana Mangano - (Italy) Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad, starring Rosalind Russell and Robert Morse One-Armed Swordsman (Dubei dao), directed by Chang Cheh - (Hong Kong) Oscar, directed by Édouard Molinaro - (France) Our Mother's House, starring Dirk Bogarde - (U.K.) Paranoia - (Netherlands) Pedro Páramo, starring John Gavin - (Mexico) Peppermint Frappé, directed by Carlos Saura - (Spain) The Plank, directed by and starring Eric Sykes with Tommy Cooper - (U.K.) Playing Soldiers (Mali vojnici) - (Yugoslavia) Playtime, directed by and starring Jacques Tati - (France) Point Blank, directed by John Boorman, starring Lee Marvin and Angie Dickinson Poor Cow, directed by Ken Loach, starring Terence Stamp and Carol White - (U.K.) The President's Analyst, starring James Coburn Privilege, directed by Peter Watkins, starring Paul Jones and Jean Shrimpton - (U.K.) Quatermass and the Pit, starring James Donald - (U.K.) Ram Aur Shyam (Ram and Shyam), starring Dilip Kumar - (India) The Rats Woke Up (Buđenje pacova) - (Yugoslavia) The Red and the White (Csillagosok, katonak), directed by Miklós Jancsó - (Hungary) Reflections in a Golden Eye, directed by John Huston, starring Marlon Brando and Elizabeth Taylor The Reluctant Astronaut, starring Don Knotts Robbery, directed by Peter Yates, starring Stanley Baker - (U.K.) Rosie!, starring Rosalind Russell Rough Night in Jericho, starring Dean Martin and George Peppard The Sailor from Gibraltar, starring Ian Bannen, Jeanne Moreau, Vanessa Redgrave, Orson Welles - (U.K.) The St. Valentine's Day Massacre, starring Jason Robards (as Al Capone), George Segal, Ralph Meeker, Jean Hale Le Samouraï (The Samurai), starring Alain Delon - (France) Samurai Rebellion (Jōi-uchi: Hairyō tsuma shimatsu), directed by Masaki Kobayashi, starring Toshiro Mifune - (Japan) The Shooting, starring Warren Oates, Millie Perkins, Jack Nicholson The Shuttered Room, starring Gig Young, Carol Lynley and Oliver Reed Slave Girls, starring Martine Beswick, Michael Latimer Smashing Time, starring Rita Tushingham, Lynn Redgrave and Michael York Soleil O - (Mauritania/France) The Sorcerers', directed by Michael Reeves, starring Boris Karloff and Ian Ogilvy- (U.K.) Son of Godzilla, directed by Jun Fukuda - (Japan) Stimulantia - (Sweden) The Stolen Airship The Stranger (Lo Straniero), directed by Luchino Visconti, starring Marcello Mastroianni - (Italy) The Taming of the Shrew, directed by Franco Zeffirelli, starring Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor - (Italy/U.S.) Ten Thousand Days (Tízezer nap) - (Hungary) The Thief of Paris, directed by Louis Malle and starring Jean-Paul Belmondo and Geneviève Bujold - (France) This Night I'll Possess Your Corpse (Esta Noite Encarnarei no Teu Cadáver) - (Brazil) Thoroughly Modern Millie, directed by George Roy Hill, starring Julie Andrews, Mary Tyler Moore, Carol Channing Thunder Alley, directed by Richard Rush, starring Annette Funicello The Tied Up Balloon, directed by Binka Zhelyazkova and starring Georgi Partsalev, Grigor Vachkov, Georgi Kaloyanchev, Konstantin Kotsev - (Bulgaria) The Tiger Makes Out, starring Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson The Tiger and the Pussycat, starring Vittorio Gassman, Ann-Margret, Eleanor Parker - (Italy) Titicut Follies To Sir, with Love, starring Sidney Poitier - (U.K.) Tobruk, starring Rock Hudson and George Peppard Tony Rome, directed by Gordon Douglas, starring Frank Sinatra, Jill St. John, Gena Rowlands, Richard Conte, Sue Lyon Torture Garden, starring Burgess Meredith, Michael Bryant, Beverly Adams, Peter Cushing, Jack Palance - (U.K.) The Trip, directed by Roger Corman, starring Peter Fonda and Susan Strasberg Two for the Road, directed by Stanley Donen, starring Audrey Hepburn and Albert Finney - (U.K.) The Two of Us (Le vieil homme et l'enfant), directed by Claude Berri - (France) Ultraman - (Japan) Ulysses, starring Milo O'Shea - (U.K./U.S.A.) Up the Down Staircase, starring Sandy Dennis Upkar, directed by and starring Manoj Kumar - (India) Valley of the Dolls, directed by Mark Robson, starring Barbara Parkins, Patty Duke, Sharon Tate, Susan Hayward, Paul Burke The Venetian Affair, starring Elke Sommer, Robert Vaughn, Felicia Farr The Vengeance of Fu Manchu, starring Christopher Lee and Tony Ferrer - (U.K./U.S.A.) Violated Angels (Okasareta Hakui) - (Japan) Viy (aka Spirit of Evil) - (U.S.S.R.) The Vulture, starring Robert Hutton and Diane Clare - (U.K.) Wait Until Dark, directed by Terence Young, starring Audrey Hepburn, Alan Arkin, Richard Crenna, Jack Weston, Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. War and Peace (Voyna i mir), directed by Sergei Bondarchuk - (U.S.S.R.) The War Wagon, directed by Burt Kennedy, starring John Wayne and Kirk Douglas Warning Shot, starring David Janssen, Stefanie Powers, Joan Collins, Eleanor Parker, Lillian Gish, George Sanders Waterhole No. 3, starring James Coburn, Carroll O'Connor and Margaret Blye The Way West, starring Kirk Douglas, Richard Widmark, Robert Mitchum, Lola Albright, Sally Field We Still Kill the Old Way (A ciascuno il suo), starring Gian Maria Volontè and Irene Papas - (Italy) Weekend, directed by Jean-Luc Godard - (France) Welcome to Hard Times, starring Henry Fonda, Aldo Ray, Janice Rule, Warren Oates The Whisperers, starring Edith Evans and Nanette Newman - (U.K.) The White Bus, a short film by Lindsay Anderson - (U.K.) Who's Minding the Mint? starring Jim Hutton, Dorothy Provine, Walter Brennan, Milton Berle Who's That Knocking at My Door, directed by Martin Scorsese You Only Live Twice, starring Sean Connery as James Bond - (U.K.) The Young Girls of Rochefort, directed by Jacques Demy, starring Catherine Deneuve and Françoise Dorléac - (France) Looney Tunes (1930&ndash;1969) Merrie Melodies (1931&ndash;1969) Speedy Gonzales (1953&ndash;1968) Daffy Duck (1937&ndash;1968) January 2 - Tia Carrere, American actress January 14 - Emily Watson, English actress February 10 - Laura Dern, American actress February 13 – Carolyn Lawrence, American actress and voice actress February 19 - Benicio del Toro, Puerto Rican actor March 1 - Rosyam Nor, Malaysian actor March 16 - Lauren Graham, American actress April 17 - Kimberly Elise, American actress May 1 - Scott Coffey, American actor/director May 31 - Sandrine Bonnaire, French actress June 6 - Paul Giamatti, American actor June 19 - Mia Sara, American actress June 20 - Nicole Kidman, Australian actress July 1 - Pamela Anderson, American actress July 16 - Will Ferrell, American actor July 18 - Vin Diesel, American Actor July 22 – Rhys Ifans, Welsh actor and singer July 23 - Philip Seymour Hoffman, American actor (d. 2014) September 11 - Harry Connick, Jr., American actor and singer October 3 - Tiara Jacquelina, Malaysian actress October 4 - Liev Schreiber, American actor October 5 - Guy Pearce, Australian actor October 28 - Julia Roberts, American actress November 13 - Steve Zahn , American actor November 22 - Mark Ruffalo, American actor November 28 - Anna Nicole Smith, American model and actress (d. 2007) December 11 - Mo'Nique, American actress December 16 - Miranda Otto, Australian actress January 8&nbsp;– Zbigniew Cybulski, 39, Polish actor, Ashes and Diamonds, The Saragossa Manuscript January 21&nbsp;– Ann Sheridan, 51, American actress, Angels with Dirty Faces, Kings Row January 22&nbsp;– Jobyna Ralston, 67, American actress, Wings, The Freshman January 28 Ruut Tarmo, 70, Estonian actor Václav Wasserman, 68, Czech actor, screenwriter and director February 6&nbsp;– Martine Carol, 46, French actress, Lola Montes, Around the World in 80 Days February 14&nbsp;– Sig Ruman, 82, German actor, Stalag 17, Ninotchka February 15&nbsp;– Antonio Moreno, 79, Spanish-American actor and director, The Searchers, Creature from the Black Lagoon February 16 Smiley Burnette, 55, American actor, King of the Cowboys, Ridin' on a Rainbow Amund Rydland, (79), Norwegian actor February 21&nbsp;- Charles Beaumont, 38, American television and film writer, Brain Dead, The Intruder February 24&nbsp;– Franz Waxman, 60, German film composer, Stalag 17, Mister Roberts March 5&nbsp;– Mischa Auer, 61, Russian actor, You Can't Take It With You, Destry Rides Again March 6&nbsp;– Nelson Eddy, 65, American singer and actor, Make Mine Music, The Chocolate Soldier March 11&nbsp;– Geraldine Farrar, 85, American singer and actress, Carmen, Joan the Woman April 10&nbsp;- Aage Winther-Jørgensen, 66, Danish actor, The Rector of Veilbye, Bussen April 15&nbsp;– Totò, 69, Italian actor and writer, Big Deal on Madonna Street, The Hawks and the Sparrows April 22&nbsp;- Tom Conway, 62, Russian-American actor, The Falcon's Brother, Cat People April 24&nbsp;- Frank Overton, 49, American actor, To Kill a Mockingbird, Fail-Safe April 29&nbsp;- Anthony Mann, 60, American director, El Cid, Winchester '73 May 8 LaVerne Andrews, 55, American singer and actress (Andrews Sisters), Road to Rio, Follow the Boys Barbara Payton, 39, American actress, Bride of the Gorilla, Kiss Tomorrow Goodbye May 30&nbsp;– Claude Rains, 77, British actor, Casablanca, Lawrence of Arabia June 10&nbsp;– Spencer Tracy, 67, American actor, Judgment at Nuremberg, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner June 16&nbsp;– Reginald Denny, 75, British actor, Rebecca, Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House June 26&nbsp;– Françoise Dorléac, 25, French actress, The Soft Skin, Cul-de-sac June 29&nbsp;– Jayne Mansfield, 34, American actress, The Wild, Wild World of Jayne Mansfield, The Girl Can't Help It July 8&nbsp;– Vivien Leigh, 53, British actress, Gone with the Wind, A Streetcar Named Desire July 17&nbsp;– Enzo Petito, 69, Italian actor, The Good, the Bad and the Ugly July 21 Basil Rathbone, 75, British actor, The Adventures of Robin Hood, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes David Weisbart, 52, American film editor and producer, Rebel Without a Cause, Them! August 9&nbsp;– Anton Walbrook, 70, Austrian actor, La Ronde, The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp August 13&nbsp;– Jane Darwell, 87, American actress, The Grapes of Wrath, Gone with the Wind August 25&nbsp;– Paul Muni, 71, Ukrainian-American actor, Scarface, I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang September 1&nbsp;- James Dunn, 65, American actor, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, Bright Eyes October 12 - Nat Pendleton, 72, American actor, former Olympic swimmer, The Thin Man, The Great Ziegfeld November 1 - Benita Hume, 61, British actress, Tarzan Escapes, The Private Life of Don Juan November 9 - Charles Bickford, 76, American actor, Days of Wine and Roses, The Song of Bernadette December 4 - Bert Lahr, 72, American actor, The Wizard of Oz, Sing Your Worries Away December 21 - Stuart Erwin, 64, American actor, Pigskin Parade, Going Hollywood Richard Dreyfuss - Valley of the Dolls Faye Dunaway - Hurry Sundown Dustin Hoffman - The Tiger Makes Out Anthony Hopkins - Red, White and Zero Anjelica Huston - Casino Royale Harvey Keitel - Who's That Knocking at My Door Richard Pryor - The Busy Body Martin Sheen - The Incident Jon Voight - Fearless Frank Gene Wilder - Bonnie and Clyde
