   The summer of 1967 is "The Summer of Love" in San Francisco. It also became an important year for psychedelic rock, with releases from The Beatles (Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band and Magical Mystery Tour), Small Faces ("Itchycoo Park"), Eric Burdon & The Animals (Winds of Change), The Doors (The Doors and Strange Days), Jefferson Airplane (Surrealistic Pillow and After Bathing at Baxter's), Pink Floyd (The Piper at the Gates of Dawn), Love (Forever Changes), Cream (Disraeli Gears), The Byrds (Younger Than Yesterday), The Rolling Stones (Their Satanic Majesties Request), The Who (The Who Sell Out), The Velvet Underground (The Velvet Underground & Nico), Procol Harum (Procol Harum), and The Jimi Hendrix Experience (Are You Experienced? and Axis: Bold As Love). The following songs achieved the highest chart positionshttp://tsort.info/music/yr1967.htm 1967 chart positions in the charts of 1967. w. = words, m. = music Hot 100 No. 1 Hits of 1967 Day Album Artist Notes 4 The Doors The Doors 9 Collections The Rascals More of the Monkees The Monkees 13 Soul of Mann Manfred Mann 20 Between the Buttons The Rolling Stones 23 The Supremes Sing Holland–Dozier–Holland The Supremes - Miles Smiles Miles Davis More Than a New Discovery Laura Nyro Roy Orbison Sings Don Gibson Roy Orbison The Stone Poneys The Stone Poneys Sugar Nancy Sinatra The Youngbloods The Youngbloods Day Album Artist Notes 6 Younger Than Yesterday The Byrds 10 Trogglodynamite The Troggs 13 Hello, I'm Dolly Dolly Parton 17 A Hard Road John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers 27 How Great Thou Art Elvis Presley Gospel - Deliver The Mamas & the Papas Surrealistic Pillow Jefferson Airplane There's a Kind of Hush All Over the World Herman's Hermits Day Album Artist Notes 3 Images The Walker Brothers 4 I'm a Lonesome Fugitive Merle Haggard 6 Temptations Live! The Temptations Live 10 I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You Aretha Franklin Matthew and Son Cat Stevens 12 The Velvet Underground & Nico The Velvet Underground, Nico 13 Patsy Cline's Greatest Hits Patsy Cline Compilation 16 King & Queen Otis Redding & Carla Thomas 17 The Grateful Dead Grateful Dead 18 Album 1700 Peter, Paul & Mary 27 Bob Dylan's Greatest Hits Bob Dylan Compilation 30 Club Meeting Billy Preston - Eric Is Here Eric Burdon & The Animals Francis Albert Sinatra & Antonio Carlos Jobim Frank Sinatra, Antonio Carlos Jobim Green, Green Grass of Home Tom Jones Decca album James Brown Sings Raw Soul James Brown Johnny Mathis Sings Johnny Mathis Mellow Yellow Donovan Thoroughly Modern Millie Various Artists Soundtrack Waylon Sings Ol' Harlan Waylon Jennings Day Album Artist Notes 1 Don't Stop Me Now! Cliff Richard 10 Born Free Andy Williams 29 Happy Together The Turtles - Chuck Berry's Golden Decade Chuck Berry Electric Comic Book Blues Magoos The Electric Prunes The Electric Prunes Happiness Is Dean Martin Dean Martin Sounds Like... Herb Alpert Tim Hardin 2 Tim Hardin The Way I Feel Gordon Lightfoot Day Album Artist Notes 11 Electric Music for the Mind and Body Country Joe and the Fish 12 Are You Experienced The Jimi Hendrix Experience 14 On Stage and in the Movies Dionne Warwick 22 Headquarters The Monkees The Supremes Sing Rodgers & Hart The Supremes 26 Absolutely Free The Mothers of Invention - Canciones folklóricas de América Víctor Jara Live at the Garden James Brown Live Make Way for Willie Nelson Willie Nelson Super Psychedelics The Ventures Up, Up and Away The 5th Dimension You're a Big Boy Now The Lovin' Spoonful Soundtrack The Zodiac: Cosmic Sounds Paul Beaver Day Album Artist Notes 1 David Bowie David Bowie Double Trouble Elvis Presley Soundtrack Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band The Beatles 2 From the Beginning Small Faces Compilation 6 Moby Grape Moby Grape 23 Small Faces Small Faces 26 Flowers The Rolling Stones Compilation - Big Swing Face Buddy Rich Evergreen, Volume 2 Stone Poneys Evolution The Hollies The Fastest Guitar Alive Roy Orbison motion picture soundtrack Hip Hug-Her Booker T & the M.G.'s Insight Out The Association James Brown Plays the Real Thing James Brown Leonard Nimoy Presents Mr. Spock's Music from Outer Space Leonard Nimoy Debut Ray Charles Invites You to Listen Ray Charles Side Trips Kaleidoscope US band This Is My Song Ray Conniff Tom Jones Live! Tom Jones Day Album Artist Notes 10 Jigsaw The Shadows Live in Europe Otis Redding Live 14 Bee Gees' 1st Bee Gees 17 The Temptations with a Lot o' Soul The Temptations 24 Best of The Beach Boys Vol. 2 The Beach Boys Compilation Little Games The Yardbirds 31 Groovin' The Young Rascals - The 5000 Spirits or the Layers of the Onion The Incredible String Band Canned Heat Canned Heat The Everly Brothers Sing The Everly Brothers Greatest Hits, Vol. 1 Johnny Cash Compilation Let's Live for Today The Grass Roots Ode to Billie Joe Bobbie Gentry Reach Out Four Tops The Sound of Wilson Pickett Wilson Pickett Triangle The Beau Brummels Welcome to My World Dean Martin Day Album Artist Notes 4 Aretha Arrives Aretha Franklin 5 The Piper at the Gates of Dawn Pink Floyd 7 The Byrds' Greatest Hits The Byrds Compilation Lumpy Gravy Frank Zappa Original release; subsequently reedited and reissued in 1968 27 I Was Made to Love Her Stevie Wonder 28 Branded Man Merle Haggard 29 Greatest Hits Diana Ross & the Supremes Compilation Make It Happen Smokey Robinson & The Miracles United Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell 31 The Windows of the World Dionne Warwick - Big Brother and the Holding Company Big Brother and the Holding Company Born Under a Bad Sign Albert King Brighten the Corner Ella Fitzgerald Carryin' On with Johnny Cash and June Carter Johnny Cash and June Carter Chuck Berry in Memphis Chuck Berry Cold Sweat James Brown Goodbye and Hello Tim Buckley Joan Joan Baez Love of the Common People Waylon Jennings Lush Life Nancy Wilson Spanky and Our Gang Spanky and Our Gang Underground The Electric Prunes Vanilla Fudge Vanilla Fudge The World We Knew Frank Sinatra Day Album Artist Notes 1 Crusade John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers 15 Something Else by The Kinks The Kinks 16 Scott Scott Walker 18 Smiley Smile The Beach Boys 25 Strange Days The Doors - Alice's Restaurant Arlo Guthrie Blowin' Your Mind! Van Morrison Everybody Needs Love Gladys Knight & the Pips It Must Be Him Vikki Carr Live at Fillmore Auditorium Chuck Berry Martha and the Vandellas Live! Martha and the Vandellas Live Procol Harum Procol Harum Safe as Milk Captain Beefheart Wave Antonio Carlos Jobim Winds of Change Eric Burdon & The Animals Day Album Artist Notes 10 Clambake Elvis Presley Soundtrack 16 A Christmas Album Barbra Streisand Christmas Love, Andy Andy Williams 26 Soul Men Sam & Dave 27 Ten Years After Ten Years After Where Am I Going? Dusty Springfield 30 Buffalo Springfield Again Buffalo Springfield 31 Pleasures of the Harbor Phil Ochs - Chelsea Girl Nico Cry Softly Lonely One Roy Orbison The Don Heckman-Ed Summerlin Improvisational Jazz Workshop Don Heckman and Ed Summerlin Gorilla Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band One Nation Underground Pearls Before Swine Sammy Davis, Jr. Sings the Complete 'Dr. Dolittle' Sammy Davis, Jr. Silk & Soul Nina Simone Simply Streisand Barbra Streisand A Whole New Thing Sly and the Family Stone Wildflowers Judy Collins Day Album Artist Notes 6 Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn & Jones Ltd. The Monkees 10 Days of Future Passed The Moody Blues Disraeli Gears Cream 27 Magical Mystery Tour The Beatles Someday at Christmas Stevie Wonder Christmas The Temptations in a Mellow Mood The Temptations 30 After Bathing at Baxter's Jefferson Airplane - The Amboy Dukes The Amboy Dukes Butterfly The Hollies Easter Everywhere 13th Floor Elevators Ella Fitzgerald's Christmas Ella Fitzgerald Christmas Forever Changes Love I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Country Joe and the Fish The One and Only Waylon Jennings Tangerine Dream Kaleidoscope UK band The Blues Is Now Jimmy Witherspoon The Time Has Come The Chambers Brothers Day Album Artist Notes 1 Axis: Bold as Love The Jimi Hendrix Experience UK 8 Their Satanic Majesties Request The Rolling Stones 15 The Who Sell Out The Who 18 Wild Honey The Beach Boys 27 John Wesley Harding Bob Dylan Songs of Leonard Cohen Leonard Cohen - 13 Smash Hits Tom Jones A Gift from a Flower to a Garden Donovan The Look of Love Dusty Springfield The Magic Garden The 5th Dimension Mr. Fantasy Traffic Pandemonium Shadow Show Harry Nilsson The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw Paul Butterfield Blues Band Song Cycle Van Dyke Parks Sorcerer Miles Davis # Artist Title Year Country Chart Entries 1 Procol Harum "A Whiter Shade of Pale" 1967 UK 1 – May 1967, Canada 1 – Jun 1967, Netherlands 1 – Jun 1967, France 1 – May 1972, Germany 1 – Jul 1967, Éire 1 – Jun 1967, Australia 1 for 3 weeks Nov 1967, Australia Goset 1 – Jun 1967, Norway 3 – Jun 1967, Europe 4 of the 1960s, US BB 5 – Jul 1967, RYM 5 of 1967, DDD 6 of 1967, Global 7 (10 M sold) – 1967, Italy 10 of 1967, South Africa 19 of 1967, TOTP 36, US BB 38 of 1967, POP 38 of 1967, US CashBox 47 of 1967, Rolling Stone 57, WXPN 60, Scrobulate 62 of oldies, Poland 69 of all time, Belgium 75 of all time, Acclaimed 100, OzNet 131, Germany 144 of the 1960s 2 The Monkees "I'm a Believer" 1967 UK 1 – Jan 1967, US BB 1 – Dec 1966, Canada 1 – Nov 1966, Netherlands 1 – Jan 1967, Norway 1 – Jan 1967, Germany 1 – Feb 1967, Éire 1 – Jan 1967, Australia 1 for 1 weeks Apr 1967, US BB 2 of 1966, Australia Goset 2 – Jan 1967, South Africa 2 of 1967, POP 2 of 1966, US CashBox 8 of 1967, Australia 9 of 1967, DDD 12 of 1966, RYM 26 of 1966, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1966, OzNet 34, 38 in 2FM list, Scrobulate 49 of 60s, Germany 67 of the 1960s, Italy 85 of 1967, Acclaimed 503 3 The Beatles "All You Need Is Love" 1967 UK 1 – Jul 1967, US BB 1 – Jul 1967, Canada 1 – Jul 1967, Netherlands 1 – Jul 1967, Norway 1 – Jul 1967, Germany 1 – Aug 1967, Éire 1 – Aug 1967, Australia 1 for 4 weeks Dec 1967, Australia Goset 1 – Jul 1967, Europe 26 of the 1960s, RYM 26 of 1967, US CashBox 43 of 1967, Scrobulate 50 of classic rock, DDD 52 of 1967, Italy 60 of 1967, Germany 118 of the 1960s, Party 130 of 2007, Rolling Stone 362, WXPN 491, OzNet 869, Acclaimed 1488 4 The Doors "Light My Fire" 1967 US BB 1 – Jun 1967, France 1 – Jul 1971, Éire 1 – Jun 1991, US CashBox 2 of 1967, Canada 2 – Jun 1967, DDD 2 of 1967, UK 7 – Jun 1991, Europe 9 of the 1960s, US BB 15 of 1967, POP 15 of 1967, Australia Goset 16 – Sep 1967, RYM 19 of 1967, 20 in 2FM list, Acclaimed 23, Scrobulate 24 of classic rock, Netherlands 25 – Aug 1967, Belgium 31 of all time, Rolling Stone 35, RIAA 52, Poland 65 of all time, Virgin 71, TheQ 137, WXPN 161, OzNet 194 5 The Beatles "Strawberry Fields Forever" 1967 Canada 1 – Feb 1967, Netherlands 1 – Feb 1967, Norway 1 – Feb 1967, Australia 1 for 3 weeks Jul 1967, Australia Goset 1 – Mar 1967, RYM 1 of 1967, UK 2 – Feb 1967, France 4 – Apr 1976, US BB 8 – Mar 1967, DDD 9 of 1967, 11 in 2FM list, Acclaimed 12, Australia 16 of 1967, Europe 17 of the 1960s, Scrobulate 52 of classic rock, WXPN 75, Rolling Stone 76, OzNet 185, Belgium 235 of all time Single – Artist !! !! Composer Winter "Snoopy vs. the Red Baron" – The Royal Guardsmen w.m. Phil Gernhard and Richard Holler "Tell It Like It Is" – Aaron Neville w.m. George Davis and Lee Diamond "Winchester Cathedral" – The New Vaudeville Band w.m. Geoff Stephens "Sugar Town" – Nancy Sinatra w.m. Lee Hazlewood "That's Life" – Frank Sinatra w.m. Dean Kay and Kelly Gordon "Good Thing" – Paul Revere & the Raiders w.m. Mark Lindsay and Terry Melcher "Words of Love" – The Mamas & the Papas w.m. John Phillips "Standing in the Shadows of Love" – Four Tops w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "Let's Spend the Night Together"/"Ruby Tuesday" – The Rolling Stones w.m. Mick Jagger and Keith Richards "Mellow Yellow" – Donovan w.m. Donovan "Georgy Girl" – The Seekers w. Jim Dale m. Tom Springfield "Nashville Cats" – The Lovin' Spoonful w.m. John Sebastian "Tell It to the Rain – The Four Seasons w.m. Mike Petrillo and Angelo Cifelli "Kind of a Drag" – The Buckinghams w.m. Jim Holvay "(We Ain't Got) Nothin' Yet" – Blues Magoos w.m. Ronnie Gilbert, Ralph Scala and Mike Esposito "98.6" – Keith w.m. George Fischoff and Tony Powers "Love Is Here and Now You're Gone" – The Supremes w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "The Beat Goes On" – Sonny and Cher w.m. Sonny Bono "Gimme Some Lovin'" – The Spencer Davis Group w.m. Steve Winwood, Muff Winwood and Spencer Davis "Then You Can Tell Me Goodbye" – The Casinos w.m. John D. Loudermilk "Baby I Need Your Loving" – Johnny Rivers w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "Sock It to Me, Baby" – Mitch Ryder and the Detroit Wheels w.m. Bob Crewe and L. Russell Brown "Penny Lane"/"Strawberry Fields Forever" – The Beatles w.m. John Lennon and Paul McCartney "Happy Together" – The Turtles w.m. Gary Bonner and Alan Gordon "My Cup Runneth Over" – Ed Ames w. Tom Jones m. Harvey Schmidt "There's a Kind of Hush" – Herman's Hermits w.m. Les Reed and Geoff Stephens "For What It's Worth" – Buffalo Springfield w.m. Stephen Stills "Dedicated to the One I Love" – The Mamas & the Papas w.m. Lowman Pauling and Ralph Bass . Spring "Bernadette" – Four Tops w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "Incense and Peppermints" – Strawberry Alarm Clock w.m. John S. Carter, Tim Gilbert "This Is My Song" – Petula Clark w.m. Charlie Chaplin "Something Stupid" – Frank Sinatra and Nancy Sinatra w.m. C. Carson Parks "Western Union" – The Five Americans w.m. Mike Rabon, Norman Ezell and John Durrill "I Think We're Alone Now" – Tommy James and the Shondells w.m. Ritchie Cordell "A Little Bit Me, A Little Bit You" – The Monkees w.m. Neil Diamond "I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You" – Aretha Franklin w.m. Ronnie Shannon "Jimmy Mack" – Martha and the Vandellas w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "Sweet Soul Music" – Arthur Conley w.m. Sam Cooke, Arthur Conley and Otis Redding "The Happening" – The Supremes w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland and Frank DeVol "Don't You Care" – The Buckinghams w.m. Gary Beisbier and Jim Holvay "Close Your Eyes" – Peaches & Herb w.m. Chuck Willis "You Got What It Takes" – The Dave Clark Five w.m. Berry Gordy, Roquel Davis and Gwen Gordy Fuqua "I'm a Man" – The Spencer Davis Group w.m. Jimmy Miller and Steve Winwood "Groovin'" – The Young Rascals w.m. Eddie Brigati and Felix Cavaliere "I Got Rhythm" – The Happenings w. Ira Gershwin m. George Gershwin "Respect" – Aretha Franklin w.m. Otis Redding "Release Me" – Engelbert Humperdinck w.m. Robert Yount, Eddie Miller and Dub Williams "Him Or Me—What's It Gonna Be?" – Paul Revere & the Raiders w.m. Mark Lindsay and Terry Melcher "Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon" – Neil Diamond w.m. Neil Diamond "Somebody to Love" – Jefferson Airplane w.m. Grace Slick "All I Need Is You" – The Temptations w.m. Eddie Holland, R. Dean Taylor and Frank Wilson "She'd Rather Be with Me" – The Turtles w.m. Gary Bonner and Alan Gordon "Little Bit O'Soul" – The Music Explosion w.m. John Carter and Ken Lewis "Windy" – The Association w.m. Ruthann Friedman "Mirage" – Tommy James & the Shondells w.m. Ritchie Cordell and Bo Gentry . Summer "San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)" – Scott McKenzie w.m. John Phillips "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" – Frankie Valli w.m. Bob Crewe and Bob Gaudio "Creeque Alley" – The Mamas & the Papas w.m. John Phillips and Michelle Phillips "Sunday Will Never Be the Same" – Spanky and Our Gang w.m. Terry Cashman and Gene Pistilli "Let's Live for Today" – The Grass Roots w.m. David Shapiro. Michael Cenciarelli and Guido Guilio. "Come on Down to My Boat" – Every Mother's Son w.m. Wes Farrell and Jerry Goldstein "Don't Sleep in the Subway" – Petula Clark w.m. Jackie Trent and Tony Hatch "Up, Up and Away" – The 5th Dimension w.m. Jimmy Webb "The Tracks of My Tears" – Johnny Rivers w.m. Smokey Robinson, Warren Moore and Marv Tarplin "C'mon Marianne" – The Four Seasons w.m. Ray Bloodworth and L. Russell Brown "I Was Made to Love Her" – Stevie Wonder w.m. Henry Cosby, Lula Mae Hardaway, Sylvia Moy and Stevie Wonder "White Rabbit" – Jefferson Airplane w.m. Grace Slick "Pleasant Valley Sunday" – The Monkees w.m. Gerry Goffin and Carole King "Carrie-Anne" – The Hollies w.m. Tony Hicks, Allan Clarke and Graham Nash "A Girl Like You" – The Young Rascals w.m. Eddie Brigati and Felix Cavaliere "Baby I Love You" – Aretha Franklin w.m. Ronnie Shannon "Ode to Billie Joe" – Bobbie Gentry w.m. Bobbie Gentry "Reflections" – Diana Ross & the Supremes w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "You're My Everything (The Temptations song)" – The Temptations w.m. Norman Whitfield, Roger Penzabene and Cornelius Grant "Come Back When You Grow Up" – Bobby Vee and the Strangers w.m. Martha Sharp "The Letter" – Box Tops w.m. Wayne Carson Thompson "Apples, Peaches, Pumpkin Pie" – Jay & the Techniques w.m. Maurice Irby "San Franciscan Nights" – Eric Burdon & the Animals w.m. Eric Burdon, John Weider, Barry Jenkins, Danny McCulloch and Vic Briggs "Funky Broadway" – Wilson Pickett w.m. Arlester Christian "Never My Love" – The Association w.m. Donald Addrisi and Richard Addrisi "Higher and Higher" – Jackie Wilson w.m. Gary Jackson, Raynard Miner, Carl William Smith "I Dig Rock and Roll Music" – Peter, Paul and Mary w.m. Paul Stookey, James Mason and Dave Dixon . Autumn "Brown Eyed Girl" – Van Morrison w.m. Van Morrison "Little Ole Man" – Bill Cosby w. Bill Cosby, w.m. Henry Cosby, Stevie Wonder and Sylvia May "How Can I Be Sure" – The Young Rascals w.m. Eddie Brigati and Felix Cavaliere "Gimme Little Sign" – Brenton Wood w.m. Alfred Smith, Joe Hooven and Hal Winn "To Sir, with Love" – Lulu w. Don Black m. Mark London "Soul Man" – Sam and Dave w.m. Isaac Hayes and David Porter "Expressway to Your Heart" – The Soul Survivors w.m. Leon Huff, Kenneth Gamble and Donald Storball "It Must Be Him" – Vikki Carr w. Maurice Vidalin trans. Mack David m. Gilbert Bécaud "Your Precious Love" – Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell w.m. Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" – Aretha Franklin w.m. Carole King "The Rain, The Park and Other Things" – The Cowsills w.m. Artie Kornfeld and Steve Duboff "Please Love Me Forever" – Bobby Vinton w.m. Johnny Malone and Ollie Blanchard "I Say a Little Prayer" – Dionne Warwick w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach "I Can See for Miles" – The Who w.m. Pete Townshend "Daydream Believer" – The Monkees w.m. John Stewart "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" – Gladys Knight & the Pips w.m. Norman Whitfield and Barrett Strong "An Open Letter to my Teenage Son" – Victor Lundberg w. Victor Lundberg "I Second That Emotion" – Smokey Robinson & the Miracles w.m. Smokey Robinson and Arthur Cleveland "Hello, Goodbye" – The Beatles w.m. John Lennon and Paul McCartney "In and out of Love" – Diana Ross & the Supremes w.m. Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland "Boogaloo Down Broadway" – The Fantastic Johnny C w.m. Jesse James "You Better Sit Down, Kids" – Cher w.m. Sonny Bono "Woman, Woman" – Gary Puckett & The Union Gap w.m. Jim Glaser and Jimmy Payne "Judy in Disguise (with Glasses)" – John Fred & His Playboy Band w.m. John Fred and Andrew Bernard "Chain of Fools" – Aretha Franklin w.m. Don Covay "Bend Me, Shape Me" – The American Breed w.m. Scott English and Larry Weiss "Skinny Legs and All" – Joe Tex w.m. Joe Tex January 8 – Elvis Presley turns 32. His January recording session, in Nashville, is "Guitar Man" with Jerry Reed on guitar. January 13 – Stephen Foster Memorial Day is observed for the first time in the United States (on the 103rd anniversary of the composer's death). January 15 – The Rolling Stones appear on The Ed Sullivan Show. At Ed Sullivan's request, the band change the lyrics of "Let's Spend the Night Together" to "Let's spend some time together". January 16 – The Monkees begin work on Headquarters, the first album to give them complete artistic and technical control over their material. January 17 – The Daily Mail newspaper reports 4,000 potholes in Blackburn, Lancashire; and Guinness heir Tara Browne is killed in a car wreck. These articles inspire lyrics for The Beatles song "A Day in the Life". January 22 – Simon & Garfunkel give live concert at Philharmonic Hall in New York City. Some of this concert is released on October 4, 1997, on their box set Old Friends, but most is not released until July 2002. January 29 – Mantra-Rock Dance, the "ultimate high" of the hippie era, is organised at The Avalon ballroom in San Francisco, featuring Janis Joplin, Grateful Dead, Big Brother and the Holding Company, Moby Grape, beat poet Allen Ginsberg and A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada in support of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. January 30 – The Beatles shoot a promotional film for their forthcoming single "Strawberry Fields Forever" at Knole Park in Sevenoaks. February 3 – UK record producer Joe Meek murders his landlady and then commits suicide by shooting himself in the head at Holloway, North London. February 6 – Michael Nesmith and Micky Dolenz of the Monkees fly into London. Dolenz sees Till Death Us Do Part on British TV and uses the term "Randy Scouse Git" from the programme for the title of The Monkees' next single release "Randy Scouse Git", not realising it is an offensive term. British censors force the title to be changed to "Alternate Title" in the UK. February 7 – Micky Dolenz meets Paul McCartney at his home in St John's Wood, London, and they pose together for the press. His impressions of the visit feature in the lyrics of "Randy Scouse Git". February 10 – Abbey Road Studio 2 session with Michael Nesmith in attendance as The Beatles record "A Day in the Life" with the London Philharmonic Orchestra performing an "orgasm of noise" featured twice in the song. February 12 – British police raid 'Redlands', the Sussex home of Keith Richards in the early hours of the morning following a tip-off about a party from the News of the World; although no arrests are made at the time, Richards, Mick Jagger and art dealer Robert Fraser are subsequently charged with possession of drugs. February 14 – Aretha Franklin records "Respect" at the New York based Atlantic Studios. February 16 – "Aretha Franklin Day" is declared in Detroit, Michigan. February 24 – The Bee Gees sign a management contract with Robert Stigwood. March 3 – Eric Burdon & The Animals refuse to perform a show in Ottawa, Ontario, unless they are paid in advance. The audience of 3000 riots, causing $5000 in damages to the auditorium. March 11 – A taped appearance by The Beatles on American Bandstand includes their new music video for the songs "Penny Lane" and "Strawberry Fields Forever" March 25 – The Who perform their first concert in the United States, in New York. March 27 – John Lennon and Paul McCartney are awarded the Ivor Novello award for "Michelle", the most performed song in Britain in 1966. March 30 – The Beatles pose with a photographic collage and wax figures from Madame Tussaud's famous museum for the cover artwork of Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album at Chelsea Manor Studios in London. March 31 – Kicking off a tour with The Walker Brothers, Cat Stevens and Engelbert Humperdinck at The Astoria London, Jimi Hendrix sets fire to his guitar on stage for the first time. He is taken to hospital suffering burns to his hands. The guitar-burning act would later become a trademark of Hendrix's performances. April 8 – The 12th Eurovision Song Contest is held in the Hofburg Imperial Palace, Vienna, Austria. The United Kingdom wins the contest for the first time with the Bill Martin/Phil Coulter song "Puppet on a String", sung by Sandie Shaw. May 1 – Paul McCartney reveals that all four members of the Beatles have "dropped acid". Elvis Presley marries Priscilla Beaulieu at the Aladdin, Las Vegas. May 2 – In the United States, Capitol Records pulls the plug on the Beach Boys' mysterious Smile project. Brian Wilson, who had taken more than a year to compose and produce the album, could not bring himself to finish it. May 12 Pink Floyd stage the first ever rock concert with quadraphonic sound at Queen Elizabeth Hall ("Games for May"). The debut album of The Jimi Hendrix Experience, Are You Experienced, is released in the UK. May 15 – Paul McCartney meets American photographer Linda Eastman at a club called "Bag O' Nails". May 19 – Linda McCartney (her maiden name, Eastman), photographs The Beatles at the London Press Party for Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band held at the Chapel Street home of Brian Epstein. Media there were perplexed by the band's fashion statements and the music itself. May 30 – BBC Radio broadcasts "Where It's At" featuring The Beatles interviews, and John Lennon's comedy intro to "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds". BBC refuse to air "A Day in the Life" for alleged "drug references" in the lyrics. June 1 Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band by The Beatles is released in Mono and Stereo LPs. Greece's fascist junta issues "Army decree No 13", which bans playing or listening to the music of Mikis Theodorakis. June 4 – Jimi Hendrix Experience, Cream, Denny Laine and his Electric String Band, Procol Harum and The Chiffons, perform a two-hour "Sunday Special" at Saville Theatre in London. June 10 – June 11 – The KFRC Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival at Mount Tamalpais in Marin County, California features Canned Heat, The Byrds, The Seeds, Blues Magoos, Jefferson Airplane, The Doors, Country Joe and the Fish and others on the bill for a charity concert attended by 15,000; considered the first pop festival in some histories, but eclipsed in attendance and stature by the Monterey Pop Festival the following week. June 15 – Jacqueline Du Pré marries Daniel BarenboimJacqueline DuPré Biography at the Western Wall in Jerusalem. June 16 – Barbra Streisand performs live concert "A Happening in Central Park" in New York's Central Park. June 16 – June 18 – The Monterey Pop Festival, the world's first large scale outdoor rock music festival, is held in Monterey, California. Stars include The Who, Simon and Garfunkel, Eric Burdon & The Animals, The Byrds, The Association, Jefferson Airplane, Big Brother and The Holding Company w/ Janis Joplin, and Jimi Hendrix. Otis and the MG's take the stage at 1:00 am after Jefferson Airplane and bring down the house; 55,000 are in attendance. Ravi Shankar is among the performers at the festival. June 19 – During his stay in California on a houseboat in Sausalito, while listening to the Beatles' Sgt Pepper Lonely Hearts Club Band, Otis Redding is inspired to compose "Sitting On the Dock of the Bay". June 25 – The Beatles perform "All You Need Is Love" for the Our World television special, the first worldwide television broadcast. Backing singers include Eric Clapton, members of The Rolling Stones and The Who. June 28 The Supremes perform for the first time as Diana Ross & the Supremes at the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas. Florence Ballard is fired from the group after the first night, and on-hand stand-in Cindy Birdsong permanently takes Ballard's place in the group. The Monkees fly in to London at the start of their concerts at the Empire Pool, Wembley. June 29 – Mick Jagger and Keith Richards are sentenced to jail for drug possession. They later appeal successfully against the sentences. June/July – Shortly after the end of the Six-Day War, conductor Leonard Bernstein leads the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra on a tour to the Sinai desert, the site of fighting only days before. July 1 – William Rees-Mogg, editor of The Times, uses the phrase "Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel?" in his editorial criticizing the prison sentences given to Mick Jagger and Keith Richard two days earlier. July 2 – Jeff Beck and John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers perform a two-hour "Sunday Special" at Saville Theatre in London. July 3 – The Beatles host a party at the Speakeasy Club for The Monkees on the completion of their concerts in London. July 5 – First of the Schaefer Music Festivals, held in Central Park. Lineup consists of Len Chandler, The Young Rascals, and The Jimi Hendrix Experience. July 18 – The Jimi Hendrix Experience is thrown off a tour of The Monkees after complaints from the conservative Daughters of the American Revolution. (Hendrix's manager Chas Chandler later admitted it was a publicity stunt.) July 29 – Motown Records releases "Reflections," the first single by the group's new billing, "Diana Ross & The Supremes" and after firing founding member Florence Ballard; Ballard, nevertheless, sings on the record and appears on the vinyl's cover alongside group members Ross and Wilson because the song was recorded before her dismissal. August 14 – The Marine Broadcasting Offences Act becomes law in the United Kingdom, and most offshore radio stations (including Wonderful Radio London) have already closed down. Only Radio Caroline North & South on 259 would continue. As Radio Caroline International. August 21 – Mikis Theodorakis is arrested by the Greek military authorities and jailed for five months. August 23 – Brian Epstein's last visit to a Beatles' recording session, at the Chappell Recording Studios on Maddox Street, London. The last new Beatles song he lived to hear was "Your Mother Should Know".Miles (1997) p.&nbsp;355 August 27 – The Beatles, in Bangor, Wales, with the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, are informed of the death of their manager Brian Epstein, and they return to London at once. August 31 – Paul McCartney calls a band meeting to discuss his TV movie idea about a psychedelic bus ride. September 7 – Eric Burdon marries Angie King. September 16 – Too ill to conduct, after undergoing surgery for pancreatic cancer, Sir Malcolm Sargent makes a valedictory appearance at the Last Night of the Proms.BBC Proms Archive. Accessed 28 May 2013 September 17 The Doors appear on The Ed Sullivan Show and perform "Light My Fire". Despite having agreed to Sullivan's request that the line "Girl we couldn't get much higher" be changed for the show, Jim Morrison performs it the way it was written and The Doors are banned from the show. The Who destroy their instruments during a performance on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour.  Keith Moon's exploding drum kit injures Pete Townshend."The Who spark an explosion on national television", This Day in History. Accessed 24 March 2013 September 30 – The BBC replaces the Home Service with a pop music programme, Radio 1, and changes the Light Programme into the more MOR-orientated Radio 2, also launching the all-news Radio 4. The Third Programme is unchanged. October 14 – Tammi Terrell faints and collapses into duet partner Marvin Gaye's arms onstage during a performance at the Hampton University homecoming in Virginia. She was later diagnosed with a brain tumor, and would die from brain cancer in 1970 at the age of 24. October 18 – The first issue of Rolling Stone rolls off the press at about 5:30pm, with a cover dated November 9 and featuring a photo of John Lennon in the film How I Won the War. The original inspiration for the magazine was Bomp! magazine based in California, which preceded the existence of Rolling Stone. October 27 – Sir Malcolm Sargent's memorial service is attended by 3,000 people including Princess Marina of Kent, Bridget D'Oyly Carte, Pierre Boulez, Larry Adler, Douglas Fairbanks Junior, Léon Goossens, Sir Arthur Bliss, and representatives of the London orchestras and of the Promenaders. Colin Davis and the BBC Chorus and Symphony Orchestra performed the music.The Times, 28 October 1967, p. 10 November 22 Oricon is founded by Sōkō Koike and begins publishing a singles chart. Otis Redding records "(Sittin' On) the Dock of the Bay". December 5 George Harrison begins recording tracks for Wonderwall Music, his first solo album, in London; he continues the recording in Mumbai. The Beatles open the Apple Boutique in London. Party guests include Eric Clapton and movie director Richard Lester. December 8 – Otis and the Bar-Kays play at a popular nightclub, Leo's Casino. This is to be Otis's last performance. Two days later he and four of the six Bar-Kays die in a plane crash in Lake Monona (Madison, Wisconsin), one of the worst air tragedies in entertainment history, and the worst since the Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens, and the Big Bopper air crash, 8 years earlier, in 1959. December 9 – During a performance at the New Haven Arena in New Haven, Connecticut, Jim Morrison of The Doors becomes the first singer to be arrested on stage, having earlier been sprayed with a can of mace. He was charged with inciting a riot, indecency and public obscenity. The charges are dropped several weeks later due to a lack of evidence. December 15 – The Who release their third studio album, The Who Sell Out. It is a concept album, formatted as a collection of unrelated songs interspersed with faux commercials and public service announcements. December 26 – First telecast of The Beatles' Magical Mystery Tour on BBC1. Shown in black and white, it upsets McCartney because it ruins the intended psychedelic color effects. Pickwick Records releases LP collection of ten 1950s A- and B-sides of singles by Simon & Garfunkel, recorded under their pseudonym Tom & Jerry, and tries to pass it off as current material by the duo. Simon and Garfunkel file a legal challenge, and the record is swiftly withdrawn from the market. Toots & the Maytals releases "54-46 That's My Number", one of the first reggae songs. The Savonlinna Opera Festival is re-launched in Savonlinna, Finland, after a gap of fifty years. The first LP recording of traditional Estonian music, Eesti rahvalaule ja pillilugusid, is released. The International Society of Bassists is founded by Gary Karr. Narsaloo Ramaya becomes leader of the Naya Zamana. Ali Akbar Khan founds a school of music in California. See  The Crystals Johnny Kidd & The Pirates Orchestre de la Société des Concerts du Conservatoire The Rooftop Singers The Tornados The Trashmen And We Were Lovers – Shirley Bassey Back Up Train - Al Green The Beat of Brazil – Sergio Mendes & Brasil '66 Blaze - Herman's Hermits The Blues Alone - John Mayall Blue Benson – George Benson Blues Is King – B. B. King Call of the Valley – Hariprasad Chaurasia, Brij Bhushan Kabra and Shivkumar Sharma Cauldron - Fifty Foot Hose Casino Royale - Burt Bacharach Cellophane – The Troggs Christmas with Anita Bryant – Anita Bryant Clear Light - Clear Light Cliff in Japan – Cliff Richard Colour My World – Petula Clark Conquistador! – Cecil Taylor A Day in the Life – Wes Montgomery Doktor Dolittle - Fred Åkerström Double Dynamite – Sam & Dave A Drop of the Hard Stuff – The Dubliners Ella and Duke at the Cote D'Azur – Ella Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington Emotions - The Pretty Things Evil – Howlin' Wolf Extra Special! – Peggy Lee The Far East Suite – Duke Ellington Feelin' Groovy – Harper's Bizarre The First Edition - Kenny Rogers and the First Edition For All the Seasons of Your Mind – Janis Ian From Sergio – With Love – Sergio Franchi Future – The Seeds Gene Clark with the Gosdin Brothers - Gene Clark H. P. Lovecraft - H. P. Lovecraft High Priestess of Soul – Nina Simone Hour Glass - Hour Glass I Think We're Alone Now – Tommy James and the Shondells Incense and Peppermints - Strawberry Alarm Clock Inner Views - Sonny Bono Introducing the Sonics – The Sonics Juicy – Willie Bobo Just for You - Neil Diamond Knock on Wood - Eddie Floyd The Last Waltz – Engelbert Humperdick The Letter/Neon Rainbow - The Box Tops Live! At Caesar's Palace - Checkmates, Ltd. Live at the Fillmore Auditorium - Chuck Berry Ludo – Ivor Cutler Trio The Marvelettes – The Marvelettes Mixed Bag - Richie Havens More of the Hard Stuff – The Dubliners Morning Dew – Tim Rose Nice Girls Don't Stay for Breakfast – Julie London Nina Simone Sings the Blues – Nina Simone The Nitty Gritty Dirt Band - Nitty Gritty Dirt Band No Way Out - The Chocolate Watchband The Original Spinners - The Spinners The Parable of Arable Land - The Red Crayola The Party's Over and Other Great Willie Nelson Songs – Willie Nelson Ptooff! - The Deviants Reach Out – Burt Bacharach The Real McCoy – McCoy Tyner Reflections – Terry Knight and the Pack Release Me – Engelbert Humperdinck Revolution! - Paul Revere & the Raiders Ricochet - Nitty Gritty Dirt Band Say Siegel-Schwall - Siegel-Schwall Band Seen in Green – The Seekers Shake Down – Savoy Brown Songs for Rainy Day Lovers – Clare Fischer Sorcerer - Miles Davis The Story of Simon Simopath - Nirvana The Soul of a Bell – William Bell Straight, No Chaser – Thelonious Monk Strictly Instrumental – Lester Flatt, Earl Scruggs and Doc Watson Super Blues – Bo Diddley, Muddy Waters & Little Walter Supernatural Fairy Tales – Art The Super Super Blues Band – Bo Diddley, Muddy Waters & Howlin' Wolf These Are My Songs – Petula Clark There Goes My Heart – Sergio Franchi The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack - The Nice The Trip – Electric Flag (Soundtrack) Víctor Jara – Víctor Jara Waist Deep in the Big Muddy – Pete Seeger Walk Through This World with Me – George Jones We Are Ever So Clean - Blossom Toes The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band Part One – The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band West Side Soul – Magic Sam Whisper Not – Ella Fitzgerald With Body & Soul – Julie London "Puppet on a String" – Sandie Shaw "Silence Is Golden" – The Tremeloes "The Last Waltz" – Engelbert Humperdinck "Massachusetts" – Bee Gees "Baby Now That I've Found You" – The Foundations "Let the Heartaches Begin" – Long John Baldry "7-Rooms of Gloom" – Four Tops "Ain't No Mountain High Enough" – Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell "Alfie" – Helen Reddy "Seven Drunken Nights" – The Dubliners "At the Zoo"/"The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin' Groovy)" – Simon & Garfunkel "Autumn Almanac" – The Kinks "Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)" - Nancy Sinatra "Black Velvet Band" - The Dubliners "The Boat That I Row" - Lulu "Bottle of Wine" - The Fireballs "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" – Glen Campbell "California Nights" – Lesley Gore (m. Marvin Hamlisch w. Howard Liebling) "Darling Be Home Soon" – The Lovin' Spoonful "The Day I Met Marie" – Cliff Richard "Death of a Clown" – Dave Davies "Down On Me" - Big Brother and The Holding Company "Even The Bad Times Are Good" – The Tremeloes "Flowers in the Rain" – The Move "Friday on My Mind" – The Easybeats "From the Underworld" – The Herd "Gettin' Together by Tommy James and the Shondells "Gimme Little Sign"- Brenton Wood "Good Times" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "Excerpt from 'A Teenage Opera'" – Keith West "Happy Jack" – The Who "Here Comes My Baby" – The Tremeloes "Heroes and Villains" – The Beach Boys "Hole in My Shoe" – Traffic "Homburg" – Procol Harum "I Feel Love Comin' On" – Felice Taylor "I Know You Love Me Not"- Julie Driscoll "(I Wanna) Testify" – The Parliaments "If I Could Choose – Sean Dunphy "(I'm Not Your) Steppin' Stone" – The Monkees "I'm Wondering" – Stevie Wonder "It Takes Two" – Marvin Gaye and Kim Weston "Itchycoo Park" – Small Faces "Knock on Wood" – Otis Redding and Carla Thomas "L'amour est bleu – Vicky Leandros "La balsa" – Los Gatos (Founding song of the "Rock en español" movement) "Let's Go To San Francisco" – The Flower Pot Men "The Look of Love" – Dusty Springfield (m. Burt Bacharach w. Hal David) "Magic Colors"- Lesley Gore "Matthew and Son" – Cat Stevens "Monterey" – Eric Burdon & the Animals "More and More" - Andy Williams "More Love" – Smokey Robinson and the Miracles "Music to Watch Girls By" - Andy Williams "My Back Pages" – The Byrds "New York Mining Disaster 1941" – Bee Gees "Maids When You're Young Never Wed An Old Man" - The Dubliners "Night of Fear" – The Move "Night Of The Long Grass"- The Troggs "Nights In White Satin – The Moody Blues "No Milk Today" – Herman's Hermits (w.m. Graham Gouldman) "On a Carousel" – The Hollies "People Are Strange" – The Doors "Pictures of Lily" – The Who "Pretty Ballerina" – Left Banke "Puppet on a String" - Al Hirt "The Rain, The Park & Other Things – The Cowsills "Alternate Title" ("Randy Scouse Git" in the US) – The Monkees "She's a Rainbow" – The Rolling Stones "So You Want to Be a Rock 'n' Roll Star" – The Byrds "Society's Child (Baby I've Been Thinking)" – Janis Ian (w.m. Janis Ian) "Soul Finger" – The Bar-Kays "Summer Colors" - Wayne Newton "Susan" – The Buckinghams "There Is a Mountain" – Donovan "To Love Somebody" – Bee Gees "Tramp" – Otis Redding and Carla Thomas "Try a Little Tenderness" – Otis Redding "Twelve Thirty" – The Mamas & the Papas "Waterloo Sunset" – The Kinks "We Love You"/"Dandelion" – The Rolling Stones "Wear Your Love Like Heaven" – Donovan "When I Was Young" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "Zabadak!" – Dave Dee, Dozy, Beaky, Mick & Tich "At the Crossroads" w.m. Leslie Bricusse, from the film Doctor Dolittle "The Bare Necessities" w.m. Terry Gilkyson from the film The Jungle Book "Blowin' Away" w.m. Laura Nyro "Bonnie and Clyde" w.m. Charles Strouse "Both Sides, Now" w.m. Joni Mitchell "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" w.m. Jimmy Webb "Colour My World" w.m. Jackie Trent & Tony Hatch "Do You Know The Way To San Jose?" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach "Even The Bad Times Are Good" w. Peter Callander  m. Mitch Murray "The Eyes Of Love" w. Bob Russell m. Quincy Jones "Fortuosity" w.m. Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman, introduced by Tommy Steele in the film The Happiest Millionaire "Gentle On My Mind" w.m. John Hartford "Happiness" w.m. Clark Gesner from the musical You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown "Hare Krishna"  w. Gerome Ragni & James Rado m. Galt MacDermot "I Wanna Be Like You" w.m. Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman, from the film The Jungle Book "I've Gotta Be Me" w.m. Walter Marks "In the Heat of the Night" w. Alan Bergman & Marilyn Bergman m. Quincy Jones.  Theme song from the film of the same name, performed by Ray Charles "The Look of Love" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach from the film Casino Royale, sung by Dusty Springfield "Mrs. Robinson" w.m. Paul Simon from the film The Graduate "My Friend, The Doctor" w.m. Leslie Bricusse from the film Doctor Dolittle "One Less Bell To Answer" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach "Springtime for Hitler" w.m. Mel Brooks, from the film The Producers "Puppet on a String" w.m. Bill Martin & Phil Coulter "Talk to the Animals" w.m. Leslie Bricusse. Introduced by Rex Harrison in the film Doctor Dolittle "The Tapioca" w. Sammy Cahn m. Jimmy Van Heusen Introduced by Jim Bryant dubbing for James Fox in the film Thoroughly Modern Millie "Thoroughly Modern Millie" w. Sammy Cahn m. Jimmy Van Heusen Introduced by Julie Andrews in the film Thoroughly Modern Millie "To Sir, with Love" w.m. Don Black & Mark London. Introduced by Lulu in the 1967 film To Sir, with Love "What a Wonderful World" w.m. Bob Thiele & George David Weiss "You Only Live Twice" w. Leslie Bricusse m. John Barry "Alegria, Alegria" w.m. Caetano Veloso "Comme d'habitude" w. Claude François and Gilles Thibaut m. Claude François and Jacques Revaux "Déshabillez-moi" w. Robert Nyel m. Gaby Verlor "Nezhnost'" w. Nikolay Dobronravov and Sergey Grebennikov m. Alexandra Pakhmutova Jean Absil – Concerto for Piano and Orchestra No. 2 George Crumb – Echoes of Time and the River (Echoes II) for orchestra Gottfried von Einem – Violin Concerto Benjamin Frankel – Viola Concerto Philip Glass – 600 Lines Paul Lansky – String Quartet No. 1 György Ligeti – Lontano Witold Lutosławski – Symphony No. 2 Steve Reich – "Piano Phase" Karlheinz Stockhausen – Hymnen Mixtur, version for small orchestra Prozession Toru Takemitsu – November Steps Bernd Alois Zimmermann Intercomunicazione Tratto Yasushi Akutagawa – Orpheus of Hiroshima Richard Rodney Bennett – A Penny for a Song Cromwell Everson – Klutaimnestra (Eng: Clytemnestra) Elizabeth Maconchy – The Three Strangers William Walton – The Bear The Boy Friend (Sandy Wilson) – London revival opened at the Comedy Theatre on November 29 and ran for 365 performances By Jupiter (Music: Richard Rodgers Lyrics: Lorenz Hart Book: Rodgers and Hart). Off-Broadway revival opened at Theatre Four on January 19 and ran for 118 performances. Curley McDimple (Music & Lyrics: Robert Dahdah Book: Mary Boylan and Robert Dahdah). Off-Broadway production opened at the Bert Wheeler Theatre on November 22 and ran for 931 performances Fiddler on the Roof (Music: Jerry Bock Lyrics: Sheldon Harnick Book: Joseph Stein). London production opened at Her Majesty's Theatre on February 16 and ran for 2030 performances. The Four Musketeers, (Music: Laurie Johnson Lyrics: Herbert Kretzmer Book: Michael Pertwee). London production opened at the Drury Lane Theatre on December 5 and ran for 462 performances Hallelujah, Baby! – Broadway production Henry, Sweet Henry – Broadway production How Now, Dow Jones – Broadway production Oliver! (Music, Lyrics & Book: Lionel Bart) – London revival opened at the Piccadilly Theatre on April 26 and ran for 331 performances Sweet Charity (Music: Cy Coleman Lyrics: Dorothy Fields Book: Neil Simon). London production opened at the Prince of Wales Theatre on October 11 and ran for 476 performances. Anna Camelot Doctor Dolittle starring Rex Harrison, Samantha Eggar and Anthony Newley.  Directed by Richard Fleischer Half a Sixpence starring Tommy Steele The Happiest Millionaire How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying Les Demoiselles de Rochefort The Mikado Thoroughly Modern Millie starring Julie Andrews and Mary Tyler Moore. Magical Mystery Tour January 2 – Tia Carrere (Althea Rae Janairo), American actress and singer January 4 – Son of Dave (Benjamin Darvill), Canadian-born musician (Crash Test Dummies) January 6 – A. R. Rahman (A. S. Dileep Kumar), Indian film composer January 7 – Mark Lamarr (Mark Jones), English presenter of radio and TV music programmes January 9 – Dave Matthews, American singer, songwriter and guitarist January 14 – Steve Bowman, American rock drummer (Counting Crows) January 22 – Eleanor McEvoy, Irish singer-songwriter and guitarist January 25 – Voltaire (Aurelio Voltaire Hernández), Cuban-born cabaret musician January 28 – Marvin Sapp, American singer-songwriter January 31 Fat Mike (Michael Burkett), American rock singer and musician Chad Channing, American rock drummer (Nirvana) Jason Cooper, English drummer (The Cure and My Life Story) February 6 Anita Cochran, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer Izumi Sakai, Japanese pop singer (Zard) (d.2007) February 11 Clay Crosse, American Christian musician Paul McLoone, Irish DJ, producer, voice actor and frontman/lead vocalist with The Undertones February 12 – Chitravina N. Ravikiran, Indian composer and musician February 17 – Chanté Moore, American singer February 19 – Sven Erik Kristiansen Norwegian Black metal and hardcore punk singer (Maniac) February 20 – Kurt Cobain, American singer and songwriter (Nirvana) (d. 1994) March 4 – Evan Dando (The Lemonheads) March 7 Randy Guss, (Toad the Wet Sprocket) Ruthie Henshall, star of stage musicals March 11 – John Barrowman, actor and singer March 17 – Billy Corgan (The Smashing Pumpkins) March 18 – Miki Berenyi, British rock lead singer March 21 – Jonas Berggren (Ace of Base) March 29 – John Popper (Blues Traveler) April 12 – Sarah Cracknell (Saint Etienne) April 14 – Barrett Martin, American drummer and composer April 15 – Frankie Poullain, British rock bassist (The Darkness) April 17 – Liz Phair, American singer and songwriter April 20 – Mike Portnoy, American rock drummer (Dream Theater) April 28 – Kari Wuhrer, American actress and singer April 30 – Filipp Kirkorov, Soviet and Russian pop singer, actor, producer, TV presenter May 1 – Tim McGraw, American country singer May 6 – Mark Bryan (Hootie & the Blowfish) May 11 – Apache Indian (real name Steven Kapur), reggae singer and DJ May 13 Chuck Schuldiner, American singer and guitarist (d. 2001) Melanie Thornton, American singer (d. 2001) May 18 – Rob Base, American rapper May 22 – MC Eiht, American rapper May 23 – Phil Selway (Radiohead) May 24 – Heavy D, rapper (d. 2011) May 29 – Noel Gallagher, songwriter (Oasis) June 7 – Dave Navarro, guitarist (Jane's Addiction & Red Hot Chili Peppers) June 8 – Jasmin Tabatabai, German/Iranian actress and musician June 9 – Dean Felber, Hootie & the Blowfish June 17 Dorothea Röschmann, German soprano and actress Eric Stefani, American keyboard player, songwriter, and animator (No Doubt) June 18 – Glen Benton, American rock singer/bassist (Deicide) June 24 Jeff Cease, American guitarist (The Black Crowes) Richard Z. Kruspe (Rammstein) June 29 Murray Foster, Canadian rock bassist (Moxy Früvous) Melora Hardin, American actress and singer July 7 – Jackie Neal, American blues singer (d. 2005) July 12 – John Petrucci, American virtuoso guitarist July 17 – Susan Ashton, American singer July 19 – Stuart Howe, Canadian operatic tenor July 22 – Pat Badger (Extreme) July 27 – Juliana Hatfield, singer-songwriter July 28 – Taka Hirose, Japanese musician (Feeder) August 18 – Blas Elias, American drummer (Slaughter) August 21 – Serj Tankian (System of a Down) August 22 Yukiko Okada, Japanese pop singer (d. 1986) Layne Staley, American rock singer (Alice in Chains) (d. 2002) August 25 – Jeff Tweedy (Wilco) August 29 – Anton Newcombe, American rock musician (The Brian Jonestown Massacre) September 2 – Dino Cazares, American rock guitarist (Divine Heresy', Fear Factory) September 9 – Chris Caffery, American guitarist and singer September 11 – Harry Connick, Jr., jazz singer and pianist September 18 – Ricky Bell, New Edition, Bell Biv DeVoe September 20 Gunnar Nelson, American singer Matthew Nelson, American singer September 21 – Faith Hill, country singer September 26 – Shannon Hoon, American singer (Blind Melon) (d. 1995) September 28 – Moon Unit Zappa, American actress and musician September 29 – Brett Anderson, Suede October 2 – Bud Gaugh (Sublime) October 4 – Ekin Cheng, Hong Kong actor and singer October 5 – Johnny Gioeli, American power metal singer October 7 – Toni Braxton, American R&B singer October 8 – Teddy Riley, American R&B and hip hop singer October 10 – Mike Malinin (Goo Goo Dolls) October 17 – René Dif (Aqua) October 19 – Trouble T Roy, back-up singer for Heavy D & the Boyz October 22 – Salvatore Di Vittorio, Italian composer & conductor October 26 – Keith Urban, country music singer October 27 – Scott Weiland (Stone Temple Pilots) (d. 2015) October 29 – Péter Kun, Hungarian guitarist (d. 1993) October 31 – Adam Schlesinger (Fountains of Wayne) November 1 Sophie B. Hawkins, American singer and songwriter Tina Arena, Australian singer and songwriter November 3 – Steven Wilson, English musician November 7 Steve DiGiorgio, American musician (bassist) Sharleen Spiteri, singer (Texas) November 14 Letitia Dean, actress and singer Nina Gordon, American singer November 15 – E-40, American rapper November 16 – Ronnie DeVoe (New Edition, Bell Biv DeVoe) November 20 – Teoman, Turkish rock singer and songwriter November 24 – Melanie Thornton, singer (d.2001) November 27 – Rodney Sheppard, American guitarist (Sugar Ray) December 5 –  Gary Allan, American country musician December 6 – Hacken Lee, Hong Kong singer and actor December 9 – Joshua Bell, violinist December 12 Yuzo Koshiro, Japanese composer and producer Takenobu Mitsuyoshi, Japanese composer and voice actor Deke Sharon, American singer-songwriter and producer (The House Jacks and Beelzebubs) December 17 – Gigi D'Agostino, DJ December 25 – Jason Thirsk, Pennywise Date unknown – Gábor Tarján, composer January 1 – Moon Mullican, country singer, 57 (heart attack) January 3 – Mary Garden, operatic soprano, 93 January 7 – Carl Schuricht, conductor, 86 January 15 – Albert Szirmai, composer, 86 January 27 – Luigi Tenco, singer-songwriter and actor, 28 (suicide by gunshot) January 31 – Geoffrey O'Hara, composer, 84 February 5 – Violeta Parra, Chilean folk musician, 49 (suicide by gunshot) February 12 – Muggsy Spanier, jazz cornettist, 60 February 15 – Li Jinhui, composer and songwriter, 75 February 16 – Smiley Burnette, singer and songwriter, 55 (leukaemia) February 24 – Franz Waxman, composer, 60 February 25 – Fats Pichon, jazz pianist, bandleader, 60 March 6 Zoltán Kodály, composer, 84 Nelson Eddy, US singer and actor, 65 March 7 – Willie Smith, alto saxophonist, 56 (cancer) March 11 – Geraldine Farrar, operatic soprano, 85 March 22 – Luigi Piazza, operatic baritone, 82 March 23 – Pete Johnson, jazz pianist, 62 March 29 – Cheo Marquetti, singer-songwriter, 57 April 5 – Mischa Elman, violinist, 76 April 12 – Buster Bailey, jazz musician, 64 April 15 – Totò, songwriter, 69 April 17 – Red Allen, jazz trumpeter April 20 – Anna Fitziu, operatic soprano, 80 April 29 – J. B. Lenoir, blues musician, 38 (heart attack) April 30 – Jef Le Penven, composer, 47 May 9 – Philippa Schuyler, pianist and child prodigy May 10 – Arthur Carron, operatic tenor, 66 May 17 – John Wesley Work III, composer, 65 May 21 – Ilona Eibenschütz, pianist, 95 May 31 – Billy Strayhorn, composer and pianist, 51 (esophageal cancer) June 3 – André Cluytens, conductor, 62 June 24 Lionel Belasco, pianist and bandleader, about 85 Kai Normann Andersen, composer, 67 June 26 – Françoise Dorléac, actress and singer, 25 (car accident) June 29 – Jayne Mansfield, actress, violinist and sometime singer, 34 (car accident) July 17 – John Coltrane, jazz musician, 40 (liver cancer) July 26 – Matthijs Vermeulen, composer, 79 July 30 – Marios Varvoglis, composer, 81 August 4 – , composer, editor and critic, 90 August 5 – Evelyn Scotney, coloratura soprano, 71 August 8 – Jaromír Weinberger, composer, 71 August 27 – Brian Epstein, manager of The Beatles, 32 September 15 – Hans Haug, primitivist composer, 67 September 25 – Stuff Smith, jazz violinist, 58 October 3 Woody Guthrie singer, songwriter, 55(Huntingtons Disease) Sir Malcolm Sargent, conductor, 72 November 8 - Keg Johnson, jazz trombonist, 58 November 10 – Ida Cox, blues singer, 71 November 13 – Harriet Cohen, pianist, 71 November 16 – Roshan, Bollywood composer, 50 (heart attack) November 22 – Edvin Kallstenius, composer, 86 November 23 – Otto Erich Deutsch, musicologist, 84 November 24 – Raúl Borges, guitarist and composer, 85 November 25 – Dawid Engela, broadcaster, composer and musicologist, 36 (road accident) November 30 – Heinz Tietjen, conductor, 86 December 4 – Bert Lahr, vaudeville performer, 72 December 6 – Lillian Evanti, operatic soprano, 77 December 10 (in plane crash): Otis Redding, soul singer, 26 Four of six members of soul group The Bar-Kays  : Ronnie Caldwell, 18 Phalon Jones, 18 Jimmy King, 18 Carl Cunningham, 18 December 11 – Victor de Sabata, conductor and composer, 75 December 19 – Carmen Melis, operatic soprano, 82 December 28 – Maria Nemeth, operatic soprano, 70 December 29 – Paul Whiteman, bandleader, 77 December 30 – Roger Penzabene, Motown songwriter (suicide) date unknown Stanley R. Avery, composer Texas Gladden, folk singer Knud Harder, composer Barsegh Kanachyan, composer of the Armenian national anthem Nino Marcelli, conductor and composer Grammy Awards of 1967 Eurovision Song Contest 1967 Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for Hindustani music – Amir Khan
