    List of notable events in music that took place in the year 1968. In the USA, 6,540 pop singles and 4,057 albums were released.Encyclopedia of recorded sound, Volume 1 | Frank W. Hoffmann, Howard Ferstler The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1968. See also: Hot 100 No. 1 Hits of 1968 (USA) Day Album Artist Notes 2 Elvis' Gold Records Volume 4 Elvis Presley Compilation Sing Me Back Home Merle Haggard 15 The Notorious Byrd Brothers The Byrds 16 Vincebus Eruptum Blue Cheer 21 Boogie with Canned Heat Canned Heat The Graduate Simon & Garfunkel (incidental music by Dave Grusin) Soundtrack 22 Gris-Gris Dr. John Heavy Iron Butterfly Lady Soul Aretha Franklin Spirit Spirit 30 White Light/White Heat The Velvet Underground - A Beacon from Mars Kaleidoscope Did She Mention My Name? Gordon Lightfoot From Sea to Shining Sea Johnny Cash Mass in F Minor The Electric Prunes Movin' with Nancy Nancy Sinatra Now and Them Them Om John Coltrane Something Else Again Richie Havens Steppenwolf Steppenwolf Day Album Artist Notes 19 Once Upon a Dream The Rascals 21 Child Is Father to the Man Blood, Sweat & Tears 23 The Dock of the Bay Otis Redding Compilation 24 Fleetwood Mac Fleetwood Mac - The Beat Goes On Vanilla Fudge Hangin' On Waylon Jennings Horizontal Bee Gees The Inner Mystique The Chocolate Watch Band Day Album Artist Notes 3 Eli and the Thirteenth Confession Laura Nyro 4 We're Only in It for the Money The Mothers of Invention 6 The United States of America The United States of America 23 Dionne Warwick in Valley of the Dolls Dionne Warwick - Birthday The Association The Hangman's Beautiful Daughter The Incredible String Band I Can't Stand Myself When You Touch Me James Brown A Long Time Comin' Electric Flag The Move The Move Nefertiti Miles Davis A Portrait of Ray Ray Charles Reflections The Supremes Safe at Home The International Submarine Band Scott 2 Scott Walker Song to a Seagull Joni Mitchell Day Album Artist Notes 3 Bookends Simon & Garfunkel Wow/Grape Jam Moby Grape double LP 6 Sher-oo! Cilla Black 8 The Legend of Bonnie & Clyde Merle Haggard 19 Odessey and Oracle The Zombies 22 The Birds, The Bees & The Monkees The Monkees 27 Dance to the Music Sly & the Family Stone 29 The Temptations Wish It Would Rain The Temptations - Doin' Our Thing Booker T and The MG's God Bless Tiny Tim Tiny Tim I Got the Feelin' James Brown Journey to the Center of the Mind Amboy Dukes Like to Get to Know You Spanky and Our Gang Linda Ronstadt, Stone Poneys and Friends, Vol. III Stone Poneys Simon Says 1910 Fruitgum Company The Twain Shall Meet Eric Burdon & The Animals Day Album Artist Notes 1 Speedway Elvis Presley Soundtrack 4 Just Because I'm a Woman Dolly Parton 24 Ogdens' Nut Gone Flake Small Faces - At Folsom Prison Johnny Cash Live Basic Blues Magoos Blues Magoos The Beat of the Brass Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass La La Means I Love You The Delfonics The Papas & The Mamas The Mamas & the Papas Quicksilver Messenger Service Quicksilver Messenger Service The Tom Jones Fever Zone Tom Jones Parrot album A Tramp Shining Richard Harris Day Album Artist Notes 14 Aretha Now Aretha Franklin In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida Iron Butterfly The Inflated Tear Rahsaan Roland Kirk 21 Bare Wires John Mayall's Bluesbreakers 24 Friends The Beach Boys Time Peace: The Rascals' Greatest Hits The Rascals Compilation 29 A Saucerful of Secrets Pink Floyd - 40 Blue Fingers, Freshly Packed and Ready to Serve Chicken Shack Baptism: A Journey Through Our Time Joan Baez Children of the Future Steve Miller Band Fairport Convention Fairport Convention Feliciano! José Feliciano The Immortal Otis Redding Otis Redding Compilation It's All About Spooky Tooth Old Golden Throat Johnny Cash Os Mutantes Os Mutantes The Pentangle Pentangle Randy Newman Randy Newman Renaissance Vanilla Fudge Silver Apples Silver Apples Day Album Artist Notes 1 Music from Big Pink The Band 3 Waiting for the Sun The Doors 5 Creedence Clearwater Revival Creedence Clearwater Revival My People Were Fair and Had Sky in Their Hair... Tyrannosaurus Rex 18 Anthem of the Sun Grateful Dead 19 Music in a Doll's House Family 22 Miles in the Sky Miles Davis Super Session Mike Bloomfield/Al Kooper/Stephen Stills 26 In Search of the Lost Chord The Moody Blues 30 Last Time Around Buffalo Springfield - Delilah Tom Jones Getting to the Point Savoy Brown Hair West End cast Only the Greatest Waylon Jennings Shades of Deep Purple Deep Purple US Tape from California Phil Ochs Wheels of Fire Cream Day Album Artist Notes 10 Undead Ten Years After 12 Cheap Thrills Big Brother and the Holding Company 19 The Best of The Beach Boys Vol. 3 The Beach Boys Compilation Stack-O-Tracks The Beach Boys Compilation 21 Tell Mama Etta James 23 Mr. Wonderful Fleetwood Mac 26 Diana Ross & the Supremes Sing and Perform "Funny Girl" Diana Ross & the Supremes performance of Funny Girl Broadway musical I Heard It Through the Grapevine Marvin Gaye later re-released as I Heard It Through the Grapevine Live at London's Talk of the Town The Supremes Live 30 Sweetheart of the Rodeo The Byrds - Donovan in Concert Donovan Live Every One of Us Eric Burdon & The Animals Frank Sinatra's Greatest Hits Frank Sinatra Compilation James Brown Plays Nothing But Soul James  Brown Live at the Apollo, Volume II James Brown Live Lonely Is the Name Sammy Davis Jr. Memories The Vogues Outsideinside Blue Cheer Special Occasion The Miracles Stoned Soul Picnic The 5th Dimension Together Country Joe and the Fish Truth The Jeff Beck Group Turn Around, Look at Me The Vogues You're All I Need Marvin Gaye & Tammi Terrell Day Album Artist Notes 27 Picturesque Matchstickable Messages from the Status Quo Status Quo - Bobby Darin Born Walden Robert Cassotto Bobby Darin Crown of Creation Jefferson Airplane Idea Bee Gees Life Sly & the Family Stone Magic Bus: The Who on Tour The Who Compilation Shine On Brightly Procol Harum Day Album Artist Notes 3 Mama Tried Merle Haggard 5 Electric Mud Muddy Waters 12 Aretha in Paris Aretha Franklin Live 14 Prophets, Seers & Sages: The Angels of the Ages Tyrannosaurus Rex 16 Electric Ladyland The Jimi Hendrix Experience Three Dog Night Three Dog Night 19 Dream a Little Dream Cass Elliot 25 This Was Jethro Tull - 1, 2, 3, Red Light 1910 Fruitgum Company The Book of Taliesyn Deep Purple US Bradley's Barn The Beau Brummels The Fantastic Expedition of Dillard & Clark Dillard & Clark The Hurdy Gurdy Man Donovan In Person at the Whisky a Go Go Otis Redding Live Nazz Nazz Sailor Steve Miller Band The Second Steppenwolf Traffic Traffic The Tumbler John Martyn Day Album Artist Notes 1 Living the Blues Canned Heat double LP; studio + live Wonderwall Music George Harrison Soundtrack 8 Diana Ross & the Supremes Join The Temptations Diana Ross & the Supremes & The Temptations Duets 12 Neil Young Neil Young 13 Love Child Diana Ross & the Supremes 20 Eivets Rednow Stevie Wonder released under pseudonym Eivets Rednow 22 The Beatles The Beatles commonly referred to as The White Album Dusty... Definitely Dusty Springfield Elvis Elvis Presley Soundtrack to 1968 TV special The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society The Kinks 29 Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins John Lennon and Yoko Ono - Ars Longa Vita Brevis The Nice Astral Weeks Van Morrison Back Here on Earth Gordon Lightfoot Blues from Laurel Canyon John Mayall Born to Be Melanie Safka The Doughnut in Granny's Greenhouse Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band Gentle on My Mind Dean Martin Help Yourself Tom Jones I've Gotta Be Me Sammy Davis Jr. The Marble Index Nico Promises, Promises Dionne Warwick Release of an Oath The Electric Prunes This Is My Country The Impressions with Curtis Mayfield Time Out! Time In For Them Them The Turtles Present the Battle of the Bands The Turtles Wee Tam and the Big Huge The Incredible String Band Day Album Artist Notes 1 Head The Monkees Soundtrack 2 Cruising with Ruben & the Jets The Mothers of Invention 6 Beggars Banquet The Rolling Stones James Taylor James Taylor 8 For Once in My Life Stevie Wonder 11 Blood, Sweat & Tears Blood, Sweat & Tears 23 The Natch'l Blues Taj Mahal - Any Day Now Joan Baez Brooklyn Bridge Johnny Maestro & the Brooklyn Bridge The Circle Game Tom Rush The Family That Plays Together Spirit Jewels Waylon Jennings Live at the Copa The Temptations Live Love Is Eric Burdon & The Animals The Sinatra Family Wish You a Merry Christmas Frank Sinatra The Soft Machine The Soft Machine Sweet Child Pentangle # Artist Title Year Country Chart Entries 1 The Beatles Hey Jude 1968 UK 1 – September 1968, US BB 1 – September 1968, US CashBox 1 of 1968, Canada 1 – August 1968, Netherlands 1 – September 1968, Switzerland 1 – September 1968, Norway 1 – September 1968, Australia 1 of 1968, Germany 1 – Jan 1969, Éire 1 – September 1968, Australia 1 for 15 weeks February 1969, Australia Goset 1 – October 1968, Europe 1 of the 1960s, RYM 1 of 1968, DDD 2 of 1968, OzNet 2, Virgin 3, Global 7 (10 M sold) – 1968, Rolling Stone 8, WXPN 9, TheQ 20, US BB 23 of 1968, POP 23 of 1968, Italy 30 of 1968, Scrobulate 32 of classic rock, Acclaimed 32, Germany 52 of the 1960s, Belgium 55 of all time, Poland 84 of all time 2 Louis Armstrong What a Wonderful World 1968 UK 1 – February 1968, US BB 1 of 1988, Australia 1 for 1 weeks Jan 1989, POP 1 of 1988, Netherlands 2 – Mar 1968, Norway 6 – May 1968, Germany 6 – Jun 1968, Switzerland 7 – Jun 1968, Scrobulate 7 of jazz, Australia 8 of 1988, RYM 9 of 1967, South Africa 11 of 1968, Poland 22 – April 1988, Australia Goset 29 – Jun 1968, TOTP 31, Party 31 of 2007, US BB 32 – Mar 1988, WXPN 34, Poland 50 of all time, Europe 58 of the 1960s, OzNet 67, Italy 72 of 1976, RIAA 84, Germany 400 of the 1980s, Acclaimed 502 3 Otis Redding (Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay 1968 US BB 1 – February 1968, US BB 1 of 1968, POP 1 of 1968, Canada 2 – Jan 1968, Norway 2 – April 1968, RYM 2 of 1968, UK 3 – February 1968, France 3 – Jun 1970, US CashBox 4 of 1968, DDD 4 of 1968, Scrobulate 5 of soul, Netherlands 6 – February 1968, Switzerland 7 – April 1968, Acclaimed 7, Australia Goset 12 – April 1968, Germany 15 – May 1968, RIAA 22, Rolling Stone 28, OzNet 29, Europe 41 of the 1960s, 49 in 2FM list, WXPN 89 4 The Rolling Stones Jumpin' Jack Flash 1968 UK 1 – May 1968, Canada 1 – May 1968, Germany 1 – July 1968, Australia Goset 1 – Jun 1968, Netherlands 2 – Jun 1968, Switzerland 2 – May 1968, US BB 3 – Jun 1968, Norway 3 – Jun 1968, RYM 4 of 1968, DDD 6 of 1968, US BB 16 of 1968, POP 16 of 1968, Acclaimed 25, US CashBox 26 of 1968, Europe 56 of the 1960s, Virgin 73, Italy 84 of 1968, Rolling Stone 124, Germany 151 of the 1960s, WXPN 181, Belgium 189 of all time, OzNet 372 5 The Beatles Lady Madonna 1968 UK 1 – Mar 1968, Canada 1 – Mar 1968, Switzerland 1 – Mar 1968, Australia 1 for 3 weeks August 1968, Australia Goset 1 – April 1968, Norway 2 – Mar 1968, Germany 2 – April 1968, Netherlands 3 – Mar 1968, US BB 4 – Mar 1968, US BB 11 of 1968, Poland 11 – November 2006, POP 11 of 1968, Australia 16 of 1968, RYM 17 of 1968, US CashBox 27 of 1968, Scrobulate 41 of oldies, Italy 49 of 1968, DDD 51 of 1968, OzNet 76, Germany 219 of the 1960s Composer !! Composition !! Date !! Location !! Performers Langgaard, Rued Violin Concerto (1944) 1968-01-10  Odense Laursen / Odense Municipal Orchestra – WellejusDaCapo RecordsDanacord Records Stockhausen, Karlheinz Kurzwellen for six players with shortwave receivers and live electronics 1968-05-05  Bremen, Radio Bremen TV Studio, Pro Musica Nova Aloys Kontarsky, Alings, Gehlhaar, Fritsch, Bojé, StockhausenKarlheinz Stockhausen, "Kurzwellen", in his Texte zur Musik 3, edited by Dieter Schnebel, 112–20. DuMont Dokumente. Cologne: Verlag M. DuMont Schauberg. ISBN 3-7701-0493-5. Citation on 114, 116. Villa-Lobos, Heitor Fantaisie concertante for piano, clarinet and bassoon 1968-11-19  Rio de Janeiro, Sale Cecilia Meireles Botelho, Devos, ImprotaVilla-Lobos, sua obra, second edition ([Rio de Janeiro]: MEC/DAC/Museu Villa-Lobos, 1972): 83. January 4 – Guitarist Jimi Hendrix is jailed by Stockholm police, after trashing a hotel room during a drunken fist fight with bassist Noel Redding. January 6 – The Gibson Guitar Corporation patents its Gibson Flying V electric guitar design. January 13 – Johnny Cash performs his famous concert at Folsom State Prison in California. January 20 – The Who and the Small Faces start with a tour of Australia and New Zealand. February 1 - Universal Studios offers the Doors $500,000 to star in a feature film, which is never made. February 4 - The Bee Gees make their American television debut on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour. February 12 – Jimi Hendrix is given an honorary high school diploma from Garfield High School in Seattle, Washington. Hendrix is also given the key to the city. February 16 – The Beatles, Mike Love, Mia Farrow, Donovan and others travel to India to visit Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at Rishikesh. February 18 – David Gilmour joins Pink Floyd, replacing founder Syd Barrett, who had checked himself into a psychiatric hospital. February 21 – McGraw-Hill, Inc., outbids eight other publishers and pays $150,000 for the U.S. rights to Hunter Davies' authorized biography of the Beatles. February 22 – Florence Ballard of the Supremes is released from her contract with Motown. February 27 - Doo-wop Singer Frankie Lymon is found dead at his grandmothers house in Harlem, New York of a heroin overdose March 1 – Johnny Cash and June Carter are married in Franklin, Kentucky, with Merle Kilgore as best man. March 8 – Bill Graham opens the Fillmore East in an abandoned movie theater in New York City. March 25 – The 58th and final new episode of The Monkees airs on NBC. March 30 – The Yardbirds record their live album Live Yardbirds at the Anderson Theater. April 4 – James Brown appears on national television, in an attempt to calm feelings of anger in the United States following the assassination of Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. April 6 The 13th Eurovision Song Contest is held in the Royal Albert Hall, London. The winning song, Spain's "La, la, la" is sung by Massiel, after Spanish authorities refused to allow Joan Manuel Serrat to perform it in Catalan. The UK finish in second place, just one point behind, with the song "Congratulations" sung by Cliff Richard, which goes on to outsell the winning Spanish entry throughout Europe. The Open Pibroch Competition of the Scottish Piping Society of London is held at the London Scottish headquarters at Buckingham Gate. First place was won by Robert Brown, for the ninth time in ten years, with a performance of The King's Taxes. Second prize went to Seamus McNeill of the College of Piping, Glasgow, with The Bells of Perth, third prize to Pipe Major Angus MacDonald of the First Battalion, Scots Guards, with Macfarlane's Gathering, and fourth prize to John MacFadyen with The Battle of Auldern. MacFadyen, however, won narrowly over Brown in the second big competition, that for the Bratach Gorm, the blue banner of the MacCrimmons.Iverach McDonald, "Ninth Win for Piper Brown", The Times, issue 57221 (Monday 8 April 1968): 10. April 7 – Singer/pianist/songwriter Nina Simone's performance at Westbury Music Fair is dedicated to the late Dr Martin Luther King, Jr. The song "Why? (the king of love is dead)" by Gene Taylor is performed for the first time. the show was partially released on the Emmy nominated album Nuff Said (1968). April 29 – The rock musical Hair opens on Broadway at the Biltmore Theatre. May 4 – Mary Hopkin performs on the British TV show Opportunity Knocks. Hopkin catches the attention of model Twiggy, who recommends her to Paul McCartney. McCartney would soon sign Hopkin to Apple Records. May 5 – Buffalo Springfield performs together for the last time in Long Beach, California. May 7 Aretha Franklin records her live LP Aretha in Paris at the Olympia Theater. Karlheinz Stockhausen begins composing his fifteen intuitive music works, Aus den sieben Tagen. May 14 – At a press conference, John Lennon and Paul McCartney introduce the Beatles' new business concept, Apple Corps, Ltd., a disastrously mismanaged entertainment company that included a recording studio, a record label, and clothing store. May 26 – Blues artist Little Willie John dies in prison after being convicted of manslaughter. May 30 – The Beatles begin recording The White Album (officially titled, simply, The Beatles). Sessions would span over 4 months, ending on October 14. June 20 – David Ruffin is fired from The Temptations Martha Reeves & the Vandellas make their debut at the Copacabana in New York City, winning a rave review in the New York Times. The engagement was recorded but remains in the Motown vaults. July 7 – The Yardbirds perform for the last time before disbanding. July 9–14 – The International Eisteddfod takes place in Llangollen, North Wales July 18 – Mina presents her Italian white soul hits "Se stasera sono qui" and "Colpo al cuore". The performance is transmitted live without playback from the Auditorio A of the Radiotelevisione Italiana regional headquarters in Naples. August 1 – Jeff Beck Group releases their album Truth.  A seminal work of heavy metal, it incorporates blues and hard rock. It introduced the talents of Rod Stewart and Ronnie Wood. August 4 – Yes performs for the first time, at a summer camp. August 5–10 – The Royal National Eisteddfod takes place in Barry, Wales. August 23 – Simon & Garfunkel give a live concert at the Hollywood Bowl, Hollywood, California. A recording is later released on CD in 1994 by Australian company Vigotone Records as Voices of Intelligent Dissent. September 7 – Led Zeppelin performs for the first time, billed as The New Yardbirds (the Yardbirds had disbanded two months earlier, and guitarist Jimmy Page subsequently formed this new group). September 14 – Two sons of singer Roy Orbison, 10-year-old Roy DeWayne Orbison and 6-year-old Anthony King Orbison, die in a house fire in Hendersonville, Tennessee. Orbison's youngest son is saved. September 15 Song of Summer, Ken Russell's noted TV documentary about Frederick Delius, is shown for the first time as part of the BBC's Omnibus series. PocketDiscs are released in several test markets in the United States. September 19 – The Who begin recording Tommy, a rock opera that tells the story about a deaf, dumb and blind boy, including his experiences with life and the relationship with his family. October 8 – The soundtrack for the 1968 film Romeo and Juliet is released, containing popular "What Is a Youth" tune. November 8 – John and Cynthia Lennon are divorced. November 11 - Three days after their divorce, John Lennon costars with Yoko Ono in Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins, which ends up to become a flop. November 15 – 500,000 people march in Washington, D.C. for peace, which becomes the largest anti-war rally in U.S. history. In attendance: Arlo Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Peter, Paul and Mary, John Denver, Mitch Miller, touring cast of Hair November 17 – Diana Ross & the Supremes replace The Beatles' hugely successful "Hey Jude" at number-one in the U.S. with "Love Child"; this would be the last of five turnovers at number-one between the two most successful music acts in America during the 1960s. November 22 – The Beatles (also known as "The White Album") by The Beatles is released.  Also released is The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society by The Kinks. "Once again The Beatles had over a quarter of a million advance orders, and of course went straight to number 1. While The Beatles broke artistic and commercial ground even before it was released (over 250,000 advance orders!), the Kinks' effort was their worst charting release ever, but has since become their biggest album in terms of sales and artistic statement. November 26 – Cream plays their farewell concert at the Royal Albert Hall. It will be the last time Eric Clapton, Jack Bruce, and Ginger Baker play together until their 1993 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. December 2 Jimi Hendrix's manager Chas Chandler quits over differences with Hendrix during the recording of Electric Ladyland Janis Joplin and Big Brother and the Holding Company perform their last concert together before Janis goes solo. Elvis Presley's If I Can Dream airs on NBC. December 9 A political confrontation at the Planten un Blomen Hall in Hamburg results in cancellation of the scheduled premiere of Hans Werner Henze's oratorio Das Floß der Medusa, a score dedicated to Che Guevara. TCB airs on NBC starring Diana Ross & the Supremes and The Temptations, becoming the first variety special in America to feature an exclusively African American cast. Shinjuku Music Festival is broadcast for the first time by Nippon Cultural Broadcasting. December 11 - The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus was filmed. Acts included The Rolling Stones, The Who, Taj Mahal, Jethro Tull, The Dirty Mac, and Marianne Faithfull. This was the last appearance of Brian Jones as a member of The Rolling Stones. December 20 – Peter Tork announces he is leaving The Monkees. December 22 – The Animals reunite for one benefit concert at the Newcastle City Hall while Eric Burdon & The Animals are disbanding. Buffalo Springfield Cream Freddie and the Dreamers The Righteous Brothers The Seekers The Shangri-Las The Yardbirds (Reformed in 1992) The Zombies (Reformed in 1991) Los Speakers 30 by Ella – Ella Fitzgerald Action! – Desmond Dekker & the Aces Agemo's Trip to Mother Earth – Group 1850 Aerial Ballet - Harry Nilsson All of Us – Nirvana The Archies - The Archies At It Again – The Dubliners Backstage - Cher Balaklava - Pearls Before Swine A Banda Tropicalista do Duprat – Rogério Duprat Bang, Bang You're Terry Reid – Terry Reid Bend Me, Shape Me – The American Breed Bill Evans at the Montreux Jazz Festival – Bill Evans Bill Haley's Biggest Hits – Bill Haley & His Comets Blues on Top of Blues – B. B. King Bobby Taylor & The Vancouvers – Bobby Taylor & the Vancouvers Caravan - Caravan The Cheerful Insanity of Giles, Giles and Fripp - Giles, Giles and Fripp Come Out Fighting Ghengis Smith – Roy Harper The Crazy World of Arthur Brown - The Crazy World of Arthur Brown Cycles - Frank Sinatra Dino Valente – Dino Valente Dion – Dion DiMucci Drinkin' and Courtin' – The Dubliners Easy Does It – Julie London The Electric Flag: An American Music Band – Electric Flag The Electricfying Eddie Harris  – Eddie Harris Elmer Gantry's Velvet Opera – Elmer Gantry's Velvet Opera Fall Out – Terry Smith Feelings – The Grass Roots Filles de Kilimanjaro - Miles Davis First Edition's 2nd – The First Edition For the Sake of the Song – Townes Van Zandt Francis A. & Edward K. - Frank Sinatra and Duke Ellington From St. Louie to Frisco – Chuck Berry Gal Costa – Gal Costa God Bless the Red Krayola and All Who Sail With It - Red Krayola Golden Grass – The Grass Roots Gun – Gun H. P. Lovecraft II - H. P. Lovecraft Heart of Cash – Johnny Cash Here Comes The Judge – Frederick Earl "Shorty" Long Hickory Holler Revisited – O.C. Smith Honey - Andy Williams The Horse – Cliff Nobles & Co. I Can't Stop Dancing – Archie Bell & The Drells I Stand Alone - Al Kooper I'm a Fool to Want You – Sergio Franchi In My Own Dream - Paul Butterfield In New York – Ravi Shankar It Crawled into My Hand, Honest – The Fugs It's All About - Spooky Tooth Karyobin – Spontaneous Music Ensemble Large as Life and Twice as Natural – Davey Graham Live - The 13th Floor Elevators Look to Your Heart – Perry Como Love Is All Around – The Troggs Love and Other Crimes – Lee Hazlewood Love is Blue – The Lawrence Welk Orchestra Lucille - B. B. King A Man Without Love – Engelbert Humperdinck Members, Don't Git Weary – Max Roach The Midnight Mover – Wilson Pickett Miracle Mirror - Golden Earrings Mony Mony - Tommy James and the Shondells A Morning Raga / An Evening Raga – Ravi Shankar Nancy & Lee – Nancy Sinatra & Lee Hazlewood NBC-TV Special:TCB Soundtrack – Diana Ross & The Supremes with The Temptations 'Nuff Said! – Nina Simone On Stage – Bill Haley & His Comets ONE - to get ready: FOUR..... to – GO! – Clare Fischer Otis Redding Live at the Whiskey A Go Go – Otis Redding Outrageous – Kim Fowley The Perry Como Christmas Album – Perry Como Power of Love - Hour Glass The Progressive Blues Experiment - Johnny Winter Promise Of A Future – Hugh Masekela Rare Junk - Nitty Gritty Dirt Band Reality Is Bad Enough – Patrick Sky Realization – Johnny Rivers Recital na Boite Barroco – Maria Bethânia Rhinoceros – Rhinoceros Ring Out Joy - Ed Summerlin Roots – The Everly Brothers S.F. Sorrow - The Pretty Things Scratching the Surface – The Groundhogs (debut) Shake! - Siegel-Schwall Band Sir John Alot of Merry Englandes Musyk Thynge and ye Grene Knyghte – John Renbourn Slow Drag – Donald Byrd Soul Master – Edwin Starr Soulful Christmas – James Brown The Sounds of India – Ravi Shankar Soul Limbo - Booker T. & the MGs Speak Like a Child – Herbie Hancock Special Occasion – Smokey Robinson & The Miracles Strictly Personal - Captain Beefheart and his Magic Band Switched-On Bach – Walter Carlos Taj Mahal – Taj Mahal Le temps des fleurs – Dalida Tenderness Junction – The Fugs Texas in My Soul – Willie Nelson There Is – The Dells There Goes My Everything – Don Cherry Tighten Up – Archie Bell & The Drells Tiny Tim's 2nd Album – Tiny Tim Tomorrow - Tomorrow The Transformed Man - William Shatner Vigil - The Easybeats Wake Up...It's Tomorrow – Strawberry Alarm Clock Welcome to Trini Country – Trini Lopez Wine and Song – Sergio Franchi With Their New Face On - The Spencer Davis Group The World in a Sea Shell - Strawberry Alarm Clock "2 in 3" - Esther & Abi Ofarim "Ain't Got No, I Got Life"/"Do What You Gotta Do" – Nina Simone "Ain't No Way" - Aretha Franklin "Ain't Nothin' but a Houseparty" – The Showstoppers "Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing" – Marvin Gaye & Tammi Terrell "All Along the Watchtower" – The Jimi Hendrix Experience "Albatross" – Fleetwood Mac "Am I That Easy to Forget" – Engelbert Humperdinck "Anything" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "Baby Come Back" – The Equals "The Ballad of Bonnie and Clyde" – Georgie Fame "Bend Me, Shape Me" – The American Breed "Bend Me, Shape Me" – Amen Corner "Blue Eyes" – Don Partridge "Born to Be Wild" – Steppenwolf "Both Sides Now"- Judy Collins "Breakin' Down the Walls of Heartache" – The Bandwagon "Build Me Up Buttercup" – The Foundations "California Dreamin'" – Bobby Womack "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" – Andy Williams "Captain of Your Ship" – Reparata and the Delrons "Chain of Fools" – Aretha Franklin "Classical Gas" – Mason Williams "Cloud Nine" – The Temptations "Congratulations" – Cliff Richard "Cry Like a Baby" – The Box Tops "Dance to the Music" – Sly & the Family Stone "Darlin'" – The Beach Boys "A Day Without Love" – Love Affair "Days" – The Kinks "Delilah" – Tom Jones "Do It Again" – The Beach Boys "Do You Know the Way to San Jose" – Dionne Warwick "Du sollst nicht weinen" - Heintje "Eloise" – Barry Ryan "Everlasting Love" – Love Affair "Everything I Am" – Plastic Penny "Fire!" – The Crazy World of Arthur Brown "Fire Brigade" – The Move "Fool on the Hill" – Sergio Mendes & Brasil '66 "Going Up the Country" – Canned Heat "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" – Hugo Montenegro "Grazing in the Grass" – Hugh Masekela "Green Tambourine" – The Lemon Pipers "Gimme Little Sign" – Brenton Wood "Harper Valley P.T.A" – Jeannie C. Riley "Hello, Goodbye" – The Beatles "Hello, I Love You" – The Doors "Help Yourself" – Tom Jones "Helule Helule" – The Tremeloes "Hey Jude"/"Revolution" – The Beatles "High in the Sky – Amen Corner "Honey" – Bobby Goldsboro "The House That Jack Built" – Aretha Franklin "Hurdy Gurdy Man" – Donovan "Hush" – Deep Purple "The Horse" – Cliff Nobles & Co. "I Can Take or Leave Your Loving" - Herman's Hermits "I Close My Eyes and Count to Ten" – Dusty Springfield "I Don't Want Our Loving to Die" – The Herd "I Love You" – People! "Il est cinq heures, Paris s'éveille" - Jacques Dutronc "I Pretend" – Des O'Connor "I Wish It Would Rain" – The Temptations "I'll Love You Forever Today" – Cliff Richard "I'm a Tiger" – Lulu "I'm Gonna Make You Love Me" – Diana Ross & the Supremes and The Temptations "I'm the Urban Spaceman" – Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band "I've Gotta Be Me" – Sammy Davis, Jr. "I've Gotta Get a Message to You" – Bee Gees "Ice in the Sun" – Status Quo "If I Only Had Time" – John Rowles "In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida" – Iron Butterfly "Indian Rope Man"- Julie Driscoll, Brian Auger & The Trinity "Jennifer Juniper" – Donovan "Jesamine" – The Casuals "Journey to the Center of the Mind" – The Amboy Dukes "Judy in Disguise (With Glasses)" – John Fred & His Playboy Band "Jumpin' Jack Flash" – Rolling Stones "Just Dropped In (To See What Condition My Condition Was In)" – The First Edition "Keep On" – Bruce Channel "Keep the Ball Rollin'" - Al Hirt "Lady Madonna" – The Beatles "Lady Willpower" – Gary Puckett & The Union Gap "Lazy Sunday" – Small Faces "The Legend of Xanadu" – Dave Dee, Dozy, Beaky, Mick & Tich "Little Arrows" – Leapy Lee "Little Green Apples" – Roger Miller "Little Green Apples" – O. C. Smith "The Look of Love" – Sergio Mendes & Brasil '66 "Love Child" – Diana Ross & The Supremes "Love is Blue" – Paul Mauriat "Lovin' Things" – Marmalade "MacArthur Park" – Richard Harris "Magic Bus" – The Who "A Man Without Love" – Engelbert Humperdinck "Marianne" – Cliff Richard "Master Jack" - Four Jacks and a Jill "Mathilda" - Udo Jürgens "Me the Peaceful Heart" – Lulu "Midnight Confessions" – The Grass Roots "Mighty Quinn" – Manfred Mann "Monterey" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "Mony Mony" – Tommy James & the Shondells "Mrs. Robinson" – Simon & Garfunkel "My Little Lady" – The Tremeloes "My Name is Jack" – Manfred Mann "My Song" - Aretha Franklin "Need Your Love So Bad" – Fleetwood Mac "Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da" – The Marmalade "On the Road Again" – Canned Heat "Only One Woman" – The Marbles "Over You" – Gary Puckett & The Union Gap "Paradise Lost" – The Herd "Piece of my Heart" – Big Brother and the Holding Company "Pictures of Matchstick Men" – Status Quo "Race with the Devil" – The Gun "Rainbow Valley" – Love Affair "Reach out of the Darkness" - Friend & Lover "Rosie" – Don Partridge "Say It Loud" – James Brown "Scarborough Fair" – Sergio Mendes & Brasil '66 "Schlager Rendezvous 1" - Peter Alexander "See Saw" - Aretha Franklin "The Silent Sun" – Genesis "Simon Says" – 1910 Fruitgum Company "(Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay" – Otis Redding "Sky Pilot" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "Sleepy Joe" - Herman's Hermits "Some Velvet Morning"- Lee Hazlewood & Nancy Sinatra "Son of a Preacher Man" – Dusty Springfield "Son of Hickory Holler's Tramp" – O. C. Smith "Soulful Strut" – Young-Holt Unlimited "Spooky" – Classics IV "Step Inside Love" – Cilla Black "Stoned Soul Picnic" – The 5th Dimension "Suddenly You Love Me" – The Tremeloes "Summertime"- Big Brother & The Holding Company "Sunshine Girl" - Herman's Hermits "Sunshine of Your Love" – Cream "Suzie Q." – Creedence Clearwater Revival "Sweet Blindness" - The 5th Dimension "(Sweet Sweet Baby) Since You've Been Gone" – Aretha Franklin "This Guy's in Love With You" – Herb Alpert "This Wheel's on Fire" – Julie Driscoll, Brian Auger & The Trinity "Those Were The Days" – Mary Hopkin "Tighten Up" – Archie Bell & the Drells "Tiptoe Through the Tulips" – Tiny Tim "Valleri" – The Monkees "Valley Of The Dolls" – Dionne Warwick "The Weight" – The Band "What a Wonderful World" – Louis Armstrong, His Orchestra & Chorus "White Horses" – Jacky "White Houses" – Eric Burdon & The Animals "White Room" – Cream "A Winter's Tale" – Genesis "With a Little Help from My Friends" – Joe Cocker "Yesterday Has Gone" – Cupid's Inspiration "You Ain't Goin' Nowhere" – The Byrds "Young Girl" – The Union Gap featuring Gary Puckett "Yummy Yummy Yummy" – The Ohio Express "1,2,3, Red Light" w.m. Sal Trimachi and Bobbi Trimachi "1432 Franklin Pike Circle Hero" w.m. Bobby Russell "Abraham, Martin and John" w.m. Dick Holler "Les Bicyclettes de Belsize" w.m. Les Reed & Barry Mason "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film of the same name "Classical Gas" m. Mason Williams "Congratulations" w.m. Bill Martin and Phil Coulter "Dear World" w.m. Jerry Herman from the musical Dear World "Eli's Coming" w.m. Laura Nyro "The Fool on the Hill" w.m. John Lennon & Paul McCartney "For the Good Times" w.m. Kris Kristofferson "Galveston" w.m. Jimmy Webb "Heffalumps and Woozles" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day "Honey Pie" w.m. John Lennon and Paul McCartney "I'll Never Fall in Love Again" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach from the musical Promises, Promises "Indian Lake" w.m. Tony Romeo "Indian Reservation" w.m. John D. Loudermilk, first recorded by Don Fardon "Little Green Apples" w.m. Bobby Russell "Mac Arthur Park" w.m. Jimmy Webb "Mr. Bojangles" w.m. Jerry Jeff Walker "My Way" (French: "Comme d'habitude") w.m. Claude François & Jacques Revaux, Eng.: Paul Anka "The Night They Raided Minsky's" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse from the film The Night They Raided Minsky's "A Perfect Gentleman" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse Introduced by Jason Robards and Norman Wisdom in the film The Night They Raided Minsky's "Promises, Promises" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach from the musical Promises, Promises "Save The Country" w.m. Laura Nyro "Stand By Your Man" w.m. Billy Sherrill & Tammy Wynette "Stoned Soul Picnic" w.m. Laura Nyro "Sweet Blindness" w.m. Laura Nyro "Take Ten Terrific Girls" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse from the film The Night They Raided Minsky's "Ten Feet off the Ground w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film The One and Only, Genuine, Original Family Band "This Guy's In Love With You" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach "Wichita Lineman" w.m. Jimmy Webb "The Windmills of Your Mind" w. Alan Bergman & Marilyn Bergman m. Michel LeGrand from the film The Thomas Crown Affair "The Wonderful Thing About Tiggers" w.m. Richard M. Sherman & Robert B. Sherman from the film Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day "You Rat, You" w. Lee Adams m. Charles Strouse from the film The Night They Raided Minsky's Milton Babbitt – Relata II for orchestra Samuel Barber – Twelfth Night and To Be Sung on the Water, op. 42 Luciano Berio – O King Sinfonia Chemins III Questo vuol dire che for three female voices, small chorus, tape and other available resources Carlos Chávez – Pirámide (ballet) John Corigliano – Piano Concerto George Crumb – Songs, Drones, and Refrains of Death for baritone, electric guitar, electric double bass, amplified piano/electric harpsichord, and two percussionists Mario Davidovsky – Music for Solo Violin Peter Maxwell Davies – Stedman Caters Stedman Doubles (revised version) Fantasia on a Ground and 2 Pavans (after Purcell) Epistrophe for two pianos L’homme armé Edison Denisov – Osen′ (Autumn), for 13 solo voices Oda, pamyati Khe Gevara (Ode in Memory of Che Guevara) Romanticheskaya muzïka (Romantic Music) Cristóbal Halffter – Symposion Yes, Speak Out, Yes Roy Harris – Symphony no. 12 Concerto for Amplified Piano, Brass, Double Bass, and Percussion Sonata for Cello and Piano (revised version) Hans Werner Henze – Das Floß der Medusa Heinz Holliger – h for wind quintet Karel Husa - Music for Prague 1968 Ladislav Kupkovic – Souvenir (one of his few recorded works) Helmut Lachenmann – temA for flute, voice and cello György Ligeti – Zehn Stücke für Bläserquintett (Ten Pieces for Wind Quintet) Witold Lutosławski – Livre pour orchestre Bo Nilsson – Attraktionen, for string quartet Per Nørgård – Rejse ind i den gyldne skærm (Voyage into the Golden Screen) Roger Sessions – Symphony no. 8 Dmitri Shostakovich – String Quartet no. 12 in D major, op. 133 Sonata for Violin and Piano in D major, op. 134 Karlheinz Stockhausen – Aus den sieben Tagen Kurzwellen Stimmung Spiral John Tavener – The Whale (cantata) David Tudor & Lowell Cross – Reunion Charles Wuorinen – Flute Variations II String Trio Iannis Xenakis – Nomos Gamma for 98 musicians dispersed among the audience Benjamin Britten – The Prodigal Son (church parable) Carlos Chávez – Los visitantes (revision of Panfilo e Lauretta) Peter Maxwell Davies – Revelation and Fall Gian Carlo Menotti – Help, Help, The Globolinks! Ástor Piazzolla – María de Buenos Aires Cabaret (Kander and Ebb) – London production Canterbury Tales&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London production Dames at Sea&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Off-Broadway production opened at the Bouwerie Lane Theatre on December 20 and transferred to the Theatre de Lys on April 22, 1969 for a total run of 575 performances. The Dancing Years (Ivor Novello) – London revival Darling of the Day (w. E. Y. Harburg m. Jule Styne) Broadway production opened at the George Abbott Theatre on January 27 and ran for 31 performances.  Starred Patricia Routledge and Vincent Price George M!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production Golden Boy&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London production Golden Rainbow&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production Hair – Broadway (1,750 performances) and London (1,997 performances) productions House of Flowers&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;off-Broadway revival Lady, Be Good!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London revival Man of La Mancha&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London production Promises, Promises&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production (1,281 performances) The Happy Time – musical/comedy – 286 performances at the Broadway Theatre featuring Robert Goulet 1968 Tony Award winner for Best Actor in a Musical. Nominee 1968 Tony Award Best Musical. Zorba – after the movie (Zorba the Greek, 1964) and book (Nikos Kazantzakis, 1952).1969 Tony Award for Best Musical and numerous other nominations, 1969 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics (to Fred Ebb, the first year of that category) and three other nominations. 305 performances starting 11/16/68 at the Imperial Theatre, NY. (Revival 9/16/83 at the Broadway Theatre, NY, ran 362 performances with 1984 Theatre World Award to actor Robert Westenberg.) Aashirwad Bhagyamudra Les Bicyclettes de Belsize Chitty Chitty Bang Bang Finian's Rainbow Funny Girl Head - starring The Monkees and written by Jack Nicholson. The Jungle Book – animated feature film Monterey Pop The Night They Raided Minsky's – released December 22 starring Jason Robards and Britt Ekland Oliver! The One and Only, Genuine, Original Family Band Star! Yellow Submarine – animated feature film January 9 – Al Schnier, American rock guitarist January 11 – Tom Dumont, guitarist January 14 – LL Cool J, rapper January 19 - Ikuko Kawai, violinist January 27 Mike Patton (Faith No More) Deb Talan, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (The Weepies) Tricky, rapper January 28 Sarah McLachlan, Canadian singer DJ Muggs (Cypress Hill) February 1 – Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of Elvis Presley and Priscilla Presley February 4 – Marko Matvere, Estonian actor and singer February 5 – Chris Barron (Spin Doctors) February 7 – Sully Erna, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Godsmack and Meliah Rage) February 12 Gregory Charles, Canadian singer, dancer, pianist, and actor Chynna Phillips of Wilson Phillips, daughter of John & Michelle Phillips of the Mamas & the Papas February 22 – Brad Nowell (Sublime) (died 1996) February 25 – Evridiki, Cypriot singer March 4 – Patsy Kensit, British actress and singer March 8 – Shawn Mullins, American singer-songwriter March 11 – Lisa Loeb, American singer-songwriter March 15 Jon Schaffer (Iced Earth) Mark McGrath (Sugar Ray) Kahimi Karie, Japanese singer March 23 – Damon Albarn, British singer (Blur), (Gorillaz) March 26 James Iha (The Smashing Pumpkins) Kenny Chesney, country singer March 30 – Céline Dion, Canadian singer April 1 – Julia Boutros, Lebanese singer April 3 – Sebastian Bach (Skid Row) April 28 – Howard Donald, British singer and dancer (Take That) April 29 – Carnie Wilson of Wilson Phillips, daughter of Brian Wilson May 1 – D'arcy Wretzky (The Smashing Pumpkins) May 16 – Ralph Tresvant (New Edition) May 28 – Kylie Minogue, Australian actress and singer June 1 – Jason Donovan, Australian actor and singer June 6 – Alan Licht, American guitarist, composer, and journalist (Run On) June 10 – The D.O.C., African-American rapper June 12 – Bobby Sheehan (Blues Traveler) June 13 – Denise Pearson, British singer (Five Star) June 30 – Phil Anselmo (Pantera) July 4 – Jack Frost, American guitarist and songwriter (Seven Witches and The Bronx Casket Co.) July 5 – Nardwuar the Human Serviette, Canadian singer-songwriter and keyboard player (The Evaporators) July 10 - Claudia Pop, operatic soprano and theatre director July 16 - Olga Souza ("Corona"), singer July 19 – Robert Flynn, American musician July 22 – Rhys Ifans, actor and former vocalist with Super Furry Animals July 30 – Elvis Crespo, Puerto Rican singer August 1 – Dan Donegan, American rock musician (Disturbed) August 2 – John Stanier, American drummer (Helmet, Tomahawk, The Mark of Cain, and Battles) August 10 – Michael Bivins, New Edition, Bell Biv Devoe August 11 – Charlie Sexton, American guitarist, singer and songwriter August 12 – Paul Tucker, British musician (Lighthouse Family) August 25 – Stuart Murdoch, Scottish singer, songwriter and guitarist (Belle and Sebastian) September 10 – Big Daddy Kane, rapper September 11 – Kay Hanley (Letters To Cleo) September 12 – Ler LaLonde )Primus, Possessed) September 13 – Mike Davenport (The Ataris) September 25 – Catherine Zeta-Jones, actress, singer and dancer October 1 Kevin Griffin (Better Than Ezra) Sagol 59, Israeli rapper October 5 – Nana, rapper October 6 – Dominique A, singer-songwriter October 7 – Thom Yorke, British musician (Radiohead) October 8 – CL Smooth, African-American rapper October 11 – Jane Krakowski, American actress and singer October 12 – Hugh Jackman, actor and singer October 14 – Johnny Goudie, American musician October 17 – Ziggy Marley, reggae artist October 19 – Rodney Carrington, American stand-up comic and country musician October 22 – Shaggy, Jamaican-American reggae & dancehall singer November 9 – Nazzareno Carusi, Italian pianist November 10 – Steve Brookstein, British singer November 11 – David L Cook, Christian music singer and comedian November 14 - Ken Ford, jazz violinist November 15 Ol' Dirty Bastard, rapper (d. 2004) Jennifer Charles, American singer November 21 – Alex James, British bassist (Blur) November 25 – Tunde Baiyewu, British singer (Lighthouse Family) November 28 – Dawn Robinson, American singer (En Vogue) November 29 Martin Carr (Boo Radleys) Jonathan Knight, American singer (New Kids on the Block) December 2 – Nate Mendel (Foo Fighters) December 9 – Brian Bell (Weezer) December 16 – Lalah Hathaway, American singer and daughter of Donny Hathaway December 29 – Glen Phillips (Toad the Wet Sprocket) January 18 – Gribouille, French singer, 26 (alcohol and drug-related) February 5 – Luckey Roberts, ragtime composer and pianist, 80 February 13 Ildebrando Pizzetti, composer, 87 Portia White, singer, 56 February 15 – Little Walter, blues singer and harmonica player, 37 February 27 – Frankie Lymon, American singer, 25 (heroin overdose) February 28 – Doretta Morrow, dancer, 40 (cancer) March 6 – Iša Krejčí, composer and conductor, 63 March 10 – Blind Joe Reynolds, singer-songwriter March 16 – Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, composer, 72 April 15 – Borys Lyatoshynsky, composer, 73 April 25 – Harald Kreutzberg, dancer and choreographer, 65 May 15 - Florence Austral, operatic soprano, 76 May 19 – Coleman Hawkins, jazz musician, 64 May 24 – Bernard Rogers, composer, 75 May 26 – Little Willie John, blues artist, 30 (heart attack) June 2 - André Mathieu, pianist and composer, 39 June 8 – Bumble Bee Slim, blues musician, 63 June 14 – Karl-Birger Blomdahl, composer and conductor, 51 June 15 – Wes Montgomery, jazz guitarist, 45 (heart attack) June 26 – Ziggy Elman, US trumpet player, 54 July 21 – Ruth St. Denis, dancer, 89 July 27 – Lilian Harvey, actress and singer, 62 July 28 - Carl Ravazza, US violinist, vocalist and bandleader, 58 July 30 – Jón Leifs, composer, 69 August 5 – Luther Perkins, guitarist of The Tennessee Two, 40 (burns and smoke inhalation following a house fire) August 18 – Arthur Marshall, ragtime composer, 86 September 19 – Red Foley, country singer, 58 October 8 – Frank Skinner, film composer, 70 October 15 – Franz Reizenstein, pianist and composer, 57 October 20 – Bud Flanagan, music hall star, 72 October 30 – Pops Foster, jazz musician, 77 November 8 – Kokomo Arnold, blues musician, 67 November 9 – Jan Johansson, jazz pianist, 37 (car crash) November 11 – Jeanne Demessieux, organist, pianist and composer, 47 (embolism) December 1 – Nicolae Bretan, composer, 81 December 9 – Percy Greenbank, lyricist, 90 December 14 - Margarete Klose, operatic mezzo-soprano, 69 December 19 – Tiberiu Brediceanu, composer December 31 – Sabin Drăgoi, composer, 91 date unknown Juan F. Acosta, composer and music teacher Lucille Dompierre, pianist and arranger Billy Pigg, bagpiper Vincenzo Scaramuzza, pianist Grammy Awards of 1968 Eurovision Song Contest 1968
