   List of notable events in music that took place in the year 1970. In 1970, 4,000 albums and 5,700 singles were released in the US.Solid gold: the popular record industry | R. Serge Denisoff   The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1970. Day Album Artist Notes 1 Big Band Sound Jo Stafford Compilation On the Boards Taste Stone the Crows Stone the Crows 3 The Madcap Laughs Syd Barrett 5 Wings Upon Your Horns Loretta Lynn 7 Tony Sings the Great Hits of Today! Tony Bennett 8 That's the Way Love Is Marvin Gaye 9 Magic Christian Music Badfinger UK 15 Back in the USA MC5 A Brand New Me Dusty Springfield This Girl's in Love with You Aretha Franklin 19 John B. Sebastian John Sebastian Album recorded autumn 1968 23 A Song for Me Family 25 John Phillips (John, the Wolf King of L.A.) John Phillips 26 Bridge over Troubled Water Simon & Garfunkel Chicago Chicago aka Chicago II - American Woman The Guess Who Argent Argent Barbra Streisand's Greatest Hits Barbra Streisand Compilation Hello, I'm Johnny Cash Johnny Cash One Day at a Time Joan Baez Try a Little Kindness Glen Campbell Day Album Artist Notes 9 Burnt Weeny Sandwich The Mothers of Invention Morrison Hotel The Doors Zabriskie Point Various Artists Soundtrack 13 Black Sabbath Black Sabbath UK; released June 1970 in US 24 Funkadelic Funkadelic 26 Hey Jude The Beatles Compilation; aka The Beatles Again 28 Moondance Van Morrison - Atomic Roooster Atomic Rooster The Great Songs of Roy Orbison Roy Orbison Compilation The Least We Can Do Is Wave to Each Other Van der Graaf Generator Lord Sutch and Heavy Friends Screaming Lord Sutch Nilsson Sings Newman Harry Nilsson Randy Newman compositions Shazam The Move Sweet Baby James James Taylor Uncle Charlie & His Dog Teddy Nitty Gritty Dirt Band Day Album Artist Notes 6 Lie: The Love and Terror Cult Charles Manson recorded 1967–'68 Psychedelic Shack The Temptations 7 Climbing! Mountain 11 Déjà Vu Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young 13 A Beard of Stars Tyrannosaurus Rex Egg Egg 23 Leon Russell Leon Russell 25 Band of Gypsys Jimi Hendrix Live Vintage Violence John Cale 27 Sentimental Journey Ringo Starr 30 Ginger Baker's Air Force Ginger Baker's Air Force Live 31 It Ain't Easy Three Dog Night - Bloodrock Bloodrock Easy Action Alice Cooper First Step Faces Ladies of the Canyon Joni Mitchell Marriage on the Rocks/Rock Bottom The Amboy Dukes On Tour with Eric Clapton Delaney & Bonnie Live Silk Purse Linda Ronstadt Tom Rush Tom Rush Watertown Frank Sinatra Day Album Artist Notes 9 Remedies Dr. John 10 Elton John Elton John 13 Farewell Diana Ross & The Supremes Live 17 Brinsley Schwarz Brinsley Schwarz Cricklewood Green Ten Years After McCartney Paul McCartney 20 Benefit Jethro Tull 22 Live Iron Butterfly Live 24 Mona Bone Jakon Cat Stevens 26 Right On The Supremes 28 What Love Has...Joined Together Smokey Robinson & the Miracles - 12 Songs Randy Newman Bitches Brew Miles Davis Burrito Deluxe The Flying Burrito Brothers Candles in the Rain Melanie Cucumber Castle Bee Gees Eric Burdon Declares "War" Eric Burdon & War Getting to This Blodwyn Pig The Grass Is Greener Colosseum US only I Looked Up Incredible String Band Live Cream Cream Live 1968 + 1 studio outtake McLemore Avenue Booker T. & the M.G.s instrumental covers LP of Abbey Road My Kind of Jazz Ray Charles Oh Happy Day Glen Campbell Open Blues Image Portrait The 5th Dimension Sit Down Young Stranger Gordon Lightfoot Soul on Top James Brown Zero She Flies Al Stewart Day Album Artist Notes 6 Poco Poco 8 ABC The Jackson 5 Let It Be The Beatles 11 Woodstock: Music from the Original Soundtrack and More Various Artists Soundtrack 15 In the Wake of Poseidon King Crimson 16 Live at Leeds The Who Live - CJ Fish Country Joe and the Fish Hot Tuna Hot Tuna Live Quatermass Quatermass Thank Christ for the Bomb The Groundhogs Will You Visit Me on Sunday? George Jones The World of Johnny Cash Johnny Cash Writer Carole King Day Album Artist Notes 3 Deep Purple in Rock Deep Purple 5 Barclay James Harvest Barclay James Harvest Home Procol Harum 6 Third Soft Machine 8 Self Portrait Bob Dylan 13 ... Very 'Eavy ... Very 'Umble Uriah Heep 14 Workingman's Dead Grateful Dead 15 Closer to Home Grand Funk Railroad 19 Diana Ross Diana Ross From Home to Home Fairfield Parlour 26 Fire and Water Free - Alone Together Dave Mason Blood, Sweat & Tears 3 Blood, Sweat & Tears Changes The Monkees Ecology Rare Earth Electronic Meditation Tangerine Dream Fotheringay Fotheringay Gasoline Alley Rod Stewart Hark! The Village Wait Steeleye Span Memphis Petula Clark Norwood Glen Campbell Soundtrack On Stage Elvis Presley Live Parachute The Pretty Things Runt Runt / Todd Rundgren Struttin' The Meters Vehicle Ides of March Day Album Artist Notes 1 Cactus Cactus 7 Fun House The Stooges Osmium Parliament 14 Supertramp Supertramp 20 Absolutely Live The Doors Live 24 Time and a Word Yes 25 Cosmo's Factory Creedence Clearwater Revival - The Delfonics The Delfonics Free Your Mind... and Your Ass Will Follow Funkadelic Full House Fairport Convention Humble Pie Humble Pie James Gang Rides Again James Gang John Barleycorn Must Die Traffic The Last Puff Spooky Tooth On the Waters Bread Day Album Artist Notes 3 Future Blues Canned Heat 7 A Question of Balance The Moody Blues Signed, Sealed & Delivered Stevie Wonder 10 Weasels Ripped My Flesh The Mothers of Invention 12 Chapter Two Roberta Flack 13 Metamorphosis Iron Butterfly 14 Hawkwind Hawkwind 17 Stage Fright The Band 19 Close to You Carpenters 24 Spirit in the Dark Aretha Franklin 31 Sunflower The Beach Boys - Come Saturday Morning The Sandpipers Easy Does It Al Kooper Eric Clapton Eric Clapton Hank Williams the Roy Orbison Way Roy Orbison Just for Love Quicksilver Messenger Service Mad Dogs & Englishmen Joe Cocker Live Ma Kelly's Greasy Spoon Status Quo Mongrel The Bob Seger System The Rill Thing Little Richard Something Shirley Bassey Whales & Nightingales Judy Collins Day Album Artist Notes 4 Get Yer Ya-Ya's Out! The Rolling Stones in Concert The Rolling Stones Live If I Could Do It All Over Again, I'd Do It All Over You Caravan 8 Third Album The Jackson 5 14 Untitled The Byrds 18 Kiln House Fleetwood Mac Paranoid Black Sabbath UK; released January 1971 in US 19 After the Gold Rush Neil Young Performance Various Artists Soundtrack 23 Idlewild South The Allman Brothers Band 25 Beaucoups of Blues Ringo Starr 30 A Pocket Full of Miracles The Miracles - Abraxas Santana Curtis Curtis Mayfield Death Walks Behind You Atomic Rooster Down Home Seals and Crofts The Glen Campbell Goodtime Album Glen Campbell If If Jesus Christ Superstar by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice Johnny Winter And Johnny Winter Leftover Wine Melanie Mad Shadows Mott the Hoople The Magnificent 7 The Supremes & The Four Tops New Feelin' Liza Minnelli The Original Human Being Blue Cheer Scorpio's Dance Shocking Blue Day Album Artist Notes 2 Atom Heart Mother Pink Floyd 5 Led Zeppelin III Led Zeppelin 15 Jackson 5 Christmas Album The Jackson 5 Christmas 19 New Morning Bob Dylan Shades of Rock The Shadows 22 Miles Davis at Fillmore Miles Davis Live 23 Chunga's Revenge Frank Zappa Trespass Genesis 30 Tumbleweed Connection Elton John - Be a Brother Big Brother and the Holding Company Bloodrock 2 Bloodrock The First Ten Years Joan Baez Compilation Indianola Mississippi Seeds B.B. King The Johnny Cash Show Johnny Cash Live Looking In Savoy Brown New Ways but Love Stays The Supremes Potlatch Redbone Share the Land The Guess Who Shooting at the Moon Kevin Ayers Skid Skid Row Tapestry Don McLean Tony Bennett's Something Tony Bennett U Incredible String Band UFO 1 UFO Vintage Dead Grateful Dead Live Warhorse Warhorse Washington County Arlo Guthrie Woodsmoke and Oranges Paul Siebel Words and Music Jimmy Webb Day Album Artist Notes 1 American Beauty Grateful Dead Bryter Layter Nick Drake 4 The Man Who Sold The World David Bowie 9 No Dice Badfinger US 11 That's the Way It Is Elvis Presley Soundtrack 14 Barrett Syd Barrett Osmonds The Osmonds 15 His Band and the Street Choir Van Morrison Loaded The Velvet Underground 16 The J. Geils Band The J. Geils Band Live Album Grand Funk Railroad Live 18 Naturally Three Dog Night 20 Despite It All Brinsley Schwarz Emerson Lake & Palmer Emerson, Lake & Palmer 21 Greatest Hits Sly and the Family Stone Compilation 23 Stephen Stills Stephen Stills Tea for the Tillerman Cat Stevens 25 Christmas and the Beads of Sweat Laura Nyro 27 All Things Must Pass George Harrison Gentle Giant Gentle Giant Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround, Part One The Kinks 28 Play It Loud Slade 30 13 The Doors Compilation - 2 Years On Bee Gees Air Conditioning Curved Air Almost in Love Elvis Presley Anyway Family Blows Against the Empire Paul Kantner & Jefferson Starship Confessions of the Mind The Hollies Cruel Sister Pentangle Come to My Garden Minnie Riperton I Walk the Line Johnny Cash Soundtrack The Isaac Hayes Movement Isaac Hayes Kraftwerk Kraftwerk Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs Derek and the Dominoes Loaded The Velvet Underground Medusa Trapeze Number 5 Steve Miller Band Osmonds The Osmonds Scott Joplin: Piano Rags Joshua Rifkin Starsailor Tim Buckley Steppenwolf 7 Steppenwolf ...To Be Continued Isaac Hayes Twelve Dreams of Dr. Sardonicus Spirit Warhorse Warhorse The Worst of Jefferson Airplane Jefferson Airplane Compilation Day Album Artist Notes 4 The End of an Ear Robert Wyatt Wishbone Ash Wishbone Ash 7 Pendulum Creedence Clearwater Revival 10 Ginger Baker's Air Force 2 Ginger Baker's Air Force 11 John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band John Lennon and Plastic Ono Band Lizard King Crimson Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band Yoko Ono and Plastic Ono Band 18 T. Rex T. Rex - The Black-Man's Burdon Eric Burdon and War Daughter of Time Colosseum Desertshore Nico The End of the Game Peter Green False Start Love H to He, Who Am the Only One Van der Graaf Generator Highway Free I Like Your Lovin' (Do You Like Mine?) The Chi-Lites if 2 If Kingdom Come Sir Lord Baltimore Lick My Decals Off, Baby Captain Beefheart & the Magic Band Looking On The Move Ry Cooder Ry Cooder Soul Rebels The Wailers 'Til the Band Comes In Scott Walker Watt Ten Years After What About Me Quicksilver Messenger Service # Artist Title Year Country Chart Entries 1 The Beatles Let It Be 1970 US BB 1 – Mar 1970, Canada 1 – Mar 1970, Netherlands 1 – Mar 1970, Switzerland 1 – Mar 1970, Norway 1 – Mar 1970, Australia 1 of 1970, Australia 1 for 8 weeks Sep 1970, Australia Goset 1 – Apr 1970, UK 2 – Mar 1970, Germany 2 – Apr 1970, DDD 3 of 1970, Italy 8 of 1970, US CashBox 9 of 1970, RYM 9 of 1970, France 10 – Mar 1970, Virgin 11, WXPN 12, Japan 14 of all time (international songs), Europe 15 of the 1970s, US BB 20 of 1970, Rolling Stone 20, POP 20 of 1970, OzNet 25, Poland 28 – Dec 2003, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1970, Scrobulate 34 of classic rock, Belgium 77 of all time, Germany 149 of the 1970s, TheQ 318, Acclaimed 342 2 Mungo Jerry In the Summertime 1970 UK 1 – Jun 1970, Netherlands 1 – Jun 1970, Switzerland 1 – Jun 1970, Norway 1 – Jul 1970, Germany 1 – Jul 1970, Éire 1 – Jul 1970, Australia 1 for 1 weeks Feb 1971, Australia Goset 1 – Aug 1970, South Africa 2 of 1970, US BB 3 – Jul 1970, Canada 4 – Jul 1970, Italy 5 of 1970, France 7 – Aug 1970, Australia 16 of 1970, US BB 26 of 1970, POP 26 of 1970, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1970, US CashBox 35 of 1970, Germany 45 of the 1970s, DDD 47 of 1970, RYM 61 of 1970, Acclaimed 2195 3 Simon & Garfunkel Bridge over Troubled Water 1970 UK 1 – Feb 1970, US BB 1 – Feb 1970, Canada 1 – Feb 1970, Australia Goset 1 – Mar 1970, Grammy in 1970, DDD 2 of 1970, Germany 4 – Apr 1970, US CashBox 5 of 1970, Netherlands 5 – Feb 1970, Switzerland 5 – Mar 1970, Australia 5 of 1970, Norway 7 – Apr 1970, US BB 9 of 1970, France 10 – Apr 1970, Europe 18 of the 1970s, RYM 19 of 1970, 28 in 2FM list, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1970, POP 41 of 1970, WXPN 41, Rolling Stone 47, Acclaimed 64, Scrobulate 66 of oldies, Belgium 162 of all time, Germany 239 of the 1970s 4 Shocking Blue Venus 1970 US BB 1 – Dec 1969, Canada 1 – Dec 1969, France 1 – Apr 1970, Switzerland 1 – Oct 1969, Australia 1 for 2 weeks Aug 1970, Australia Goset 1 – Jan 1970, Norway 2 – Feb 1970, Germany 2 – Jan 1970, Netherlands 3 – Jul 1969, Italy 3 of 1970, US CashBox 6 of 1970, South Africa 7 of 1970, UK 8 – Jan 1970, Japan 15 of all time (international songs), POP 17 of 1970, Australia 19 of 1970, Europe 20 of the 1960s, US BB 21 of 1970, RYM 26 of 1969, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1969, DDD 34 of 1969, Germany 261 of the 1960s 5 Led Zeppelin Whole Lotta Love 1970 France 1 – Jan 1970, Germany 1 – Mar 1970, Australia 1 for 2 weeks Sep 1970, Australia Goset 1 – Feb 1970, TheQ 1, DDD 1 of 1969, Canada 2 – Dec 1969, US BB 4 – Dec 1969, Netherlands 4 – Dec 1969, Switzerland 5 – Mar 1970, RYM 8 of 1969, Australia 11 of 1970, Europe 11 of the 1960s, Scrobulate 11 of classic rock, US BB 38 of 1970, POP 38 of 1970, Belgium 48 of all time, US CashBox 54 of 1970, Poland 74 of all time, Rolling Stone 75, Acclaimed 85, Germany 120 of the 1970s, WXPN 400 January 3 – Pink Floyd frontman Syd Barrett releases his first solo album The Madcap Laughs. January 4 – The Who drummer Keith Moon fatally runs over his chauffeur with his Bentley trying to escape a mob outside a pub. The death is later ruled an accident. January 7 – Max Yasgur, owner of the New York farm where the 1969 Woodstock Festival was held, is sued for $35,000 in property damages by neighboring farmers. January 9 - Led Zeppelin performs at The Royal Albert Hall. John Bonham plays a fifteen minutes rendition of Moby Dick. January 14 – Diana Ross and the Supremes perform for the last time together at the Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas. January 16 – John Lennon's London art gallery exhibit of lithographs, Bag One, is shut down by Scotland Yard for displaying "erotic lithographs". January 24 – James "Shep" Sheppard, of The Heartbeats and Shep and the Limelites, is found murdered in his car on the Long Island Expressway. January 26 – Simon & Garfunkel release their final album together, Bridge Over Troubled Water. The title track and album stay #1 on the Billboard charts for six weeks and go on to win a record six Grammys at the 13th Grammy Awards, including "Record of the Year", "Song of the Year", and "Album of the Year." In Britain it tops the album chart at regular intervals over the next two years, and becomes the best-selling album in Britain during the 1970s. January 27 - Miles Davis makes the final recordings for his experimental album Circle in the Round, featuring sitar and tabla. January 28 – The newly formed Band of Gypsies breaks up when guitarist Jimi Hendrix walks out after playing just two songs, telling the audience "I'm sorry we just can't get it together". February 11 – The film The Magic Christian, starring Peter Sellers and Ringo Starr, is premiered in New York City. The film's soundtrack album, including Badfinger's "Come and Get It" (written and produced by Paul McCartney), is released on Apple Records. February 13 – English band Black Sabbath release their self titled debut album in the U.K., credited as the first major album in the heavy metal genre. February 14 – The Who records Live At Leeds in Yorkshire, England. The Grateful Dead plays an equally historic concert on the same date at the Fillmore East, New York City. February 17 – Joni Mitchell announces that she is retiring from live performances, following her show at London's Royal Albert Hall. She would be back performing concerts within a year. February 23 – Ringo Starr appears on the television show Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In. February 27 – Jefferson Airplane is fined $1,000 for using profanity during a concert in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. February 28 – Led Zeppelin perform in Copenhagen under the pseudonym The Nobs, to avoid a threatened lawsuit by Count Eva von Zeppelin, descendant of airship designer Ferdinand von Zeppelin. March 4 – Janis Joplin is fined $200 for using obscene language during a concert performance in Tampa, Florida. March 6 – Cult leader and suspected murderer Charles Manson releases an album titled Lie: The Love and Terror Cult to help finance his defense. March 7 – Mountain, one of the many bands credited as having influence in the development of heavy metal music, releases Climbing!, their debut album. March 15 – West German pavilion at Expo '70 in Osaka features 5½ hours' daily live performances of the music of Karlheinz Stockhausen (to September 13). March 19 – David Bowie marries model Angela Barnett. March 21 – In Amsterdam, Dana wins the 15th annual Eurovision Song Contest for Ireland with the song "All Kinds of Everything". She is elected to the European Parliament some 29 years later. March 25 – José José gives a masterful performance of the song "El Triste" at the "Latin Song Festival II", predecessor of the OTI Festival. March 26 – Peter Yarrow (of Peter, Paul and Mary) pleads guilty to "taking immoral liberties" with a 14-year-old girl in Washington, D.C., on August 31, 1969. April 2 – The London Magistrate's Court hears arguments on John Lennon's indecency summons for his exhibition of erotic lithographs during his art exhibit on January 16. April 3 – Minneapolis nightclub the Depot opens, eventually renamed to First Avenue. April 10 – Paul McCartney publicly announces the break-up of The Beatles. April 14 - Michael Nesmith announces he has left The Monkees. April 17 – Johnny Cash performs at the White House at the invitation of President Richard M. Nixon. April 20 – Paul McCartney's first solo album, McCartney, is released. April 24 – Grace Slick of Jefferson Airplane is invited to a tea party at the White House by Tricia Nixon, daughter of U.S. President Richard Nixon. Slick arrives at the party with Abbie Hoffman, who is on trial for conspiring to riot at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. The pair planned to spike Nixon's tea cup with a heavy dose of LSD. Slick is recognized (although Hoffman is not) and told to leave because she is on the FBI list. May 4 – Charles Wuorinen, 32, becomes the youngest composer ever to win the Pulitzer Prize for Music. May 8 – The Beatles' last LP, Let It Be, is released. May 16 Randy Bachman leaves the Guess Who to start up Brave Belt. The Who release Live at Leeds which is their first live album. Since its initial reception, Live at Leeds has been cited by several music critics as the best live rock recording of all time. May 20 – The Beatles' film Let It Be premières in London and Liverpool.  None of the four band members are in attendance at either screening. May 23–24 – Grateful Dead make their first British appearance at Hollywood Festival, Newcastle-under-Lyme, on a bill also featuring Black Sabbath, Free, and José Feliciano. Everyone is completely upstaged by the previously unknown Mungo Jerry, whose debut single "In the Summertime" becomes the best-selling hit of the year. June - Australian composer Peter Sculthorpe receives the MBE in the Queen's Birthday Honours. June 7 - The Who play two shows of Tommy, at the New York Metropolitan Opera House. June 13 "The Long and Winding Road" becomes the Beatles' last U.S. Number 1 song, though it is never released as a single in Britain.The Long And Winding Road The Stooges play at the Cincinnati Pop Festival. July 4 – The music countdown show American Top 40 debuts. July 17 – The Guess Who perform at the White House for President Nixon and his guest The Prince of Wales. At Pat Nixon's request, they do not play their breakthrough hit "American Woman" due to the song's supposed anti-American lyrics. July 26 – Guitarist Jimi Hendrix plays at his hometown of Seattle at Sicks Stadium where, under the influence of drugs, he starts verbally abusing members of the audience. August 3 – Janis Joplin makes her final TV appearance, on the Dick Cavett Show. August 26–30 – The Isle of Wight Festival 1970 takes place on East Afton Farm off the coast of England. Some 600,000 people attend the largest rock festival of all time. Artists include The Moody Blues, Jimi Hendrix, The Who, The Doors, Chicago, Oliver, Leonard Cohen, Miles Davis, Richie Havens, John Sebastian, Joan Baez, Ten Years After, Emerson, Lake & Palmer and Jethro Tull. August 30 – The Rolling Stones open their European tour in Malmö, Sweden. September 6 – During his final European tour, guitarist Jimi Hendrix is greeted by booing and jeering by German fans as a result of his late appearance on stage and incoherent stage performance. Bassist Billy Cox quits the tour and returns to the United States. September 17 – Jimi Hendrix makes his last appearance, with Eric Burdon & War jamming at Ronnie Scotts Club in London. Hendrix, aged 27, dies the following day from a barbiturate overdose at his London hotel. October 4 – Janis Joplin is found dead in her bedroom. She died from a heroin overdose, at the age of 27. October 10 – Newly independent Fiji adopts God Bless Fiji as its national anthem. October 30 – Jim Morrison of The Doors, found guilty of indecent exposure and profanity because of his behavior during a March 1, 1969 concert, is sentenced to eight months of hard labor and a $500 fine.Jim Morrison bares all | Jim Morrison | Encore | Music | Entertainment Weekly November 12 - After Yehudi Menuhin accepts honorary citizenship from Switzerland, he receives a letter from the United States State Department telling him that both he and his son will lose their US citizenship as a result."Citizenship in peril, US advises Menuhin", Milwaukee Journal, December 7, 1970. Accessed 8 August 2014 November 23 – The Electric Factory concert venue in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania' closes its doors. December 8 – John Lennon conducts a lengthy and intensely candid interview with Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone magazine. He discusses his new solo album and the influence of primal therapy on its creation, as well as his personal traumas dating back to childhood. He also makes many revelations about his time in The Beatles, including his account of the group's breakup. December 12 - The Doors play their final concert with singer Jim Morrison. After the concert The Doors decide that they will not play live anymore due to Morrisons unpredictable live persona. December 31 The Beatles officially and finally split up after 10 years. Dalida, still unable to cut a UK record deal, leaves Barclay Records for Orlando Records. Derek Bailey and Evan Parker found Incus Records, specialising in releasing free improvised music and said to be the first independent artist-owned record label. Miles Davis' Bitches Brew is widely considered the first successful full-fledged fusion of rock and roll and jazz, as well as being one of Davis's best-known albums. See  The Beatles break up permanently. Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band split, with reunions in 1972, 1988, and 2006. Simon & Garfunkel – both members of the duo go on to solo careers, although they have reunited and performed together numerous times since breaking up. The Turtles (reform in 1983) See also  4 Compositions for Sextet – Tony Oxley Accept – Chicken Shack Again - Oliver Andy Williams' Greatest Hits - Andy Williams The Andy Williams Show - Andy Williams Back Home – Chuck Berry The Big O – Roy Orbison Black Gold - Nina Simone Canto libre – Víctor Jara Copperfields – The Dillards Cowboy in Sweden – Lee Hazlewood Down to Earth – Jimmy Buffett El Triste - José José Emitt Rhodes - Emitt Rhodes Entrance - Edgar Winter Flat Baroque and Berserk – Roy Harper Fools – Soundtrack-Kenny Rogers and The First Edition Focus Plays Focus – Focus Good-byes and Butterflies – Five Man Electrical Band Gula Matari – Quincy Jones Honey, Wheat and Laughter – Anne Murray In Concert at the Troubadour, 1969 - Ricky Nelson Intensified – Desmond Dekker & the Aces Just Another Diamond Day – Vashti Bunyan Klopfzeichen – Kluster Kristofferson - Kris Kristofferson Legal – Gal Costa Lie Back and Enjoy It – Juicy Lucy Loretta Lynn Writes 'Em & Sings 'Em - Loretta Lynn Loudon Wainwright III – Loudon Wainwright III Lucifer's Friend – Lucifer's Friend Open Road - Donovan The Partridge Family Album - The Partridge Family Perry Como in Person at the International Hotel, Las Vegas – Perry Como Raindrops Keep Fallin' on My Head - Andy Williams Redbone – Redbone Revolution – The Dubliners Rick Sings Nelson – Ricky Nelson Right On - Wilson Pickett Rock Festival - The Youngbloods Rose Garden – Lynn Anderson Seatrain – Seatrain Sex Machine - James Brown Small Talk at 125th and Lenox – Gil Scott-Heron – Live Snowbird - Anne Murray Something's Burning – Kenny Rogers and The First Edition Stonehenge – Richie Havens Sugarloaf – Sugarloaf Tap Root Manuscript - Neil Diamond Tell It All Brother – Kenny Rogers and The First Edition Things Ain't What They Used to Be (And You Better Believe It) – Ella Fitzgerald Tide – Antonio Carlos Jobim Tony Joe – Tony Joe White Trapeze – Trapeze Travelin' – Tommy James and the Shondells A Tribute to the Best Damn Fiddle Player in the World (or, My Salute to Bob Wills) – Merle Haggard USA Union - John Mayall Warpig – Warpig We Went to Different Schools Together - the Jaggerz Yeti – Amon Düül II "ABC" – The Jackson 5 "After Midnight" – Eric Clapton "Ain't It Funky Now (Part 1)" – James Brown "Ain't No Mountain High Enough" – Diana Ross "Airport Love Theme (Gwen & Vern)" – Vincent Bell & Orchestra "All I Have to Do Is Dream" – Bobbie Gentry & Glen Campbell "All Kinds of Everything" – Dana (Won the Eurovision song contest) "All Right Now" – Free "Always Something There to Remind Me" – R. B. Greaves "Amazing Grace" – Judy Collins "American Woman" – The Guess Who "Amos Moses" – Jerry Reed "Are You Ready?" – Pacific Gas & Electric "Arizona" – Mark Lindsay "As the Years Go By" – Mashmakhan "Baby Hold On" – The Grass Roots "Ball of Confusion (That's What the World Is Today)" – The Temptations "Band of Gold" – Freda Payne "Be My Baby" – Andy Kim "Beaucoups of Blues" – Ringo Starr "The Bells" – The Originals "Betty" – The Commodores (Not from Tuskegee, but a white quintet from Chatsworth, California) "Big Yellow Taxi" – Joni Mitchell "Black Magic Woman" – Santana "Black Night" – Deep Purple "(Blame It) On The Pony Express" – Johnny Johnson and the Bandwagon "Blowing Away" – The 5th Dimension "Border Song (Holy Moses)" – Aretha Franklin "Born to Wander" – Rare Earth "The Boxer" – Simon & Garfunkel "Bridge over Troubled Water" – Simon & Garfunkel "Brontosaurus" – The Move "Brother Rapp (Parts 1 & 2)" – James Brown "Call Me" – Aretha Franklin "Candida" – Tony Orlando and Dawn "Can't Help Falling in Love" – Andy Williams "Cecilia" – Simon & Garfunkel "Celebrate" – Three Dog Night "Check Out Your Mind" – The Impressions "Chestnut Mare" – The Byrds "(They Long to Be) Close to You" – The Carpenters "I'm Your Captain (Closer to Home)" – Grand Funk Railroad "Come And Get It" – Badfinger "Come Running" – Van Morrison "Come Saturday Morning" – The Sandpipers "Cottonfields" – The Beach Boys "Cracklin' Rosie" – Neil Diamond "Cry Me A River" – Joe Cocker "Cupid" – Johnny Nash "Daughter of Darkness" – Tom Jones "Deeper and Deeper" – Freda Payne "Didn't I (Blow Your Mind This Time)" – The Delfonics "Do It" – Neil Diamond "Do the Funky Chicken" – Rufus Thomas "Do What You Wanna Do" – Five Flights Up "Do You See My Love (for You Growing)" – Jr. Walker & the All-Stars "Does Anybody Really Know What Time It Is" – Chicago "Domino" – Van Morrison "Don't Play That Song (You Lied)" – Aretha Franklin "Easy Come, Easy Go" – Bobby Sherman "El Condor Pasa" – Simon & Garfunkel "Eli's Coming" – Three Dog Night "Engine Number 9" – Wilson Pickett "Everybody Get Together" – The Dave Clark Five "Everybody's Got the Right to Love" – The Supremes "Everybody's Out of Town" – B. J. Thomas "Everything Is Beautiful" – Ray Stevens "Everything's Tuesday" – Chairmen of the Board "Evil Ways" – Santana "Express Yourself" – Charles Wright & the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band "Farewell is a Lonely Sound" – Jimmy Ruffin "Fire and Rain" – James Taylor "For the Good Times" – Ray Price "For the Love of Him" – Bobbi Martin "Friends" – Arrival "Get Ready" – Rare Earth "Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine" – James Brown "Gimme Dat Ding" – The Pipkins "The Girls' Song" - The 5th Dimension "Give Me Just a Little More Time" – Chairmen of the Board "God, Love and Rock & Roll" – Teegarden & Van Winkle "Goodbye Sam, Hello Samantha" – Cliff Richard "Gotta Hold on to This Feeling" – Jr. Walker & the All Stars "Govinda" – Radha Krishna Temple "Green-Eyed Lady" – Sugarloaf "The Green Manalishi (With the Two-Prong Crown)" – Fleetwood Mac "Groovin' with Mr. Bloe" – Mr. Bloe "Groovy Situation" – Gene Chandler "Gypsy Woman" – Brian Hyland "Hand Me Down World" – The Guess Who "He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother" – Neil Diamond "He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother" – The Hollies "Heaven Help Us All" – Stevie Wonder "Heed the Call" – Kenny Rogers & the First Edition "Hey Lawdy Mama" – Steppenwolf "Hey There Lonely Girl" – Eddie Holman "Hey, Mister Sun" – Bobby Sherman "Hi-De-Ho" – Blood, Sweat & Tears "Hitchin' a Ride" – Vanity Fare "Holly Holy" – Neil Diamond "Home Lovin' Man" – Andy Williams "Honey Come Back" – Glen Campbell "House of the Rising Sun" – Frijid Pink "I (Who Have Nothing)" – Tom Jones "I Ain't Got Time Anymore" – Cliff Richard "I Am Somebody (Part 2)" – Johnnie Taylor "I Can't Tell The Bottom From The Top" – The Hollies "I Don't Believe In If Anymore" – Roger Whittaker "I Hear You Knocking" – Dave Edmunds "I Just Can't Help Believing" – B. J. Thomas "I'm Not My Brother's Keeper" – The Flaming Ember "I Really Don't Want to Know" – Elvis Presley "I Think I Love You" – The Partridge Family "I Want You Back" – The Jackson 5 "I Will Survive" – Arrival "If I Were Your Woman" – Gladys Knight & the Pips "If You Could Read My Mind" – Gordon Lightfoot "(If You Let Me Make Love to You Then) Why Can't I Touch You?" – Ronnie Dyson "I'll Be There" – The Jackson 5 "I'll Never Fall in Love Again" – Dionne Warwick "I'll Say Forever My Love" – Jimmy Ruffin "I'm A Man" – Chicago "I'm Not My Brother's Keeper" – The Flaming Ember "Immigrant Song" – Led Zeppelin "In the Summertime" – Mungo Jerry "Indiana Wants Me" – R. Dean Taylor "Instant Karma!" – John Lennon, Yoko Ono with the Plastic Ono Band "It Don't Matter to Me" – Bread "It's a New Day (Parts 1 & 2)" – James Brown "It's a Shame" – The Spinners "It's All in the Game" – Four Tops "It's Impossible" – Perry Como "It's Only Make Believe" – Glen Campbell "It's So Easy" - Andy Williams "I've Lost You" – Elvis Presley "(I Know) I'm Losing You" – Rare Earth "You've Got Me Dangling on a String" – Chairmen of the Board "5-10-15-20 (25–30 Years of Love)" – The Presidents "Jam Up and Jelly Tight" – Tommy Roe "Jennifer Tomkins" – Street People "Jingle Jangle" – The Archies "Joanne" – Michael Nesmith & The First National Band "Joy of Living" – Cliff & Hank "Julie, Do Ya Love Me" – Bobby Sherman "Kentucky Rain" – Elvis Presley "Knock Knock, Who's There?" – Mary Hopkin "Knock Three Times" – Tony Orlando and Dawn "Lady Barbara" - Herman's Hermits "Lady D'Arbanville" – Cat Stevens (all other versions were dubbed) "Lay A Little Lovin' On Me" – Robin McNamara "Lay Down (Candles in the Rain)" – Melanie with The Edwin Hawkins Singers "Leaving on a Jet Plane" – Peter, Paul and Mary "Let A Man Come in and Do the Popcorn (Part 2)" – James Brown "Let It Be" – The Beatles "Let's Work Together" – Canned Heat "The Letter" – Joe Cocker with Leon Russell "Little Green Bag" – George Baker Selection "Lola" – The Kinks "Lonely Days" – Bee Gees "The Long and Winding Road" – The Beatles "Long Lonesome Highway" – Michael Parks "Long Long Time" – Linda Ronstadt "Look What They've Done to My Song, Ma" – The New Seekers "Looking Out My Back Door" – Creedence Clearwater Revival "Love Grows (Where My Rosemary Goes)" – Edison Lighthouse "Love Land" – Charles Wright & the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band "Love of the Common People" – Nicky Thomas "Love on a Two Way Street" – The Moments "Love or Let Me Be Lonely" – The Friends of Distinction "Love the One You're With" – Stephen Stills "The Love You Save" – The Jackson 5 "Lucretia MacEvil" – Blood, Sweat & Tears "Ma Belle Amie" – The Tee Set "Make It Easy on Yourself" – Dionne Warwick "Make It with You" – Bread "Make Me Smile" – Chicago "Mama Told Me Not to Come" – Three Dog Night "Me And My Life" – The Tremeloes "Midnight Cowboy" – Ferrante & Teicher "Mississippi Queen" – Mountain "Mongoose" – Elephant's Memory "Montego Bay" – Bobby Bloom "Most of All" – B. J. Thomas "Mr. Bojangles" – Nitty Gritty Dirt Band "My Baby Loves Lovin'" – White Plains "My Sweet Lord" – George Harrison "Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" – Steam "Natural Sinner" – Fair Weather "Neanderthal Man" – Hotlegs "Never Had a Dream Come True" – Stevie Wonder "New World in the Morning" – Roger Whittaker "No Matter What" – Badfinger "No Sugar Tonight" - The Guess Who "No Time" – The Guess Who "Ohio" – Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young "One Day of Your Life" - Andy Williams "One Less Bell to Answer" – The 5th Dimension "Only Love Can Break Your Heart" – Neil Young "On the Beach (In the Summertime)" - The 5th Dimension "Ooh Child" – The Five Stairsteps "Our House" – Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young "Out in the Country" – Three Dog Night "Overture from Tommy (A Rock Opera)" – The Assembled Multitude "Paranoid" – Black Sabbath "Patches" – Clarence Carter "Psychedelic Shack" – The Temptations "Puppet Man" – The 5th Dimension "Question" – The Moody Blues "Rainbow" – Marmalade "Raindrops Keep Fallin' On My Head" – B. J. Thomas "Raindrops Keep Fallin' On My Head" – Bobbie Gentry "Raindrops Keep Fallin' On My Head" – Sacha Distel (dubbed) "Rainy Night In Georgia" – Brook Benton "The Rapper" – The Jaggerz "Reach Out and Touch (Somebody's Hand)" – Diana Ross "Reflections of My Life" – Marmalade "Remember Me" – Diana Ross "Ride Captain Ride" – Blues Image "Rubber Duckie" – Ernie (Jim Henson) "Ruby Tuesday" – Melanie "Save the Country" – The 5th Dimension "See Me, Feel Me" – The Who "Share the Land" – The Guess Who "She Came in Through the Bathroom Window" – Joe Cocker "Shilo" – Neil Diamond "Signed, Sealed, Delivered I'm Yours" – Stevie Wonder "Silver Bird" – Mark Lindsay "Sly, Slick & The Wicked" – Lost Generation "Snowbird" – Anne Murray "Solitary Man" – Neil Diamond "Somebody's Been Sleeping" – 100 Proof (Aged in Soul) "Someday We'll Be Together" – Diana Ross & the Supremes "Something" – Shirley Bassey "Something's Burning" – Kenny Rogers & the First Edition "Son of a Preacher Man" – Aretha Franklin "A Song of Joy (Himno A La Alegria)" – Miguel Rios "Soolaimon (African Trilogy II)" – Neil Diamond "Spill the Wine" – Eric Burdon & War "Spirit in the Dark" – Aretha Franklin "Spirit in the Sky" – Norman Greenbaum "Stand By Your Man" – Candi Staton "Steal Away" – Johnnie Taylor "Still Water (Love)" – Four Tops "Stoned Love" – The Supremes "Stoney End" – Barbra Streisand "Stop the War Now" – Edwin Starr "Sugar, Sugar" – Wilson Pickett "Summertime Blues" – The Who "Super Bad (Parts 1 & 2)" – James Brown "Sweet Inspiration" – Johnny Johnson and the Bandwagon "Take a Letter Maria" – R. B. Greaves "Teach Your Children" – Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young "The Tears of a Clown" – Smokey Robinson & the Miracles "Tell It All, Brother" – Kenny Rogers & the First Edition "Temma Harbour" – Mary Hopkin "Temptation Eyes" – The Grass Roots "Tennessee Bird Walk" – Jack Blanchard & Misty Morgan "Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)" – Sly & the Family Stone "That's Where I Went Wrong" – Poppy Family "The Thrill Is Gone" – B. B. King "Ticket to Ride" – The Carpenters "Tighter, Tighter" – Alive N Kickin' "Tobacco Road" – Eric Burdon & War "Tracy" – The Cuff Links "Travelin' Band" – Creedence Clearwater Revival "Turn Back the Hands of Time" – Tyrone Davis "25 or 6 to 4" – Chicago "Ugena Za Ulimwengu (Unite the World)" – The Temptations "United We Stand" – The Brotherhood of Man "Up Around the Bend" – Creedence Clearwater Revival "Up on Cripple Creek" – The Band "Up the Ladder to the Roof" – The Supremes "Vehicle" – The Ides of March "Venus" – Shocking Blue "Viva Tirado (Part 1)" – El Chicano "Voodoo Chile" – The Jimi Hendrix Experience "Walk a Mile in My Shoes" – Joe South "Wand'rin' Star" – Lee Marvin "War" – Edwin Starr "We Gotta Get You a Woman" – Runt (Todd Rundgren) "Westbound #9" – The Flaming Ember "We've Only Just Begun" – The Carpenters "What Is Truth" – Johnny Cash "When I'm Dead And Gone" – McGuinness Flint "Which Way You Goin' Billy?" – Poppy Family "Whole Lotta Love" – Led Zeppelin "Whole Lotta Love" – C.C.S. "Who'll Stop the Rain" – Creedence Clearwater Revival "Who's Your Baby" – The Archies "The Witch" – The Rattles "The Witch's Promise"/"Teacher" – Jethro Tull "Without Love" – Tom Jones "The Wonder of You"/"Mama Liked the Roses" – Elvis Presley "Wonderful World, Beautiful People" – Jimmy Cliff "Woodstock" – Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young "Woodstock" – Matthews Southern Comfort "Years May Come, Years May Go" - Herman's Hermits "Yellow River" – Christie "You Can Get It If You Really Want" – Desmond Dekker "You Don't Have to Say You Love Me" – Elvis Presley "You Need Love Like I Do (Don't You)" – Gladys Knight & the Pips "Young, Gifted and Black" – Bob and Marcia "An American Trilogy" medley written & arranged by Mickey Newbury "Bein' Green" w.m. Joe Raposo, from the TV series Sesame Street "Have You Ever Seen the Rain?" w.m. John C. Fogerty "I Love youuuuuu" w.m. Jeff Moss, from the TV series Sesame Street "If Not For You" w.m. Bob Dylan "Kentucky Rain" w.m. Eddie Rabbitt & Dick Heard "The Ladies Who Lunch" w.m. Stephen Sondheim. Introduced by Elaine Stritch in the musical Company. "Lookin' out My Back Door" w.m. John C. Fogerty "People in Your Neighborhood" w.m. Jeff Moss, from the TV series Sesame Street "Rubber Duckie" w.m. Jeff Moss, from the TV series Sesame Street "Teach Your Children" w.m. Graham Nash "(They Long to Be) Close to You" w. Hal David m. Burt Bacharach "Who'll Stop the Rain" w.m. John C. Fogerty "Where Do I Begin" (Love Story) – w. Carl Sigman, m. Francis Lai Sir Arthur Bliss – Concerto for Cello and Orchestra  George Crumb Ancient Voices of Children for mezzo-soprano, boy soprano, oboe, mandolin, harp, amplified piano (and toy piano), and percussion (three players) Black Angels (Images I) for electric string quartet Charles Dodge – Earth's Magnetic Field Mario Davidovsky – Synchronisms No. 6 for piano and electronic sound Morton Feldman Madame Press Died Last Week at Ninety The Viola in My Life 1, 2 and 3 Luc Ferrari – Presque rien No. 1 "Le Lever du jour au bord de la mer" Miloslav Kabeláč – Symphony No. 8 "Antiphonies" György Ligeti – Continuum Witold Lutosławski – Concerto for Cello and Orchestra Olivier Messiaen – La Fauvette des Jardins Allan Pettersson – Symphony No. 9 Karlheinz Stockhausen Expo for three players with short-wave radios, and sound projectionist Mantra for two pianos and live electronics Pole for two players with short-wave radios, and sound projectionist Herman D. Koppel – Macbeth 1776, London production Applause (book: Betty Comden & Adolph Green, lyrics: Lee Adams, music: Charles Strouse) – Broadway production The Boy Friend (Sandy Wilson) – Broadway revival Cabaret (Kander and Ebb) – Vienna production Company (Stephen Sondheim) – Broadway production Dames at Sea, Broadway revival Georgy, Broadway production Golden Bat Off-Broadway production opened at the Sheridan Square Playhouse on July 21 and ran for 152 performances The Great Waltz, London production Look to the Lilies (Jule Styne and Sammy Cahn) – Broadway production The Me Nobody Knows, Broadway production Minnie's Boys, Broadway production Purlie, Broadway production The Rothschilds (book: Sherman Yellen, lyrics: Sheldon Harnick, music: Jerry Bock), Broadway production opened at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre on October 19 and ran for 507 performances.  Starring Hal Linden, Jill Clayburgh and Paul Hecht. Two by Two, Broadway production The Aristocats&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;animated feature film with the voices of Phil Harris, Eva Gabor, Thurl Ravenscroft, Hermione Baddeley and Sterling Holloway Darling Lili, starring Julie Andrews, Rock Hudson, Lance Percival and Jeremy Kemp Dastak, starring Sanjeev Kumar Johny Mera Naam, starring Dev Anand and Pran Let It Be, a documentary film featuring The Beatles On a Clear Day You Can See Forever starring Barbra Streisand, Yves Montand and Bob Newhart Peau d'Âne, starring Catherine Deneuve and Jean Marais, with music by Michel Legrand Scrooge, starring Albert Finney, Alec Guinness, Kenneth More, Suzanne Neve and Anton Rodgers Song of Norway, starring Toralv Maurstad, Florence Henderson and Harry Secombe. Woodstock, a documentary film featuring Jimi Hendrix, The Who, Jefferson Airplane, Canned Heat and others January  – Frank Mullen, American rock singer (Suffocation) January 2 Eric Whitacre, composer Karen Kamensek, orchestra conductor January 9 Lara Fabian, Belgian singer Mia X, rapper January 12 Zack de la Rocha (Rage Against the Machine) Raekwon, rapper January 18 – DJ Quik, rapper and record producer January 20 – Edwin McCain, American singer-songwriter and guitarist January 23 – Brendan O'Connor, Irish singer and television host January 26 – Kirk Franklin, gospel singer January 27 – Mark Trojanowski (Sister Hazel) January 31 Minnie Driver, actress and singer Danny Michel, Canadian singer-songwriter and producer February 18 Susan Egan, American actress and singer Raine Maida, Canadian musician and beat poet February 26 – Linda Brava, Finnish violinist March 5 – John Frusciante, guitarist (Red Hot Chili Peppers) March 7 – Vladislav Adelkhanov, Russian classical violinist and writer March 9 La India, salsa singer Shannon Leto, American drummer (Thirty Seconds to Mars) March 17 – Gene Ween, guitarist and vocalist (Ween) March 18 – Queen Latifah, American rapper, singer and actress March 24 – Sharon Corr, Irish musician March 25 – Teri Moïse, American singer March 27 Brendan Hill, drummer (Blues Traveler) Mariah Carey, American singer April 4 – Sean Kelly, Canadian musician April 5 – Miho Hatori, Japanese singer and songwriter (Cibo Matto) April 6 – Joe Gittleman, guitarist (The Mighty Mighty Bosstones) April 10 – Mike Mushok, guitarist (Staind) April 11 – Delroy Pearson, British singer (Five Star) April 12 – Nick Hexum, American singer and guitarist April 13 – Eduardo Capetillo, Mexican actor and singer April 17 – Redman, rapper April 18 – Greg Eklund, American rock drummer (Everclear) April 19 – Luis Miguel, Mexican singer April 20 – Phife Dawg, rapper April 22 – Regine Velasquez, Filipino singer, actress, model and record producer April 26 – Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins, singer and songwriter TLC May 4 – Gregg Alexander, singer-songwriter (New Radicals) May 9 – Ghostface Killah, American rapper May 10 – Perry Blake, Irish singer-songwriter May 17 – Jordan Knight, American singer (New Kids on the Block) May 18 – Billy Howerdel, guitarist, songwriter and producer (A Perfect Circle) May 19 – Attrell Cordes (P.M. Dawn) June 2 – B-Real, rapper (Cypress Hill) June 3 – Peter Tägtgren, Swedish musician (Hypocrisy) June 10 – Mike Doughty, American singer June 13 – Rivers Cuomo, singer, guitarist and songwriter (Weezer) June 15 – Claus Norreen, Danish musician and record producer (Aqua) June 17 – Sasha Sokol, Mexican singer June 19 MJ Hibbett, English singer-songwriter Brian Welch, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (Korn and Love and Death) June 21 Eric Reed, American pianist and composer (Black Note) Pete Rock, American rapper and producer (Pete Rock & CL Smooth) June 22 – Steven Page, Canadian singer and songwriter (Barenaked Ladies) June 24 – Glenn Medeiros, American singer July 4 – Christian Giesler, American bass player (Kreator) July 6 – Morten Ryelund Sørensen, Danish violinist and conductor July 8 – Beck, singer-songwriter July 10 Gary LeVox, American singer Jason Orange, British singer (Take That) July 12 – Juba Kalamka, American rapper (Deep Dickollective) July 14 – Thomas Lauderdale, American pianist (Pink Martini) July 15 – Chi Cheng (musician), American rock bassist August 3 – Itamar Golan, Israeli pianist August 11 – Andy Bell, bassist August 19 – Joseph Cartagena (Fat Joe), American rapper August 23 – River Phoenix, actor and singer of Aleka's Attic (d. 1993) August 24 – Kristyn Robyn Osborn, American country singer (SHeDAISY) August 28 – Sherrié Austin, actress and singer August 30 – Guang Liang, Malaysian singer August 31 – Debbie Gibson, American singer-songwriter September 4 – Daisy Dee, singer September 5 – Liam Lynch, songwriter and music video director September 7 – Chad Sexton, drummer (311) September 8 – Benny Ibarra, Mexican singer September 9 – Macy Gray, singer September 10 Jeff Marx, American Broadway composer Ménélik, French rapper September 14 – Craig Montoya, bassist (Everclear) September 15 – Jukka Jokikokko, Finnish musician and studio engineer September 19 – Takanori Nishikawa, singer and actor (T.M. Revolution) September 23 – Ani DiFranco, singer, guitarist and songwriter October 5 - South Park Mexican,Chiacno rapper October 6 – Amy Jo Johnson, American actress and singer October 15 – Eric Benét, American singer October 21 – Tony Mortimer, British singer (East 17) October 24 – Jarkko Martikainen, Finnish rock musician October 27 – Adrian Erlandsson, Swedish drummer October 31 – Linn Berggren, Swedish musician (Ace of Base) November 2 – Ely Buendia, Filipino rock lead singer and rhythm guitarist (The Eraserheads) November 7 – Neil Hannon, Northern Irish musician (The Divine Comedy) November 9 Susan Tedeschi, American musician and singer Scarface, American rapper November 12 – Sarah Harmer, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist November 15 – Jack Ingram, American singer-songwriter and guitarist November 20 – Q-Tip, rapper December 2 Sergei Krylov, violinist Treach, American rapper (Naughty by Nature) December 6 – Ulf Ekberg, Swedish musician (Ace of Base) December 9 – Kara DioGuardi, American songwriter December 14 – Beth Orton, British singer-songwriter December 16 – Benjamin Kowalewicz, Canadian musician December 18 DMX, American rapper Cowboy Troy, American singer and rapper December 24 – Will Oldham, American musician December 29 – Aled Jones, Welsh boy soprano, later baritone date unknown Seagram, American rapper (d. 1996) Ralph Farris, American violist, violinist, composer, arranger, producer and conductor (ETHEL) January 5 – Roberto Gerhard, composer, 73 January 9 – Jani Christou, composer, 44 (car accident) January 17 Simon Kovar, bassoonist Billy Stewart, scat singer, 32 (car accident) January 25 – Jane Bathori, opera singer, 92 January 31 – Slim Harpo, blues musician, 46 (heart attack) February 1 – Blaž Arnič, composer, 69 (car crash) February 12 Ishmon Bracey, blues musician, 69 Nick Pantas, guitarist (Elf) (car accident) André Souris, composer and writer, 70 February 19 - Pavel Ludikar, operatic bass, 87 February 20 – Albert Wolff, conductor, 86 March 1 – Lucille Hegamin, blues singer, 75 March 16 – Tammi Terrell, singer, 24 (brain tumor) April 12 - Kerstin Thorborg, operatic contralto, 73 April 20 – Shakeel Badayuni, songwriter, 53 (diabetes-related) April 21 – Earl Hooker, blues musician, 41 (tuberculosis) April 23 – Adeline Genée, ballerina April 24 – Otis Spann, blues musician, 40 (liver cancer) April 26 – Gypsy Rose Lee, burlesque entertainer, 59 (cancer) May 11 – Johnny Hodges, jazz musician May 14 – Jack Fina, pianist and bandleader, 56 (heart attack) May 22 - John Waterhouse, Canadian violinist, conductor, and music educator, 92 May 23 – Nydia Westman, actress and singer June – Calvin Boze, trumpeter and bandleader June 11 – Earl Grant, pianist and singer, 39 (car accident) June 16 Heino Eller, composer and music teacher Lonnie Johnson, blues and jazz musician July 7 – Charles Tobias, US songwriter and singer July 12 – L. Wolfe Gilbert, Russian-born US songwriter July 13 – Roger Edens, composer and arranger, 64 July 14 – Luis Mariano, singer and actor July 17 – Stanley Wilson, conductor, arranger and film composer, 54 (heart attack) July 23 – Leith Stevens, composer, 60 (heart attack) July 29 – Sir John Barbirolli, conductor, 70 July 30 – George Szell, conductor and composer July 31 – Booker Ervin, jazz musician, 39 (kidney failure) September 2 Mercedes Llopart, operatic soprano, 75 Kees van Baaren, composer and music teacher, 63 September 3 – Alan Wilson, singer of Canned Heat, 27 (drug overdose) September 18 Jimi Hendrix, guitarist and singer, 27 (asphyxiated) Maxwell Davis, saxophonist, 54 September 25 - Yefim Golyshev, Ukrainian violinist, painter and composer, 73 October 2 – Bo Linde, Swedish composer, 37 October 4 Janis Joplin, singer, 27 (heroin overdose) George Frederick McKay, composer, 71 October 13 – Julia Culp, operatic soprano ("the Dutch nightingale"), 90 October 22 Pauline Donalda, operatic soprano, 88 Samson François, pianist, 46 October 28 – Baby Huey, singer, 26 (heart attack) October 31 – Arvid Andersen, violinist, conductor and composer November 6 – Agustín Lara, composer, 73 November 7 – Eddie Peabody, banjo player, 68 November 19 – Maria Yudina, pianist, 71 November 25 – Albert Ayler, saxophonist and composer, 34 December 19 - Giulia Recli, composer and writer, 80 December 23 – Mimi Benzell, operatic soprano, 46 (cancer) December 31 Ray Henderson, songwriter, 74 Cyril Scott, composer, 91 date unknown Efisio Melis, folk musician Rokneddin Mokhtari, Iranian violinist Grammy Awards of 1970 Eurovision Song Contest 1970
