 This is a list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1975.      The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1975. Note: best sellers of the year are bold. Day Album Artist Notes 8 Promised Land Elvis Presley 16 Forever, Michael Michael Jackson 20 Blood on the Tracks Bob Dylan 23 Never Can Say Goodbye Gloria Gaynor - Commoners Crown Steeleye Span Don't Cha Love It The Miracles Down by the Jetty Dr. Feelgood The First Minute of a New Day Gil Scott-Heron and Brian Jackson Flavours The Guess Who It's Time Bonnie Bramlett Melissa Melissa Manchester Modern Times Al Stewart New Year, New Band, New Company John Mayall Picture Music Klaus Schulze Play Don't Worry Mick Ronson Plug Me Into Something Henry Gross Scorching Beauty Iron Butterfly Sunday's Child John Martyn Urban Renewal Tower of Power Day Album Artist Notes 7 Mister Magic Grover Washington, Jr. 12 Have You Never Been Mellow Olivia Newton-John 15 Fly by Night Rush 16 Bolan's Zip Gun T.Rex 17 High Voltage AC/DC Australia-only; Debut Rock 'n' Roll John Lennon Covers album 21 On the Level Status Quo Young Americans David Bowie 24 Physical Graffiti Led Zeppelin 27 On Your Feet or on Your Knees Blue Öyster Cult Live 28 Yesterdays Yes Compilation - Ambrosia Ambrosia Debut Album Changing Woman Buffy Sainte-Marie Cold on the Shoulder Gordon Lightfoot Desperate Straights Slap Happy and Henry Cow Dixie Rock Wet Willie An Evening with John Denver John Denver Live For Earth Below Robin Trower Mad Dog John Entwistle Pieces of the Sky Emmylou Harris Really Rosie Carole King Soundtrack Song for America Kansas Street Rats Humble Pie Then Came You Dionne Warwick Unrequited Loudon Wainwright III Studio and live Visions of the Emerald Beyond Mahavishnu Orchestra Day Album Artist Notes 1 Feel Like Makin' Love Roberta Flack 11 Welcome to My Nightmare Alice Cooper 12 Chocolate City Parliament 14 Blue Jays Justin Hayward and John Lodge 15 That's the Way of the World Earth, Wind & Fire Soundtrack 16 The Bargain Store Dolly Parton 19 Dressed to Kill Kiss Hearts America 21 Rubycon Tangerine Dream 22 Bundles Soft Machine Songbird Jesse Colin Young 24 Chicago VIII Chicago Nuthin' Fancy Lynyrd Skynyrd Specs Appeal The Shadows 25 Just Another Way to Say I Love You Barry White Slow Dazzle John Cale 26 A Quiet Storm Smokey Robinson 29 Blow by Blow Jeff Beck - The Best Years of Our Lives Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel Between the Lines Janis Ian Duit on Mon Dei Harry Nilsson Feelings Paul Anka Frampton Peter Frampton Funny Lady Barbra Streisand Soundtrack Go Girl Crazy! The Dictators The Great Fatsby Leslie West I'll Play for You Seals & Crofts Judith Judy Collins Katy Lied Steely Dan Let There Be Music Orleans Lou Reed Live Lou Reed Live The Original Soundtrack 10cc The Rotters' Club Hatfield and the North Spring Fever Rick Derringer Sweet Deceiver Kevin Ayers Switch Golden Earring There's One in Every Crowd Eric Clapton Tommy Various Artists Soundtrack Two Sides of the Moon Keith Moon Day Album Artist Notes 1 Journey Journey 2 The Manhattan Transfer The Manhattan Transfer 7 Will O' The Wisp Leon Russell 8 Toys in the Attic Aerosmith 11 Fish Rising Steve Hillage 14 Spirit of America The Beach Boys Compilation 18 Fandango! ZZ Top Half live/half studio 19 Stars Cher 21 ABBA ABBA Let's Take It to the Stage Funkadelic 25 Stampede The Doobie Brothers - Ain't Life Grand Black Oak Arkansas Al Green's Greatest Hits Al Green Compilation The Beau Brummels The Beau Brummels Beautiful Loser Bob Seger Diamonds & Rust Joan Baez Discothèque Herbie Mann Hair of the Dog Nazareth Hokey Pokey Richard and Linda Thompson Ian Hunter Ian Hunter Jamaica Say You Will Joe Cocker The Myths and Legends of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table Rick Wakeman New City Blood, Sweat & Tears Playing Possum Carly Simon The Snow Goose Camel Straight Shooter Bad Company Subtle as a Flying Mallet Dave Edmunds Survival The O'Jays Tomorrow Belongs to Me Sensational Alex Harvey Band Day Album Artist Notes 1 Gorilla James Taylor 3 USA King Crimson Live 5 Newborn James Gang 7 Today Elvis Presley 9 Warrior on the Edge of Time Hawkwind 15 Moving Violation Jackson 5 16 Soap Opera The Kinks 19 Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy Elton John 22 Adventures in Paradise Minnie Riperton 27 Venus and Mars Wings - America's Choice Hot Tuna Armageddon Armageddon Coming Down Your Way Three Dog Night Ernie Sings & Glen Picks Tennessee Ernie Ford and Glen Campbell Four Wheel Drive Bachman–Turner Overdrive In Praise of Learning Henry Cow Love Will Keep Us Together Captain & Tennille Once Upon a Star Bay City Rollers Red Headed Stranger Willie Nelson Ruth Is Stranger Than Richard Robert Wyatt Spirit of '76 Spirit Steppin' Pointer Sisters Tale Spinnin' Weather Report There's No Place Like America Today Curtis Mayfield Your Mamma Won't Like Me Suzi Quatro Day Album Artist Notes 6 Made in the Shade The Rolling Stones Compilation Metamorphosis The Rolling Stones Outtakes recorded 1964-'70 10 One of These Nights Eagles 13 Red Octopus Jefferson Starship 14 Initiation Todd Rundgren 16 Why Can't We Be Friends? War 20 It's My Pleasure Billy Preston Tonight's the Night Neil Young & Crazy Horse 23 Stills Stephen Stills 25 One Size Fits All Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention 26 The Basement Tapes Bob Dylan & The Band Recorded 1967-'75 - Cut the Cake Average White Band The Dream Weaver Gary Wright Dreaming My Dreams Waylon Jennings Greatest Hits Cat Stevens Compilation The Heat Is On The Isley Brothers The Hit Man Eddie Kendricks Horizon The Carpenters HQ Roy Harper Jasmine Nightdreams Edgar Winter Main Course Bee Gees Michael Bolotin Michael Bolton Return to Fantasy Uriah Heep Rising for the Moon Fairport Convention Trying to Burn the Sun Elf The Tubes The Tubes Day Album Artist Notes 1 Trooper Trooper 2 Now Look Ronnie Wood 4 Ride a Rock Horse Roger Daltrey 6 KC and the Sunshine Band KC and the Sunshine Band 11 Fleetwood Mac Fleetwood Mac From Mighty Oaks Ray Thomas 28 Free Hand Gentle Giant US Sabotage Black Sabbath US - Ego Is Not a Dirty Word Skyhooks Fire on the Bayou The Meters Force It UFO Futurama Be-Bop Deluxe Half a Love The Chi-Lites Head over Heels Poco The Higher They Climb David Cassidy In the City Tavares Metal Machine Music Lou Reed Outlaws Outlaws Power in the Music The Guess Who Rhinestone Cowboy Glen Campbell Scheherazade and Other Stories Renaissance Sha Na Now Sha Na Na Stop Eric Burdon Band This Time We Mean It REO Speedwagon Day Album Artist Notes 4 Ritchie Blackmore's Rainbow Rainbow 15 Atlantic Crossing Rod Stewart 18 Daryl Hall & John Oates Hall & Oates 19 Phoenix Labelle 20 Deluxe Harmonia 22 Man-Child Herbie Hancock Nightingales & Bombers Manfred Mann's Earth Band 25 Born to Run Bruce Springsteen 27 Love to Love You Baby Donna Summer 28 The Best of Michael Jackson Michael Jackson Compilation - Acid Queen Tina Turner Al Green Is Love Al Green Caught in the Act Grand Funk Railroad Live Dreamboat Annie Heart Canada; released in US Feb. '76 E. C. Was Here Eric Clapton Live Honey Ohio Players Mellow Madness Quincy Jones Pick of the Litter The Spinners Searchin' for a Rainbow The Marshall Tucker Band So Fine Loggins & Messina Spirit of the Boogie Kool & The Gang Stamp Album Climax Blues Band Timewind Klaus Schulze Win, Lose or Draw The Allman Brothers Band Day Album Artist Notes 1 Blues for Allah Grateful Dead 5 Minstrel in the Gallery Jethro Tull 10 Alive! Kiss Live 12 Fighting Thin Lizzy Second Chapter Danny Kirwan Wish You Were Here Pink Floyd 14 Crisis? What Crisis? Supertramp 15 Fool for the City Foghat Wind on the Water Crosby & Nash 17 In Trance Scorpions 22 Extra Texture (Read All About It) George Harrison U.S. release. 3 October in U.K. 24 Caress of Steel Rush 27 Portrait Gallery Harry Chapin - Another Green World Brian Eno Another Year Leo Sayer Bandolier Budgie Bay City Rollers Bay City Rollers Compilation; North America debut Captured Angel Dan Fogelberg The Car Over the Lake Album The Ozark Mountain Daredevils Changing All the Time Smokie Face the Music Electric Light Orchestra Hotline The J. Geils Band In the Slot Tower of Power John Fogerty John Fogerty Landed Can Masque Kansas Maximum Darkness Man Prisoner in Disguise Linda Ronstadt Procol's Ninth Procol Harum The Sound of Sunshine The Sunshine Band Instrumental Symphonion Dream Nitty Gritty Dirt Band Ted Nugent Ted Nugent Thirteen Blue Magic Lane Blue Magic Warner Bros. Presents Montrose Waterbed Herbie Mann Windsong John Denver X-Rated Black Oak Arkansas Day Album Artist Notes 1 Tryin' to Get the Feeling Barry Manilow 2 Bongo Fury Frank Zappa & The Mothers of Invention with Captain Beefheart Live + some studio tracks 3 The Who by Numbers The Who 6 Still Crazy After All These Years Paul Simon 10 Come Taste the Band Deep Purple 14 Breakaway Art Garfunkel 16 You Aretha Franklin 21 Ommadawn Mike Oldfield 24 History: America's Greatest Hits America Compilation Rock of the Westies Elton John Shaved Fish John Lennon Compilation Siren Roxy Music 27 Angel Angel - Against the Grain Rory Gallagher All Around My Hat Steeleye Span Flying Again The Flying Burrito Brothers Godbluff Van der Graaf Generator Indiscreet Sparks Lazy Afternoon Barbra Streisand Malpractice Dr. Feelgood Mother Focus Focus Movin' On Commodores Nighthawks at the Diner Tom Waits Live Radio-Activity Kraftwerk Sun and Steel Iron Butterfly Day Album Artist Notes 1 Northern Lights – Southern Cross The Band Spanish Train and Other Stories Chris de Burgh 5 Dolly: The Seeker/We Used To Dolly Parton 7 Fish Out of Water Chris Squire 10 Zuma Neil Young & Crazy Horse 11 Gratitude Earth, Wind & Fire 17 Greatest Hits ABBA Compilation Schoolboys in Disgrace The Kinks Teaser Tommy Bolin 21 A Night at the Opera Queen 30 Numbers Cat Stevens - The Best of Carly Simon Carly Simon Compilation Discreet Music Brian Eno Family Reunion The O'Jays Greatest Hits Nazareth Compilation Helen of Troy John Cale The Hissing of Summer Lawns Joni Mitchell Hot Chocolate Hot Chocolate If the Shoe Fits Pure Prairie League It's Only Love Rita Coolidge The Last Record Album Little Feat Lisztomania Rick Wakeman Soundtrack Mustard Roy Wood Nomadness Strawbs Pour Down Like Silver Richard and Linda Thompson Pressure Drop Robert Palmer Rufus featuring Chaka Khan Rufus Strung Up Sweet Together Anne Murray Track of the Cat Dionne Warwick Who's to Bless and Who's to Blame Kris Kristofferson Day Album Artist Notes 1 Equinox Styx T.N.T. AC/DC Australia We Sold Our Soul for Rock 'n' Roll Black Sabbath Compilation 4 Stephen Stills Live Stephen Stills 5 Live! Bob Marley & The Wailers Live 12 Blast from Your Past Ringo Starr Compilation Marcus Garvey Burning Spear 13 Horses Patti Smith 15 Mothership Connection Parliament 29 Elite Hotel Emmylou Harris - Evening Star Fripp & Eno Head On Bachman–Turner Overdrive Heaven and Hell Vangelis Ricochet Tangerine Dream Live Wouldn't You Like It? Bay City Rollers # Artist Title Year Country Chart entries 1 Billy Swan I Can Help 1975 USA - 1, Netherlands - 1, Austria - 1, Switzerland - 1, Norway - 1, Belgium - 1, New Zealand - 1, Germany - 1, Sweden - 1,  Australia - 1, France - 1, Denmark - 1, Canada - 2, South Africa - 3, Ireland - 11 2 10cc I'm Not In Love 1975 UK - 1, Ireland - 1, Canada - 1, Brazil - 1, USA - 2, France - 2, Australia - 3, New Zealand - 4, Belgium - 5, Netherlands - 5, Norway - 6, Germany - 8, Switzerland - 8, South Africa - 17, Italy - 24 3 The Sweet Fox on the Run 1975 Germany - 1, Australia - 1, South Africa - 1, UK - 2, Canada - 2, Belgium - 2, Netherlands - 2, Norway - 2, Ireland - 2, Austria - 3, New Zealand - 3, Switzerland - 3, USA - 5, Sweden - 10 4 Glen Campbell Rhinestone Cowboy 1975 USA - 1, Canada - 1, Ireland - 1, Belgium - 1, New Zealand - 2, South Africa - 2, Netherlands - 3, UK - 4, Australia - 5, Sweden - 17, Germany - 31 5 George Baker Selection Paloma Blanca 1975 Netherlands - 1, Sweden - 1, Austria - 1, Switzerland - 1, Norway - 1, Germany - 1, Belgium - 1, South Africa - 1, Canada - 5, UK - 10, Italy - 11, USA - 26 U.S. number one singles and artist(weeks at number one) UK number one singles and artist(weeks at number one) "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" - Elton John (2) "Mandy" - Barry Manilow (1) "Please Mr. Postman" - The Carpenters (1) "Laughter in the Rain" - Neil Sedaka (1) "Fire" - Ohio Players (1) "You're No Good" - Linda Ronstadt (1) "Pick Up the Pieces" - Average White Band (1) "Best of My Love" - Eagles (1) "Have You Never Been Mellow" - Olivia Newton-John (1) "Black Water" - The Doobie Brothers (1) "My Eyes Adored You" - Frankie Valli (1) "Lady Marmalade" - Labelle (1) "Lovin' You" - Minnie Riperton (1) "Philadelphia Freedom" - Elton John (2) "(Hey Won't You Play) Another Somebody Done Somebody Wrong Song" - B. J. Thomas (1) "He Don't Love You (Like I Love You) - Tony Orlando and Dawn (3) "Shining Star" - Earth, Wind & Fire (1) "Before the Next Teardrop Falls" - Freddy Fender (1) "Thank God I'm a Country Boy" - John Denver (1) "Sister Golden Hair" - America (1) "Love Will Keep Us Together" - Captain & Tennille (4) "Listen to What the Man Said" - Paul McCartney & Wings (1) "The Hustle" - Van McCoy (1) "One of These Nights" - Eagles (1) "Jive Talkin'" - Bee Gees (2) "Fallin' in Love" - Hamilton, Joe Frank & Reynolds (1) "Get Down Tonight" - KC and the Sunshine Band (1) "Rhinestone Cowboy" - Glen Campbell (2) "Fame" - David Bowie (2) "I'm Sorry" - John Denver (1) "Bad Blood" - Neil Sedaka (3) "Island Girl" - Elton John (3) "That's the Way (I Like It) - KC and the Sunshine Band (2) "Fly, Robin, Fly" - Silver Convention (3) "Let's Do It Again"- The Staple Singers (1) "Lonely This Christmas" - Mud (2 weeks 1974 + 2 weeks 1975) "Down Down" - Status Quo (1) "Ms Grace" - The Tymes (1) "January" - Pilot (3) "Make Me Smile (Come Up and See Me)" - Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel (2) "If" - Telly Savalas (2) "Bye, Bye, Baby (Baby Goodbye)" - Bay City Rollers (6) "Oh Boy" - Mud (2) "Stand by Your Man" - Tammy Wynette (3) "Whispering Grass" - Windsor Davies & Don Estelle (3) "I'm Not in Love" - 10cc (2) "Tears on My Pillow (I Can't Take It)" - Johnny Nash (1) "Give a Little Love" - Bay City Rollers (3) "Barbados" - Typically Tropical (1) "Can't Give You Anything (But My Love)" - The Stylistics (3) "Sailing" - Rod Stewart (4) "Hold Me Close" - David Essex (3) "I Only Have Eyes for You" - Art Garfunkel (2) "Space Oddity" - David Bowie (2) "D.I.V.O.R.C.E." - Billy Connolly (1) "Bohemian Rhapsody" - Queen (5 weeks 1975 + 4 weeks 1976) January 2 - New York City U.S. District Court Judge Richard Owen rules that former Beatle John Lennon and his lawyers can have access to Department of Immigration files pertaining to his deportation case. January 5 - The Wiz, a new musical version of the classic Wizard of Oz story, opens at Broadway's Majestic Theater in New York City. January 6 - Approximately 1000 Led Zeppelin fans, waiting for tickets to go on sale for Led Zeppelin's February 4 concert, cause an estimated $30,000 in damage to the lobby of the Boston Garden. The fans reportedly broke chairs and doors and caused other damage to the building. Boston Mayor Kevin White cancels the upcoming show. January 8 - Three Led Zeppelin concerts at Madison Square Garden sell out in a record four hours. January 12 - "The Warner Brothers Music Show" begins a nine city, 18 show tour of Europe. The tour included Warner Brothers acts Little Feat, Tower of Power, the Doobie Brothers, Bonaroo, Montrose, and Graham Central Station. January 24 - Jazz pianist Keith Jarrett plays the solo improvisation 'The Köln Concert' at the Cologne Opera, which, recorded live, becomes the best-selling piano recording in history. February 13 - The film Slade In Flame, starring the members of Slade, premieres at the Metropole Theatre in London. February 21 - John Lennon releases his Rock 'n' Roll LP, featuring his favorite rock songs from the 1950s. To promote the album he conducts a telephone interview with 20 rock radio stations simultaneously. March 1 - Jeff Beck releases the album Blow by Blow. It is the first album to be released using just his name. March 2 - Los Angeles Police make a routine traffic stop that turns out to be Paul McCartney and his wife Linda. Linda is arrested for having 170 to 225&nbsp;grams (six to eight ounces) of marijuana in her pocketbook. March 21 - Alice Cooper, now a solo artist, begins the Welcome to My Nightmare tour in Kalamazoo, Michigan. The elaborate show is among the largest stage spectacles of the decade. March 22 - In the Eurovision Song Contest in Stockholm, Sweden, the Dutch group Teach-In wins with the song "Ding-A-Dong". March 23 - Promoter Bill Graham stages the S.N.A.C.K. (Students Need Athletics, Culture and Kicks) charity concert at Kezar Stadium in San Francisco, California, to benefit the city's educational system. Almost 60,000 people come to see The Grateful Dead, The Doobie Brothers, Santana, Jefferson Starship, Tower of Power, Eddie Palmieri, Joan Baez, Graham Central Station and Neil Young joined by members of The Band along with a surprise appearance by Bob Dylan. It's the largest benefit concert in history to date. March 26 - The film version of The Who's Tommy premieres in London. April 3 - Steve Miller is arrested and charged with setting fire to the clothes and personal effects of a friend, Benita DiOrio, and resisting arrest. DiOrio drops the charges the following day. April 7 - Ritchie Blackmore plays a final show with Deep Purple in Paris before quitting to form his own group, Rainbow. April 17 - Cambodian singer-songwriter Sinn Sisamouth and his pregnant wife are among millions forced out of Phnom Penh by the Khmer Rouge. April 18 - Alice Cooper's first television special, Welcome to My Nightmare: The Making of a Record Album airs. April 24 - Pete Ham, founder of the group Badfinger, is found hanged in his London garage. His death is ruled a suicide. April 28 - Tom Snyder interviews John Lennon on the Tomorrow Show. May 1 - The Rolling Stones announce their forthcoming North American tour by performing Brown Sugar from a flatbed truck on Fifth Avenue in New York City. The occasion was guitarist Ronnie Wood's debut with the band. May 10 - Stevie Wonder performs before 125,000 people at the Washington Monument as part of Human Kindness Day festivities. June 1 - The Rolling Stones open their North American Tour in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. June 20 - Talking Heads perform their first show at CBGB in New York. June 23 - Alice Cooper falls off the stage during a concert in Vancouver, breaking six ribs. June 24 - "Gens du pays", the unofficial national anthem of Quebec, is performed for the first time by Gilles Vigneault in a concert on Montreal's Mount Royal. June 30 - Cher and Gregg Allman are married in a Las Vegas hotel suite. July 4 - the Texas Senate declares the Fourth of July "Willie Nelson Day", as over 70,000 fans visit Liberty Hill for the third annual picnic and country rock show headlined by Willie himself. August 4 - Robert Plant and his wife Maureen are seriously injured in a car accident while vacationing on the Greek island of Rhodes. The immediate future of Led Zeppelin is cast into doubt, as Plant will not recover for quite some time. August 9 The Bee Gees begin their mid-1970s international comeback when "Jive Talkin'" reaches #1 and goes platinum with sales over 1 million. Renato Carosone's comeback concert after a 15-year retirement. The first Rock Music Awards, produced by Don Kirshner, are held in Los Angeles, co-hosted by Elton John and Diana Ross. John wins "Outstanding Rock Personality of the Year". The Who's film Tommy,  wins "Rock Movie of the Year." August 23 - Peter Gabriel leaves British progressive rock group Genesis. September 15 - Pink Floyd releases their ninth album, Wish You Were Here. September 29 - Singer Jackie Wilson suffers a massive heart attack while performing on stage in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. He survives but never physically recovers. October 3 - The Who release their seventh studio album The Who By Numbers. October 7 - John Lennon finally wins his battle to stay in the United States after the New York Court of Appeals overturns Lennon's 1972 deportation order. October 9 John Lennon and Yoko Ono become parents of Sean Ono Lennon at 2:00 AM. The birth heralds the beginning of John's temporary retirement from the music business as he vows to devote himself to family for the next five years. Rock band Kiss earns publicity by playing the homecoming dance of Cadillac High School in Cadillac, Michigan. October 18 - Simon & Garfunkel reunite on the second-ever episode of Saturday Night Live on NBC, performing "The Boxer", "Scarborough Fair", and new collaboration "My Little Town". October 27 - Bruce Springsteen appears on the covers of both Time and Newsweek magazines on the same week. October 30 - Bob Dylan's Rolling Thunder Revue tour begins. November 6 - The Sex Pistols play their first concert at St. Martin's School of Art in London. November 21 - Queen's "Bohemian Rhapsody" goes to number one in the U.K., where it remains for 5 weeks of 1975 and 4 weeks of 1976. December 6 - The Who set the record for largest indoor concert at the Pontiac Silverdome, attended by 78,000 fans. December 10 - The John Denver holiday special Rocky Mountain Christmas airs on ABC. December 18 - The official break-up of Faces is announced at a London press conference. Rod Stewart will continue his solo career while Ronnie Wood is widely expected to be announced as an official member of The Rolling Stones in the near future. December 24 - The first issue of Punk magazine is released with a January 1976 cover date. A drawing of Lou Reed is on the cover. December 25 - Bassist Steve Harris forms Iron Maiden, drawing the name from a torture device mentioned in The Man in the Iron Mask. December 31 - The fourth annual New Year's Rockin' Eve airs on ABC, with performances by Average White Band, Melissa Manchester, Freddy Fender, and Neil Sedaka. John Rutter becomes Director of Music at Clare College, Cambridge. Billy Davis, Jr. and Marilyn McCoo leave the 5th Dimension and start solo careers. The Goodies have five top twenty singles (in the UK) becoming, according to Bill Oddie, "the first, the only and the most successful comedy rockers". Ramones sign to Sire Records. See  Brinsley Schwarz Faces Faust (reform in 1990) The First Edition (Played a few shows without Mickey Jones in 1976 before Kenny Rogers formed a new band) The Guess Who (reform in 1977) Hatfield and the North Humble Pie (reform in 1979, 1989 and 2001) If Jo Jo Gunne (reform in 2005) McGuinness Flint Neu! (reform in 1985) Ocean Raspberries Stealers Wheel (reform in 2008) Wizzard The Butts Band Afro-Filipino - Joe Bataan All the Fun of the Fair - David Essex Born to Be with You - Dion DiMucci + Produced by Phil Spector Brown Rice - Don Cherry Chocolate Chip - Isaac Hayes Chuck Berry - Chuck Berry Come Again - the Jaggerz Confusion – Fela Kuti Crack the Sky - Crack The Sky Dan McCafferty - Dan McCafferty Das schönste im Leben - Die Flippers The Dragon is Dancing - Jimmie Spheeris Dreadlocks Dread - Big Youth Expensive Shit - Fela Kuti Fox - Fox (debut) A Funky Thide of Sings - Billy Cobham Goodbye – Gene Ammons High Step - Paul Chambers and John Coltrane Home Plate - Bonnie Raitt Journey to Love - Stanley Clarke Juice Newton & Silver Spur - Juice Newton and Silver Spur The Köln Concert - Keith Jarrett Live at the Paris Olympia - The Shadows Live/Hhaï - Magma - Live Mel Tormé live at the Maisonette - Mel Tormé Montreux '75 - Ella Fitzgerald Moxy - Moxy Neu! '75 - Neu! Nils Lofgren - Nils Lofgren No Mystery - Return to Forever Not a Little Girl Anymore - Linda Lewis Not Just Another Pretty Foot - Jim Stafford Now - The Dubliners Old No. 1 - Guy Clark The Other Side of Me - Andy Williams Power and the Passion - Eloy Pre-Creedence - The Golliwogs - Compilation Reality - James Brown Right or Wrong - Stealers Wheel Rimmel - Francesco de Gregori The Rocky Horror Picture Show - Various Artists - Soundtrack Ronnie Drew - Ronnie Drew (solo debut) Rudy's Rock: The Sax That Changed the World - Rudy Pompilli and The Comets Sex Machine Today - James Brown Sky High - The Oak Ridge Boys Solstice - Ralph Towner Stand Back - April Wine Still Caught Up - Millie Jackson Sunset and Other Beginnings - Melanie The Sweet Singles Album - The Sweet Taking It All In Stride - Tom Snow Tails of Illusion - Fox Tea Break Over–Back on Your 'Eads! - IF Thank You Baby - The Stylistics Two Steps Forward, One Step Back - Patrick Sky Velvet Donkey - Ivor Cutler Waves - Jade Warrior "And All That Jazz" w. Fred Ebb m. John Kander. Introduced by Chita Rivera in the musical Chicago "Anytime (I'll Be There)"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Paul Anka "At Seventeen" w.m. Janis Ian "Calypso"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. John Denver "I'm Not in Love"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Graham Gouldman & Eric Stewart "I'm Sorry"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. John Denver "Love Will Keep Us Together"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Neil Sedaka & Howard Greenfield "Mamma Mia"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Benny Andersson, Stig Anderson & Björn Ulvaeus "Movin' On Up" w.m. Jeff Barry and Ja'net Dubois, theme from the TV series The Jeffersons "New York State of Mind" w.m. Billy Joel "One"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w. Edward Kleban m. Marvin Hamlisch "Rockin' All Over the World" w.m. John C. Fogerty "Wasted Days Wasted Nights"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Freddy Fender & Wayne Duncan "The Way I Want To Touch You"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Toni Tennille "What I Did For Love"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w. Edward Kleban m. Marvin Hamlisch "You"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Tom Snow Samuel Adler – Symphony No. 5, We are the Echoes Osvaldas Balakauskas – Sonata of the Mountains Claude Bolling and Jean-Pierre Rampal – Suite for Flute and Jazz Piano Mario Davidovsky – Scenes from Shir ha-Shirim for soprano, two tenors, bass soli and chamber ensemble Theo Loevendie – Concerto for Bass Clarinet and Orchestra, Incantations Witold Lutosławski – Les Espaces du Sommeil Frederic Rzewski – "The People United Will Never Be Defeated!" Karlheinz Stockhausen – Harlekin, for clarinet, Nr. 42 Der kleine Harlekin, for clarinet, Nr. 42½ Musik im Bauch, for six percussionists and music boxes, Nr. 41 Tierkreis,  for a melody and/or chording instrument, Nr. 41½ Alexander Vustin – The Word Dmitri Shostakovich – Viola Sonata (his final work) John Rutter - Bang! (14 March, Fairfield Halls, Croydon) Aulis Sallinen - The Horseman (17 June, Savonlinna Opera Festival) Chicago - Broadway production A Chorus Line (Marvin Hamlisch and Edward Kleban) - Broadway production A Little Night Music (Stephen Sondheim) - London production Dance With Me - Broadway Production The Wiz - Broadway production Pacific Overtures - Broadway Production At Long Last Love Funny Lady Lisztomania The Magic Flute The Rocky Horror Picture Show Tommy January 2 Doug Robb (Hoobastank) Chris Cheney, Australian rock musician (The Living End) January 3 - Thomas Bangalter (Daft Punk) January 13 - Jason King, radio DJ January 15 &ndash; Edith Bowman, British radio DJ January 24 &ndash; Paul Marazzi, English singer (A1) January 28 - Lee Latchford-Evans, British singer (Steps) January 29 &ndash; Kelly Packard, American singer-actress-hostess January 30 &ndash; Yumi Yoshimura, Japanese singer (Puffy Amiyumi) February 1 - Big Boi (OutKast) February 4 - Natalie Imbruglia, Australian singer February 5 - Adam Carson, drummer (AFI) February 6 &ndash; Tomoko Kawase, Japanese singer February 7 - Wes Borland (Limp Bizkit) February 14 &ndash; Scott Owen, Australian rock musician (The Living End) February 17 - Harisu, South Korean singer, model and actress February 18 - Simon Kvamm, Danish singer, keyboard player, and actor (Nephew) February 19 &ndash; Daniel Adair, Canadian rock drummer (Nickelback) February 20 - Brian Littrell, American singer (Backstreet Boys) February 21 &ndash; Heri Joensen, Faroese rock musician (Týr) February 23 - Robert Lopez, composer and lyricist March 4 &ndash; Hawksley Workman, Canadian rock singer-songwriter March 8 - Peggy Zina, Greek singer March 10 - Jerry Horton (Papa Roach) March 12 - Kelle Bryan, British singer (Eternal) March 15 &ndash; will.i.am, American rapper/singer of the Black Eyed Peas March 17 Justin Hawkins, vocalist (The Darkness) Jairzinho Oliveira, Brazilian singer/songwriter/composer March 18 &ndash; Sutton Foster, American actress, singer and dancer March 25 &ndash; Melanie Blatt, singer (All Saints) March 27 &ndash; Fergie, (Stacy Ferguson) singer (The Black Eyed Peas) April 10 &ndash; Chris Carrabba, American rock musician (Dashboard Confessional) April 14 &ndash; Stefano Miceli, Italian conductor and pianist 22 April - Anders Nyström, Swedish guitarist (Katatonia & Bloodbath) April 26 Joey Jordison (Slipknot) José Pasillas (Incubus) May 3 - Maksim Mrvica, pianist May 8 - Enrique Iglesias, singer May 15 - Peter Iwers, Swedish rock bassist (In Flames) May 16 B.Slade, American singer Tony Kakko, Finnish singer May 18 - Jack Johnson, singer-songwriter May 19 - Jonas Renkse, Swedish vocalist (Katatonia) & bassist (Bloodbath) May 20 - Andrew Sega, American musician May 25 - Lauryn Hill, singer (The Fugees) May 27 - André 3000, vocalist (OutKast) May 29 - Melanie Brown, singer (Spice Girls) June 4 - Russell Brand, actor, comedian and DJ June 8 - Emm Gryner, Canadian singer-songwriter June 23 - KT Tunstall, singer-songwriter and guitarist June 26 KJ-52, American rapper (Peace of Mind) Marie-Nicole Lemieux, operatic contralto June 28 Jon Nödtveidt, Swedish singer (d. 2006) Ning Baizura, Malaysian singer July 1 &ndash; Sufjan Stevens, American folk musician July 2 - Erik Ohlsson, Millencolin July 5 &ndash; Gunnar H. Thomsen, Faroese rock bassist (Týr) July 6 - 50 Cent, rapper July 9 Isaac Brock, American musician Shona Fraser, British born music journalist and judge Jack White (The White Stripes) July 11 &ndash; Lil' Kim, American rapper July 12 - Tracie Spencer, American singer and actress July 14 Jaime Luis Gomez, known as "Taboo", rapper/singer of the Black Eyed Peas Tameka Cottle known as "Tiny", American singer/songwriter member of the group Xscape July 18 Daron Malakian (System of a Down) M.I.A., English musician July 21 &ndash; Fredrik Johansson, Swedish rock guitarist July 22 - Aile Asszonyi, operatic soprano July 25 - Håvard Ellefsen (Mortiis) August 5 &ndash; Eicca Toppinen, Finnish cellist (Apocalyptica) August 7 - Gaahl, black metal vocalist August 27 - Björn Gelotte Swedish guitarist (In Flames) August 28 - Marek Szulen, electronic music composer September 1 Natalie Bassingthwaighte, Australian actress and singer Omar Rodríguez-López (At the drive-in, The Mars Volta) September 4 &ndash; Mark Ronson, British DJ and music producer September 8 - Richard Hughes, British drummer (Keane) September 9 - Michael Bublé, Canadian big band singer September 11 - Brad Fischetti, LFO September 16 - Shannon Noll, Australian singer September 17 - Constantine Maroulis, American singer (Pray for the Soul of Betty) September 21 - Lil Rob, Chicano rapper September 22 - Mystikal, rapper September 23 &ndash; Chris Hawkins, British radio personality September 30 &ndash; Georges-Alain Jones, French singer October 7 &ndash; Damian Kulash, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (OK Go and 8in8) October 9 Alain Altinoglu, conductor Sean Ono Lennon, son of John Lennon and Yoko Ono October 14 &ndash; Shaznay Lewis, English singer (All Saints) October 27 &ndash; Max Lilja, Finnish cellist (Apocalyptica) October 30 &ndash; Ian D'Sa, Canadian rock guitarist (Billy Talent) November 1 - Bo Bice, singer November 5 Lisa Scott-Lee, singer (Steps) Jamie Spaniolo (Jamie Madrox), American rapper November 6 - Mike Herrera (MxPx) November 8 &ndash; Ángel Corella, Spanish dancer November 12 &ndash; Aaron Solowoniuk, Canadian rock drummer (Billy Talent) November 14 Travis Barker, drummer (blink-182) Faye Tozer, British singer (Steps) November 19 - Tamika Scott, American singer/songwriter and producer November 20 Dierks Bentley, singer-songwriter Davey Havok, AFI Jeffrey Lewis, American anti-folk singer November 25 - Paul Mealor, composer December 13 - Tom Delonge, American musician (blink-182) December 14 - Justin Furstenfeld (Blue October) December 16 &ndash; Benjamin Kowalewicz, Canadian rock lead singer (Billy Talent) December 21 &ndash; Paloma Herrera, Argentine ballet dancer December 30 &ndash; Yoma Komatsu, former member of the female J-Pop group, BeForU January 8 - Richard Tucker, operatic tenor, 61 (heart attack) January 11 - Max Lorenz, Wagnerian tenor, 73 January 16 - Paul Beaver, electronic jazz keyboardist, 49 January 26 - Toti Dal Monte, operatic soprano, 81 January 30 - Boris Blacher, composer, 72 February 3 - Umm Kulthum, singer, songwriter, and actress February 4 - Louis Jordan, jazz musician, 66 February 10 - Dave Alexander, bassist (The Stooges), 27 (pulmonary edema) February 13 &ndash; Eric Thiman, English composer, 74 February 16 - Norman Treigle, operatic bass-baritone, 47 February 19 - Luigi Dallapiccola, composer, 71 February 22 - Lionel Tertis, viola player, 98 March 4 - Cornel Chiriac, Romanian record producer, broadcaster and jazz musician, 33 (murdered) March 14 - Will Mastin, American vaudevillian March 15 - Sandy Brown, jazz musician, 46 (heart attack) March 16 &ndash; T-Bone Walker, African-American musician (b. 1910) March 27 - Sir Arthur Bliss, Master of the Queen's Musick, 83 April 12 &ndash; Josephine Baker, African-American dancer (b. 1906) April 14 - Michael Flanders, lyricist, actor, humorist and singer (Flanders and Swann), 53 (intracranial berry aneurysm) April 23 - Pete Ham, singer and songwriter (Badfinger), 27 (suicide) May 2 - Conchita Badía, operatic soprano, 77 May 13 - Bob Wills, American Western swing bandleader, 70 May 18 - Leroy Anderson, American composer and conductor, 66 June 4 - Frida Leider, operatic soprano, 87 June 7 - Robert Schmertz, American folk musician and architect, 77 June 16 - Don Robey, songwriter and producer, 72 June 21 - David Tamkin, composer, 68 June 29 - Tim Buckley, singer-songwriter, 28 (drug overdose) July 5 - Gilda Dalla Rizza, operatic soprano, 82 July 10 - Ernst Fischer, composer, 75 July 14 - Zutty Singleton, American jazz drummer, 77 July 19 - Lefty Frizzell, Country Music Hall of Fame singer, 47 (stroke) August 8 - Julian Cannonball Adderley, American saxophonist (b. 1928) August 9 - Dmitri Shostakovich, composer, 68 (heart attack) August 10 - Neva Carr Glyn, operatic contralto, 67 September - Flora Perini, operatic soprano, 87 September 5 Georg Ots, Estonian opera singer (b. 1920) Bill Sprouse Jr., Christian singer and songwriter, 26 (heart attack) September 20 - Vincent Lopez, American bandleader (b. 1895) October 1 - Al Jackson, Jr., R&B drummer, 39 (shot) October 28 - Oliver Nelson, jazz saxophonist, 43 October 30 - John Scott Trotter, U.S. arranger and conductor December 8 - Gary Thain, rock bassist, 27 (heroin overdose) December 14 - Mongezi Feza, jazz trumpeter and flautist, 30 (pneumonia) December 17 Noble Sissle, U.S. bandleader and singer, 86 Hound Dog Taylor, blues musician, 60 December 24 Bernard Herrmann, composer, 64 Tilly Losch, dancer and actress, 72 December 25 - Julio Cueva, trumpeter, bandleader and composer, 78 Grammy Awards of 1975 Eurovision Song Contest 1975 Dimitri Alexeev Ravi Shankar Zubin Mehta
