    A list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1976.       The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1976. Most of these singles were top 20 in either the US or the UK. Day Album Artist Notes 1 The Longhorn Jamboree Presents: Willie Nelson & His Friends Willie Nelson Look into the Future Journey 2 Let the Music Play Barry White 5 Desire Bob Dylan 6 Frampton Comes Alive! Peter Frampton Live 8 Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 2 Elvis Presley Compilation Songs for the New Depression Bette Midler 9 M.U. – The Best of Jethro Tull Jethro Tull Compilation 12 Wanted! The Outlaws Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, Jessi Colter & Tompall Glaser Compilation 19 Coney Island Baby Lou Reed 23 Station to Station David Bowie 30 Futuristic Dragon T.Rex - Aftertones Janis Ian Born to Die Grand Funk Railroad Chronicle, Vol. 1 Creedence Clearwater Revival From Every Stage Joan Baez Live Havana Daydreamin' Jimmy Buffett How Dare You! 10cc Inner Worlds Mahavishnu Orchestra Jessi Jessi Colter Lovin' and Learnin' Tanya Tucker Native Sons Loggins and Messina Release Henry Gross Run with the Pack Bad Company Sandman Harry Nilsson Second Childhood Phoebe Snow Thoroughbred Carole King To the Hilt Golden Earring Day Album Artist Notes 2 Gimme Back My Bullets Lynyrd Skynyrd A Trick of the Tail Genesis 4 Ramones Ramones 7 Jesse Come Home James Gang 10 Diana Ross Diana Ross Smokey's Family Robinson Smokey Robinson 14 Dreamboat Annie Heart US; released in Canada Oct. '75 17 Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975) Eagles Compilation 29 Come On Over Olivia Newton-John - Classical Barbra Barbra Streisand Full of Fire Al Green It's All in the Movies Merle Haggard Reflections Jerry Garcia Smile Laura Nyro The Sound in Your Mind Willie Nelson Starcastle Starcastle Sunburst Finish Be-Bop Deluxe The Third Reich 'n Roll The Residents Day Album Artist Notes 5 A Love Trilogy Donna Summer Nobody's Fools Slade 10 Wings of Love The Temptations 15 Destroyer Kiss 16 I Want You Marvin Gaye 19 Takin' It to the Streets The Doobie Brothers 22 The Sun Sessions Elvis Presley Recorded 1954–'55 23 Sad Wings of Destiny Judas Priest 25 Wings at the Speed of Sound Wings 26 Amigos Santana Jailbreak Thin Lizzy Moonmadness Camel 31 Presence Led Zeppelin - American Pastime Three Dog Night Blue for You Status Quo Captured Live! Johnny Winter Live Close Enough for Rock 'n' Roll Nazareth Give Us a Wink Sweet Home Is Where the Heart Is David Cassidy - Illegal Stills Stephen Stills Just for the Record Ray Stevens Kingfish Kingfish Locked In Wishbone Ash Love & Understanding Kool & The Gang Mackintosh & T.J. Waylon Jennings & Willie Nelson Soundtrack Silk Degrees Boz Scaggs You Can't Argue with a Sick Mind Joe Walsh Live Day Album Artist Notes 1 2112 Rush 9 Hideaway America 12 Live Bullet Bob Seger & The Silver Bullet Band Live 15 Steppin' Out Neil Sedaka Still Life Van der Graaf Generator 16 Moondawn Klaus Schulze 19 Welcome Back John Sebastian 22 Blow Your Face Out The J. Geils Band Live 23 Black and Blue The Rolling Stones Garvey's Ghost Burning Spear If I Were Brittania I'd Waive the Rules Budgie Interview Gentle Giant Too Old to Rock 'n' Roll: Too Young to Die! Jethro Tull 25 Watashi no Koe ga Kikoemasuka Miyuki Nakajima 30 Here and There Elton John Live High Voltage AC/DC International debut Rastaman Vibration Bob Marley & The Wailers - Faithful Todd Rundgren Let Your Love Flow The Bellamy Brothers A Little Bit More Dr. Hook & the Medicine Show Pat Travers Pat Travers Stingray Joe Cocker Wedding Album Leon and Mary Russell Young and Rich The Tubes Day Album Artist Notes 1 From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee Elvis Presley 3 Rocks Aerosmith 4 Harvest for the World The Isley Brothers 17 Rising Rainbow 18 Warren Zevon Warren Zevon 19 Turnstiles Billy Joel 20 Changesonebowie David Bowie Compilation 21 Agents of Fortune Blue Öyster Cult 27 Sparkle Aretha Franklin Soundtrack 29 Rose of Cimarron Poco - Balls of Fire Black Oak Arkansas Contradiction Ohio Players Fly Like an Eagle Steve Miller Band I'm Nearly Famous Cliff Richard A Kind of Hush Carpenters Nine on a Ten Scale Sammy Hagar No Earthly Connection Rick Wakeman No Heavy Petting UFO The Royal Scam Steely Dan Sky High! Tavares Slow Down World Donovan T Shirt Loudon Wainwright III Tales of Mystery and Imagination The Alan Parsons Project Wired Jeff Beck Day Album Artist Notes 1 The Runaways The Runaways 7 All Things in Time Lou Rawls Rock 'n' Roll Music The Beatles Compilation 14 Chicago X Chicago 18 A Night on the Town Rod Stewart Unorthodox Behaviour Brand X 25 Alice Cooper Goes to Hell Alice Cooper Whistling Down the Wire Crosby & Nash 26 Steal Your Face Grateful Dead Live Two for the Show Trooper - Airborne The Flying Burrito Brothers Another Passenger Carly Simon Are You Ready for the Country Waylon Jennings Farther Along Spirit High and Mighty Uriah Heep Hot on the Tracks Commodores In the Pocket James Taylor Long Hard Ride The Marshall Tucker Band R.E.O. REO Speedwagon Shake Some Action Flamin' Groovies Shouting and Pointing Mott Softs Soft Machine Spitfire Jefferson Starship Starz Starz Summertime Dream Gordon Lightfoot Take the Heat off Me Boney M ...That's the Way It Is Harry Nilsson Yes We Have No Mañanas (So Get Your Mañanas Today) Kevin Ayers Day Album Artist Notes 5 15 Big Ones The Beach Boys 20 The Clones of Dr. Funkenstein Parliament I've Got You Gloria Gaynor 21 The Originals Kiss Compilation 24 Olias of Sunhillow Jon Anderson - Anthology The Jackson 5 Compilation Best of BTO (So Far) Bachman–Turner Overdrive Compilation Child in Time Ian Gillan Band Dance Pure Prairie League Diamond in the Rough Jessi Colter Howlin' Wind Graham Parker and the Rumour More Than Ever Blood, Sweat & Tears Music, Music Helen Reddy My Love Affair with Trains Merle Haggard Sincerely Dwight Twilley Band Surreal Thing Kris Kristofferson Trick Bag The Meters Year of the Cat Al Stewart Day Album Artist Notes 1 What a Lemon Gasolin' 2 Good Singin', Good Playin' Grand Funk Railroad 6 All I Can Do Dolly Parton Stretchin' Out in Bootsy's Rubber Band Bootsy's Rubber Band 8 My Name Is Jermaine Jermaine Jackson 18 Man in the Hills Burning Spear 19 Coming Out The Manhattan Transfer 25 Boston Boston 27 Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music Hawkwind No Reason to Cry Eric Clapton The Roaring Silence Manfred Mann's Earth Band - Amigo Arlo Guthrie Bigger Than Both of Us Hall & Oates Hasten Down the Wind Linda Ronstadt Honor Among Thieves Artful Dodger Jaco Pastorius Jaco Pastorius The Modern Lovers The Modern Lovers Second Thoughts Split Enz Secrets Herbie Hancock Spirit John Denver Super Ape The Upsetters This One's for You Barry Manilow Viva! Roxy Music Waking and Dreaming Orleans Day Album Artist Notes 8 Blackheart Man Bunny Wailer 11 A New World Record Electric Light Orchestra 13 Car Wash: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Rose Royce Soundtrack Hard Rain Bob Dylan Live One More from the Road Lynyrd Skynyrd Live 17 Ringo's Rotogravure Ringo Starr 20 Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap AC/DC Australia Long May You Run The Stills-Young Band Stephen Stills and Neil Young 21 Tales of Kidd Funkadelic Funkadelic 25 Technical Ecstasy Black Sabbath 28 Songs in the Key of Life Stevie Wonder 29 All the World's a Stage Rush Live - Barefoot Ballet John Klemmer Children of the World Bee Gees Dedication Bay City Rollers Here's Some Love Tanya Tucker Joan Armatrading Joan Armatrading Jump on It Montrose Keeping in Touch Anne Murray Let's Stick Together Bryan Ferry The Power of Music The Miracles Private Eyes Tommy Bolin Small Change Tom Waits Spirit Earth, Wind & Fire Stupidity Dr. Feelgood Live Troubadour JJ Cale The Troublemaker Willie Nelson The Whole World's Goin' Crazy April Wine Day Album Artist Notes 1 Chestnut Street Incident Johnny Cougar Crystal Ball Styx 9 Virgin Killer Scorpions 11 Arrival ABBA Four Seasons of Love Donna Summer Hoppkorv Hot Tuna 13 Triumph Triumph 16 Johnny the Fox Thin Lizzy 20 Zoot Allures Frank Zappa 22 Blue Moves Elton John Night Moves Bob Seger The Song Remains the Same Led Zeppelin Live 1973 23 On the Road to Kingdom Come Harry Chapin 24 Calling Card Rory Gallagher 25 Land of the Midnight Sun Al Di Meola 29 Hardcore Jollies Funkadelic - Big Beat Sparks Burton Cummings Burton Cummings Deep Cuts Strawbs Don't Stop Believin' Olivia Newton-John Flow Motion Can Free-for-All Ted Nugent Gold Ohio Players Compilation + 2 new tracks I'd Rather Believe in You Cher It Looks Like Snow Phoebe Snow Leftoverture Kansas Long Misty Days Robin Trower Love's a Prima Donna Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel Made in Europe Deep Purple Live New England Wishbone Ash Part 3 KC and the Sunshine Band Radio Ethiopia Patti Smith Group Rock and Roll Heart Lou Reed Some People Can Do What They Like Robert Palmer World Record Van der Graaf Generator Day Album Artist Notes 1 Greatest Hits James Taylor Compilation 2 Water Babies Miles Davis Recorded 1967–'68 3 Efter endnu en dag Gasolin' 4 Imaginary Voyage Jean-Luc Ponty 5 All This and World War II Various Artists Soundtrack The Jacksons The Jacksons 8 The Best of George Harrison George Harrison Compilation 9 Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers 11 Rock and Roll Over Kiss 18 Have a Good Time Al Green 19 Thirty Three & 1/3 George Harrison 29 Tejas ZZ Top 30 Is This Whatcha Wont? Barry White - A Star Is Born Barbra Streisand Soundtrack Best of The Doobies The Doobie Brothers Compilation Endless Flight Leo Sayer Getting It in the Street David Cassidy Gulf Winds Joan Baez Hejira Joni Mitchell Love Is All Around Eric Burdon & War Night Shift Foghat Open Sesame Kool & the Gang Play 'n' the Game Nazareth The Pretender Jackson Browne The Roots of My Raising Merle Haggard Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas The Allman Brothers Band Live Day Album Artist Notes 2 Still Stills: The Best of Stephen Stills Stephen Stills 5 Oxygène Jean Michel Jarre France 8 Hotel California Eagles 10 A Day at the Races Queen Wings over America Wings Live 27 Wind & Wuthering Genesis - Andy Irvine/Paul Brady Andy Irvine & Paul Brady Blondie Blondie Debut Brass Construction II Brass Construction Dawn Eloy Firefly Uriah Heep Waylon Live Waylon Jennings Live # Artist Title Year Country Chart entries 1 ABBA Dancing Queen 1976 UK 1 – Aug 1976, US BB 1 – Jan 1977, Netherlands 1 – Aug 1976, Sweden (alt) 1 – Aug 1976, France 1 – Aug 1976, Norway 1 – Aug 1976, Éire 1 – Sep 1976, Australia 1 for 8 weeks Apr 1977, POP 1 of 1977, US BB 2 of 1977, Germany 2 – Aug 1976, Party 2 of 2007, US CashBox 3 of 1977, Switzerland 3 – Aug 1976, Australia 3 of 1976, Austria 4 – Sep 1976, RYM 4 of 1976, Canada 6 – Jan 1977, South Africa 10 of 1976, Europe 14 of the 1970s, OzNet 31, Global 33 (5 M sold) – 1976, Italy 65 of 1976, Scrobulate 82 of pop, Germany 99 of the 1970s, Acclaimed 122, RIAA 148, Rolling Stone 171, Belgium 224 of all time, WXPN 847 2 Queen Bohemian Rhapsody 1976 UK 1 – Dec 1991, Canada 1 – Mar 1976, Netherlands 1 – Dec 1975, Éire 1 – Dec 1975, Australia 1 for 2 weeks Oct 1976, Europe 1 of the 1970s, RYM 1 of 1975, US BB 2 of 1992, Australia 2 of 1976, Virgin 2, France 3 – Nov 1975, Belgium 3 of all time, Switzerland 4 – Feb 1976, Norway 4 – Jan 1976, Poland 4 of all time, TOTP 5, POP 5 of 1992, OzNet 6, 8 in 2FM list, Scrobulate 9 of rock, Germany 10 – Jan 1976, Austria 14 – Feb 1992, TheQ 16, Sweden (alt) 18 – Feb 1976, US CashBox 22 of 1992, US BB 33 of 1976, Acclaimed 63, WXPN 90, Rolling Stone 163 3 Chicago If You Leave Me Now 1976 UK 1 – Oct 1976, US BB 1 – Aug 1976, Canada 1 – Sep 1976, Netherlands 1 – Oct 1976, Éire 1 – Dec 1976, Australia 1 for 5 weeks Jul 1977, Sweden (alt) 2 – Nov 1976, France 3 – Oct 1976, Austria 3 – Jan 1977, Switzerland 3 – Jan 1977, Germany 3 – Jan 1977, Norway 4 – Nov 1976, Australia 10 of 1977, South Africa 11 of 1977, US CashBox 14 of 1976, POP 18 of 1976, Italy 25 of 1977, RYM 31 of 1976, Europe 41 of the 1970s, Germany 168 of the 1970s, OzNet 449 4 ABBA Fernando 1976 UK 1 – Mar 1976, Netherlands 1 – Mar 1976, Austria 1 – Apr 1976, Switzerland 1 – Mar 1976, Australia 1 of 1976, Germany 1 – Mar 1976, Australia 1 for 14 weeks Nov 1976, Sweden (alt) 2 – Apr 1976, Norway 2 – Apr 1976, South Africa 5 of 1976, Canada 7 – Sep 1976, Global 7 (10 M sold) – 1976, France 10 – Apr 1976, US BB 13 – Sep 1976, Germany 15 of the 1970s, Italy 23 of 1976, Scrobulate 33 of Swedish, POP 35 of 1976, RYM 36 of 1976 5 Elton John Kiki Dee Don't Go Breaking My Heart 1976 UK 1 – Jul 1976, US BB 1 – Jul 1976, Canada 1 – Jun 1976, France 1 – Aug 1976, Éire 1 – Aug 1976, Australia 1 for 1 weeks Apr 1977, Netherlands 2 – Aug 1976, Sweden (alt) 3 – Sep 1976, South Africa 3 of 1976, Switzerland 4 – Sep 1976, US CashBox 5 of 1976, Norway 5 – Aug 1976, Australia 5 of 1976, Germany 5 – Sep 1976, Austria 8 – Oct 1976, Italy 25 of 1976, RYM 50 of 1976, Germany 313 of the 1970s, OzNet 522 US number one singles and artist  (weeks at number one) UK number one singles and artist  (weeks at number one) "Saturday Night" – Bay City Rollers (1)"Convoy" – C. W. McCall (1)"I Write the Songs" – Barry Manilow (1)"Theme from Mahogany (Do You Know Where You're Going To)" – Diana Ross (1)"Love Rollercoaster" – Ohio Players (1)"50 Ways to Leave Your Lover" – Paul Simon (3)"Theme from S.W.A.T." – Rhythm Heritage (1)"Love Machine" – The Miracles (1)"December, 1963 (Oh, What a Night) – The Four Seasons (3)"Disco Lady" – Johnnie Taylor (4)"Let Your Love Flow" – The Bellamy Brothers (1)"Welcome Back" – John Sebastian (1)"Boogie Fever" – The Sylvers (1)"Silly Love Songs" – Paul McCartney & Wings (5)"Love Hangover" – Diana Ross (2)"Afternoon Delight" – Starland Vocal Band (2)"Kiss and Say Goodbye" – The Manhattans (2)"Don't Go Breaking My Heart" – Elton John & Kiki Dee (4)"You Should Be Dancing" – Bee Gees (1)"(Shake, Shake, Shake) Shake Your Booty" – KC and the Sunshine Band (1)"Play That Funky Music" – Wild Cherry (3)"A Fifth of Beethoven" – Walter Murphy & The Big Apple Band (1)"Disco Duck" – Rick Dees & His Cast Of Idiots (1)"If You Leave Me Now" – Chicago (2)"Rock'n Me" – Steve Miller Band (1)"Tonight's The Night" – Rod Stewart (7 weeks 1976 + 1 week 1977), best seller of the year "Bohemian Rhapsody" – Queen (5 weeks 1975 + 4 weeks 1976)"Mamma Mia" – ABBA (2)"Forever and Ever" – Slik (1)"December, 1963 (Oh, What a Night)" – The Four Seasons (2)"I Love to Love (But My Baby Loves to Dance)" – Tina Charles (3)"Save Your Kisses for Me" – Brotherhood of Man (6), best seller of the year"Fernando" – ABBA (4)"No Charge" – J. J. Barrie (1)"Combine Harvester (Brand New Key) " – The Wurzels (2)"You to Me Are Everything" – The Real Thing (3)"Forever and Ever" – Demis Roussos (1)"Don't Go Breaking My Heart" – Elton John & Kiki Dee (6)"Dancing Queen" – ABBA (6)"Mississippi" – Pussycat (4)"If You Leave Me Now" – Chicago (3)"Under the Moon of Love" – Showaddywaddy (3)"When a Child is Born" – Johnny Mathis (1 week 1976 + 2 weeks 1977) January 5 – Former Beatles road manager Mal Evans is shot dead by Los Angeles police after refusing to drop what police only later determine is an air rifle. January 7 – Kenneth Moss, a former record company executive, is sentenced to 120 days in the Los Angeles County Jail and four years probation for involuntary manslaughter in the 1974 drug-induced death of Average White Band drummer Robbie McIntosh. January 13 – A trial begins for seven Brunswick Records and Dakar Records employees. The record company employees are charged with stealing more than $184,000 in royalties from artists. January 19 – Concert promoter Bill Sargent makes an offer of $30 million to the Beatles if they will reunite for a concert. February 15 – Bette Midler bails seven members of her entourage out of jail after they are arrested on charges of cocaine and marijuana possession. February 19 – Former Tower of Power lead singer Rick Stevens is arrested and charged with the drug-related murders of three men in San Jose, California. February 20 – Kiss have their footprints added to the sidewalk outside Hollywood's Grauman's Chinese Theater. February 24 – Having been released one week before, The Eagles' Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975) compilation becomes the first album in history to be certified platinum by the RIAA. The new platinum certification represents sales of at least 1 million copies for albums and 2 million copies for singles. March 4 – ABBA arrive at Sydney airport for a promotional tour in Australia. March 6 – EMI Records reissues all 22 previously released British Beatles singles, plus a new single of the classic "Yesterday". All 23 singles hit the UK charts at the same time. March 7 – A wax likeness of Elton John is put on display in London's Madame Tussaud's Wax Museum. March 9 – The Who's Keith Moon collapses onstage ten minutes into a performance at the Boston Garden. March 15 – Members of The Plastic People of the Universe are arrested in communist Czechoslovakia. They were sentenced from 8 to 18 months in jail. March 20 – Alice Cooper marries Sheryl Goddard in an Acapulco restaurant. March 25 – Jackson Browne's wife Phyllis commits suicide. March 26 – In Paris, France, Wings guitarist Jimmy McCulloch breaks one of his fingers when he slips in his hotel bathroom following the final performance on the band's European tour. The injury ended up delaying the band's United States tour by three weeks. April 3 – British pop group Brotherhood of Man win the 21st Eurovision Song Contest in The Hague, Netherlands, with the song "Save Your Kisses For Me". It goes on to be the biggest selling Eurovision winner ever. April 14 – Stevie Wonder announces that he has signed a "$13 million-plus" contract with Motown Records. April 23 - The Ramones release their eponymous titled debut studio album Ramones. April 24 – Saturday Night Live producer Lorne Michaels makes a semi-serious on-air offer to pay the Beatles $3000 to reunite live on the show. In a 1980 interview, John Lennon stated that he and Paul McCartney happened to be watching the show together at Lennon's apartment in New York and considered walking down to the SNL studio "for a gag" but were "too tired".John Lennon Playboy interview, 1980 On May 22, Michaels raises his offer from $3,000 to $3,200. April 28 – The Rolling Stones open their European tour in Frankfurt, Germany. April 29 – When his tour stops in Memphis, Tennessee, Bruce Springsteen jumps the wall at Elvis Presley's mansion, "Graceland", in an attempt to see his idol. Security guards stop Springsteen and escort him off the grounds. May 3 Paul McCartney and Wings start their Wings over America Tour in Fort Worth, Texas. This is the first time McCartney has performed in the US since The Beatles' last concert in 1966 at Candlestick Park. Paul Simon puts together a benefit show at Madison Square Garden to raise money for the New York Public Library. Phoebe Snow, Jimmy Cliff and the Brecker Brothers also perform. The concert brings in over $30,000 for the Library. May 19 Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards is involved in a car accident northwest of London. Cocaine is found in his wrecked car. Richards is given a court date of January 12, 1977. Rumour spread by German press: ABBA members killed in plane crash, only Anni-Frid survived. May 25 – Bob Dylan's Rolling Thunder Revue tour ends. June – Former Spring Canyon keyboardist Mark Cook joins Daniel Amos. June 6 – Keith Richards and Anita Pallenberg suffer tragedy when their 10-week-old son Tara dies of respiratory failure. June 10 – Alice Cooper collapses and is rushed to UCLA Hospital in Los Angeles, three weeks before the Goes To Hell tour would begin. The tour is cancelled. June 18 – ABBA perform "Dancing Queen" for the first time on Swedish television in Stockholm on the eve of the wedding of King Carl XVI Gustaf to Silvia Sommerlath. June 25 – Uriah Heep performs its last show with David Byron as lead singer in Bilbao, Spain. Byron is sacked shortly afterward. July 2 Composer Benjamin Britten accepts a life peerage, only a few months before his death. Brian Wilson performs on stage with The Beach Boys for the first time in three years at a Day on the Green concert in Oakland, California. July 4 – Many outdoor festivals and shows are held all over the United States as the country celebrates its bicentennial. Elton John performs for 62,000 at Shaffer Stadium in Foxboro, Massachusetts, while The Eagles and Fleetwood Mac play for 36,000 at Tampa Stadium, Lynyrd Skynyrd and ZZ Top draw 35,000 at Memphis Memorial Stadium and Elvis Presley performs for 11,974 at the Mabee Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma. July 7 – 50,000 fans brave the rain in New York to attend a free Jefferson Starship concert in Central Park. July 27 – Tina Turner files for divorce from husband Ike. August 5 – Eric Clapton provokes an uproar over comments he makes on stage at a Birmingham concert, voicing his opposition to immigration using multiple racial slurs while exhorting the audience to support Enoch Powell and to "keep Britain white". August 11 – Keith Moon is rushed to hospital for the second time in five months, collapsing after trashing his Miami hotel room. August 13 – The official ABBA logo with the reversed 'B' is adopted. August 16 – Cliff Richard becomes one of the first Western artists ever to perform in the Soviet Union when he gives a concert in Leningrad. August 21 – An estimated 120,000 fans pack Knebworth House to see The Rolling Stones. Todd Rundgren, Lynyrd Skynyrd and 10cc also perform. August 31 – a U.S. district court decision rules that George Harrison had "subconsciously" copied The Chiffons' hit "He's So Fine" when he wrote the song "My Sweet Lord". September 1 – Ode Records president Lou Adler is kidnapped at his Malibu home and released eight hours later after a $25,000 ransom is paid. Two suspects are soon arrested. September 3 – Rory Gallagher joins the short list of Western popular musicians to perform behind the Iron Curtain with a show in Warsaw, Poland. September 8 – In a candid interview appearing in the October 7 edition of Rolling Stone published today, Elton John publicly discloses his bisexuality for the first time. September 14 – The one-hour Bob Dylan concert special Hard Rain airs on NBC, coinciding with the release of the live album of the same name. September 18 Queen performs a massive free concert at London's Hyde Park for over 150,000 people. The second annual Rock Music Awards air on CBS. Peter Frampton wins Rock Personality of the Year, while Fleetwood Mac wins for Best Group and Best Album. September 20 & September 21 – 100 Club Punk Festival, the first international punk festival is held in London. Siouxsie and the Banshees play their first concert. September 25 – Bono, The Edge, Adam Clayton and Larry Mullen, Jr form a band called Feedback in Dublin. The band would later be renamed U2. October 2 – Joe Cocker performs a duet of "Feelin' Alright" with himself (as portrayed by John Belushi) on Saturday Night Live. October 8 – English punk rock group the Sex Pistols sign a contract with EMI Records. October 11 – Irish singer Joe Dolan is banned for life by Aer Lingus after an air rage incident en route to Corfu from Dublin. October 20 – The Led Zeppelin concert film The Song Remains the Same premieres at Cinema I in New York. October 31 – George Clinton and Parliament Funkadelic begin "The P-Funk/Rubber Band Earth Tour" in Houston, a national live series highlighting one of the biggest and revolutionary stage shows in the history of the music industry (the rock group Kiss would be the other group to do a similar act), relying on elaborate costumes, special lighting and effects, and extremely large props including "the Mothership", which would arrive and land on stage, all of what this band is generally known for. This live set would vary in length (on average of 3 to 5 hours long) and at high volume. November 18 – Former Tower of Power lead singer Rick Stevens and another person are found guilty on two counts of murder. November 23 Thin Lizzy are forced to cancel their U.S. tour when guitarist Brian Robertson injures his hand in a bar fight. Jerry Lee Lewis is arrested after showing up drunk outside Graceland at 3 a.m., waving a pistol and loudly demanding to see Elvis Presley. Presley denied his request. November 25 – The Band gives its last public performance; Martin Scorsese is on hand to film it. November 26 – The Sex Pistols' debut single "Anarchy in the U.K." is released by EMI. December 1 – In the UK, the Sex Pistols cause a national outcry after swearing on Thames Television's Today show. December 2 – The Bee Gees perform at Madison Square Garden and donate the proceeds to the Police Athletic League in New York. In January 1979, they will receive the Police Athletic League's "Superstars of the Year" award. December 3 A Pink Floyd album cover shoot in South London goes awry when a large inflatable pig balloon being used for the shoot breaks free of its moorings and drifts out of sight. Bob Marley and several others are injured when gunmen burst into his home in Kingston, Jamaica and open fire. December 8 The Carpenters air their "Very First Television Special" on ABC. The Eagles release Hotel California. December 12 – Ace Frehley is shocked on stage during a Kiss concert in Lakeland, Florida after touching an ungrounded metal railing. The incident inspires the song "Shock Me". December 31 – The fifth annual New Year's Rockin' Eve special airs on ABC, with performances by Donna Summer, Bachman-Turner Overdrive, The Four Seasons, and KC and the Sunshine Band. The last practitioner of the rekuhkara form of throat-singing dies, in Hokkaido, Japan. Tenor Franco Corelli retires from the stage at the age of 55. Cheryl Byron performs rapso in calypso tents for the first time, beginning the popularization of rapso. Peter Brown's solo career begins. Peter Tosh's solo career begins. Bunny Wailer's solo career begins. Leif Garrett's solo career begins. .38 Special's musical career begins. Y&T (Yesterday & Today)'s musical career begins. Sergio Franchi becomes TV spokesman for Chrysler Corporation's Plymouth "Volare" and media spokesman for Hills Brothers coffee. Steve Martin signs a contract with Warner Bros. Eddie Money signs a contract with CBS. "Ten Percent", by Double Exposure, becomes the first 12-inch single commercially available to the public (as opposed to DJ-only promotional copies). The Chinese Music Society of North America is founded. Gabin Dabiré embarks on a tour of Italy. See  The Pirates See  20 Magnificent Songs - Sergio Franchi After Hours – Little River Band After the Dust Settles – Juice Newton and Silver Spur Andy Irvine/Paul Brady The Art of Tea Michael Franks Automatic Man – Automatic Man Basie Jam 2 – Count Basie Basie Jam 3 – Count Basie Beautiful Noise - Neil Diamond The Book of Invasions – Horslips Both Sides of Ray Stevens – Ray Stevens Brass Construction II – Brass Construction Bright Size Life – Pat Metheny Chicken Skin Music - Ry Cooder City Boy – City Boy Coup de chapeau au passé – Dalida Cry Tough – Nils Lofgren David Soul – David Soul Disco Train – Donny Osmond Dr. Buzzard's Original Savannah Band – Dr. Buzzard's Original Savannah Band The Early Show - Art Pepper Ella and Oscar - Ella Fitzgerald, Oscar Peterson Everybody Loves the Sunshine – Roy Ayers Everyday of My Life – Michael Bolton Fitzgerald and Pass... Again – Ella Fitzgerald, Joe Pass Flyin' High – Blackfoot Fly with the Wind – McCoy Tyner Focal Point – McCoy Tyner From My Private Collection - Sergio Con Amore - Sergio Franchi Good High – Brick Greatest Hits – War Happy to Be – Demis Roussos Heat Treatment – Graham Parker Helluva Band - Angel Hit the Road Jack – Big Youth Hot – James Brown Hot Tracks – Nazareth I Told You So – Count Basie In the Falling Dark – Bruce Cockburn It's a Good Night for Singing – Jerry Jeff Walker Jammy Smears – Ivor Cutler Kites – Jade Warrior L – Steve Hillage La Düsseldorf – La Düsseldorf Love To The World – L.T.D. Late General Murtala Ramat Mohammed – Salawa Abeni Legalize It – Peter Tosh Life & Times – Billy Cobham A Little Bit More – Dr. Hook & The Medicine Show Lone Star – Lone Star Look My Way – Rosemary Clooney Look Out for #1 – The Brothers Johnson Mahogany Rush IV – Mahogany Rush The Manhattans – The Manhattans Man to Man – Hot Chocolate Marriott – Steve Marriott Max Webster – Max Webster Message in the Music – The O'Jays Metallic K.O. – The Stooges – Live 1973–'74 The Mini-Album – Sex Pistols (live EP) Misty – Ray Stevens Mondo Deco – The Quick More, More, More – Andrea True Connection Moxy II – Moxy Music from the Penguin Cafe – Penguin Cafe Orchestra Natty Cultural Dread – Big Youth No Rest for the Wicked – Truth and Janey Octoberon – Barclay James Harvest A Parcel of Rogues – The Dubliners Pangaea - Miles Davis - Live Passport – Nana Mouskouri Ports of the Heart – Jimmie Spheeris Ratcity in Blue – Good Rats Right Time – Mighty Diamonds Ripper '76 – Various Artists Roadhawks – Hawkwind Robin Trower Live - Robin Trower R-O-C-K – Bill Haley & His Comets Rocket Cottage – Steeleye Span Romantic Warrior – Return to Forever School Days - Stanley Clarke Seed of Memory – Terry Reid Sergio Franchi - Sergio Franchi (TeleHouse album) Sergio Franchi Sings Volare - Sergio Franchi (Chrysler Corp. Promo) Ship of Memories – Focus Song of Joy – Captain & Tennille Southern Tracks & Fantasies – Paul Davis Sowiesoso – Cluster Starland Vocal Band – Starland Vocal Band Still Shakin' – Flamin' Groovies A Street Called Straight – Roy Buchanan Streetheart – Dion Teenage Depression – Eddie and the Hot Rods This Is Sergio Franchi - Sergio Franchi (compilation) Timeless Flight – Steve Harley & Cockney Rebel Trenchtown Mix Up – The Gladiators 20th Anniversary of Rock 'n' Roll – Bo Diddley Von Herz zu Herz – Die Flippers The Wild Tchoupitoulas – The Meters, George & Amos Landry, The Neville Brothers Yesterday and Today – Y&T (debut) Zombie – Fela Kuti "16 Bars" – The Stylistics "All By Myself" – Eric Carmen "Anarchy in the U.K." – Sex Pistols "Arms of Mary" – Sutherland Brothers and Quiver "Baby, I Love Your Way" – Peter Frampton "The Best Disco in Town" - Ritchie Family (medley) "Beth" – Kiss "Blinded by the Light" – Manfred Mann's Earth Band "The Boys Are Back in Town" – Thin Lizzy "Come On Over" – Olivia Newton-John "Couldn't Get It Right" – Climax Blues Band "Crazy on You" – Heart "Daddy Cool - Boney M. "Dazz" – Brick "Devil Woman" – Cliff Richard "Do You Feel Like We Do" – Peter Frampton "Doctor Kiss Kiss" – 5000 Volts "Doina de Jale (The Light of Experience)" – Gheorghe Zamfir "(Don't Fear) The Reaper" – Blue Öyster Cult "Dream Weaver" – Gary Wright "Evil Woman" – Electric Light Orchestra "Fanny (Be Tender with My Love)" - Bee Gees "Fly Away" - John Denver (with backing vocals by Olivia Newton-John) "Fooled Around and Fell in Love - The Elvin Bishop Group "Fopp" - Ohio Players "Fox on the Run" - Sweet "Fool to Cry" – The Rolling Stones "Get Closer" - Seals and Crofts "Get the Funk Out of My Face" - Brothers Johnson "Getaway" - Earth, Wind and Fire "Golden Years" - David Bowie "(Giving Him) Something He Can Feel" - Aretha Franklin "Get Up and Boogie" – Silver Convention "Got to Get You Into My Life" - The Beatles "Grow Some Funk of Your Own" - Elton John "Happy Days" - Pratt and McLain with Brotherlove "Happy Music" - Blackbyrds "Heart On My Sleeve" – Gallagher and Lyle "Heaven Must Be Missing an Angel" – Tavares "Hot Line" – The Sylvers "Howzat" – Sherbet "Hurricane" – Bob Dylan "I Love Music" – The O'Jays "I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do" - ABBA "I Feel Like a Bullet (In the Gun of Robert Ford)" - Elton John "I Love to Boogie" – T. Rex "I Need to Be in Love" - The Carpenters "I Never Cry" - Alice Cooper "I Only Want to Be with You" - The Bay City Rollers "I Want You" – Marvin Gaye "I Wish" – Stevie Wonder "I'd Really Love to See You Tonight" – England Dan and John Ford Coley "I'll Be Good to You" - Brothers Johnson "I'm Mandy Fly Me" – 10cc "If You Know What I Mean" - Neil Diamond "In Dulce Jubilo/On Horseback" – Mike Oldfield "In Zaire" – Johnny Wakelin "Junk Food Junkie" - Larry Groce "Just to Be Close to You" - The Commodores "The Killing of Georgie (Part I and II)" – Rod Stewart "Let 'Em In" – Paul McCartney & Wings "Let Her In" - John Travolta "Let's Do It Again" - The Staple Singers "Let's Call It Quits" – Slade "Let's Stick Together" – Bryan Ferry "A Little Bit More" – Dr. Hook "Livin' Thing" – Electric Light Orchestra "Livin' for the Weekend" - The O'Jays "Lonely Night (Angel Face)" - The Captain and Tennille "Love And Affection" – Joan Armatrading "Love Ballad" - L.T.D. "Love Hurts" – Nazareth "Love in the Shadows" - Neil Sedaka "Love Is Alive" - Gary Wright "Love Me" – Yvonne Elliman "Love Really Hurts Without You" – Billy Ocean "Love So Right" - Bee Gees "Love to Love You Baby" – Donna Summer "Lowdown" – Boz Scaggs "Magic Man" – Heart "Miss You Nights" – Cliff Richard "Misty Blue" – Dorothy Moore "Money Honey" - The Bay City Rollers "Money, Money, Money" – ABBA "Moonlight Feels Right" – Starbuck "More, More, More" – Andrea True Connection "More Than a Feeling" – Boston "Movin'" - Brass Construction "Music" – John Miles "Muskrat Love" – The Captain & Tennille "Nadia's Theme (The Young & The Restless)" – Barry DeVorzon & Perry Botkin, Jr. "Never Gonna Fall in Love Again" - Eric Carmen "One Love in My Lifetime" - Diana Ross "Only Sixteen" – Dr. Hook "Over My Head" - Fleetwood Mac "Pinball Wizard" – Elton John "Rain" – Status Quo "Rhiannon" – Fleetwood Mac "Right Back Where We Started From" – Maxine Nightingale "Rock and Roll All Nite" - Kiss (live version) "Rock and Roll Music" - The Beach Boys "Rodrigo's Guitar Concerto (Concerto De Aranjuez)" – Manuel and His Music of the Mountains (erroneously listed at UK#1 briefly Feb. 21) "The Rubberband Man" – The Detroit Spinners "Sara Smile" - Daryl Hall & John Oates "Say You Love Me" – Fleetwood Mac "Shannon" – Henry Gross "She's Gone" – Daryl Hall & John Oates "Shop Around" – The Captain & Tennille "Shout It Out Loud" – Kiss "Show Me the Way" – Peter Frampton "Silly Love Songs" – Paul McCartney & Wings "Silver Star" – The Four Seasons "Sing a Song" - Earth, Wind and Fire "Somebody to Love" – Queen "Somewhere in the Night" - Helen Reddy "Sophisticated Lady (She's a Different Lady)" - Natalie Cole "Sorry Seems to Be the Hardest Word" – Elton John "Squeeze Box" - The Who "Still the One" – Orleans "Strange Magic" – Electric Light Orchestra "Summer" - War "Sweet Thing" - Rufus featuring Chaka Khan "Take It To The Limit" – Eagles "Take the Money and Run" – Steve Miller Band "Takin' It to the Streets" - The Doobie Brothers "Tangerine" - Salsoul Orchestra "Tear The Roof Off The Sucker" - Parliament "That'll Be the Day" – Linda Ronstadt "There's a Kind of Hush (All Over the World)" – The Carpenters "This Masquerade" - George Benson "This Old Heart of Mine" – Rod Stewart "Times of Your Life" - Paul Anka "Today's the Day" - America "Tryin' to Get the Feeling Again" – Barry Manilow "Turn the Beat Around" - Vickie Sue Robinson "Wake Up Everybody" - Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes "Walk Away from Love" - David Ruffin "Weekend In New England" – Barry Manilow "Wham Bam" - Silver "Who'd She Coo" - Ohio Players "With Your Love" - Jefferson Starship "The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald" – Gordon Lightfoot "Year of the Cat" – Al Stewart "You Are the Woman" – Firefall "You Make Me Feel Like Dancing" – Leo Sayer "You See The Trouble With Me" – Barry White "You Sexy Thing" – Hot Chocolate "You'll Never Find Another Love Like Mine" – Lou Rawls "You're My Best Friend" – Queen "Young Hearts Run Free" – Candi Staton "Always and Forever"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Rod Temperton "Dancing Queen"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Benny Andersson, Stig Anderson & Björn Ulvaeus "Devil Woman"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Terry Britten & Christine Authors "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina" w. Tim Rice m. Andrew Lloyd Webber "Don't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue" w.m. Richard Leigh "Empty Tables"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w. Johnny Mercer m. Jimmy Van Heusen "Evergreen"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w. Paul Williams m. Barbra Streisand "Fernando"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Benny Andersson, Stig Anderson & Björn Ulvaeus "Gonna Fly Now" (aka "Theme From Rocky") &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w. Carol Connors & Ayn Robbins m. Bill Conti "I Never Do Anything Twice" aka "The Madam's Song" w.m. Stephen Sondheim. Introduced by Régine in the film The Seven-Per-Cent Solution "Isn't She Lovely?"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Stevie Wonder "Like A Sad Song"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. John Denver "A Little Bit More"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Bobby Gosh "Making Our Dreams Come True" w.m. Norman Gimbel & Charles Fox, from the TV series Laverne and Shirley "Money, Money, Money"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m. Benny Andersson & Björn Ulvaeus "Sorry Seems To Be The Hardest Word"&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;w.m.Elton John "Welcome Back" w.m. John Sebastian.  Theme song from the television series Welcome Back Kotter "Ballade pour Adeline" m. Paul de Senneville and Olivier Toussaint "Djambo, Djambo" w.m. Peter Reber "El Pasadiscos" w.m. Diego Verdaguer "Kabhi Kabhie Mere Dil Mein" w. Sahir Ludhianvi m. Khayyam Geoffrey Burgon – Requiem Elliot Carter – A Symphony of Three Orchestras Brian Cherney – String Trio George Crumb Dream Sequence (Images II) for violin, cello, piano, percussion (one player), and off-stage glass harmonica (two players) Night Music I (1963, revised 1976) for soprano, piano/celeste, and two percussionists Mario Davidovsky – String Quartet No. 3 Henri Dutilleux – Ainsi la nuit Einar Englund – Symphony No. 4 Nostalgic (in memory of Shostakovich) Lorenzo Ferrero Le néant où l'on ne peut arriver Romanza senza parole Henryk Górecki – Symphony No. 3 Symphony of Sorrowful Songs Ib Nørholm - Sonata No. 1, op. 69, for guitar Krzysztof Penderecki – Violin Concerto No. 1 Karlheinz Stockhausen – Amour Manfred Trojahn Architectura caelestis for vocalists and orchestra String Quartet No. 1 Peter Maxwell Davies – The Martyrdom of St Magnus Carlisle Floyd – Bilby's Doll Philip Glass – Einstein on the Beach Bubbling Brown Sugar&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production Fiddler on the Roof (Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick) – Broadway revival Guys and Dolls&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway revival Irene&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London revival My Fair Lady (Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe) – Broadway revival Oh Calcutta&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway revival Pacific Overtures (Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman) – Broadway production opened at the Winter Garden Theatre on January 11 and ran for 193 performances Porgy and Bess&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway revival Salad Days (Julian Slade) – London revival Side by Side by Sondheim&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London production Starmania The Threepenny Opera (Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill) – Broadway revival The Blank Generation Bound for Glory Bør Børson II Bugsy Malone Dus Numbri Hera Pheri Leadbelly The Slipper and the Rose The Song Remains the Same – Led Zeppelin A Star Is Born That's Entertainment, Part II January 8 – Jenny Lewis, vocalist (Rilo Kiley) January 16 – Stuart Fletcher (The Seahorses) January 18 – Damien Leith, Australian singer/songwriter January 20 – Sid Wilson (Slipknot) January 21 – Emma Bunton, British singer (Spice Girls) January 23 – Tony Lucca, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actor January 29 – Chris Castle, American singer-songwriter and guitarist February 4 – Cam'ron, rapper February 13 – Leslie Feist (Broken Social Scene) February 15 Brandon Boyd (Incubus) Ronnie Vannucci, Jr. (The Killers) February 28 – Ja Rule, American rapper March 8 – Gareth Coombes, British singer (Supergrass) March 16 – Blu Cantrell, singer March 17 – Stephen Gately, Irish singer (Boyzone) (died.2009) March 20 – Chester Bennington (Linkin Park) March 26 – Dave Keuning (The Killers) April 2 – Lucy Diakovska, German-Bulgarian pop singer April 10 - Jan Werner Danielsen, Norwegian singer (d.2006) April 18 – Sean Maguire, British actor and singer April 29 – Jay Orpin, Swedish composer and record producer May 8 Martha Wainwright, singer-songwriter, daughter of Loudon Wainwright III and Kate McGarrigle Ian "H" Watkins, British singer (Steps) May 10 – Udo Mechels, Belgian singer May 14 – Hunter Burgan (AFI) May 17 – Kandi Burruss (Xscape) May 22 – Daniel Erlandsson, Swedish drummer (Arch Enemy) May 29 – Dave Buckner (Papa Roach) June 2 Tim Rice-Oxley, British musician (Keane) Adrian Olivares (Menudo) June 6 – Emilie-Claire Barlow, Canadian singer-songwriter and actress June 7 – Necro (Ron Braunstein), American rapper and record producer June 11 – Tai Anderson, American rock bassist (Third Day) June 13 Jason "J" Brown, English rock musician (5ive) Kym Marsh, English singer (Hear'Say) June 15 Gary Lightbody, Northern Irish rock musician and songwriter (Snow Patrol) Dryden Mitchell (Alien Ant Farm) June 18 – Blake Shelton, American singer-songwriter and guitarist June 20 – Jerome Fontamillas, American singer and guitarist (Switchfoot, Mortal, and Fold Zandura) June 21 – Mike Einziger (Incubus) June 22 – Gordon Moakes (Bloc Party) June 23 – Joe Becker, American guitarist and composer June 26 – Paul Phillips, guitarist (Puddle of Mudd) June 27 – Leigh Nash, American singer (Sixpence None the Richer) July 1 Justin Lo, Hong Kong singer and actor Plies, American rapper July 3 – Shane Lynch, Irish singer (Boyzone) July 5 Bizarre, African American rapper Mike DeWolf, American rock musician (Taproot) July 8 – David Kennedy, American guitarist and songwriter (Angels & Airwaves, Box Car Racer, Hazen Street, and Over My Dead Body) July 10 – Elijah Blue Allman, American musician, son of Cher and Greg Allman July 12 – Tracie Spencer, American singer-songwriter and actress July 16 – Chiara Zeffirelli, crossover soprano July 20 – Andrew Stockdale, Australian rock singer/guitarist (Wolfmother) July 22 – Kokia, Japanese singer-songwriter August 8 JC Chasez, American singer (*NSYNC) Drew Lachey, American singer (98 Degrees) August 11 Brendan Bayliss, American  rock guitarist and vocalist Ben Gibbard, American rock musician (Death Cab for Cutie, The Postal Service) August 12 Mikko Lindström, Finnish rock guitarist Wednesday 13, American rock lead singer (Murderdolls, FDQ) Lina Rafn, Danish singer August 13 – Roddy Woomble, Scottish musician August 14 – Maya Nasri, Lebanese actress and singer August 18 - Alex Katunich, (Incubus) September 12 – Bizzy Bone, American rapper, member of Bone Thugs-n-Harmony September 16 Tina Barrett, British singer (S Club 7) Elīna Garanča, operatic soprano October 6 – Barbie Hsu, Taiwanese actress and singer October 7 – Taylor Hicks, American singer October 19 – Omar Gooding, rapper October 20 – Tom Wisniewski (MxPx) October 22 – Jon Foreman, American rock singer/guitarist (Switchfoot) November 2 - Mike Leon Grosch, German singer November 11 - Jesse F. Keeler (Death from Above 1979) November 12 – Tevin Campbell, singer-songwriter November 13 – Shagrath, Dimmu Borgir November 16 – Mario Barravecchia, Italian singer November 18 – Shagrath, Norwegian black metal musician (Dimmu Borgir) November 19 – Jun Shibata, Japanese singer and songwriter December 4 – Amie Comeaux, American country music singer (d. 1997) December 12 – Dan Hawkins, British rock guitarist (The Darkness) December 18 - Red Cafe, rapper December 25 Tuomas Holopainen, Finnish metal keyboardist (Nightwish) Armin van Buuren, Dutch music producer and DJ date unknown Philip Howard, pianist and composer John Collura (The Ataris) Patrick Riley (The Ataris) January 8 – George Baker, singer, 90 January 10 – Howlin' Wolf, blues musician, 65 January 16 – Vasco Campagnano, operatic tenor, 65 January 18 – Friedrich Hollaender, composer, 79 January 23 – Paul Robeson, singer, 77 January 25 – Chris Kenner, American singer-songwriter, 46 (heart attack) January 29 – Jesse Fuller, blues musician, 79 January 30 – Mance Lipscomb, blues musician, 80 January 31 – Evert Taube, composer and singer, 85 February 5 – Rudy Pompilli, saxophone player and 20-year member of Bill Haley & His Comets, 50 (lung cancer) February 6 – Vince Guaraldi, jazz musician and pianist, 47 February 9 – Percy Faith, bandleader and composer, 67 February 12 – Sal Mineo, actor and singer, 37 (murdered) February 13 – Lily Pons, coloratura soprano, 77 February 22 – Florence Ballard, The Supremes, 32 (coronary thrombosis) February 25 – Tarquinia Tarquini, operatic soprano, 93 March 14 – Busby Berkeley, musical director and choreographer, 80 March 19 – Paul Kossoff, guitarist, (Free), 25 (cerebral and pulmonary oedema) March 25 – Maria Zamboni, operatic soprano, March 26 – Duster Bennett, blues musician, 29 (car accident) April 8 – Phil Ochs, protest singer, 35 (suicide) April 25 - Alexander Brailowsky, pianist, 80 May 12 – Rudolf Kempe, conductor, 65 May 14 – Keith Relf, vocalist (The Yardbirds), 35 (cardiac arrest due to electrocution) May 15 – David Munrow, early music performer, 33 (suicide) May 21 – Harold Blair, operatic tenor, 51 May 26 – Maggie Teyte, operatic soprano, 88 June 6 – Elisabeth Rethberg, operatic soprano, 81 June 25 – Johnny Mercer, singer and songwriter, 66 June 28 Malcolm Lockyer, film composer and conductor, 52 Yakov Zak, pianist and music teacher, 62 August 2 – Cecilia (singer), Spanish singer-songwriter, 27 (road accident) August 6 – Gregor Piatigorsky, Russian cellist, 73 August 24 - Michael Head, composer, 76 August 26 – Lotte Lehmann, opera singer, 88 August 27 – Mukesh, Indian singer, 53 (heart attack) August 29 – Jimmy Reed, US blues musician, 50 September 26 – L.C. Robinson, US blues musician, 61 October 3 – Victoria Spivey, US singer, pianist and composer, 69 October 11 Connee Boswell, US singer, member of the Boswell Sisters, 68 Alfredo Bracchi, Italian lyricist, 78 Werner Haas, pianist, 45 (car accident) October 21 – Jean Berveiller, organist and composer, 73 November 12 – Walter Piston, composer, 82 December 4 Benjamin Britten, composer, 63 Tommy Bolin, guitarist, 25 (drug-induced suffocation) December 6 – Raymond Hanson, composer, 63 December 28 – Freddie King, blues musician, 42 Date Unknown - Patrick Kelly, Irish folk fiddler Grammy Awards of 1976 Eurovision Song Contest 1976
