   This is a list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1994.   The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1994. All albums have been named albums of the year for their hits in the charts. Date Album Artist Notes JANUARY 4 Music from the Motion Picture Philadelphia Various Artists Soundtrack Trashed Lagwagon 11 She'd Give Anything Boy Howdy EP 18 Antenna ZZ Top Dogman King's X Here It Is Freddie Jackson Whiskey for the Holy Ghost Mark Lanegan 24 Dubnobasswithmyheadman Underworld 25 Life Lover Aaron Kwok Chinese Compilation Album of UFO Record Labels Best of Bachman–Turner Overdrive Live Bachman–Turner Overdrive Live Face the Music NKOTB Hips and Makers Kristin Hersh Jar of Flies Alice in Chains EP Kickin' It Up John Michael Montgomery Snuff the Punk P.O.D. Debut Too High to Die Meat Puppets 31 Blackhawk Blackhawk Cross Purposes Black Sabbath UK Under the Pink Tori Amos – ? Cleansing Prong Mirror Blue Richard Thompson FEBRUARY 1 Blunted on Reality Fugees Dookie Green Day Diamond (15 million+ copies sold) Reality Bites soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack What a Crying Shame The Mavericks 7 Brave Marillion Motorcade of Generosity Cake Debut Troublegum Therapy? 24 Hour Revenge Therapy Jawbreaker 8 For Your Own Special Sweetheart Jawbox "Some Old Bullshit" Beastie Boys No Doubt About It Neal McCoy Paid Vacation Richard Marx Welcome to the Cruel World Ben Harper Debut 9 Dreamspace Stratovarius 12 The New Great Adventure of Grand Deluxe Horizon Aaron Kwok Chinese 1st of 2nd The New Album of UFO Record Labels Forget Love Potion Andy Lau UFO Record Semi-finale Just Say You Love Me Dave Wong UFO Record Labels 14 Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain Pavement 15 Angelfish Angelfish North America Moonlight Becomes You Willie Nelson Pronounced Jah-Nay Zhané Debut 21 In the Nightside Eclipse Emperor 22 Stereopathetic Soulmanure Beck Beyond Flavor Original Flavor Gangsta Funk 5th Ward Boyz Ro Sham Bo The Grays Debut 24 Hex Bark Psychosis The Principle of Evil Made Flesh Cradle of Filth Debut MARCH 1 Bewitched Luna Dart to the Heart Bruce Cockburn The Funky Headhunter Hammer Glow Raven Mellow Gold Beck Naïve/Hell to Go KMFDM Rats Sass Jordan that dog. that dog. Debut Live at the Acropolis Yanni Live 4 Woke up with a Monster Cheap Trick 7 Selected Ambient Works Volume II Aphex Twin 2x CD 8 Brutal Youth Elvis Costello The Downward Spiral Nine Inch Nails 4x Platinum Hard to Earn Gang Starr Magnified Failure Martinis and Bikinis Sam Phillips Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T-Shirt John Frusciante Point Blank Nailbomb Debut Ringmaster Insane Clown Posse Superunknown Soundgarden 5x Platinum Your Filthy Little Mouth David Lee Roth 13 Amor Prohibido Selena 14 Forever Now Level 42 Longing in Their Hearts Bonnie Raitt 15 Living Room Cell Mötley Crüe Mötley Crüe The Seventh Sign Yngwie Malmsteen Europe Son of Altered Beast Matthew Sweet EP Unboxed Sammy Hagar Greatest Hits +2 new tracks 21 Essex Alison Moyet Talk Yes 22 Above the Rim: The Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Brother Sister Brand New Heavies Devil Hopping Inspiral Carpets Far Beyond Driven Pantera Fuck What You Think Main Source Hit the Highway The Proclaimers Mind Blowin Vanilla Ice Naveed Our Lady Peace Debut; Canadian release New Plastic Ideas Unwound Not a Moment Too Soon Tim McGraw The Brian Setzer Orchestra The Brian Setzer Orchestra Vauxhall and I Morrissey 24 Black Hand Inn Running Wild 25 True Force Powerman 5000 Debut EP 28 Now That's What I Call Music! 27 Various Artists Promenade The Divine Comedy 29 The Crow soundtrack Various Artists Groove Family Cyco Infectious Grooves Hoist (album) Phish Gold This Toilet Earth GWAR 30 The Division Bell Pink Floyd UK Date Album Artist Notes APRIL 4 Rusty Rodan 5 The Divine Comedy Milla Jovovich Some Change Boz Scaggs 7 To the Death M.O.P. 8 Smash The Offspring 6x Platinum and the best-selling independent label album of all time. 9 Crash! Boom! Bang! Roxette 12 All-4-One All-4-One The Bleeding Cannibal Corpse Live Through This Hole Weight Rollins Band 18 And She Closed Her Eyes Stina Nordenstam Foolish Superchunk How to Make Friends and Influence People Terrorvision His 'n' Hers Pulp 19 Crookt, Crackt, or Fly Gastr del Sol Illmatic Nas Debut Well... Katey Sagal 21 Australian Melodrama The Triffids Let Love In Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds 25 Mädchen Lucilectric Germany Parklife Blur Santa Monica '72 David Bowie UK, Live 26 American Recordings Johnny Cash A Date with The Smithereens The Smithereens Last Day on Earth John Cale and Bob Neuwirth Read My Mind Reba McEntire Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik OutKast Debut This Is Me Randy Travis Throwing Copper Live 8x Platinum (US); 7x Platinum (Canada) MAY 3 Middle Class Revolt The Fall The Sweetest Illusion Basia Where It All Begins The Allman Brothers Band 4 Dark Funeral Dark Funeral EP 9 The Very Best of Kenny G Kenny G Greatest Hits 10 Arrive All Over You Danielle Brisebois Debut Diary Sunny Day Real Estate Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star Sonic Youth Four Chords & Several Years Ago Huey Lewis and The News Covers of popular songs from the 1950s & '60s G. Love and Special Sauce G. Love & Special Sauce Gold (US) Last of the Independents The Pretenders Swamp Ophelia Indigo Girls Ten Feet Tall and Bulletproof Travis Tritt Weezer ("Blue Album") Weezer Debut; 3x Platinum (US), 2x Platinum (Canada) 17 Boingo Oingo Boingo I Say I Say I Say Erasure New Times Violent Femmes A Night in San Francisco Van Morrison Live 23 Ill Communication Beastie Boys 3x Platinum (US) Seal Seal aka Seal II Street Angel Stevie Nicks Teenager of the Year Frank Black 24 David Byrne David Byrne De Mysteriis Dom Sathanas Mayhem Dulcinea Toad the Wet Sprocket Everyone Should Be Killed Anal Cunt Fruitcakes Jimmy Buffett Heart, Soul & a Voice Jon Secada Nuttin' But Love Heavy D & the Boyz The Sun Rises in the East Jeru the Damaja Debut 25 Humanimal Talisman 27 199Quad 69 Boyz Lifeforms Future Sound of London 2 x CD 31 Así Es Gerardo Mortal Kombat: The Album The Immortals Now I'm a Cowboy The Auteurs JUNE 3 Balls to Picasso Bruce Dickinson Europe; released in US on 7/26 4 Oh My Love Zard 7 Purple Stone Temple Pilots Regulate...G Funk Era Warren G Debut Walk On Boston When Love Finds You Vince Gill 8 Back at Your Ass for the Nine-4 2 Live Crew 10 Migratory Birds Dave Wong UFO Record Labels 13 Split Lush 14 Age Ain't Nothing but a Number Aaliyah Debut Pure and Simple Joan Jett and the Blackhearts Suicidal for Life Suicidal Tendencies Turn It Upside Down Spin Doctors Zingalamaduni Arrested Development 15 Deflowered Pansy Division 17 Temple Stone Ghost Live 20 Bee Thousand Guided by Voices Genius and Brutality...Taste and Power Brainbombs 21 Betty Helmet Super Bad Terminator X Creepin on ah Come Up Bone Thugs-n-Harmony EP Dance Naked John Mellencamp Kiss My Ass: Classic Kiss Regrooved Various Artists Kiss tribute Let's Go Rancid 27 Keb' Mo' Keb' Mo' Debut One Foot In The Grave Beck 28 Funkdafied Da Brat Debut Get Up on It Keith Sweat MTV Unplugged: Tony Bennett Tony Bennett Live One Step Ahead of the Spider MC 900 Ft. Jesus Same as It Ever Was House of Pain Si Te Vas Jon Secada Tiger Bay Saint Etienne ¡Viva Zapata! 7 Year Bitch Welcome to Sky Valley Kyuss Who I Am Alan Jackson 30 Love Gone Sour, Suspicion, and Bad Debt The Clarks Date Album Artist Notes JULY 1 Year of the Dog Wolfstone 4 Music for the Jilted Generation The Prodigy 5 Cracked Rear View Hootie & the Blowfish Diamond (10 million+ copies sold) Hot Boxing Magnapop I Ain't Movin' Des'ree Liquor in the Front The Reverend Horton Heat Thirty Years of Maximum R&B The Who Box set 11 Voodoo Lounge The Rolling Stones 12 Cowboys in Love Riders in the Sky Dewdrops in the Garden Deee-Lite Uncle Sam's Curse Above the Law (group) downset. downset. Grassroots 311 Hungry for Stink L7 The Kansas Boxed Set Kansas Box set The Last Temptation Alice Cooper Tales from the Thousand Lakes Amorphis 13 The Lion King: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists 14 Roman Candle Elliott Smith 15 W.F.O. Overkill 18 Parables for Wooden Ears Powderfinger Debut Terminal Spirit Disease At the Gates 19 Chief Boot Knocka Sir Mix-a-Lot For the Love of Strange Medicine Steve Perry Harbinger Paula Cole It Takes A Thief Coolio Peep This Jamie Foxx Debut Portrait of an American Family Marilyn Manson Debut Punk in Drublic NOFX We Come Strapped MC Eiht 25 Chocolate Synthesizer Boredoms Japan only These Are Not Fall Colors Lync Whaler Sophie B. Hawkins 26 Going Public Newsboys Gringo Honeymoon Robert Earl Keen Out of Range Ani DiFranco 29 Desire Aaron Kwok Chinese UFO Records AUGUST 1 Now That's What I Call Music! 28 Various Artists Compilation 2 Creep wit' Me Ill Al Skratch Debut Love Spit Love Love Spit Love Playtyme Is Over Immature The Tractors The Tractors Rotting Piñata Sponge 5 Prick The Melvins 9 Autogeddon Julian Cope Burn My Eyes Machine Head Debut Mars Audiac Quintet Stereolab 6 Feet Deep Gravediggaz Debut 10 Living Under June Jann Arden Canada 16 After the Storm Crosby, Stills & Nash Come Prince Handful of Rain Savatage Jerky Boys 2 Jerky Boys Maybe You Should Drive Barenaked Ladies Picture Perfect Morning Edie Brickell Sleeps with Angels Neil Young and Crazy Horse Stress: The Extinction Agenda Organized Konfusion 18 Hard Hats Phil Beer 22 Dummy Portishead Debut Twelve Deadly Cyns...and Then Some Cyndi Lauper Compilation + new tracks 23 Bakesale Sebadoh Bust a Nut Tesla Cover Girl Shawn Colvin Grace Jeff Buckley Muse Sick-n-Hour Mess Age Public Enemy Natural Born Killers: A Soundtrack for an Oliver Stone Film Various Artists Produced by Trent Reznor Natural Ingredients Luscious Jackson Rhythm of Love Anita Baker Rubberneck Toadies Debut Stoned & Dethroned The Jesus and Mary Chain When I Woke Rusted Root Without a Sound Dinosaur Jr. 26 Down The Jesus Lizard The Holy Bible Manic Street Preachers House of Love Amy Grant 29 Days in the Wake Palace 30 Definitely Maybe Oasis Debut Segundo Romance Luis Miguel Stranger Than Fiction Bad Religion Fresh soundtrack Various Artists II Boyz II Men Twice Removed Sloan Usher Usher Debut SEPTEMBER 5 Change Giver Shed Seven UK release date; Debut album Mamouna Bryan Ferry 6 Ain't Life Grand Widespread Panic Born Dead Body Count File Under: Easy Listening Sugar U.S.A. Flatlinerz LAND Land 12 D.I. Go Pop Disco Inferno Disco 2 Pet Shop Boys Remix album 13 Autopilot The Samples four Blues Traveler Friendly People Guttermouth From the Cradle Eric Clapton Covers CD If I Were A Carpenter Various Artists Carpenters tribute John Henry They Might Be Giants Ready to Die The Notorious B.I.G. Debut Red Hot + Country Various Artists Part of Red Hot Benefit series Secret World Live Peter Gabriel Live There's Nothing Wrong with Love Built to Spill Universal Mother Sinéad O'Connor 19 Dos Dedos Mis Amigos Pop Will Eat Itself Kylie Minogue Kylie Minogue 20 I See It Now Tracy Lawrence Mighty Joe Moon Grant Lee Buffalo Project: Funk da World Craig Mack Debut Whip-Smart Liz Phair 25 Speak Squeak Creak Melt-Banana 26 Protection Massive Attack Thug Life: Volume 1 2Pac 27 American Thighs Veruca Salt Debut Boomtown Toby Keith Brandy Brandy Debut Chocolate and Cheese Ween 11 Tracks of Whack Walter Becker The Glory of Gershwin Larry Adler/Various Artists Gershwin tribute The Great Subconscious Club K's Choice I Love Everybody Lyle Lovett In the Hot Seat Emerson, Lake & Palmer Kermit Unpigged The Muppets Monster R.E.M. Permanent Record: Al in the Box "Weird Al" Yankovic Box Set Pulp Fiction soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Ruby Vroom Soul Coughing Debut Shade Business PMD Songs Luther Vandross Under the Table and Dreaming Dave Matthews Band Debut Waitin' on Sundown Brooks & Dunn 30 Greater Art Lake of Tears The Best Mixes from the Album Debut for All the People Who Don't Buy White Labels Björk Remix Date Album Artist Notes OCTOBER 1 Overdose Pizzicato Five Purgatory Afterglow Edge of Sanity 3 Divine Intervention Slayer No Need to Argue The Cranberries 7x Platinum (US); 5x Platinum (Canada/Europe) 4 Awake Dream Theater Danzig 4p Danzig Death Row Accept Greatest Hits: The Platinum Collection Barry Manilow Compilation Low Testament Lucacentric Lucas Nativity in Black: A Tribute to Black Sabbath Various Artists Black Sabbath tribute Night Music Joe Jackson Pisces Iscariot The Smashing Pumpkins Compilation of B-Sides/Unreleased material Question the Answers The Mighty Mighty Bosstones Stones in the Road Mary Chapin Carpenter 10 Dog Man Star Suede King of the Kill Annihilator Música de Rua Daniela Mercury Singin' with the Big Bands Barry Manilow 11 Bumpin' Dis-n-Dat Clerks: Music from the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack Colouz Uv Sound Simple E Country 'til I Die John Anderson Korn Korn Debut The Lead and How to Swing It Tom Jones 13 The Cult The Cult Genocide & Juice The Coup Steam East 17 14 No Quarter: Jimmy Page and Robert Plant Unledded Page and Plant Renaissance: The Mix Collection Sasha and Digweed Mix album 15 Murder Was the Case Various Artists Soundtrack 17 The Return of the Space Cowboy Jamiroquai UK 18 Cross Road Bon Jovi Compilation The Diary Scarface Hold Me Thrill Me Kiss Me Gloria Estefan Covers CD Promised Land Queensrÿche Return to the Valley of The Go-Go's The Go-Go's Compilation +3 new tracks Scratch the Surface Sick of It All Stoner Witch The Melvins Whaler Sophie B. Hawkins Word...Life O.C. Debut Worst Case Scenario dEUS 19 Humanimal Part 2 Talisman EP 20 The Sea and Cake The Sea and Cake 21 Love or Nothing Miyuki Nakajima 24 Starlite Walker Silver Jews Toward the Within Dead Can Dance Live Oyster Heather Nova 25 At Action Park Shellac Bedtime Stories Madonna Geek the Girl Lisa Germano Nervous Breakdown Fu-Schnickens Resurrection Common Sense Turbulent Indigo Joni Mitchell Wildhoney Tiamat 26 The Special Collectors Edition Blur Compilation of B-Sides 28 Tiny Tunes Millencolin 31 Thank You For The Music ABBA Europe; Box Set Sacrifice Gary Numan NOVEMBER 1 Amorica The Black Crowes Big Ones Aerosmith Compilation The Good, the Bad & the Argyle The Bouncing Souls Healing Hands of Time Willie Nelson Letters Never Sent Carly Simon Merry Christmas Mariah Carey Christmas songs MTV Unplugged in New York Nirvana Live Wildflowers Tom Petty Youthanasia Megadeth 7 Amber Autechre 8 Athos Stephan Micus The Buddha of Suburbia soundtrack David Bowie TV soundtrack Fields of Gold: The Best of Sting 1984-1994 Sting Compilation +2 new tracks Hell Freezes Over Eagles Live/Studio Higher Power Big Audio Lost in the Former West The Fatima Mansions The Main Ingredient Pete Rock & CL Smooth The Most Beautifullest Thing in This World Keith Murray Still Climbing Cinderella 12 The Best of Sade Sade Compilation 14 Bizarre Fruit M People Parachute Guster Debut 15 Fate (with Utha Likumahuwa crying-saxophone and Harvey Malaiholo composser) Andy Lau UFO Record Finale CrazySexyCool TLC Diamond status, 23 million+ copies sold Duets II Frank Sinatra Tical Method Man 21 Don't Ask Tina Arena Now That's What I Call Music! 29 Various Artists Compilation 22 Behind Bars Slick Rick The Black Album Prince Recorded 1986–'87 Bootlegs & B-Sides Ice Cube Compilation Box of Fire Aerosmith Box Set Dare Iz a Darkside Redman Miracles: The Holiday Album Kenny G Christmas Album 24 Blasphemy Made Flesh Cryptopsy 29 The Impossible Bird Nick Lowe My Life Mary J. Blige 30 Live at the BBC The Beatles Recorded 1963-'65 DECEMBER 1 For All Tid Dimmu Borgir 5 Second Coming The Stone Roses Vitalogy Pearl Jam 6 Ambushed Da Bush Babees Sixteen Stone Bush Debut; 6x Platinum The Sweetest Days Vanessa Williams 12 Rapid City Muscle Car Cherry Poppin' Daddies 13 The Hits Garth Brooks Compilation Interview with the Vampire: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Maná en Vivo Maná Live Artist Title Year Country Chart entries 1 Bruce Springsteen Streets of Philadelphia 1994 Austria 1 – Apr 1994, Norway 1 – Feb 1994, Poland 1 – Feb 1994, Germany 1 – Mar 1994, Éire 1 – Mar 1994, Oscar in 1993, UK 2 – Mar 1994, Switzerland 2 – Mar 1994, Italy 3 of 1994, France 4 – Feb 1994, Holland 6 – Feb 1994, RYM 6 of 1994, Sweden 7 – Feb 1994, US BB 9 of 1994, Europe 29 of the 1990s, US BB 30 of 1994, Australia 30 of 1994, US CashBox 49 of 1994, POP 63 of 1994, AFI 68, Germany 74 of the 1990s, WXPN 837 2 Bryan Adams & Rod Stewart & Sting All For Love 1994  /  US BB 1 of 1994, Sweden 1 – Dec 1993, Austria 1 – Feb 1994, Switzerland 1 – Jan 1994, Norway 1 – Jan 1994, Poland 1 – Dec 1993, Germany 1 – Jan 1994, Éire 1 – Jan 1994, Australia 1 for 2 weeks Apr 1994, UK 2 – Jan 1994, Holland 3 – Jan 1994, US BB 9 of 1994, Italy 9 of 1994, Australia 10 of 1994, US CashBox 22 of 1994, POP 25 of 1994, Germany 87 of the 1990s 3 Rednex Cotton Eye Joe 1994 UK 1 – Dec 1994, US BB 1 of 1995, Holland 1 – Aug 1994, Sweden 1 – Aug 1994, Austria 1 – Oct 1994, Switzerland 1 – Oct 1994, Norway 1 – Oct 1994, Germany 1 – Jan 1995, New Zealand 1 for 6 weeks Mar 1995, POP 1 of 1995, Germany 18 of the 1990s, US BB 25 of 1995, Australia 41 of 1995, Party 54 of 2007, Scrobulate 72 of party 4 All-4-One I Swear 1994 US BB 1 of 1994, Holland 1 – Jul 1994, Austria 1 – Aug 1994, Switzerland 1 – Jul 1994, Germany 1 – Jul 1994, New Zealand 1 for 6 weeks Jul 1994, Australia 1 for 5 weeks Nov 1994, UK 2 – Jun 1994, Norway 2 – Jul 1994, Australia 2 of 1994, US CashBox 3 of 1994, Sweden 3 – Aug 1994, US BB 7 of 1994, Poland 14 – Jul 1994, Germany 39 of the 1990s, OzNet 657 5 Mariah Carey Without You 1994 UK 1 – Feb 1994, Holland 1 – Feb 1994, Sweden 1 – Feb 1994, Austria 1 – Apr 1994, Switzerland 1 – Apr 1994, Poland 1 – Feb 1994, Germany 1 – Mar 1994, Éire 1 – Feb 1994, New Zealand 1 for 1 weeks Apr 1994, US BB 3 of 1994, Norway 3 – Mar 1994, US CashBox 15 of 1994, Australia 15 of 1994, Germany 25 of the 1990s, POP 37 of 1994 January 19 - Bryan Adams becomes the first major Western music star to perform in Vietnam since the end of the Vietnam War."In the Heat of the Night", Entertainment Weekly, 4 February 1994. Accessed 7 June 2014 January 25 – Alice in Chains release their Jar of Flies album which makes its US chart début at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming the first ever EP to do so. January 29 – The Supremes' Mary Wilson is injured when her Jeep hits a freeway median and flips over just outside Los Angeles, USA. Wilson's 14-year-old son is killed in the accident. February 1 – Green Day release their breakthrough album Dookie, ushering in the mid-1990s punk revival.MTV "Green Day's Dookie: 15 Years Later, Still A Genuine Punk Classic", 13 May 2009. Accessed 7 June 2014 Dookie eventually achieves diamond certification. February 7 – Blind Melon's lead singer Shannon Hoon is forced to leave the American Music Awards ceremony because of his loud and disruptive behavior. Hoon is later charged with battery, assault, resisting arrest, and destroying a police station phone.Rock Cemetery February 11 – The three surviving members of The Beatles secretly reunite to begin recording additional music for a few of John Lennon's old unfinished demos, presented to Paul McCartney by Yoko Ono, with Jeff Lynne producing. The track, "Free As A Bird", is released as a single in late 1995 as part of the exhaustive Beatles Anthology project, reaching #2 in the UK and #6 in the United States. February 14 – The Grateful Dead's Jerry Garcia marries Deborah Koons. February 23 – Eddie Van Halen, Chris Isaak, and B.B. King attend the ground breaking ceremony for the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino takes place in Paradise, Nevada, USA. March 1 Selena becomes the first Tejano music singer to win a Grammy Award. Nirvana play their final concert, in Munich. Frank Sinatra receives the Grammy Legend Award. Sinatra's acceptance speech is cut short and other artists, upset by this action, criticize the producer's decision during the show, including Billy Joel who takes extra time to perform his song, The River of Dreams, noting that he is wasting valuable air time. March 3 – In Rome, Nirvana's Kurt Cobain lapses into a coma after overdosing on Rohypnol and champagne. March 5 – Grace Slick is arrested for pointing a shotgun at police in her Tiburon, California home. March 7 - The United States Supreme Court decision Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. rules that parody can qualify as fair use. The case was spurred by 2 Live Crew releasing a parody of the Roy Orbison hit "Oh, Pretty Woman" without a license from the publishing firm Acuff-Rose Music. March 13 - Selena releases her final Spanish album Amor Prohibido.  Its production had been delayed because of the launch of Selena's fashion clothing line and boutiques, and her extensive tour in support of Live!. March 18 Courtney Love calls the police, fearing that her husband, Nirvana's Kurt Cobain, is suicidal. Police confiscate four guns and twenty-five boxes of ammo from Cobain's home. Bassist Darryl Jones replaces Bill Wyman in The Rolling Stones, March 30 – Pink Floyd embark on what would be their last world tour before their breakup. The record-breaking tour supports their Division Bell album, with the band playing to 5,500,000 people in 68 cities and grossing over £150,000,000. March 31 – Madonna on Late Show with David Letterman: Madonna appears on the Late Show with David Letterman, making headlines with her foul-mouthed, profanity-laced interview. Robin Williams later describes the segment as a "battle of wits with an unarmed woman." April 8 – The body of Kurt Cobain, lead singer of Nirvana, is found. Cobain's death, three days before, is legally declared to be suicide from a self-inflicted gunshot. April 25 Blur releases Parklife, its first album reaching #1 in UK, where it was certified "quadruple platinum".Platinum Awards Content. BPI.co.uk. Retrieved on September 9, 2008. Adam Horovitz of the Beastie Boys is sentenced to 200 hours of community service for attacking a television cameraman during funeral services for actor River Phoenix in November 1993. April 26 - Grace Slick pleads guilty to having pointed a shotgun at police officers on March 5. April 27 - The legendary Fillmore club reopens in San Francisco with a concert headlined by The Smashing Pumpkins. May 2 - A Los Angeles jury finds Michael Bolton, along with co-writer Andy Goldmark and Sony Music Entertainment, guilty of copyright infringement over the song "Love Is a Wonderful Thing". The song is ruled to be too similar to a song of the same name by The Isley Brothers. May 3 - The Rolling Stones arrive by yacht to a press conference in New York City to announce the Voodoo Lounge Tour kicking off in the summer. May 6 Pearl Jam files a complaint against Ticketmaster with the U.S. Justice Department charging that the company has a monopoly on the concert ticket business. To help promote his new album, Alice Cooper releases a three-part comic book that followed the album The Last Temptation. May 9–May 13 – 1994 International Rostrum of Composers May 10 Tupac Shakur begins serving a 15-day sentence in a county jail for attacking director Allen Hughes on the set of a video shoot. Weezer are introduced to the world with their self-titled debut, often referred to as the Blue Album. It would go on to become one of the most influential records of the 1990s spanning hits "Undone - The Sweater Song", "Buddy Holly" and "Say It Ain't So". May 26 - Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley are married in the Dominican Republic. May 27 - The Eagles launch the Hell Freezes Over tour in Burbank, California. The reunion tour is the group's first since breaking up in 1980, but much is also made of the band becoming the first to charge over $100 per ticket for arena shows. June 7 – Grace Slick is sentenced to 200 hours of community service and three month's worth of Alcoholics Anonymous meetings after a March 5 incident with police officers. June 9 - Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes of TLC, in a domestic dispute with partner Andre Rison, sets fire to his shoes; the fire ultimately spreads to the mansion they share and destroys it. June 21 - George Michael loses his legal bid to be released from his contract with Sony Records in a London court. June 27 - Aerosmith becomes the first major band to premiere a new song on the Internet. Over 10,000 CompuServe subscribers download the free track "Head First" within its first eight days of availability. July 30 The Verbier Festival is launched. In keeping with the country's new constitution and the promotion of its native language, Moldova adopts Limba noastră as its new national anthem, replacing the anthem of Romania which was previously in use. Suede announce that guitarist Bernard Butler has left the band following fractious recording sessions for their album Dog Man Star August 9 Rich Mullins and "Leave a Legacy" contest winner, 76-year-old Miguel Garcia Massiate, travel to Bogotá, Colombia with Compassion International. The two men visit the Ciudad Sucre Center where Mullins presented them with over $40,000 that was raised on his summer '94 Ragamuffin Band tour. Decca releases a recording of the 1949 première of Benjamin Britten's Spring Symphony for the first time. Machine Head release their first album Burn My Eyes, which was a big success and becomes Roadrunner Records' best selling debut album. August 12–14 – Woodstock '94 is held in Saugerties, New York. As with the original 1969 festival, attendance is swelled by a high number of gatecrashers, while heavy rains turn the festival grounds into a sea of mud. Nine Inch Nails, Metallica, Aerosmith, Bob Dylan, Crosby, Stills & Nash, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Peter Gabriel and Green Day are among the many performers. August 23 – Jeff Buckley releases his single, critically acclaimed, full-length studio album Grace. August 30 Oasis release their debut album Definitely Maybe, it becomes the fastest selling debut album in the United Kingdom at the time until 2006 when it was beaten by the Arctic Monkeys' debut album, Whatever People Say I Am, That's What I'm Not. Luis Miguel release Segundo Romance, the best-selling Latin album of the 1990s by a male artist. Four singles from the album were released; two of which reached #1 on the Top Latin Songs. It received a Grammy Award and a Billboard Latin Music Award. September 6 José Cura wins the Operalia – International Plácido Domingo Opera Singer Competition [ ]. Bad Religion release their eighth studio album (and proper major-label debut) Stranger than Fiction. This proved to be the last to feature founding guitarist/songwriter Brett Gurewitz for seven years, until his return. Gurewitz would be replaced by former Minor Threat / Dag Nasty / Junkyard guitarist Brian Baker, who turned down a touring job for R.E.M. at this time, and eventually becomes a permanent member of Bad Religion. September 8 – Richard A. Morse, lead male vocalist of RAM, narrowly escapes a kidnapping by armed men during the band's live performance at the Hotel Oloffson in Port-au-Prince, Haiti; the attempted kidnapping was provoked by the performance of "Fèy", a RAM single banned nationwide by the military authorities. September 15 - A 1957 audio tape of John Lennon performing with The Quarrymen on the same night he met Paul McCartney fetches £78,500 at a Sotheby's auction in London. October 11 - Korn, a nu metal band from Bakersfield, California, launches its self-titled debut album Korn, peaking at number 72 on the Billboard 200 and launching the nu metal sound. October 12 - Jimmy Page and Robert Plant: No Quarter (Unledded) premieres on MTV. The "unplugged" concert special featuring the two former Led Zeppelin bandmates was filmed to accompany the release of the album of the same name. November 20 - David Crosby undergoes a seven-hour liver transplant operation in Los Angeles. November 30 - The Breeders guitarist Kelley Deal is arrested at her Ohio home after accepting a private-courier package containing four grams of heroin. December 2 - Warner Music Group acquires a 49 percent share of Seattle record label Sub Pop in a deal believed to be worth over $30 million. December 18 - Paul Oakenfold's legendary Goa Mix is first broadcast in the early hours of this day as a BBC Radio 1 Essential Mix. December 19 - Aerosmith opens the 250-seat Mama Kin Music Hall in Boston, co-owned by the group, with a performance. December 31 - The twenty-third annual New Year's Rockin' Eve special airs on ABC, with appearances by Melissa Etheridge, The O'Jays, Salt-n-Pepa, Hootie & the Blowfish and Jon Secada. Christoph von Dohnányi becomes principal guest conductor of the Philharmonia Orchestra. Josep Pons becomes principal conductor of the City of Granada Orchestra. Christian Olde Wolbers replaces Andrew Shives in Fear Factory. ALL part ways with their original home Cruz Records, and sign a recording contract with Interscope (though they shortly leave that label after releasing an album in the following year). The Offspring frontman Dexter Holland and bassist Greg Kriesel form the label Nitro Records, an incubator for successful punk artists such as AFI. The label later releases albums from classic punk bands, including The Damned and T.S.O.L., and also reissues the first Offspring album. Social Distortion manager Jim Guerinot forms the label Time Bomb Recordings in joint-venture agreement with Arista. The label actually exists mostly as an imprint for current releases from Social Distortion and solo albums by Mike Ness, along with the administration of the label's back catalog. Summer - Tony Wilson attempts to revive Factory Records, in collaboration with London Records, as "Factory Too".David Nolan, Tony Wilson - You're Entitled to an Opinion But. . .: (2009) Former Wolfsbane lead singer Blaze Bayley auditions and is hired by Iron Maiden. See  See  Circle Jerks (hiatus since 1989) King Crimson (since 1984) Acappella – Johnny Maestro & the Brooklyn Bridge Acid Eaters - Ramones Aria - Asia The Best of – Hank Marvin and The Shadows The Best of Chris Rea – Chris Rea Big Bad Voodoo Daddy – Big Bad Voodoo Daddy Blue Cadet-3, Do You Connect? (EP) – Modest Mouse Blue House - Marcia Ball Blue Room – Unwritten Law Bright Red - Laurie Anderson The Business Trip – Hawkwind - Live The Church Within - The Obsessed Churn – Seven Mary Three Clocking Out Is for Suckers – Drake Tungsten D Generation - D Generation Deliverance – Corrosion of Conformity Dingleberry Haze (EP) – Bloodhound Gang Ditch Diggin' - Southern Culture on the Skids Dreamchild – Toyah Everyone's Got One – Echobelly Fear, Emptiness, Despair – Napalm Death Flesh – David Gray Frigate – April Wine Giant Robot – Buckethead Give Out But Don't Give Up - Primal Scream Of Ruine or Some Blazing Starre - Current 93 Dial Hard - Gotthard Hold on It Hurts - Cornershop Goodbye to the Age of Steam – Big Big Train Green World (demo) – The Suicide Machines Halo in a Haystack – Converge Hell Paso (EP) – At the Drive-In Hellig Usvart    -  Horde The Icon Is Love - Barry White I Hope Your Heart Is Not Brittle – Portastatic Information Highway Revisited – New Bomb Turks Isolationism – Various Artists Jimmy Eat World – Jimmy Eat World Let's Go Get Stoned - The Chesterfield Kings Life in the Streets – Prince Ital Joe & Marky Mark Live!! New York City October 14, 1994 – They Might Be Giants LL77 - Lisa Lisa Loose - Victoria Williams Love, Nancy – Nancy Wilson Murmurs – The Murmurs Nefarious (EP) – Spoon Old Stuff, Part Two – Anal Cunt Pandemonium – Killing Joke Pandora's Toys – Aerosmith (compilation) Pawnshop Guitars - Gilby Clarke Peter Frampton - Peter Frampton Pigeonhed – Pigeonhed Potatoes for Christmas (EP) – Papa Roach Promises – Bo Diddley Quick – Far Rester vrai – Florent Pagny Rite of Passage - Mitch Ryder Rivermaya – Rivermaya Robbin' the Hood – Sublime San Francisco - American Music Club Socialism, Sexism & Sexuality – White Town Soda Pop-Rip Off - Slant 6 Sour – Ours Storyteller – Crystal Waters Strength in Numbers - Tyketto Stuck – Puddle of Mudd Sugar Mouth - David Kilgour Superstar – Len Swell – Psyched Up Janis Unboxed - Free Kitten Ungod – Stabbing Westward When You're a Tuesday Girl – The Tuesdays The Woman's Boat - Toni Childs Yank Crime - Drive Like Jehu "21st Century (Digital Boy)" - Bad Religion "100% Pure Love" – Crystal Waters "About a Girl (Unplugged)" – Nirvana "Absolutely Fabulous" - Pet Shop Boys "Age Ain't Nothing but a Number" - Aaliyah "All For Love" – Bryan Adams, Rod Stewart & Sting "All I Have to Do Is Dream" - Cliff Richard & Phil Everly "All I Wanna Do" – Sheryl Crow "All I Want for Christmas Is You" - Mariah Carey "All That She Wants" – Ace of Base "Al Palo" - King África "Always" – Bon Jovi "Always" – Erasure "Amazing" – Aerosmith "Amor Prohibido" - Selena "An Angel" - The Kelly Family "Another Day - Whigfield "Another Night" – M.C. Sar & the Real McCoy "Any Time, Any Place" – Janet Jackson "Anytime You Need a Friend" - Mariah Carey "Around the World" - East 17 "(At Your Best) You Are Love" - Aaliyah "Basket Case" – Green Day "Baby, Come Back" - Pato Banton & UB40 "Baby, I Love Your Way" - Big Mountain "Back & Forth" - Aaliyah "Better Man" – Pearl Jam "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom" - Selena "Big Yellow Taxi" – Amy Grant "Black Hole Sun" – Soundgarden "Buddy Holly" – Weezer "Bump n' Grind" - R. Kelly "Can You Feel The Love Tonight" – Elton John "Chains" - Tina Arena "Cigarettes & Alcohol - Oasis "Circle of Life" – Elton John "Come On You Reds" - The Manchester United Football Squad "Come Out and Play" – The Offspring "Corduroy" – Pearl Jam "Closer" – Nine Inch Nails "Confide in Me" - Kylie Minogue "Cotton-Eyed Joe - Rednex "Crazy" – Aerosmith "C.R.E.A.M." - Wu-Tang Clan "Creep" – TLC "Dedicated to the One I Love" - Bitty McLean "Deuces Are Wild" – Aerosmith "Dimension Divertida" - Paco Pil "Disarm" - The Smashing Pumpkinshttp://www.billboard.com/artist/279618/smashing-pumpkins/chart?sort=timeon&f=376 "Dromen zijn bedrog" - Marco Borsato "Don't Turn Around" – Ace of Base "Donde Quiera Que Estés" - Barrio Boyzz & Selena "Doop" - Doop "Dreams" - The Cranberries "Dreams (Will Come Alive)" - 2 Brothers on the 4th Floor "Dry County" - Bon Jovi "Eins, Zwei, Polizei" - Mo-Do "Endless Love" - Luther Vandross & Mariah Carey "Everyday" – Phil Collins "Everybody" - DJ BoBo "Everybody Gonfi-Gon" - 2 Cowboys "Everything Changes" - Take That "Fade into You" - Mazzy Star "Fantastic Voyage" - Coolio "Feel the Heat of the Night" - Masterboy "Found Out About You" – Gin Blossoms "Fotos y Recuerdos" - Selena "Foule sentimentale" - Alain Souchon "Funkdafied" – Da Brat "Games People Play" - Inner Circle "Gin & Juice" – Snoop Doggy Dogg "Girls & Boys" – Blur "Happy Nation" - Ace of Base "Here Comes the Hotstepper" - Ini Kamoze "(Hey Now) Girls Just Want to Have Fun" - Cyndi Lauper "Hyper Hyper" - Scooter "I Alone" – Live "I'll Make Love to You" – Boyz II Men "I'll Remember" – Madonna "I'll Stand by You" - The Pretenders "I Like to Move It" – Reel 2 Real "I Swear" – All-4-One "Infected" – Bad Religion "Inside (Stiltskin song)" - Stiltskin "Inside Your Dreams" - U96 "Interstate Love Song" – Stone Temple Pilots "In Your Room" - Depeche Mode "I Show You Secrets" - Pharao "I Stay Away" - Alice in Chains "It's Alright" – East 17 "It's a Rainy Day" - Ice MC "It's Take Me Away" - Marusha "I Wanna Be Down" – Brandy "Je danse le Mia" – IAM "Jessie" - Joshua Kadison "Juicy" – Notorious B.I.G. "La solitudine" - Laura Pausini "(Lay Your Head On My) Pillow" – Tony! Toni! Tone! "Let the Dream Come True" – DJ BoBo "Let the Beat Control Your Body" - 2 Unlimited "Live Forever" – Oasis "Living in Danger" - Ace of Base "Longview" – Green Day "Look Who's Talking" - Dr Alban "Loser" – Beck (released in 1993) "Lost in America" – Alice Cooper "Love Ain't Here Anymore" - Take That "Love Is All Around" - Wet Wet Wet "Love Is Strong" – Rolling Stones "Love Religion" - U96 "Love Song" - Mark 'Oh "Lucky One" – Amy Grant "Mädchen" - Lucilectric "Mamá Yo Quiero" - King África "Mary Jane's Last Dance" – Tom Petty & The Heartbreakers "Max Don't Have Sex With Your Ex" - E-Rotic "(Meet) The Flintstones" - The B-52's "Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm" - Crash Test Dummies "Move on Baby" - Cappella "Mr. Jones" – Counting Crows (released in 1993) "Mass Appeal" – Gangstarr "Never Lie" – Immature "No Excuses" – Alice in Chains "No Good (Start the Dance)" - The Prodigy "No More (I Can't Stand It)" - Maxx "No Me Queda Mas" - Selena "No One" - 2 Unlimited "No One to Run With" – The Allman Brothers Band "Now and Forever" - Richard Marx "Nutshell" - Alice in Chains "Omen III" - Magic Affair "On Bended Knee" - Boyz II Men "Only One Road" - Celine Dion "Over You" - Anne Murray "Penso Positivo" - Jovanotti "Player's Ball" – Outkast "Regulate" – Warren G featuring Nate Dogg "Return To Innocence" – Enigma "The Rhythm Is Magic" - Belinda Carlisle "Right Beside You" - Sophie B. Hawkins "Rock My Heart" - Haddaway "Run Away - Real McCoy "Sabotage" – Beastie Boys "Saturday Night" - Whigfield "Say You'll Be Mine" – Amy Grant "Secret" – Madonna "Seether" – Veruca Salt "Self Esteem" – The Offspring "Sensualité" – Axelle Red "Set the World on Fire" - E-Type "Seven Seconds" – Neneh Cherry & Youssou N'dour "Shine" - Aswad "Shine" - Collective Soul "Short Dick Man" - 20 Fingers & Gillette "Sleeping In My Car" – Roxette "Slow Wine" – Tony! Toni! Tone! "Somewhere Over the Rainbow" - Marusha "Spin the Black Circle" - Pearl Jam "Spoonman" - Soundgarden "Si Una Vez" - Selena "Stay (I Missed You) – Lisa Loeb "Stay Another Day" - East 17 "Stay Together" - Suede "Strani amori" - Laura Pausini "Streets of Philadelphia" - Bruce Springsteen "Strong Enough" - Sheryl Crow "The Sign" – Ace of Base "Sukiyaki" - 4 P.M. "Summer in the City" - Joe Cocker "Supersonic" – Oasis "Sure" - Take That "Swamp Thing" - The Grid "Sweet Dreams" - La Bouche "Sweets for My Sweet" - C.J. Lewis "Take a Bow" – Madonna "Take Control" - DJ BoBo "Tears Don't Lie" - Mark 'Oh "Techno Cumbia" - Selena "Tell Me When" - Rick Astley "There is a Star" - Pharao "The Most Beautiful Girl in the World" - Prince "The Real Thing - 2 Unlimited "The Real Thing" - Tony Di Bart "Things Can Only Get Better" - D:Ream "Think About the Way" - Ice MC "Think Twice" - Celine Dion "This D.J." - Warren G "This Is The Way" - E-Type "Thuggish Ruggish Bone" – Bone Thugs-N-Harmony "Tootsee Roll" – 69 Boyz "Trouble " – Shampoo "Turn the Beat Around" - Gloria Estefan "Twist and Shout" - Chaka Demus & Pliers "U Send Me Swingin'" – Mint Condition "Undone - The Sweater Song" – Weezer "United" - Prince Ital Joe & Marky Mark "Until I Fall Away" – Gin Blossoms "What's My Name"- Snoop Doggy Dogg "Welcome to Paradise" – Green Day "Welcome to Tomorrow (Are You Ready?)" - Snap! "Whatta Man" - Salt-n-Pepa & En Vogue "What Would You Say" – Dave Matthews Band "When I Come Around" – Green Day "Wild Night" - John Mellencamp & Me'shell Ndegeocello "Without You" – Mariah Carey "You Want This" – Janet Jackson "Zombie" - The Cranberries Jeff Buckley - Grace Oasis - Definitely Maybe Weezer - Weezer Portishead - Dummy Nirvana - MTV Unplugged In New York Green Day - Dookie Nas - Illmatic Blur - Parklife Soundgarden - Superunknown Nine Inch Nails - The Downward Spiral Thomas Beveridge – Yizkor Requiem George Crumb – Quest for guitar, soprano saxophone, harp, double bass, and percussion (two players) Richard Danielpour – Cello Concerto Mario Davidovsky – Festino for guitar, viola, violoncello, contrabass David Diamond – Trio for violin, clarinet and piano Lorenzo Ferrero Paesaggio con figura for small orchestra Portrait for string quartet Osvaldo Golijov - The Dreams and Prayers of Isaac the Blind Vagn Holmboe – Symphony No. 13, M.362 (begun 1993) Karl Jenkins – Adiemus: Songs of Sanctuary Oliver Knussen – Horn Concerto György Kurtág – Stele Frederik Magle – Concerto for organ and orchestra The Infinite Second Tristan Murail – L'esprit des dunes Michael Nyman – Concerto for Trombone Einojuhani Rautavaara – Symphony No. 7 Angel of Light Steve Reich – City Life; Nagoya Marimbas Robert Simpson – String Quintet No. 2 (1991–4) Karlheinz Stockhausen – Weltraum (electronic music from Freitag aus Licht) Boris Tishchenko – Symphony No. 7 Peter Maxwell Davies - The Doctor of Myddfai Vivian Fine – Memoirs of Uliana Rooney Adam Guettel – Floyd Collins Nicholas Lens – The Accacha Chronicles Trilogy: Flamma Flamma – The Fire Requiem Tobias Picker - Emmeline, with a libretto by JD McClatchy. Karlheinz Stockhausen – Freitag aus Licht (completed; not staged until 1996) Beauty and the Beast – Broadway production Carousel (Rodgers & Hammerstein) – Broadway revival Damn Yankees (Richard Adler and Jerry Ross) – Broadway revival Grease – Broadway revival Show Boat (Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein II) – Broadway revival Sunset Boulevard (Andrew Lloyd Webber) – Broadway production Airheads Backbeat Fear of a Black Hat Hated: GG Allin and the Murder Junkies The Lion King – animated feature film with songs by Elton John and Tim Rice That's Entertainment! III February 1 Skylar Laine, American singer-songwriter Harry Styles, British singer of the band One Direction February 8 – Nikki Yanofsky, Canadian singer February 14 – Paul Butcher, American actor and singer February 17 – Angie Miller, American singer-songwriter and pianist February 24 - Earl Sweatshirt, American rapper March 1 – Justin Bieber, Canadian singer April 4 – Risako Sugaya, Japanese singer April 12 – Airi Suzuki, Japanese singer July 7 - Ashton Irwin, Australian drummer and singer of the band 5 seconds of summer August 18 - Bobby Andonov, Australian singer-songwriter and actor September 1 – Bianca Ryan, American singer September 17 Taylor Ware, American singer and yodeler Chen Yihan, Chinese pianist and composer January 6 – Harold Sumberg, violinist, 88 January 15 – Harry Nilsson, singer, songwriter, 52 (heart attack) January 17 – Georges Cziffra, pianist, 72 January 30 - Rudolf Schwarz, conductor, 88 February 5 - Tiana Lemnitz, operatic soprano, 96 February 7 – Witold Lutosławski, composer, 81 February 8 - Raymond Scott, composer and bandleader, 85 February 22 - Papa John Creach, blues violinist, 76 February 24 – Dinah Shore, singer, actress, 77 March 6 – Yvonne Fair, African-American singer, 51 March 13 – Danny Barker, jazz musician and composer, 85 March 16 – Nicolas Flagello, composer, 66 March 18 - Ephraim Lewis, soul and R&B singer, 26 March 22 – Dan Hartman, singer, 42 (brain tumour) March 23 – Donald Swann, pianist, composer and entertainer (Flanders and Swann), 70 April 5 Rowland Greenberg, Norwegian jazz trumpeter, 73 Kurt Cobain, singer & guitarist (Nirvana), 27 (self-inflicted shotgun wound) April 7 - Lee Brilleaux, British R&B singer (Dr Feelgood), 41 (cancer) April 19 - Larry Davis, blues singer and guitarist, 57 May 23 - Joe Pass, jazz guitarist, 65 (liver cancer) May 25 - Eric Gale, jazz guitarist, 55 (lung cancer) May 26 - Sonny Sharrock, jazz guitarist, 53 May 27 - Red Rodney, bop trumpeter, 66 May 29 - Oliver Jackson, jazz drummer, 61 May 31 - Herva Nelli, operatic soprano, 85 June 4 - Earle Warren, saxophonist, 79 June 11 – Robert Beadell, composer, 68 June 14 – Henry Mancini, composer, 70 June 15 – Manos Hadjidakis, composer, 68 June 16 – Kristen Pfaff, bass guitarist (Hole), 27 (heroin overdose) June 25 Kin Vassy, songwriter, performer, co-lead singer and guitarist of The First Edition 1969–72 (lung cancer), 50 DJ Train, producer (smoke inhalation) June 29 – Kurt Eichhorn, conductor, 85 July 2 - Marion Williams, gospel singer, 66 July 31 – Anne Shelton, British singer, 70 August 6 – Domenico Modugno, Italian singer and songwriter, 66 September 2 – Roy Castle, musician and all-round entertainer, 62 (lung cancer) September 3 - Major Lance, R&B singer, 55 September 6 Nicky Hopkins, session musician, keyboardist, 50 (complications from intestinal surgery) Max Kaminsky, jazz trumpeter and bandleader, 85 September 7 - Eric Crozier, librettist, 79 September 13 – John Stevens, jazz musician September 20 – Jule Styne, songwriter, 88 September 24 – Urmas Alender, singer, 40 (drowned in MS Estonia sinking) September 29 – Cheb Hasni, Algerian Raj musician, 26 (murdered) October 4 - Danny Gatton, guitarist, 49 October 19 – Martha Raye, singer and comedienne, 88 October 22 Jimmy Miller, record producer, 52 Shlomo Carlebach, Jewish songwriter October 26 - Wilbert Harrison, R&B singer, pianist, guitarist and harmonica player, 65 October 27 - Robert White, Motown session guitarist, 57 October 31 - Lester Sill, record executive, 76 November 4 – Fred "Sonic" Smith, MC5 guitarist, 45 (heart attack) November 7 – Shorty Rogers, jazz trumpeter, 70 November 11 – Elizabeth Maconchy, composer, 87 November 18 – Cab Calloway, jazz and scat singer, 86 November 28 – Vic Legley, Belgian violist and composer of French birth, 79 December 8 – Antônio Carlos Jobim, bossa nova composer and songwriter, 67 December 10 – Garnett Silk, reggae singer, 28 (house fire) The following artists are inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: John Lennon, Elton John, Grateful Dead, The Band, Bob Marley, Duane Eddy, Rod Stewart, and The Animals Inductees of the GMA Gospel Music Hall of Fame include Tennessee Ernie Ford Kumar Sanu – Filmfare Best Male Playback Award Filmfare Best Music Director Awards – Rahul Dev Burman Grammy Awards of 1994 Eurovision Song Contest 1994 Elegant Slumming – M People wins. Rascalz – Juno Award Best rap album KROQ Top 106.7 Countdown of 1994 Triple J Hottest 100, 1994 1994 in music (UK)
