    This is a list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1996.   The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1996. Date Album Artist Notes JANUARY 1 Cut in Half and Also Double Emily Haines Inquilaab Junoon 9 Early Mornin' Stoned Pimp Kid Rock — Right in the Middle of It Chely Wright Victor Alex Lifeson — Young, Rich & Dangerous Kris Kross — 12 Music of My Life Jo Stafford 15 Loops of Fury Chemical Brothers EP Predator Accept — 16 Viva! La Woman Cibo Matto — Words Tony Rich — 18 Rising Yoko Ono — 22 Boys for Pele Tori Amos — The Cult of Ray Frank Black — 23 10 Speed Mystery Machine — Helter Skelter The D.O.C. — The Trouble with the Truth Patty Loveless — Wither Blister Burn & Peel Stabbing Westward — 25 Stormblåst Dimmu Borgir — 26 Maniacal Laughter The Bouncing Souls — 29 Advance LFO — 30 Diatribes Napalm Death — Don't Be a Menace to South Central While Drinking Your Juice in the Hood Various Artists Soundtrack Filth Pig Ministry — Millions Now Living Will Never Die Tortoise — Str8 off tha Streetz of Muthaphukkin Compton Eazy-E Total Total — 31 Heavy Petting Zoo NOFX — ? Hey Man Mr. Big — How Long Has This Been Going On Van Morrison Live FEBRUARY 5 Don't Stop Status Quo 6 Kids on the Street Cherry Poppin' Daddies — Sackcloth 'n' Ashes 16 Horsepower — Tennessee Moon Neil Diamond — 13 All Eyez on Me 2Pac 2x CD Congratulations I'm Sorry Gin Blossoms Looking East Jackson Browne — The Score The Fugees — 17 Purpendicular Deep Purple Europe 19 Skunkworks Bruce Dickinson — 20 Affliction Econoline Crush — Bloom Audio Adrenaline — Come Find Yourself Fun Lovin' Criminals Debut The Jester Race In Flames — Murder Ballads Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds — Pies Descalzos Shakira — Roots Sepultura — Set the Twilight Reeling Lou Reed — Take Me to Your Leader Newsboys — 23 Our Band Could Be Your Life: A Tribute to D Boon and the Minutemen Various Artists Tribute to Minutemen 27 Fizzy Fuzzy Big & Buzzy The Refreshments — Goldfinger Goldfinger — The Gray Race Bad Religion — High on the Hog The Band — Lay It Down Cowboy Junkies — Peach Fuzz Enuff Z'Nuff US Pogue Mahone The Pogues — The Process Skinny Puppy — MARCH 4 After Murder Park The Auteurs — Myra Lee Cat Power — 5 Gravity Kills Gravity Kills — House of GVSB Girls Against Boys — I Feel Alright Steve Earle — Naughty Little Doggie Iggy Pop — Offbeat: A Red Hot Soundtrip Various Artists Red Hot AIDS benefit The Time of the Oath Helloween — 11 Beat the Bastards The Exploited — Refresh the Demon Annihilator — 12 Bad Hair Day "Weird Al" Yankovic — Black Love The Afghan Whigs — Falling into You Celine Dion US Gato Negro 7 Year Bitch — Kiss Unplugged Kiss Live Mercury Falling Sting — Roots Sepultura — 17 MMMBop Hanson — 18 Another Way to Shine Spiritual Beggars — The Beatles Anthology, Volume 2 The Beatles Compilation 19 Born on a Pirate Ship Barenaked Ladies — The Burdens of Being Upright Tracy Bonham Debut "The Resurrection" Geto Boys Colossal Head Los Lobos — Girl 6 Prince Soundtrack No. 2 Live Dinner Robert Earl Keen Live Off Parole Rappin' 4-Tay — Second Toughest in the Infants Underworld — Songs in the Key of X: Music from and Inspired by the X-Files Various Artists Soundtrack to The X-Files TV series 25 Call the Doctor Sleater-Kinney — Made Again Marillion 2x CD; Live Now That's What I Call Music! 33 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 26 40 More Reasons to Hate Us Anal Cunt — The Coming Busta Rhymes Solo Debut Free Spirit Bonnie Tyler — Golden Heart Mark Knopfler — On Avery Island Neutral Milk Hotel — Regretfully Yours Superdrag — Tiny Music... Songs from the Vatican Gift Shop Stone Temple Pilots — Under the Bushes Under the Stars Guided by Voices — Villains The Verve Pipe — ? Hesher Nickelback Hits Mike + The Mechanics Compilation Date Album Artist Notes APRIL 1 A Maximum High Shed Seven UK Milk and Kisses Cocteau Twins UK 2 Count the Days Citizen King EP "The In Sound from Way Out! (Beastie Boys album)" Beastie Boys Crimson Edge of Sanity — The Golden Age Cracker — Maxwell's Urban Hang Suite Maxwell Debut Oz Factor Unwritten Law — 10 Song Demo Rosanne Cash — 5 Reject All American Bikini Kill — 8 Moseley Shoals Ocean Colour Scene — Repetition Unwound — 9 Death Threatz MC Eiht — Emperor Tomato Ketchup Stereolab — Here to Save You All Chino XL — Schoolhouse Rock! Rocks Various Artists Tribute The Villain in Black MC Ren — 16 As Good as Dead Local H — Blow It Out Your Ass It's Veruca Salt Veruca Salt EP Blue Moon Toby Keith — Borderline Brooks & Dunn — Evil Empire Rage Against the Machine Sophomore Farewell: Live from the Universal Amphitheatre, Halloween 1995 Oingo Boingo — Louder Than Words Lionel Richie — Make Your Mama Proud Fastball — Sell, Sell, Sell David Gray — Shot The Jesus Lizard — This Is a Long Drive for Someone with Nothing to Think About Modest Mouse Debut You? Me? Us? Richard Thompson — 18 Destroy All Monsters/Live in Japan Raven Live The Forgotten Tales Blind Guardian Compilation 22 Episode Stratovarius — Wildest Dreams Tina Turner — 23 Through Silver in Blood Neurosis (band) — Blue Clear Sky George Strait — Fairweather Johnson Hootie & the Blowfish — Guitar Slinger The Brian Setzer Orchestra — Less Talk, More Rock Propagandhi — New Beginning SWV — 29 Arise Therefore Palace — Nearly God Tricky — To the Faithful Departed The Cranberries — 30 Crash Dave Matthews Band — Drunk on the Moon No Knife — Eventually Paul Westerberg — Tin Cans with Strings to You Far — MAY 1 Ass Cobra Turbonegro — Curb Nickelback 6 1977 Ash — Backstreet Boys (International) Backstreet Boys debut; Europe only Dr. Octagonecologyst Kool Keith — Electriclarryland Butthole Surfers — The It Girl Sleeper — 7 Imperial Drag Imperial Drag — Infotainment? Pitchshifter — Now in a Minute Donna Lewis Debut Teri Yakimoto Guttermouth — Trouble at the Henhouse The Tragically Hip — Twister: Music from the Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack 13 Slang Def Leppard — 14 All This Useless Beauty Elvis Costello & The Attractions — Elegy Amorphis — Long Line Peter Wolf — Looking in the Shadows The Raincoats — Now & Forever Color Me Badd — Older George Michael — Today's Specials The Specials Covers album Too Much Too Young: The Gold Collection The Specials Compilation You've Got to Believe in Something Spin Doctors — 20 The Beautiful Game Various artists — Ear Candy King's X — Everything Must Go Manic Street Preachers — Fuzzy Logic Super Furry Animals Debut Love in Space Hawkwind Live 21 Bringing Down the Horse The Wallflowers — Chim Chim's Badass Revenge Fishbone — Destruction by Definition The Suicide Machines Debut Dilate Ani DiFranco — Down on the Upside Soundgarden — Gettin' It (Album Number Ten) Too $hort — Let It Rock Great White — Morningrise Opeth — Perspective Jason Becker — Pure Instinct Scorpions — Rubbing Doesn't Help Magnapop — Vile Cannibal Corpse — Walking Wounded Everything but the Girl — Wild Mood Swings The Cure — 22 The Great Southern Trendkill Pantera — Live at the Budokan Blur Live album 25 Roomic Cube Takako Minekawa — 28 Good God's Urge Porno for Pyros — Take It From The Man! The Brian Jonestown Massacre Undisputed Attitude Slayer — JUNE 1 Oh Lord! When? How? The Hives Debut EP Supershitty to the Max! The Hellacopters Debut Load Metallica — 3 Romeo's Heart John Farnham — 4 Banana Wind Jimmy Buffett — Copperopolis Grant Lee Buffalo — Delinquent Habits Delinquent Habits Debut Destiny Gloria Estefan US 18 til I Die Bryan Adams — Future Rhythm Digital Underground — Hot Squirrel Nut Zippers — Ice-T VI: Return of the Real Ice-T — Legal Drug Money Lost Boyz Debut Me and You Kenny Chesney — My Heart Donell Jones Spirit Willie Nelson 6 Tigermilk Belle & Sebastian — 7 Dreamland Robert Miles — 10 The Light User Syndrome The Fall — Swansong Carcass — Peace at Last The Blue Nile — 11 T.A.P.O.A.F.O.M. George Clinton and the P-Funk All Stars — 12 One Chord to Another Sloan Canada 17 Macarena Non Stop Los del Río — Upgrade & Afterlife Gastr del Sol — 18 Arena Asia — Book of Shadows Zakk Wylde — Gone Again Patti Smith — High/Low Nada Surf — Just Like You Keb' Mo' — Live from Neon Park Little Feat Live Odelay Beck — The Patti Smith Masters Patti Smith Box set The Road to Ensenada Lyle Lovett — Rocket Primitive Radio Gods — Secrets Toni Braxton — Their Satanic Majesties' Second Request The Brian Jonestown Massacre Very Proud of Ya AFI — 25 America Is Dying Slowly Various Artists Red Hot AIDS benefit Braver New World Jimmie Dale Gilmore — Dust Screaming Trees — Get On Up and Dance Quad City DJ's — H2O H2O Debut Peace Beyond Passion Me'shell Ndegeocello — Ranetoe Serdce (Broken Heart) Lyapis Trubetskoy — Reasonable Doubt Jay-Z Debut Xtort KMFDM — You Wanted the Best, You Got the Best!! Kiss Live Date Album Artist Notes JULY 2 Broken Arrow Neil Young and Crazy Horse — The Final Tic Crucial Conflict — It Was Written Nas — It's Martini Time The Reverend Horton Heat — Jawbox Jawbox — Live from the Fall Blues Traveler Live Stakes Is High De La Soul Wax Ecstatic Sponge — 3 None So Vile Cryptopsy — 8 Today Is Another Day Zard — 9 Building the Bridge REO Speedwagon — Blue LeAnn Rimes — Chaos and Disorder (Prince) Irresistible Bliss Soul Coughing — Scenery and Fish I Mother Earth — 16 Lemon Parade Tonic — No Lunch D Generation — Outpost The Samples — 12 Golden Country Greats Ween — 22 Technicolour Disco Inferno — 23 Demo Evergreen Terrace 1996 Evergreen Terrace EP The Dark Saga Iced Earth — Miracle of Science Marshall Crenshaw — Songs for a Blue Guitar Red House Painters — Static Prevails Jimmy Eat World — Three Snakes and One Charm The Black Crowes — Tidal Fiona Apple — 24 Shape Frente! — 26 The Return of the Aquabats The Aquabats — 29 Drum 'n' Bass for Papa Plug — Irreligious Moonspell — A New Stereophonic Sound Spectacular Hooverphonic Belgium 30 Beats, Rhymes and Life A Tribe Called Quest — Mista Mista — Sublime Sublime — Unplugged Alice in Chains Live Rockin' down the Highway: The Wildlife Concert The Doobie Brothers Live This World This World — AUGUST 6 Anne Murray Anne Murray — Interstate 8 Modest Mouse EP Music from the Unrealized Film Script, Dusk at Cubist Castle Olivia Tremor Control — Shake a Lil' Somethin' 2 Live Crew — Songs and Music from "She's the One" Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers Soundtrack Sweet Relief II: Gravity of the Situation Various Artists Vic Chestnutt benefit album 9 Theli Therion — 12 First Band on the Moon The Cardigans — Now That's What I Call Music! 34 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 13 Beautiful Freak Eels — "Unreleased and Revamped" Cypress Hill The Curtain Hits the Cast Low — Fantastic Planet Failure — Friction, Baby Better Than Ezra — Full Circle Randy Travis — Put it in Your Mouth Akinyele EP Turn the Radio Off Reel Big Fish — 15 Supersexy Swingin' Sounds White Zombie Remix 18 Acrobatic Tenement At the Drive-In — 19 Becoming X Sneaker Pimps — 20 Cowboy Songs Riders in the Sky — Die for the Government Anti-Flag Nada Es Igual Luis Miguel — October Rust Type O Negative — Paradise in Me K's Choice — Harmacy Sebadoh — 26 Snap! Attack: The Best of Snap! Snap! — Awaken The Blood Divine — The Half Tail Wolfstone — 27 ATLiens OutKast — Bad As I Wanna B MC Lyte — Don't Back Down The Queers — Gabrielle Gabrielle — The Latch-Key Child A+ — No Code Pearl Jam — One in a Million Aaliyah — Rent: Original Broadway Cast Recording Broadway cast of Rent — The Restless Kind Travis Tritt — A Small Circle of Friends: Germs (Tribute) Various Artists The Germs tribute Veiled Leah Andreone — 28 Written in the Sand Michael Schenker Group — SEPTEMBER 2 Bilingual Pet Shop Boys UK Coming Up Suede — Double Allergic Powderfinger — Man Neneh Cherry — 3 Did I Shave My Legs for This? Deana Carter US Jennifer Love Hewitt Jennifer Love Hewitt — 9 C'mon Kids The Boo Radleys — Excerpts from a Love Circus Lisa Germano — face to face Face to Face — Like Cats and Dogs Catherine Wheel Compilation Travelling Without Moving Jamiroquai UK 10 The Doctor Came at Dawn Smog — High School High soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Home Again New Edition — Mr. Happy Go Lucky John Mellencamp — New Adventures in Hi-Fi R.E.M. US Nine Objects of Desire Suzanne Vega — Test for Echo Rush — What Would the Community Think Cat Power — William Bloke Billy Bragg — 13 Dynamite Stina Nordenstam — 14 In a Bar, Under the Sea dEUS — 16 K Kula Shaker UK Spiders Space — 17 Fashion Nugget Cake — Fire Garden Steve Vai — Rhythmeen ZZ Top — Six Whodini — White Light, White Heat, White Trash Social Distortion — 23 Angry Machines Dio Europe Animal Rights Moby — Better Living Through Chemistry Fatboy Slim — Dance Hall at Louse Point PJ Harvey and John Parish — Louder Than Hell Manowar Europe 24 Best of the Beast Iron Maiden Compilation Illadelph Halflife The Roots — Pinkerton Weezer — Sheryl Crow Sheryl Crow — Susanna Hoffs Susanna Hoffs — Signify Porcupine Tree — That Thing You Do! Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Walking on Locusts John Cale — 27 How Bizarre OMC — Northern Exposure Sasha and Digweed DJ mix 112 112 — 30 First Grand Constitution and Bylaws Secret Chiefs 3 — Date Album Artist Notes OCTOBER 1 Ænima Tool — At the Speed of Life Xzibit — Belly to Belly Volume One Warrant — Black Dots Bad Brains — A Few Small Repairs Shawn Colvin — From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah Nirvana Live Compilation Fountains of Wayne Fountains of Wayne — Greatest Hits Thompson Twins Compilation The Moment Kenny G — The Natural Bridge Silver Jews — Soul on Ice Ras Kass — This Is the Time Michael Bolton Christmas Album Yourself or Someone Like You Matchbox 20 — 2 Black Earth Arch Enemy A Worm's Life Crash Test Dummies 3 Plays Metallica by Four Cellos Apocalyptica Covers 5 Republica Republica — 8 Antichrist Superstar Marilyn Manson — Baja Sessions Chris Isaak — Brown P.O.D. Christmas Island Jimmy Buffett Christmas East Side Militia Chemlab — Factory Showroom They Might Be Giants — Ginuwine...the Bachelor Ginuwine — No Doubt 702 — No Talking, Just Head The Heads Members of Talking Heads Satan Is Real Again, or Feeling Good About Bad Thoughts Country Teasers — Tell Me Something: The Songs of Mose Allison Van Morrison, Georgie Fame, Mose Allison and Ben Sidran — 11 The Starres Are Marching Sadly Home (Theinmostlightthirdandfinal) Current 93 EP 14 Sutras Donovan — 15 Breathe Midnight Oil — Car Button Cloth The Lemonheads — Genius of America The Tubes — Justus The Monkees — Kind Hearted Woman Michelle Shocked — Life Is Peachy Korn — No Doy moe. — Overnight Sensation Motörhead — Recovering the Satellites Counting Crows — Red Hot + Rio Various Artists Red Hot Organization AIDS benefit Stories Told & Untold Bad Company — This Fire Paula Cole — Billy Breathes Phish 22 Autobiography of Mistachuck Chuck D — Best Of – Volume I Van Halen Compilation +2 new tracks Bow Down Westside Connection — Time Will Reveal Above the Law (group) — Dance into the Light Phil Collins — Get Off the Cross, We Need the Wood for the Fire Firewater Debut Motel California Ugly Kid Joe — Public Cowboy #1: The Music of Gene Autry Riders in the Sky — Soundtracks for the Blind Swans — Trial by Fire Journey — Truth Crushed to Earth Shall Rise Again House of Pain — 12 Soulful Nights of Christmas Jermaine Dupri Christmas 23 Actual Fantasy Ayreon — Wiseblood Corrosion of Conformity — 25 Evita Madonna Soundtrack Thank God for Mental Illness The Brian Jonestown Massacre — 28 The Beatles Anthology, Volume 3 The Beatles Compilation; UK A Different Beat Boyzone 29 American Hardcore L.A. Guns Among My Swan Mazzy Star Being There Wilco Double album Danzig 5: Blackacidevil Danzig — Fever In Fever Out Luscious Jackson — Ironman Ghostface Killah — The Rutles Archaeology The Rutles — Skillet Skillet — 31 Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. Slipknot — Back in the Shootin' Match Ace Troubleshooter NOVEMBER 1 Around the World Hit Singles: The Journey So Far East 17 Compilation 4 Richard D. James Album Aphex Twin Spice Spice Girls UK 5 Beavis and Butt-head Do America: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory 2Pac — Just the Same Terri Clark — Take You There k-os — Tierna La Noche Fey — II The Presidents of the United States of America — Unchained Johnny Cash — Unknown Country The Clean — 9 Further Along The Dubliners — 11 Pre-Millennium Tension Tricky — 12 About to Choke Vic Chesnutt — Epiphany: The Best of Chaka Khan, Vol. 1 Chaka Khan Compilation Hard Core Lil' Kim Debut Infinite Eminem Debut Losing Streak Less Than Jake — Nico Blind Melon — Space Jam: Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack Tha Doggfather Snoop Doggy Dogg — 18 If You're Feeling Sinister Belle & Sebastian — Now That's What I Call Music! 35 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 19 Blood Brothers Bruce Springsteen EP Dusk and Her Embrace Cradle of Filth — Emancipation (Prince) 3xCD Endtroducing..... DJ Shadow — Hell on Earth Mobb Deep — House of Music Tony! Toni! Tone! — Ill Na Na Foxy Brown — Life in General MxPx — Razorblade Suitcase Bush — Summer of '78 Barry Manilow — 22 Remember Rusted Root — Telegram Björk UK; Remix 25 Enter Suicidal Angels Dark Tranquillity — Le Roi Est Mort, Vive Le Roi! Enigma — Someday Maybe The Clarks — 26 The Aeroplane Flies High The Smashing Pumpkins Box Set Broken China Richard Wright UK Enigma Keith Murray Poison's Greatest Hits: 1986-1996 Poison Compilation The Preacher's Wife: Original Soundtrack Album Whitney Houston Soundtrack 29 Switchstance Quarashi EP Tormented Staind — Brave Murder Day Katatonia Live Around the World Meat Loaf Live ? Telegram Björk Remix DECEMBER 2 Telling Everybody Human Nature 3 Nerf Herder Nerf Herder — One Fierce Beer Coaster The Bloodhound Gang — Punk-O-Rama Vol. 2 Various Artists Compilation 5 Christmas on Death Row Various Artists Christmas 10 Five Smokin' Tracks from Lit Lit EP Lama Rabi Rabi Ghost — Muddy Waters Redman — This Is Teen-C Power! Bis EP 16 Machines Against the Rage TISM Live Artist Title Year Country Chart entries 1 Los Del Rio "Macarena" 1996 US BB 1 of 1996, Netherlands 1 – Aug 1993, Austria 1 – Feb 1996, Switzerland 1 – Mar 1996, Germany 1 – Apr 1996, Australia 1 for 9 weeks Nov 1996, UK 2 – Jul 1996, US BB 2 of 1996, Norway 2 – Jun 1996, Australia 2 of 1996, POP 2 of 1996, Global 7 (10&nbsp;M sold) – 1993, Sweden 8 – Jun 1996, Germany 26 of the 1990s, Party 102 of 2007 2 Spice Girls "Wannabe" 1996 UK 1 – Jul 1996, US BB 1 of 1997, Netherlands 1 – Aug 1996, Sweden 1 – Aug 1996, Switzerland 1 – Aug 1996, Norway 1 – Aug 1996, Germany 1 – Aug 1996, Éire 1 – Aug 1996, New Zealand 1 for 1 weeks Nov 1996, Australia 1 for 11 weeks Jan 1997, US BB 3 of 1997, POP 3 of 1997, Austria 4 – Aug 1996, Australia 5 of 1996, Poland 22 – Aug 1996, Italy 31 of 1996, Global 33 (5&nbsp;M sold) – 1996, Scrobulate 59 of pop, RYM 94 of 1996, Germany 170 of the 1990s, OzNet 963, Acclaimed 1504 3 Celine Dion "Because You Loved Me" 1996 US Billboard 1 - Mar 1996 (33 weeks), Japan (Tokyo) 1 - Mar 1996 (19 weeks), Australia 1 of 1996, Australia 1 for 3 weeks - Aug 1996, ASCAP song of 1996, Oscar in 1996 (film 'Up Close & Personal') (Nominated), Grammy in 1996 (Nominated), Golden Globe in 1996 (film 'Up Close & Personal') (Nominated), US Platinum (certified by RIAA in Apr 1996), US BB 3 of 1996, Switzerland 3 - Jun 1996 (32 weeks), ARC 4 of 1996 (peak 1 22 weeks), Holland 4 - May 1996 (15 weeks), Poland 4 - May 1996 (20 weeks), Germany Gold (certified by BMieV in 1996), POP 4 of 1996, UK 5 - Jun 1996 (16 weeks), Belgium 5 - Jun 1996 (16 weeks), US Radio 9 of 1996 (peak 1 21 weeks), Japan (Osaku) 11 of 1996 (peak 2 22 weeks), Sweden 12 - Aug 1996 (4 weeks), Germany 13 - Oct 1996 (3 months), Brazil 19 of 1996, Switzerland 20 of 1996, Austria 23 - Jun 1996 (3 weeks), UK Silver (certified by BPI in Jun 1996), Party 134 of 1999 4 Oasis "Wonderwall" 1996 New Zealand 1 for 1 weeks Mar 1996, Australia 1 for 1 weeks May 1996, UK 2 – Nov 1995, Scrobulate 2 of rock, Sweden 4 – Nov 1995, RYM 4 of 1995, Norway 5 – Dec 1995, US BB 8 of 1996, Netherlands 9 – Dec 1995, Australia 10 of 1996, Austria 12 – Mar 1996, Poland 15 – Jan 1996, US BB 16 of 1996, Switzerland 17 – Feb 1996, POP 20 of 1996, Virgin 22, Germany 24 – Feb 1996, Europe 70 of the 1990s, Acclaimed 123, Belgium 146 of all time, WXPN 856 5 Robert Miles "Children" 1996 Sweden 1 – Mar 1996, Austria 1 – Apr 1996, Switzerland 1 – Jan 1996, Norway 1 – Apr 1996, Germany 1 – Feb 1996, UK 2 – Feb 1996, France 2 – Feb 1996, Netherlands 3 – Feb 1996, Italy 3 of 1996, US BB 21 of 1996, Australia 26 of 1996, Germany 32 of the 1990s, Scrobulate 71 of house, RYM 159 of 1996, OzNet 336 January 8 – Robert Hoskins is found guilty and convicted on five charges of assault, stalking, and threatening to kill Madonna. January 16 At the trial of two American teenagers, Nicholaus McDonald and Brian Bassett, for the murder of Bassett's parents and young brother, defense lawyers attempt to lay the blame for the murders on the fact the pair had been listening to "Israel's Son" by Silverchair prior to the crimes, which are  dubbed the "Israel's Son Murders". Murmur Records released an official response, stating that Silverchair do not condone violence of any kind and that the song "seeks to criticize violence and war by portraying them in all their horror."  Jamaican authorities open fire on Jimmy Buffett's seaplane, Hemisphere Dancer, mistaking it for a drug trafficker's plane. U2 singer Bono and Island Records executive, Chris Blackwell, are also on the plane; no-one is injured. January 18 – Lisa Marie Presley files for divorce from Michael Jackson. January 25 – Madonna receives death threats from Argentine Peronists who are enraged and insulted that she is playing Eva Peron in Evita. After she arrives in Argentina, over 50 walls throughout the city have been spray-painted with the words: ¡Viva Evita! ¡Fuera Madonna! (Long Live Evita! Get Out, Madonna!). January 26 - The controversial musical Rent is given its first public performance at the New York Theatre Workshop, a day after the death of its creator, Jonathan Larson.Creative Team – Jonathan Larson January 28 – Chris Isaak makes a guest appearance on the television show Friends. January 29 La Fenice opera house in Venice, Italy, is destroyed by fire. Kiss reveals that they have reunited with original members Ace Frehley and Peter Criss, with a surprise appearance on the American Music Awards. The band took to the podium in full makeup and costume for the first time since 1983. Garth Brooks refuses to accept his American Music Award for Favorite Overall Artist. Brooks says that Hootie and the Blowfish had done more for music that year than he did. February 4 – Former Milli-Vanilli band member Rob Pilatus is hospitalized when a man hits him over the head with a baseball bat in Hollywood, while Pilatus is attempting to steal the man's car. February 13 Tupac Shakur releases the first ever rap double album, All Eyez on Me, one of the most influential albums in hip hop history. All Eyez on Me achieves platinum sales in just four hours and reaches No. 1 on the Billboard 200 charts. Take That formally announce that they are splitting up. February 14 – The Artist Formerly Known As Prince marries backup singer Mayte Garcia. February 19 - Jarvis Cocker disrupts a performance by Michael Jackson at the BRIT Awards. During an elaborate staging of "Earth Song" Cocker crashed the stage, lifted his shirt and pointed his bottom in Jackson's direction before getting into a scuffle with security. Cocker later stated that his actions were "a form of protest at the way Michael Jackson sees himself as some kind of Christ-like figure with the power of healing". February 20 Snoop Dogg and his bodyguard are acquitted of first degree murder. The jury deadlocks on voluntary manslaughter charges and a mistrial is declared. Storytellers premieres on VH1. The first episodes features Ray Davies. February 22 - MCA Records buys half of Interscope Records. Time Warner had owned half of Interscope until September 1995 when it sold off its share due to political pressure for the explicit lyrics of the label's gangsta rap artists. March 4 – The Beatles' second reunion song is released as part of their first reunion since the band's breakup 26 years earlier. The song is a finished version of "Real Love", a John Lennon demo from 1980. March 13 – Ramones fans riot in Buenos Aires, Argentina after waiting all night for concert tickets only to find out that the show had been sold out. March 16 – Mariah Carey and Boyz II Men's 16th consecutive week stay at No. 1 in the American charts with "One Sweet Day" ends when Celine Dion's "Because You Loved Me" reaches #1. "One Sweet Day" enjoyed the longest consecutive stay at No. 1 in the Billboard Hot 100's history.  March 18 – The Sex Pistols announce that they will be reuniting for a 20th anniversary tour. March 28 – Phil Collins announces that he is leaving Genesis to focus on his solo career. April 1 - Roberto Alagna marries Angela Gheorghiu backstage at the New York Metropolitan Opera.Martha Duffy, "So Happy Together", Time magazine, April 29, 1996 John Squire announces his departure from The Stone Roses. April 3 – M.C. Hammer files for bankruptcy. April 4 – The Grateful Dead's Bob Weir and Jerry Garcia's widow, Deborah, scatter part of Garcia's ashes in the Ganges River in India. April 10 – Alice in Chains plays at Majestic Theatre in NYC for a MTV unplugged record and video to be released in July. April 15 – The remaining part of Jerry Garcia's ashes are scattered near the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco. April 16 – Madonna announces that she is four months pregnant by Carlos Leon, her then boyfriend and trainer. April 17 - Carlo Bergonzi gives his American farewell concert at Carnegie Hall. April 24 – This Train, Rick Elias, Jimmy A, Phil Keaggy, Carolyn Arends, Third Day & Ashley Cleveland perform a tribute concert for Rich Mullins at Nashville's Cafe Milano. Speakers included Reunion Records executive Terry Hemmings, record producer Reed Arvin, disc jockey Jon Rivers, and author Brennan Manning. April 28 – Oasis play the second of two gigs in Maine Road, home of Manchester City F.C., featured on the video "…There and Then". May 8 The Galway Early Music Festival is launched in Ireland. In Los Angeles, a judge rules against Tommy Lee and wife, actress Pamela Anderson Lee, in their attempt to keep Penthouse magazine from publishing still photos taken from an X-rated home movie that was stolen from their home. May 11 - A 17-year-old fan is crushed in the festival seating section at a concert by The Smashing Pumpkins in Dublin, Ireland, despite the presence of 110 security guards and repeated admonishments from the band telling the crowd to stop surging towards the stage. The fan dies of her injuries the next day and the band cancels that night's show in Belfast as a result. May 25 - Sublime lead singer Bradley Nowell dies of a heroin overdose. May 30 - Depeche Mode leader Dave Gahan is arrested upon his release from hospital, having overdosed on a heroin and cocaine 'speedball' in a Los Angeles hotel room and been pronounced clinically dead for two minutes in an ambulance.  Gahan is ordered by the court to complete a 9-month rehabilitation. June 2 - Alice Cooper performs at Sammy Hagar's club, Cabo Wabo, in Mexico. It was recorded and released the next year as a live album. June 12 - The final of the Eurovision Young Musicians 1996 competition is held in Lisbon, Portugal.  The winner is German violinist and pianist Julia Fischer. June 15 and 16 - The first Tibetan Freedom Concerts are held in San Francisco. June 19 - Japanese duo Chage and Aska become the first Asian group to participate in MTV Unplugged. June 21 – The Sex Pistols start their reunion tour in Lahti, Finland. June 26 - Sammy Hagar leaves Van Halen. June 28 - Kiss kicks off the Alive/Worldwide reunion tour at Tiger Stadium in Detroit. It's the first tour by the original lineup of the band since 1979. July 3 This World releases their first album since 1986 Alice in Chains performs their last concert with lead singer Layne Staley  in Kansas City, Missouri while touring with Kiss. July 8 – The Spice Girls release their debut single "Wannabe" in the United Kingdom. The song proves to be a global hit, hitting number 1 in 31 countries and becoming not only the biggest selling debut single by an all-female group but also the biggest-selling single by an all-female group of all time. July 11 – Robert Simpson's second string quintet receives its première at the Cheltenham International Festival by the Maggini Quartet with Pal Banda, cellist. July 13 – Phil Anselmo of Pantera overdoses on heroin after a Texas homecoming gig. July 19 - The Proms in the Park event is launched in London, UK. July 27 – Adrian Erlandsson & Patrik Jensen form The Haunted.The Haunted – No false pride, no fashion, no fake set of values   August 1 – MTV2 is launched. The first video played is "Where It's At" by Beck. August 6 – Influential punk rock group The Ramones play their final show at The Palace in Hollywood. August 10 & 11 – Oasis play the largest free-standing gigs in British history at Knebworth House, Stevenage. 2.7 Million people apply for tickets and a sold out crowd of 350,000 attend the concerts, 175,000 each night. Stone Roses guitarist John Squire joins the band onstage to play guitar to Champagne Supernova. August 15 & 16 - Phish hosts The Clifford Ball at Plattsburgh Air Force Base. The event is the first of their festivals, currently totaling nine. 70,000 people show up. The event is considered a precursor to the large scale music festivals of today. August 27 – Aaliyah released her album One in a Million September 4 - At the MTV Video Music Awards, Van Halen makes a surprise appearance with original singer David Lee Roth. September 7 Rapper Tupac Shakur is shot one time whilst being driven from the MGM Grand Hotel along Sunset Strip in Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, after seeing the allegedly fixed Mike Tyson versus Bruce Seldon boxing match, in what is apparently a drive-by shooting. Michael Jackson starts the HIStory World Tour. September 10 - Wal-Mart announces it will not be carrying Sheryl Crow's upcoming self titled album because of the lyric "Watch out sister, watch out brother/watch our children while they kill each other/with a gun they bought at Wal-Mart Discount Stores". September 11 - David Bowie's single "Telling Lies" becomes the first song offered as a digital single by a major record label (Virgin Records). Bowie launches the single by hosting an online chat in which he and two other people pretending to be him answer questions from the audience; Bowie tells the truth, while the other two are "telling lies". September 12 – Controversy follows The Eagles when the band dedicates "Peaceful Easy Feeling" to Saddam Hussein at a United States Democratic Party fundraiser held in Los Angeles. September 13 - Seven months after the release of the epic 'All Eyez on Me', Tupac Shakur was pronounced dead at 4:03 pm as a result of injuries sustained 6 days earlier in a second Murder attempt on his life. September 21 – Meg White marries John Anthony Gillis, who took Meg's name and changed his name to Jack White. They would form The White Stripes one year later. September 24 - Weezer releases its second record, 'Pinkerton'. Due to its darker vibe and its departure from their earlier style, it sold less well and was critically panned. However, it has since become arguably the biggest cult record of the decade, topping "best of" lists by different critics. September 27 - Sasha and Digweed release Northern Exposure, which has gone on to be considered one of the greatest dance albums of all time. October 4 Eddie and Alex Van Halen announce that David Lee Roth will not be continuing as lead singer of Van Halen and that Gary Cherone will be the band's next vocalist. C-Block releases the single "So Strung Out", which reaches fourth chart position in Germany. October 6 – Country singers Faith Hill and Tim McGraw get married. October 13 - Prince's son Gregory Nelson dies from Pfeiffer Syndrome. October 14 - Madonna gives birth to daughter Lourdes Maria Ciccone Leon. October 15 - Korn's second studio album, Life is Peachy, debuts at number 3 on the Billboard 200 and goes on to sell 6 million copies worldwide. October 27 - Pop-Up Video premieres on VH1. October 28 - MTV India is launched. October 29 Slash announces in a faxed statement that he is officially leaving Guns N' Roses. Ian Brown and Mani officially dissolve The Stone Roses November 8 – After having been premièred at the Sundance Film Festival in January, the film Hype!, a documentary on the Seattle grunge scene, opens to general audiences. November 24 – Crowded House plays its farewell concert on the steps of the Sydney Opera House in Australia, in front of an audience of almost 200,000.  Proceeds from this concert support the Sydney Children's Hospital. November 12 - Eminem releases his debut studio album "Infinite" December 7 – The Sex Pistols finish their reunion tour in Santiago, Chile. December 16 – Max Cavalera leaves Sepultura because of Sepultura not renewing his wife Gloria's contract as manager as well as being overwhelmed by the death of his stepson. December 31 - The twenty-fifth annual New Year's Rockin' Eve special airs on ABC, with appearances by Shawn Colvin, KC & the Sunshine Band, Spice Girls, Squirrel Nut Zippers and Usher. Jesper Strömblad leaves Hammerfall. House of Pain breaks up which leads to DJ Lethal joining Limp Bizkit. The Monkees embark on their 30th Anniversary Reunion Tour. Singer Tori Amos is sued when a man crashes his car after being distracted by a billboard advertising her album. The billboard featured a photo of Amos breastfeeding a piglet. Coal Chamber signs with Roadrunner Records and Mikey "Bug" Cox replaces John Tor. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 is passed in the United States, deregulating the number of radio and TV stations that any one broadcaster can own. See  See  The Monkees New Edition Poison Kiss Devo Supertramp Patti Smith All the Pretty Little Horses – Current 93 Atom-Powered Action! - Bis - EP Better Can't Make Your Life Better - Lilys Bis vs. the D.I.Y. Corps - Bis Black Eye - Fluffy Boc Maxima - Boards of Canada Chixdiggit! - Chixdiggit Classics - Joey Beltram The Closing Chronicles – Nightingale Corey Hart - Corey Hart Dead Man Walking - Various Artists Democracy – Killing Joke Digilogue (compact disc version) – :zoviet*France: Creature - Moist Eleventeen (EP) – Eve 6 Garibaldi Guard! – U.S. Bombs G. - Gotthard Get Fired Up – Murk Get Your Legs Broke – Len Hamsters of Rock (EP) – Spacehog Hank Plays Holly – Hank Marvin Hank Plays Live – Hank Marvin Holy Land - Angra In Sides - Orbital Introducing Save Ferris (EP) – Save Ferris Katatonia/Primordial – Katatonia/Primordial La Passione – Chris Rea Lynda – Lynda Thomas Petitioning the Empty Sky - Converge A Man Amongst Men – Bo Diddley Music of Hair – Andrew Bird Nénette et Boni – Tindersticks Neu! '72 Live in Düsseldorf – Neu! Not in My Airforce - Robert Pollard Out of the Everywhere – Angie Aparo Ravendusk in My Heart – Diabolical Masquerade The Secret Vampire Soundtrack - Bis - EP Shakespearean Fish - Melanie Doane Six Pence for the Sauces (EP) – Drake Tungsten The Smiths Is Dead - Various Artists -The Smiths tribute Still Life – The Paradise Motel Tao of the One Inch Punch – One Inch Punch Telephono – Spoon Third Day - Third Day Time – Steeleye Span Vans Warped Music Sampler 1996 - Various Artists Welcome to the Infant Freebase – The Soundtrack of Our Lives "1, 2, 3, 4 (Sumpin' New)" - Coolio "1979"&nbsp;– The Smashing Pumpkins "2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted" – 2Pac & Snoop Dogg "6th Avenue Heartache"&nbsp;– The Wallflowers "Aeroplane"&nbsp;– Red Hot Chili Peppers "Again" – Alice in Chains "Ahead by a Century" – The Tragically Hip "Aicha" - Khaled "All Mixed Up"&nbsp;– 311 "Always Be My Baby"&nbsp;– Mariah Carey "Amish Paradise"&nbsp;– "Weird Al" Yankovic "A Neverending Dream" - X-Perience "Bailando" - Paradisio "Barely Breathing" - Duncan Sheik "Beautiful Ones" - Suede "Because You Loved Me"&nbsp;– Celine Dion "Before" - Pet Shop Boys "Betcha by Golly, Wow" - Prince "Between You And Me" - dc Talk "Big Me"&nbsp;– Foo Fighters "Blue Jeans" – Lynda Thomas "Boomerang" - Blümchen "Born Slippy .NUXX" - Underworld "Breakfast at Tiffany's" - Deep Blue Something "Break My Stride" - Unique II "Breathe" - The Prodigy "Breathe Babylon" – P.O.D. "Bullet with Butterfly Wings"&nbsp;– The Smashing Pumpkins "Bulls on Parade"&nbsp;– Rage Against the Machine "California Love"&nbsp;– Tupac Shakur / Dr. Dre "Can't Get You Off My Mind"&nbsp;– Lenny Kravitz "Change the World"&nbsp;– Eric Clapton "Champagne Supernova"&nbsp;– Oasis "Charmless Man"&nbsp;– Blur "Child" - Mark Owen "Children" – Robert Miles "Closer to Free" – BoDeans "C'Mon N' Ride It (The Train)"&nbsp;– Quad City DJ's "Coco Jamboo" - Mr. President "Cold Rock a Party" - MC Lyte & Missy Elliott "Crash Into Me"&nbsp;– Dave Matthews Band "Dance into the Light" - Phil Collins "Darla dirladada"&nbsp;– Dalida (remix) "Don't Look Back in Anger"&nbsp;– Oasis "Don't Speak"&nbsp;– No Doubt "Don't Stop Movin'" - Livin' Joy "Down"&nbsp;– 311 "Do U Still?" - East 17 "Drain You" live&nbsp;– Nirvana "Drill Instructor" - Captain Jack "E-Bow the Letter"&nbsp;– R.E.M. featuring Patti Smith "El Amor No Tiene Edad" – Lynda Thomas "Everyday Is a Winding Road" – Sheryl Crow "Everything Falls Apart" – Dog's Eye View "Fable" - Robert Miles "Falling into You" - Celine Dion "Fastlove" - George Michael "Firestarter" - The Prodigy "Flava" - Peter Andre "Follow You Down" – Gin Blossoms "Forever Love" - Gary Barlow "Free as a Bird"&nbsp;– The Beatles "Freed from Desire" - Gala "Freedom" - Robbie Williams "Fu-Gee-La" - Fugees "Funky" - Tic Tac Toe "Get Down (You're the One for Me)" - Backstreet Boys "Get Money"&nbsp;– Junior M.A.F.I.A. "Gira Que Gira" – Lynda Thomas "Give Me One Reason"&nbsp;– Tracy Chapman "GoldenEye" - Tina Turner "Guilty"&nbsp;– Gravity Kills "Hand in My Pocket"&nbsp;– Alanis Morissette "Head over Feet"&nbsp;– Alanis Morissette "Heaven" - U96 "Hero of the Day"&nbsp;- Metallica "Have a Little Faith in Me" – John Farnham "Heaven Beside You" – Alice in Chains "How Bizarre - OMC "How Can You Live With Yourself"&nbsp;– The Tubes "How Deep Is Your Love" - Take That "How Do U Want It"&nbsp;– Tupac Shakur "I Ain't Mad at Cha" – 2Pac "I Believe I Can Fly"&nbsp;– R. Kelly "I Can't Help Myself" - The Kelly Family "Ich Find' Dich Scheisse" - Tic Tac Toe "I Don't Wanna Be a Star" - Corona "I Give You My Heart" - Mr. President "I Love You Always Forever" – Donna Lewis "I Want to Come Over"&nbsp;– Melissa Etheridge "If I Ruled the World (Imagine That)" – Nas featuring Lauryn Hill "If It Makes You Happy"&nbsp;– Sheryl Crow "If You Could Only See"&nbsp;– Tonic "If You Ever" - East 17 & Gabrielle "If Your Girl Only Knew"&nbsp;– Aaliyah "I'll Never Break Your Heart" - Backstreet Boys "I'll Stick Around"&nbsp;– Foo Fighters "I'm Raving" - Scooter "I Need You" - 3T "Insomnia" - Faithless "Interstate Love Song"&nbsp;– Stone Temple Pilots "Ironic"&nbsp;– Alanis Morissette "it's All Coming Back to Me Now" - Celine Dion "It's Oh So Quiet"&nbsp;– Björk "I Want You Back" - 'N Sync "Jealousy"&nbsp;– Natalie Merchant "Jesus to a Child" - George Michael "Killing Me Softly With His Song"&nbsp;– Fugees "King of New Orleans"&nbsp;– Better Than Ezra "King Nothing"&nbsp;– Metallica "Kleiner Satellit (Piep, Piep)" - Blümchen "Last Night" - Az Yet "Let's Make a Night to Remember"&nbsp;– Bryan Adams "La Mamma"&nbsp;– Dalida (inédit) "Là-bas dans le noir"&nbsp;– Dalida (remix) "Lemon Tree" - Fool's Garden "Long Way Down"&nbsp;– Goo Goo Dolls "Loungin" - LL Cool J & Total "Love Don't Live Here Anymore"&nbsp;– Madonna "Macarena" - Los Del Mar "Macarena"&nbsp;– Los Del Rio "Mama Said"&nbsp;– Metallica "Motel California"&nbsp;– Ugly Kid Joe "My Boo"&nbsp;– Ghost Town DJ's "Mysterious Girl" - Peter Andre "Naked Eye"&nbsp;– Luscious Jackson "Naked"&nbsp;– Goo Goo Dolls "Name" – Goo Goo Dolls "Nobody" - Keith Sweat & Athena Cage "Nobody Knows" - The Tony Rich Project "No Diggity"&nbsp;– Blackstreet featuring Dr. Dre "Novocaine for the Soul"&nbsp;– Eels "No Woman No Cry" - Fugees "Number One" - Alexia "One and One" - Robert Miles "One by One" - Cher "One Headlight"&nbsp;– The Wallflowers "One in a Million" – Aaliyah "One More Chance" - Madonna "One Sweet Day"&nbsp;– Mariah Carey and Boyz II Men (released in 1995) "Ooh Aah...Just a Little Bit" - Gina G "Open Arms" - Mariah Carey "Over Now" – Alice in Chains "Pepper"&nbsp;– Butthole Surfers "People of the Sun"&nbsp;– Rage Against the Machine "Piu bella cosa" - Eros Ramazotti "Pony" - Ginuwine "Pray" - DJ BoBo "Pretty Noose"&nbsp;– Soundgarden "Professional Widow"&nbsp;– Tori Amos "Quit Playing Games (With My Heart)"&nbsp;– Backstreet Boys "Ready or Not"&nbsp;– Fugees "Reach" - Gloria Estefan "Real Love" - The Beatles "Rebel Yell" - Scooter "Return of the Mack"&nbsp;– Mark Morrison "Roses Are Red" - Aqua "Salva Mea" - Faithless "Salvation" - The Cranberries "Se a vida e (That's the Way Life Is)" - Pet Shop Boys "Setting Sun" - The Chemical Brothers "Seven Days and One Week" - B.B.E. "Slight Return" - The Bluetones "Soldier, Soldier" - Captain Jack "So Much To Say"&nbsp;– Dave Matthews Band "So Strung Out" - C-Block "Spaceman" - Babylon Zoo "Spinning the Wheel" - George Michael "Standing Outside a Broken Phone Booth With Money in My Hand"&nbsp;– Primitive Radio Gods "Steelo"&nbsp;– 702 "Stranger in Moscow" - Michael Jackson "Stupid Girl"&nbsp;– Garbage "Summer Is Crazy" - Alexia "Tahitian Moon"&nbsp;– Porno for Pyros "Tha Crossroads"&nbsp;– Bone Thugs-N-Harmony "That Girl" - Maxi Priest & Shaggy "That Thing You Do" - The Wonders "That's What My Love Is For" - Anne Murray and Aaron Neville "Theme from Mission: Impossible" - Adam Clayton & Larry Mullen "The Only Thing That Looks Good on Me Is You"&nbsp;- Bryan Adams "They Don't Care About Us"&nbsp;– Michael Jackson "The Beautiful People"&nbsp;– Marilyn Manson "The Earth, The Sun, The Rain"&nbsp;– Color Me Badd "The X-Files" - DJ Dado "The X-Files" - Mark Snow "Tic, Tic Tac"&nbsp;– Carrapicho "Time to Say Goodbye" - Andrea Bocelli & Sarah Brightman "To Love You More" - Celine Dion "Tonight, Tonight"&nbsp;– The Smashing Pumpkins "Trash" - Suede "Twisted" - Keith Sweat "Un-Break My Heart"&nbsp;– Toni Braxton "Until It Sleeps"&nbsp;– Metallica "Vamonos (Hey Chico are You ready)" - Garcia "Vapors"&nbsp;– Snoop Doggy Dogg "Verpiss Dich" -Tic Tac Toe "Virtual Insanity"&nbsp;– Jamiroquai "Walking on the Milky Way" - OMD "Wannabe - Spice Girls "We've Got It Goin' On" - Backstreet Boys "Wash Away"&nbsp;– Vertical Horizon "When You're Gone"&nbsp;– The Cranberries "Whatever You Want" - Tina Turner "What I Got"&nbsp;– Sublime "What's Love Got to Do with It" - Warren G "The Wedding" – Cliff Richard and Helen Hobson "Where Do You Go" - No Mercy "Where It's At"&nbsp;– Beck "Who Will Save Your Soul"&nbsp;– Jewel "Who You Are" - Pearl Jam "Why"&nbsp;– 3T feat. Michael Jackson "Woman" - Neneh Cherry "Wonder"&nbsp;– Natalie Merchant "Wonderwall"&nbsp;– Oasis (released in 1995) "Woo Hah!! Got You All in Check" – Busta Rhymes "Words" - Boyzone "You Don't Fool Me" - Queen "You Learn"&nbsp;– Alanis Morissette "You Must Love Me"&nbsp;– Madonna "You Oughta Know"&nbsp;– Alanis Morissette (released in 1995) "You're Makin' Me High" - Toni Braxton "You Were Meant For Me"&nbsp;– Jewel "Zehn kleine Jagermeister" - Die Toten Hosen "Zero"&nbsp;– The Smashing Pumpkins Torstein Aagaard-Nilsen – Trumpet Concerto No. 2 Michael Berkeley – Viola Concerto (revised) Elliott Carter – Clarinet Concerto Mario Davidovsky – Quartetto No. 2 for oboe, violin, viola, violoncello Peter Maxwell Davies – Strathclyde Concerto No 10: Concerto for Orchestra Joël-François Durand – Les raisons des forces mouvantes for organ Lorenzo Ferrero – My Piece of Africa, for violin, viola, violoncello, and contrabass Alexander Goehr – Viola Concerto Sofia Gubaidulina – Viola Concerto Hans Werner Henze – Labyrinth (revision of 1951 work) Wilhelm Kaiser-Lindemann – Homage a Nelson Mandela Frederik Magle –  Christmas cantata: A newborn child, before eternity, God! John Pickard – Third Symphony David Sawer – Tiroirs Juan Maria Solare – Diez Estudios Escénicos Karlheinz Stockhausen – Orchester-Finalisten Lorenzo Ferrero – La nascita di Orfeo Daron Hagen – Vera of Las Vegas Franz Hummel – Gesualdo (14 January 1996, Kaiserslautern)Eckhard Roelcke, "Mördermusik", Die Zeit 1996, no. 5 (26 January). James MacMillan – Inés de Castro Michael Obst – Solaris (4 December, Muffathalle, Munich Biennale)Eleanore Buening, "Die Soap mit den Aliens", Die Zeit 1996, no. 51 (13 December). Karlheinz Stockhausen – Freitag aus Licht (12 September, Leipzig Opera)Heinz Josef Herbort, "Erlösung trotz alledem: Freitag, Karlheinz Stockhausens fünfte LICHT-Oper, in Leipzig uraufgeführt", Die Zeit 1996, no. 39 (20 September). Chicago (Kander and Ebb) – Broadway revival A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (Stephen Sondheim) – Broadway revival I Love You, You're Perfect, Now Change – off Broadway production The King and I (Rodgers and Hammerstein) – Broadway revival Once Upon a Mattress – Broadway revival Rent (Jonathan Larson) – Broadway production (originally off Broadway) State Fair – Broadway production Aur Ek Prem Kahani Bal Bramhachari Everyone Says I Love You Evita Glastonbury the Movie Grace of My Heart Hommage à Noir Hype! The Hunchback of Notre Dame James and the Giant Peach Saajan Chale Sasural That Thing You Do! January 23 – Chachi Gonzales, American actress and dancer January 27 – Braeden Lemasters, American actor and singer January 28 – Emily Piriz, American singer February 9 – Kelli Berglund, American actress, singer, and dancer May 14 - Martin Garrix - Dutch DJ June 27 - Lauren Jauregui, American singer and member of girl group Fifth Harmony July 13 - Jena Irene, American singer-songwriter August 1 Cymphonique Miller, American actress and singer Ellona Santiago, Filipino-American singer October 14 – Lourdes Maria Ciccone Leon, first child of Madonna, in Los Angeles, California. October 15 - Zelo - South Korean rapper November 15 - Jackie Squirrel, Space Jam cheerleader-singer-dancer from New Jersey January 20 – Gerry Mulligan, saxophonist, 68 January 21, in a car accident, the London Boys: Edem Ephraim, 37 Dennis Fuller, 37 January 25 – Jonathan Larson, composer and writer of the hit Broadway musical Rent, 35 (aortic aneurysm) January 26 – Henry Lewis, American bassist and conductor, 63 (heart attack) January 30 - Bob Thiele, record producer, 73 February 2 – Gene Kelly, actor and dancer, 83 February 3 – Audrey Meadows, American actress and singer, 73 February 7 – Boris Tchaikovsky, composer, 70 February 15 - Wild Jimmy Spruill, guitarist, 61 February 16 - Brownie McGhee, blues singer and guitarist, 80 February 17 – Evelyn Laye, English actress and singer, 95 February 20 – Toru Takemitsu, composer, 66 February 21 - Morton Gould, composer conductor arranger ASCAP President, 82 February 26 – Mieczysław Weinberg, composer, 76 March 4 – Minnie Pearl, comedienne and country musician, 84 March 15 – Olga Rudge, violinist, 101 March 22 – Don Murray, drummer (The Turtles), 50 (post-operative complications) March 31 - Jeffrey Lee Pierce, singer and songwriter (The Gun Club), 37 April 2 - Booba Barnes, blues singer and guitarist, 59 (cancer) April 18 – Bernard Edwards (Chic), 43 (pneumonia) May 8 – Celedonio Romero, leader of the Romeros guitar quartet, 83 May 10 – Ethel Smith, organist, 85 May 11 - Walter Hyatt, singer/songwriter, 46 May 17 Kevin Gilbert (musician), studio engineer, songwriter with Toy Matinee, Tuesday Night Music Club (asphyxiation) Johnny "Guitar" Watson - guitarist, 61 (myocardial infarction) May 25 – Brad Nowell, lead singer and guitarist of Sublime, 28 (heroin overdose) May 30 - John Kahn, rock bassist, 48 June 15 – Ella Fitzgerald, jazz singer, 79 June 20 – Jim Ellison, singer and guitarist of Material Issue, 32 July 12 – Jonathan Melvoin, touring keyboardist for The Smashing Pumpkins, 34 (heroin overdose) July 16 – John Panozzo, drummer for Styx and brother of Chuck Panozzo, 48 July 17 Chas Chandler (The Animals), 57 (heart attack) Marcel Dadi, French country and western guitarist, 45 (in the crash of TWA flight 800) July 22 – Rob Collins, original keyboardist of The Charlatans, 31 July 29 – Jason Thirsk, Pennywise bassist, 28 (suicide) August 11 - Mel Taylor, drummer (The Ventures), 62 (cancer) August 13 – David Tudor, pianist and composer, 70 August 14 Sergiu Celibidache, Romanian conductor, 84 Al Cleveland, songwriter and producer, 66 (heart disease) August 23 – Jurriaan Andriessen, Dutch composer, 71 September 1 – Vagn Holmboe, Danish composer, 83 September 9 - Bill Monroe, bluegrass singer, composer and mandolin player, 84 September 13 – Tupac Shakur, rapper, poet, actor, 25 (shot) September 28 - Bob Gibson, folk singer/songwriter, 64 October 2 – Joonas Kokkonen, Finnish composer, 75 October 6 - Ted Daffan, country musician, 84 October 11 – Renato Russo, lead singer and composer for Legião Urbana, 36 October 17 Berthold Goldschmidt, German composer, 93 Chris Acland, Lush drummer, 30 (suicide) November 2 – Eva Cassidy, American vocalist, 33 (skin cancer) November 5 - Eddie Harris, jazz saxophonist, pianist and organist, 62 November 10 - Manik Varma, Indian classical musician, 76 November 13 - Bill Doggett, jazz and R & B pianist and organist, 80 (heart attack) November 30 – Tiny Tim, musician, 64 December 5 - Wilf Carter, Canadian country musician, 91 December 10 – Faron Young, country singer, 64 December 29 – Mireille, French singer, 90 Eurovision Song Contest Main article: Eurovision Song Contest 1996 Grammy Awards Main article: Grammy Awards of 1996 MTV Video Music Awards Main article: 1996 MTV Video Music Awards Mercury Music Prize The Mercury Music Prize was awarded to Different Class, the album  by Pulp. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame The following artists were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: David Bowie, Gladys Knight and the Pips, Jefferson Airplane, Little Willie John, Pink Floyd, The Shirelles and The Velvet Underground. Toru Takemitsu (laureate), Tan Dun (protégé) Triple J Hottest 100 Main article: Triple J Hottest 100, 1996 1996 in music (UK)
