 list of notable events in music that took place in the year 1999. The following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the charts of 1999. Date Album Artist Notes JANUARY 1 A Song for ×× Ayumi Hamasaki Debut album 5 In Your Area Hawkwind 7 Black the Sun Alex Lloyd 11 Hawkwind 1997 Hawkwind Live Unification Iron Savior 12 14:59 Sugar Ray ...Baby One More Time Britney Spears Debut album By Your Side The Black Crowes Knock Knock Smog 16 A Day and a Thousand Years Walls of Jericho EP 19 I See a Darkness Bonnie 'Prince' Billy Inside Out Anthrax EP Live at Luther College Dave Matthews & Tim Reynolds Live Made Man Silkk the Shocker Up Up Up Up Up Up Ani DiFranco 25 1999 Cassius 26 Apocalypse Dudes Turbonegro Chyna Doll Foxy Brown Colin James and the Little Big Band II Colin James Dreaming Neon Black Nevermore Moontower Dan Swanö 27 Theater of Salvation Edguy 29 Science Fiction blackmail FEBRUARY 1 Dialogue Four Tet No Exit Blondie 2 Extremely Cool Chuck E. Weiss Keep It Like a Secret Built to Spill Rushmore: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack X-Ray Sierra Tom Cochrane 9 Dosage Collective Soul Good Morning Spider Sparklehorse US Hedwig and the Angry Inch Original Cast Album Cast of Hedwig and the Angry Inch Original cast recording Rare & Fatty Bad Manners Compilation Sam Prekop Sam Prekop 15 Anima Animus The Creatures 16 Da Next Level Mr. Serv-On Greatest hits album New Kids on the Block Compilation 17 Apple Venus Volume 1 XTC Eien Zard 19 The '90s Suck and So Do You Angry Samoans Eatin' Dust Fu Manchu 22 The Dirtchamber Sessions Volume One The Prodigy Compilation Rusted Angel Darkane 23 ALL ALL EP Blue Plate Specials Live The Specials Live Can You Still Feel? Jason Falkner Clarity Jimmy Eat World FanMail TLC February Son Oleander The Hot Rock Sleater-Kinney Live at the Fillmore East Jimi Hendrix Live The Mountain Steve Earle and the Del McCoury Band A Place in the Sun Lit A Prince Among Thieves Prince Paul The Sebadoh Sebadoh The Slim Shady LP Eminem "Old School Vs. New School" Various Artists Suicaine Gratifaction Paul Westerberg Things Fall Apart The Roots What I Deserve Kelly Willis 24 Dance Classics of Chaka Khan Chaka Khan Compilation 25 Eureka Jim O'Rourke 27 Volume 1 CKY 28 At the Heart of Winter Immortal MARCH 1 Live and Enhanced Tonic Live 2 Spiritual Black Dimensions Dimmu Borgir Universal Madness Madness Live 8 Live at the Hardback Hot Water Music Live Neon Ballroom Silverchair Peasants, Pigs & Astronauts Kula Shaker Performance and Cocktails Stereophonics Slow Riot for New Zerø Kanada Godspeed You! Black Emperor EP 9 Back on Top Van Morrison Central Reservation Beth Orton Everything Louder Than Everyone Else Motörhead Live Fuse Joe Henry The Gang's All Here Dropkick Murphys Gedida Natacha Atlas Have a Nice Day Roxette If I Could Turn Back Time: Cher's Greatest Hits Cher Compilation The Movement Harlem World Pistolero Frank Black and the Catholics Ravenous (OST) Damon Albarn and Michael Nyman Soundtrack Summerteeth Wilco 10 First Love Hikaru Utada 15 Axxess & Ace Songs: Ohia 13 Blur 16 Burning London: The Clash Tribute Various Artists Tribute The Ideal Crash dEUS 100% Ginuwine Ginuwine Libido Buck-O-Nine Mindfields Toto Shades 1968-1998 Deep Purple Box Set Stay the Same Joe McIntyre Solo debut Who Else! Jeff Beck 22 Social Dancing Bis Windowlicker Aphex Twin EP 23 @#!* Pulley Black Foliage: Animation Music Volume One The Olivia Tremor Control "The N.W.A Legacy, Vol. 1: 1988–1998" N.W.A Caledonia Shana Morrison Solo Debut Elton John and Tim Rice's Aida Elton John Finally BLACKstreet Foolish soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack Give Yourself a Hand Crash Test Dummies Hempstead High A+ Instrument Soundtrack Fugazi Soundtrack Labour of Love III UB40 Covers Live Usher Live New Way to Be Human Switchfoot The Original Bad Company Anthology Bad Company Compilation +4 new songs Red Voodoo Sammy Hagar Savage Land Mob Rules Strange Behaviour Duran Duran Remix Compilation Super Hits Brooks & Dunn Compilation Tonight Silk Traveling Miles Cassandra Wilson Wisconsin Death Trip Static-X 29 Come on Die Young Mogwai UK Now That's What I Call Music! 42 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation Power Plant Gamma Ray Tuonela Amorphis 30 Go: Music from the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack The Matrix: Music from the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack No Gods, No Managers Choking Victim The PJs: Music from & Inspired by the Hit Television Series Various Artists TV Soundtrack Date Album Artist Notes APRIL 4 T.O.P. Shinhwa Voices of Transgression – A 90s Retrospective Kreator Compilation 5 The Middle of Nowhere Orbital 6 15 Minutes Nik Kershaw Buckcherry Buckcherry Heated Big Sugar US I Am... Nas Jordan Knight Jordan Knight Solo debut Life in the Fat Lane Various Artists Compilation Stupid Dream Porcupine Tree Throttle Junkies Soil Thug Mentality 1999 Krayzie Bone Tight Mindless Self Indulgence Utopia Parkway Fountains of Wayne We Kill Everything GWAR 7 Innamoramento Mylène Farmer 10 I Am Shelby Lynne Shelby Lynne 12 Carboot Soul Nightmares on Wax Fun in the Dark Groovie Ghoulies Rides Reef 13 18 Tracks Bruce Springsteen Blue Skies, Broken Hearts...Next 12 Exits The Ataris Dysfunction Staind Burn the Priest Burn the Priest band changed name to Lamb of God Echo Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers Eye II Eye Scorpions I've Got a Right to Cry Mandy Barnett Karma Rick Springfield Love Songs Yanni Compilation Tal Bachman Tal Bachman 16 What Are You Going to Do with Your Life? Echo & the Bunnymen 19 Bury the Hatchet The Cranberries 20 Adios KMFDM Chopper City in the Ghetto B.G. The Earth Pressed Flat 10,000 Maniacs Endorama Kreator 4 Nights at the Palais Royale Sloan Live Greatest Hits 1984-1987 Reggie and the Full Effect Compilation Holy Roller The Reverend Horton Heat Compilation The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper Alice Cooper Box Set Monsters and Robots Buckethead Mule Variations Tom Waits Six Mansun US Snuffbox Immanence Ghost Street Faërie Cree Summer Tight Mindless Self Indulgence Tune In, Turn On, Free Tibet Ghost 23 Miami Babasónicos 26 Fantômas Fantômas Hatebreeder Children of Bodom 27 Black Sails EP AFI EP Implode Front Line Assembly "Suge Knight Represents: Chronic 2000" Various Artists Murda Muzik Mobb Deep Nineteen Naughty Nine: Nature's Fury Naughty by Nature Playing My Game Lene Marlin Soundbombing II Various Artists Compilation Take Your Shoes Off Robert Cray The Unauthorized Biography of Reinhold Messner Ben Folds Five 28 Host Paradise Lost MAY 1 Hybrid Theory Linkin Park 3 Head Music Suede 4 The Ego Has Landed Robbie Williams Compilation First Come, First Served Kool Keith As Dr. Dooom Hopeless Romantic The Bouncing Souls A Place in the Sun Tim McGraw Point No. 1 Chevelle The Matrix: Original Motion Picture Score Don Davis Soundtrack Sonic Brew Black Label Society Times of Grace Neurosis Undeniable Raven-Symoné The Warriors EP P.O.D. 10 Remedy Basement Jaxx UK 11 I'd Rather Eat Glass Bijou Phillips No Limit Top Dogg Snoop Dogg Ricky Martin Ricky Martin 60 Second Wipe Out Atari Teenage Riot 14 Intimités Miss Kittin & The Hacker EP 17 Grande Rock The Hellacopters The Maggot The Melvins The Only Reason I Feel Secure Pedro the Lion EP 18 Bigger than the Devil Stormtroopers of Death Black Sails in the Sunset AFI Freedumb Suicidal Tendencies Helldorado W.A.S.P. The Hush Texas If Looks Could Kill, I'd Watch You Die Death By Stereo Millennium Backstreet Boys Seven Wolfstone Thug Ride White Dawg Whereabouts Ron Sexsmith 21 Colony In Flames Stairway to Fairyland Freedom Call 24 Skydancer Dark Tranquillity Reissue Beach House on the Moon Jimmy Buffett Saltwater Chicane 25 The Amazing Jeckel Brothers Insane Clown Posse The Art of Storytelling Slick Rick Innamoramento Mylène Farmer A New Kind of Army Anti-Flag This Moment Is Mine Chanté Moore You Can't Stop the Bum Rush Len 31 Mike + The Mechanics Mike + The Mechanics JUNE 1 Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me - Music from the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack Barefoot on the Beach Michael Franks Blaque Blaque Enema of the State Blink-182 1st album to feature Travis Barker on drums Gorgeous Guttermouth Here Comes the Bride Spin Doctors No Angel Dido On the 6 Jennifer Lopez Debut Play Moby Short Music for Short People Various Artists Compilation Shrinking Violet L.A. Guns Straight Ahead Pennywise 1011 Woodland The Fixx Venni Vetti Vecci Ja Rule 3 The Siket Disc Phish Internet 6 Cowboy Bebop Remixes: Music for Freelance Various Artists Compilation 7 Crowning of Atlantis Therion Leisure Noise Gay Dad 8 Astro Lounge Smash Mouth Buena Vista Social Club Presents Ibrahim Ferrer Ibrahim Ferrer Californication Red Hot Chili Peppers Return of John Frusciante on guitar Dark Side of the Spoon Ministry Euphoria Def Leppard The Gathering Testament Get Skintight The Donnas Her Wallpaper Reverie The Apples in Stereo In a Reverie Lacuna Coil New World Disorder Biohazard Stereo * Type A Cibo Matto Synkronized Jamiroquai Terror Twilight Pavement Triptych The Tea Party When I Look in Your Eyes Diana Krall 10 Songs from the Heart Yanni Compilation 12 Ágætis byrjun Sigur Rós 14 Guerrilla Super Furry Animals 15 Double Up Mase Erase the Slate Dokken Everything You Want Vertical Horizon Heavy Heavy D Liquid Tension Experiment 2 Liquid Tension Experiment Messenger Edwin McCain Mirrorball Sarah McLachlan Live No Boundaries: A Benefit for the Kosovar Refugees Various Artists [R]evolution Sister Machine Gun Schizophonic Geri Halliwell Solo Debut 702 702 South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut – Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack Supernatural Santana This or That Sway & King Tech The White Stripes The White Stripes Debut 21 The Beta Band The Beta Band UK Beware the Heavens Sinergy Judgement Anathema 22 A2G Blackalicious EP Da Real World Missy "Misdemeanor" Elliott Hypocrisy Hypocrisy It's Real K-Ci & JoJo Paintin' the Town Brown: Ween Live 1990-1998 Ween Live Punk-O-Rama Vol. 4 Various Artists Compilation The RZA Hits RZA Compilation The Soft Bulletin The Flaming Lips Significant Other Limp Bizkit Surrender Chemical Brothers Tuesday's Child Amanda Marshall 29 Brave New World Styx Classics in the Key of G Kenny G Covers album Electric Honey Luscious Jackson Freaks of Nature Drain STH No Mercy No Remorse RBX Nothing Safe: Best of the Box Alice in Chains Compilation One Guitar, No Vocals Leo Kottke Running With Scissors "Weird Al" Yankovic Slipknot Slipknot Debut Soundpieces: Da Antidote Lootpack Supersonic and Demonic Relics Mötley Crüe Rarities Compilation Date Album Artist Notes JULY 4 Act of Depression Underøath 5 How I Learned to Love the Bootboys The Auteurs On How Life Is Macy Gray UK 6 Can't Get There from Here Great White Fenix*TX Fenix*TX The Golden Band The American Analog Set Live at Woodstock Jimi Hendrix Live Ratt Ratt The Very Best of Dokken Dokken Compilation 7 Fun 9 Takako Minekawa 12 Before The Calm Witness UK; Debut album 13 Beware the Heavens Sinergy Blue Green Orange I Mother Earth California Mr. Bungle Can't Stay Away Too $hort Full Clip: A Decade of Gang Starr Gang Starr Compilation Night and Day Willie Nelson Someday Yanni Compilation The Wonderful World of Cease A Leo Lil' Cease 18 Long Tall Weekend They Might Be Giants Internet Trepanation American Head Charge 19 Now That's What I Call Music! 43 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 20 Burning Bridges Arch Enemy Jewels for Sophia Robyn Hitchcock Life of the Party The Planet Smashers There's a Poison Goin' On Public Enemy This Time Los Lobos Timbre Sophie B. Hawkins Tonight the Stars Revolt! Powerman 5000 23 Watoosh! Pezz Later changed name to Billy Talent 27 Alive in Athens Iced Earth Live At the Show MxPx Live The Blues Eric Clapton Compilation A Cheap and Evil Girl Bree Sharp Debut Guerrilla Warfare Hot Boys Ignorance is Bliss Face to Face Jaws of Death Primal Fear Now That's What I Call Music! 2 (US series) Various Artists Compilation Staying Power Barry White 'Til the Medicine Takes Widespread Panic Vaya At the Drive-In EP The Verve Pipe The Verve Pipe The Writing's On The Wall Destiny's Child US 29 Beneath the Surface GZA The Melancholy Collection Millencolin Sweden; Compilation AUGUST 3 Awesome Mix Tape vol. 6 The Pietasters The Coming of Age Memphis Bleek Detroit Rock City: Music from the Motion Picture Various Artists Soundtrack Do the Collapse Guided by Voices Fly the Flag Down by Law Forget About It Alison Krauss Here I Stand Oysterband Philadelphonic G. Love & Special Sauce The Process of Self-Development Candiria 10 Black Elvis/Lost in Space Kool Keith "The Most Beautifullest Hits" Keith Murray "Violator: The Album" Various Artists The Burning Red Machine Head Come Pick Me Up Superchunk Liberate Te Ex Inferis Zao The Most Beautifullest Hits Keith Murray Compilation No Division Hot Water Music Edge of Forever Lynyrd Skynyrd 16 Juxtapose Tricky 17 Before You Were Punk 2 Various Artists Compilation Incognegro Ludacris Mary Mary J. Blige Rough Harvest John Mellencamp Steal the Sky Yanni Soundtrack Teenage Snuff Film Rowland S. Howard The 10 Year Limited Edition Anniversary Box Set Blur Box set 23 The Bootlicker The Melvins J-Tull Dot Com Jethro Tull Soulburner Gardenian 24 The Austin Sessions Kris Kristofferson Bitter Meshell Ndegeocello Bring Your Own Stereo Jimmie's Chicken Shack Christina Aguilera Christina Aguilera Debut Forever Puff Daddy The Fundamental Elements of Southtown P.O.D. Home Sevendust LFO LFO A Little Bit of Mambo Lou Bega Mock Tudor Richard Thompson Monarch (Lay Your Jewelled Head Down) Feist The Muse Elton John Soundtrack Oh! The Grandeur Andrew Bird's Bowl of Fire Slap-Happy L7 Title of Record Filter The Vault: Old Friends 4 Sale Prince Compilation 27 Au cœur du stade Celine Dion Live 30 The Abba Generation A*Teens Sweden A Secret History... The Best of the Divine Comedy The Divine Comedy Compilation Yesterday Went Too Soon Feeder 31 Days of the New Days of the New 2nd album Fly Dixie Chicks Greatest Hits SWV Compilation Live aus Berlin Rammstein Live Risk Megadeth Tonight's Decision Katatonia Vitamin C Vitamin C Sound Asleep EP Evanescence SEPTEMBER 2 The Avenger Amon Amarth 6 Only Yazoo Yazoo Compilation 7 August Everywhere Blinker the Star Chamber Music Coal Chamber Ecliptica Sonata Arctica Debut Nasty Little Thoughts Stroke 9 One Part Lullaby The Folk Implosion Riot, Riot, Upstart Agnostic Front Risin' Outlaw Hank Williams III Solo Debut Seven Year Itch: 1982-1989 Platinum Blonde Compilation 69 Love Songs The Magnetic Fields Box Set Somewhere Between Heaven and Earth Cindy Bullens The Ultra Zone Steve Vai Zygote John Popper 8 Beyond the Veil Tristania 9 Gettin' High on Your Own Supply Apollo 440 UK 12 Between the Bridges Sloan 13 The Contino Sessions Death in Vegas Liquid Skin Gomez One From The Modern Ocean Colour Scene Sang pour sang Johnny Hallyday Yellow Submarine Songtrack The Beatles Soundtrack 14 Afterglow Dot Allison Solo Debut Amarte Es Un Placer Luis Miguel Avenue B Iggy Pop Beautiful Midnight Matthew Good Band Breakfast in New Orleans, Dinner in Timbuktu Bruce Cockburn Felons & Revolutionaries Dope Marc Anthony Marc Anthony English-language debut Nigga Please Ol' Dirty Bastard Q2K Queensrÿche Ruff Ryders' First Lady Eve Winter Light Yanni Compilation A Single History: 1991–1997 Unwound Compilation 20 Blazing the Crop Rae & Christian Compilation The Ladder Yes UK Metalhead Saxon UK Supergrass Supergrass 21 A Love Like Ours Barbra Streisand Back at One Brian McKnight Burn to Shine Ben Harper and the Innocent Criminals Cobra and Phases Group Play Voltage in the Milky Night Stereolab Euphoria Morning Chris Cornell The Fragile Nine Inch Nails Going for Gold Shed Seven Compilation The Greatest Hits – Volume 1 The Beach Boys Compilation The Greatest Hits – Volume 2 The Beach Boys Compilation Happiness...Is Not a Fish That You Can Catch Our Lady Peace Canada I'll Take Care Of You Mark Lanegan Live at the Wiltern CPR Live Stan and Judy's Kid Adam Sandler The Sweetest Punch Elvis Costello and Bill Frisell Tightrope Brooks & Dunn To Venus and Back Tori Amos Double Album: 1 Studio, 1 Live World Coming Down Type O Negative 22 Beaucoup Fish Underworld Inside Wants Out John Mayer EP King of the Nordic Twilight Luca Turilli Melvin Flynt - Da Hustler Noreaga Time Third Day Underground Vol. 2: Club Memphis Three 6 Mafia 27 A Different Beat Gary Moore 28 Amen Paula Cole Balance Swollen Members Bennett Sings Ellington: Hot & Cool Tony Bennett Black Diamond Angie Stone US Blackout! Method Man & Redman Brand New Day Sting Calculating Infinity The Dillinger Escape Plan Come On Now Social Indigo Girls Deconstruction Meredith Brooks Garth Brooks in ... The Life of Chris Gaines Garth Brooks as Chris Gaines Ghost Town Live The Specials Live Human Clay Creed LB IV Life Lost Boyz Lost and Gone Forever Guster The Luxury of Time David Mead Debut Right Back Long Beach Dub Allstars Debut Something To Write Home About The Get Up Kids Temperamental Everything but the Girl The Time Machine Alan Parsons XXX ZZ Top Date Album Artist Notes OCTOBER 1 No Time for Love Eighteen Visions EP Now That's What I Call Music! 43 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 4 From Here to Eternity: Live The Clash Live The Grass Is Blue Dolly Parton Hooray for Boobies The Bloodhound Gang Europe hours... David Bowie Run Devil Run Paul McCartney S Club S Club 7 Showbiz Muse 5 All Hallow's EP AFI EP Breakdown Melissa Etheridge – Christmas the Cowboy Way Riders in the Sky Christmas Colour Moving and Still Chantal Kreviazuk The Distance to Here Live Golden Arms Redemption U-God More Betterness! No Use for a Name Synchronistic Wanderings Pat Benatar Compilation 11 Nightlife Pet Shop Boys 12 Against Da Grain YoungBloodZ American Girl Juice Newton BBC Sessions Cocteau Twins Black On Both Sides Mos Def Clapton Chronicles: The Best of Eric Clapton Eric Clapton Compilation Immortalized Spice 1 In Reverse Matthew Sweet I Want It All Warren G Live On Kenny Wayne Shepherd The Marshall Suite The Fall Otherworld Lunasa The Private Years Yanni Box set Soundsystem 311 Total Abandon: Live in Australia Deep Purple Live Where I Wanna Be Donell Jones 13 Millionaires James 18 Awake and Breathe B*Witched UK Flying Without Wings Westlife UK I Wanna Be Santa Claus Ringo Starr Christmas Rise Gabrielle UK Solo Journey Bradley Joseph Still Life Opeth Suicide Pact - You First Therapy? UK 19 Bloodthirst Cannibal Corpse A Christmas to Remember Amy Grant Christmas Give 'Em the Boot II Various Artists Compilation God Save the Smithereens The Smithereens Honey to the B Billie Internal Affairs Pharoahe Monch Keith Urban Keith Urban Los grandes éxitos en español Cypress Hill Compilation with Spanish lyrics Modified Save Ferris Nothing Gold Can Stay A New Found Glory Peace Eurythmics Rock Art and the X-Ray Style Joe Strummer & The Mescaleros Smoke This Lynch Mob So... How's Your Girl? Handsome Boy Modeling School Symphony No. 1 Joe Jackson This Beautiful Life Big Bad Voodoo Daddy This Christmas 98° Christmas Washed Up! Catch 22 EP 25 As Time Goes By Bryan Ferry Leaders Not Followers Napalm Death EP Live from a Shark Cage Papa M Steptacular Steps Sunday 8PM / Saturday 3AM Faithless Turn It on Again: The Hits Genesis Compilation Xeneizes Quarashi 26 Aktapuss Akinyele All Systems Go 2 Rocket from the Crypt Forever: Rich Thugs, Book One Above the Law American Made Music to Strip By Rob Zombie Remix The Aquabats! vs. the Floating Eye of Death! The Aquabats! The Days of Our Nights Luna Emergency & I The Dismemberment Plan A Guided Tour of Chicago The Lawrence Arms Hidden Stash Kottonmouth Kings Introducing IMx IMx LeAnn Rimes LeAnn Rimes Looking Forward Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young The Lost Files Digital Underground Compilation Make Yourself Incubus Metropolis Pt. 2: Scenes from a Memory Dream Theater No. 4 Stone Temple Pilots Only God Can Judge Me Master P RéCréation Florent Pagny Double covers album The Science of Things Bush State Songs John Linnell Tiger Army Tiger Army Under the Influence Alan Jackson 27 Vision Creation Newsun Boredoms 28 Tokyo Warhearts Children of Bodom Live Twenty Four Seven Tina Turner NOVEMBER 1 Blank-Wave Arcade The Faint Ether~Electrified Porch Music Carbon Leaf Fire and Skill: The Songs of the Jam Various Artists Tribute Love This City The Whitlams Of Someday Shambles Jebediah Paul McCartney's Working Classical Paul McCartney Westlife Westlife Wonderful Madness 2 The Battle of Los Angeles Rage Against the Machine Bleach Bleach Tha Block Is Hot Lil Wayne Dirty Harriet Rah Digga End of Days Original Movie Soundtrack Various Artists Soundtrack It All Comes Down to This Bane Joy: A Holiday Collection Jewel Christmas Love and the Russian Winter Simply Red Making the Road Hi-Standard Northern Star Melanie C Rainbow Mariah Carey The Roots Come Alive The Roots Live Scream for Me Brazil Bruce Dickinson Live Shapeshifter Marcy Playground 6:66 Satan's Child Danzig This Desert Life Counting Crows There Is Nothing Left to Lose Foo Fighters Through Being Cool Saves The Day 8 Abbamania Various Artists Tribute Choose Your Masques: Collectors Series Volume 2 Hawkwind Live Glastonbury 90 Hawkwind Live Greatest Hits III Queen Compilation Invincible Five UK Magic Hour Cast 9 Affirmation Savage Garden Temple of Hiphop Kulture: Criminal-Justice from Darkness to Light Various Artists Alanis Unplugged Alanis Morissette Live Breathe Faith Hill Darrin's Coconut Ass: Live from Omaha Goldfinger Live The Exchange Against All Authority/The Criminals Split EP The Gift of Game Crazy Town Greatest Hits Sublime Compilation It Just Gets Worse Anal Cunt Live at Sturgis 38 Special Live marillion.com Marillion Metal Jukebox Helloween Covers Rave Un2 the Joy Fantastic Prince Sugar Tonic When the Pawn... Fiona Apple 10 Loveppears Ayumi Hamasaki 12 The Corrs Unplugged The Corrs Live The Last Tour on Earth Marilyn Manson Live 13 Spit Kittie Debut 15 Charlotte Church Charlotte Church UK The Road to Hell: Part 2 Chris Rea 16 All the Way... A Decade of Song Celine Dion Compilation The Chosen Ones Stratovarius Compilation Coping with the Urban Coyote Unida Cut Carefully and Play Loud Rocket from the Crypt EP Faith: A Holiday Album Kenny G Holiday Greatest Hits of the 20th Century Béla Fleck and the Flecktones Compilation The House of Atreus Act I Virgin Steele Immobilarity Raekwon Issues Korn Live... With a Little Help from Our Friends Gov't Mule Live Love Liberty Disco Newsboys Ödemarkens Son Vintersorg Reload Tom Jones Return of the Killer A's Anthrax Compilation SYR4: Goodbye 20th Century Sonic Youth Tha Streetz Iz a Mutha Kurupt Timeless: The Classics Vol. 2 Michael Bolton Covers album To the Teeth Ani DiFranco 2001 Dr. Dre Willennium Will Smith 19 Sweet Kisses Jessica Simpson Debut Album 20 1999 Remixes Jamiroquai Box Set 22 Don't Mind If I Do Culture Club Now That's What I Call Music! 44 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 23 Alchemy Yngwie Malmsteen Amplified Q-Tip Blue Third Eye Blind The Decline NOFX EP Early Days: Best of Led Zeppelin Volume One Led Zeppelin Compilation Enrique Enrique Iglesias English-language debut Friends Again Various Artists TV Soundtrack Garth Brooks and the Magic of Christmas Garth Brooks Christmas Grey Dawn October Tide Hampton Comes Alive Phish Live Listener Supported Dave Matthews Band Live Midnite Vultures Beck IX Equilibrium Emperor Live They Might Be Giants Live Live Era: '87-'93 Guns N' Roses Live Nastradamus Nas S&M Metallica with the San Francisco Symphony Live The Sounds of Science Beastie Boys Compilation +1 new track Viva Wisconsin Violent Femmes Live 29 Complete '79: Collectors Series Volume 1 Hawkwind Live 30 Europop Eiffel 65 US The Fragile Art of Existence Control Denied The Greatest Hits Cher Compilation The Master Rakim The Mystery of the Whisper The Crüxshadows Unleash the Dragon Sisqo DECEMBER 7 Born Again Notorious B.I.G. Kaleidoscope Kelis Magnolia Aimee Mann Soundtrack Methods of Mayhem Methods of Mayhem Mimosa Fun Lovin' Criminals Compilation Resurrection Vice Squad Sheryl Crow and Friends: Live from Central Park Sheryl Crow Live So Real Mandy Moore Debut Tha G-Code Juvenile 13 Still I Rise 2Pac and Outlawz Songs from the Last Century George Michael Covers album 21 ...And Then There Was X DMX Best of the Specials The Specials Compilation Everything Is Healing Nicely Frank Zappa World Party Goodie Mob 28 Singles of the 90s Ace of Base Compilation Vol. 3: Life and Times of S. Carter Jay-Z Artist Title Year Country Chart Entries 1 Britney Spears ...Baby One More Time 1999 UK 1 – Feb 1999, US BB 1 of 1999, Netherlands 1 – Jan 1999, Sweden 1 – Jan 1999, Austria 1 – Mar 1999, Switzerland 1 – Feb 1999, Norway 1 – Feb 1999, Australia 1 of 1999, Germany 1 – Feb 1999, Éire 1 – Feb 1999, New Zealand 1 for 4 weeks Feb 1999, Australia 1 for 9 weeks Jun 1999, Poland 3 – Mar 1999, France 6 – Jan 1999, Italy 7 of 1999, US BB 29 of 1999, POP 29 of 1999, Germany 41 of the 1990s, Scrobulate 91 of upbeat, RYM 95 of 1998, OzNet 814, Acclaimed 875 2 Lou Bega Mambo No 5 (A Little Bit of ...) 1999 UK 1 – Sep 1999, Netherlands 1 – Jun 1999, Austria 1 – May 1999, Switzerland 1 – May 1999, Norway 1 – Jun 1999, Germany 1 – May 1999, Éire 1 – Aug 1999, New Zealand 1 for 6 weeks Sep 1999, Australia 1 for 8 weeks Jan 2000, Australia 3 of 1999, Italy 3 of 1999, POP 3 of 1999, Poland 4 – Jul 1999, US BB 4 of 1999, US BB 4 of 1999, Party 04 of 1999, Sweden 5 – Aug 1999, Germany 11 of the 1990s, RYM 189 of 1999 3 Eiffel 65 Blue (Da Ba Dee) 1999 UK 1 – Sep 1999, Netherlands 1 – Jul 1999, Sweden 1 – Aug 1999, Austria 1 – Aug 1999, Switzerland 1 – Jul 1999, Norway 1 – Aug 1999, Germany 1 – Jul 1999, Éire 1 – Sep 1999, New Zealand 1 for 1 weeks Nov 1999, Australia 1 for 9 weeks Mar 2000, Poland 1 for 2 weeks Jan 2000, US BB 6 of 2000, Italy 16 of 1999, Australia 20 of 1999, Germany 20 of the 1990s, US BB 32 of 1999, Party 103 of 1999, RYM 185 of 1998 4 TLC No Scrubs 1999 US BB 1 of 1999, Éire 1 – May 1999, New Zealand 1 for 2 weeks Apr 1999, Australia 1 for 7 weeks Aug 1999, UK 3 – Apr 1999, Netherlands 3 – Mar 1999, Australia 4 of 1999, Switzerland 5 – Apr 1999, Germany 5 – Apr 1999, France 6 – Mar 1999, Norway 7 – Apr 1999, US BB 12 of 1999, Sweden 19 – Mar 1999, Poland 21 – Apr 1999, Austria 30 – May 1999, Italy 30 of 1999, POP 33 of 1999, Scrobulate 52 of rnb, RYM 55 of 1999, Acclaimed 268, Germany 302 of the 1990s, RIAA 361 5 Backstreet Boys I Want It That Way 1999 Sweden 1 – Oct 1999, France 20 – Sep 1999, Norway 1 – Nov 1999, Germany 1 – Jan 2000, Éire 1 – May 2000, Austria 1 – Sep 1999, UK 1 – Apr 2000, Switzerland 1- Sep 1999, Italy 1 of 2000, Netherlands 1 – Oct 1999, US BB 18 of 2000, POP 18 of 2000, Poland 24 – Oct 1999, Australia 25 of 2000, RYM 41 of 1999, US BB 52 of 2000, Scrobulate 66 of fun, Germany 98 of the 1990s, Party 98 of 1999 January 7 After eight years of marriage, musician husband Rod Stewart and supermodel wife Rachel Hunter announce their separation. Paul McCartney attends the launch of his stepdaughter Heather's first housewares collection in Georgia. January 11 – During the American Music Awards, Billy Joel is awarded the Special Award of Merit for his "inspired songwriting skills" and "exciting showmanship." January 12 Britney Spears releases her debut album, ...Baby One More Time, which would go on to sell 23 million copies. The album hits number one on the charts. The title track and first single released from the album, also hits number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1999. Fredrik Johansson is fired from Dark Tranquillity.http://darktranquillity.com/oldnews.html January 21 - A&M Records is shut down and merged into the Universal Music Group umbrella label Interscope Geffen A&M. It would be relaunched in 2007. January 22 – German industrial band KMFDM announces that it has disbanded. January 26 – Foxy Brown releases her second album, Chyna Doll, and becomes the first female rapper to debut an album at number 1. February 2 - The Artist Formerly Known as Prince releases a new recording of his 1982 hit "1999" to coincide with celebrations surrounding the calendar year. February 10 - Iron Maiden announces that singer Bruce Dickinson has rejoined the band. February 14 – Elton John appears as himself in a special episode of the animated series The Simpsons February 15 – "Rolling Stones Day" is declared in Minnesota by Governor (and former Rolling Stones bodyguard) Jesse Ventura February 19 – Marilyn Manson files a defamation countersuit against former Spin Magazine editor Craig Marks, in response to a multimillion-dollar lawsuit that Marks filed in January against the singer, the record label Nothing/Interscope, and Manson's bodyguard agency. February 20 – Trace Adkins performs his first concert following surgery for tendon damage and a broken ankle. Contrary to doctor's orders, Adkins does not remain seated during the performance. February 23 - Eminem's The Slim Shady LP and The Roots' "Things Fall Apart" are released. February 25 – The Artist Formerly Known as Prince files a lawsuit against nine Web sites for copyright and trademark infringement, claiming that the websites sell bootlegged recordings and offer unauthorized song downloads. March 1 – Sony Music Distribution raises wholesale prices on audio compact discs by 8 US cents. March 2 - Cher's song "Believe" reaches number one on the Billboard Hot 100, making Cher the oldest female artist (at the age of 52) to perform this feat. Cher also set the record for the longest hit-making career span, with 33 years between the release of her first and last Billboard Hot 100 #1 singles (1965 and 1999). March 2 - The House of Blues in Paradise, Nevada at the Mandalay Bay Resort. Bob Dylan performs a concert at the club and is joined by U2's lead singer Bono for an encore of "Knockin' on Heaven's Door". March 3 - British soul singer Dusty Springfield dies of breast cancer at the age of 59. March 5 – Trauma Records files a $40 million breach-of-contract lawsuit against the members of Bush for failing to deliver a new album. March 6 – A 67-year-old George Jones is seriously injured in a car accident while on his way home. Jones' Lexus crashed into a bridge at about 1:30&nbsp;p.m. It is later revealed that alcohol was a factor in the accident. March 10 – Hikaru Utada releases her debut album First Love, selling 2,026,870 in its debut week. Two months later, First Love became the Japan's best-selling album of all time. March 15 – Marilyn Manson is injured when he slips and falls during a concert at the Great Western Forum in Inglewood, California. Manson's performance is cut short. March 16 - The Recording Industry Association of America introduces a new certification level, Diamond, for albums or singles selling ten million units and the first Radio Disney Jams volume gets released on CD and cassette for the very first time. March 21 – Irish girl band B*Witched score their fourth consecutive #1 with Blame It On The Weatherman on the UK singles chart. They become the first band to have all their first four singles enter at the top simultaneously and set a new record. It is broken a year later by Irish boy band Westlife. March 27 – The Bee Gees end their One Night Only tour in Sydney, Australia. April 10 – A charity tribute concert for Linda McCartney is held at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Here, There and Everywhere: A Concert For Linda, features performances by Paul McCartney, Chrissie Hynde of the Pretenders, Elvis Costello, Sinéad O'Connor, and George Michael. Proceeds raised at the event went to animal rights causes. April 19 – Neil Young performs at Madison Square Garden in New York City. Due to a mistake by a Madison Square Garden staff member, the marquee read "Bob Dylan, Tonight at 8pm". Young jokingly introduced one of his guitar players as Bob Dylan during the show. April 20 Billy Joel performs at Meadowlands in New Jersey. Joel announces that this would be his last public pop music concert. Joel also announces plans on devoting his future efforts to classical music. Columbine High School massacre takes place in Jefferson County, Colorado, sparking a widespread moral panic that ultimately tries to place the blame on violent media, including music perceived to be violent and/or connected to the goth culture. American rocker Marilyn Manson receives the brunt of the blame despite evidence that neither of the shooters were fans of his and recludes, only to address the issue in the form of his fourth studio album. The finger is also pointed at German industrial metal acts Rammstein and KMFDM, of whom the shooters were fans. This sensationalism gradually wanes in the years following, and all three music acts ironically achieve more mainstream acceptance in the U.S. than they had prior to the massacre. Christian Contemporary Music artists respond to the concept that Atheism caused the shooting and in particular the Cassie Bernall urban legend (about a girl who was initially believed to have been shot in the head for answering "yes" when perpetrator Eric Harris asked her if she believed in God) with songs such as "A New Hope" by Five Iron Frenzy, about a band member's sister who had been trapped in the choir room returning to school after the shooting, and "This Is Your Time" by Michael W. Smith, a direct response to the Cassie Bernall story. April 26 - Musician and former bandleader of The Sound, Adrian Borland, commits suicide in London. April 28 – Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame April 30 – Columbine High School massacre: Aerosmith visits Columbine High School shooting victim Lance Kirklin in a Colorado hospital before a concert in Denver, Colorado. Kirklin was one of 24 wounded in the April 20 shooting, 13 others were killed. May 1 "The Paintings of Paul McCartney" exhibit opens at the Lyz Art Forum in Siegen, Germany. The exhibit features around 70 paintings created by the former Beatle. Musical group Atari Teenage Riot starts a riot in Berlin with their anti-consumer and anti-government lyrics. The riot was stopped with concert goers pleading for peace from the Swat crew ruthlessly beating down pedestrians. This band is under the label Digital Hardcore Recordings. May 18 – The American music group, the Backstreet Boys release their multi-platinum 3rd studio album Millennium, that spawned four Top 40 Billboard singles, and would go on to be the best-selling album of 1999. The album up to today has sold over 40 million copies and is in the 100 best-selling albums of all time. June 1 Blink-182 release their third studio album, Enema of the State, which would later sell 15 million copies worldwide. The album was a commercial and critical success, it was also the first album that was produced by Jerry Finn who was the "fourth member of Blink-182" according to bassist Mark Hoppus. The American actress Jennifer Lopez releases her debut album On the 6; the first single "If You Had My Love" reaches number one in U.S., Canada, and Australia. Peer-to-peer file sharing network Napster is launched. June 2 – Backstreet Boys smashes the old first-week sales record of Garth Brooks' 1.08 million, with (Millennium) which sold over 1.13 million in its first week and was the first album to sell over 500,000 copies at least 2 weeks. The album holds at No. 1 first-weeks sales record of the 1990s. June 8 – Red Hot Chili Peppers release Californication, the first album with John Frusciante in 8 years; the album goes on to sell 13 million copies worldwide. June 13 - S Club 7 debut at #1 on the UK singles chart with their first single "Bring It All Back" and become the largest vocal group to enter at the top. June 15 - Santana releases his best selling album Supernatural with the number one hits "Smooth" and "Maria Maria". June 22 - Limp Bizkit's second album, Significant Other, debuts at number one on the Billboard 200, with 643,874 copies sold in its first week. The album launches them into mainstream success. June 28 - Britney Spears embarked her first concert tour, ...Baby One More Time Tour. The tour only reached North America and garned a positive review, but generated some controversy due to her racy outfit and accusation of lip syncing. July 1 – The new Scottish Parliament is formally opened with a rock concert in the shadow of Edinburgh Castle and is headlined by Garbage, of which, lead singer Shirley Manson, is at the time one of the biggest music stars from Scotland. July 3 – Indie rock icon Mark Sandman collapses on stage at the Giardini del Principe in Palestrina, Latium, Italy (near Rome) while performing with Morphine. He is soon pronounced dead of a heart attack at the age of 46. Morphine immediately disbands. July 8 - Adrian Erlandsson quits The Haunted as the drummer while the band hires Per Möller Jensen as Erlandsson's replacement. July 12 – Gregg Alexander issues a press release dissolving the New Radicals. July 23–25 – The highly anticipated Woodstock 99 festival takes place in Rome, New York. July 28-Destiny's Child released their second album The Writing's on The Wall August 6 - The Grateful Dead's tape archivist Dick Latvala dies at age 56. August 14-15 - The Artist Formerly Known as Prince holds a weekend yard sale at his Paisley Park Studios, with part of the proceeds going to benefit underprivileged youth. August 24 – Christina Aguilera releases her self titled debut album. The album and first single, "Genie in a Bottle", both went to number one on the charts. August 27–29 – The third Terrastock festival is held in London. September 1 - The Irish Music Hall of Fame opens; Van Morrison is the first inducted into the museum. September 17 - Rapper Eminem is sued by his mother for $10 million, claiming that public comments he made about her were slanderous and had caused emotional stress and financial harm. She eventually collects a mere $1,600 settlement in 2001. September 21 David Bowie's Hours... becomes the first complete album by a major artist available to download over the Internet, preceding the physical release by two weeks. Trent Reznor releases the fourth Nine Inch Nails album, The Fragile after a five-year hiatus to great critical acclaim. September 30 - Billboard announces that Ministry of Sound Recordings Ltd is expanding into Australia after ending a partnership with MDS Dancenet and establishes Ministry of Sound Australia, known until 2005 as Ministry of Sound (UK) Pty Ltd. Ministry UK also secures a distribution deal with EMI Music Group Australasia Pty Ltd.http://books.google.com.au/books?id=eAgEAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA40&dq=ministry+of+sound+australia&hl=en&sa=X&ei=xONdT4OpOs6iiAflmLy8DQ&ved=0CDkQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=ministry%20of%20sound%20australia&f=false October 9 "Heartbreaker", the lead single from Mariah Carey's ninth studio album, Rainbow, reaches #1 on the Billboard 100, becoming her 14th #1 single and also her 59th week atop the chart. When it stayed at #1 for a further week Carey surpassed The Beatles for the act with the most weeks spent at number one. The song also topped charts in Canada and New Zealand. The first Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival is held in California. The inaugural line-up consists of Beck, The Chemical Brothers, Tool, Morrissey and Rage Against the Machine. The anti-poverty initiative NetAid is launched with simultaneous benefit concerts in London, New Jersey and Geneva. October 19 – Eurythmics releases first album in 10 years, Peace. October 20 - Melissa Auf der Maur leaves Hole. November 5 - Australian independent record label Liberation Music is formed. Gary Cherone leaves Van Halen. November 12 - 1970s rock star Gary Glitter is jailed for four months for downloading child pornography off the Internet. November 15 – Korn performs their entire album Issues at the Apollo Theater in New York City, becoming the first rock band ever to perform at the Apollo. November 16 Korn's fourth studio album, Issues, debuts at number 1 on the Billboard 200 with 575,000 copies sold in its first week. Dr. Dre's second studio album 2001 is released. Will Smith releases his second solo studio album Willennium November 23 Reba McEntire releases her twenty-sixth album, So Good Together. The album peaked at number 5 on the Billboard Top Country Albums and number 28 on the Billboard 200 Albums. The album is certified Platinum by the RIAA. Jessica Simpson releases her debut album, Sweet Kisses which would go on to sell 4 million copies. The first single, "I Wanna Love You Forever", both went to number three on the charts. University of Oregon student Jeffrey Levy is the first person ever convicted for pirating MP3s under the NET Act of 1997. He is sentenced to two years of probation and a limit on Internet access. December 4 – The Spice Girls start their Christmas Tour around the UK, dubbed as the Christmas in Spiceworld Tour. December 14 BMI announces the most played songs on American radio and television in the 20th century [ ] (full list) Paul McCartney returns to The Cavern Club to play a special concert for 300 fans. Boy George is injured by a 62-pound disco ball that falls from a concert venue's ceiling during a rehearsal, nearly killing him as it almost landed on his head. December 27 - Puff Daddy and fellow rapper Shyne are arrested for weapons violations and other charges after a shooting in a Manhattan nightclub that leaves three people injured. December 30 - George Harrison survives a knife attack by an intruder in his Friar Park home. December 31 Sisqó's Thong Song comes out. Becoming the last song of the 1990s, the last song of 1999, the first of the 2000s, and the first song of 2000. Many special New Year's Eve concerts are held around the world to celebrate the arrival of the year 2000. Big shows include Barbra Streisand at The MGM Grand Las Vegas, The Eagles at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, Billy Joel at Madison Square Garden, and Metallica with Kid Rock and Ted Nugent playing for 54,000 the Pontiac Silverdome. The biggest concert on Earth that night is by Phish, however, playing for 75,000 people at the Big Cypress Indian Reservation in Florida. Iron Maiden fires lead singer Blaze Bayley. Bruce Dickinson and Adrian Smith return to the band. The band now has three lead guitarists. Vocalist, Lawrence Mackrory quits Darkane. The band hires by Andreas Sydow as his replacement after. See  The Animals See  The Collection – Spandau Ballet Ella in Budapest, Hungary – Ella Fitzgerald Face Down – Serial Joe In Stereo - Bomfunk MC's Mi Día de la Independencia – Lynda Thomas*Side Show Freaks – 40 Below Summer Simple Pleasure – Tindersticks Where We Stand – Yellowcard "2 Times" - Ann Lee "9pm (Till I Come)" - ATB "All I Really Want" - Kim Lukas "All or Nothing" – Cher "Absolutely Everybody" – Vanessa Amorosi (debut) "All Star" – Smash Mouth "Aller plus haut" – Tina Arena "Almost Doesn't Count" – Brandy "Always Have, Always Will - Ace of Base "American Woman" – Lenny Kravitz "Amazed" – Lonestar "Ana's Song (Open Fire)" – Silverchair "Angel" – Sarah McLachlan "Angel of Mine" – Monica "Anton aus Tirol" - Anton & DJ Ötzi "As" - George Michael & Mary J. Blige "Au Nom de la rose" – Moos "...Baby One More Time" – Britney Spears (debut) "Back At One" – Brian McKnight "Back in My Life" - Alice DeeJay "Bailamos" – Enrique Iglesias "Bawitdaba" – Kid Rock "B-Boys & Flygirls" - Bomfunk MC's "Beautiful Stranger" – Madonna "Believe" – Cher "Better Days (And the Bottom Drops Out)" - Citizen King "Better Off Alone" - Alice DeeJay "Big Big World" – Emilia "Bills, Bills, Bills" - Destiny's Child "Bla Bla Bla" - Gigi D'Agostino "Black Balloon" – Goo Goo Dolls "Blue Monday" – Orgy "Blue (Da Ba Dee)" – Eiffel 65 "Boom, Boom, Boom, Boom" - Vengaboys "Born to Make You Happy" – Britney Spears "Bring It All Back" – S Club 7 "Bring It All To Me" – Blaque "Burning Down the House" – Tom Jones featuring The Cardigans "Bye Bye Baby" - TQ "Call Me Mañana - Scooter "Candy" – Mandy Moore (debut) "Canned Heat" - Jamiroquai "The Carpet Crawlers 1999" – Genesis "Cherish the Day" – Sade "Corazón Perdido" – Lynda Thomas "Desert Rose" – Sting "Dizzy" – Goo Goo Dolls "Dolphins Cry" - Live "Don't Call Me Baby" - Madison Avenue "Don't Say You Love Me" – M2M "Don't Stop!" - ATB "Dov'e l'amore - Cher "Down So Long" – Jewel "Drinking in L.A." - Bran Van 3000 "Drop It" - Scoop "Electricity" - Suede "Everlasting Night" – Dannii Minogue "Everybody's Free (To Wear Sunscreen)" – Baz Luhrmann "Everyday I Love You" - Boyzone "Everything You Want" – Vertical Horizon "Every Morning" – Sugar Ray "Falling Away From Me" – KoЯn "Faster Harder Scooter" - Scooter "Fear the Voices" – Alice in Chains "Flat Beat" - Mr. Oizo "Flying Without Wings" – Westlife (UK) "Freak on a Leash" – KoЯn "Freestyler" – Bomfunk MC's "Fuck the Millennium" - Scooter "Genie in a Bottle" – Christina Aguilera (debut) "Get Born Again" – Alice in Chains "Guerrilla Radio" – Rage Against the Machine "Have You Ever?" – Brandy "Heartbreak Hotel" – Whitney Houston, Faith Evans, & Kelly Price "Heartbreaker" – Mariah Carey "Hello Time Bomb" – Matthew Good Band "Here with Me" - Dido "Hey Boy Hey Girl" - The Chemical Brothers "Honey to the Bee" – Billie "I Feel Lonely" - Sascha Schmitz "I Got a Girl" - Lou Bega "I Have a Dream" - Westlife "I Need to Know" – Marc Anthony "I Knew I Loved You" – Savage Garden "I Saved the World Today" - Eurythmics "I Still Believe" - Mariah Carey "I Try" - Macy Gray "I Wanna Love You Forever" – Jessica Simpson (debut) "I Want It That Way" – Backstreet Boys "I Will Remember You" – Sarah McLachlan "If I Could Turn Back the Hands of Time" - R. Kelly "If I Let You Go" – Westlife (UK) "If Ya Gettin' Down" - Five "If You Had My Love" – Jennifer Lopez "If You Love Me" - Mint Condition "Irgendwie, irgendwo, irgendwann" - Jan Delay "It's Not Right but It's Okay" - Whintey Houston "It's Only Us" - Robbie Williams "Jesse Hold On" - B*Witched "Join Me in Death" - HIM "Kalimba de Luna" - Garcia "Keep On Movin'" - Five "Kernkraft 400" - Zombie Nation "King of My Castle" - Wamdue Project "Kiss Me" – Sixpence None the Richer "Kiss of Life" – Sade "Kiss (When the Sun Don't Shine)" - Vengaboys "Larger than Life" - Backstreet Boys "Last Kiss" – Pearl Jam "Lean on Me (with the Family)" - 2-4 Family "Learn to Fly" – Foo Fighters "Lit Up" – Buckcherry "Livin' la Vida Loca" – Ricky Martin "Load Me Up" – Matthew Good Band "Look at Me" - Geri Halliwell "Love's Got a Hold on My Heart" - Steps "Ma Baker" - Boney M vs Sash! "Maldita Timidez" – Lynda Thomas "Mambo No. 5 (A Little Bit Of...)" – Lou Bega "Mamma Mia" - A-Teens "Man! I Feel Like a Woman!" – Shania Twain "Maria" – Blondie "Maschen-Draht-Zaun" - Stefan Raab "MFG" - Die Fantastischen Vier "Mi Chico Latino" - Geri Halliwell "The Millennium Prayer" – Cliff Richard "The Miracle" – Cliff Richard "Move Your Body" - Eiffel 65 "Mudshovel" - Staind "My Love Is Your Love" - Whitney Houston "My Name Is" – Eminem "My Own Worst Enemy" – Lit "Nie Wieder" - Tic Tac Toe "Never Let You Go" – Third Eye Blind "New York City Boy" - Pet Shop Boys "No Quiero Verte" – Lynda Thomas "No Scrubs" – TLC "Nookie" – Limp Bizkit "Nothing Else Matters '99" - Metallica "Nothing Is Real but the Girl" – Blondie "Nothing Really Matters" – Madonna "Opa Opa" - Antique "Outside" - Staind "Parce que c'est toi" - Axelle Red "Perfect Moment" - Martine McCutcheon "Pretty Fly (For a White Guy)" – The Offspring "Praise You" – Fatboy Slim "Promises" - The Cranberries "Protect Your Mind (For The Love Of A Princess)" - DJ Sakin & Friends "Rhythm Divine" - Enrique Iglesias "S Club Party" – S Club 7 "Saltwater" - Chicane "Sandstorm" - Darude "Satisfy You" - Puff Daddy & R. Kelly "Scar Tissue" – Red Hot Chili Peppers "Seasons in the Sun" - Westlife "Sexy, Sexy Lover" - Modern Talking "Shake Your Bon-Bon" - Ricky Martin "She Wants You" – Billie "She's All I Ever Had" - Ricky Martin "She's So High" – Tal Bachman "She's the One" - Robbie Williams "Silence" - Delerium & Sarah McLachlan "Sing it Back" - Moloko "Sitting Down Here" - Lene Marlin "Sleep Now in the Fire" – Rage Against the Machine "Slide" – Goo Goo Dolls "Slippin'" - DMX "Smooth" – Santana feat. Rob Thomas "Someday" – Sugar Ray "Sometimes" – Britney Spears "Steal My Sunshine" – Len "Still D.R.E." - Dr. Dre featuring Snoop Dogg "Strong Enough" – Cher "Summer Son" - Texas "Sun Is Shining" - Bob Marley vs Funkstar De Luxe "Super Trouper - A-Teens "Swear It Again" – Westlife (UK) (debut) "Sweet Like Chocolate" - Shanks & Bigfoot "Take a Picture" – Filter "Take Me to Your Heaven" - Charlotte Nilsson "Tarzan & Jane"  - Toy-Box "Tell Me Why" - Prezioso feat. Marvin "Tender" – Blur "That's The Way It Is" – Celine Dion "The Animal Song" – Savage Garden "The Bad Touch" – Bloodhound Gang "The Best of Me" - Bryan Adams "The Launch" - DJ Jean "Thank ABBA for the Music" – Steps, Tina Cousins, Cleopatra, B*Witched, Billie "That Don't Impress Me Much" – Shania Twain "The Riddle" - Gigi D'Agostino "The Rigga-Ding-Dong-Song" - Passion Fruit "The World Is Not Enough" – Garbage "Then the Morning Comes" – Smash Mouth "There She Goes" – Sixpence None the Richer "Tu ne m'as pas laissé le temps" – David Hallyday "Turn Around" - Phats & Small "Turn Your Lights Down Low" - Lauryn Hill & Bob Marley "Two in a Million" - S Club 7 "U Don't Know Me" - Armand Van Helden "U Know What's Up" - Donell Jones & Lisa Lopes "Unpretty" – TLC "Waiting for Tonight" – Jennifer Lopez "We Can Leave the World" - Sascha Schmitz "We're Going to Ibiza" - Vengaboys "Wish I Could Fly" - Roxette "Will2K" - Will Smith & K-Ci "What a Girl Wants" – Christina Aguilera "What It's Like" – Everlast "What's It Gonna Be?!" - Busta Rhymes & Janet Jackson "What's My Age Again?" – Blink-182 "When the Heartache Is Over" – Tina Turner "When Worlds Collide" – Powerman 5000 "When You Say Nothing at All" - Ronan Keating "Where My Girls At" -702 "Why Does My Heart Feel So Bad?" - Moby "Why Don't You Get a Job?" - The Offspring "Wild Wild West" – Will Smith featuring Dru Hill and Kool Moe Dee "You Are Not Alone" - Modern Talking "(You Drive Me) Crazy" – Britney Spears "You'll Be in My Heart" – Phil Collins "You Needed Me" - Boyzone "You're a God" – Vertical Horizon "You're My Number One" - S Club 7 "You're Still the One" – Shania Twain "You Get What You Give" – New Radicals Backstreet Boys – Millennium Britney Spears – ...Baby One More Time Shania Twain – Come on OverBillboard.com – Year End Charts – Year-end Albums – The Billboard 200# 'N Sync – *NSYNC Ricky Martin – Ricky Martin Christina Aguilera – Christina Aguilera Santana – Supernatural TLC – FanMail Kid Rock – Devil Without a Cause Eminem – The Slim Shady LP Samuel Adler – Viola Concerto Leonardo Balada – Piano Concerto No. 3 Michael Daugherty – Hell's Angels Joël-François Durand – La Terre et le Feu (Oboe and orchestra) Carlo Forlivesi – Requiem Patrick Hawes – The Call (song cycle) Joe Jackson – Symphony No. 1 Karl Jenkins – The Armed Man: A Mass for Peace John Kinsella – Symphony No. 8: Into the New Millennium Richard Payne – Saxophone Concerto William Bolcom – A View from the Bridge Deborah Drattell – Festival of Regrets Rued Langgaard – Antikrist (composed 1921-30, premiered 1999) Daron Hagen – Bandanna John Harbison – The Great Gatsby Nicholas Lens – The Accacha Chronicles Trilogy: Terra Terra – The Aquarius Era Annie Get Your Gun (Irving Berlin) – Broadway revival Fame – The Musical&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;London production Kiss Me, Kate (Cole Porter) – Broadway revival Mamma Mia! (ABBA) – London production My Fair Lady (Lerner & Loewe) – London revival Saturday Night Fever&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production Buena Vista Social Club Mother Pyaar Mein Kabhi Kabhi Raja Sangamam South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut Sugar Town Topsy-Turvy January 5 – Marc Yu, American pianist and cellist July 14 – Camryn, American singer and actress January 2 – Rolf Liebermann (88), composer January 21 - Charles Brown, (76), blues singer and pianist January 22 - Gabor Carelli (83), operatic tenor January 23 – "Prince" Lincoln Thompson (49), reggae musician February 3 – Gwen Guthrie (48), singer February 4 – Kenneth C. Burns (68), country musician February 6 – Jimmy Roberts (74), American tenor February 12 – Toni Fisher (67), singer February 14 - Buddy Knox (65), singer and songwriter February 15 Lamont "Big L" Coleman (24), rapper (gunshot) Agnes Bernelle (75), actress and singer February 16 – Necil Kâzım Akses (90), Turkish composer (date of death from this contemporary newspaper) March 2 David Ackles (62), singer/songwriter Dusty Springfield (59), singer (breast cancer) March 4 – Eddie Dean (91), country music artist, actor March 7 - Lowell Fulson (77), blues guitarist and songwriter March 9 – Harry Somers (73), Canadian composer March 12 – Yehudi Menuhin (92), violinist and musical director March 13 – Bidu Sayão (97), Brazilian opera singer March 14 Gregg Diamond (49), jazz pianist Marius Müller (40), Norwegian guitarist (car crash) March 26 – Ananda Shankar (50), Indian classical musician and composer (cardiac arrest) March 28 - Freaky Tah (27), rapper (Lost Boyz) (shot) March 29 – Joe Williams (80), jazz singer April 1 - Jesse Stone (97), R & B musician and songwriter April 3 – Lionel Bart (68), songwriter and composer April 6 – Red Norvo (91), jazz musician April 14 – Anthony Newley (67), songwriter, actor and singer April 16 – Skip Spence (52), musician (Jefferson Airplane, Moby Grape), lung cancer April 21 – Buddy Rogers (94), jazz musician April 25 Roger Troutman (47), R&B singer (gunshot wounds) Larry Troutman (54), R&B percussionist (suicide after killing younger brother) Kemi Olusanya (35), British drum and bass duo Kemistry & Storm (freak highway accident) April 26 – Adrian Borland (41), English singer, songwriter, guitarist (The Sound) (suicide) April 27 Al Hirt (76), New Orleans trumpeter Maria Stader (87), operatic soprano April 30 – Darrell Sweet (51), drummer (Nazareth), heart attack May 8 - Leon Thomas (61), jazz singer May 14 – William Tucker, guitarist, Ministry, suicide by slitting own throat May 17 - Bruce Fairbairn (49), producer May 18 - Augustus Pablo (44), reggae producer and instrumentalist (collapsed lung) May 26 – Paul Sacher (93), Swiss conductor June 5 – Mel Tormé, (73), singer June 15 – Fausto Papetti, (76), Italian saxophonist June 16 - Screaming Lord Sutch (58), UK musician June 21 – Kami, (26), Japanese drummer for Malice Mizer, subarachnoid hemorrhage June 27 – Sven Einar Englund, (83), Finnish composer July 1 Dennis Brown (42), reggae singer Guy Mitchell (72), pop singer July 3 – Mark Sandman, (46), alternative rock musician, member of Morphine, heart attack July 6 Benny Bell, (93), musician Joaquín Rodrigo (97), Spanish composer July 11 – Helen Forrest (82), big band singer July 13 - Louise Caselotti (88), operatic mezzo-soprano July 17 – Kevin Wilkinson (41), drummer (suicide by hanging) July 22 – Gar Samuelson (41), American drummer (liver failure) July 27 - Harry "Sweets" Edison (83), jazz trumpeter July 29 - Anita Carter (66), country and folk singer August 3 - Leroy Vinnegar (71), jazz bassist (heart attack) August 20 – Bobby Sheehan (31), bassist for Blues Traveler (drug overdose) August 25 – Rob Fisher (42), keyboardist and songwriter (cancer) September 8 - Moondog (83), avant-garde musician September 10 Beau Jocque (46), zydeco musician Alfredo Kraus (72), opera singer October 4 – Art Farmer (71), jazz trumpeter October 6 – Amalia Rodrigues (79), Portuguese singer October 9 – Milt Jackson (76), jazz vibraphonist October 10 – Robert Wright (90), songwriter and librettist October 12 - Frank Frost (63), blues harmonica player October 15 - Josef Locke (82), Irish tenor October 16 – Ella Mae Morse, (75), singer October 19 – Harry Bannink (70), Dutch songwriter October 26 Hoyt Axton (61), country music singer/songwriter (heart attack) Rex Gildo (63), German singer October 28 – Robert Linn (74), composer and teacher November 8 - Lester Bowie (58), jazz trumpet player and composer November 13 - Donald Mills (84), American singer (Mills Brothers) November 18 – Doug Sahm (58), country and rock musician November 21 – Marie Kraja (88), operatic and folk singer December 2 – Charlie Byrd (74), jazz guitarist December 3 – Scatman John (57), pop musician December 6 – Todd Barnes (34), T.S.O.L. December 10 – Rick Danko (56), rock singer in The Band (drug-related heart failure) December 17 – Grover Washington Jr. (56), American saxophonist December 18 - Joe Higgs (59), reggae musician December 20 - Hank Snow (85), country music artist December 26 – Curtis Mayfield (57), singer/composer The following artists are inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: Billy Joel, Curtis Mayfield, Paul McCartney, Del Shannon, Dusty Springfield, Bruce Springsteen and The Staple Singers Inductees of the GMA Gospel Music Hall of Fame include The Fairfield Four and Second Chapter of Acts Grammy Awards of 2000 Eurovision Song Contest 1999 Ok – Talvin Singh wins. 1999 MTV Video Music Awards Yo-Yo Ma (laureate), Wu Man (protégé) Triple J Hottest 100, 1999 Pop Culture Madness 1999 Pop Music Chart 1999 in music (UK)
