   See also: P Date Album Artist Notes JANUARY 1 Çà et là du Japon Pizzicato Five 8 Light of Day, Day of Darkness Green Carnation 9 Oz Various Artists TV Soundtrack 16 Alcohol Fueled Brewtality Black Label Society Azure Ray Azure Ray From Long Beach 2 Fillmoe Daz Dillinger & J.T. the Bigga Figga Little Sparrow Dolly Parton J.Lo Jennifer Lopez 22 Crystal Empire Freedom Call Things We Lost in the Fire Low 23 Anthology Obituary Compilation Carnival Diablos Annihilator Day of the Death Death by Stereo The Donnas Turn 21 The Donnas It Was All a Dream Dream O-Town O-Town 2000 Years of Human Error Godhead The Very Best of Daryl Hall & John Oates Hall & Oates Compilation The World According to Gob Gob 29 Believe in Nothing Paradise Lost Nuclear Fire Primal Fear Germany 30 The Best of Tevin Campbell Tevin Campbell Compilation Dog in the Sand Frank Black and the Catholics I Need You LeAnn Rimes More Vitamin C You Don't Have to Be Blood to Be Family Throwdown FEBRUARY 1 Brushfire Fairytales Jack Johnson Lucy Ford: The Atmosphere EPs Atmosphere 5 The Anthology... So Far Ringo Starr Live 6 Dither moe. End Is Forever The Ataris Greatest Hits Vol. II Gloria Estefan Compilation Planet Pop ATC Risen O.A.R. Simply Mortified BS 2000 Sing Loud, Sing Proud! Dropkick Murphys 604 Ladytron Today's Empires, Tomorrow's Ashes Propagandhi You Had It Coming Jeff Beck 12 Hits II: Ganked & Gaffled Spice 1 Compilation 13 Conquering Ruler The Specials Covers album Firestarr Fredro Starr Stephen Malkmus Stephen Malkmus and the Jicks To Record Only Water for Ten Days John Frusciante Road Movies LAND 15 Toki no Tsubasa Zard 16 Flowers Echo & the Bunnymen 19 Another Late Night: Fila Brazillia Fila Brazillia Karma Kamelot 20 Girls Can Tell Spoon Music Box The Monkees Box Set A Predator's Portrait Soilwork Standards Tortoise Wasted Days The Slackers 26 Any Other City Life Without Buildings Sleepwalking Rae & Christian Teen Spirit A*Teens 27 American Hi-Fi American Hi-Fi Blackwater Park Opeth A Bum Note and a Bead of Sweat Baboon Live Cydonia The Orb Everyday Dave Matthews Band My World, My Way Silkk the Shocker Phantom Moon Duncan Sheik The Professional 2 DJ Clue? (Self Titled) Zao Who I Am Jessica Andrews MARCH 1 Another Late Night: Rae & Christian Rae & Christian Compilation B.P. Empire Infected Mushroom 2 Death's Design Diabolical Masquerade 5 The Optimist LP Turin Brakes When It's All Over We Still Have to Clear Up Snow Patrol 6 Accepted Eclectic Aceyalone Anarchists of Good Taste Dog Fashion Disco ANThology Alien Ant Farm Dark Assault Iron Savior From Wisdom to Hate Gorguts Fat Music Volume 5: Live Fat, Die Young Various Artists Compilation Identity Crisis Thrice Insanity Darkane Just Push Play Aerosmith Loco Fun Lovin' Criminals Mars/Venus Koffee Brown Musipal Wagon Christ Quiet Is the New Loud Kings of Convenience Scorpion Eve SGNL>05 Isis EP Unwind Oleander 7 Insomnia Chihiro Onitsuka Jumping into the World BoA EP 9 Group Sounds Rocket from the Crypt One Nil Neil Finn 12 Awakening the World Lost Horizon Sweden Back to the Blues Gary Moore Human Rod Stewart Regeneration The Divine Comedy Sunny Border Blue Kristin Hersh Superstars and Cannonballs Savage Garden VHS/DVD Timeless Departure Skyfire 13 All About Chemistry Semisonic Discovery Daft Punk Gourmandises Alizée Let It Fall Sean Watkins Reptile Eric Clapton Trick Pony Trick Pony 18 Spin Darren Hayes Australia 19 456132015 De Facto EP Ease Down the Road Bonnie 'Prince' Billy Know Your Enemy Manic Street Preachers 20 EP 2 Zero 7 Exit Wounds: The Album Various Artists Soundtrack Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards Lars Frederiksen and the Bastards The Gift Bizzy Bone Healing Unloco Hypothetical Threshold Nation Sepultura Part III 112 The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most Dashboard Confessional Puritanical Euphoric Misanthropia Dimmu Borgir Satellite Rides Old 97's Thug By Nature L-Burna Thugs Are Us Trick Daddy Unleashed Memories Lacuna Coil 23 Itse Ajattara 26 Angel of Mine Frank Duval Compilation Gorillaz Gorillaz Natural History I Am Kloot Debut 27 Acoustic Soul India.Arie Another Perfect World Peter Cetera Drops of Jupiter Train Endangered Species Big Pun Compilation Every Six Seconds Saliva Greatest Hits Billy Idol Compilation How I Loved You Angels of Light Kiss tha Game Goodbye Jadakiss Live from Mars Ben Harper 2xCD; Live Live in New York City Bruce Springsteen Live The Moon is Down Further Seems Forever musicforthemorningafter Pete Yorn Roll On The Living End The Sneak Attack KRS-One Time Bomb Buckcherry Until the End of Time 2Pac Whole New You Shawn Colvin 28 A Best Ayumi Hamasaki Compilation Distance Hikaru Utada 29 10 Years of Abuse (and Still Broke) Eyehategod Live 31 Echo Echo Carbon Leaf Date Album Artist Notes APRIL 2 45 rpm: The Singles, 1977–1979 The Jam Box Set Clarence Park Chris Clark Mutter Rammstein No More Shall We Part Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds 3 Arrival Journey US Blood Sweat and Years JT Money Crown Royal Run-D.M.C. From Here to Infirmary Alkaline Trio I Don't Care That You Don't Mind Crash Test Dummies The Life Ginuwine Now That's What I Call Music! 6 (U.S. series) Various Artists Compilation Poets and Madmen Savatage Room Service Roxette The Swimming Hour Andrew Bird Unholy Terror W.A.S.P. The Yin and the Yang Cappadonna 9 Jessico Babasónicos Now That's What I Call Music! 48 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 10 Covered With Ants Guttermouth For the Stars Elvis Costello and Anne Sofie von Otter Isolation Drills Guided by Voices Live Frogs Set 1 Colonel Les Claypool's Fearless Flying Frog Brigade Live Revelling/Reckoning Ani DiFranco Rock the Plank Mad Caddies Surfer NOFX EP 16 Colossus of Destiny The Melvins Live Free All Angels Ash A Girl Like Me Emma Bunton 17 Just Enough Education to Perform Stereophonics Leaves Turn Inside You Unwound Live Insurrection Halford Live Olivia Olivia One for the Kids Yellowcard 6.0 Sister Machine Gun Steers & Stripes Brooks & Dunn Super Hits New Kids on the Block Compilation Up Close and Personal Angie Martinez The Very Best of Elvis Costello Elvis Costello Compilation 21 Abulum Glen Phillips 23 Echo Park Feeder In America Kenny G Compilation Simple Things Zero 7 UK 24 All for You Janet Jackson Digimortal Fear Factory Dizzy Spells The Ex Going Somewhere Colin Hay Man in the Moon L.A. Guns Mutiny on the Bay Dead Kennedys Live Sad Sappy Sucker Modest Mouse Set This Circus Down Tim McGraw Steers & Stripes Brooks & Dunn Streethawk: A Seduction Destroyer This Is Where I Came In Bee Gees Underground Network Anti-Flag The Unraveling Rise Against Wide Awake Bored Treble Charger 25 Wages of Sin Arch Enemy 27 All Rise Blue 30 45 rpm: The Singles, 1980–1982 The Jam Box Set Confield Autechre Rock Action Mogwai MAY 1 Carrying On Montgomery Gentry Dillinger & Young Gotti Tha Dogg Pound Mechanical Wonder Ocean Colour Scene PeteStrumentals Pete Rock Popstars Eden's Crush Survivor Destiny's Child Trouble in Shangri-La Stevie Nicks Ultimate Collection Buju Banton Compilation 5 Complete 'B' Sides Pixies Compilation 7 Truth Be Told Shed Seven Wingspan: Hits and History Paul McCartney Compilation 8 All Killer No Filler Sum 41 Awakening the World Lost Horizon Ayeshteni Natacha Atlas Best of B-Boy Records Boogie Down Productions Compilation Bridge Blues Traveler The Crusher Amon Amarth Dare To Dream Billy Gilman Deltron 3030: The Instrumentals Deltron 3030 Falconer Falconer Field Songs Mark Lanegan Hi-Teknology Hi-Tek Last Fair Deal Gone Down Katatonia Lions The Black Crowes Live on the Black Hand Side Danzig Live Look into the Eyeball David Byrne Moulin Rouge! Music from Baz Luhrmann's Film Various Artists Soundtrack Voodoo Child: The Jimi Hendrix Collection Jimi Hendrix Compilation XX Mushroomhead 9 Sexual Healing E-Rotic 14 Acoustica Scorpions Live Exciter Depeche Mode Reveal R.E.M. Sexual Healing E-Rotic To Be Frank Nik Kershaw 15 Anoraknophobia Marillion beautiful. Fantastic Plastic Machine Brand New History Econoline Crush The Cold Vein Cannibal Ox God Bless The Go-Go's The Go-Go's Lateralus Tool Meet Joe Mac Joey McIntyre Miss E… So Addictive Missy "Misdemeanor" Elliott Shoulda Been Home Robert Cray Sweet Tea Buddy Guy A Tribute to Jim Reeves Charley Pride Jim Reeves tribute Weezer Weezer "The Green Album" The World Needs a Hero Megadeth 17 Same Girl, New Songs The All-American Rejects EP 21 200 Po Vstrechnoy t.A.T.u. Can Our Love... Tindersticks Genetic World Télépopmusik The Merry Sisters of Fate Lunasa Scream if You Wanna Go Faster Geri Halliwell 4Lyn 4Lyn 22 All This and Puppet Stew The Dickies Blacktrash: The Autobiography of Kirk Jones Sticky Fingaz Bliss, Please blackmail Break the Cycle Staind Everybody Got Their Something Nikka Costa Hawthorne, CA The Beach Boys Compilation How I Spent My Summer Vacation The Bouncing Souls Lechuza Fenix*TX Machine Static-X Malpractice Redman Mediocre Generica Leftöver Crack One Wild Night Live 1985-2001 Bon Jovi Live Pneumonia Whiskeytown Put Yo Hood Up Lil Jon & the Eastside Boyz Quest for Fire: Firestarter, Vol. 1 Kardinal Offishall Rising Again Donovan Live The Renaissance EP MxPx EP Stabbing Westward Stabbing Westward 23 Lovebeat Yoshinori Sunahara 28 10 000 Hz Legend Air Pause Four Tet UK 29 Irresistible Jessica Simpson Part II Brad Paisley JUNE 4 Amnesiac Radiohead Faerie Stories Peatbog Faeries Angel Delivery Service Emil Bulls 5 Are You Man Enough? Betty Blowtorch Aura Asia Bodily Functions Herbert Broken Silence Foxy Brown Curse of the Hidden Mirror Blue Öyster Cult The Economy of Sound Seven Mary Three Essence Lucinda Williams A Flight and a Crash Hot Water Music Free City St. Lunatics Full Bluntal Nugity Ted Nugent Live Inside Out Trisha Yearwood Loser Anthems Matthew Good Band EP The Merry Sisters of Fate Lunasa US Poses Rufus Wainwright Punk-O-Rama Vol. 6 Various Artists Compilation Shine Like It Does: The Anthology (1979-1997) INXS Compilation Sinner Drowning Pool Somewhere Over The Slaughter House Buckethead Songs in A Minor Alicia Keys Styx World: Live 2001 Styx Live Swordfish:The Album Paul Oakenfold Soundtrack 8 Myra Myra 11 The Invisible Band Travis Organik Robert Miles Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives Prefuse 73 12 9 Lives AZ Archive The Specials Compilation Beneath the Encasing of Ashes As I Lay Dying The Best of Eighteen Visions Eighteen Visions Compilation Love Session Silk Perhaps, I Suppose... Rufio PS You Love Me Kid 606 Rainbow Connection Willie Nelson Recordings Porcupine Tree Compilation Sugar Ray Sugar Ray Take off Your Pants and Jacket blink-182 Under the Influence Warrant Covers album +2 original tracks Zoom Electric Light Orchestra 13 Document 8 Pg. 99 15 Lara Croft: Tomb Raider Various Artists Soundtrack 18 Beat 'Em Up Iggy Pop Origin of Symmetry Muse UK Outrospective Faithless 19 !!! !!! Alive in an Ultra World Steve Vai Live Cuts for Luck and Scars for Freedom Mystic Devil's Night D12 Don't Tell the Band Widespread Panic Far from Over Edwin McCain From Chaos 311 GQ on the EQ++ Kid 606 Greatest Fits Ministry Compilation I'm Already There Lonestar Just Like Gravity CPR Land of the Free? Pennywise Live in San Francisco Joe Satriani Live Live, Loud and Loose Loverboy Live Mandy Moore Mandy Moore No Nose Job: The Legend of Digital Underground Digital Underground Compilation Oh, Inverted World The Shins Return of Dragon Sisqo Shangri-La Dee Da Stone Temple Pilots Tongues Esham LP Trust No One Dave Navarro 2001 Warped Tour Compilation Various Artists Compilation The Tyranny of Distance Ted Leo and the Pharmacists The World Won't End Pernice Brothers Luther Vandross (album) Luther Vandross This Ain't a Game Ray J 20 Beyond Good and Evil The Cult Friends & Family, Vol. 2 Suicidal Tendencies, Various Artists Compilation Worldchanger Jorn 21 Mercuric Element Eighty 25 Ridgeriders Phil Beer, Ashley Hutchings and Chris While 26 Based on a True Story Lil' Mo Episode II Safri Duo Horror Show Iced Earth Jagged Little Thrill Jagged Edge Life Is Good LFO Madhouse - The Very Best of Anthrax Anthrax Compilation The Reason Beanie Sigel Rooty Basement Jaxx ? Jennie Bomb Sahara Hotnights Date Album Artist Notes JULY 1 Nearly Lost You Screaming Trees Compilation Tales of the Inexpressible Shpongle 2 Blowback Tricky Kerrang! The Album Various artists Compilation Rock and Roll: an Introduction to The Velvet Underground The Velvet Underground Compilation 3 Brothers and Sisters, Are You Ready? Big Sugar Endless Summer Fennesz Lil' Romeo Lil' Romeo Live at L'Olympia Jeff Buckley Live Tales from the B-Side Biohazard Compilation White Blood Cells The White Stripes X.O. Experience Tha Liks 9 4.35am Gemma Hayes EP 11:11 Regina Spektor The Director's Cut Fantômas Covers album Yeah Yeah Yeahs Yeah Yeah Yeahs EP 10 Anakonda Akinyele Ancient Melodies of the Future Built to Spill Blood Red Cherry Jann Arden Camino Palmero The Calling Dream Street Dream Street Fires at Midnight Blackmore's Night King of da Ghetto Z-Ro Long Distance Ivy US; released in Japan in Nov. 2000 The Metal Opera Avantasia Priesthood Killah Priest The Saga Continues... P. Diddy & the Bad Boy Family Skin Melissa Etheridge Space Boogie: Smoke Oddessey Kurupt Stay What You Are Saves The Day 16 Hot Shots II The Beta Band UK Song Yet to Be Sung Perry Farrell 17 Aaliyah Aaliyah Buffalo Springfield Buffalo Springfield Box Set 1st Born Second Bilal Pleased to Meet You James Tales from the Lotus Pod Dark Lotus LP What I Learned About Ego, Opinion, Art & Commerce Goo Goo Dolls Compilation 21 Ryden Dirtay Psychopathic Rydas LP 23 Rings Around the World Super Furry Animals 24 Bleed American Jimmy Eat World retitled Jimmy Eat World after 9/11 The Butterfly Collection The Nerve Agents Celebrity NSYNC Comfort Eagle Cake Contact! Eiffel 65 Global a Go-Go Joe Strummer & The Mescaleros Greatest Hits Alice in Chains Compilation Live Frogs Set 2 Les Claypool's Frog Brigade Live Love Is a Battlefield Hi-Standard EP Plan B Huey Lewis and the News Prowler in the Yard Pig Destroyer The Realness Cormega Sounding the Seventh Trumpet Avenged Sevenfold Tiger Army II: Power of Moonlite Tiger Army 29 Elv1s Elvis Presley Compilation 30 Beetroot Cast Captain Easychord Stereolab EP Now That's What I Call Music! 49 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation 31 Both Worlds *69 Gangsta Boo Demolition Judas Priest Duces 'N Trayz: The Old Fashioned Way Tha Eastsidaz Girl Eskimo Joe Losing All Hope Is Freedom Evergreen Terrace Megaton Shotblast De Facto EP Now That's What I Call Music! 7 (U.S. series) Various Artists Compilation Blake Shelton Blake Shelton So Blu Blu Cantrell Take-Offs and Landings Rilo Kiley Time (The Revelator) Gillian Welch Tweekend The Crystal Method 2002 Tha Dogg Pound Compilation The Very Best of Prince Prince Compilation AUGUST 6 Crow Sit on Blood Tree Graham Coxon Secrets The Human League The Tokyo Showdown Live In Japan 2000 In Flames Live 7 8701 Usher Eternal The Isley Brothers feat. Ronald Isley, aka Mr. Biggs Funk All Y'all Detroit Grand Pubahs Get Down or Lay Down Philly's Most Wanted GodMusic Chocolate Genius Gravitational Forces Robert Earl Keen Kiss tha Game Goodbye Jadakiss Mechanized Warfare Jag Panzer Oh Aaron Aaron Carter True Carnage Six Feet Under 8 Actual Size Mr. Big Warmness on the Soul Avenged Sevenfold EP 9 Cockroach Danger Danger 10 Pull My Chain Toby Keith 13 How It Works Bodyjar 14 Jump5 Jump5 Live by Request k.d. lang Live New Favorite Alison Krauss No Self Control The Planet Smashers Ozzfest 2001: The Second Millennium Various Artists Live The Spirit Room Michelle Branch Supernova Lisa Lopes Debut 16 Beautiful Creatures Beautiful Creatures 21 Adema Adema The Best of the Early Years: 1990-1995 Buju Banton Compilation Choices: The Album Three 6 Mafia Closer Better Than Ezra Compression Billy Sheehan Danse Macabre The Faint Die Hards The Casualties Just Be Free Christina Aguilera Recorded 1994-'95 Live Plus One ALL/Descendents Live Mother Earth Within Temptation Nice Rollins Band Project English Juvenile Rock and Roll Part Three Ozma Start Static Sugarcult 10 Years of Chaos and Confusion Hypocrisy Too Bad You're Beautiful From Autumn To Ashes The War of Art American Head Charge 27 Deep Shadows and Brilliant Highlights HIM Get Ready New Order Grave Disorder The Damned Is This It The Strokes Read My Lips Sophie Ellis-Bextor Those Who Tell the Truth Shall Die, Those Who Tell the Truth Shall Live Forever Explosions in the Sky Trouble – Norwegian Live EP Coldplay Live EP Vespertine Björk 28 Alien Youth Skillet The Anatomy of the Tongue in Cheek Relient K Anghellic Tech N9ne Anyone for Doomsday? Powerman 5000 Circulatory System Circulatory System Come Clean Puddle of Mudd The Creepy EP Relient K EP Digital Bullet RZA Flirting with Twilight Kurt Elling Gangland Kool & the Gang Iowa Slipknot It's a Wonderful Life Sparklehorse No More Drama Mary J. Blige Sound-Dust Stereolab Superhero Brian McKnight Thug On Da Line Krayzie Bone 30 Live at Java Joe's Jason Mraz SEPTEMBER 1 All The Footprints You've Ever Left And The Fear Expecting Ahead Envy Japan 3 Cold Frontier Show of Hands A Funk Odyssey Jamiroquai If You've Never Been Embrace Morning Star Entombed Mutilated Genitals Dog Fashion Disco EP Sound-Dust Stereolab 4 A-Town Blues Wayne Hancock Almost Heathen Karma to Burn Back to the Mansion April Wine Jane Doe Converge Silence Sonata Arctica The Tokyo Showdown In Flames Live Toxicity System of a Down 10 Magnification Yes UK 11 All Is Dream Mercury Rev And the Word Became Flesh Professor Griff The Blueprint Jay-Z The Coast Is Never Clear Beulah The Convincer Nick Lowe Dig Boz Scaggs Face 2 Face Babyface 5:30 Saturday Morning Lennon Ghetto Fabolous Fabolous Glitter Mariah Carey Soundtrack The Goat of Mendes Akercocke God Hates Us All Slayer Halfway Tree Damian Marley Live in a Dive: No Use for a Name No Use for a Name Live Live Scenes from New York Dream Theater Live "Love and Theft" Bob Dylan Mediocre Generica Leftover Crack Mink Car They Might Be Giants The Moldy Peaches The Moldy Peaches Rockin' The Suburbs Ben Folds Satellite P.O.D. Scars Soil Silver Side Up Nickelback The Tiki Bar Is Open John Hiatt Toilet Boys Toilet Boys Tomcats Screaming Outside Roland Orzabal US Uncivilization Biohazard Wonders of the World Long Beach Dub Allstars Worship Michael W. Smith Live 12 Southern Rock Opera Drive-By Truckers 14 Revolutionary Vol. 1 Immortal Technique 17 EP+6 Mogwai UK; Compilation Let It Come Down Spiritualized Strange Little Girls Tori Amos 18 The Attraction to All Things Uncertain Tweaker The Dirty Story: The Best of Ol' Dirty Bastard Ol' Dirty Bastard Dragontown Alice Cooper V Live The Golden Hum Remy Zero Greatest Hits Martina McBride Compilation The Id Macy Gray In Search of Truth Evergrey The Look of Love Diana Krall Positively Somewhere Jennifer Paige The Power Station Years: The Unreleased Recordings Jon Bon Jovi Compilation Rain on Lens Smog Revolution Revolución Ill Niño Room for Squares John Mayer 7even Year Itch Collective Soul Compilation Shameless Therapy? 22 Kristnihald undir Jökli Quarashi 24 Building the Machine Glenn Hughes Resonance Anathema Compilation Souljacker Eels UK 25 AArt Acoustic Alchemy Baldhead Slick & Da Click Guru The Best of Bruce Dickinson Bruce Dickinson Compilation Dead Yuppies Agnostic Front Declaration Steven Curtis Chapman Everywhere and His Nasty Parlour Tricks Modest Mouse EP The Glow Pt. 2 The Microphones Gold Ryan Adams Humanistic Abandoned Pools Killing Ground Saxon Live Evolution Queensrÿche Live Love Makes the World Carole King Manic Moonlight King's X Nivea Nivea Songs from Call Me Claus Garth Brooks Christmas Songs in Red and Gray Suzanne Vega Steal This Record The Suicide Machines Tenacious D Tenacious D Violent Revolution Kreator A Wild-Eyed Christmas Night .38 Special Christmas World of Glass Tristania 26 Built from Scratch The X-Ecutioners 27 Symphony for the Devil Witchery 28 In Search Of... N*E*R*D Date Album Artist Notes OCTOBER 1 Amélie Yann Tiersen Soundtrack Beautifulgarbage Garbage Fever Kylie Minogue Songs from the West Coast Elton John UK Trouble Every Day Tindersticks Soundtrack Victoria Beckham Victoria Beckham 2 All Back to the Mine Moloko Compilation Alright Guy Gary Allan Creedence Clearwater Revival: Box Set Creedence Clearwater Revival Box Set Fantasies & Delusions Billy Joel Greatest Hits Live: Vancouver 1986 Donovan Live Instructions Jermaine Dupri Pain Is Love Ja Rule Pass Out of Existence Chimaira Supercharger Machine Head Total Devastation: The Best of Busta Rhymes Compilation The Very Best of Winger Winger Compilation 6 Nothing New for Trash Like You Against All Authority 8 "Born into Trouble as the Sparks Fly Upward" The Silver Mt. Zion Memorial Orchestra & Tra-La-La Band Deep in the Hole Masters of Reality thefakesoundofprogress Lostprophets Re-release Love Is Here Starsailor Neon Lights Simple Minds Secret of the Runes Therion 9 Bridge Across Forever Transatlantic Chrome Trace Adkins Dark Days, Bright Nights Bubba Sparxxx D.F.F.D. The Dictators Direct Action: Day 21 Sham 69 Enchantment Charlotte Church Epitaph Front Line Assembly Falling into Place Finch EP Field Commander Cohen: Tour of 1979 Leonard Cohen Live A Fine Day to Exit Anathema Gerardo: Fame, Sex y Dinero Gerardo Hidden Stash II: The Kream of the Krop Kottonmouth Kings I'm Serious T.I. Is This It The Strokes US Christina Milian Christina Milian 1942 Soul-Junk EP No World Order Gamma Ray Not All Who Wander Are Lost Chris Thile The Photo Album Death Cab for Cutie Stupid Fat Americans Zebrahead Sweet Home Transylvania The Bronx Casket Co. Ten New Songs Leonard Cohen Together Again For The First Time Pulley Your Favorite Weapon Brand New 15 The DVD Napalm Death Live DVD Gold: Greatest Hits Steps Compilation The Very Best of Bananarama Bananarama Compilation 16 Armageddon Through Your Speakers Bionic Jive The Argument Fugazi Atomic Lit Bootleg Series Volume 1: The Quine Tapes The Velvet Underground Live Cuttin' Heads John Mellencamp Down to Earth Ozzy Osbourne The Essential Journey Journey Compilation Feminist Sweepstakes Le Tigre God Bless America LeAnn Rimes Here to Heaven Jamie-Lynn Sigler The Interzone Mantras The Tea Party John P. Kelly Mr. Cheeks Live in L.A. (Death & Raw) Death Live 1 Less G n Da Hood Blaze Ya Dead Homie LP Mahogany Soul Angie Stone US Pretty Together Sloan 17 Wanderland Kelis 18 Disposable Arts Masta Ace Full Collapse Thursday 21 A Bad Brains Reunion Live from Maritime Hall Bad Brains Live Prometheus: The Discipline of Fire & Demise Emperor 22 Cryptic Collection Vol. 2 Twiztid LP drukqs Aphex Twin The Grave Digger Grave Digger Germany We Love Life Pulp Your New Favourite Band The Hives Compilation 23 Audio Dog Bruce Kulick Bi-Polar Vanilla Ice LP California Crossing Fu Manchu Change The Dismemberment Plan The Complete Limelight Sessions Shania Twain Compilation 8 Days of Christmas Destiny's Child Christmas Expansion Team Dilated Peoples Feeding the Wheel Jordan Rudess First Strike Still Deadly Testament Golden State Bush The Great Depression DMX Greatest Fits The Headstones Compilation Greatest Hits Vol. 3: I'm a Survivor Reba McEntire Compilation The Hits: Chapter One Backstreet Boys Compilation +1 new song Kingsize Five Live in Chicago 12.19.98 Dave Matthews Band Live The Melancholy Collection Millencolin US; Compilation Morning View Incubus A New Morning, Changing Weather The (International) Noise Conspiracy Novakane Outlawz Now That's What I Call Christmas! (U.S. series) Various Artists Compilation Snowflakes Toni Braxton Christmas Understand This Grand Puba Wake Up and Smell the Coffee The Cranberries 29 Into The Rasmus The Tired Sounds of Stars of the Lid Stars of the Lid Turn to Me Vanessa Amorosi 30 The Audio of Being Matthew Good Band Cuts from the Crypt The Misfits Compilation Escape Enrique Iglesias Everywhere Michelle Branch Greatest Hits, Vol. 2 Clint Black Compilation Invincible Michael Jackson Legacy: The Greatest Hits Collection Boyz II Men Compilation Lenny Lenny Kravitz Oracle Kittie Through the Eyes Flaw Tomahawk Tomahawk Versus Kings of Convenience Remix White Knuckled Substance Vendetta Red 31 Give Blood Bane ? Polen Lynda Thomas NOVEMBER 2 The Definitive Collection ABBA Compilation 5 All Hits All Saints Compilation Are You Are Missing Winner The Fall Best of The Corrs The Corrs Compilation Echoes: The Best of Pink Floyd Pink Floyd Compilation The Fallout Default Premium Quality... Serve Loud! Peter Pan Speedrock White Lilies Island Natalie Imbruglia 6 Alive 1997 Daft Punk Live Best of SWV SWV Compilation Britney Britney Spears Diary Of A Sinner: 1st Entry Petey Pablo Faithfully Faith Evans Life Dope Momentum tobyMac Party Music The Coup Playing with my friends: Bennett Sings The Blues Tony Bennett Relative Ways ...And You Will Know Us By The Trail Of Dead EP Seul... avec vous Garou Live They Might Be Giants in Holidayland They Might Be Giants Christmas EP Warts and All: Volume 1 moe. Live Word of Mouf Ludacris 9 Blueprint for a Sunrise Yoko Ono 11 Swing When You're Winning Robbie Williams They Don't Know So Solid Crew Debut 12 Driving Rain Paul McCartney I Might Be Wrong Radiohead Live Kerrang! 2 The Album Various artists Compilation Play It Like That Bardot Work to a Calm Gemma Hayes EP World of Our Own Westlife Europe 13 Animosity Sevendust Bad Dreams Swollen Members Bulletproof Wallets Ghostface Killah C True Hollywood Stories Canibus Cunt Blood Duster Destination Unknown Mest Dirty Money UGK Disc One: All Their Greatest Hits Barenaked Ladies Compilation The Dreadful Hours My Dying Bride GHV2 Madonna Compilation Greatest Hits - HIStory Volume I Michael Jackson Compilation Here at the Mayflower Barry Manilow I Get Wet Andrew W.K. International Superhits! Green Day Compilation Laundry Service Shakira Live on the Edge of Forever Symphony X Live Love, Shelby Shelby Lynne Mis Romances Luis Miguel Motherland Natalie Merchant Rain of a Thousand Flames Rhapsody EP Rebirth Angra Scarecrow Garth Brooks Simple Things Zero 7 US The Sinister Urge Rob Zombie This Way Jewel 25 & Alive Boneshaker Motörhead DVD 14 Rusty Medals and Broken Badges Over My Dead Body 16 Here & Now: The Best of Human Nature Human Nature Compilation Violence Has Arrived GWAR Whatever Green Velvet 19 Insignificance Jim O'Rourke Légende du Scorpion à Quatre Queues De Facto EP Not for Beginners Ronnie Wood Now That's What I Call Music! 50 (UK series) Various Artists Compilation Span Thang Basement Jaxx EP Whatever Gets You Through The Day Lighthouse Family UK 20 ...All This Time Sting Live The Beginning of All Things to End Mudvayne The Box Set Kiss Box Set Bright Flight Silver Jews Cappadonna Hits Cappadonna Compilation Cocky Kid Rock Fractures in the Facade of Your Porcelain Beauty Atreyu EP Hoobastank Hoobastank Indecent Proposal Timbaland & Magoo Missundaztood Pink Now That's What I Call Music! 8 (U.S. series) Various Artists Compilation The Rainbow Children Prince Rotten Apples The Smashing Pumpkins Compilation Songs for the Front Row Ocean Colour Scene Compilation Washed Up and Through the Ringer Catch 22 Weathered Creed Young Lust: The Aerosmith Anthology Aerosmith Compilation 21 Greatest Hits The Cure Compilation 22 Cover Up UB40 26 Arcana Edenbridge Even in Darkness Dungeon Family "Ridgeriders" In Concert Phil Beer, Ashley Hutchings and Chris While Live 7 Worlds Collide Neil Finn Live Sunshine S Club 7 27 Dark Genesis Iced Earth Box Set Eudora The Get Up Kids Compilation Genesis Busta Rhymes Marc Lavoine Marc Lavoine Mandrake Edguy Smash Mouth Smash Mouth Ultra.Chilled 01 Various Artists DECEMBER 3 Kollapse Breach 4 AOI: Bionix De La Soul B-Sides Ultra James Compilation Bang or Ball Mack 10 Big Boi and Dre Present...OutKast OutKast Compilation Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.) Fat Joe Music and Me Nate Dogg New Old Songs Limp Bizkit Remix Rock Steady No Doubt Stiff Upper Lip Live AC/DC VHS/DVD Stoned Raiders Cypress Hill Tears The Crüxshadows EP 7 Paws Four Tet EP 10 Live Rounds in Tokyo The Haunted 11 Better Days Joe Cannon to a Whisper Breaking Pangaea Freak of Nature Anastacia How High: The Soundtrack Method Man & Redman Soundtrack Infamy Mobb Deep Les Indispensables Celine Dion Compilation The Return of the Regulator Warren G 12 G Sides Gorillaz B-Sides 14 2 Florent Pagny Cover album 18 Doggy Bag Bow Wow Dreams Can Come True, Greatest Hits Vol. 1 Gabrielle Compilation Forgotten Freshness Volume 3 Insane Clown Posse Compilation Game Face Master P Idiot Road The Arrogant Worms Iron Flag Wu-Tang Clan Jay-Z: Unplugged Jay-Z Live More Fast and Furious: Music from and Inspired by the Motion Picture The Fast and the Furious Various Artists Soundtrack Stillmatic Nas 21 A Call to Arms Bandits of the Acoustic Revolution EP 23 For the Kids Gym Class Heroes – 2001 in music (UK) January 9 – Apple Inc. introduces the iTunes media player. January 12 - January 21 – Rock in Rio 3 is held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Headlining acts consist of Sting, R.E.M., 'N Sync, Iron Maiden, Neil Young, Red Hot Chili Peppers and a new line-up of Guns N' Roses. January 17 – Bass player Jason Newsted leaves Metallica after 14 years with the band. January 20 – At the American Music Awards, the Backstreet Boys perform their hit single Larger than Life, during the performance they're surprisingly joined on stage by 'N Sync. It is the only time that the two rival boy bands performed on the same stage together at the same time. January 26 – A crowd crush occurs during the a set by Limp Bizkit at the Sydney Big Day Out music festival. Jessica Michalik is killed and the band subsequently leaves the country after threats to their safety. February 1 – CFXJ (Flow 93.5), Canada's first urban music station, goes to air for the first time as a testing signal (its official debut is on March 1.) This is considered a breakthrough for Canadian hip hop and R&B musicians. Jennifer Lopez becomes first female and artist to have both a number one album (J.Lo) and a number one movie (The Wedding Planner) in the same week. February 6 – Don Felder is fired from the Eagles. Felder sues the band for wrongful termination, and is countersued by Don Henley and Glenn Frey for breach of contract. The suits are settled out of court. February 13 – Peter Frampton receives the Orville H. Gibson Lifetime Achievement Award. February 17 – Manic Street Preachers become the first western rock band to play in Cuba. (Fidel Castro is in attendance.) They did not tour however, meaning that the unsigned British rock band Sandstone Veterans are the only band from the western world to tour Cuba. February 18 – James Taylor weds for the third time, marrying Caroline "Kim" Smedvig, director of public relations and marketing for the Boston Symphony Orchestra. February 28 – Courtney Love sues to get out of her contract with Vivendi Universal, on the grounds that music industry contracts are unfairly long compared to those in other industries. March 1 – Collin Raye is awarded the Artist Humanitarian Award from Country Radio Broadcasters. The award was given in recognition of Raye's work on behalf of a number of different charitable organizations including Childhelp USA, USA Weekend's Make A Difference Day and the Native American organization Hecel Oyakapi. March 8 – Melanie Chisholm announces she does not intend to do any more work with the Spice Girls. Although the group denies it is splitting, it would not be active again until 2007. March 9 Janet Jackson's single "All for You" breaks several airplay records, becoming the first song to be added to every station in three mainstream radio formats within its first week of release. It was also the highest debut for a single not commercially available in both the United States and France, and the highest debut and largest opening airplay figure on the Radio Songs chart. Eric Singer replaces Peter Criss as the drummer for Kiss as the band continues its farewell tour in Yokohama, Japan. Singer dons the "Catman" make-up, ending the band's tradition of creating new make-up and personas for replacement members. March 14 – The Court of Appeals in Rome finds Michael Jackson "not guilty" of plagiarism, reversing a decision made in 1999 by a lower court. Italian songwriter Albano Carrisi had claimed that Jackson's "Will You Be There" was a copy of his song "I Cigni Di Balaka." March 16 – Sean "Puffy" Combs is acquitted on all charges stemming from a December 1999 nightclub shooting in Manhattan. However, an artist on his Bad Boy Records label, Shyne, is convicted of two counts of assault as well as reckless endangerment and gun possession. March 24 – John Connolly of Sevendust marries Lori Kirkley. March 28 Sergei Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 2 replaces Max Bruch's violin concerto at #1 in the Classic FM Hall of Fame. Two super-mega hit albums : Hikaru Utada's Distance and Ayumi Hamasaki's A Best are released on exactly the same date. Their debut week sales are 3,002,720 and 2,874,870, respectively, setting the world's #1 and #2 one-week album sales records.ORICON STYLE – Weekly album chart : 2nd week of April 2001 March 31 – Disgraced couple Whitney Houston and Bobby Brown were fired and banned for life from Hollywood's Bel Air Hotel and arrested and jailed after destroying their room. Property that was allegedly damaged included a TV and two doors. According to hotel workers, the walls and carpets were also stained by alcohol. The hotel closed down the room for five days for repairs. April 3 – Mariah Carey signs a blockbuster contract with Virgin Records, worth $80 million for four albums. April 4 – Original Zombies lead singer Colin Blunstone and keyboardist Rod Argent reunite for a two-part performance at London's Jazz Cafe, the first time the two had performed together in over 30 years. April 14 - Janet Jackson's "All for You" reaches number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and remains atop the chart for seven non-consecutive weeks. It becomes the longest reigning hit of the year. April 15 - The Dutch DJ Tiësto releases his first solo album, In My Memory, on Black Hole Recordings. April 21 – The first Top Chinese Music Awards ceremony is held. April 24 – Janet Jackson releases her seventh studio album, All for You. It becomes her fifth consecutive album to open at number one, with sales exceeding 600,000 copies. It receives three Grammy Award nominations, winning for Best Dance Recording. May 1 Huey Lewis and the News makes a comeback with their album Plan B, their first album of new material in a decade. The 4th EJCF is held in Basel. The next time was in 2004. May 12 – Joey Fatone of 'N Sync injures his leg in a trap door during rehearsals for the new tour. May 15 – Charley Pride's A Tribute to Jim Reeves is the first compact disc to have copy protection, 80's band The Go Go's release there first album in 17 years:"God Bless The Go Go's May 22 – Mötley Crüe publishes their collective autobiography The Dirt. June 2 – Christina Aguilera scores her fourth number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 for "Lady Marmalade" a collaboration with Lil' Kim, Mýa, and Pink. The video wins the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year. June 9 – Madonna kicks off her first concert tour in 8 years, the Drowned World Tour, in Barcelona, Spain. June 12 –  Blink-182 release their fourth studio album Take Off Your Pants And Jacket which would later sell 14 million copies worldwide. This was the band's second successful album. Electric Light Orchestra release Zoom, their first album in 15 years. June 15 – Bad Religion drummer Bobby Schayer, who had been with the band since 1991, is forced to give up music after experiencing a "most unfortunate career-ending injury". This leads to his leaving Bad Religion for good; he is replaced by current dummer Brooks Wackerman. By this time, Bad Religion were dropped from Atlantic Records and had returned to their original label Epitaph, and founding guitarist Brett Gurewitz had just rejoined the band after a 7-year hiatus. June 16 – The Los Angeles, California radio station KROQ-FM airs the 9th Annual of the Weenie Roast show with Blink-182, Coldplay, Crazy Town, The Cult, Disturbed, Jane's Addiction, Linkin Park, The Living End, New Found Glory, Pennywise, Papa Roach, Stabbing Westward, Staind, Stone Temple Pilots, Sum 41 and 311. June 19 - Gorillaz release their self-titled debut album, Gorillaz. June 24 - Jazz pianist John Hicks marries flautist Elise Wood.New York Times, 24 June 2001 July 2 Willy Denzey makes his first appearance at Les Francofolies de La Rochelle. Napster shuts down its entire network in order to comply with a court injunction ordering it to halt the trading of copyrighted files. July 7 - Janet Jackson begins her All for You Tour. July 9 – Backstreet Boys put their Black & Blue summer tour on hold to allow A. J. McLean to enter a rehabilitation facility to deal with alcoholism and depression. July 10 - Dream Street bursts onto the music scene with the release of their debut album Dream Street July 19 – Ol' Dirty Bastard is sentenced to 2 to 4 years in prison for drug possession. July 24 - NSYNC releases their third studio album (second under Jive Records) Celebrity July 25 – Mariah Carey checks into a hospital for what a spokesperson terms "extreme exhaustion". Carey had exhibited several incidents of bizarre behavior during the previous week, including performing a strange striptease during an unscheduled visit to MTV's Total Request Live and posting a rambling message on her Web site in which she wrote, "I don't know what's going on with life". August 3 – Whitney Houston signs the largest contract in music history with Arista Records, a six-album deal worth over $100 million. August 6 – Death Row Records founder Suge Knight is released from prison after serving five years of a nine-year sentence for a parole violation. August 7 - Aaron Carter comes back with his third studio album (second under Jive Records) Oh Aaron August 13 – Two weeks before its official release, Spider One of Powerman 5000 pulls Anyone for Doomsday? off the market because it sounds too much like their previous release Tonight the Stars Revolt!. Later he releases the album on their website. Two months later, Al 3 & Dorian 27 leave the band. August 15 – Wilco signs a buy-out deal with Reprise Records after the label rejects the Yankee Hotel Foxtrot album and the band refuses to make any changes. Wilco leaves with the rights to the album in their possession. August 25 – A Cessna 402 aircraft carrying 9 people, including R&B singer Aaliyah, crashes in the Bahamas, killing all aboard. September 4 – The second studio album from Armenian-American band System of a Down, Toxicity, is released worldwide. After the 9/11 attacks, the single "Chop Suey!" is put on the list of songs deemed inappropriate by Clear Channel. September 6  – At the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards, Britney Spears performs her new single I'm a Slave 4 U in a very revealing outfit and featuring a number of exotic animals including a white and live albino Burmese Python on her shoulder, leading to a great deal of criticism from animal rights organisation PETA. Nevertheless, MTV named the performance as the most memorable moment in VMA history. September 7 and 10  – The Michael Jackson: 30th Anniversary Special tribute concerts are held at Madison Square Garden in New York City. September 10 – Blink-182 start shooting a video for "Stay Together for the Kids", featuring the band playing in a derelict house. When they try to finish the video the following day, the 9–11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City occur, and the band abandon the attempt and decide to shoot a different video for the song. September 11 – The September 11 attacks result in the cancellation or postponement of many musical events, due to the halting of many commercial flights and the somber mood of communities around the world. MTV and VH1 suspend regular programming to carry a newsfeed from CBS, and the 2001 Latin Grammy Awards broadcast is canceled. Sting, who had planned to stream a performance in Italy on the Internet, reduces the Webcast to one song, "Fragile". The MuchMusic Video Awards scheduled for September 23 are also canceled. Gerard Way witnesses the attacks and is inspired to start a band, which later becomes My Chemical Romance. Prior to this, The Blueprint, an album by Jay-Z, would be released. September 14 – Clear Channel Communications issues a controversial memorandum to its radio stations containing a list of 165 songs considered "lyrically questionable" in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. The list includes "Knockin' on Heaven's Door", all songs by Rage Against the Machine and John Lennon's "Imagine". September 21 – America: A Tribute to Heroes airs uninterrupted on all major networks. The solemn concert, only 10 days after the September 11 attacks, included performances by Bruce Springsteen, Tom Petty, Celine Dion, Neil Young, Stevie Wonder, Alicia Keys, Dave Matthews, Faith Hill, Mariah Carey, and others. September 25 – XM Satellite Radio is launched. September 29 – Jennifer Lopez weds back-up dancer Cris Judd. The marriage would end in June 2002. October 6 Burton C. Bell gets into a fight with his bandmate Dino Cazares about a manager they fired. The event triggers the demise of Fear Factory. Pop Idol premieres on ITV. October 9 – The first CD in the Kidz Bop series, consisting of Top 40 hits sung by children, is released. October 10 – Heavy metal band Anthrax issues a press release in response to the 2001 anthrax attacks jokingly stating that they will be changing the name of the group to "Basket Full of Puppies". It concludes, "we don't want to change the name of the band, not because it would be a pain in the ass, but because we hope that no further negative events will happen and it won't be necessary. We hope and pray that this problem goes away quietly and we all grow old and fat together." The band has reported increased traffic to their website due to Internet users going to anthrax.com looking for information about the disease. October 12 – Wes Borland leaves Limp Bizkit. October 16 – Michael Jackson releases special editions of his albums Off the Wall, Thriller, Bad and Dangerous. October 20 The Concert for New York City airs on VH1, with performances by Paul McCartney, The Rolling Stones, Bon Jovi The Who, Billy Joel and others. Volunteers For America benefit concert is held in Atlanta, Georgia, MC was Drew Carey with performances by Edgar Winter Group, Mark Farner, Jack Blades, John Waite, The Knack, Eddie Money, Peter Frampton, Survivor, Kansas, Journey, Styx,  REO Speedwagon, Bad Company, Lynyrd Skynyrd,  and others. October 21 United We Stand: What More Can I Give benefit concert is held at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C., with performances by Michael Jackson, Aerosmith, Mariah Carey, James Brown, Backstreet Boys, 'N Sync, and others. Volunteers For America benefit concert is held at Smirnoff Music Centre in Dallas, Texas, MC was Drew Carey with performances by Edgar Winter Group, Mark Farner, Jack Blades, John Waite, The Knack, Eddie Money, Peter Frampton, Survivor, Kansas, Journey, Styx, REO Speedwagon, Bad Company, and others. October 23 The Backstreet Boys release their first compilation album The Hits: Chapter One The first iPod is released by Apple Inc. Incubus releases their third full-length major label album entitled Morning View. It debuted on the Billboard Top 200 at the #2 spot (266,000 copies were sold in its first week). This was the highest ever placement for Incubus. At the same time, "Wish You Were Here" was at #2 on the Modern Rock Charts, and "Drive" sat at #48 on the Hot 100 chart. October 25 – Quarashi performs a live concert with the Icelandic Symphony Orchestra (the band, Botnleðja also performed) in the Háskólabíó in Reykjavík, Iceland, which is notable for being the first time that a rap act performed a live concert with the Icelandic Symphony Orchestra. Quarashi perform seven songs from their (at the time) upcoming album, Jinx. October 30 - Michael Jackson releases Invincible, which debuts at number one. October 31 - Britney Spears comes back to the music scene with the release of her third studio album Britney November 1 The governing body of the UK Singles Chart, Chart Information Network Ltd. (CIN), changes its name to The Official UK Charts Company. Britney Spears starts her Dream Within a Dream Tour, in support her self-titled third studio album. The tour was accompanied by many extravagant special effect including a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage during the encore. The tour was commercial success, all the venues on the 2001 leg are largely sold out and grossed $43.7 million from 68 show. November 5 – In the UK, BMG becomes the first major label to release a compact disc with copy protection, Natalie Imbruglia's White Lilies Island. Within two weeks BMG announces they will re-issue the disc without the copy protection, due to complaints from consumers who were unable to play the CDs in their personal computers. November 6 – Britney Spears' third album, Britney debuts at #1, making her the first female artist to have her first three albums enter the US charts at #1. The soundtrack album of the Nickelodeon movie Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius is also released. December 1 Mike Turner quits Our Lady Peace. December 4 Gospel music singer Yolanda Adams releases her eighth studio album Believe December 12  – Surviving Nirvana members Krist Novoselic and Dave Grohl sue Courtney Love in an effort to oust her from the board controlling the management of the band's affairs, calling her "irrational, mercurial, self-centered, unmanageable, inconsistent and unpredictable." The legal battle over the band's legacy has blocked the release of a planned Nirvana box set containing the unreleased track "You Know You're Right". Area One music festival brings together a variety of acts including Moby, Incubus, Outkast, New Order, Nelly Furtado, The Roots, Rinocerose, Paul Oakenfold, and Carl Cox. The Republic of France awards Jean-Yves Thibaudet the honour of Chevalier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. Deporitaz releases Microwave this CD, his second album, on MP3.com. Sean Beasley joins Dying Fetus. See  See  Army of Lovers Devourment Electric Light Orchestra (with new members except for original members, Jeff Lynne and Richard Tandy) Level 42 The Monkees Maroon 5 Roxy Music Zebra Sunny Day Real Estate Breaking Benjamin – Breaking Benjamin First Album – Miss Kittin & The Hacker On the Edge - Iron Fire Polen – Lynda Thomas Songs For A Small Room - Fantastic Something Yule Ritual – Hawkwind Hybrid Theory – Linkin Park 1 – The Beatles Invincible – Michael Jackson All That You Can't Leave Behind – U2 Aaliyah (album) – Aaliyah Invincible / Michael Jackson ~ 6.500.000 Hot Shot / Shaggy ~ 4,507,568 Celebrity / NSYNC ~ 4,421,231 A Day Without Rain / Enya ~ 4,410,053 Break the Cycle / Staind ~ 4,242,507 Songs in A Minor / Alicia Keys ~ 4,102,482 J.Lo / Jennifer Lopez ~ 4,056,985 Survivor / Destiny's Child ~ 3,718,446 Weathered / Creed ~ 3,581,344 O Brother, Where Art Thou? / Soundtrack ~ 3,460,852 "19-2000" – Gorillaz (June 25 (UK) July 17 (US)) "A Little Respect" – Wheatus "À ma place" – Axel Bauer and Zazie "All for You" – Janet Jackson (March 27) "All or Nothing" – O-Town (January 23) "American Psycho" – Treble Charger "Another Day In Paradise" – Brandy feat. Ray J (March) Anthology – Bad Manners "Ay, Ay, Ay" – Lynda Thomas "Bad Ambassador" – The Divine Comedy (April 17) "Because I Got High" – Afroman "Bel Amour" – Bel Amour "Bodies" – Drowning Pool "Bootylicious" – Destiny's Child (June 26 (US), July 3 (worldwide)) "Brand New Low" – Treble Charger "Buck Rogers" – Feeder (January 8) "Butterfly" – Crazy Town "Butterfly" – Kylie Minogue (November 12) "California" – Wave "Candy" – Ash (October 1) "Can't Get You Out of My Head" – Kylie Minogue (September 17) "Chop Suey!" – System of a Down (August) "Clint Eastwood" – Gorillaz (March 5 (UK)) "Come Along" – Titiyo "Control" - Puddle of Mudd (July) "Crawling" – Linkin Park (April 17) "Crying at the Discoteque" – Alcazar "Crystal" – New Order (13 August) "Digital Love" – Daft Punk "Don't Tell Me" – Madonna (November 21, 2000 (non-US); January 16, 2001 (US)) "Drops of Jupiter (Tell Me)" – Train (February 20) "Drowning" – Backstreet Boys "Electric Avenue (remix)" – Eddy Grant "Elevation" – U2 (June 25 [AUS]; July 2 [EUR]; July 10 [US]) "Eternity/The Road to Mandalay" – Robbie Williams (July 9) "Fade" - Staind (September 4) "Fallin'" – Alicia Keys (July 10) "Family Affair" – Mary J. Blige "Fat Lip" – Sum 41 (August 28 USA; October 1 UK) "Fight Music" – D12 "First Date" – Blink-182 (September 24) "Freedom" - Paul McCartney (Written about the September 11th attacks) "Get Ur Freak On" – Missy Elliott (February 20) "Gone" – NSYNC (October) "Handbags and Gladrags" – Stereophonics "Hanging By A Moment" – Lifehouse "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" - Daft Punk "Hard to Explain" – The Strokes (June 25, 2001 (UK), April 30, 2002 (USA)) "Have a Nice Day" – Stereophonics "Heaven" - DJ Sammy & Yanou featuring Do "Heaven Is A Halfpipe" - OPM "Hell Bent"- Kenna "Here With Me" – Dido (January 29 EU; February 5 UK) "Here's to the Night (song)" – Eve 6 (May 21 US) "Hero" – Enrique Iglesias (November) "How We Roll" – Big Pun "How You Remind Me" – Nickelback "I Believe" – Galleon "I Don't Want a Lover (remix)" – Texas "I Feel Loved" – Depeche Mode (July 30 UK; July 31 US) "I Want Love" – Elton John "I'm a Slave 4 U" – Britney Spears (October 23 [US]; October 8 [UK]) "I'm Real" – Jennifer Lopez (October 16) "Imitation of Life" – R.E.M. (April) "Inner Smile" – Texas "In the End" – Linkin Park (November 20) "In Too Deep – Sum 41 (December 3 UK) "Island in the Sun"- Weezer (August 28) "Irresistible"- Jessica Simpson (April 12) "It's Been Awhile"- Staind (June 26) "It's Raining Men" – Geri Halliwell (April 30 [UK]) "I Wanna Be Bad" – Willa Ford (May 22) "Izzo (H.O.V.A.)" – Jay Z (July 17) "Jaded" – Aerosmith (March 13) "Just Push Play" – Aerosmith "Juxtapozed with U" – Super Furry Animals "Knives Out" – Radiohead August 14 (Pt.1, Pt.2); August 28 (US CD); September 25, 2001 (Pt. 3) "La Musique (Angelica)" – Star Academy France (December) "La Negra Tiene Tumbao" - Celia Cruz (October 2, 2001) "Lady Marmalade"- Christina Aguilera, Pink, Lil' Kim & Mýa (May 8) "Last Nite" – The Strokes "Left Behind" – Slipknot "Let Me Blow Ya Mind" – Eve featuring Gwen Stefani (May 15) "Life" – E-Type featuring Nana Hedin "Liquid Dreams" – O-Town "Lo Mejor de Mi" – Lynda Thomas "Love Don't Cost A Thing" – Jennifer Lopez (January 30) "Love What You Do" – The Divine Comedy "Loverboy" – Mariah Carey (July 16) "Mr. Writer" – Stereophonics "More Than a Woman – Aaliyah (November 13, 2001 [US]; February 19, 2002 [UK]; March 5, 2002 [AUS]) "My Sacrifice" – Creed (December 11) "My Way" – Limp Bizkit (May) "Ocean Spray" – Manic Street Preachers (June 4) "One Last Breath" – Creed "One Minute Man" – Missy Elliott (featuring Ludacris and Trina) "One Step Closer" – Linkin Park "Only Time – Enya "Out of Reach" – Gabrielle "Outside" – Staind (May) "Overprotected" – Britney Spears (December) "Played-A-Live (The Bongo Song)" – Safri Duo "Play" - Jennifer Lopez "Pop" – NSYNC (July 17) "Purple Hills" – D12 featuring Eminem "Pyramid Song" – Radiohead (May 29, 2001; June 19, 2001 (Pt.1, Pt.2); December 11, 2001 (Japan CD) "Queen of My Heart" – Westlife (UK) "Ramp! (The Logical Song)" – Scooter "Ride Wit Me" – Nelly (July 24) "Rock The Boat" – Aaliyah (August 2001 (North America); March 5, 2002 (Australia); May 6, 2002 (UK)) "Sail Away" – David Gray "Salsoul Nugget (If U Wanna)" – M&S Pres. The Girl Next Door "Seul" – Garou "Sexual Guarantee" – Alcazar (November 26) "Shining Light" – Ash (January 29) "Schism" – Tool "Short Skirt/Long Jacket" – Cake "Sick Cycle Carousel" – Lifehouse "Side" – Travis (September 17) "Sing" – Travis (May 28) "Smooth Criminal" – Alien Ant Farm "Someone To Call My Lover" – Janet Jackson "Something" - Lasgo "Somewhere Over the Rainbow/What a Wonderful World" (medley) – Cliff Richard "So I Begin" – Galleon "So Why So Sad" – Manic Street Preachers (February 26) "Standing Still" – Jewel "Starlight" – The Supermen Lovers "Step On My Old Size Nines" – Stereophonics "Stop Your Crying" – Spiritualized "Stuck in a Moment You Can't Get Out Of" – U2 (January 29 UK, February 12 AUS, March 27 FRA, October 30 CAN) "Superman (It's Not Easy)" - Five For Fighting "Survivor" – Destiny's Child (February 13, 2001 (Australia); April 24, 2001 (Germany); May 8, 2001 (U.S.) May 15, 2001 (U.K.)) "Thank You" – Dido (21 May) "The Rock Show" – Blink-182 (July 1) "There Must Be an Angel" – No Angels "The Way You Like It" – Adema "This Year's Love" – David Gray "Toutes les femmes de ta vie" – L5 "Turn off the Light" – Nelly Furtado (August 14) "Up On The Downside" – Ocean Colour Scene "Uptown Girl" – Westlife (UK) "Walk On" – U2 (November 19) (UK/Eur); November 26(Aus) "We Need A Resolution" – Aaliyah (April 24) "Weapon of Choice" – Fatboy Slim "What It Feels Like for a Girl" – Madonna "Whenever, Wherever" – Shakira "Wherever You Will Go" – The Calling "Who Do You Love Now?" – Riva featuring Dannii Minogue (November 19) "Whole Again" – Atomic Kitten "With Arms Wide Open" – Creed "Wish You Were Here" – Incubus "Wrong Impression" – Natalie Imbruglia "Yellow" – Coldplay "You Rock My World" – Michael Jackson John Adams – American Berserk, for piano Nancy's Fancy, for ensemble Louis Andriessen – Passeggiata in tram in America e ritorno, for female Italian voice, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, electric guitar, electric violin, double bass, piano, and percussion De vleugels van de herinnering, for voice and piano Fanfare om te beginnen, for sx groups of horns Georges Aperghis – Le petit chaperon rouge, for chamber ensemble Rasch, for violin and viola Milton Babbitt – A Lifetime or So, for tenor and piano Leonardo Balada – Cello Concerto No. 2 New Orleans Osvaldas Balakauskas – Symphony No. 5 Gerald Barry – Dead March, for large ensemble God Save the Queen, for solo boy's voice, choir, and large ensemble Snow is White, for piano quartet String Quartet No. 3 (Six Marches) Luciano Berio – Sonata, for piano Christophe Bertrand – Dikha, for clarinet/bass clarinet and electronics Ektra, for solo flute Full, for four vibraphones, piano, and eight amplified voices Frank Michael Beyer – Klangtore, for orchestra Harrison Birtwistle – Fanfare, for brass and percussion Saraband, for piano The Shadow of Night, for orchestra Tenebrae David, for brass ensemble Pierre Boulez – Incises, for piano (revised version) Elliott Carter Concerto for Cello and Orchestra Figment II, for cello Hiyoku, for two clarinets Quartet, for oboe, violin, viola, and cello Steep Steps, for bass clarinet Anna Clyne – Arclight, for tape Manipura, for chamber ensemble One, for tape Wish, for voice or voices John Corigliano – Symphony No. 2 for String Orchestra George Crumb – Unto the Hills for soprano, percussion quartet and piano Peter Maxwell Davies – Symphony No. 8 (Antarctic Symphony) Alexandra du Bois – Júdica Me, for a cappella chorus Preludes to Solitude, for guitar String Quintet: A Requiem for the Living for two violins, viola and two double basses Songs (4), for mezzo-soprano and orchestra Joël-François Durand – Athanor for orchestra Péter Eötvös – Snatches of a Conversation, for ensemble Brian Ferneyhough – In nomine à 3, for piccolo, oboe, and clarinet Stelae for Failed Time, for 12 voices and live electronics Lorenzo Ferrero Two Cathedrals in the South concertino for trumpet and orchestra Moonlight Sonata for five percussion instruments Michael Finnissy – The History of Photography in Sound Alexandra Fol – Concerto for violin and orchestra Requiem No. 1, for chorus and orchestra, Op. 19 Frans Geysen – City of Smiles, twenty solos for one recorder player, playing soprano to bass Ehrung an M.C.E. (E=mc2), for alto recorder Met vel, rand en tand, for three percussionists Met zijn twaalven, for twelve recorders Möbiusband 15, for string quartet Op de fles, for four players on 16 bottles Philip Glass – Concerto, for cello and orchestra Friedrich Goldmann – Concerto a 8 (Octet), for two oboes, two clarinets, two horns, and two bassoons Drei Strophen, for clarinet and violin Study, for two pianos Tombeau (in memoriam Iannis Xenakis), for bass clarinet, bassoon, trombone, piano, viola, and cello Howard Goodall – In Memoriam Anne Frank Georg Friedrich Haas Blumenstück De terrae fine, for violin solo Flow and Friction, for sixteenth-tone piano four-hands Sodass ich’s hernach mit einem Blick gleichsam wie ein schönes Bild... im Geist Übersehe Jeff Hamburg – Aychah, for choir and orchestra Jonathan Harvey – The Summer Cloud's Awakening, for choir, flute, cello, and electronics York Höller Ex tempore, for flute, oboe, clarinet (doubling bass clarinet), percussion, violin, viola, cello, harp, and piano Trias, for alto saxophone, percussion, and piano Der ewige Tag, for chorus, orchestra, and electronics Mauricio Kagel – Piano Trio No. 2 Helmut Lachenmann – Grido (string quartet) György Ligeti –Études, Book 3, for piano James MacMillan – The Birds of Rhiannon, for orchestra with optional chorus O Bone Jesu, for SSAATTBB choir with soli Robin Maconie – Songs for The Caucasian Chalk Circle (15), after Brecht Frederik Magle – The Hope for brass band, choir, organ and percussion. Mesías Maiguashca – La noche cíclica, for violin, cello, piano, marimba, and 4 envelope followers Tomás Marco – Laberinto marino, for cello and orchestra Anna Mikhailova – Sonata for piano Songs (4), for baritone and piano Stuart Mitchell – Seven Wonders Suite, for choir and orchestra Olga Neuwirth – Ecstaloop, for soprano, speaker, sampler, and ensemble Incidental music for Abenteuer in Sachen Haut, after Dylan Thomas, by Peter Carp Locus...doublure...solus, for piano and orchestra (or chamber ensemble) Michael Obst – Piano Trio No. 1 Transit, for orchestra Henri Pousseur – Berceuses (4), for unaccompanied voice or unison choir Eclipticare, ou les périples constellés, for one, two, or three instruments, surrounded or not, each a "consort" Sursauts, for violin (doubling viola), trombone, and piano Jaime Reis – Estátua de Pessanha, piano, bass flute, and real-time video Wolfgang Rihm – Jagden und Formen, for chamber orchestra Sechs Gedichte von Friedrich Nietzsche, for voice and piano Peter Ruzicka – Trans – Requiem für Giuseppe Sinopoli Vahram Sargsyan – Luys Zvart [Joyful Light], for female chorus Bright Sheng – Distant Birthday Bells, for piano Tibetan Dance, for violin, clarinet, and piano Stuart Saunders Smith – And Cold for xylophone/narrator Breath for mezzo-soprano and orchestra bells (glockenspiel) Family Portraits: Ligeia (Daughter) for soprano voice and piano Light  Dew for solo double bass Madness for xylophone/narrator Minor for solo violin Pond for xylophone/narrator Sometime Then for xylophone/narrator Juan María Solare – Les atavismes du crépuscule [Atavisms of twilight], for clarinet, alto saxophone, and trombone Blind Date, for two bass clarinets (with theatral elements) Blues en mí [Blues in E / Blues in Me], for piano Fastango for piano Icarus, for flute, clarinet, violin, cello, and piano Pasaje Seaver, tango for piano RED: A Deconstructed Blues (Music for Marcel Worms) for piano Winchmore Hill for piano Karlheinz Stockhausen – Stop und Start, for six instrumental groups, Nr. 18⅔ Dennis Tobenski – The Passionate Shepherd to His Love, for mixed choir Three Poems of Thomas Hardy, for voice and piano Stephen Truelove – Broken Song, for solo horn Preludium and Chakratour, for string quartet Three Songs to Poems by Frank Anderton, for soprano and piano Michel van der Aa – Here [to Be Found], for soprano, chamber orchestra, and soundtrack Kevin Volans – Concerto for Double Orchestra Zeno at 4 am, theatre piece for shadow puppets, actors, bass, string quartet, and chorus Dafina Zeqiri – Dialog for violin and piano My Mother for mixed chorus Walter Zimmermann – Clinamen I–IV, for six orchestral groups La fleur Inverse, for organ Schatten der Ideen 6, 'Blaupause', for piano Die Sorge geht über den Fluss, for solo violin Umbræ Idearum (Schatten der Ideen 4), for piano and string quartet Ellen Taaffe Zwillich – Openings Jason Kao Hwang - The Floating Box: A Story in Chinatown Theo Loevendie – Johnny & Jones Sven-David Sandström – Jeppe: The Cruel Comedy David Sawer – From Morning to Midnight Michel van der Aa – Vuur Atgof o'r Sêr – first performed by Bryn Terfel and Cor Rhuthun in north Wales. Commissioned for the National Eisteddfod of Wales at Denbigh. A Class Act&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production opened at the Ambassador Theatre on March 11 and ran for 105 performances 42nd Street&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway revival opened at the Ford Center on May 2 Mamma Mia!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production opened at the Winter Garden Theatre on October 18 The Producers&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production opened at St. James Theatre on April 19 Urinetown&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Broadway production opened at the Hudson Theatre on September 20 and ran for 965 performances Beijing Rocks Carmen: A Hip Hopera Gadar: Ek Prem Katha, starring Sunny Deol, Amisha Patel and Amrish Puri Glitter released September 21, starring Mariah Carey and Max Beesley Hedwig and the Angry Inch, directed by and starring John Cameron Mitchell Hysteria – The Def Leppard Story Love You Hamesha, starring Akshaye Khanna and Sonali Bendre Moulin Rouge! released May 18, starring Nicole Kidman and Ewan McGregor On the Road to Emmaus, starring Peter Franzén One Night the Moon, starring Paul Kelly and Kaarin Fairfax Rebelové, starring Zuzana Norisová and Tomáš Hanák Rock Star Scratch January 4 – Les Brown, bandleader (89) January 5 – Milan Hlavsa, Czech musician (Plastic People of the Universe) (49) January 7 – James Carr, soul singer (58) January 10 – Bryan Gregory, guitarist (The Cramps)(49) January 24 – Leif Thybo, Danish composer and organist (78) February 4 J.J. Johnson, jazz bebop trombonist (77) Iannis Xenakis, Greek composer (78) February 10 - Buddy Tate, jazz musician (87) February 13 – George T. Simon, music critic and original Glenn Miller Orchestra drummer (pneumonia) February 19 – Charles Trenet French singer and songwriter (87) February 21 Ronnie Hilton, English singer (75) Malcolm Yelvington, rockabilly musician (82) February 22 – John Fahey, guitarist, indie label owner (61) March 4 – Glenn Hughes, The Village People (50) March 12 – Sir Lancelot, calypso singer (98) March 18 – John Phillips, singer-songwriter, co-founder of The Mamas & the Papas (65) March 20 – Francis Grasso, disc jockey (51) March 28 – Moe Koffman, Canadian jazz singer (73) March 29 – John Lewis, jazz pianist (80) April 6 – Charles Pettigrew, of Charles & Eddie (37) (cancer) April 9 - Graziella Sciutti, operatic soprano (73) April 11 Sandy Bull, folk musician (60) Graciela Naranjo, bolero singer and actress (84) Sir Harry Secombe, entertainer (79) April 15 – Joey Ramone, lead singer of The Ramones (49) (lymphoma) April 20 – Giuseppe Sinopoli, composer and conductor (54)(heart attack) May 3 – Billy Higgins, jazz drummer (64) May 5 – Boozoo Chavis, zydeco musician (70) May 10 – James E. Myers, songwriter ("Rock Around the Clock") (81) May 12 – Perry Como, American crooner (88) May 16 – Prince Ital Joe, reggae singer (38) (car accident) May 20 – Renato Carosone, Italian musician and singer (81) June 4 – John Hartford, bluegrass musician (64) June 7 – Carole Fredericks, singer June 13 – Marcelo Fromer, guitarist for Brazilian band Titãs (39) (rammed by a motorcycle) June 18 – Davorin Popović, lead singer for Bosnian band Indexi (55) June 21 – John Lee Hooker, blues musician (83) June 30 Chet Atkins, country musician (77) Joe Henderson, jazz saxophonist (64) July 3 Delia Derbyshire, English electronic composer (64) Johnny Russell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (61) July 5 – Ernie K-Doe, R & B singer (65) July 7 – Fred Neil, folk singer-songwriter (65) July 15 – Anthony Ian Berkeley, rapper (Brothers Grym, Gravediggaz) (36) (colon cancer) July 18 – Mimi Fariña, singer-songwriter (56) (neuroendocrine cancer) July 23 – Richie Lee, singer and bassist (Acetone)(34)(suicide) July 27 Harold Land, hard bop saxophonist (73) Leon Wilkeson, bassist for Lynyrd Skynyrd (49) August 2 – Ronald Townson, American singer and actor (The 5th Dimension) (68) August 18 – Roland Cardon, Belgian composer and multi-instrumentalist (72) August 25 – Aaliyah, American singer and actress (22)(plane crash) August 27 – Karl Ulrich Schnabel, pianist (92) August 29 – Graeme "Shirley" Strachan, lead singer of Skyhooks (49) September 1 – Ted Mulry, lead singer with Ted Mulry Gang (54) September 6 – Carl Crack, techno musician (Atari Teenage Riot)(30) September 22 – Isaac Stern, violinist (81) October 3 - Tatiana Menotti, operatic soprano (92) October 5 – Ivan Hrušovský, Slovak composer (74) October 10 – Barry McCauley, operatic tenor (51)(lung cancer) October 17 – Jay Livingston, songwriter (86) November 17 - Michael Karoli, guitarist, violinist and composer (53)(cancer) November 21 – Ralph Burns, American songwriter, bandleader, composer, conductor, arranger and bebop pianist (79) November 24 – Melanie Thornton, singer (La Bouche) (34)(air crash) November 28 – Kal Mann, American lyricist ("Teddy Bear", "Butterfly")(84) November 29 – George Harrison, musician and former member of The Beatles (58)(lung cancer) December 13 – Chuck Schuldiner, vocalist and guitarist with Death (34)(cancer) December 15 – Rufus Thomas, singer (84) December 16 – Stuart Adamson, guitarist with Big Country (43)(suicide) December 17 – Débria Brown, operatic soprano (65) December 18 – Gilbert Bécaud, singer-songwriter (74) December 22 – Norman Granz, American producer (83) December 29 – Cássia Eller, Brazilian singer (39) The following artists are inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: Aerosmith, Solomon Burke, The Flamingos, Michael Jackson, Queen, Paul Simon, Steely Dan and Ritchie Valens Inductees of the GMA Gospel Music Hall of Fame include Larry Norman, and Elvis Presley ARIA Music Awards of 2001 Grammy Awards of 2001 Juno Awards of 2001 March 4 – Bruce Cockburn is inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame Eurovision Song Contest 2001 Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea – PJ Harvey wins. 2001 MTV Video Music Awards
