     7 (seven; ) is the natural number following  and preceding . In fact, if one sorts the digits in the number 142857 in ascending order, 124578, it is possible to know from which of the digits the decimal part of the number is going to begin with. The remainder of dividing any number by 7 will give the position in the sequence 124578 that the decimal part of the resulting number will start. For example, 628 ÷ 7 = ; here 5 is the remainder, and would correspond to number 7 in the ranking of the ascending sequence. So in this case, 628 ÷ 7 = 89.714285. Another example, 5238 ÷ 7 = , hence the remainder is 2, and this corresponds to number 2 in the sequence. In this case, 5238 ÷ 7 = 748.285714. In quaternary, 7 is the smallest prime with a composite sum of digits.  In the beginning, various Hindus wrote 7 more or less in one stroke as a curve that looks like an uppercase J vertically inverted. The western Ghubar Arabs' main contribution was to make the longer line diagonal rather than straight, though they showed some tendencies to making the character more rectilinear. The eastern Arabs developed the character from a 6-look-alike into an uppercase V-look-alike. Both modern Arab forms influenced the European form, a two-stroke character consisting of a horizontal upper line joined at its right to a line going down to the bottom left corner, a line that is slightly curved in some font variants. As is the case with the European glyph, the Cham and Khmer glyph for 7 also evolved to look like their glyph for 1, though in a different way, so they were also concerned with making their 7 more different. For the Khmer this often involved adding a horizontal line above the glyph.Georges Ifrah, The Universal History of Numbers: From Prehistory to the Invention of the Computer transl. David Bellos et al. London: The Harvill Press (1998): 395, Fig. 24.67 This is analogous to the horizontal stroke through the middle that is sometimes used in handwriting in the Western world but which is almost never used in computer fonts. This horizontal stroke is, however, important to distinguish the glyph for seven from the glyph for one in writings that use a long upstroke in the glyph for 1.   On the seven-segment displays of pocket calculators and digital watches, 7 is the number with the most common glyph variation (1, 6 and 9 also have variant glyphs). Most calculators use three line segments, but on Sharp, Casio, and a few other brands of calculators, 7 is written with four line segments because, in Japan and Korea, 7 is written as ① in the illustration to the right. While the shape of the 7 character has an ascender in most modern typefaces, in typefaces with text figures the character usually has a descender, as, for example, in .  Most people in Continental Europe and increasingly in the UK and Ireland as well as Latin America write 7 with a line in the middle ("7"), sometimes with the top line crooked. The line through the middle is useful to clearly differentiate the character from the number one, as these can appear similar when written in certain styles of handwriting. This glyph is used in official handwriting rules for primary school in Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Poland, and other Slavic countries,"Education writing numerals in grade 1."(Russian) as well as in France, Finland and Germany."Example of teaching materials for pre-schoolers"(French)  The number seven in the seven days of Creation is typological and the number seven appears commonly elsewhere in the Bible. These include: Other sevens in Christian knowledge and practice include:   Base Numeral system 2 binary 111 3 ternary 21 4 quaternary 13 5 quinary 12 6 senary 11 7 septenary 10 over 7 (octal, decimal, etc.) 7 Multiplication 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 50 100 1000 7 × x 7 Division 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 7 ÷ x 7 3.5 2. 1.75 1.4 1.1 1 0.875 0. 0.7 0. 0.58 0. 0.5 0.4 x ÷ 7 0.142857 0.285714 0.428571 0.571428 0.714285 0.857142 1 1.142857 1.285714 1.428571 1.571428 1.714285 1.857142 2.142857 Exponentiation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 7x 7 49 2401 16807 117649 823543 5764801 40353607 282475249 1977326743 13841287201 96889010407 x7 1 2187 16384 78125 279936 823543 2097152 4782969 19487171 35831808 62748517 Radix 1 5 10 15 20 25 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 200 250 500 1000 10000 100000 1000000 x7 1 5 137 217 267 347 427 557 1017 1147 1307 1437 1567 2027 2157 2317 2447 2607 3037 4047 5057 13137 26267 411047 5643557 113333117 ;Rugby league :*The jersey number 7 is worn by the starting scrum-half/halfback in most competitions (but not in the European Super League, which uses static squad numbering). :*7, The number of consecutive State of Origin Series wins (2006-2012) by Queensland against New South Wales in Australia. The highest since the inception of the State of Origin Series concept which commenced in 1980. ;Rugby union :*The jersey number 7 is worn by the starting openside flanker. (Some teams use "left" and "right" flankers instead of "openside" and "blindside", with 7 being worn by the starting right flanker.) :*A converted try is worth 7 points. This number is also significant because the standard bonus points system used in most competitions awards 1 bonus point to a team that loses by 7 points or less. :* The IRB Sevens World Series, an annual competition for national teams in rugby union sevens (see below) :* The Rugby World Cup Sevens, the World Cup for the union version of Sevens ;Cross-code :* Rugby sevens, a variant of union and league that contains only seven players per side instead of the standard 15 (union) or 13 (league) Seven, the fourth prime number, is not only a Mersenne prime (since ) but also a double Mersenne prime since the exponent, 3, is itself a Mersenne prime. It is also a Newman–Shanks–Williams prime, a Woodall prime, a factorial prime, a lucky prime, a happy number (happy prime), a safe prime (the only Mersenne safe prime), and the fourth Heegner number. Seven is the lowest natural number that cannot be represented as the sum of the squares of three integers. (See Lagrange's four-square theorem#Historical development.) Seven is the aliquot sum of one number, the cubic number  and is the base of the 7-aliquot tree. n = 7 is the first natural number for which the next statement does not hold: "Two nilpotent endomorphisms from Cn with the same minimal polynomial and the same rank are similar." 7 is the only number D for which the equation  has more than two solutions for n and x natural. In particular, the equation  is known as the Ramanujan–Nagell equation. 7 is the only dimension, besides the familiar 3, in which a vector cross product can be defined. 7 is the lowest dimension of a known exotic sphere, although there may exist as yet unknown exotic smooth structures on the 4-dimensional sphere. 999,999 divided by 7 is exactly 142,857. Therefore, when a vulgar fraction with 7 in the denominator is converted to a decimal expansion, the result has the same six-digit repeating sequence after the decimal point, but the sequence can start with any of those six digits.Bryan Bunch, The Kingdom of Infinite Number. New York: W. H. Freeman & Company (2000): 82 For example, 1/7&nbsp;=&nbsp;0.142857&nbsp;142857... and 2/7&nbsp;=&nbsp;0.285714&nbsp;285714.... A seven-sided shape is a heptagon. The regular n-gons for n ≤ 6 can be constructed by compass and straightedge alone, but the regular heptagon cannot. Figurate numbers representing heptagons (including seven) are called heptagonal numbers. Seven is also a centered hexagonal number. Seven is the first integer reciprocal (multiplicative inverse) with infinitely repeating sexagesimal representation. There are seven frieze groups, the groups consisting of symmetries of the plane whose group of translations is isomorphic to the group of integers. There are seven fundamental types of catastrophes. When rolling two standard six-sided dice, seven has a 6 in  (or ) probability of being rolled (1–6, 6–1, 2–5, 5–2, 3–4, or 4–3), the greatest of any number. The Millennium Prize Problems are seven problems in mathematics that were stated by the Clay Mathematics Institute in 2000. Currently, six of the problems remain unsolved. 7 (New York City Subway service), a service of the New York City Subway BMW 7 Series, a flagship range of luxury vehicles from German automobile manufacturer, BMW. The Lotus Seven, a kit car produced by Lotus Each airplane in Boeing's line of passenger jets is named with a 3-digit number beginning and ending in 7. Seven deadly sins Seven Classical Planets ("7 Luminaires") Seven Heavens Seven days in the week Seven colors in the rainbow Seven Seas Seven Continents Seven against Thebes Seven Kings of Rome Seven Emperors (and period; Rome, history) Julius Caesar, Augustus, Galba, Hadrian, Nerva, Sallust, Vespasian Seven hills of Istanbul Seven hills of Rome Seven Liberal Arts Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove in China Seven Sages of Greece Saptarishi Seven Sages concept in Ancient India Seven Wise Masters, a cycle of medieval stories Seven Wonders of the ancient world 7 was considered a God number in ancient Egypt. The Pharaoh usually ordered things in groups of multiples of 7. For a time, 7 was not even used in writings for the people of Egypt. 7 pure notes in the diatonic scale 7-Eleven is the trading name of a chain of convenience stores based in the U.S. Seven Jeans, also known as Seven '7' for all Mankind, a brand of designer jeans. 7 Up is the name of a popular soft drink. Seven Arts Productions Seven Arts Pictures Se7en, also just called Seven is a 1995 movie about a serial killer basing his murders and victims on the seven deadly sins. James Bond's secret agent number is 007 Star Trek: Voyager features a character named Seven of Nine. The Star Trek: The Original Series episode "Assignment: Earth" features a character named Gary Seven. The 1925 film Seven Chances starring Buster Keaton In the Disney film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937) The 1940 film Seven Sinners directed by Tay Garnett, starring Marlene Dietrich The musical film Seven Brides for Seven Brothers (1954) The 1954 film Seven Samurai by Akira Kurosawa starring Toshiro Mifune The Marilyn Monroe film The Seven Year Itch (1955) which is famous for her white dress billowing up from a grate The Swedish film The Seventh Seal (1957) directed by Ingmar Bergman The 1960 American western film The Magnificent Seven starring Yul Brynner The 1964 film, "7 Faces of Dr. Lao" starring Tony Randall. The 1964 film, "Seven Days in May" starring Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas. The movie The Seventh Sign, directed in 1988 by Carl Schultz and starring Jürgen Prochnow and Demi Moore The movie Seven, directed in 1995 by David Fincher and starring Brad Pitt and Morgan Freeman The 1997 film Seven Years in Tibet directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud The 2008 film Seven Pounds starring Will Smith Lotto Super 7, a Canadian-lottery game that had its final drawing September 18, 2009. Sevens, a card game Seven is the sum of any two opposite sides on a standard six-sided dice. The 7th Guest, produced by Trilobyte and released by Virgin Games in 1993, is an FMV-based puzzle horror video game. "The 7" are a group of deadly mercenaries that kidnap the protagonist's family in the video game Kane & Lynch: Dead Men. In the Killer7 game, the number of individual personalities serving Harman Smith as part of the group of assassins called the Killer7 In 999: Nine Hours, Nine Persons, Nine Doors, one of the characters goes by the code name "Seven". As You Like It by William Shakespeare's contains Shakespeare's 7 Ages of Man theory. In Beloved (novel) by Toni Morrison the number seven seems to have recurring significance, Beloved has seven letters, 124 adds up to seven, each chapter begins on a number containing seven, and the second chapter contains seven parts. The original British version of Anthony Burgess' novel A Clockwork Orange is split into three sections of seven chapters. In the first of the three Deltora Quest series of books by Emily Rodda, the protagonist must collect the seven gems of the fabled Belt of Deltora: topaz, ruby, opal, lapis lazuli, emerald, amethyst, and diamond. Each of the seven gems are guarded by one of seven guardians located in one of the seven locations around Deltora: The Forests of Silence, Lake of Tears, City of the Rats, The Shifting Sands, Dread Mountain, Maze of the Beast, and Valley of the Lost. In the Dragon Ball series, there are 7 crystalline spheres known as the Dragon balls. Each Dragon ball has a certain number of stars on it displaying its respective number in the set. The manga Eureka Seven, based on the anime series In Fist of the North Star (Hokuto no Ken), the main character, Kenshiro, is also known as "the man with seven wounds" for the seven scars on his body in the shape of the Big Dipper. In the Fushigi Yuugi manga series, the four beast gods each have seven warriors, the Genbu Seven, the Byakko Seven, the Seiryuu Seven, and the Suzaku Seven. In the Harry Potter series of novels by J.K. Rowling, seven is said to be the most powerfully magical number. There are a number of references to seven in Harry Potter: there are a total of seven books in the series; Ginny Weasley is the seventh child and only daughter of the Weasley family; Harry Potter was born in July, the seventh month of the year; Wizarding students must complete seven years of school at Hogwarts; There are seven secret passages leading out of Hogwarts; Seven is also the number on the back of Harry Potter's Quidditch robes (Prisoner of Azkaban movie). Professor Moody was also hidden in a chest with an underground cubby, which was locked with seven locks Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. In Quidditch each team consists of seven players. Chapter four of Book 7 is titled "The Seven Potters". Lord Voldemort planned in making six Horcruxes (objects containing parts of his soul), so that his soul would exist in seven parts, although he made an extra one. In the InuYasha series, the Shichinintai are, as their name says, a band of seven mercenaries. The Seven Rings of the Vongola Family in Katekyo Hitman Reborn: Sky, Storm, Rain, Sun, Thunder, Mist, and Cloud. In The Lost Years of Merlin series, a book is titled "The Seven Songs of Merlin" The character 7 (Nana) and the organization Septimal Moon in Loveless (manga) In the "Nana manga series, there are many recurrent instances of the number seven ("nana" is Japanese for "seven"), including the name of both main characters. Team 7 consists of the main characters in Naruto: Naruto Uzumaki, Sasuke Uchiha, Kakashi Hatake, and Sakura Haruno. Later in the series, Sai joined team 7 after Sasuke left Konohagakure. In the One Piece series, the Shichibukai (literally, "Seven Military Seas", known in the English versions as the "Seven Warlords of the Sea") are seven powerful pirates who work for the government. The Saga of Seven Suns, a series of seven novels by Kevin J. Anderson. In Neil Gaiman's Sandman series, there are 7 Endless: Destiny, Death, Dream, Destruction, Despair, Desire and Delirium. The Secret Seven, name of a children's adventure book by Enid Blyton In the Septimus Heap series, Septimus Is the seventh son of a seventh son, 7 is believed to be the most magykal number. There will also be 7 books in the series, along with many other things relating to the number 7. Aleksis Kivi's "Seven Brothers", the most famous book of Finnish literature The Seven Dials Mystery by Agatha Christie The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, a book by Stephen Covey Seven Pillars of Wisdom, a book written by T.E. Lawrence The book Seven Years in Tibet The novel Seven Days in May, written by Fletcher Knebel In The Silmarillion, also a Tolkien work, there are seven Lords of the Valar, and seven Ladies of the Valar; Fëanor, a central character, has seven sons: Maedhros, Maglor, Celegorm, Curufin, Caranthir, Amrod, and Amras. In George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire, seven gods, the Mother, the Father, the Warrior, the Crone, the Smith, the Maiden, and the Stranger, are worshipped in the land of Westeros, which is made up of seven former kingdoms and often called the Seven Kingdoms. The Seven are the primary deities of Westeros. In W. E. B. Du Bois's book The Souls of Black Folk, he refers to "the Negro" as "the seventh son". In The Tales of Alvin Maker, an alternate history fantasy series by Orson Scott Card, seventh sons are imbued with special powers, referred to as "knacks", over the physical world. The powers of a seventh son of a seventh son, the birthright of the series' main character, Alvin Smith, are especially pronounced. Men who wield these powers to create are referred to as "Makers." In Toaru Majutsu no Index, there are a total of seven Level 5 espers: Accelerator, Kakine Teitoku, Misaka Mikoto, Mugino Shizuri, Shokuhou Misaki, an unknown esper and Sogiita Gunha. In The Two Towers, the second volume of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, the following poem appears: "Tall ships and tall kings/Three times three/What brought they from the foundered land/Over the flowing sea?/Seven stars and seven stones/And one white tree." The "foundered land" is Númenor, and the "Seven Stars" are unknown, but they may refer to a constellation, the Sickle of the Valar. The Seven Stones are the palantíri, the seeing-stones. The number seven was also significant to Dwarvish culture as portrayed by Tolkien: there were seven fathers of the Dwarves (as recounted in The Silmarillion) and the Dwarves were later given seven rings by Sauron (according to The Lord of the Rings). David Eastis authored two books about the popular number seven both with the title "7". Jackie Leo wrote "Seven". We are Seven by William Wordsworth in The Owl Keeper the owl keeper (by Christine Brodien-Jones) is said to be born on the 7th day of the 7th month at 7 past midnight. Marina or Number Seven is a character in the book series The Lorien Legacies. The Revenge of Seven by Pittacus Lore In Rick Riordan's series The Heroes of Olympus there are seven heroes of the Great Prophecy: Percy Jackson, Annabeth Chase, Jason Grace, Piper McLean, Leo Valdez, Hazel Levesque, and Frank Zhang. The number of notes in the traditional Western diatonic scale (major or minor) In music, the Roman numeral vii is the leading tone (vii) or subtonic (VII) scale degree, chord (leading-tone seventh chord or secondary leading-tone chord), or diatonic function, when distinguished V = major and v = minor. The original diameter in inches of the 45rpm format gramophone record. There are seven musicians in a septet or a septuor. There are seven basic swaras [saptaswaras] in Indian Carnatic music "7" is a song by Prince and The New Power Generation, from the 1992 Love Symbol Album. 7 is a 2003 Enrique Iglesias album. 7 (Mick Thompson) is one of the guitarists for popular metal band Slipknot. Sweet 7 is an album by Sugababes The number of dastgahs in Persian traditional music 'Seventh son of a Seventh son' is the 7th album of the English heavy metal band Iron Maiden, brought out in 1988 Sevens is the 7th album by Country singer Garth Brooks, released in 1997, consisting of 14 songs(2 sets of 7). "Seven" is a song by Megadeth on their 1999 album Risk UK-based alt-rock band, Take The Seven (TTVII). "The Munificent Seven" is the appended parenthetical title for the song "Love Is Stronger Than Justice" on Sting's 1993 album Ten Summoner's Tales Seven is a song on David Bogie's album 'Hours...' In the NHL, MLB, and NBA, the maximum number of games played in a playoff series. The jersey number 7 has been retired by several North American sports teams in honor of past playing greats or other key figures: Major League Baseball The Houston Astros, for Hall of Famer Craig Biggio. The New York Yankees, for Hall of Famer Mickey Mantle. National Football League: The Chicago Bears, for Hall of Fame player, coach, and owner George Halas. The Denver Broncos, for Hall of Famer John Elway. The Detroit Lions, for Hall of Famer Dutch Clark. The Los Angeles Rams, for Hall of Famer Bob Waterfield. The New York Giants, for Hall of Famer Mel Hein. National Basketball Association The Cleveland Cavaliers, for Bingo Smith. The New Orleans Hornets, for Hall of Famer Pete Maravich. He died in January 1988, before the franchise began as the Charlotte Hornets, but his number was retired based on his years in the city with the New Orleans Jazz. The Phoenix Suns, for Kevin Johnson. The Utah Jazz, also for Maravich. He briefly played with the team while it was in Utah, and played five seasons with the team in its previous location of New Orleans. National Hockey League The Boston Bruins, for Hall of Famer Phil Esposito. The Buffalo Sabres, for Rick Martin. The Dallas Stars, for Neal Broten. The Detroit Red Wings, for Hall of Famer Ted Lindsay. The Edmonton Oilers, for Hall of Famer Paul Coffey. The Montreal Canadiens, for Hall of Famer Howie Morenz. The New York Rangers, for Hall of Famer Rod Gilbert. The Philadelphia Flyers, for Hall of Famer Bill Barber. The Washington Capitals, for Yvon Labre. The Toronto Maple Leafs have a policy of not retiring numbers unless the player honoured either died or suffered a career-ending incident while a member of the team. Other players whose numbers would otherwise be retired instead have their numbers enshrined by the team as "Honoured Numbers", which remain in circulation for future players. The number 7 is currently honoured for Hall of Famers King Clancy and Tim Horton. In high school baseball, a regulation game lasts seven innings. In baseball, the 7th Inning stretch attributed to the 27th U.S. President, William Howard Taft. In scoring baseball, seven represents the left fielder's position. In association football, the right winger traditionally wears the number 7 In American and Canadian football, a team scores 7 points by scoring a touchdown and kicking the extra point. In American and Canadian football, the minimum number of players who, by rule, must be lined up at the line of scrimmage on offense (otherwise the team commits the foul of illegal formation) In Ultimate Frisbee, the number of players on the field for each team In team handball, the number of players on each team including the goalkeeper In Formula 1 the #7 is owned by 2007 World Champion Kimi Räikkönen In motorcycling, the racing number for British World Champion Barry Sheene In NASCAR: In the Sprint Cup Series, the #7 car is currently owned by Robby Gordon Motorsports. Team owner Robby Gordon, plus other team drivers, race a part-time schedule in this car. In the Nationwide Series, the #7 car is currently owned by JR Motorsports. Danica Patrick, who began racing in that car late in the 2011 season, took over the full-time ride in the 2012 season. In the IndyCar Series, the #7 car is currently owned by Andretti Autosport. Patirck drove full-time in this car through the 2011 season before moving to NASCAR. A regulation game in softball consists of seven innings. In cross country running, a team traditionally consists of seven athletes A heptathlon is a combined event of seven running, jumping and throwing disciplines for both men's and women's athletics. Each team is allowed to have a maximum of seven players, one of them a goalkeeper, in the playing area of the pool at any given time. The circle 7 logo used by numerous ABC network O&O stations in the U.S. (In the late 1940s, ABC arranged for its five original, founding O&O TV stations to broadcast on channel 7.) Maximum number of VHF broadcast channels available in any TV market in the United States of America; they are channels 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13 in the Greater New York City and Los Angeles-Long Beach SMSAs. ProSieben (sieben being German for seven), a television network in Germany Seven Network, a television network in Australia. Trans7 (formerly TV7 before taken over by Trans Corporation), a television network in Indonesia. 7 Days, a comedy gameshow based on news stories from New Zealand. The name of a television show 7th Heaven. The name of a The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3 cartoon episode, "7 Continents for 7 Koopas". Blake's 7 was a BBC science fiction series that ran from 1978 to 1981 Eureka Seven, a science fiction and romance anime. In Red Dwarf II episode "Parallel Universe", Holly forgets the number 7 in a countdown for the Holly Hop Drive. After Rimmer reminds him, he admits he has "a blind spot for sevens". Seven, an episodic character from the sitcom Married... with Children. In the Seinfeld episode "The Seven", Seven is the name George Costanza desires to give his first-born, having allegedly promised this to the widow of baseball great Mickey Mantle (whose uniform number was 7). George is enraged, however, when his fiance's cousin and spouse copy the idea and give the name to their child. Seven Days, a science fiction show about the NSA using time travel. The name of one of the monsters in the cartoon television show Seven Little Monsters. In Star Trek: Voyager, Seven of Nine (also called Seven for short) is one of the crewmembers The Ultra Series has two heroes with "Seven" in their name: Ultra Seven and Ultra Seven-21. Ultra Seven, a television series aired in 1967, and the superhero of the same name. He is the honorary seventh member of the Ultra Garrison In House of Anubis (on Nickelodeon), the "chosen one" has to be born on 7/7 (July 7) at 7:00am. George Carlin in what is perhaps his best-known routine, "Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television". The last episode of American Horror Story: Coven is named The Seven Wonders, after the seven great powers a witch should perform to become the leader or "Supreme" of the generation: Telekinesis, Concilium, Descensum, Divination, Transmutation, Vitalum Vitalis and Pyrokinesis. The traditional count of Basque provinces as expressed in the slogan Zazpiak Bat, translates as "the seven [are] one" and refers to the seven Basque traditional provinces.. The figurative number of seas The Seven Virgins mountain range in Sri Lanka, which was the scene of an air disaster on December 4, 1974, involving a DC-8 Series 55F passenger jetliner operated by the charter company Martinair, which left 191 dead. The Sevens (sometimes typeset as "7he Sevens"), a rugby union stadium in Dubai, UAE and home to the Dubai Sevens tournament Seven Hebrew words of Bereishit 1:1 / Genesis 1:1 (28 letters). Seven days of Creation (Genesis 1) e.g., God rested on and sanctified the seventh day (Sabbath) Anyone who dares to kill Cain 'will suffer vengeance seven times over' (Genesis 4:15) Lamech in his "Song of the Sword" claims that 'if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold', he himself shall be 'seventy-sevenfold' (Genesis 4:24) Noah is commanded to bring seven pairs of every clean animal onto the ark (Genesis 7:2) Seven years of plenty and seven years of famine in Pharaoh's dream (Genesis 41) In regards to the sin sacrifice, the anointed priest was to sprinkle the bullock's blood seven times before the lord (Leviticus 4:6) Seven days of the feast of Passover (Exodus 13:3–10) Seven day week and the pattern concerning distribution and use of manna (Exodus 16) The Menorah (), is a seven-branched candelabrum lit by olive oil in the Tabernacle and the Temple in Jerusalem (Exodus 25) Seven year cycle around the years of Jubilee (Leviticus 25) Jericho's walls fall on the seventh day after seven priests with seven trumpets march around the city seven times (Joshua 6:8) King David had seven older brothers (1 Samuel 16) The child sneezed seven times after Elisha raised him from the dead (2 Kings 4:35) Seven things that are detestable to the LORD (Proverbs 6:16–19) Seven Pillars of the House of Wisdom (Proverbs 9:1) The woman with seven sons in 2 Maccabees. Seven loaves multiplied into seven basketfuls of surplus (Matthew 15:32–37) Peter asked Jesus if he should forgive those who sinned against him up to 7 times; Jesus responded by saying to forgive them 'seventy times seven times', remembering so the curse of Cain and the song of Lamech in Genesis 4.21Then Peter came to Jesus and asked, 'Lord, how many times shall I forgive my brother when he sins against me? Up to seven times?' 22Jesus answered, 'I tell you, not seven times, but seventy times seven.' Seven demons were driven out of Mary Magdelene. (Luke 8:2). The seven last sayings of Jesus on the cross. Seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom (Acts 6:3) In the Book of Revelation, seven is a central figure of quantities: Seven Spirits of God, Seven Churches (to which the book is addressed); Seven of the following appear in Revelation: golden lampstands(1:12), stars(1:16), torches of fire(4:5) Seven Seals(5:1), angels and their trumpets(8:2), last plagues(15:1), golden bowls(15:7), thunders(10:3), horns and eyes(5:6), diadems(12:3) and kings(17:10). See . The Seven Corporal Acts of Mercy and Seven Spiritual Acts of Mercy of Roman Catholic, Anglican, and other traditions The Seven deadly sins: lust, gluttony, greed, sloth, wrath, envy, and pride Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit The Seven Joys of the Virgin Mary, of Roman Catholic, Anglican, and other traditions The Seven Sacraments in the Catholic faith (though some traditions assign a different number) The Seven Sorrows of the Virgin Mary, of Roman Catholic, Anglican, and other traditions There are seven suicides mentioned in the Bible (OT and NT). The seven terraces of Mount Purgatory (one per deadly sin) The Seven Virtues: chastity, temperance, charity, diligence, kindness, patience, and humility In the genealogy in the Gospel of Luke, Jesus is 77th in a direct line The number of heads of the three beasts (7 × 10 × 7 + 7 × 10 × 10 + 7 × 10 = 1260) of the Book of Revelation, and the seven seals The Sanskrit word sapta refers to number seven. Indian Music has "Saptak Swaras," seven octats (sa re ga ma pa dha ni) which are basics of music, using which hundreds of Ragas are composed. Celestial group of seven stars (7 Classical Planets) are named as "Sapta Rishi" based on the seven great saints. Seven Promises [Saptapadi], Seven Rounds in Hindu Wedding and Seven Reincarnation According to Hinduism, there are seven worlds in the universe, seven seas in the world and seven Rishies (seven gurus) called sapta rishis. Seven hills at tirumala also known as Yedu Kondalavadu [in Telugu], ezhu malaiyan [in Tamil] means Sevenhills God There are 7 Chakras in the basic model used in various eastern traditions and philosophies. The number of ayat in surat al-Fatiha The number of layers of the Earth in Islamic religion is seven The number of skies in Islamic religion is seven The number of circumambulations (Tawaf) that are made around the Kaaba The number of walks between Al-Safa and Al-Marwah mountains—that is travelling back and forth—seven times during the ritual pilgrimages of Hajj and Umrah The number of heavens in Islamic religion, i.e. levels in heaven. The number of hells in hell is also seven i.e. levels in hell. The number of doors to hell is seven (for heaven the number of doors is eight). In Verse 12:46 (see Islamic view of Joseph) of the Quran, Joseph (Yusef) is asked to interpret the King's dream where seven fat cows were dreamt to have been devoured by seven skinny cows and seven green spikes, and others shrivelled. The number of the big sins or vices is seven which are from a Hadith of the prophet Mohamed : "Avoid the seven sins polytheism, witchcraft, the killing of the soul which Allah has forbidden except by right, consuming riba, consuming the wealth of the orphan, to escape from the battles and slandering chaste women" A naming ceremony is held for babies on their seventh day of life Shiv`a (another pronunciation of the Hebrew word for 7—()), is the number of days of mourning. Hence, one sits Shiva. As in Shiva (Judaism) The weekly Torah portion is divided into seven aliyahs, and seven Jewish men (or boys over the age of 13 who are considered men; Bar Mitzvah) are called up for the reading of these aliyahs during Shabbat morning services. Seven blessings are recited under the chuppah during a Jewish wedding ceremony. A Jewish bride and groom are feted with seven days of festive meals after their wedding, known as Sheva Berachot ("Seven Blessings"). The number of Ushpizzin (also known as the "Seven Shepherds") who visit the sukkah during the holiday of Sukkot: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, and David. The number of nations God told the Israelites they would displace when they entered the land of Israel (Deut. 7:1): the Hittite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. In Breslov tradition, the seven orifices of the face (2 eyes, 2 nostrils, 2 ears, and the mouth) are called "The Seven Candles." The 7 Sephirot of primary conscious emotion that are attributes of the creator. The number of daughters of Atlas in the Pleiades (also called the "Seven Sisters") The number of saints appearing in a constellation called "Saptharishi Mandalam" in Indian astronomy. The Seven Lucky Gods refer to the seven gods of good fortune in Japanese mythology. The number of archangels according to some systems. In Buddhism, Buddha walked 7 steps at his birth. In Khasi mythology, the seven divine women who were left behind on earth and became the ancestresses of all humankind. The number of sleeping men in the Christian myth of the "Seven Sleepers." The number of sages in Hindu mythology; their wives are the deities referred to as the "Seven Mothers." In Iran, German, Spanish, and other cultures that speak Romance Languages, cats are said to have 7 lives as opposed to English, where cats are said to have 9 lives. In Irish mythology, the epic hero Cúchulainn is associated with the number 7. He has 7 fingers on each hand, 7 toes on each foot, and 7 pupils in each eye. In the Irish epic Táin Bó Cúailnge, Cúchulainn is 7 years old when he receives his first weapons and defeats the armies of the Ulaidh and his son Connla is 7 years old when he is slain by Cúchulainn in "The Death of Aife's Only Son." In Galician folklore, a seventh son will be a werewolf. In other folklores, after six daughters, the seventh child is to be a son and a werewolf. In other European folklores, the seventh son of a seventh son will be a child with special powers of healing and clairvoyant seeing, and in other cultures that seventh son of a seventh son would be a vampire. In Guaraní mythology, the number of prominent legendary monsters. In the eponymous British folk tale, Thomas the Rhymer went to live in the faerie kingdom for 7 years. Mahatma Gandhi's list of the destructive Seven Blunders of the World that cause violence: Wealth without work, pleasure without conscience, knowledge without character, commerce without morality, science without humanity, religion without sacrifice and politics without principle. The cosmogony of Urantia Urantia Fondation website gives an explanation to the sacredness of the number 7 in some religions, including those based on a triple deity: 7 indeed is the number of all the possible combinations of three elements taken one by one, two by two, or by three. It therefore expresses all the associative possibilities of the three fundamental aspects of the absolute (Christian Trinity, for example, or Trimurti in Hinduism) which organizes the Creation. The seventh of these combinations being the one that combines the three aspects, 7 therefore also expresses spiritual achievement. The number of main islands of mythological Atlantis. The number of gateways traversed by Inanna during her descent into the underworld. Cibola was one of the legendary Seven Cities of Gold the Spanish thought existed. In the Bahá'í faith, the text The Seven Valleys, by the Prophet-Founder Bahá'u'lláh, relates the journey of the soul through the seven "valleys" of Search, Love, Knowledge, Unity, Contentment, Wonderment, and finally True Poverty and Absolute Nothingness. Circle Seven Koran, the holy scripture of the Moorish Science Temple of America The Seven-Branched Sword in Japanese mythology. The Theosophical teachings of Alice A. Bailey divide the human race into seven psychological types called the Seven Rays, which she calls "the basis of New Age psychology". The minor symbol number of yang from the Taoist yin-yang. The number of palms in an Egyptian Sacred Cubit. The number of ranks in Mithraism. The number seven is of particular significance within Cherokee cosmology. In British folklore, every 7 years the Queen of the Fairies pays a tithe to Hell (or possibly Hel) in the tale of Tam Lin. The number of celestial objects in the solar system visible to the naked eye from Earth – the Sun, the Moon and the five classical naked eye planets: Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn. Messier object M7, a magnitude 3.5 open cluster in the constellation Scorpius. The New General Catalogue object NGC 7, a 14th magnitude spiral galaxy in the constellation Sculptor. The number of main stars in the constellations of the Big Dipper and Orion. The Saros number of the solar eclipse series which began on April 8, 2590 BC and ended on May 16, 1310 BC. The duration of Saros series 2 was 1280.14 years, and it contained 72 solar eclipses. The Saros number of the lunar eclipse series which began on July 15, 2595 BC and ended on February 22, 1008 BC. The duration of Saros series 7 was 1586.6 years, and it contained 89 lunar eclipses. The Roman numeral VII stands for white dwarfs in the Yerkes spectral classification scheme. The Roman numeral VII (usually) stands for the seventh-discovered satellite of a planet or minor planet (e.g., Jupiter VII). Almost all mammals have 7 cervical vertebrae The number of spots on a seven-spot ladybird There are 7 types of virus according to the Baltimore classification A neutral pH value between acidity and alkalinity The atomic number of nitrogen Heptane is an alkane with 7 carbon atoms in each molecule The number of periods, or horizontal rows of elements, in the periodic table The number of principal energy levels for electrons around the nucleus The number of crystal systems: triclinic, monoclinic, orthorhombic, tetragonal, trigonal, hexagonal, and cubic. The number of crystal lattice systems: cubic (or isometric), hexagonal, tetragonal, rhombohedral, orthorhombic, monoclinic and triclinic. There are 7 SI base units. These are a coherent set of units defined to measure 7 basic physical properties: metre, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin, mole, candela. The 7 SI base units are used to define all other SI units, which are known as SI derived units. Isaac Newton identified 7 colors of the rainbow – red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two 7 is the calling code of Russia. Only the North American Numbering Plan (+1) and Russia (+7) have a single-digit code. There are seven layers in the OSI model. Windows 7, one of the previous releases of Windows series of operating systems from Microsoft. Video game developer Bungie, famed for the Halo series of games, often references the number seven in their products. The seven days of the week The Kulin people of Australia living near the Dandenong Ranges traditionally have seven seasons. Some of the Native Americans of Montana also have seven seasons: chinook season, muddy spring, green summer, gold summer (or dry summer), "Indian" Summer, late fall, and cold winter. The Heptarchy, from the (Greek for seven realm), is the name applied by historians to the period (500–850 CE) in English history after the Anglo-Saxon conquest of England, derived from the seven kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia, East Anglia, Essex, Kent, Sussex, and Wessex, which eventually merged to become the Kingdom of England during the early 10th century. September was the seventh month in the ancient Roman calendar, as its name indicates. After the reform that led to the current order, the seventh month is July. Septidi was the seventh day of the decade in the French Revolutionary Calendar. The 7th glyph of the Maya Calendar is Blue Hand, it represents the days in creation and is associated with creative perfection. This is the glyph of the last day of their calendar that ends on December 21, 2012. Septenary (numeral system) Septenary (Theosophy) Seven climes Year Seven (School) Se7en (disambiguation) Luck One-seventh area triangle Wells, D. The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Numbers London: Penguin Group (1987): 70–71 The Significance of The Number Seven by Hillel ben David (Greg Killian) The Number Seven in the Holy Bible by Ed F. Vallowe The Bible Wheel: The Number Seven and Scripture The Number 7 The Positive Integer 7 Prime curiosities: 7
