   The Academy Award for Best Picture is one of the Academy Awards of Merit presented annually since the awards debuted in 1929, by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to producers working in the film industry and is the only category in which every member is eligible to submit a nomination. The actors or actresses in the film will not accept this award unless he or she produced the film. Best Picture is considered the most important of the Academy Awards, as it represents all the directing, acting, music composing, writing, editing and other efforts put forth into a film . Best Picture is the final award at every Academy Awards ceremony. The Grand Staircase columns at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles, where the Academy Awards ceremonies have been held since 2002, showcase every film that has won the Best Picture title since the award's inception. As of the 88th Academy Awards nominations, there have been 528 films nominated for the Best Picture award. At the 1st Academy Awards ceremony (for 1927 and 1928), there were two categories that were seen as equally the top award of the night: Outstanding Picture and Unique and Artistic Production, the previous being won by the war epic Wings, and the latter by the art film Sunrise, both the awards were intended to honor different and equally important aspects of superior filmmaking. The following year, the Academy dropped the Unique and Artistic Production award, and decided retroactively that the award won by Wings was the highest honor that could be awarded. Though the award kept the title Outstanding Picture for the next ceremony, the name underwent several changes over the years as seen below, the last being in 1962 when it became Best Picture. Originally the production company was presented the award until 1950 whereupon all credited producers were able to receive the award. This rule was modified in 1998, when a three-producer limit was applied due to all five producers of Shakespeare in Love receiving the award. , the "Special Rules for the Best Picture of the Year Award" limit recipients to those who meet two main requirements: The rules permit "bona fide team[s] of not more than two people to be considered to be a single 'producer' if the two individuals have had an established producing partnership for at least the previous five years and as a producing team have produced a minimum of five theatrically-released feature motion pictures during that time. The Academy can make exceptions to the limit, as when Anthony Minghella and Sydney Pollack were posthumously among the four producers nominated for The Reader. As of 2014 it is the Producers Branch Executive Committee that makes such exceptions, only in "rare and extraordinary circumstance[s]." The Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Director have been very closely linked throughout their history. Of the 87 films that have been awarded Best Picture, 62 have also been awarded Best Director. Only four films have won Best Picture without their directors being nominated: Wings (1927/28), Grand Hotel (1931/32), Driving Miss Daisy (1989), and Argo (2012). The only two Best Director winners to win for films which did not receive a Best Picture nomination are distinctly during the early years: Lewis Milestone for Two Arabian Knights (1927/28), and Frank Lloyd for The Divine Lady (1928/29). On June 24, 2009, AMPAS announced that the number of films nominated in the Best Picture award category would increase from five to ten, starting with the 82nd Academy Awards (2009). The expansion was a throwback to the Academy's early years in the 1930s and 1940s, when eight to twelve films were nominated. "Having 10 Best Picture nominees is going to allow Academy voters to recognize and include some of the fantastic movies that often show up in the other Oscar categories but have been squeezed out of the race for the top prize," AMPAS President Sid Ganis said in a press conference. "I can't wait to see what that list of 10 looks like when the nominees are announced in February." At the same time, the voting system was switched from first-past-the-post to instant runoff voting (also known as preferential voting).Poll: Vote on the Oscars Like an Academy Member, Rob Richie, Huffington Post, 16 February 2011 Two years after this change, the Academy revised the rule again so that the number of films nominated was between 5 and 10; nominated films must earn either 5% of first-place rankings or 5% after an abbreviated variation of the single transferable vote nominating process used for nominations in other major categories. Bruce Davis, the Academy executive director at the time, stated, "A Best Picture nomination should be an indication of extraordinary merit. If there are only eight pictures that truly earn that honor in a given year, we shouldn't feel an obligation to round out the number." The Award is not without controversy. One point of contention is the lack of consideration of non-English language films for Best Picture. To date, only nine foreign language films have been nominated in the category: Grand Illusion (French, 1938); Z (French, 1969); The Emigrants (Swedish, 1972); Cries and Whispers (Swedish, 1973); Il Postino: The Postman (Italian/Spanish, 1995); Life Is Beautiful (Italian, 1998); Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Mandarin Chinese, 2000); Letters from Iwo Jima (Japanese, 2006, but ineligible for Best Foreign Language Film, as it was an American production); and Amour (French, 2012). Similarly, the award rarely goes to films produced by non-U.S. studios; only 12 films exclusively financed outside the United States have won Best Picture, 11 of which were financed, in part or in whole, by the United Kingdom. Those films were, in chronological order: Hamlet, The Bridge on the River Kwai, Lawrence of Arabia, Tom Jones, A Man for All Seasons, Oliver!, Chariots of Fire, Gandhi, The Last Emperor, Slumdog Millionaire, and The King's Speech. The twelfth film, The Artist, was financed in France. Other points of contention include categories of film with few or no nominations or awards. Only three animated films have been nominated (Disney's Beauty and the Beast was the first, and Disney-Pixar's Up and Toy Story 3 were nominated after the Academy expanded the number of nominees) and none have won; no science fiction film or superhero film has won (the latter hasn't even received a nomination); only one fantasy film has won (The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, 2003); and no light comedies have won since the 1970s. Also no documentary (eligible in a separate category) has been nominated for Best Picture. This category, like the Academy Awards in general, has also received criticism for disproportionately recognizing stories about white men over those of women and/or people of color. Of the films that have won Best Picture, few (All About Eve, 1950; Terms of Endearment, 1983; Chicago, 2002; Million Dollar Baby, 2004) have featured women exclusively in leading roles, and only five (In the Heat of the Night, 1967; Gandhi, 1982; The Last Emperor, 1987; Slumdog Millionaire, 2008; and 12 Years a Slave, 2013) have featured people of color exclusively in leading roles. No film featuring women of color exclusively in leading roles has won, and only three (The Color Purple, 1985; Precious, 2009; and Beasts of the Southern Wild, 2012) have been nominated. Only a small number of sequels have been nominated for Best Picture of which two have won: The Godfather Part II and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. Other nominees include The Bells of St. Mary's, The Godfather Part III, The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, Toy Story 3 and Mad Max: Fury Road. Another nominee, Broadway Melody of 1936, was a follow-up of sorts to previous winner The Broadway Melody, although, beyond the title and some music, there is no story connection with the earlier film. In addition, The Silence of the Lambs was adapted from the sequel novel to Red Dragon, which had previously been adapted for the screen as Manhunter by a different studio. Furthermore, another Best Picture nominee, The Lion in Winter, features Peter O'Toole as King Henry II, a role he had played previously in the film Becket. Clint Eastwood's Letters from Iwo Jima was a companion piece to his film Flags of Our Fathers, released earlier the same year, which depicts the same battle from different viewpoints; the two films were shot back-to-back. Notably, the only remake to win is The Departed, though a few other winners, such as Mutiny on the Bounty and Ben-Hur, were heavily inspired and influenced by previous films of the same name, they were nevertheless primarily considered different adaptations of the same novel. Best Picture winner My Fair Lady was a musical version of George Bernard Shaw's play Pygmalion, a version of which was nominated for Best Picture in 1938.  The Artist (with the exception of a single scene of dialogue, and dream sequence with sound effects) was the first silent film since Wings to win Best Picture. The film was also the first silent nominee since The Patriot, as well as the first Best Picture winner shot entirely in black-and-white since 1960's The Apartment (Schindler's List, the 1993 winner, was predominantly black-and-white but contained some color sequences). No Best Picture winner has been lost, though a few such as All Quiet on the Western Front and Lawrence of Arabia exist only in a form altered from their original, award-winning release form, usually due to editing for reissue (and subsequently partly restored by archivists) while other winners and nominees such as Tom Jones and Star Wars are widely available only in subsequently altered versions. The Broadway Melody originally had some sequences photographed in two-color Technicolor. This footage survives only in black and white. The 1928 film The Patriot is the only Best Picture nominee that is lost. The Racket, also from 1928, was believed lost for many years until a print was found in Howard Hughes' archives. It has since been restored and shown on Turner Classic Movies. Also, the only surviving complete prints of 1931's East Lynne and 1934's The White Parade exist within the UCLA film archive. In the list below, winners are listed first in the colored row, followed by the other nominees. Except for the early years (when the Academy used a non-calendar year), the year shown is the one in which the film first premiered in Los Angeles County, California; normally this is also the year of first release, but it may be the year after first release (as with Casablanca and, if the film-festival premiere is considered, Crash). This is also the year before the ceremony at which the award is given; for example, a film exhibited theatrically during 2005 was eligible for consideration for the 2005 Best Picture Oscar, awarded in 2006. The number of the ceremony (1st, 2nd, etc.) appears in parentheses after the awards year, linked to the article on that ceremony. Each individual entry shows the title followed by the production company, and the producer. Until 1950, the Best Picture award was given to the production company; from 1951 on, it has gone to the producer or producers. The Academy used the producer credits of the Producers Guild of America (PGA) until 1998, when all five producers of Shakespeare in Love made speeches after its win. A three-producer limit has applied since. There was controversy over the exclusion of some PGA-credited producers of Crash and Little Miss Sunshine. The Academy can make exceptions to the limit, as when Anthony Minghella and Sydney Pollack were posthumously among the four nominated for The Reader. For the first ceremony, three films were nominated for the award. For the following three years, five films were nominated for the award. This was expanded to eight in 1933, to ten in 1934, and to twelve in 1935, before being dropped back to ten in 1937. In 1945 it was further reduced to five. This number remained until 2009, when the limit was raised to ten and later adjusted in 2011, to vary between five and ten. For the first six ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned two calendar years. For example, the 2nd Academy Awards presented on April 3, 1930, recognized films that were released between August 1, 1928, and July 31, 1929. Starting with the 7th Academy Awards, held in 1935, the period of eligibility became the full previous calendar year from January 1 to December 31.  Notes A: The official name of the award from 1927/28 to 1928/29 was Outstanding Picture. B: The official name of the award from 1929/30 to 1940 was Outstanding Production. C: The official name of the award from 1941 to 1943 was Outstanding Motion Picture. D: The official name of the award from 1944 to 1961 was Best Motion Picture. E: The official name of the award since 1962 has been Best Picture. F: There were two categories that were seen as equally the top award at the time: "Outstanding Picture" and Unique and Artistic Production where the winner for the latter was Sunrise (production company: Fox; producer: William Fox). This category was dropped immediately after the first year of the Academy Award and the former category was retroactively seen as the top award. G: Head of studio H: The Academy also announced that A Farewell to Arms came in second, and Little Women third. I: The Academy also announced that The Barretts of Wimpole Street came in second, and The House of Rothschild third. J: The Academy also announced that The Informer came in second, and Captain Blood third. K: Nominated motion picture with non-English dialogue track (AMPAS: foreign language film). Four of which – Z; Life is Beautiful; Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon; and Amour – won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. L: Production company with the most nominations (38) and the most awards (5). Applying only from 1927/1928 to 1950. M: Person with the most nominations (8 nominations, 0 awards). Applying only from 1951 to 2012. N: Person with the most awards (3 awards, Spiegel 4 nominations, Zaentz 3 nominations). Applying only from 1951 to 2008. O: Winner with partly non-English dialogue track (AMPAS: foreign language).      Film Production Company(s) Producer(s) Wings Paramount, Famous Players-Lasky Lucien Hubbard The Racket Paramount, Caddo Howard Hughes Seventh Heaven Fox William Fox Film Production Company(s) Producer(s) The Broadway Melody Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer  Irving Thalberg, Lawrence Weingarten Alibi United Artists, Feature Productions Roland West Hollywood Revue Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Harry Rapf In Old Arizona Fox Winfield Sheehan  The Patriot Paramount Ernst Lubitsch Film Production company(s) Producer(s) All Quiet on the Western Front Universal Carl Laemmle, Jr. The Big House Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg Disraeli Warner Bros. Jack L. Warner, Darryl F. Zanuck The Divorcee Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Robert Z. Leonard The Love Parade Paramount Ernst Lubitsch Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Cimarron RKO Radio William LeBaron East Lynne Fox Winfield Sheehan  The Front Page United Artists, Caddo Howard Hughes Skippy Paramount Adolph Zukor Trader Horn Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Grand Hotel Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg Arrowsmith Goldwyn, United Artists Samuel Goldwyn Bad Girl Fox Winfield Sheehan  The Champ Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer King Vidor Five Star Final Warner Bros., First National Hal B. Wallis One Hour with You Paramount Ernst Lubitsch Shanghai Express Paramount Adolph Zukor The Smiling Lieutenant Paramount Ernst Lubitsch Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Cavalcade  Fox Winfield Sheehan  42nd Street Warner Bros. Darryl F. Zanuck A Farewell to Arms  Paramount Adolph Zukor I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis Lady for a Day Columbia Frank Capra Little Women  RKO Radio Merian C. Cooper, Kenneth MacGowan The Private Life of Henry VIII London Films Alexander Korda She Done Him Wrong Paramount William LeBaron Smilin' Through Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg State Fair Fox Winfield Sheehan  Film Production company(s) Producer(s) It Happened One Night  Columbia Harry Cohn, Frank Capra The Barretts of Wimpole Street  Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg Cleopatra Paramount Cecil B. DeMille Flirtation Walk First National Jack L. Warner, Hal B. Wallis, Robert Lord The Gay Divorcee RKO Radio Pandro S. Berman Here Comes the Navy Warner Bros. Lou Edelman The House of Rothschild  20th Century, United Artists Darryl F. Zanuck, William Goetz, Raymond Griffith Imitation of Life Universal John M. Stahl One Night of Love Columbia Harry Cohn, Everett Riskin The Thin Man Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Hunt Stromberg Viva Villa! Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer David O. Selznick The White Parade Fox Jesse L. Lasky Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Mutiny on the Bounty  Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg, Albert Lewin Alice Adams RKO Radio Pandro S. Berman Broadway Melody of 1936 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer John W. Considine, Jr. Captain Blood  Warner Bros., Cosmopolitan Hal B. Wallis, Harry Joe Brown, Gordon Hollingshead David Copperfield Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer David O. Selznick The Informer  RKO Radio Cliff Reid The Lives of a Bengal Lancer Paramount Louis D. Lighton A Midsummer Night's Dream Warner Bros. Henry Blanke Les Misérables 20th Century, United Artists Darryl F. Zanuck Naughty Marietta Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Hunt Stromberg Ruggles of Red Gap Paramount Arthur Hornblow, Jr. Top Hat RKO Radio Pandro S. Berman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Great Ziegfeld Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Hunt Stromberg Anthony Adverse Warner Bros. Henry Blanke Dodsworth Goldwyn, United Artists Samuel Goldwyn, Merritt Hulbert Libeled Lady Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Lawrence Weingarten Mr. Deeds Goes to Town Columbia Frank Capra Romeo and Juliet Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg San Francisco Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer John Emerson, Bernard H. Hyman The Story of Louis Pasteur Warner Bros. Henry Blanke A Tale of Two Cities Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer David O. Selznick Three Smart Girls Universal Joe Pasternak, Charles R. Rogers Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Life of Emile Zola Warner Bros. Henry Blanke The Awful Truth Columbia Leo McCarey, Everett Riskin Captains Courageous Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Louis Lighton Dead End Goldwyn, United Artists Samuel Goldwyn, Merritt Hulbert The Good Earth Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Thalberg, Albert Lewin In Old Chicago 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck, Kenneth MacGowan Lost Horizon Columbia Frank Capra One Hundred Men and a Girl Universal Charles R. Rogers, Joe Pasternak Stage Door RKO Radio Pandro S. Berman A Star Is Born Selznick International, United Artists David O. Selznick Film Production company(s) Producer(s) You Can't Take It With You Columbia Frank Capra The Adventures of Robin Hood Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis, Henry Blanke Alexander's Ragtime Band 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck, Harry Joe Brown Boys Town Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer John W. Considine, Jr. The Citadel Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Victor Saville Four Daughters Warner Bros., First National Hal B. Wallis, Henry Blanke Grand Illusion  R. A. O., World Pictures Frank Rollmer, Albert Pinkovitch Jezebel Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis, Henry Blanke Pygmalion Pascal Film Productions Gabriel Pascal Test Pilot Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Louis Lighton Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Gone with the Wind Selznick International, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer David O. Selznick Dark Victory Warner Bros. David Lewis Goodbye, Mr. Chips Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Victor Saville Love Affair RKO Radio Leo McCarey Mr. Smith Goes to Washington Columbia Frank Capra Ninotchka Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sidney Franklin Of Mice and Men Roach, United Artists Lewis Milestone Stagecoach United Artists Walter Wanger The Wizard of Oz Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Mervyn LeRoy Wuthering Heights Goldwyn, United Artists Samuel Goldwyn Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Rebecca Selznick International, United Artists David O. Selznick All This, and Heaven Too Warner Bros. Jack L. Warner, Hal B. Wallis, David Lewis Foreign Correspondent Wanger, United Artists Walter Wanger The Grapes of Wrath 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck, Nunnally Johnson The Great Dictator Chaplin, United Artists Charlie Chaplin Kitty Foyle RKO Radio David Hempstead The Letter Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis The Long Voyage Home Argosy, Wanger, United Artists John Ford Our Town Lesser, United Artists Sol Lesser The Philadelphia Story Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Joseph L. Mankiewicz Film Production company(s) Producer(s) How Green Was My Valley 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck Blossoms in the Dust Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Irving Asher Citizen Kane RKO Radio Orson Welles Here Comes Mr. Jordan Columbia Everett Riskin Hold Back the Dawn Paramount Arthur Hornblow, Jr. The Little Foxes RKO Radio Samuel Goldwyn The Maltese Falcon Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis One Foot in Heaven Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis Sergeant York Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis, Jesse L. Lasky Suspicion RKO Radio Alfred Hitchcock Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Mrs. Miniver Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sidney Franklin The Invaders (49th Parallel) Ortus Michael Powell Kings Row Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis The Magnificent Ambersons Mercury, RKO Radio Orson Welles The Pied Piper 20th Century Fox Nunnally Johnson The Pride of the Yankees Goldwyn, RKO Radio Samuel Goldwyn Random Harvest Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sidney Franklin The Talk of the Town Columbia George Stevens Wake Island Paramount Joseph Sistrom Yankee Doodle Dandy Warner Bros. Jack L. Warner, Hal B. Wallis, William Cagney Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Casablanca Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis For Whom the Bell Tolls Paramount Sam Wood Heaven Can Wait 20th Century Fox Ernst Lubitsch The Human Comedy Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Clarence Brown In Which We Serve Two Cities Films Noël Coward Madame Curie Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sidney Franklin The More the Merrier Columbia George Stevens The Ox-Bow Incident 20th Century Fox Lamar Trotti The Song of Bernadette 20th Century Fox William Perlberg Watch on the Rhine Warner Bros. Hal B. Wallis Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Going My Way Paramount Leo McCarey Double Indemnity Paramount Joseph Sistrom Gaslight Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Arthur Hornblow, Jr. Since You Went Away Selznick International, United Artists David O. Selznick Wilson 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Lost Weekend Paramount Charles Brackett Anchors Aweigh Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Joe Pasternak The Bells of St. Mary's RKO Radio Leo McCarey Mildred Pierce Warner Bros. Jerry Wald Spellbound Selznick International, United Artists David O. Selznick Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Best Years of Our Lives RKO Radio Samuel Goldwyn Henry V Two Cities Films Laurence Olivier It's a Wonderful Life RKO Radio Frank Capra The Razor's Edge 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck The Yearling Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sidney Franklin Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Gentleman's Agreement 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck The Bishop's Wife RKO Radio Samuel Goldwyn Crossfire RKO Radio Adrian Scott Great Expectations Cineguild Ronald Neame Miracle on 34th Street 20th Century Fox William Perlberg Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Hamlet Two Cities Films Laurence Olivier Johnny Belinda Warner Bros. Jerry Wald The Red Shoes Independent Producers, The Archers Michael Powell, Emeric Pressburger The Snake Pit 20th Century Fox Anatole Litvak, Robert Bassler The Treasure of the Sierra Madre Warner Bros. Henry Blanke Film Production company(s) Producer(s) All the King's Men Rossen, Columbia Robert Rossen Battleground Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Dore Schary The Heiress Paramount William Wyler A Letter to Three Wives 20th Century Fox Sol C. Siegel Twelve O'Clock High 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck Film Production company(s) Producer(s) All About Eve 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck Born Yesterday Columbia S. Sylvan Simon Father of the Bride Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pandro S. Berman King Solomon's Mines Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sam Zimbalist Sunset Boulevard Paramount Charles Brackett Film Production company(s) Producer(s) An American in Paris Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Arthur Freed Decision Before Dawn 20th Century Fox Anatole Litvak, Frank McCarthy A Place in the Sun Paramount George Stevens Quo Vadis Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sam Zimbalist A Streetcar Named Desire Warner Bros. Charles K. Feldman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Greatest Show on Earth Paramount Cecil B. DeMille High Noon United Artists Stanley Kramer Ivanhoe Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pandro S. Berman Moulin Rouge Romulus Films John Huston, John and James Woolf The Quiet Man Republic John Ford, Merian C. Cooper Film Production company(s) Producer(s) From Here to Eternity Columbia Buddy Adler Julius Caesar Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer John Houseman The Robe 20th Century Fox Frank Ross Roman Holiday Paramount William Wyler Shane Paramount George Stevens Film Production company(s) Producer(s) On the Waterfront Columbia Sam Spiegel  The Caine Mutiny Columbia Stanley Kramer The Country Girl Paramount William Perlberg Seven Brides for Seven Brothers Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Jack Cummings Three Coins in the Fountain 20th Century Fox Sol C. Siegel Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Marty United Artists, Steven Productions, Hecht-Lancaster Productions Harold Hecht Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing 20th Century Fox Buddy Adler Mister Roberts Warner Bros. Leland Hayward Picnic Columbia Fred Kohlmar The Rose Tattoo Paramount Hal B. Wallis Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Around the World in 80 Days United Artists, Michael Todd Productions Michael Todd Friendly Persuasion Allied Artists William Wyler Giant Warner Bros. George Stevens, Henry Ginsberg The King and I 20th Century Fox Charles Brackett The Ten Commandments Paramount Cecil B. DeMille Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Bridge on the River Kwai Horizon Pictures Sam Spiegel 12 Angry Men United Artists Henry Fonda, Reginald Rose Peyton Place 20th Century Fox Jerry Wald Sayonara Warner Bros. William Goetz Witness for the Prosecution United Artists Arthur Hornblow, Jr. Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Gigi Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Arthur Freed Auntie Mame Warner Bros. Jack L. Warner Cat on a Hot Tin Roof Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Lawrence Weingarten The Defiant Ones Kramer, United Artists Stanley Kramer Separate Tables United Artists Harold Hecht Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Ben-Hur Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Sam Zimbalist Anatomy of a Murder Columbia Otto Preminger The Diary of Anne Frank 20th Century Fox George Stevens The Nun's Story Warner Bros. Henry Blanke Room at the Top Remus Films John and James Woolf Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Apartment United Artists, The Mirisch Company Billy Wilder The Alamo United Artists, Batjac Productions John Wayne Elmer Gantry United Artists Bernard Smith Sons and Lovers 20th Century Fox Jerry Wald The Sundowners Warner Bros. Fred Zinnemann Film Production company(s) Producer(s) West Side Story United Artists Robert Wise Fanny Warner Bros. Joshua Logan The Guns of Navarone Columbia, High Road Carl Foreman The Hustler 20th Century Fox Robert Rossen Judgment at Nuremberg United Artists Stanley Kramer Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Lawrence of Arabia Horizon Pictures Sam Spiegel The Longest Day 20th Century Fox Darryl F. Zanuck The Music Man Warner Bros. Morton DaCosta Mutiny on the Bounty Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Aaron Rosenberg To Kill a Mockingbird Universal-International Alan J. Pakula Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Tom Jones Woodfall Films Tony Richardson America, America Warner Bros. Elia Kazan Cleopatra 20th Century Fox Walter Wanger How the West Was Won Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Cinerama Bernard Smith Lilies of the Field United Artists Ralph Nelson Film Production company(s) Producer(s) My Fair Lady Warner Bros. Jack L. Warner Becket Keep Films, Paramount Film Service Hal B. Wallis Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb Columbia, Hawk Films Stanley Kubrick Mary Poppins Disney Walt Disney, Bill Walsh Zorba the Greek 20th Century Fox Michael Cacoyannis Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Sound of Music 20th Century Fox Robert Wise Darling Vic Films, Appia Films Joseph Janni Doctor Zhivago Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Carlo Ponti Ship of Fools Columbia Stanley Kramer A Thousand Clowns United Artists Fred Coe Film Production company(s) Producer(s) A Man for All Seasons Columbia, Highland Films Fred Zinnemann Alfie Sheldrake Films Lewis Gilbert The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming United Artists Norman Jewison The Sand Pebbles 20th Century Fox Robert Wise Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? Warner Bros. Ernest Lehman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) In the Heat of the Night United Artists Walter Mirisch Bonnie and Clyde Warner Bros., Seven Arts Warren Beatty Doctor Dolittle 20th Century Fox Arthur P. Jacobs The Graduate Embassy Lawrence Turman Guess Who's Coming to Dinner Columbia Stanley Kramer Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Oliver! Romulus Films, Warwick Film Productions John Woolf Funny Girl Columbia Ray Stark The Lion in Winter Embassy, Haworth Productions Martin Poll Rachel, Rachel Warner Bros. Paul Newman Romeo and Juliet B.H.E. Productions, Verona Produzione, Dino De Laurentiis Anthony Havelock-Allan, John Brabourne Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Midnight Cowboy United Artists Jerome Hellman Anne of the Thousand Days Universal Hal B. Wallis Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid 20th Century Fox John Foreman Hello, Dolly! 20th Century Fox Ernest Lehman Z  O.N.C.I.C., Cinema V Jacques Perrin, Ahmed Rachedi Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Patton 20th Century Fox Frank McCarthy Airport Universal Ross Hunter Five Easy Pieces Columbia Bob Rafelson, Richard Wechsler Love Story Paramount Howard G. Minsky M*A*S*H 20th Century Fox Ingo Preminger Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The French Connection 20th Century Fox Philip D'Antoni A Clockwork Orange Warner, Hawk Films Stanley Kubrick Fiddler on the Roof United Artists Norman Jewison The Last Picture Show Columbia Stephen J. Friedman Nicholas and Alexandra Columbia Sam Spiegel Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Godfather Paramount Albert S. Ruddy Cabaret Allied Artists, ABC Pictures Cy Feuer Deliverance Warner Bros. John Boorman The Emigrants  Svensk Filmindustri Bengt Forslund Sounder 20th Century Fox Robert B. Radnitz Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Sting Universal Tony Bill, Michael Phillips, Julia Phillips American Graffiti Lucasfilm, Universal, Coppola Co. Francis Ford Coppola, Gary Kurtz Cries and Whispers  Cinematograph, Svenska Filminstitutet Ingmar Bergman The Exorcist Warner Bros. William Peter Blatty A Touch of Class Avco Embassy, Gordon Film Productions Melvin Frank Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Godfather Part II  Paramount Francis Ford Coppola, Gray Frederickson, Fred Roos Chinatown Paramount Robert Evans The Conversation Paramount, Coppola Co. Francis Ford Coppola Lenny United Artists Marvin Worth The Towering Inferno 20th Century Fox, Warner Bros. Irwin Allen Film Production company(s) Producer(s) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest United Artists Saul Zaentz , Michael Douglas Barry Lyndon Warner Bros., Peregrine Productions, Hawk Films Stanley Kubrick Dog Day Afternoon Warner Bros. Martin Bregman, Martin Elfand Jaws Universal Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown Nashville Paramount Robert Altman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Rocky United Artists Irwin Winkler, Robert Chartoff All the President's Men Warner Bros. Walter Coblenz Bound for Glory United Artists Robert F. Blumofe, Harold Leventhal Network Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, United Artists Howard Gottfried Taxi Driver Columbia Michael Phillips, Julia Phillips Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Annie Hall United Artists Charles H. Joffe The Goodbye Girl Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Warner Bros. Ray Stark Julia 20th Century Fox (Richard Roth) Star Wars Lucasfilm, 20th Century Fox Gary Kurtz The Turning Point 20th Century Fox Herbert Ross, Arthur Laurents Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Deer Hunter Universal, EMI Barry Spikings, Michael Deeley, Michael Cimino, John Peverall Coming Home United Artists Jerome Hellman Heaven Can Wait Paramount Warren Beatty Midnight Express Columbia, Casablanca Filmworks Alan Marshall, David Puttnam An Unmarried Woman 20th Century Fox, Casablanca Filmworks Paul Mazursky, Tony Ray Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Kramer vs. Kramer Columbia Stanley R. Jaffe All That Jazz 20th Century Fox, Columbia Robert Alan Aurthur Apocalypse Now Zoetrope Francis Ford Coppola, Fred Roos, Gray Frederickson, Tom Sternberg Breaking Away 20th Century Fox Peter Yates Norma Rae 20th Century Fox Tamara Asseyev, Alex Rose Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Ordinary People Paramount Ronald L. Schwary Coal Miner's Daughter Universal Bernard Schwartz The Elephant Man Paramount, Brooksfilms Jonathan Sanger Raging Bull United Artists Irwin Winkler, Robert Chartoff Tess Columbia, Renn Productions, Timothy Burrill Productions Claude Berri, Timothy Burrill Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Chariots of Fire Warner Bros., The Ladd Company, Enigma Film Productions David Puttnam Atlantic City Cine-Neighbor, Selta Films Denis Héroux On Golden Pond ITC, Universal Bruce Gilbert Raiders of the Lost Ark Lucasfilm, Paramount Frank Marshall Reds Paramount Warren Beatty Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Gandhi Columbia Richard Attenborough E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial Universal, Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy  Missing Universal Edward Lewis, Mildred Lewis Tootsie Columbia Sydney Pollack, Dick Richards The Verdict 20th Century Fox Richard D. Zanuck, David Brown Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Terms of Endearment Paramount James L. Brooks The Big Chill Columbia Michael Shamberg The Dresser Columbia, Goldcrest, World Film Services Peter Yates The Right Stuff Warner Bros., The Ladd Company Irwin Winkler, Robert Chartoff Tender Mercies Universal, EMI Philip S. Hobel Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Amadeus Orion Saul Zaentz The Killing Fields Enigma Film Productions David Puttnam A Passage to India Columbia, G.W. Films, Thorn EMI John Brabourne, Richard Goodwin Places in the Heart Tri-Star Arlene Donovan A Soldier's Story Columbia Norman Jewison, Ronald L. Schwary, Patrick Palmer Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Out of Africa Universal, Mirage Enterprises Sydney Pollack The Color Purple Warner Bros., Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, Quincy Jones Kiss of the Spider Woman Island Alive, FilmDallas Pictures, HB Filmes David Weisman Prizzi's Honor 20th Century Fox, ABC Motion Pictures John Foreman Witness Paramount Edward S. Feldman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Platoon Orion, Hemdale Arnold Kopelson Children of a Lesser God Paramount Burt Sugarman, Patrick J. Palmer Hannah and Her Sisters Orion Robert Greenhut The Mission Warner Bros., Enigma Film Productions, Goldcrest Films, Kingsmere Fernando Ghia, David Puttnam A Room with a View Merchant Ivory Ismail Merchant Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Last Emperor  Columbia, Recorded Picture Company, Yanco Films, TAO Films, AAA, Soprofilms Jeremy Thomas Broadcast News 20th Century Fox James L. Brooks Fatal Attraction Paramount Stanley R. Jaffe, Sherry Lansing Hope and Glory Columbia, Goldcrest Films, Nelson Entertainment John Boorman Moonstruck Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Patrick J. Palmer, Norman Jewison Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Rain Man United Artists Mark Johnson The Accidental Tourist Warner Bros. Lawrence Kasdan, Charles Okun, Michael Grillo Dangerous Liaisons Warner Bros., Lorimar, N.F.H. Productions Norma Heyman, Hank Moonjean Mississippi Burning Orion Frederick Zollo, Robert F. Colesberry Working Girl 20th Century Fox Douglas Wick Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Driving Miss Daisy Warner Bros. Richard D. Zanuck, Lili Fini Zanuck Born on the Fourth of July Universal A. Kitman Ho, Oliver Stone Dead Poets Society Touchstone Steven Haft, Paul Junger Witt, Tony Thomas Field of Dreams Universal Lawrence Gordon, Charles Gordon My Left Foot Miramax, Ferndale Films, Granada Television International Noel Pearson Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Dances with Wolves Orion, TIG Productions Jim Wilson and Kevin Costner Awakenings Columbia Walter F. Parkes and Lawrence Lasker Ghost Paramount Lisa Weinstein The Godfather Part III Paramount, American Zoetrope Francis Ford Coppola Goodfellas Warner Bros. Irwin Winkler Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Silence of the Lambs Orion Edward Saxon, Kenneth Utt, and Ron Bozman Beauty and the Beast Disney Don Hahn Bugsy TriStar, Mulholland Productions, Baltimore Pictures Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, and Warren Beatty JFK Warner Bros., Regency Enterprises A. Kitman Ho and Oliver Stone The Prince of Tides Columbia Barbra Streisand and Andrew S. Karsch Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Unforgiven Warner Bros., Malpaso Clint Eastwood The Crying Game Palace Pictures Stephen Woolley A Few Good Men Columbia, Castle Rock Entertainment David Brown, Rob Reiner, and Andrew Scheinman Howards End Merchant Ivory Ismail Merchant Scent of a Woman Universal Martin Brest Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Schindler's List Universal, Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg, Gerald R. Molen, and Branko Lustig The Fugitive Warner Bros. Arnold Kopelson In the Name of the Father Universal, Hell's Kitchen Jim Sheridan The Piano Jan Chapman Productions Jan Chapman The Remains of the Day Columbia, Merchant Ivory Mike Nichols, John Calley, and Ismail Merchant Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Forrest Gump Paramount Wendy Finerman, Steve Tisch, and Steve Starkey Four Weddings and a Funeral PolyGram, Working Title Duncan Kenworthy Pulp Fiction Miramax Lawrence Bender Quiz Show Hollywood Michael Jacobs, Julian Krainin, Michael Nozik, and Robert Redford The Shawshank Redemption Columbia, Castle Rock Entertainment Niki Marvin Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Braveheart Paramount, 20th Century Fox, Icon Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd, Jr., and Bruce Davey Apollo 13 Universal, Imagine Entertainment Brian Grazer Babe Universal, Kennedy Miller Productions Bill Miller, George Miller, and Doug Mitchell Il Postino: The Postman  Cecchi Gori Group Tiger Cinematografica, Esterno Mediterraneo Film, Blue Dahlia, Penta Film Mario Cecchi Gori, Vittorio Cecchi Gori, and Gaetano Daniele Sense and Sensibility Columbia, Mirage Lindsay Doran Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The English Patient Miramax, Tiger Moth Productions Saul Zaentz Fargo PolyGram Ethan Coen Jerry Maguire TriStar, Gracie Films James L. Brooks, Laurence Mark, Richard Sakai, and Cameron Crowe Secrets & Lies October, Thin Man Films Simon Channing-Williams Shine Momentum Films Jane Scott Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Titanic Paramount, 20th Century Fox, Lightstorm Entertainment James Cameron and Jon Landau As Good as It Gets Tristar, Gracie Films James L. Brooks, Bridget Johnson, Kristi Zea The Full Monty Redwave Films Umberto Pasolini Good Will Hunting Miramax, A Band Apart Lawrence Bender L.A. Confidential Warner Bros., Regency Enterprises Curtis Hanson, Arnon Milchan, and Michael G. Nathanson Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Shakespeare in Love Miramax, Universal, Bedford Falls Company David Parfitt, Donna Gigliotti, Harvey Weinstein, Edward Zwick, and Marc Norman Elizabeth PolyGram, Working Title Alison Owen, Eric Fellner, and Tim Bevan Life Is Beautiful  Melampo Cinematografica, Pacific Pictures Elda Ferri and Gianluigi Braschi Saving Private Ryan DreamWorks, Paramount, Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg, Ian Bryce, Mark Gordon, and Gary Levinsohn The Thin Red Line 20th Century Fox Robert Michael Geisler, John Roberdeau, and Grant Hill Film Production company(s) Producer(s) American Beauty DreamWorks, Jinks/Cohen Co. Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks The Cider House Rules Miramax, FilmColony Richard N. Gladstein The Green Mile Warner Bros., Castle Rock Entertainment Frank Darabont and David Valdes The Insider Touchstone, Spyglass Entertainment Pieter Jan Brugge and Michael Mann The Sixth Sense Hollywood, Spyglass Entertainment Frank Marshall, Kathleen Kennedy, and Barry Mendel Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Gladiator DreamWorks, Universal, Scott Free Productions, Red Wagon Entertainment Douglas Wick, David Franzoni, and Branko Lustig Chocolat Miramax David Brown, Kit Golden, and Leslie Holleran Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon  Sony Pictures Classics William Kong, Hsu Li Kong, and Ang Lee Erin Brockovich Universal, Columbia, Jersey Films Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher Traffic Universal, USA, Bedford Falls Company Edward Zwick, Marshall Herskovitz, and Laura Bickford Film Production company(s) Producer(s) A Beautiful Mind DreamWorks, Universal, Imagine Entertainment Brian Grazer and Ron Howard Gosford Park USA, Sandcastle 5 Productions, Zestwick Robert Altman, Bob Balaban, and David Levy In the Bedroom Miramax, Good Machine Graham Leader, Ross Katz, and Todd Field The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring New Line Cinema, WingNut Films Peter Jackson, Fran Walsh, and Barrie M. Osborne Moulin Rouge! 20th Century Fox, Bazmark Martin Brown, Baz Luhrmann, and Fred Baron Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Chicago Miramax, Producer Circle Co., Storyline Entertainment Martin Richards Gangs of New York Miramax Alberto Grimaldi and Harvey Weinstein The Hours Paramount, Miramax, Scott Rudin Productions Scott Rudin and Robert Fox The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers New Line Cinema, WingNut Films Barrie M. Osborne, Fran Walsh, and Peter Jackson The Pianist Focus Features, RP Productions, Heritage Films, Babelsberg Studios, Runteam Roman Polanski, Robert Benmussa, and Alain Sarde Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King New Line Cinema, WingNut Films Barrie M. Osborne, Peter Jackson, and Fran Walsh Lost in Translation Focus Features, American Zoetrope Ross Katz and Sofia Coppola Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World 20th Century Fox, Miramax, Universal, Samuel Goldlwyn Films Samuel Goldwyn, Jr., Peter Weir, and Duncan Henderson Mystic River Warner Bros.,Village Roadshow Pictures, Malpaso Robert Lorenz, Judie G. Hoyt, and Clint Eastwood Seabiscuit DreamWorks, Universal, Spyglass Entertainment, Kennedy/Marshall Productions Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, and Gary Ross Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Million Dollar Baby Warner Bros., Lakeshore Entertainment, Malpaso Clint Eastwood, Albert S. Ruddy, and Tom Rosenberg The Aviator Warner Bros., Miramax, Forward Pass, Appian Way Michael Mann and Graham King Finding Neverland Miramax, Filmcolony Richard N. Gladstein and Nellie Bellflower Ray Universal, Britsol Bay Productions, Anvil Films Taylor Hackford, Stuart Benjamin, and Howard Baldwin Sideways Fox Searchlight Michael London Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Crash Lionsgate, BlackFriar's Bridge, Harris Company, ApolloProScreen Paul Haggis and Cathy Schulman Brokeback Mountain Focus Features, River Road Entertainment Diana Ossana and James Schamus Capote Sony Pictures Classics, United Artists, A-Line Pictures, Cooper's Town Productions, Infinity Media Caroline Baron, William Vince, and Michael Ohoven Good Night, and Good Luck Warner Independent, Section Eight Productions, 2929 Entertainment Grant Heslov Munich DreamWorks, Universal, Amblin Entertainment, Kennedy/Marshall Productions Steven Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy, and Barry Mendel Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Departed Warner Bros., Plan B Pictures, Initial Entertainment Group, Vertigo Entertainment Graham King Babel Paramount Vantage, Anonymous Content, Zeta Film Alejandro González Iñárritu, Steve Golin, and Jon Kilik Letters from Iwo Jima  DreamWorks, Warner Bros., Malpaso, Amblin Entertainment Clint Eastwood, Steven Spielberg, and Robert Lorenz Little Miss Sunshine Fox Searchlight, Big Beach, Deep River Productions David T. Friendly, Peter Saraf, and Marc Turtletaub The Queen Miramax, Granada Productions Andy Harries, Christine Langan, and Tracey Seaward Film Production company(s) Producer(s) No Country for Old Men Paramount Vantage, Miramax, Mike Zoss Productions Scott Rudin, Joel Coen, and Ethan Coen Atonement Focus Features, Working Title Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, and Paul Webster Juno Fox Searchlight, Mr. Mudd Lianne Halfon, Mason Novick, and Russell Smith Michael Clayton Warner Bros., Castle Rock Entertainment, Section Eight Productions, Mirage Enterprises Jennifer Fox, Kerry Orent, and Sydney Pollack There Will Be Blood Paramount Vantage, Miramax Paul Thomas Anderson, Daniel Lupi, and JoAnne Sellar Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Slumdog Millionaire  Fox Searchlight, Warner Bros., Celador, Film4 Christian Colson The Curious Case of Benjamin Button Paramount, Warner Bros., Kennedy/Marshall Productions Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, and Cean Chaffin Frost/Nixon Universal, Imagine Entertainment, Working Title Ron Howard, Brian Grazer, and Eric Fellner Milk Focus Features, Jinks/Cohen Co., Groundswell Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks The Reader The Weinstein Co., Mirage, Neunte Babelsberg Film Anthony Minghella, Sydney Pollack, Donna Gigliotti, and Redmond Morris Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Hurt Locker Summit Entertainment, Voltage Pictures, First Light Productions, Kingsgate Films Kathryn Bigelow, Mark Boal, Nicolas Chartier, and Greg Shapiro Avatar 20th Century Fox, Lightstorm Entertainment, Dune Entertainment, Ingenious Media James Cameron and Jon Landau The Blind Side Warner Bros., Alcon Entertainment Gil Netter, Andrew A. Kosove, and Broderick Johnson District 9 Tristar, WingNut Films Peter Jackson and Carolynne Cunningham An Education Sony Pictures Classics, Finola Dwyer Productions, Wildgaze Films Finola Dwyer and Amanda Posey Inglourious Basterds The Weinstein Co., Universal, Band Apart, Zehnte Babelsberg Film Lawrence Bender Precious: Based on the Novel "Push" by Sapphire Lionsgate, Lee Daniels Entertainment, Smokewood Entertainment Lee Daniels, Sarah Siegel-Magness, and Gary Magness A Serious Man Focus Features, Working Title, Mike Zoss Productions Joel Coen and Ethan Coen Up Disney, Pixar Jonas Rivera Up in the Air Paramount, The Montecito Picture Company Daniel Dubiecki, Ivan Reitman, and Jason Reitman Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The King's Speech The Weinstein Co., Momentum Pictures, UK Film Council, See-Saw Films, Bedlam Productions Iain Canning, Emile Sherman, and Gareth Unwin 127 Hours Fox Searchlight, Pathé, Dune Entertainment, Everest Entertainment Danny Boyle, John Smithson, and Christian Colson Black Swan Fox Searchlight, Dune Entertainment, Cross Creek Pictures, Phoenix Pictures Scott Franklin, Mike Medavoy, and Brian Oliver The Fighter Paramount, The Weinstein Co., Mandeville Films David Hoberman, Todd Lieberman, and Mark Wahlberg Inception Warner Bros., Legendary Pictures, Syncopy Christopher Nolan and Emma Thomas The Kids Are All Right Focus Features, Gilbert Films Gary Gilbert, Jeffrey Levy-Hinte, and Celine Rattray The Social Network Columbia, Scott Rudin Productions, Trigger Street Productions Dana Brunetti, Ceán Chaffin, Michael De Luca, and Scott Rudin Toy Story 3 Disney, Pixar Darla K. Anderson True Grit Paramount, Skydance Productions, Mike Zoss Productions Joel Coen, Ethan Coen, and Scott Rudin Winter's Bone Roadside Attractions Alix Madigan and Anne Rosellini Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Artist The Weinstein Co., La Petite Reine, ARP Sélection, Studio 37, La Class Americane, France 3 Cinema, U Film, Jouror Productions, JD Prod, Wild Bunch Thomas Langmann The Descendants Fox Searchlight Jim Burke, Alexander Payne, and Jim Taylor Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close Warner Bros., Scott Rudin Productions Scott Rudin The Help DreamWorks, Touchstone, Participant Media, Imageation Abu Dahbi Brunson Green, Chris Columbus, and Michael Barnathan Hugo Paramount, GK Films, Infinitum Nihil Graham King and Martin Scorsese Midnight in Paris Sony Pictures Classics, Gravier, Mediapro, Pontchartrain, Versatil Letty Aronson and Stephen Tenenbaum Moneyball Columbia, Scott Rudin Productions, Michael De Luca Productions Michael De Luca, Rachael Horovitz, and Brad Pitt The Tree of Life Fox Searchlight, River Road Entertainment Sarah Green, Bill Pohlad, Dede Gardner, and Grant Hill War Horse DreamWorks, Touchstone, Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg and Kathleen Kennedy Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Argo Warner Bros., GK Films, Smoke House Pictures Grant Heslov, Ben Affleck, and George Clooney Amour  Sony Pictures Classics, Les Films du Losange, X Filme Creative Pool, Wega Film Production Margaret Menegoz, Stefan Arndt, Veit Heiduschka, and Michael Katz Beasts of the Southern Wild Fox Searchlight, Cinereach Dan Janvey, Josh Penn, and Michael Gottwald Django Unchained The Weinstein Co., Columbia, Band Apart Stacey Sher, Reginald Hudlin, and Pilar Savone Les Misérables Universal, Working Title, Cameron Mackintosh Limited Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Debra Hayward, and Cameron Mackintosh Life of Pi 20th Century Fox, Dune Entertainment, Ingenious Media, Haishang Films Gil Netter, Ang Lee, and David Womark Lincoln DreamWorks, Touchstone, 20th Century Fox, Amblin Entertainment Steven Spielberg and Kathleen Kennedy Silver Linings Playbook The Weinstein Co. Donna Gigliotti, Bruce Cohen, and Jonathan Gordon Zero Dark Thirty Columbia, Annapurna Pictures Mark Boal, Kathryn Bigelow, and Megan Ellison Film Production company(s) Producer(s) 12 Years a Slave Fox Searchlight, Regency Enterprises, River Road Entertainment, Plan B Entertainment, New Regency, Film4 Productions Brad Pitt, Dede Gardner, Jeremy Kleiner, Steve McQueen, and Anthony Katagas American Hustle Columbia, Atlas Entertainment, Annapurna Pictures Charles Roven, Richard Suckle, Megan Ellison, and Jonathan Gordon Captain Phillips Columbia, Michael De Luca Productions, Scott Rudin Productions, Trigger Street Scott Rudin, Dana Brunetti, and Michael De Luca Dallas Buyers Club Focus Features, Truth Entertainment, Voltage Pictures Robbie Brenner and Rachel Winter Gravity Warner Bros., Esperanto Filmoj, Heyday Films Alfonso Cuarón and David Heyman Her Warner Bros., Entertainment Film Distributors, Annapurna Pictures Megan Ellison, Spike Jonze, and Vincent Landay Nebraska Paramount Vantage, FilmNation Entertainment Albert Berger and Ron Yerxa Philomena The Weinstein Co., Pathé, BBC Films, British Film Institute, Canal+, Cine+, Baby Cow Productions, Magnolia Mae Films Gabrielle Tana, Steve Coogan, and Tracey Seaward The Wolf of Wall Street Paramount, Universal, Red Granite Pictures, Appian Way Productions, Sikelia Productions, Emjag Productions Martin Scorsese, Leonardo DiCaprio, Joey McFarland, and Emma Tillinger Koskoff Film Production company(s) Producer(s) Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) Fox Searchlight, Regency Enterprises, Worldview Entertainment Alejandro G. Iñárritu, John Lesher, and James W. Skotchdopole American Sniper Warner Bros., Village Roadshow Pictures, Mad Chance Productions, 22nd and Indiana Pictures, Malpaso Clint Eastwood, Andrew Lazar, Robert Lorenz, Bradley Cooper, and Peter Morgan Boyhood IFC, Detour Filmproduction Richard Linklater and Cathleen Sutherland The Grand Budapest Hotel Fox Searchlight, American Empirical Pictures, Indian Paintbrush, Babelsberg Studio Wes Anderson, Scott Rudin, Steven Rales, and Jeremy Dawson The Imitation Game The Weinstein Co., Black Bear Pictures, Bristol Automotive, StudioCanal Nora Grossman, Ido Ostrowsky, and Teddy Schwarzman Selma Paramount, Pathé, Cloud Eight Films, Plan B Entertainment, Harpo Films Christian Colson, Oprah Winfrey, Dede Gardner, and Jeremy Kleiner The Theory of Everything Focus Features, Working Title Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Lisa Bruce, and Anthony McCarten Whiplash Sony Pictures Classics, Bold Films, Blumhouse Productions, Right of Way Films Jason Blum, Helen Estabrook, and David Lancaster Film Production company(s) Producer(s) The Big Short Paramount, Regency Enterprises, Plan B Entertainment Dede Gardner, Jeremy Kleiner, and Brad Pitt Bridge of Spies DreamWorks, Touchstone, 20th Century Fox, Amblin Entertainment, Participant Media, Afterworks Limited, Studio Babelsberg, Marc Platt Productions Steven Spielberg, Marc Platt, and Kristie Macosko Krieger Brooklyn Fox Searchlight, TSG Entertainment, BFI, BBC Films, Wildgaze Films, Irish Film Board, Parallel Film Productions, Item 7 Finola Dwyer and Amanda Posey Mad Max: Fury Road Warner Bros., Village Roadshow Pictures, Kennedy Miller Mitchell, RatPac-Dune Entertainment Doug Mitchell and George Miller The Martian 20th Century Fox, TSG Entertainment, Scott Free Productions, Kinberg Genre Simon Kinberg, Ridley Scott, Michael Schaefer, and Mark Huffam The Revenant 20th Century Fox, Regency Enterprises, RatPac Entertainment, Anonymous Content, Appian Way Productions, M Productions, New Regency Pictures, RatPac-Dune Entertainment Arnon Milchan, Steve Golin, Alejandro G. Iñárritu, Mary Parent, and Keith Redmon Room A24, TG4 Films, Nope Films, Mauvais Plan, Inc., CampTrace Entertainment, and Lester Peroductions Ed Guiney Spotlight Open Road, Anonymous Content, First Look Media, Participant Media, Rocklin/Faust Blye Faust, Steve Golin, Nicole Rocklin, and Michael Sugar 1927/28 to 1928/29: Academy Award for Outstanding Picture 1929/30 to 1940: Academy Award for Outstanding Production 1941 to 1943: Academy Award for Outstanding Motion Picture 1944 to 1961: Academy Award for Best Motion Picture 1962 to present: Academy Award for Best Picture those with screen credit of "producer" or "produced by" those three or fewer producers who have performed the major portion of the producing functions BAFTA Award for Best Film Broadcast Critics’ Choice Movie Award for Best Film Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture List of actors who have appeared in multiple Best Picture winners List of superlative Academy Award winners and nominees List of presenters of the Academy Award for Best Picture List of Big Five Academy Award winners and nominees List of Academy Award-winning films List of film production companies List of films considered the best List of films considered the best (by year) List of Best Picture milestones Lists of films Oscars.org (official Academy site) Oscar.com (official ceremony site) The Academy Awards Database (official site)
