    The Advanced Passenger Train (APT) was an experimental tilting high speed train developed by British Rail during the 1970s and early 1980s, for use on the West Coast Main Line, which contained a lot of curves. Notable among numerous technical advancements was the active tilting system, which the APT pioneered and has since appeared on other designs around the world. Other features of the APT such as the hydrokinetic braking, used to stop the train within existing separations, have not been adopted.http://www.apt-p.com/aptbrakesystem.htm The experimental version APT-E achieved a new British railway speed record when on 10 August 1975 it hit 152.3&nbsp;mph (245.1&nbsp;km/h). The introduction into service of the Advanced Passenger Train was to be a three-stage project. Phase 1, the development of an experimental APT, the APT-E, was completed. Phase 2, the introduction of three prototype trains, known as the APT-P, into revenue service on the Glasgow-London route, enjoyed only limited service due to bad publicity. Phase 3, the introduction of the Squadron-Service fleet designated APT-S, did not occur. The APT suffered from delays between the APT-E and APT-P, and then a lengthy series of in-service problems when the APT-P started testing. As these delays grew, the programme was dismissed as a white elephant and every minor problem was heavily covered in the press. It gathered a reputation that led to politicians wishing to distance themselves from the fray. Further funding for service entry became increasingly difficult to find, and the project eventually ground to a halt.   In the mid to late 20th century, British Rail express services compared unfavourably with France's TGV and Japan's Shinkansen. Experience with increasing the speed of passenger services had shown that reduced journey times could produce a significant increase in passenger numbers. The East Coast Main Line was largely straight and suited to high speeds, but other lines, especially the West Coast Main Line (WCML) from London to Glasgow, were not straight enough to support high speeds with conventional equipment. Lateral forces would be just too high around curves; passengers would not be able to stand upright easily, and things would move on tables. One solution is to bank the rails around curves, so the forces remain more in-line with the floor. This technique, known as superelevation, only works exactly for a single selected speed - trains going slower will feel as if they are tipping over to the inside of the curve, while those going faster still feel leftover outward forces. For new lines like the Shinkansen or TGV this was an acceptable solution as those lines would be used purely for high-speed trains, and they could select the best angle for those trains. But with the WCML also serving slower traffic the allowable bank angle was more restricted. Considerable experience had shown that the maximum cant allowable on lines with slower traffic was 6.5 degrees, which worked well for speeds as high as the  range, but began to demonstrate cant deficiency at speeds above . For higher speeds on such lines the train itself would have to bank in addition to any superelevation. Several train designs had attacked this problem using a passive tilting concept introduced by Talgo. This consisted of a bogie between the train cars with the car bodies suspended from an A-frame with a pivot near the top. When the train rounded a bend, the centrifugal forces caused the car body to swing out like a pendulum, reaching the proper tilt angle naturally. However, this system had a distinct delay between entering the curve and the body swinging out, and then swung past this angle and then oscillated briefly until settling at the right angle. When traversing a series of curves, like in a switchyard, it tended to swing about alarmingly. Although a number of semi-experimental designs of the 1970s made use of it, like the UAC TurboTrain, the concept was not widely used. In 1964 a number of BR's engineering teams were organized at the new Derby Research Division. Through the 1960s they carried out an extensive study of the dynamics of steel wheeled trains, which has been called the most detailed study of the physics of train dynamics ever produced. Among these was a detailed investigation into a problem known as hunting oscillation that affects high speed trains, causing the carriages to oscillate back and forth between the rails. Their research clearly demonstrated that a properly designed suspension would dampen out this motion, and allowed for travel over  on conventional rail. This led to the desire for a train capable of reaching these speeds on the BR network, especially the heavily used WCML. This line had numerous curves and some sort of tilt system would be required for safe travel. The Research Division attacked the problems of the passive pendulum mounting by replacing it with an active system that drove the car to the correct angle using hydraulic or electric means. This would allow the cars to be quickly moved to precisely the correct angle, without swinging past that angle as is the case in the pendulum systems. An active tilt system also meant the actual motion could be controlled through shaped rails so that the axis of rotation was through the middle of the car rather than the top. It was believed this would offer a more natural motion, with the rotation through the rider's midsection instead of above their head. It also reduced the amount of distance the car swung out from the centerline of the railbed, as the top and bottom moved in opposite directions to produce the angle, rather than only the bottom. Finally, the system could simply be turned off when navigating switchyards, eliminating the swinging problems. Research into such a system began using hydraulic rams controlled by spirit level sensors. BR deliberately commissioned two young engineers with no experience in trains or railways to head the development of the project. One had worked in missiles and the other for the National Coal Board. They worked in isolation to the in-house British Rail engineering team. The reason for total outsiders to develop the trains was that they would have no preconceived rail engineering prejudices and would approach the problem with a fresh open mind. A train designed to operate at 155&nbsp;mph on British rail lines presented the additional problem that the train had to be able to stop within the signalling distances designed for slower trains. Either the signals would have to be moved further apart to allow more time for the trains to stop, or a new form of brakes would have to be used that could dissipate the tremendous heat of braking from high speed without wearing out. As the goal was to allow the train to work on a significant portion of the BR network, moving the signals was not an option. This led to the introduction of hydrokinetic brakes, which dissipated the energy into a water turbine, which could then be cooled with radiators. These lost efficiency as the vehicle slowed, so an additional set of conventional hydraulically operated friction brakes was used for speeds below . With the go-ahead to begin development given in 1969, the first order of business was to test the brakes, tilting mechanism and bogies. This was accomplished with the APT-POP, consisting of two prototype power cars moved by a conventional locomotive. The cars were skinless, topped with a space frame holding ballast to simulate the various parts of the prospective design. The name "POP" was an acronym for "power-zero-power", indicating the two car layout with no passenger cars in the middle. This was soon rendered inaccurate when a passenger car was added to make a three-car train, and the power cars given bodies. The POP underwent a number of changes, notably trialling different bogie designs, over its lifetime. The goal of allowing operation across a significant section of the BR network also drove the choice of powerplant. As most of the network was not electrified, the team chose a stationary gas turbine as the power source, due to their light weight and high reliability. The chosen power plant was multiple  Leyland 2S/350 gas turbines running on diesel fuel, along with additional engines that provided power for the climate control and lighting in the passenger cars. During the testing period the engines were progressively upgraded to .APT: A Promise Unfulfilled, p480 The driving cars had a nose section which extended forward of the bogies which gave it a distinctive look. The first experimental example, the APT-E (for Experimental), was completed in 1972. This was only four cars in length; two power cars, one at each end and two 'passenger' cars full of instrumentation. APT-E made its first run on 25 July 1972 from Derby to Duffield. The design had a single operator's chair, and the rail union seized upon this as evidence that the company was intending to move to single operators on their trains. They refused to operate any equipment related to APT-E, and it sat until August 1973 when the issue was finally resolved and testing resumed. On 10 August 1975 it hit  whilst on test with the Western Region between Swindon and Reading. It was also tested extensively on the Midland Main Line out of London St. Pancras and on the Old Dalby Test Track, where in January 1976 it attained a speed of . Generally the APT-E was a success, but was caught up in a series of events that made its design undesirable. The first was the 1973 oil crisis which caused fuel prices to rise, in some cases by as much as three times. The turbine engines were notoriously thirsty; the TurboTrain used between 50 and 100% more fuel than conventional sets running on the same routes. Adding to this was Leyland's exit from the gas turbine business, leaving the BR team looking for a suitable alternative. As a result of the APT-E tests and the desire to move away from turbine power, the BR team eventually decided to make the APT use pantograph-supplied ("pan") electric power. The WCML had already been electrified by this time, and although moving to electric traction would limit APT to this route, other lines were already planning for electrification at least in the London area and this was expected to expand over time. The result was a new design, the APT-P (for prototype), which would be followed by the APT-S (for service). Unfortunately, the design of the overhead lines on the WCLM and elsewhere had not been made with high-speed trains in mind, and when a train did pass them at high speed it set up a wave in the lines that did not settle down again for several hundred metres. This was fine for trains that ran with kilometres between them, but meant it was very difficult for a single train to pick up power at multiple locations. Since the APT had been designed to be driven from both ends, this presented a serious problem. One obvious solution would be to run power lines between the cars, perhaps on the roof, but this was rejected by BR engineers as being impractical. Some consideration was given to placing both engines back-to-back at one end of the train, the rear being the simplest, but concerns were raised over over excessive buckling forces at the high speeds with the tilt feature active. So, finally, the design team chose to place the engines back-to-back in the center of the train, pushing half of it and pulling the other. The two engines would be identical and both would carry a pantograph to pick up power, but in normal operation only the "front" of the two engines would raise its pan, and the other engine would be fed power through a coupling. Power was converted to direct current by ASEA thyristors, supplying four  DC traction motors mounted in each power car. The traction motors transmitted their power through internal gearboxes, cardan shafts and quill final drives, minimising the unsprung weight on the axles. Although  center-motor layout was the simplest in terms of solving the immediate technical problems, it would cause significant problems in operational terms. Although there was a passage through the power cars that connected the two halves of the train, it was noisy, cramped and not permitted for passengers. Instead, each end of the train now required its own dining car and similar facilities. The split design also presented problems in the stations, where only the two ends of the platforms could now be used, instead of the locomotive parking off the end. Although all auxiliary equipment such as lighting, air conditioning and air compressors was powered by motor alternators driven from the 25 kV overhead line, it was recognised that if there were to be an overhead line failure conditions in the passenger vehicles would quickly become unsafe and unbearable. Each driving van trailer i.e. the leading and trailing vehicles, was equipped with a diesel-alternator generator capable of supplying the minimum requirement of auxiliary power. The diesel-alternators were started using air motors powered from the train's air system, since the APT carried few batteries. The APT was designed for faster running than existing trains on the same track. At the APT's design speeds, it was not possible for the operator to read the speed limits on trackside signs in time to slow down if needed. Instead, a new system using a transponder-based cab display was introduced called "C-APT". A radio signal from the train caused a track-mounted transponder to return the local speed limit. These sealed, unpowered transponders were placed at intervals of no more than 1&nbsp;km. Approaching speed restrictions were provided at the appropriate distance, along with an audible alert; failure to acknowledge these alerts would result in an automatic brake application. C-APT was driven by a redundant onboard computer system using Intel 4004 microprocessors. The track units were essentially the same as the modern French Balise beacons. The hydrokinetic brake system was successful and reliable on the APT-E and was retained for the APT-P. However, as a cost-cutting measure, the hydraulic brakes used for low speed were modified to use a water-glycol mix instead of the normal oil-filled designs. Although APT-P used much of the technology developed on the APT-E, construction of the first APT-P was delayed several times before being officially unveiled to the public on 7 June 1978. It entered testing soon after, and set the UK speed record at  in December 1979, a record that stood for 23 years. Two additional examples were delivered, each with minor changes, and entered testing soon after. In spite of these successes, testing also revealed a host of problems. Long delays in the production of the prototype meant that the brake units had to be stored for an extended period before being installed. The change from oil to water-glycol mix required the cylinders to be covered internally with an anti-corrosion coating, which broke down during storage. In testing the cylinders repeatedly failed, and the loss of pressure caused the train to take nearly as long to slow from 25&nbsp;mph to a standstill as it did to slow from 125&nbsp;mph to 25&nbsp;mph. During commissioning, because of this and other development issues, every axle on the trains was modified and exchanged. The compressed air systems that actuated the brakes and powered the doors and other moving parts was another source of problems. The air piping would normally be run in such a way that there were natural low points where water condensing out of the air would collect and could be removed. On APT these runs were tortuous, and resulted in numerous points where the water would collect, and in cold weather, freeze. Although the commissioning team found a Westinghouse designed solution that would eliminate the water being produced by the compressors, the design team would not accept the solution, stating that the problem would not occur with a full train formation, as opposed to the shorter formation used in commissioning. Finally, was only discovered at the APT-P commissioning stage that parts of the WCML had been built in such a way that, if two APT-P trains with their tilt systems failed and the carriages stuck in the inward tilted position met, they would strike one another. The railway had not been built with tilting trains in mind, and the dynamic envelopes too small for a tilted APT. The effect was not seen with conventional trains since, without tilt, their movements stayed well within the dynamic envelope. While the commissioning team continued to report, and solve, problems in the APT design, BR management was under increasing pressure from the press. By the early 1980s the project had been running for over a decade and the trains were still not in service. Private Eye lampooned it with a timetable proclaiming "The APT arriving at Platform 4 is fifteen years late". Press pressure led to political pressure which led to management pressure, and the APT team was told to put the train into operation in spite of its ongoing problems. This led to one of the most infamous events in rail history. On 7 December 1981 the press was invited aboard APT for its first official run from Glasgow to London. They noted a distinct sickening sensation from the tilt system, and nicknamed it the "queezy rider". They also reported that the stewardess, Marie Docherty, suggested the solution was to "just stand with your feet apart." BR engineers did little to address the problem when one publicly suggested that the reporters were simply too drunk on BR's free liquor. On its return trip from London the next day, one of the coaches stuck in position when the tilt system failed, and this was heavily reported in the press. APT became the focus of a storm of negative press reporting, with every failure extensively reported on and continued claims that the entire project was a white elephant. For instance, when it was learned that only two of the three APT-P's was in operation and the third would be out of service for overhaul and maintenance, the press dubbed it the "Accident Prone Train". This was not helped by the fact that BR also ran a second train 15 minutes behind it in case it failed. And since the train was mixed among existing traffic, speed was limited to 125&nbsp;mph instead of its full speed. BR, desperate for some good publicity, hired former Blue Peter presenter Peter Purves to make the journey from Glasgow. On arrival at Euston, Purves claimed to have had an "excellent breakfast in the most delightful surroundings", and when asked about the train, said "it's smooth, it's quiet, and an altogether delightful experience." However, as the last statement was uttered there was a slight shudder visible, and the sound of rattling dishes was clearly audible. Over the next month the air system proved perfectly capable of freezing up even on a full length train. Doors repeatedly stuck, and the brake system could not be trusted. The trains were withdrawn from service at the end of the month. As the trainsets were removed from service a long series of upgrades and fixes followed. Among them was a fix for the motion sickness being experienced by riders. The commissioning team had been well aware of this problem before it entered service, but a fix was not available at that time. The problem was due to two effects. One was that the control system did not respond instantly, so the cars tended to not respond when the curve first started, and then reacted too rapidly to make up for this lag. The fix for this was to take information on the tilt from the car in front, giving the system the slight time advantage it needed. The other problem was similar to sea sickness. When the train rounded corners the eye could see that there was motion going on, but because the system removed this sensation there was a disconnect between the visual and the equilibrioception system. The solution was to slightly reduce the amount of tilt, so that there was always some leftover forces, which proved to completely cure the effect. Some of the senior managers in British Rail at the time were unwilling to commit the company to a single project, and so initiated a parallel project to design a train based on conventional technology as a stopgap. This was the High Speed Train (HST), which was also marketed under the InterCity 125 name. As the APT program dragged on, management began infighting and a round of empire building followed. Experienced engineering resources were withheld from the APT project, using them instead to press ahead as swiftly as possible with what they saw as a conventional rival to APT. The APT-P trains were quietly reintroduced into service in mid-1984 and operated regularly, the problems having been apparently corrected but the political and managerial will to continue the project and build the projected 140&nbsp;mph capable APT-S production vehicles had evaporated. Meanwhile, HST entered service as the InterCity 125 in 1976 and proved to be an all-round success. It's diesel operation and slightly slower speeds also meant it could operate on a wider variety of BR's network. Pressure to abandon APT in favour of HST was continual. Supporters of the APT were increasingly isolated, and the system was removed from service in the winter of 1985/6. This was made formal in 1987, when the trains were broken up and sent to museums. One APT-P set was kept at Glasgow Shields Depot and found use once or twice as an "EMU" to take journalists from Glasgow Central to Anderston railway station and back, for the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre. A second APT-P was stored in a siding behind Crewe Works. The "Glasgow" APT-P and the third APT-P were scrapped very quietly without publicity. WilliamsWilliams (1985) notes that work continued on a new variant, the APT-U (APT-Update), and that the project was later retitled InterCity 225, perhaps to distance it from the bad publicity surrounding the APT-P. The Mark 4 coach design that was introduced as part of the new IC225 sets for the East Coast Main Line electrification is a direct descendant of the APT-U, and the coach was designed for the retrofitting of the tilt mechanism, although this was never implemented. The Class 91 locomotives that power the IC225s also take many features from the APT-P power cars, including body- rather than bogie-mounted traction motors to reduce unsprung load, and having the transformer below rather than on top of the underframe to reduce the centre of gravity. Unlike the APT-P power cars, though, they were never intended to tilt.    Political and managerial pressure to show results led to the three APT-P trains being launched in 1981 when, in hindsight, they were not ready for service; many technical problems persisted and reliability was not high. Predictably, the train suffered highly visible problems. Two APT-Ps were intended to be available for service at any given time, with the third out of service for overhaul and maintenance. The APT was often jokingly referred to by passengers as the 'Accident Prone Train' because of this. Members of the press riding the first demonstration train apparently reported high levels of motion sickness and this caused considerable bad publicity; though it has been suggested by some, including APT designer Prof. Alan Wickens,The Great Train Robbery - The Manufacturer that the 'motion sickness' suffered by the press may have had more to do with them over-indulging in BR's "liquid hospitality". None of the other passengers on this demonstration run or subsequent runs noticed the problem. The commissioning team, however, was familiar with the feeling of motion sickness. The tilt sensors on each vehicle, which determined when and by how much a vehicle should tilt on curves, detected the need for tilting too late, so that a smooth transition into tilt, unnoticed by passengers, didn't occur. The tilt system didn't "lean into the curve" as it approached. Effectively passengers experienced the curve, then the tilt cut in, lagging the curve. The eyes could see turning but the body did not feel it in synchronisation; moving the tilt sensor control to the preceding vehicle and reducing the tilt by a few degrees so that the curves could be felt cured this. On one test run with the press, certain units of the train 'stuck' tilted to one side for parts of the journey. The first "public"  APT-P run on 7 December 1981, from Glasgow Central to London Euston, was successful. Even so, British Rail played safe by running a scheduled service out of Glasgow some 15 minutes later. Some APT-P cars suffered tilt failures during the return trip out of London and this was widely publicised by the media. The extremely cold weather also caused problems with the brakes freezing. The trains were withdrawn from revenue service four days later. This highly visible failure was eventually to prove terminal for the project. The APT-P trains were quietly reintroduced into service in mid-1984 and operated regularly, the problems having been apparently corrected but the political and managerial will to continue the project and build the projected 140 mph capable APT-S production vehicles had evaporated. One APT-P set was kept at Glasgow Shields Depot and found use once or twice as an "EMU" to take journalists from Glasgow Central to Anderston railway station and back, for the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre. A second APT-P was stored in a siding behind Crewe Works. The "Glasgow" APT-P and the third APT-P were scrapped very quietly without publicity. WilliamsWilliams (1985) notes that work continued on a new variant, the APT-U (APT-Update), and that the project was later retitled InterCity 225, perhaps to distance it from the bad publicity surrounding the APT-P. The Mark 4 coach design that was introduced as part of the new IC225 sets for the East Coast Main Line electrification is a direct descendant of the APT-U, and the coach was designed for the retrofitting of the tilt mechanism, although this was never implemented. The Class 91 locomotives that power the IC225s also take many features from the APT-P power cars, including body- rather than bogie-mounted traction motors to reduce unsprung load, and having the transformer below rather than on top of the underframe to reduce the centre of gravity. Unlike the APT-P power cars, though, they were never intended to tilt.  The APT-E unit is now owned by the National Railway Museum and is on display at its Locomotion museum at Shildon in County Durham. Also at Locomotion is an APT-P power car, number 49006, which is due to undergo restoration work after having been stored outdoors at York for many years. The second APT-P unit is now on display at Crewe Heritage Centre and can be seen from trains passing on the adjacent WCML. During special events, the driving trailer 370003 offers a "tilt" experience which is basically tilting the coach when it is static. The APT power car technology was imported almost wholesale, though without the tilt, into the design of the Class 91 locomotives."The Design and Development of the Class 91 Locomotive", P J Donnison and G R West, Main Line Railway Electrification Conference 1989 - Proceedings of the Institute of Electrical Engineers, 1989."The design, manufacture and assembly of the British Rail Class 91, 25kV 225km/h locomotive", M L Broom and G W Smart, Proceedings of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers Vol. 205, 1990. The APT vehicles were largely constructed using welded aluminium extrusions, rather than the then more conventional stressed skin steel monocoque. The use of aluminium in railway vehicle construction is now almost universal and apart from the tilting systems is one of the more successful technologies trialed on the APT. While tilting trains had been in development in other countries for some years, and even seen service, so-called 'pendular tilt' had not been particularly satisfactory. The designs of the APT 'powered tilt' carriages were sold to Fiat Ferroviaria, which exploited the technology in the design of the second generation of the functionally similar Pendolino trains, coupled with an in-house electronic control system (first generation systems had been in service since 1976). Italian Pendolino systems incorporating original APT technology have since been sold internationally, including the British Class 390 Pendolino introduced on the West Coast Main Line from late 2003 onwards, culminating in September 2004 with the introduction of a full passenger timetable, with tilting enabled from Manchester and Birmingham to London Euston. The introduction of the Squadron fleet designated APT-S did not occur as had been originally envisaged. The APT project succumbed to an insufficient political will in the United Kingdom to persist in solving the teething difficulties experienced with the many immature technologies necessary for a ground breaking project of this nature. The decision not to proceed was made against a backdrop of negative public perceptions shaped by media coverage of the time.Potter (1987)Gourvish (2004), Chapter 3: Operations, Productivity and Technological Change. The APT is acknowledged as a milestone in the development of the current generation of tilting high speed trains. 25 years later on an upgraded infrastructure the Class 390 Pendolinos now match the APT's scheduled timings. The London to Glasgow route by APT (1980/81 timetable) was 4hrs 10min, the same time as the fastest Pendolino timing (December 2008 timetable). In 2006, on a one off non-stop run for charity, a Pendolino completed the Glasgow to London journey in 3hrs 55min, whereas the APT completed the opposite London to Glasgow journey in 3hrs 52min in 1984. Gourvish, Terry (2002). British Rail: 1974-97: From Integration to Privatisation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-926909-2. Potter, Stephen (1987). On the Right Lines?: The limits of technological innovation. London: Frances Pinter (Publishers). ISBN 0-86187-580-X. Williams, Hugh, (1985). APT: A Promise Unfulfilled. London: Ian Allan Ltd. ISBN 0-7110-1474-4. Body, Geoffrey, (1981). Advanced Passenger Train: The official illustrated account of British Rail's revolutionary new 155&nbsp;mph train. Weston-super-Mare: Avon-Anglia Publications & Services. ISBN 0-905466-37-3. Nock,  O.S. (1980). Two Miles a Minute. London: Patrick Stephens Limited. ISBN 0-85059-412-X British Transport Films (1975) E for Experimental. Republished 2006 by the British Film Institute on DVD as part of British Transport Films Collection (Vol. 3): Running A Railway. APT-E APT-P APT-E at Old Dalby APT-P high speed pantograph tests on WCML Wickens, A., (1988) APT - With Hindsight Newsletter of the Friends of the National Railway Museum, No.84, Summer 1988 Advanced Passenger Train Info Site Advanced Passenger Train Restoration Site
