  Alfred Thaddeus Crane Pennyworth is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, most commonly in association with Batman. The character first appears in Batman #16 (April 1943), and was created by writers Bob Kane and Bill Finger, and artist Jerry Robinson. Alfred serves as a loyal, tireless butler who assists his employer's secret life as Batman. In modern interpretations, he is depicted as Bruce Wayne's butler, legal guardian, best friend, aide-de-camp, and surrogate father following the murders of Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne. He sometimes has been called "Batman's batman". He also provides comic relief, as his sometimes sarcastic and cynical attitude often adds humor to dialogue between himself and Batman. A vital part of the Batman mythos, Alfred was nominated for the Wizard Fan Award for Favorite Supporting Male Character in 1994. In non-comics media, the character has been portrayed by noted actors William Austin, Eric Wilton, Michael Gough, and Michael Caine on film and by Alan Napier, Efrem Zimbalist, Jr., Ian Abercrombie, and Sean Pertwee on television; Jeremy Irons will portray the character in his next film appearance.  When Alfred Pennyworth first appeared, he was overweight and clean-shaven; however, when the 1943 Batman serial was released, William Austin, the actor who played Alfred, was trim and sported a thin moustache. DC editors wanted the comic Alfred to resemble his cinematic counterpart, so in Detective Comics #83 (January 1944), Alfred vacationed at a health resort, where he slimmed down and grew a mustache. This look has remained with the character ever since, even surviving his "death" and resurrection.Detective Comics #356 in 1966 Alfred was originally conceived as a comedic foil for Batman and Robin. In most early tales, he made bungling attempts to be a detective on a par with the young masters. He was given a four-page feature of his own, and the feature lasted thirteen issues, skipping Batman #35, with the last story in Batman #36. The stories followed a simple formula, with Alfred solving a crime and catching the culprits entirely by accident. In later years, the comedic aspects of the character were downplayed. The Pre-Crisis comics (the comics that were published by DC Comics between 1938 and 1986) established Alfred as a retired actor and intelligence agent who followed the deathbed wish of his dying father Jarvis Pennyworth to carry on the tradition of serving the Wayne family. To that end, Alfred introduced himself to Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson at Wayne Manor and insisted on becoming their valet. Although the pair did not want one, especially since they did not want to jeopardize their secret identities with a servant in the house, they did not have the heart to reject Alfred. Initially, Alfred discovered their identities by accident; while fighting a burglar in Batman #16 (Alfred's first appearance), he accidentally hit a switch and opened a sliding panel leading to the Batcave. He is helpful to the duo, following them to a theatre where they are captured, bound and gagged by a criminal gang, and rescues them after Batman attracts his attention by knocking a rope down before the crooks return. This was revised in Batman #110 (September 1957); during his first night at Wayne Manor, Alfred awoke to moaning and followed the sound to the secret passage to the staircase leading to the Batcave and met his would-be employers in their superhero identities. As it turned out, the wounds were actually insignificant, but Alfred's care convinced the residents that their butler could be trusted. Since then, Alfred included the support staff duties of the Dynamic Duo on top of his regular tasks. Ironically, Alfred's loyalty would lead him to become a member of Batman's rogue's gallery. While pushing Batman and Robin out of the way of a falling boulder, Alfred was seemingly killed in Detective #328 (June 1964). It was revealed in Detective #356 (October 1966) that he had been revived by a scientist named Brandon Crawford. His attempt at regeneration resulted in a dramatic change: Alfred awoke from his apparent death with pasty white skin with circular markings, superhuman powers, including telekinesis, and a desire to destroy Batman and Robin. Calling himself The Outsider, he indirectly battled the Dynamic Duo on a number of occasions, using others as his puppets &ndash; the Grasshopper Gang in Detective #334, Zatanna in Detective #336, and even the Batmobile itself in Detective #340 &ndash; and generally only appeared as a mocking voice over the radio. He did not physically appear in the comics until Detective #356, when he is bathed again in the rays of the regeneration machine during a struggle with Batman, and returns to normal, with no memory of his time as a supervillain. His time as the Outsider is collected in Showcase Presents: Batman Volumes 1 and 2. Alfred was later reunited with his long-lost daughter, Julia Remarque, though this element was not included in Post-Crisis comics. Her mother was the DC war heroine Mademoiselle Marie, whom Alfred had met while working as an intelligence agent in occupied France during World War II. In the Post-Crisis comics' continuity, Alfred has been the Wayne family valet all of Bruce's life and had helped his master establish his superhero career from the beginning. In addition, he was Bruce's legal guardian following the deaths of his parents. Alfred's history has been modified several times over the years, creating assorted versions. In one such version, Alfred was hired away from the British Royal Family by Bruce's parents, and he virtually raised Bruce after they were murdered. Meanwhile, another version of Alfred's Post-Crisis life was slightly more closely linked to his pre-Crisis counterpart. In this version, Alfred is an actor on the English stage who agrees to become the Waynes' butler to honor his father's dying wish. At the time he begins working for the Waynes, Bruce is a young child. After several months, Alfred voices the desire to quit and return home to continue his life as an actor. However, these plans are momentarily forgotten when young Bruce returns home after getting into a fight with a school bully. Alfred teaches Bruce to handle the bully strategically, rather than using brute force. Following Alfred's advice, Bruce takes care of his bully problem. Upon returning home, Bruce requests that Alfred stay, and Alfred agrees without a second thought. Alfred raises Bruce after the Waynes are murdered. Alfred later helps Bruce raise Dick Grayson, Jason Todd, and Tim Drake, all of whom were adopted by Bruce Wayne and became his partner Robin. He also had close friendships with other members of the Bat-Clan including Barbara Gordon and Cassandra Cain. Alfred often acts as a father-figure to Bruce, and a grandfather to Dick, Jason, and Tim. He is also highly respected by those heroes who are aware of his existence, including Superman, Wonder Woman, Green Lantern, and the original Teen Titans. Alfred has also been romantically linked to Dr. Leslie Thompkins, though his relationship with her never came to anything, particularly after she apparently allowed Stephanie Brown to die from neglect. He also developed feelings for Tim Drake's stepmother, but again, nothing came of it. During the events of Knightquest, Alfred accompanies Wayne to England and becomes enraged when Wayne insists on endangering his own health while paraplegic. This was the culmination of several weeks of Wayne's self-destructive behavior, and when Wayne returns to Gotham City, Alfred remains in England, tendering his resignation. He spends some time vacationing in Antarctica and The Bahamas before returning to England. Dick Grayson tracks him down several months later and convinces him to return to Wayne Manor. In that story, it was revealed he had walked out of his own wedding years earlier. His resourcefulness came to the fore in the No Man's Land storyline, especially in Legends of the Dark Knight #118. Batman is missing for weeks, leaving Alfred alone to watch his city for him. He uses his skills as an actor, storyteller, medic, and spy to survive and collect information on the recently destroyed society. Alfred even uses hand-to-hand combat in a rare one-panel fight sequence between him and a pair of slavers that ends with his rescue by Batman. In Batman #677, agents of Batman's mysterious enemy the Black Glove attack and beat Alfred in front of Bruce and Jezebel Jet, severely injuring him. In the same issue, a reporter from The Gotham Gazette suggests to Commissioner Gordon that Alfred may be Bruce's biological father and that this may be a reason for the murder of Martha Wayne. Alfred later denies the entire story, agreeing with Bruce that it was a fabrication. In Batman and the Outsiders Special, Alfred is seen apologizing at the graves of Thomas and Martha Wayne at the loss of Bruce, commenting that he grieves as a parent, regarding Bruce as his son. Later, a secret panel in Alfred's room opens, the result of a fail-safe planted by Bruce in the event of his death. Bruce leaves his one final task and also gives him an emotional goodbye, telling Alfred he considered him as a father. Alfred is left emotionally shattered, commenting more than once that, even if his biological fatherhood is a fabrication, in a deeper sense he actually was Bruce Wayne's father, having watched over him for years and feeling he failed him in the last moments. After the event of Final Crisis, when Batman was apparently killed in action, Alfred finds himself with the task of raising Bruce's biological son Damian with Grayson. Batman: Battle for the Cowl sees Alfred allowing Damian Wayne to take on his first mission as Robin, giving Damian a Robin tunic and calling on Squire to assist the new Boy Wonder in finding Tim Drake, who went missing hunting down Jason Todd. Alfred also assists Grayson in his role as Gotham's new Dark Knight. After discovering that the original Batman was actually lost in time after his battle with Darkseid, Alfred immediately seeks clues to his whereabouts. Eventually, Bruce finds his way to the present. After Batman successfully expands his mission globally with Batman Inc., Bruce assumes full responsibility as a father, and Alfred assists him in raising Damian. In The New 52 (a reboot of the DC universe), it is revealed that Alfred's father Jarvis Pennyworth was the butler of the Wayne family before Alfred when Bruce was still a child. Jarvis was blackmailed by the Court of Owls to set a trap for the pregnant Martha Wayne. Despite declining, the Court managed to cause a car accident that caused the child to be born prematurely and eventually to have died. Jarvis attempted to resign from his services and write a letter to his son in which he describes the manor as a cursed place, and tells Alfred that he should not begin his service under the Wayne family. However, Jarvis was unable to send it as he was murdered that night. During the fifth issue in the Batman: Endgame arc, the Joker broke into the Batcave, and during a confrontation with Alfred, cut off Alfred's hand. Julia confirms to Bruce later in the issue that Alfred survived the encounter and is in a stable condition. Following the death of Bruce Wayne, Julia says that with current medical technology, they can have Alfred's hand reattached without any complications. However Alfred refuses, stating that with Bruce dead, he no longer has need of it as he has no one left to serve. Even with the loss of Bruce as Batman, Alfred still assists the Bat-Family in the Batcave along with Julia. After Bruce is discovered to be alive but with no memory of who he is or his life as Batman, Alfred tells Bruce everything that had happened in his life up to the point of the creation of Batman. Alfred did this so that after years of service to the people of Gotham and the world that Bruce had earned the reward of a life without pain and the burning to desire to be Batman, so that his life as Bruce Wayne can finally begin. In Frank Miller and Jim Lee's All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder, Alfred is a tougher individual with a different backstory. Following Batman's assault on the corrupt Gotham City police, Alfred and Vicki Vale are caught in the devastating car wreckage Batman creates (not aware of their presence) and Vale is badly hurt. Alfred is seen, shirtless and muscled, applying a tourniquet and generally taking control of the situation. He is described as having been a medic in the RAF and as ex-British Secret Service.  Alfred appears as a main character in Geoff Johns' and Gary Frank's Batman: Earth One. In this incarnation, Alfred was a member of the Royal Marines. Alfred met Thomas Wayne during a tour of duty in the Middle East and the two became good friends. During a battle, Alfred saved Thomas' life but lost his right leg in the process. It is also implied that both he and Thomas are keeping a traumatic secret. Discharged back to his home in London, Alfred received a gift from Thomas in the form of a very expensive prosthetic leg. He later traveled to Gotham City to visit his friend and found himself arriving on the night of a campaign party for Thomas' bid at the mayoral office. Afraid for his friend after hearing of the death threats on his life, Alfred tried to talk Thomas out of going to the movies with his wife and son, but Thomas refused to allow threats to keep him from enjoying his weekly movie night with Martha and Bruce. Later that night, Alfred was called to the police station. Thomas and Martha had been killed by a mugger outside the theatre and Bruce had been orphaned. To Alfred's shock, he discovered that Thomas and Martha had named him Bruce's legal guardian some time ago. Unsure of himself, Alfred still made it his mission to look out for Bruce as he grew up. When Bruce took on his costumed persona of Batman and began his war on crime, Alfred reluctantly took on the role of confidante and advisor, often telling Bruce to simply carry a gun instead of a belt full of untested gadgets. Alfred later saved Bruce's life by shooting Mayor Oswald Cobblepot. Though Alfred introduced himself to the eight-year-old Bruce as his butler, it is obvious he never serves as a manservant in the story otherwise as Bruce's guardian and mentor. However, he is recruited by Thomas as his family's head of security prior of Thomas and his wife's deaths. He is also a skilled martial artist, and trains Bruce the combat skills he would eventually utilize as Batman. He has a daughter living in Seoul, South Korea with her mother, where Alfred had previously worked at a security firm, implying Julia Remarque's existence in this continuity.Batman: Earth One  During the "Trinity War" event of The New 52, it is revealed that the leader of the Secret Society is Alfred from Earth-3 who serves Owlman of the Crime Syndicate of America.Justice League Vol. 2 #23 Alfred makes a very brief appearance in the 1997 Tangent Comics One Shot Green Lantern in a story revolving around the Tangent versions of King Faraday and Roy Raymond. In this version Alfred Pennyworth is the head of a publishing empire that owned "The House Of Mystery". Alfred appears in Tiny Titans, and often has to make Robin stand in the corner because he has misbehaved. Alfred introduced himself as the son of a butler named Jarvis in one of his early appearances, and the convention being that British butlers are known by their surnames, it was unclear whether Jarvis was his father's first or last name, the latter case which would have made Alfred's name Alfred Jarvis. Whether by coincidence or not, the name "Jarvis" was later used for the Avengers' butler, Edwin Jarvis, a character with many similarities to Alfred. Alfred's name was later given officially as Alfred Beagle. This name was subsequently given to an alternative version of the character from the world of Earth-Two, and Pennyworth became Alfred's accepted surname in the mainstream continuity. Alfred has also used the alias "Thaddeus Crane", which is derived from his middle names. His full name of Alfred Thaddeus Crane Pennyworth was depicted on his tombstone in Superman/Batman: Generations. The Beagle surname was brought back into continuity (post-Crisis on Infinite Earths but pre-Infinite Crisis) as Alfred's original name as an actor and Cold War spy. He adopted the "Pennyworth" surname after his brief intelligence career, based on a comment from his handler that his life was not even worth a penny (in reference to a cyanide pill concealed within a fake penny). Grant Morrison's run has referred to the Beagle surname as a possible stage name. In the 2012 film The Dark Knight Rises, Bruce Wayne leaves the residue of his estate to Alfred, listing him in the will as Alfred J. Pennyworth. A highly intelligent and resourceful man, Alfred runs the day-to-day operations of Wayne Manor and maintains much of the equipment of the Batcave beneath it. A former actor, he can use his acting and disguise skills to help Batman in the field when necessary, and is even capable of impersonating Bruce Wayne on the telephone convincingly. He has also provided first aid up to and including suturing wounds and removing bullets, as well as occasional tactical support. He is also able to perform arthroscopy and other advanced medical procedures, thus limiting, if not eliminating, the need for hospital medical treatment even in the face of grievous injuries. Nevertheless, Batman still requires professional medical treatment when Bane breaks his back (Batman: Knightfall) and Hush's machinations result in his suffering a skull fracture (Batman: Hush). On these occasions, Alfred admits that his own skills are inadequate for such medical procedures. While not as skilled at martial arts as Bruce Wayne, Alfred is still nearly as resourceful. In one story in which he is kidnapped, he readily escapes and overcomes his captors without disturbing the cut of his suit. It was later mentioned that he had been kidnapped unsuccessfully 27 times (it should be noted, however, that these events take place in the Gotham Adventures comics, based on the animated adventures of Batman, and not within the standard DCU continuity). During Batman: The Resurrection of Ra's al Ghul, Ubu, Ra's al Ghul's musclebound bodyguard, attempts to use Alfred as a hostage, only to be disabled by a well timed sucker punch from Alfred. Presumably due to his lack of superpowers, the advanced combat training Bruce's other associates have, and Alfred's age, Alfred is the only member of the "Batman Family" that Bruce does not mind using a firearm, in his case favoring a shotgun when dealing with direct attacks on his person. Current issues of the various Batman comics seem to indicate that Alfred is a pioneer in and has also mastered several fields of rose breeding (even creating his own, the "Pennyworth Blue"), computer programming, computer engineering, electrical engineering, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, nanotechnology, and biotechnology as he singlehandedly builds, programs, and maintains much of Batman's next-generational technology such as the Batcomputer. Alfred Pennyworth is a supporting character in the Batman: Arkham franchise where he is voiced by Martin Jarvis.   Alfred appears in the Elseworlds series Superman & Batman: Generations. He serves the Wayne family before dying in 1967, but his spirit remains around to give Bruce advice. In Generations 2, he makes his final appearance in 1975, when he convinces the ghost of Dick Grayson not to kill the Joker. He manages to convince Dick to pass over, but in the process his own soul crosses over, meaning he cannot come back. In Batman: Dark Knight Dynasty, in a timeline where the Waynes were never killed, Alfred assists Bruce in investigating his parents' deaths when they apparently fall out of their penthouse (Revealed to have been done due to the influence of Vandal Savage's henchwoman the Scarecrone when the Waynes threatened his plan to acquire the meteor that gave him his powers). While studying available information on the meteor after Bruce determines its connection to events, Alfred discovers a record of the unusual energy reading it emits, but triggers a booby-trap that destroys Wayne Manor and kills him. Five centuries later, Bruce's descendant Brenda Wayne discovers a fragmented recording of Alfred and the energy reading that assists her in her own investigations into Savage's activities. Alfred plays a prominent role in the "Vampire Batman" trilogy where Batman is turned into a vampire to fight Dracula, forging Batman's weapons to use against the remaining members of Dracula's 'family' and subsequently working with Commissioner Gordon after Batman succumbs to his vampiric instincts and begins to kill his old enemies. At the conclusion of the trilogy, with Gordon being hunted by Two-Face and Killer Croc in the remains of the Batcave, Alfred sacrifices his life to allow Batman to drink his blood, giving his old master the strength to save Gordon and Gotham itself one last time before he allows himself to die to end the threat that he has become.  Jarvis: Alfred's father in both pre-Crisis and New 52 continuity. Mademoiselle Marie: A war heroine with whom Alfred (while working as an intelligence agent in France) has a daughter in pre-Crisis continuity.Detective Comics #501-502 Julia Remarque: Alfred's daughter by Mademoiselle Marie. Wilfred Pennyworth: Alfred's brother, Wilfred is referenced in the late 1960s and early 1970s and is mentioned in the 1997 film Batman & Robin. Margaret Wilson née Pennyworth: Alfred and Wilfred Pennyworth's sister, in the 1997 film Batman & Robin. Daphne Pennyworth: Alfred Pennyworth's niece, daughter of Wilfred Pennyworth, Daphne briefly appeared in the late 1960s/early 1970s. Barbara Wilson: Alfred's niece, daughter of Margaret Wilson née Pennyworth in the 1997 film Batman & Robin. Alan Napier portrayed Alfred in the live-action TV series Batman starring Adam West and Burt Ward. However, his surname Pennyworth was never used. If Bruce Wayne was in occasional danger, Alfred would secretly wear the Batman costume. This emergency situation occurred in a few episodes of this series. Ian Abercrombie portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in the live-action TV series Birds of Prey. Sean Pertwee portrays a younger, more deadly, version of Alfred Pennyworth in the Batman prequel series Gotham. He is portrayed as former Royal Marines whom Bruce convinces to train him.episode "The Last Laugh" As in Batman Begins, he is Bruce Wayne's legal guardian after the murder of Thomas and Martha Wayne; yet the adolescent Bruce asserts himself as Alfred's employer, creating a conflict of authorities. Olan Soule voiced Alfred in the cartoon The Batman/Superman Hour. Alfred Pennyworth appeared in the Challenge of the Super Friends, voiced by William Callaway. In the episode "Wanted: The Superfriends", he is among the male humans that get turned into a Bizarro. Alfred Pennyworth appeared in The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians, voiced by Jack Angel. Alfred Pennyworth appeared as recurring character in the DC animated universe, voiced by Clive Revill (in the first three produced episodes for Batman: The Animated Series before leaving due to a previous commitment) and by Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. (throughout the rest of Batman: The Animated Series as well as for the character's appearances in The New Batman Adventures, Superman: The Animated Series, Static Shock and the Justice League cartoon series). This version combines elements from pre-Crisis and post-Crisis continuities; Alfred has been serving the Wayne family since before Thomas's and Martha's death and helped his young charge assume the Batman identity, but was also revealed to be a former agent for the British Intelligence Agency MI-6. His character is also alluded occasionally in Batman Beyond. Alfred Pennyworth appears in the animated TV series The Batman, voiced by Alastair Duncan. In this incarnation, his grandfather served the Penguin's obnoxious family in England, but was mistreated and then fired. Also, Alfred is shown to be younger than other depictions. Alfred Pennyworth is featured in Batman: The Brave and the Bold, voiced by James Garrett. He appears in a non-speaking cameo in Batman's flashbacks in "Invasion of the Secret Santas", and appears again in a non-speaking cameo in "Chill of the Night!". In "The Super-Batman of Planet X", a robot likeness named Alpha-Red (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) appears and serves as the robotic butler of the Batman of Zur-En-Arrh. In "The Knights of Tomorrow", Alfred works on a book about the events depicted in the episode. In "The Triumvirate of Terror," when Lex Luthor breaks into the Batcave, Alfred briefly masquerades as Batman and fights Luthor to give Bruce enough time to change into his outfit and avoid Lex finding out his secret identity. Alfred Pennyworth appears in the Young Justice episode "Downtime", voiced by Jeff Bennett. Alfred Pennyworth appears as a main character in Beware the Batman, voiced by J. B. Blanc. In the series, he is portrayed as a former agent of MI-6, along with being Bruce Wayne's butler and bodyguard. He is also godfather to Katana. Unlike earlier portrayals, he has a muscular physique and is a proficient hand-to-hand combatant. Alfred is also more involved in the story line, having connections to major villains Ra's al Ghul and Deathstroke. Alfred Pennyworth appears in Lego Batman: Be-Leaguered, voiced by Nolan North.http://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/tv-shows/DC-Super-Heroes-Batman-Be-leaguered/voice-credits/ William Austin portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in the 1943 serial Batman. Austin's appearance influenced the change of Alfred's design from the original fat, clean shaven Alfred. Eric Wilton portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in the 1949 serial Batman and Robin. Alan Napier portrayed Alfred in the 1966 live-action film Batman, based on the 1960s TV series. Michael Gough portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in the Tim Burton/Joel Schumacher Batman film series. In the fourth film Batman & Robin, he has a niece named Barbara Wilson who turns into Batgirl. Gough also portrayed Alfred in a 1989 Diet Coke commercial, in the BBC radio-drama presentation of the "Knightfall" story arc from the Batman comics, and in a series of OnStar commercials featuring Batman. In flashback scenes of Batman & Robin, a young Alfred is portrayed by Jon Simmons. Michael Caine portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in the The Dark Knight Trilogy. In Batman Begins, he is Bruce Wayne's legal guardian after Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne are murdered by Joe Chill. When Bruce vanishes for seven years and is declared dead by Wayne Enterprises' CEO William Earle in order to claim his shares, this plan is thwarted because Bruce left everything to Alfred. After Bruce returns from training in the League of Shadows, Alfred is told of his goal to become a symbol to frighten the criminals of Gotham City. Alfred helps Bruce arrange the order of the tools necessary for Bruce to become Batman, and encourages Bruce to feign a social life to deflect attention from the idea that he could be Batman. When the League of Shadows attack Wayne Manor, Alfred saves Bruce when trapped under a beam and rallies his surrogate son to resume his fight to save Gotham. In the aftermath, Alfred offers some suggestions about updating the Batcave. In The Dark Knight, Alfred and Bruce Wayne have moved to a downtown penthouse and the Batcave has been relocated to Gotham Harbor while Wayne Manor is being rebuilt. When Bruce travels to Hong Kong to capture a Mafia accountant, Alfred invents an alibi for Bruce. While reflecting on the Joker's reign of terror in Gotham, Alfred recalls a tale from his past career as a British intelligence agent about a thrill-seeking bandit in order to explain to Bruce that some men "just want to watch the world burn". Rachel Dawes gives Alfred the task of giving Bruce a letter "when the time is right". After Rachel's death, Alfred reads the letter and discovers that she was going to marry Harvey Dent. He later burns the letter, reflecting that, just as the people of Gotham would need to believe in Dent, Bruce needed to believe that Rachel loved him. In The Dark Knight Rises, Alfred has grown concerned as Bruce has not moved on from Rachel or Batman eight years later. Alfred reveals that during Bruce's absence, he frequently visited a restaurant in Florence in the hope that he would see Bruce there, settled down and happy. Alfred reluctantly assists Bruce in finding out information about the mercenary Bane. Following Batman's first encounter with Bane, Alfred fears that Bruce will get himself killed, and threatens to leave in order to dissuade Bruce. Alfred then tells Bruce that Rachel wanted to marry Harvey Dent, and that he burned her letter to protect Bruce's feelings. Angry and hurt, Bruce orders Alfred to leave. Alfred returns after Batman apparently sacrifices himself to save Gotham, and attends Bruce's funeral with Commissioner James Gordon, Lucius Fox and Detective John Blake. Over Bruce's grave, Alfred tearfully apologizes to Thomas and Martha for having failed to protect their son. When Alfred returns to the Florentine restaurant, he looks across to see Bruce alive and dining with Selina Kyle. They exchange knowing smiles and Alfred leaves, happy that Bruce has begun moving on with his life. Jeremy Irons has been cast as the character in the 2016 DC Comics film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. voiced Alfred Pennyworth in the animated films Batman: Mask of the Phantasm, Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero, and Batman: Mystery of the Batwoman. Alastair Duncan voiced Alfred Pennyworth in the animated film The Batman vs. Dracula and Batman Unlimited: Animal Instincts. David McCallum voiced Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: Gotham Knight, Son of Batman and Batman vs. Robin. Alan Oppenheimer voiced Alfred Pennyworth in Superman/Batman: Public Enemies. Jim Piddock voiced Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: Under the Red Hood. Jeff Bennett reprises his role as Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: Year One. Robin Atkin Downes voiced Alfred Pennyworth in Justice League: Doom. Michael Jackson voiced Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: The Dark Knight Returns Part 1 and 2. Alfred Pennyworth makes a non-speaking cameo appearance in Lego Batman: The Movie - DC Super Heroes Unite, an adaptation of the video game of the same name. Martin Jarvis reprises his role as Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: Assault on Arkham. James Garrett reprises his role as Alfred Pennyworth in Batman: Bad Blood. Ralph Fiennes will be voicing Alfred in the upcoming animated movie The Lego Batman Movie. An Easter egg in World of Warcraft: Wrath of the Lich King shows a character named Alfred Copperworth, a homage to Alfred Pennyworth, located in the Purple Parlor in the city of Dalaran (a copper is the lowest form of currency in the game, equivalent almost to a penny, and was the metal used to make the original U.S. penny). Alfred Pennyworth appears in the Batman Begins video game, voiced by Michael Caine. Alfred Pennyworth appears in LEGO Batman for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Nintendo DS and Wii as a playable character.Game Informer features a two-page gallery of the many heroes and villains who appear in the game with a picture for each character and a descriptive paragraph. See "LEGO Batman: Character Gallery," Game Informer 186 (October 2008): 92. Alfred Pennyworth appears in Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes, voiced by Steven Blum. Alfred Pennyworth appears as a playable character in Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham, voiced by Robin Atkin Downes. In one level, Batman ends up mind-controlled by Brainiac's ship causing Robin and Alfred to follow him through the Batcave. When playable, the tray that Alfred is carrying can enable him to cross through fiery areas. Downes would later return to voice the character in Lego Dimensions. Alfred Pennyworth's biography can be unlocked in Batman: Arkham Asylum. The player must scan a plaque describing one of Bruce Wayne's donations to the Arkham Medical Center. He is referenced consistently in Batman: Arkham City, while the character does not make an actual appearance, he remains in constant radio contact with the players as the game's storyline progresses, and his bio appears. In Batman: Arkham Origins, The character makes his first in-game appearance in the series, as the prequel shows his different mentality towards Bruce Wayne's adventures as Batman. Throughout the game, there are several instances where he disapproves of the techniques which Batman uses. Batman seems to hold Alfred at a distance, often shown taking advantage of his butler and shunning any attempts of warmth. When hired assassins target Batman, Alfred pleads with him to abandon his vigilante persona, but his words fall on deaf ears. Bane knows that Batman and Bruce Wayne are one and the same. He breaks into the Batcave and beats Alfred close to death before Batman can get to him (having taken a detour to defeat Firefly). Arriving in time to see Alfred die, Batman is able to save him by electric shocks from Electrocutioner's gauntlets which helped to restart Alfred's heart. The event leaves Batman so shaken he considers giving up on saving the city. With his understanding of Batman renewed, Alfred convinces him to keep fighting. After this, he continues to help Batman as he travels to Blackgate Prison to stop the chaos. This time, Batman shows gratitude towards Alfred. In the "Cold, Cold Heart" DLC, Alfred is present with Bruce Wayne at a party at Wayne Manor commemorating Ferris Boyle until Mr. Freeze crashes the party with Penguin's gang to capture Boyle. Upon Bruce becoming Batman, he was able to rescue Alfred and the other hostages. In Batman: Arkham Knight, He contacts Batman throughout the game again through a holographic projector giving Batman valuable information. In the ending where Batman's secret identity is revealed, he and Alfred are supposedly killed in a large explosion at Wayne Manor, though it is possible they faked their deaths.
