 Algonquin is a village in Illinois located in both McHenry and Kane counties. It is a northwest suburb of Chicago, located approximately 40 miles from the Loop. The 2010 Census placed the Village's population at 30,046, growing considerably from the 2000 Census figure of 23,276. The village is known as "The Gem of the Fox River Valley", since its downtown is nestled in the heart of Illinois' Fox River Valley.  Established in 1890 and long known as a small river community, the village is making the transition into a major regional hub, as it has experienced considerable suburban growth over the past 20 years.  Now stretching all the way west to the busy Randall Road corridor, Algonquin has become a major center of retail activity, with popular shopping centers and various well known restaurants, and a growing corporate campus.  Additionally, the village continues to see considerable residential growth.  The Village is proud that it has managed its growth to increase the commercial tax base, build great neighborhoods, preserve its character and history, and substantially increase its recreational offerings and quality of life.  Algonquin is located at  (42.162741, -88.302571). According to the 2010 census, Algonquin has a total area of , of which  (or 98.55%) is land and  (or 1.45%) is water.  The majority of Algonquin is approximately 2/3 in McHenry County, with approximately 1/3 in Kane County.  Algonquin is the 35th safest place to live in the United States. As of the census of 2004, there were 27,900 people, 8,300 households, and 7,100 families residing in the village.  The population density was 2,367.4 people per square mile (914.2/km²).  There were 7,952 housing units at an average density of 808.8 per square mile (312.3/km²). The racial makeup of the village was 94.26% White, 0.92% African American, 0.10% Native American, 2.35% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 1.20% from other races, and 1.16% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.07% of the population. Within the last decade, the Polish Community has doubled. There were 8,000 households out of which 50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 74.7% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 17.8% were non-families. 14.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 3.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 3.02 and the average family size was 3.38. In the village the population was spread out with 32.8% under the age of 18, 5.2% from 18 to 24, 36.8% from 25 to 44, 20.0% from 45 to 64, and 5.3% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 98.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.2 males. The median income for a household in the village was $99,873, and the median income for a family was $110,737. Males had a median income of $60,473 versus $36,624 for females. The per capita income for the village was $29,820.  About 1.0% of families and 1.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.5% of those under age 18 and 4.6% of those age 65 or over. Long before Europeans settled in Algonquin, the Potawatomi Native Americans originally inhabited the land.  Algonquin was the location of Indian burial mounds known in the 1800s as the Algonquin Mounds.automobile blue book, vol.c , 1917  By 1834 the first settler of Algonquin, Samuel Gillilan, came to the area from Virginia. Settlers Dr. Cornish, Dr. Plumleigh, Eli Henderson, Alex Dawson, and William Jackson arrived shortly thereafter. There was some dispute regarding the original name of Algonquin, and numerous other names were suggested including Denny's Ferry, Cornish Ferry, Cornishville, and Osceola. But Samuel Edwards suggested the name Algonquin and on December 23, 1847, the name Algonquin became official. The first signs of economic growth occurred in 1855 when the town saw the construction of the railroad, which enabled farmers in the neighboring area to have other means of getting their products to the markets in Chicago. Finally on February 25, 1890 the Village of Algonquin was formed. The Village Hall of Algonquin was erected on January 31, 1907 at 2 S. Main Street. and is still standing today, where it functions as a historical landmark and community gathering place. It served as the Village Hall of Algonquin until a new Village Hall was built at 2200 Harnish Drive in 1996. From 1906 to 1913, the automobile companies began to go to the Algonquin Hill Climbs, which was an event where if an automobile was able to make it up a series of steep hills in the Village, it would be given the stamp of approval. And because of that, the Algonquin Cup was formed which received national recognition at the time. The two hills used in the race were the Phillips Hill which extends from Illinois Route 31 to the cemetery and Perry Hill, located south of downtown, and which is now Lundstrom Lane. The village created a new hill for the race called Huntington Hill, which is now Huntington Drive. A park stands in place of the finish line of Huntington Hill at the intersection of Huntington Drive and Circle Drive which is called Hill Climb Park. The festival in recognition of the event continues to be held each year. For much of the 20th century, Algonquin was a quasi-resort town and people from the Chicago area would visit the town in order to escape urban life. The Fox River offered immense recreational opportunities and several summer homes were constructed. Soon, more people began living in Algonquin year-round. Algonquin remained a small town for much of the 20th Century, growing steadily, until the 1980s, when the Village's population exploded with new residential construction. The development continued in earnest in the 1990s and 2000s. The village's first shopping center, Algonquin Town Center, was constructed in the late 1980s on East Algonquin Road and numerous die & mold industries were established west of downtown. In the 1990s, development shifted to Randall Road, which saw the construction of numerous retailers, restaurants, and services, beginning in 1993. In 2004, the 80-store Algonquin Commons outdoor mall (the largest outdoor mall in Illinois)[ ]   opened for business, followed by the Algonquin Galleria outdoor mall, which is under development and saw its first stores open in 2006. In the mid-2000s, development also began on the Algonquin Corporate Campus, which is slated to include industrial and office development spread over  on the southwest side of the Village, bringing hundreds of high-paying jobs to the area.[ ]  [ ]  The Village of Algonquin includes dozens of distinct neighborhoods, most of which are subdivisions. The Village's oldest neighborhood is the Old Town District.  The Old Town District, a neighborhood established by the Village, includes all those areas that were in the Village when the Village was first incorporated.  Major streets in this area include Illinois Route 31 (Main Street), Illinois Route 62 (Algonquin Road), Harrison Street, Washington Street, and Front Street. Included in this area are old Victorian homes, small shops, fine restaurants, churches and religious schools, and three of the village's most picturesque parks: Riverfront Park, Cornish Park, and Towne Park. The symobolic Historic Algonquin Village Hall serves as the centerpiece of this area. The Fox River and the McHenry County Prairie Path run through the heart of this area, providing for immense recreational opportunities. Under development in this area are the Riverside Square and Main Street Commons luxury condominium developments, which will add to the character of the village. Located north of the Old Town District along Harrison Street are the Algonquin Hills and Algonquin Shores neighborhoods, which consist of older homes mostly built before World War II, many of them within proximity to the Fox River. Pioneer Park is located in this area. Located on the west side of Route 31 is the Arrowhead subdivision. Located on the Village's east side, south of Algonquin Road, east of the Fox River, and west of Sandbloom Road is Rattray's Village Green and other subdivisions, consisting mostly of ranch homes built after World War II.  Also embedded in this area, at the northwest corner of Sandbloom Road and Souwanas Trail, is the Alta Vista neighborhood.  Located in the heart of this area are Eastview Elementary School, Algonquin Middle School, Snapper Field, Lions-Armstrong Memorial Pool, and the Algonquin Library - Eastgate Branch. Two fairly newer neighborhoods, located along Sandbloom Road, south of Algonquin Road, are Riverwood and Algonquin Lakes.  Riverwood was built in the 1980s and 1990s, while Algonquin Lakes was built in the early 2000s.  Both include single-family homes and townhomes.  Located within Algonquin Lakes is Algonquin Lakes Elementary, Algonquin Lakes Park, and a series of trails and lakes.  This neighborhood abuts Jewel-Osco and Walgreens.  Glenloch, an age 55+ age-restricted community consisting of single-family and multi-family homes, is pending development, just east of Algonquin Lakes along the south side of Algonquin Road. On the east side, north of Algonquin Road, are a series of single family home subdivisions with pockets of multi-family homes embedded within.  These subdivisions, built mostly in the 1980s and 1990s include Copper Oaks, Cinnamon Creek, Glen Oaks, Glenmoor, Spring Creek, and Old Oak Terrace.  Holder Park and Yellowstone Park are both found in this area.  These neighborhoods back up to Algonquin Town Center and other retail developments along East Algonquin Road.  Located north of this area, along Highland Avenue, is the expansive Presidential Park and the Prairie Path subdivision, which is pending construction. Located west of the Old Town District are a series of ranch and two-story homes in multiple subdivisions along Huntington Drive.  This area is commonly referred to as High Hill Farms, which was constructed in many phases over several years.  Homes in this region were built mostly in the 1970s and 1980s.  Hill Climb Park has become the centerpiece of this area, named after the famous auto races of the early 1900s which took place on the Huntington Drive hill.  Neubert Elementary School is also located in this area, where Huntington Drive branches off into two streets, Huntington Drive North and Harnish.  Highland Glen, a townhome community built in the early-mid-1990s, is located in the northern portion of this area, on the east side of Hanson Road. South of this area is Gaslight Terrace West and Gaslight Terrace North.  These include larger, pricier homes on big lots.  Gaslight Park and Braewood Park serve these neighborhoods. West of Hanson Road, south of Algonquin Road, east of Randall Road, and north of County Line Roads are a variety of neighborhoods, mostly built in the late 1980s and the 1990s.  These include Fieldcrest Farms, later phases of the High Hill Farms subdivision, Dawson Mill, Falcon Ridge, Arbor Hills, and Tunbridge.  The Algonquin Village Hall and Police Department are located in the heart of this area.  High Hill Park and Tunbridge Park serve neighborhood residents.  Important streets in this area include Huntington Drive, Harnish Drive, and Stonegate Road.  The Golf Club of Illinois abuts this area, as do several retail developments along Randall Road. Located south of County Line Road, along Sleepy Hollow Road and Longmeadow Parkway, and east of Randall Road is the expansive Willoughby Farms neighborhood, built in a variety of phases throughout the 1990s.  Westfield Community School and Willoughby Farms Park serve the area.  Also in this area is the Brittany Hills subidivision and the under-construction Creek's Crossing neighborhood.  The Algonquin Galleria lies just to the west of this region. West of Randall Road are a variety of townhome developments that serve as a transition between the retail centers along Randall Road and the estate-style developments further west.  These developments include Canterbury Place, Millbrook, Creekside, and Winding Creek.  Abutting the  Ted Spella Park is the age-restricted community, Grand Reserve.  These neighborhoods are all located along the picturesque Woods Creek corridor.  Also in this area is the Algonquin Area Public Library District's Main Library and Harry D. Jacobs High School. Further west of Woods Creek, and stretching west to Square Barn Road, are pricier homes on larger lots, in the Terrace Hill, Terrace Lakes, Prestwicke, Fairway View Estates, Woods Creek Valley Estates, and The Coves developments.  These neighborhoods are adjacent to the private Terrace Hill Golf Course, Ted Spella Park, and James B. Wood Park.  Homes in this area were built from the late 1980s up until today.  Construction of this area is exepected to be complete by the end of the 2000s. West of Square Barn Road is the Manchester Lakes subdivision, a single-family and multi-family home development built over several phases in the 2000s.  This neighborhood is adjacent to the Square Barn Commons retail center and Kelliher Park.  A variety of lakes and ponds and an extensive trail system can be found within this development.  South of Manchester Lakes is the Square Barn Road School Campus, which includes Mackeben Elementary School, Conley Elementary School, Heineman Middle School, and the School District 158 administration building. Further residential development west of Square Barn Road is expected in the future. Algonquin has a council-manager form of government, where an elected Board of Trustees, led by the Village President, establishes policy & vision and approves ordinances & resolutions, while an appointed Village Manager leads a team of professional staff that carries out the policies and daily operations of the village. The current Village President is John Schmitt and the current Trustees are Brian Dianis, Jerry Glogowski, Robert Smith, Debby Sosine, John Spella, and Jim Steigert. The Village Clerk, who handles village records, is Gerald Kautz. All officials are elected to four-year terms which are staggered to maintain consistency. The current Village Manager is Tim Schloneger. The Assistant to the Village Manager, Michael Kumbera, leads the General Services Administration Department, Police Chief John Bucci leads the Police Department, Director Robert Mitchard who leads the Public Works Department, and Director Russell Farnum leads the Community Development Department. The General Services Administration Department is responsible for village records, water billing, recreation programs, public information, technology & GIS, human resources, finance, and the municipal court. The Police Department is responsible for law enforcement and public safety. The Public Works Department is responsible for maintaining village streets, utilities, parks, and internal services. The Community Development Department handles planning & zoning, economic development, and building permitting & inspections. The Village maintains a staff of approximately 130 people and an annual budget of approximately $38 million.[ ] [ ]   Algonquin's fire protection and rescue services are handled by either the Algonquin-Lake in the Hills Fire Protection District (ALITHFPD), the Huntley Fire Protection District (HFPD), or the Carpentersville Countryside Fire Protection District (CCFPD), depending on what part of the village. These agencies are separate entities from the village and levy their own taxes. The ALITHFPD covers most of the village, including all areas along Randall Road and eastward. Two ALITH fire stations are located in the village: one on the east side of the village along Cumberland Parkway just north of Algonquin Road and one on the west side of the village along Harnish Drive just east of Randall Road. The district's headquarters are at the intersection of Algonquin and Pyott Roads in nearby Lake in the Hills. The HFPD covers the far western sections of the village, generally following the boundaries of School District 158. The HFPD has a station in the village, located at the southwest corner of Algonquin and Square Barn Roads. The CCFPD includes a small section of the far south end of the village, along Sleepy Hollow Road, which is serviced by a station in nearby western Carpentersville. Community Unit School District 300, a large district based out of nearby Carpentersville, serves the village's eastern two-thirds, generally along and east of Randall Rd.  The District 300 schools serving Algonquin include: Consolidated School District 158 is headquartered in Algonquin, and the schools on the Square Barn Road campus serve the village's far western side, as well as portions of neighboring communities Huntley and Lake in the Hills. School District 158 schools serving far western Algonquin include: St. John's Evangelical Lutheran School and St. Margaret Mary Catholic School, both located in the heart of Algonquin, offer private K-8 education. On the west side of town is Foundations Montessori School. The nearest community colleges are McHenry County College and Elgin Community College.  Generally speaking, McHenry County College serves residents residing in District 158 boundaries, while Elgin Community College serves residents residing in District 300 boundaries. The majority of the Village is served by the Algonquin Area Public Library District which includes two facilities, the main branch on Harnish, just west of Randall Road, and a second branch on Eastgate, south of Algonquin Road. Both offer exceptional educational and reading programs.[ ]   Huntley Public Library, Dundee Township Library, and the Barrington Area Library also serve certain sections of the Village. The village of Algonquin is a major center for shopping activities, both regionally and locally.  The village is known for its chic lifestyle centers, power centers, grocers, and growing variety of restaurants.  Most of the village's retail is confined to Randall Road and, to a lesser extent, Algonquin Road. The Randall Road corridor is a regional shopping, dining, and entertainment corridor that is home to a variety of shopping centers, including lifestyle centers such as Algonquin Commons, the Algonquin Galleria, and the Esplanade, power centers like Woods Creek Commons, Oakridge Court, and River Pointe, as well as stand-alone big-box stores and small retail shops.  The retail corridor also extends partially into nearby Lake in the Hills and Carpentersville.  In addition to serving the needs of the local western Algonquin area, the corridor also functions as a major destination retail area serving a vast region that includes most of McHenry and northern Kane Counties. Major retailers along the Randall Road corridor in Algonquin include Jewel-Osco, Office Depot, Guitar Center, Aldi, Joe Caputo & Sons Fruit Market, Home Depot, Meijer, Super Target, Kohl's, Michael's, HomeGoods, Famous Footwear, Pier 1 Imports, Lane Bryant, Maurices, Payless Shoe Source, Party City, Petco, JC Penney, Toys "R" Us/Babies "R" Us, TJ Maxx, Dollar Tree, Shoe Carnival, Five Below, Sally Beauty, Binny's Beverage Depot, Gander Mountain, Walmart Supercenter, FedEx Office, Dick's Sporting Goods, Old Navy, DSW Shoe Warehouse, Ross Dress for Less, Ulta, Discovery Clothing Co., Trader Joe's, Art Van Furniture, Family Christian Stores, Half Price Books, Men's Wearhouse, Best Buy, La-Z-Boy, Jo-Ann, Hobby Lobby, Dania Furniture, Ashley Furniture, Harlem Furniture, and the Great Escape. In addition, the corridor is home to family entertainment facility Brunswick Zone XL and fitness centers Lifetime Fitness and Fitness 19. Restaurants along the corridor include Rosati's, Yen Ching Express, Baskin-Robbins, Subway, Kobe, McDonald's, Wendy's, Burger King, Bentley's Bagels & Brew, Papa John's, Georgio's Pizza, Diced Fresh, Chipotle, Panda Express, Yogurtland, Jimmy John's, Burnt Toast, Colonial Cafe, KFC, Red Robin, Panera Bread, Buffalo Wild Wings, Starbucks, Sonic Drive-In, Georgia's Pancake House, Chili's, Giordano's, Montarra Grill, Oberweis Dairy, Jamba Juice, Potbelly Sandwich Works, Famous Dave's, Golden Corral, Houlihan's, On the Border, Bonefish Grill, Fuddruckers, Thirsty Whale, Jiang's Mongolian Grill, Ta Wan Thai Restaurant, Biaggi's Ristorante Italiano, and Village Vintner Winery & Brewery. Banks along Randall Road include Harris Bank, American Chartered Bank, Fifth Third Bank, Algonquin State Bank, PNC Bank, Chase Bank, TCF Bank, US Bank, and Woodforest Bank. Auto-related businesses include Rosen Hyundai dealership, Napa Auto Parts, and Phillips 66, Meijer, and BP service stations.[ ] [ ]  [ ]  The East Algonquin Road retail corridor is primarily a neighborhood retail area that serves the general needs of eastern Algonquin and also portions of nearby Carpentersville and Barrington. The area is centered on Algonquin's first shopping center, Algonquin Town Center, which was constructed in the late 1980s. Major retailers along the corridor include Butera Market, Dollar Tree, Jewel-Osco, and Walgreens. Restaurants include Nero's Pizza, McDonald's, Bad Monkey Bar & Grill, Subway, India Curry House, China Dragon, Jimmy John's, Starbucks, Quizno's, Chubby's Gyros, Gourmet House, and Mandile's. Auto-related uses include Merlin Muffler, Super Wash, Goodyear Tires, Francen & Son, Marathon, and Phillips 66. The corridor also includes fitness centers Snap Fitness and Cardinal Fitness. Chase Bank, First Merit Bank, Algonquin State Bank, and Stop & Store Self Storage are also present along the corridor.[ ]  Like the East Algonquin Road Corridor, the West Algonquin Road Corridor is a neighborhood retail area, composed mostly of small retail shops, restaurants, and neighborhood services. This is a newer retail area, with most of the retailers having been constructed in the 1990s and 2000s. The corridor predominantly serves western Algonquin and Lake in the Hills. A Walgreens at the corner of Algonquin and Square Barn Roads serves as an anchor in an area that features an abundance of small shops. Algonquin Bank & Trust is also nearby. Restaurants include Fradillio's Hot Dogs, Buddyz Chicago Pizzeria, Aroma Tapas, Domino's Pizza, China Bistro, Kosta's Gyros, Subway, @Bangkok Thai, and Taylor Street Pizza. Auto-related uses include Jiffy Lube/Super Brite and Discount Tire. The Village's Old Town District, focused primarily along Main Street/Illinois Route 31 includes dozens of independent retailers and franchises, offices, and fine restaurants.  Other strip centers can be found nearby along Route 31 including the Fox River Center and Edgewood Plaza. Restaurants in the Old Town area include Cucina Bella, Port Edward, the Texan BBQ, Buena Vista, Reese's, Bella's Short Stacks, Wine & Roses, the Riverview, Downtown Dogs, Cafe Firefly, Old World Pizza, Dairy Queen, Yin & Yang's, and Algonquin Sub Shop. Bars include Martini's on Main, Tavern on the Bridge, Creekside Tap, and Main Street Billiards. Algonquin State Bank has a branch downtown and the Shell service station is also in the area. A growing number of businesses can be found in Algonquin.  From a manufacturing corridor along Algonquin Road between Pyott Road and Route 31 to a planned corporate campus on the west side of Randall Road, industry is a significant part of the Algonquin area economy. Just west of the village's Old Town District is the Algonquin Industrial Park, located along Algonquin Road.  Several major companies can be found in this area, including tool, die, and mold industries, plastics industries, and transportation-related businesses.  Major businesses located in this area include Wauconda Tool & Engineering, Kenmode Tool & Engineering, Schiffmayer Plastics, Crystal Die & Mold, VCP Printing, Burnex Corporation, and Lion Tool.  Algonquin's main Post Office is also located in this area. The post office also serves nearby Lake in the Hills, even though the two municipalities have separate zip codes. Under development is the Algonquin Corporate Campus on the Village's west side along Randall Road. Set on over  stretching from Randall Road west to Square Barn Road, and north of Huntley Road, the development is aimed at providing more jobs to the greater Algonquin area. As a result, any potential business or building in the park that brings high-paying jobs has the opportunity for incentives and to have the development review process expedited. Located in the park is Young Innovations, a company that specializes in oral healthcare supplies; and Advantage Moving and Storage, a moving and storage company. Two multi-tenant industrial/office buildings have also been constructed, Rothbart Building #1 and the Algonquin Corporate Condominiums, both of which already have tenants, including Progressive Solutions and DirecTV. Additional buildings are planned for construction. Businesses the village is targeting for the park include those specializing in healthcare, technology, and research and development. Located directly adjacent to the Algonquin Corporate Campus are the village's outdoor malls Algonquin Commons and Algonquin Galleria. Also part of the park is the mixed-use Esplanade development, which currently includes 2nd and 3rd story office space for several companies.[ ]   Other major industries in Algonquin include Duro-Life, a manufacturer of machine parts located along Randall Road, and Meyer Material Service, a mining company located along Route 31. There is also over . of small office and medical office space located in various buildings throughout town, most heavily concentrated along Randall Road, Algonquin Road, and Illinois Route 31.  The largest such series of office buildings is the Briarwood Center at the intersection of Randall Road and County Line Road. The village is unique in that it does not have an actual park district, as park operations are run by the village itself. Nevertheless, the quality of parks, trails, and programs is nearly unmatched. In addition, the village's scenic waterways remain a regional draw.  Some noteworthy recreational opportunities in Algonquin include: Algonquin is a center of transportation for McHenry and Kane Counties.  Some of the major roadways include: Churches in Algonquin include:      Demographics (2000)  White Black Hispanic Asian 94.26% 0.92% 4.07% 2.35% Islander Native Other 0.01% 0.10% 1.20% Neubert Elementary School (K-5) serves students residing in areas immediately west of the Old Town District Lincoln Prairie Elementary School (K-5) in nearby Lake in the Hills serves students residing in sections of the village near Randall Road Eastview Elementary School (K-5) serves students residing in areas within Old Town Algonquin, as well as areas immediately north and east of there Algonquin Lakes Elementary School (K-5) serves students residing in far eastern sections of the village Liberty Elementary School (K-5) in nearby Carpentersville serves students residing in the Brittany Hills neighborhood Westfield Community School (K-8) is a combined elementary-middle school.  The elementary school serves the Willoughby Farms area.  In addition to Westfield Elementary, Neubert, Lincoln Prairie, and Lake in the Hills elementary schools feed into Westfield Middle School. Westfield Middle School feeds mostly into Jacobs High School. Dundee Middle School (6-8) in nearby Dundee serves students residing in the Brittany Hills neighborhood and feeds mostly into Jacobs High School Algonquin Middle School (6-8) serves Eastview and Algonquin Lakes, and feeds mostly into Dundee-Crown High School. Harry D. Jacobs High School (9-12) serves high-school aged students residing generally west of the Fox River to just a half mile west of Randall Road Dundee-Crown High School (9-12) in nearby Carpentersville serves high school-aged students residing in the east half of the village. Mackeben Elementary School (K-2) Marion Conley Elementary School (3-5) Bernice Heinemann Middle School (6-8) Huntley High School (9-12) in nearby Huntley serves high school-aged students residing in far western sections of the village. Coleman Hospitality Campus Located at Randall Road and Bunker Hill Drive, this complex features a Holiday Inn Express, local chain restaurant Colonial Cafe, and a proposed Conference Center. Victorian Garden Bed and Breakfast Bed and Breakfast located in the heart of downtown Algonquin Downtown Algonquin, a compact downtown featuring several shops and restaurants near the Fox River, as well as features like upscale lighting, planters, and well-kept sidewalks. The Fox River, a major tributary in Illinois which runs north-south through the heart of the village's downtown. Raging Buffalo Snowboard Ski Park, a snowboarding and ski terrain park located on Route 31 just south of village's limits. Fox River Trail/McHenry County Prairie Path, a sub-section of the Grand Illinois Trail A  trail system consisting of a mixture of off-road neighborhood trail systems and on-street route designations Golf Club of Illinois, a public golf course on the village's southern end. Terrace Hill Golf Course, a private golf course on the village's western side. Lifetime Fitness, a chain fitness center with a sizable location in Algonquin. Other fitness centers include Cardinal Fitness and Fitness 19. Kelliher Park, a park on the village's far western side featuring several ballfields. Ted Spella Park, a large park under development on the village's west side. Snapper Field and Lions Pool, a recreational complex near Algonquin Middle School featuring ballfields and the municipal pool Towne Park, Cornish Park, and Riverfront Park, three parks located in the village's downtown, significant for the role they play in the popular Founders Days festival and several other downtown events throughout the year Presidential Park, an important recreational area for the village's eastside residents, it features several ballfields and open areas, as well as a few picnic shelters. Algonquin Lakes, a grouping of natural and man-made lakes, trails, and adjacent community park in a residential neighborhood by the same name on the village's eastern side. Manchester Lakes, a grouping of man-made lakes, recreational areas, and complex bike path system within a neighborhood by the same name on the village's far western side. Woods Creek, a scenic creek, nature preserve, and trail which runs south-north through the village's far western side Hill Climb Park, a relatively new park at the intersection of Circle and Huntington Drives ALITHSA, the Algonquin Lake in the Hills Soccer Association, which provides fall and spring season soccer experiences for children ages four through high school. AAYO, the Algonquin Area Youth Organization, which utilizes many of the ballfields in the area for tee-ball, softball, and baseball leagues for children from age five to high school. The Hill Climb Race, a very historic tradition in the village in which classic cars are driven up a hill in the southwestern part of downtown.  According to tradition, in the infancy of automobile production, a car's worth was judged based upon its ability to climb this particular hill in the town. The event is held in the spring. Farmers' Markets, held every Thursday afternoon, from late May through early October at Riverfront Park Summer Concert Series, held in the village's downtown parks, it features several outdoor musical performances by local and regional acts on several weekends during the summer. Conservation Community Day, a family-oriented program educating the public about the importance of the conservation of natural resources and the protection of the environment. The event is held along Woods Creek on the village's west side in June. Art on the Fox, a fine art festival held at Riverfront Park, usually in June or July. Artwork is showcased and sold at the event, and live musical entertainment and artist demonstrations are sometimes featured as well. Founders' Days, the village's cornerstone festival and tradition, it includes a carnival, parade, fireworks display, bags tournament, Founders Run,Taste of Algonquin, and 7 year strong barcrawl starting at Tavern at the Bridge and ending at Riverview. It is always held on the last full weekend in July. National Night Out, a national event that the village participates in, which is designed to promote community spirit and awareness in order to combat crime. Held in early August at Snapper Field and Lions-Armstrong Memorial Pool on the east side of the village.[ ]  Old Time Country Harvest Festival, a fall festival occurring every October that features a farmers' market, cemetery walk, and other activities, in the Old Town District. A number of events held annually at Algonquin Commons, including Touch-a-Truck, summer concerts, holiday carriage rides, and other special events. Holiday Rock on the Fox, a winter festival in downtown Algonquin that is held in early December. Algonquin's Public Art Program, which showcases pieces of artwork at prominent public locations in the village throughout the year. The program emphasizes the various styles of artwork and the importance of art in the community. Artwork is rotated annually.[ ]   Polish-American Fest, held at Saint Margaret Mary's Catholic Church. Algonquin has one of the largest Polish communities in the Chicago suburbs. Randall Road is a major multi-lane highway serving the village's western side.  The road is entirely lined with major outdoor shopping malls, big-box retailers, restaurants, and a major corporate center which serve the region.  For a mile-long stretch between Harnish Drive and Corporate Parkway, near the village's malls, the road is six lanes wide with a landscaped center median with dual left turn lanes. Elsewhere, the road is four lanes wide with a striped median with single left turn lanes. The road connects Algonquin with Crystal Lake and Lake in the Hills on the north and Carpentersville, Elgin, South Elgin, Geneva, and the rest of the Fox River Valley suburbs to the south. Illinois Route 25 is a north-south road on the village's eastern side which ends at Illinois Route 62.  It connects the village to Carpentersville, East Dundee, Elgin, and the rest of the Fox River Valley suburbs to its south. Illinois Route 31 (Main Street) is a major north-south road going through the heart of the village's downtown. Despite Route 31's high traffic volume, the road is only two lanes wide with a center striped median and left turn lanes, resulting in considerable backups at the road's intersection with Algonquin Road. In the Old Town District, there are on-street parallel parking spots to service the downtown shops located along the road. Because the shops and many other buildings are so close to the road, widening is not an option to ease traffic congestion, so a western 31 bypass of the village's downtown is planned. This bypass would include an interchange at Algonquin Road, currently one of the most congested intersections in McHenry County. Illinois Route 31 connects to Crystal Lake and McHenry on the north and Carpentersville, West Dundee, Elgin, and St. Charles on the south. Illinois Route 62 (Algonquin Road) is a major east-west arterial road. West of Illinois Route 31, the road loses the Illinois Route 62 designation and becomes a county highway (Algonquin Road) that continues west to Illinois Route 47. The road is locally infamous for its westbound backups from Sandbloom Road west to Illinois Route 31, particularly during the weekday evening rush hour. Algonquin Road is four lanes with a center median for its entirety in the Village. West of Randall Road, the median is landscaped, while east of Randall, it is striped. Algonquin Road connects the village to Huntley on the west and other major northwest suburbs like Hoffman Estates, Schaumburg, Arlington Heights, Mount Prospect, and Des Plaines on the east. West of Pyott Road, Algonquin Road roughly forms the border between Algonquin and Lake in the Hills. Lake Cook Road terminates at East Algonquin Road on the eastern edge of the village and connects it to Barrington, Palatine, Arlington Heights, Buffalo Grove, Wheeling, Northbrook and Glencoe. Pyott Road and Lakewood Road terminate at West Algonquin Road, just north of the village limits, and connect the village to Lake in the Hills, Crystal Lake, and Lakewood. Other important roads within Algonquin include Highland Avenue, River Road, Haegers Bend Road, Sandbloom Road, Souwanas Trail, Edgewood Drive, Hanson Road, County Line Road, Sleepy Hollow Road, Longmeadow Parkway, Huntington Drive, Harnish Drive, Square Barn Road, Stonegate Road, Bunker Hill Drive, Boyer Road, and Corporate Parkway. St. Margaret Mary Catholic Church, a large catholic church complex, which includes a church, ministry, rectory, and a private K-8 school, located just east of Old Town Algonquin, along the south side of East Algonquin Road between South Hubbard Street and Eastgate Drive. Since the early 2000s, Algonquin has seen a huge number of Poles migrating to Algonquin and the church holds several services, including Polish speaking masses, for the Polish community. The church is affiliated with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockford. St. John's Evangelical Lutheran Church, a Lutheran church affiliated with the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, and located in the Old Town District at the southwest corner of Jefferson and Washington Streets.  The church also includes a private K-8 school and a resale shop. Congregational Church of Algonquin, a church affiliated with the United Church of Christ, located in the Old Town District at the southwest corner of Washington and Harrison Streets. Light of Christ Lutheran Church, a Lutheran church affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, located on the west side of Hanson Road, just south of Algonquin Road. The church plans to build a new facility at the northeast corner of Sleepy Hollow Road and Longmeadow Parkway. Christ United Methodist Church, a church affiliated with the United Methodist Church, located just outside village limits on West Algonquin Road, west of Square Barn Road. Rockne Brubaker, ice skater Josh Caterer, musician Evan Jager, American record-holder in the 3000 meter steeplechase and 2012 Olympian Village of Algonquin Algonquin/Lake in the Hills Chamber of Commerce Algonquin Founders' Days festival website Barrington Area Library History of Algonquin, Il.
