  Allan Octavian Hume CB (6 June 1829 – 31 July 1912) was a civil servant, political reformer, ornithologist and botanist who worked in British India. He was one of the founders of the Indian National Congress, a political party that was later to lead in the Indian independence movement. A notable ornithologist, Hume has been called "the Father of Indian Ornithology" and, by those who found him dogmatic, "the Pope of Indian ornithology." As an administrator of Etawah, he saw the 1857 mutiny as a result of misgovernance and made great efforts to improve the lives of the common people. The district of Etawah was among the first to be returned to normalcy and over the next few years Hume's reforms led to the district being considered a model of development. Hume rose in the ranks of the Indian Civil Service but like his father Joseph Hume, the radical MP, he was bold and outspoken in questioning British policies in India. He rose in 1871 to the position of secretary to the Department of Revenue, Agriculture, and Commerce under Lord Mayo. His criticism of Lord Lytton however led to his removal from the Secretariat in 1879. He founded the journal Stray Feathers in which he and his subscribers recorded notes on birds from across India. He built up a vast collection of bird specimens at his home in Shimla by making collection expeditions and obtaining specimens through his network of correspondents. Following the loss of manuscripts that had been maintaining for long in the hope of producing a magnum opus on the birds of India, he gave up ornithology and gifted away his collection to the British Museum of Natural History where it continues to be the single largest collection of Indian bird skins. He was briefly a follower of the theosophical movement founded by Madame Blavatsky. He left India in 1894 to live in London from where he continued to take an interest in the Indian National Congress, apart from taking an interest in botany and founding the South London Botanical Institute towards the end of his life. Hume was born at St Mary Cray, Kent,Moulton (2004); Encyclopaedia Britannica and some older sources give his birthplace as Montrose, Forfarshire. a younger son (and the eighth child in a family of nine) of Joseph Hume, the Radical member of parliament, by his marriage to Maria Burnley. He was educated at University College Hospital, where he studied medicine and surgery and was then nominated to the Indian Civil Services which led him to study at the East India Company College, Haileybury. Early influences included his friend John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer. Hume sailed to India in 1849 and the following year, joined the Bengal Civil Service at Etawah in the North-Western Provinces, in what is now Uttar Pradesh. His career in India included service as a district officer from 1849 to 1867, head of a central department from 1867 to 1870, and secretary to the Government from 1870 to 1879.Wedderburn (1913):3 He married Mary Anne Grindall (1823/4-1890) in 1853. It was only nine years after his entry to India that Hume faced the Indian Rebellion of 1857 during which time he was involved in several military actions for which he was created a Companion of the Bath in 1860. Initially it appeared that he was safe in Etawah, not far from Meerut where the rebellion began but this changed and Hume had to take refuge in Agra fort for six months.Wedderburn (1913):11–12 Nonetheless, all but one Indian official remained loyal and Hume resumed his position in Etawah in January 1858. He built up an irregular force of 650 loyal Indian troops and took part in engagements with them. Hume blamed British ineptitude for the uprising and pursued a policy of "mercy and forbearance". The district of Etawah was restored to peace and order in a year, something that was not possible in most other parts.Wedderburn (1913):19 Shortly after 1857, he set about in a range of reforms. As a District Officer in the Indian Civil Service, he began introducing free primary education and held public meetings for their support. He made changes in the functioning of the police department and the separation of the judicial role. Noting that there was very little reading material with educational content, he started, along with Koour Lutchman Singh, a Hindi language periodical, Lokmitra (The People's Friend) in 1859. Originally meant only for Etawah, its fame spread.Wedderburn (1913):21 He took up the cause of education and founded scholarships for higher education. He wrote, in 1859, that education played a key role in avoiding revolts like the one in 1857: ... assert its supremacy as it may at the bayonet's point, a free and civilized government must look for its stability and permanence to the enlightenment of the people and their moral and intellectual capacity to appreciate its blessings. In 1863 he moved for separate schools for juvenile delinquents rather than flogging and imprisonment which he saw as producing hardened criminals. His efforts led to a juvenile reformatory not far from Etawah. He also started free schools in Etawah and by 1857 he established 181 schools with 5186 students including two girls.Wedderburn (1913):16 The high school that he helped build with his own money is still in operation, now as a junior college, and it was said to have a floor plan resembling the letter "H". This, according to some was an indication of Hume's imperial ego. Hume found the idea of earning revenue earned through liquor traffic repulsive and described it as "The wages of sin". With his progressive ideas on social reform, he advocated women's education, was against infanticide and enforced widowhood. Hume laid out in Etawah, a neatly gridded commercial district that is now known as Humeganj but often pronounced Homeganj. In 1867 Hume became Commissioner of Customs for the North West Province, and in 1870 he became attached to the central government as Director-General of Agriculture. In 1879 he returned to provincial government at Allahabad. Hume was very interested in the development of agriculture. He believed that there was too much focus on obtaining revenue and no effort had been spent on improving the efficiency of agriculture. He found an ally in Lord Mayo who supported the idea of developing a complete department of agriculture. Hume noted in his Agricultural reform in India that Lord Mayo had been the only Viceroy who had any experience of working in the fields. Hume made a number of suggestions for the improvement of agriculture placing carefully gathered evidence for his ideas. He noted the poor yields of wheat, comparing the yields that he had estimated with the records of Emperor Akbar and the yield of farms in Norfolk. Lord Mayo's supported his ideas but was unable to establish a dedicated agricultural bureau as the scheme did not find support in the Secretary of State for India, but they negotiated the setting up of a Department of Revenue, Agriculture and Commerce despite Hume's insistence that Agriculture be the first and foremost aim. Hume was made a secretary of this department in July 1871 leading to his move to Shimla. With the murder of Lord Mayo in the Andamans in 1872, Hume lost patronage and support for his work. He however went about reforming the department of agriculture, streamlining the collection of meteorological data (the meteorological department was set up by order number 56 on 27 September 1875 signed by Hume) and statistics on cultivation and yield. Hume proposed the idea of having experimental farms to demonstrate best practices to be set up in every district. He proposed to develop fuelwood plantations "in every village in the drier portions of the country" and thereby provide a substitute heating and cooking fuel so that manure (dried cattle dung was used as fuel by the poor) could be returned to the land. Such plantations, he wrote, were "a thing that is entirely in accord with the traditions of the country  –  a thing that the people would understand, appreciate, and, with a little judicious pressure, cooperate in." He wanted model farms to be established in every district. He noted that rural indebtedness was caused mainly by the use of land as security, a practice that had been introduced by the British. Hume denounced it as another of "the cruel blunders into which our narrow-minded, though wholly benevolent, desire to reproduce England in India has led us." Hume also wanted government-run banks, at least until cooperative banks could be established. The department also supported the publication of several manuals on aspects of cultivation, a list of which Hume included as an appendix to his Agricultural Reform in India. Hume supported the introduction of cinchona and the project managed by George King to produce quinine locally at low cost. Hume was very outspoken and never feared to criticise when he thought the Government was in the wrong. Even in 1861, he objected to the concentration of police and judicial functions in the hands of police superintendents. In March 1861, he took a medical leave due to a breakdown from overwork and departed for Britain. Before leaving, he condemned the flogging and punitive measures initiated by the provincial government as 'barbarous … torture'. He was allowed to return to Etawah only after apologizing for the tone of his criticism. He criticized the administration of Lord Lytton before 1879 which according to him, had cared little for the welfare and aspiration of the people of India. Lord Lytton's foreign policy according to Hume had led to the waste of "millions and millions of Indian money". Hume was critical of the land revenue policy and suggested that it was the cause of poverty in India. His superiors were irritated and attempted to restrict his powers and this led him to publish a book on Agricultural Reform in India in 1879. Hume noted that the free and honest expression was not only permitted but encouraged under Lord Mayo and that this freedom was curtailed under Lord Northbrook who succeeded Lord Mayo. When Lord Lytton succeeded Lord Northbrook, the situation worsened for Hume.Wedderburn (1913):37 In 1879 Hume went against the authorities. The Government of Lord Lytton dismissed him from his position in the Secretariat. No clear reason was given except that it "was based entirely on the consideration of what was most desirable in the interests of the public service". The press declared that his main wrongdoing was that he was too honest and too independent. The Pioneer wrote that it was "the grossest jobbery ever perpetrated" ; the Indian Daily News wrote that it was a "great wrong" while The Statesman said that "undoubtedly he has been treated shamefully and cruelly." The Englishman in an article dated 27 June 1879, commenting on the event stated, "There is no security or safety now for officers in Government employment."Wedderburn (1913):35–38 Demoted, he left Simla and returned to the North-West Provinces in October, 1879, as a member of the Board of Revenue. It has pointed out that he was victimized as he was out of step with the policies of the Government, often intruding into aspects of administration with critical opinions. In spite of the humiliation of demotion, he did not resign immediately from service and it has been suggested that this was because he needed his salary to support the publication of "The Game Birds of India" that he was working on. Hume retired from the civil service only in 1882. In 1883 he wrote an open letter to the graduates of Calcutta University, calling upon them to form their own national political movement. This led in 1885 to the first session of the Indian National Congress held in Bombay. In 1887 writing to the Public Commission of India he made what was then a statement unexpected from a civil servant — I look upon myself as a Native of India. Hume's wife Mary died on 30 March 1890 and news of her death reached him just as he reached London on 1 April 1890. Their only daughter Maria Jane Burnley ("Minnie") (1854 - 1927) had married Mr. Ross Scott at Simla on 28 December 1881. Maria became a member of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, another occult movement, after moving to England. Ross Scott was the founding secretary of the Simla Eclectic Theosophical Society, who was sometime Judicial Commissioner of Oudh and died in 1908. Hume's grandson Allan Hume Scott served with the Royal Engineers in India. Hume left India in 1894 and settled at The Chalet, 4, Kingswood Road, Upper Norwood in London. He died at the age of eighty-three on 31 July 1912. His ashes were buried in Brookwood Cemetery. The bazaar in Etawah was closed on hearing of his death and the Collector, H. R. Neville, presided over a memorial meeting.Wedderburn (1913):134 The Indian postal department released a commemorative stamp with his portrait in 1973 and a special cover depicting Rothney Castle, his home in Shimla was released in 2013. From early days, Hume had a special interest in science. Science, he wrote:  and of natural history he wrote in 1867:   During his career in Etawah, he built a personal collection of bird specimens, however it was destroyed during the 1857 rebellion. Subsequently he started afresh with a systematic plan to survey and document the birds of the Indian Subcontinent and in the process he accumulated the largest collection of Asiatic birds in the world, which he housed in a museum and library at his home in Rothney Castle on Jakko Hill, Simla. Rothney castle originally belonged to P. Mitchell, C.I.E and after Hume bought it, he tried to convert the house into a palace expecting it to be bought by the Government as a Viceregal residence since the Governor-General then occupied Peterhoff, a building too small for large parties. Hume spent over two hundred thousand pounds on the grounds and buildings. He added enormous reception rooms suitable for large dinner parties and balls, as well as a magnificent conservatory and spacious hall with walls displaying his superb collection of Indian horns. He hired a European gardener, and made the grounds and conservatory a perpetual horticultural exhibition, to which he courteously admitted all visitors. Rothney Castle could only be reached by a troublesome climb, and was never purchased by the British Government and Hume himself never used the larger rooms except for one that he converted into a museum for his collection of birds, and for occasional dances. He made several expeditions to collect birds both on health leave and where work took him. He was Collector and Magistrate of Etawah from 1856 to 1867 during which time he studied the birds of that area. He later became Commissioner of Inland Customs which made him responsible for the control of  of coast from near Peshawar in the northwest to Cuttack on the Bay of Bengal. He travelled on horseback and camel in areas of Rajasthan to negotiate treaties with various local maharajas to control the export of salt and during these travels he took note of the birdlife: Hume appears to have planned a comprehensive work on the birds of India around 1870 and this "forthcoming comprehensive work" finds mention in the second edition of The Cyclopaedia of India (1871) by his cousin Edward Balfour. Hume made several expeditions solely to study ornithology the largest being an expedition to the Indus area in late November 1871 and continued until the end of February 1872. In March 1873, he visited the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal along with geologists Dr. Ferdinand Stoliczka and Dr. Dougall of the Geological Survey of India and James Wood-Mason of the Indian Museum in Calcutta. In 1875 he made an expedition to the Laccadive Islands aboard the marine survey vessel IGS Clyde under the command of Staff-Commander Ellis. The official purpose of the visit being to examine proposed sites for lighthouses. During this expedition Hume collected many bird specimens, apart from conducting a bathymetric survey to determine whether the island chain was separated from India by a deep canyon. And in 1881 he made his last ornithological expedition to Manipur, a visit in which he collected and described the Manipur bush quail (Perdicula manipurensis), a bird that has remained obscure with few reliable reports since. Hume spent an extra day with his assistants cutting down a large tract of grass so that he could obtain specimens of this species. This expedition was made on special leave following his demotion from the Central Government to a junior position on the Board of Revenue of the North Western Provinces. Apart from personal travel, he also sent out a trained bird-skinner to accompany officers travelling in areas of ornithological interest such as Afghanistan. Around 1878 he was spending about ₤ 1500 a year on his ornithological surveys. Hume was a member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal from January 1870 to 1891 and admitted Fellow of the Linnean Society on November 3, 1904. After returning to England in 1890 he also became president of the Dulwich Liberal and Radical Association. Hume used his vast bird collection to good use as editor of his journal Stray Feathers. He also intended to produce a comprehensive publication on the birds of India. Hume employed William Ruxton Davison as a curator for his personal bird collection and also sent him out on collection trips to various parts of India, when he was held up with official responsibilities. In 1883 Hume returned from a trip to find that many pages of the manuscripts that he had maintained over they years had been stolen and sold off as waste paper by a servant. Hume was completely devastated and he began to lose interest in ornithology due to this theft and a landslip, caused by heavy rains in Simla, which had damaged his museum and many of the specimens. He wrote to the British Museum wishing to donate his collection on certain conditions. One of the conditions was that the collection was to be examined by Dr. R. Bowdler Sharpe and personally packed by him, apart from raising Dr. Sharpe's rank and salary due to the additional burden on his work caused by his collection. The British Museum was unable to heed his many conditions. It was only after the destruction of nearly 20000 specimens, that alarm bells were raised by Dr. Sharpe and the museum authorities let him visit India to supervise the transfer of the specimens to the British Museum. Sharpe wrote of Hume's impressive private ornithological museum:  Sharpe also noted:  The Hume collection of birds was packed into 47 cases made of deodar wood constructed on site without nails that could potentially damage specimens and each case weighing about half a ton was transported down the hill to a bullock cart to Kalka and finally the port in Bombay. The material that went to the British museum in 1884 consisted of 82,000 specimens of which 75,577 were finally placed in the museum. A breakup of that collection is as follows (old names retained). Hume had destroyed 20,000 specimens prior to this as they had been destroyed by dermestid beetles.   The Hume Collection contained 258 type specimens. In addition there were nearly 400 mammal specimens including new species such as Hadromys humei. The egg collection was made up of carefully authenticated contributions from knowledgeable contacts and on the authenticity and importance of the collection, E. W. Oates wrote in the 1901 Catalogue of the Collection of Birds' Eggs in the British Museum (Volume 1):  Hume described many species, some of which are now considered as subspecies. He also erected two genus names that are currently in use. The use of trinomials had not yet gone into regular usage during Hume's time. The following subspecies are current placements of taxa that were named as new species by Hume.   An additional species, the large-billed reed-warbler Acrocephalus orinus was known from just one specimen collected by him in 1869 but the name that he used, magnirostris, was found to be preoccupied and replaced by the name orinus provided by Harry Oberholser in 1905. The status of the species was contested until DNA comparisons with similar species in 2002 suggested that it was a valid species. It was only in 2006 that the species was seen in the wild in Thailand, with a match to the specimens confirmed using DNA sequencing. Later searches in museums led to several other specimens that had been overlooked and based on the specimen localities, a breeding region was located in Tajikistan and documented in 2011.  This was Hume's first major work on birds. It had 422 pages and accounts of 81 species. It was dedicated to Edward Blyth and Dr. Thomas C. Jerdon who, he wrote [had] done more for Indian Ornithology than all other modern observers put together and he described himself as their friend and pupil. He hoped that his book would form a nucleus round which future observation may crystallize and that others around the country could help him fill in many of the woeful blanks remaining in record. In the preface he notes:  Hume started the quarterly journal Stray Feathers in 1872. At that time the only journal for the Indian region that published on ornithology was the "Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal". He had wondered if there was merit to start a new journal and in that idea was supported by Stoliczka, who was an editor for the Journal of the Asiatic Society:   He used the journal to publish descriptions of his new discoveries, such as Hume's owl, Hume's wheatear and Hume's whitethroat. He wrote extensively on his own observation as well as critical reviews of all the ornithological works of the time and earned himself the nickname of Pope of Indian ornithology. He critiqued a monograph on parrots, Die Papageien by Friedrich Hermann Otto Finsch suggesting that name changes (by "cabinet naturalists") were aimed at claiming authority to species without the trouble of actually discovering them. He wrote:  Hume in turn was attacked, for instance by Viscount Walden, but Finsch became a friend and Hume named a species, Psittacula finschii, after him.  In his younger days Hume had studied some geology from the likes of Gideon MantellWedderburn (1913):116. and he appreciated the synthesis of ideas from other fields in ornithology. Hume included in 1872, a detailed article on the osteology of birds in relation to their classification written by Richard Lydekker who was then in the Geological Survey of India. The early meteorological work in India was done within the department headed by Hume and he saw the value of meteorology in the study of bird distributions. In a work comparing the rainfall zones, he notes how the high rainfall zones indicated affinities to the Malayan fauna. Hume sometimes mixed personal beliefs in notes that he published in Stray Feathers. For instance he believed that vultures soared by altering the physics ("altered polarity") of their body and repelling the force of gravity. He further noted that this ability was normal in birds and could be acquired by humans by maintaining spiritual purity claiming that he knew of at least three Indian Yogis and numerous saints in the past with this ability of aethrobacy.  Hume corresponded with a large number of ornithologists and sportsmen who helped him by reporting from various parts of India. More than 200 correspondents are listed in his Game Birds alone and they probably represent only a fraction of the subscribers of Stray Feathers. This large network made it possible for Hume to cover a much larger geographic region in his ornithological work. During the lifetime of Hume, Blyth was considered the father of Indian ornithology. Hume's achievement which made use of a large network of correspondents was recognized even during his time:  Many of Hume's correspondents were eminent naturalists and sportsmen of the time.  Hume exchanged skins with other collectors. A collection made principally by Hume that belonged to the Earl of Northbrook was gifted to Oxford University in 1877. One of his correspondents, Louis Mandelli from Darjeeling, stands out by claiming that he was swindled in these skin exchanges. He claimed that Hume took skins of rarer species in exchange for the skins of common birds but the credibility of the complaint has been doubted. Hume named Arborophila mandelli after Mandelli in 1874. He also corresponded and stayed up to date with the works of ornithologists outside India including R. Bowdler Sharpe, the Marquis of Tweeddale, Père David, Henry Eeles Dresser, Benedykt Dybowski, John Henry Gurney, J. H. Gurney, Jr., Johann Friedrich Naumann, Nikolai Severtzov and Dr. Aleksandr Middendorff. He helped George Ernest Shelley with specimens from India aiding the publication of a monograph on the sunbirds of the world (1876-1880).  Hume's vast collection from across India was possible by recruiting a network. He corresponded with these contributors, providing them with information, methods and tips for preservation while at the same time seeking information from them. The Vade Mecum was published as a substitute for the notes that he frequently had to send to potential collaborators who sought advice. Materials for preservation are carefully tailored for India with the provision of the local names for ingredients and methods to prepare glues and preservatives with ready to find household equipment. Apart from skinning and preservation, the book also covers matters of observation, keeping records, the use of natives to capture birds, obtain eggs and the care needed in obtaining other information apart from care in labelling. This work was co-authored by C. H. T. Marshall. The three volume work on the game birds was made using contributions and notes from a network of 200 or more correspondents. Hume delegated the task of getting the plates made to Marshall. The chromolithographs of the birds were drawn by W. Foster, E. Neale, (Miss) M. Herbert, Stanley Wilson and others and the plates were produced by F. Waller in London. Hume had sent specific notes on colours of soft parts and instructions to the artists. He was unsatisfied with many of the plates and included additional notes on the plates in the book. This book was started at the point when the government demoted Hume and only the need to finance the publication of this book prevented him from retiring from service. He had estimated that it would cost ₤ 4000 to publish it and he retired from service on 1 January 1882 after the publication. In the preface Hume wrote:  while his co-author Marshall, wrote:  This was another major work by Hume and in it he covered descriptions of the nests, eggs and the  breeding seasons of most Indian bird species. It makes use of notes from contributors to his journals as well as other correspondents and works of the time. Hume also makes insightful notes such as observations on caged females separated from males that would continue to lay fertile eggs through the possibility of sperm storage and the reduction in parental care by birds that laid eggs in warm locations (mynas in the Andamans, river terns on sand banks). A second edition of this book was made in 1889 which was edited by Eugene William Oates. This was published when he had himself given up all interest in ornithology. An event precipitated by the loss of his manuscripts through the actions of a servant. He wrote in the preface:  Eugene Oates wrote his own editorial note:  This nearly marked the end of Hume's interest in ornithology. Hume's last piece of ornithological writing was part of an Introduction to the Scientific Results of the Second Yarkand Mission in 1891, an official publication on the contributions of Dr. Ferdinand Stoliczka, who died during the return journey on this mission. Stoliczka in a dying request had asked that Hume edit the volume on ornithology. A number of animals and birds are named after Hume. These include :  Hume's interest in theosophy took root around 1879. An 1880 newspaper reports the initiation of his daughter and wife into the movement. Hume did not have great regard for institutional Christianity, but believed in the immortality of the soul and in the idea of a supreme ultimate. Hume wanted to become a chela (student) of the Tibetan spiritual gurus. During the few years of his connection with the Theosophical Society Hume wrote  three articles on Fragments of Occult Truth under the pseudonym "H. X." published in The Theosophist. These were written in response to questions from Mr. Terry, an Australian Theosophist. He also privately printed several Theosophical pamphlets titled Hints on Esoteric Theosophy. The later numbers of the Fragments, in answer to the same enquirer, were written by A.P. Sinnett and signed by him, as authorized by Mahatma K. H., A Lay-Chela. Madame Blavatsky was a regular visitor at Hume's Rothney castle at Simla and an account of her visit may be found in Simla, Past and Present by Edward John Buck (who succeeded Mr. Hume in charge of the Agricultural Department). A long story about Hume and his wife appears in A.P. Sinnett's book Occult World, and the synopsis was published in a local paper of India.  The story relates how at a dinner party, Madame Blavatsky asked Mrs Hume if there was anything she wanted.  She replied that there was a brooch, her mother had given her, that had gone out of her possession some time ago. Blavatsky said she would try to recover it through occult means. After some interlude, later that evening, the brooch was found in a garden, where the party was directed by Blavatsky. According to John Murdoch (1894), the brooch had been given by Mrs. Hume to her daughter who had given it to a man she admired. Blavatsky had happened to meet the man in Bombay and obtained the brooch in return for money. Blavatsky allegedly planted it in the garden before directing people to the location through what she claimed as occult techniques. After the incident, Hume too had privately expressed grave doubts on the powers attributed to Madame Blavatsky. He subsequently held a meeting with some of the Indian members of the Theosophical Society and suggested that they join hands with him to force the resignation of Blavatsky and sixteen other members for their role as accomplices in fraud. Those present could however not agree to the idea of seeking the resignation of their founder. Hume soon fell out of favour with the Theosophists and lost all interest in the theosophical movement in 1883. Hume's interest in spirituality brought him into contact with many independent Indian thinkers who also had nationalist ideas and this led to the idea of creating  the Indian National Congress. Hume's immersion into the theosophical movement eventually led him to become a vegetarian and also to give up killing birds for their specimens.   After retiring from the civil services and towards the end of Lord Lytton's rule, Hume observed that the people of India had a sense of hopelessness and wanted to do something, noting "a sudden violent outbreak of sporadic crime, murders of obnoxious persons, robbery of bankers and looting of bazaars, acts really of lawlessness which by a due coalescence of forces might any day develop into a National Revolt." Concerning the British government, he stated that a studied and invariable disregard, if not actually contempt for the opinions and feelings of our subjects, is at the present day the leading characteristic of our government in every branch of the administration.Hume to Northbrook, 1 August 1872, Northbrook Papers, cited in Mehrotra 2005 There were agrarian riots in the Deccan and Bombay, and Hume suggested that an Indian Union would be a good safety valve and outlet to avoid further unrest. On the 1st of March 1883 he wrote a letter to the graduates of the University of Calcutta:   His poem The Old Man's Hope published in Calcutta in 1886 also captures the sentiment:Cited in Mehrotra 2005:75  Sons of Ind, why sit ye idle, Wait ye for some Deva's aid? Buckle to, be up and doing! Nations by themselves are made! Are ye Serfs or are ye Freemen, Ye that grovel in the shade? In your own hands rest the issues! By themselves are nations made! ...  The idea of the Indian Union took shape and Hume initially had some support from Lord Dufferin for this, although the latter wished to have no official link to it. Dufferin's support was short-lived. It has been suggested that the idea was originally conceived in a private meeting of seventeen men after a Theosophical Convention held at Madras in December 1884. Hume took the initiative, and it was in March 1885, when the first notice was issued convening the first Indian National Union to meet at Poona the following December. He attempted to increase the Congress base by bringing in more farmers, townspeople and Muslims between 1886 and 1887 and this created a backlash from the British, leading to backtracking by the Congress. Hume was disappointed when Congress opposed moves to raise the age of marriage for Indian girls and failed to focus on issues of poverty. Some Indian princes did not like the idea of democracy and some organizations like the United Indian Patriotic Association went about trying to undermine the Congress by showing it as an organization with a seditious character. In 1892, he tried to get them to act by warning of a violent agrarian revolution but this only outraged the British establishment and frightened the Congress leaders. Disappointed by the continued lack of Indian leaders willing to work for the cause of national emancipation, Hume left for Britain in 1894. Many Anglo-Indians were against the idea of the Indian National Congress. The press in India tended to look upon it negatively, so much so that Hume is said to have held a very low opinion of journalists even later in life. A satirical work published in 1888 included a character called "A. O. Humebogue". The organizers of the 27th session of the Indian National Congress at Bankipur (26–28 December 1912) recorded their "profound sorrow at the death of Allan Octavian Hume, C.B., father and founder of the Congress, to whose lifelong services, rendered at rare self-sacrifice, India feels deep and lasting gratitude, and in whose death the cause of Indian progress and reform sustained irreparable loss."Wedderburn (1913):176   After the loss of his manuscript containing his lifetime of ornithological notes. Hume took up a great interest in horticulture while at Shimla. ... He erected large conservatories in the grounds of Rothney Castle, filled them with the choicest flowers, and engaged English gardeners to help him in the work. From this, on returning to England, he went on to scientific botany. But this, as Kipling says, is another story, and must be left to another pen.Wedderburn (1913):43, quoting CHT Marshall  Hume took an interest in wild plants and especially on invasive species although his botanical publishing was sparse with only a few short notes in 1901 on a variety of Scirpus maritimus and another on the flowering of Impatiens roylei. Hume contacted W.H. Griffin in 1901 to help develop a herbarium of botanical specimens. Hume would arrange his plants on herbarium sheets in artistic positions before pressing them. The two made many botanical trips including one to Down in Kent to seek some of the rare orchids that had been collected by Darwin.Wedderburn (1913):113-115 In 1910, Hume bought the premises of 323 Norwood Road, and modified it to have a herbarium and library. He called this establishment the South London Botanical Institute with the aim of "promoting, encouraging, and facilitating, amongst the residents of South London, the study of the science of botany." One of the aims of the institute was to help promote botany as a means for mental culture and relaxation, an idea that was not shared by Henry Groves, a trustee for the Institute. Hume objected to advertisement and refused to have any public ceremony to open the institute. The first curator was W.H. Griffin and Hume endowed the Institute with £10,000. Frederick Townsend, F.L.S., an eminent botanist, who died in 1905, had left instructions that his herbarium and collection was to be given to the institute, which was then only being contemplated.Wedderburn (1913):118–121 Hume left £15,000 in his will for the maintenance of the botanical institute.  In the years leading up to the establishment of the Institute, Hume built up links with many of the leading botanists of his day. He worked with F. H. Davey and in the Flora of Cornwall (1909), Davey thanks Hume as his companion on excursions in Cornwall and Devon, and for help in the compilation of the 'Flora', publication of which was financed by Hume. The SLBI has since grown to hold a herbarium of approximately 100,000 specimens mostly of flowering plants from Europe including many collected by Hume. The collection was later augmented by the addition of other herbaria over the years, and has significant collections of Rubus (bramble) species and of the Shetland flora. 2830 birds of prey (Accipitriformes)… 8 types 1155 owls (Strigiformes)…9 types 2819 crows, jays, orioles etc.…5 types 4493 cuckoo-shrikes and flycatchers… 21 types 4670 thrushes and warblers…28 types 3100 bulbuls and wrens, dippers, etc.…16 types 7304 timaliine birds…30 types 2119 tits and shrikes…9 types 1789 sun-birds (Nectarinidae) and white-eyes (Zosteropidae)…8 types 3724 swallows (Hirundiniidae), wagtails and pipits (Motacillidae)…8 types 2375 finches (Fringillidae)…8 types 3766 starlings (Sturnidae), weaver-birds (Ploceidae), and larks (Alaudidae)…22 types 807 ant-thrushes (Pittidae), broadbills (Eurylaimidae)…4 types 1110 hoopoes (Upupae), swifts (Cypseli), nightjars (Caprimulgidae) and frogmouths (Podargidae)…8 types 2277 Picidae, hornbills (Bucerotes), bee-eaters (Meropes), kingfishers (Halcyones), rollers(Coracidae), trogons (trogones)…11 types 2339 woodpeckers (Pici)…3 types 2417 honey-guides (Indicatores), barbets (Capiformes), and cuckoos (Coccyges)…8 types 813 parrots (Psittaciformes)…3 types 1615 pigeons (Columbiformes)…5 types 2120 sand-grouse (Pterocletes), game-birds and megapodes(Galliformes)…8 types 882 rails (Ralliformes), cranes (Gruiformes), bustards (Otides)…6 types 1089 ibises (Ibididae), herons (Ardeidae), pelicans and cormorants (Steganopodes), grebes (Podicipediformes)…7 types 761 geese and ducks (Anseriformes)…2 types 15965 eggs Heteroglaux Hume, 1873 Ocyceros Hume, 1873 Anas albogularis (Hume, 1873) Perdicula manipurensis Hume, 1881 Arborophila mandellii Hume, 1874 Syrmaticus humiae (Hume, 1881) Puffinus persicus Hume, 1872 Ardea insignis Hume, 1878 Pseudibis davisoni (Hume, 1875) Gyps himalayensis Hume, 1869 Spilornis minimus Hume, 1873 Buteo burmanicus Hume, 1875 Sternula saundersi (Hume, 1877) Columba palumboides (Hume, 1873) Phodilus assimilis Hume, 1877 Otus balli (Hume, 1873) Otus brucei (Hume, 1872) Strix butleri (Hume, 1878) Heteroglaux blewitti Hume, 1873 Ninox obscura Hume, 1872 Tyto deroepstorffi (Hume, 1875) Caprimulgus andamanicus Hume, 1873 Aerodramus maximus (Hume, 1878) Psittacula finschii (Hume, 1874) Hydrornis oatesi Hume, 1873 Hydrornis gurneyi (Hume, 1875) Rhyticeros narcondami Hume, 1873 Megalaima incognita Hume, 1874 Podoces hendersoni Hume, 1871 Podoces biddulphi Hume, 1874 Pseudopodoces humilis (Hume, 1871) Mirafra microptera Hume, 1873 Alcippe dubia (Hume, 1874) Stachyridopsis rufifrons (Hume, 1873) Cyornis olivaceus Hume, 1877 Oenanthe albonigra (Hume, 1872) Dicaeum virescens Hume, 1873 Pyrgilauda blanfordi (Hume, 1876) Ploceus megarhynchus Hume, 1869 Spinus thibetana (Hume, 1872) Carpodacus stoliczkae (Hume, 1874) Gampsorhynchus torquatus Hume, 1874 Sylvia minula Hume, 1873 Sylvia althaea Hume, 1878 Phylloscopus neglectus Hume, 1870 Horornis brunnescens (Hume, 1872) Yuhina humilis (Hume, 1877) Pteruthius intermedius (Hume, 1877) Certhia manipurensis Hume, 1881 Calandrella acutirostris Hume, 1873 Pycnonotus fuscoflavescens (Hume, 1873) Pycnonotus erythropthalmos (Hume, 1878) Alectoris chukar pallida (Hume, 1873) Alectoris chukar pallescens (Hume, 1873) Francolinus francolinus melanonotus Hume, 1888 Perdicula erythrorhyncha blewitti (Hume, 1874) Arborophila rufogularis tickelli (Hume, 1880) Phaethon aethereus indicus Hume, 1876 Gyps fulvus fulvescens Hume, 1869 Spilornis cheela davisoni Hume, 1873 Accipiter badius poliopsis (Hume, 1874) Accipiter nisus melaschistos Hume, 1869 Rallina eurizonoides telmatophila Hume, 1878 Gallirallus striatus obscurior (Hume, 1874) Sterna dougallii korustes (Hume, 1874) Columba livia neglecta Hume, 1873 Macropygia ruficeps assimilis Hume, 1874 Centropus sinensis intermedius (Hume, 1873) Otus spilocephalus huttoni (Hume, 1870) Otus lettia plumipes (Hume, 1870) Otus sunia nicobaricus (Hume, 1876) Bubo bubo hemachalanus Hume, 1873 Strix leptogrammica ochrogenys (Hume, 1873) Strix leptogrammica maingayi (Hume, 1878) Athene brama pulchra Hume, 1873 Ninox scutulata burmanica Hume, 1876 Lyncornis macrotis bourdilloni Hume, 1875 Caprimulgus europaeus unwini Hume, 1871 Aerodramus brevirostris innominatus (Hume, 1873) Aerodramus fuciphagus inexpectatus (Hume, 1873) Hirundapus giganteus indicus (Hume, 1873) Lacedo pulchella amabilis (Hume, 1873) Pelargopsis capensis intermedia Hume, 1874 Halcyon smyrnensis saturatior Hume, 1874 Megalaima asiatica davisoni Hume, 1877 Dendrocopos cathpharius pyrrhothorax (Hume, 1881) Picus erythropygius nigrigenis (Hume, 1874) Falco cherrug hendersoni Hume, 1871 Pericrocotus brevirostris neglectus Hume, 1877 Pericrocotus speciosus flammifer Hume, 1875 Dicrurus andamanensis dicruriformis (Hume, 1873) Rhipidura aureola burmanica (Hume, 1880) Garrulus glandarius leucotis Hume, 1874 Dendrocitta formosae assimilis Hume, 1877 Corvus splendens insolens Hume, 1874 Corvus corax laurencei Hume, 1873 Coracina melaschistos intermedia (Hume, 1877) Coracina fimbriata neglecta (Hume, 1877) Remiz coronatus stoliczkae (Hume, 1874) Alauda arvensis dulcivox Hume, 1872 Alaudula raytal adamsi (Hume, 1871) Galerida cristata magna Hume, 1871 Pycnonotus squamatus webberi (Hume, 1879) Pycnonotus finlaysoni davisoni (Hume, 1875) Alophoixus pallidus griseiceps (Hume, 1873) Hemixos flavala hildebrandi Hume, 1874 Hemixos flavala davisoni Hume, 1877 Ptyonoprogne obsoleta pallida Hume, 1872 Aegithalos concinnus manipurensis (Hume, 1888) Leptopoecile sophiae stoliczkae (Hume, 1874) Prinia crinigera striatula (Hume, 1873) Prinia inornata terricolor (Hume, 1874) Prinia sylvatica insignis (Hume, 1872) Orthotomus atrogularis nitidus Hume, 1874 Rhopocichla atriceps bourdilloni (Hume, 1876) Pomatorhinus hypoleucos tickelli Hume, 1877 Pomatorhinus horsfieldii obscurus Hume, 1872 Pomatorhinus ochraceiceps austeni Hume, 1881 Stachyridopsis rufifrons poliogaster (Hume, 1880) Alcippe poioicephala brucei Hume, 1870 Pellorneum albiventre ignotum Hume, 1877 Pellorneum ruficeps minus Hume, 1873 Turdoides caudata eclipes (Hume, 1877) Garrulax caerulatus subcaerulatus Hume, 1878 Trochalopteron chrysopterum erythrolaemum Hume, 1881 Trochalopteron variegatum simile Hume, 1871 Minla cyanouroptera sordida (Hume, 1877) Minla strigula castanicauda (Hume, 1877) Heterophasia annectans davisoni (Hume, 1877) Chrysomma altirostre griseigulare (Hume, 1877) Rhopophilus pekinensis albosuperciliaris (Hume, 1873) Zosterops palpebrosus auriventer Hume, 1878 Yuhina castaniceps rufigenis (Hume, 1877) Aplonis panayensis tytleri (Hume, 1873) Sturnus vulgaris nobilior Hume, 1879 Sturnus vulgaris minor Hume, 1873 Copsychus saularis andamanensis Hume, 1874 Anthipes solitaris submoniliger Hume, 1877 Cyornis concretus cyaneus (Hume, 1877) Ficedula tricolor minuta (Hume, 1872) Myophonus caeruleus eugenei Hume, 1873 Geokichla sibirica davisoni (Hume, 1877) Dicaeum agile modestum (Hume, 1875) Cinnyris asiaticus intermedius (Hume, 1870) Cinnyris jugularis andamanicus (Hume, 1873) Aethopyga siparaja cara Hume, 1874 Aethopyga siparaja nicobarica Hume, 1873 Passer ammodendri stoliczkae Hume, 1874 Lonchura striata semistriata (Hume, 1874) Lonchura kelaarti jerdoni (Hume, 1874) Linaria flavirostris montanella (Hume, 1873) Leith Adams, Kashmir Lieut. H. E. Barnes, Afghanistan, Chaman, Rajpootana Captain R. C. Beavan, Maunbhoom District, Shimla, Mount Tongloo (1862) Colonel John Biddulph, Gilgit Dr. George Bidie, Madras Major C. T. Bingham, Thoungyeen Valley, Burma, Tenasserim, Moulmein, Allahabad Mr. W. Blanford Mr. Edward Blyth Mr. W. Edwin Brooks (father of Allan Brooks, the Canadian bird artist) Sir Edward Charles Buck, Gowra, Hatu, near Narkanda (in Himachal Pradesh), Narkanda, (about  north of Shimla) Captain Boughey Burgess, Ahmednagar (?-1855) Captain and then Colonel E. A. Butler, Belgaum (1880), Karachi, Deesa, Abu Miss Cockburn (1829–1928), Kotagiri Mr. James Davidson, Satara and Sholapur districts,Khandeish, Kondabhari Ghat Colonel Godwin-Austen, Shillong, Umian valley, Assam Mr. Brian Hodgson, Nepal Duncan Charles Home, 'Hero of the Kashmir Gate' (Bulandshahr, Aligarh) Dr. T. C. Jerdon, Tellicherry Colonel C. H. T. Marshall, Bhawulpoor, Murree Colonel G. F. L. Marshall, Nainital, Bhim tal Mr. James A. Murray, Karachi Museum Mr. Eugene Oates, Thayetmo, Tounghoo, Pegu Captain Robert George Wardlaw Ramsay, Afghanistan, Karenee hills Mr. G. P. Sanderson (Chittagong) Major and later Sir O. B. St. John, Shiraz, Persia Dr. Ferdinand Stoliczka Mr. Robert Swinhoe, Hong Kong Mr. Charles Swinhoe, S. Afghanistan Colonel Samuel Tickell Colonel Robert Christopher Tytler, Dacca, 1852 Mr. Valentine Ball, Rajmahal hills, Subanrika (Subansiri) Richard Lydekker Hume's leaf-warbler Phylloscopus humei Sikkim wedge-billed babbler "Sphenocichla humei" Manipur bush rat, Hadromys humei (Thomas, 1886) Hume's argali, Ovis ammon humei Lydekker 1913Lydekker (1913):6–7  (now treated as Ovis ammon karelini, Severtzov, 1873) My Scrap Book: Or Rough Notes on Indian Oology and Ornithology (1869) List of the Birds of India (1879) The Nests and Eggs of Indian Birds (3-volumes) Game Birds of India, Burmah and Ceylon (3-volumes) Hints on Esoteric Theosophy Agricultural Reform in India (1879) Lahore to Yarkand. Incidents of the Route and Natural History of the Countries Traversed by the Expedition of 1870 under T. D. Forsyth Stray Feathers (11-volumes + index by Charles Chubb) Bruce, Duncan A. (2000) The Scottish 100: Portraits of History's Most Influential Scots, Carroll & Graf Publishers. Mearns and Mearns (1988) Biographies for Birdwatchers. Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-487422-3 Mehrotra, S. R. (2005) Towards India's Freedom and Partition, Rupa & Co., New Delhi. Mehrotra, S. R.; Edward C. Moulton (Eds) (2004) Selected Writings of Allan Octavian Hume: District Administration in North India, Rebellion and Reform, Volume One: 1829–1867. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-565896-5 Moxham, Roy (2002) The Great Hedge of India. ISBN 0-7567-8755-6 My scrap book: or rough notes on Indian oology and ornithology (1869) List of the birds of India (1879) The Indian Ornithological Collector's Vade Mecum (1874) The Nests and Eggs of Indian Birds: Volume 1 Volume 2 Volume 3 Game birds of India, Burmah and Ceylon: Volume 1 Volume 2 Volume 3 Hints on Esoteric Theosophy Agricultural Reform in India (1879) Lahore to Yarkand. Incidents of the Route and Natural History of the countries traversed by the expedition of 1870 under T. D. Forsyth Stray Feathers – volumes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Index 1–11 Biographies of ornithologists Hume-Blavatsky correspondence South London Botanical Institute The Victorian Web Botanical Society of the British Isles Works by Allan Octavian Hume at Hathi Trust
