  The American Institute of Architecture Students (AIAS) is an independent, nonprofit, student-run organization dedicated to providing unmatched progressive programs, information, and resources on issues critical to architecture and the experience of education. The vision of the AIAS is to promote excellence in architecture education, and training; foster an appreciation of architecture, design and related disciplines; enrich communities in a spirit of collaboration; and organize students and combine their efforts to advance the art and policy of architecture. The core focus of AIAS membership supports architecture students in collegiate schools across the United States, a population of approximately 25,000 students annually enrolled in accredited degree programs. In recent years, the AIAS has also expanded into international academic programs. The organization represents one of five collateral organizations that govern the discipline of architecture in the United States, including allied organizations: the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture (ACSA), the National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB), National Council of Architectural Registration Boards (NCARB), and the American Institute of Architects (AIA). These governing bodies reflect the trajectory an architect will take during their career, from initial education, through licensure, and into practice. The AIAS fulfills an important advocacy role by representing the voice of its members and future trends in practice to professional of these collateral organizations. AIAS publishes Crit, Journal of the AIAS (short for critique) and hosts diverse events for students and professionals throughout the year, including FORUM, Grassroots Leadership Conference, and Quad Conferences. The organization was founded in 1956; it was originally called the National Architectural Student Association (NASA). Later the name changed to the Association of Student Chapters, AIA (ASC/AIA), before finding its present day name the American Institute of Architecture Students. In 1956, architecture students established a continuing presence with the formation of the National Architectural Student Association (NASA). Chapters are established at all of the schools of architecture and a regional governance network is formed by the students at the first Student Forum.The first Forum was held in November 1955 at the Octagon House in Washington, DC and the student delegates elected leaders to represent them at this gathering. At this time, the Student Forum is an annual event strictly for governance purposes (just for the student chapter representatives). NASA also hosts the first annual convention in November 1958, usually held in conjunction with the AIA Convention. In 1960, the meeting minutes of the student board of directors report the exploration of separating the activities so that "business would transpire...at the Forum, thus permitting the Convention time to be devoted more to the topic of architecture itself." Today, the AIAS still organizes Forum and it is the primary annual meeting of the organization. The students also elect Jim Barry (Rice Institute) as the first national president. Having accomplished the task of organizing a disparate array of local student activities into a collective voice, the ambitious students of NASA plant the seed for the nationally organized student voice from which we benefit from today. Jim Barry serves as a part-time volunteer from his school with funding provided by the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and Washington-area architectural programs. During his term, NASA publishes the first issue of LINE magazine, has representatives involved on AIA committees and hosts many interesting programs at the Octagon. The members of NASA also attend AIA Convention in Los Angeles, with special programs designed specifically for students. In 1958 the student organization is renamed the Association of Student Chapters, AIA (ASC/AIA), with the goal of bridging members to the AIA upon graduation. However, staff and leaders of the AIA are concerned in the early years about a separate student organization. It is believed this will conflict with the objective of encouraging students to maintain their memberships with both organizations. At the 1960 student convention (held on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley) the AIA board of directors proposed to abolish the ASC/AIA. John Richards, FAIA, then president of the AIA states, "... [the student affiliations] of the past had not been as successful as had been hoped, and that it was feeling of the staff of the AIA that student organization structure was in need of improvement." Students leaders lobbied to convince the AIA board of directors that the ASC/AIA chapter system was the foundation for the AIA and for the promotion of future generations entering architecture. Final remarks made by student president Charles Jones (University of Arizona) on this matter foreshadow what is to become. In his speech to the General Session of the AIA on April 22, 1960 he states, "The students have no desire to make this organization so large that it becomes completely out of hand." However, the organization did grow. At the 1970 AIA Convention student president Taylor Culver (Howard University) leads a student revolt. Minutes of the meeting report that Culver and his fellow students take over the podium held by the AIA president and display their strength and solidarity in numbers. The strength of the organization continues to grow in all directions, and the responsibilities of the officers coincide. In 1972, two-term student president Fay D'Avignon (Boston Architectural Center) is elected as the first female president of the organization, and also becomes the first ASC/AIA officer to take full-time responsibilities in Washington, DC. This marks a new phase in the organization's efforts to become an autonomous voice of architectural students. This is a significant point when professionals and the AIA relinquish responsibilities to the ASC/AIA in many affairs that directly impact students. As a result, ASC/AIA develops into a unified national voice for students. The number of local chapters increases steadily as does the general membership. With the extra workload, it is clear that the vice president is also needed on a full-time basis in Washington, DC. In 1975 president Ella Hall (North Carolina State University) and vice president Steve Biegel (Syracuse University) become the first ASC/AIA national officers to work full time in the National Office in Washington, DC as a team. The term for the national officers also changes to the July–June schedule, parallel to academic schedules.  Exhibiting unbridled energy, 1976–1977 team Jerry Compton (SCI-ARC) and Robert Rosenfeld (University of California-Berkeley) demonstrate creativity and clarity of vision. Notable achievements include solidifying the ASC/AIA growing operations budget, holding the first design competition, publishing the magazine Telesis, and establishing student representation on the IDP Coordinating Committee. Rosenfeld names Crit, which launches the rebranded publication the following year. Crit celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2016. The following year, Rosenfeld continues on as vice president, with Charles Guerin (University of Houston) as president. These two officers start many current traditions of the organizations, including initiating the first ASC/AIA Chapter Honor Award and publishing the first issues of Crit. They also hold perhaps the most unusual competition to date, which concludes with the construction of a hot air balloon that is then launched over the Pacific Ocean. In 1978 John Jeronimo (University of Miami) and Mary Beth Permar (Clemson University and The University of Illinois) collaborate on the continuation and improvement of Crit from a magazine format to a true architectural journal. Additionally, they increase the size of the board of directors to include the FORUM Chair and Crit Editor. The overall operating budget of the ASC/AIA passes the $100,000 mark for the first time in history. Jeronimo and Permar set in motion the largest national design competition to date, the first McDonald's Competition, which includes over 650 entries (only surpassed in number of entries by the Vietnam Memorial Design Competition). After several years of continued prosperity, the ASC/AIA arrives at a critical phase. The growth of the organization is beginning to outweigh the abilities and skills of the national officers alone. In 1984, after a thorough self-examination, president Tom Fowler (New York Institute of Technology-Old Westbury) accepts the recommendations of the Special Task Force to review the structure of the organization. This report further suggests renaming the organization "The American Institute of Architecture Students" (AIAS), incorporatingThe AIAS, Inc., and receiving status as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization in 1983. The organization hires the first full-time Executive Director, Carl D. Costello, who quickly exhibits outstanding administrative skills and an understanding of the interests and concerns of architecture students. That year the organization is officially incorporated in Washington, DC as The American Institute of Architecture Students, Inc. With a fresh name and new independence, the AIAS leadership takes to the task of developing the organization. 1985 president Scott Norberg (University of Nebraska) and vice president Whitney Powers (Mississippi State University) dedicate themselves to examining issues that are critical to the architectural scene. During the Kent State Memorial Competition, Ian Taberner's award-winning proposal is rejected by the University "because he was not a citizen of the United States, as required by the design competition". This sparks debate within the AIAS and becomes an issue at the annual meeting. Participation at these meetings is exceptional: over 1,100 students attend the 1985 AIAS FORUM in New York. The first meeting of AIAS Grassroots Leadership Conference was organized during the summer of 1985. This sets the beginning of a 30+ year legacy of chapter leaders from around the country gathering annually at the AIAS National Office in Washington, DC to discuss chapter issues, community involvement and participate in the governance of the organization. Also during 1985, the AIAS holds three national design competitions. In Norberg's second term, alongside vice president Lee Waldrep (Arizona State University), the number of competitions increases to four; the AIAS initiates the Search for Shelter Program to address the growing issue of homelessness in America; and the AIAS contributes to the AIA Education Initiative by establishing the AIAS Outstanding Practitioner in Education award (which still exists today under a different name). Norberg's successor, president Kent Davidson, combines forces with vice president Karen Cordes (University of Arkansas). During their term, the Search for Shelter Program is further developed with design charrettes across the country. The AIAS partners with Microtecture Corporation to initiate a computer software grants program providing 56 schools of architecture with Datacad computer software with an estimated retail value of $1,000,000. In 1988-1989 the AIAS accepts its first chapter outside the United States when the Council of Presidents votes to accept Ryerson Polytechnic Institute in Toronto, Ontario (Canada).Chapters begin to organize in other countries and territories like France, Kuwait, Mexico, Puerto Rico and the United Arab Emirates. AIAS strengthens its commitment to the housing for the homeless issue with active participation in the Habitat for Humanity program. The "Partners in Education" program is also founded. The sponsorship-based program provides interested individuals and corporations the opportunity to support students of architecture and the AIAS. In 1989-1990 the AIAS moves into new office space, increases the full-time national office positions to five, and makes a major investment in desktop publishing software (which is very expensive at the time). The dues structure for local chapters is also revised to reflect a commitment to the organization by individual member dues, rather that a lump-sum from the entire school. One substantial outgrowth of this revision is the establishment of an active database which allows individual mailings of pertinent information to each AIAS member. A triumph for students this year is the inclusion of a standardized NAAB four-year degree language in college catalogs. This mandate is initiated by the AIAS and adopted by the five collateral architecture organizations the following year. The 1990-1991 term sees the AIAS experience grow with the addition of thirteen chapters, which pushes membership to a then record 156 chapters. An additional full-time staff person is hired to coordinate AIAS competitions. The year's agenda is largely an affirmation of student commitment to environmental issues. The Environmental Action Committee (EAC) is established to gather information pertaining to environmental issues and their relationship to the design process, and disseminate this information to fellow students and educators. Two significant position papers on architectural education deficiencies and degree nomenclature are also presented to the collateral organizations by AIAS leaders during this term. These are included in a newly compiled, comprehensive set of AIAS governing documents. The 1991-1992 officers, president Lynn N. Simon (University of Washington) and vice president Kevin P. McGillycuddy (Washington-Alexandria Center), emphasize a devotion to the quality of career counseling and the internship experience. Five national directors focus their endeavors on minority programs, affordable housing, women in architecture, community involvement and career options. The Five Presidents Declaration (five architecture collateral presidents) proposes a single designation for the professional degree in architecture, that sparks discussion and debate among students, educators and practitioners. At the beginning of the 1992-1993 term the officers and staff work to make the office's duties manageable while combating a budget deficit. But there is continued development when the office produces a new handbook for each chapter to use on the local level, while the 1992-1993 national directors produce informational documents on career options and environmentally safe resources for the studio, and a video on women in architecture. A new system of regional coordinators is also set into place, the AIAS Long Range Plan is developed into a finished document, and the Sustainability Declaration is finalized for adoption by the four other collateral organizations. The membership is at 7,520. 1993-1994 president Garen D. Miller (Drury College) and vice president Christine A. Malecki (Carnegie Mellon University) hire former AIAS vice president Irene Dumas Tyson as Executive Director. The Council of Presidents (COP) votes to double individual dues with a goal to maintain a high membership level. Indeed, the 1993-1994 membership grew to 8,025. The AIAS enters the information highway with an e-mail address, involvement on the AIAOnline network, and develops of an all-electronic design competition. The COP approves a historic policy of the AIAS, requiring all speakers invited to AIAS events to verify that they pay their interns legally-mandated wages (still required of all AIAS speakers today). Following the lead of the AIAS, the board of directors of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture (ACSA) and the AIA adopt similar policies. In 1995 the AIAS is ready to celebrate forty years of history, including eleven years as an independent organization. Turning the corner on this major milestone, the organization and leaders of the AIAS must confront a major challenge. In order to continue to grow and offer important services, a substantial member dues increase is necessary. At the 1995 Grassroots conference the Council of Presidents is offered three options for membership dues: $12 (the fee at the time), $24 or $36. Taking the appropriate action, the COP votes to triple the dues to $36/school year. Unfortunately, the consequence of this action is 42% drop in membership to 3,980 members, however, 85% of the chapters remain active. The AIAS enters its 40th year with decreased membership, but with leaders determined to re-grow the organization. The next year, 1997-1998 president Robert L. Morgan (Clemson University) and vice president Rachel Livingston Ahalt (University of Colorado Denver) spend their term focusing on the financial viability of the National Office, and organizing AIAS Legacy members (former officers and directors) to defeat a proposal by the AIA board of directors to investigate the creation of a student category of membership within the AIA. The proposal sparks cohesiveness among AIAS members and debates at the 1998 AIA Convention reaffirm AIA members' support for the AIAS as an independent organization. The 21st Century begins with an exploration on the quality of the educational experience in the school-based design studios. The board of directors establishes a Studio Culture Task Force to study the effects of current architectural education practices on student's health. In December 2002 the organization publishes 'The Redesign of Studio Culture' that outlines the five values for the preferred culture in studios: engagement, innovation, optimism, respect and sharing. These values serve as a basis for making changes to the culture in architectural design studios. Two years later (in 2004) the National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB) adopts a 13th Condition for Accreditation (Condition 3.5) requiring schools to have a written policy regarding a positive learning environment in their studio environments. The AIAS also hosts a summit in 2004 to explore strategies for improving the studio experience. The year 2002 sees the addition of two days to the Grassroots conference to focus on leadership education in collaboration with professionals from Georgetown University. The AIAS also reaches its healthiest financial position at the time with a strong organizational reserve, new investment policies, and professional management. Other organizational improvements included a shift in the terms of board of directors to coincide with the Grassroots conference, the creation of Personnel and Finance Committees, the initiation of a strategic planning process and a streamlining of the elections process. In early 2003, Pam Kortan Day resigns as the Executive Director and the board of directors hires Michael V. Geary, CAE. Efforts then increase to better market the organization, increase membership, expand fundraising efforts, and prepare for the 50th anniversary. In 2004 the organization adopts a new logoThe previous logo (referred by many as the "Dancing Bunnies") was designed in 1985 by Kim Murray (Montana State University). and Web site. The new logo, with its alternating layered shapes, is both reflective of the past and forward thinking suggesting a progressive organization that is respectful of its history. It includes an iconic "A" in the middle representing a design compass and the "A"s in the organization's acronym. Also at this time the masthead and interior of Crit, Journal of the AIAS and AIASinfo (the bimonthly electronic newsletter) are redesigned by the award winning firm Design Army to properly reflect the modern design aesthetics of the members. The AIAS makes a major shift to elevate the social members of the organization can make by launching Freedom by Design™. The program encourages architecture students to radically impact the lives of people in their community through modest design and construction solutions. Freedom by Design™ (FBD) teaches students how to resolve accessibility issues while simultaneously providing them with the real world experience of working with a client, mentorship from an architect and constructor, and an understanding of the practical impact of architecture and design. In the year 2006 the AIAS celebrated fifty years of organizing students. While operating in an autonomous manner, the organization has not been alone over the years. Allied organizations like The American Institute of Architects, Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture, National Architectural Accrediting Board, and the National Council of Architectural Registration Boards work collaboratively with the AIAS. There are also numerous companies, trade associations and professionals who play an important role in ensuring the viability and continuity of the AIAS. More importantly, the 100,000 students involved over the years demonstrate the long-term capability and necessity of a non-profit, independent and student-run association. Freedom by Design™ begins growing rapidly, reaching chapters across the organization. In 2006, the Beyond Architecture Campaign is launched as part of the fifty year celebration. This capital campaign raised $1.5M in endowment funds to support leadership development programs, including the Freedom By Design community service initiative of the AIAS. By December 2007, the (Great Recession) begins causing significant damage within the construction industry. Many practicing designers in the field of architecture lose their jobs between 2007-2012. The United States hits an all time unemployment high, second only to the (Great Depression). The residual damage caused severe impact on architecture graduates trying to enter the field. Many left the practice of architecture entirely during 2007-2014. This major moment in time increased interest in alternative careers in architecture.  In 2008, president Andrew C. Caruso (Carnegie Mellon University) and vice president Tony P. Vanky (Tulane University) releases the AIAS Issue Brief on Architectural Education. With rapid changes in technology, this critical and anticipatory document highlighted issues relevant to the future education and practice of the profession. The brief was intended to impact the 2008 review of the National Architectural Accrediting Board Conditions for Accreditation, citing opportunities for necessary and visionary change by way of major themes such as ecological literacy, social responsibility, global change, urbanism, diversity, technology, and culture (among others). 2009 president JW Blanchard (Southern Polytechnic State University) focused on ensuring the legacy of Crit to continue as a valuable asset to the membership. Development of resources to assist Quads with conference planning were released, which expanded outreach of regional events within the four territories. Participation numbers for Quad conferences rose. At the end of 2009, Michael V. Geary, CAE resigns as Executive Director, launching an Executive Search for the organization. Association Strategies is hired to assist in finding a qualified replacement. Joshua Caulfield, IOM is hired in spring of 2010. Between 2009-2011, president Je'Nen M. Chastain (University of North Carolina at Charlotte), vice president Brett Roeth (Miami University), and president Tyler W. Ashworth (University of Idaho) and vice president Danielle McDonough (Northeastern University) were faced with the challenge of transitioning the organization into the next decade. Strategic planning exercises started in 2006 are carried through to realize long discussed programs, policies, committees, and member benefits that will support growing professional needs of the membership. Implementation takes off quickly into 2011-2012. FORUM receives a record high attendance of 1,000+ students in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Under the leadership of president Nick Mancusi (Taliesin, The Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture) and vice president Laura Meador (Louisiana State University) the AIAS undergoes a Re:Branding effort. Advocacy also shifts forward as a strategic priority of the organization with the introduction of the Federal Student Loans (National Design Services Act). A four year financial plan to double revenue is created, with the goal to achieve decade record high membership. New program tracks are introduced at the Grassroots Leadership Conference, and membership services are expanded. Continued growth takes place in 2011-2012. Gradual recovery from the (Great Recession) in the United States allows the profession of architecture to also recover. AIAS continues to thrive as programs grow. In 2012 the AIAS is met with the resignation of Executive Director Joshua Caulfield, IOM. President Westin Conahan (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) hires Nick Serfass, CAE as the new Executive Director.  AIAS has been working with students in architecture programs around the world for over 50 years. As a result, the organization has many programs for members. A vast collection of resources and activities are designed for members to assist with educational and professional pursuits–and life. The AIAS also helps ensure success upon completing education through the connections made with educators, architects, designers and other professionals. The AIAS offers several conferences and events each year. They include the annual meeting FORUM, the Grassroots Leadership Conference, Freedom by Design, and Quad Conferences. Most student members experience the AIAS through a campus-based chapter. Membership provide an immeasurable amount of diverse opportunities. Lectures, field trips, social events, community service projects and conferences are some of the activities organized by the chapters. Membership is open to college and high school students, educators, interns and professionals. We encourage anyone interested in supporting architectural education to join. Many people feel confined in their own homes. They are unable to get into their showers, ascend steps, open doors or pass through doorways. Most troubling is that many people are unable to flee their homes in an emergency without assistance because the residences are not properly designed for their specific needs. Freedom by Design™, the AIAS community service program, utilizes the talents of architecture students to radically impact the lives of people in their community through modest design and construction solutions. Vital modifications are made to enhance the homes of low-income and disabled individuals by addressing their struggles with everyday tasks such as bathing, ascending stairs and opening doors. Our priority is improving the safety, comfort and dignity of the home’s occupants. Through numerous AIAS chapters, Freedom by Design™ (FBD) teaches students how to resolve accessibility issues while simultaneously providing them with the real world experience of working with a client, mentorship from an architect and constructor, and an understanding of the practical impact of architecture and design. You are invited to get involved. The AIAS is seeking mentors and supporters to help us grow this important program. Please help us better the lives of those in need. For 30 years the AIAS has been preparing future leaders in architecture through our AIAS Grassroots Leadership Conference. Please join us as we continue with our 31st annual conference July 7–10, 2016 in Washington, DC. Each year the conference brings together chapter leaders, AIAS Freedom By Design program leaders and other emerging professionals seeking insight and preparation on how to make the most of their year ahead. All are welcome to attend! FORUM is the annual membership meeting of the AIAS, gathering 600-1,000 architecture students in one city over New Years. The AIAS signature conference, FORUM, is the largest annual gathering of architecture students in the world. Organized by the four regions of the AIAS: Northeast, Midwest, South, and West, Quad conferences bring students together at nearby schools of architecture. Students learn about the cities, culture, and design trends of these areas. CRIT is the journal of the AIAS and the premier publication of student’s in architecture, design, and associated fields. Published since 1976, CRIT offers a variety of opportunities for AIAS members and acts as a forum for critical discourse and the dissemination of knowledge. CRIT is your opportunity to distinguish yourself from your peers and provide you a competitive edge. CRIT presents opportunities for students to have their work published in a national journal that is read by thousands of students and is a part of the collections of nearly every architecture school library and a growing number of architecture firms. Publication in CRIT is a unique accomplishment and an honor. Contributing to CRIT is also an opportunity to develop research and writing skills. The Editor-in-Chief has the dual responsibility of curating a high-caliber journal and acting as a writing mentor to contributors. AIAS administers various competitions throughout the year. During the 60 year history of the AIAS, the name and branding of the organization has evolved. Current Branding Guidelines are available on the AIAS website for explanation of proper use of the logo, colors, and fonts for the organization. Chapters are expected to incorporate these into their local branding efforts. 1956 - 1958, National Architectural Student Association (NASA) 1958 - 1984, Association of Student Chapters, AIA (ASC/AIA) 1984–Present, American Institute of Architecture Students (AIAS) Referred to as the "Dancing Bunnies" Logo, the previous logo was designed in 1985 by Kim Murray of Montana State University. The symbolism reflects the evolution of mankind in creating architecture, from preliminary tribal structures to iconic Greek temples. In 2004 the organization adopts a new logo and website. In 2004, the AIAS introduces a new logo with alternating layered shapes, that are reflective of both the past and forward looking. This suggests a progressive organization that is also respectful of its history. It includes an iconic "A" in the middle representing a compass (drawing tool), an "A" for architecture, and the "A"s in the organization's acronym. A compass is a technical drawing instrument that can be used for inscribing circles or arcs. As dividers, they can also be used as tools to measure distances, in particular on maps. Compasses can be used for mathematics, drafting, navigation, and other purposes. Members of the organization received a pin with this symbol and began wearing it on their lapel. In 2011 the organization began a Re:Branding effort led by president Nick Mancusci (Taliesin, The Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture). The redesign was revisited again in 2015, as the organization explored modifications to simplify the 2004 logo. Executive Director Nick Serfass, AIA, CAE said the brand refresh is part of a larger effort to better reflect and serve the student organization. “The national office is taking a clean look at everything we do in an effort to more effectively achieve our mission. The refreshed logo reflects this perspective.” The new logo is a variation of the iconic "A" representing the design compass, bringing a refresh to the AIAS brand.  The compass is now enclosed in a circle, representing focus, inclusion, mobility, and being complete, directly correlating with the membership and organization. Members of the organization are recognized with a pin of this symbol. Legacy members receive a silver version of this pin. The primary color for the AIAS logo will always be hexadecimal #6b8fb5. When AIAS chapters add their text next to the logo and under the AIAS text it will appear in the color hexadecimal #5c6266. The secondary palette, which is only used on material to complement the logo, is the following colors: hexadecimal #364c63, #ffd400, and #e3e2d9. The AIAS website has been updated four times since 2004. As technology has quickly evolved in the past decade, the demand for an improved interactive website for members has become increasingly important. The AIAS has an active social media presence through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Instagram. Recently the organization has started using Slack. The organization is made up of members from various chapters across the United States and abroad. Currently 6,000 members strong, the AIAS represents the nearly 25,000 architecture students enrolled in NAAB accredited programs. Being centralized in the U.S., our regions are based on four geographic territories: Northeast Quad, Midwest Quad, South Quad, and West Quad. Chapters follow the governing rules of the AIAS set forth in the Bylaws and Rules of the Board; however, every chapter also creates their independent culture based on location, design school philosophies, support from faculty and administrators, and engagement of students. AIAS celebrates these differences, knowing when we come together we can learn from one another, and that we are bonded by our passion for architecture. Chapter leaders serve on the Council of Presidents (COP). This governing body of the organization meets twice a year to vote on business of the AIAS, including election of the board of directors. Meetings of the COP occur at the Grassroots Leadership Conference in the summer and FORUM, the annual meeting during New Years break. Engaging the organization at the national level allows students the chance to develop their leadership skills, learn about macro scale issues impacting the profession, and gain new ideas for their chapters and schools.      -Intl  = International Chapters FORUM is the annual conference of the American Institute of Architecture Students, and is the largest annual gathering of architecture students in the world.   The AIAS National Board of Directors are students and recent graduates elected by members to serve the organization's highest office for a one year term. Elections include a rigorous candidacy at the AIAS annual meeting FORUM, including national speeches, Q&A, and networking. Once elected, the new board of directors undergoes a transition period from December to July. In July of each year the new board of directors is sworn into term at the National Building Museum (a member attended tradition started in 2011). Individuals are asked to "raise their drawing hand" in order to take the oath. The President and Vice President, known as Officers, are hired full time to work together on behalf of the organization out of the National Office in Washington, DC. Presidents transition into the role of Past President upon completion of their term on the board. Quad Directors work with students from within their region, typically while still attending school. Liaisons are appointed from collateral organizations, including the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture and the American Institute of Architects. The AIAS is supported by a full time staff led by the Executive Director in Washington, DC. Members who have served the organization are honored with the title of Legacy Member. Notable Legacy have continued on to assume teaching positions at architecture school, launched careers with nonprofits that support the built envirornment, followed a path into research or public policy, and/or run award winning architectural design practices. The diversity of careers by these former leaders of the organization sets the example of the broader possibility an architectural education can provide students that seek to build their own careers. Legacy are frequently called upon by the AIAS as mentors and guest speakers. Matthew Herb, President – University of Maryland Aaron Koch, Vice President – University of Minnesota Scott Baldermann, President – University of Nebraska Nicole Kuhar, Vice President – University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee Melissa Mileff, President – University of Oklahoma John M. Cary, Jr., Vice President – University of Minnesota Jay M. Palu, President – University of Nebraska Amy J. Isenburg, Vice President – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Robert L. Morgan, President – Clemson University Rachel Livingston Ahalt, Vice President – University of Colorado at Denver Raymond H. Dehn, President – University of Minnesota Casius Pealer, Vice President – Tulane University Robert J. Rowan, President – Washington State University Shannon Kraus, Vice President – Southern Illinois University Dee Christy Briggs, President – City College of New York Elizabeth M. Koski, Vice President – Arizona State University Garen D. Miller, President – Drury College Christine A. Malecki, Vice President – Carnegie Mellon University Courtney E. Miller, President – University of Maryland Leigh Chatham Hubbard, Vice President – North Carolina State University Lynn N. Simon, President – University of Washington Kevin P. McGillycuddy, Vice President – Washington-Alexandria Center Alan D.S. Paradis, President – Roger Williams College David T. Kunselman, Vice President – Carnegie Mellon University Douglas A. Bailey, President – Montana State University Catherine R. Miller, Vice President – University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Matthew W. Gilbertson, President – University of Minnesota Irene Dumas Tyson, Vice President – Mississippi State University Kent Davidson, President – University of Nebraska Karen Cordes, Vice President – University of Arkansas Scott Norberg, President – University of Nebraska Lee W. Waldrep, Ph.D., Vice President – Arizona State University Scott Norberg, President – University of Nebraska Whitney Powers, Vice President – Mississippi State University Thomas Fowler IV, President – NYIT–Old Westbury Christine Reinke, Vice President – University of Miami Robert Fox, President – Temple University Darrel Babuk, Vice President – Montana State University Robert Klancher, President – University of Cincinnati Christina Vina, Vice President – Texas Tech University Bill Plimpton, President – University of California at Berkeley Nora Klebow, Vice President – Kent State University Alejandro Barbarena, President – University of Houston Margie Miller, Vice President – Arizona State University Richard Martini, President – Boston Architectural Center Kimberly Stanley, Vice President – Clemson University John Maudlin-Jeronimo, President – University of Miami Mary Beth Permar, Vice President – Clemson University Charles Guerin, President – University of Houston Robert Rosenfeld, Vice President – University of California at Berkeley Jerry Compton, President Southern – California Inst. of Architecture Robert Rosenfeld, Vice President – University of California at Berkeley Ella Hall, President – North Carolina State University Steve Biegel, Vice President – Syracuse University Patric Davis, President – Boston Architectural Center Ella Hall, Vice President – North Carolina State University Fay D’Avignon, President – Boston Architectural Center Perry Reader, Vice President – University of Florida Fay D’Avignon, President – Boston Architectural Center Patrick Delatour, Vice President – Howard University Joseph Siff, President – Rice University Robert Graham, Vice President – Howard University Mark Maves, Vice President – University of California at Berkeley James Miller, Vice President – University of California at Berkeley Bruce Webb, Vice President – Montana State University Michael Interbartolo, President – Boston Architectural Center Stephan Castellanos, Vice President – California Polytechnic State Gene Lindman, Vice President – University of Illinois at Chicago Jack Mathis, Vice President – Auburn University Taylor Culver, President – Howard University Jim Kollaer, Vice President – Texas Tech University Jim Brown, Secretary/Treasurer – Georgia Institute of Technology Edward Mathes, President – University of Southwestern Louisiana Ray Franklin Kenzie, Vice President – Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Richard Kidwell, Secretary/Treasurer – Arizona State University Morten Awes, President – University of Idaho Jack Worth III, President – Georgia Institute of Technology Kenneth Alexander, President – Pratt Institute Joseph Morse, President – Howard University Carl Schubert, President – California State Polytechnic University Donald Williams, President – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Ray Gaio, President – University of Notre Dame Alexi Vergun, Vice President – Massachusetts Institute of Technology Charles Jones, President – University of Arizona Alexi Vergun, Vice President – Massachusetts Institute of Technology Paul Ricciutti, President – Case Western Reserve University Eugene Burr, Vice President Allen Roth, Secretary/Treasurer Robert Harris, President – Princeton University James R. Barry, President – Rice University Robert Harris, Vice President - Princeton University Laurie M. Maurer, Secretary/Treasurer Related Organizations: Year Host City Host Chapter Theme 1957–1967 Washington, D.C. AIAS National Office 1968 Ann Arbor, Michigan University of Michigan 1969 Houston, Texas Rice University 1970 San Francisco, California 1971 Washington, D.C. 1972 Tucson, Arizona Arizona State University 1973 Miami, Florida University of Miami 1974 Fargo, North Dakota North Dakota State University 1975 Phoenix, Arizona 1976 Columbus, Indiana Ball State University 1977 Charleston, South Carolina Clemson University 1978 Sun Valley, Idaho University of Idaho 1979 Houston, Texas Rice University 1980 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 1981 Los Angeles, California 1982 Lincoln, Nebraska University of Nebraska 1983 Atlanta, Georgia 1984 Ann Arbor, Michigan University of Michigan 1985 New York, New York 1986 Phoenix, Arizona Arizona State University Permagrid 1987 Boston, Massachusetts 1988 Chicago, Illinois 1989 New Orleans, Louisiana Tulane University 1990 San Francisco, California 1991 Miami, Florida University of Miami 1992 Buffalo, New York SUNY Buffalo 1993 Lexington, Kentucky University of Kentucky 1994 Portland, Oregon 1995 Washington, D.C. AIAS National Office 1996 Denver, Colorado 1997 San Francisco, California 1998 Fort Lauderdale, Florida AIAS Fort Lauderdale (FAU/BCC) Oceanside Forum 1999 Toronto, Ontario, Canada Ryerson University Beyond Borders 2000 Los Angeles, California University of Southern California Transformation 2001 Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Carnegie Mellon University Going Beyond Green 2002 Chicago, Illinois University of Illinois City Reborn 2003 Austin, Texas University of Texas - Austin Off the Beaten Path 2004 New Orleans, Louisiana Tulane University Tourin’ the Vernacular 2005 Cincinnati, Ohio University of Cincinnati Building from Crisis 2006 Boston, Massachusetts Wentworth Institute of Technology Transitions 2007 Milwaukee, Wisconsin University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Architecture in Motion 2008 Denver, Colorado University of Colorado Denver Energy 2009 Minneapolis, Minnesota University of Minnesota Connections 2010 Toronto, Ontario, Canada Ryerson University Action Reaction 2011 Phoenix, Arizona Taliesin, Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture Arizona State University Solutions 2012 Savannah, Georgia Savannah College of Art and Design [a]part 2013 Chicago, Illinois Illinois Institute of Technology Unified 2014 Nashville, Tennessee The University of Tennessee, Knoxville Reverb 2015 San Francisco, California No host school Bandwidth Term Year President Vice President NE Quad Director MW Quad Director S Quad Director W Quad Director ACSA Liaisons AIA Liaisons Executive Director 2016-2017 60 Sarah Wahlgren, Auburn University Rachel Law, Ryerson University Clayton Daher, Roger Williams University Jeremy Gentile, Illinois Institute of Technology Jenn Elder, University of Tennessee at Knoxville Elizabeth Seidel, Montana State University TBD, TBD Steve Vogel, FAIA, Detroit, Michigan Nick Serfass, AIA, CAE 2016-2017 59 Danielle Mitchell, Pennsylvania State University Joel Pominville, Clemson University Rachel Law, Ryerson University Danielle Jones, Kent State University Sarah Wahlgren, Auburn University Ashley Kopetzky, University of Oregon Greg Hall, PhD, AIA, NCARB, Mississippi State University Steve Vogel, FAIA, Detroit, Michigan Nick Serfass, AIA, CAE 2014-2015 58 Charlie Klecha, School of the Art Institute of Chicago Obiekwe Okolo, University of Texas San Antonio Danielle Mitchelle, Pennsylvania State University Joel Pominville, Clemson University Nicole Gerou, Lawrence Technological University Kirsten Keane, Arizona State University Greg Hall, PhD, AIA, NCARB, Mississippi State University Nick Docous, AIA, Sacramento, California Nick Serfass, AIA, CAE 2013-2014 57 Westin Conahan, University of Nevada, Las Vegas Jennifer Taylor, Tuskegee University Dave Golden, Drexel University Ryan Gann, Illinois Institute of Technology Obiekwe Okolo, University of Texas San Antonio Andrea Young, The University of Arizona Marleen Kay Davis, University of Tennessee Nick Docous, AIA, Sacramento, California Lenore M. Lucey, FAIA, Interim Executive Director;  Joshua Caulfield, IOM 2012-2013 56 Matthew A. Barstow, University of New Mexico Brent A. Castro, University of Tennessee Knoxville Unknown, ? Jason Soderlund, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Miyuki Tsujimura, University of North Carolina at Charlotte Westin Conahan, University of Nevada, Las Vegas Marleen Kay Davis, University of Tennessee Chris Morrison, FAIA, LEED AP BD+C, Washington, DC Joshua Caulfield, IOM 2011-2012 55 Nick Mancusi, Taliesin, the Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture Laura Meador, Louisiana State University Becky Joyce, Drexel University Bryce Gamper, Lawrence Technological University Brent A. Castro, University of Tennessee Knoxville Matthew A. Barstow, University of New Mexico Thomas Dutton, Miami University Chris Morrison, FAIA, LEED AP BD+C, Washington, DC Joshua Caulfield, IOM 2010-2011 54 Tyler W. Ashworth, University of Idaho Danielle McDonough, Northeastern University Jared E. McKnight, Penn State University Michelle Morehead, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Laura Meador, Louisiana State University Nick Mancusi, Taliesin, the Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture Thomas Dutton, Miami University Ed Zeigler, FAIA, Greenville, South Carolina Joshua Caulfield, IOM 2009-2010 53 Je'Nen M. Chastain, University of North Carolina at Charlotte Brett Roeth, Miami University Dave M.A. Guerriero, Philadelphia University Jared Sang, Kansas State University Sarah Able, University of Oklahoma Tyler W. Ashworth, University of Idaho Bradford Grant, Howard University Ed Zeigler, FAIA, Greenville, South Carolina Susan Zuber, Interim Executive Director;  Michael Geary, CAE 2008-2009 52 JW Blanchard, Southern Polytechnic State University Deana Moore, University of North Carolina at Charlotte Anna McCorvey, Howard University Ashley Wilson, Ball State University Je'Nen M. Chastain, University of North Carolina at Charlotte Amy Perenchio, Washington State University Bradford Grant, Howard University Stephen K. Loos, FAIA, Lyons, Colorado Michael Geary, CAE 2007-2008 51 Andrew C. Caruso, Carnegie Mellon University Tony P. Vanky, Tulane University Danielle McDonough, Northeastern University Brian Dennen, Iowa State University JW Blanchard, Southern Polytechnic State University Henry G. Schneider, University of Hawaii at Manoa David Mohney, University of Kentucky Stephen K. Loos, FAIA, Lyons, Colorado Michael Geary, CAE 2006-2007 50 Jonathan K. Bahe, University of Minnesota Catherine McNeel, Mississippi State University Andrew C. Caruso, Carnegie Mellon University Melissa Schricker, Auburn University Daniel Brown, University of Nevada-Las Vegas David Mohney, University of Kentucky Michael Geary, CAE 2005-2006 49 Eric Zaddock, Andrews University Matthew Fochs,University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee Michael Geary, CAE 2004-2005 48 Jacob R. Day, University of Maryland Trinity Simons, University of Arkansas Ashley Wood, University of North Carolina at Charlotte Ryan McEnroe, Arizona State University Michael Geary, CAE 2003-2004 47 Wayne Mortensen, University of Nebraska Katherine Bojsza, Carnegie Mellon University Michael Geary, CAE 2003-2004 47 Lawrence Fabbroni, Carnegie Mellon University Jeanine Gunderson, University of Idaho Pam Kortan Day AIAS Competitions Page AIAS Illinois (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) Andrews University Ball State University Bowling Green State University Drury University Ferris State University Illinois Central College Illinois Institute of Technology Iowa State University Judson University Kansas State University Kent State University Lawrence Technological University Loyola Academy Miami University North Dakota State University Ohio State University Ranken Technical College School of the Art Institute of Chicago Southern Illinois University Carbondale University of Cincinnati University of Detroit Mercy University of Illinois at Chicago University of Kansas University of Kentucky University of Michigan University of Minnesota University of Nebraska at Lincoln University of Notre Dame University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Western Kentucky University Anne Arundel Community College Boston Architectural College The Catholic University of America City College of New York Cooper Union Cornell University Drexel University Fairmont State University Hampton University Howard University Keene State College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Morgan State University CUNY- New York City College of Technology NJIT- New Jersey Institute of Technology New York Institute of Technology- Old Westbury Northampton Community College Northern Virginia Community College - Alexandria Northeastern University* Norwich University Pennsylvania State University Philadelphia University Pratt Institute Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Roger Williams University Ryerson University  -Intl  State University of New York at Morrisville Alfred State College Syracuse University Temple University Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology University at Buffalo University of Hartford University of Maryland, College Park University of Massachusetts Amherst University of Virginia Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University AIAS Fort Lauderdale Auburn University Central Piedmont Community College Clemson University Florida A&M University Florida International University Georgia Institute of Technology Louisiana State University Louisiana Tech University Mississippi State University North Carolina State University Oklahoma State University Palm Beach State College Prairie View A&M University San Antonio College Savannah College of Art and Design Southern Polytechnic State University Texas A&M University Texas Tech University Tulane University Tuskegee University Universidad de Puerto Rico Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico (Universidad Politecnica de Puerto Rico) Pontifical Catholic University of Puerto Rico (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Puerto Rico) University of Arkansas University of Central Florida University of Florida University of Houston University of Louisiana at Lafayette University of Miami University of North Carolina at Charlotte University of Oklahoma University of South Florida University of Tennessee at Knoxville University of Texas at Arlington University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at San Antonio Valencia Community College Academy of Art University American University of Sharjah -Intl  American University in Dubai Arapahoe Community College Arizona State University Arizona Western College California State Polytechnic University, Pomona California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo California College of the Arts College of the Canyons Comsumnes River College Cuesta College East Los Angeles College Kuwait University -Intl  Montana State University NewSchool of Architecture and Design Portland State University Saddleback College Spokane Community College Stanford University Taliesin, Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture Truckee Meadows Community College University of Arizona University of Bahrain -Intl  University of California, Berkeley University of California, Los Angeles University of Colorado at Boulder University of Colorado at Denver University of Hawaii at Manoa University of Idaho University of Nevada, Las Vegas University of New Mexico University of Oregon University of San Diego University of San Francisco University of Southern California University of Utah University of Washington Ventura College Washington State University West Valley College Woodbury University Woodbury University-San Diego Pikes Peak Community College 2001-2002: 2000-2001: 1999-2000: 1998-99: 1997-98: 1996-97: 1995-96: 1994-95: 1993-94: 1992-93: 1991-92: 1990-91: 1989-90: 1988-89: 1987-88: 1986-87: 1985-86: 1984-85: 1983-84: 1982-83: 1981-82: 1980-81: 1979-80: 1978-79: 1977-78: 1976-77: 1975-76: 1974-75: 1973-74: 1972-73: 1971-72: 1970-71: 1969-70: 1968-69: 1967-68: 1966-67: 1965-66: 1964-65: 1962-63: 1961-62: 1960-61: 1959-60: 1958-59: 1957-58: 1956-57: American Institute of Architects Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture National Architectural Accrediting Board National Council of Architectural Registration Boards American Architectural Foundation (AAF) National Organization of Minority Architecture Students (NOMAS) Society of Architectural Historians (SAH) Official Website
