     America's Army is the name given to a game technology platform used to develop first person shooter (FPS) games published in 2002 by the U.S. Army.  The game is branded as a strategic communication device, designed to allow young Americans to virtually explore the Army at their own pace and according to their interests to determine if soldiering matches their needs, interests and abilities. America's Army represents the first large-scale use of game technology by the U.S. government as a platform for strategic communication and the first use of game technology in support of U.S. Army recruiting. The America's Army concept was conceived in 1999 by Colonel Casey Wardynski; the Army's Chief Economist and Professor at the United States Military Academy. Wardynski envisioned "using computer game technology to provide the public a virtual Soldier experience that was engaging, informative and entertaining."  America's Army was managed by two other U.S. Army officers serving with Wardynski at the Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis (OEMA): Major Chris Chambers and Major Bret Wilson. The Windows version 1.0, subtitled Recon, was first released on July 4, 2002. As of January 2014, there have been over 41 versions and updates released, including updates to America's Army: Proving Grounds which was released in August 2013. All versions have been developed on the Unreal Engine. The game is financed by the U.S. government and distributed by free download. According to game historian Carrie McLeroy America's Army has "grown in ways its originators couldn't have imagined". Dozens of government training and simulation applications using the America's Army platform have been developed to train and educate U.S. Army soldiers. America's Army has also been used to deliver virtual soldiering experiences to participants at events, such as air shows, amusement parks, and sporting events around the country. The America's Army series has also been expanded to include versions for Xbox and Xbox 360, arcade, and mobile applications published through licensing arrangements. America's Army is multiplayer, a round based team tactical shooter game with the player acting as a soldier in the U.S. Army, with combat at squad-level with three fireteams. GameSpot admires the game's authenticity: It's pretty realistic— you take one or two shots and you go limp, you take one more and you're done. Another game review describes America's Army as "the most realistic portrayal of weapons and combat of any game". America's Army always promoted adherence to the U.S. Army's seven core values. To this extent, the game's main ranking system, "Honor", is named after one. America's Army also includes optional medical training designed to provide real-world information. In order to assume the role of combat life-saver in the game, players must pass a virtual medical training course based on actual training that soldiers receive with regard to evaluating and prioritizing casualties, controlling bleeding, recognizing and treating shock, and administering aid when victims are not breathing. Two America's Army players have reported using the training they received in-game to save lives in emergency situations; one such account, by Paxton Galvanek, received national media attention. The game also allows players to train to drive the HMMWV and qualify to use the CROWS system allowing in game use of the Mk 19 grenade launcher and Browning M2. Training is also available for the Javelin missile as well as specialist training such as parachute training, which allows access to the Airborne missions, and Special Forces training which allows access to the Special Forces missions. The round ends when one team completes the objective or eliminates the entire opposing team. In certain circumstances such as when both teams are eliminated or both sides have not completed their objectives when time runs out there will be a tie. America's Army achieves a high realism level in terms of visual and acoustic representation of combat and firearm usage and mechanics but its critics have alleged that it fails to convey wartime conditions as accurately as it claims. "If you are going to join the Army, you know the risk." says player Bart Koscinski. "In this game you might die eight times in 15 minutes. In real life people know what they are getting themselves into."  America's Army 3 (AA3) is a first-person shooter computer/video game and a sequel to the critically acclaimed game America’s Army. In comparison to its previous versions, AA3 was completely remade using Unreal Engine 3 and introduced a number of changes. Medical training was now compulsory, allowing all players to give basic IFAK treatment. While the original America's Army required the completion of training to play online, AA3 allowed you to jump into a game with limited capability, and training was required to unlock desired equipment and skills. Another new feature was melee combat in battle using the rifle butt, allowing for more stealthy close combat situations. America's Army 3 also removed jump, to eliminate the practice of unrealistic bunny hopping-type evasive manoeuvres. However players can still climb onto or hurdle over low obstacles. AA3 reorganized the fireteams that players were grouped into; the Designated Marksman was made a member of one of the fireteams instead of being a separate two-man shooter/spotter element as would be more fitting of a sniper team. In June 2011, the U.S. Army released an update (AA 3.1) to the America’s Army 3 game that included two new multiplayer maps, Shantytown and Stronghold, and a number of new features including new gameplay for “Every Soldier a Sensor." The ES2 gameplay in AA3 brought awareness of the importance of every Soldier being observant on every mission. During AA3 gameplay, players were rewarded for observing and reporting back things that they came across during the mission that were suspicious or out-of-place.  In December 2011, AA3.2 introduced a new inventory item, the M106 Fast Obscurant Grenade (FOG) into game-play. The release also provided a new game loader front end to easily create player accounts; view news, manuals, Personnel Jacket and player stats; launch a game server and link to the America’s Army website. America’s Army: Proving Grounds (AA:PG) is a first-person shooter computer/video game created using Unreal Engine 3, and is the most current game of the America’s Army FPS series. AA:PG was released in open beta on August 29, 2013. The game brings back many features from previous AA games and stresses small unit tactical maneuvers and training to reflect the current day U.S. Army. As with previous versions, AA:PG was designed with certain principles and ideals in mind including Army Values, Soldier’s Creed, teamwork, training and completing the objective. Gameplay scenarios included Battle Drill Exercises and Forward Line Operations. Battle Drill Exercises (BDX) are fast-paced and meant for small engagements of 6 vs. 6 players. BDX maps focus on the basic movements and maneuvers, allowing players to quickly learn how opposing forces play and adjust their strategy for future engagements. Forward Line Operations (FLO) are larger 12 vs. 12 mission-based exercises allowing players to use the skills learned in their Battle Drills to achieve success. In AA:PG, players can use weapons new to the series such as the Remington 870 MCS shotgun and M14 EBR-RI Designated Marksman Rifle, in addition to weapons like the M9 pistol, M4/M4A1 and the M249 light machine gun which had been in previous AA games. Gameplay features include situational awareness for spotting the enemies, effects of weapon suppression, a supported fire system for steadying or resting weapons to help with aim, self aid where players can stabilize themselves, revival of incapacitated teammates, securing the enemy and a more advanced hardcore mode. The game also features updated versions of Hospital and Bridge, two maps that have been popular with AA fans. Set in a fictional story line in the Republic of the Ostregals, players assume the role of an 11B Infantryman practicing combat maneuvers at Joint Training Center Griffin (aka The Proving Grounds), a MOUT (Military Operations on Urban Terrain) training environment quickly assembled using existing building infrastructure, Conex shipping containers and local materials. This training is crucial to the player’s success as part of the Long Range Combined Arms – Recon (LRCA-R) team, a full spectrum capable unit for doing special operations missions deep behind enemy lines. America’s Army: Proving Grounds also debuts a new story line in a full digital comic series through IDW Publishing. The America’s Army Comics series, available on the web and for mobile devices, unveils the story line that influences the plot for the game’s missions and maps and gives the player a better understanding of their assignment and the challenges they will face. In AA Comics, players learn the saga of American forces deployed to the Ostregal Islands, a tiny foreign nation in the middle of a chaotic conflict. The game was developed by Colonel Wardynski who recognized that a video game might be helpful to the U.S. Army in the strategic communication efforts by providing more information to prospective soldiers and to help reduce the number of recruits who wash out during the nine weeks of basic training. The effort proved successful as more than 13 million players have registered America’s Army accounts over the years, with more than 260 million hours played on the various titles. One teenager was quoted saying the game "provides great information. This would probably spark an interest. I don't know how I would have found out so much some other way." With several thousand players online at any one time between 2001 and 2007, it ranked in the top 10 FPS (First Person Shooter) games played online during the period, as tracked by GameSpy. The America's Army developers licensed commercial game engine technology, specifically the Unreal game engine as the foundation for its game. It was the first game to feature Unreal Engine 2. America's Army is intended to give a positive impression of the U.S. Army. In the official Frequently Asked Questions page the developers confirmed in a statement that one of the reasons people outside the United States can play the game is "We want the whole world to know how great the U.S. Army is." America's Army is the first well-known overt use of computer gaming for political aims. Chris Chambers, the former deputy director of development for America's Army, admits it is a recruitment tool, and Chris Morris of CNN/Money states that "the Army readily admits [America's Army] is a propaganda device." The game, considered by the U.S. Army to be a "cost-effective recruitment tool," aims to become part of youth culture's "consideration set" as confirmed by Army Deputy Chief of Personnel Timothy Maude in testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee. America's Army and its official webpage contain links to the "Go Army" recruitment website, another recruiting tool that, according to the Army Subcommittee Testimony from February 2000, has a higher chance of recruiting than "any other method of contact." Guiding American players to the website is a major goal of the game and it was confirmed that twenty-eight percent of all visitors of America's Army's webpage click through to this recruitment site. According to Colonel Wardynski, the game generated interest from other U.S. government agencies including the Secret Service resulting in the development of a training version for internal government use only. On November 6, 2003, version 2.0 of America's Army was released, with the full title of America's Army: Special Forces. In a booklet produced by the MOVES Institute an article by Wagner James Au explains that "the Department of Defense want to double the number of Special Forces soldiers, so essential in Afghanistan and northern Iraq; consequently, orders trickled down the chain of command and found application in the current release of America's Army." As the game became more widely distributed, it generated additional media interest. In December 2003, The Boston Globe columnist said "... America's Army isn't just a time-wasting shoot-'em-up. It's full of accurate information about military training and tactics, intended to prepare a new generation of potential recruits. Amidst all the shouting drill sergeants and whistling bullets, some real education is going on. America's Army is a 'serious game,' part of a new wave of computer simulations that provide entertaining lessons about real world activities." After the game proved successful, the lack of the army's acknowledgment for the contribution by the U.S. Navy led to tension and political fights over the project. Eventually, the project was withdrawn from the Naval Postgraduate School due to allegations of mismanagement in March 2004 and the development team was moved to two new locations. One month after taking over production, the army signed an exclusive long-term contract with Ubisoft to reach a wider and younger audience. America's Army: Rise of a Soldier, a different version of the game for Xbox was produced by Ubisoft in collaboration with the U.S. Army. Despite a 10-year publishing deal, the control over all communication and advertising remains with the army. The Xbox version was released in November, 2005. It was also due to be released on the PlayStation 2 but was later canceled. A version of the game was also made for the mobile phone by Gameloft. It was announced in early 2008 that America's Army 3, would be released in "fall 2008". Due to technical issues and problems with software licenses the game release was delayed and rescheduled for "some time in 2009". America's Army 3 entered beta testing in late 2008 and was released on June 17, 2009. Despite America's Army 3 being an entirely new game created using the Unreal Engine 3, there were still a number of similarities between previous versions of America's Army including similar training exercises. AA3 put emphasis on graphical performance and on flexibility to cover a broader range of PCs, as well as decreased size for the full version of the software. The game also featured fictional weapons for the enemy as opposed to the Soviet and Warsaw Pact based weapons used in the previous versions. Although the game had initial problems with online play it worked well offline. A hotfix was launched shortly after the game's release which addressed several problems with the authorization servers not being able to register that players had completed training. Five days after release, players were once again able to play online. One day after the launch the civilian developers team contracted until game release were dismissed.America's Army Development Studio Closed IGNAmerica's Army Developers Laid Off Shacknews Responsibility for development of the game was passed on to the Army Game Studio, part of the AMRDEC Software Engineering Directorate at Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Army Game Studio houses the development and management staff for the America's Army outreach products as well as numerous Military and Government applications.  On August 28, 2012, the developers were taking suggestions for a new America's Army game, the fourth in the America's Army series. The game, which is called America’s Army: Proving Grounds,[ ] America's Army Forums was released in an Open Beta on Steam on August 29, 2013. During the Open Beta, the developers had been updating the game with new maps and features as the game evolved. The beta ended on October 1, 2015 with the full release of the game, introducing new features and a new look and feel. America’s Army: Proving Grounds brings back many features from previous games, and stresses small unit tactical maneuvers and training that reflects the current day Army. The game includes a mission editor, a feature brought back from America's Army 2. America's Army: Rise of a Soldier was released for Xbox on November 2005. According to the press release, the game features "all the action-packed realism that players have come to expect from the America's Army game brand" and "offers the most true-to-life Army experience, allowing players to create a soldier and lead him through the excitement of an Army career". In February 2007, Gameloft and the U.S. Army released America's Army: Special Operations for mobile phones. The game features two types of gameplay. Players can  man an armored vehicle or serve as an infantryman. According to Mobicritic.com, "Gameloft does a great job with this game and the only fault one could find is that the game is too short. It isn't, really: you just won't realize how fast the hours of play have passed, as this game really gives the term 'action packed' a new meaning." The arcade version of America's Army was developed by Global VR and released on July 2007. It is billed as a "realistic and engaging game centered on exciting training exercises and includes a significant amount of authentic Army videos". America's Army: True Soldiers was released for the Xbox 360 on November 2007. It had both a single-player campaign and multiplayer features on Xbox Live. True Soldiers focused on the army's "core values" by incorporating gameplay based on mission accomplishment, teamwork, leadership, and rules of engagement. The America's Army Real Heroes program, launched in September 2006, focused on specific soldiers who had been recognized for various acts. Described in an article from U.S. News & World Report, the idea of the Real Heroes program "is to tout ordinary people who, when thrust into danger, showed extraordinary courage" The Real Heroes program used videos, photo albums and blogs on the Real Heroes website to depict the lives of nine U.S. Army, Reserve and National Guard Soldiers featured in the program. Soldiers' likenesses and biographies were incorporated into the America's Army game and used to create action figures sold at retail stores and distributed at Army events. Additionally, those featured in the Real Heroes program made media appearances at America's Army events across the country such as the Virtual Army Experience, gaming competitions and Technology Education programs. On January 23, 2007, Real Hero Sergeant Tommy Rieman was recognized by President George W. Bush during his State of the Union address. President Bush affirmed "... and like so many other Americans who have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the respect and the gratitude of our country." In 2005, the America's Army developers partnered with the Software Engineering Directorate and the Army's Aviation and Missile Research Development Engineering Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to manage the commercial game development process and use the America's Army platform to create government training and simulations. "America's Army has pushed to reuse the same elements for many purposes," said Colonel Wardynski, originator of the game, "We can build one soldier avatar and use it again and again. When we build something in America's Army, the U.S. government owns it completely ... and [it] can therefore be used for any application or use of the game. So costs keep going down. " After AA went live, requests started coming in to use the game for purposes other than recruiting, such as training. The partnership with SED, an army software lifecycle management center, allowed the development team to repurpose the commercial software to meet the needs of soldiers preparing for deployment. SED engineers developed customized applications used by many different Army and government organizations including the JFK Special Forces School and the army's Chemical School. They are used to provide training in use of rare equipment such as PackBot robots, CROWS, and Nuclear Biological Chemical Reconnaissance Vehicles. The Virtual Army Experience (VAE) was a mobile U.S. Army simulator that launched in February 2007. The VAE, enclosed in a 10,000 sq ft inflatable dome, was displayed at public events across the U.S. such as NASCAR races and air shows and allowed participants to virtually experience aspects of soldiering. The core of VAE was the America's Army game reworked to provide a variety of scenarios. The VAE could be deployed in a single full scale rendition or split into two smaller versions enabling it to appear at separate events. During its lifetime, the VAE hosted over 130,000 participants at more than 100 events. From August 29, 2008 to July 31, 2010, the U.S. Army operated the Army Experience Center, a facility where visitors could virtually experience many aspects of army life. Located inside the Franklin Mills Mall in Philadelphia, the  facility featured a number of interactive simulations and online learning programs to inform visitors about army careers, training and educational opportunities. Pete Geren, Secretary of the Army, said "Potential recruits are afforded a unique opportunity through the Army Experience Center to learn what it means to be the best-led, best-trained and best-equipped Army in the world by allowing them to virtually experience multiple aspects of the Army." The head of Army Recruiting Command, Major General Thomas Bostick, called the AEC "a learning laboratory" — but not just for those who are thinking of joining. "It's incumbent upon the American public to know about their Army," Bostick said. In July 2010 the Army closed the center at the end of its two-year pilot program. Launched in 2007, the Technology Education Program provided real world applications of classroom learning that augmented the curriculum in academic areas including math, physical science, physics, chemistry, technology, computer science, art, animation, graphic design, social studies, anatomy, physiology and psychology. Army experts and Soldiers worked with students to teach them about robotics; optics; missiles; video games; and intellectual, emotional and physical development. In April 2008, Discovery Education featured America's Army in a live webinar in which over 1000 students and educators participated with AA game developers and software engineers. The America’s Army comics series allows readers to further explore the America’s Army universe and delve deep into the lives of Soldiers  who are deployed or at home station.  Readers learn about Soldiers and the missions they do, their values, jobs or Military Occupational Specialties (MOS), the high-tech equipment they use, and about the vast team of support on which they rely. The comics are free and available to read on browser or mobile device (iOS or Android) through the America’s Army website or through IDW publishing using comiXology, Apple iBooks, on the Nook, Kindle and others. The AA comics tell the story of U.S. Soldiers deployed to a tiny foreign nation in the middle of a chaotic conflict. The description for the series reads “From the seemingly insignificant country of Czervenia, President-General Adzic and his army set upon a campaign of annihilation against the neighboring Republic of the Ostregals, setting in motion a mysterious plan that could change the course of world power forever.  America's Army must create new experimental combat teams, forged together in secret Proving Grounds, and uncover the General's insidious plot before time runs out.” America's Army has been positively received, up until 2.8. GameSpot states "nothing beats going in and seeing what the Army really does...without actually having to do it" It has a rating of 82 on MetacriticAmerica's Army: Operations (pc: 2002): Reviews In addition, it has been covered in thousands of media outlet stories around the world and has received many awards.  America's Army has gained the interest of numerous professionals in the fields of business, economics, and social science. A partial list of published analyses includes: Anthropologist Robertson Allen spent 2 years (2007–09) embedded with the America's Army game development team and researching the network of defense, government, and contracting institutions that make up the Army Game Project: America's Army has been described as an extension of the military entertainment complex or so-called "militainment" with criticism that it contributes to a militarization of society. Because America's Army focuses on the technological aspect of war rather than the moral, it has been referred to as How We Fight, alluding to the U.S. government's series of films named Why We Fight, which supported the war effort for World War II. Media theorist David B. Nieborg criticized the game and noted that its mechanics are a careful blend of propaganda, advertising and education. Use of the game by recruitment and training centers has been criticized and protested against, amongst others by the Veterans for Peace group. Its use in schools as a recruiting tool aimed at children has also been criticized.   Name Award Tour Selection Date LTC Jason Amerine Bronze Star w V Device OEF-A 2006 SGT Tommy Rieman Silver Star OIF 2006 SFC Gerald Wolford Silver Star OIF 2006 SGT Matthew Zedwick Silver Star OIF 2006 SPC Jason Mike Silver Star OIF 2007 SSG Timothy Nein Distinguished Service Cross OIF 2007 SFC Robert David Groff Bronze Star w V Device OIF 2008 SSG John Adams Bronze Star w V Device OIF 2008 SGT Monica Lin Brown Silver Star OEF 2009 Presenting body Award Year Computer Gaming World Magazine Editor's Choice award (4.5 out of 5 stars) 2002 Computer Games Magazine Best Use of Tax Dollars 2002 PC Gamer Magazine Best Value 2002 PC Gamer Magazine The Best Gaming moments of 2002 2002 IGN ActionVault Debut Game of the Year 2002 IGN ActionVault Biggest Surprise of the Year 2002 IGN ActionVault Multiplayer Game of the Year (Honorable Mention) 2002 GameSpot.com Biggest Surprise on a PC 2002 GameSpot.com Best Multiplayer Game (Runner Up) 2002 GameSpot.com Nominated for Best Sound in a Game 2002 GameSpy.com Best Action Game of E3 (Runner Up) 2002 Wargamer.com Best First Person / Tactical Shooter 2002 Computer Gaming World Multiplayer Game of the Year (Nominated) 2002 Clan World Network Most Realistic Game of the Year 2002 Well-Rounded Entertainment.com Best Game of E3 2003 2003 DoubleClick's Insight Awards Honorable Mention for Best Multi-Channel Marketing 2003 Academy for Interactive Arts & Sciences Finalist for 2003's First Person Action Game 2003 GameSpot Runner up for Best Multiplayer Game of the Year 2003 2003 CBS Online One of the Best Games of 2003 2003 GameSpy Best of 2003 – Best Value 2003 PC Gamer Runner Up for Best Value 2003 Computer Games Magazine Best Free Game 2004 Tom's Hardware The Best of E3America's Army: Special Forces - Most Dedicated Developers 2004 Digital Entertainment & Media Excellence Award (DEMX) Best Advergame of 2005 2005 Innovations in American Government Award Finalist 2006 M16 Copywriting and Text Gold Prize for demonstrating compelling and creative copy 2006 Event Design Magazine Awards Bronze Medal for Best Outdoor Consumer Environment (VAE) 2007 Guinness World Records Largest Traveling Game Simulator (VAE) 2009 Guinness World Records Largest Virtual Army 2009 Guinness World Records Most Downloaded War Game 2009 Guinness World Records Most Hours Spent Playing a Free Online Shooter 2009 Guinness World Records Earliest Military Website to Support a Video Game 2009 Strategic Horizons ThinkAbout Experience Stager of the Year - EXPY for America's Army and VAE 2009 North American Effie Awards Effie in Government/Institutional/ Recruitment & Brand Experience (VAE) 2009 Corporate Events Magazine Judges Choice Award for Best Road Show/Multi Venue Event (VAE) 2009 Jay Chiat Award for Strategic Excellence Bronze Award for Brand Experience & Innovative Design 2009 Ranks are accurate as of the time of award. "Changing the Game: How Video games are Transforming the Future of Business October, 2008." David Edery, Microsoft Xbox executive and research affiliate of the MIT Comparative Media Studies Program, and Ethan Mollick, researcher at the MIT Sloan School of Management, investigate the future of video games. They cite the combat medic training received by Paxton Galvanek to save a life as "tangible evidence of the power of games to educate". (p.&nbsp;97) Furthermore, the book praises America's Army by saying "Far-sighted companies are using games to recruit, train, motivate, and make employees more productive" (p.&nbsp;97) and includes research that supports this point: "30% of all Americans age 16 to 24 had a more positive impression of the Army because of the game and, even more amazingly, the game had more impact on recruits than all other forms of Army advertising combined." (p.&nbsp;141) "Watch This, Listen Up, Click Here: Inside the 300 Billion Dollar Business Behind the Media You Constantly Consume April, 2007." David Verklin, CEO of Carat, and Bernice Kanner, marketing expert, test the stability of old, traditional media and find they're collapsing under pressure from online services. Highlights the U.S. Army video game as the 21st century's recruitment poster. "America's Army has proven to be such powerful weaponry that an official game store does brisk business selling collectible action figures, clothes, coffee mugs, and other doodads emblazoned with the logo." (p.&nbsp;90) "Experience the Message: How Experiential Marketing Is Changing the Brand World by Max Lendermann, creative director of GMR Marketing, December, 2005." Cites AA advergaming success and rollout to an experiential marketing campaign. "The America's Army experience is an advergaming juggernaut, an empire that is looked to enviably by the rest of the advergaming nations." (p.&nbsp;218) "Not only do players get a fun and exciting experience, they also get as close to the real thing of being in the army as possible, without actually getting a buzz cut and general-issue fatigues." (p.&nbsp;222) "Authenticity: What Consumers Really Want by James H. Gilmore and B. Joseph Pine II, co-founders of Strategic Horizons LLP, September 2007." http://authenticitybook.com/ Published by Harvard Business School Press, this book cites America's Army as one of the most innovative and successful examples of virtual placemaking and Col. Wardynski's efforts in establishing new and better metric analyses. "According to the director of the program, Colonel Casey Wardynski, 20 percent of those matriculating at West Point in 2005 had played America's Army, along with 20 to 40 percent of enlisted soldiers recruited that year." (p.&nbsp;168) "America's Army director Colonel Wardynski uses the metric 'cost per person hour', estimating in 2005 that the million the Army puts into the program each year results in 'a cost per person hour of 10 cents, vers to for TV'." (p.&nbsp;173) "Career Innovation Case Study of the U.S. Army as part of the "Digital Generation Initiative"" Case study analyzed the Army Game Project efforts and concluded the following: First, to reach the Digital Generation, content must be engaging and authentic. Employers will have to adopt a much more open and transparent approach to communicating information and allowing contact with employees than is currently the norm. Second, the Digital Generation will expect to be able to virtually explore and even "test drive" jobs and organizations. The Army's experience shows the potential and importance of virtual tools and capabilities in shaping the brand image of employers. Third, games and simulations can play a role in preparing new hires for the job. And finally, employers should treat investments in games and simulations as a platform to support a wide range of recruiting, learning and performance development activities and goals. Virtual simulators are cheaper than real ones in many instances. "The Potential of America's Army as Civilian-Military Public Sphere" extensive February 2004 thesis (149 pages) by graduate student Zhan Li for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - includes ethnographic analysis of Soldiers who play the game during the invasion of Iraq, and interviews with West Point directors of the America's Army project. "Social Realism in Gaming academic analysis of AA in terms of "Social realism" by Alexander R. Galloway" a book author and Assistant Professor at New York University. Alexander R. Galloway, an associate professor at New York University notes that, "What is interesting about America's Army, is not the debate over whether it is thinly-veiled propaganda or a legitimate recruitment tool, for it is unabashedly and decisively both, but rather that the central conceit of the game is one of mimetic realism." In his analysis, Galloway concludes that AA, despite being a fairly realistic game, with real-life settings, does not make even the least attempt to achieve narrative realism—that is, accurately representing what serving a tour in the Army would actually be like. Instead, it simply expresses a nationalistic sentiment under the guise of realism, being little more than a "naïve and unmediated or reflective conception of aesthetic construction." "Video Games, Manipulation and the U.S. Military: A Comparative Analysis of America's Army and SOCOM II: US Navy SEALs" academic analysis of America's Army and SOCOM II: U.S. Navy SEALs in terms of "Visual Discourse" by Caroline S. Brooks, a PhD candidate at East Carolina University. "America's Army PC Game - Vision and Realization," published by the MOVES Institute and the US Army, February 2004, 40 pages. Michael Zyda, Alex Mayberry, Jesse McCree, and Margaret Davis “From Viz-Sim to VR to Games: How We Built a Hit Game-Based Simulation,” in W.B. Rouse and K.R. Boff (Eds.) Organizational Simulation: From Modeling & Simulation to Games & Entertainment, New York: Wiley Press, 2005,pp., ISBN 0-471-68163-6. Margaret Davis, Russell Shilling, Alex Mayberry, Jesse McCree, Phillip Bossant, Scott Dossett, Christian Buhl, Christopher Chang, Evan Champlin, Travis Wiglesworth and Michael Zyda "Researching America’s Army," in Design Research: Methods and Perspectives, edited by Brenda Laurel, MIT Press, 1 October 2003, ISBN 0-262-12263-4, 268-275. Russ Shilling, Michael Zyda and E. Casey Wardynski, "Introducing Emotion into Military Simulation and Videogame Design: America's Army Operations and VIRTE," in the Proceedings of the GameOn Conference, London, 30 November 2002, pp. 151–154. Robertson Allen. 2009. "The Army Rolls Through Indianapolis: Fieldwork at the Virtual Army Experience." Transformative Works and Cultures 2. Robertson Allen. 2011. "The Unreal Enemy of America's Army." Games and Culture 6(1):38-60. Robertson Allen. 2012. "Games Without Tears, Wars Without Frontiers." In War, Technology, Anthropology. Koen Stroken, ed. Critical Interventions: A Forum for Social Analysis, Vol. 13. New York: Berghahn Books. Pp. 83–93. Robertson Allen. 2013. "Virtual Soldiers, Cognitive Laborers." In Virtual War and Magical Death: Technologies and Imaginaries for Terror and Killing. Sverker Finnstrom and Neil Whitehead, eds. Durham: Duke University Press. Pp. 152–170. Details the 2009 layoffs of the America's Army game development team and the cognitive/immaterial labor undertaken in the video game industry. Close Combat: First to Fight, video game developed with input from U.S. Marines Full Spectrum Warrior VBS1 The Glorious Mission, first-person shooter released by the People's Liberation Army of China Marine DOOM, 1996 modified version of id software's DOOM II Special Force and Special Force 2, first-person shooters developed by Hizbullah America's Army Platform for government applications The MOVES Institute (former developers) "War games in a time of war", MSNBC article (July 18, 2004) "The Army Game Project" article for the Army Magazine by Chris Chambers (deputy director of AA), Thomas Sherlock (teacher of political science) and Paul Kucik (economic analyst in the Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis), 2002 Enjoy the video game? Then join the army. by the Christian Science Monitor Official PunkBuster site Authentication system for America's Army 2.5 (unofficial community project)
