    Annie is a Broadway musical based upon the popular Harold Gray comic strip Little Orphan Annie, with music by Charles Strouse, lyrics by Martin Charnin, and the book by Thomas Meehan. The original Broadway production opened in 1977 and ran for nearly six years, setting a record for the Alvin Theatre (now the Neil Simon Theatre). It spawned numerous productions in many countries, as well as national tours, and won the Tony Award for Best Musical. The musical's songs "Tomorrow" and "It's the Hard Knock Life" are among its most popular musical numbers. In 1933, eleven-year-old Annie is in the Municipal Girls Orphanage, along with Molly (age 6), Kate (age 7), Tessie (age 10), Pepper (age 12), July and Duffy (both 13). When Molly awakes from a bad dream, angering Pepper and Duffy, July tells them to hush up and eventually gets into a fight with Pepper. Annie gets up and tells everyone to go back to sleep. Molly then asks if Annie could read her note from when her parents left her at the orphanage. Duffy and Pepper are yet again annoyed. Along with Kate, Pepper and Duffy imitate Annie's acting as if they were her parents ("Maybe"). Annie decides to escape to find her parents, but is caught by Miss Hannigan, who is currently suffering from a hangover. She is angered by this and forces all the girls to vigorously clean the orphanage ("Hard Knock Life"). Shortly after, Mr. Bundles, the laundry man, comes in to pick up the blankets. While Miss Hannigan is flirting with him, Annie climbs into the laundry basket and the orphans cover her up with the blankets. Once Miss Hannigan realizes she is gone, the other orphans express their frustration ("Hard Knock Life (Reprise)"). Annie successfully escapes, running into a friendly stray dog. As she comforts him, she tells him of better days yet to come ("Tomorrow"). The dog catcher is after him, so she pretends the dog is hers by calling him Sandy. Though at first unsuccessful, she convinces the dog catcher, and she continues on. She later finds a Hooverville, where people made homeless by the Great Depression have come together as a community ("We'd Like To Thank You, Herbert Hoover"). However, a policeman named Lt. Ward, who had been sent by Miss Hannigan, catches Annie and brings her back. Grace Farrell, assistant to the billionaire Oliver Warbucks, comes to the orphanage asking for an orphan to come to his mansion for the Christmas holiday. Because Annie was in Miss Hannigan's office, Grace asks to take her, and Miss Hannigan reluctantly agrees. Once she has left, Miss Hannigan explodes with her hatred for all the girls in the orphanage ("Little Girls"). Meanwhile, at the Warbucks Mansion, the staff welcomes Annie with open arms ("I Think I'm Gonna Like It Here"). When Oliver Warbucks comes back, though, he is very moody and not too happy to have an orphan in his mansion. He asks Grace to take Annie to a movie, but she persuades him to come too. As he and Annie begin to like each other, they enjoy a fabulous night in New York City ("N.Y.C."). Back at the orphanage, Miss Hannigan's brother, Rooster, and his girlfriend, Lily, pay a visit. Miss Hannigan mentions that Annie is staying at a billionaire's house, and they think they could use this situation to their advantage, though they do not yet know how ("Easy Street"). Warbucks sees the locket around Annie's neck, and buys her a new one from Tiffany & Co. He debates taking her "under his wing", because he doesn't know much about children, but he decides he loves her and gives her the locket ("Why Should I Change A Thing?"). However, she bursts into tears, saying it was the only thing left by her parents, and refuses to accept a new one. Grace and the staff then pledge to find her parents no matter what it takes ("You Won't Be An Orphan For Long"). Annie appears on the radio on a show by Bert Healy ("Maybe" reprise) where Warbucks announces that he is offering $10,000 to the couple who can prove they are her parents. Healy then sings a song with the Boylan Sisters ("You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile"). Back at the orphanage the girls are listening to the song. Everyone is fascinated that their friend is on the radio, except Pepper; who couldn't care less. ("You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile" reprise). When Miss Hannigan hears, she barges in and demands to know what was happening. Molly announces that Annie was on the radio, and that there is a $10,000 reward for her parents. Miss Hannigan is anything but pleased. Shortly after, a couple named Ralph and Shirley Mudge arrive, saying they left a little girl here eleven years ago and have come back for her. Miss Hannigan is shocked. They soon reveal themselves to be Rooster and Lily; they explain their plan to get the reward. They request information about Annie from Miss Hannigan for one third of the money, though she demands one half for this service, and she tells them about the note and the locket ("Easy Street" reprise). Warbucks brings Annie to Washington, D.C., where she requests to meet the president. Warbucks thinks that it would be better if Annie waited outside, but Franklin D. Roosevelt asks her to stay. She begins to sing "Tomorrow", though shushed by the cabinet. Roosevelt, however, believes that people must be optimistic during tough times, and commands them to sing ("Tomorrow" Cabinet reprise). Once back home, Warbucks tells Annie how much he loves her ("Something Was Missing"). Because her parents have not shown up, he announces he would like to adopt her ("I Don't Need Anything But You"). They decide to throw a Christmas party, and Annie wants to invite Miss Hannigan and the orphans. While preparing, the delighted staff tell of how her arrival has changed their lives ("Annie"). Judge Louis Brandeis shows up to begin the adoption proceedings, but is interrupted by Mr. and Mrs. Mudge (Rooster and Lily in disguise) who come to pick up Annie. Grace and Warbucks are shocked, because they know about the note and the locket. Still, Warbucks does not think they are her real parents. He requests that she will be allowed to stay one more night for the Christmas party, and then they can take her away to their supposed pig farm in New Jersey. Early that morning, she wishes she could have been adopted, not sent off with her "parents" ("Maybe" reprise). Warbucks then receives a surprise visit from Roosevelt and his Secret Service. It is revealed by him that Annie's parents are actually David and Margaret Bennett, who died when she was a baby. They then realize that Mr. and Mrs. Mudge are really Rooster and Lily, just as they show up to claim her and the money. They, along with Miss Hannigan, are arrested by the Secret Service, and everyone is delighted by Roosevelt's new deal for the economy ("New Deal for Christmas"). The New York Times estimates that Annie is produced 700 to 900 times each year in the United States.Healy, Patrick. "Stage Girls in Hard-Knock Competition", The New York Times, September 6, 2012 Annie had its world premiere on August 10, 1976 at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Connecticut under the direction of Michael P. Price, Executive Director. Kristen Vigard was the first actress to play the title role. However, the producers soon decided that Vigard's genuinely sweet interpretation was not tough enough for the street-smart orphan. After a week of performances, Vigard was replaced by Andrea McArdle, who played one of the other orphans, Pepper. Vigard went on to become McArdle's Broadway understudy.  The original Broadway production opened at the Alvin Theatre on April 21, 1977 and starred Andrea McArdle as Annie, Reid Shelton as Daddy Warbucks, Dorothy Loudon as Miss Hannigan, and Sandy Faison as Grace Farrell. Danielle Brisebois was one of the orphans. It was nominated for eleven Tony Awards and won seven, including the Best Musical, Best Score, and Best Book. Replacements in the title role on Broadway included then-child actors Shelly Bruce, Sarah Jessica Parker, Allison Smith and Alyson Kirk. Replacements in the role of Miss Hannigan included Alice Ghostley, Dolores Wilson, Betty Hutton, Marcia Lewis, and June Havoc. Ann Ungar understudied and played for Dorothy Loudon in the role of Miss Hannigan.  She also understudied Alice Ghostley and Dolores Wilson. The show closed on January 2, 1983, after a total of 2,377 performances, setting a record for the longest running show at the Alvin Theatre (now the Neil Simon Theatre), until it was surpassed by Hairspray in 2009. During the Broadway run of Annie, there were four touring companies that were launched from the original production to tour to major U.S. cities: The 1st National Touring Company opened in Toronto in March 1978 with Kathy Jo Kelly as Annie, Norwood Smith as Daddy Warbucks, Jane Connell, Ruth Kobart as Miss Hannigan, and Gary Beach as Rooster. It played in Miami from April 12 to May 13, 1978 then continued for a few more cities until it landed in Chicago where it played for 32 weeks. In April 1979, it continued on the road in with Mary K. Lombardi now in the lead as Annie. In the fall of 1980, Theda Stemler took over the part and was replaced in Boston when she grew too old. On May 15, 1981, Louanne Sirota, who had played Annie in the long-running Los Angeles production (see below), took over the role for four months. In August 1981, Becky Snyder became the company's last Annie, closing the tour on September 6, 1981. The 2nd National Touring Company (sometimes referred to as the West Coast or Los Angeles Production) opened in San Francisco on June 22, 1978 with Patricia Ann Patts starring as Annie, Jennifer Cihi as Pepper and the then-unknown Molly Ringwald as one of the orphans. The show landed in Los Angeles on October 15, 1978 for an open-ended run at the Shubert Theatre. On June 12, 1979, Sirota, just 9 years old (up until that time, all Annies had been 11 years old), took over the role from Patts. Marisa Morell took the role in December 1979, closing the Los Angeles run and continuing on tour with the show through December 1980. Kristi Coombs then played Annie until this touring company closed in Philadelphia on January 23, 1982. Alyssa Milano played one of the orphans in 1981. The 3rd National Touring Company opened in Dallas on October 3, 1979 with Rosanne Sorrentino (who would later go on to portray Pepper in the 1982 film version) in the title role. This company toured to 23 cities playing mostly shorter runs of a month or less. On March 27, 1981, Bridget Walsh took over as Annie. Becky Snyder (who had closed the 1st National Tour) joined this company in the summer of 1982 and stayed with it until it closed in September of that year. The 4th National Touring Company opened on September 11, 1981 with Mollie Hall playing Annie. This production was a "bus and truck" tour, with a slightly reduced cast, that traveled the country and often played in two cities a week. This company was still touring when the original Broadway production closed in January 1983, making Kathleen Sisk the final performer to play Annie from the original production team. This tour closed in September 1983. The musical premiered in the West End at the Victoria Palace Theatre on 3 May 1978. Andrea McArdle the original Broadway Annie played the title role for 40 performances, British 12-year-old Ann Marie Gwatkin was also cast in the title role and appeared on the Original London cast recording. The Opening night cast and the original sound track of children were Claire Hood, Jane Collins, Annette Mason, Helen Stephenson, Jackie Ekers and Linda Brewis. Ann Marie Gwatkin alternated with Christine Hyland and four other Annies were cast at this point: Anne O'Rourke, Jacinta Whyte, Helen Thorne, Rosa Michelle who were to play the role over the next year.  Following this Ann Marie Gwatkin and Jackie Ekers shared the title role followed by many other cast's of Annie. Miss Hannigan was originally played by Sheila Hancock, and later by Maria Charles and Stella Moray; Daddy Warbucks was played by Stratford Johns and later by Charles West, with Deborah Clarke playing Pepper in the first year and Melanie Grant playing Molly. Annie closed on 28 November 1981, after 1485 performances. The musical transferred to the Bristol Hippodrome for a special Christmas season before touring Britain. Because of strict British employment laws for juvenile actors, a succession of actresses took on the lead role every four months. One of the last girls to perform the role at the Victoria Palace before the show went on tour was 10-year-old Claudia Bradley from Leeds who was featured on a 1981 BBC programme called Fame. A 20th anniversary Broadway revival, which played at the Martin Beck Theatre (now called the Al Hirschfeld Theatre) in 1997, entitled Annie, the 20th Anniversary, starred Nell Carter as Miss Hannigan, but controversy surrounded the casting of the titular character. The original actress cast in the role, Joanna Pacitti, was fired and replaced by her understudy, Brittny KissingerInformation at BrittnyKissinger.com brittnykissinger.com (fan site), accessed August 29, 2011 (who usually played orphan July) just two weeks before her Broadway debut, while battling bronchitis in Boston. The Pre-Broadway Tour was playing the Colonial Theatre. 'Annie' Understudy and Swing Orphan Alexandra Keisman performed the role the first night Pacitti was absent. The producers then gave Kissinger the next performance. The show then moved on to the Oakdale in Connecticut where an insert was placed in the Playbill claiming "The Role of Annie is now being played by Brittny Kissinger". Public sentiment seemed to side with Pacitti as she was the winner of a highly publicized contest to find a new Annie sponsored by the department store Macy's. This incident, coupled with the mixed reviews the new staging garnered, doomed it to a short run, although it was followed by a successful national tour. Kissinger, then 8, became the youngest actress to ever play Annie on Broadway. More controversy surrounding the show involved Nell Carter. Carter reportedly was very upset when commercials promoting the show used a different actress, Marcia Lewis, a white actress, as Miss Hannigan. The producers claimed that the commercials, which were made during an earlier production, were too costly to reshoot. Carter felt that racism played a part in the decision. "Maybe they do not want audiences to know Nell Carter is black", she told the New York Post. However, the ads did mention that Carter was in the show. "It hurts a lot", Carter told the Post, "I've asked them nicely to stop it — it's insulting to me as a black woman." Later reports stated that "Nell Carter of Broadway's 'Annie' denied Thursday that she called her show's producers racist because they chose to air commercials featuring a previous Miss Hannigan--who is white--instead of her.""Nell Carter Denies Charges of Racism, partial".Los Angeles Sentinel (partial reprint at highbeam.com), June 4, 1997 Her statement, released by the Associated Press, read: " 'Yes, it is true that I and my representatives have gone to management on more than one occasion about the commercial and were told that there was nothing they could do about it,' Carter said in a statement Thursday. 'Therefore, I have resigned myself to the fact that this is the way it is.' The statement also addressed the alleged charges of racism, first published in Thursday's New York Post. Carter is black. 'I, Nell Carter, never, ever, ever accused my producers or anyone in the show of racism,' she said. Producers have said it is too expensive to film a new commercial.""Names in the News", Associated Press (Domestic News), Dateline: New York, May 23, 1997 Carter was later replaced by another white actress, Sally Struthers. The revival closed on October 19, 1997 after 14 previews and 239 performances. The show was revived at the Victoria Palace, running from 30 September 1998 to 28 February 1999. It starred Lesley Joseph and then Lily Savage (the female alter ego of comedian Paul O'Grady) as Miss Hannigan and Kevin Colson as Warbucks. The young girls who played Annie were Charlene Barton, Tasha Gold, Libby Gore and Sophie McShera."'Annie', London, 1998-1999" albemarle-london.com, accessed August 29, 2011 Starting in August 1999, the post Broadway National Tour continued with Meredith Anne Bull as Annie. In the spring of 2000, Ashley Wieronski, who had been playing Duffy, moved up to play Annie. In July 2000, Dana Benedict took over as Annie. In 2000/2001 a tour played Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane. Anthony Warlow starred as Daddy Warbucks with Amanda Muggleton as Miss Hannigan. A new song, "Why Should I Change a Thing", was written for Warlow.Information from Australian Network Entertainment.com  Appearing as Annie in the Sydney production were Rachel Marley and Jodie McGaw. A publicist noted that "each time the show moves to a new city two casts of seven orphans plus two Annies have to be found to join the adult cast.""Orphan Annie set to run", Gold Coast Bulletin (Australia), November 30, 2000 Further UK tours of the show were also staged, including a one-month run at The Theatre Royal in Lincoln in 2001. Members of the original cast included Kate Winney and Jemma Carlisle as Annie, Louise English (Grace), Vicki Michelle (Miss Hannigan) and Simon Masterton-Smith (Daddy Warbucks). The show proved to be a success, and so for the first two tours and the Malaysian Genting Highlands Production, the role of Annie was then shared by Faye Spittlehouse and a young Lucy May Barker. Miss Hannigan was late performed by Sue Pollard and Ruth Madoc and Daddy Warbucks by Mark Wynter. This particular production toured from 2001–2007 and resumed in September 2008.Annie UK 2008 tour information theatre4u.co.uk  Starting in August 2005, a 30th anniversary traveling production of Annie"Sunny 'Annie' Opens Sunday At The Paramount", The Seattle Post-Intelligencer, August 19, 2005, p.29 by NETworks Tours embarked on a multi-city tour. This production was directed by Martin Charnin. For the first year of the tour, Conrad John Schuck played Daddy Warbucks, Alene Robertson was Miss Hannigan and Annie was played by Marissa O'Donnell.Morgan, Terry. "Legit Reviews, Road:'Annie', Pantages Theater, Hollywood", Variety, October 17, 2005 - October 23, 2005, p.55 Throughout the run of the show, there were a couple of replacements, including Amanda Balon, who took over as Molly. For the 2nd year of the tour, Annie was played by Marissa O'Donnell again.NextGenKids.com This Equity Tour closed on March 25, 2007, at the Hippodrome Theatre in Baltimore, Maryland. The 2007-2008 cast included Amanda Balon, returning as Annie, David Barton as Oliver Warbucks, Lynn Andrews as Miss Hannigan and J. Michael Zygo as Rooster. The 2008-09 cast for the tour featured Tianna Stevens as Annie. Early in 2009, Amanda Balon returned temporarily to play the role of Annie until Madison Kerth was rehearsed to play the title role. Also returning were Barton, Andrews and Meisner. Other cast members included Mackenzie Aladjem (Molly). In the 2009-10 tour, Kerth returned as Annie along with most of the previous year's cast, adding Jordan Boezem (from Spotlight Kids in Sarasota, Fl) in the role of July.Jones, Chris."'Annie' at Auditorium Theatre: Heartfelt ‘Tomorrow’ is here today" ChicagoTribune.com, January 20, 2010[ ] annieontour.com, accessed August 29, 2011 A 35th Anniversary production opened on Broadway in 2012. Thomas Meehan revised the musical, with James Lapine directing.Jones, Kenneth. "James Lapine Will Direct 'Annie' on Broadway in 2012". Playbill.com, October 13, 2010 Lilla Crawford starred as Annie with Katie Finneran as Miss Hannigan,"Breaking News: Two-Time Tony Award Winner Katie Finneran is Miss Hannigan in 'ANNIE!'" broadwayworld.com, May 25, 2012 and Anthony Warlow playing "Daddy" Warbucks.Jones, Kenneth. G'day, Daddy! Australian Star Anthony Warlow Lands Role of Annie's Warbucks" Playbill.com, June 3, 2012 Featured cast includes Brynn O'Malley, Clarke Thorell and J. Elaine Marcos as Grace Farrell, Rooster and Lily St. Regis (respectively).Jones, Kenneth."Annie Gets Its Grace, Rooster and Lily; Clarke Thorell and J. Elaine Marcos Will Be on 'Easy Street' " Playbill.com, June 6, 2012 The revival started previews at the Palace Theatre on October 3, 2012, and officially opened on November 8, 2012 receiving mostly mixed reviews. Notable replacements include Jane Lynch and Faith Prince as Miss Hannigan."BREAKING NEWS: Jane Lynch to Replace Katie Finneran as 'Miss Hannigan' in 'ANNIE' Beginning May 16" broadwayworld.com, February 20, 2013"Faith Prince to Take Over for Jane Lynch as 'Miss Hannigan' in 'ANNIE' on July 19!" broadwayworld.com, June 20, 2013 On July 30, Taylor Richardson and Sadie Sink both began alternating the role of Annie, replacing Crawford.Gioia, Michael. "Taylor Richardson and Sadie Sink Share the Role of Broadway's 'Annie' Beginning July 30" Playbill, July 30, 2013 This production closed on January 5, 2014, after 38 previews and 487 regular performances.Hetrick, Adam. "Broadway Revival of 'Annie' Closes Jan. 5 at the Palace Theatre" playbill.com, January 5, 2014 Annie has been produced professionally in Argentina (19821), Australia (19781, 2000, 20111, 2012), Denmark (1982), Germany(1999), Hungary (1998), Israel (20011, 2010), Italy (1982,2006), Japan (1979, 1986, 2004, 2010)2, United Kingdom (19781, 1983, 1998, tours from 2000–2010), Mexico (19791,1991, 2010, 2015), The Netherlands (1997-19991, 2005-20071, 2012-20131), Norway (19911, 20041, 2013 ), Philippines (1978, 1987, 1998), Portugal (1982,1, 2010), Spain (19821, 20001, 2010), Sweden (1979 (Stockholm), 1999 (Stockholm), 2005-2006 (Malmö)1), Peru (1986, 1997, 2002), Zimbabwe (2003), Colombia (2006), Belgium (1992, 2008–2009, 2012), Poland (1989), North America (1978, 2003), United Arab Emirates 2009 (Dubai), Denmark (2011), Puerto Rico (2012), Singapore (2012). 1Indicates the production made an official cast recording. 2In Japan, a special demo recording of selected songs is made each year, with the new actress playing Anni The first attempt at a sequel, Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge, opened at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C. in December 1989 to universally disastrous reviews. Extensive reworking of the script and score proved futile, and the project ended before reaching Broadway.Rothstein, Mervyn."Troubled 'Annie 2' Closing Out of Town; Revisions Planned". The New York Times, January 16, 1990 In 1993, a second attempt (with a similar plot and score) entitled Annie Warbucks was developed in a workshop at the Goodspeed Opera House under the direction of Michael P. Price where the original Annie enjoyed its world premier in 1976. It subsequently opened at the Off Broadway Variety Arts Theatre, where it ran for 200 performances.   † This number was added as a showcase for Nell Carter in the 1997 Broadway revival. It has not appeared in any subsequent productions. ‡ This number was added as a showcase for Anthony Warlow in a 2000 Australian production, and has since become a standard part of the show, though it notably did not appear in the 2012 Broadway revival, also starring Warlow. The Original Broadway Cast recording was released in 1977; a CD containing bonus tracks was released on September 15, 1998 by Sony (ASIN: B00000AG6Z). The 1998 London studio cast recording, featuring the National Symphony Orchestra, stars Sarah French as Annie, Kim Criswell as Miss Hannigan and Ron Raines as Daddy Warbucks. A 30th anniversary cast recording was released in 2008 on Time–Life Records. An all-star cast of former Annie cast members includes Carol Burnett, Sally Struthers, Kathie Lee Gifford, Andrea McArdle, John Schuck, Harve Presnell, Gary Beach and Amanda Balon. The rest of the cast is made up of the members of the 30th Anniversary Tour. This recording is a double CD set and includes the entire show as it is performed now on the first disc. The second one includes songs from the sequel, "Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge" as well as songs that were cut from or added to the original production. There is also a song from the 1977 Annie Christmas special. The booklet is made up of original drawings by Philo Barnhart, who is the creator of Ariel and Ursula in "The Little Mermaid", and is presented in a comic book style.Jones, Kenneth."Two-CD 'Annie 'Package Includes New Recording of Complete Score, Plus Obscurities" Playbill.com, May 30, 2008 The Columbia Pictures film was released in 1982, starring Albert Finney as Daddy Warbucks, Carol Burnett as Miss Hannigan, Ann Reinking as Grace Farrell, Tim Curry as Rooster, Bernadette Peters as Lily, and newcomer Aileen Quinn as Annie. A sequel, Annie: A Royal Adventure! was made for television in 1995. It starred Ashley Johnson, Joan Collins, George Hearn, and Ian McDiarmid. Aside from a reprise of "Tomorrow", there are no songs in it. A made-for-TV Wonderful World of Disney movie version, produced by The Walt Disney Company and directed by Rob Marshall, was broadcast in 1999; it starred Victor Garber as Daddy Warbucks, Kathy Bates as Miss Hannigan, Audra McDonald as Grace Farrell, Alan Cumming as Rooster, Kristin Chenoweth as Lily, and newcomer Alicia Morton as Annie. A documentary film, Life After Tomorrow, was directed and produced by one of the original Broadway and National Tour orphans, Julie Stevens and partner, Gil Cates Jr. It reunites more than 40 women who played orphans in the show and reveals the highs and lows of their experiences as child actresses in a cultural phenomenon. The film premiered on Showtime and was released on DVD in 2008. In January 2011, Will Smith announced plans for a redux of Annie set in the present day, produced with his wife Jada Pinkett Smith and rapper Jay-Z for release by Columbia Pictures, now owned by Sony Pictures Entertainment.Stewart, Andrew. Will Smith, Sony exploring 'Annie' Redux. Variety (January 19, 2011). Retrieved on January 20, 2011. This version was to star the Smiths' daughter, Willow, as Annie; as she had aged out of the part before production began, she was replaced by Academy Award-nominated actress Quvenzhané Wallis. Directed by Will Gluck and released on December 19, 2014, this version of Annie also stars Jamie Foxx as Will Stacks (an update of Daddy Warbucks),Jamie Foxx in Talks to Star in Sony's 'Annie' Retrieved April 29, 2013 Rose Byrne as Grace Farrell, and Cameron Diaz as Miss Hannigan.Cameron Diaz Signed For ‘Annie’ To Play Miss Hannigan After Sandra Bullock Passes Deadline, Retrieved June 27, 2013 The film's song score includes most of the original musical's songs plus new compositions produced by Greg Kurstin and Sia. Annie Jr. is a musical licensed by Music Theatre International's Broadway Junior collection, specially edited to be performed by youngsters in a shortened version. It is performed internationally every year by acting academies, programs, schools, and theatre camps.http://www.mtishows.com/show_detail.asp?showid=000170"Annie by Jay Maeder and Ted Slampyak" Tribune Media Services, accessed August 29, 2011  MTI also licenses another youth version of the show, called Annie KIDS, a 30-minute length version meant for elementary school aged performers.http://www.mtishows.com/show_detail.asp?showid=000391 The songs "We'd Like to Thank You Herbert Hoover", "A New Deal for Christmas", "Something Was Missing" and "Tomorrow (Cabinet Reprise)" were cut. There is only one version of "You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile", which is sung by the orphans. Also, there are only two "Maybe" reprises. The song "You won't Be an Orphan For Long" only feature Annie and Daddy Warbucks. The song "Easy Street" was also shortened. Annie's popularity is reflected in its numerous mentions in popular media. References to the show appear in films such as Austin Powers: Goldmember, where Dr. Evil and Mini-Me perform Jay-Z's version of the song 'Hard Knock Life'; and in the 1994 John Waters dark comedy Serial Mom, where a woman is bludgeoned to death with a leg of mutton by the titular serial killer while watching the 1982 film version and singing along. It is parodied in Reefer Madness, where President Franklin D. Roosevelt shows up as the deus ex machina at the end of the satirical musical to tell the assembled crowd, "A little orphan girl once told me that the sun would come out tomorrow. Her adopted father was a powerful billionaire, so I suppressed the urge to laugh in her face, but now, by gum, I think she may have been on to something!" References in television series include: The song "Tomorrow" is sung in many media references, including by Joe's aunt in a scene in the film You've Got Mail; in Dave, by Kevin Kline and Sigourney Weaver; by Lewis on The Drew Carey Show; by Jane Krakowski in the fourth season of Ally McBeal; in Roseanne, by Darlene and Becky; by Reese Witherspoon in Just Like Heaven; by Donkey in the CGI movies Shrek II (although he passes out halfway through the second line) and Shrek Forever After when he is pulling the witches' cart to Rumpelstiltskin with an unconscious Shrek inside after making the deal with Rumpelstiltskin; in a commercial for Lowe's Hardware promoting their next-day delivery; by the Royle Family in the episode "The Queen of Sheba" of the eponymous series; by contestant Teresa Cooper on an episode of Survivor: Africa; in a Duel Masters episode, it is recited by Shobu; by Marta in School Of Rock; in Like Mike, by a couple hoping to be Calvin's adoptive parents; and in Addams Family Values. In the Ugly Betty episode "Loss the Boss" the song can be heard playing in the bedroom of Justin Suarez after he was sent there for fighting in school. Pastiche versions of the song are sung in the Disney theme park attraction It's Tough to be a Bug! and in the Rooms To Go next-day delivery ad campaign. The long-running Broadway parody production of Forbidden Broadway took up "Tomorrow" as sung by an adult Annie ("I'm thirty years old&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tomorrow") pleading for a sequel to the original musical. The climax of the animated film Igor involved a giant robot portraying Annie. Other prominent media references include the following:       Characters Description Oliver "Daddy" Warbucks Billionaire businessman who opens his home – and finally opens his heart – to Annie. Annie The spunky and optimistic 11 year old orphan who's looking for her birth parents.  She ends up getting adopted by Oliver Warbucks. Grace Farrell Oliver Warbucks' faithful secretary, who loves Annie from the start. Daniel "Rooster" Hannigan Miss Hannigan's  younger brother, a convict who escaped jail so he can rob his sister and plot to Kidnap Annie. Miss Agatha Hannigan The orphanage matron, disillusioned, she hates children, but is fond of alcoholic beverages. Lily St. Regis Rooster's girlfriend, a gold digger. She and Rooster pose as Annie's "parents" so they can fool Warbucks and  get their hands on the $50,000 reward. Franklin D. Roosevelt President of the United States, he aids Daddy Warbucks in the search for Annie's parents. Molly The youngest orphan (6) who is also Annie's best friend. Pepper The bossiest orphan (12) Who likes to take control and is not very good friends with Annie. Duffy The oldest orphan (13) Who often hangs around with Pepper but is friends with everyone. July The quietest orphan (13) Who doesn't talk much but is mother-like to all the kids. Tessie The crybaby orphan (10) Who is known for line "Oh my goodness". Kate The shyest orphan (7) Who never really speaks but is friends with everyone. Louis Brandeis Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, he is called upon to assist in Annie's adoption. Bert Healy Radio announcer who agrees to broadcast Annie's search for her parents. The Boylan Sisters Singers on the Bert Healy Show who hope to be famous someday. Drake The butler at the Warbucks Mansion; a good friend to Annie and Daddy Warbucks. Lt. Ward A policeman sent after Annie, he finds her at the local homeless town (Hooverville). Sandy An abandoned mixed–breed dog that, once Annie rescues him, becomes her faithful companion. Harold Ickes Cabinet Member who sings "Tomorrow" with Annie and Warbucks. Year Award Category Nominee Result 1977 Tony Award Best Musical Best Book of a Musical Thomas Meehan Best Original Score Charles Strouse and Martin Charnin Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical Reid Shelton Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Musical Andrea McArdle Dorothy Loudon Best Direction of a Musical Martin Charnin Best Choreography Peter Gennaro Best Scenic Design David Mitchell Best Costume Design Theoni V. Aldredge Drama Desk Award Outstanding Musical Outstanding Book of a Musical Thomas Meehan Outstanding Actor in a Musical Reid Shelton Outstanding Featured Actress in a Musical Dorothy Loudon Outstanding Director of a Musical Martin Charnin Outstanding Choreography Peter Gennaro Outstanding Music Charles Strouse Outstanding Lyrics Martin Charnin Outstanding Costume Design Theoni V. Aldredge Year Award Category Nominee Result 1997 Tony Award Best Revival of a Musical Year Award Category Nominee Result 1999 Laurence Olivier Award Best Performance in a Supporting Role in a Musical Andrew Kennedy Best Theatre Choreographer Peter Gennaro Year Award Category Nominee Result 2013 Tony Award Best Revival of a Musical Drama Desk Award Outstanding Actor in a Musical Anthony Warlow Overture – Orchestra "Maybe" – Annie and Orphans "It's the Hard Knock Life" – Annie and Orphans "It's the Hard Knock Life" (Reprise) – Orphans "Tomorrow" – Annie "We'd Like to Thank You, Herbert Hoover" – Hooverville-ites "Little Girls" – Miss Hannigan "Little Girls" (Reprise) – Miss Hannigan "I Think I'm Gonna Like It Here" – Grace, Annie and Staff "N.Y.C." – Warbucks, Grace, Annie, Star-to-Be and Chorus "N.Y.C." (Reprise) / "Lullaby" – Warbucks "You Make Me Happy" - Miss Hannigan, Grace † "Easy Street" – Rooster, Miss Hannigan and Lily "You Won't Be an Orphan for Long" – Grace and Warbucks "Why Should I Change a Thing?" - Warbucks ‡ "Maybe" (Reprise) – Annie "Maybe" (Reprise II) – Annie "You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile" – Bert Healy and the Boylan Sisters "You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile" (Children Reprise) – Orphans "Easy Street" (Reprise) – Rooster, Miss Hannigan and Lily "Tomorrow" (Cabinet Reprise) – Annie, Roosevelt, Warbucks and Cabinet "Tomorrow" (Cabinet Reprise II) - Roosevelt and the Cabinet "Something Was Missing" – Warbucks "Annie" – Grace, Drake and Staff "I Don't Need Anything But You" – Warbucks and Annie "Maybe" (Reprise III) – Annie "A New Deal for Christmas" – Warbucks, Grace, Annie, Roosevelt and staff "Tomorrow" (Finale) – Company In the The X-Files episode "Die Hand Die Verletzt (The hand that hurt)", Annie is suggested as a more appropriate school production than Jesus Christ Superstar, for a high school that turns out to be run by a Satanic coven. Pushing Daisies where Emerson referred to Chuck's father as "Daddy Dead-bucks" in the episode entitled "The Norwegians" (Season 2: Episode 10). An episode of SCTV, features a spoof commercial of the "original" cast, now older adults still playing their kid roles, performing the 8,000th performance of Annie. Zoey 101, where Marc wants the school production changed to Annie. Full House, where Stephanie Tanner sings the song in several episodes The Family Guy episode "Peter, Peter, Caviar Eater" (1999), where the Griffin family inherits a luxury mansion, and the staff puts on a large-scale production number spoofing the song "I Think I'm Gonna Like It Here". Also, in the episode "Brian's Got a Brand New Bag" (2009), a number of "orphaned" DVDs (movies nobody wants to buy such as Enemy Mine, and What Dreams May Come) at a store, sing the opening of "Maybe". "I Think I'm Gonna Like It Here" is also spoofed in the Drawn Together episode "Alzheimer's That Ends Well". In the first episode of Boston Legal, Alan Shore represents a black girl who was not hired as Annie in the national tour, and wins the case with the help of Al Sharpton. In the Baby-Sitters Club book Keep Out Claudia, the babysitting charges have started a band called All The Children and were considering performing numbers from Annie. In the South Park episode "Ginger Kids", Eric Cartman and his group of Ginger Supremacists protest against Annie being played by a non-freckled, non-red-haired girl. On Yes, Dear, Dominic and his new friend Ronnie put on a show for the parents including "Hard Knock Life", to Jimmy's horror. On 30 Rock, Liz Lemon is discovered in her office after hours listening to music on her headset and singing "Maybe". Also in 30 Rock, "The Tuxedo Begins", an unnamed caricature of an aspiring actress (quickly revealed to be a prostitute) sings parts of "NYC" both in the beginning and end of the episode. The role was played by thespian Sarah Schenkkan. The stop-motion comedy show Robot Chicken parodied Annie in episodes including "Maurice Was Caught" (2009)."Robot Chicken: Episode Guide". TV.MSN.com, accessed December 23, 2010 In "The Potter Puppet Pals", in the episode Neville's Birthday, Ron states that he is going to try out for the lead in Annie. NCIS has referenced Annie twice: when Israeli character Ziva David's coworkers were explaining The American Dream to her, and when forensic scientist Abby Sciuto finds out she was adopted, calling herself as 'Little Orphan Abby'. On Friends, Chandler shows his love of Annie by saying to Monica how she also has a copy of the Annie Soundtrack CD, but in fact, both are his. "Lights Out", an episode of Glee, has cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) singing "Little Girls". Coincidentally, Lynch would go on to play Miss Hannigan in a 2013 revival of Annie. Producer The 45 King heavily sampled "It's the Hard-Knock Life" from the original Broadway cast recording on rapper Jay-Z's single "Hard Knock Life (Ghetto Anthem)" (1998).http://www.songfacts.com/detail.php?id=7099 The NFL Network produced two Super Bowl ads in 2004 and 2005 featuring "Tomorrow." A series of football celebrities who were retired or did not make it to that year's Super Bowl would sing the song, ending with the caption, "...Tomorrow, we're all undefeated again."[ ] nfl.comand "2004 Super Bowl ad nflnetwork"2005 Super Bowl ad" ifilm.com  Comedian Zach Galifianakis lip-synched to a recording of "Tomorrow" during his monologue on the March 12, 2011 episode of Saturday Night Live. He was dressed as Annie. Annie album on Masterworks Broadway Annieshow site at Music Theatre International Annie JR.show site at Music Theatre International Annie KIDSshow site at Music Theatre International
