     Another World (often shortened to AW) is an American television soap opera that ran on NBC for 35 years from May 4, 1964 to June 25, 1999. It was created by Irna Phillips along with William J. Bell, and was produced by Procter & Gamble Productions at NBC Studios, 1268 East 14th Street in Brooklyn. Set in the fictional town of Bay City, from 1964 to 1987 the show opened with announcer Bill Wolff intoning its epigram, “We do not live in this world alone, but in a thousand other worlds,” which Phillips said represented the difference between “the world of events we live in, and the world of feelings and dreams that we strive for.”LaGuardia, Robert (1974). The Wonderful World of TV Soap Operas, page 288. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-25482-1. Another World focused less on the conventional drama of domestic life as seen in other soap operas, and more on exotic melodrama between families of different classes and philosophies. In 1964, Another World was the first soap opera to talk about abortion when such subjects were taboo. It was the first soap opera to do a crossover, with the character of Mike Bauer from Guiding Light, which was also created by Irna Phillips, coming from Springfield to Bay City. It was also the first to expand to one hour, then to ninety minutes, and then back to an hour. It was the first soap to launch two spin-offs, Somerset and Texas, as well as an indirect one, Lovers and Friends, which would be renamed For Richer, For Poorer. Another World was also the first soap opera with a theme song to chart on the Billboard Hot 100, "(You Take Me Away To) Another World" by Crystal Gayle and Gary Morris, in 1987. On March 31, 1999, it was announced that NBC canceled Another World due to low ratings, with its final episode on the network airing on June 25, 1999. Shortly after the show's conclusion, NBC retained the timeslot, replacing Another World with another soap opera, Passions, on July 5, 1999.   Irna Phillips envisioned Another World as a spin-off of her popular soap opera As the World Turns, but CBS did not have room for it and would not allow a spin-off to air on a competing network. Phillips instead sold the show to NBC (eager to snap up a show by the successful Phillips), removing references to ATWT Oakdale and cancelling plans to have character crossover appearances by the Hughes family. (Ironically, two characters from another CBS soap, Guiding Light—attorney Mike Bauer and his daughter Hope—would cross over from Guiding Light to Another Word in 1966, remaining for a year before returning to GL). Despite the severed connections to As the World Turns, the name Another World remained, as a reference to its origins. Expectations were so high that Another World had six weeks of commercial time sold in advance.Lackmann, Ron (1976). Soap Opera Almanac, page 23. New York: Berkley Publishing Corporation. ISBN 0-425-03234-5 On November 22, 1963, a group of executives (including Executive Producer Allen M. Potter and director Tom Donovan) met at the Young & Rubicam ad agency in New York to discuss the show’s opening story, the death of William Matthews, when they heard the news of another death in Dallas: the assassination of President Kennedy.LaGuardia, Robert (1974). The Wonderful World of TV Soap Operas. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-25482-1 After opening with a death in the core Matthews family, Irna planned to follow up with an out-of-wedlock pregnancy, a septic abortion, a shooting, and murder trial. As Allen M. Potter explained, “Irna just didn’t want to take a chance on waiting for the ratings. She felt that with this kind of showy story she could build an audience more quickly.” LaGuardia, Robert (1974). The Wonderful World of TV Soap Operas, page 169. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-25482-1. Said Tom Donovan, “In construction, Irna was attempting to follow the structure of As the World Turns. Irna would never conceive of a story not based on a family.” LaGuardia, Robert (1974). The Wonderful World of TV Soap Operas, page 170. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-25482-1.  The first episode was the aftermath of the funeral of wealthy William Matthews. His widow Liz (Audra Lindley) did not like his working-class brother Jim (Shepperd Strudwick) or his family. The fights between upper-class Liz and her middle-class in-laws started the show. As the '60s went on, the lives and loves of Jim's children (Russ, Alice, and Pat) took center stage. Jim's wife, Mary (Virginia Dwyer), usually intervened when there was a crisis, which was most of the time. In the first year, the show had a controversial storyline involving teenager, Pat Matthews (Susan Trustman), having an illegal abortion after becoming pregnant. This was the first time that American television had covered the subject. In the story, the abortion made her sterile, and the shock from the news caused her to find her ex-boyfriend, Tom Baxter, and shoot him in cold blood. Pat was eventually brought to trial and acquitted. She then fell in love with and married her lawyer, John Randolph (Michael M. Ryan). Another notable early storyline revolved around the star-crossed romance of Bill Matthews (Joseph Gallison) and Melissa Palmer (Carol Roux). Liz did not consider Melissa good enough for her son and was constantly interfering in their relationship. After many trials and hardships, Bill and Melissa were finally married, but their happiness was short-lived, as Bill later drowned in a boating accident. After a one-year run, NBC was expected to cancel the program. But instead, former soap opera actor James Lipton was hired to write the show. His ideas included pushing the Matthews family into the background and introducing the Gregory family. Agnes Nixon, who was then the head writer of CBS's Guiding Light, was hired to write for the program. Beverly Penberthy replaced Susan Trustman in the role of Pat Randolph. Trustman had been on nearly every show while Miss Phillips was the writer, and she was exhausted. In 1966, Nixon created the roles of hairdresser Ada Davis (Constance Ford) and her daughter Rachel  (Robin Strasser), which were immediate successes. Down-to-earth Ada could sit in her kitchen on Bowman Street and be perfectly content with her life. Rachel was a schemer who hated her lower-class background, and fought for what she wanted, even if it meant she had to resort to underhanded means. Ada provided a good foil for Rachel, as Ada was the only person Rachel really loved, besides herself. In 1968, wealthy Steve Frame (George Reinholt) was introduced. A shrewd businessman, he came from a poor background and earned everything he worked for. He and Rachel immediately bonded over their respective pasts, but it was Alice Matthews (Jacqueline Courtney), who stole his heart. Alice was sophisticated, shy, and demure—everything Rachel was not. They courted and were to marry in 1969, but the marriage was called off when Rachel, who was married to Alice's brother Dr. Russ Matthews (Sam Groom), crashed the engagement party with the news that she was carrying Steve's child. She gave birth to a son, James Gerald (later referred to as Jamie), in November of that year. The love triangle revolving around Steve, Alice, and Rachel took Another World to the top of the ratings.  As 1970 began, Alice had a breakdown and went to live in France. Steve and Rachel bonded yet again, this time over their child, but Alice eventually returned and she married Steve the next year. After the departure of Agnes Nixon (who left the show in order to create One Life to Live for ABC), Robert Cenedella was briefly hired to replace her. He also created the spin-off series Somerset. After having left Somerset to concentrate on Another World, Cenedella stepped down as head writer, and sponsor Procter & Gamble hired a newcomer, playwright Harding Lemay, to write the program. Lemay's screenplays took the form of tragic plays, as they were carried out in five dramatic acts. As the show rose higher in the ratings, NBC brass wished to expand the show to an hour; the first regularly scheduled hour-long episode was telecast on January 6, 1975. Thoroughly convinced that her child, Jamie, would be instrumental in breaking up the new Frame marriage and snagging her Steve once and for all, Rachel (now played by Victoria Wyndham) enlisted the help of her drifter father, who tricked Alice into finding Steve and Rachel in a compromising position. She filed for divorce and left town again. Fed up with Alice's wavering ways, and already feeling an attachment to Rachel and a duty to have more of a role in his son's life, Steve married Rachel. Steve tried to settle into his new life with Rachel and Jamie (Robert Doran), but Alice was always on his mind. When Alice returned to Bay City, she exposed Rachel and her father's scheme, which accidentally sent Steve to prison as an accomplice to embezzlement. When he was released, Steve reunited with Alice. Steve and Alice were finally allowed to be together and they were married for the second time (on AW's tenth-anniversary telecast). Rachel continued to scheme, even trying to evict Alice from the house Steve had given her, causing Alice to have another mental breakdown. The triangle finally ended when Steve was supposedly killed in a helicopter crash in Australia.  Rachel began a new chapter in her life and stopped being the conniving troublemaker she had been for years. This was in tune with Victoria Wyndham's wish that Rachel be played with more facets to her character—for many years, her character was totally "black" in personality, compared to "white", good Alice. Both head writer Harding Lemay and Wyndham wanted to change the character of Rachel as she was so blindly hated by many fans, who wrote to the NBC studios wishing that she be killed off. The love of a good man was ultimately what redeemed Rachel, when she crossed paths with wealthy publisher, Mac Cory (Douglass Watson), at his welcoming party. Originally, Mac was a love interest for Liz Matthews. He and Rachel were not planned to be a romantic coupling, but Lemay noticed the chemistry between Watson and Wyndham and wrote a slow-developing love story for them. Fearing backlash from viewers who may have found an older man-younger woman relationship tasteless, Lemay penned chance encounters for the two characters, which led to innocent yet intimate conversations. By the time the characters had their first kiss, the story had gone on for six months. Continuing on the slow path, Mac and Rachel's relationship blossomed. Mac and Rachel were married on Valentine's Day 1975. Mac accepted Jamie as his own child, but the same could not be said for Mac's daughter, Iris Carrington (Beverlee McKinsey), and Rachel. The drama produced by Iris interfering in their marriage carried the show for the rest of the 70s. Iris was a glamorous socialite who had left her husband, Eliot Carrington (James Douglas), and their son, Dennis (Mike Hammett), to go jet-setting. She was insanely jealous and wanted to be the only woman in her father's life (although she had approved of Mac dating the wealthy Liz). She resented Rachel, who she saw as beneath her family and was disgusted by the fact that they were the same age. Unfortunately for Iris, her many schemes to drive Rachel away from Mac often backfired. The presence of the Cory maid, Louise (Anne Meacham), provided comedic relief in otherwise dramatic storylines. Other times, Louise served as a stern confidante and a sometime voice of reason for Mac during his fights with Rachel or Iris. After Steve's death, Alice became a backburner character for the first time in 11 years, in tune with Lemay's wish that Jacqueline Courtney leave the show. She was replaced by actress Susan Harney. Alice became a registered nurse, and  adopted an orphaned girl named Sally (Cathy Greene). While Alice's story finally calmed down, her siblings' stories expanded. Her sister Pat Randolph experienced marital problems with John. He ended up divorcing Pat and marrying the maniacal Olive Gordon (Jennifer Leak). The ratings for Another World had declined since its final peak at #1 in 1978. To keep the spot, executive producer Paul Rauch pitched the idea to NBC to make the show longer. Although not at its peak, the show was still the most successful soap in NBC's lineup, so they agreed. Lemay penned a special effects-laden storyline involving the fiery death of Michael M. Ryan's character John Randolph. The storyline, which was meant to be kept secret from the press, was leaked a month before the scenes aired, prompting both Guiding Light and The Edge of Night to counteract with their own shocking episode to air in the same time slot: the rape of Holly Thorpe by her husband Roger (GL) and the shocking murder storyline of Wade Meecham (EON), respectively. The March 6, 1979 episode featured a building being set on fire by Olive with Alice trapped inside. John rescued Alice and was killed in the process. The sensational episode coincided with the move to 90-minute episodes each weekday. It was at that time that Lemay, who had written since 1971, decided to hand over his duties to Tom King, citing overwork. While the ratings got a slight boost, most viewers did not like the change to longer episodes. The episode duration opened up space for many new characters to be introduced, but most of them did not catch on with the audience. The soap also started facing strong competition from ABC's General Hospital which enjoyed a significant resurgence in the ratings starting around mid 1978 under the direction of Gloria Monty with its more action and youth oriented storylines. In the final months of the 90-minute experiment, many characters debuted on Another World in storylines that focused on the character of Iris as she planned a move to Houston, Texas. This fictional move was incorporated in the new spinoff serial Texas in 1980. The initial concept was for a show set in the Antebellum South entitled Reunion, but NBC wanted something more in line with the hugely successful primetime soap Dallas.Grunwald, D: "Who Shot Texas", pages 23-27. TV Guide (Canadian edition), March 5, 1983. Series producer Paul Rauch then chose to have Texas revolve around the popular Another World character Iris Carrington, played by Beverlee McKinsey. Iris initially set out to visit her grown son Dennis (Jim Poyner), who had relocated from Bay City to Houston. Within a matter of weeks, Iris became involved with her first love (and Dennis's biological father), Alex Wheeler (Bert Kramer). A range of new characters who had been introduced in the storyline connected to Iris' move, also moved to the new series. To accommodate Texas, Another World went back to 60 minutes, and was moved from the three o'clock hour to two o'clock. Another two million viewers defected, partly due to McKinsey's departure, partly due to the time change, and partly due to the influx of new characters who then moved to Texas. Because of the audience erosion, the move to 90-minute installments is generally regarded as a failure. Mac and Rachel had their own marital troubles, mostly regarding Rachel's decision to work full-time as a sculptress. It started off as a hobby, but when she found that she had a talent for it, it took up more and more of her time, even after giving birth to their daughter, Amanda, in 1978. Mac became involved with the editor of Brava magazine (a part of Cory Publishing), Janice Frame (Christine Jones), who was also Steve's sister. Rachel discovered the affair and they divorced. Janice married Mac, but she only wanted him for his money. She was having an affair with photographer Mitch Blake (William Gray Espy) and the two plotted to kill Mac and acquire his estate. To crack the scheme that Rachel suspected Janice was spearheading, Rachel also slept with Mitch, who by then had backed out of Janice's plan. The Mac/Rachel/Janice/Mitch storyline had carried on for a year when it culminated in scenes taped on location in St. Croix, in which Rachel found Mac just as the poison Janice had given him was killing him. After a scuffle involving a knife, the two women fell into a swimming pool, and Rachel came out alive, having killed Janice. Rachel was mortified to find out that she was pregnant with Mitch's child, but still remarried Mac. When Mitch was supposedly murdered by Rachel, she was put on trial. She was forced to admit on the witness stand that the child she was carrying was Mitch's, leaving Mac heartbroken. She was found guilty and sentenced to eight years in prison. Mac started divorce proceedings. Rachel first arranged for her newborn son Matthew to be raised by her ex-husband Russ and his new wife, singer Tracy Merrill (who was subsequently killed in a mob hit). However, Mac protested, desiring to raise Matthew himself. Mac felt something was not right about Mitch's death. He and Jamie (now played by Richard Bekins), along with an escaped Rachel, who had been let out of prison for a day to attend the funeral of her stepfather, Charley Hobson (Fred J. Scollay), managed to track down a very much alive Mitch. It turned out he did not remember the events surrounding his supposed death. Rachel was free and Mac dropped the divorce. Mac was still jealous of Mitch, who had returned to Bay City to be closer to his son. It turned out Mac's jealousy was warranted since Rachel began an affair with Mitch. Rachel decided to start a new life with Mitch and divorced Mac. Further straining the Cory family was the discovery of Mac's illegitimate son, Alexander "Sandy" Cory (Christopher Rich). Jamie and Sandy formed a brotherly relationship, but it was damaged when Jamie's scheming wife Cecile (Nancy Frangione) left him for Sandy and subsequently gave birth to Sandy's daughter, Maggie. During this time Mac was briefly engaged to Rachel's former rival Alice Frame (now played by Vana Tribbey), who returned to Bay City and had served as Mac's private nurse following a near-fatal gunshot wound.  Alice was struggling to raise adopted teenage daughter Sally (now played by Jennifer Runyon), after failed romances with brother-in-law Willis Frame and Dan Shearer, ex-husband of her cousin Susan Shearer, and a brief marriage to Ray Gordon (Ted Shackelford). In mid-1982, the Matthews family also mourned the passing of long-time patriarch Jim Matthews, following the death of veteran actor Hugh Marlowe earlier that year. Steve Frame was "resurrected" in 1981, first masquerading as the mysterious, wealthy Edward Black. It was revealed that he did not die in 1975, but had suffered amnesia. He received a new look in the form of David Canary, who took over the role. His presence caused Alice to break off her engagement with Mac and Rachel to leave Mitch in San Francisco. Once again, Steve's relationship with Alice went sour and Steve reunited with Rachel. On their wedding day in February 1983, a car accident claimed Steve's life—for good. Rachel survived, and Mac told Rachel how much he loved her. A double wedding was held in summer 1983, with Mac's son Sandy (Christopher Rich) and his fiancé Blaine Ewing (Laura Malone).  Alice (once again played by Jacqueline Courtney) returned for one last extended time in the mid-1980s. Now a doctor, she tended to Rachel during her bout with amnesia after being kidnapped by Carl Hutchins (Charles Keating). Eventually, Rachel's memory returned. As the show went through the 1980s, the newly introduced Love family became more prominent, at the expense of the core Matthews family. In 1982, Pat Randolph was written out of the show. Marianne Randolph left Bay City, attempting to resurrect her marriage with Rick Halloway, Russ Matthews departed for Seattle, and Alice eventually left again, too, leaving only Aunt Liz remaining in Bay City, where she continued on and off as Mac's private secretary. The wealthy Love family was headed by tyrannical patriarch, Reginald (John Considine), who came back from the dead to cause trouble for his children: Peter, Nicole, and Donna. He had spent the last twenty years leaving under the alias LaSalle and had a whole other family, wife, Marissa, who was none other than Mary McKinnon (Denise Alexander), suffering from amnesia, and an adopted son, Scott (Hank Cheyne). Donna (Anna Stuart) started off as a snobbish troublemaker, a la Iris, but mellowed somewhat when she married the love of her life, stable boy-turned-businessman Michael Hudson (Kale Browne). However, the fact that she was raped years ago by Michael's brother John (David Forsyth) complicated matters. Michael and Donna had identical twins, Marley and Vicky, when they were teenagers (played by Ellen Wheeler in a dual role). Marley was raised as Donna's sister and Vicky was stolen by Reginald and put up for adoption. Vicky came to town with her best friend, Jake McKinnon (Tom Eplin), to swindle the Love family, but eventually bonded with them. Jake and Marley fell in love and married. Vicky's nanny, Bridget Connell (Barbara Berjer), who raised her after the death of her adoptive parents, also came to town. Peter, originally a good guy, became rather scheming after being dumped by Sally and marrying pregnant Brittany Peterson (Sharon Gabet), only to find out he was not the child's father. Peter left town in 1987 after deciding he had disgraced his family enough. Nicole was a model with a cocaine addiction who shot Jason Frame to death and was sent to a mental institution in 1989. Glamorous novelist, Felicia Gallant (Linda Dano), was introduced and became a main stay in Bay City until the end of the show's run. Many popular love stories emerged in the 1980's. Felicia fell in love with ex-con Mitch Blake and the two had a storybook wedding. A down-to-earth love story came about between troubled Vietnam vet, John Hudson, and former prostitute, Sharlene Frame (Anna Kathryn Holbrook). Jamie Frame (Laurence Lau) and Lisa Grady (Joanna Going) were going to tie the knot, but Vicky (Anne Heche) broke them up. The pairing of journalist Kathleen McKinnon (Julie Osburn) and playboy lawyer Cass Winthrop (Stephen Schnetzer) also proved extremely popular. Another popular love story was that of Catlin Ewing (Thomas Ian Griffith) and Sally Frame (now played by Mary Page Keller). Sally ran out on her wedding to David Thatcher (Lewis Arlt) to be with Catlin. When David was murdered, Catlin took the fall thinking Sally had murdered him (she hadn't). Catlin was eventually cleared and the pair married. Their marriage was declared invalid when Catlin's presumed-dead wife, Brittany Peterson, arrived in town. Sally and Catlin legally married a year later, even though Catlin knew Brittany was pregnant with his child and was passing it off as Peter Love's. Sally was tragically killed in a car accident caused by Reginald Love mere days after her wedding to Catlin. One aborted love story was the impending marriage between police officers M.J. McKinnon (Sally Spencer) and Adam Cory (Ed Fry). M.J. desperately tried to hide her past as a high class prostitute in Chicago. But then her former pimp and lover, Chad Rollo (Richard Burgi), arrived in town. A video surfaced of her having sex with a client and Adam dumped her. M.J. decided to move to Minnesota to start over. In 1987, the series introduced Dawn Rollo (Barbara Tyson), Chad's sister and a love interest for Scott LaSalle (Hank Cheyne). Dawn soon learned that she had contracted HIV from a blood transfusion, and died in 1988. This was the first AIDS-related storyline to air on a daytime soap opera in the United States."Soap Operas and AIDS: From Tragedies to Triumph". Daytime Confidential, December 1, 2010. In the late 1980's, Mac and Rachel's two youngest children came back as young adults, Amanda was now played by Sandra Ferguson and Matthew by Matt Crane. Amanda married budding artist Sam Fowler (Robert Kelker-Kelly), and they had a daughter, Alli. Matthew started a relationship with Sharlene Frame's daughter, Josie Watts (Alexandra Wilson). The Cory family continued to be fan favorites, but the family's importance on the show was shaken when Douglass Watson unexpectedly died while on vacation in Arizona in May 1989. At the time of Watson's death, Another World was about to celebrate its 25th anniversary, which writers had scripted in the form of a 25th anniversary celebration for Brava magazine.  The Corys, minus an absent Mac, hosted a gala celebration that featured the return of several veteran characters, including Russ Matthews (David Bailey), Alice Frame (Jacqueline Courtney), Pat Randolph (Beverly Penberthy), Dennis Carrington (Jim Poyner), Gwen Frame (Dorothy Lyman), and Robert Delaney (Nicolas Coster).  It also featured a mystical sequence with Rachel coaxed back from near-death by ghost ex-husband Steve, thwarting sister Janice's attempt to lure Rachel "into the light". Shortly after, it was revealed that the absent Mac had died off-screen while in Maine. Rachel and her family tearfully buried him on the June 16, 1989 episode. With Watson's passing, the show was left without a unifying center, as for the next few years, the character of Rachel tried to adjust to life without Mac, and sometimes stumbled on her way. Although actress Victoria Wyndham tried to fill the void left by Watson's absence, much of the central role shifted to Anne Heche who took over the dual roles of Vicky and Marley Hudson. Vicky was the town schemer, very reminiscent of Rachel at her worst. She slept with soon-to-be married Jamie Frame, had a one-night-stand with her brother-in-law Jake, married Jamie knowing she may be pregnant with Jake's baby, falsely claimed Jake had raped her, and blackmailed Rachel to get back custody of her son, Steven, from Jamie by offering to vote for her as CEO of Cory Publishing. Mac's daughter Iris Wheeler (now played by Carmen Duncan) had returned to Bay City from Europe late in 1988, having lost her last husband, Alex (she married him on the spin-off series Texas), some years earlier. It soon became apparent that Iris had not changed a bit when it was revealed she had been behind a plot to take over Cory Publishing. Mac was devastated by this and left town prior to the Brava 25th anniversary to ponder the implications, dying without having ever reconciled with her. This set up a series of conflicts between Iris, Amanda and Rachel, who had been left equal shares of Cory Publishing, as Rachel now attempted to head the company and counter Iris's continued interference. When the vote for CEO came down, Rachel and Iris were tied. In an unforgettable moment, Vicky walked into the Cory Publishing boardroom and, to get back at Rachel for rejecting her blackmail, used her shares of the company to break the tie by voting for Iris. The absence of Mac continued to affect the show as it moved into the new decade. However, some of the show's most popular storylines came about in the 1990's. After divorcing Mitch, Felicia was reunited with her old flame, Lucas Castigliano (John Aprea). Lucas hunted Felicia down in an attempt to find their daughter, who turned out to be none other than Lorna Devon (Alicia Coppola). Felicia and Lorna had become enemies quickly, especially after Lorna went behind the scenes at Felicia's talk show and switched live footage with a videotape of a pornographic video Lucas and Felicia's adoptive daughter, Jenna Norris (Alla Korot), had unwittingly made. Felicia and Lorna ended up repairing their relationship, especially after Lucas's death. Jenna found true love with rocker Dean Frame (Ricky Paull Goldin); their happiness, and Dean's success as a rock star, was chronicled in the nighttime special Summer Desire. Mac's death ushered in the appearance of his illegitimate daughter, Paulina Cantrell (Cali Timmins), who fought to prove her legitimacy as a Cory and win over her family, while constantly at odds with Iris. Cass Winthrop had a rocky relationship with eccentric detective, Frankie Frame (Alice Barrett). As much as they loved each other, they faced huge obstacles to be together. One such hindrance was Cass's presumed-dead wife Kathleen returning to Bay City after being in the Witness Protection Program. The 1990 story Who shot Jake McKinnon? became one of the biggest storylines the show ever told, with over two years of build-up. In 1988, Jake and Marley's marriage broke down and they split up. They eventually reconciled, but then it was discovered that Jake had a one-night-stand with Vicky and might be the father of her son, Steven. Jamie turned out to be Steven's father, but both marriages were destroyed. Jake through caution to the wind and spent the next year scheming his way through Bay City. He blackmailed Iris after she bribed him to prove Paulina was not Mac's illegitimate daughter, blackmailed Paulina with fake proof that Mac was not her father, and slept with his former mother-in-law, Donna, who was married to Michael. Jake asked Marley to marry him again, but she had found out that he was in the midst of an affair with Paulina and turned down him down. Enraged, Jake raped her and was later shot by a mystery assailant. Jake survived and Marley was put on trial for his attempted murder. It was later revealed that Paulina had shot Jake. Jake was still in love with Marley, who was now with Jamie (Russell Todd). Jake eventually accepted that they were officially over, but it was just beginning for him and Paulina. Paulina (now played by Judi Evans) married Jake so he wouldn't turn her in and he married her to get his hands on the Cory fortune. Jake and Paulina ended up genuinely falling in love and had a long, tumultuous relationship. Popular actress Anne Heche left the show in 1991 and Jensen Buchanan took over as Vicky and Marley. Vicky's romance with Ryan Harrison (Paul Michael Valley) became one of the show's most popular love story of the 90's. Ryan was a down-to-earth police officer who helped quell Vicky's wild ways. They had been happy together for almost two years when Vicky cheated on Ryan with his brother, Grant (Mark Pinter). Vicky would come to regret the day she ever got involved with Grant as he continued to terrorize her for years. Jamie and Marley planned to marry, but they never made it down the aisle due to several factors, the most prominent being Marley's inability to have children. Amanda saw her marriage to Sam crash and burn due to her affair with Evan Frame (son of Janice Frame; played by Charles Grant). Liz Matthews (Irene Dailey) returned periodically, and also for one last run, Russ (once again played by David Bailey), as they united to shelter Russ's daughter Olivia (Allison Hossack), who had a child with Dennis Wheeler (formerly Carrington; now played by Chris Bruno). This marked the last appearances by the members of the Matthews family prior to the demise of the series. The show was renewed in 1993. The lower rated Santa Barbara was given the axe instead, but Another Worlds ratings still were not performing well, placing as the second-lowest rated soap opera on U.S. television at the time (ahead of only ABC's Loving). The odds were not in the show's favor that it would be renewed again in 1999. Early in 1995, news at the top signaled a change in executive producer. Jill Farren Phelps, who had won Emmy awards for her work on Santa Barbara, was given the job. Both cast members who were over the age of 55, Barbara Berjer (Bridget Connell) and David Hedison (Spencer Harrison), were fired in an attempt to move the show in a more youthful direction. Rachel's beloved mother, Ada Hobson, died in Summer 1993 (veteran actress Constance Ford had died earlier that year). Rachel needed support more than ever, and she found it in the unlikeliest source, Mac's former enemy, reformed villain Carl Hutchins. The two fell in love and became engaged. Iris did not like this news one bit, and at Rachel and Carl's wedding, she planned to startle Carl by firing blanks at him. Evan Frame (now played by Eric Scott Woods) placed real bullets into Iris's gun, causing Iris to gravely wound Carl. She was convicted of the crime and sentenced to prison time. Matthew Cory developed a May–December romance with his business partner, Donna Hudson. They became a very popular couple, but Phelps insisted that the characters be paired up with people their own age. Their characters were then broken up when Donna cheated on Matthew with her ex-husband, Michael. Vicky married Grant, but left him to reunite with Ryan. Vicky later gave birth to Grant's son, Kirkland, and the two fought tooth and nail over the child. Grant married Amanda (now played by Christine Tucci), but the marriage quickly ended when she discovered Grant's affair with Lorna Devon (now played by Robin Christopher). Cass and Frankie were finally wed and they honeymooned on the Orient Express. After divorcing, remarrying, and years of putting up with Jake's cons, swindles, and lies, Paulina divorced him a second time and tied the knot with police officer, Joe Carlino (Joseph Barbara). One of the show's most maligned stories of all time involved show matriarch Rachel Cory Hutchins being kidnapped and then impersonated by an evil doppelganger countess, Justine Duvalier (ex-wife of Spencer and mother of Ryan and Grant; also played by Victoria Wyndham). The storyline was panned by the soap press as being worthy of a Mystery Science Theater 3000 level of ridicule. The show was dealt a major blow when fan favorite Paul Michael Valley was fired. His character, Ryan, was killed by Grant, causing Justine, to be shoved in front of a train. Justine did not die and continued to cause more terror before finally being finished by Carl Hutchins with a letter opener. Wyndham was quoted as liking the storyline at first, but after it was played out, she stated that she wished she had never appeared in it. After the Justine story and the death of Ryan, AW took a serious blow creatively. Ryan and Vicky had been the show's most popular couple and it had never done something as outlandish as a doppelganger before. The show unfortunately continued in a creative decline that ultimately led to its demise. Budget cuts caused Phelps to institute a serial killer storyline. Phelps decided to kill one major character and it was originally decided that Anna Stuart's wildly popular Donna Hudson was to be offed, but massive fan protest caused Phelps to scrap the plan. Phelps decided to then kill off either Alice Barrett's Frankie Frame or Judi Evans's Paulina Carlino, and when a focus group responded lukewarm to Frankie but warmer to Paulina, Phelps gave the greenlight to axe Frankie. Frankie was one of the show's most beloved characters and another massive rampage of fan protests arose. Phelps quickly asked then-head writer Margaret DePriest to re-write Frankie's exit so that the character would at least still live. DePriest, eager to satisfy her wish to see Frankie's husband, Cass, return to his former rogue ways, vehemently refused. Frankie was murdered in what many felt were brutal, gruesome scenes. Rachel gave birth to twins, even though she was well into her fifties. Although the believability of this story was debated by fans, it was a nod back to when her mother, Ada, gave birth to Rachel's sister Nancy late in life. Robert Kelker-Kelly was lured back to the show in a different role from Sam Fowler, the mysterious Bobby Reno. Bobby falls for Vicky and it is revealed he was given Ryan's corneas in a transplant. The storyline became convoluted when Bobby's identity was rewritten and his former wife, Lila Roberts (Lisa Peluso), came to town to reclaim him. Bobby proved unpopular with fans and was killed off. On March 31, 1999, as part of a shakeup of the network's daytime and early morning schedules (in which NBC also cancelled NBC News at Sunrise – with newcomer Early Today replacing it as the network's early-morning newscast – and picked up the daytime talk show Later Today, a short-lived spinoff of Today), NBC announced that it would not renew Another World, effectively ending the series' run after 35 years once the show's previous renewal agreement ended that June. Many reasons abounded for Another World cancellation, one of the more notable events occurred in the summer of 1998: the network's San Francisco affiliate KRON-TV (now a MyNetworkTV affiliate) – at the time one of NBC's highest-rated stations – stopped airing the show altogether, leaving Days of Our Lives and Sunset Beach as the only NBC soaps that the station cleared on its schedule; the move resulted in Another World being unavailable in around two million television households within the large San Francisco–Oakland–San Jose market, resulting in additional erosion of the program's already below-mediocre ratings (it was later picked up by smaller independent station KICU-TV). Another reason behind the cancellation decision was that a new soap opera produced and owned by NBC (through its NBC Studios unit), Passions, had already entered into production and was slated to begin airing on the network within a few months. As the network did not have an unoccupied time slot to place Passions, NBC necessarily had to make room for it at the expense of an existing program. Rumors abounded that Days of Our Lives would possibly be the serial it would drop, as renewal talks between NBC and Columbia Pictures Television were going poorly at the time (at the same time, there were rumors that ABC would cancel Port Charles to make room for Days). There were also rumors that the low-rated, younger-skewing soap Sunset Beach (the lowest-rated of NBC's three daytime serials at the time) would be cancelled. Given its much higher ratings, Days of our Lives was renewed at the eleventh hour, sealing the fate of Another World. Sunset Beach was picked up for another six months due to its slightly better ratings in the younger demographics; that series was ultimately cancelled in December 1999. The final episode of Another World aired on June 25, 1999. The episode revolved around the wedding of Cass and Lila. In the show's final scene, Rachel and Carl happily embraced in the Cory living room, she remarked "All's well that ends well," and, after looking at the pictures of all her loved ones, Rachel went upstairs with Carl. The final image was a still frame of Mac and the show faded to black. On January 3, 2000, the show's former NBC studio in Brooklyn became the home to As the World Turns, which had moved from CBS Broadcast Center. Irna Phillips's original plan of crossovers with As the World Turns was finally realized—after Another World was canceled.  Another World characters Lila (Lisa Peluso), Cass (Stephen Schnetzer), Vicky (Jensen Buchanan), Marley (Ellen Wheeler), Donna (Anna Stuart), and Jake (Tom Eplin) all moved into ATWT storylines.  By 2002, Vicky and Jake had been killed off violently in separate incidents, and the crossover experiment had, for the most part, ended. Schnetzer continued to make occasional appearances, as his character of Cass was used as a "visiting lawyer" in As the World Turns trials. The character of Cass also appeared in a few episodes of Guiding Light in 2002. The show was commemorated in print twice in 1999.  Another World, the 35th Anniversary Celebration, by Julie Poll, was a coffee-table style book chronicling the show's history on- and off-screen. Another World was the last of all the long-running soap opera programs of the time to be preserved in this way. The other book was decidedly different; The Ultimate Another World Trivia Book, by Gerard J. Waggett, listed several juicy tidbits about the show's stars and what happened behind-the-scenes.  Many fans have treated Poll's book as they would a high school yearbook, getting Another World performers to sign their autographs in the book along with messages of appreciation or thanks for the fans' continued support in watching the program. From July 2003 to April 2007, SOAPnet, an ABC channel, started rerunning old Another World episodes that originally aired from July 1, 1987 to May 10, 1991. The contract was not renewed to continue airing Another World, so that SOAPnet could begin airing episodes of both One Tree Hill and The O.C.. The Another World Reunion aired on SOAPnet on October 24, 2003. Hosted by Linda Dano, the special program reunited fan favorites such as Stephen Schnetzer, Sandra Ferguson, John Aprea, Alicia Coppola, Kale Browne, and Ellen Wheeler. On the special, Dano interviewed the members of the assembled cast, one by one, interspersed with classic Another World clips. Before and after commercial breaks, Another World quiz questions were posed to the audience at home, and audience members told the viewers at home their favorite Another World moments, supplemented with clips from the actual episodes (for example, one viewer said her favorite Another World moment was from 1980, in which Rachel, on the stand for Mitch's murder, was forced to tell Mac that Matthew was not his child. Another viewer cited Ryan marrying Vicky while in Heaven).  This special was nominated for a Daytime Emmy for Outstanding Special Class Special in 2004. The Another World Reunion was rerun in May 2004 to commemorate AW's 40th anniversary. In 2006, Procter & Gamble began making several of its soap operas available, a few episodes at a time, through America Online's AOL Video service, downloadable free of charge."AOL to Launch New Video Portal," WebWire.com, July 31, 2006.  Reruns of older Another World episodes began from August 1, 1980. As of January 2009, Procter & Gamble announced that Another World and three other of its cancelled soap operas would no longer be streamed on AOL Video. The notice referred to exploring other options to make the shows available for viewing."PGP Classic Soap Channel," pgpclassicsoaps.com, January 1, 2009. On July 29, 2008, episodes also became available on the video streaming website Hulu. The episodes begin with the May 10, 1991 episode - the last one that ran on SOAPnet. There were 24 episodes made available initially, with the promise of 3 more each week. As of December 2009, the same episodes seen through Hulu were also available through YouTube. Hulu stopped airing episodes of the soap on October 21, 2010. The last AW episode to air on the site was October 5, 1992. TeleNext Media also introduced a new website in April 2009 that continued Another World. The site was called Another World Today (anotherworldtoday.com) and essentially picked up 10 years after AW's last episode in a blog/fan fiction format. Readers could submit story ideas to help form the story angles and pacing of the so-called 'sequel'.  Each webisode came out weekly and the website also showed classic clips of Another World. In July 2011, the site became no longer affiliated with TeleNext Media and was independently run until December 2014, when it stopped publishing new episodes. For most of a 15-year period between 1965 and 1980, Another World was NBC's highest-rated soap opera. During that time, NBC ran a 90-minute drama block consisting of Days of Our Lives, The Doctors and Another World, all of which enjoyed great ratings and critical success before declining at the end of the 1970s. Another World did not take long to establish itself as NBC's highest-rated daytime drama, although it was still behind the then-dominant CBS lineup which would usually occupy the first six places on the ratings chart. Making its debut at 3 p.m. Eastern/2 Central, Another World slowly chipped away at ABC's General Hospital and CBS' daytime version of To Tell the Truth. Its efforts resulted in a swift rise to second place in 1967-1968; the show would remain in the upper end of the ratings chart until 1978. CBS later tried The Secret Storm, a soap opera that reputedly served as the model for Another World, against it, but to no avail. On March 30, 1970, AW became the first daytime soap to produce a spinoff series, Somerset, which ran until 1976. For Somerset's first year, the two shows shared the same branding, with the mother show titled Another World in Bay City and the daughter show Another World in Somerset. NBC and Procter and Gamble discontinued this after a year; Somerset eventually veered away from Another World's romantic and domestic storylines, developing into more of a crime drama. Title references to one-another were dropped, as were crossover stories. With the arrival of Harding Lemay, Another World would consolidate its place as not only the most popular and critically acclaimed soap opera on NBC, but one of the highest-rated soap opera of the decade. Between 1973 and 1978, it consistently attained second place in the ratings chart and tied with As the World Turns (its Procter and Gamble sister) for first place twice—in the 1973-1974 and 1977-1978 television seasons. The earlier triumph was no mean feat when one considers that CBS put up its star game The Price Is Right against it for two years. When the one-hour 10th anniversary special in spring 1974 proved a massive ratings success, NBC and Procter and Gamble made the decision to expand to 60 minutes permanently on January 6, 1975, replacing the original version of the game show Jeopardy!, in a scheduling shuffle with the in-house-produced How to Survive a Marriage. Another World became the first serial to broadcast one hour daily, only some six years after the last two 15-minute soaps (CBS' Search for Tomorrow and Guiding Light, also Procter and Gamble shows) finally doubled their daily lengths. The show took over the entire 3-4 pm/2-3 Central period, the latter part of which witnessed it beating back, to some degree, CBS' huge Match Game, then daytime's most popular program. However, starting in 1978, Another World began to experience an erosion in ratings caused mainly by the surge in popularity of General Hospital. Another World fell from a first-place tie in 1978 to eighth in 1979 (a drop from 8.6 to 7.5), but remained NBC's highest-rated daytime drama. Despite the fall in ratings, Another World became the first, and thus far only, soap opera to expand to 90 minutes, a move that proved unsuccessful—it remained in eighth place in the 1979-1980 television season. Although it is widely thought that Another World expansion to 90 minutes was a cause of ratings erosion, the decision to expand the show was made at a time when its ratings (and that of NBC's other serials) were already in steady decline. During the period when Another World ran daily for 90 minutes it remained NBC's highest-rated soap opera, as it had been for a decade. In the second half of 1980, after the show returned to 60 minutes, Another World and fellow NBC serials Days of our Lives and, most dramatically, The Doctors, experienced a collapse in ratings from which NBC's daytime lineup never fully recovered. It would not be until 1984 that both Days of Our Lives and Another World would recover some of their lost ground. It is possible that the 90-minute format was intended to be temporary, with the added time used to prepare a storyline for a spinoff, Texas in 1980. For upon its debut, the mother show contracted to 60 minutes again, this time moving to 2/1 Central, where it settled for the remaining 19 years of its run. Texas, starring the hugely popular Beverlee McKinsey and attempting to cash in on the Dallas craze, while itself not a success, may have caused further erosion of Another World viewership, to the point that it was no longer NBC's highest-rated serial, losing that position to Days of our Lives (which itself, along with the rest of NBC's daytime lineup, was in serious ratings trouble). Another World fell from eighth to as low as 11th in the ratings chart, and by the 1981-1982 television season it sunk so low in the Nielsens to 4.7 (a drop of 3.9 points in four seasons). Much like General Hospital winning the 3/2 slot for ABC, One Life to Live came in strong at 2/1, with CBS attempting to get its new Capitol off the ground during that period. After five years of sharply declining ratings, Another World experienced something of a mini-revival, and for the 1983-1984 television season, the show jumped to ninth place and 5.6 (compared with 10th place and 4.8 in 1983). The ratings increase was attributed to the emergence of couple Sally Frame (Mary Page Keller, later Taylor Miller) and Catlin Ewing (Thomas Ian Griffith), the addition of Linda Dano as chic romance novelist Felicia Gallant who was brought on to bring an element of glamour to the show, and the return of actress Jacqueline Courtney as Dr. Alice Frame, who had been fired from the show nine years earlier despite being immensely popular with viewers. The show remained in ninth place through the decade (occasionally moving up to eighth), pulling in generally stable numbers against One Life to Live (which was a big ratings hit at the time) and its Procter and Gamble sister soap As the World Turns. The show received some of its strongest critical acclaim during the 1980s as well. Many soap critics praised the show for keeping its focus on relationships and family crisis. However, like many soaps at the time, the show did dive into occasional action/crime storylines such as the Sin Stalker murders in 1987 as a response to the popularity of the action/adventure oriented soap General Hospital during the decade. In common with other daytime soaps, Another World experienced a gradual erosion of viewership but, amazingly enough given its turbulent history, held on to ninth place on the ratings chart from the mid 1980s until the end of its run. While it never showed signs of moving up through this period, it was for the most part never in danger of falling to last place. In early 1995, Another World was the first daytime soap to eliminate the full-screen closing credits crawl in favor of the one-third screen credits/promo combination. This was implemented by NBC to allow network news and local news outlets to break in with hourly updates on the O.J. Simpson trial alongside the closing credits. In instances where news updates did not break in, scenes from that day's episode would appear on the left two-thirds of the screen, with the regular closing theme music accompanying it. The "squeeze credits" trend remained in place on most NBC programs (and quickly spread to other networks) after the Simpson trial concluded; through the end of its run, Another World continued the one-third credits format while its daytime stablemate, Days of Our Lives, barred the network from running its credits in this fashion until 2001. Between 1974 and 1999, Another World won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series only once (in 1976), a stark contrast to five wins for The Young and the Restless and six for General Hospital within that time frame. Another World was the first soap opera: The show spawned two spin-offs: Somerset (1970–1976) and Texas (1980–1982). (In 1970, the two shows were known as Another World: Bay City and Another World: Somerset before reverting to their unique names.) One primetime special aired in 1992: Another World: Summer Desire. A "viewer-directed," text-based continuation of the series called Another World Today exists online, sanctioned by TeleNext Media, the production arm of Procter & Gamble. While individual NBC affiliates had the right to air any show whenever they wished, most of the affiliates (almost all of them, in the earlier days of television) aired the show when it would be transmitted to the network's direct affiliates. In the mid-to-late 1990s, when AW was in its final ratings slump, many affiliates swapped AW's time slot with Days of Our Lives, which usually aired an hour earlier. Others affiliates transferred AW to their morning schedule. The network aired the show at the following times throughout its history: Many well-known film and television actors and celebrities appeared on Another World early in their careers: Another World production left the studio to film exterior scenes several times. Some of these locations included:   Category Recipient Role(s) Year(s) Outstanding Drama Series 1976 Lead Actor Douglass WatsonCharles Keating Mackenzie CoryCarl Hutchins 1980, 19811996 Lead Actress Laurie HeinemanIrene DaileyLinda Dano Sharlene FrameLiz MatthewsFelicia Gallant 197819791993 Supporting Actress Anna Kathryn Holbrook Sharlene Frame 1996 Younger Actress Ellen WheelerAnne Heche Marley Hudson/Vicky HudsonMarley Hudson/Vicky Hudson 19861991 Head writer(s) Years Executive Producer(s) Irna Phillips with William J. Bell May 1964 – March 1965 Allen M. Potter James Lipton March – October 1965 Doris Quinlan Agnes Nixon November 1965 – January 1969 Allen M. Potter; Charles Fisher; Paul Robert; Mary Harris Robert Cenedella February 1969 – August 1971 Mary Harris; Lyle B. Hill Harding Lemay August 1971 – May 11, 1979 Paul Rauch Tom King May 14, – November 1979 Paul Rauch Tom King and Robert Soderberg November 1979 – December 1980 Paul Rauch L. Virginia Browne December 1980 – November 1981 Paul Rauch Corinne Jacker November 1981 - November 1982 Paul Rauch Robert Soderberg November 1982 Paul Rauch Robert Soderberg and Dorothy Ann Purser November 1982 – December 1983 Paul Rauch Dorothy Ann Purser December 1983 – February 1984 Paul Rauch; Allen M. Potter Richard Culliton March – June 1984 Stephen Schenkel Richard Culliton and Gary Tomlin July 1984 – January 1985 Stephen Schenkel Gary Tomlin January – July 1985 Stephen Schenkel Sam Hall and Gillian Spencer August 1985 – March 1986 Stephen Schenkel and John Whitesell Margaret DePriest March 1986 – January 1988 John Whitesell Sheri Anderson February – April 1988 John Whitesell; Michael Laibson Donna Swajeski (WGA Strike) April – September 1988 Michael Laibson Harding Lemay September 12, 1988 – November 10, 1988 Michael Laibson Donna Swajeski November 1988 – November 1992 Michael Laibson Peggy Sloane, Samuel D. Ratcliffe November 1992 – November 1994 Laibson; Terri Guarnieri; John Valente Carolyn Culliton November 1994 – August 1995 John Valente; Jill Farren Phelps Tom King and Craig Carlson August 1995 – May 1996 Jill Farren Phelps Margaret DePriest May 1996 – January 1997 Phelps; Charlotte Savitz Elizabeth PageTom KingCraig Carlson January – March 1997 Charlotte Savitz Tom King and Craig Carlson March – April 1997 Charlotte Savitz Michael Malone April – December 1997 Charlotte Savitz Richard Culliton December 1997 – May 1998 Charlotte Savitz Richard CullitonJean Passanante May – July 1998 Charlotte Savitz Jean Passanante July 1998 Charlotte Savitz Leah Laiman and Jean Passanante July 1998 –  June 1999 Charlotte Savitz; Christopher Goutman To discuss abortion. In 1964, the subject was a taboo and it was nine years before the Roe v. Wade decision made abortion legal for women in all 50 U.S. states. To expand to an hour-long format (1975). At one point, AW expanded to 90 minutes (March 1979), but eventually returned to the hour-long format in August 1980, where it remained until the show was cancelled in 1999. To spin off new shows. AW's Missy Matthews, Ricky Matthews, Sam Lucas, and Lahoma Lucas, relocated to Somerset from 1970 until 1976. Subsequently, on August 4, 1980, NBC aired its second spin-off by introducing Another World characters Iris Carrington, Dennis Carrington, Reena Cook, Dr. Kevin Cook, and Vivien Gorrow. Those Bay City characters relocated to Houston and launched the hour long serial Texas, which was initially aired in the 3:pm eastern time slot (against the then-ratings powerhouses General Hospital and Guiding Light). Following the premiere of Texas, Another World was shortened from 90 minutes to 60 minutes, and aired in the time slot directly preceding its spin-off series. Although Texas was axed due to poor ratings in December 1982, the storylines would impact Iris Cory Wheeler, who had been living in New York since leaving Houston in November 1981, on the mother show AW for the next two decades. May 4, 1964 to January 3, 1975: 3:00-3:30 PM January 6, 1975 to March 2, 1979: 3:00-4:00 PM March 5, 1979 to August 1, 1980: 2:30-4:00 PM August 4, 1980 to June 25, 1999: 2:00-3:00 PM Christine Baranski (Beverly Tucker) Laurie Bartram (Karen Campbell) Faith Ford (Julia Shearer) Morgan Freeman (Roy Bingham) Joanna Going (Lisa Grady) Kelsey Grammer (Dr. Canard) Thomas Ian Griffith (Catlin Ewing) Jackee Harry (Lily Mason) Amy Carlson (Josie Watts) Anne Heche (Marley Hudson / Vicky Hudson) Mary Page Keller (Sally Frame) Audra Lindley (Liz Matthews) Ray Liotta (Joey Perrini) Lindsay Lohan (Alexandra "Alli" Fowler) Nancy Marchand (Irene Kimbalt / Therrese Lamonte) Rue McClanahan (Caroline Johnson) Alicia Coppola (Lorna Devon) Julian McMahon (Ian Rain) Chris Noth Ed O'Neill (Kidnapper) Mark Valley (Father Pete) Luke Perry (Kenny) Jane Krakowski (Tonya) Marcus Giamatti (Jeff) Chris Bruno (Dennis Wheeler) Paul Perri (Joey Perrini) Brad Pitt (Chris) Ving Rhames (Czaja Carnek) Christopher Rich (Sandy Cory) Kim Rhodes (Cynthia 'Cindy' Brooke Harrison) Eric Roberts (Ted Bancroft) Howard E. Rollins, Jr. (Ed Harding) Jodi Lyn O'Keefe (Maggie Cory) Kyra Sedgwick (Julia Shearer) Ted Shackelford (Ray Gordon) Jean Smart (Passenger on Bus) Susan Sullivan (Lenore Moore Curtin Delaney) Dolph Sweet (Gil McGowan) Henry Simmons (Tyrone Montgomery) Janine Turner (Patricia Kirkland) Justin Chambers (Nick Hudson) Theodore Bikel (Henry Davenport) Charles Durning (Gil McGowan) Dick Cavett (Oliver Twist (a magician)) Jose Ferrer (attorney Reuben Marino) Crystal Gayle (herself) Virginia Graham (herself) Donna Hanover (a judge during one of Vicky's trials) Liberace (himself) Gary Morris (himself) Joan Rivers (Meredith Dunston) Al Roker (himself) Ann Sheridan (Kathryn Corning) Betty White (Brenda Barlowe) 1995 "Outstanding Achievement in Music Direction and Composition for a Drama Series" 1995 "Outstanding Original Song" 1994 "Outstanding Achievement in Hairstyling for a Drama Series" 1994 "Outstanding Achievement in Costume Design for a Drama Series" 1993 "Outstanding Achievement in Hairstyling for a Drama Series" 1992 "Outstanding Drama Series Directing Team" 1992 "Outstanding Achievement in Hairstyling for a Drama Series" 1990 "Outstanding Achievement in Hairstyling for a Drama Series" 1990 "Outstanding Achievement in Costume Design for a Drama Series" (tied with All My Children) 1989 "Outstanding Achievement in Costume Design for a Drama Series" 1975 "Outstanding Drama Series Writing" 1974 "Outstanding Art Direction or Scenic Design" (tied with The Young and the Restless) Directors Guild of America Award (1992) Arizona, USA Central Park, New York City, New York, USA Lake Louise, Banff National Park, Alberta, Canada. (The storyline, which aired in 1984, consisted of the presumed death of Mac Cory while he was on an excursion) Majorca, Spain New York (state), USA St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands Wyoming, USA List of Another World cast members List of Another World characters Julie Poll, "Another World 35th Anniversary Celebration", ISBN 0060193042, HarperEntertainment, April 27, 1999.  Retrieved 2015-10-11. Gerard J. Waggett, "The Ultimate Another World Trivia Book", ISBN 1580630812, Renaissance Books, September 4, 1999. Retrieved 2015-10-11. Another World home page site Another World Fan Fiction The continuing story of Another World on the Web Another World Today webisode sequel website The Somerset Register
