   Anthony Trollope (; 24 April 1815 – 6 December 1882) was one of the most successful, prolific and respected English novelists of the Victorian era. Among his best-loved works is a series of novels collectively known as the Chronicles of Barsetshire, which revolves around the imaginary county of Barsetshire. He also wrote perceptive novels on political, social, and gender issues, and on other topical matters.Nardin, Jane (1990). "The Social Critic in Anthony Trollope's Novels," Studies in English Literature, 1500–1900, Vol. XXX, No. 4, pp. 679–696. Trollope's literary reputation dipped somewhat during the last years of his life,"What about Anthony Trollope? Was not Anthony Trollope popular, even during the days of Dickens and Thackeray? And who ever preached a reactionary crusade against him? Yet is he not fast disappearing from the attention of our novel readers? Trollope, unlike most successful novelists, was himself made sensible during his later years of a steady decline of his popularity. I heard a well-known London publisher once say that the novelist who had once obtained by any process a complete popular success never could lose it during his life time; that, let him write as carelessly and as badly as he might, his life time could not last long enough to enable him to shake off his public. But the facts of Trollope's literary career show that the declaration of my publisher friend was too sweeping in its terms. For several years before his death, Trollope's prices were steadily falling off. Now, one seldom hears him talked of; one hardly ever hears a citation from him in a newspaper or a magazine." – M'Carthy, Justin (1900). "Disappearing Authors," The North American Review, Vol. 170, No. 520, p. 397. but he regained the esteem of critics by the mid-twentieth century. Thomas Anthony Trollope, Anthony's father, was a barrister.  Though a clever and well-educated man and a Fellow of New College, Oxford, he failed at the bar due to his bad temper. In addition, his ventures into farming proved unprofitable, and he lost an expected inheritance when an elderly childless uncle remarried and had children. As a son of landed gentry,. he wanted his sons to be raised as gentlemen and to attend Oxford or Cambridge. Anthony Trollope suffered much misery in his boyhood owing to the disparity between the privileged background of his parents and their comparatively small means.   Born in London, Anthony attended Harrow School as a free day pupil for three years from the age of seven because his father's farm, acquired for that reason, lay in that neighbourhood.  After a spell at a private school at Sunbury, he followed his father and two older brothers to Winchester College, where he remained for three years.  He returned to Harrow as a day-boy to reduce the cost of his education. Trollope had some very miserable experiences at these two public schools. They ranked as two of the most élite schools in England, but Trollope had no money and no friends, and was bullied a great deal. At the age of twelve, he fantasized about suicide. However, he also daydreamed, constructing elaborate imaginary worlds. In 1827, his mother Frances Trollope moved to America with Trollope's three younger siblings, to Nashoba Commune. After that failed, she opened a bazaar in Cincinnati, which proved unsuccessful. Thomas Trollope joined them for a short time before returning to the farm at Harrow, but Anthony stayed in England throughout. His mother returned in 1831 and rapidly made a name for herself as a writer, soon earning a good income. His father's affairs, however, went from bad to worse. He gave up his legal practice entirely and failed to make enough income from farming to pay rents to his landlord, Lord Northwick. In 1834, he fled to Belgium to avoid arrest for debt. The whole family moved to a house near Bruges, where they lived entirely on Frances's earnings. In Belgium, Anthony was offered a commission in an Austrian cavalry regiment. To accept it, he needed to learn French and German; he had a year in which to acquire these languages. To learn them without expense to himself and his family, he took a position as an usher in a school in Brussels, which position made him the tutor of thirty boys. After six weeks of this, however, he received an offer of a clerkship in the General Post Office, obtained through a family friend. He returned to London in the autumn of 1834 to take up this post.Trollope, Anthony (1883).  An Autobiography. Chapter 2. Retrieved 2 July 2010. Thomas Trollope died in the following year.Anthony Trollope: Biography. The Trollope Society. Retrieved 2 July 2010. According to Trollope, "the first seven years of my official life were neither creditable to myself nor useful to the public service."Trollope (1883).  Chapter 3. Retrieved 2 July 2010. At the Post Office, he acquired a reputation for unpunctuality and insubordination. A debt of £12 to a tailor fell into the hands of a moneylender and grew to over £200; the lender regularly visited Trollope at his work to demand payments. Trollope hated his work, but saw no alternatives and lived in constant fear of dismissal. In 1841, an opportunity to escape offered itself.Moore, W. S. (1928). "Trollope and Ireland," The Irish Monthly, Vol. 56, No. 656, pp. 74–79. A postal surveyor's clerk in central Ireland was reported as being incompetent and in need of replacement. The position was not regarded as a desirable one at all; but Trollope, in debt and in trouble at his office, volunteered for it; and his supervisor, William Maberly, eager to be rid of him, appointed him to the position. Trollope based himself in Banagher, County Offaly, with his work consisting largely of inspection tours in Connacht. Although he had arrived with a bad character from London, his new supervisor resolved to judge him on his merits; by Trollope's account, within a year he had the reputation of a valuable public servant.Trollope (1883).  Chapter 4. Retrieved 2 July 2010. His salary and travel allowance went much farther in Ireland than they had in London, and he found himself enjoying a measure of prosperity. He took up fox hunting, which he pursued enthusiastically for the next three decades.  His professional role as a post-office surveyor brought him into contact with Irish people, and he found them pleasant company: "The Irish people did not murder me, nor did they even break my head. I soon found them to be good-humoured, clever—the working classes very much more intelligent than those of England—economical and hospitable." At the watering place of Kingstown, Trollope met Rose Heseltine, the daughter of a Rotherham bank manager. They became engaged when he had been in Ireland for a year; because of Trollope's debts and her lack of a fortune, they were unable to marry until 1844. Soon after their marriage, Trollope transferred to another postal district in the south of Ireland, and the family moved to Clonmel.Byrne, P. F. (1992). "Anthony Trollope in Ireland," Dublin Historical Record, Vol. 45, No. 2, pp. 126–128. Though Trollope had decided to become a novelist, he had accomplished very little writing during his first three years in Ireland. At the time of his marriage, he had only written the first of three volumes of his first novel, The Macdermots of Ballycloran. Within a year of his marriage, he finished that work.Tingay, Lance O. (1951). "The Reception of Trollope's First Novel," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 195–200. Trollope began writing on the numerous long train trips around Ireland he had to take to carry out his postal duties."Some authors appear to be able to write at any time and in any place. Anthony Trollope did much writing in a railway train." –  Andrews, William (1898). Literary Byways, Williams Andrews & Co., pp. 22–23. Setting very firm goals about how much he would write each day, he eventually became one of the most prolific writers of all time. He wrote his earliest novels while working as a Post Office inspector, occasionally dipping into the "lost-letter" box for ideas.Super, R. H. (1981). Trollope in the Post Office. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press. pp. 16–45. Significantly, many of his earliest novels have Ireland as their setting—natural enough given his background, but unlikely to enjoy warm critical reception, given the contemporary English attitude towards Ireland.Edwards, Owen Dudley. "Anthony Trollope, the Irish Writer. Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 38, No. 1 (June 1983), p. 1 It has been pointed out by critics that Trollope's view of Ireland separates him from many of the other Victorian novelists.  Some critics claim that Ireland did not influence Trollope as much as his experience in England, and that the society in Ireland harmed him as a writer, especially since Ireland was experiencing the Great Famine during his time there.Trollope: A Commentary London: Constable 1927 p. 136 Such critics were dismissed as holding bigoted opinions against Ireland and failing to recognise Trollope's true attachment to the country."Trollope and the Matter of Ireland," Anthony Trollope, ed. Tony Bareham, London: Vision Press 1980, pp. 24–25 Trollope wrote four novels about Ireland. Two were written during the Great Famine of the mid-19th century, while the third deals with the famine as a theme (The Macdermots of Ballycloran, The Landleaguers, and Castle Richmond, respectively).Terry, R.C. Anthony Trollope: The Artist in Hiding London: Macmillan 1977 pp. 175–200 The Macdermots of Ballycloran was written while he was staying in the village of Drumsna, County Leitrim. A fourth, The Kellys and the O'Kellys (1848) is a humorous comparison of the romantic pursuits of the landed gentry (Francis O'Kelly, Lord Ballindine) and his Catholic tenant (Martin Kelly). Two short stories deal with Ireland ("The O'Conors of Castle Conor, County Mayo"Published in Harper's, May 1860. and "Father Giles of Ballymoy"Published in Argosy, May 1866.).Trollope, The Spotted Dog, and Other Stories, ed. Herbert Van Thal. London: Pan Books 1950 It has been argued by some critics that these works seek to unify an Irish and British identity, instead of viewing the two as distinct.Edwards p.3 Even as an Englishman in Ireland, Trollope was still able to attain what he saw as essential to being an "Irish writer": possessed, obsessed, and "mauled" by Ireland."Irishness" in Writers and Politics. London: Chatto and Windus 1965, pp. 97–100 The reception of the Irish works left much to be desired. Henry Colburn wrote to Trollope, "It is evident that readers do not like novels on Irish subjects as well as on others." In particular, magazines such as The New Monthly Magazine, which wrote reviews that attacked the Irish for their actions during the famine, were representative of the dismissal by English readers of any work written about the Irish.New Monthly Magazine, August 1848.Trollope: The Critical Heritage ed. Donald Smalley London: Routledge 1969, p. 555 In 1851, Trollope was sent to England, charged with investigating and reorganising rural mail delivery in southwestern England and southern Wales. The two-year mission took him over much of Great Britain, often on horseback. Trollope describes this time as "two of the happiest years of my life".Trollope (1883).  Chapter 5. Retrieved 2 July 2010. In the course of it, he visited Salisbury Cathedral; and there, according to his autobiography, he conceived the plot of The Warden, which became the first of the six Barsetshire novels. His postal work delayed the beginning of writing for a year;The dates in Trollope's An Autobiography, chapter 5, are inconsistent: he states that he began writing The Warden in July 1853, that he "recommenced it" at the end of 1852, and that he finished it in the autumn of 1853. the novel was published in 1855, in an edition of 1000 copies, with Trollope receiving half of the profits: £9 8s. 8d. in 1855, and £10 15s. 1d. in 1856. Although the profits were not large, the book received notices in the press, and brought Trollope to the attention of the novel-reading public. He immediately began work on Barchester Towers, the second Barsetshire novel;Trollope (1883).  Chapter 6. Retrieved 2 July 2010. upon its publication in 1857,Trollope (1883).  Chapter 20. Retrieved 2 July 2010. he received an advance payment of £100 (about £ in  consumer pounds) against his share of the profits. Like The Warden, Barchester Towers did not obtain large sales, but it helped to establish Trollope's reputation. In his autobiography, Trollope writes, "It achieved no great reputation, but it was one of the novels which novel readers were called upon to read."  For the following novel, The Three Clerks, he was able to sell the copyright for a lump sum of £250; he preferred this to waiting for a share of future profits. Although Trollope had been happy and comfortable in Ireland, he felt that as an author, he should live within easy reach of London. In 1859, he sought and obtained a position in the Post Office as Surveyor to the Eastern District, comprising Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and most of Hertfordshire.Trollope (1883).  Chapter 8. Retrieved 2 July 2010. Later in that year he moved to Waltham Cross, about  from London in Hertfordshire, where he lived until 1871."Anthony Trollope". Lowewood Museum. Retrieved 2 July 2010. In late 1859, Trollope learned of preparations for the release of the Cornhill Magazine, to be published by George Murray Smith and edited by William Makepeace Thackeray.Payne, Jr.L. W. (1900). "Thackeray," The Sewanee Review, Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 447–448. He wrote to the latter, offering to provide short stories for the new magazine. Thackeray and Smith both responded: the former urging Trollope to contribute, the latter offering £1000 for a novel, provided that a substantial part of it could be available to the printer within six weeks. Trollope offered Smith Castle Richmond, which he was then writing; but Smith declined to accept an Irish story, and suggested a novel dealing with English clerical life as had Barchester Towers. Trollope then devised the plot of Framley Parsonage, setting it near Barchester so that he could make use of characters from the Barsetshire novels.Sadleir, Michael (1927).  Trollope: A Commentary. Farrar, Straus and Company. Framley Parsonage proved enormously popular, establishing Trollope's reputation with the novel-reading public and amply justifying the high price that Smith had paid for it.Moody, Ellen.  Framley Parsonage introduction. Ellen Moody's Website: Mostly on English and Continental and Women's Literature. Retrieved 7 April 2011. The early connection to Cornhill also brought Trollope into the London circle of artists, writers, and intellectuals, not least among whom were Smith and Thackeray.Cook, E. T. (1910). "The Jubilee of the 'Cornhill'," The Cornhill Magazine, Vol. XXVIII, New Series. By the mid-1860s, Trollope had reached a fairly senior position within the Post Office hierarchy, despite ongoing differences with Rowland Hill, who was at that time Chief Secretary to the Postmaster General. Postal history credits him with introducing the pillar box (the ubiquitous mail-box) in the United Kingdom. He was earning a substantial income from his novels. He had overcome the awkwardness of his youth, made good friends in literary circles, and hunted enthusiastically. When Hill left the Post Office in 1864, Trollope's brother-in-law, John Tilley, who was then Under-Secretary to the Postmaster General, was appointed to the vacant position. Trollope applied for Tilley's old post, but was passed over in favour of a subordinate. In the fall of 1867, he resigned his position at the Post Office, having by that time saved enough to generate an income equal to the pension he would lose by leaving before the age of 60.Trollope (1883).  Chapter 15. Retrieved 2 July 2010. Trollope had long dreamt of taking a seat in the House of Commons.Trollope (1883), chapter 16. Retrieved 21 May 2010. As a civil servant, however, he was ineligible for such a position. His resignation from the Post Office removed this disability, and he almost immediately began seeking a seat for which he might run.Super, R. H. (1988).  The Chronicler of Barsetshire. University of Michigan Press.  pp. 251–5. Retrieved 19 May 2010. In 1868, he agreed to stand as a Liberal candidate in the borough of Beverley, in the East Riding of Yorkshire.Tingay, Lance O. (1950). "Trollope and the Beverley Election," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 23–37. Party leaders apparently took advantage of Trollope's eagerness to run and willingness to spend money on a campaign. Beverley had a long history of vote-buying and of intimidation by employers and others. Every election since 1857 had been followed by a petition alleging corruption, and it was estimated that 300 of the 1100 voters in 1868 would sell their votes.Modern Beverley: Political and Social History, 1835–1918. British History Online. Retrieved 20 May 2010. The task of a Liberal candidate was not to win the election, but to give the Conservative candidates an opportunity to display overt corruption, which could then be used to disqualify them. Trollope described his period of campaigning in Beverley as "the most wretched fortnight of my manhood". He spent a total of £400 on his campaign. The election was held on 17 November 1868; the novelist finished last of four candidates, with the victory going to the two Conservatives. A petition was filed, and a Royal Commission investigated the circumstances of the election; its findings of extensive and widespread corruption drew nationwide attention, and led to the disfranchisement of the borough in 1870. The fictional Percycross election in Ralph the Heir is closely based on the Beverley campaign. After the Beverley loss, Trollope concentrated entirely on his literary career. While continuing to produce novels rapidly, he also edited the St Paul's Magazine, which published several of his novels in serial form. In 1871, Trollope made his first trip to Australia, arriving in Melbourne in July, with his wife and their cook.Muir, Marcie (1949). Anthony Trollope in Australia, Wakefield Press, p. 36. The trip was made to visit their younger son, Frederic, who was a sheep farmer near Grenfell, New South Wales.Starck, Nigel (2008) "Anthony Trollope's travels and travails in 1871 Australia", National Library of Australia News, XIX (1), p. 19 He wrote his novel Lady Anna during the voyage. In Australia, he spent a year and two days "descending mines, mixing with shearers and rouseabouts, riding his horse into the loneliness of the bush, touring lunatic asylums, and exploring coast and plain by steamer and stagecoach".Starck, p. 20 Despite this, the Australian press was uneasy, fearing he would misrepresent Australia in his writings. This fear was based on rather negative writings about America by his mother, Fanny, and by Charles Dickens. On his return, Trollope published a book, Australia and New Zealand (1873). It contained both positive and negative comments. On the positive side, it included finding a comparative absence of class consciousness, and praising aspects of Perth, Melbourne, Hobart and Sydney. However, he was negative about Adelaide's river, the towns of Bendigo and Ballarat, and the Aboriginal people. What most angered the Australian papers, though, were his comments "accusing Australians of being braggarts". Trollope returned to Australia in 1875 to help his son close down his failed farming business. He found that the resentment created by his accusations of bragging remained. Even when he died in 1882, Australian papers still "smouldered", referring yet again to these accusations, and refusing to fully praise or recognise his achievements.Starck, p. 21 In 1880, Trollope moved to the village of South Harting in West Sussex. He spent some time in Ireland in the early 1880s researching his last, unfinished, novel, The Landleaguers. It is said that he was extremely distressed by the violence of the Land War.Stanford, Jane, 'That Irishman: The Life and Times of John O'Connor Power', Part Three, 'The Fenian is the Artist', pp. 123–124, The History Press Ireland, May 2011, ISBN 978-1-84588-698-1 He died in London in 1882, and is buried in Kensal Green Cemetery, near the grave of his contemporary, Wilkie Collins. Trollope's first major success came with The Warden (1855)—the first of six novels set in the fictional county of "Barsetshire" (often collectively referred to as the Chronicles of Barsetshire), dealing primarily with the clergy and landed gentry. Barchester Towers (1857) has probably become the best-known of these. Trollope's other major series, the Palliser novels, which overlap with the Barset novels, concerned itself with politics, with the wealthy, industrious Plantagenet Palliser (later Duke of Omnium) and his delightfully spontaneous, even richer wife Lady Glencora usually featuring prominently (although, as with the Barsetshire series, many other well-developed characters populated each novel, and in one, The Eustace Diamonds, the Pallisers play only a small role). Trollope's popularity and critical success diminished in his later years, but he continued to write prolifically, and some of his later novels have acquired a good reputation.  In particular, critics who concur that the book was not popular when published, generally acknowledge the sweeping satire The Way We Live Now (1875) as his masterpiece.Amanda Craig, journalist wrote – http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/book-of-a-lifetime-the-way-we-live-now-by-anthony-trollope-1676694.html# In all, Trollope wrote forty-seven novels, as well as dozens of short stories and a few books on travel. After his death, Trollope's Autobiography appeared and was a best-seller in London.  Trollope's downfall in the eyes of the critics stemmed largely from this volume.Saintsbury, George (1895). "Three Mid-Century Novelists." In Corrected Impressions, London: William Heinemann, 172–173.Shumaker, Wayne (1954). "The Mixed Mode: Trollope's Autobiography." In English Autobiography, Berkeley: University of California Press. Even during his writing career, reviewers tended increasingly to shake their heads over his prodigious output, but when Trollope revealed that he strictly adhered to a daily writing quota, he confirmed his critics' worst fears."He told me that he began to write at five o'clock every morning, and wrote a certain number of hours till it was time to dress, never touching his literary work after breakfast.  I remember telling him that I always worked at night, and his saying, 'Well, I give the freshest hours of the day to my work; you give the fag end of the day to yours.' I have often thought over this, but my experience has always been that the early morning is the best time for study and taking in ideas, night the best time for giving out thoughts.  I said that I envied him the gift of imagination, which enabled him to create characters. He said, 'Imagination! my dear fellow, not a bit of it; it is cobbler's wax.' Seeing that I was rather puzzled, he said that the secret of success was to put a lump of cobbler's wax on your chair, sit on it and stick to it till you had succeeded.  He told me he had written for years before he got paid." — Brackenbury, Sir Henry (1909). Some Memories of My Spare Time, William Blackwood & Sons, pp. 51–52. The Muse, in their view, might prove immensely prolific, but she would never ever follow a schedule."It happened that Anthony Trollope was a writer. But that circumstance was unimportant. He was pre-eminently a man. Trollope devoted himself to the business of authorship exactly as he might have devoted himself to any other business. He worked at writing for three hours each day, not a very hard daily stint. But, as it happened, he had another occupation, a position in the English postal service. He made up his mind to do his stint of writing no matter what happened. Often he would write on trains. What writers call 'waiting for an inspiration' he considered nonsense. The result of his system was that he accomplished a vast amount of work. But, by telling the truth about his system, he injured his reputation. When his 'Autobiography' was published after his death, lovers of literature were shocked, instead of being impressed by his courage and industry. They had the old-fashioned notion about writing, which still persists, by the way. They liked to think of writers as 'inspired,' as doing their work by means of a divine agency. As if we did not all do our work by a divine agency no matter what the work may be. But the divine agency insists on being backed up with character, which means courage and persistence, the qualities that make for system. In the 'Autobiography,' Anthony Trollope unquestionably showed that he was not an inspirational writer, and that he was a man inspired by tremendous moral force." – Barry, John D. (1918). "Using Time." In Reactions and Other Essays, J.J. Newbegin, pp. 39–40. Furthermore, Trollope admitted that he wrote for money; at the same time he called the disdain of money false and foolish. The Muse, claimed the critics, should not be aware of money. Julian Hawthorne, an American writer, critic and friend of Trollope, while praising him as a man, calling him "a credit to England and to human nature, and ...[deserving] to be numbered among the darlings of mankind", also says that "he has done great harm to English fictitious literature by his novels".Hawthorne, Julian (1887). "The Maker of Many Books." In Confessions and Criticisms, Ticknor and Company, pp. 160–62.His father, eminent novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne, saw it differently: "Have you ever read the novels of Anthony Trollope?" He asked his publisher, James T. Fields, in February 1860; "They precisely suit my taste; solid, substantial, written on strength of beef and through inspiration of ale, and just as real as if some giant had hewn a great lump out of the earth and put it under a glass case, with all its inhabitants going about their daily business, and not suspecting that they were made a show of." — Heddendorf, David (2013). "Anthony Trollope's Scarlet Letter," Sewanee Review, Vol. 121, No. 3, p. 368. Henry James also expressed mixed opinions of Trollope.Jones, Vivien (1982). "James and Trollope," The Review of English Studies, Vol. 33, No. 131, pp. 278–294. The young James wrote some scathing reviews of Trollope's novels (The Belton Estate, for instance, he called "a stupid book, without a single thought or idea in it ... a sort of mental pabulum"). He also made it clear that he disliked Trollope's narrative method; Trollope's cheerful interpolations into his novels about how his storylines could take any twist their author wanted did not appeal to James's sense of artistic integrity. However, James thoroughly appreciated Trollope's attention to realistic detail, as he wrote in an essay shortly after the novelist's death: His [Trollope's] great, his inestimable merit was a complete appreciation of the usual. ... [H]e felt all daily and immediate things as well as saw them; felt them in a simple, direct, salubrious way, with their sadness, their gladness, their charm, their comicality, all their obvious and measurable meanings. ... Trollope will remain one of the most trustworthy, though not one of the most eloquent, of the writers who have helped the heart of man to know itself. ... A race is fortunate when it has a good deal of the sort of imagination—of imaginative feeling—that had fallen to the share of Anthony Trollope; and in this possession our English race is not poor.James, Henry (1888). "Anthony Trollope." In Partial Portraits, Macmillan and Co., pp. 100–01, 133. Writers such as Thackeray, Eliot and Collins admired and befriended Trollope, and George Eliot noted that she could not have embarked on so ambitious a project as Middlemarch without the precedent set by Trollope in his own novels of the fictional—yet thoroughly alive—county of Barsetshire.Super, R. H. (1988), p. 412. Other contemporaries of Trollope praised his understanding of the quotidian world of institutions, official life, and daily business; he is one of the few novelists who find the office a creative environment.Sullivan, Ceri (2013). Literature in the Public Service: Sublime Bureaucracy, Palgrave Macmillan, Ch. 3, pp. 65–99. W. H. Auden wrote of Trollope as follows: "Of all novelists in any country, Trollope best understands the role of money. Compared with him, even Balzac is too romantic."Quoted in Wintle, Justin & Kenin, Richard, eds. (1978). The Dictionary of Biographical Quotation, p. 742. Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd. As trends in the world of the novel moved increasingly towards subjectivity and artistic experimentation, Trollope's standing with critics suffered. But Lord David Cecil noted in 1934 that "Trollope is still very much alive... and among fastidious readers." He noted that Trollope was "conspicuously free from the most characteristic Victorian faults".Lord David Cecil, Early Victorian Novelists – Essays in Revaluation, p. 245 In the 1940s, Trollopians made further attempts to resurrect his reputation; he enjoyed a critical renaissance in the 1960s, and again in the 1990s. Some critics today have a particular interest in Trollope's portrayal of women—he caused remark even in his own day for his deep insight and sensitivity to the inner conflicts caused by the position of women in Victorian society."Anthony Trollope reveals an amazing insight into the love and the motive of woman. In this detail he has no equal in the whole catalogue of British male novelists until we go as far back as Richardson. Trollope has an amazing comprehension of the young lady. Meredith cannot approach the ground held by Trollope here." –  Harvey, Alexander (1917). "A Glance at Marcia." In William Dean Howells: A Study of the Achievement of a Literary Artist, B.W. Huebsch, p. 69.Koets, Christiaan Coenraad (1933). Female Characters in the Works of Anthony Trollope, Gouda, T. van Tilburg.Hewitt, Margaret (1963). "Anthony Trollope: Historian and Sociologist," The British Journal of Sociology, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 226–239.Aitken, David (1974). "Anthony Trollope on 'the Genus Girl'," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 417–434.Kennedy, John Dorrance (1975). Trollope's Widows, Beyond the Stereotypes of Maiden and Wife, (PhD Dissertation), University of Florida. Recently, interest in Trollope has increased. A Trollope Society flourishes in the United Kingdom, as does its sister society in the United States.Allen, Brooke (1993). "New York's Trollope Society," City Journal, Autumn. In 2011, the University of Kansas' Department of English, in collaboration with the Hall Center for the Humanities and in partnership with The Fortnightly Review, began awarding an annual Trollope Prize. The Prize was established to focus attention on Trollope's work and career. Notable fans have included Alec Guinness (who never travelled without a Trollope novel); the former British Prime Ministers Harold MacmillanPeter Catterall, "The Prime Minister and His Trollope: Reading Harold Macmillan's Reading", Cercles: Occasional Papers Series (2004). and John Major; the first Canadian Prime Minister, John A. Macdonald; the economist John Kenneth Galbraith; the English judge Lord Denning; the American novelists Sue Grafton and Dominick Dunne; the poet Edward Fitzgerald;Lewis, Monica C. (2010). "Anthony Trollope and the Voicing of Victorian Fiction," Nineteenth-Century Literature, Vol. 65, No. 2, p. 141. the artist Edward Gorey, who kept a complete set of his books; the American author Robert CaroLunch with the FT: Robert Caro and the soap opera writer Harding Lemay.   Single novels Chronicles of Barsetshire  Palliser novels Short stories Non-fiction Plays Literary allusions in Trollope's novels have been identified and traced by Professor James A. Means, in two articles that appeared in The Victorian Newsletter (vols. 78 and 82) in 1990 and 1992 respectively.       The Macdermots of Ballycloran (1847) The Kellys and the O'Kellys (1848) La Vendée: An Historical Romance (1850) The Three Clerks (1858) The Bertrams (1859) Castle Richmond (1860) Orley Farm (1862) The Struggles of Brown, Jones & Robinson (1862) Rachel Ray (1863) Miss Mackenzie (1865) The Belton Estate (1866) The Claverings (1867) Nina Balatka (1867) Linda Tressel (1868) He Knew He Was Right (1869) The Vicar of Bullhampton (1870) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite (1871) Ralph the Heir (1871) The Golden Lion of Granpère (1872) Harry Heathcote of Gangoil (1874) Lady Anna (1874) The Way We Live Now (1875) The American Senator (1877) Is He Popenjoy? (1878) John Caldigate (1879) An Eye for an Eye (1879) Cousin Henry (1879) Ayala's Angel (1881) Doctor Wortle's School (1881) The Fixed Period (1882) Kept in the Dark (1882) Marion Fay (1882) Mr. Scarborough's Family (1883) The Landleaguers (1883) An Old Man's Love (1884) The Warden (1855) Barchester Towers (1857) Doctor Thorne (1858) Framley Parsonage (1861) The Small House at Allington (1864) The Last Chronicle of Barset (1867) Can You Forgive Her? (1865) Phineas Finn (1869) The Eustace Diamonds (1873) Phineas Redux (1874) The Prime Minister (1876) The Duke's Children (1880) Tales of All Countries – 1st Series (1861) Tales of All Countries – 2nd Series (1863) "Gentle Euphemia" (1866) "Katchen's Caprices" (1866) Lotta Schmidt & Other Stories (1867) An Editor's Tales (1870) "Christmas at Kirkby Cottage" (1870) "Never, Never -- Never, Never" (1875) "Catherine Carmichael" (1878) Why Frau Frohmann Raised Her Prices and other Stories (1882) The Two Heroines of Plumpington (1882) "Not If I Know It" The West Indies and the Spanish Main (1859) North America (1862) Hunting Sketches (1865) Travelling Sketches (1866) Clergymen of the Church of England (1866) On English Prose Fiction as a Rational Amusement (1869) The Commentaries of Caesar (1870) Australia and New Zealand (1873) New South Wales & Queensland (1874) South Africa (1878) How the 'Mastiffs' Went to Iceland (1878) Iceland (1878) Thackeray (1879) Life of Cicero (1880) Lord Palmerston (1882) An Autobiography (1883) London Tradesmen (1927) The New Zealander (1927) Did He Steal It? (1869) The Noble Jilt (1923) "The Irish Church," Fortnightly Review, Vol. II, 1865, pp.&nbsp;82–90. "Public Schools," Fortnightly Review, Vol. II, 1865, pp.&nbsp;476–87. "The Civil Service," Fortnightly Review, Vol. II, 1865, pp.&nbsp;613–26. The Letters of Anthony Trollope, ed. by B. A. Booth (1951) The Letters of Anthony Trollope, ed. by N. John Hall (1983) Roberts, Ruth (1971). Trollope: Artist and Moralist, Chatto and Windus. Booth, Bradford Allen (1958). Anthony Trollope: Aspects of his Life and Art, Indiana University Press. Cockshut, O. J. (1955). Anthony Trollope: A Critical Study, London: Collins. Escott, T. H. S. (1913). Anthony Trollope, his Work, Associates and Literary Originals, John Lane: The Bodley Head. Glendinning, Victoria (1992). Anthony Trollope, Alfred A. Knopf. Hall, N. John (1991). Trollope: A Biography, Clarendon Press. Kincaid, James R. (1977). The Novels of Anthony Trollope, Oxford: Clarendon Press. MacDonald, Susan (1987). Anthony Trollope, Twayne Publishers. Mullen, Richard (1990). Anthony Trollope: A Victorian in his World, Duckworth. Polhemus, Robert M. (1966). The Changing World of Anthony Trollope, University of California Press. Pollard, Arthur (1978). Anthony Trollope, Routledge & Kegan Paul, Limited. Pope-Hennessy, James (1971). Anthony Trollope, Jonathan Cape. Smalley, Donald (1969). Anthony Trollope: The Critical Heritage, Routledge. Walpole, Hugh (1928). Anthony Trollope, New York: The Macmillan Company. Anthony Trollope – Comprehensive summaries of all of Trollope's plots and characters as well as information on all things Trollopian Trollope Society website Works by Anthony Trollope, at Unz.org Works by Anthony Trollope at Adelaide University E books Classical references in the Barsetshire series of novels, researched by students from Hendrix College. Vanity Fair – Mrs. Trollope's America Collection of portraits of Trollope at the National Portrait Gallery, London The Trollope Prize at the University of Kansas. The Fortnightly Review Prospectus by Anthony Trollope
