       Sir Arthur Seymour Sullivan MVO (13 May 1842 – 22 November 1900) was an English composer.  He is best known for his series of 14 operatic collaborations with the dramatist W. S. Gilbert, including H.M.S. Pinafore, The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado. His works comprise 23 operas, 13 major orchestral works, eight choral works and oratorios, two ballets, incidental music to several plays, and numerous hymns and other church pieces, songs, and piano and chamber pieces. The best known of his hymns and songs include "Onward Christian Soldiers" and "The Lost Chord". The son of a military bandmaster, Sullivan composed his first anthem at age eight. He was selected as soloist in the boys' choir of the Chapel Royal. In 1856, the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14-year-old Sullivan, allowing him to study first at the Academy and then in Germany, at the Leipzig Conservatoire. His graduation piece was a suite of incidental music to Shakespeare's The Tempest.  When it was performed in London in 1862, it was an immediate sensation. Sullivan began his composing career with a series of ambitious works, interspersed with hymns, parlour ballads and other light pieces. Among his best received early pieces were a ballet, L'Île Enchantée (1864), and his Irish Symphony, Cello Concerto and Overture in C (In Memoriam) (all in 1866). From 1861 to 1872, he supplemented his income by working as a church organist and music teacher, and writing hymns and songs. In 1866, Sullivan composed a one-act comic opera, Cox and Box, which is still widely performed. His most successful orchestral work, the Overture di Ballo, premiered in 1870. Sullivan's talent and native charm earned him many friends in musical and social circles, including Queen Victoria's son Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh. In 1871, Sullivan wrote his first opera with W. S. Gilbert, Thespis. Sullivan then produced his Festival Te Deum (1872), an oratorio, The Light of the World (1873), and incidental music for West End productions of several Shakespeare plays. He also had conducting and academic appointments. In 1875, producer Richard D'Oyly Carte reunited Gilbert and Sullivan to create a one-act piece, Trial by Jury, which was a surprise hit. Their 1878 opera H.M.S. Pinafore became an international sensation, as did The Pirates of Penzance (1879) and Patience (1881). Sullivan never married but had a long love affair with an American socialite, Fanny Ronalds. After the death of his brother Fred in 1877, Sullivan supported Fred's large family financially for the rest of his life, effectively adopting his nephew Bertie. Carte used his profits from the Gilbert and Sullivan partnership to build the Savoy Theatre in 1881, and their joint works then became known as the Savoy operas. Later hits in the series were Iolanthe (1882), The Mikado (1885), The Yeomen of the Guard (1888) and The Gondoliers (1889). Sullivan was knighted for his contributions to music in 1883. His infrequent serious pieces during the 1880s included two cantatas, The Martyr of Antioch (1880) and The Golden Legend (1886), his most popular choral work. Sullivan's only serious opera, Ivanhoe, though initially successful in 1891, was little-heard after that. Gilbert broke from Sullivan and Carte in 1890, quarrelling over expenses at the Savoy.  They reunited in the 1890s for two more operas, but those did not achieve the popularity of their earlier works. Sullivan continued to compose comic operas with other librettists and wrote a number of other major and minor works throughout the decade. He died at the age of 58, regarded as Britain's foremost composer. His comic opera style served as a model for the generations of musical theatre composers that followed, and his music is still frequently performed, recorded and pastiched.  Sullivan was born in Lambeth, London.Jacobs, p. 4  His parents were Thomas Sullivan (1805–1866), a military bandmaster, clarinettist and music teacher born in Ireland and raised in Chelsea, London, and Mary Clementina (née Coghlan, 1811–1882), English born, of Irish and Italian descent.Young, pp. 1–2 Thomas Sullivan was based from 1845 to 1857 at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he was the bandmaster and taught music privately to supplement his income.Ainger, pp. 6 and 22–23Jacobs, pp. 6–7  Young Sullivan became proficient with many of the instruments in the band and had composed an anthem, "By the waters of Babylon", by the age of eight.Ainger, p. 24; Jacobs, p. 7  He later recalled:  While recognising the boy's obvious musical talent, his father knew the insecurity of a musical career and discouraged him from pursuing it.Young, p. 5 While studying at a private school in Bayswater, Sullivan, then aged 11, persuaded his parents and the headmaster to allow him to apply for membership in the choir of the Chapel Royal.Jacobs, p. 7; and Ainger, p. 24  Despite concerns that Sullivan at nearly 12 years of age was too old to give much service as a treble before his voice broke, he was accepted and soon became a soloist and, by 1856, was promoted to "first boy".Jacobs, pp. 8 and 12  Even at this age, Sullivan's health was delicate, and he was easily fatigued.Jacobs, pp. 12–13 Sullivan flourished under the training of the Reverend Thomas Helmore, master of the choristers, and began to compose anthems and songs.Jacobs, pp. 10–11  Helmore encouraged the young Sullivan's composing talent and arranged for one of his pieces, "O Israel", to be published in 1855, Sullivan's first published work.Young, p. 8  Helmore also enlisted Sullivan's assistance in creating harmonisations for a volume of The Hymnal Noted"Arthur Sullivan", The Musical Times, 1 December 1900, pp. 785–87  and arranged for Sullivan's compositions to be performed; one of the boy's anthems was given at the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace under the direction of Sir George Smart.  In 1856, the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14-year-old Sullivan, granting him a year's training at the academy. His principal teacher there was John Goss, whose own teacher, Thomas Attwood, had been a pupil of Mozart.MacKenzie, Alexander. "The Life-Work of Arthur Sullivan", Sammelbände der Internationalen Musikgesellschaft, 3. Jahrg., H. 3, May 1902, pp. 539–64  He studied piano with the head of the academy, William Sterndale Bennett, and with Arthur O'Leary.Fitzsimons, pp. 98 and 142 During this year at the Royal Academy, Sullivan continued to sing solos with the Chapel Royal, which provided a small amount of spending money.Jacobs, pp. 13–16 Sullivan's scholarship was extended to a second year, and in 1858 in what the biographer Arthur Jacobs calls an "extraordinary gesture of confidence"Jacobs, p. 17 the scholarship committee extended his grant for a third year so that he could study in Germany, at the Leipzig Conservatoire.  While there, Sullivan studied composition with Julius Rietz and Carl Reinecke, counterpoint with Moritz Hauptmann and Ernst Richter and the piano with Louis Plaidy and Ignaz Moscheles.Ainger, p. 37  He was trained in Mendelssohn's ideas and techniques but was also exposed to a variety of musical styles, including Schubert, Verdi, Bach, and Wagner.Jacobs, p. 24 Visiting a synagogue, he was so struck by some of the cadences and progressions of the music that thirty years later he could recall them for use in his serious opera, Ivanhoe. Though the scholarship was extended to permit Sullivan to spend one year in Leipzig, he stayed for three years.Young, p. 15 There, he became friendly with the impresario Carl Rosa and the violinist Joseph Joachim.Jacobs, pp. 22–24 For his last year at Leipzig, his father scraped together the money for living expenses, and the conservatoire assisted by waiving its fees.Jacobs, p. 23 Sullivan credited his Leipzig period with tremendous musical growth. His graduation piece, completed in 1861, was a set of incidental music to Shakespeare's The Tempest. Revised and expanded, it was performed at the Crystal Palace in 1862, a year after his return to London, and was an immediate sensation. He began building a reputation as England's most promising young composer.Lawrence, Arthur H. "An Illustrated interview with Sir Arthur Sullivan", The Strand Magazine, vol. xiv, No. 84, December 1897  Sullivan embarked on his composing career with a series of ambitious works, interspersed with hymns, parlour songs and other light pieces in a more commercial vein. His compositions were not enough to support him financially, and from 1861 to 1872 he supplemented his income by working as a church organist, which he enjoyed, and as a music teacher, sometimes at the Crystal Palace School,Musgrave, Michael. The Musical Life of the Crystal Palace, Cambridge University Press, 1995, pp. 171–172 ISBN 0-52137562-2 which he hated and gave up as soon as he could.Ainger, p. 56  Sullivan had an early chance to compose several pieces for royalty in connection with the wedding of the Prince of Wales in 1863.Jacobs, p. 35 Sullivan's association with works for voice and orchestra began with The Masque at Kenilworth (Birmingham Festival, 1864).Jacobs, p. 38 During a spell as organist at Covent Garden, he composed his first ballet, L'Île Enchantée (1864).Jacobs, p. 37 In 1866, he premiered his Irish Symphony and Cello Concerto, his only works in each such genre.Jacobs, pp. 36 and 42 In the same year, his Overture in C (In Memoriam), commemorating the recent death of his father, was a commission from the Norwich Festival.  During his lifetime, it achieved considerable popularity.Jacobs, p. 43 In 1867, his overture Marmion was premiered by the Philharmonic Society.Jacobs, Arthur. "Sullivan, Sir Arthur," Grove Music Online, Oxford Music Online, accessed 19 August 2011  The Times called it "another step in advance on the part of the only composer of any remarkable promise that just at present we can boast.""Concerts", The Times, 17 June 1867, p. 12 In the autumn of 1867, Sullivan travelled with George Grove to Vienna in search of neglected manuscript scores by Schubert.Jacobs, p. 45 They found and copied several and were particularly excited about their final discovery, the score to Rosamunde. Sullivan's first attempt at opera, The Sapphire Necklace (1863–64) to a libretto by Henry F. Chorley, was not produced and is now lost, except for the overture and two songs from the work, which were separately published.Jacobs, pp. 42–43 His first surviving opera, Cox and Box (1866), was written for a private performance.Ainger, p. 65 It then received charity performances in London and Manchester, and was later produced at the Gallery of Illustration, where it ran for an extraordinary 264 performances. W. S. Gilbert, writing in Fun magazine, pronounced the score superior to F. C. Burnand's libretto.Young, p. 63 Sullivan and Burnand were soon commissioned by Thomas German Reed for a two-act opera, The Contrabandista (1867; revised and expanded as The Chieftain in 1894), but it did not do as well.Young, p. 63; and Rollins & Witts, p. 15 Sullivan wrote a group of seven part songs in 1868, the best-known of which is "The Long Day Closes".Sullivan, Marc. "Discography of Sir Arthur Sullivan: Recordings of Hymns and Songs", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 11 July 2010, accessed 9 September 2011 Sullivan's last major work of the 1860s was a short oratorio, The Prodigal Son, premiered in Worcester Cathedral as part of the 1869 Three Choirs Festival to much praise."Worcester Music Festival", The Times, 9 September 1869, p. 10  Sullivan's most enduring orchestral work, the Overture di Ballo, was composed for the Birmingham Festival in 1870. Also in 1870, Sullivan met Gilbert.They met at a rehearsal for a second run of Gilbert's Ages Ago at the Gallery of Illustration, probably in July 1870. See Crowther (2011), p. 84 1871 was a busy year for Sullivan. He published his only song cycle, The Window; or, The Songs of the Wrens, to words by Tennyson,Jacobs, pp. 57–58 and he wrote the first of a series of suites of incidental music for West End productions of Shakespeare plays. Still in 1871, Sullivan composed a dramatic cantata, On Shore and Sea, for the opening of the London International Exhibition,Jacobs, pp. 65–66 and the hymn Onward, Christian Soldiers, with words by Sabine Baring-Gould. The Salvation Army adopted the latter as its favoured processional,Branston, John. "Christian Soldiers: The Salvation Army brings humility and $48 million to the fairgrounds discussion", Memphis Flyer, 18 November 2005 and it became Sullivan's most enduring hymn. At the end of 1871, the impresario John Hollingshead commissioned Sullivan to work with W. S. Gilbert to create the burlesque-style comic opera Thespis for the Gaiety Theatre.Ainger, p. 93 Played as a Christmas entertainment, it ran through to Easter 1872, a good run for such a piece.Rees, p. 78. Its run was extended beyond the length of a normal run at the Gaiety: Walters, Michael. "Thespis: a reply",  W. S. Gilbert Society Journal, Vol. 4, part 3, Issue 29, Summer 2011 After Thespis, Gilbert and Sullivan went their separate waysStedman, p. 94 until they collaborated on three parlour ballads in late 1874 and early 1875.Stedman, pp. 126–27 Sullivan's large-scale works of the early 1870s were the Festival Te Deum (Crystal Palace, 1872);Jacobs, pp. 75–76 and the oratorio, The Light of the World (Birmingham Festival, 1873). He provided suites of incidental music for productions of The Merry Wives of Windsor at the Gaiety in 1874Jacobs, p. 76 and Henry VIII at the Theatre Royal, Manchester in 1877.Jacobs, p. 108  He continued to compose hymns throughout the decade.  In 1873, Sullivan contributed songs to Burnand's Christmas "drawing room extravaganza", The Miller and His Man.Howarth, Paul. The Miller and His Man, the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed January 2, 2013 In 1875, the manager of the Royalty Theatre, Richard D'Oyly Carte, needed a short piece to fill out a bill with Offenbach's La Périchole.  Carte had conducted Sullivan's Cox and Box.Ainger, pp. 107–08 Remembering that Gilbert had suggested a libretto to him, Carte reunited Gilbert and Sullivan, and the result was the one-act comic opera Trial by Jury.Ainger, p. 108 Trial, starring Sullivan's brother Fred as the Learned Judge, became a surprise hit, earning glowing praise from the critics and playing for 300 performances over its first few seasons.Allen, p. 30 The Daily Telegraph commented that the piece illustrated the composer's "great capacity for dramatic writing of the lighter class", and other reviews emphasised the felicitous combination of Gilbert's words and Sullivan's music.London's Daily News, 27 March 1875, p. 3 One wrote, "it seems, as in the great Wagnerian operas, as though poem and music had proceeded simultaneously from one and the same brain.""Trial by Jury", The Musical World, 3 April 1875, p. 226, accessed 17 June 2008  Soon after the opening of Trial, Sullivan wrote The Zoo, another one-act comic opera, with a libretto by B. C. Stephenson.Jacobs, pp. 91–92 But the latter work had only a few short runs, and for the next 15 years Sullivan's sole operatic collaborator was Gilbert; the two created an additional 12 operas together.Rollins and Witts, pp. 5–12 Sullivan also turned out more than 80 popular songs and parlour ballads, most of them written before the end of the 1870s.Young, pp. 273–78, gives a complete list His first popular song was "Orpheus with his Lute" (1866), and a well-received part song was "Oh! hush thee, my babie" (1867). The best known of his songs is "The Lost Chord" (1877, lyrics by Adelaide Anne Procter), written in sorrow at the death of his brother Frederic.Ainger, p. 128 The sheet music for his best received songs sold in large numbers and were an important part of his income; many of them were adapted as dance pieces.Sands, John. "Dance Arrangements from the Savoy Operas" (Introduction), The Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 4 April 2010, accessed 19 October 2011"Dance Arrangements from the Savoy Operas" (Piano scores), The Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 19 October 2011 In this decade, Sullivan's conducting appointments included the Glasgow Choral Union concerts (1875–77) and the Royal Aquarium, London (1876).Ainger, p. 121 In addition to his appointment as Professor of Composition at the Royal Academy of Music, of which he was a Fellow, he was appointed as the first Principal of the National Training School for Music in 1876. He accepted the latter post reluctantly, fearing that discharging the duties thoroughly would leave too little time for composing. In this he was correct, as his successor Hubert Parry also discovered.Legge, Robin H. "Charles Hubert Hastings Parry", The Musical Times, 1 November 1918, pp. 489–91  Sullivan was not effective in the post, and he resigned in 1881. Sullivan's next collaboration with Gilbert, The Sorcerer (1877), ran for 178 performances,Rollins and Witts, p. 5 a success by the standards of the day,Crowther (2000), p. 96 but H.M.S. Pinafore (1878), which followed it, turned Gilbert and Sullivan into an international phenomenon.Crowther (2000), p. 96, and Stedman, p. 169  The bright and cheerful music of Pinafore was composed during a time when Sullivan suffered from excruciating pain from a kidney stone.Ainger, p. 155Bradley (1996), pp. 115–16 Pinafore ran for 571 performances in London, the then-second-longest theatrical run in history,Who's Who in the Theatre, Fourteenth edition, ed. Freda Gaye, p. 1532, Pitman, London (1967) ISBN 0-273-43345-8; and Gillan, Don. "Longest Running Plays in London and New York", StageBeauty.net (2007), accessed 10 March 2009 and more than 150 unauthorised productions were quickly mounted in America alone.Prestige, Colin. "D'Oyly Carte and the Pirates: The Original New York Productions of Gilbert and Sullivan", pp. 113–48 at p. 118, Gilbert and Sullivan Papers Presented at the International Conference held at the University of Kansas in May 1970, Edited by James Helyar. Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas Libraries, 1971. Among other favourable reviews, The Times noted that the opera was an early attempt at the establishment of a "national musical stage" ... free from risqué French "improprieties" and without the "aid" of Italian and German musical models.The Times, 27 May 1878, p. 6 The Times and several of the other papers agreed, however, that while the piece was entertaining, Sullivan was capable of higher art, and frivolous light opera would hold him back.Allen, Introduction to chapter on H.M.S. Pinafore  This criticism would follow Sullivan throughout his career. In 1879, Sullivan suggested to a reporter from The New York Times the secret of his success with Gilbert: "His ideas are as suggestive for music as they are quaint and laughable. His numbers ... always give me musical ideas.""A Talk With Mr. Sullivan", The New York Times, 1 August 1879, p. 3, accessed 22 May 2012 Pinafore was followed by The Pirates of Penzance in 1879, another international success, which opened in New York and then ran in London for 363 performances.Rollins and Witts, p. 7  In 1880, Sullivan was appointed director of the triennial Leeds Music Festival.Jacobs, p. 139 For his first festival he was commissioned to write a sacred choral work. He chose Henry Hart Milman's 1822 dramatic poem based on the life and death of Saint Margaret the Virgin for its basis.Ainger, p. 163 Gilbert adapted the libretto for Sullivan.McClure, Derrick. "The Martyr of Antioch: Gilbert's Contribution to the Libretto", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 13 July 2008 The Martyr of Antioch premiered in October 1880.  Sullivan was not a showy conductor, and some thought him dull and old fashioned on the podium, but his composition had an enthusiastic reception and was frequently revived.Ainger, pp. 190, 195, 203, 215, 255–56 and 390 A grateful Sullivan presented his collaborator with an engraved silver cup inscribed "W.S. Gilbert from his friend Arthur Sullivan." After the run of The Pirates of Penzance, Carte opened the next Gilbert and Sullivan piece, Patience, in April 1881 at London's Opera Comique, where their past three operas had played.  In October, Patience transferred to the new, larger, state-of-the-art Savoy Theatre, built with the profits of the previous Gilbert and Sullivan works.  The rest of the partnership's collaborations were produced at the Savoy, as a result of which they are widely known as the "Savoy Operas".Rollins & Witts, passim; Cellier and Bridgeman, passim Iolanthe (1882), Gilbert and Sullivan's fourth hit in a row, was the first of the operas to premiere at the new theatre.Jacobs, p. 178  Sullivan, despite the financial security of writing for the Savoy, increasingly viewed his work with Gilbert as unimportant, beneath his skills, and also repetitious. After Iolanthe, Sullivan had not intended to write a new work with Gilbert, but he suffered a serious financial loss when his broker went bankrupt in November 1882. Therefore, he concluded that his financial needs required him to continue writing Savoy operas.Ainger, pp. 217–19  In February 1883, he and Gilbert signed a five-year agreement with Carte, requiring them to produce a new comic opera on six months' notice.Baily, p. 251; Ainger, p. 219 On 22 May 1883, Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria for his "services ... rendered to the promotion of the art of music" in Britain.Ainger, p. 220 The musical establishment, and many critics, believed that this should put an end to his career as a composer of comic opera – that a musical knight should not stoop below oratorio or grand opera.Baily, p. 250  Having just signed the five-year agreement, Sullivan suddenly felt trapped.Jacobs, p. 188  In mid-December, he bade farewell to his sister-in-law Charlotte, Fred's widow, who emigrated with her young family to America. Sullivan's oldest nephew, Herbert, stayed behind in England as his uncle's ward.Ainger, pp. 224–25 The next opera, Princess Ida (1884, the duo's only three-act, blank verse work), had a noticeably shorter run than its four predecessors, although Sullivan's score was praised. With box office receipts lagging in March 1884, Carte gave the six months' notice, under the partnership contract, requiring a new opera.Jacobs, p. 187 Sullivan's close friend, the composer Frederic Clay, had suffered a serious stroke in early December 1883 that effectively ended his career at the age of 45. Sullivan, reflecting on this, on his own longstanding kidney problems, and on his desire to devote himself to more serious music, replied to Carte, "[I]t is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself."Crowther, Andrew. "The Carpet Quarrel Explained", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 15 August 2011  Gilbert had already started work on a new opera involving a plot in which people fell in love against their wills after taking a magic lozenge. The composer wrote, on 1 April 1884 that he had "come to the end of my tether" with the operas: "I have been continually keeping down the music in order that not one [syllable] should be lost. ...  I should like to set a story of human interest & probability where the humorous words would come in a humorous (not serious) situation, & where, if the situation were a tender or dramatic one the words would be of similar character."Ainger, p. 230 In a lengthy exchange of correspondence, Sullivan pronounced Gilbert's plot sketch (particularly the "lozenge" element) unacceptably mechanical, and too similar in both its grotesque "elements of topsyturveydom" and in actual plot to their earlier work, especially The Sorcerer, and repeatedly requested that Gilbert find a new subject.Jacobs, pp. 190–93 The impasse was finally resolved on 8 May when Gilbert proposed a plot that did not depend on any supernatural device. The result was Gilbert and Sullivan's most successful work, The Mikado (1885).Rollins & Witts, p. 10 The piece ran for 672 performances, which was the second-longest run for any work of musical theatre, and one of the longest runs of any theatre piece, up to that time.  In 1886, Sullivan composed his second and last large-scale choral work of the decade. It was a cantata for the Leeds Festival, The Golden Legend, based on Longfellow's poem of the same name.  Apart from the comic operas, this proved to be Sullivan's best received full-length work.Jacobs, pp. 242–43 It was given hundreds of performances during his lifetime, and at one point he declared a moratorium on its presentation, fearing that it would become over-exposed.Turnbull, Stephen. "Sullivan Biography", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 22 August 2011 Only Handel's Messiah was performed more often in Britain in the 1880s and 90s.Russell Hulme, David. Notes to Hyperion CD set CDA67280, The Golden Legend] (2001) It remained in the repertory until about the 1920s, but since then it has been seldom performed,Jacobs, p. 243 although it received its first professional recording in 2001. The musical scholar and conductor David Russell Hulme writes that the work influenced Elgar and Walton. Ruddigore followed The Mikado at the Savoy in 1887. It was profitable, but its nine-month run was disappointing compared with most of the earlier Savoy operas.Ainger, pp. 259–61 For their next piece, Gilbert submitted another version of the magic lozenge plot; Sullivan immediately rejected it. Gilbert finally proposed a comparatively serious opera, to which Sullivan agreed.Ainger, pp. 265, 270  Although it was not a grand opera, The Yeomen of the Guard (1888) provided him with the opportunity to compose his most ambitious stage work to date.Ainger, pp. 281–82, and Jacobs, pp. 274–75 As early as 1883, Sullivan had been under pressure from the musical establishment to write a grand opera. In 1885, he told an interviewer, ""The opera of the future is a compromise [among the French, German and Italian schools] – a sort of eclectic school, a selection of the merits of each one. I myself will make an attempt to produce a grand opera of this new school. ... Yes, it will be an historical work, and it is the dream of my life.""Sir Arthur Sullivan: A Talk With the Composer of Pinafore", San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 1885, p. 9 After The Yeomen of the Guard opened, Sullivan turned once again to Shakespeare, composing incidental music for Henry Irving's production of Macbeth (1888).Hughes, p.19 Sullivan wished to produce further serious works with Gilbert. He had collaborated with no other librettist since 1875. But Gilbert felt that the reaction to The Yeomen of the Guard had "not been so convincing as to warrant us in assuming that the public want something more earnest still." He proposed instead that Sullivan should go ahead with his plan to write a grand opera, but should continue also to compose comic works for the Savoy. Sullivan was not immediately persuaded. He replied, "I have lost the liking for writing comic opera, and entertain very grave doubts as to my power of doing it." Nevertheless, Sullivan soon commissioned a grand opera libretto from Julian Sturgis (who was recommended by Gilbert), while suggesting to Gilbert that he revive an old idea for an opera set in colourful Venice.Jacobs, pp. 282–83 and 288, and Ainger, p. 294 The comic opera was completed first: The Gondoliers (1889) was a piece described by Gervase Hughes as a pinnacle of Sullivan's achievement.Hughes, p. 24  It was the last great Gilbert and Sullivan success.Ainger, p. 303  The relationship between Gilbert and Sullivan suffered its most serious breach in April 1890, during the run of The Gondoliers, when Gilbert objected to Carte's financial accounts for the production, including a charge to the partnership for the cost of new carpeting for the Savoy Theatre lobby.  Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone.Stedman, p. 270 Carte was building a new theatre to present Sullivan's forthcoming grand opera, and Sullivan sided with Carte, going so far as to testify erroneously as to certain old debts.Ainger, pp. 307–08 Gilbert took legal action against Carte and Sullivan and vowed to write no more for the Savoy, and so the partnership came to an acrimonious end.Ainger, p. 312 Sullivan wrote to Gilbert in September 1890 that he was "physically and mentally ill over this wretched business. I have not yet got over the shock of seeing our names coupled ... in hostile antagonism over a few miserable pounds".Lamb, Andrew. "Ivanhoe and the Royal English Opera", The Musical Times, Vol. 114, No. 1563, May 1973, pp.&nbsp;475–78 Sullivan's only grand opera, Ivanhoe, based on Walter Scott's novel, opened at Carte's new Royal English Opera House on 31 January 1891. Sullivan completed the score too late to meet Carte's planned production date, and costs mounted; Sullivan was required to pay Carte a contractual penalty of £3,000 for his delay.Jacobs, pp. 328–29Ainger, p. 322 The production lasted for 155 consecutive performances, an unprecedented run for a serious opera, and earned good notices for its music.Gordon-Powell, Robin. Ivanhoe, full score, Introduction, vol. I, pp. XII–XIV, 2008, The Amber Ring Afterwards, Carte was unable to fill the new opera house with other opera productions, however, and Ivanhoe was blamed for the failure of the opera house. The opera passed into obscurity after a touring revival in 1894–95.Eden, David. "Ivanhoe on Tour 1895", Sir Arthur Sullivan Society Magazine, No. 68, Summer 2008 The episode was, as the critic Herman Klein observed, "the strangest comingling of success and failure ever chronicled in the history of British lyric enterprise!"Klein Herman, "An Account of the Composition and Production of Ivanhoe", Thirty Years of Musical Life in London, 1870–1900 (1903), reprinted at the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 3 October 2003, accessed 5 October 2014 Sullivan did not seriously consider writing grand opera again. Later in 1891, Sullivan composed music for Tennyson's The Foresters, which ran well at Daly's Theatre in New York in 1892, but failed in London the following year.  Sullivan returned to comic opera, but because of the fracture with Gilbert, he and Carte sought other collaborators. Sullivan's next piece was Haddon Hall (1892), with a libretto by Sydney Grundy based loosely on the historical elopement of Dorothy Vernon with John Manners.Jacobs, pp. 336–42 Although still comic, the tone and style of the work was considerably more serious and romantic than most of the operas with Gilbert. It enjoyed a modest popularity, running for 204 performances, and earned critical praise.Jacobs, pp. 341–42 In 1895, Sullivan once more provided incidental music for the Lyceum, this time for J. Comyns Carr's .Jacobs, pp. 436–37 The partnership with Gilbert had been so profitable that Carte and his wife sought to reunite the author and composer, eventually succeeding with the help of Tom Chappell, their music publisher.Ainger, p. 328 Their next opera, Utopia Limited (1893), ran for 245 performances, barely covering the expenses of the lavish production,Ainger, p. 346 although it was the longest run at the Savoy in the 1890s.Coles, Clifton. "Mirette: Introduction", Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 28 May 1998, accessed October 5, 2014 Sullivan came to disapprove of the leading lady, Nancy McIntosh, and refused to write another piece featuring her, while Gilbert insisted that she must appear in his next opera.Ainger, p. 352 Instead, Sullivan teamed up again with his old partner, F. C. Burnand. The Chieftain (1894), a heavily-revised version of their earlier two-act opera, The Contrabandista, flopped.Ainger, p. 357 Gilbert and Sullivan reunited one more time, after McIntosh announced her retirement from the stage, for The Grand Duke (1896). This also failed, and Sullivan never worked with Gilbert again, although their operas continued to be revived with success at the Savoy.Young, p. 201 In May 1897, Sullivan's full-length ballet, Victoria and Merrie England, opened at the Alhambra Theatre to celebrate the Queen's Diamond Jubilee. The work's seven scenes celebrate English history and culture, with the Victorian period as the grand finale. Its six-month run was considered a great achievement.Jacobs, pp. 372–76 The Beauty Stone (1898), with a libretto by Arthur Wing Pinero and J. Comyns Carr was based on mediaeval morality plays. The collaboration did not go particularly well: Sullivan wrote that Pinero and Comyns Carr were "gifted and brilliant men, with no experience in writing for music",Entry from Sullivan's diary, quoted in Jacobs p. 379 and, when he asked for alterations to improve the structure, they refused.Jacobs, p. 379 Sullivan's score, moreover, was too serious for the Savoy audiences' tastes.Coles, Clifton. "The Beauty Stone: Notes on the Text", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 2004, accessed 14 July 2008 The opera was a critical failure and did not attract a following, running for only seven weeks.Jacobs, pp. 379–80 In 1899, to benefit "the wives and children of soldiers and sailors" on active service in the Boer War, Sullivan composed the music of a jingoistic song, "The Absent-Minded Beggar", to a text by Rudyard Kipling, which became an instant sensation and raised an unprecedented £250,000 from performances and the sale of sheet music and related merchandise.Fowler, Simon. "The Absent-Minded Beggar": an introduction, Fowler History site, 2001, accessed 7 September 2011 In The Rose of Persia (1899), Sullivan returned to his comic roots, writing to a libretto by Basil Hood that combined an exotic Arabian Nights setting with plot elements of The Mikado. Sullivan's tuneful score was well received, and the opera proved to be his most successful full-length collaboration apart from those with Gilbert.Jacobs, pp. 387, 391–92 Another opera with Hood, The Emerald Isle, quickly went into preparation, but Sullivan died before it could be completed.Jacobs, p. 400   Having suffered from long-standing recurrent kidney disease that made it necessary, from the 1880s, for him to conduct sitting down, Sullivan died of heart failure, following an attack of bronchitis, at his flat in London on 22 November 1900.Jacobs, Arthur.  "Sullivan, Sir Arthur Seymour (1842–1900)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, September 2004 (online edition, May 2006), accessed 8 July 2008  His unfinished opera, The Emerald Isle, was completed by Edward German and produced in 1901. His Te Deum Laudamus, written to commemorate the end of the Boer War, was performed posthumously.Howarth, Paul. "Te Deum Laudamus, A Thanksgiving for Victory", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 12 January 2010, accessed 28 August 2011 A monument in the composer's memory featuring a weeping Muse was erected in the Victoria Embankment Gardens in London and is inscribed with Gilbert's words from The Yeomen of the Guard: "Is life a boon? If so, it must befall that Death, whene'er he call, must call too soon". Sullivan wished to be buried in Brompton Cemetery with his parents and brother, but by order of the Queen he was buried in St. Paul's Cathedral."Funeral of Sir Arthur Sullivan", The Times, 28 November 1900, p. 12 In addition to his knighthood, honours awarded to Sullivan in his lifetime included Doctor in Music, honoris causa, by the universities of Cambridge (1876) and Oxford (1879); Chevalier, Légion d'honneur, France (1878); The Order of the Medjidieh conferred by the Sultan of Turkey (1888); and appointment as a Member of the Fourth Class of the Royal Victorian Order (MVO) in 1897.The London Gazette, 9 July 1897, p. 54 In all, Sullivan's artistic output included 23 operas, 13 major orchestral works, eight choral works and oratorios, two ballets, one song cycle, incidental music to several plays, numerous hymns and other church pieces, and a large body of songs, parlour ballads, part songs, carols, and piano and chamber pieces. Sullivan's operas have often been adapted, first in the 19th century as dance piecesSands, John. "Dance Arrangements from the Savoy Operas", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, 4 April 2010 and in foreign adaptations of the operas themselves. Since then, his music has been made into ballets (Pineapple Poll (1951) and Pirates of Penzance - The Ballet! (1991)) and musicals (The Swing Mikado (1938), The Hot Mikado (1939) and Hot Mikado (1986), Hollywood Pinafore (1945), The Black Mikado (1975), etc.). His operas are not only frequently performed, but also frequently parodied, pastiched, quoted and imitated in comedy routines, advertising, law, film, television, and other popular media.Bradley, Chapter 1 His legacy, apart from writing the Savoy operas and his other works, is felt perhaps most strongly today through his influence on the American and British musical theatre. The innovations in content and form of the works that he and Gilbert developed directly influenced the development of the modern musical throughout the 20th century.Downs, Peter. "Actors Cast Away Cares", Hartford Courant, 18 October 2006 Jones, J. Bush. Our Musicals, Ourselves, pp. 10–11, 2003, Brandeis University Press: Lebanon, N.H. (2003) 1584653116  In addition, biographies and scholarly articles and analyses continue to be written about Sullivan's life and work.e.g., Jacobs and Ainger  Sullivan never married, but he had serious love affairs with several women. The first was with Rachel Scott Russell (1845–1882), the daughter of the engineer John Scott Russell. Sullivan was a frequent visitor at the Scott Russell home in the mid-1860s, and by 1865 the affair was in full bloom. Rachel's parents did not approve of a possible union with a young composer with uncertain financial prospects, but the two continued to see each other covertly. At some point in 1868, Sullivan started a simultaneous (and secret) affair with Rachel's sister Louise (1841–1878). Both relationships had ceased by early 1869.Ainger, p. 87; Jacobs, pp. 53–55.  Some two hundred love letters from the two women have survived; they are excerpted in detail in Wolfson. Sullivan's longest love affair was with the American socialite, Fanny Ronalds, a woman three years his senior, who had two children.Ainger, pp. 128–29 He met her in Paris around 1867, and the affair began in earnest soon after she moved to London permanently in 1871. A contemporary account described Fanny Ronalds this way: "Her face was perfectly divine in its loveliness, her features small and exquisitely regular. Her hair was a dark shade of brown – châtain foncé [deep chestnut] – and very abundant ... a lovely woman, with the most generous smile one could possibly imagine, and the most beautiful teeth."Quoted in Jacobs, p. 88 Sullivan called her "the best amateur singer in London".Ainger, p. 167  She often performed Sullivan's songs at her famous Sunday soirees. She became particularly associated with "The Lost Chord", singing it both in private and in public, often with Sullivan accompanying her.Ainger, p. 135 When Sullivan died, he left her the autograph manuscript of that song, along with other bequests.Ainger, p. 390 Ronalds was separated from her American husband, but they never divorced. Social conventions of the time compelled Sullivan and Ronalds to keep their relationship private. In his diary, he would refer to her as "Mrs. Ronalds" when he saw her in a public setting, but "L. W." (for "Little Woman") or "D. H." (possibly "Dear Heart") when they were alone together, often with a number in parentheses indicating the number of sexual acts completed.Jacobs, p. 161Ainger, p. 177 Ronalds was apparently pregnant on at least two occasions and procured abortions in 1882 and 1884.Jacobs, pp. 178, 203–04; and Ainger, pp. 210 and 237–38 Sullivan had a roving eye, and his diary records the occasional quarrel when Ronalds discovered his other liaisons, but he always returned to her. She was a constant companion up to the time of Sullivan's death, but around 1889 or 1890, the sexual relationship seems to have ended.Ainger, pp. 306 and 342 He started to refer to her in the diary as "Auntie",Jacobs, p. 295 and the tick marks indicating sexual activity were no longer there, although similar notation continued to be used for his relationships with other women who have not been identified, and who were always referred to by their initials. In 1896, the 54-year-old Sullivan proposed marriage to the 22-year-old Violet Beddington (1874–1962), but she refused him.Ainger, pp. 364–65; Beddington later married Sydney Schiff, who used elements of her relationship with Sullivan in his 1925 novel Myrtle. She was the younger sister of Ada Beddington. See Whitworth, Michael H. "Schiff, Sydney Alfred (1868–1944)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, January 2008, accessed 26 October 2012.  See also Usher, David A. "In Search of Miss Violet: The Personal Journey of a Gilbert & Sullivan Devotee", GASBAG, Friends of the University of Michigan Gilbert and Sullivan Society, Volume XLIV, No. 1, Issue 259, Summer 2013, pp. 24–29Jacobs, p. 371  Sullivan loved to spend time in France (both in Paris and the south of France), where his friends ranged from European royalty to the composer Claude Debussy, and where the casinos enabled him to indulge his passion for gambling.Young, p. 250 He enjoyed hosting private dinners and entertainments at his home, often featuring famous singers and well-known actors.Grossmith, George. "Sir Arthur Sullivan: A Personal Reminiscence", The Pall Mall Magazine, February 1901, reprinted at The Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 6 October 2011 In 1865 he was initiated into Freemasonry and was Grand Organist of the United Grand Lodge of England in 1887 during Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee.Beresiner, Yasha. Freemasons-freemasonry.com "Gilbert and Sullivan: Musical Masons", Pietre-Stones Review of Freemasonry, 18 December 2007 Sullivan's talent and native charm gained him the friendship of many not only in the musical establishment, such as Grove, Chorley, and Herman Klein, but also in society circles, such as Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh.Jacobs, p. 73 and passim Sullivan enjoyed playing tennis although, according to George Grossmith, "I have seen some bad lawn-tennis players in my time, but I never saw anyone so bad as Arthur Sullivan". Sullivan was devoted to his parents, particularly his mother, with whom he corresponded regularly, when away from London, until her death in 1882. Henry Lytton wrote, "I believe there was never a more affectionate tie than that which existed between [Sullivan] and his mother, a very witty old lady, and one who took an exceptional pride in her son's accomplishments.Lytton, Henry (1922). "Leaders of the Savoy", Secrets of a Savoyard, the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 20 August 2011 Sullivan was also very fond of his brother Fred, whose acting career he assisted whenever possible, and of Fred's children.Hayes, passim When Fred died at the age of 39, he left his pregnant wife, Charlotte, with seven children under the age of 14. After Fred's death, Arthur visited the family often and became guardian to all of the children.Hayes, pp. 6–7 In late 1883, Charlotte and six of her children emigrated to Los Angeles, California, leaving the oldest boy, "Bertie", in Sullivan's sole care. Despite his reservations about the move to America, Sullivan paid all the costs and gave substantial financial support to the family.Hayes, p. 9 Only a year later, in January 1885, Charlotte died, leaving the six children to be raised mostly by her brother and the older girls.Hayes, pp. 10–12. One of the children, Frederic Richard Sullivan, went on to become a well-known film director. From June to August 1885, after The Mikado premiered, Sullivan visited the family in Los Angeles and took them on a sightseeing trip of the American west.Hayes, pp. 14–22 Throughout the rest of his life, and in his will, he contributed financially to Fred's children, continuing to correspond with them and to be concerned with their education, marriages and financial affairs. Bertie stayed with his uncle Arthur for the rest of the composer's life.Hayes, pp. 23–32 Three of Sullivan's cousins, the daughters of his uncle John Thomas Sullivan, performed with D'Oyly Carte: Rose, Jane ("Jennie") and Kate Sullivan, the first two of whom used the stage surname Hervey. Kate was a chorister who defected to the Comedy Opera Company's rival production of H.M.S. Pinafore, where she had the opportunity to play Josephine in 1879.Stone, David. Kate Sullivan, Who Was Who in the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, 27 January 2007, accessed 29 August 2010 Jennie was a D'Oyly Carte chorister for fourteen years.Stone, David. Jennie Hervey, Who Was Who in the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, 8 August 2002, accessed 29 August 2010 Rose took principal roles in many of the companion pieces that played with the Savoy operas.Stone, David. Rose Hervey, Who Was Who in the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, 7 August 2002, accessed 29 August 2010See Sullivan family tree in appendix to Jacobs  Sullivan told an interviewer, Arthur Lawrence, "I don't use the piano in composition – that would limit me terribly".  Sullivan explained that his process was not to wait for inspiration, but "to dig for it. ...  I decide on [the rhythm] before I come to the question of melody. ... I mark out the metre in dots and dashes, and not until I have quite settled on the rhythm do I proceed to actual notation."Lawrence, Arthur H. "An Illustrated interview with Sir Arthur Sullivan, Part II", The Strand Magazine, vol. xiv, No. 84, December 1897 Sullivan's text setting, compared with that of his 19th century English predecessors or his European contemporaries, was "vastly more sensitive. ... Sullivan's operatic style attempts to create for itself a uniquely English text-music synthesis", and, in addition, by adopting a conservative musical style, he was able to achieve "the clarity to match Gilbert's finely honed wit with musical wit of his own."Fink, Robert. "Rhythm and Text Setting in The Mikado", 19th Century Music, vol. XIV No. 1, Summer 1990 In composing the Savoy operas, Sullivan wrote the vocal lines of the musical numbers first, and these were given to the actors. He, or an assistant, improvised a piano accompaniment at the early rehearsals; he wrote the orchestrations later, after he had seen what Gilbert's stage business would be.Ainger, p. 138 He left the overtures until last and often delegated their composition, based on his outlines, to his assistants,"Sir Arthur Sullivan", interviewed by The Pall Mall Gazette, 5 December 1889 often adding his suggestions or corrections.Hughes, p. 130 Those Sullivan wrote himself include Thespis,Rees, p. 79 Iolanthe, Princess Ida, The Yeomen of the Guard, The Gondoliers, The Grand Duke and probably Utopia Limited.Hughes, pp. 130–41 Most of the overtures are structured as a potpourri of tunes from the operas in three sections: fast, slow and fast. Those for Iolanthe and The Yeomen of the Guard are written in a modified sonata form. The overtures from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas remain popular, and there are many recordings of them.Shepherd, Marc. "Overtures", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 2005, accessed 21 August 2011 Sullivan invariably conducted the operas on their opening nights.Rollins and Witts, pp. 3–18 In 1957, a review in The Times gave this rationale for "the continued vitality of the Savoy operas": "[T]hey were never really contemporary in their idiom. ...  Gilbert and Sullivan's [world was] an artificial world, with a neatly controlled and shapely precision. ...  For this, each partner has his share of credit.  The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert's plots is perfectly matched by his language. ...  [Of] equal importance ... Gilbert's lyrics almost invariably take on extra point and sparkle when set to Sullivan's music. ... Sullivan's tunes, in these operas, also exist in a make-believe world of their own. ... [He is] a delicate wit, whose airs have a precision, a neatness, a grace, and a flowing melody"."The Lasting Charm of Gilbert and Sullivan: Operas of an Artificial World", The Times, 14 February 1957, p. 5 The Musical Times noted that Sullivan's tunes, at least in the comic operas, appeal to the professional as much as to the layman: his continental contemporaries such as Debussy, Leoncavallo and Saint-Saëns held the Savoy operas in high regard.De Ternant, Andrew. "Debussy and Others on Sullivan", The Musical Times, 1 December 1924, pp. 1089–90  Hughes writes, "When Sullivan wrote what we call 'a good tune' it was nearly always 'good music' as well. Outside the ranks of the giants there are few other composers of whom the same could be said." Although his melodies sprang from rhythm, some of his themes may have been prompted by his chosen instrumentation or his harmonic techniques.Hughes, p. 129 In the comic operas, where many numbers were in verse-plus-refrain form, Sullivan frequently produced two climaxes in the melodic line. Hughes instances "If you go in" (Iolanthe) as a good example. In Hughes's view, though most of the tunes in the Savoy operas are good ones, Sullivan rarely reached the same class of excellence elsewhere when he had no librettist to feed his imagination.Hughes, p. 128 Even so, on those occasions when Gilbert wrote in unvaried metre, Sullivan often followed suit and produced phrases of simple repetition, such as "Love is a plaintive song" (Patience) and "A man who would woo a fair maid" (The Yeomen of the Guard).Hughes, p. 125 Sullivan's deliberate echoes of other composers are covered below under "Musical Quotations", but other echoes may not have been conscious: Hughes cites the concluding bars of "Tell a tale of cock and bull" from The Yeomen of the Guard as an example of Handel's influence, and another critic, Edward Greenfield, found a theme in the slow movement of the Irish Symphony "an outrageous crib" from Schubert's Unfinished Symphony.Hughes, p. 152Greenfield, Edward. "Sullivan – Symphony in E major", The Gramophone, February 1969, p. 61 Sullivan was trained in the classical style, and contemporary music did not greatly attract him.Hughes, p. 44 Harmonically his early works used the conventional formulae of Auber, Donizetti, Balfe and Schubert.  Later he drew on Gounod and Bizet. Mendelssohn's influence, conspicuous in early works, appears intermittently in later ones. As a contemporary writer observed, Sullivan draws on these various influences while remaining recognisably himself.Hughes, p. 49 Yet, in the field of harmony, Hughes writes, Sullivan remained an eclectic: "He had easily recognisable habits but his style never achieved individuality". In general, Sullivan preferred to write in major keys. In the Savoy operas, there are only eleven substantial numbers wholly in a minor key (less than 5% of the musical numbers), and even in his serious works the major prevails.Hughes, p. 52 Examples of Sullivan's rare excursions into minor keys include the long E minor melody in the first movement of the Irish Symphony, "Go away, madam" in the Act I finale of Iolanthe (echoing Verdi and Beethoven) and the funeral march in the Act I finale of The Yeomen of the Guard. Sullivan was happy on occasion to use chords traditionally considered technically incorrect. When reproached for using consecutive fifths in Cox and Box, he replied "if 5ths turn up it doesn't matter, so long as there is no offence to the ear." Hughes comments that harmonic contrast in the Savoy works is enhanced by Sullivan's characteristic modulation between keys, as in "Expressive glances" (Princess Ida), where he smoothly negotiates E major, C sharp minor and C major, or "Then one of us will be a queen" (The Gondoliers), where he writes in F major, D flat major and D minor.Hughes, p. 59 Both HughesHughes, p. 48 and Jacobs in Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians comment adversely on Sullivan's over-use of tonic pedals, usually in the bass, which Hughes attributes to "lack of enterprise or even downright laziness". Another Sullivan trademark criticised by Hughes is the repeated use of the chord of the augmented fourth at moments of pathos.Hughes, pp. 47–48 In his serious works, Sullivan attempted to avoid harmonic devices associated with the Savoy operas, with the result, according to Hughes, that The Golden Legend is a "hotch-potch of harmonic styles".Hughes, p. 66  Despite his thorough contrapuntal training in London and Leipzig, as well as his experience as a church organist, Sullivan rarely composed fugues. Hughes cites examples from the Epilogue to The Golden Legend and Victoria and Merrie England.Hughes, pp. 73–74 In the Savoy operas, fugal style is reserved for making fun of legal solemnity in Trial by Jury and Iolanthe (e.g., the Lord Chancellor's leitmotif in the latter). Less formal counterpoint is employed in numbers such as "Brightly Dawns our Wedding Day" (The Mikado) and "When the Buds are Blossoming" (Ruddigore).Hughes, p. 75 Sullivan's best known contrapuntal device was "the simultaneous presentation of two or more distinct melodies previously heard independently".Hughes, p. 78 He was not the first composer to combine themes in this way, but it became a characteristic feature of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas.  Sometimes the melodies were for solo voices, as in "Once more the face I loved so well" (The Zoo), and "I am so proud" (The Mikado), which combines three melodic lines;Hughes, pp. 79 and 81–82 other examples are in choruses, where typically a graceful tune for the ladies is combined with a robust one for the men. Examples include "When the Foeman bares his steel" (The Pirates of Penzance), "In a doleful train" (Patience) and "Welcome, gentry" (Ruddigore).Hughes, pp. 79–80 At other times, notably in "How beautifully blue the sky" (The Pirates of Penzance), one theme is given to the chorus and the other to solo voices.Rees, p. 80 Gervase Hughes concludes his chapter on Sullivan's orchestration: "[I]n this vitally important sector of the composer's art he deserves to rank as a master."Hughes, p. 118 Sullivan was a competent player of at least four orchestral instruments (flute, clarinet, trumpet and trombone) and a technically highly skilled orchestrator. Though sometimes inclined to indulge in grandiosity when writing for a full symphony orchestra, he was adept in using smaller forces to the maximum effect.Hughes, pp. 96–97 Percy Young writes that orchestral players generally like playing Sullivan's music: "Sullivan never asked his players to do what was either uncongenial or impracticable."Young, p. 178Hughes, p. 96  Sullivan's orchestra for the Savoy Operas was typical of any other pit orchestra of his era: 2 flutes (+ piccolo), oboe, 2 clarinets, bassoon, 2 horns, 2 cornets, 2 trombones, timpani, percussion and strings.  According to Geoffrey Toye, the number of players in the Savoy orchestra was originally 31."The Savoy Opera Revival", The Observer, 28 September 1919 Sullivan argued hard for an increase in the pit orchestra's size, and starting with The Yeomen of the Guard, the orchestra was augmented with a second bassoon and a bass trombone.Hughes, p. 108 Sullivan generally orchestrated each score at almost the last moment, noting that the accompaniment for an opera had to wait until he saw the staging, so that he could judge how heavily or lightly to orchestrate each part of the music.Findon, p. 107 For his large-scale orchestral pieces, Sullivan added a second oboe part, sometimes double bassoon and bass clarinet, more horns, trumpets, tuba, and sometimes an organ and/or a harp.  Many of these pieces used very large orchestras.Eden and Saremba, Appendix: The orchestration of Sullivan's major works One of the most recognisable features in Sullivan's orchestration is his woodwind scoring. Hughes especially notes Sullivan's clarinet writing, exploiting all registers and colours of the instrument, and his particular fondness for oboe solos. For instance, the Irish Symphony contains two long solo oboe passages in succession, and in the Savoy operas there are many shorter examples.Hughes, p. 104 In the operas, and also in concert works, another characteristic Sullivan touch is his fondness for pizzicato passages for all the string sections. Most of the operas have at least one number that Hughes calls "virtually a pizzicato ostinato"; he instances "Kind sir, you cannot have the heart" (The Gondoliers), "Free from his fetters grim" (The Yeomen of the Guard) and "In vain to us you plead" (Iolanthe).Hughes, p. 117  Sullivan often quoted or imitated famous themes and passages from well-known tunes or parodied the styles of famous composers.Cooper, Martin. "Sullivan", Opera News, April 1960, pp. 8–12  He also liked to evoke familiar musical styles, such as his madrigals in The Mikado, Ruddigore and The Yeomen of the Guard, glees in H.M.S. Pinafore and The Mikado and gavottes in Ruddigore and The Gondoliers.Hughes, pp. 144–45 In The Sorcerer, there is a country dance in "If you'll marry me".  In Ruddigore, the sailor character dances a hornpipe, while in The Mikado, Sullivan quotes a Japanese war song in "Miya Sama".  Sullivan's 1882 trip to Egypt inspired musical styles in his later opera, The Rose of Persia."The Rose of Persia; Or, the Story-teller and the Slave", The Era, 2 December 1899, p. 14 Of the sextette "I hear the soft note" in Patience, Sullivan said to the singers, "I think you will like this. It is Dr. Arne and Purcell at their best."Grossmith, George. "Sir Arthur Sullivan",  The Pall Mall Magazine, vol. 23, No. 94, February 1901, p. 255 In early pieces, imitated Mendelssohn (for example in his incidental music for The Tempest), Auber in his Henry VIII music and Gounod in The Light of the World. In his comic operas, Sullivan followed Offenbach's lead in parodying the idioms of French and Italian opera, such as those of Donizetti, Bellini and Verdi.Hughes, pp. 150–51, and Jacobs, p. 52 His music also shows the influence of Handel, Schubert and, conspicuously in the fairy music in Iolanthe, Mendelssohn.Hughes, pp. 46–47 and 152 The then-popular composer Michael Balfe is parodied in The Sorcerer and The Pirates of Penzance, and "Twenty Love Sick Maidens" imitates William Vincent Wallace's "Alas Those Chimes" from Maritana.Lamb, Andrew.  "Comic Opera Goes Latin-American, 1890–92, Part 2", The Gaiety, Winter 2006, p. 33  The sextet "A Nice Dilemma" in Trial by Jury parodies "D'un pensiero" in Bellini's La sonnambula.Scherer, Barrymore Laurence. "Gilbert & Sullivan, Parody's Patresfamilias", The Wall Street Journal, 23 June 2011  Other examples of opera parody include Mabel's aria "Poor Wand'ring One" in The Pirates of Penzance and the duet "Who are you, sir?" from Cox and Box.Hughes, pp. 151 and 80 In H.M.S. Pinafore, the whispered plans for elopement in "This very night" parody the conspirators' choruses in Verdi's Il trovatore and Rigoletto, and the octet, "Farewell, my own," evokes the ensemble "Mag der Himmel euch vergeben" in Flotow's Martha and such concerted numbers as the sextet in Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor. The mock-jingoistic "He is an Englishman" in H.M.S. Pinafore and choral passages in The Zoo satirise patriotic British tunes such as Arne's "Rule, Britannia!". The chorus "With catlike tread" from Pirates is an imitation of Verdi's "Anvil Chorus" from Il trovatore.Hughes, pp. 150–51 In Princess Ida, there is a strong Handelian flavour to Arac's song in Act III ("This helmet, I suppose"), and the Act II quartet "The world is but a broken toy" has been called "Gounodesque".Hope-Wallace, Philip. "Princess Ida Returns", The Manchester Guardian, 28 September 1954, p. 5  Florian's statement in "Gently, Gently": "In this college, useful knowledge/Everywhere one finds" is a quotation from Chopin's Waltz No. 5 in A-flat Major (Op. 42).Bamberger, David. The Palace Peeper, vol. 73, No. 10, p. 4 (June 2009), The Gilbert and Sullivan Society of New York In The Gondoliers, there are the Spanish cachucha, the Italian saltarello and tarantella, and the Venetian barcarolle. Hughes compares "Here is a case unprecedented" from The Gondoliers to the Act II quintet from Bizet's Carmen.Hughes, p. 91 In "A more humane Mikado", when the Mikado mentions "Bach interwoven with Spohr and Beethoven", the clarinet and bassoon quote the fugue subject of Bach's Fantasia and Fugue in G minor.Hughes, p. 109 The Golden Legend shows the influence of Liszt and Wagner.Young, p. 221, and Burton, Nigel. "100 Years of a Legend", The Musical Times, 1 October 1986 pp. 554–57 Sullivan frequently gives groups or locations their own characters and motifs. Hughes points to the striking difference between the male chorus of rustics in The Sorcerer and the eponymous gondoliers, and between the fairies in Iolanthe and the undergraduates in Princess Ida. H.M.S Pinafore retains "a nautical tang throughout", and in The Yeomen of the Guard the Tower of London is evoked continually by its own motif.Hughes, p. 143 A distinctive four-note theme is associated with the character Iolanthe, and the Fairy Queen's music parodies that of Wagnerian heroines such as Brünnhilde.Williams, p. 217  This use of Wagnerian leitmotif technique is repeated and developed further in Ivanhoe.Young, p. 223  Sullivan's critical reputation has undergone extreme changes since he first came to prominence in the 1860s.  At first, critics were struck by his potential, and he was hailed as the long-awaited great English composer.Jacobs, pp. 28 and 42 His incidental music to The Tempest received an acclaimed premiere at the Crystal Palace just before Sullivan's 20th birthday in April 1862. The Athenaeum wrote:  His Irish Symphony of 1866 won similarly enthusiastic praise, but as Arthur Jacobs notes, "The first rapturous outburst of enthusiasm for Sullivan as an orchestral composer did not last."Jacobs, p. 48 A comment typical of those that followed him throughout his career was that "Sullivan's unquestionable talent should make him doubly careful not to mistake popular applause for artistic appreciation."Jacobs, p. 49 When Sullivan turned to comic opera with Gilbert, the serious critics began to express disapproval. Peter Gammond writes of "misapprehensions and prejudices, delivered to our door by the Victorian firm Musical Snobs Ltd. ... frivolity and high spirits were sincerely seen as elements that could not be exhibited by anyone who was to be admitted to the sanctified society of Art."Gammond, p. 137 As early as 1877 The Figaro wrote that Sullivan "has all the ability to make him a great composer, but he wilfully throws his opportunity away. ... He possesses all the natural ability to have given us an English opera, and, instead, he affords us a little more-or-less excellent fooling."The Figaro, quoted in Allen, pp. 49–50 Few critics denied the excellence of Sullivan's theatre scores. The Theatre wrote that "Iolanthe sustains Dr Sullivan's reputation as the most spontaneous, fertile, and scholarly composer of comic opera this country has ever produced."Beatty-Kingston, William. The Theatre, 1 January 1883, quoted in Baily, p. 246 However, comic opera, no matter how skilfully crafted, was viewed as an intrinsically lower form of art than oratorio. The Athenaeum's review of The Martyr of Antioch declared: "[I]t is an advantage to have the composer of H.M.S. Pinafore occupying himself with a worthier form of art."25 October 1880, quoted in Jacobs, p. 149 Sullivan's knighthood in 1883 gave the serious music critics further ammunition. The Musical Review of that year wrote:  Even Sullivan's friend George Grove wrote: "Surely the time has come when so able and experienced a master of voice, orchestra, and stage effect – master, too, of so much genuine sentiment – may apply his gifts to a serious opera on some subject of abiding human or natural interest." Sullivan finally redeemed himself in critical eyes with The Golden Legend in 1886. The Observer hailed it as a "triumph of English art"."Leeds Music Festival", The Observer, 17 October 1886, p. 6 The World called it "one of the greatest creations we have had for many years. Original, bold, inspired, grand in conception, in execution, in treatment, it is a composition which will make an "epoch" and which will carry the name of its composer higher on the wings of fame and glory. ... The effect of the public performance was unprecedented."Quoted in Harris, p. IV Hopes for a new departure were evident in the Daily Telegraph's review of The Yeomen of the Guard (1888), Sullivan's most serious opera to that point: "[T]he music follows the book to a higher plane, and we have a genuine English opera, forerunner of many others, let us hope, and possibly significant of an advance towards a national lyric stage."Quoted in Allen, p. 312 Sullivan's only wholly serious opera, Ivanhoe (1891), received generally favourable reviews, although J. A. Fuller Maitland, in The Times, expressed reservations, writing that the opera's "best portions rise so far above anything else that Sir Arthur Sullivan has given to the world, and have such force and dignity, that it is not difficult to forget the drawbacks which may be found in the want of interest in much of the choral writing, and the brevity of the concerted solo parts."Quoted in Jacobs, p. 331 Sullivan's 1898 ballet Victoria and Merrie England was one of several late pieces that won praise from most critics:  Although the more solemn members of the musical establishment could not forgive Sullivan for writing music that was both comic and accessible, he was, nevertheless, "the nation's de facto composer laureate".Maine, Basil. Elgar, Sir Edward William, 1949, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography archive, accessed 20 April 2010  In the decade after his death, Sullivan's reputation sank considerably. In 1901, Fuller Maitland took issue with the generally laudatory tone of most of the obituaries: "Is there anywhere a case quite parallel to that of Sir Arthur Sullivan, who began his career with a work which at once stamped him as a genius, and to the height of which he only rarely attained throughout life? ...  It is because such great natural gifts – gifts greater, perhaps, than fell to any English musician since ... Purcell – were so very seldom employed in work worthy of them."Fuller Maitland, J. A. "Obituary", Cornhill Magazine, March 1901, pp. 300–09 Edward Elgar, to whom Sullivan had been particularly kind,Young, p. 264 rose to Sullivan's defence, branding Fuller Maitland's obituary "the shady side of musical criticism ... that foul unforgettable episode."Quoted in Young, p. 264 Fuller Maitland's followers, including Ernest Walker, also dismissed Sullivan as "merely the idle singer of an empty evening".Hughes, p. 6 As late as 1966, Frank Howes, music critic of The Times condemned Sullivan for a "lack of sustained effort ... a fundamental lack of seriousness towards his art [and] inability to perceive the smugness, the sentimentality and banality of the Mendelssohnian detritus ... to remain content with the flattest and most obvious rhythms, this yielding to a fatal facility, that excludes Sullivan from the ranks of the good composers."Howes, p. 54  Thomas F. Dunhill wrote a in 1928 that Sullivan's "music has suffered in an extraordinary degree from the vigorous attacks which have been made upon it in professional circles. These attacks have succeeded in surrounding the composer with a kind of barricade of prejudice which must be swept away before justice can be done to his genius."Dunhill 1928, p. 13 Sir Henry Wood continued to perform Sullivan's serious music."Sir Henry Wood Jubilee Concert at Albert Hall", The Times, 6 October 1938, p. 10 In 1942, Wood presented a Sullivan centenary concert at the Royal Albert Hall, but it was not until the 1960s that Sullivan's music other than the Savoy operas began to be widely revived and reassessed. In 1960 Hughes published the first full-length book about Sullivan's music "which, while taking note of his weaknesses (which are many) and not hesitating to castigate his lapses from good taste (which were comparatively rare) [attempted] to view them in perspective against the wider background of his sound musicianship." The work of the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society, founded in 1977, books about Sullivan by musicians such as Young (1971) and Jacobs (1986), and a growing number of recordings have contributed to the re-evaluation of Sullivan's serious music. The Symphony in E had its first professional recording in 1968, and a considerable number of Sullivan's non-Gilbert works have since been recorded.Shepherd, Marc. "Discography of Sir Arthur Sullivan", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 10 July 2010, accessed 5 October 2014 Scholarly critical editions of a growing number of Sullivan's works have been published. In a 2000 article in The Musical Times, Nigel Burton wrote:  On 14 August 1888, George Gouraud introduced Thomas Edison's phonograph to London in a press conference, including the playing of a piano and cornet recording of Sullivan's "The Lost Chord", one of the first recordings of music ever made."Historic Sullivan Recordings", the Gilbert and Sullivan Archive, accessed 30 June 2007 Sullivan was invited to a party on 5 October 1888 given to demonstrate the technology. After dinner, he recorded a speech to be sent to Edison, saying, in part:  These recordings were discovered in the Edison Library in New Jersey in the 1950s:      The first commercial recordings of Sullivan's music, beginning in 1898, were of individual numbers from the Savoy operas. In 1917, the Gramophone Company (also known as HMV) produced the first album of a complete musical score of a Gilbert and Sullivan opera, The Mikado, followed by recordings of eight more of the operas.Shepherd, Marc. "The First D'Oyly Carte Recordings", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 18 November 2001, accessed October 5, 2014 Electrical recordings of the complete musical scores of most of the operas were then issued by the Gramophone Company and Victor Talking Machine Company beginning in the late 1920s. These recordings were supervised by Rupert D'Oyly Carte.Shepherd, Marc. "G&S Discography: The Electrical Era", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 18 November 2001, accessed 5 October 2014 The D'Oyly Carte Opera Company continued to produce recordings until 1979.Shepherd, Marc. "The D'Oyly Carte Stereo Recordings", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 24 December 2003, accessed 5 October 2014 Between 1988 and 2003, after the company was revived, it recorded seven of the operas.Shepherd, Marc. "G&S Discography: The Digital Era", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 27 August 2002, accessed 5 October 2014 Other recordings have been made by opera companies such as Gilbert and Sullivan for All,Shepherd, Marc. "The Gilbert and Sullivan for All recordings", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, accessed 8 September 2011, accessed 5 October 2014 and Australian Opera, among many others.Shepherd, Marc. "G&S on Film, TV and Video", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 18 November 2001, accessed 5 October 2014 Ad hoc companies of operatic singers conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent in the 1950s and 60sShepherd, Marc. "G&S Discography: The Stereo Era", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, accessed 18 November 2001, accessed 5 October 2014 and Sir Charles Mackerras in the 1990s have made audio sets of several Savoy operas, and in the 1980s Alexander Faris conducted video recordings of most of the operas with casts including show-business stars as well as professional singers.Shepherd, Marc. "The Brent Walker Videos", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 5 April 2003, accessed 5 October 2014 The long-running Broadway production of The Pirates of Penzance presented by Joseph Papp, re-orchestrated with synthesisers replacing the strings, was put on record in 1981.Shepherd, Marc. "Papp's Pirates (1980)", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 5 April 2003, accessed 11 September 2011 Since 1994, the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival has released numerous professional and amateur CDs and videos of its productions and other Sullivan recordings.Gilbert and Sullivan Festival CDs and DVDs from Musical Collectables, accessed 8 September 2011 Sullivan's non-Savoy works were infrequently recorded until the 1960s. A few of his songs were put on disc in the early years of the 20th century, including versions of "The Lost Chord" by Enrico Caruso and Clara Butt.HMV 78 discs 02397 and 03151 The first of many recordings of the Overture di Ballo was made in the 1940s.Columbia DX1200 Sullivan's Irish Symphony was first recorded in 1968 under Sir Charles Groves.EMI LP ASD 2435 Since then, much of Sullivan's serious music and his operas without Gilbert have been recorded. Some highlights includeShepherd, Marc. "Major Works of Sir Arthur Sullivan, by Genre", the Gilbert and Sullivan Discography, 3 April 2009, accessed 5 October 2014 the cello concerto by Julian Lloyd Webber (1986),EMI LP DS-38318 The Golden Legend under Ronald Corp (2001)Hyperion CD set 67280 and Ivanhoe, under the conductor David Lloyd-Jones (2009).Chandos CD set CHAN 10578 Mackerras's Sullivan ballet score, Pineapple Poll, has received many recordings since its premiere in 1951, four of them conducted by Mackerras.EMI LPs 33SX1001; ESD7028; and CFP40293; and Decca LP SXDL7619    Cartoon from Punch in 1880.  It was premature in declaring Sullivan's knighthood, but was accompanied by a parody version of "When I, good friends" from Trial by Jury that summarised Sullivan's career to that date: &nbsp; "A HUMOROUS KNIGHT." ["It is reported that after the Leeds Festival Dr. Sullivan will be knighted." Having read this in a column of gossip, a be-nighted Contributor, who has "the Judge's Song" on the brain, suggests the following verse, adapted to probabilities.] As a boy I had such a musical bump, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And its size so struck Mr. HELMORE, That he said, "Though you sing those songs like a trump, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You shall write some yourself that will sell more." So I packed off to Leipsic, without looking back, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And returned in such classical fury, That I sat down with HANDEL and HAYDN and BACH,— &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And turned out "Trial by Jury." &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; But W.S.G. he jumped for joy &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As he said, "Though the job dismay you, Send Exeter Hall to the deuce, my boy; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It's the haul with me that'll pay you." And we hauled so well, mid jeers and taunts, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That we've settled, spite all temptations, To stick to our Sisters and our Cousins and our Aunts,— &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And continue our pleasant relations. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Yet I know a big Duke, and I've written for Leeds, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And I think (I don't wish to be snarly), If honour's poured out on a chap for his deeds, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I'm as good-—come, as MONCKTON or CHARLEY! So the next "first night" and the Opéra C., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let's hope, if you're able to find him, You'll cry from the pit, "There's W. S. G. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the stalls,—with a KNIGHT behind him!'" List of musical compositions by Arthur Sullivan Extensive list of links to Sullivan works and materials, Gilbert and Sullivan Archive Sir Arthur Sullivan Society Obituary notices in The Times Detailed 1879 article about Sullivan Analysis of Sullivan music and legacy "Sir Arthur Sullivan Buried in St. Paul's" The New York Times, 1900 "The Other Side of Sullivan", lecture by Robin Wilson, 2008. Sullivan scores at The Morgan Library
