    The big things of Australia are a loosely related set of large structures, some of which are novelty architecture and some are sculptures. There are estimated to be over 150 such objects around the country, the first being the Big Scotsman in Medindie, Adelaide, which was built in 1963. There are big things in every state in Australia. Most big things began as tourist traps found along major roads between destinations. The big things have become something of a cult phenomenon, and are sometimes used as an excuse for a road trip, where many or all big things are visited and used as a backdrop to a group photograph. Many of the big things are considered works of folk art and have been heritage-listed.   Name Location Built Size Notes Image Giant Mushroom Belconnen 1998 Located in the Belconnen Fresh Food Markets, the Giant Mushroom shelters a children's playground.  It was officially launched in 1998 by the ACT Chief Minister. Giant Owl Belconnen 2011 Located at the main entrance to Belconnen town centre, the statue cost $400,000 and was built by Melbourne sculptor Bruce Armstrong. Name Location Built Size Notes Image Big Ant Broken Hill 1980 A bull ant sculpture designed by artist Pro Hart, which was erected in 1980 and originally stood at the Stephens Creek Hotel. It was moved to its current location, next to the Tourist Information Centre in Broken Hill, after being donated to the city in 1990. Big Apple Batlow Located in the middle of an orchard about 3&nbsp;km north of Batlow, without public access. Only its top is visible from Batlow-Tumut Road, as it is largely blocked by apple trees. Big Apple Yerrinbool Visible from the Hume Highway Big Avocado Duranbah Located at Tropical Fruit World. The Big Axe Kew 1979 Located alongside the Kew Visitor Information Centre.  The original sculpture was replaced in 2002 as a result of ant induced damage. Big Ayers Rock North Arm Cove 1990 This 1/40 scale model of Uluru was formerly an attraction at Leyland Brothers World, and now forms the roof of the Rock Restaurant. Technically not a "Big Thing" (as it is substantially smaller than the item it is modelled on), the Rock Restaurant is loosely grouped with the big things as an object of roadside art. Big Banana Coffs Harbour 1964 Sometimes claimed to be the first Big Thing in Australia. The Big Banana tourist complex includes a banana-themed souvenir shop, tours of the surrounding plantation and an indoor ski slope. The Big Beer Can Cobar 1990 The Big Beer Can has a Tooheys New design, and is located above the entrance to the Grand Hotel. Big Bench Broken Hill September 2002 As part of the Landscapes and Backgrounds exhibition, a 2.5 times scale park bench was constructed on the top of the Line of Lode, which is a high hill of mine deposits in the centre of the city of Broken Hill. The Big Blue Heeler Muswellbrook 2001  high Located adjacent to the town information centre. The Big Bogan Nyngan 2015  high The Big Bogan is the brainchild of Reverend Graham McLeod from Nyngan's St Mark's Anglican Church. Big Bottles Mangrove Mountain and Hanwood Big Bowl Lake Cathie, New South Wales 1975 A 10-foot high replica of a lawn bowl, consisting of one-and-a-half tonnes of steel and concrete. Big Bull Wauchope The Big Bull was pulled down in October 2007. Big Bunch of Bananas Coffs Harbour Formerly located in Sawtell, the Big Bunch of Bananas was relocated when the Pacific Highway bypassed the town and now lie just to the south of Coffs Harbour. The Big Bicycle Chullora 1997 The bicycle built by Jonh Ridley, Andy Lugiz and Phillip Becker adorns the entrance to the Chullora Waste Transfer Station, Chullora. Big Cheese Bodalla The Big Cheese is located at the former Bodalla cheese factory on the Princes Hwy, Bodalla. It is as of 2013 closed. Big Cherries Young Originally located off Short Street, but moved with the tourist information centre to Lovell Street to the old railway station. Big Chook Moonbi 1970s Big Chook Mount Vernon Big Flower Ourimbah Big Funnel Web Spider Jamberoo, New South Wales 2015 The Big Funnel Web Spider was built at Jamberoo Action Park located 20 minutes south of Wollongong and is a steel, fibreglass and concrete structure 420 times larger than a female Sydney funnel-web spider. It was awarded a Guinness World Record as the Largest Spider Sculpture in August 2015. The Big Gold Panner Bathurst 1979 Located in front of the Gold Panner Motor Inn. The Big Gold Pick and Pan Grenfell 2005 Pick 4 m, Pan 3 m (diam) Located between the Goods Shed and historic Station Building at the old Railway Station precinct, just off the northern end of West Street. The Big Golden Guitar Tamworth 1988 Modelled on the Golden Guitar trophies given to winners at the Country Music Awards of Australia ceremony night during the Tamworth Country Music Festival. The Big Knight Knockrow At the entrance to the Macadamia Castle, a nut-themed park and store. The Big Hammer Mudgee Located at Fairview Artspace in Mudgee is a Tig Crawley's artwork "Water Hammer". This installation is located in the front garden and has beautiful view of Mudgee and the countryside The Big Headphones Newcastle 2015 Located on Darby St, this fully operational pair of headphones was designed by Mark Tisdell and built in collaboration with Tom Ireland (fabrication and design detailing), Sean Bell (graphics), Adrian Garner (electrical engineering), Brad Phillips and Rhian Leek (architectural design), with the support of the Darby Street Traders Group. The Big Kookaburra Kurri Kurri 2009 Sculpture by Chris Fussell. It is located in Rotary Park. The Big Lamb Guyra 1988 Erected by the town and district to promote the lamb and potato industries in New England.  The lamb is stood over a potato plant. The Big Merino Goulburn 1985 A sculpture of a merino ram, built in 1985. Goulburn and The Big Merino were bypassed by the Hume Highway in 1992, leading to a reduction in visitor numbers. On 26 May 2007, Rambo (as the Merino is locally known) was relocated by low-loader to a new home within sight of the highway. The Big Miner's Lamp Lithgow Big Mosquito Hexham 1993 "Ossie the Mossie" at the Hexham Bowls Club is modelled on the local Ochlerotatus alternans mosquito species, known as "Hexham Greys". It includes illuminated eyes which switch on at night. Big Murray Cod Tocumwal 1967 Located near the corner of Delinquin Rd and Murray St, near the Murray River. Big Orange Tenterfield The Big Oyster Taree The Big Playable Guitar Narrandera 1991 The largest playable guitar in the world. Ploddy the Dinosaur Somersby 1963 Situated in the Australian Reptile Park, and commissioned by the Park's founder, Eric Worrell. The concrete structure, based on the shape of a Diplodocus, is 30 metres long and weighs almost 100 tonnes."Ploddy the Dinosaur". Australian Reptile Park. Retrieved 1 September 2015. The Big Potato Robertson 1977 A giant potato constructed by farmer Jim Mauger in 1977. The Big Poo Kiama 2002 The Big Poo was built by local residents as a protest against Sydney Water's decision not to reuse waste water in the area. Built from foam, it was unveiled by Ian Cohen on 29 April 2002. The Big Prawn Ballina 1989 On 24 September 2009, Ballina Shire Council voted to allow the demolition of the Big Prawn, but this permission was never acted upon. Bunnings Warehouse purchased the site, and the Prawn, in August 2011, and stated their intention to retain and refurbish the Prawn as part of the redevelopment.  The prawn now sits on a stand next to the entrance of the Bunnings Warehouse carpark. Big Rabbit Trap Albert 2013 A Big Rabbit Trap, located on the roof of the Rabbit Trap Hotel. The Big Rocket Moree 2009  high The Big Rocket, launched during the International Year of Astronomy and the 40th anniversary of the first manned moon landing, contains two slides and a space-themed command centre playground. Big Rubik's Cube Maroubra 2008 A cement cube painted as per a Rubik's Cube on top of a storm water drain on Maroubra Beach. The Big Slurpee Coffs Harbour 2009 Dismantled in 2009.Slurpee News: The Big Slurpee at www.slurpee.com.au The Big Soldier Uralla In front of Hassett's Military Museum. The Big Spider Urana 2009 The Big Spider (named "Not so Itsy" by the artist) was created by Andrew Whitehead, a nearby resident of the town. The spider commemorates the local football club, who were, for many years, known as the Spiders, and is built from a range of materials – including a wash tub and a hot dog muffler. The World's Biggest Sundial Singleton 1987 A 25-foot high sundial presented as a gift from Lemington Mine, to honour the occasion of the Australian Bicentenary. At the time of its creation, it was recognised by the Guinness Book of World Records as the world's largest sundial, and still lays claim to being the largest one-piece sundial in the Southern hemisphere. Big Tennis Racquet Barellan 3 October 2009  long Built in honour of Evonne Goolagong, who grew up in Barellan. The Big Trout Adaminaby 1973 Designed by Andy Lomnici, the Big Trout is located in the town of Adaminaby, near Lake Eucumbene in the Snowy Mountains. Opened in 1973, the trout is built from fiberglass over a steel frame.Clark, Big Things, p. 136. The Big Trout Oberon The Big Turtle Forster Carved from timber, the big turtle is located behind the main street of Forster on a riverside boardwalk. The Big Ugg Boots Thornton 20 April 2015 Mortels Sheepskin Factory is home to The Big Ugg Boots. These big ugg boots are 13 times the size of a women's US size 8 ugg boot. The Big Ugg Boots are located in the Hunter Region of NSW. The Big Windmill Coffs Harbour 1972 Although work started on the Big Windmill in 1972, the death of Franz De Kever in 1974 delayed completion until 1982, as it was not until the site was purchased by Hans Eecen that work was able to resume. The Big Windmill has since changed hands, and is now operated by Mark and Jodi Taylor. The site includes a 41-room motel and a restaurant. The Big Wine Bottle Pokolbin 1998 Located at the Hunter Valley Gardens. The neck forms a chimney for an open fire contained within. The Big Wine Cask Mourquong Located at the Constellation Stanley winery *Edit - as of Dec 2013 no longer there. Building is, but has been painted out and is not accessible* Name Location Built Size Notes Image The Big Boxing Crocodile Humpty Doo 1988 Outside the United fuel station (formerly known as the Bush Shop) on the Arnhem Highway at Humpty Doo. The Boxing Crocodile was built by Ray Park in 1988"The Big Boxing Crocodile, Humpty Doo NT". Our Naked Australia. 19 May 2014. on a commission by Ray Whear who was the owner of The Bush Shop at that time. It was created to celebrate Australia winning the America's Cup in 1983 and to assist with attracting tourism to the area. The Boxing Crocodile is Humpty Doo's equivalent to the Boxing Kangaroo. The Big Aboriginal Hunter Anmatjere Community Located approx. 150&nbsp;km north of Alice Springs at the Aileron roadhouse/ caravan park. The Big Jumping Crocodile Mary River Located at Mary Rivernear the entrance to Kakadu National Park. The Big Stockwhip Acacia The Big Stubbie Larrimah Name Location Built Size Notes Image The Big Apple Thulimbah 1978 From the "Landmark Legends of Stanthorpe", "The original Big Apple, a Granny Smith, lived at the petrol station at Applethorpe from 1978. The steel and fibreglass sculpture stands 4m tall and the apple is 4.5m in diameter. It was crafted by local artisan Johnny Ross. It went into temporary retirement in 2003 when the Applethorpe site was redeveloped. After a brief facelift, the re-grafted apple emerged as a Royal Gala apple slightly north of town at Thulimbah. Its new home is Vincenzo’s at the Big Apple, which is situated on the opposite side of the new England Highway to Suttons Apple Orchard & Cidery."Clark, Big Things, p. 1-3. Big Apple Acacia Ridge Located at 1102 Beaudesert Road. Big Banana North Mackay 1987 Clark, Big Things, p. 4-5. Big Barrel Bundaberg 2005 The Barrel is an interpretive visitors' centre, gift and bottle shop for Bundaberg Brewed Drinks, located at 147 Bargara Road. According to a commemorative plaque inside the Barrel, it was opened by the Hon. Mr. Mark Vaile MP, Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the Nationals on Friday, 18 November 2005. The Big Barramundi Normanton 1995 Clark, Big Things, p. 8. The Big Barramundi Daintree 1986 Clark, Big Things, p. 6-7. Big Bolt and Nut Roma Located in front of Banks Bolts and Fastners at 177–183 Raglan Street. The Big Boot / Shoe Chermside 1960s A large shoe mounted on the roof of a car sales yard on the corner of Rode and Gympie Roads (621 Gympie Road). The boot originally came from a boot and footwear factory on the corner of Hale and Caxton Streets in Paddington, operated by the Morris family in 1960. In 1976, the factory became a restaurant called the Spaghetti Emporium, and the boot remained on the roof there until it was brought to its current location in the late 1970s as a marker for Boots Camping. The Big Brolga Townsville 1988 Clark, Big Things, p. 9. Big Bulls Rockhampton 1978 There were initially six bulls at many of the entrances into the city.  Five of the bulls were created by sculptor Hugh Anderson.Clark, Big Things, p. 10-13. The Big Cane Toad Sarina 1983 “Buffy”, short for the cane toad’s scientific name ‘Bufo Marinus’, is located in Broad Street, Sarina.  Built out of Paper Mache in 1983, for a float in the Apex Sugar Festival Parade, the Sarina council eventually cast the Big Toad in fiberglass to become a permanent fixture in the town’s centre. Clark, Big Things, p. 14-15. The Big Captain Cook Cairns 1972 Modelled on the explorer Captain Cook.Clark, Big Things, p. 16-17. The Big Cassowary Mission Beach Built by Darryl Lourigan.Clark, Big Things, p. 18-19. The Big Cockatoo Mossman In front of the Mossman Hotel and Holiday Villas. The Big Cow Yandina 1976 Clark, Big Things, p. 20-21. Big (Mud) Crab Cardwell 1986 Built by Terry Tebble, senior preparator at the Queensland museum.Clark, Big Things, p. 22-23. Located at Muddies Restaurant in Cardwell North. The original mold is kept at NatureWorks, a company near Samford, QLD. Big Crab Miriam Vale 1979 Located at the Shell petrol station and roadhouse on the corner of Dougall Street and Roe Street (Bruce Highway). Created by proprietor Lex Milner, who owned the service station at the time and wanted to promote his tasty mud crab sandwiches.Clark, Big Things, p. 24-25. Big Crocodile Daintree 2001 Clark, Big Things, p. 26. Big Crocodile Hartley's Creek 1984 Also known as 'Big Ted', this Big Thing is at Hartley's Creek Adventures, a crocodile farm with over 3000 crocs. Big Ted is a life-sized replica of one shot by Krys Pawlowski near Karumba in 1957.Clark, Big Things, p. 27. Big Crocodile Normanton 1996 An accurate artist's impression of the largest recorded saltwater crocodile ever killed. "Krys the Savannah King" was shot in 1957 by Krystina Pawlowski on the banks of the Norman River.Clark, Big Things, p. 28-29. Big Deck Chair Winton 2002 Located at the Royal Theatre, an open air picture show, on Elderslie Street. The chair was donated in April 2005 by the Free Masons Taskforce Victoria. Claimed to be the World's largest, but claim has not been verified. The Big Dinosaur Ballandean 1998 Also known as 'The Big Triceratops' or 'Fruitisforus', this large fibreglass triceratops was originally used as a float in the 1998 Apple & Grape Festival. After the festival, residents placed it on the roadside to help sell fruit for a local fundraiser, and it became a popular landmark. The triceratops was refurbished in 2009 to repair weather damage and then returned to its original post in front of the Ballandean railway station. The Big Dugong Rockhampton 1992 Located at the Rockhampton Dreamtime Cultural Centre.Clark, Big Things, p. 30. The Big Easel Emerald 1999 The Big Easel, located off Capricorn Highway in Morton Park, holds a  reproduction of one of Van Gogh's Sunflower paintings.The Big Easel Van Gough ProjectClark, Big Things, p. 31-33. Big Golf Ball Broadbeach The Big Golden Gumboot Tully 2003 Clark, Big Things, p. 34-37. The Big Gun Underwood A  field gun mounted on top of a two-story fruit shop.  The gun was in a metal scrap yard that occupied the site in the 1960s before the shops and offices were built in the 70s. The Big Hard Rock Guitar Surfers Paradise 1996 The iconic large guitar that fronts every Hard Rock Cafe.  The Surfers Paradise location was established 22 March 1996.Hard Rock Cafe Website – Surfers Paradise Location The Big Macadamia Nut Nambour 1978 Six years after the Big Pineapple opened the owners built the Big Macadamia nut. Once part of the "Nut Country Tour", the building was eventually converted to the "Rainforest Creatures of the Night" display in 2000.  The building has since closed, and remains unused as of June 2013.Clark, Big Things, p. 38-39. The Big Mandarin Mundubbera 1983 Clark, Big Things, p. 40-41. The Big Mango Bowen 2002 The Big Mango stands at the tourist information centre in Bowen.Clark, Big Things, p. 42-43. In February 2014, the Mango was temporarily "stolen" by restaurant chain Nando's as a publicity stunt. The Big Marlin Cairns 1980 Clark, Big Things, p. 44. Big Meat Ant Augathella 2011 A giant meat ant sculpture commissioned by Murweh Shire Council, in the hope of attracting "thousands of tourists". Big Merino Blackall 1983 Clark, Big Things, p. 45. The Big Miner Rubyvale 1983 In front of the Bobby Dazzler mine.  Missing its left hand in May 2012.  Hand repaired and statue repainted prior to December 2012.Clark, Big Things, p. 46-47. The Big Mower Beerwah 1974 Clark, Big Things, p. 48. The Big Ned Kelly Maryborough The Big Ned Kelly stands in front of the Ned Kelly Motel and service station. Built by Dat Romano.Clark, Big Things, p. 49. The Big Orange Gayndah 1977 Clark, Big Things, p. 50-51. The Big Orange Lockyer Valley Corner of Lake Clarendon Way and Crowley Vale Road. The Big Paperclip West End, Brisbane This was a public sculpture that once stood on the lot next to Paul's dairy factory on Montague Road. The area is now part of the ramp onto the Go Between bridge, and the fate of the sculpture is unknown. Last photo located on the internet was dated 2007. The Big Peanut Tolga 1977 Clark, Big Things, p. 52. The Big Pelican Noosaville Mounted on a motorised float in parkland next to the Noosa River.Clark, Big Things, p. 53. The Big Pick, Shovel and Sieve Sapphire 1999 Located in front of the Blue Gem Store Van Park. Built by Barry Richardson and David Gould.Clark, Big Things, p. 54. The Big Pie Yatala late 1970s  diameter Mounted atop a  pole next to the car park of the Yatala Pies drive-through pie shop.Clark, Big Things, p. 55. Big Pineapple Gympie 1971  high Formerly located next to a service station on the Bruce Highway, the Gympie Big Pineapple was demolished in 2008 during redevelopment of the site.Clark, Big Things, p. 56-57. The Big Pineapple Woombye 1971 The Big Pineapple is a tourist attraction on the Sunshine Coast in South East Queensland, Australia.  It is 16 metres high and is claimed to be the world's largest pineapple, gaining this title after a large pineapple-shaped water tower in Hawaii was dismantled in 1993 (see List of World's Largest Roadside Attractions). The pineapple was originally opened on 15 August 1971, and is situated on a 165-hectare site in Woombye.Clark, Big Things, p. 58-61. The Big Pumpkin Beaudesert The Big Red Elephant Lockyer Valley Located at 4138 Warrego Highway in Hatton Vale.  Part of the "Jumbo" shopping centre. The Big Redback Eight Mile Plains, Brisbane 1996 Clark, Big Things, p. 62. The Big Rig Roma over  tall A tourist attraction which commemorates the finding of oil in Roma. The Big Rum Bottle Bundaberg 1988 The bottle started out as the Bundaberg Rum Company's pavilion at World Expo 88 in Brisbane, and is now located outside the visitors' centre at the Bundaberg Distillery.  Since then there have been several copies of the bottle which are found in various locations throughout Queensland, one being outside of the Sundowner Saloon in Haigslea.Clark, Big Things, p. 63. The Big Sapphire Anakie 1982 Located in front of the Big Sapphire and Gemfield Information Centre at 1 Anakie Road, which was closed as of May 2012.Clark, Big Things, p. 64-65. The Big Sapphire Ring Sapphire 1984 Located in front of Pat's Gems. Built by Victor Saunders.Clark, Big Things, p. 66-67. The Big Sausage King Centenary Heights, Toowoomba The Big Sausage King sits on the roof of Gray’s Modern Meat Mart in Centenary Heights. In 2010 it was stolen, and in spite of  sausage reward from the store and an additional $500 being offered by radio station Triple M, it was eleven months before it was discovered in a local quarry. The Big Shell Tewantin 1960s The Big Shell is the entrance to a Hawaiian / tropical lifestyle store, full of little treasures and shells. The Shell is now under the third owner.Clark, Big Things, p. 68. The Big Spanner Sapphire 1982 The first big thing in the area of Rubyvale and Sapphire, and was built by Allen May.Clark, Big Things, p. 69. The Big Strawberry Elimbah Outside Rolin Farms, a strawberry and orchid farm near Caboolture. The Big Stubby Tewantin 1966 No longer there. Queensland's first big thing, built by George Clifford out of 17,000 empty stubby bottles.Clark, Big Things, p. 70. The Big Whale Kinka Beach Built by Kevin Logan.Clark, Big Things, p. 71. Name Location Built Size Notes Image The Australian Farmer (also known as the Big Farmer) Wudinna 2008 Taking 17 years to develop from the initial proposal to the final unveiling, the Australian Farmer, located in the town of Wudinna in South Australia, was carved by artist Marijan Bekic and his son David between 2007 and 2009. Representing the early settlers of the region, the work stands at  in height, and was carved out of approximately  of local granite. The Big Ant Poochera 2008 Situated at The Poochera Roadhouse on Highway 1, South Australia. The Big Bee Kingscote The Big Bob-tail Lizard Port Lincoln Outside the Aboriginal Arts Centre The Big Cherries Pages Flat Located at Fleurieu Cherries on Pages Flat Road (B34) in Pages Flat, SA The Big Church Block Bottle McLaren Vale, South Australia 2010 The Big Church Block Bottle, named Our Work of Art, is a  high replica bottle of Wirra Wirra, Church Block wine. The bottle was constructed to launch the Melbourne Food and Wine Festival in March 2010, located at Southbank in Melbourne, Victoria. The bottle was located in Melbourne from 14 March 2010 through to 19 March 2010 before it was re-located to the Wirra Wirra vineyard in McLaren Vale, South Australia, during April 2010. The bottle was designed in five sectional pieces, made from steel framework covered in wire mesh. The mesh has been cladded entirely by recycled corks. Each cork was individually drilled and threaded onto elastic before being cable tied around each section of the bottle. The Big Dice Barrier Highway The Big Dice consist of six concrete blocks piled into a small pyramid. They can be found between Yunta and Mannahill, just off the Barrier Highway.Clark, Big Things, p. 173. The Big Galah Kimba 1993 Residing at the "Halfway Across Australia Tourist Shop" at Kimba, South Australia, the Big Galah was built from fiberglass over a steel frame by Robert Venning, and was opened in 1993. Modelled on the Galahs that frequent the region, it stands at  high and  wide, and weighs in the vicinity of .Clark, Big Things, pp. 174–175. The Big Kangaroo Border Village 1986 Also known as "Rooey II", the Big Kangaroo can be found at Border Village in South Australia, located just shy of the border with West Australia. Made from papier-mâché and fiberglass over a steel frame, from a design by Bill Metheral, Rooey was intended to capitalise on traffic journeying to Perth for the America's Cup, and was opened in 1986.Clark, Big Things, pp. 176–179. The Big Lobster Kingston SE 1979 Known locally as "Larry", the Big Lobster was designed and built by Paul Kelly (who also designed the Big Scotsman) as a means of attracting attention to the visitor centre and restaurant at which it is located. It was built in six months out of a steel frame with a fiberglass shell. The size is said to have been an error: the original plans were drawn in feet, but the designer misinterpreted them to be metres.Clark, Big Things, pp. 180–183. Map the Miner Kapunda 1988 Named Map Kernow, the "son of Cornwall", Map the Miner represents the Cornish miners who once worked at the town of Kapunda. Standing at the southern end of the town, the work was built by Ben van Zetten and opened on 5 June 1988.Clark, Big Things, pp. 171–172.  The statue was destroyed by a fire in 2006, but has since been rebuilt. The Big Olive Tailem Bend 2009 The Big Olive was constructed to attract tourists to The Big Olive processing plant and visitors' center. Located just outside Tailem Bend, it consists of two olives – one green and one black – which together stand at  and weigh over . The olives were constructed out of fiberglass by The Newell Group, and were placed on the site in April 2005. The Big Orange Berri 1980 Located in the South Australian Riverland, the Big Orange was designed by Adelaide-based architect John Twopenny. It is constructed with fiberglass panels covering a steel frame, with the entire structure weighing in the vicinity of .Clark, Big Things, p. 185. The structure consists of four levels, with a function room on the first floor, a souvenir shop and cafe on the second, a mural depicting the local scenery on the third, and a lookout on the fourth.Clark, Big Things, p. 186. *Edit Dec 2013, now closed but can still get photos from the road* The Big Oyster Ceduna 1992 As with the Big Pelican, the Big Oyster was originally built as a float for a local festival – in this case, Ceduna's annual Oysterfest. Built by Leon Veerhuis out of ferro-concrete, it was retired from parade duties in 1994.Clark, Big Things, p. 189. It is located next to an information booth on Eyre Highway  just north of Ceduna. The Big Pelican Loxton 1992 The Big Pelican was originally constructed as a float for a local Mardi Gras in 1979. After being employed for this purpose on a number of occasions, including once in Adelaide, the papier-mâché structure was remodelled, and, in 1992, it was overlaid with fibreglass. Today it can be found at the Loxton Caravan Park. Another Big Pelican Loxton 2015 This Big Pelican was carved from a single tree. It includes depictions of a pelican as well as an Indigenous and a European child holding a fish together. It was created by Ants Redgum Gallery and unveiled in August 2015. It is located in Jubilee Park on the Princes Highway (B1) The Big Ram Karoonda 2003 The Big Ram in Karoonda recognises the importance of the sheep industry in the region. Instigated by the Karoonda Development Group and located on the Railway Lawns, the Big Ram is  high and  long, and is built from concrete. It was completed in 2003. The Big Rocking Horse Gumeracha 1981 Part of a complex that includes a wooden toy factory and a wildlife park, the Big Rocking Horse in the Adelaide Hills stands at over 18 metres tall and weighs more than 25 tonnes. Designed by David McIntosh and John Twopenny (the latter also designed The Big Orange), it took eight months to build at a cost of over $100,000. The steel structure incorporates three viewing platforms.Clark, Big Things, pp. 191–192. The Big Scotsman Medindie (Adelaide) 1963 The Big Scotsman, affectionately known as 'Scotty', was erected in 1963 and thus predated the Big Banana by a year. Located at Scotty's Motel on the corner of Main North Road and Nottage Terrace in the inner-city suburb of Medindie, the Big Scotsman was designed by Paul Kelly, who later went on to build the Big Lobster.Clark, Big Things, pp. 182, 193. The Big Teddy Bear Spencer Hwy, between Maitland and Minlaton, South Australia The Big Winch Coober Pedy 1986 The Big Winch acknowledges Coober Pedy's opal-mining industry. Built by Klaus Wirries in the 1970s, the original Big Winch was destroyed in 1986 and rebuilt shortly thereafter.Clark, Big Things, p. 194. The Big Wombat Bookabie Situated at Scotdesco Aboriginal Community (Tjilkaba),  on Highway 1, South Australia. Link To Scotdesco Page and The Big Wombat The Big Yabby Clayton 1973 Built in 1973 by Henry Jones, the Big Yabby resides at the Murray River town of Clayton, and originally sat outside his family's Yabby City Restaurant. While the concrete yabby remains, the restaurant has since changed both owners and name to become Sails at Clayton, and yabbies are no longer on the menu.As of 2015, the Yabby is no longer there.Clark, Big Things, p. 195. Name Location Built Size Notes Image Big Apple Spreyton The Big Cherry Latrobe Adjacent to the Bass Highway at The Cherry Shed. The Big Coffee Pot Deloraine Constructed by the addition of a spout and handle to a grain silo. The Big Penguin Penguin 1975 Constructed from fibro cement to mark the centenary of the proclamation of the township of Penguin. Unveiled 25 October 1975. The Big Platypus Latrobe The Big Rock Lobster Stanley Mounted on the roof of Hursey Seafoods. The Big Slide Rule University of Tasmania (Hobart) Located in the School of Mathematics and Physics. The Big Spud Sassafras The Big Tasmanian Devil Mole Creek Standing at the entrance to the Trowunna Wildlife park and Tasmanian Devil research centre. The Big Thumbs Up Scottsdale Scottsdale, Tasmania. The Big Wickets Westbury Located at the front of the local cricket pitch, commemorating locally born player Jack Badcock. Name Location Built Size Notes Image Big Abalone Laverton North A fibre glass replica of an abalone that used to sit atop a 5.3 m tower at the Plummer Road premises of the Australian Abalone Exports office. Once it was illuminated, and rotated slowly. It was removed after the business ceased operating. Big Apple Bacchus Marsh The Apple was removed from display at the road side when the adjacent fruit shop closed down.  It used to sit behind a fence next to a dumpster however this has now been removed.  There is now a concrete version that is not quite as grand. Big Lizzie Red Cliffs 1915 - 1916 The Big Apple Gladysdale The fiberglass Big Apple hangs from a pole outside the Gladysdale Primary School which is the home of the annual Gladysdale Apple and Wine Festival.  After sustaining damage from vandals some time ago it has been restored to its former glory by a local builder and aircraft engineer.  Organisers of the festival are planning to unveil the restored apple at the 2014 event on 4 May 2014. The Big Cherry Glenrowan Owners of the property removed the Big Cherry in 2010/11. Big Cigar Churchill Replica of Sir Winston Churchill's cigar, after whom the town is named. Big Coffee Maker Brunswick Located outside Georges Gourmet Coffee, 340 Victoria Street, Brunswick, Melbourne. Big Cows Newhaven The Big Cows are located outside the Phillip Island Chocolate Factory. Big Dead Fish Fish Creek Positioned on the roof of the Fishy Pub. Fairfield Industrial Dog Object (FIDO) Fairfield 2000 Created in 2000 and positioned next to Fairfield Railway Station. The Big Flower Yarra Junction March 2014 The Big Flower sits atop a florist on Warburton Highway, Yarra Junction The Big Golf Ball Clayton South The Big Golf Ball is found at the Spring Valley Golf Course in Clayton South. Big Hens Meredith Adjacent to the Midland Highway outside a battery egg farm. Big Koala Cowes The Big Koala can be found next to Rusty Water Brewery and Restaurant on Phillip Island Road. The Giant Koala Dadswells Bridge 1989 The Giant Koala is  north-west of Stawell in the small township of Dadswells Bridge. The Koala is  high, and weighs . It is made of bronze set on a steel frame.  The sculptor is Mr Ben Van Zetton who was hired in 1988 to design and construct the piece. Big Lizard Marysville The Big Blue-Tongued Lizard takes pride of place in Gallipoli Park, Marysville Big Mallee Bull Birchip Big Mallee Root Ouyen The Big Mallee Root is an actual mallee root rather than an oversized replica like most of Australia's big things. It is on display in a park. Big Miner Ballarat opened 1 December 2006 Located at Gold Rush Golf on the Western Highway (M8) on the eastern side of Ballarat with the Big Ned Kelly. “The Big Miner stands as a tribute to the tens of thousands of gold prospectors who frequented regional Victoria during the second half of the nineteenth century. The statue stands 8 meters tall (6 meters of statue on a 2 metre base). It has been hand sculptured from polystyrene and has a 1.5 ton steel frame. The 2 metre high concrete base is approximately 15 tons. It was designed by Wayne Johnston of 3D Theme Concepts and sculptured by Steve Bristow.  Ballarat Mayor, David Vendy, officially unveiled the statue on 1 December 2006.” Big Ned Kelly Ballarat Located at Gold Rush Golf on the Western Highway (M8) on the eastern side of Ballarat with the Big Miner. Giant Murray Cod Swan Hill Located at the train station. The Big Ned Kelly Glenrowan A tribute to the bushranger Ned Kelly. The Big Pheasant Tynong The Big Pheasant sits at the entrance to Gumbuya Park. It was the victim of an attack by vandals in October 2011,Gumbuya Park landmark blown up and was restored to its previous condition by April 2012. The world's largest rolling pin Wodonga The Big Rolling Pin sits atop a bakery and spins. Big Smoke Myrtleford No longer painted as the 'Big Smoke' due to closure of cigarette factory, located on Myrtleford–Yackandandah Road Big Strawberry Koonoomoo Located at the Big Strawberry store on the corner of Goulburn Valley Hwy and Cobram-Koonoomoo Rd. Big Tap Cowes The Big Tap suspended in the air above A Maze'N Things on Phillip Island Road. Big Watermelon Wantirna South Situated outside a fruit and vegetable store on High Street Road Big Wave Newhaven The Big Wave is a popular photo point, where you can ride the wave. Located at the Island Surf Experience, Phillip Island Road, Newhaven. Big Wine Bottle Rutherglen A water tower in the shape and colour of a wine bottle. Located on the corner of Campbell St and Hopetoun Rd. Big Wool Bales Hamilton The Giant Worm Bass Located on the Bass Highway, the Big Worm contains interactive displays and one can walk inside.  There are also animals to view and a gift shop on the property. Public Purse Melbourne Located at the North-West end of the Bourke Street Mall outside the GPO. Giant Pocket Watch Melbourne Name Location Built Size Notes Image Big Apple Donnybrook Big Banana Carnarvon World's Tallest Bin Kalgoorlie 1980 About  tall Located on Hannan Street Bert Bolle Barometer Denmark 1985 Over  A working water barometer being the largest barometer in the world, recognised by the Guinness Book of Records. Built in the Netherlands by Bert Bolle and donated to the community of Denmark in 2007. The barometer was considered a monument and carried the name ’The Bert Bolle Barometer’. It was set up in The Barometer Tower in the Denmark Visitor Centre, but was removed in 2011 Big Bobtail Kalamunda, Perth 2012 Carved out of rammed earth by Yagan memorial artist Roman Antoniuk, and modelled on a  blue-tongued skink that lives on the block. The Big Camera Meckering A building housing a museum of photography and a huge collection of cameras Cow on the Corner Brunswick Junction The Big Crocodile Wyndham 1987 The Big Lobster Dongara The Big Marron Between Denmark and Walpole Known as "Rex of the River", based on the local species of freshwater crayfish, the Cherax tenuimanus. The Big Mushroom Balingup Situated in the gardens of the Old Cheese Factory, Nannup Road, Balingup. Big Orange Harvey  diameter The Big Prawn Learmonth Situated outside the MG Kailis dock, 20&nbsp;km south of Exmouth. The Giant Ram Wagin Leeuwin Way Whale Eucla Situated in the carpark of the Eucla roadhouse, Eyre Highway. The Big Wheelbarrow Port Hedland Situated at the entrance to the Wedgefield Industrial Area between Port Hedland and South Hedland. The London production of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert: the Musical references the Big Prawn, Big Merino, Big Pineapple and the Big Banana. The ABC produced a documentary titled Big Things as part of its programme The Big Picture. The National Museum in Canberra has a comprehensive multimedia exhibit displaying many big things. In 2007 Australia Post issued a set of 50c postage stamps commemorating five of the most iconic big things: The Big Banana at Coffs Harbour (NSW) The Big Golden Guitar at Tamworth (NSW) The Big Lobster at Kingston SE (SA) The Big Merino at Goulburn (NSW) The Big Pineapple at Nambour (QLD) Danny Wallace mentions Australia's big things in his book Yes Man. Travel writer Bill Bryson details his visit to the Big Lobster and the Big Bull in his book Down Under / In a Sunburned Country In the Australian comedy film Young Einstein, when the titular character books into a hotel the desk clerk asks if he's "Here to see the Big Bed?" English stand-up comedian Ross Noble, visits many of Australia's big things during his 2009 tour Ross Noble's Australian Trip. Dunedoo, New South Wales, which decided against "The Big Dunny" List of world's largest roadside attractions New Zealand's big things Novelty architecture Scutt, Craig. The Little Book of Big Aussie Icons. Five Mile Press. ISBN 9781741786002. Big Things of Australia, Postie Notes. Map of big things
