 Bob Jones University (BJU) is a private non-denominational Protestant university in Greenville, South Carolina, known for its conservative cultural and religious positions. It has approximately 2,800 students, and is accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. In 2008, the university estimated the number of its graduates at 35,000. The university's athletic teams compete in Division I of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and are collectively known as the Bruins.   During the Fundamentalist-Modernist controversy of the 1920s, Christian evangelist Bob Jones, Sr. grew increasingly concerned about the secularization of higher education and the influence of religious liberalism in denominational colleges. Children of church members were attending college, only to reject the faith of their parents. Jones later recalled that in 1924, his friend William Jennings Bryan had leaned over to him at a Bible conference service in Winona Lake, Indiana, and said, "If schools and colleges do not quit teaching evolution as a fact, we are going to become a nation of atheists."Turner, 19 While he himself was not a college graduate, Jones grew determined to found a college, and on September 12, 1927, he opened Bob Jones College in Panama City, with 88 students. Jones said that although he had been averse to naming the school after himself, his friends overcame his reluctance "with the argument that the school would be called by that name because of my connection with it, and to attempt to give it any other name would confuse the people."Turner, 23–25. In the earliest years of the college, important contributions were made to its stability by J. Floyd Collins and Eunice Hutto. Johnson, 180, 198. Bob Jones took no salary from the college and helped support the school with personal savings and income from his evangelistic campaigns. Both time and place were inauspicious. The Florida land boom had peaked in 1925, and a hurricane in September 1926 further reduced land values. The Great Depression followed hard on its heels. Bob Jones College barely survived bankruptcy and its move to Cleveland, Tennessee in 1933. However, Jones's move to Cleveland proved extraordinarily advantageous.  Bankrupt at the nadir of the Depression, without a home, and with barely enough money to move its library and office furniture, the college became in thirteen years the largest liberal arts college in Tennessee. With the enactment of GI Bill at the end of World War II, the college was virtually forced to seek a new location and build a new campus.Turner, 68, 101–02. Though he had served as Acting President as early as 1934, Jones' son, Bob Jones, Jr. officially became the school's second president in 1947 just before the college moved to Greenville, South Carolina, and became Bob Jones University.Turner, 57–58. On the move to Greenville see John Matzko, "'This Is It, Isn't It, Brother Stone?' The Move of Bob Jones University from Cleveland, Tennessee, to Greenville, 1946–47", South Carolina Historical Magazine, 108 (July 2007), 235–256. The former Cleveland campus currently serves as the home of Lee University, an institution supported by the Church of God. In Greenville, the university more than doubled in size within two years and started its own radio station, film department, and art gallery—the latter of which eventually became one of the largest collections of religious art in the Western Hemisphere.Hilde S. Hein, Public Art: Thinking Museums Differently (Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2006), xxix. During the late 1950s, BJU and alumnus Billy Graham, who had attended Bob Jones College for one semester and received an honorary degree from the university in 1948, engaged in a controversy about the propriety of theological conservatives cooperating with theological liberals to support evangelistic campaigns, a controversy that widened an already growing rift between separatist fundamentalists and other evangelicals. Negative publicity caused by the dispute precipitated a decline in BJU enrollment of about 10% in the years 1956–59, and seven members of the university board (of about a hundred) also resigned in support of Graham, including Graham himself and two of his staff members. When, in 1966, Graham held his only American campaign in Greenville, Graham had only three campaigns scheduled that year: London, Berlin, and Greenville, South Carolina. the university forbade any BJU dormitory student from attending under penalty of expulsion."No Bob Jones University dormitory student will be permitted to go to a single meeting of the Greenville crusade. No Bob Jones University adult student, if he is married or lives in town, may attend the crusade and remain as a student." Bob Jones, Jr., Chapel talk, February 8, 1965, Mack Library Archives, quoted in . An exception was made for Bob Jones Academy students who lived in town with their parents. Enrollment quickly rebounded, and by 1970, there were 3300 students, approximately 60% more than in 1958. In 1971, Bob Jones III became president at age 32, though his father, with the title of Chancellor, continued to exercise considerable administrative authority into the late 1990s.Turner, 205. Although BJU had admitted Asians and other ethnic groups from its inception, it did not enroll Africans or African-American students until 1971. From 1971 to 1975, BJU admitted only married blacks, although the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had already determined in 1970 that "private schools with racially discriminatory admissions policies" were not entitled to federal tax exemption. In 1975, the University Board of Trustees authorized a change in policy to admit black students, a move that occurred shortly before the announcement of the Supreme Court decision in Runyon v. McCrary (427 U.S. 160 [1976]), which prohibited racial exclusion in private schools. However, in May of that year, BJU expanded rules against interracial dating and marriage.Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574, 581) In 1976, the Internal Revenue Service revoked the university's tax exemption retroactively to December 1, 1970 on grounds that it was practicing racial discrimination.Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574 @725) The case eventually was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1982. After BJU lost the decision in Bob Jones University v. United States (461 U.S. 574)[1983], the university chose to maintain its interracial dating policy and pay a million dollars in back taxes. The year following the Court decision, contributions to the university declined by 13 percent.  In 2000, following a media uproar prompted by the visit of presidential candidate George W. Bush to the university, Bob Jones III dropped the university's interracial dating rule, announcing the change on CNN's Larry King Live."Dancing with Compromise" (April 2000), The Multiracial Activist. In the same year, Bob Jones III drew criticism when he reposted a letter on the university's web page referring to Mormons and Catholics as "cults which call themselves Christian". In 2005, Stephen Jones, great-grandson of the founder, became BJU's president on the same day that he received his Ph.D. from the school.  Bob Jones III then took the title Chancellor. In 2008, the university declared itself "profoundly sorry" for having allowed "institutional policies to remain in place that were racially hurtful".USA Today, November 24, 2008; Statement about Race at Bob Jones University. In the statement, the university admitted to having "conformed to the culture" rather than providing "a clear Christian counterpoint to it". Earlier that year some BJU alumni expressed concern that the university had never repudiated its racist past and petitioned the school to make a formal apology. Greenville News, November 22, 2008. That year BJU enrolled students from fifty states and nearly fifty countries, representing diverse ethnicities and cultures, and the BJU administration declared itself "committed to maintaining on the campus the racial and cultural diversity and harmony characteristic of the true Church of Jesus Christ throughout the world".Statement about Race at Bob Jones University.  In 2011, the university became a member of the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools (TRACS) and reinstated intercollegiate athletics."Investiture of Stephen D. Pettit as Fifth President of Bob Jones University" http://www.bju.edu/about/president/program.pdf; Christian Century, November 2011. In 2013, it replaced the "BJ" logo that had been used since 1967 with a new shield logo based on the university crest. In December 2011, Jones announced that the board of trustees of the BJU was forming a committee, and would hire an independent ombudsman, to review its sexual abuse policy and its application. The action came in response to "national media reports of the mishandling of sexual abuse".   BJU commissioned an independent group called GRACE (Godly Response to Abuse in the Christian Environment) to serve as the ombudsman and investigate the charges. In his interview with GRACE, Jones said: "I know you are aware of the situation with Chuck Phelps's church and Chuck Phelps was on the board {of BJU}. When all that came out in November [2011], that made us look at our policies." In 2013, Jones resigned for health reasons, and the following year, Steve Pettit was named BJU's president, the first unrelated to the Jones family.Greenville News, May 9, 2014.  Pettit was formally installed as president on September 19, 2014. "Investiture of Stephen D. Pettit as Fifth President of Bob Jones University" ; Greenville News, September 20, 2014, 1. The December 2014 GRACE report said that the "heart of the investigation centered on BJU's response to known cases of alleged sexual abuse". Among the respondents to GRACE's survey (all of whom were anonymous), 47.5% called BJU's response to their discussion of past sexual abuse very or somewhat hurtful, 48% said BJU personnel directed them not to report the abuse or discouraged them from reporting it, and 57% said that the response was blaming and disparaging. In March 2015, President Steve Pettit responded that on "behalf of Bob Jones University, I would like to sincerely and humbly apologize to those who felt they did not receive from us genuine love, compassion, understanding, and support after suffering sexual abuse or assault. We did not live up to your expectations. We failed to uphold and honor our own core values. We are deeply saddened to hear that we added to the pain and suffering.". As a twelve-year-old, Bob Jones, Sr. made a twenty-minute speech in defense of the Populist Party. Jones was a friend and admirer of William Jennings Bryan but also campaigned throughout the South for Herbert Hoover (and against Al Smith) during the 1928 presidential election. Even the authorized history of BJU notes that both Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. “played political hardball” when dealing with the three municipalities in which the school was successively located. For instance, in 1962, Bob Jones, Sr. warned the Greenville City Council that he had “four hundred votes in his pocket and in any election he would have control over who would be elected.”   From the inception of Bob Jones College, a majority of students and faculty were northerners, and therefore many were already Republicans living in the "Solid South." Turner, 246; Interviews of Mary Gaston Stollenwerck Jones by Margaret Beall Tice, (September–October 1973), University Archives, Mack Library, BJU. Bob Jones, Sr. had held many evangelistic campaigns in the North prior to founding the college, and he correctly guessed that a new college in Florida would be more attractive to northerners than a new college in his home state of Alabama. After South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond switched his allegiance to the Republican Party in 1964, BJU faculty members became increasingly influential in the new state Republican party, and BJU alumni were elected to local political and party offices. In 1976, candidates supported by BJU faculty and alumni captured the local Republican party with unfortunate short-term political consequences, but by 1980 the religious right and the "country club" Republicans had joined forces.Alan Ehrenhalt, The United States of Ambition: Politicians, Power and the Pursuit of Office (New York: Random House, 1991), 98-99. "With its factions bitterly opposed to each other, the Republican party lost virtually all its state legislative seats in Greenville County, even as Gerard Ford was carrying the county against Jimmy Carter by more than 3,000 votes." (98) From then on, most Republican candidates for local and statewide offices sought the endorsement of Bob Jones III and greeted faculty/staff voters at the University Dining Common."As late as 1978 the state representative for most of the Bob Jones precincts was Sylvia Dreyfus, a liberal Jewish Democrat. That does not happen anymore. These days, when elections are held in the districts that surround the university, anybody who does not have a Bob Jones connection does not have a realistic chance." Ehrenhalt, 99. National Republicans soon followed. Ronald Reagan spoke at the school in 1980, although the Joneses supported his opponent, John Connally, in the South Carolina primary."GOP debaters politick in state," Greenville News, February 29, 1980. Reagan said he was "surprised" by Jones's endorsement of Connally. (Later, Bob Jones III denounced Reagan as "a traitor to God's people" for choosing George H.W. Bush—whom Jones called a "devil"—as his vice president. Even later, Jones III shook Bush's hand and thanked him for being a good president.)Washington Post, May 4, 2005 In the 1990s, other Republicans such as Dan Quayle, Pat Buchanan, Phil Gramm, Bob Dole, and Alan Keyes also spoke at BJU. Democrats were rarely invited to speak at the university, in part because they took political and social positions (especially support for abortion rights) opposed by the Religious Right.. As Bob Jones Jr. wrote in his memoirs, "While the lecture platform of Bob Jones University will never be open to dishonest Liberals like Ted Kennedy, conservative politicians and honorable statesmen have been speaking from that platform for many years."  On February 2, 2000, George W. Bush, as candidate for President, spoke during school's chapel hour.New York Times website Bush gave a standard stump speech making no specific reference to the university. His political opponents quickly noted his non-mention of the university's ban on interracial dating. During the Michigan primary, Bush was also criticized for not stating his opposition to the university's anti-Catholicism. (The John McCain campaign targeted Catholics with a "Catholic Voter Alert," phone calls reminding voters of Bush's visit to BJU.)CNN website  Bush denied that he either knew of or approved what he regarded as BJU's intolerant policies. On February 26, Bush issued a formal letter of apology to Cardinal John Joseph O'Connor of New York for failing to denounce Bob Jones University's history of anti-Catholic statements. At a news conference following the letter's release, Bush said, "I make no excuses. I had an opportunity and I missed it. I regret that....I wish I had gotten up then and seized the moment to set a tone, a tone that I had set in Texas, a positive and inclusive tone." Also during the 2000 Republican primary campaign in South Carolina, Richard Hand, a BJU professor, spread a false e-mail rumor that John McCain had fathered an illegitimate child. (The McCains have an adopted daughter from Bangladesh, and later push polling also implied that the child was biracial.)CNN website Although the March 2007 issue of Foreign Policy listed BJU as one of "The World's Most Controversial Religious Sites" because of its past influence on American politics,"The World's Most Controversial Religious Sites". The others mentioned were the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo; Potala Palace in Tibet; Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh state, India; and the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif in Jerusalem. BJU has seen little political controversy since Stephen Jones became president. When asked by a Newsweek reporter if he wished to play a political role, Stephen Jones replied, "It would not be my choice." Further, when asked if he felt ideologically closer to his father's engagement with politics or to other evangelicals who have tried to avoid civic involvement, he answered, "The gospel is for individuals. The main message we have is to individuals. We’re not here to save the culture." Susannah Meadows, "Passing the Torch at Bob Jones U." Newsweek "Web Exclusive" [MSNBC link expired], January 29, 2005, hard copy at Fundamentalist File, Mack Library, BJU. In a 2005 Washington Post interview, Jones dodged political questions and even admitted that he was embarrassed by "some of the more vitriolic comments" made by his predecessors. "I don't want to get specific," he said, "But there were things said back then that I wouldn't say today."Washington Post, April 4, 2005. In October 2007 when Bob Jones III, as "a private citizen," endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination for president, Stephen Jones made it clear that he wished "to stay out of politics" and that neither he nor the university had endorsed anyone.Greenville News, October 21, 2007. Despite a hotly contested South Carolina primary, none of the candidates appeared on the platform of BJU's Founders' Memorial Amphitorium during the 2008 election cycle.Candidate Ron Paul did speak in a large classroom to an overflow crowd. BJU's vice president for administration said, “We purposefully chose a room in the Alumni building because we do not want candidates to hold rallies on campus. We want interested students, faculty and staff to benefit from the educational experience of listening to a candidate, and hopefully, as a result, be able to make a more informed voting decision.” BJU Collegian, January 25, 2008. In April 2008 Stephen Jones told a reporter, "I don't think I have a political bone in my body."Greenville Journal (April 4, 2008), 32. In 2015, with the school's earlier racial positions (in the words of a Greenville News reporter) "ancient history," BJU reemerged as campaign stop of significance for conservative Republicans.  Ben Carson and Ted Cruz held large on-campus rallies on two successive days in November; and BJU president Steve Pettit met with Marco Rubio, Rick Perry, Mike Huckabee, and Scott Walker.  Chip Felkel, a Greenville Republican consultant, noted that some of the candidates closely identified "with the folks at Bob Jones.  So it makes sense for them to want to be there."  Nevertheless, unlike BJU's earlier periods of involvement in politics, Pettit said he would not endorse anyone.Tim Smith and Rudolph Bell, "Bob Jones University Back in Political Limelight," Greenville News, November 15, 2015, 1, 4;Reid J. Epstein, "GOP Candidates Return to Bob Jones University as Party Shifts Right," Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2015. While preparing for a 2016 Republican presidential forum at BJU, Oran Smith, president of Palmetto Family Council, said that BJU now seemed to be "a welcoming place, [a] much more winsome place, and the candidates seem to feel very comfortable about appearing there."Nathaniel Cary, "GOP candidates headed to forum at BJU," Greenville News, January 30, 2016, 1A, 4A. The university occupies 205 acres at the eastern city limit of Greenville. The institution moved into its initial 25 buildings during the 1947–48 school year, and later buildings were also faced with the light yellow brick chosen for the originals.BJU Catalog (2011–12), 235; John Matzko, "'This is it, Isn't it, Brother, Stone?' The Move of Bob Jones University from Cleveland, Tennessee, to Greenville, 1946–47", South Carolina Historical Magazine 108:3 (July 2007), 255–56. The University updated its dining common and snack bar, which includes a Chick Fil' A, Brody's Grill, and Papa Johns. Bob Jones, Jr. was a connoisseur of European art and began collecting after World War II on about $30,000 a year authorized by the University Board of Directors. "A Collector's Dream" Greenville Piedmont, 9 February 1989, A1. Jones first concentrated on the Italian Baroque, a style then out of favor and relatively inexpensive in the years immediately following the war. Fifty years after the opening of the gallery, the BJU collection included more than 400 European paintings from the 14th to through the 19th centuries (mostly pre-19th century), period furniture, and a notable collection of Russian icons. The museum also includes a variety of Holy Land antiquities collected in the early 20th century by missionaries Frank and Barbara Bowen. Not surprisingly, the gallery is especially strong in Baroque paintings and includes notable works by Rubens, Tintoretto, Veronese, Cranach, Gerard David, Murillo, Mattia Preti, Ribera, van Dyck, and Gustave Doré. Included in the Museum & Gallery collection are seven very large canvases, part of a series by Benjamin West painted for George III, called "The Progress of Revealed Religion", which are displayed in the War Memorial Chapel.BJU Museum & Gallery website history of the West paintings. (Baroque art was created during—and often for—the Counter-Reformation and so, ironically, BJU has been criticized by some other fundamentalists for promoting "false Catholic doctrine" through its art gallery.)[ ] Example of fundamentalist criticism of BJU for promoting Catholicism. David Gibson, "Looking for Catholic art? Fundamentalist Bob Jones University has it" Christian Century, Nov 22, 2011. After the death of Bob Jones, Jr., Erin Jones, the wife of BJU president Stephen Jones, became director. According to David Steel, curator of European art at the North Carolina Museum of Art, Erin Jones "brought that museum into the modern era", employing "a top-notch curator, John Nolan", and following "best practices in conservation and restoration". The museum now regularly cooperates with other institutions, lending works for outside shows such as a Rembrandt exhibit in 2011.David Gibson, "Looking for Catholic art? Fundamentalist Bob Jones University has it" Christian Century, Nov 22, 2011. In 2008, the BJU Museum & Gallery opened a satellite location, the "Museum & Gallery at Heritage Green" near downtown Greenville, which features rotating exhibitions from the main museum as well as interactive children's activities. The Heritage Green building, an extensively remodeled Coca-Cola bottling plant, joined the neighboring Upcountry History Museum and the Greenville Children's Museum, all of which feature "the latest in museum technology"."Extraordinary art made more accessible", Greenville News, March 17, 2008; "Sacred art museum opens today", Greenville News, April 19, 2008. Greenville News April 19, 2009 Each Easter season, the university and the Museum & Gallery present the Living Gallery, a series of tableaux vivants recreating noted works of religious art using live models disguised as part of two-dimensional paintings.Greenville News, April 9, 2006; "A dramatic transformation: BJU's 'Living Gallery' breathes life into religious masterworks", Greenville News, March 25, 2008.  The  Mack Library (named for John Sephus Mack) holds a collection of more than 300,000 books and includes seating for 1,200 as well as a computer lab and a computer classroom. (Its ancillary, a music library, is included in the Gustafson Fine Arts Center.) Mack Library's Special Collections includes an American Hymnody Collection of about 700 titles.American Hymnody Collection. The "Jerusalem Chamber" is a replica of the room in Westminster Abbey in which work on the King James Version of the Bible was conducted, and it displays a collection of rare Bibles. An adjoining Memorabilia Room commemorates the life of Bob Jones, Sr. and the history of the University.J.S. Mack Library – Archives.  The library's Fundamentalism File collects periodical articles and ephemera about social and religious matters of interest to evangelicals and fundamentalists.The Fundamentalism File, created in 1978, has more than 100,000 non-book items, mostly articles listed under 5,000 subject headings; it also contains the papers of three notable 20th-century fundamentalists: G. Archer Weniger (1915–1982), W. O. H. Garman (1899–1983), and Gilbert Stenholm (1915–1989). BJU Library website, Fundamentalism File, Introduction to the File The university Archives holds copies of all university publications, oral histories of faculty and staff members, surviving remnants of university correspondence, and pictures and artifacts related to the Jones family and the history of the university.BJU Archives Research. For instance, the archives hold decades of working scripts for university stage performances. The university consists of seven colleges and schools that offer more than 60 undergraduate majors, including fourteen associate degree programs. Given that BJU's faculty is untenured, most University employees consider their positions as much ministries as jobs.: "Bob Jones University has a scholarly, dedicated faculty who regard teaching as not just a profession but as a Christian calling." It is common for retiring professors to have served the university for thirty, forty, and even occasionally, fifty years, a circumstance that has contributed to the stability and conservatism of an institution of higher learning that has virtually no endowment and at which faculty salaries are "sacrificial".Voice of the Alumni [publication of the BJU Alumni Association], 1996–2006. In 1993, the CFO Roy Barton said that teachers' salaries were kept as "low as possible in order to offer affordable higher education to Christians". Barton said he could name "dozens of people who work here for half or a third of what they could be earning on the outside, but they are here because of a desire to be part of the ministry of training young people". Greenville News, April 18, 1993, "Upstate Business", 11. In the same Greenville News issue, Bob Jones III said, "Everyone here is like a missionary." (10) BJU does not have federal tax-exempt status, but a number of its ancillaries, including Bob Jones Academy and the BJU Museum & Gallery, are tax-exempt entities.BJU webpage; "Investing in Lives for Eternity", BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 15, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. The university's endowment is $7.5 million, and donations account for two to three percent of the budget.Greenville Journal, December 11, 2009, 27. The university also operates two 501(c)(3) charitable organizations to provide scholarship assistance solely for minority students.Financial Aid; see also Florence Williams, "Being Black at Bob Jones U.", August 14, 2003,KillingtheBuddha.com  The School of Religion includes majors for both men and women, although only men train as ministerial students.BJU School of Religion. Many of these students go on to a seminary after completing their undergraduate degree. Others take ministry positions straight from college, and rising juniors participate in a church internship program to prepare them for the pastoral ministry. In 1995 there were 1,290 BJU graduates serving as senior or associate pastors in churches across the United States.   The university requires use of the King James Version (KJV) of the Bible in its services and classrooms, but it does not hold that the KJV is the only acceptable English translation or that it has the same authority as the original Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. "Statement about Bible Translations", BJU website. The King-James-Only Movement—or more correctly, movements, since it has many variations—became a divisive force in fundamentalism only as conservative modern Bible translations, such as the New American Standard Bible (NASB) and the New International Version (NIV), began to appear in the 1970s. BJU has taken the position that orthodox Christians of the late 19th and early 20th centuries (including fundamentalists) agreed that while the KJV was a substantially accurate translation, only the original manuscripts of the Bible written in Hebrew and Greek were infallible and inerrant. Bob Jones, Jr. called the KJV-only position a "heresy" and "in a very definite sense, a blasphemy". The Division of Fine Arts has the largest faculty of the university's six undergraduate schools.Of about 350 faculty members listed in the 2007–08 catalog, around a hundred, or roughly 30% taught in the Division of Fine Arts. Bob Jones University Catalog, 2007–08, 341–47. Each year the university presents an opera in the spring semester and Shakespearean plays in both the fall and spring semesters.Concert, opera, & drama series, BJU website. In 2011 the university won second place in the professional division of the National Opera Association 2009-10 video competition for its production of Samson et Dalila. NOA website. A service called "Vespers", presented occasionally throughout the school year, combines music, speech, and drama.. Turner gives a detailed description of the development of Vespers from a recital potpourri to a themed program with a specific Christian message. BJU website The Division of Fine Arts includes an RTV department with a campus radio and television station, WBJU. More than a hundred concerts, recitals, and laboratory theater productions are also presented annually."Investing in Lives for Eternity", BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 6, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. Each fall, as a recruiting tool, the university sponsors a "High School Festival" in which students compete in music, art, and speech (including preaching) contests with their peers from around the country.High school students to compete in Fall Festival Article from BJU website by Jeanne Petrizzo describing the festival  In the spring, a similar competition sponsored by the American Association of Christian Schools, and hosted by BJU since 1977, brings thousands of national finalists to the university from around the country. In 2005, 120 of the finalists from previous years returned to BJU as freshmen.BJU Collegian article from BJU website  Bob Jones University supports young-earth creationism, all their faculty are young Earth creationists and the university rejects evolution, calling it "at best an unsupportable and unworkable hypothesis". The school offers undergraduate majors in biology (zoo and wildlife, and cell biology), pre-med, chemistry, engineering, and physics and also offers courses in astronomy. Between 80% and 100% of the pre-med graduates are accepted to medical school every year. The Department of Biology hosts two research programs on campus, one in cancer research, the other in animal behavior. In 2008 no member of the BJU science faculty held a degree in geology, and the university offered only one introductory course in the subject.Bob Jones University Catalog, 2007–08, 90. Although ten of the sixteen members of the science faculty have undergraduate degrees from BJU, all earned their doctorates from accredited, non-religious institutions of higher learning. The university's nursing major is approved by the South Carolina State Board of Nursing, and a BJU graduate with a BSN is eligible to take the National Council Licensure Examination to become a registered nurse. The BJU engineering program was accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). Bob Jones, Sr. was leery of academic accreditation almost from the founding of the college, and by the early 1930s, he had publicly stated his opposition to holding regional accreditation.However, in the earliest college catalog (called "An Epoch in Education") Jones wrote, "Having met all the requirements, we have made application for admission to the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools." (32) Not surprisingly, Jones and the college were criticized for this stance, and academic recognition, as well as student and faculty recruitment, were hindered. In 1944, Jones wrote to John Walvoord of Dallas Theological Seminary that while the university had "no objection to educational work highly standardized…. We, however, cannot conscientiously let some group of educational experts or some committee of experts who may have a behavioristic or atheistic slant on education control or even influence the administrative policies of our college."Jones to Walwoord, May 8, 1944 in  Five years later, Jones reflected that "it cost us something to stay out of an association, but we stayed out. We have lived up to our convictions."Jones to James O. Buswell, May 12, 1949, in  In any case, lack of accreditation seems to have made little difference during the post-war period, when the university more than doubled in size. Because graduates did not have the benefit of accredited degrees, the faculty felt an increased responsibility to prepare their students. Early in the history of the college, there had been some hesitancy on the part of other institutions to accept BJU credits at face value, but by the 1960s, BJU alumni were being accepted by most of the major graduate and professional schools in the United States."BJU's reputation in academic circles gradually became more respected for the intellectual preparation and strong character of its graduates. By the 1960s several graduate schools actively courted university alumni, and BJU graduates were accepted into most of the major graduate programs in the country despite the school's opposition to regional accreditation."  Undoubtedly helpful was that some of the university's strongest programs were in the areas of music, speech, and art, disciplines in which ability could be measured by audition or portfolio rather than through paper qualifications.Michael Collins, "Accreditation at Bob Jones University" (2007), unpublished paper, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. Nevertheless, by the early 2000s, the university quietly reexamined its position on accreditation as degree mills proliferated and various government bureaucracies, such as law enforcement agencies, began excluding BJU graduates on the grounds that the university did not appear on appropriate federal lists. In 2004, the university began the process of joining the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. Candidate status—effectively, accreditation—was obtained in April 2005, and full membership in the Association was conferred in November 2006.BJU is also a founding member of the American Association of Christian Colleges and Seminaries, a small group of institutions "clearly identified with the historic Christian fundamentalist tradition".American Association of Christian Colleges and Seminaries. In December 2011, BJU announced its intention to apply for regional accreditation with the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS).Greenville News, December 7, 2011. The university said that "significant changes" in SACS' approach to accreditation, including "respect [for] the stated mission of the institution, including religious mission" had addressed its earlier concerns about regional accreditation. BJU website. In Forbes national university ranking, Bob Jones was unranked in 2011, #606 in 2010, and #279 in 2009. In 2014, the Educate to Career College Ranking Index listed BJU as 15th in the nation by economic value."BJU ranked as 15th-best value", Greenville News, September 8, 2014, 3A; www.educatetocareer.org. Both Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. believed that film could be an excellent medium for mass evangelism, and in 1950, the university established Unusual Films within the School of Fine Arts. (The studio name derives from a former BJU promotional slogan, "The World's Most Unusual University".) Bob Jones, Jr. selected a speech teacher, Katherine Stenholm, as the first director. Although she had no experience in cinema, she took summer courses at the University of Southern California and received personal instruction from Hollywood specialists, such as Rudolph Sternad.; biographical information on Sternad Unusual Films has produced seven feature-length films, each with an evangelistic emphasis: Wine of Morning, Red Runs the River, Flame in the Wind, Sheffey, Beyond the Night, The Printing, and Milltown Pride. Wine of Morning (1955), based on a novel by Bob Jones, Jr., represented the United States at the Cannes Film Festival."Wine of Morning was selected by the University Film Producers Association to represent the United States at the International Congress of Motion Picture and Television Schools in Cannes, France, and following a showing at the Congress, garnered praise from the international film community. Wine of Morning was also awarded four 'Christian Oscars' from the National Evangelical Film Foundation for Best Film, Best Actor, Best Director, and Best Producer." . There may have been some Cold War posturing involved in the nomination of this film. The president of the UFPA wrote to Stenholm that the "excellence of your production, Wine of Morning...will provide the high quality which it is desirable to use in these international showings. We feel that the contrast between your film with its religious background and [the Russian entry] would be most revealing and that the contrast would reflect credit on our way of life." ("Bob Jones Religious Film To Represent US Colleges", The (Columbia, SC) State, May 2, 1958, 12C). The first four films are historical dramas set, respectively, in the time of Christ, the U.S. Civil War, 16th-century Spain, and the late 19th-century South—the latter a fictionalized treatment of the life of Methodist evangelist, Robert Sayers Sheffey. Beyond the Night closely follows an actual 20th-century missionary saga in Central Africa, and The Printing uses composite characters to portray the persecution of believers in the former Soviet Union. In 1999, Unusual Films began producing feature film for children, including The Treasure Map, Project Dinosaur, and Appalachian Trial. They also released a short animated film for children, The Golden Rom. Unusual Films returned to their customary format in 2011 with their release of Milltown Pride, a historical film set in 1920s Upstate South Carolina. Unusual Films also maintains a student film production program. The Cinema Production program is designed to give professional training in all facets of motion picture production. This training combines classroom instruction with hands-on experience in a variety of areas including directing, editing, and cinematography. Before graduation, seniors produce their own high definition short film in which they write, direct, and edit.  BJU Press originated in the need for textbooks for the burgeoning Christian school movement, and today it is the largest book publisher in South Carolina. Although it published its first trade book, a history of fundamentalism, in 1973, its first text was George Mulfinger and Emmet Williams, Physical Science for Christian Schools published in 1974. The Press publishes a full range of K–12 textbooks. More than a million pre-college students around the world use BJU textbooks, and the Press has about 2,500 titles in print. BJU Press also offers distance learning courses via online, DVD, and hard drive.Until May 2009, BJU Press offered elementary and high school classes via satellite over the BJ HomeSat Network and BJ LINC (Live Interactive Network Classroom), an interactive satellite system that allowed a teacher in Greenville to communicate with Christian school students across the country. In 2006, about 45,000 students participated in BJU's distance-learning programs.; Greenville News, 20 September 2006, 9A; BJU Catalog, 2007–08, 329. Another ancillary, the Academy of Home Education, is a "service organization for homeschooling families", that maintains student records, administers achievement testing, and issues high school diplomas. The Press sold its music division, SoundForth, to Lorenz Publishing on October 1, 2012. The university operates Bob Jones Academy, an elementary, middle, and high school.BJA website. The school of about 1500 students is the largest K–12 private school in the Carolinas and one of the largest in the Southeast.Greenville News, February 19, 2011. About 30% of BJA students are children of BJU staff members. Religion is a major aspect of life and curriculum at BJU. The BJU Creed, written in 1927 by journalist and prohibitionist Sam Small, is recited by students and faculty four days a week at chapel services. The university also encourages church planting in areas of the United States "in great need of fundamental churches", and it has provided financial and logistical assistance to ministerial graduates in starting more than a hundred new churches.BJU website on church planting Bob Jones III has also encouraged non-ministerial students to put their career plans on hold for two or three years to provide lay leadership for small churches. Students of various majors participate in Missions Advance (formerly Mission Prayer Band), an organization that prays for missionaries and attempts to stimulate campus interest in world evangelism.BJU Student Life; Collegian, 24 (February 4, 2011), 1.  During summers and Christmas breaks, about 150 students participate in teams that use their musical, language, trade, and aviation skills to promote Christian missions around the world. Although a separate nonprofit corporation, Gospel Fellowship Association, an organization founded by Bob Jones Sr. and associated with BJU, is one of the largest fundamentalist mission boards in the country.GFA Missions websiteBJU website. BJU's website calls it an "additional ministry". Through its "Timothy Fund", the university also sponsors international students who are training for the ministry.BJU website; "Timothy program offers foreign students Bible training", Collegian, April 12, 2007.  The university requires use of the King James Version (KJV) of the Bible in its services and classrooms, but it does not hold that the KJV is the only acceptable English translation or that it has the same authority as the original Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. The university's position has been criticized by some other fundamentalists, including fellow conservative university Pensacola Christian College, which in 1998 produced a widely distributed videotape which argued that this "leaven of fundamentalism" was passed from the 19th-century Princeton theologian Benjamin B. Warfield (1851–1921) through Charles Brokenshire (1885–1954) to current BJU faculty members and graduates.Documents on the BJU-Pensacola controversy archived on a private website. Strict rules govern student life at BJU.Student Handbook (pdf) (Archive) Some of these are based directly on the university's interpretation of the Bible. For instance, the 2015–16 Student Handbook states, "Students are to avoid any types of entertainment that could be considered immodest or that contain profanity, scatological realism, sexual perversion, erotic realism, lurid violence, occultism and false philosophical or religious assumptions." Grounds for immediate dismissal include stealing, immorality (including sexual relations between unmarried students), possession of hard-core pornography, use of alcohol or drugs, and participating in a public demonstration for a cause the university opposes.BJU Student Handbook, 2014–15, 33,52. Similar "moral failures" are grounds for terminating the employment of faculty and staff. In 1998, a homosexual alumnus was threatened with arrest if he visited the campus. Other rules are not based on a specific biblical passage. For instance, the Handbook notes that "there is no specific Bible command that says, 'Thou shalt not be late to class', but a student who wishes to display orderliness and concern for others will not come in late to the distraction of the teacher and other students."BJU Day Student Handbook, 2007–08, 7. In 2008 a campus spokesman also said that one goal of the dress code was "to teach our young people to dress professionally" on campus while giving them "the ability to...choose within the biblically accepted options of dress" when they were off campus."BJU Changes Dress Code", Greenville Journal, May 2, 2008, 18. Additional rules include the requirement that freshman resident hall students sign out before leaving campus and that resident hall students abide by a campus curfew of 11:00 pm, with lights out at midnight."Student Expectations", BJU website  Students are forbidden to go to movie theaters while in residence, or listen to most contemporary popular music.BJU Student Handbook, 2014–15, 34–35.: "The following music conflicts with our mission and is therefore excluded from performance, personal listening on and off campus, or use in student organizations, societies, student productions or social media: Any music which, in whole or in part, derives from the following broadly defined genres or their subgenres: Rock, Pop, Country, Jazz, Electronic/Techno, Rap/Hip Hop or the fusion of any of these genres [or any] music in which Christian lyrics or biblical texts are set to music which is, in whole or in part, derived from any of these genres or their subgenres. Male students with upperclassman privileges and graduate students may have facial hair that is fully grown in prior to the start of the semester, neatly  trimmed and well maintained at approximately ½ inch or less. BJU Student Handbook, 2015–16, 34. Women are expected to dress modestly and wear dresses or skirts that come to the bottom of the knee to class and religious services.BJU Student Handbook, 2014–15, 38–40. The university prohibits students from wearing clothing that displays the logos of Abercrombie & Fitch or its subsidiary Hollister because these companies have "shown an unusual degree of antagonism to biblical morality".BJU Student Handbook, 2014–15, 41.  After BJU abandoned intercollegiate sports in 1933, its intramural sports program included competition in soccer, basketball, softball, volleyball, tennis, badminton, flag football, table tennis, racquetball, and water polo. The university also competed in intercollegiate debate within the National Educational Debate Association, in intercollegiate mock trial and computer science competitions, and participated at South Carolina Student Legislature.BJU Catalog (2008–09), 323–27; "BJU debate team wins national award", Greenville News, April 25, 2008. The BJU debate team "received NEDA's President's Award three years in a row in recognition of the school's outstanding debate program." "Investing in Lives for Eternity", BJU Advancement brochure (2008), 6, Bob Jones University Archives, Mack Library. In 2012, BJU joined Division I of National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and in 2014 participated in intercollegiate soccer, basketball, cross-country, and golf.Greenville News, December 6, 2011. The teams are known as the Bruins. The university requires all unmarried incoming freshman students under the age of 23 to join one of 45 "societies".BJU Catalog, 2011–12, 243. Societies meet most Fridays for entertainment and fellowship and also hold a weekly prayer meeting. Societies compete with one another in intramural sports, debate, and Scholastic Bowl.http://www.bju.edu/life-faith/societies/  The university also has a student-staffed newspaper (The Collegian),The Collegian Online and yearbook (Vintage).BJU Catalog, 2011–12, 244. Early in December, thousands of students, faculty, and visitors gather around the front campus fountain for an annual Christmas carol sing and lighting ceremony, culminating in the illumination of tens of thousands of Christmas lights.Jeanne Petrizzo, "Nearly 100,000 lights to illuminate campus" Collegian article On December 3, 2004, the ceremony broke the Guinness World Record for Christmas caroling with 7,514 carolers.Guinness World Records. In November 2007, BJU also broke a previous record (set a year earlier in Rochester, New York) for the largest kazoo ensemble. That year during the annual Turkey Bowl game in Alumni Stadium, 3,800 students, staff and visitors played kazoos as part of the halftime entertainment. "BJU enters Guinness Book for second time", Greenville News, July 25, 2008.  Before 2015, students and faculty were required to attend a six-day Bible Conference in lieu of a traditional Spring Break.BJU Catalog, 2007–08, 320–21. However, the university announced that beginning in 2016, Bible Conference will be held in February, and students will be given a week of Spring Break in March.http://www.bju.edu/events/calendar/year-overview.php The Conference typically attracts fundamentalist preachers and laymen from around the country, and some BJU class reunions are held during the week.BJU Catalog, 2007–08, 326, 329. BJU's athletic teams compete in Division I of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and are collectively known as the Bruins. The school began its inaugural intercollegiate season with four teams: men's soccer, men's basketball, women's soccer, and women's basketball. Intercollegiate golf and cross country teams were added in the 2013–2014 school year. Christian novelist Jamie Langston Turner (an alumna) teaches poetry and writing at BJU. She is the winner of a Christy Award and her novel Winter Birds was named one of the "one hundred best books" of 2006 by Publishers Weekly.Publishers Weekly Best Books list A number of BJU graduates have become influential within fundamentalist and evangelical Christianity, including Ken Hay (founder of The Wilds Christian camps) Ron "Patch" Hamilton (composer and president of Majesty Music)http://ministry127.com/contributors/dr-ron-hamilton Billy Kim (former president of Baptist World Alliance), and Moisés Silva (president of the Evangelical Theological Society). BJU alumni also include the third pastor (1968–1976) of Riverside Church (Ernest T. Campbell), the former president of Northland Baptist Bible College (Les Ollila), late president of Baptist Bible College (Ernest Pickering), and the former president of Clearwater Christian College (Richard Stratton). One BJU alumnus, Asa Hutchinson, served as the governor of Arkansas and also served in the U.S. Congress, and several others have served in state government: Michigan state senator Alan Cropsey, Pennsylvania state representative Gordon Denlinger, Pennsylvania state representative Mark M. Gillen, former Speaker Pro Tempore of the South Carolina House of Representatives Terry Haskins, member of the South Carolina House of Representatives Wendy Nanney, Pennsylvania state representative Sam Rohrer, member of the Missouri House of Representatives Ryan Silvey, Maryland state senator Bryan Simonaire, South Carolina state senator Danny Verdin.     "I believe in the inspiration of the Bible (both the Old and the New Testaments); the creation of man by the direct act of God; the incarnation and virgin birth of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ; His identification as the Son of God; His vicarious atonement for the sins of mankind by the shedding of His blood on the cross; the resurrection of His body from the tomb; His power to save men from sin; the new birth through the regeneration by the Holy Spirit; and the gift of eternal life by the grace of God." — BJU Creed Bob Jones University website BJU Press website Bob Jones Museum & Gallery
