  The Brotherhood of Mutants, originally known as the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants, is a fictional Marvel Comics supervillain team devoted to mutant superiority over normal humans. They are among the chief adversaries of the X-Men. The group's roster and ideology have varied from incarnation to incarnation, ranging from world domination to serving as a terrorist group that targets anti-mutant public figures. They are almost always at odds with the more peaceful X-Men, though on rare occasions the two sides have allied against a common threat. The Brotherhood was founded by Magneto and its members were his primary allies in his early battles with the X-Men during the 1960s. The original Brotherhood ultimately disbanded, with Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch going on to become members of the Avengers. In 1981, the Brotherhood of Mutants was revived under the leadership of Mystique while the group's most visible incarnation during the early 1990s was led by Toad. With each additional incarnation, the group abandoned its political ideology and regressed to the status of "hired goons." Since the end of the 1990s, several incarnations have sought to return to the political roots. The Brotherhood of Mutants has also appeared in several animated series featuring the X-Men and has been Magneto’s group in the recent X-Men film series. The original Brotherhood of Evil Mutants was created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby and first appeared in X-Men #4 (March 1964). While later incarnations of the Brotherhood promoted the group's existence as a political and ideological rival to Professor Charles Xavier's dream of peace with humans, the group was originally conceived as simply a small, but powerful army of minions gathered by Magneto to aid in his schemes for world domination. But since the group's second incarnation, the group has become a much more politically motivated group designed for use of violence to provide justice and lead the so-called 'mutant revolution' against mankind. One of the greater ironies of the group has been its use of "Evil" in its name. When his decision to name the group thusly was brought up in an interview, Stan Lee simply said, "We were kind of corny in those days." Since the early 1990s, writers have attempted to explain this away by having Toad describe it as irony, based upon the perceived notion that all mutants are "evil." Later writers have opted instead to simply drop "Evil" from the group's name and refer to the group as "The Brotherhood of Mutants" or simply the Brotherhood. In Earth-X, Uatu explained that Magneto chose it so that, as the opposing side, Charles would be forced to assume the role of "Good," and that Magneto believed that by locking Charles into absolutes of morality, he could manipulate him. Many of the group's members have been shown to be past victims of anti-mutant prejudice, which has made the group a haven for many mutants who feel they are outcasts and pariahs. While many of these outcast mutants have willingly embraced the violent aspects of the Brotherhood's ideology, several have ultimately rejected it and left the group because of it. Most notably, Quicksilver and the Scarlet Witch left the group due to their disdain for Magneto's various schemes for world domination to join the Avengers, a group of heroes dedicated to help save the world as opposed to ruling it. The original leader of the team was Magneto, a mutant with the ability to control magnetic fields. It would later be revealed that Magneto was a Holocaust survivor, explaining his distrust of humanity and its inability to accept those who are different. The other members of the original team were Quicksilver, who can move and think at incredible speeds, his twin sister, the Scarlet Witch, who has the power to affect probability fields, the Toad, a sniveling villain with incredible jumping ability and a medieval costume, and Mastermind, with the power to create illusions of sight, smell, taste, touch and sound. Quicksilver and the Scarlet Witch are Magneto's children, although at the time of the original Brotherhood all three of them were unaware of it. They had joined after Magneto saved Wanda from a mob who believed she was a Witch after she accidentally made a house burst into flame. She joined to repay the debt, and Pietro joined to keep her safe. Time and again, the Brotherhood clashed with the original X-Men team (consisting of Cyclops, the Angel, the Beast, Iceman and Marvel Girl), in their first appearance taking control of a small country with the aid of Mastermind creating an illusion of an army. They captured the Angel and took him to Asteroid M, but he was rescued. They tried to recruit the Sub-Mariner, and then the Blob, but the X-Men succeeded against them. Finally Magneto and Toad were captured by an extraterrestrial being called the Stranger, who they at first believed was a powerful mutant, but he revealed himself to be an alien. Mastermind had been turned to a block of solid matter by the Stranger, Quicksilver and the Scarlet Witch left the team and later joined the Avengers. Later, back on Earth, Magneto reorganized the team three times, including such mutants as the Blob and Unus the Untouchable, and creating a team that was later alternately called Mutant Force and the Resistants. The shapeshifting mutant Mystique later organized her own Brotherhood of Evil Mutants. Members included Pyro, the Blob, Avalanche, Destiny and Rogue. This team (minus Rogue, who had defected to the X-Men) later became the core membership of the government-sponsored team called Freedom Force. As Freedom Force, their membership briefly included Spiral and the second Spider-Woman, and later included Super Sabre, the Crimson Commando, and Stonewall. This group both fought and teamed up with several heroic groups, including the Avengers, but ultimately disbanded after Destiny, Super Sabre and Stonewall were killed in action, Mystique faked her death, the Crimson Commando was crippled and the Blob and Pyro were abandoned on a mission in Iraq. The Toad also organized a Brotherhood of Evil Mutants of his own at one point, including the Blob and Pyro, a woman named Phantazia who could disrupt electronics and superhuman powers, and the vampiric humanoid pterodactyl called Sauron, who is not an actual mutant. Toad's Brotherhood was concerned mostly with hatching revenge schemes against the X-teams, but was repeatedly defeated by X-Force, X-Factor, Darkhawk, Spider-Man and Sleepwalker. Havok, after being captured and subjected to intensive brainwashing by the Dark Beast, formed his own short-lived Brotherhood of Mutants whose membership included himself, the Dark Beast, Fatale, and, briefly, Aurora, Random, Ever and X-Man. Despite Jean Grey's proclamation that Havok was acting of his own free will as well as the plot point of Dark Beast brainwashing Havok, it was ultimately revealed that Havok formed the team as part of a sting operation designed to find out the illegal experiments the Dark Beast was performing and fell apart when Havok and the Dark Beast finally clashed. This incarnation was the first Brotherhood to omit the "Evil" from its name. The following incarnation included new members the Mimic and Post as well as the Blob and Toad. They freed Charles Xavier from prison and helped the X-Men against the animated Cerebro, who had created a team of fake X-Men. They later cooperated with Mystique in an attempt to capture the Machine Man. The team disbanded shortly afterwards. During this time period, it was revealed that the teleporter named Astra had been a member of the original Brotherhood, providing Magneto with the technology used to create Asteroid M and locating potential recruits, including Nightcrawler. Though she was in love with Magneto (and had encountered Professor X at some point), Magneto did not love her back and this rejection led to her quitting the team and served as the motivation behind her creation of the Magneto clone Joseph. During the threat of the Legacy Virus, Mystique organized another Brotherhood, drawing members from nearly every incarnation, and adding Sabretooth and Martinique Jason, the new Mastermind to the lineup. A training session also showed a new Super Sabre and Commando, but they were not included on the mission. This Brotherhood managed to assassinate Moira MacTaggert before they were disbanded. Later, a short-lived Marvel series called The Brotherhood featured a large group of mutant terrorists, unrelated to any other version of the Brotherhood. The group was founded by the mutants Hoffman, Orwell and Marshal, but Marshal left the group and became a government agent. Hoffman hid his identity under the alias "X". Marshal had the orders to take down the Brotherhood, but was really planning on killing Hoffman and becoming the new "X". This series was cancelled after nine issues, at which point all members had either been killed in the power struggle between Hoffman and Marshal or by the publicity-driven X-Force (later renamed X-Statix).The Brotherhood at the Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe The next incarnation of the Brotherhood was led by Mystique again and included the new member Fever Pitch. This Brotherhood had infiltrated the X-Corps and took over the group, before it was defeated by the X-Men and Mystique sucked into another dimension by X-Corps recruit Abyss (ironically landing the two into the arms of Azazel, who was the father of both Abyss and Mystique's biological son Nightcrawler). Following her being rescued from her former lover's realm, Mystique would become a reluctant agent of Professor X, doing black ops missions for him. While employed, Mystique claimed that the second and third Brotherhood formed by her was actually formed by someone trying to frame her, something Xavier dismissed as lies designed by Mystique to gain sympathy from Xavier. Another Brotherhood was formed by former X-Man Xorn, who thought he was Magneto. His Brotherhood were his former students Beak, Angel Salvadore, Martha Johansson, Basilisk II, Ernst, Esme and old Brotherhood member Toad. Most members rebelled against Xorn after he accidentally killed Basilisk and his insanity became too obvious to ignore. In the "Heroes and Villains" arc that concluded Chuck Austen's run on X-Men, a new version of the Brotherhood appeared. The team was led by the powerful mutant Exodus, who had once been Magneto's herald, and its other members included Avalanche, Sabretooth (who had simply been hired by Exodus), and new members Black Tom Cassidy, Mammomax, Nocturne (who was revealed to be spying on the team), and Juggernaut (who was later revealed to be a mole). After Black Tom killed Juggernaut's friend Sammy Paré the "Fish-Boy" (who was attacking Juggernaut for his "apparent betrayal"), Juggernaut lashes out and tried to destroy the Brotherhood. After knocking Juggernaut and several other Brotherhood members unconscious, Exodus led his team to the Xavier Institute to claim revenge for the apparent death of Magneto. The entire team was defeated by the second Xorn, who sucked them into the "black hole" within his head; Nocturne was sucked in as well, and Juggernaut followed her. They eventually landed in Mojoworld, where the others sold Nocturne and Juggernaut to Mojo, for their freedom. In Young X-Men, Donald Pierce, in disguise as Cyclops, deceives several X-Men in training into attacking what he dubs a new incarnation of the Brotherhood, which consists of Cannonball, Danielle Moonstar and Magma, all under the leadership of Sunspot, Lord Imperial of the Hellfire Club. However, this was just a manipulative ruse, and these four New Mutants were neither a team at the time nor conducting villainous activity. An all-female incarnation called the Sisterhood was formed by the "Red Queen"—revealed to (supposedly) be Madelyne Pryor—who recruited Martinique Jason, Lady Mastermind, Chimera, and the non-mutants Spiral and Lady Deathstrike. The Sisterhood was able to capture and brainwash the former X-Man Psylocke, making her a member also.Uncanny X-Men #508Uncanny X-Men #509 Although being neither female nor a recruited member, former Hellions member Empath was revealed to be helping the team in their attack against the X-Men.Uncanny X-Men #510 The Red Queen is later lured into a trap set by Cyclops (Madelyne's former husband) and defeated. Psylocke broke free from her brainwashing and rejoined the X-Men. The other Sisterhood members all escape.Uncanny X-Men #511  In the miniseries "Magneto: Not a Hero", Joseph is resurrected under unknown circumstances and forms a new Brotherhood of Mutants with Astra and mutated deformed versions of Blob, Mastermind, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, and Toad. It is soon revealed that the mutated versions of Blob, Mastermind, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, and Toad are clones created by Astra. All the clones were killed by Magneto. Joseph is defeated by Magneto and remanded to Utopia's X-Brig.Magneto: Not a Hero #1-4 In Uncanny X-Force, Wolverine's son Daken forms a new Brotherhood of Evil Mutants with Mystique, Sabretooth, Shadow King, Blob (AoA version), Skinless Man (Weapon III of Weapon Plus) and the Omega Clan (consisting of Omega Red, Omega Black and Omega White who each share the DNA of the original Omega Red) with the apparent goal of exacting revenge on X-Force. The group was seen recruiting Genesis as their next member, in order to turn him into the new Apocalypse.Uncanny X-Force #26 Mystique has since gathered a new Brotherhood which consists of herself, Sabretooth, Blob, Silver Samurai II, and Lady Mastermind.All New X-Men #09 By using Lady Mastermind's illusions, they commit numerous heists to incriminate the original X-Men,All New X-Men #12 who had recently been brought through time to the present by Beast.All New X-Men #02 With the money the Brotherhood of Mutants robbed in the heists, Mystique acquired Madripoor from HYDRA and attempted to turn it into a mutant sanctuary. Posing as Dazzler, Mystique attracted Magneto to the island and showed him her plans. However, Magneto reacted violently to the plan, believing that Mystique and the others were traitors to their species in part due to allowing the use of Mutant Growth Hormone to run rampant in the streets to fund their operations. He heavily injured Mystique and the Brotherhood and left after making their base collapse.Uncanny X-Men Vol. 3 #16 Inspired by Madelyne's attempt of defeating the X-Men, Lady Deathstrike has recruited the likes of Typhoid Mary and Enchantress and put together an all new Sisterhood, her own illuminati to take down the X-Men, as well as helping each one of them to achieve their individual goals. They have recently added the newly resurrected Selene to their ranks with the aid of the sentient virus, Arkea, and intend to bring back Madelyne Pryor herself as well.X-Men (vol. 4) #8X-Men (vol. 4) #11 After Lady Deathstrike's host, Ana Cortes had a change of heart about being a supervillain and serving Arkea, she contacted the X-Men and informed them of the Sisterhood's location. She committed suicide. Arkea placed Lady Deathstrike's consciousness in the same body Arkea used for a host, Reiko. Arkea then took the Jean Grey genetic material she purchased and modified Ana Cortes corpse so that it could host Madelyne Pryor. Amora completed the resurrection of Madelyne Pryor. The X-Men assaulted the Sisterhood's hideout. They cut the hideout off the grid. The X-Men assaulted the Sisterhood. As most members of the Sisterhood did not particularly care for Arkea, they did not defend her to the fullest of their capabilities. Karima killed Arkea with a bullet specifically designed to destroy hive mind bacteria. As Arkea Prime was the queen bee of Arkea, once she was killed all Arkea bacteria everywhere died. As Madelyne and Selene left, Madelyne informed the group of her plan to create a new Sisterhood. Lady Deathstrike survived the destruction of Arkea."X-Men (vol.4)" #12 This version of the Brotherhood appeared in the Battle of the Atom event, first posing as a future X-Men team who wanted to send the past X-Men to their own time.X-Men: Battle of the Atom #1 Their true reasons, to prevent the past X-Men from suffering and dying in the future, were revealed,All-New X-Men #17 and they were soon at war against the present X-Men, the Uncanny X-Men, and the true Future X-Men. Their members include Xorn (the past Jean Grey, who had to wear a Xorn mask to limit her power), Charles Xavier II (the alleged son of the original Professor X and Mystique), Beast, Ice Thing (a semi-sentient ice construct created by the future Iceman), Molly Hayes, Deadpool, and Raze Logan (the son of Wolverine and Mystique, who first arrived disguised as Shadowcat). Some of the members of the Future Brotherhood died during the event, while some of them survived and remain living in the present.X-Men: Battle of the Atom #2 Although it appeared that all of the Brotherhood members had survived when they infiltrated Cyclops' new school,All-New X-Men #26 after the Brotherhood were defeated by the past-Jean Grey's mind powers, it is revealed that Xorn/Jean had been killed in their first appearance in the past, while all of the Brotherhood's other members- except for Raze Logan- were only working with the team due to the telepathic influence of Charles Xavier II. With Xavier II and Raze both subdued, the former Brotherhood were freed and returned to their home future while Charles Xavier II and Raze Logan are left in the present, locked in the prison's Cage.All-New X-Men #29 In Amazing Spider-Girl #22, a Sisterhood of Mutants is featured. This group consists of Magneta, Impact (a superstrong mutant able to increase the size of any part of her body), Pirouette (who can rotate at high speeds), and Headcase (a powerful psychic). The Brotherhood, led by Chief Detective Eric Magnus, is a cabal of corrupt and violent policemen, doing the bidding of Sebastian Shaw. It is formed by Magnus, Dukes and Wyngarde.X-Men Noir #1 In Ultimate X-Men, the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants is called the Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy, headed by a far more violent and genocidal version of Magneto. It was originally formed by Professor X and Magneto in a plan to create a safe haven for mutants in a city within the Savage Land, but Magneto had other plans to make the mutants more dominant over the humans. The original Brotherhood first seen consisted of Blob, Mastermind, Magneto's twins Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch; Toad, and Wolverine. Soon after their first appearance, Wolverine was planted in the X-Men as a mole and later defected to the X-Men. Cyclops once sided with the Brotherhood during Wolverine's infiltration only to turn against the Brotherhood and assist the X-Men into fighting the Brotherhood of Mutants. When Magneto was seemingly killed by Professor X, Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch tried to use the Brotherhood in more useful ways of gaining mutant rights such as proceeding with talks to the UN. This caused many splinter groups (such as the Acolytes) to split off and attempt to continue Magneto's genocidal techniques. During this short-lived less violent phase, several mutant animal recruits rescued from laboratories were added (one of which was the mutated ape Prosimian), but Magneto rejected them upon his return seeing them as lower species like Homo sapiens and wiped out the mutant animals. In the Ultimate War and "Return of the King" storylines, Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch defected to the Ultimates to help stop the resurfaced Magneto. Unus, Juggernaut, Hard-Drive, Rogue, Sabretooth, Vanisher, Forge and Multiple Man join the Brotherhood. After being defeated by the X-Men, the Brotherhood receded for a time. Mystique and Forge free Magneto from his plastic prison cell in The Triskelion, with Mystique taking his place to prevent anyone from realizing that Magneto is free. In "The Ultimates 3," Magneto leads Sabertooth, Blob, Unus, Multiple Man, Mystique, Pyro, Mastermind, and Lorelei.Ultimates 3 #2Ultimates 3 #3Ultimates 3 #4 Magneto, Blob, Detonator, Forge, Hard-Drive, Longshot, Lorelei, and Multiple Man are killed during the Ultimatum.Ultimatum #3Ultimatum #4 In the Age of Apocalypse reality, Apocalypse is served by a strikeforce of mutant fanatics calling itself the Brotherhood of Chaos. Its members are Copycat, Box, Spyne, Yeti and Arclight.Weapon X #2 (April 1995), Marvel Comics In Neil Gaiman's Marvel 1602 series, Magneto is Enrique, the Grand Inquisitor of the Spanish Inquisition during the year 1602, with Brother Petros and Sister Wanda (Pietro and Wanda Maximoff respectively) serving under him as messenger and assistant, respectively. Enrique had been born a Jew in the ghetto of Venice, but he was taken away from his parents and raised within the Catholic Church. At some point Enrique befriended Carlos Javier, that world's Professor X, who crafted a helmet to protect Enrique from his psychic powers. After Toad, their spy at the Vatican, betrays the fact that they have been sheltering any 'Witchbreed' (1602 word for Mutants) that can hide their powers, he and his children escape being burnt at the stake, capture Toad, and sail to the Americas; as Gaiman's reinterpretation of Magneto is more rooted in religion than morality, here his group is named 'The Brotherhood of Those Who Will Inherit The Earth'. After a brief encounter with Carlos Javier in which Roberto Trefusis freezes their ship in the middle of the ocean, Enrique agrees to work with the other heroes. When the world is saved, Enrique departs, entrusting Wanda and Petros to Javier, and instructing him to take care of them until he returns, and never to tell them that they are his children. The fate of Toad in this world is unknown, but Enrique had promised to punish him for his betrayal, a punishment which was ultimately left unseen. In the Marvel Fairy Tales continuity, the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants appears as a group of Oni who have captured the Emperor's daughter (Jean Grey). Hitome/Cyclops subdues them. The team members used for this issue were Magneto, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, and Toad.X-Men: Fairy Tales #1 In the alternate reality depicted in the 2005 "House of M" storyline, the Brotherhood was created as an NYPD strikeforce team to take down organized crime. Members included John Proudstar (leader), Frank Castle (only human member who left due to seeing how the Brotherhood are mistreating the human criminalsHouse of M: Avengers #3), Blob, Feral, Taskmaster, Avalanche, Boom Boom and Misty Knight (who had secretly infiltrated the "Avengers", and would later defect from the Brotherhood).House of M: Avengers #2 In the alternate future of the 2005 miniseries Weapon X: Days of Future Now, Malcolm Colcord convinced people to hate mutants. In issue 4, most of the surviving mutants gather to see the return of Magneto. One of the groups is the Brotherhood led by Sabretooth and consisting of Avalanche, Blob, Caliban, Hub, Mimic, and Scalphunter.   The Brotherhood made their first ever appearance in the Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends episode entitled "The Prison Plot". It consisted of Magneto, Toad, The Blob, Destiny and Mastermind. The Spider-Friends are called into action when Magneto appears demanding the release of his "Brotherhood of Evil Mutants" from jail. The Brotherhood of Mutants appear in the 1989 animated television pilot X-Men: Pryde of the X-Men, therein referred to as "The Brotherhood of Mutant Terrorists" and consists of Magneto, Toad, The Blob, Pyro, The Juggernaut, and White Queen. This Brotherhood was a mix of Magneto's group and Mystique's along with the previously unaffiliated Juggernaut and White Queen. "The Brotherhood of Evil Mutants" appeared in the animated series X-Men, with the Blob, Avalanche and Pyro being led by Mystique with Rogue being shown as a former member. The Brotherhood was shown also to be initially financed by Apocalypse, though only Mystique knew of this. Notably absent from the series was Mystique's longtime lesbian lover Destiny. As such, major changes had to be made towards the adaptation of "Days of Future Past" in which the Brotherhood attempts to assassinate presidential candidate Senator Robert Kelly. In X-Men: Evolution, "The Brotherhood of Bayville" is portrayed less as a group of terrorists and more as trouble-making teenagers. Brought together by Mystique (secretly working for Magneto), the core group consisted of teenage versions of Avalanche, Toad, Blob, Rogue (who was not officially with them), and Quicksilver. Boom-Boom was briefly with them until Mystique returned. Magneto's mentally-disturbed daughter Scarlet Witch joins later in season 2 episode "Hex Factor". In the two-part episode "Day of Reckoning," Mystique (in the form of Professor X) had the Brotherhood work with the X-Men when it came to fighting Magneto's Acolytes (consisting of Colossus, Sabretooth, Pyro and Gambit). Due to the shifting loyalties of Mystique and long periods of absence from Magneto, these four teens were often left without any guidance, and as the series progressed they went from super-villains to standard criminals until the point where they simply stopped caring and just stayed home most of the time. In "The Stuff of Villains," Magneto sent Gambit to have the Brotherhood bust Quicksilver from a military transport. Afterwards, Gambit tells them that Quicksilver will be leading them if they want to be a part of Magneto's Acolytes. Notably in "No Good Deed", the populace of Bayville starts seeing them as heroes after they save people from a subway disaster. However, they (except for Wanda) soon see this as an opportunity to capitalize on the rewards received by grateful citizens. Towards the end of the series, they became a wild card that could be swayed to any cause, and often teamed-up with the X-Men, who remained their rivals while no longer enemies. When it came to the two-part episode "Ascension," Wanda joins the X-Men in fighting Apocalypse where she, Shadowcat, Sunspot, Angel, and Havok were dispatched to South America. The other Brotherhood members showed up to rescue Wanda and help take down an Apocalypse-controlled Magneto. When Professor X reveals the visions he saw through Apocalypse, it showed the Brotherhood with Pyro working with S.H.I.E.L.D. as that show's version of Freedom Force. The Brotherhood of Mutants appear in Wolverine and the X-Men. It consists of Avalanche, Blob, Domino, Quicksilver, Rogue, and Toad. Under the leadership of Quicksilver, the Brotherhood performs missions for Magneto. In "Time Bomb," Toad informs Quicksilver about Nitro and they spring him out against his will to be brought to Magneto. Quicksilver brought in Psylocke to suppress Nitro's powers. They gave him back to the X-Men after learning how unstable Nitro's powers were. In "Battle Lines," Magneto instructed them to attack the X-Men while the Acolytes break into the MRD Prisons. The X-Men defeat them causing Magneto to cut them loose. After a visit from Quicksilver in "Backlash," Magneto has Scarlet Witch inform the MRD of the Brotherhood's hideout. After taking out the Sentinel Prowlers, the Brotherhood helps the X-Men in the fight against the Sentinels at the location where Master Mold is. When Master Mold was temporarily defeated, the Brotherhood left with Quicksilver stating that the X-Men owe them one. In 2000's X-Men movie, The Brotherhood included Magneto (Sir Ian McKellen), Mystique (Rebecca Romijn-Stamos), Sabretooth (Tyler Mane), and Toad (Ray Park). In the film, Magneto with the help of his Brotherhood, devises a machine that can trigger mutation in human beings, and with which the former plans to wipe out the human race and replace it with a whole world of mutates. The Brotherhood's plans are, however, foiled by the X-Men after the team discovers that the machine's forced mutations destroy the subject's DNA, with Toad and Sabretooth being apparently killed in the fight. In the sequel X2: X-Men United (2003) the lineup was greatly reduced to Magneto and Mystique only. However at the end of the film, they were joined by Pyro (Aaron Stanford). The third installment of the series, X-Men: The Last Stand (2006), gave fans a glimpse of depicting a much larger Brotherhood, including Juggernaut (Vinnie Jones), Multiple Man (Eric Dane), the Omegas members Quill (Ken Leung), Callisto (Dania Ramirez), Arclight (Omahyra Mota), Psylocke (Meiling Melancon), Spike (Lance Gibson), Glob Herman (Clayton Dean Watmough), Phat (Via Saleaumua and Richard Yee), and a bunch of generic mutants. The Brotherhood was expanded when it came to the mutant cure (which was harvested from Leech's DNA) being distributed where it was produced on Alcatraz Island by Warren Worthington II's company. During a raid upon a government convoy, Mystique sacrifices herself (and ultimately her powers) when she takes a cure dart to the chest aimed at Magneto. Magneto deserts his most loyal ally revealing "You're not one of us anymore." Commenting that it was a shame to lose her "beauty", Magneto leads the remaining Brotherhood members away. After Jean Grey's Phoenix side killed Professor X, Magneto brought her into the group. Later in the film, Mystique as Raven Darkholme (her human form) is seen providing the United States government with information regarding the whereabouts of Magneto's base of operations. With Multiple Man as the diversion for the army which leads to Multiple Man's arrest, Magneto leads his Brotherhood to Alcatraz to prevent the production of the cure where they rode the Golden Gate Bridge to Alcatraz. Among the generic Brotherhood Mutants seen taking part in the assault on Alcatraz are a lizard mutant member of the Omegas that is similar to Anole (credited as "Lizard Man" and played by Lloyd Adams), a mutant that is similar to Vanisher, a black cracked-skinned mutant member of the Omegas who exhales a superheated cloud of ash and cinders (referred to as "Ash" in the DVD commentary and portrayed by an uncredited Mark Helfrich), a bald man who can re-grow his lost limbs, a mutant who apparently makes copies of himself when he falls into the battle (not to be confused with Multiple Man), mutants with minor distortions (such as glowing eyes and rhinoceros-like horns), and several mutants strong enough to leap over a large pile of debris. The weaker Brotherhood Mutants were sent in first where they were hit by cure darts encased in plastic where Magneto used them in a Chess-based strategy. The stronger Brotherhood Mutants later went in with some of them either killed or survived in their battle with the X-Men. Of the main villains, Juggernaut and Pyro's fate is left unknown (although in the novel it is stated Iceman saved Pyro as Phoenix destroyed the island). Dark Phoenix and Spike are killed by Logan. A deleted scene showed Phat being frozen by Iceman and shattered by Colossus. Callisto was killed by Storm during a large battle. Quill, Arclight, and Psylocke are killed in the island's destruction. Magneto, Glob Herman, Mystique, and the Anole-like mutant are all cured with cure darts. The final scene shows Magneto reaching out toward a chess piece as it moves a little bit, indicating that the mutant cure was not permanent. This is confirmed in The Wolverine and the future scenes of X-Men: Days of Future Past, where Magneto has indeed fully regained his powers. At the conclusion of the 2011 film X-Men: First Class, Magneto forms a similar team out of the remnants of the Hellfire Club, though the group is not referred to by name. The lineup is composed of Magneto, Emma Frost, Riptide, Azazel, Mystique, and Angel Salvadore. By the time of the film's sequel X-Men: Days of Future Past (which also followed The Wolverine), Emma Frost, Riptide, Azazel and Angel Salvadore have been killed by Bolivar Trask's Project Wideawake program leaving only Magneto and Mystique alive. Additionally, Magneto's attempts to kill Mystique have presumably driven her away, leaving him as the sole member. The Brotherhood appeared in X-Men: Mutant Academy. Much like the first X-Men film, the roster consists of Magneto, Mystique, Toad, and Sabretooth. In X-Men: Mutant Academy 2, the Brotherhood has the same members, except the fact that the Juggernaut was the Brotherhood's latest member. In X-Men: Next Dimension, the Brotherhood's roster expanded, with the Blob and Lady Deathstrike joining the Brotherhood. In the X-Men Legends games, the Brotherhood of Mutants appears as one of the main antagonists in the first and reluctant heroes in the second. In addition to a substantial number of unnamed Brotherhood grunts, it consists of Magneto, Mystique, Toad, Blob, Pyro, Avalanche, Sabretooth, and Havok (he was temporary until he discovered Magneto's true plans for humanity). In the first, the Brotherhood is based on Asteroid M and initially led by Mystique until Magneto is rescued from jail. Magneto's plan to blockade the Earth with asteroids is thwarted by the X-Men, but the Brotherhood escape. In X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse, Magneto has relocated to the island of Genosha. Though Sabretooth, Mystique, Blob, Toad, and Pyro remain members, its latest members include Juggernaut, Scarlet Witch, and Quicksilver. When Quicksilver is kidnapped by Apocalypse, the Brotherhood temporarily joins forces with the X-Men to defeat Apocalypse and rescue Quicksilver. Pyro and Blob do not accompany the teams during the game and Avalanche is not even mentioned throughout the game. Also, Destiny was a member of the Brotherhood before she quit and relocated to Avalon in the Savage Land due to her latest precognition revolving around Apocalypse. In X-Men: Destiny, the Brotherhood of Mutants is one of the two factions the player character can choose from, depending on the choices the player chooses. The lineup consists of Magneto, Mystique, Juggernaut, Pyro, Quicksilver, and Toad. The Brotherhood of Mutants appear in Marvel: Avengers Alliance. Known members include Magneto, Avalanche, Blob, Juggernaut, Mystique, Sabretooth, and Toad. The Brotherhood of Mutants' foot soldiers consist of artificial mutants generated by ISO-8, known as BL-Alphas, BL-Betas, BR-Alphas, BR-Betas, IN-Alphas, IN-Betas, SC-Alphas, SC-Betas, TA-Alphas, and TA-Betas which were the results of the experiments with Iso-8. The Brotherhood of Mutants have also included their own versions of Sentinels called the M-Series Rho MK III, the M-Series Sigma MK III, and the M-Series MK III. The Brotherhood of Mutants appear in Lego Marvel Super Heroes. Known members include Magneto, Mystique, Sabretooth, Toad, Pyro, Blob, Mastermind, and Juggernaut. Doctor Doom enlists the Brotherhood of Mutants to help him collect the Cosmic Bricks.
