   The Burmese language (, MLCTS: myanma bhasa, ) is the official language of Myanmar. Although the Constitution of Myanmar officially recognizes the English name of the language as the Myanmar language,Constitution of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar (2008), Chapter XV, Provision 450 most English speakers continue to refer to the language as Burmese. Burmese is spoken as a first language by 32 million, primarily the Bamar people and related sub-ethnic groups, and as a second language by 10 million, particularly ethnic minorities in Myanmar and neighboring countries like the Mon. Burmese is a tonal, pitch-register, and syllable-timed language, largely monosyllabic and analytic language, with a subject–object–verb word order. It is a member of the Lolo-Burmese grouping of the Sino-Tibetan language family. The Burmese alphabet is thought to be  derived from the Mon script, but in any case is descended from Pallava, one of the Brahmic scripts that was adopted and adapted by various Southeast Asian languages (Khmer, Thai, Lao) due to Indian influence. Burmese belongs to the Southern Burmish branch of the Sino-Tibetan languages. Burmese is the most widely spoken of the non-Sinitic Sino-Tibetan languages. Burmese was the fifth of the Sino-Tibetan languages to develop a writing system, after Chinese characters, the Pyu script, the Tibetan alphabet and the Tangut script. The majority of Burmese speakers, who live throughout the Irrawaddy River Valley, use a number of largely similar dialects, while a minority speak non-standard dialects found in the  peripheral areas of the country. These dialects include: Arakanese (Rakhine) in Rakhine State and Marma in Bangladesh are also sometimes considered dialects of Burmese and sometimes as separate languages. Despite vocabulary and pronunciation differences, there is mutual intelligibility among Burmese dialects, as for the most part, they share the same four tones, consonant clusters and the use of the Burmese script. However, several dialects substantially differ in Burmese with respect to vocabulary, lexical particles, and rhymes. The standard dialect of Burmese (the Mandalay-Yangon dialect continuum) comes from the Irrawaddy River valley. Regional differences between speakers from Upper Burma (e.g., Mandalay dialect), called anya tha , and speakers from Lower Burma (e.g., Yangon dialect), called auk tha , occur in vocabulary choice, not in pronunciation. Minor pronunciation differences do exist within the Irrawaddy River valley. For instance, for the term  "food offering [to a monk]", Lower Burmese speakers use  instead of , which is the pronunciation used in Upper Burma. The standard dialect is represented by the Yangon dialect because of the modern city's media influence and economic clout. In the past, the Mandalay dialect represented standard Burmese. The most noticeable feature of the Mandalay dialect is its use of the first person pronoun  kya.nau  by both men and women, whereas in Yangon, the said pronoun is used only by male speakers while  kya.ma.  is used by female speakers. Moreover, with regard to kinship terminology, Upper Burmese speakers differentiate the maternal and paternal sides of a family whereas Lower Burmese speakers do not. Spoken Burmese is remarkably uniform among Burmese speakers, particularly those living in the Irrawaddy valley, who all use variants of Standard Burmese. The first major reason for the uniformity is the traditional Buddhist monastic education system, which encouraged education and uniformity in language throughout the Upper Irrawaddy valley, the traditional homeland of the Bamar people. According to the 1891 British census conducted five years after the annexation of the entire country, Konbaung Burma had an "unusually high male literacy" rate where 62.5% of age 25 and over in Upper Burma could read and write. The figure would have been much higher if non-Bamars (e.g., Chins, Kachins, etc.) were excluded. For the whole country, the literacy rate was 49% for men and 5.5% for women. The migration of Burmese speakers of Bamar descent to Lower Burma is relatively recent. As late as the mid-1700s, the Austroasiatic language Mon was the principal language of Lower Burma and the Mon people who inhabited it. After the Burmese-speaking Konbaung Dynasty's victory over the Mon-speaking Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom in 1757, the shift to Burmese began in Lower Burma. By 1830, an estimated 90% of the population in the region identified themselves as Bamar (and, as such, Burmese speakers) due the influx from Upper Burma, assimilation, and intermarriage. In the British colonial era, British incentives, particularly geared toward rice production, as well as political instability in Upper Burma, accelerated this migration.  More distinctive non-standard varieties emerge as one moves farther away from the Irrawaddy River valley toward peripheral areas of the country. These varieties include the Yaw, Palaw, Myeik (Merguese), Tavoyan and Intha dialects. Despite substantial vocabulary and pronunciation differences, there is mutual intelligibility among most Burmese dialects. Dialects in Tanintharyi Region, including Palaw, Merguese and Tavoyan, are especially conservative in comparison to Standard Burmese. The Tavoyan and Intha dialects have preserved the  medial, which is otherwise only found in Old Burmese inscriptions. They also often reduce the intensity of the glottal stop. Myeik has 250,000 speakers while Tavoyan has 400,000. The most pronounced feature of the Arakanese language of Rakhine State is its retention of the  sound, which has become a  sound in standard Burmese. Also, Arakanese features a variety of vowel differences, including the merger of the   and   vowels. Hence, a word like "blood"  is pronounced  in standard Burmese and  in Arakanese. Burmese is a diglossic language with two distinguishable registers (or diglossic varieties): The literary form of Burmese retains archaic and conservative grammatical structures and modifiers (including particles, markers and pronouns) no longer used in the colloquial form. In most cases, the corresponding grammatical markers in the literary and spoken forms are totally unrelated to each other. Examples of this phenomenon include the following lexical items: Historically the literary register was preferred for written Burmese on the grounds that "the spoken style lacks gravity, authority, dignity". In the mid-1960s some Burmese writers spearheaded efforts to abandon the literary form, asserting that the spoken vernacular form ought to be used. Some Burmese linguists such as Minn Latt, a Czech academic, proposed moving away from the high form of Burmese altogether. Although the literary form is heavily used in written contexts (literary and scholarly works, radio news broadcasts, and novels), the recent trend has been to accommodate the spoken form in informal written contexts. Nowadays, television news broadcasts, comics, and commercial publications use the spoken form or a combination of the spoken and simpler, less ornate formal forms. The following sample sentence reveals that differences between literary and spoken Burmese mostly occur in grammatical particles: Spoken Burmese has politeness levels and honorifics that take the speaker's status and age in relation to the audience into account. The particle  pa is frequently used after a verb to express politeness. Moreover, Burmese pronouns relay varying degrees of deference or respect. In many instances, polite speech (e.g., addressing teachers, officials, or elders) employs feudal-era third person pronouns or kinship terms in lieu of first and second person pronouns. Furthermore, with regard to vocabulary choice, spoken Burmese clearly distinguishes the Buddhist clergy (monks) from the laity (householders), especially when speaking to or about bhikkhus (monks). The following are examples of varying vocabulary used for Buddhist clergy and for laity : Burmese primarily has a monosyllabic received Sino-Tibetan vocabulary. Nonetheless, many words, especially loanwords from Indo-European languages like English, are polysyllabic, and others, from Mon, an Austroasiatic language, are sesquisyllabic. Burmese loanwords are overwhelmingly in the form of nouns. Historically, Pali, the liturgical language of Theravada Buddhism, had a profound influence on Burmese vocabulary. Burmese has readily adopted words of Pali origin because of phonotactic similarities between two languages alongside the fact that the script used for Burmese can reproduce Pali spellings with complete accuracy. Pali loanwords are often related to religion, government, arts, and science. Burmese loanwords from Pali primarily take four forms: Burmese has also adapted a great deal of words from Mon, traditionally spoken by the Mon people, who until recently formed the majority in Lower Burma. Most Mon loanwords are so well assimilated that they are not distinguished as loanwords as Burmese and Mon were used interchangeably for several centuries in pre-colonial Burma. Mon loans are often related to flora, fauna, administration, textiles, foods, boats, crafts, architecture and music. As a natural consequence of British rule in Burma, English has been another major source of vocabulary, especially with regard to technology, measurements and modern institutions. English loanwords tend to take one of three forms: To a lesser extent, Burmese has also imported words from Sanskrit (religion), Hindi (food, administration, and shipping), and Chinese (games and food). Burmese has also imported a handful of words from other European languages such as Portuguese. Here is a sample of loan words found in Burmese: Since the end of British rule, the Burmese government has attempted to limit usage of Western loans (especially from English) by coining new words (neologisms). For instance, for the word "television," Burmese publications are mandated to use the term  (lit. "see picture, hear sound") in lieu of , a direct English transliteration. Another example is the word "vehicle", which is officially   (derived from Pali) but   (from English "car") in spoken Burmese. Some previously common English loanwords have fallen out of usage with the adoption of neologisms. An example is the word "university", formerly  , from English "university", now  , a Pali-derived neologism recently created by the Burmese government and derived from the Pali spelling of Taxila ( Takkasila), an ancient university town in modern-day Pakistan. Some words in Burmese may have many synonyms, each having certain usages, such as formal, literary, colloquial, and poetic. One example is the word "moon", which can be   (native Tibeto-Burman),   (derivatives of Pali canda "moon"), or   (Sanskrit). The transcriptions in this section use the International Phonetic Alphabet. The consonants of Burmese are as follows: Phonetic notes:  is uncommon, except as a voiced allophone of .  is rare, having disappeared from modern Burmese, except in transcriptions of foreign names and a handful of native words.  is rare, used only in toponyms that have retained Sanskrit or Pali pronunciations (such as Amarapura, pronounced  and in English-derived words. Historically,  became  in Burmese, and is usually replaced by  in Pāli loanwords, e.g. "monk"  ra.hanta , "king"  raja. . Occasionally it is replaced with  (e.g., "animal"  ti.rac hcan), pronounced  or . ɴ is a special syllable-final nasal consonant, which bears some resemblance to Japanese moraic n, ン. Burmese exhibits two distinct types of voicing sandhi, which occurs in the consonant phones:  In the first type, the initial consonant of the second syllable becomes voiced: e.g. "hot water":   ←  +  In the second type, the initial consonants of both syllables become voiced: e.g. "promise":   ←  +  In some compound works, the phoneme , when following the nasalized final , can shift to a  sound: e.g. "blouse" ( angkyi):  → . The phonemes , when following the nasalized final , can become  in compound words: e.g. "to consult" :  →  e.g. "to apologize" :  →  e.g. "airplane" :  →  The placeless nasal  is realized as nasalization of the preceding vowel or as a homorganic nasal of the following consonant; thus  "storm" is pronounced . In many Burmese verbs, pre-aspiration and post-aspiration distinguishes the causative and non-causative forms of verbs, where the aspirated initial consonant indicates active voice or a transitive verb, while an unaspirated initial consonant indicates passive voice or an intransitive verb: e.g. "to cook" ,  vs. "to be cooked" ,  e.g. "to loosen" ,  vs. "to be loosened" ,   e.g. "to elevate" ,  vs. "to be elevated" ,  The vowels of Burmese are: The monophthongs , , , and  occur only in open syllables (those without a syllable coda); the diphthongs , , , and  occur only in closed syllables (those with a syllable coda).  only occurs in a minor syllable, and is the only vowel that is permitted in a minor syllable (see below). The close vowels  and  and the close portions of the diphthongs are slightly centered to  and  in closed syllables, i.e. before  and . Thus   "two" is phonetically  and   "cat" is phonetically . Burmese is a tonal language, which means phonemic contrasts can be made on the basis of the tone of a vowel. In Burmese, these contrasts involve not only pitch, but also phonation, intensity (loudness), duration, and vowel quality. However, some linguists consider Burmese a pitch-register language like Shanghainese. There are four contrastive tones in Burmese. In the following table, the tones are shown marked on the vowel  as an example. For example, the following words are distinguished from each other only on the basis of tone: In syllables ending with , the checked tone is excluded: In spoken Burmese, some linguists classify two real tones (there are four nominal tones transcribed in written Burmese), "high" (applied to words that terminate with a stop or check, high-rising pitch) and "ordinary" (unchecked and non-glottal words, with falling or lower pitch), with those tones encompassing a variety of pitches. The "ordinary" tone consists of a range of pitches. Linguist L. F. Taylor concluded that "conversational rhythm and euphonic intonation possess importance" not found in related tonal languages and that "its tonal system is now in an advanced state of decay." The syllable structure of Burmese is C(G)V((V)C), which is to say the onset consists of a consonant optionally followed by a glide, and the rime consists of a monophthong alone, a monophthong with a consonant, or a diphthong with a consonant. The only consonants that can stand in the coda are  and . Some representative words are: A minor syllable has some restrictions: Some examples of words containing minor syllables:   The Burmese alphabet consists of 33 letters and 12 vowels, and is written from left to right. It requires no spaces between words, although modern writing usually contains spaces after each clause to enhance readability. Characterized by its circular letters and diacritics, the script is an abugida, with all letters having an inherent vowel  a.  or . The consonants are arranged into six consonant groups (called  based on articulation, like other Brahmi scripts. Tone markings and vowel modifications are written as diacritics placed to the left, right, top, and bottom of letters. The development of the script followed that of the language, which is generally divided into Old Burmese, Middle Burmese and modern Burmese. Old Burmese dates from the 11th to the 16th century (Pagan and Ava dynasties); Middle Burmese from the 16th to the 18th century (Toungoo to early Konbaung dynasties); modern Burmese from the mid-18th century to the present. Orthographic changes followed shifts in phonology (such as the merging of the  and  medials) rather than transformations in Burmese grammatical structure and phonology, which has not changed much from Old Burmese to modern Burmese. For example, during the Pagan era, the medial   was transcribed in writing, which has been replaced by medials   and   in modern Burmese (e.g. "school" in old Burmese   →   in modern Burmese). Likewise written Burmese has preserved all nasalized finals , which have merged to  in spoken Burmese. (The exception is , which, in spoken Burmese, can be one of many open vowels . Likewise, other consonantal finals  have been reduced to . Similar mergers are seen in other Sino-Tibetan languages like Shanghainese, and to a lesser extent, Cantonese.) Written Burmese dates to the early Pagan period. The British colonial period scholars believed that the Burmese script was developed c. 1058 from the Mon script. However, evidence shows that the Burmese script has been in use at least since 1035 (perhaps as early as 984) while the earliest Burma Mon script, which is different from the Thailand Mon script, dates to 1093. The Burmese script may have been sourced from the Pyu script. (Both Mon and Pyu scripts are derivatives of the Brahmi script.) Burmese orthography originally followed a square format but the cursive format took hold from the 17th century when popular writing led to the wider use of palm leaves and folded paper known as parabaiks . Much of the orthography in written Burmese today can be traced back to Middle Burmese. Standardized tone marking was not achieved until the 18th century. From the 19th century onward, orthographers created spellers to reform Burmese spelling, because ambiguities arose over spelling sounds that had been merged. During British colonial rule, Burmese spelling was standardized through dictionaries and spellers. The latest spelling authority, named the Myanma Salonpaung Thatpon Kyan , was compiled in 1978 at the request of the Burmese government. The basic word order of the Burmese language is subject-object-verb. Pronouns in Burmese vary according to the gender and status of the audience. Burmese is monosyllabic (i.e., every word is a root to which a particle but not another word may be prefixed). Sentence structure determines syntactical relations and verbs are not conjugated. Instead they have particles suffixed to them. For example, the verb "to eat,"  ca:  is itself unchanged when modified. Burmese does not have adjectives per se. Rather, it has verbs that carry the meaning "to be X", where X is an English adjective. These verbs can modify a noun by means of the grammatical particle  tai.  in colloquial Burmese (literary form:  sau: , which is suffixed as follows: Colloquial:  hkyau: tai. lu  Formal:  hkyau: so: lu Gloss: "beautiful" + adjective particle + "person" Adjectives may also form a compound with the noun (e.g.  lu hkyau:  "person" + "be beautiful"). Comparatives are usually ordered: X +  htak pui  + adjective, where X is the object being compared to. Superlatives are indicated with the prefix  a.  + adjective +  hcum: . Numerals follow the nouns they modify. Moreover, numerals follow several pronunciation rules that involve tone changes (low tone → creaky tone) and voicing shifts depending on the pronunciation of surrounding words. A more thorough explanation is found on Burmese numerals. The roots of Burmese verbs are almost always suffixed with at least one particle which conveys such information as tense, intention, politeness, mood, etc. Many of these particles also have formal/literary and colloquial equivalents. In fact, the only time in which no particle is attached to a verb is in imperative commands. However, Burmese verbs are not conjugated in the same way as most European languages; the root of the Burmese verb always remains unchanged and does not have to agree with the subject in person, number or gender. The most commonly used verb particles and their usage are shown below with an example verb root  ca:  "to eat". Alone, the statement  is imperative. The suffix  tai  (literary form:  sany  can be viewed as a particle marking the present tense and/or a factual statement:  ca: tai  "I eat" The suffix  hkai.  denotes that the action took place in the past. However, this particle is not always necessary to indicate the past tense such that it can convey the same information without it. But to emphasize that the action happened before another event that is also currently being discussed, the particle becomes imperative. Note that the suffix  tai  in this case denotes a factual statement rather than the present tense:  ca: hkai. tai  "I ate" The particle  ne  is used to denote an action in progression. It is equivalent to the English '-ing'"  ca: ne tai  "I am eating" This particle  pri , which is used when an action that had been expected to be performed by the subject is now finally being performed,  has no equivalent in English. So in the above example, if someone had been expecting you to eat and you have finally started eating, the particle  is used as follows:  (ca.) ca: pri  "I am (now) eating" The particle  mai  (literary form:  many  is used to indicate the future tense or an action which is yet to be performed:  ca: mai  "I will eat" The particle  tau.  is used when the action is about to be performed immediately when used in conjunction with . Therefore it could be termed as the "immediate future tense particle".  ca: tau. mai  "I'm going to eat (straight-away)" When  is used alone, however, it is imperative:  ca: tau.  "Eat (now)" Verbs are negated by the particle  ma. , which is prefixed to the verb. Generally speaking, other particles are suffixed to that verb, along with . The verb suffix particle  nai.  (literary form:  hnang.  indicates a command:  ma.ca: nai.  Don't eat The verb suffix particle  bhu:  indicates a statement:  ma.ca: bhu:  "[I] don't eat" Nouns in Burmese are pluralized by suffixing the particle  twe  (or  if the word ends in a glottal stop) in colloquial Burmese or  mya:  in formal Burmese. The particle  (tou. , which indicates a group of persons or things, is also suffixed to the modified noun. An example is below: Plural suffixes are not used when the noun is quantified with a number. Although Burmese does not have grammatical gender (e.g. masculine or feminine nouns), a distinction is made between the sexes, especially in animals and plants, by means of suffix particles. Nouns are masculinized with the following particles:  hti: ,  hpa , or  hpui , depending on the noun, and feminized with the particle  ma. . Examples of usage are below:  Like its neighboring languages such as Thai, Bengali, and Chinese, Burmese uses numerical classifiers (also called measure words) when nouns are counted or quantified. This approximately equates to English expressions such as "two slices of bread" or "a cup of coffee". Classifiers are required when counting nouns, so  hka.le: nga:  (lit. "child five") is ungrammatical, because the measure word for people  yauk  needs to suffix the numeral. The standard word order of quantified words is: quantified noun + numeral adjective + classifier, except in round numbers (numbers that end in zero), in which the word order is flipped, where the quantified noun precedes the classifier: quantified noun + classifier + numeral adjective. The only exception to this rule is the number 10, which follows the standard word order. Measurements of time, such as "hour,"  "day,"  or "month,"  do not require classifiers. Below are some of the most commonly used classifiers in Burmese. The Burmese language makes prominent usage of particles (called  in Burmese), which are untranslatable words that are suffixed or prefixed to words to indicate level of respect, grammatical tense, or mood. According to the Myanmar–English Dictionary (1993), there are 449 particles in the Burmese language. For example,   is a grammatical particle used to indicate the imperative mood. While  ("work" + particle indicating politeness) does not indicate the imperative,  ("work" + particle indicating imperative mood + particle indicating politeness) does. Particles may be combined in some cases, especially those modifying verbs. Some particles modify the word's part of speech. Among the most prominent of these is the particle  , which is prefixed to verbs and adjectives to form nouns or adverbs. For instance, the word  means "to enter," but combined with , it means "entrance" . Also, in colloquial Burmese, there is a tendency to omit the second  in words that follow the pattern  + noun/adverb +  + noun/adverb, like , which is pronounced  and formally pronounced . Subject pronouns begin sentences, though the subject is generally omitted in the imperative forms and in conversation. Grammatically speaking, subject marker particles   in colloquial,   in formal) must be attached to the subject pronoun, although they are also generally omitted in conversation. Object pronouns must have an object marker particle   in colloquial,   in formal) attached immediately after the pronoun. Proper nouns are often substituted for pronouns. One's status in relation to the audience determines the pronouns used, with certain pronouns used for different audiences. Polite pronouns are used to address elders, teachers and strangers, through the use of feudal-era third person pronouns in lieu of first and second person pronouns. In such situations, one refers to oneself in third person:  kya. nau  for men and  kya. ma.  for women, both meaning "your servant", and refer to the addressee as  min  "your highness",  khang bya:  "master, lord" () or  hrang  "ruler/master". So ingrained are these terms in the daily polite speech that people use them as the first and second person pronouns without giving a second thought to the root meaning of these pronouns. When speaking to a person of the same status or of younger age,  nga  "I/me" and  nang  "you" may be used, although most speakers choose to use third person pronouns. For example, an older person may use  dau le:  "aunt" or  u: lei:  "uncle" to refer to himself, while a younger person may use either  sa:  "son" or  sa.mi:  "daughter". The basic pronouns are: * The basic particle to indicate plurality is  tui., colloquial  dui.. ‡ Used by male speakers. † Used by female speakers. Other pronouns are reserved for speaking with bhikkhus (Buddhist monks). When speaking to a bhikkhu, pronouns like  bhun: bhun: (from  phun: kri: "monk"),  chara dau  "royal teacher", and  a.hrang bhu.ra:  "your lordship" are used depending on their status  when referring to oneself, terms like  ta. paey. tau "royal disciple" or  da. ka , "donor" are used. When speaking to a monk, the following pronouns are used: † The particle ma.  is suffixed for women. ‡ Typically reserved for the chief monk of a kyaung (monastery_. In colloquial Burmese, possessive pronouns are contracted when the root pronoun itself is low toned. This does not occur in literary Burmese, which uses ၏  as postpositional marker for possessive case instead of  . Examples include the following: The contraction also occurs in some low toned nouns, making them possessive nouns (e.g.  or , "mother's" and "Myanmar's" respectively).  Minor pronunciation differences do exist within regions of Irrawaddy valley. For example, the pronunciation  of  "food offering [to a monk]" is preferred in Lower Burma, instead of , which is preferred in Upper Burma. However, the most obvious difference between Upper Burmese and Lower Burmese is that Upper Burmese speech still differentiates maternal and paternal sides of a family: 1 The youngest (paternal or maternal) aunt may be called  , and the youngest paternal uncle  . In a testament to the power of media, the Yangon-based speech is gaining currency even in Upper Burma. Upper Burmese-specific usage, while historically and technically accurate, is increasingly viewed as countrified speech, or at best regional speech. In fact, some usages are already considered strictly regional Upper Burmese speech, and are likely dying out. For example: In general, the male-centric names of old Burmese for familial terms have been replaced in standard Burmese with formerly female-centric terms, which are now used by both sexes. One holdover is the use of  (younger brother to a male) and  (younger brother to a female). Terms like  (elder brother to a male) and  (younger sister to a male) now are used in standard Burmese only as part of compound words like  (brothers) or  (brother and sister). Reduplication is prevalent in Burmese and is used to intensify or weaken adjectives' meanings. For example,   "beautiful" is reduplicated, the intensity of the adjective's meaning increases. Many Burmese words, especially adjectives with two syllables, such as   "beautiful", when reduplicated ( →  ) become adverbs. This is also true of some Burmese verbs and nouns (e.g.  "a moment" →  "frequently", which become adverbs when reduplicated. Some nouns are also reduplicated to indicate plurality. For instance,   "country", but when reduplicated to   "country", means "many countries," as in   "international". Another example is , which means "a kind," but the reduplicated form  means "multiple kinds." A few measure words can also be reduplicated to indicate "one or the other": There is no official romanization system for Burmese. There have been attempts to make one, but none have been successful. Replicating Burmese sounds in the Latin script is complicated. There is a Pali-based transcription system in existence, MLC Transcription System which was devised by the Myanmar Language Commission (MLC). However, it only transcribes sounds in formal Burmese and is based on the orthography rather than the phonology. Several colloquial transcription systems have been proposed, but none is overwhelmingly preferred over others. Transcription of Burmese is not standardized, as seen in the varying English transcriptions of Burmese names. For instance, a Burmese personal name like   may be variously romanized as Win, Winn, Wyn, or Wynn, while   may be romanized as Khaing, Khine, or Khain.  The Burmese script can be entered from a standard QWERTY keyboard. The most popular Burmese font, Zawgyi, is not Unicode-compliant, but a number of Unicode-compliant Burmese fonts exist. The national standard keyboard layout is known as the Myanmar3 layout, and it was published along with the Myanmar3 Unicode font. The layout, developed by the Myanmar Unicode and NLP Research Center, has a smart input system to cover the complex structures of Burmese and related scripts.      noun verb part. noun part. adj. part. verb part. part. part. Literary hracle:lum:a.re:a.hkang: hprac sau:a.hkaka. lu u:re 3000 hmya. sehcum: hkai. kra. sany Spoken tum:ka. a.yauk lauk se Gloss The Four Eights Uprising happen when people measure word 3,000 approximately die past tense plural marker sentence final Bilabial Dental Alveolar Post-al./Palatal Velar Glottal Placeless Nasal  &nbsp;  ɴ Stop/Affricate pʰ &nbsp;  &nbsp; tʰ &nbsp; &nbsp; tɕʰ &nbsp; kʰ &nbsp; &nbsp; Fricative &nbsp; &nbsp; sʰ &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Approximant(Lateral) &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;() ()  &nbsp;  Monophthongs Diphthongs Front Back Front offglide Back offglide Close Close-mid Mid Open-mid Open Tone Burmese Symbol(shown on a) Phonation Duration Intensity Pitch Low normal medium low low, often slightly rising High sometimes slightly breathy long high high, often with a fall before a pause Creaky tense or creaky, sometimes with lax glottal stop medium high high, often slightly falling Checked centralized vowel quality, final glottal stop short high high (in citation; can vary in context) hka.le: nga: yauk child five classifier Burmese !! MLC !! IPA !! Usage !! Remarks yauk for people Used in informal context u: for people Used in formal context and also used for monks and nuns pa: for people Used exclusively for monks and nuns of the Buddhist order kaung for animals hku. general classifier Used with almost all nouns except for animate objects lum: for round objects pra: for flat objects cu. for groups Can be . Person Singular Plural* Informal Formal Informal Formal First person  nga ‡ kywan to† kywan ma.   nga tui. ‡ kywan to tui.† kywan ma. tui.  Second person  nang mang: ‡ khang bya:† hrang  nang tui. ‡ khang bya: tui.† hrang tui. Third person  su  (a.) sang  su tui.  sang tui. Person Singular Informal Formal First person † ta.paey. tau † da. ka Second person bhun: bhun:(u:) pasang:  a.hrang bhu.ra:‡chara dau Term Upper Burmese Lower Burmese Myeik dialect Term Upper Burmese Standard Burmese Tanintharyi Region: Merguese (Myeik, Beik), Tavoyan (Dawei), and Palaw Magway Region: Yaw Shan State: Intha, Taungyo and Danu Literary High (H) form ( mranma ca): the high variety (formal and written), used in literature (formal writing), newspapers, radio broadcasts, and formal speeches Spoken Low (L) form ( mranma ca.ka:): the low variety (informal and spoken), used in daily conversation, television, comics and literature (informal writing) "this" (pronoun):    i →   di "that" (pronoun):    htui →   hui "at" (postposition):   hnai.  →   hma  plural (marker):    mya: →   twe possessive (marker):    i. →   re. "and" (conjunction):    hnang. →   ne. "if" (conjunction):    hlyang →   rang "sleep" (verb):  kyin:  for monks vs.  ip  for laity "die" (verb):  pyam tau mu  for monks vs.  se  for laity Direct loan: direct import of Pali words with no alteration in orthography "life": Pali  jiva → Burmese  jiva Abbreviated loan: import of Pali words with accompanied syllable reduction and alteration in orthography (usually by means of a placing a diacritic, called athat  (lit. "nonexistence") atop the last letter in the syllable to suppress the consonant's inherent vowel "karma": Pali  kamma → Burmese  kam "dawn": Pali  aruṇa → Burmese  arun "merit": Pali  kusala → Burmese  kusuil Double loan: adoption of two different terms derived from the same Pali word Pali  māna → Burmese   "arrogance" and   "pride" Hybrid loan (e.g., neologisms or calques): construction of compounds combining native Burmese words with Pali or combine Pali words: "airplane":  , lit. "air machine fly", ←  (native Burmese, "air") +  (from Pali yana, "vehicle") +  (native Burmese word, "fly") Direct loan: adoption of an English word, adapted to the Burmese phonology "democracy": English democracy → Burmese  Neologism or calque: translation of an English word using native Burmese constituent words "human rights": English "human rights" → Burmese  ( "human" +  "rights") Hybrid loan: construction of compound words by native Burmese words to English words "to sign":   ←  (English, "sign") +  (native Burmese, "inscribe"). suffering:  , from Pali dukkha radio:  , from English "radio" method:  , from Mon eggroll:  , from Hokkien 潤餅 (jūn-piáⁿ) wife:  , from Hindi jani noodle:  , from Shan   foot (unit of measurement):  , from Portuguese pé flag:  ,  ʿalam storeroom:  , from Malay gudang Low  "shake" High  "be bitter" Creaky  "fee" Checked  "draw off" Low  "undergo" High  "dry up" Creaky  "appoint" CV  'girl' CVC  'crave' CGV  'earth' CGVC  'eye' CVVC  (term of address for young men) CGVVC  'ditch' It contains  as its only vowel It must be an open syllable (no coda consonant) It cannot bear tone It has only a simple (C) onset (no glide after the consonant) It must not be the final syllable of the word  'knob'  'flute'  'mock'  'be wanton'  'rice-water'  mrac  "river"  mrac twe  "rivers" (colloquial)  mrac mya:  "rivers" (formal)  mrac tou:  "rivers"  kraung hti:  "male cat"  kraung ma.  "female cat"  krak hpa.  "rooster/cock"  htan: hpui  "male toddy palm plant"   "I" +  (postpositional marker for possessive case) =   "my"   "you" +  (postpositional marker for possessive case) =   "your"   "he, she" +  (postpositional marker for possessive case) =   "his, her"  (measure word for people) →  (someone)  (measure word for things) →  (something) Omniglot: Burmese Language Learn Burmese online Online Burmese lessons Burmese language resources from SOAS Myanmar Unicode and NLP Research Center Myanmar 3 font and keyboard Burmese online dictionary (Unicode) Ayar Myanmar online dictionary Myanmar unicode character table Download KaNaungConverter_Window_Build200508.zip from the Kanaung project page and Unzip Ka Naung Converter Engine
