 Unrelated to the similarly named Jason of Star Command. Buzz Lightyear of Star Command is an American animated series produced by Walt Disney Television Animation.  The series originally aired on UPN and ABC from August 2000 to January 2001 as part of Disney's One Saturday Morning programming block."Buzz Lightyear of Star Command". www.bcdb.com, May 13, 2012 It follows the adventures of space ranger Buzz Lightyear, who previously appeared as an action figure in the films Toy Story and Toy Story 2. 2001 – Outstanding Sound Editing – Special Class – Jennifer Mertens, Paca Thomas, Otis Van Osten, Rick Hammel, Eric Hertsguaard, Robbi Smith, Brian F. Mars, Marc S. Perlman, and Dominick Certo (won)  A videogame based on the series was developed by Traveller's Tales and published by Activision. It was released for PlayStation, Game Boy Color, Microsoft Windows and Dreamcast in 2000. The gameplay revolves around Buzz Lightyear chasing down the various villains from the show, and defeating them using different color-coded weapons. The series aired during UPN's Disney's One Too programming block from October 2000 to August 2003. Reruns aired on Disney Channel from 2000 to September 2, 2003,http://www.toonzone.net/forums/disney-pixar-forum/85070-disney-channel-september-info-now-up.html#.VJI18Yd-9E5 and again from June 5, 2006http://www.toonzone.net/forums/disney-pixar-forum/167304-classics-returning-disney-channel-june-5-a.html to May 16, 2008.http://www.tvschedulearchive.com/disney-channel/2008/051208.txt Toon Disney reran the series from 2003 to 2007.     Episode Number Title Original Air Date Synopsis 01 "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins, Part 1" August 8, 2000 The beginning of the direct-to-video pilot film. Zurg kidnaps three LGM's with the intention of discovering how they are composed of intelligent minds and a rescue mission ends in tragedy when Buzz's partner, Warp Darkmatter is supposedly killed. 02 "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins, Part 2" August 8, 2000 The middle of the direct-to-video pilot film. Zurg's new accomplice Agent Z successfully captures the Uni-Mind, rendering the LGM's minds useless, and also destroys training robot XR in battle. Buzz continues to refuse in working with new recruit Mira Nova, and she defies orders by launching a prototype spacecraft to take on Zurg. 03 "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins, Part 3" August 8, 2000 The end of the direct-to-video pilot film. Zurg uses the Uni-Mind to control every planet in the Galactic Alliance, including Star Command. It's down to Buzz, Mira, XR and Booster to save the day before it's too late. 04 "The Torque Armada" October 2, 2000 Zurg's Hornets spring Torque from a prison transport and have him brought to Planet Z. While Torque is on Planet Z, Zurg has the Grubs place a cell-separating device on Torque that enables him to make clones of himself. 05 "Gravitina" October 3, 2000 Star Command is directly in the path of an asteroid field. Team Lightyear responds to the emergency and starts to destroy the asteroids, but they keep on coming. The source of the attack is an evil, female, Big-Headed alien known as Gravitina,the Mistress of Mass...and she has a big crush on Buzz. 06 "XL" October 4, 2000 After a series of high tech robberies the team decides to put XR as bait to lure the robber who turns out to be a previous experimental robotic ranger XL (who was deactivated), but he ambushes and kidnaps the commander after which the team rushes to save him and disable the robot again. 07 "Little Secrets" October 5, 2000 Booster sneaks in an exponentially growing plant from Riason that behaves like a monster; XR sneaks in children for private tours of Star Command; Mira, instead of completing her paperwork, throws it in the trash and Buzz is charged with hunting a spy on Star command. 08 "Inside Job" October 6, 2000 When the ambassador or Gargantua announces his intent to join the Galactic Alliance, a few extremists try to stop and assassinate him before doing so and Buzz and his team get charged with his protection.  Worsening matters at hand is a new recruit who makes Booster insecure. 09 "NOS-4-A2" October 8, 2000 After Team Lightyear rescues a mysterious box from a cargo freighter that is under attack by Warp Darkmatter, they bring the box back to Star Command, unaware that they are actually falling right into Zurg's evil trap. The box contains a robotic energy vampire named NOS-4-A2, who was created by Zurg to destroy Star Command by using his ability to control any machine he bites, including XR. 10 "The Planet Destroyer" October 9, 2000 Zurg shows off his latest invention, capable of destroying planets at freewill, on Tradeworld. When the Galactic President refuses to negotiate with Zurg, he retaliates by destroying Tangea, Mira's home planet. However, Team Lightyear soon discovers that the deadly weapon isn't all what it seems to be. 11 "The Beasts of Karn" October 10, 2000 While checking up on a wildlife researcher living on a Wildlife planet, 42 crashes.  With the ship damaged, the team has to stay there until repairs are complete.  While on the planet, Booster gets kidnapped by poachers. 12 "Tag Team" October 11, 2000 After a conflict with Warp Darkmatter, Buzz realizes that he has an implant in his neck that cannot be removed, due to the potential security risk he is suspended from duty. It is also determined that a similar implant is in Warp Darkmatter's neck and they try to figure out what to do with it. 13 "The Main Event" October 12, 2000 Buzz and XR respond to an emergency distress call that sends them to the planet Sentilla looking for a downed cargo ship full of V-Class Hyper Bombs. Little do they know that the call is just a ruse to lure them to the planet for the amusement of Rentwhistle Swack and his client Klerm. Note: Mira Nova and Booster are absent in this episode. 14 "The Return of XL" October 13, 2000 XL kidnaps XR and steals a vital component of his. Feeling depressed and neglected, XR runs off to Tradeworld in an attempt to be properly fixed, but only runs into more trouble. 15 "Strange Invasion" October 15, 2000 While saving a tour shuttle from a star that's going nova, Team Lightyear crash lands in a desert on an unexplored alien planet named Roswell. Booster is separated from the others during the crash and crashes unnoticed and meets a little alien girl named Becky. The others however are seen by the military and taken to an army base and both Buzz and Mira are classified as invading aliens (since XR is a robot). Working together, the two of them along with Becky's father the sheriff must rescue the others and get Team Lightyear off the planet. 16 "The Taking of PC-7" October 16, 2000 When the president of the Galactic Alliance gets trapped in a siege where galactic criminals take control of a prison planet named PC-7 with advanced systems that can even program personalities of criminals and even Rangers. 17 "Mindwarp" October 17, 2000 Whilst on vacation, Buzz is kidnapped, brainwashed and finds himself working as an office clerk under the name 'Flip Faxtone'. Team Lightyear soon discovers Klerm is behind this and is using Buzz's thoughts to strengthen his latest invention, the Klerm Slambots. 18 "Mira's Wedding" October 18, 2000 Lord Angstrom gatecrashes Mira's anniversary party to inform that she is getting married tomorrow to Doppler. Team Lightyear is immediately suspicious about Angstrom's intentions of the ceremony, which turns out to be a divine plan to seize the throne of Tangea from Mira's father. 19 "Panic on Bathyos" October 19, 2000 Smugglers are interrupting the flow of crystals being mined from the watery planet Bathyos. The crystals are needed for Crystal Fusion Propulsion and Bathyos has the galaxy's largest supply. Team Lightyear is called in to investigate, which angers some Bathyosians who have formed a group called BAAB, short for Bathyosians Against Air Breathers. 20 "Shiv Katall" October 20, 2000 Brain Pod #13 defects from Zurg and the Evil Emperor either wants him back or destroyed. He calls on the Galaxy's most infamous man hunter Shiv Katall to get the job done. When word gets to Star Command that Katall has been called, Buzz goes after him and dismisses the rest of the team. Mira doesn't like this and decides to intervene in the mission and find Katall. When the team does locate Katall he isn't quite the villain they thought him to be. 21 "Stress Test" October 22, 2000 Buzz's co-workers believe that their leader is beginning to crack under the pressure of constantly being on guard against Zurg. They send him to a doctor who recommends vacation time. Buzz is sent to the relaxing planet Rizone for some R & R. However it seems Buzz was right as Zurg is preparing an attack on that exact planet. 22 "A Zoo Out There" October 23, 2000 When politicians start getting kidnapped and Zurg and any of his minions deny involvement.  When the team sets a trap, they themselves get taken which leads them to the truth that they were kidnapped for a zoo. 23 "Root of Evil" October 24, 2000 When vegetables start attacking people, Buzz concludes that Zurg is responsible and the team starts investigating in which an old friend of Booster and his father's farm may be involved. 24 "Super Nova" October 25, 2000 To succeed in their latest mission, Mira uses her ghosting powers to walk into a Crystallic Fusion Generator. She emerges as a glowing, hyper-active ranger. Despite her father's warnings on how dangerous this new power is, Mira begins using her new powers to the extreme, eventually falling into the temptation of taking on Zurg by herself.NOTE: This episode was banned in the U.S. when moved to Toon Disney because Mira's new powers were believed to be interpreted as a drug addiction, and Mira even goes through withdrawal in one scene, though the episode was originally intended as an anti-drug theme.. 25 "Downloaded" October 26, 2000 During an impending crisis, XR downloads all the files of Star Command into himself. Despite being ordered to delete these files due to the potential risk this carries, XR pretends to do so. However when he makes the mistake of contacting a celebrity whose phone number is in the files, unaware that she was dating Zurg at the time. Zurg, upon learning on what's happened, places a bounty on XR's head to retrieve the files for himself. Now Team Lightyear has to protect XR from the villains that have come to claim this bounty and keep the files safe. 26 "The Plasma Monster" October 27, 2000 While escorting a dignitary's daughter for Star Command training, the team encounters a plasma monster who, in fact, is Plasma Boy, the girl's boyfriend.  Things turn serious after a smitten Booster starts a fight with him. 27 "The Crawling Flesh" October 29, 2000 Zurg's Brain Pods invent a new gas that has the ability to melt and morph anyone that comes into contact with it into a crawling blob. Buzz and Mira are the first to experience its effects and it's not long before everyone in Star Command is infected. The only cure is a unique antidote that Zurg keeps hold of. 28 "Dirty Work" October 30, 2000 When demand becomes high, Cosmo orders a K-3000 Uni-appliance that multi-tasks all of the kitchen's jobs for his diner. However, when NOS-4-A2 bites it, the appliance seizes entire control of the diner. Team Lightyear, much to Buzz's chagrin, has to rely on Professor Triffid's unique vegenetic technologies to return the diner back to normal. 29 "The Slayer" October 31, 2000 After NOS-4-A2 escapes from PC-7, Buzz and XR go to Trade World to arrest him, but after a few initial failures, Buzz has to strike an alliance with a child for his capture. 30 "The Lightyear Factor" November 1, 2000 Zurg accidentally stumbles into a parallel universe, where an evil Buzz Lightyear rules. Zurg uses this to his advantage in finally capturing the real Buzz, leaving Buzz to experience the terrors of the parallel world, and Zurg free to destroy Star Command. 31 "Clone Rangers" November 2, 2000 Zurg gets hold of Team Lightyear's DNA and is able to clone them to create evil versions of the Rangers. In his hurry to do, the clones emerge as kiddie versions of the team left to take on the Rangers. 32 "Bunzel Fever" November 3, 2000 It's the annual bunzel harvest on Jo-Ad, but Booster misses it, believing his space rangers duties are more important. Team Lightyear is soon left fighting Torque and XL on Tradeworld...and a deranged Booster, who is struck down by a fever that he originally dismissed as a myth. Now Team Lightyear must keep Booster under control and defeat Torgue and XL so they can get Booster to Jo-Ad to cure him. 33 "Devolutionaries" November 5, 2000 Warp Darkmatter attacks a strange planet with a crater of Banpanaliya that holds a secret: it contains a secret gas that devolves everyone who smells it.  As a result, the protectors become devolved into lemur like creatures, Buzz get devolved into an Caveman, Mira becomes blue sludge and Booster becomes a dinosaur-like creature, leaving only XR to fight Warp and Zurg's Bugs. 34 "Head Case" November 6, 2000 XR is injured while repelling a Vulturan attack. The rest of the team mistake his metal fatigue as mental fatigue, and urge him to undergo psych evaluation and while on vacation he is kidnapped and replaced by XL.  This is all part of XL's plan to infiltrate and destroy Star Command. 35 "The Yukari Imprint" November 7, 2000 While on a trip to Trade World on which they had to pick up a diplomat, Booster picks up a Yukari pod (a small pod that creates little playbuddies) for himself, and they become so many, that they start eating everything around them. 36 "The Shape Stealer" November 8, 2000 Zurg's latest creation, Project X, has the ability to turn a person evil against their will. It soon creates havoc on both Tradeworld and then Star Command, ultimately landing Buzz under Zurg's evil spell. 37 "Star Crossed" November 9, 2000 After Shiv Katall's alias is burned, Zurg is suffering from a shortage of credible assassins and bounty hunters, so he hires a new Tangean grounder to hunt a brain pod who tried to defect to Star Command.  Mira finds out that he is her ex-boyfriend, and in the following confusion, he captures Buzz so that he can deliver him to Zurg and complete his job. 38 "Haunted Moon" November 10, 2000 While trying to stop a comet on collision course to a planet the crew responsible suffers a serious haunting, as the team investigates, and they have some odd experiences too but at the end Buzz realizes that the last man attempting to do the job was the one who was trying to tell them that this was not a one-person job. 39 "Stranger Invasion" November 12, 2000 Booster gets in trouble when he is discovered to still be in contact with Becky from Roswell, even though Roswell is still an undeveloped world. Around that time Zurg invades Roswell and takes it over, with plans to build and deploy a surprise attack fleet to conquer Capital Planet. When Buzz decides to take Booster with him to Roswell's system on a patrol mission to cheer him up, they discover this, and the two must work with Roswell's military at foiling Zurg's plan.Note: In an eerie copy of Toy Story 3s climax, this episode has Zurg requesting to have a garbage incinerator in his new base, rather than a garbage smasher, as it would be far more difficult to escape from. Also, Zurg says he is Buzz's father, just like in Toy Story 2. 40 "Eye of the Tempest" November 13, 2000 While responding to a distress call of a young woman, Buzz walks into a trap set by a disgruntled former Star Command scientist, but Buzz has misjudged the intentions and feelings of both Spirou and Bonnie Lampkin. 41 "Revenge of the Monsters" November 14, 2000 NOS-4-A2 overthrows Zurg, and together with XL, takes over Zurg's palace. When Team Lightyear investigate the sudden appearance of vampire hornets, they discover NOS' ultimate plan, the creation of a new weapon that transforms everyone into "wirewolves", as Booster and Mira experience first hand. 42 "Lone Wolf" November 15, 2000 Because of lack of evidence, a criminal is about to walk free, making the team depressed. Buzz tells them about how in his initial years when he got depressed due to a similar incident and what inspired him to rejoin Star Command as a Space Ranger. 43 "Planet of the Lost" November 16, 2000 While investigating the disappearance of ships around a planet which looks like a desert but shows a significant amount of technology, the team ends up stranded along with all the people who crashed there and on detailed inspection they realize that the shriekers that caused the crash only wanted to trap people and mystery follows. 44 "Revenge of the Raenoks" November 17, 2000 Booster is taken prisoner by the Raenoks, who plan to use him for a prisoner exchange to get their leader, Varg, back. Buzz and Mira set out to rescue him, using a new cloaking device developed by the LGMs. 45 "The Starthought" November 19, 2000 Mira's father comes to Star Command with a special ship without any conventional controls that is driven by thought.  Mira gets to solo pilot the craft, but she is ambushed and loses it, so the team sets out to retrieve the captured craft. 46 "Millennial Bugs" November 20, 2000 Zurg and the Hornets raids a museum and steals a display of fossilized eggs of the extinct Millennial Bugs. Upon obtaining the services of Dr. Ozma Furbanna, Zurg plans to hatch the Millennial Bug eggs. Now Team Lightyear must convince Dr. Ozma Furbanna that Zurg is planning to use the Millennial Bugs to attack Capital Planet. 47 "Conspiracy" November 21, 2000 The Gargantians pose as Buzz in an attempt to get the Galactic President assassinated during the signing of a historic peace initiative. An innocent Buzz is soon jailed for the crime and must break out of prison to find out who is setting him up. 48 "At Large on a Small Planet" November 23, 2000 When the Gargantian ambassador wants to open a pizza place, he invites Buzz and Booster to show the people what the people from the outside world are like, but thanks to the size difference between normal species and Gargantians, people get scared so they use a machine to become small.  When Gargantian militants seize control of the machine for their own ends, Buzz and Booster must regain control of it despite the disadvantage they now find themselves at. 49 "Sunquake" November 24, 2000 Evil Buzz takes up the alias of Shiv Katall and starts stealing high tech stuff.  On closer inspection, Buzz and Mira find that there is a ship close to the sun and evil Buzz is involved with Gravitina, who intends to destroy everything with solar flares. 50 "First Missions" November 26, 2000 While they are pinned down by Zurg's Hornets while protecting Professor Reddshift, to help boost Reddshift's confidence that Buzz will save them in time, Mira, Booster, and XR tell him the stories of when each of them first met Buzz. 51 "Large Target" November 27, 2000 Team Lightyear busts a gang of weapon smugglers...but not the 'big fish' behind it. While they go off on vacation, XR, disguised as Booster, insults the mobster and he puts a contract out on Booster. Before long every bounty hunter in the galaxy is gunning for him. 52 "War and Peace and War" November 29, 2000 A routine equipment test is interrupted by Zurg, leading to a duel between him and Buzz. Their quarrel is interrupted by the image of a great floating head which wishes to impose peace on the galaxy by any means necessary. Buzz and Zurg reluctantly ally themselves to stop this threat to the galaxy, especially when they discover these aliens are only promoting peace to weaken their defenses so they could conquer the galaxy. Episode Number Title Original Air Date Synopsis 53 "Lost in Time" October 14, 2000 When Buzz travels into a Black Hole, Zurg uses it to trick him into thinking he is in the future and collect all of his secrets in his latest attempt to destroy Star Command. 54 "Rookie of the Year" October 21, 2000 Mira, Booster, and XR are all nominated for the 'Rookie of the Year' award. Zurg steals a new matter transporter whilst the three become more competitive with each other to impress Buzz the most, leaving them in more than a sticky situation. 55 "Wirewolf" October 28, 2000 When NOS-4-A2 attacks an energy base, Buzz and his team come to the aid of an old friend (Ty from Buzz's academy days), but when NOS-4-A2 attacks XR, Ty jumps in and gets bitten by NOS-4-A2. Later at night he mutates into a werewolf like creature. 56 "Rescue Mission" November 4, 2000 When the LGMs receive a faint transmission to construct a matter transporter so that Buzz can go and save a queen, he finds himself helping small creatures that are living somewhere a little too close for comfort. 57 "Star Smasher" November 11, 2000 Zurg kidnaps an LGM with independent thought. He extracts the information for the Flux Gravity Capacitor which is essentially a large trash compactor. He uses it to crush Team Lightyear's ship and then attack Capital Planet's sun and create a Black Hole which will suck Space Command and the planet into oblivion. 58 "Enemy Without a Face" November 18, 2000 Team Lightyear is caught in a gravity field of a planet. It turns out to be an ancient defense system and the planet seems devoid of life, bar two lone survivors from an ancient war and a parasite that stimulates aggressive behavior. Soon, all of Star Command, bar XR and Commander Nebula, are overcome by the mysterious creatures and begin to attack each other. 59 "Good Ol' Buzz" November 25, 2000 After Team Lightyear defeats Torque, they encounter a time-traveling elderly version of Buzz Lightyear, who comes to the present to prevent an event that would lead to the death of Mira Nova. 60 "Return to Karn" December 2, 2000 After the president of the Galactic Alliance is attacked by Zurg, Mira, being in charge of her security, decides to land her ship on Karn, where, apart from the obvious challenges of wildlife and terrain, they also have to face betrayals and Zurgs schemes. 61 "Speed Trap" December 9, 2000 When a large ship does not follow the space traffic guidelines, the team boards the ship to investigate only to be faced with a lack of understanding of the technology and an unconventional foe. 62 "Holiday Time" December 16, 2000 The team meets Santa Clause and find out how he does what he does. 63 "Opposites Attract" December 23, 2000 Gravitina, smitten with Buzz, gives him a big head in an attempt to make him love her. Team Lightyear set out to shrink it back down to size. 64 "Ancient Evil" January 6, 2001 The LGMs discover a space mummy with warnings of a great evil but when Warp Darkmatter tries to take it, the mummy drains him off his life force and escapes to conquer the whole world. 65 "42" January 13, 2001 To counter a new kind of threat, the LGMs give 42 a new systemic upgrade, but what the team does not realize at first is that the upgrade is actually an AI with a feminine personality. Buzz Lightyear (voiced by Patrick Warburton in the TV series, including re-dubbing Tim Allen's lines from the direct-to-video pilot film The Adventure Begins) – A famed Space Ranger from the planet Morph who is known for heroism and bravery. He often suggests that his arch-villain Emperor Zurg is behind every evil plot and is often proven correct. Like his Toy Story incarnation, Buzz is a stickler for procedure, but will tell a cover story if he needs to.In the episode "42" Buzz admits to Booster that he didn't lie to Commander Nebula by stating that he only told a cover story However, he has few people skills, and at times displays a lack of common sense. He attended PS-&nbsp;193 (that's 6859) as a primary school. He wrote at least half of the regulations in the Star Command Manual. He also owns a house on Capital Planet, (similar to the House of Tomorrow attraction Disneyland had in the 1960s) though as they all look alike and his duties often keep him away, he is confused over just which one is his.Although he is seen at his house on several episodes."Tag Team He seems to have a little crush on Dr. Ozma Furbanna and vice versa. Princess Mira Nova (voiced by Nicole Sullivan) – A rookie ranger and heir to the Tangean Royal throne. She uses her people's ability to phase through walls (called "ghosting") and can read minds. Buzz has a tendency to refer to her as "Princess" when he's angry with her. She acts as Buzz's co-pilot and second-in-command. She has the most common sense among the members of the team. Mira also has an estranged relationship with her father King Nova, who disapproves of her choice of being a Space Ranger, though deep down she still cares about him. She has red hair and turquoise skin. Booster Sinclair Munchapper (voiced by Stephen Furst) – A huge dinosaur-like former janitor from the agricultural planet Jo-ad (a play on the name of the Joad family, from John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath). He has a big appetite and incredible strength, but is sweet and occasionally naive. He is in awe of Buzz Lightyear and has encyclopedic knowledge of his prior adventures. XR, or Xpirimental Ranger (voiced by Larry Miller and Neil Flynn) – A short robot that was originally emotionless and programmed to learn from Buzz, but was blown apart by Agent Z during his first mission. The LGMs rebuilt him, but the temporary loss of the Uni-Mind to Emperor Zurg left them off their game. They rebuilt XR with his slicker, more emotional personality and a variety of attachments. The LGMs have stated that experimental ranger is the official meaning of the name, though other characters on the show hold the erroneous belief that the X stands for Expendable. He gets blown apart on nearly every mission he goes on, but is easily rebuilt. He considers Commander Nebula his father (due to his signing the paperwork authorizing his creation) and is always seeking his approval. Commander Zeb Nebula (voiced by Adam Carolla) – The Space Rangers' commander, whose left leg was replaced by a pegleg-like plasma cannon. He is short-tempered and constantly speaks with a loud voice. He has a robotic desk that forces him to do his paperwork. He hates to do so though and therefore signs forms without looking at them. By doing so, he inadvertently gave permission for the creation of XR, who therefore considers Nebula a father (He thought the form was the LGMs' vacation request). Nebula is frequently irritated by this, though he gives XR his due for his successes. LGMs, or Little Green Men (voiced by Jeff Pidgeon in Andy's Room sequence, Patrick Warburton in the actual series) – Small, three-eyed aliens (originally appeared as squeeze toy aliens in the Toy Story movies) from the religious planet Venus who keep the station running while inventing/maintaining all of the equipment. When one of their own is kidnapped, the other LGMs will instinctively try to rescue him by any means necessary. LGMs are typically in awe of Buzz. While they generally like the other Rangers, they may not be able to tell one from another.In "Good Ol' Buzz", an LGM mistakenly refers to Mira as "Booster". Upon being corrected, he says the Rangers all look the same to them. Several of their race are also shown to work for Santa Claus, acting as his toy builders. Ty Parsec (voiced by Steve Hytner) – An infamous old comrade of Buzz, who is fed up with Buzz always coming to his rescue. Ty was accidentally transformed into the robotic Wirewolf on the planet of Canis Lunis, after being bitten by the villain NOS-4-A2 while exposed to radioactive moonrock. Appeared in two episodes, with a cameo appearance in the episode "War, Peace, and War". He is ultimately cured and reinstated as a Space Ranger. Rocket Crocket (voiced by Phil LaMarr) – A member of Star Command and leader of Team Rocket. He is Buzz's rival since their academy days. Fop Doppler (voiced by Rob Paulsen) – The second Tangean Royal Ranger. He was challenged to complete basic Ranger Training and passed becoming one of the highest ranking Rangers winning every medal possible, then did not want to get married after Lord Angstrom attacked the wedding, discovering how much fun being a Space Ranger was and was allowed to after XR made up another of the many Tangean Royal rules. Petra Hammerhold (voiced by Nikki Cox) – Senator Hammerhold's daughter. She joined Star Command when her father forced her to do so (largely to keep her from her boyfriend Plasma Boy). She was initially resentful of this, but was moved by Buzz's heroism during a crisis. Plasma Boy (voiced by Michael Showalter) – Petra's boyfriend, who has a Plasma Monster form. Booster competed against him for Petra's affection. When Mira and XR fired a laser at his Plasma Monster form, he destabilized enough to the brink of explosion. He was kept from exploding when Booster used his suit and Ion Stabilization Matrix on him. He's now a member of Star Command. 42 (voiced by Joy Behar) – Usually the name of Buzz Lightyear's ship, it gained A.I. from one of the encounters with the Valkyran Raiders and a new energy projector device inserted on the ship by the LGMs. 42 doesn't like what Buzz says about her and usually controls the ship herself. XR developed a crush on her. When the Valkyran Raiders were thwarted, 42's consciousness was placed into a robot body and she now helps the LGMs. Evil Emperor Zurg (voiced by Wayne Knight) – The main antagonist of the series, who rules an empire on Planet Z and dreams of ruling the entire galaxy and destroying Star Command. He considers Buzz his arch-enemy and often takes any opportunity to try to eliminate him. Most of his subjects are robots. His feet double as rockets and he can transform his arms into a variety of weapons. Despite often breaking the seriousness of otherwise purely evil statements, Zurg is widely considered the most evil person in the galaxy, especially by the other villains. He seems to have some neuroses about being touched.  The episode War, and Peace and War was notably the only episode where Zurg teamed up with Buzz Lightyear to defeat the Heed, a common enemy that was trying to take over their galaxy. In Stranger Invasion, he revealed himself to be Buzz's father (a parody upon The Empire Strikes Back and a nearly identical scene in Toy Story 2), but quickly took it back, using the statement as a 'Made You Look' to stun Buzz and gain the upper hand. Warp Darkmatter / Agent Z (voiced by Diedrich Bader) – Warp Darkmatter was a partner and friend of Buzz, but he had been secretly working for Zurg since his academy days as a double agent. He eventually began working for Zurg full-time as Zurg's second-in-command and was given the title "Agent Z." His right arm is robotic (with various weapon attachments) and was grafted to his body after he was nearly killed in a self-destruction sequence. Warp often takes on assignments for Zurg and is paid quite handsomely (he owns a moon and a summer home). Buzz has vowed to bring Warp in for treason, but retains some hope that there is still some good in him. Grubs (voiced by Frank Welker) – Zurg's equivalents to the LGMs of Star Command (though far less competent) who perform mechanical and technical duties and work for Zurg against their will. They often desire freedom, but many of them are simply too afraid to try to defect. Brain Pods (Various Voices for each one) – Cybernetic brains in mobile jars, who serve Zurg as scientists and researchers. Although they take pride in their creations, they secretly harbor a desire to escape from Zurg's control (two of them are shown succeeding in doing so on-screen). Hornets – Zurg's robotic foot soldiers, extremely expendable and lousy shots. They always get vaporized in mass numbers by Lightyear's team. Hornets come in different models, but the most frequently seen are yellow and of average height. Gravitina (voiced by Kerri Kenney-Silver) – A large-headed female villain with mental control over gravity who is one of Zurg's allies, once hired to destroy Star Command. She's in love with Buzz and later his evil counterpart. NOS-4-A2 (voiced by Craig Ferguson) – A robotic energy vampire created by Zurg that can drain any system or entity driven by electrical power, as well as controlling any machine he bites. His bite (in combination with radioactive moonrock) also transformed Ty Parsec into Wirewolf. Using Wirewolf and XL, he briefly usurped control of Planet Z from Zurg and attempted to transform everyone in the galaxy into machines for him to feed on, but was defeated and destroyed. His name is a pun on the term Nosferatu. Torque (voiced by Brad Garrett) – A minor alien villain from Tradworld who committed crimes of terrorism, smuggling, arson, and unpaid parking tickets. After being freed from a prison transport by Zurg's Hornets, the Grubs implanted a cell-separation device upon his chest. Torque then possesses the ability to create duplicate versions of himself. They are unstable, however, as a single laser blast is enough to destroy them. In "The Taking of PC-7", he tried to turn Booster evil (and later Buzz) with a memory-altering device built by the Warden of PC-7. The same device also made Torque (temporarily at least) a heroic good guy. XL (voiced by Bobcat Goldthwait) – XR's predecessor (and technically older brother), who was shut down due to his villainous attitude. When he was reactivated by Zurg, XL rebuilt himself into a larger, more powerful robot with stolen cutting edge robot parts. His head is red, whereas XR's is yellow. He infiltrates Star Command numerous times because its command codes are in his head. Like XR, he considers Commander Nebula his father, though he resents him for shutting him down. He later redeems himself and is converted into an office managing robot capable of photocopying, collating, and other office related functions. His name is a pun referring to his size (extra large). Wirewolf – Ty Parsec patrolled the planet Canis Lunis until an attack from NOS-4-A2. While Ty was in combat with the energy vampire, NOS-4-A2 flew himself and Ty up into the beam, that gives power to the planet from the moon's radioactive energy, and bit into Ty's skin. After NOS-4-A2 fled, Ty started to mutate into some sort of electronic canine later given the title of Wirewolf. After discovering that this transformation only happens in the light of the Canis Lunis moon, Buzz told Booster to destroy the moon. Once the moon was destroyed, Team Lightyear believed that the Wirewolf was finished until NOS-4-A2 gave Ty a Canis Lunis moonrock. When NOS-4-A2 was destroyed, Ty was turned back to normal, ending the curse of the Wirewolf. Chlorm Scientists – Era (voiced by Jonathan Harris), Eon (voiced by Bill Mumy), and Epoch (voiced by Frank Welker) are Chlorm scientists who implanted devices into Buzz and Warp during their academy days to study the residents of the galaxy. After Warp first began working for Zurg, at Epoch's suggestion, their study shifted to the differences between good and evil and which was better. (Eon preferred the former and Era preferred the latter.) After learning of the implants, Buzz and Warp broke into their lab and prematurely ended their study. They were subsequently demoted (though Epoch maintains it was a lateral career move) to zoo and research facilities. They began kidnapping Galactic Alliance senators off Capital Planet for the zoo (as they see the other races as lesser, wild animals), but Team Lightyear thwarted them. Crumford Lorak (voiced by Jon Favreau) – A resident of Trade World who is a known scam artist and a stool pigeon for Star Command if the price is right. Crumford is in fact one of the Space Rangers best and worst assets when it came to gathering info on major bad guys. The only time when Crumford went big-time was when he impersonated Senator Banda of Bathyos to give information of the Galactic Alliance to the Raenok leader Varg. Evil Buzz Lightyear (voiced by Patrick Warburton) – A ruthless, pure evil version of Buzz Lightyear from an alternate reality. He was his reality's ruler, head of a vast evil empire, and was cruel and cunning, manipulating Zurg and Gravitina (who adored him) to his own wicked ends. He is the exact opposite of Buzz in personality and demeanor, wears a modified uniform in colors similar to Zurg's and has a goatee (a reference to Star Trek, where parallel doubles tend to sport that hairstyle). However, he can survive things like Buzz that most people can't, such as surviving his ship's own explosion or falling into the sun. Gargantian Militants – Tiny beings who hide in robotic exosuits used as various disguises/ways to infiltrate what they desire. The Gargantian Militants hate commercial places on their planets as well as the fact that their people joined the Galactic Alliance, meaning no wars. They are led by Tremendor (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) and the known members of these militants are Tremendor's second-in-command Monumentus (voiced by Charles Fleischer), Immensitor (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson), and Behemor (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson). As a joke, most Gargantian names (as well as species as a whole) are an ironic pun to their small stature Lardak Lurdak (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) – A minor criminal in a dome helmet. Norbert Q. Klerm (voiced by Mitchell Whitfield) – The rich and ruthless head of the business company "Compu-klerm" and a friend of the Madame President. He first appeared to make Buzz Lightyear and Zurg fight each other. He later brainwashed Buzz into thinking he was a Compu-klerm employee named "Flip Faxtoner", and occasionally picked Buzz's brain with a large helmet for combat data to use in his battle robots. His plans were ultimately thwarted by Buzz when he came to his senses and replaced his bots' brains with a fellow co-worker. Raenoks – The fiercest aliens in the Galaxy. Varg (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) is the ambassador of the Raenoks and the supreme commander of the Raenok military. Kleev (voiced by Clancy Brown) is the leader of the Raenoks and Minister of Schemes and Treachery. Rentwhistle Swack (voiced by French Stewart) – A con man from the jungle planet Karn who poached creatures on his homeworld and bagged Booster in his hunt. He had some of the creatures that he poached brought to a space station where he met up with some hunters that started poaching Booster. While the hunters were hunting Booster, Rentwhistle Swack fled the area only to be intercepted by Team Lightyear and Dr. Ozma Furbanna. The hunters were defeated and they alongside Rentwhistle Swack were sentenced to community service on Karn by Booster. Rentwhistler Swack was later Norbert Q. Klerm's "agent/booker/tour guide" when Norbert was making Buzz and Zurg fight each other. Shiv Katall (voiced by Patrick Warburton) – A mysterious soldier of fortune/mercenary/hitman/bounty hunter usually hired by Zurg to eliminate Brain Pods and Grubs who get up enough guts to defect from Zurg. He is secretly a covert identity adopted by Buzz Lightyear, and before Buzz, Commander Nebula. Unfortunately, that identity was compromised due to the actions of Mira, Booster and XR. At the end of said episode it was hinted that Booster was going to become the next Shiv Katall, but it was ignored in future episodes. In a later episode the evil Buzz Lightyear used the Shiv Katall guise to acquire parts for a base station he was building near Capital Planet's sun, in order for him and Gravitina to use it to produce 'sunquakes', threatening all nearby life. Smeego (voiced by Phil LaMarr) – A fidgety small-time crook and acquaintance of Torque who can sometimes be found on Trade World. Tangean Grounders – Ground-dwellers of Tangea that often clash with the Tangean Royals. They can explode things with their minds. Clay (voiced by Jess Harnell) and Marl (voiced by John Kassir) are examples of Tangean Grounders. Another Tangean Grounder and bounty hunter named Romac (voiced by David James Elliott), who was Mira's ex-boyfriend, was hired by Zurg to obtain Brain Pod #57. Grounders and Royals lose their respective super-abilities when close to each other. Madam President (voiced by Roz Ryan) – Head of the Galactic Alliance. Her real name is unknown. Senator Aarrfvox (voiced by Jim Cummings) – A Shragorakian senator. Senator Banda (voiced by Dan Castellaneta) – A Bathyosian senator. Senator Hammerhold (voiced by Corey Burton) – Petra Hammerhold's father. Senator Phlegmex (voiced by Frank Welker) – A Phlegmian senator. Becky (voiced by Russi Taylor) – A little alien girl from the planet Roswell. She befriended Booster (who she calls Pickles) when Team Lightyear's ship crashed on her planet. Brent Starkisser (voiced by Corey Burton) – The Galaxy's reporter. Cosmo (voiced by Paul Rugg) – An alien that owns and runs the diner that Team Lightyear eats at. He has a mechanical arm as well as a foreign accent. Dr. Animus (voiced by Tony Jay) – The Galaxy's therapist. Dr. Ozma Furbanna (voiced by Linda Hamilton) – Lead (and only) naturalist on planet Karn. She favors all animals (even the lethal carnivores) and hates to have them hurt; no matter what. Has a crush on Buzz (won't admit it, though), and vice versa. In her first appearance, she assisted Buzz Lightyear at the time when Rentwhistle Swack was poaching some creatures and selling them to some hunters. Rentwhistle Swack and the hunters were defeated and sentenced to community service on Karn by Booster. Zurg once used Dr. Ozma Furbanna's help to hatch the eggs of the extinct Millennial Bugs where Zurg will use them on Capital Planet. Buzz and Dr. Ozma Furbanna ended up finding out that the Millennial Bugs were ticklish which they used to subdue them and later relocate them to someplace where they won't cause anyone harm. Dr. Ozma Furbanna later aided Team Lightyear when the ship carrying Mira Nova and the Madame President crash-landed on Karn following an attack by Zurg. Ed (voiced by Paul Rugg) – A courier who somehow always knows how to track down Buzz Lightyear. Officer Panchex (voiced by Brian Doyle-Murray) – A fish policeman who helped Buzz Lightyear fight Minister Gularis. Professor Triffid (voiced by Joel Murray) – A scientist from Rhizome. He cares a lot for the plants there. Savy SL2 (voiced by Cree Summer) – A young girl who works as a robotic vampire hunter. Her adopted robot parents were attacked by NOS-4-A2 in "The Slayer", which led her to hunting him down for revenge. Sheriff of Roswell (voiced by Stephen Root) – Becky's father and ally of Team Lightyear. King Nova (voiced by John O'Hurley) – Mira's father and the ruler of Tangea. Being more tradition bound he clearly disapproves of his daughter being a space ranger and therefore has a complicated relationship with her as well as Buzz. But regardless of his pompous nature he still cares about his daughter and also came to her aid when she had developed a power addiction and helped her get over it, though he almost got his wish of getting his daughter back in this instance had Buzz not saved her career through a cover story. Santa Claus (voiced by Earl Boen) – The holiday figure, who delivers presents to all the good people in the galaxy during the Holiday. He previously used a sleigh powered by belief and later time manipulation to accomplish this massive task. Zurg stole his time manipulation device to destroy the Holiday for everyone, prompting Santa to seek Team Lightyear's help. Daytime Emmy Awards
