 California State University, Sacramento (Sacramento State, informally Sac State), founded in 1947 as Sacramento State College, is a public comprehensive university in the city of Sacramento, the capital city of the U.S. state of California. It is the eleventh oldest school in the 23 campus California State University system. The university enrolls approximately 29,000 students annually, has an alumni base of 215,000 and awards 7,000 degrees annually. The university offers 151 different Bachelor's degrees, 69 Master's degrees, 28 types of teaching credentials, and 2 Doctoral degrees. The university also has extensions in Singapore, offering a unique IMBA (International Master's in Business Administration). The campus is consistently one of the top three destinations among all universities in the state for California Community College students, welcoming over 4,000 new transfers each academic year. The campus sits on 300 acres, covered with over 3,500 trees and over 1,200 resting in the University Arboretum (formerly the Goethe Arboretum). The university is the site of two National Register of Historic Places, the Julia Morgan House and the terminus of the Pony Express. The Arbor Day Foundation officially declared the university "Tree Campus USA" in 2012. The university has been distinguished as a U.S. President's National & Community Service Honor Roll member in 2013. The efforts to get a four-year university in Sacramento date back to the 1920s; however, legislation repeatedly failed. Local supporters blamed "pork barrel politics" by Bay Area legislators trying to monopolize higher education. Sacramento State was formally established in 1947 through legislation by State Senator Earl D. Desmond, by playing hardball to get it done – convincing the Senate's finance committee to withhold funding for the University of California until he had a commitment. Later on, Desmond eventually had 11 children and grandchildren graduate from the college. Originally founded as Sacramento State College on Sept. 22, 1947, during a time of intense demand for higher education after World War II, Sacramento State shared space with Sacramento Junior College. Sacramento State's first semester of classes consisted of 235 students enrolled in 44 sections. During December 1947, the official mascot "Herky" (short for Hercules) the Hornet was chosen over the Elk, which wasn't considered to be aggressive enough. The college's colors – green and gold symbolizing the foothills and trees, were also established. The next Spring, the college held its first graduation ceremony. A single student, history major John J. Collins, who had transferred from UC Berkeley, graduated. By 1948, the college was already fielding intercollegiate teams in basketball, baseball, and tennis. In Spring 1949, the winning "Fight Hornet Fight" song was composed by Donald McDonald. The State Hornet and Statesman yearbook were first published in 1949. Several sites for a permanent home for the college were considered. A site at 5th Street and Broadway, a site near Fruitridge and Stockton Boulevard, and a site in the Pocket Area of South Sacramento were all rejected. In 1949, the state purchased 244 acres of what was then peach farm land to be the site of the new college at $1,650 to $1,800 an acre. On December 1952, the school left the Sacramento City College property and moved to its permanent location on the banks of the American River. In February 9, 1953, the then 289-acre campus opened to approximately 2,400 students with a parade through town called "GO EAST WITH WEST," in reference to President West. Parking has notoriously been a problem at the university, and since the beginning, drivers were confronted by a sea of mud. Students would simply drive as close to the buildings as they could and park. Construction began in 1951. By 1962, 30 new structures had been built and occupied. A campus landmark was created when the Guy West Bridge was erected – a bridge modeled after the Golden Gate Bridge and named after the college's founding president. In 1955, the first Hornet football team scored its first victory, against Southern Oregon College. Jackrabbits were a problem in the early years and landscapers were permitted to shoot them on sight through the 1960s. In 1972, the school became California State University, Sacramento. In 2004, it formally adopted Sacramento State as its primary name; it had been used in athletics for some time.  Today, Sacramento State is the only major four-year comprehensive university in the city of Sacramento. The university underwent a major expansion in the Korean War years, with the 'heart' of the campus residing in Douglass Hall, Shasta Hall, Sacramento Hall (the administration building). In 1975, the University Union opened its doors, originally comprising 65,000 square feet. In 1981, the Sacramento State Aquatic Center was established. The Center for California Studies was established the following year. In 1986, Sacramento State established a Master Plan that called for over $100 million in growth. During that same year, the university came within hours of being deliberately flooded as officials contemplated blowing floodgates to avoid a massive levee failure in Sacramento. The 1990s saw additional growth, constructing more than 1.2 million square-feet of space. In 1992, Hornet Stadium was renovated, providing capacity for 26,000 patrons. In 2000 and 2004, the campus hosted the U.S. Olympic Track and Field Trials. In 2003, Dr. Alexander Gonzalez was appointed the 11th president of the University. In his first year, he launched Destination 2010, an initiative focusing on reforming academic programs and constructing new facilities. Sacramento State is organized into seven academic colleges and a college of continuing education. The university is also a member of the consortium that operates Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, offering curricula in marine sciences. In keeping with its proximity to a burgeoning electronics industry, the university is developing expanded applications of technology to learn through computerized and televised instruction over a wide area of Northern California. The university reached an important strategic milestone. Seven years ago, Sacramento State launched Destination 2010, an initiative focused on creating excellent academic programs, new student facilities and a more welcoming campus culture and environment. During that time, the campus constructed the four-story Academic Information Research Center, Parking Structure III (which at 3,000 spaces is the largest in the CSU system), the new Hornet Bookstore, Eli and Edythe Broad Athletic Fieldhouse, and the American River Courtyard residence hall (with 600 beds). Many prominent icons have lectured or performed at Sacramento State, including Martin Luther King, Jr., Jimi Hendrix, Sheryl Crow, Oliver Stone, Jesse Jackson,  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Wangari Maathai, John Kerry, Stokely Carmichael, Woody Harrelson, Maya Soetoro-Ng and Chuck D. Shasta Hall, many people say, is haunted. Students have talked for years about a ghost in the building's theatre who disrupts play openings. Some think is a state building inspector who fell to his death in the building before it was completed. Now a popular coffee spot, the Roundhouse was controversial when it was built in 1969. Its design put off many people, and President Robert Johns apparently arranged for its construction without the approval of the CSU Board of Trustees. Sequoia Hall was originally constructed to have an attractive white cement finish, but the funding ran short. Today the building stands with plain concrete. In 1999, Sacramento State was given authority to award its first ever Doctoral degree, a unique find at the time in the California State University. In the past, authority to award any sort of degree beyond Master's in California's higher public education was given solely to the University of California. The program would be a joint Ph.D in history with the University of California, Santa Barbara. However, this program later phased out due to declining enrollment. The university was given authority again to award its first ever Doctorate in Education (Ed.D) degree in 2007, with its first graduating class in 2010. Since its establishment, the program has branched into several focuses offering different types of degrees. In 2012, the university was fully accredited to award its first Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) with the first class entering in Fall of 2012. The program is notoriously competitive, with over 400 applications for just 32 seats. This program eventually will fade out the Master's in Physical Therapy by 2015, following standards set by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education. To date, the university now awards two independent doctorates (Ed.D degree and DPT). In 2004, the university re-branded itself as Sacramento State, or Sac State for short. The formal name is California State University, Sacramento. The terms CSUS, Cal State Sacramento, Sacramento State University, CSU Sacramento and CS Sacramento are inappropriate, per the Identity Style Guide, even though the university's web address is csus.edu. The university also adopted a new logo and seal that replaced the previous design based on the Seal of California. In addition, the exact shades of Sacramento State's colors of green and gold were formalized in the 2005 Style Guide. President Gonzalez presented the initiative "Redefining the Possible" in his Spring 2012 convocation following Destination 2010's success. This initiative calls for more construction and campus updates, all part of the CSU Capital Outlay, including demolishing several of the original campus buildings in center campus, constructing a Space Planetarium, a 10,000 seat arena, a 4,800 space parking garage (the largest at CSU), four new 8-story dormitory towers, and a 1,200 seat performing arts center – all to be completed over the next 10 years. Robert S. Nelsen, former President at The University of Texas Pan-American begin his duties as President on July 1, 2015. In 2007, the faculty overwhelmingly (77% of ballots) approved a "No Confidence" vote for President Alexander Gonzalez. The vote expressed anger over the President's handling of finances, including a $6.5 million structural deficit the university is facing. They also accused him of pumping money into student recruitment and promotion rather than academic affairs. In response to the vote Gonzalez publicly replied, "in the 28 years I have been apart of the California State University...I have yet to encounter the level of incivility, mean-spiritedness and outright distortion that I have found among some members of the Sacramento State community. It embarrasses and saddens me." Similarly in 2011, then Sacramento State Police Chief Daniel Davis also received a "No Confidence" vote by 14 out of 15 sworn in officers. The vote came amid seven alleged sexual assaults that occurred the prior fall semester. This was also the second time the police force voiced concerns about the police chief's mismanagement.  Fall Statisticshttp://www.csus.edu/oir/Data%20Center/University%20Fact%20Book/SEC%202-New%20Students.pdf Some 35,000 students applied to Sacramento State for the Fall 2012 semester, marking the record amount of applications in one semester. Following a CSU-wide trend, the university has seen growth over the past few years in the amount of applications. The campus is consistently one of the top three destinations amongst all universities in the state for California Community College transfer, welcoming over 4,000 new students each academic year. Sacramento State historically attempts to admit the top 1/3 of California high school graduates. For students entering Fall 2012, 13,728 freshmen were accepted out of 19,702 applicants, a 69.6% acceptance rate.  Enrolled freshmen had an average high school GPA of 3.26 and an average SAT score of 960 (out of a possible 1600 for reading and math scores). For transfer students, Sacramento State accepted 9,218 of 10,566 applicants in the Fall of 2012, an 87.2% acceptance rate. The average transfer GPA for Fall 2012 was 3.05. The university accepted 1,434 graduate students out of 3,044 applications for an acceptance rate of 47.1%. Approximately 30% of incoming freshman live on-campus in the dorms, while around an additional 25% are traditionally accommodated at the Upper Eastside Lofts just across the street from campus at the F65 crossing, providing housing for about 50% for incoming freshman. For the Fall 2012 semester, just about 50% of incoming freshman came from the Sacramento Region, while around 18% came from the San Francisco Bay Area, an additional 13% came from the Northern CA Foothills, and the remaining came in from Southern California (14.4%), other parts of the United States (0.8%), or Foreign Countries (0.4%). The average course load of all undergraduate students in 12.2 units, classified as a full-time student. For the most recent commencement, the average amount of years taken to complete degrees of the class was 4.8, while the average amount of units accumulated was 132 (12 above what is needed for a bachelor's).  As the sixth-largest campus of the 23 state universities in California, the main campus is composed of   in the city of Sacramento and lies adjacent to U.S. Route 50. The campus is bordered by the American River to the East, Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the West, Folsom Boulevard to the South and H Street to the North. The North end of campus is dominated by the University Arboretum, formerly Goethe Arboretum, and residence halls. Officially "Tree Campus USA," Sacramento State has more than 3,500 trees, with flower gardens, miles of trails stretching along the nearby river parkway, and student housing with recreational areas such as Lake Natoma and Old Sacramento, in addition to its on-campus housing. Guy West Bridge, a pedestrian bridge built to scale of the Golden Gate Bridge, spans the nearby American River. There are more than 30 research and community service centers on campus such as the Center for California Studies, the Institute for Social Research, the Center for Collaborative Policy, the Center for Small Business, and the Office of Water Programs. At the northeastern edge of campus are the dormitories which can currently accommodate 1,700 students. Southwest of the campus is the Upper Eastside Lofts located near the light rail station at Folsom Boulevard and 65th Street and is owned by University Enterprises. The lofts can accommodate an additional 443 students and is a short walk from campus via Hornet Tunnel. The university also purchased a piece of land south of the campus, Romana Site, and plans to construct housing for faculty and students in an apartment style housing complex that will be a close walk to campus. The Port of Sacramento Japanese School (ポート･オブ･サクラメント補習授業校 Pōto obu Sakuramento Hoshū Jugyō Kō), a weekend supplementary Japanese school, holds its classes in Amador Hall."campus_map.pdf" (Archive). Port of Sacramento Japanese School. Retrieved on May 23, 2014."学校案内" (Archive). Port of Sacramento Japanese School. Retrieved on May 23, 2014. The school's committee is located in Roseville."Home" (Archive). Port of Sacramento Japanese School. Retrieved on May 23, 2014. "校舎所在地 California State University, Sacramento 6000 J St., Sacramento, CA　95819 運営委員会 c/o Renesas Electronics America, Inc. 7501 Foothills Blvd., Roseville, CA 95747"  Located on Lake Natoma,  east of the university right next to Nimbus Dam, the Sacramento State Aquatic Center is a cooperative operation of the Associated Students of California State University, Sacramento, University Union of Sacramento State, California Department of Boating and Waterways, and the California Department of Parks and Recreation. The center was established in 1981 and has provided instruction to thousands of students. The center houses the Sacramento State Rowing Team, and is the training destination for many other university rowing teams and clubs. The center hosts several national championships, including the Pac 10 Rowing Championships, Pacific Coast Rowing Championships, NCAA Women's Rowing Championships, IRA National Rowing Championships and the West Coast Conference Rowing Championships.  Located three miles (5&nbsp;km) west of Sacramento State and was designed by famous architect Julia Morgan. It was donated to the school in 1966 by Sacramento philanthropist and eugenicist Charles Goethe and was placed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1982. The school remodeled the house in 2000 honored by the California Heritage Council. Sacramento State uses the home hosting lectures, small meetings, conferences, community events, and it is available for public special events such as receptions and weddings. The home's west wing houses the Life Center and provides health and fitness classes for seniors. Since 1951, the university has been accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges. Sacramento State is a Space-grant university and is an affiliate institution of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program, sponsoring an outreach program to girls and minorities for excellency in Engineering and Computer Science. The school is a member of the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities. The university is nationally and internationally accredited in specific specialized programs including the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) for Business programs, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics for Didactic programs in Dietetics, the American Physical Therapy Association for professional programs in Physical Therapy Administration, the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association for programs in Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology, the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education for various Nursing (CNURED) programs, the National Association of Schools of Art and Design, the National Association of Schools of Music, and the National Association of Schools of Theatre.   The university comprises the following colleges: Sacramento State's largest academic major for undergraduates is nursing with nearly 2,000 students, followed by criminal justice with 1,800 students in the department,[ ]  psychology with 1,600 enrolled,[ ]   Biological Sciences with over nearly 1,500 students,[ ]  and Accounting with over 1,200 students. With nearly 2,700 students, the university's division of Public Affairs is the largest in the California State University (CSU). The university is home to the largest Chemistry program within the CSU with over 400 students. Along with CSUN, it is the only university in California to offer a bachelor's degree in Deaf Studies. The average class size throughout the university is 38 students. The student-to-faculty ratio is about 28 to 1. (22,461 FTE students to 803 FTE faculty). Most transfer students come from two-year colleges, and about 750 international students from 80 nations. Approximately 160 students from India study abroad at the university, the largest country represented. The school has the largest cooperative education program in the entire state. Students from all majors are placed in paid positions while simultaneously receiving academic credit. Many students work in government-related internships and fellowships. Approximately 36% of students work as volunteers. With nearly 1,800 undergraduate and graduate students, Its criminal justice program is one of the largest in all of North America. The school's College of Engineering and Computer Science is the only university in California to offer a master's degree in Electrical Engineering, and is designated as a national center of cyber-security. The university along with Chico State offers CSU's only Electronic engineering degree option. The College of Business Administration holds is accredited by the AACSB. Sacramento State is the only campus in the CSU to offer a bachelor's degree in Cinematic Arts, Digital cinematography and professional performance. Sacramento State is one of only 649 universities in America to hold this prestigious accrediting, and one of only four universities in California (the others including UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, and CSU Los Angeles). The university has a significant impact on the Sacramento Region and California statewide economy. It sustains nearly 9,000 jobs in the region and statewide, generates $816 million to the Sacramento economy, and nearly $1 billion to the state economy, with annual spending amongst the campus exceeding $600 million. The campus has the state's largest co-operative education program, placing students in paid positions where they receive academic credit. Biology students help in the Sacramento crime lab with DNA matching while Physical Therapy students are assisting stroke victims regain their mobility, and Government students are staffed at the Capitol. The campus has one of the largest Criminal Justice programs in all of North America with nearly 1,500 undergraduate students and 80 graduate students. Nearly 36% of students volunteer through the Sacramento State Serves program, committing more than 2 million hours of service each year. The campuses houses over 30 research centers. Notable include: The College Assistance Migrant Program (CAMP)/High School Equivalent Program is one of nearly 50 federally funded assistance programs that is geared to help migrant or seasonal farmworkers (or children of them) not currently enrolled in school achieve the equivalent of a high school diploma and then subsequently obtain employment. The program serves more than 7,000 annually. Ranked as one of the top 10 internships in the nation by Forbes, Sacramento State works with the California State government to host the Capital Fellowship program through the Center for California Studies. The Center administers the Jesse M. Unruh Assembly Fellowship, Executive Fellowship, Judicial Administration Fellowship, and  California Senate Fellows  programs. These programs, known collectively as the Capital Fellows Programs, are nationally recognized. The 18 Assembly Fellows, 18 Senate Fellows, 18 Executive Fellows and 10 Judicial Administration Fellows receive an outstanding opportunity to engage in public service and prepare for future careers, while actively contributing to the development and implementation of public policy in California. The ranks of former fellows and associates include a Justice of the California Supreme Court, members of the United States Congress and the State Legislature, a deputy director of the Peace Corps, corporate executives, and local government and community leaders. The Center provides services for public disputes at the state, regional, and local levels, ranging from conflicts between agencies to multi-party disputes on major policies. Its methods are mediation, negotiation, and consensus-building. It tries to reach solutions satisfying everyone while avoiding traditional adversarial processes. Created in 1952 and offering one of the best ranked graduate programs in Speech Pathology Audiology in the US, the Maryjane Rees Language Speech and Hearing Center is a renowned clinic in the Sacramento Region offering low cost services for those with speech and language disorders. Working in conjunction with the department of SPA, the clinic employs five faculty members, 20 part-time faculty, 60 graduate students, and 160 undergraduate students offering them exposure to a wide range of fields. Since its establishment, the clinic now serves approximately 200 clients a week and has since served over 14,000 people aged from 2 to 102 coming from all over different parts of Northern California.    The university offers 21 intercollegiate sports. In hopes of expanding its athletics department even further, the university added its 21st sport, Women's Sand Volleyball in the Spring of 2013.[ ]  Sacramento State sports teams participate in NCAA Division I (FCS for College Football). Sacramento State's colors are green and gold and its mascot is the Hornet. Conference breakdowns are as follows: Scholarships are offered in all sports. The football and track and field teams compete in Hornet Stadium, baseball at John Smith Field, and the volleyball, men's and women's basketball and gymnastics teams call Colberg Court home, in honor of legendary volleyball coach Debby Colberg. The baseball stadium was renamed John Smith Field in 2011 in honor of the long-time head coach. Most athletic teams compete in the Big Sky Conference. Sacramento State is the only school from California in the Big Sky, which also includes Eastern Washington, Portland State, Idaho State, Northern Colorado, Northern Arizona and Weber State. UC Davis and Cal Poly joined the Big Sky for football only in 2012. In 2013, the women's rowing team was granted access into an NCAA-affiliated conference, Conference USA (C-USA). Previously the team competed in Western Intercollegiate Rowing Association (WIRA) which is not recognized as a conference by the NCAA. Effective for the 2013–14 season, along with San Diego State University, the rowing team transferred into C-USA, with 12 rowing members, increasing competition, and providing eligibility for NCAA Championships nationally. However, the team only competed for one season in C-USA; it will move along with San Diego State to the American Athletic Conference beginning in 2014–15. In 2003 and from 2005 to 2007, the university hosted the NCAA Track and Field Championships at Hornet Stadium. The California Education Code §89901 identifies auxiliary organizations of the California State University.CSU Fresno Association v. Superior Court, 90 Cal.App.4th 810, 831, 108 Cal. Rptr. 2d 870 (2001) Sacramento State currently has several auxiliary organizations:List of CSU Auxiliary Organizations by Campus The school hosts Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps, Detachment 088, which trains US Air Force cadets from Sacramento State and University of California Davis. It is currently the largest Detachment in Northern California.  An independent Army ROTC program existed until the 1996 when the program was phased out by California State University, Sacramento President Donald Gerth due to the Army's policy of "Don't ask, don't tell". The program was allowed back onto campus in 1997, due to the possibility of the campus losing federal student aid and research funding. In 2002, the program received the gold MacArthur ROTC Leadership Award. The program currently exists as an extension of the Forged Gold Battalion based at University of California, Davis. Associated Students Inc. is a nonprofit corporation that provides programs, services, and student government for Sacramento State, ostensibly through California Education Code.http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=edc&group=89001-90000&file=89300-89304 §89300 ASI is a California recognized 501(c)(3) corporation. Students elect the Board of Directors, which consists of the President, Executive Vice President, Vice President of Finance, Vice President of University Affairs, Vice President of Academic Affairs, a representative from each of the academic colleges, a representative for undeclared students, and a representative for graduate students. ASI has a budget of over $6 million, which is collected through semesterly student fees and revenues generated through its programs: Peak Adventures, Aquatic Center, Children's Center, and ASI student shop. Like most other CSUs, ASI offers a unique day care center for faculty, staff, or student's children ages newborn to five years. The ASI Children's Center is accredited by the NAEYC, something that only about 7% of children's centers are endorsed by. Child Development and Teacher Education majors are given the opportunity to work with the Children's Center. Sacramento State owns and operates multiple public radio stations throughout California in close cooperation with Capital Public Radio. Two of these stations are KXPR and KXJZ, both on FM.  KXPR plays classical and jazz music. KXJZ offers local news and talk programming, including several popular shows like "This American Life," "A Prairie Home Companion," "Car Talk" and others. The listener-supported stations broadcast without commercials and with the support of underwriters. Both stations carry programming from National Public Radio. KSSU 1580AM is a non-profit free format radio station at Sacramento State and part of Associated Students. The radio station has only a 3-watt signal and is not strong enough to broadcast much farther than the campus, but it can be heard all over the world at kssu.com. KSSU is maintained and funded by the Associated Students. KSSU.COM has formed itself into being one of the premier college radio stations in North America. In 2007 the station won Music Director of the year from the College Music Journal and then returned to New York for the award show in 2008 with 8 nominations for awards by CMJ. In 2008 KSSU.COM was also nominated for College Radio Station of the Year by MTVU.  Notable former DJ's include actor and international hip hop artist, Only Won who gave credit to KSSU at the 2010 Distinguished Service award for influencing his career in the music industry.[ ] The State Hornet serves as Sacramento State's student newspaper. The State Hornet publishes 14 or 15 issues each semester and produces content for a daily Web site. The online edition carries the content of the print edition, posted Wednesday mornings, and publishes unique content to the site as generated by the staff. The 1999–2000 staff of the newspaper, led by Editor-in-Chief David Sommers and Faculty Advisor Sylvia Fox, was awarded the National Newspaper Pacemaker Award, considered to be the highest national honor in collegiate journalism and unofficially known as the "Pulitzer Prizes of student journalism." In 2012, the newspaper was placed in the Associated Collegiate Press Pacemaker Finalists category. The newspaper is formally administered by the Department of Communication Studies in the College of Arts and Letters. The CSUS student activity center is the University Union. The University Union is unique in that it is the original building that was first structured in 1972. It has gone under major renovations throughout the years, with the first phase in 1992 that added a large ballroom and space for food vendors and meeting rooms and other extensions. In 1998, the Union underwent another major renovation again, adding another 180,000 square feet for certain University Outlets such as KSSU and Peak Adventures (which have both since moved). In 2012, the Union yet again under went major renovations, including adding the university operated restaurant Good Eats,  new flooring and stage demolition in the Redwood Room, a complete remodel of Round Table Pizza, an addition of the much requested "prayer room" or "quiet room" on the second floor, a complete remodel of the Terminal Lounge on the second floor, and tearing down the University Center Restaurant and building the new Epicure Restaurant. Much is offered, including a large fast food court, a game room, public computers with internet access, free WiFi, conference rooms, the university's main auditoria, a prayer room, and many offices for student organizations including the Pride Center, the State Hornet (student paper), and others.  Sacramento State has a wide selection of social and academic clubs and organizations. Each are dedicated to help students of similar interests bond together by common goals and aspirations. They make up a wide range of opportunities to be involved. They often represent national, international, local and regional organizations. Some also promote certain cultures or multiculturalism as well as political and recreational. Clubs and organizations are overseen by Student Organizations & Leadership. In the Fall 2012, approximately 7% of undergraduate men (or 774 students) were part of fraternities while 5% of undergraduate women (or 725 students) were part of sororities for a total of about 1,500 Greeks (the largest class to date). In 2014, the CSU removed recognition from certain religious organizations that had policy conflicts with a state-mandated nondiscrimination policy.http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/09/intervarsity-sanctioned-california-state-university_n_5791906.html Religious clubs must allow any student eligibility to participate as a student leader regardless of beliefs.http://www.calstate.edu/sas/nondiscrim.shtml Both CRU and Intervarsity, as of Fall 2015, have agreed to follow the nondiscrimination policy and return.http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/jun/23/college-christian-groups-to-allow-non-believers-ho/?page=all University Transportation and Parking Services (UTAPS), an auxiliary of Sacramento State, operates its own buses known as the Hornet Express shuttle,  providing several lines around the campus running approximately 7:30am until 5:00pm in conjunction with Sacramento Regional Transit District. The Hornet Line serves the south end of the university, University/65th Light-Rail Station, and newly added Folsom Hall, the Green Line serves the College Town/La Riviera District and the east end of Campus, while the Gold Line runs all the way to the Fair Oaks district and the Arden Fair Mall. UTAPS also runs night shuttle for students, providing point-to-point service from dusk to 11:00pm. The university has a bus terminal station at the north end of campus, which serves as a major stop for Sacramento Regional Transit. RT provides bus services to downtown (Route 30), Midtown/Sutter District (Route 34), American River College/Watt (Route 82), Marconi/Arcade Light-Rail Station (Route 87), seven days a week departing approximately every 10 minutes. The university is located about 1/2 mile from the University/65th Light Rail Station, just south of the campus. Sacramento State students can use these resources, including LRT, for free with their student One Card. The university also has multiple Zipcars housed on campus for students, faculty and staff to utilize 24-hours a day, part of the ZipCarU program. Plans have been in the works for the university to operate its own street car Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system, looping around the perimeter of the campus and back to the University/65th Light Rail Station. However this has been set back due to budget constraints. The Sacramento light rail system was originally proposed to run through the library quad, but then-president Donald Gerth vetoed the proposal over concerns for student safety. The school is situated just north of US 50 and is accessible by two exits – 65th St. and Howe Avenue. The university has conferred over 200,000 degrees since its establishment. CSUS alumni live over all 50 states of the U.S., with over 165,000 residing in California, nearly 3,000 in Washington, 2,500 in Oregon and over 2,000 Texas. There are also over nearly 1,000 alumni residing in approximately 62 countries, including 102 located in Japan, 90 in India, and nearly 60 in Canada and China. center Creed Bratton Tom Hanks Lester Holt Joan Lunden Bobby McFerrin Brian Posehn Rene Syler      &nbsp; !! 2015 !! 2014 !! 2013 !! 2012 !! 2011 !! 2010 Freshman Applicants 22,863 21,550 20,803 19,702 18,617 17,557 Admits 15,377 15,657 14,696 13,728 12,496 12,440 % Admitted 67.31 72.65 70.64 69.67 67.12 70.85 Enrolled 3,783 3,694 3,372 3,151 2,912 2,732 GPA 3.30 3.27 3.25 3.26 3.23 3.22 SAT Composite 952 946 951 960 951 958 *SAT out of 1600 !! Undergraduate !! Graduate African American 6.2% 4.6% Asian American 22.9% 12.0% White American 36.4% 51.4% Hispanic American 21.2% 12.4% Multiracial 0.5% 4.7% Native American 0.0% 1.3% International 0.2% 5.0% Unknown 0.5% 8.3% College Dean Enrollment (UG) Arts and Letters Edward Inch 3,343 Business Administration Chiang Wang, administrator-in-charge 3,577 Education Vanessa Sheared 723 Engineering & Computer Science Lorenzo M. Smith 2,307 Health & Human Services Fred Baldini 5,448 Natural Sciences & Mathematics Jill Trainer 2,144 Social Sciences & Interdisciplinary Studies Örn Bodvarsson 4,283 Continuing Education Guido Krickx N/A The university was ranked the 15th most ethnically diverse campus of the West and the 21st most Economically Diverse campus in the Western Region with 57% of students receiving Pell Grants in 2012, according to US News and World Report. PayScale ranked Sacramento State 59th for salary potential amongst all State/Research Universities in the nation, averaging a $45,700 starting salary and a median salary of $82,700 based on the 2013 list – the 6th best amongst all CSUs placed on the list. The University's social work program ranks 89th in the nation. The Speech-Language Pathology program was placed on USNWR of top in the nation. In 2012, Sacramento State was placed on the top Public Affairs Masters schools to earn an M.P.A. by USNWR. Sacramento State's Nursing School was placed on US News and World Report's top Graduate Schools programs in 2011. In 2012, the Physical Therapy Doctorate and Masters programs were placed on the US News and World Report Best Graduate Schools listing. For the third year in a row in 2012, the university's Capital Fellows Program was placed in the top 10 internships in the nation by Forbes. The Army ROTC program at the university has been ranked No. 1 across the nation, and has been lauded with the gold McArthur ROTC Leadership Award. For the 2012–2013 report, the American Council of Trustees and Alumni gave Sacramento State's General Education an overall score a B, the 14th best in the state. California Smart Grid Center (engages in automated metering infrastructure) Archaeological Research Center Center for African Peace and Conflict Resolution Center for California Studies (houses Capitol Fellows) Office of Water Programs North Central Information Center STEM Research Big Sky Conference: Men's Basketball, Football, Men's Cross Country, Men's Indoor Track & Field, Men's Golf (effective 2014–15), Men's Tennis, Men's Outdoor Track & Field, Women's Volleyball, Women's Basketball, Women's Cross Country, Women's Indoor Track & Field, Women's Golf, Women's Tennis, Women's Outdoor Track & Field, Women's Soccer, Softball Big West Conference: Men's Soccer Western Athletic Conference: Baseball, Women's Gymnastics American Athletic Conference: Rowing (effective 2014–15) Northern California Sand Volleyball Consortium: Women's Sand Volleyball Guy A. West (1947–1965) F. Blair Mayne (1965) Stephen L. Walker (1965–1966) Robert Johns (1966–1969) Otto Butz (1969–1970) Bernard L. Hyink (1970–1972) James G. Bond (1972–1978) W. Lloyd Johns (1978–1983) Austin J. Gerber (1983–1984) Donald R. Gerth (1984–2003) Alexander Gonzalez (2003–2015) Robert S. Nelsen (2015–present) Causeway Classic Sacramento State Athletics website
