    Catherine Zeta-Jones,  (; born Catherine Zeta Jones; 25 September 1969) is a Welsh actress. She has received critical acclaim and numerous accolades throughout her career, including one Academy Award, one BAFTA Award, and three Screen Actor Guild Awards. She was named Hasty Pudding's Woman of the Year in 2005, and was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2010 Birthday Honours. Zeta-Jones began her acting career at age 12, with the lead role in the stage musical Annie, and subsequently pursued a career on theatre with appearances in productions, such as West End's 42nd Street. She made her movie debut in the 1991 French fantasy feature Les 1001 nuits and continued her film work with supporting roles in Christopher Columbus: The Discovery (1992) and Splitting Heirs (1993), while starring in the ITV series The Darling Buds of May from 1991 until 1993. She established her early film career in the United Kingdom and eventually transitioned into Hollywood mainstream movies, appearing in the action  western The Mask of Zorro (1998) and the crime thriller  Entrapment (1999), both of which were international commercial successes. Her performance in Steven Soderbergh's Traffic (2000) earned her significant critical praise and her first Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress&nbsp;– Motion Picture. Zeta-Jones starred as Velma Kelly in the film adaptation of the musical Chicago (2002), another critical and commercial success. For the film, she received the Academy Award and the British Academy Film Award for Best Supporting Actress, plus two Screen Actors Guild Awards and her second Golden Globe Award nomination, for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. She then appeared in the romantic comedy Intolerable Cruelty (2003), the crime film Ocean's Twelve (2004) and reprised her starring role in the sequel of the 1998 film, The Legend of Zorro (2005). Parts in the smaller-scale features Death Defying Acts (2008) and The Rebound (2009) were followed by a 3-year hiatus from screen acting. During that time, she returned to the stage and portrayed Desiree in A Little Night Music (2010), for which she won the Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical. She has since done further film work in the musical comedy Rock of Ages and the psychological thriller Side Effects (2013). Catherine Zeta-Jones was born in Swansea on 25 September 1969, to David Jones, a sweet-factory owner, and his wife Patricia (née Fair),  a seamstress. Her father is Welsh, and her mother is of Welsh and Irish ancestry. She was named after her grandmothers, Zeta Jones and Catherine Fair. She has two brothers who both help with her production company, Milkwood Films. Zeta-Jones grew up in the prosperous Swansea suburb of Mumbles. At the age of 10, she was sent to the Hazel Johnson School of Dance to make use of her energy. By the time she was 11, she was a British tap-dancing champion. She was educated at Dumbarton House School, a co-educational independent school in Swansea, but left early to further her acting ambitions without obtaining O-levels. She then attended the independent Arts Educational Schools in Chiswick, London, for a full-time, three-year course in Musical Theatre. Zeta-Jones made her professional acting debut when she played the lead in Annie, a production at Swansea Grand Theatre. When she was 14, Zeta-Jones was cast as Tallulah in theatre production of Bugsy Malone, and at age 17, she had a part in the chorus of The Pajama Game at the Haymarket Theatre, Leicester starring Paul Jones and Fiona Hendley. The show subsequently toured the United Kingdom, and in 1987, she starred in 42nd Street as Peggy Sawyer at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. She was cast in the leading role after both the actress playing Peggy Sawyer and her understudy fell ill. She also played Mae Jones in the Kurt Weill opera Street Scene with the English National Opera at the London Coliseum Theatre in 1989. After the show closed, she travelled to France where she played the lead role in French director Philippe de Broca's Les 1001 Nuits (1990), her feature film debut. Her singing and dancing ability suggested a promising future but it was in a straight acting role as Mariette in the popular ITV period drama The Darling Buds of May (1991–1993), an adaptation of H. E. Bates' novel of the same name that brought her to public attention and made her a British tabloid darling; "Literally, with one hour of television my life completely changed. I couldn't go anywhere", she once told USA Weekend magazine about her celebrity status in the United Kingdom due to her part in the show. She briefly flirted with a musical career, beginning with a part in the 1992 album Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of Spartacus, from which the single "For All Time" was released in 1992. It reached No.&nbsp;36 in the UK charts. She went on to release the singles "In the Arms of Love", "I Can't Help Myself", and a duet with David Essex "True Love Ways", reaching No.&nbsp;38 in the UK singles chart in 1994. Around that time, she starred in an episode of the American television series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles (1992–1993) as well as in the film Christopher Columbus: The Discovery (1992). In 1990, Zeta-Jones participated in a television commercial for the German Deutsche Bahn at the age of 21, playing the part of a young woman eloping with her lover from a joyless marriage, a role which apparently helped in promoting her acting career. She continued to find moderate success with a number of television projects, including The Return of the Native (1994) based on the novel of the same name (1878) by Thomas Hardy and the miniseries Catherine the Great. She also appeared in Splitting Heirs (1993), a comedy film starring Eric Idle, Rick Moranis and John Cleese. In 1996, she was cast as the evil aviatrix Sala in the action film The Phantom, based on the comic by Lee Falk. The following year, she co-starred in the CBS miniseries Titanic (1996), which also starred Peter Gallagher, Tim Curry and George C. Scott. Steven Spielberg, who noted her performance in the miniseries Titanic (1996), recommended her to Martin Campbell, the director of The Mask of Zorro (1998). Zeta-Jones subsequently landed a lead role in the film, alongside Welsh compatriot Anthony Hopkins and Antonio Banderas. She studied dancing, riding, sword-fighting and took part in dialect classes to play her role as Elena. The movie was released in the United States on 17 July 1998 to critical and financial success ( with a 83% Rotten Tomatoes rating and a US$250.2 million worldwide gross). For her part, the actress was brought to a much wider recognition and earned critical and popular praise; commenting on her performance, Variety noted, "Zeta-Jones is bewitchingly lovely as the center of everyone's attention, and she throws herself into the often physical demands of her role with impressive grace." She nabbed the Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Female Newcomer and was nominated for the Female Breakthrough Performance award at the 1999 MTV Movie Awards. She also scored Empire Award and Saturn Award nominations for The Mask of Zorro.  Her first release of 1999 was the caper film Entrapment, where she co-starred with Sean Connery, portraying an insurance agent named Virginia Baker, who is sent by her employer to track down and help capture an art thief. A box office success, the movie came out to moslty polarizing reviews, but Zeta-Jones rated favorably with critics. Roger Ebert noted that she played "a preposterous role absolutely straight", and Washington Post called on viewers to "appreciate what she brings to the movie". Despite the positive reaction towards Catherine, she later received a Golden Raspberry Award nomination for Worst Actress. Later that year, she appeared alongside Liam Neeson and Lili Taylor in The Haunting. It was a remake of the classic 1963 movie of the same name about a team of paranormal experts who look into strange occurrences in an ill-fated mansion. Upon its release, the horror feature was generally critical panned but performed well commercially, with US$177.3 million made worldwide. She nabbed other Razzie Award nomination due to her role—for Worst Screen Couple (shared with Taylor). In 2000, Zeta-Jones starred in Steven Soderbergh's critically acclaimed Traffic, where her role was Helena Ayala, the wife of a drug lord named Carlos Ayala (played by Steven Bauer). The picture also featured her real life husband Michael Douglas; through they were engaged when principal photography took place, none shared screen time. As she was pregnant at the time with her first child, her role in the movie was adjusted to suit her condition. Originally, her character was already a mother of two instead of an expecting one. Eager to work with director Soderbergh, she suggested to play her part pregnant as "it would give the character a vulnerability and would also up the stakes for her". Traffic was highly profitable at the box office and earned praise from the press, with the critic for the Dallas Observer calling the movie "a remarkable achievement in filmmaking, a beautiful and brutal work". Along with the cast, she won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture and scored her first Golden Globe nomination, in the category of Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture.  She then headlined America's Sweethearts (2001), a romantic comedy film also starring Julia Roberts, Billy Crystal and John Cusack, where she portrayed a film star named Gwen Harrison. The film came out to moslty mediocre and average reviews, with Los Angeles Weekly stating that the film "isn't just banal, it's aggressively, arrogantly banal." However, it was a hit at the box office grossing over US$138&nbsp;million worldwide. The following year, Zeta-Jones played murderous vaudevillian Velma Kelly in the film adaptation of the Broadway musical Chicago. It was commercial success, grossing more than US$306&nbsp;million worldwide, and received universal acclaim. Her performance was widely praised by critics as well; Seattle Post-Intelligencer felt that the actress  "makes a wonderfully statuesque and bitchy saloon goddess", and Slate wrote in its verdict that she has "a smoldering confidence that takes your mind off her not – always – fluid dancing – although she's a perfectly fine hoofer, with majestic limbs and a commanding cleavage". The movie earned her the Best Supporting Actress award at the 75th Academy Awards and the 56th BAFTA Awards, plus two Screen Actors Guild Awards: for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role and as a cast member for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture. She voiced Marina, opposite Brad Pitt as the title role in Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas, an animated film that premiered on 2 July 2003 theatrically. She was drawn to appear in the project, which marked her first voice-over work, as it meant "a great opportunity" for her children to "hear [her] and get a sense of [her] on film". The movie debuted to mixed reviews, and despite recouping its US$60 million production budget, it was a box office bomb. Later that year, Zeta-Jones co-starred with George Clooney, portraying serial divorcee Marilyn Rexroth in the black comedy Intolerable Cruelty, which earned her further critical acclaim; while Empire magazine felt that she played her part with "admirable facility", other reviews such as those for the Washington Post, Salon and Boston Globe showed approval of the psychical chemistry between her and Clooney. The film opened on 10 October 2003 and grossed US$120 million worldwide. The following year, she played air hostess Amelia Warren in The Terminal alongside Tom Hanks. It was a romantic comedy directed by Steven Spielberg and revolves around  a man who becomes trapped in JFK International Airport terminal when he is denied entry into the United States and at the same time cannot return to his native country due to a revolution. The movie rated reasonably favorable with critics, and meant yet another box office success for Zeta-Jones. Her next film appearance in the year was in Steven Soderbergh's Ocean's Twelve, the sequel to Ocean's Eleven (2001), where she reunited with George Clooney, Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts, playing Europol agent Isabel Lahiri. The sequel earned dividing comments from reviewers and was highly profitable with $362.7 million made globally. The cast members were nominated for the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Cast.   Following her Oscar win for Chicago and her starring roles in mostly acclaimed and commercially successful movies, Zeta-Jones' career trajectory the subsequent years had been less noteworthy, as she withdrew from screen acting several years to focus on her family life, and her less frequent acting appearances were in smaller-scale and less successful features. Her only film release of 2005 was The Legend of Zorro, the sequel to The Mask of Zorro, where she reprised her role of Elena opposite Antonio Banderas. According to an IGN interview with Zeta-Jones, the follow-up was always "in the conversation" between her, Banderas and the movie's director, recalling that the 1998 original installment "wasn't just professionally important, but personally" for her, as Michael Douglas, who would later become her husband, first noticed her through that movie. The Legend of Zorro received negative reviews from critics, with Zeta-Jones and Banderas' on-screen attraction garnering mixed reactions. James Berardinelli felt the chemistry between the two leads had "evaporated during the intervening years" but Variety and Slate magazine praised it in particular while reviewing the movie. The movie's opening weekend at the North American and foreign box office was "decisively unspectacular", according to Box Office Mojo, and eventually grossed US$142 million internationally, on a production budget of US$75 million. She later received a People's Choice Award nomination for her role. She did not appear in any feature film in 2006, and come back to the big screen when she starred opposite Aaron Eckhart and Abigail Breslin in 2007's romantic comedy-drama No Reservations, an American remake of the German film Mostly Martha (2001). She played a hard-edged chef named Kate, whose life is turned upside down when she decides to take in her young niece following a tragic accident that killed her sister. The film garnered mixed or average reviews, but Roger Ebert found Catherine "convincing" in her role, and Claudia Puig of USA Today newspaper wrote that she "shines as a character that finely balances off-putting reserve with sympathetic appeal". It performed decently at the box office (grossing US$92&nbsp;million worldwide) and marked Zeta-Jones' last commercially successful movie of the decade. She starred alongside Guy Pearce and Saoirse Ronan in Death Defying Acts, a biography about legendary escapologist Harry Houdini at the height of his career in the 1920s. The movie had its premiere screening at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival and received mixed reviews from critics, who moslty concluded that it was "pretty but dull, with unconvincing turns" from leads Zeta-Jones and Pearce. However, she was singled out for her portrayal by  ViewLondon, noting that "Zeta Jones also pulls off an extremely impressive Edinburgh accent and it's great to see her in a decent role for once". Acquired primarily for the home video market, the Weinstein Co. eventually gave the movie a 2008 release in just two theaters in the U.S. It grossed US$8 million around the globe on a budget of US$20 million. She followed with the starring role in the romantic comedy The Rebound, in which she played a 40-year-old mother of two, who falls in love with a younger man, played by Justin Bartha. The movie premiered theatrically in a number of countries throughout 2009–10, and was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on 25 December 2010 but was cancelled due to the film's distributor shutting down. It ended up going direct-to-video on 7 February 2012.  She made her Broadway debut in Trevor Nunn's revival of A Little Night Music with Angela Lansbury, beginning December 2009. Set in Sweden at the turn of the twentieth century, it follows three lovestruck couples as they lose, and find, each other during a long midsummer night on a country estate. Reviews towards the play were polarizing, with Zeta-Jones earning a very similar response; The Telegraph remarked that she "loads every word, gesture and facial expression with a knowing sassiness". However, The New York Times observed, "swapping arch banter, sung or spoken, doesn't come naturally to Ms Zeta-Jones". For her performance, she received an Outer Critics Circle Award, Drama Desk Award, as well as a Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical. Meanwhile, she took a 3 year-break from film roles to focus on her husband, who was suffering from throat cancer at the time, and seek treatment for bipolar disorder. Her next movie appearance was in Stephen Frears' comedy Lay the Favorite, which also starred Bruce Willis and Rebecca Hall. It premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival, and received a  release in selected theaters on 7 December 2012. Her role was the sharp-tongued wife of Willis' character, named Tulip Heimowitz, who was jelous of an aspiring Las Vegas cocktail waitress (played by Hall), when she falls in with her husband. The movie received mainly negative reviews, and was a commercial disappointment with only US$1.5 million grossed, based on a US$20 million production budget. ViewLondon felt she "manages to make Tulip a more layered and interesting character than you first suspect", while Los Angeles Times concluded that the actress was "far too shrill to amuse". Zeta-Jones was cast to appear as a supporting character in the musical film Rock of Ages, co-starring Tom Cruise and Alec Baldwin. In the picture, she portrayed Patricia Whitmore, the main antagonist and a religiously conservative wife of a mayor. Her role was solely based on US Republican candidate Michele Bachmann, and Catherine once recalled: "I even put my hair like hers. She was trying to run for president when I was shooting and I used to watch her on TV and go, 'Oh, you’ve got to be kidding me'". The movie was released on 15 June 2012, receiving mixed reviews and underperforming at the box office. Later that year, she also appeared in the comedy Playing for Keeps, with Gerard Butler. As with Zeta-Jones' previous projects, the film bombed commercially with a total gross of US$24 million, and received overwhelmingly negative reviews from critics who, according to aggregate-site Rotten Tomatoes, called it "a dispiriting, lowest-common-denominator Hollywood rom-com". Her first 2013 release was the crime thriller Broken City, directed by Allen Hughes and where she co-starred with Mark Wahlberg and Russell Crowe. The film centers on a private detective (played by Wahlberg) who is hired by the mayor of New York (Crowe) to uncover the identity of the lover of his wife (who is played by Zeta-Jones). Going largely unnoticed at the box office, the movie also garnered negative reviews. However, the actress was singled out for her part. The Hollywood Reporter noted that she "looks like class itself and nicely underplays", and Globe and Mail observed that the actress "does a fair, if incongruous, impersonation of a forties vamp". She subsequently appeared in Steven Soderbergh's Side Effects (their third collaboration), opposite Channing Tatum, Jude Law and Rooney Mara.The film, where she played Dr. Victoria Siebert, concerns the ramifications of an event following a young woman being prescribed antidepressant drugs, in particular the fictional new drug Ablixa (alipazone). Critical reaction towards the movie was unanimously positive. Toronto Star found her performance to be "electric", and Express.co.uk concluded that "there was an enjoyably silky turn" from her. It was released on 8 February 2013 and was a moderate commercial success, with a gross total of US$63 million on a production budget of US$30 million. She next appeared as Russian agent Katya in the action comedy sequel RED 2, which opened on 19 July 2013. In the film, she co-starred with Helen Mirren, Mary-Louise Parker, John Malkovich, and Bruce Willis. Zeta-Jones was drawn to appear in the project as she was initially attracted to its "concept [...] the action, the humour, the tongue-in-cheek quality of it", as she once described it to The Telegraph. The movie also gave her the chance to work for the third time with Willis, with whom she had always loved working. "When I watched the [movie] the other day for the first time, it just kind of jumps from the screen how much fun we're having and the audience will have a lot of fun watching it." The movie received mixed reviews. Daily Mail found the actress "over-the-top" and  "unfunny" as her character, but USA Today positively pointed out her and co-star Parker calling them "terrific". Upon its release, the crime caper feature grossed US$148 million worldwide, from a budget of US$84 million. Zeta-Jones is set to star in Dad's Army, an upcoming British war comedy film slated to be released on 5 February 2016. She will play a glamorous journalist named Rose Winters, who is sent to report on the Walmington-on-Sea Home Guard platoon. She also stars in the crime biopic The Godmother, about former drug lord Griselda Blanco, known as the Cocaine Godmother. Principal photography began on 29 June 2015, and a theatrical release is scheduled for 2016. With the recognition found in Traffic and Chicago that helped her establish a successful acting career, Zeta-Jones became an advertising spokeswoman for high-profile brands outside the screen. She was named the public face and global spokeswoman for cosmetics giant Elizabeth Arden in 2002. Chosen to be the firm's face as she "personifies the essence" of the brand, according to executive vice president for marketing Ron Rolleston, she was described as "the epitome of personal style, elegance and sophistication". Around the same time, she started an endorsement deal with phone company T-Mobile, headlining numerous television commercials and campaigns, in conjunction with the launch of brand in the U.S. She told Sunday Times during an interview at the time, that her deal, for which she reportedly earned more than US$20 million, was something she "could not – and should not – refuse. Everyone asked, 'Why is she doing this?' I'm also a businesswoman. Catherine Zeta-Jones is a brand name". In 2005, Zeta-Jones renewed her contract with the firm, but it came to an end in the fall of 2006 when T-Mobile phased her out. However, she came back in an advertising campaign for the brand in the spring of 2009. She also appeared in a Alfa Romeo commercial, and later on, became the spokeswoman for Di Modolo jewellery. The campaign, in which she was featured, debuted in the November 2007 issues of fashion and lifestyle publications, including W and Town and Country. In 1991, she graced the cover of UK's Radio Times, and in subsequent years, with her profile signicantly raised for The Mask of Zorro and Entrapment, she landed on the covers of American magazines and publications such as Maxim, Entertainment Weekly, Details and Allure in the late 1990s. Since then, the list has grown to include other magazines like Vogue, Harper's Bazaar, Vanity Fair, In Style and Esquire. Zeta-Jones was named the "Most Outrageously Beautiful Woman" in 1998 by Movieline and also appeared on the 1999 cover of the magazine. She was chosen as one of the "Most Beautiful People" in 1998 by People and then appeared four more times in the 2000, 2001, 2003 and 2004 editions of the same list. She ranked #68 in FHM's "100 Sexiest Women in the World" 2005 special supplement and was also listed as #82 in 2006. She has, in addition, ranked #50 on VH1's "100 Hottest Hotties", and listed at #57, #5 and #36 on AskMen.com's 99 "most desirable" women list, in 2002, 2001 and 2003, respectively. Zeta-Jones was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2010 Birthday Honours. Throughout the years, Zeta-Jones has became a subject of parody and satire, due to her celebrity status and high-profile marriage to Michael Douglas; British comedians Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders parodied her in 2007, on their sketch comedy television show French & Saunders (1987–2010), and she was also parodied by Debra Stephenson in the BBC comedy sketch show The Impressions Show with Culshaw and Stephenson (2009–2011). A 2006 episode of satirical British television show Star Stories (2006–2008) was entitled 'Catherine Zeta-Jones - Her Quest To Prove Herself... And Also Find Love', about a ficticuous life story of Zeta-Jones, and she was once again parodied later by comedian Mo Collins during an episode of MADtv. Catherine appeared as a singing fairy in one of four YouTube spoof shorts directed by Jimmy Kimmel for the Jimmy Kimmel Live! post-Oscar special in February 2014. The segment, called David After Dentist Double Rainbow Oh My God! in 3D, also starred Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Seth Rogen and Samuel L. Jackson.  Zeta-Jones met actor Michael Douglas, with whom she shares a birthday and who is 25 years her senior, at the Deauville Film Festival in France in August 1998, after being introduced by Danny DeVito. According to Catherine, when they met, he told her that "I'd like to father your children". They began dating in March 1999 and eventually became engaged on 31 December 1999; they were married at the Plaza Hotel in New York City on 18 November 2000, after Douglas' divorce was finalised. A traditional Welsh choir sang at their wedding. Her Welsh gold wedding ring includes a Celtic motif and was purchased in the Welsh town of Aberystwyth. Mick Hucknall from the band Simply Red, who previously dated Zeta-Jones, also performed at their wedding. Zeta-Jones and Douglas have two children, son Dylan Michael (born 8 August 2000) and daughter Carys Zeta (born 20 April 2003). The family resides in Bedford, New York. In August 2013, People claimed that Douglas and Zeta-Jones began living separately in May 2013, but had not taken any legal action towards separation or divorce. A representative for Zeta-Jones subsequently confirmed that they "are taking some time apart to evaluate and work on their marriage." It was reported on November 1 that the couple had reconciled and moved back in together. In April 2011, Zeta-Jones sought treatment for bipolar II disorder, checking herself into Silver Hill Hospital in New Canaan, Connecticut. Zeta-Jones checked into a health care facility again in April 2013 for further treatment related to her bipolar disorder.      Year Title Role Notes 1990 Scheherazade 1001 Nights 1992 Christopher Columbus: The Discovery Beatriz 1993 Splitting Heirs Kitty 1995 Blue Juice Chloe 1996 Sala 1998 Eléna (De La Vega) Montero 1999 Entrapment Virginia Baker 1999 Theo 2000 High Fidelity Charlie Nicholson 2000 Traffic Helena Ayala 2001 America's Sweethearts Gwen Harrison 2002 Chicago Velma Kelly 2003 Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas Marina Voice role 2003 Intolerable Cruelty Marylin 2004 Amelia Warren 2004 Ocean's Twelve Isabel Lahiri 2005 Eléna (De La Vega) Montero 2007 No Reservations Kate Armstrong 2007 Death Defying Acts Mary McGarvie 2009 Sandy 2012 Rock of Ages Patricia Whitmore 2012 Lay the Favorite Tulip Heimowitz 2012 Playing for Keeps Denise 2013 Broken City Cathleen Hostetler 2013 Side Effects Dr. Victoria Siebert 2013 Red 2 Katya Petrokovich 2016 The Godmother Griselda Blanco Filming 2016 Dad's Army Rose Winters Year Title Role Notes 1991–93 The Darling Buds of May Mariette ITV series (main role; all episodes) 1994 Eustacia Vye Hallmark Hall of Fame movie 1994 Victoria Chapman ITV miniseries 1995 Catherine the Great Catherine II A&E movie 1996 Titanic Isabella Paradine CBS miniseries 1999 The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles Maya Episode "Daredevils of the Desert" 2016 Galaxy World of Alisa Marina (voice) British English dub Year Title Role Notes 1981 Annie Annie Swansea Grand Theatre 1983 Bugsy Malone Tallulah Her Majesty's Theatre 1986 The Pajama Game Chorus Haymarket Theatre, Leicester 1987 42nd Street Peggy Sawyer Theatre Royal, Drury Lane 1989 Street Scene Mae Jones Coliseum Theatre 2009 A Little Night Music Desiree Armfeldt Walter Kerr Theatre Year Title Label 1989 Street Scene Jay Records 1990 Les 1001 Nuits soundtrack Stars Music One 1992 For All Time Sony Music Entertainment 1992 Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of Spartacus Sony Music Entertainment 1994 True Love Ways (feat. David Essex) Lamplight Music Ltd. 1995 In The Arms of Love The WOW! Recording Company, Ltd. 1995 I Can't Help Myself The WOW! Recording Company, Ltd. 2003 Chicago soundtrack Sony Music Entertainment, Inc. 2010 Stephen Sondheim: A Little Night Music Nonesuch Records 2012 Rock of Ages soundtrack WaterTower Music Year Association Category Work Result 1999 Blockbuster Entertainment Award Favorite Female Newcomer The Mask of Zorro 1999 Saturn Awards Best Actress The Mask of Zorro 1999 MTV Movie Awards Best Breakthrough Performance The Mask of Zorro 1999 MTV Movie Awards Best Fight (shared with Antonio Banderas) The Mask of Zorro 1999 European Film Awards Best Actress Entrapment 2000 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards Favorite Actress – Action Entrapment 2000 Golden Raspberry Awards Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress Entrapment 2000 Golden Raspberry Awards Worst Screen Couple (shared with Sean Connery) Entrapment 2000 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards Favorite Actress – Horror The Haunting 2000 Golden Raspberry Awards Worst Screen Couple (shared with Lili Taylor) The Haunting 2001 Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Traffic 2001 Golden Globe Awards Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Traffic 2001 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards Favorite Actress – Drama Traffic 2001 Chicago Film Critics Association Awards Best Supporting Actress Traffic 2001 Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Awards Best Supporting Actress Traffic 2002 Empire Awards Best British Actress Traffic 2002 Boston Society of Film Critics Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 Academy Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 BAFTA Awards Best Actress in a Supporting Role Chicago 2003 Critics' Choice Movie Awards Best Acting Ensemble Chicago 2003 Critics' Choice Movie Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 Evening Standard British Film Awards Best Actress Chicago 2003 Phoenix Film Critics Society Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards Best Cast Chicago 2003 Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Chicago 2003 Screen Actors Guild Awards Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role Chicago 2003 Boston Society of Film Critics Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2003 Golden Globe Awards Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy Chicago 2003 Online Film Critics Society Awards Best Supporting Actress Chicago 2005 Critics' Choice Movie Awards Best Acting Ensemble Ocean's Twelve 2006 People's Choice Awards Favorite Female Action Star The Legend of Zorro Year Association Category Work Result 2010 Tony Awards Best Actress in a Musical A Little Night Music 2010 Drama Desk Awards Outstanding Actress in a Musical A Little Night Music 2010 Outer Critics Circle Awards Outstanding Actress in a Musical A Little Night Music
