  Chinese herbology () is the theory of traditional Chinese herbal therapy, which accounts for the majority of treatments in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). A Nature editorial described TCM as "fraught with pseudoscience", and said that the most obvious reason why it hasn't delivered many cures is that the majority of its treatments have no logical mechanism of action. The term herbology is misleading in the sense that, while plant elements are by far the most commonly used substances, animal, human, and mineral products are also utilized. In the Neijing they are referred to as 毒藥 [duyao] which means a toxin, poison and medicine. Unschuld points out that this is similar etymology as the Greek pharmakon and so he uses the term 'pharmaceutic'.Unschuld Paul U., Medicine in China: A History of Pharmaceutics, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA. 1986 Thus, the term "medicinal" (instead of herb) is usually preferred as a translation for 药 (). The effectiveness of traditional Chinese herbal therapy remains poorly documented. There are concerns over a number of potentially toxic Chinese herbs.   Chinese herbs have been used for centuries. Among the earliest literature are lists of prescriptions for specific ailments, exemplified by the manuscript "Recipes for 52 Ailments", found in the Mawangdui tombs which were sealed in 168&nbsp;BC. The first traditionally recognized herbalist is Shénnóng (神农, lit. "Divine Farmer"), a mythical god-like figure, who is said to have lived around 2800&nbsp;BC. He allegedly tasted hundreds of herbs and imparted his knowledge of medicinal and poisonous plants to farmers.  His Shénnóng Běn Cǎo Jīng (神农本草经, Shennong's Materia Medica) is considered as the oldest book on Chinese herbal medicine. It classifies 365 species of roots, grass, woods, furs, animals and stones into three categories of herbal medicine:Unschuld, Paul Ulrich (1986), Medicine in China, A History of Pharmaceutics, 本草, University of California Press. The original text of Shennong's Materia Medica has been lost; however, there are extant translations.Du Halde J-B (1736): Description géographique, historique etc. de la Chine, Paris The true date of origin is believed to fall into the late Western Han dynasty (i.e., the first century BC). The Treatise on Cold Damage Disorders and Miscellaneous Illnesses was collated by Zhang Zhongjing, also sometime at the end of the Han dynasty, between 196 and 220 CE. Focusing on drug prescriptions,;  it was the first medical work to combine Yinyang and the Five Phases with drug therapy. This formulary was also the earliest Chinese medical text to group symptoms into clinically useful "patterns" (zheng 證) that could serve as targets for therapy. Having gone through numerous changes over time, it now circulates as two distinct books: the Treatise on Cold Damage Disorders and the Essential Prescriptions of the Golden Casket, which were edited separately in the eleventh century, under the Song dynasty., pp. 100–101. Succeeding generations augmented these works, as in the Yaoxing Lun (simplified Chinese: 药性论; traditional Chinese: 藥性論; literally "Treatise on the Nature of Medicinal Herbs"), a 7th-century Tang Dynasty Chinese treatise on herbal medicine. There was a shift in emphasis in treatment over several centuries. A section of the Neijing Suwen including Chapter 74 was added by Wang Bing [王冰 Wáng Bīng] in his 765 edition. In which it says: 主病之謂君，佐君之謂臣，應臣之謂使，非上下三品之謂也。 "Ruler of disease it called Sovereign, aid to Sovereign it called Minister, comply with Minister it called Envoy (Assistant),  not upper lower three classes (qualities) it called."  The last part is interpreted as stating that these three rulers are not the three classes of Shénnóng mentioned previously. This chapter in particular outlines a more forceful approach. Later on Zhang Zihe [張子和 Zháng Zĭ-hè (or hē?), aka Zhang Cong-zhen] (1156-1228) is credited with founding the 'Attacking School' which criticized the overus of tonics. Arguably the most important of these later works is the Compendium of Materia Medica (Bencao Gangmu:本草綱目) compiled during the Ming dynasty by Li Shizhen, which is still used today for consultation and reference. The use of Chinese herbs was popular during the medieval age in western Asian and Islamic countries. They were traded through the Silk Road from the East to the West. Cinnamon, ginger, rhubarb, nutmeg and cubeb are mentioned as Chinese herbs by medieval Islamic medical scholars Such as Rhazes (854– 925 CE), Haly Abbas (930-994 CE) and Avicenna (980-1037 CE). There were also multiple similarities between the clinical uses of these herbs in Chinese and Islamic medicine. There are roughly 13,000 medicinals used in China and over 100,000 medicinal recipes recorded in the ancient literature. Plant elements and extracts are by far the most common elements used.Foster & Yue 1992, p.11 In the classic Handbook of Traditional Drugs from 1941, 517 drugs were listed – out of these, only 45 were animal parts, and 30 were minerals. For many plants used as medicinals, detailed instructions have been handed down not only regarding the locations and areas where they grow best, but also regarding the best timing of planting and harvesting them. Some animal parts used as medicinals can be considered rather strange such as cows' gallstones. Furthermore, the classic materia medica Bencao Gangmu describes the use of 35 traditional Chinese medicines derived from the human body, including bones, fingernail, hairs, dandruff, earwax, impurities on the teeth, feces, urine, sweat, and organs, but most are no longer in use. Each herbal medicine prescription is a cocktail of many substances, usually tailored to the individual patient. Typically, one batch of medicinals is prepared as a decoction of about 9 to 18 substances."Nach der Erfahrung des Verfassers bewegen sich in der VR China 99% der Rezepturen in einem Bereich zwischen 6 und 20 Kräutern; meist sind es aber zwischen 9 und 18,... ("According to the experience of the author, 99% of prescriptions in the PR of China range from 6 to 20 herbs; in the majority, however, it is 9 to 12,...") A seen at: Kiessler, (2005), p. 24 Some of these are considered as main herbs, some as ancillary herbs; within the ancillary herbs, up to three categories can be distinguished."Innerhalb einer Rezeptur wird grob zwischen Haupt- und Nebenkräuter unterschieden. Bei klassischen Rezepturen existieren sehr genaue Analysen zur Funktion jeder einzelnen Zutat, die bis zu drei Kategorien (Chen, Zun und Chi) von Nebenkräutern differenzieren." ("Regarding the content of the prescription, one can differentiate between main herbs and ancillary herbs. For classical prescriptions, detailed analyses existet for each single ingredient which discriminate between up to three categories (Chen, Zun, and Chi) of ancillary herbs.") As seen at: Kiessler (2005), p. 25 Some ingredients are added in order to cancel out toxicity or side-effects of the main ingredients; on top of that, some medicinals require the use of other substances as catalysts.  Chinese patent medicine (traditional Chinese: 中成藥, Simplified Chinese: 中成药, pinyin: zhōngchéng yào) is a kind of traditional Chinese medicine. They are standardized herbal formulas. From ancient times, pills were formed by combining several herbs and other ingredients, which were dried and ground into a powder. They were then mixed with a binder and formed into pills by hand. The binder was traditionally honey. Modern teapills, however, are extracted in stainless steel extractors to create either a water decoction or water-alcohol decoction, depending on the herbs used. They are extracted at a low temperature (below 100 degrees Celsius) to preserve essential ingredients. The extracted liquid is then further condensed, and some raw herb powder from one of the herbal ingredients is mixed in to form an herbal dough. This dough is then machine cut into tiny pieces, a small amount of excipients are added for a smooth and consistent exterior, and they are spun into pills. Teapills are characteristically little round black pills. Chinese patent medicines are easy and convenient. They are not easy to customize on a patient-by-patient basis, however. They are often used when a patient's condition is not severe and the medicine can be taken as a long-term treatment. These medicines are not patented in the traditional sense of the word. No one has exclusive rights to the formula. Instead, "patent" refers to the standardization of the formula. In China, all Chinese patent medicines of the same name will have the same proportions of ingredients, and manufactured in accordance with the PRC Pharmacopoeia, which is mandated by law. However, in western countries there may be variations in the proportions of ingredients in patent medicines of the same name, and even different ingredients altogether. Several producers of Chinese herbal medicines are pursuing FDA clinical trials to market their products as drugs in U.S. and European markets.Chinese Herbal Medicine Passes FDA Phase II Clinical Trials   http://www.suntenglobal.com/news/show.php?ID=218&page= Chinese herbal extracts are herbal decoctions that have been condensed into a granular or powdered form. Herbal extracts, similar to patent medicines, are easier and more convenient for patients to take. The industry extraction standard is 5:1, meaning for every five pounds of raw materials, one pound of herbal extract is derived.Chinese Herbal Extract FAQs   https://www.evherb.com/for_patients/herb_faq.html There are several different methods to classify traditional Chinese medicinals: The Four Natures are: hot (热), warm (温), cool (凉), cold (寒) or neutral (平), in terms of temperature.Ergil et al. 2009, p. 232 Hot and warm herbs are used to treat cold diseases, while cool and cold herbs are used to treat heat diseases.   The Five Flavors, sometimes also translated as Five Tastes, are: acrid/pungent (辛), sweet (甘), bitter (苦), sour (酸), and salty (咸). Substances may also have more than one flavor, or none (i.e., a bland (淡) flavor). Each of the Five Flavors corresponds to one of the zàng organs, which in turn corresponds to one of the Five Phases:Ergil et al. 2009, p. 61 A flavor implies certain properties and therapeutic actions of a substance: saltiness "drains downward and softens hard masses"; sweetness is "supplementing, harmonizing, and moistening"; pungent substances are thought to induce sweat and act on qi and blood; sourness tends to be astringent (涩) in nature; bitterness "drains heat, purges the bowels, and eliminates dampness". This classification refers not just to the meridian, but also to the meridian-associated zàng-organ, which can be expected to be primarily affected by a given medicinal (there are 12 standard meridians in the body a medicinal can act upon). For example, traditional beliefs hold that menthol is pungent and cool and goes to the Lung and the Liver channels. The Traditional Chinese concept of the Lungs includes the function of protecting the body from colds, and menthol is thought to cool the Lungs and purge heat toxins caused by wind-heat invasion (one of the patterns of common cold). These categories mainly include: Many herbs earn their names from their unique physical appearance. Examples of such names include Niu Xi (Radix Cyathulae seu Achyranthis), "cow's knees," which has big joints that might look like cow knees; Bai Mu Er (Fructificatio Tremellae Fuciformis), white wood ear,' which is white and resembles an ear; Gou Ji (Rhizoma Cibotii), 'dog spine,' which resembles the spine of a dog.Chen, John and Chen, Tina (2004) Chinese Medical Herbology and Pharmacology. AOM Press. Pages 3–6. Color is not only a valuable means of identifying herbs, but in many cases also provides information about the therapeutic attributes of the herb. For example, yellow herbs are referred to as 'huang' (yellow) or 'jin' (gold). Huang Bai (Cortex Phellodendri) means 'yellow fir," and Jin Yin Hua (Flos Lonicerae) has the label 'golden silver flower." Unique flavors define specific names for some substances. "Gan" means 'sweet,' so Gan Cao (Radix Glycyrrhizae) is 'sweet herb," an adequate description for the licorice root. "Ku" means bitter, thus Ku Shen (Sophorae Flavescentis) translates as 'bitter herb.' The locations or provinces in which herbs are grown often figure into herb names. For example, Bei Sha Shen (Radix Glehniae) is grown and harvested in northern China, whereas Nan Sha Shen (Radix Adenophorae) originated in southern China. And the Chinese words for north and south are respectively "bei" and "nan." Chuan Bei Mu (Bulbus Fritillariae Cirrhosae) and Chuan Niu Xi (Radix Cyathulae) are both found in Sichuan province, as the character "chuan" indicates in their names. Some herbs, like Fang Feng (Radix Saposhnikoviae), literally 'prevent wind," prevents or treats wind-related illnesses. Xu Duan (Radix Dipsaci), literally 'restore the broken,' effectively treats torn soft tissues and broken bones. Many herbs indigenous to other countries have been incorporated into the Chinese materia medica. Xi Yang Shen (Radix Panacis Quinquefolii), imported from North American crops, translates as 'western ginseng," while Dong Yang Shen (Radix Ginseng Japonica), grown in and imported from North Asian countries, is 'eastern ginseng.' Similar examples are noted in the text whenever geography matters in herb selection. From the earliest records regarding the use of medicinals to today, the toxicity of certain substances has been described in all Chinese materia medica.Ergil et al. 2009, pp. 234–236 Since TCM has become more popular in the Western world, there are increasing concerns about the potential toxicity of many traditional Chinese medicinals including plants, animal parts and minerals. For most medicinals, efficacy and toxicity testing are based on traditional knowledge rather than laboratory analysis. The toxicity in some cases could be confirmed by modern research (i.e., in scorpion); in some cases it couldn't (i.e., in Curculigo).Ergil et al. 2009, p. 236 Further, ingredients may have different names in different locales or in historical texts, and different preparations may have similar names for the same reason, which can create inconsistencies and confusion in the creation of medicinals, with the possible danger of poisoning. Edzard Ernst "concluded that adverse effects of herbal medicines are an important albeit neglected subject in dermatology, which deserves further systematic investigation." Research suggests that the toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs found in Chinese herbal medicines might be a serious health issue. Substances known to be potentially dangerous include aconite, secretions from the Asiatic toad, powdered centipede, the Chinese beetle (Mylabris phalerata, Ban mao), and certain fungi. There are health problems associated with Aristolochia. Toxic effects are also frequent with Aconitum. To avoid its toxic adverse effects Xanthium sibiricum must be processed. Hepatotoxicity has been reported with products containing Polygonum multiflorum, glycyrrhizin, Senecio and Symphytum. The evidence suggests that hepatotoxic herbs also include Dictamnus dasycarpus, Astragalus membranaceous, and Paeonia lactiflora; although there is no evidence that they cause liver damage. Contrary to popular belief, Ganoderma lucidum mushroom extract, as an adjuvant for cancer immunotherapy, appears to have the potential for toxicity. A 2013 review suggested that although the antimalarial herb Artemisia annua may not cause hepatotoxicity, haematotoxicity, or hyperlipidemia, it should be used cautiously during pregnancy due to a potential risk of embryotoxicity at a high dose. However, many adverse reactions are due misuse or abuse of Chinese medicine. For example, the misuse of the dietary supplement Ephedra (containing ephedrine) can lead to adverse events including gastrointestinal problems as well as sudden death from cardiomyopathy. Products adulterated with pharmaceuticals for weight loss or erectile dysfunction are one of the main concerns. Chinese herbal medicine has been a major cause of acute liver failure in China.  Regarding Traditional Chinese herbal therapy, only few trials exist that are considered to be of adequate methodology by modern western medical researchers, and its effectiveness therefore is considered poorly documented.  A 2012 Cochrane review found no difference in decreased mortality when Chinese herbs were used alongside Western medicine versus Western medicine exclusively. A 2010 Cochrane review found there is not enough robust evidence to support the effectiveness of traditional Chinese medicine herbs to stop the bleeding from haemorrhoids.  A 2008 Cochrane review found promising evidence for the use of Chinese herbal medicine in relieving painful menstruation, compared to conventional medicine such as NSAIDs and the oral contraceptive pill, but the findings are of low methodological quality. A 2007 Cochrane review found there is not enough evidence to support or dismiss the use of Chinese medicinal herbs for the treatment of influenza. A 2005 Cochrane review found that although the evidence was weak for the use of any single herb, there was low quality evidence that some Chinese medicinal herbs may be effective for the treatment of acute pancreatitis. Successful results have however been scarce: artemisinin, for example, which is an effective treatment for malaria, was discovered from an herb traditionally used to treat fever. Although advocates have argued that research had missed some key features of TCM, such as the subtle interrelationships between ingredients, it is largely pseudoscience, with no valid mechanism of action for the majority of its treatments.  The traditional practice of using (by now) endangered species is controversial within TCM. Modern Materia Medicas such as Bensky, Clavey and Stoger's comprehensive Chinese herbal text discuss substances derived from endangered species in an appendix, emphasizing alternatives. Parts of endangered species used as TCM drugs include tiger bones and rhinoceros horn.Facts about traditional Chinese medicine (TCM): rhinoceros horn, Encyclopædia Britannica, Facts about traditional Chinese medicine (TCM): rhinoceros horn, as discussed in rhinoceros (mammal): – Britannica Online Encyclopedia Poachers supply the black market with such substances, and the black market in rhinoceros horn, for example, has reduced the world's rhino population by more than 90 percent over the past 40 years."Rhino horn: All myth, no medicine", National Geographic, Rhishja Larson Concerns have also arisen over the use of turtle plastron and seahorses. TCM recognizes bear bile as a medicinal. In 1988, the Chinese Ministry of Health started controlling bile production, which previously used bears killed before winter. Now bears are fitted with a sort of permanent catheter, which is more profitable than killing the bears."治人病还是救熊命——对养熊"引流熊胆"的思考"南风窗. November 12, 2002 More than 12,000 asiatic black bears are held in "bear farms", where they suffer cruel conditions while being held in tiny cages.http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2025388/China-Tortured-mother-bear-kills-cub-herself.html The catheter leads through a permanent hole in the abdomen directly to the gall bladder, which can cause severe pain. Increased international attention has mostly stopped the use of bile outside of China; gallbladders from butchered cattle (niú dǎn / 牛膽 / 牛胆) are recommended as a substitute for this ingredient. Collecting American ginseng to assist the Asian traditional medicine trade has made ginseng the most harvested wild plant in North America for the last two centuries, which eventually led to a listing on CITES Appendix II.  There are over three hundred herbs that are commonly being used today. Some of the most commonly used herbs are Ginseng (人参, 人參, rénshēn), wolfberry (枸杞子), Dong Quai (Angelica sinensis, 当归, 當歸, dāngguī), astragalus (黄耆, 黃耆, huángqí), atractylodes (白术, 白朮, báizhú), bupleurum (柴胡, cháihú), cinnamon (cinnamon twigs (桂枝, guìzhī) and cinnamon bark (肉桂, ròuguì)), coptis (黄莲, 黃蓮, huánglián), ginger (姜, 薑, jiāng), hoelen (茯苓, fúlíng), licorice (甘草, gāncǎo), ephedra sinica (麻黄, 麻黃, máhuáng), peony (white: 白芍, báisháo and reddish: 赤芍, chìsháo), rehmannia (地黄, 地黃, dìhuáng), rhubarb (大黄, 大黃, dàhuáng), and salvia (丹参, 丹參, dānshēn).  The use of ginseng (人参) is well over two thousand years old in Chinese medicine. Ginseng contains ginsenosides. The amount of ginsenosides in ginseng depends on how the plant was cultivated and the age of the root. Wild ginseng is rare and commands the highest prices on the market. Red Panax ginseng is the most popular form of ginseng and it is usually packaged as a liquid or tea. Ginseng comes in two kinds, red and white. The color of the ginseng depends on how it is processed. White ginseng is unprocessed and dries naturally. Red ginseng is processed with steam and is believed to be more effective. Native Americans have used American ginseng for dry coughs, constipation, and fevers. TCM Information: Species: Panax ginseng. Pinyin: Ren Shen. Common Name: Chinese Ginseng. Quality: Sweet, Bitter, Warm. Meridians: Lung, Spleen, Heart. Actions: Tonifies yuan qi to treat collapse of qi, tonifies spleen and lung, generates fluids, mildly tonifies heart qi.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 710.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75741.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/renshen-properties.htm Species: Elutherococcus senticosus. Pinyin: Ci Wu Jia. Common Name: Siberian Ginseng. Quality: Pungent (Acrid), Slightly bitter, Warm. Meridians: Spleen, Heart, Kidney. Actions: Tonifies spleen and kidney, mildly tonifies heart qi, promote blood circulation, calms shen.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 735.Psychosomatic Disorders (2002) hsttp://tcm.health-info.org/psychology/Psychosomatic%20Disorders.htm Species: Panax quinquefolius. Pinyin: Xi Yang Shen. Common Name: American Ginseng. Quality: Sweet, Slightly bitter, Cold. Meridians: Heart, Kidney, Lung. Actions: Tonifies lung and spleen qi, tonifies lung yin, cools fire from lung yin deficiency, generates fluids.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 822.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/xiyangshen-properties.htm  Mushrooms have long been used as a medicinal food and as a tea in Chinese herbology. Clinical, animal, and cellular research has shown some mushrooms may be able to up-regulate aspects of the immune system. Notable mushrooms used in Chinese herbology include Reishi and Shiitake.  Wolfberry (枸杞子) is grown in the Far East and is grown from shrubs with long vines. The shrubs are covered with small trumpet-shaped flowers, which turn into small, bright red berries. The berries are usually fresh and sometimes used when dried. TCM Information: Species: Lycium barbarum. Pinyin: Gou Qi Zi. Common Name: Chinese Wolfberry. Quality: Sweet, Neutral. Meridians: Liver, Lung, Kidney. Actions: Tonifies kidney and lung yin, tonifies liver blood, tonifies jing, improves vision.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 761.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/gouqizi-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75756.shtml Dang Gui (当归, Angelica sinensis or "female ginseng") is an aromatic herb that grows in China, Korea, and Japan. TCM Information: Species: Angelica sinensis. Pinyin: Dang Gui. Common Name: Chinese Angelica Root. Quality: Sweet, Pungent(Acrid), Warm. Meridians: Liver, Heart, Spleen. Actions: Tonify blood, invigorate blood, regulate menstruation, relieve pain, unblock bowels by moistening intestine.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 750Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/danggui-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75752.shtml Astragalus (黄芪) is a root used for immune deficiencies and allergies. TCM Information: Species: Astragalus membranaceus. Pinyin: Huang Qi. Common Name: Astragalus Root, Milkvetch Root. Quality: Sweet, Slightly warm. Meridians: Lung, Spleen. Actions: Raise yang qi to treat prolapse, tonify spleen and lung qi, tonify wei qi, increases urination, promotes drainage of pus, generates flesh.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 718.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/huangqi-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75743.shtml Atractylodes (白术) is believed to be important in the treatment of digestive disorders and problems of moisture accumulation. TCM Information: Species: Atractylodes lancea. Pinyin: Cang Zhu. Common Name: Atractylodes Rhizome. Quality: Pungent(Acrid), Bitter, Warm. Meridians: Spleen, Stomach. Actions: Strong to dry dampness, strengthens the spleen, induce sweating, expel wind-cold, clears damp-heat from lower jiao, improves vision.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 467.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/cangzhu-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75713.shtml Bupleurum (柴胡) is believed to be useful for the treatment of liver diseases, skin ailments, arthritis, menopausal syndrome, withdrawal from corticosteroid use, nephritis, stress-induced ulcers, and mental disorders. TCM Information: Species: Bupleurnum chinense. Pinyin: Chai Hu. Common Name: Hare's Ear Root. Quality: Bitter, Pungent(Acrid), Cool. Meridians: Gallbladder, Liver, Pericardium, San Jiao. Actions: Treats alternating chills and fever, clears lesser yang disorders, relieves liver qi stagnation, raises yang qi to treat prolapse, treats certain menstrual disorders.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 74.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75679.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002)http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/chaihu-properties.htm Cinnamon (桂枝, 肉桂), mostly gui zhi and rou gui, are twigs and bark from large tropical trees. Studies show that cinnamon reduces serum glucose, triglyceride, LDL cholesterol, and total cholesterol in people with type 2 diabetes, and the findings suggest that the inclusion of cinnamon in the diet of people with type 2 diabetes will reduce risk factors associated with diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. TCM Information: Species: Cinnamomum cassia. Pinyin: Gui Zhi. Common Name: Cinnamon Twig. Quality: Pungent (Acrid), Sweet, Warm. Meridians: Heart, Lung, Bladder. Actions: Induce sweating, warms and unblocks channels, unblocks yang qi of the chest, treats dysmenorrhea.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 8.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/guizhi-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75668.shtml Species: Cinnamomum cassia. Pinyin: Rou Gui. Common Name: Cinnamon Bark. Quality: Pungent (Acrid), Sweet, Hot. Meridians: Heart, Kidney, Liver, Spleen. Actions: Tonifies kidney yang, leads fire back to its source, disperses cold, encourages generation of qi and blood, promotes blood circulation, alleviates pain due to cold, dysmenorrhea.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 684.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/rougui-properties.htmBeijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75718.shtml Coptis chinensis (黄莲) is a rhizome that is one of the bitterest herbs used in Chinese medicine. TCM Information: Species: Coptis chinensis. Pinyin: Huang Lian. Common Name: Coptis Rhizome. Qualities: Bitter, Cold. Meridians: Heart, Large Intestine, Liver, Stomach. Actions: Clears heat and drains damp, drains fire(especially from heart and stomach), eliminates toxicity.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 134.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75686.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/huanglian-properties.htm  Ginger (姜, 薑) is a herb and a spice that is used in Chinese cuisine. There are four main kinds of preparations in Chinese herbology: fresh ginger, dried ginger, roasted ginger, and ginger charcoal, all made of the rhizomes. TCM Information: Species: Zingiber officinalis. Pinyin: Sheng Jiang (生姜, 生薑). Common Name: Fresh Ginger Rhizome. Quality: Pungent(Acrid), Slightly warm. Meridians: Lung, Spleen, Stomach. Actions: Release the exterior, expel cold, warm the middle jiao, relieve nausea, transform phlegm, warm lung to stop coughing, treat toxicity, and moderate the toxicity of other herbs.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 30.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75674.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/shengjiang-properties.htm Species: Zingiber officinalis. Pinyin: Gan Jiang (干姜, 乾薑). Common Name: Dried Ginger Rhizome. Quality: Pungent(Acrid), Hot. Meridians: Heart, Lung, Spleen, Stomach. Actions: Warms the spleen and stomach, restores devastated yang, warms the lung to transform thin mucus, warms and unblocks channels.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 682.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/ganjiang-properties.htm The use of the licorice plant (甘草) Glycyrrhiza glabra L. is thought to help treat hepatitis, sore throat, and muscle spasms. TCM Information: Species: Glycyrrhiza inflata or Glycyrrhiza glabra. Pinyin: Gan Cao. Common Name: Licorice Root. Quality: Sweet, Neutral. Meridians: All 12 channels, but mainly Heart, Lung, Spleen, Stomach. Actions: Tonify spleen qi, moisten lung for dry cough, clears heat and fire toxicity, tonifies heart qi to regulate pulse, alleviates spasmodic pain, antidote for toxicity, moderates the effects of harsh herbs.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 732.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75744.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/gancao-properties.htm Ephedra (麻黄) TCM Information: Species: Ephedra sinica or Ephedra intermedia. Pinyin: Ma Huang. Common Name: Ephedra Stem. Quality: Pungent(Acrid), Slightly Bitter, Warm. Meridians: Lung, Bladder. Actions: Induce sweating and release exterior for wind-cold invasion with no sweating, promotes urination, move lung qi for wheezing, cough or asthma.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 4.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75667.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/mahuang-properties.htm Peony (白芍, 赤芍) comes in two varieties: bai shao (white) and chi shao (red), the root of the plant is used in both varieties. TCM Information: Species: Paeonia lactiflora. Pinyin: Bai Shao. Common Name: White Peony Root. Quality: Bitter, Sour, Cool. Meridians: Liver, Spleen. Actions: Tonify liver blood, calms liver yang, alleviates flank/abdominal pain from liver qi stagnation or liver and spleen disharmony, preserves yin and adjusts nutritive and protective levels, regulates menses for blood deficiency problem.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 12.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75754.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/baishaoyao-properties.htm Species: Paeonia lactiflora or Paeonia veitchii. Pinyin: Chi Shao. Common Name: Red Peony Root. Quality: Sour, Bitter, Cool. Meridians: Liver, Spleen. Actions: Clears heat, cools blood, invigorates blood and dispel stasis to treat irregular menses, dysmenorrhoea, amenorrhea, abdominal pain, and fixed abdominal masses.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 622.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/chishaoyao-properties.htm Rehmannia (地黄) is a root where the dark, moist part of the herb is used. TCM Information: Species: Rehmannia glucinosa. Pinyin: Sheng Di Huang. Common Name: Chinese Foxglove Root. Qualities: Sweet, Bitter, Cold. Meridians: Heart, Kidney, Liver. Actions: Clears heat, cools blood, nourishes yin, generates fluids, treats wasting and thirsting disorder.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 120.Traditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/shengdihuang-properties.htm Species: Rehmannia glucinosa. Pinyin: Shu Di Huang. Common Name: Chinese Foxglove Root Prepared with Wine. Qualities: Sweet, Slightly warm. Meridians: Heart, Kidney, Liver. Actions: Tonifies blood, tonifies liver and kidney yin, treats wasting and thirsting disorder, nourishes jing.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 744.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75755.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/shudihuang-properties.htm  Rhubarb (大黄), used medicinally for its root, was one of the first herbs to be imported from China. Rhubarb James Ford Bell Library University of Minnesota (accessed January 12, 2015) TCM Information: Species: Rheum palmatum, Rheum ranguticum, or Rheum officinale. Pinyin: Da Huang. Common Name: Rhubarb Root and Rhizome. Quality: Bitter, Cold. Meridians: Heart, Large Intestine, Liver, Stomach. Actions: Purge accumulation, cool blood, invigorate blood, drain damp-heat.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 235.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75702.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002) http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/dahuang-properties.htm Salvia (丹参) are the deep roots of the Chinese sage plant. TCM Information: Species: Salvia miltiorrhiza. Pinyin: Dan Shen. Common Name: Salvia Root. Qualities: Bitter, Cool. Meridians: Heart, Pericardium, Liver. Actions: Invigorate blood, tonify blood, regulate menstruation, clear heat and soothe irritability.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition, p. 602.Beijing Digital Museum of TCM (2007) http://en.tcm-china.info/materia/single/single/75731.shtmlTraditional Chinese Medicine-Acupuncture-Herbs-Formulas (2002)http://tcm.health-info.org/Herbology.Materia.Medica/danshen-properties.htm In Chinese herbology, there are 50 "fundamental" herbs, as given in the reference text,Wong, Ming (1976). La Médecine chinoise par les plantes. Le Corps a Vivre series. Éditions Tchou. although these herbs are not universally recognized as such in other texts. The herbs are: In addition to the above, many other Chinese herbs and other substances are in common use, and these include:    Binomial nomenclature Chinese name English Common Name (when available) Agastache rugosa huò xiāng (藿香) Korean Mint Alangium chinense bā jiǎo fēng (八角枫) Chinese Alangium Root Anemone chinensis (syn. Pulsatilla chinensis) bái tóu weng (白头翁) Chinese anemone Anisodus tanguticus shān làng dàng (山莨菪) Ardisia japonica zǐ jīn niú (紫金牛)Flora of China: Ardisia japonica Marlberry Aster tataricus zǐ wǎn (紫菀) Tatar aster, Tartar aster Astragalus propinquus (syn. Astragalus membranaceus) huáng qí (黄芪) or běi qí (北芪) Chinese astragalus Camellia sinensis chá shù (茶树) or chá yè (茶叶) Tea Plant Cannabis sativa dà má (大麻) Cannabis Carthamus tinctorius hóng huā (红花) Safflower Cinnamomum cassia ròu gùi (肉桂) Cassia, Chinese Cinnamon Cissampelos pareira xí shēng téng (锡生藤) or (亞乎奴) Velvet leaf Coptis chinensis duǎn è huáng lián (短萼黄连) Chinese Goldthread Corydalis yanhusuo yán hú suǒ (延胡索) Chinese Poppy of Yan Hu Sou Croton tiglium bā dòu (巴豆) Purging Croton Daphne genkwa yuán huā (芫花) Lilac Daphne Datura metel yáng jīn huā (洋金花) Devil's Trumpet Datura stramonium  zǐ huā màn tuó luó (紫花曼陀萝) Jimson Weed Dendrobium nobile shí hú (石斛) or shí hú lán (石斛兰) Noble Dendrobium Dichroa febrifuga cháng shān (常山) Blue Evergreen Hydrangea, Chinese Quinine Ephedra sinica cǎo má huáng (草麻黄) Chinese ephedra Eucommia ulmoides dù zhòng (杜仲) Hardy rubber tree Euphorbia pekinensis dà jǐ (大戟) Peking spurge Flueggea suffruticosa (formerly Securinega suffruticosa) yī yè qiū (一叶秋) Forsythia suspensa liánqiáoXiandai Hanyu Cidian. Commercial Press, fifth Edition, p. 844. (连翘) Weeping Forsythia Gentiana loureiroi dì dīng (地丁) Gleditsia sinensis zào jiá (皂荚) Chinese Honeylocust Glycyrrhiza uralensis gān cǎo (甘草) Licorice Hydnocarpus anthelminticus (syn. H. anthelminthica) dà fēng zǐ (大风子) Chaulmoogra tree Ilex purpurea dōngqīng (冬青) Purple Holly Leonurus japonicus yì mǔ cǎo (益母草) Chinese motherwort Ligusticum wallichii chuān xiōng (川芎) Szechwan lovage Lobelia chinensis bàn biān lián (半边莲) Creeping Lobelia Phellodendron amurense huáng bǎi (黄柏) Amur cork tree Platycladus orientalis (formerly Thuja orientalis) cè bǎi (侧柏) Chinese Arborvitae Pseudolarix amabilis jīn qián sōng (金钱松) Golden Larch Psilopeganum sinense shān má huáng (山麻黄) Naked rue Pueraria lobata gé gēn (葛根) Kudzu Rauwolfia serpentina shégēnmù (蛇根木), cóng shégēnmù (從蛇根木) or yìndù shé mù (印度蛇木) Sarpagandha, Indian Snakeroot Rehmannia glutinosa dìhuáng (地黄) or gān dìhuáng (干地黄) Chinese Foxglove Rheum officinale yào yòng dà huáng (药用大黄) Chinese or Eastern rhubarb Rhododendron tsinghaiense Qīng hǎi dù juān (青海杜鹃) Saussurea costus yún mù xiāng (云木香) Costus root Schisandra chinensis wǔ wèi zi (五味子) Chinese Magnolia Vine Scutellaria baicalensis huáng qín (黄芩) Baikal Skullcap Stemona tuberosa bǎi bù (百部) Stephania tetrandra fáng jǐ (防己) Stephania Root Styphnolobium japonicum (formerly Sophora japonica) huái (槐), huái shù (槐树), or huái huā (槐花) Pagoda Tree Trichosanthes kirilowii guā lóu (栝楼) Chinese Cucumber Wikstroemia indica liāo gē wáng (了哥王) Indian stringbush The "superior" category, which includes herbs effective for multiple diseases and are mostly responsible for maintaining and restoring the body balance. They have almost no unfavorable side-effects.Unschuld, Paul Ulrich (1986), Medicine in China, A History of Pharmaceutics, 本草, University of California Press. A category comprising tonics and boosters, whose consumption must not be prolonged.Unschuld, Paul Ulrich (1986), Medicine in China, A History of Pharmaceutics, 本草, University of California Press. A category of substances which must usually be taken in small doses, and for the treatment of specific diseases only.Unschuld, Paul Ulrich (1986), Medicine in China, A History of Pharmaceutics, 本草, University of California Press. The Four Natures () The Five Flavors () The meridians () The specific function. exterior-releasingXu & Wang 2002, Summary of Contents or exterior-resolvingErgil et al. 2009, p. 239 heat-clearing downward-draining or precipitating wind-damp-dispelling dampness-transforming promoting the movement of water and percolating dampness or dampness-percolating interior-warming qi-regulating or qi-rectifying dispersing food accumulation or food-dispersing worm-expelling stopping bleeding or blood-stanching quickening the Blood and dispelling stasis or blood-quickening or Blood-moving.Bensky, Dan (2004) Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica. Eastland Press, third edition. transforming phlegm, stopping coughing and calming wheezing or phlegm-transforming and cough- and panting-suppressing Spirit-quieting or Shen-calming. calming the Liver and expelling wind or Liver-calming and wind-extinguishing orifice-opening supplementing or tonifying: this includes qi-supplementing, blood-nourishing, yin-enriching, and yang-fortifying. astriction-promoting or securing and astringing vomiting-inducing substances for external application Akebia quinata (木通) Arisaema heterophyllum (胆南星) Arsenic trioxide (砒霜) Arsenolite (砒石) Aspongopus (九香虫) Asteriscus pseudosciaenae (鱼脑石) Benzoinum (安息香) Bombyx batryticatus (僵蚕) Bulbus fritillariae cirrhosae (川贝母) Bulbus fritillariae hupehensis (湖北贝母) Bulbus fritillariae pallidiflorae (伊贝母) Bulbus fritillariae thunbergii (浙贝母) Bulbus fritillariae ussuriensis (平贝母) Bulbus lycoridis radiatae (石蒜) Cacumen securinegae suffruticosae (叶底珠) Cacumen tamaricis (西河柳) Calamina (炉甘石) Calculus bovis (牛黄) Calculus equi (马宝) Calomelas (轻粉) Calyx seu fructus physalis (锦灯笼) Caulis ampelopsis brevipedunculae (山葡萄) Caulis aristolochiae manshuriensis (关木通) Caulis bambusae in taeniam (竹茹) Caulis clematidis armandii (川木通) Caulis entadae (过江龙) Caulis erycibes (丁公藤) Caulis et folium piperis hancei (山蒟) Caulis et folium schefflerae arboricolae (七叶莲) Caulis euphorbiae antiquori (火殃勒) Caulis fibraureae (黄藤) Caulis gneti (买麻藤) Caulis hederae sinensis (常春藤) Caulis impatientis (透骨草) Caulis lonicerae (忍冬藤) Caulis mahoniae (功劳木) Caulis perillae (紫苏梗) Caulis piperis kadsurae (海风藤) Caulis polygoni multiflori (首乌藤) Caulis sargentodoxae (大血藤) Caulis sinomenii (青风藤) Caulis spatholobi (鸡血藤) Caulis tinosporae (宽根藤) Caulis trachelospermi (络石藤) Cera chinensis (虫白蜡) Chenpi (Sun-Dried tangerine (Mandarin) peel) (陳皮) Cinnabaris (朱砂) Clematis (威灵仙) Colla corii asini (阿胶) Concha arcae (瓦楞子) Concha haliotidis (石决明) Concha margaritifera usta (珍珠母) Concha mauritiae arabicae (紫贝齿) Concha meretricis seu cyclinae (蛤壳) Concretio silicea bambusae (天竺黄) Cordyceps sinensis (冬虫夏草) Corium erinacei seu hemiechianus (刺猬皮) Cornu bubali (水牛角) Cornu cervi (鹿角) Cornu cervi degelatinatum (鹿角霜) Cornu cervi pantotrichum (鹿茸) Cornu saigae tataricae (羚羊角) Cortex acanthopanacis (五加皮) Cortex ailanthi (椿皮) Cortex albiziae (合欢皮) Cortex cinchonae (金鸡纳皮) Cortex dictamni (白鲜皮) Curcuma (郁金) Dalbergia odorifera (降香) Hirudo medicinalis (水蛭) Myrrh (没药) Olibanum (乳香) Persicaria (桃仁) Polygonum (虎杖) Sparganium (三棱) Zedoary (Curcuma zedoaria) (莪朮) Chinese classic herbal formula Chinese ophthalmology Compendium of Materia Medica Herbalism, for the use of medicinal herbs in other traditions. Li Shizhen Pharmacognosy Star anise Japanese star anise Traditional Chinese medicine Traditional Japanese medicine Traditional Korean medicine Yaoxing Lun Jiuhuang Bencao John K. Chen and Tina T. Chen (2004): "Chinese Medical Herbology and Pharmacology". ISBN 0-9740635-0-9 John K. Chen and Tina T. Chen (2009): "Pocket Atlas of Chinese Medicine". ISBN 978-0-9740635-7-7 Ergil, M. et al. (2009): "Pocket Atlas of Chinese Medicine" Thieme. ISBN 978-3-13-141611-7 Foster, S. & Yue, C. (1992): "Herbal emissaries: bringing Chinese herbs to the West". Healing Arts Press. ISBN 978-0-89281-349-0 Kiessler, Malte (2005): "Traditionelle Chinesische Innere Medizin". Elsevier, Urban&FischerVerlag. ISBN 978-3-437-57220-3 Xu, L. & Wang, W. (2002) "Chinese materia medica: combinations and applications" Donica Publishing Ltd. 1st edition. ISBN 978-1-901149-02-9
