 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (usually distinguished with a parenthetical (Strangite)) is a denomination of the Latter Day Saint movement and had around three hundred members in 1998. It is an entirely separate organization from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), which is considerably larger and better known, although both churches claim to be the original organization established by Joseph Smith, on April 6, 1830. The Strangite church is headquartered in Voree, Wisconsin, just outside Burlington, and accepts the claims of James Strang as successor to Smith, as opposed to those of Brigham Young, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith III, or any other Mormon leader. Strangites share the same history with other Latter Day Saint denominations up until the assassination of Joseph Smith. During the resulting succession crisis, several early Mormon leaders asserted claims to succeed Smith, including Sidney Rigdon, Brigham Young and James Strang. Rigdon's claim rested on his status as the senior surviving member of Smith's First Presidency, the church's highest leadership quorum. Rejected by the main church body in Nauvoo, Illinois, Rigdon and his followers moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where his organization faltered. A descendant of the Rigdonite church lives on today as The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite), which is not recognized as legitimate by Strangites. Brigham Young initially argued that Smith could have no immediate successor,http://www.ils.unc.edu/~unsworth/mormon/jssuccessor.html. but rather that the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (of which he was president) should be sustained as the presiding body of the church. Young and his followers migrated west to the Salt Lake Valley, in what became Utah Territory, continuing to use Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints as their name until incorporating in 1851, when the spelling was standardized as "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints". This organization has become the largest Latter Day Saint body in the world today. Both the Utah LDS Church and the Strangite church posit themselves as the sole legal continuation of Smith's organization; neither considers the other to be legitimate, nor do they recognize the validity of any of the hundreds of other Latter Day Saint sects.  Although he was a relatively recent convert at the time of Smith's death, James Strang posed a formidable—and initially quite successful—challenge to the claims of Young and Rigdon. Strang was a Mormon elder charged with establishing a stake or "place of refuge" in Wisconsin, should the Mormons be forced to abandon their headquarters in Nauvoo. He possessed a document that came to be known as the "letter of appointment", alleged to have been written by Smith prior to his death. The wording of the letter was ambiguous; some insist that it only appointed Strang to be president of the new Voree Stake of the church,Strang's own son, Charles Strang, took this position. See Smith, Heman, History of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints,] vol. 3, chapter 2, pp. 52–53. while Strang and his followers interpreted it as a call to follow Smith as President of the Church. Strang also claimed that at the moment of Smith's death, he was visited by angels who ordained him to be Smith's successor, though he claimed no other witnesses to the event.  Strang's assertion appealed to many Latter Day Saints who were attracted to Mormonism's doctrine of continuing revelation through a living prophet. In the face of protracted Mormon anguish at Smith's death, Strang insisted that there still was, indeed, a Mormon seer who communed with God and conversed with angels. Strang's claim was bolstered by his discovery of the Voree plates, purporting to contain the last testament of an ancient Native American, one "Rajah Manchou of Vorito". These plates were found in the Hill of Promise, which would become the temple site in the new Strangite town of Voree. This event was reminiscent of Smith's translations of the golden plates (the Book of Mormon) and the Book of Abraham, and may have encouraged some Latter Day Saints to accept Strang over any of his competitors, who had not produced any such "records".  Many prominent Latter Day Saints believed in Strang's "letter of appointment" and accepted him as Mormonism's second "Prophet, Seer, Revelator and Translator"—at least in the short term. These included the church's Presiding Patriarch and apostle William Smith (Smith's only surviving brother); Book of Mormon witness Martin Harris (who left and later rejoined the LDS Church in Utah); Nauvoo Stake President William Marks; second Bishop of the Church and church trustee-in-trust George Miller; apostle John E. Page; former apostle William E. McLellin; Smith's mother Lucy Mack Smith; and other members of the Smith family. Another adherent was John C. Bennett, former mayor of Nauvoo and a former member of the First Presidency. Bennett had been in Smith's innermost circle but had broken with the founding prophet and had written an anti-Mormon exposé. Bennett founded a secretive Strangite fraternal society known as the "Order of Illuminati", but his presence disrupted Strang's church and ultimately led to his excommunication.Fitzpatrick, Doyle C. (1970). The King Strang Story: A Vindication of James J, Strang, the Beaver Island Mormon King. National Heritage., p. 151. Bennett's "order" fell by the wayside and no longer exists among the Strangites. All of these persons—with the exception of Miller, who would remain loyal to Strang until death—left the Strangite church by 1850. Many of these defections were due to Strang's seemingly abrupt "about-face" on the turbulent subject of polygamy. Vehemently opposed to the practice at first,(August 12, 1847). Voree Herald as quoted in Fitzpatrick, pp. 74–75.  See also apostle John E. Page at this same source, on his conversations with Strang on the subject. Strang reversed course in 1849 to become one of plural marriage's strongest advocates. Since many of his early disciples had looked to him as a monogamous counterweight to Young's polygamous version of Mormonism, Strang's decision to embrace plural marriage proved costly to him and his church. Strang found his greatest support among the scattered outlying branches of Mormonism, which he frequently toured. His followers may have numbered as many as 12,000,"History and Succession". Strangite.org. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. at a time when Young's group had just over 50,000.Church Educational System, "Chapter 28: Utah in Isolation", Church History In The Fulness Of Times Student Manual (Salt Lake City, Utah: LDS Church, 2003). After Strang won a debate at a conference in Norway, Illinois, he converted the entire branch.Erekson, Keith and Newell, Lloyd: A Gathering Place for the Scandinavian People: Conversion, Retention and Gathering in Norway, Illinois (1842–1849), pp. 28–29. While in Voree, the Strangites published a periodical known as the Voree Herald. Strang's church also fielded a mission to England, one of the primary sources of converts to Mormonism. This mission was led by Martin Harris, the financier of the Book of Mormon and one of its Three Witnesses. Harris proved a poor spokesman, however, and the English missions sided with the LDS Church led by Young. Because the high price of land in the Voree area made it difficult for Latter Day Saints to "gather" there, Strang moved his church headquarters to Beaver Island in Lake Michigan. Here his disciples founded a town known as St. James (now St. James Township), and in 1850, openly established an ecclesiastical monarchy with Strang as the spiritual "king" of his church. The date of his coronation, July 8, is still mandated as one of the two most important days in the Strangite church calendar (the other is April 6, the anniversary of the founding of Smith's church).Strang, James J. (1856) Book of the Law of the Lord, Being a Translation From the Egyptian of the Law Given to Moses in Sinai. St. James: Royal Press, p. 293. Contrary to popular belief, Strang never claimed to be king over Beaver Island, or any other geographical entity. Rather, he asserted that he was king over his church, which he saw as the one, true "Kingdom of God" prophesied in scripture and destined to spread over all the earth.Fitzpatrick, Doyle C. (1970) The King Strang Story: A Vindication of James J. Strang, the Beaver Island Mormon King. National Heritage, p. 199. The constitution of this kingdom was contained within the Book of the Law of the Lord, which Strang claimed to have translated from the Plates of Laban mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Originally published in 1851, this new book of Strangite scripture would be republished in a greatly expanded edition in 1856, just after Strang's murder. The book is still revered by Strangites today, remaining a vital part of their canon of scripture. In addition to printing religious materials, the Strangite printing press on Beaver Island became the source of a new periodical, the Northern Islander, which was the first real newspaper in all of northern Michigan.Fitzpatrick, p. 208. As St. James became an entrepôt for Great Lakes shipping, the Strangites began to compete with more established commercial lake ports such as Mackinac Island. Tensions grew between Mormons on Beaver Island and their non-Mormon neighbors, which frequently exploded into violence.  Accusations of thuggery and thievery were leveled by both parties against each other, compounded by ever-increasing dissension among some of Strang's own disciples, who chafed at what they saw as his increasingly tyrannical rule. In 1854, Strang published Ancient and modern Michilimackinac, including an account of the controversy between Mackinac and the Mormons. Dale Morgan, a historian of the Latter Day Saint movement, writes: "Strang surveys the geography and history of Mackinac and the surrounding region, particularly the islands of Lake Michigan, and after giving an account of the Mormon settlement upon Big Beaver Island, addresses himself to the bitter controversies between the people of Mackinac and the Mormons. Although dealing with controverted matters and colored by Strang's indignation at the outrages he and his people had to endure, the pamphlet is a responsible source on the events of which it treats, and is also interesting for the considerable measure of learning it reveals in Strang".Dale L. Morgan, Bibliography, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite). Tensions finally came to a head on June 20, 1856, when two Strangite malcontents shot Strang in the back, leading to his death three weeks later. Since Strang refused to appoint a successor,"Kingdom with a Dominion". MormonBeliefs.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. and insisted that the next Strangite prophet must be chosen and ordained by angels just as he and Smith had been,Book of the Law, pp. 163–66. Strang's church was left leaderless and vulnerable. One day before his death, vigilantes from Mackinac Island and other Lake Michigan communities converged on Beaver Island. The Strangites were rounded up, forced onto hastily commandeered steamships, and removed from the island. Most were simply dumped onto docks in Chicago and Green Bay, destitute and deprived of all their property. Strang's death and the loss of his Beaver Island settlement were twin catastrophes for his church. Despondent and spiritually adrift after the Strangite organization failed to provide a successor for Strang, most Strangites eventually chose to join what was then known as the "New Organization" of Latter Day Saints. This group had chosen not to follow Young and would eventually accept the leadership of Joseph Smith III, eldest son of Smith. This "New Organization" was later incorporated as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, becoming the second-largest body in the Latter Day Saint movement. A few congregations of Strangites, however, remained loyal to their prophet's memory. Wingfield W. Watson, a high priest who had known and served under Strang, kept the Strangite church alive into the 20th century. Strang's disciples today are divided into two main factions; one is led by a Presiding High Priest, who does not claim to have the authority or office possessed by Smith or Strang. The other claims that this first assemblage is in error, and that by incorporating in 1961 and allegedly organizing a new order of the priesthood to rule them and a new man-made set of laws to govern them, it lost its identity as a faithful continuation of Strang's organization. This second group claims that it is the sole true remnant of Strang's church."The 1961 Strangite Split". MormonBeliefs.com. The first group no longer emphasizes missionary work, as they tend to believe that after three murdered prophets (Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Strang), God closed his dispensation to the "gentiles" of the West."Mormonism: time of the Gentiles ended". MormonBeliefs.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. Consequently, this group's congregation remains small. Current membership figures vary between 50 and 300 persons, depending upon the source consulted."43,941 adherent statistic citations: membership and geography data for 4,300+ religions, churches, tribes, etc." Adherents.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. There are two groups among the second. One group has a website based in Independence, Missouri. The second group has a website based in Shreveport, Louisiana. Both conduct missionary work on the Internet. The Strangites "believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; [and] also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God," just as do most other Latter Day Saint denominations. They consider editions of the Doctrine and Covenants published prior to Smith's death (which contained the Lectures on Faith) to be scripture. Strangites hold the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible to be inspired, but do not believe modern publications of the text are accurate, so they "cautiously use the publication of his earliest corrections published as the 'Inspired Version' or 'Joseph Smith Translation' by the sons of Joseph Smith in Plano, Ill., 1867." Strangites do not have any official stance on the Book of Abraham. Strang's Book of the Law of the Lord is accepted as scripture in its expanded 1856 form; it is believed to be the same "Book of the Law of the Lord" mentioned in the Bible,Deuteronomy 29:21, Joshua 1:8; II Kings 22:8; II Chronicles 17:9; Nehemiah 8:3. and Strang claimed to have translated it from the Plates of Laban mentioned in the Book of Mormon."Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints – Mormons – Scriptures". Strangite.org. Retrieved on 2009-02-03. The Strangites also hold as scripture several prophecies, visions, revelations, and translations printed by Strang, and published in the Revelations of James J. Strang. This text contains his purported "letter of appointment" from Smith and his translation of the Voree plates. The Book of Jasher was consistently used by both Smith and Strang, but as with other Latter Day Saint denominations, there is no official stance on its authenticity and it is not considered canonical."Zion's Reveille: Dedicated to the Gospel of Christ as Restored by Joseph Smith, Jr. and James J. Strang". Strangite.net. Retrieved on 2009-02-04. One distinctive difference between Strangites and other Latter Day Saints concerns the singular subdivisions Strang makes within the Melchizedek priesthood—which his Book of the Law refers to as "The Priesthood of an endless life"—and the Aaronic priesthood, referred to as "the Priesthood of life."Book of the Law, p. 214. In the Melchizedek priesthood, Strang enumerates two "orders," that of "Apostles," and that of "Priests." Apostles are subdivided into four "degrees": Priests are subdivided into two "degrees": In the Aaronic priesthood, Strang enumerates three "orders":Book of the Law, p. 225. In addition, a "King's Council" and a "King's Court" are established, though none function within the Strangite church today.Book of the Law, pp. 183–184. While no direct link is made between the King's Court and the "High Council" established in the Doctrine and Covenants,See Doctrine & Covenants 102:1–3,5–6,8,12,24–30. All references to the D&C are to the LDS edition. certain parallels exist, such as requiring all members to hold the High Priesthood, and limiting their number to twelve.Book of the Law, p. 185. Although Strang briefly retained the services of apostle William Smith as "Chief Patriarch" of his church,Zion's Reveille, January 14, 1847. http://www.sidneyrigdon.com/dbroadhu//IA/JStrang1.htm#011447. he makes no mention of this office anywhere in his book. No Apostles (of any degree) exist within the Strangite organization today, as all must be appointed by a Strangite prophet, while the prophet himself must be appointed by God through the direct ministry of angels. The "incorporated" group of Strangites has high priests, but the "non-incorporated" group does not, insisting that the first body does not currently possess authority to ordain any.Priesthood. Retrieved on 2009-08-09. Both factions enjoy the ministry of Elders and Aaronic Priesthood offices. Another unique feature of Strangite doctrine is its singular version of the Ten Commandments.Exodus 20:2–17; Deuteronomy 5:6–21. The Strangite Decalogue differs from any other Jewish, Catholic, Islamic or Protestant version, by including the commandment: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."Book of the Law, pp. 24–25. This commandment is number four in Strang's version of the Decalogue. In his "Note on the Decalogue,"Book of the Law, pp. 38–46. Strang asserts that other versions of the Decalogue contain only nine commandments and speculates that his fourth commandment was lost perhaps as early as Josephus's time (circa 37–100 AD). As noted above, the Strangite organization opens two priesthood offices to women: Priest and Teacher.  While only the "course" of "Singer" in the office of Priest (as opposed to "Sacrificator") is permitted to females, all five "degrees" in the office of Teacher are available. Women may serve as "leaders" of the Singers. Strang ordained women to these ministries as early as 1851, and allowed them to lecture in his School of the Prophets by 1856.Hajicek, John, Intolerance toward Great Lakes Mormons. http://www.mormonism.com/out-2.htm.  Another denomination, the Community of Christ, began ordaining women to the priesthood in 1984,Community of Christ Doctrine and Covenants 156:9. http://www.centerplace.org/library/study/dc/rdc-156.htm. All offices were opened, not just Priest and Teacher. while most other Latter Day Saint churches do not ordain women to the priesthood. Animal sacrifice was instituted in the Strangite church under Strang's leadership,Book of the Law, pp. 106–109. primarily as a part of Strangite celebration rituals. Though the chapter on "Sacrifices" in Strang's Book of the Law of the Lord speaks of them as being offered for sins, the prohibition on such sacrifices contained in 3 Nephi 9:19–20,Book of Mormon. meant that Strang focused instead on sacrifice as an element of religious festivities,Book of the Law, pp. 293–297.  See also http://www.strangite.org/Offering.htm. especially the commemoration of his own coronation as king (July 8, 1850).Book of the Law, p. 293. The head of every house, from the king to his lowest subject, was to offer "a heifer, or a lamb, or a dove. Every man a clean beast, or a clean fowl, according to his household."Book of the Law, pp. 293–294. The killing of sacrifices was a prerogative of Strangite Priests,Book of the Law, p. 199, note 2. but female Priests were specifically barred from participating in this aspect of the priestly office. "Firstfruits" offerings were also demanded from all Strangite agricultural harvests.Book of the Law, pp. 295–297. Animal sacrifices are no longer practiced by the Strangites, though belief in their correctness is still required. Strangites rejectBook of the Law, pp. 147–158, "Note on the Sacrifice of Christ". This was an essay written by Strang himself, not a translation from the Plates of Laban. It does not appear in the 1851 edition, but is considered an integral part of the 1856 edition and is fully accepted as Scripture by the Strangites.Book of the Law, pp. 47–86, "The True God".  This section was "written by the prophet James, by inspiration of God." Book of the Law, page x. both the traditional Christian doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus Christ and the Mormon doctrine of plurality of gods. They insist that there is but one eternal God, the Father, and that alleged progression to godhood (a doctrine supposedly taught by Smith; Strangites reject that assertion)King Follett Sermon, http://www.utlm.org/onlineresources/sermons_talks_interviews/kingfolletsermon.htm. is impossible. God has always been God, say they, and he is one Person (not three, as in the traditional Christian Trinity).Book of the Law, pp. 47–63. Jesus Christ, Strangites believe, was the natural-born son of Mary and Joseph, who was chosen from before all time to be the Savior of mankind, but who had to be born as an ordinary mortal of two human parents (rather than being begotten by the Father or the Holy Spirit) to be able to truly fulfill his Messianic role.Book of the Law, pp. 157–158, note 9. Strang claimed that the earthly Christ was in essence "adopted" as God's son at birth, and fully revealed as such during the transfiguration.Book of the Law, pp. 165–166. After proving himself to God by living a perfectly sinless life, he was thus enabled to provide an acceptable sacrifice for the sins of men, prior to his resurrection and ascension.Book of the law, pp. 155–158. Musing at length on the nature of sin and evil, Strang wrote that of all things that God could give to man, he could never give him experience.Book of the Law, pp. 152–153. Thus, if "free agency" were to be real, said Strang, humanity must be given the opportunity to fail and to learn from its own mistakes. The ultimate goal for each human being, according to Strangites, is to willingly conform oneself to the revealed character of God in every way, preferring good to evil not out of any fear of punishment or desire for reward, but rather "on account of the innate loveliness of undefiled goodness; of pure unalloyed holiness."Book of the Law, p. 155. The Strangite church observes the seventh-day Sabbath, as the Book of the Law commanded it in lieu of Sunday.Book of the Law, pp.22–23. Strangites believe in baptism for the dead; the Strangite church practiced this to a limited extent in Voree and on Beaver Island. However, rather than simply baptizing for anyone whose name can be located, Strang required a revelation for those seeking to have a baptism done for someone outside of a close relative "within the fourth degree of consanguinity".Book of the Law, page 137. This could come through dreams, angelic appearances, or other means listed within Strang's revelation on the subject.  While still believed in, baptisms for the dead are not currently performed in the Strangite church due to the lack of a temple and prophetic leadership.Book of the Law, pp. 136–141.  See also http://www.strangite.org/BaptismDead.htm. Eternal marriage is taught in the Strangite church, though it is not required to be performed in a temple, as in the LDS Church.Book of the Law, p. 159.  See also http://www.strangite.org/Women.htm. Strangite Priests, Elders, High Priests or Apostles (of all four degrees) may perform this ceremony.Book of the Law, p. 159. Eternal marriages are still contracted among the Strangites today. Same-sex marriages (and homosexuality in general) are not permitted within the Strangite organization.Marriage, Sex, Adultery.  Retrieved on 2009-08-09. Conservation of forests and resources is mandated by the Strangite church.Book of the Law, pp. 286–287. Within Strang's Beaver Island kingdom and other places where Strangites were numerous, groves of trees were to be maintained upon each farm, village and town. Farms and cities without trees were required to plant them, and to establish parklands so that "the aged and the young may go there to rest and to play."Book of the Law, p. 287. Although Strang's kingdom has disappeared, his followers still endeavor to practice basic conservation measures. Plural marriage is sanctioned, though not expressly commanded, in the Book of the Law. The applicable text reads: "Thou shalt not take unto thee a multitude of wives disproportioned to thy inheritance, and thy substance: nor shalt thou take wives to vex those thou hast; neither shalt thou put away one to take another."Book of the Law, p. 314. Any wife already married to the prospective polygamist was given the right to express her opinion, and even to object, but not to veto the marriage. This passage seems to offer any aggrieved wife an appeal to the "Judges," but how this was to be carried out is not made clear. Strang's defense of polygamy was rather woman-centered. He claimed that far from enslaving or demeaning women, it liberated and "elevated" them by allowing them to choose the best possible mate based upon any factors deemed important to them—even if that mate were already married to someone else.Book of the Law, pp. 326–327. Rather than being forced to wed "corrupt and degraded sires" due to the scarcity of more suitable men, a woman could wed the one she saw as the most compatible to herself, the best candidate to father her children and the man who could give her the best possible life, no matter how many other wives he might have.Book of the Law, pp. 312–328. The practice of plural marriage has never been officially proscribed in the Strangite church, unlike in the LDS Church.http://www.strangite.org/Women.htm.  For the LDS ban, see http://lds.about.com/gi/dynamic/offsite.htm?site=http%3A%2F%2Fscriptures.lds.org%2F. Only twenty-two men entered into polygamy, and most of them only took one additional wife.http://www.strangite.org/Women.htm. Strang took four additional wives,Fitzpatrick, p. 117. the most of any member in his church. Polygamy was apparently practiced by a few Strangites up to 1880 or so, to include Wingfield W. Watson, a Strangite High Priest who knew and served under Strang.  However, with federal and state bans on the practice, and a divine injunction to obey "the law of the land,"Doctrine and Covenants 58:21. plural marriage has been given up in the contemporary Strangite organization, though belief in its correctness is still required and affirmed. Strangites reject Section 132 of the LDS Church's Doctrine and Covenants,About.com: http://scriptures.lds.org/ regarding it as a forgery from 1852 that was never received or approved by Smith. Strang attempted to construct a temple in Voree, but was prevented from completing it due to the poverty and lack of cooperation of his followers."Temple Locations". Strangite.org. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. No "endowment" rituals comparable to those in the LDS Church appear to have existed among his followers,"Women/Marriage". Strangite.org. Retrieved on 2007-10-28. and no Strangite temples exist today or are contemplated. Strangites welcomed African Americans into their church during a time when some other factions (such as the LDS Church, until 1978) denied them the priesthood, or certain other benefits of membership. Strang ordained at least two African Americans to the eldership during his lifetime."African-Americans". Strangite.org. Retrieved on 2007-10-18. Three different websites exist for various branches of the Strangite church: These publications are believed in by all Strangites, regardless of faction:   The Prophet/President of the Strangite church is openly referred to throughout the book as a "King," rather than as a "President".Book of the Law, pp. 168–180, 214–219. The President's Counselors are designated as "Viceroys." Viceroys are referred to as "kings," too, though this does not indicate a share in the unique royal dignity accorded to the President/King.Book of the Law, pp. 181–182; 219–220.  See especially the notes on p. 182. Strang's Twelve Apostles are named as "Princes in his Kingdom forever."Book of the Law, pp. 191–192.  Capitalization as in original. The leader of Strang's Apostles is designated as "Prince and Grand Master of the Seventies."Book of the Law, p. 195. A quorum of "Evangelists" (not to be confused with the office of Patriarch) is established, to be Apostles to a single "nation, kindred, tongue or people"—unlike the Twelve, who were sent to all nations. Seven Evangelists form a quorum, and Strang noted that such a body had never been organized "in this dispensation"Book of the Law, p. 224. (and nor did Strang organize one). This is a unique priesthood office in the Latter Day Saint movement. High Priests are to include "all inferiour Kings, Patriarchs, or heads of tribes, and Nobles, or heads of clans." Book of the Law, p.224. Furthermore, Strang continued, "They who hold it are called Sons of God."Book of the Law, p. 193. From this group, said the Book of the Law, the king is to select "counsellors, judges and rulers." Furthermore, the Book of the Law limits consecration of the Eucharist to High Priests and Apostles,Book of the Law, p. 145. as opposed to other Latter Day Saint sects, who follow the Doctrine and Covenants in permitting Elders and Priests also to do so. The "degree" of Elder includes both the offices of Seventy and Elder as generally constituted in Smith's church.Book of the Law, pp. 224–225, 194–197. Priests are subdivided into two "courses": Sacrificators and Singers. The course of Singers is opened to women. Each temple is to have a Chief Priest, assisted by a first and second High Priest.Book of the Law, pp. 225–227, 198–199.  Strangite "Sacrificators" are to kill sacrifices in accordance with appropriate provisions of the Book of the Law. Female priests are specifically barred from killing sacrifices.Book of the Law, p. 199.  The Doctrine and Covenants functions of preaching and baptizing are retained as well. Teachers are subdivided into five "degrees": Rabboni, Rabbi, Doctor, Ruler, and Teacher.Book of the Law, p. 227. This office, like that of Priest, is open to women. Teachers are not merely to instruct in spiritual matters, but in secular ones as well.Book of the Law, pp. 200–201. They are to staff schools throughout the kingdom.Book of the Law, p. 201. Deacons are subdivided into three "degrees": Marshals, Stewards and Ministers. They are to serve as "Stewards and keepers of the King's prisons, and Stewards of the King's Courts."Book of the Law, p. 202. George J. Adams Current state of polygamy in the Latter Day Saint movement ChurchOfJesusChristOfLatterDaySaintsStrangite.com, incorporated Strangites. ChurchOfJesusChristOfLatterDaySaints.org, also available at Strangite.org, unincorporated Strangites based in Independence, Missouri. Mormon Beliefs, unincorporated Strangites based in Shreveport, Louisiana. The Voree Plates A detailed description of the "Voree Plates" and the story behind them, from a Strangite point of view. Book of the Law of the Lord, Edition of 1851 First Edition, without Strang's commentary.  Contains photos of the text and the extremely rare first edition of this work. Book of the Law of the Lord, Edition of 1856 Second Edition of this work; contains Strang's commentary and notes, also considered to be scripture by Strangites. The Revelations of James J. Strang contains text of "Letter of Appointment", together with translation of the "Voree Plates" and other revelations given by Strang.  Includes a facsimile of the "plates".
