   The Civilian Conservation Corps  (CCC) was a public work relief program that operated from 1933 to 1942 in the United States for unemployed, unmarried men from relief families as part of the New Deal. Originally for young men ages 18–23, it was eventually expanded to young men ages 17–28.PBS Timeline of CCC Robert Fechner was the head of the agency. It was a major part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal that provided unskilled manual labor jobs related to the conservation and development of natural resources in rural lands owned by federal, state and local governments. The CCC was designed to provide jobs for young men, to  relieve families who had difficulty finding jobs during the Great Depression in the United States while at the same time implementing a general natural resource conservation program in every state and territory. Maximum enrollment at any one time was 300,000; in nine years 3 million young men participated in the CCC, which provided them with shelter, clothing, and food, together with a small wage of $30 (about $547 in 2015) a month ($25 of which had to be sent home to their families).John A. Salmond, The Civilian Conservation Corps CCC 1933–1942: a New Deal case study (1967) The American public made the CCC the most popular of all the New Deal programs.Perry H. Merrill, Roosevelt's Forest Army, A History of the Civilian Conservation Corps (1981) p. 196 Principal benefits of an individual's enrollment in the CCC included improved physical condition, heightened morale, and increased employability."Conservation: Poor Young Men, Time Feb. 6, 1939 online  Implicitly, the CCC also led to a greater public awareness and appreciation of the outdoors and the nation's natural resources; and the continued need for a carefully planned, comprehensive national program for the protection and development of natural resources.Robert Allen Ermentrout, "Forgotten Men: The Civilian Conservation Corps," (1982) p. 99 During the time of the CCC, enrollees planted nearly 3 billion trees to help reforest America, constructed more than 800 parks nationwide and upgraded most state parks, updated forest fire fighting methods, and built a network of service buildings and public roadways in remote areas.CCC Legacy Web site 13 July, 2014 The CCC operated separate programs for veterans and Native Americans. Despite its popular support, the CCC was never a permanent agency. It depended on emergency and temporary Congressional legislation for its existence. By 1942, with World War II and the draft in operation,  need for work relief declined and Congress voted to close the program.Wirth, pp. 105, 142-144 As governor of New York, Roosevelt had run a similar program on a much smaller scale. Long interested in conservation,John A. Salmond, The Civilian Conservation Corps 1933–1942: a New Deal case study. (1967), ch. 1 online edition as president, he proposed to Congress a full-scale national program on March 21, 1933:"Message to Congress on Unemployment Relief. March 21," The Presidential Papers of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1933 (1938)  He promised this law would provide 16 young men with meals, housing, uniforms, and medical care for working in the national forests and other government properties. The Emergency Conservation Work (ECW) Act was introduced to Congress the same day and enacted by voice vote on March 31. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 6101 on April 5, 1933 which established the CCC organization and appointed a director, Robert Fechner, a former labor union official who served until 1939. The organization and administration of the CCC was a new experiment in operations for a federal government agency. The order indicated that the program was to be supervised jointly by four government departments: Labor, which recruited the young men, War, which operated the camps, and Agriculture and Interior, which organized and supervised the work projects. A CCC Advisory Council was composed of a representative from each of the supervising departments. In addition, the Office of Education and Veterans Administration participated in the program. To end the opposition from labor unions (which wanted no training programs started when so many of their men were unemployed)Neil M. Maher, Nature's New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Roots of the American Environmental Movement (2009), p. 79 Roosevelt chose Robert Fechner, vice president of the American Machinists Union, as director of the corps. William Green, head of the American Federation of Labor, was taken to the first camp to demonstrate that there would be no job training involved beyond simple manual labor.On the formation see Frank Freidel, Franklin D. Roosevelt: Launching the New Deal (1973), pp. 255-266 Reserve officers from the U.S. Army were in charge of the camps, but there was no military training. General Douglas MacArthur was placed in charge of the programDarby, Jean Douglas. MacArthur, Twenty-First Century Books, 1989, p. 47 but stated that the number of Army officers and soldiers assigned to the camps was affecting the readiness of the Regular Army.Imparato, Edward T., editor Effect of the Civilian Conservation Corps Project upon Army Activity and Readiness for Emergency General MacArthur Speeches and Reports 1908–1964  Turner Publishing Company, 2000, p. 58 The Army found numerous benefits. When the draft began in 1940 the policy was to make CCC alumni corporals and sergeants. CCC provided command experience to Organized Reserve Corps officers. The CCC allowed the Regular Army to assess the leadership performance of both Regular and Reserve Officers. The CCC provided lessons the Army used in developing its wartime and mobilization plans for training camps.Charles E.  Heller, "The U.S. Army, the Civilian Conservation Corps, and Leadership for World War II, 1933-1942," Armed Forces & Society (2010) 36#3 pp 439-453 online The legislation and mobilization of the program occurred quite rapidly. Roosevelt made his request to Congress on March 21, 1933; the legislation was submitted to Congress the same day; Congress passed it by voice vote on March 31; Roosevelt signed it the same day, then issued an executive order on April 5 creating the agency, appointing its director (Fechner), and assigning War Department corps area commanders the task to commence enrollment. The first CCC enrollee was selected April 8 and subsequent lists of unemployed men were supplied by state and local welfare and relief agencies for immediate enrollment. On April 17 the first camp, NF-1, Camp Roosevelt, was established at George Washington National Forest near Luray, Virginia. On June 18, the first of 161 soil erosion control camps was opened, in Clayton, Alabama. By July 1, 1933 there were 1,463 working camps with 250,000 junior enrollees (18–25 years of age), 28,000 veterans, 14,000 American Indians, and 25,000 Locally Enrolled (or Experienced) Men (LEM).Ermentrout, p. 15 The typical CCC enrollee was a U.S. citizen, unmarried, unemployed male, 18–25 years of age. Normally his family was on local relief. Each enrollee volunteered and, upon passing a physical exam and/or a period of conditioning, was required to serve a minimum six-month period with the option to serve as many as four periods, or up to two years, if employment outside the Corps was not possible. Enrollees worked 40 hours a week over five days, sometimes including Saturdays if poor weather dictated. In return they received $30 a month with a compulsory allotment $22–25 sent to a family dependant, as well as food, clothing, and medical care. Following the second Bonus Army march on Washington D.C., President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 6129 (May 11, 1933) to amend the CCC program, to include work opportunities for veterans. Veteran qualifications differed from the junior enrollee; one needed to be certified by the Veterans Administration by application. They could be any age, and married or single as long as they were in need of work. Veterans were generally assigned to entire veteran camps. Enrollees were eligible for the following "rated" positions to help with camp administration: senior leader, mess steward, store keeper and two cooks; assistant leader, company clerk, assistant educational advisor and three second cooks. These men received additional pay ranging from $36 to $45 per month depending on their rating. Each CCC camp was located in the area of particular conservation work to be performed, and organized around a complement of up to 200 civilian enrollees in a designated numbered "company" unit. The CCC camp was a temporary community in itself, structured to have barracks (initially Army tents) for 50 enrollees each, officer/technical staff quarters, medical dispensary, mess hall, recreation hall, educational building, lavatory and showers, technical/administrative offices, tool room/blacksmith shop and motor pool garages. The company organization of each camp had a dual-authority supervisory staff: firstly, Department of War personnel or Reserve officers (until July 1, 1939), a "company commander" and junior officer, who were responsible for overall camp operation, logistics, education and training; and secondly, ten to fourteen technical service civilians, including a camp "superintendent" and "foreman", employed by either the Departments of Interior or Agriculture, responsible for the particular field work. Also included in camp operation were several non-technical supervisor LEMs, who provided knowledge of the work at hand, "lay of the land" and paternal guidance for inexperienced enrollees."Your CCC, A Handbook for Enrollees" Happy Days Pub. Co., Inc. (1940) pp. 8–13Ermentrout, pp. 16, 76-77 Enrollees were organized into work detail units called "sections" of 25 men each, according to the barracks they resided in."United States Army Civilian Conservation Corps. Company 114th," Francis P. Waversak, Stone Walls, Spring 1990 p. 23 Each section had an enrollee "senior leader" and "assistant leader" who were accountable for the men at work and in the barracks. The CCC performed 300 possible types of work projects within ten approved general classifications: The responses to this seven-month experimental conservation program were enthusiastic, and on October 1, 1933 Director Fechner was instructed to arrange for a second period of enrollment. By January 1934, 300,000 men were enrolled. In July 1934 this cap was increased by 50,000 to include men from midwest states that had been affected by drought. The temporary tent camps had also transitioned from tents to wooden barracks. An education program had been established emphasizing job training and literacy. Approximately 55% of enrollees were from rural communities, a majority of which were non-farm; 45% came from urban areas."Your CCC, A Handbook for Enrollees", Happy Days Pub. Co., Inc. (1940) p. 9 Level of education for the enrollee averaged 3% illiterate, 38% less than eight years of school, 48% did not complete high school, 11% were high school graduates. At the time of entry, 70% of enrollees were malnourished and poorly clothed. Few had work experience beyond occasional odd jobs. Peace was maintained by the threat of "dishonorable discharge". "This is a training station; we're going to leave morally and physically fit to lick 'Old Man Depression,'" boasted the newsletter, Happy Days, of a North Carolina camp. The New Deal was racially segregated; blacks and whites rarely worked alongside each other in New Deal programs. In the first few weeks of operation, CCC camps in the North were integrated. By July 1935, however, all the camps in the United States were segregated. A total of 200,000 blacks were enrolled; they served in 143 all-black camps and received equal pay and housing. Black leaders lobbied to secure leadership roles. Adult white men held the major leadership roles in all the camps. Director Robert Fechner refused to appoint black adults to any supervisory positions except that of education director in the all-black camps. The CCC operated an entirely separate division for members of federally recognized tribes: the Indian Emergency Conservation Work (IECW or CCC-ID). Native men from reservations worked on roads, bridges, clinics, shelters, and other public works near their reservations. Although classified as camps there were no actual permanent camps; instead, organized groups moved with their family from project to project, for which a rental allowance was issued in their pay. The CCC often provided the only paid work in remote reservations. Enrollees had to be between the ages of 17 and 35. For example, during 1933 about half the male heads of households on the Sioux reservations in South Dakota were employed by the CCC-ID. With grants from the Public Works Administration (PWA), the Indian Division built schools and operated an extensive road-building program in and around many reservations. The mission was to reduce erosion and improve the value of Indian lands. Crews built dams of many types on creeks, then sowed grass on the eroded areas from which the damming materials had been taken. They built roads and planted shelter-belts on federal lands. The steady income created an improved sense of self-worth for participants who used the funds to improve their lifestyles. John Collier the federal Commissioner of Indian Affairs and Daniel Murphy, the director of the CCC-ID, both centered the basic goals of the program around Indian self-rule and the restoration of tribal lands, governments, and cultures. In Collier's words, "no previous undertaking in Indian Service has so largely been the Indians' own undertaking". Education programs also trained participants in gardening, stock raising, safety, native arts, and some academic subjects. IECW differed from other CCC activities in that it explicitly trained men to be carpenters, truck drivers, radio operators, mechanics, surveyors, and technicians. With the passage of the National Defense Vocational Training Act of 1941, enrollees began participating in defense oriented training. The classes were paid for by the government and after course completion and a passed competency test, automatic employment in the defense work was guaranteed. A total of 85,000 Native Americans were enrolled. This proved valuable human capital for the 24,000 alumni who later served in the military and the 40,000 who left the reservations for city jobs supporting the war effort. Responding to favorable public opinion to alleviate unemployment, Congress approved the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935, on April 8, 1935, which included continued funding for the CCC program through March 31, 1937. The age limit was also expanded to 18-28 to include more men.Roosevelt message to Congress, 21 March 1933 From April 1, 1935 to March 31, 1936 was the period of greatest activity and work accomplished by the CCC program. Enrollment had peaked at 505,782 in about 2,900 camps by August 31, 1935, followed by a reduction to 350,000 enrollees in 2,019 camps by June 30, 1936.Ermentrout, p. 33 During this period the public response to the CCC program was overwhelmingly popular. A Gallup poll of April 18, 1936 asked "Are you in favor of the CCC camps?"; 82% of respondents said yes, including 92% of Democrats and 67% of Republicans.Public Opinion, 1935–1946 ed. by Hadley Cantril and Mildred Strunk 1951. p. 111 On June 28, 1937 the Civilian Conservation Corps was legally established, transferred from its original designation as the Emergency Conservation Work program. Funding was also extended for three more years by Public Law No. 163, 75th Congress, effective July 1, 1937. Congress changed the age limits to 17–23 years old, and changed the requirement that enrollees be on relief to "not regularly in attendance at school, or possessing full time employment".Civilian Conservation Corps, "Standards of Eligibility and Selection for Junior Enrollees," United States Dept. of Labor, Office of the Secretary, August 1, 1938 The 1937 law mandated the inclusion of vocational and academic training for a minimum of 10 hours per week. Another change allowed for those in school to be enrolled during (summer) vacation.Ermentrout, pp. 48–49, 51 During this period, the CCC was called in to help with disaster relief following 1937 floods in New York, Vermont and the Ohio and Mississippi River Valleys, and response and clean-up after the 1938 hurricane in New England. In 1939 Congress ended the independent status of the CCC and transferred control to the Federal Security Agency, along with other agencies such as the National Youth Administration, U.S. Employment Service, the Office of Education and the Works Progress Administration. About 5,000 Reserve officers for the camps were affected, transferred to Civil Service and military ranks and titles were eliminated. Despite this loss of an obvious military leadership in the camps by July 1940, with war in Europe and Asia, an increasing number of CCC projects focused on resources for national defense, developing infrastructure for military training facilities and forest protection. By 1940 the CCC was no longer wholly a relief agency, rapidly losing its non-military character, and becoming a system for work-training as its ranks had become increasingly younger, with life-inexperienced enrollees.Ermentrout, pp. 55, 62, 64 Although the CCC was probably the most popular New Deal program, it never became a permanent agency. The program had been reduced in operations as the Depression waned and employment opportunities improved. Fewer eligible young men were available after conscription commenced in 1940. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 all federal programs were revised to emphasize the war effort. Most CCC work, except for wildland firefighting, was shifted onto U.S. military bases to help with construction. The CCC disbanded one year earlier than planned, as the 77th United States Congress ceased funding, causing it to conclude operations formally at the end of the federal fiscal year on June 30, 1942. The end of the CCC program and closing of the camps involved arrangements to leave the incomplete work projects in the best possible state, the separation of about 1,800 appointed employees, the transfer of CCC property to the War and Navy Departments and other agencies, and the preparation of final accountability records. Liquidation of the CCC was ordered by Congress by the Labor-Federal Security Appropriation Act (56 Stat. 569) on July 2, 1942; and virtually completed on June 30, 1943.Wirth, Conrad L., Civilian Conservation Corps Program of the US Dept. of the Interior, March 1933 to June 30, 1942, a Report to Harold L. Ickes, January 1944 Liquidation appropriations for the CCC continued through April 20, 1948. Some former CCC sites in good condition were reactivated from 1941 to 1947 as Civilian Public Service camps where conscientious objectors performed "work of national importance" as an alternative to military service. Other camps were used to hold Japanese, German and Italian Americans interned under the Western Defense Command's Enemy Alien Control Program, as well as Axis prisoners of war."Civilian Conservation Corps," Densho Encyclopedia. Retrieved August 5, 2014. After the CCC disbanded, the federal agencies responsible for administration of public lands organized their own seasonal fire crews, modeled after the CCC, which performed a firefighting function formerly done by the CCC and provided the same sort of outdoor work experience for young people. Approximately 47 young men died while in this line of duty. In several cities where CCC workers worked, statues were erected to commemorate their presence."CCC Statues." National New Deal Preservation Association. Retrieved on August 22, 2009 The American Experiencehttp://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094416/ series showcasing documentaries on American history well portrayed the life in Civilian Conservation Corps in the first episode of Season 22.http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1535083/ Pride of the Bowery (1940),http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0034064/ the fourth movie in the East Side Kid series, is a movie about friendship, trouble and boxinghttp://www.imdb.com/title/tt0034064/plotsummary at a Conservation Corps Camp. Hitch - Making Good In Hard Times by Jeanette Ingold is a novel about how a teenager learns life lessons, skills for work and develops a character for himselfAnother Author: Book Review: HITCH - Making Good In Hard Times. Becomingprince.blogspot.com (February 19, 2012). Retrieved on 2013-08-12. in CCC camp.  The CCC program was never officially terminated. Congress provided funding for closing the remaining camps in 1942 with the equipment being reallocated.The American Experience It became a model for conservation programs that were implemented in the period after World War II. Present-day corps are national, state and local programs that engage primarily youth and young adults (ages 16–25) in community service, training and educational activities. The nation's approximate 113 corps programs operate in 41 states and the District of Columbia. During 2004, they enrolled more than 23,000 young people. The Corps Network, known originally as the National Association of Service and Conservation Corps (NASCC), works to expand and enhance corps-type programs throughout the country. The Corps Network began in 1985, when the nation's first 24 Corps directors banded together to secure an advocate at the federal level and a repository of information on how best to start and manage a corps. Early financial assistance from the Ford, Hewlett and Mott Foundations was critical to establishing the association. Another similar program is the National Civilian Community Corps, part of the AmeriCorps program, a team-based national service program in which 18- to 24-year-olds spend 10 months working for non-profit and government organizations. The CCC program became a model for the creation of team-based national service youth conservation programs such as the Student Conservation Association (SCA). The SCA, founded in 1959, is a nonprofit organization that offers conservation internships and summer trail crew opportunities to more than 4,000 people each year. The SCA mission is to build a new generation of conservation managers by inspiring lifelong stewardship of the environment and communities by engaging high school and college-age volunteers in hands-on service to the land. SCA program is active nationwide in the USA, including national and state parks, forests, wildlife refuges, seashores and historic sites. SCA National Headquarters is located in Charlestown, New Hampshire with regional offices across the country. In 1976, Governor of California Jerry Brown established the California Conservation Corps. This new program had many similar characteristics - residential centers, high expectations for participation, emphasis on hard work on public lands. Young adults from different backgrounds were recruited for a term of one-year. Corps members attended a training session call the Corpsmember Orientation Motivation Education and Training (COMET) program before being assigned to one of the various centers.  Life at CCC centers is rigorous, starting with early morning exercises, breakfast, roll call and a full day's work. After hours include education, life skills workshops, community meetings, volunteerism. Project work is also similar to the original CCC of the 1930s - work on public forests, state and federal parks. Established in 1995, Environmental Corps, now Texas Conservation Corps (TxCC), is an American YouthWorks program which allows youth, ages 17 to 28, to contribute to the restoration and preservation of parks and public lands in Texas. The only conservation corps in Texas, TxcC is a 501(c)3 non profit corporation based in Austin, Texas, which serves the entire state. Their work ranges from disaster relief to trail building to habitat restoration. TxCC has done projects in national, state, and city parks. The Montana Conservation Corps (MCC) is a registered 501(c)3 non-profit organization with a mission to equip young people with the skills and values to be vigorous citizens who improve their communities and environment. Collectively, MCC crews contribute more than 90,000 work hours each year. The MCC was established in 1991 by Montana's Human Resource Development Councils in Billings, Bozeman and Kalispell. Originally, it was a summer program for disadvantaged youth, although it has grown into an AmeriCorps-sponsored non-profit organization with six regional offices that serve Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, and North and South Dakota. All regions also offer MontanaYES (Youth Engaged in Service) summer programs for teenagers who are 14 to 16 years old. The Washington Conservation Corps (WCC) is a sub-agency of the Washington State Department of Ecology. It employs men and women 18 to 25 years old in a program to protect and enhance Washington's natural resources. WCC is a part of the AmeriCorps program. Conservation Corps Minnesota & Iowa provides environmental stewardship and service-learning opportunities to youth and young adults while accomplishing conservation, natural resource management projects and emergency response work through its Young Adult Program and the Summer Youth Program. These programs emphasize the development of job and life skills by conservation and community service work. The Vermont Youth Conservation Corps (VYCC) is a non-profit, youth service and education organization that hires Corps Members, aged 16–24, to work on high-priority conservation projects in Vermont. Through these work projects, Corps Members develop a strong work ethic, strengthen their leadership skills, and learn how to take personal responsibility for their actions. VYCC Crews work at VT State Parks, U.S. Forest Service Campgrounds, in local communities, and throughout the state's back country. Conservation Legacy is a non-profit employment, job training, and education organization with locations across the United States including Arizona Conservation Corps in Tucson and Flagstaff, AZ, Southwest Conservation Corps in Durango and Salida, Colorado, and Southeast Conservation Corps in Chattanooga, TN.  Conservation Legacy also operates an AmeriCorps VISTA team serving to improve the environment and economies of historic mining communities in the American West and Appalachia.  Conservation Legacy also hosts the Environmental Stewards Program - providing internships with federal, state, municipal and NGO land management agencies nationwide.conservationlegacy.org Conservation Legacy formed as a merger of the Southwest Youth Corps, San Luis Valley Youth Corps, The Youth Corps of Southern Arizona, and Coconino Rural Environmental Corps. Conservation Legacy engages young adults ages 14 to 26 and US military veterans of all ages in personal and professional development experiences involving conservation projects on public lands. Corp members live, work, and learn in teams of six to eight for terms of service ranging from 3 months to 1 year. Structural improvements: bridges, fire lookout towers, service buildings Transportation: truck trails, minor roads, foot trails and airport landing fields Erosion control: check dams, terracing and vegetable covering Flood control: irrigation, drainage, dams, ditching, channel work, riprapping Forest culture: planting trees and shrubs, timber stand improvement, seed collection, nursery work Forest protection: fire prevention, fire pre-suppression, firefighting, insect and disease control Landscape and recreation: public camp and picnic ground development, lake and pond site clearing and development Range: stock driveways, elimination of predatory animals Wildlife: stream improvement, fish stocking, food and cover planting Miscellaneous: emergency work, surveys, mosquito controlMerrill, Perry H. (1981) Roosevelt's Forest Army, A History of the Civilian Conservation Corps, p. 9 Civilian Conservation Corps Museum, Vogel State Park, Blairsville, Georgia Colossal Cave Mountain Park, Vail, Arizona Conservation Corps State Museum at Camp San Luis Obispo, San Luis Obispo, California Conservation Corps Museum and Memorial at Monte Sano State Park, Huntsville, Alabama. Civilian Conservation Corps Legacy, Edinburg, Virginia Civillan Conservation Corps Museum, Rhinelander, Wisconsin Florida Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at Highlands Hammock State Park, Sebring, Florida Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at DeSoto State Park, Fort Payne, Alabama Civilian Conservation Corps Camp in Koke'e State Park, Waimea, Kauai County, Hawaii, National Register of Historic Places listings in Hawaii Iowa Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at Backbone State Park, Strawberry Point, Iowa Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at Lake Greenwood State Recreation Area, Ninety Six, South Carolina Masker Museum at Promised Land State Park, Greentown, Pennsylvania North East States Civilian Conservation Corps Museum, Camp Conner, Stafford, Connecticut New York State Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at Gilbert Lake State Park, New Lisbon, New York Civilian Conservation Corps Museum at Pocahontas State Park, Chesterfield, Virginia West Virginia CCC Museum, Harrison County, West Virginia James F. Justin Civilian Conservation Corps Museum - online only Michigan Civilian Conservation Corps Museum, Roscommon, Michigan Civilian Conservation Corps Museum, Guernsey State Park, Guernsey, Wyoming Alvin C. York Hubert D. Humphreys, Louisiana historian Hank Bergman Ralph Hauenstein Borden Deal Stanley Makowski Henry Gurke Hyman G. Rickover, 4-star Admiral, former Corps Area Commander Raymond Burr, actor, former enrollee Archie Moore, the Light Heavyweight Boxing Champion of the World, former enrollee Robert Mitchum, actor, former enrollee Edward R. Roybal, politician, former enrollee Chuck Yeager, test pilot (first human to break the sound barrier), former enrollee Stan Musial, baseball player, former enrollee Walter Matthau, actor, former enrollee Dan White (actor), actor, former enrollee Red Schoendienst, baseball player/manager, former enrollee Conrad L. Wirth, U.S. administrator, National Park Service supervisor of CCC Program Aldo Leopold, ecologist, environmentalist, former technical forester David "Stringbean" Akeman, country music singer Archie Green, folklorist National Youth Administration Works Progress Administration She-She-She Camps American Youth Commission. Youth and the Future: The General Report of the American Youth Commission  (1942) Bass, Melissa. The Politics and Civics of National Service: Lessons from the Civilian Conservation Corps, Vista, and AmeriCorps (Brookings Institution Press, 2013) Brandimarte, Cynthia, and Angela Reed Brown. Texas State Parks and the CCC: The Legacy of the Civilian Conservation Corps (2013) Clancy, Patrick. "Conserving the Youth: the Civilian Conservation Corps Experience in the Shenandoah National Park"  The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography Volume: 105. Issue: 4. 1997. p.&nbsp;439ff. online Colen, Olen Jr. The African-American Experience in the Civilian Conservation Corps (1999) Heller, Charles E. "The US Army, the Civilian Conservation Corps, and Leadership for World War II, 1933—1942." Armed Forces & Society (2010) 36#3 pp: 439-453. Helms, Douglas. "The Civilian Conservation Corps: Demonstrating the Value of Soil Conservation,"  Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 40 (March–April 1985): 184-188 online Hendrickson Jr.; Kenneth E. "Replenishing the Soil and the Soul of Texas: The Civilian Conservation Corps in the Lone Star State as an Example of State-Federal Work Relief during the Great Depression" The Historian, Vol. 65, 2003 Hill, Edwin G. In the Shadow of the Mountain: The Spirit of the CCC. (1990). ISBN 978-0-87422-073-5 Holland, Kenneth,  and Frank Ernest Hill. Youth in the CCC (1938) detailed description of all major activities Jolley,  Harley E. "That Magnificent Army of Youth and Peace": The Civilian Conservation Corps in North Carolina, 1933-1942 (Raleigh: Office of Archives and History, 2007) 167pp. Leighninger, Robert D., Jr. Long-Range Public Investment: The Forgotten Legacy of the New Deal (2007), providing a context for American public works programs, and detailing major agencies of the New Deal: CCC, PWA, CWA, WPA, and TVA. Maher, Neil M. Nature's New Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Roots of the American Environmental Movement (2008). excerpt and text search Mielnik, Tara Mitchell. New Deal, New Landscape: The Civilian Conservation Corps and South Carolina's State Parks (University of South Carolina Press; 2011) 201 pages; CCC built 16 state parks in SC between 1933 and 1942. Otis, Alison T., William D. Honey, Thomas C. Hogg, and Kimberly K. Lakin The Forest Service and The Civilian Conservation Corps: 1933–42 (United States Forest Service FS-395, August 1986) online Paige, John C. The Civilian Conservation Corps and the National Park Service, 1933–1942: An Administrative History. (National Park Service, 1985)  online Pasquill, Jr., Robert. The Civilian Conservation Corps in Alabama, 1933-1942: A Great and Lasting Good (University of Alabama Press, 2008) 242 pp, with cd of oral interviews Patel, Kiran Klaus.  Soldiers of Labor. Labor Service in Nazi Germany and New Deal America, 1933–1945, (2005), ISBN 0-521-83416-3. online review Salmond John A.  The Civilian Conservation Corps 1933–1942: a New Deal case study. (1967), the scholarly history of the entire CCC complete text online Salmond, John A. "The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Negro," The Journal of American History, Vol. 52, No. 1. (Jun. 1965), pp.&nbsp;75–88. in JSTOR Sherraden, Michael W. "Military Participation in a Youth Employment Program: The Civilian Conservation Corps," Armed Forces and Society, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.&nbsp;227–245, April 1981, pp.&nbsp;227–245; ISSN 0095-327X available online from SAGE Publications Sommer, Barbara W. Hard Work and a Good Deal: The Civilian Conservation Corps in Minnesota (2008). Sommer, Barbara W. "' We Had This Opportunity': African Americans and the Civilian Conservation Corps in Minnesota" in The State We're In: Reflections on Minnesota History, Annette Atkins and Deborah L. Millers, eds.  (2010) pp&nbsp;134–157. Steely, James W. "Parks for Texas: Enduring Landscapes of the New Deal" (1999), detailing the interaction of local, state and federal agencies in organizing and guiding CCC work. Waller, Robert A. "The Civilian Conservation Corps and the Emergence of South Carolina's State Park System, 1933–1942*South Carolina Historical Magazine  Volume: 104#2 2003, p. 101ff. Wilson, James; "Community, Civility, and Citizenship: Theatre and Indoctrination in the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s" Theatre History Studies, Vol. 23, 2003, pp.&nbsp;77–92 Gower, Calvin W. "The CCC Indian Division: Aid for Depressed Americans, 1933–1942," Minnesota History 43 (Spring 1972) 7-12 Parman, Donald L. The Navajos and the New Deal (1969) Parman, Donald L. "The Indian and the CCC," Pacific Historical Review 40 (February 1971): p.&nbsp;54ff. CCC, "The Civilian Conservation Corps, What It Is and What It Does" (June 1940) Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) Legacy A merged non-profit foundation of the former National Association of CCC Alumni (NACCCA) and the Camp Roosevelt CCC Legacy Foundation National Archives & Records Administration: Records of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) The Corps Network (formerly known as NASCC) Wecantakeit.org, grassroots non-profit to reestablish the USCCC, based in St Petersburg, FL Bandelier National Monument Virtual Museum Exhibit and Lesson Plans, from National Park Service Life in the Civilian Conservation Corps Primary Source Adventure, a lesson plan hosted by CCC in Texas Top 10 New Deal Programs James F Justin Civilian Conservation Corps Museum, Online CCC Biographies Stories Photographs and Documents CCC in Idaho  Video produced by Idaho Public Television CCC History in Massachusetts Rosentreter, Roger L. "Roosevelt's Tree Army: Michigan's Civilian Conservation Corps", with photographs Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture, "Civilian Conservation Corps" A New Deal for Texas Parks - interactive web album of CCC activities in Texas CCC camps map, guide to projects in Washington State, with rare photographs. Great Depression in Washington State Project Henderson, James D. "Lost in the Woods–The Legacy of CCC Camp Pelican" (2009). Images of the Civilian Conservation Corps on the Oregon State University Archives Flickr Commons page. CNY Heritage Digital Library, featuring images of Civilian Conservation Corps members constructing Green Lakes State Park in Central New York (1929–1948). YouTube Video: "The Great Depression, Displaced Mountaineers in Shenandoah National Park, and the Civilian Conservation Corps (C.C.C.)" Film, The March of Time: Youth Jobs Program (CCC) During Great Depression Film: President Visits Foresters (CCC), Roosevelt 1933/08/14 NARA film: Recreation Resources, 1935 West Virginia NARA film: A Nationwide System of Parks 1939 NARA film: Alabama Highlands 1937 Alabama State Parks NARA film: Down Mobile Way, 1935 Alabama State Parks NARA film: The Cradle of the Father of Waters, 1938 Minnesota State Parks, Lake Itasca State Park NARA film: Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 1936 NARA film: Land of the Giants, 1935 California Film: American Experience: The Civilian Conservation Corps PBS's American Experience 2009 Production Year Movie: The East Side Kids (Pride of the Bowery) Leo Gorcey - Bobby Jordan, 1941.
