    Coatbridge (, ) is a town in North Lanarkshire, Scotland, about  east of Glasgow city centre, set in the central Lowlands. The town, with neighbouring Airdrie, is part of the Greater Glasgow urban area. While the earliest known settlement of the area dates back to the Stone Age era, the founding of the town can be traced to the 12th century when a Royal Charter was granted to the Monks of Newbattle Abbey by King Malcolm IV. Coatbridge, along with its neighbour Airdrie, forms the area known as the Monklands. It was during the last years of the 18th century that the area developed from a loose collection of hamlets into the town of Coatbridge. The town's development and growth have been intimately connected with the technological advances of the industrial revolution, and in particular with the hot blast process. Coatbridge was a major Scottish centre for iron works and coal mining during the 19th century and in this period was described as 'the industrial heartland of Scotland'Coatbridge (Images of Scotland) By Helen Moir. The History Press (2001). ISBN 0-7524-2132-8 and the 'Iron Burgh'. Coatbridge also had a notorious reputation for air pollution and the worst excesses of industry. By the time of the 1920s however, coal seams were exhausted and the iron industry in Coatbridge was in rapid decline. After the Great Depression the Gartsherrie ironwork was the last remaining iron works in the town. One publication has commented that in modern day Coatbridge 'coal, iron and steel have all been consigned to the heritage scrap heap'.Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland (1994) Eds. J & J Keay, HarperCollins Publishers, p.175 Coatbridge today is best described as a working class town anchored to Glasgow, the largest city in Scotland. It has also been described as "populated largely by people of Irish descent".Sport and the Contestation of Ethnic Identity: Football and Irishness in Scotland in Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies - Joseph M. Bradley (2006) p.15 There are various explanations for the origin of the town's name. The place name Coatbridge first appears on a number of 19th century maps, although Roy's 1750 map notes 'Cottbrig' as a hamlet in the Old Monkland area. Older Scots 'Cot(t)' (cottage) and 'brig' (bridge). (This reflected in the way locals refer to the town or its centre as 'The Brig': "I'm just going up the Brig.") One source states 'Coatbridge' is either derived from the Middle English 'cote', (cottage) or from the Old Welsh 'coed' meaning 'wood'. An alternative explanation is that from around the 13th century the local area was owned by the Colt family, sometimes known as Coats, and their estate generated place-names such as Coatbridge, Coatdyke, Coathill and Coatbank.  Drummond and Smith suggest the name derives from the granting of land to Ranulphus le Colt around the time of the 12th century.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982. pg. 11 However, Early Scots  had vocalized to  by the 16th centuryA History of Scots to 1700, p. xc and subsequently diphthongised to  in Modern Scots,Scottish National Dictionary, Introduction p. xxiv so that 'Colt' would have become 'Cowt' rather than 'Coat'. Modern Scots 'Cot'SND: cot Dictionary of the Scots Language (cottage) is realized . Settlement of the Coatbridge area dates back 3000 years to the Mesolithic Age. A circle of Bronze Age stone coffins was found on the Drumpellier estate in 1852.The Raddle – Journal of Monklands Historical Society; Volume 10, September 2005. A number of other Bronze Age urns and relics have been found in Coatbridge.Lanarkshire - An Inventory Of The Prehistoric And Roman Monuments - Royal Commission On The Ancient And Historical Monuments Of Scotland. HMSO - RCHMS, Edinburgh. 1978. pp. 40, 71, 75 An Iron Age wood and thatch crannóg dwelling was sited in the Loch at the present day Drumpellier Country Park. Dependent upon the water level in the loch, the remains can still be seen today.Helen Moir, Coatbridge (Images of Scotland) The History Press (2001) ISBN 0-7524-2132-8; pg. 7 Roman coins have been unearthed in Coatbridge, and there are the remains of a Roman road on the fringes of the town near the M8 motorway.   The 'Monklands' area inherited its name after the area was granted to the Cistercian monks of Newbattle AbbeyScottish Burgh and County Heraldry – RM Urqhuart. Heraldry Today (1973); pg. 188 by King Malcolm IV in 1162. 1n 1323 the Monklands name appeared for the first time on Stewards' charter.Helen Moir: Coatbridge (Images of Scotland), The History Press (2001) ISBN 0-7524-2132-8; pg. 7 The Monks mined coal and farmed the land until the time of the reformation when the land was taken from them and given to private landowners. In 1641 the parish of Monklands was divided between New Monkland (present day Airdrie) and Old Monkland (present day Coatbridge).Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland (1994) Eds. J & J Keay, HarperCollinsPublishers, pg. 175 In 1745 Bonnie Prince Charlie's Jacobite army seized Coatbridge from government troops on their march to Edinburgh in an action described as the 'Canter of Coatbridge'. Coatbridge was described in the 1799 Statistical Account as an 'immense garden' with 'extensive orchards', 'luxurious crops' where 'rivers abound with salmon'. The Monkland Canal was constructed at the end of the 18th century initially to transport coal to Glasgow from the rich local deposits. The invention of the hot blast furnace process in 1828 meant that Coatbridge's ironstone deposits could be exploited to the maximum by the canal link and hot blast process.Drummond, Peter and James Smith (1982). Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change. Monkland Library Services; pg. 15 The new advances meant that iron could be produced with two thirds less fuel.Miller, Thomas Roland (1958) The Monkland Tradition; Thomas Nelson and Sons, pg. 26 By the mid 19th century there were numerous hot blast furnaces in operation in Coatbridge. The prosperous industry which had sprung up around the new iron industry required vast numbers of largely unskilled workers to mine ironstone and work in the blast furnace plants. Coatbridge therefore became a popular destination for vast numbers of Irish (especially from County Donegal in Ulster) arriving in Scotland. The iron bars and plates produced in Coatbridge iron works were the raw materials needed throughout the British Empire for railways, construction, bridge building and shipbuilding. One example of uses Coatbridge' iron was put to included armour plating for British ships fighting in the Crimean War.Miller, Thomas Roland (1958) The Monkland Tradition; Thomas Nelson and Sons, pg. 36 Over the course of the following forty years the population of Coatbridge grew by 600%.Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland (1994) Eds. J & J Keay, Harper Collins Publishers, pg. 175 The character of the Coatbridge area changed from a rural, Presbyterian landscape of small hamlets and farmhouses into a crowded, polluted, Irish Catholic industrial town. In 1840, Rev William Park wrote that:Historical, biographical and literary sketches of Glasgow and Lanarkshire, part 1&2. Hamilton herald printing and publishing. 1904, pg. 26 One contemporary observer at this time noted that Coatbridge is 'not famous for its sylvan beauties of its charming scenery' and 'offers the visitor no inducements to loiter long'. However, 'a visit to the large Gartsherrie works is one of the sights of a lifetime'.Historical, Biographical and Literary Sketches of Glasgow and Lanarkshire, Part 1&2. Hamilton Herald Printing and Publishing. 1904. p26  Most of the town's population lived in tight rows of terraced houses built under the shadow of the iron works. These homes were often owned by their employers. Living conditions for most were appalling, tuberculosis was rife.Peden, Allan (1992) The Monklands: Illustrated Architectural Guide, Edinburgh: RIAS; pg. 38 For a fortunate few though fortunes could be won 'with a rapidity only equalled by the princely gains of some of the adventurers who accompanied Pizarro to Peru', noted one observer. Among the most notable success stories were the six sons of Coatbridge farmer Alexander Baird. The Baird family had become involved in coal mining but opened an iron foundry in order to exploit the new hot blast process of iron smelting invented by James Beaumont Neilson. The Baird's subsequently constructed numerous iron foundries in Coatbridge including the famous Gartsherrie iron works.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982 The waste heap or 'bing' from the Baird's Gartsherrie works was said to be as large as the great pyramid in Egypt. One son, James Baird, was responsible for erecting sixteen blast-furnaces in Coatbridge between 1830 and 1842. Each of the six sons of Alexander Baird was reputed to have become a millionaire. The town was vividly described by Robert Baird in 1845:Quoted in "The County of Lanark" by George Thomson (Collins, 1960), pg. 32  In the 19th century, the Baird family wielded a pervasive influence over Coatbridge. They were responsible for the design of the lay out of present day Coatbridge town centre. The land for the Town Hall and the land which later came to form Dunbeth Park was given to the town by the Bairds. Gartsherrie church was built by the Baird family. The Bairds donated the site on the Main Street for the erection of St. Patrick's Catholic Church. However, they also used patronage of the Orange Order to try and undermine the local trade union movement.The Social History of Religion in Scotland since 1730 (Routledge, 1987); Callum Brown, pg. 164  By 1885, the once plentiful Monklands ironstone deposits had been largely exhausted. It became increasing expensive to produce iron in Coatbridge as raw materials had to be imported from as far afield as Spain. The growth of the steel industry (in nearby Motherwell) had also led to a start of a decline in demand for the pig iron Coatbridge produced. Living conditions remained grim. In the 1920s Lloyd George's 'Coal and Power' report described the living conditions in the Rosehall area of Coatbridge:  George Orwell's book The Road to Wigan Pier was illustrated by a photograph of homes in the Rosehall area of Coatbridge.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982; p.39 In 1934 there was an exodus to Corby in England when the local Union Plant relocated. This had the effect of a hammer blow impact on the town's iron industry and ushered in the end of serious iron production. The decline of the Clydeside shipbuilding industry in the 1950s meant the demand for iron finally collapsed. A legacy of 'devastating'The Oxford Companion to Scottish History, Michael Lynch (ed.) OUP Oxford (2007); pg. 394 unemployment, appalling housing conditions and some of the worst overcrowding in Scotland left its stamp on the Coatbridge of the early 1930s.The Monklands: Illustrated Architectural Guide by Peden, Allan (pg. 38), RIAS, Edinburgh; 1992 As late as 1936 Coatbridge was the most overcrowded place in Scotland. In the 1930s and 1950s however massive programmes of state-sponsored house building saw thousands of new homes built in Coatbridge and some of the worst examples of slum housing were cleared away. By the early 1980s 85% of homes in Coatbridge were part of local authority housing stock.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982; pg. 42 The last of the blast furnaces, William Baird's famous Gartsherrie works, closed in 1967. Since the 1970s there have been various initiatives to attempt to regenerate Coatbridge. Urban Aid grants, European Union grants and, more recently, Social Inclusion Partnership's have attempted to breathe new life into Coatbridge. Despite these efforts the town's population has continued to fall and in recent years the town has been dubbed the 'most dismal in Scotland'.  At  (55.861°, -4.047°), Coatbridge is situated in Scotland's Central Lowlands. The town lies  above sea level,  east of Glasgow,  south of Cumbernauld and  west of Airdrie. Although Coatbridge has no major river running through it, the North Calder Water runs east-west to the south and the now defunct Monkland Canal used to run straight through the centre of the town toward Glasgow. The canal route through Coatbridge can still be seen today. There are also several smaller burns which run through Coatbridge, most of which drain to the North Calder Water. Coatbridge has four significant public parks. Dunbeth park, West End park, Whifflet park and Drumpellier Country park. Woodend and Witchwood Loch are situated on the north-west edge of Coatbridge. The topography of Coatbridge was an important feature in the towns development during the industrial revolution. Coatbridge rests 60 metres below the 'Slamannan plateau' which neighbouring Airdrie sits on the edge of. The low lying flat ground of Coatbridge was a vital factor in the siting of the towns' blast furnaces and the Monkland Canal route. Although Airdrie was an already established town and had local supplies of ironstone, the Monkland Canal link did not extend into Airdrie because of its higher elevation.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982. P.7 The Clyde Valley plan of 1949 described Coatbridge as 'situated over a flooded coalfield'.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith (Monkland Library Services, 1982) p.25 Tenement buildings in Coatbridge were not built to the same level as Glasgow tenements due to danger of local subsidence from centuries of local mining.Drummond, Peter and James Smith (1982). Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change. Monkland Library Services, p.40 Dunbeth hill where the present local authority municipal buildings stand is a wedge of rock which was probably squeezed upwards by the force of two (now-extinct) fault lines. There are the remains of spreads of glacial sands along the crest of Drumpellier, the west bank of Gartsherrie Burn and along modern day Bank Street. Kirkwood, Kirkshaws and Shawhead sit on a sandstone capped ridge looking south over the Clyde Valley. The vital Coatbridge black band coal field extended from Langloan to beyond the eastern edge of the town. Like much of the British Isles, Coatbridge experiences a temperate maritime climate with relatively cool summers and mild winters. The prevailing wind is from the west. Regular but generally light precipitation occurs throughout the year. Coatbridge is the home of 'Scotland's Noisiest Museum', Summerlee Heritage Park, which contains an insight into the life in industrial Coatbridge. A row of 1900s-1960s cottages, a working tram line and a real coal mine can all be experienced on site. The park is situated on the remains of one of Coatbridge's historic blast furnaces. In recent years there has been something of a cultural renaissance in the town, largely rooted in the St. Patrick's Day Festival. Janet Hamilton, the nineteenth century poet and essayist, died in Langloan in 1873. Present-day writers Anne Donovan (Orange prize winner), Brian Conaghan is the author of two novels The Boy Who Made it Rain' (2011) and 'When Mr Dog Bites' (2014), and award-winning author Des Dillon are all from Coatbridge. Coatbridge has regularly featured in Des Dillon's work. Two of his books about Coatbridge have been turned into plays. Mark Millar is a Coatbridge comic book writer whose Wanted comic book series has been translated into a feature film starring Angelina Jolie and Morgan Freeman, as well as the highly successful graphic novel Kickass which was adapted into the successful film of the same name in 2010. Coatbridge born Dame Laurentia McLachlan was the Benedictine abbess of the Stanbrook Community whose correspondence with George Bernard Shaw and Sydney Cockerell was the subject of the film The Best of Friends. Coatbridge is also home to the annual Deep Fried Film Festival. Local filmmakers Duncan and Wilma Finnigan have been described by The List as 'the John Cassavetes and Gena Rowlands of Coatbridge'. Thomas McAleese (alias Dean Ford) was the lead singer of The Marmalade who had a UK number one single in 1969 with a cover of The Beatles' 'Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da'. Coatbridge brothers Greg Kane and Pat Kane are the band Hue and Cry. Coatbridge born Alan Frew is the ex-pat lead singer of Canadian group Glass Tiger. Cha Burns (deceased), Jimme O'Neill and JJ Gilmour of The Silencers are from Coatbridge. Coatbridge sisters Fran and Anna were a famous duo on the Scottish traditional music scene.   Coatbridge is especially noted for its historical links with Ireland. This is largely due to large scale immigration into the town from Ulster (especially from County Donegal) in the 19th century and throughout most of the 20th century. Indeed, the town has been called 'little Ireland'.The population of Monklands by Peter Drummond. Monkland District Library Services. 1985, pg. 7Burrell, Kathy and Panikos Panayi (2003) Histories and Memories: Migrants and Their History in Britain. I.B. Tauris & Co, pg. 238Bradley, Joseph M. (2008), "Celtic Football Club, Irish Ethnicity, and Scottish Society" In: New Hibernia Review, vol. 12, 1, Earrach/Spring 2008, pp. 96-110. The most obvious manifestation of these links can be seen in the annual St. Patrick's Day Festival. The festival is sponsored by the Irish Government and Guinness. The festival runs for over a fortnight and includes lectures, film shows, dance/Gaelic football competitions and music performances. The festival is the largest Irish celebration in Scotland. The Coatbridge accent has been categorised as making less use of the Scots tongue and exhibiting a tendency to stress the 'a' vowel differently from general Scots usage. Examples of this are seen the pronunciation of the words stair (sterr), hair (herr), fair (ferr) and chair (cherr). This different enunciation has been attributed to the impact of successive influxes of Ulster Catholic immigrants into Coatbridge.Celtic Minded - Joseph M. Bradley (Ed.)The Population of Monklands in the 1980s Monkland Library Services Dept. (1985), pg. 7 However, the distinctiveness of the Coatbridge accent and pronunciation has diminished as the various surrounding populations (especially Glasgow) have mingled with that of Coatbridge.    Coatbridge's local football team are Albion Rovers. Albion Rovers play in the Scottish Football League, and Cliftonhill is where they play their home games. The "Wee Rovers" were founded in 1882 when two local Coatbridge clubs, Rovers and Albion, amalgamated to form the club bearing the name. The club's greatest success came in 1920 when they reached the final of the Scottish Cup at Hampden Park. Noted Albion Rovers players from the past have included Jock Stein, Bernie Slaven and Tony Green. Former Celtic players John Hughes, John McNamee, Gerry Creaney and Peter Grant are all from Coatbridge. Scottish football international Chris Iwelumo was born in Coatbridge. Coatbridge CC a local amateur club founded in 1976 became Scottish Champions in 1986 and again in 1988, the club was founded by Jim McCann, Frank Webb and Gerry Gallagher. The club was managed by Willie Cox and Coached by Alfie Conn of Rangers and Celtic. Drumpellier Cricket Club has been in continuous existence for around 150 years and the club have a ground in the Drumpellier area. Greyhound and Speedway racing also took part in the town, using the Albion Rovers FC ground. Greyhound Racing began on 11 December 1931 and lasted until 1986. The Edinburgh Monarchs rode there in 1968-69 (as the Coatbridge Monarchs) after losing their track at Meadowbank Stadium to the developers for the 1970 Commonwealth Games. Glasgow Tigers moved from Hampden Park to Coatbridge in 1973, and stayed there until June 1977, when they were forced out by the greyhound racing. The Coatbridge Indoor bowling club hosted the World Indoor Bowls Championships from 1979 until 1987. Coatbridge was the home of former boxer Bert Gilroy, Scotland's longest-reigning champion. Coatbridge is also home to the WBO World Super-Featherweight Champion Ricky Burns. Walter Donaldson, former World Snooker champion, also hailed from Coatbridge. There are two golf courses: the municipal course bordering Drumpellier Country Park and the nearby private member's club Drumpellier Golf Course. Clare Queen, Scotland's number one female golfer on the women's European tour, is from Coatbridge.  Coatbridge was given burgh status in 1885, and was granted a coat of arms by the Lord Lyon in 1892. The arms have a black field and on it a flaming tower to represent a blast furnace and Coatbridge's industrial tradition. The crest is a monk holding a stone in his left hand. The stone relates to the old parish of Monklands and the legend of the 'aul' Kirk stane'.Scottish Burgh and County Heraldry – RM Urqhuart. Heraldry Today (1973), pg. 188 The legend of the 'aul' Kirk stane' is that a pilgrim undertaking a penance from Glasgow carried a stone in the direction of Monklands. When he could carry the stone no further (or in another version of the legend, when an angel spoke to him) he laid the stone down. It was where the stone came to rest that he was to build a church. The church is the present day Old Monkland Kirk, at which the stone can still be seen. The Latin motto 'Laborare est orare' translates as 'to work is to pray', which originates in the writings of St. Benedict and is commonly associated with the Cistercian Order whose monks came to Monklands in the 12th century. Coatbridge is represented by three tiers of elected government. North Lanarkshire Council, the unitary local authority for Coatbridge, is based at Motherwell, and is the executive, deliberative and legislative body responsible for local governance. The Scottish Parliament is responsible for devolved matters such as education, health and justice, while reserved matters are dealt with by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Up until 1975, Coatbridge had its own Burgh Council. Between 1975 and 1996, Coatbridge was part of Monklands District Council and Strathclyde Regional Council. During the by-election campaign in Monklands East of 1994, there were accusations of sectarianism and nepotism in favour of Coatbridge over neighbouring Airdrie by Monklands District Council. See Monklandsgate and Monklands East by-election, 1994. The fact that all 17 Labour councillors were Roman Catholic led to Coatbridge being seen as a 'Catholic town'. Subsequent inquiries showed no evidence of sectarianism, but allegations of nepotism were shown to be true.Bruce, et al; Sectarianism in Scotland, Edinburgh University Press: 2004 Coatbridge is presently part of the burgh constituency of Coatbridge, Chryston and Bellshill, electing one Member of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Before the constituency's creation in 2005, Coatbridge lay in the Coatbridge and Chryston constituency. Tom Clarke of the Scottish Labour Party has been the MP since 1982. For the purposes of the Scottish Parliament, Coatbridge forms part of the Coatbridge and Cryston constituency, which is represented by Elaine Smith MSP, also Labour. Coatbridge is further represented by seven regional MSPs from the Central Scotland electoral region. A small part of the eastern fringes of the town forms part of the Airdrie and Shotts constituency. Notable politicians from Coatbridge are Baroness Liddell, a former MP who was formerly both Secretary of State for Scotland and Britain's High Commissioner in Australia, and Lord Reid, also a former MP who was the former Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and Home Secretary. Lord Reid is a former Chairman of Celtic FC. According to the United Kingdom Census 2001, the census locality of Coatbridge had a total resident population of 41,170, or 13% of the total of North Lanarkshire. This figure, combined with an area of ,List of census localities in Scotland: North Lanarkshire Wikipedia provides Coatbridge with a population density figure of . The place of birth of the town's residents was as follows: 98.7% United Kingdom (including 96% from Scotland), 0.32% Republic of Ireland, 0.30% from other European Union countries, and 0.72% from elsewhere in the world. The economic activity of residents aged 16–74 was 39.3% in full-time employment, 9.4% in part-time employment, 3.6% self-employed, 5.3% unemployed, 2.5% students with jobs, 3.2% students without jobs, 13.4% retired, 5.7% looking after home or family, 12.0% permanently sick or disabled, and 5.7% economically inactive for other reasons. Compared with the average demography of Scotland, Coatbridge has low proportions of people born outside the United Kingdom, and people over 75&nbsp;years of age. During the 19th century, Irish people began to arrive in large numbers in Coatbridge. The 1851 census recorded that the Irish constituted 35.8% of the local population. Although while a significant proportion of these emigrants were Protestant, the majority were Catholic. By 1901, the percentage of Irish-born people in Coatbridge had fallen to around 15%, but remained the highest of all the major towns in Scotland.The Irish in Scotland by James Handley, 1962 In the 2001 census Irish ethnicity was recorded at just over 1%, although just over half the population claimed their religious denomination as Roman Catholicism. In 1985, 56% of the population of Coatbridge were Roman Catholic. In 2006, Coatbridge (along with Port Glasgow and Clydebank) was identified as 'the least Scottish town in Scotland' due to having the highest percentage of Irish names in the country. Reportedly more than 28% of adults in Coatbridge had names with Irish origins. Other immigrants to Coatbridge have included in 1880s a small number Lithuanians."The Raddler" - The Journal of Monklands Historical Society. Vol. 4, September 1999 (pg. 21) In 1905, part of a 'wave' of immigrants from Monte Cassino in Italy settled in Coatbridge. A small number of Polish people had stayed in Coatbridge after a Polish tank regiment was stationed in the town during WWII. The 1960 Coatbridge town plan forecast the population to reach 76,000 by 1990.Peter Drummond, The population of Monklands, Monkland District Library Services, 1985 (pg. 21) One local author argued that despite the population apparently remaining relatively static during the 1970s, Coatbridge's population has declined by around 15,000 due to emigration. 21st century Coatbridge is the site of Scotland's inland container base. Coatbridge was chosen as the site in part due to the proximity of various rail and motorway networks. Makers of PA systems and loudspeakers Tannoy Ltd. are headquartered in Coatbridge. Lees Foods Plc is a local confectionery and bakery products company and are the manufacturers of the Lees Macaroon bar. William Lawson's Scotch Whisky distillery has been located in Coatbridge since 1967. Coatbridge was home to one of the first B&Q Depots, which was closed in 2006 and moved to the new retail park. The oldest family business in Coatbridge and Airdrie is funeral directors, Donald McLaren Ltd, which was founded in 1912. In terms of housing, property prices in Coatbridge have undergone rapid growth since 2000. In 2005, house prices rose by 35%, reportedly the largest such increase in Scotland.    The built environment around Coatbridge's town centre is characterised by its mixture of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century sandstone buildings and late twentieth-century precast concrete shops. The leafy Blairhill and Dunbeth conservation areas to the west and north of the town centre comprise detached, semi-detached and terraced sandstone residential buildings. The bulk of the remaining surrounding areas consist of various twentieth-century local authority housing buildings. Several high rise flats dominate the skyline. Due to the decline of industries, several private housing estates have been built on reclaimed land. In 2007 Coatbridge was awarded Prospect architecture magazine's carbuncle award for being the 'most dismal town in Scotland'. The town was also described by Scottish comedian Frankie Boyle as 'like Bladerunner... without the special effects'. Drumpellier Country Park is set around Woodend Loch. There are extensive woodlands, a visitor centre and a butterfly house.  Monkland Canal runs through a section of the park. The Time Capsule is a multi-purpose leisure centre containing a swimming pool, an adventure pool set in a prehistoric environment, an ice skating facility, sauna/steam room and a sports complex with gym halls and other facilities. The Showcase Leisure Park contains a 14-screen cinema, a 10-pin bowling complex and numerous restaurants. Landmarks in Coatbridge include: The Monkland Canal (completed 1791) was used in the 19th and 20th century to transport coal and iron to Glasgow. The town centre section of the canal was interred in pipe between Sikeside and Blair Road in the mid-1970s. Some sections of the Monkland Canal can still be seen today between Townhead and Drumpellier. Coatbridge is adjacent to the M8 and M73 motorways. The M74 motorway is also a short drive away. The major cities of Edinburgh, Stirling and Glasgow are all within commuting distance.  Due to the number of rail lines running through Coatbridge, it was once dubbed the "Crewe of the North".  There are six railway stations on the four railway lines that bisect the town: Motherwell-Cumbernauld Line; Argyle Line; Whifflet Line; and North Clyde Line. The six stations within Coatbridge and on these lines are: ; ; ; ; ; and . Coatbridge has had additional passenger stations, such as  and Calder Station (Greenend); these stations have been closed for many years.  The earliest map showing Coatbridge is by Timothy Pont published in Johan Blaeu's Nether warde of clyds-dail (1654). The districts of Dunpelder, Gartsherrie, Langloan, Kirkwood, Kirkshaws, Whifflet are all evident.Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change – Peter Drummond and James Smith, Monkland Library Services, 1982 p8 The present day neighbourhoods of Coatbridge are Barrowfield, Blairhill, Brownshill, Carnbroe, Cliftonville, Cliftonhill, Coatbank, Coatdyke, Cuparhead, Drumpellier, Dunbeth, Dundyvan, Espieside, Gartsherrie, Greenhill, Greenend, Kirkshaws, Kirkwood, Langloan, Old Monkland, Rosehall, Shawhead, Sikeside, Summerlee, Sunnyside, Townhead and Whifflet. Victoria Park is a relatively new area close the town centre which was built on a brownfield site once occupied by heavy industry. The Blairhill and Dunbeth neighbourhoods are part of the Blairhill and Dunbeth conservation area. Whitelaw is the area which the town centre is in but is a term which has not been used for many years. The fountain which is situated at the town centre on the corner of Main Street and South Circular Road is officially called the Whitelaw FountainNeighbourhoods and landmarks of Coatbridge Google Maps  Coatbridge College was built as Scotland's first college in the late 19th century. As Coatbridge has moved away from the traditional heavy industries the teaching focus has shifted from traditional industry courses towards commerce, care and the arts. St Ambrose, St Andrew's and Coatbridge High are the best-known secondary schools serving Coatbridge. The first two are Roman Catholic. St Ambrose was the subject of an HMI follow-up assessment visit in January 2009. Sports journalist and broadcaster Bob Crampsey was formerly headmaster of St Ambrose. Singer and television presenter Michelle McManus and musician Tony Donaldson are former pupils of that school. Coatbridge also has several special needs schools including Pentland School (Primary school), Portland High School, Drumpark School, Willowbank School (High School) and Buchanan High School. Coatbridge forms part of the Western water and sewerage regions of Scotland. Waste management is provided by the North Lanarkshire local authority. Water supplies are provided by Scottish Water, a government-owned corporation of the Scottish Government. Coatbridge's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Scottish Power. Coatbridge is served by Monklands Hospital, sited on the Airdrie side of the Coatbridge/Airdrie border. The NHS board is NHS Lanarkshire. Scottish Fire and Rescue Service is the statutory fire and rescue service which operates in Coatbridge. Policing in Coatbridge is provided by the Police Service of Scotland (Lanarkshire Division). The Strathclyde Partnership for Transport, a public body in Scotland, has direct operational responsibilities, such as supporting (and in some cases running) local bus services, and managing integrated ticketing in Coatbridge and other areas from the former Strathclyde region. Transport Scotland manages the local rail network. The local authority responsible for community-based service in Coatbridge is North Lanarkshire Council. The council provides local services related to education, social work, the environment, housing, road maintenance and leisure.Services North Lanarkshire Council Coatbridge is twinned with St. Denis, France; Campi Bisenzio, Italy; and Gatchina, Russia.   Coatbridge North Lanarkshire Scotland Total population 41,170 321,067 5,062,011 Foreign born 1.3% 1.7% 3.8% Over 75 years old 6.1% 5.6% 7.1% Unemployed 5.3% 4.5% 4.0% Year Population figure 1755 1,813 1831 9,580 1851 27,333 1901 36,991 1911 43,286 1921 43,909 1931 43,056 1951 47,685 1961 54,262 1971 51,493 1981 48,445 2001 41,170 Coatbridge Leisure Centre – Peter Womersley 1970s brutalist, modernist cantilevered building sited on the main road into Coatbridge Coatbridge Library – an Andrew Carnegie-sponsored 1905 pink sandstone structure. Imposing B-listed structure sited on Academy Street St. Augustine's Church and buildings - Built in 1873 and located in the Dundyvan area. A red sandstone B listed Rowand Anderson Gothic church The Quadrant Shopping Centre - Has been described in one article; '...from the set of Camberwick Green. A new clock tower, which looks as if it was designed on the back of a beer mat, marks the town centre, a throwaway gesture compounded by the addition of some appalling public art-cum street furniture' St Andrew's Church - 1839 early Victorian Gothic church by Scott Stephen & Gale in the Whitelaw hill area. Its steeple towers over the town centre Coatbridge railway bridges - The B-listed 1898 bridges span Bank Street, West Canal Street and the former Monkland Canal. The bridges underwent specialist restoration in 2009 St Mary's Church - B listed Gothic church in Whifflet designed by Pugin and Pugin in 1896. Contains an elaborate and ornate interior ceiling The former Cattle Market Building - erected in 1896, B listed façade of the sandstone cattle market building within the Blairhill and Dunbeth conservation area Summerlee Heritage Park 2008 extension - Spaceship style glass and metal addition to existing building by North Lanarkshire Council's in-house Design Services Team Admiral Sir James Stirling, first Governor of Western Australia. Jock Cunningham, miner, mutineer and Republican Brigade commander during the Spanish Civil War Neil Smith, Air Chief Marshal of the Royal Air Force (DBS squadron); the hero of 'Pipe Ridge' (DFC and bar) Charlie Doyle, Coatbridge-born union organiser and Communist in the United States who was imprisoned and deported as an undesirable alien; in 1953 he led strike action at Battersea Power Station and was tagged "the most hated man in Britain" Anti-child sexual abuse and bullying activist, Sandra Brown, attended Coatbridge High School Rev Dr Peter Marshall (27 May 1902 – 26 January 1949) Chaplain of the United States Senate, whose biography was the basis of the Oscar-nominated film A Man Called Peter, was born in Coatbridge Robert Lees, member of the Wisconsin State Senate Willie McDonald, footballer for Manchester United and Coventry City Cha Burns (1957 - 2007), Guitarist with the Scottish folk band, The Silencers. James (Jinky) Gilmour, Vocalist with the Scottish folk band, The Silencers. John Stein (footballer and football manager) who led Celtic to the European Cup in 1967, the first British club to win this trophy, played for Albion Rovers. Tommy Burns (footballer and football manager) played with Celtic and Scotland and managed Celtic lived in Coatbridge George Graham (footballer and football manager) played with Aston Villa, Chelsea, Arsenal, Manchester United and managed Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur lived in Bargeddie Andy Ritchie (footballer) Celtic, Morton and Motherwell) lived in Belshill Sheena Easton (singer) lived in Belshill Alan Stewart (entertainer) attended Coatbridge High School Hue and Cry a successful band from the 1980s; brothers Greg and Pat Kane are from the Blairhill area of Coatbridge Frank Gallagher, actor (River City, Taggart, etc.) born in Coatbridge, 1962, grew up, lived there until about 1981 (age 19). Bill Carroll, radio host Heather Suttie, DJ and radio presenter Gerry Maher QC (Jurist), Professor of Criminal Law, University of Edinburgh, attended St. Patrick's High School Neil Walker (Jurist), Professor of Public Law and the Law of Nure and Nations, University of Edinburgh attended Coatbridge High School Paul Watchman (Jurist), Honorary Professor of Law, University of Glasgow  attended Coatbridge High School Mark Kerr, Scottish footballer, played for Aberdeen FC Jimmy Johnstone (footballer) Glasgow Celtic and Scotland and European Cup Winnerlived in nearby Viewpark John  Roberstson (footballer) Notting Forest and Scotland and two time European Cup Winner also   in nearby Viewpark Iain Munro(footballer) St. Mirren, Hibernian, Glasgow Rangers, Sunderland Stoke and Scotland lived I. During stone and taught at Coatbridge High Hugh Murray, rugby union player Johnny Russell, Dundee United footballer attended Coatbridge High School Joe Kissock, former New Zealand international footballer Ricky Burns (boxer), World Super Featherweight Champion Edward Reid (comedy singer), reached the semi-finals of Britain's Got Talent in 2011 Tony Watt, Celtic FC striker, scored for Celtic in win against FC Barcelona in 2012 Mark Millar, Writer (Wanted, Kick-Ass, Super Crooks and many other creator owned, Marvel & DC titles.) Martin Greechan, founder of the Deep Fried Film Festival, stand up comedian and media consultant Jock Kane, intelligence officer and GCHQ whistleblower Len Gould, former editor of National Tabloid 'The People' 1990's. Dillon, Des (2007) Monks, Luath Press Ltd Drummond, Peter and James Smith (1982) Coatbridge: Three Centuries of Change, Monkland Library Services Drummond, Peter (1985) The Population of Monklands in the 1980s, Monkland Library Services Dept Miller, Andrew (1864) The Rise of Coatbridge and the Surrounding Neighbourhood, Glasgow Miller, Thomas Roland (1958) The Monkland Tradition, Thomas Nelson and Sons Moir, Helen (2001) Coatbridge (Images of Scotland), The History Press; ISBN 0-7524-2132-8 Van Helden, Oliver (2000) Old Coatbridge, Stenlake Publishing North Lanarkshire Council Coatbridge Museum Out of The Darkness Evening Times, 27 October 2008 - Article on Coatbridge's industrial past
