    Columbia Business School (CBS) is the business school of Columbia University in Manhattan, New York City. It was established in 1916 to provide business training and professional preparation for undergraduate and graduate Columbia University students. It is one of six Ivy League business schools, and its admission process is among the most selective of top business schools.    The School was founded in 1916 with 11 full-time faculty members and an inaugural class of 61 students, including 8 women. Banking executive Emerson McMillin provided initial funding in 1916, while A. Barton Hepburn, then president of Chase National Bank, provided funding for the School's endowment in 1919. The School expanded rapidly, enrolling 420 students by 1920, and in 1924 added a PhD program to the existing BS and MS degree programs.http://www.gsb.columbia.edu/about-us/historyhttp://books.google.com/books?id=wmXOAAAAMAAJ&source=gbs_ViewAPI In 1945, Columbia Business School authorized the awarding of the MBA degree. Shortly thereafter, in the 1950s, the School adopted the Hermes emblem as its symbol, reflecting the entrepreneurial nature of the Greek god Hermes and his association with business, commerce and communication.http://www.gsb.columbia.edu/alumni/news/New-Visual-Identity In 1952, CBS admitted its last class of undergraduates. The school currently offers executive education programs that culminate in a Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE) and full alumni status, and several degree programs for the MBA and PhD degrees. In addition to the full-time MBA, the school offers four Executive MBA programs: the NY-EMBA Friday/Saturday program, the EMBA-Global program (launched in 2001 in conjunction with the London Business School), the Berkeley-Columbia Executive MBA program (launched in 2002 in conjunction with the Haas School of Business at University of California, Berkeley), and the EMBA-Global Asia program (launching in 2009 in conjunction with the London Business School and the University of Hong Kong Business School). Students in jointly run programs earn an MBA degree from each of the cooperating institutions. On July 1, 2004, R. Glenn Hubbard became Columbia Business School's eleventh dean.  Hubbard, the former chair of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers, has worked at the intersection of the private, government and nonprofit sectors and played an active role in shaping national and international economic policy, including the deregulation policy leading up Wall Street bank failures in 2008. In Charles Ferguson's 2010 documentary, Inside Job, when prompted, Hubbard strongly maintains that his political and financial connections to government and Wall Street firms do not create any potential academic conflict of interest.  Today, Columbia Business School is primarily housed in Uris Hall, a recently renovated 1960s structure at the center of Columbia's Morningside Heights campus. An auxiliary space, Warren Hall, is situated on Amsterdam Avenue and is shared with the law school. Eventually, the school will be moved to a new, more spacious facility at Columbia's planned new campus on 125th Street in Manhattanville, currently under construction. In October 2010, Columbia Business School announced that alumnus Henry Kravis, the billionaire co-founder of private-equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR & Co.), pledged $100 million to fund expansion of Columbia Business School, the largest gift in its history. The donation will go toward construction of the business school’s new site in the Manhattanville section of New York City, where Columbia University is extending its campus. One of the school’s two new buildings will be named for Kravis.  The buildings will be designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro. In December 2012, Ronald Perelman also donated $100 million to the construction of the second business school building. The Columbia MBA Program is highly competitive with an admission rate of 15% in 2009. The student body is highly accomplished and diverse.  Students in the class that entered in 2009 come from 61 countries and speak more than 50 languages. The revised core curriculum, launched in the fall of 2008, represents about 40% of the degree requirement.  It consists of 2 full courses and 12 half-term courses including Corporate Finance, Financial Accounting, Managerial Statistics, Managerial Economics, Leadership, Operations Management, and Marketing Strategy. While the first year of the program is usually devoted to completing the requirements of the core curriculum, the second year provides students with the opportunity to choose from the more than 130 elective courses available at the School and supplement them with more than 4,000 graduate-level classes from the University's other graduate and professional schools. Among the most popular electives at Columbia Business School are the Economics of Strategic Behavior, Financial Statement Analysis and Earnings Quality, Launching New Ventures, Modern Political Economy, and the Seminar in Value Investing. Columbia Business School has a firm grade non-disclosure policy, stating that students refrain from disclosing specific class grades, GPAs, or transcripts until they accept full-time, post graduation positions.http://cbsgba.com/culture/grade-non-disclosure-gnd Students enter Columbia's MBA program in two tracks.  The traditional fall term is approximately 550 students, while the January term "J-Term" is approximately 200 students.  Students entering in the fall are divided into eight clusters of approximately 65 students that take all first year core classes together. J-Term students are broken into three clusters.  The J-Term is aimed at students who want an accelerated 18-month program who usually plan to return to their previous job, are company sponsored, and will not pursue a summer internship because they take classes during the summer. The recently launched Columbia CaseWorks program utilizes the faculty’s research and industry experience and brings that perspective into the classroom through the development of new cases and teaching materials. Beginning in orientation and continuing through core classes and electives, students are immersed in cases that use faculty research to address real-world business issues. Columbia CaseWorks challenges students to debate corporate decision making and to develop appropriate recommendations and solutions.  During their first year, students study and discuss an integrated case that focuses on a single company and is incorporated into several core courses.  This encourages students to think about a company holistically, analyzing it from the perspective of various disciplines.http://www4.gsb.columbia.edu/mba/academics/versatile In 2013, the median starting base salary was $110,000, with a median $30,000 signing bonus and a median $20,000 of other guaranteed compensation.Columbia Business School Employment Report – 2011. According to Forbes magazine, 90% of billionaires with MBAs who derived their fortunes from finance obtained their master's degree from one of three schools: Harvard Business School, Columbia Business School, or The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.Forbes: Billionaire Clusters. The School's faculty are divided into five academic units: Though there are no official tracks within Columbia Business School, many students choose to focus on a particular area in order to gain deeper knowledge in a specific discipline. Columbia Business School offers the following areas of focus: As part of its MBA curriculum, Columbia Business School offers the Value Investing Program at the Heilbrunn Center for Graham & Dodd Investing, for a handful of selected business school students. The program includes Applied Value Investing and Special Situations Investing. Adjunct professors include hedge fund managers, such as Joel Greenblatt, Paul Sonkin, Ken Shubin Stein and William Von Mueffling. The program also features an extensive list of guest speakers which include Seth Klarman, Michael Price, Bill Nygren, Charles Brandes, David Einhorn and Chris Browne. Notable graduates of the value investing program include Warren Buffett, Mario Gabelli, Leon G. Cooperman, Chuck Royce, Paul Sonkin and William von Mueffling. Columbia Business School's Entrepreneurship Program trains students for four career paths: entrepreneurship in new ventures, entrepreneurship in large organizations, private equity financing and social entrepreneurship. Consequently, entrepreneurship among Columbia MBA students is on the rise, with 20 students in the MBA Class of 2007 starting their own businesses directly after graduation. To supplement its Entrepreneurship Program, the Business School launched, in June 2012, an entrepreneurship lab in downtown Manhattan, an incubator space for entrepreneurs. Columbia Business School has a strong presence in consulting. All top five new MBA employers are consulting firms, with McKinsey alone offering positions to 50 new graduates in 2014. Over 30% of new graduates choose a career in consulting.  For 2015, national rankings of Columbia's MBA program include #4 by Forbes,Forbes MBA Rankings 2011 #5 by Bloomberg BusinessWeek,Bloomberg-Business Week MBA Rankings 2012 and #8 by U.S. News and World Report.US News and World Report MBA Rankings 2011  In global rankings, Columbia was ranked #5 by The EconomistEconomist MBA Rankings 2012 and #5 (2014 ranking) and #4 among U.S. Schools by Financial Times.Financial Times MBA Rankings 2012 In the most recent aggregated "ranking of rankings" of U.S. business schools, Columbia's MBA program ranked #1 in the Financial Times. These rankings are a composite of five major MBA rankings. Columbia Business School students can combine an MBA with one of ten other professional degrees.  In general, a dual degree requires one less year than it would take to complete the two degrees separately. Candidates must apply separately to Columbia Business School and the other degree program.MBA Student Services : Dual Degrees Joint degrees offered with the following schools include:  The Columbia Business School Follies is a student club that works throughout each semester to put together a production in which students write, choreograph, and perform comedy skits. It achieved notoriety in 2006 for Every Breath Bernanke Takes, its video parody of the Police song "Every Breath You Take". It purports to be from Glenn Hubbard, Dean of the Business School, in response to Hubbard's being a runner-up to the Fed Chairmanship assumed by Ben Bernanke. In 2008, the Follies team released a sequel to this video called The Market Crashed On Me, a parody of the Boyz II Men song "On Bended Knee". The Follies' other notable video parodies include Damn It Feels Good To Be A Banka, B-School Guy vs. Law School Guy, Baby Got WACC, and MRS. Key Admission Stats – Columbia MBA: Average GPA of admits: 3.5 Average GMAT of admits: 716 Average Age of admits: 28 Admission requirements include a bachelor's degree or its equivalent from an accredited institution, three essays, two letters of recommendation, a GMAT or GRE score and a TOEFL or PTE score for international applicants. Columbia offers various executive MBA programs. The Executive MBA (EMBA) Friday/Saturday Program is a 20-month graduate program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education without interrupting their careers. The EMBA program is taught on campus at Columbia University by full-time faculty. The first year of classes consists of the same core curriculum as the Full-Time MBA program. Executive education is the focus of the second year.  This Friday/Saturday program is targeted at individuals with approximately 10 years of work experience. The Executive MBA (EMBA) Saturday Program is a 24-month graduate degree program designed for individuals that are looking to enhance their education, but cannot take any time away from work.  This program is the same as the Friday/Saturday program, with the exception that classes only meet on Saturdays over a longer period of time. In addition to the New York–based EMBA Program, Columbia offers three partner programs to meet the differing needs and geographical distribution of prospective students. Because students in the partner EMBA programs must satisfy the separate requirements of each school, they earn an MBA degree from each participating university. Likewise, they become alumni of each university and business school and may avail themselves of all programs and privileges afforded to alumni. Columbia Business School currently offers three separate Master's of Science degrees in Management Science & Engineering, Financial Economics and Marketing.  Admission to the programs is extremely competitive with 543 applicants to the Financial Economics program in 2011, its first year, and only 10 students accepted. The degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) is offered by the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and is administered by the Business School.  Admission is highly competitive with 894 applicants in 2010 for positions in an entering class of 18 students (2%).  A PhD in Management or Business is a common precursor to an academic career in business schools. Throughout the program, students become familiar with research methods and the literature of their major fields through research projects and directed reading. Doctoral candidates begin the program mastering basic research tools by studying subjects such as economics, behavioral science and quantitative methods, in addition to completing course work and examinations in the major field of study. The completion of course work and qualifying examinations normally requires two to three years. The research phase begins as early as the first year, when students serve as research assistants, and continues throughout their time at the School. Students gradually become more involved in the design and execution of research and, by the end of the second year, have typically produced at least one paper suitable for publication, often as coauthor with a faculty member. The later years of the program are dedicated to original research and the creation of the dissertation. Recent Columbia Ph.D. program graduates have placed in the following institutions: Harvard Business School, Wharton School,  London Business School, Kellogg School of Management, Cornell University, University of Notre Dame, Stern School of Business, University of Minnesota, Fordham University, Polytechnic University, Baruch College, University of Washington, EWHA Womans University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Toronto, IAE Business and Management School, Universidad Austral, and University of Texas at Austin. Columbia Business School’s Executive Education program topics include management, finance, leadership, marketing, social enterprise, and strategy.http://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/execed/programs-for-individuals?sourceid=meganav The school also offers executive certification programs, including the Advanced Management Program,http://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/execed/program-pages/details/814/AMP the Certificate in Business Excellencehttp://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/execed/why-columbia/cibe and the Senior Leaders Program for Nonprofit Professionals.http://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/execed/program-pages/details/118/SLP The Certificate in Business Excellence (CIBE) is awarded to students who complete a total of 18 program days of executive education within a four-year period.Columbia Business School  Any executive education program at Columbia Business School can be applied toward the completion of the certificate. Recipients of the CIBE are granted full alumni status with Columbia Business School,Columbia Business SchoolBricker's International Directory 2006 including the following alumni benefits: Research centers, special programs, institutes, and cross-disciplinary areas at Columbia Business School include: Columbia Business School employs 136 full-time faculty members, including Joseph Stiglitz, the 2001 Nobel laureate in economics who also teaches at the university's School of International and Public Affairs; Ray Fisman, the Lambert Family Professor of Social Enterprise; and Bernd Schmitt, the Robert D. Calkins Professor of International Business. The current Dean is the former Presidential Council of Economic Advisors Chairman Glenn Hubbard. Hedge fund gurus Joel Greenblatt and Ken Shubin Stein are currently adjunct professors. Bruce Greenwald teaches Value Investing and Economics of Strategic Behavior electives. Adam Dell, brother of Dell Inc. CEO Michael Dell, is a venture capitalist who teaches Business Innovation and Technology. Jonathan Knee teaches Finance and is the author of a book titled "The Accidental Investment Banker". James Freeman teaches Investment Banking and is the CEO of a boutique investment bank by the same name.  Frederic Mishkin, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, returned to teach at CBS starting fall 2008. Rita Gunther McGrath is a well known member of the strategy faculty and the author of four books on the subject, most recently The End of Competitive Advantage: How to Keep Your Strategy Moving as Fast As Your Business (2013, Harvard Business Review Publishing) Columbia Business School has over 39,000 living alumni.About Columbia Business School : Alumni Some of the more notable alumni include the following:      Accounting Decision, Risk, and Operations Finance and Economics Management Marketing Accounting Consulting Decision, Risk and Operations Entrepreneurship Finance and Economics Healthcare and Pharmaceutical Management Human Resource Management International Business Management / Leadership Marketing Media Private Equity Real Estate Social Enterprise Value Investing School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation College of Dental Medicine School of Engineering and Applied Science School of International and Public Affairs School of Journalism School of Law Columbia Law and Business Schools to launch 3-year joint JD/MBA degreeColumbia adds three-year J.D./MBA program School of Nursing College of Physicians and Surgeons School of Public Health School of Social Work The EMBA-Global program is a 20-month program administered in partnership with the London Business School. The program enrolls approximately 70 students from around the world per year. Courses are taught by the full-time faculty of both schools. During the first year, the core curriculum classes alternate monthly between the campuses of Columbia University and the London Business School. The core curriculum is similar to that offered in the regular EMBA programs offered separately by each school, but with a more transnational-business emphasis. Second year classes may be selected from the portfolio of EMBA classes offered at either or both partner schools. The Berkeley-Columbia Executive MBA, administered in conjunction with the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley. This 19-month program enrolls approximately 70 students per year. Classes are divided into five terms. Each term contains five sessions that typically meet Thursday through Saturday. One session per term is held at the Columbia University campus, the other four are held on campus at the Haas School of Business. Courses are taught by the full-time faculty of both schools. The core curriculum is taught during the first three terms and consists of material similar to that given in the other EMBA programs. The last two terms offer elective courses. Students may opt to spend one term studying exclusively in the NY-EMBA program at Columbia or in the other MBA programs offered at Berkeley.  The Berkeley-Columbia partnership will end after the class admitted in 2012 graduates. The EMBA-Global Asia, run jointly with the London Business School and the University of Hong Kong. This 20-month program follows a curriculum similar to the EMBA-Global program. Classes are held in Hong Kong, London, New York, and Shanghai. 2 worldwide, #2 US Program, Businessweek, 2011 Executive MBA RankingsBusinessweek, 2011 Executive MBA Rankings, Worldwide 2 worldwide, Financial Times, 2010 Executive MBA Rankings, Global-EMBA program 3 US Program, #13 worldwide. Financial Times, 2010 Executive MBA Rankings, Berkeley-Columbia program 4 US Program, #15 worldwide. Financial Times, 2010 Executive MBA Rankings, NY-EMBA program 5 US News and World Report 2010 Rankings 4 BusinessWeek Executive MBA Rankings, NY-EMBA program 9 Wall Street Journal Executive MBA Rankings, 2010, NY-EMBA program Arthur J. Samberg Institute for Teaching Excellence The Behavioral Lab The Center for Decision Sciences Center for Excellence in Accounting and Security Analysis Center on Global Brand Leadership Center on Japanese Economy and Business Columbia Institute for Tele-Information Columbia University Center for International Business Education Research Competitive Strategy Decision Making and Negotiations Eugene Lang Center for Entrepreneurship Healthcare and Pharmaceutical Management Program The Heilbrunn Center for Graham & Dodd Investing Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International Business The Media Program The Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate Private Equity Program Program for Financial Studies Program on Social Intelligence Richard Paul Richman Center for Business, Law, and Public Policy The Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. Center for Leadership and Ethics The Social Enterprise Program W. Edwards Deming Center for Quality, Productivity and Competitiveness Lorne Abony, MBA 2003, owner of the Austin Aces; former CEO of Mood Media Robert Agostinelli, MBA 1981, Billionaire Founder of Rhône Group Mitch Albom, MBA, American best-selling author, journalist, screenwriter, Tuesdays with Morrie, The Five People You Meet in Heaven Robert Amen, MBA 1973, Chairman and CEO of International Flavors and Fragrances César Alierta, MBA 1970, CEO of Telefónica Mauricio García Araujo, MBA, president of the Central Bank of Venezuela from 1987 to 1989 Matthew Asinari, (MMR 1982), former CEO of Dentsu Young & Rubicam, a merger of Dentsu and Young & Rubicam J.T. Battenberg, CEO of Delphi Automotive Systems Louis Bacon, MBA 1981, Billionaire Chairman of Moore Capital Management Koos Bekker, MBA 1984, Billionaire Chairman of South Africa-based multinational mass media company Naspers Prince Amedeo of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este, MBA 2014, member of the Belgian Royal Family Michael Bellavia, MBA 1999, CEO of Animax Entertainment Robert R. Bennett, MBA 1982, CEO of Liberty Media Corporation Wolfgang Bernhard, MBA 1988, Member of the Board of Management of Daimler AG Erskine Bowles, MBA 1969, Former White House Chief of Staff; President of the University of North Carolina system Warren Buffett, MS 1951, Billionaire CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Kevin Burke, MBA, Chairman and CEO of Consolidated Edison Arthur Burns, PhD 1934, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Paul Calello, MBA 1987, Chairman and CEO of Credit Suisse's investment banking division Jeff Campbell, MBA 1967 Former Chairman and CEO of Burger King Édouard Carmignac, MBA 1972, French investment banker and fund manager Russell Carson, MBA 1967, Founder of Welsh, Carson, Anderson & Stowe Tracey Chang, MBA 2011, China Central Television anchor; Miss New York USA in 2009 Max C. Chapman, MBA, Former President and CEO of Kidder, Peabody & Co. Jerome Chazen, MBA 1950, Co-founder of Liz Claiborne Penny Chenery, MBA, American sportswoman who bred and raced Secretariat, 1973 winner of the Triple Crown Howard L. Clark, Jr., MBA 1968, Chairman and CEO of Shearson Lehman Brothers Peter A. Cohen, MBA 1969, Chairman and CEO of Shearson Lehman Brothers Todd Combs, MBA 2002, hedge fund manager, tapped as a potential successor of Warren Buffett as CIO of Berkshire Hathaway Rocco B. Commisso, MBA 1975, Chairman and CEO of Mediacom David Philbrick Conner, MBA 1976, CEO of Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation Leon G. Cooperman, MBA 1967, Billionaire Founder, Chairman, and CEO of Omega Advisors Alexander Crutchfield, MBA 1984, Senior Managing Director of Oasis Partners Robert Daniel, MBA, United States Congressman from Virginia Charles A. Davis, MBA, CEO of Stone Point Capital John T. Dillon, MBA 1971, Chairman and CEO of International Paper David LeFevre Dodd, MS 1921, PhD 1930, Father of value investing Blair Effron, Founder of Centerview Partners Charles E. Exley, Jr., MBA 1954, Former Chairman and CEO of NCR Corporation Meyer Feldberg, MBA 1965, former president of the Illinois Institute of Technology and dean of Columbia Business School George Fellows, MBA, CEO of Callaway Golf Company Lewis Frankfort, MBA 1969, Chairman and CEO of Coach Michael Fries, MBA, CEO, Vice-Chairman of Liberty Global Keiko Sofia Fujimori, MBA 2006, Peruvian politician. Gen Fukunaga, MBA 1989, Founder and CEO of Funimation Entertainment Mario Gabelli, MBA 1967, Billionaire Chairman and CEO of GAMCO Gabriele Galateri di Genola, MBA 1972, Chairman of Assicurazioni Generali, former Chairman of Telecom Italia and CEO of Fiat Mark Gallogly, MBA 1986, Founder of Centerbridge Partners Julian Geiger, MBA, Former Chairman and CEO of Aeropostal Philip Geier, MBA 1958, Former Chairman and CEO of Interpublic Group of Companies Michael Goodkin, MBA 1968, Quantitative finance entrepreneur, founder of Arbitrage Management Company and Numerix James P. Gorman, MBA 1987, Chairman and CEO of Morgan Stanley Michael Gould, MBA 1968, Chairman and CEO of Bloomingdale's Ronald Grant, MBA, Former President and COO of AOL LLC Alexander Haig, MBA 1955, United States Secretary of State N. Robert Hammer, MBA, Chairman and CEO of CommVault Systems Ernest Higa, MBA 1976, Japanese-American entrepreneur Joan Hornig, MBA 1984, jewelry designer Walter E. Hussman, Jr., MBA, CEO of WEHCO Media and publisher of the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette Philippe Jabre, MBA 1981, CEO of Jabre Capital Partners Rachel Jacobs, MBA 2002, CEO of ApprenNet killed in the 2015 Philadelphia train derailment Philip J. K. James, MBA 2005, founding CEO of Lot18 and Snooth Mike Jeffries, MBA 1968, CEO of Abercrombie and Fitch Irving Kahn, MBA, oldest living active investment professional Elle Kaplan, MBA, Founder and CEO of LexION Capital Management Robert Kasten Jr., MBA 1966, U.S. Senator from Wisconsin 1981 to 1993. James W. Keyes, MBA 1980, CEO of Fresh & Easy and former Chairman and CEO of Blockbuster Inc., 7-Eleven Jamie Kern, MBA 2004, co-founder and CEO of It Cosmetics Martin Kihn, MBA, writer and digital marketer Timothy Kopra, MBA 2013, astronaut Henry Kravis, MBA 1969, Billionaire Founder of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. Sallie Krawcheck, MBA 1992, Chairman and CEO Sanford Bernstein Irvine Laidlaw, Baron Laidlaw, MBA 1965, Scottish businessman and member of the House of Lords Bill Lambert, MBA 1972, Co-Founder of Wasserstein Perella & Co. Eugene Lang, MS 1940, Chairman of the Eugene M. Lang Foundation Frank Lautenberg, BS 1949, U.S. Senator from New Jersey Leonard Lauder, MBA, Chairman emeritus of the Estée Lauder Companies; son of Estée Lauder Rochelle Lazarus, MBA 1970, Chairman and CEO of Ogilvy & Mather Jeffrey Loria, MBA, Owner of the Florida Marlins Emilio Lozoya, MBA, Secretary of Energy of Mexico; father of Pemex CEO Emilio Lozoya Austin Li Lu, MBA 1996, Chinese-American investment banker, fund manager, and investor; one of the student leaders of the Tiananmen Square student protests of 1989 William J. Lynch, Jr., MBA, CEO of Barnes & Noble Mauricio Macri, attended, incumbent Chief of Government of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires Mark Mays, MBA 1989, President and CEO of Clear Channel Communications Gail J. McGovern, EMBA 1987, CEO of the American Red Cross Nancy McKinstry, MBA, CEO and Chairman of the Executive Board of Wolters Kluwer Joern Meissner, PhD 2005, professor at Kühne Logistics University; founder of test-prep company Manhattan Review Yuzaburo Mogi, MBA 1961, Chairman and CEO of Kikkoman Paul Montrone, PhD, Chairman and CEO of Fisher Scientific Kohsuke Musha, MBA, McKinsey & Company David Neithercut, MBA 1982, CEO of Equity Residential Akinlabi Olasunkanmi, MBA, Nigerian Senator and Federal Minister of Youth Development Kenneth Ouriel, MBA, Former CEO of Shaikh Khalifa Medical City in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; vascular surgeon Christopher O'Neill, MBA 2005, British-American businessman and husband of Princess Madeleine of Sweden Vikram Pandit, MBA 1980, PhD 1986, CEO of Citigroup Alan Patricof, MBA 1957, Founder of Apax Partners Jean-Marc Perraud, MBA, Former CFO of Schlumberger Charles R. Perrin, MBA, Chairman of Warnaco; Former CEO of Duracell, Former CEO of Avon Products Lionel Pincus, MBA 1956, Founder and Chairman of Warburg Pincus Ian Plenderleith, MBA 1971, Former Deputy Governor, South African Reserve Bank Srikumar Rao, PhD 1980, speaker, author, creator of Creativity and Personal Mastery (CPM) course Mark Reckless, MBA, UK Independence Party politician; Member of parliament for Rochester and Strood Antony Ressler, MBA, billionaire, co-founder of the private equity firm Apollo Global Management and Ares Management Joyce M. Roche, MBA 1972, former CEO of Girls, Inc. and director of AT&T Xavier R. Rolet, MBA 1984, CEO of the London Stock Exchange Benjamin M. Rosen, MBA 1961, Former Chairman and CEO of Compaq David S. Rose, MBA 1983, American entrepreneur, founder of New York Angels Louis Rossetto, MBA, Founder and Editor-in-Chief of Wired Magazine David Sainsbury, MBA, Billionaire Chairman of Sainsbury's Arthur J. Samberg, MBA 1967, Chairman and CEO of Pequot Capital Thomas Sandell, MBA 1989, Swedish billionaire hedge fund manager David C. Schmittlein, PhD 1980, Dean of the MIT Sloan School of Management Keith Sherin, EMBA 1991, Chairman and CEO of GE Capital Shin Dong-bin(Akio Shigemitsu), MBA 1980, Billionaire Chairman of Lotte Group António Pedro dos Santos Simões, MBA, CEO of HSBC UK Anna Rawson, MBA 2015, Australian professional golfer and model Donna Rosato, MBA 2000, journalist, reporter for Money Magazine Jordan Roth, MBA 2010, president and majority owner of Jujamcyn Theaters Lewis A. Sanders, MBA 1995, former chairman and CEO of AllianceBernstein David E. Simon, Chairman and CEO of Simon Property Group Jerry Speyer, MBA 1964, Billionaire CEO of Tishman Speyer Properties Jon Steinberg, MBA 2003, President of BuzzFeed Robert J. Stevens, MBA 1987, Chairman and CEO of Lockheed Martin Patrick Stokes, MBA 1966, Former Chairman and CEO of Anheuser-Busch Henry Swieca, MBA 1982, Billionaire Co-Founder of Highbridge Capital Management, Founder of Talpion Diana Taylor, MBA 1980, 42nd Superintendent of the New York State Banking Department; domestic partner of former mayor Michael Bloomberg Sidney Taurel, MBA 1971, Chairman and CEO of Eli Lilly and Company Alfred P. Thorne, PhD 1958, British Guiana-born development economist Lynn Tilton, MBA, businesswoman; Collateralized loan obligation creator, owner, and manager; owner of Patriarch Partners, largest woman-owned business in the United States Umayya Toukan, PhD 1987, Governor of the Central Bank of Jordan Joseph M. Tucci, MBA 1984, President and CEO of EMC Corporation Ira Trivedi, MBA, Indian novelist, yoga teacher, and entrepreneur Percy Uris, BS 1920, American real estate developer and namesake of Uris Hall, the business school building of Columbia Martín Varsavsky, MBA 1985, Argentine/Spanish serial entrepreneur, founder of Jazztel, Ya.com and FON Eduardo Verano De la Rosa, MBA 1978, Columbian Governor of Atlántico Joseph Vittoria, MBA 1959, Former Chairman and CEO of Avis Robert K. Watson, MBA 2006, father of LEED rating system Eudora Welty, MBA 1930-31, American author, winner of the Pulitzer Prize in 1973; recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom Benjamin Wey, MBA 2013, Chinese-born American Wall Street financier and CEO of New York Global Group Gerri Willis, MBA, news journalist for Fox Business Network Peter Woo, MBA 1972, Billionaire Chairman of Hong Kong Trade and Development Council, Wheelock & Co, and The Wharf Holdings Limited Seungpil Yu, MBA 1971, PhD 1979, Chairman and CEO of Yuyu Pharma (South Korea) Columbia Business School 2008 CBS Employment Report "The Whiz Kids" – Forbes article about the MBA Class of 1969 regarded as one of the most successful of all time Keeping America Great – Warren Buffett and Bill Gates speak with students at Columbia Business School 90 Year Anniversary Website History, Highlights, Memories, and Downloads Berkeley-Columbia Executive MBA Program Homepage EMBA Global Program Homepage QS TopMBA: Top 100 Business Schools North America
