   Standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, and Serbian are different national variants and official registers of the pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language. Contents.   In socialist Yugoslavia, the official policy insisted on one language with two standard varieties—Eastern (used in Serbia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina by all ethnicities, either with the Ekavian or the Ijekavian accent) and Western (used in Croatia by all ethnicities, the Ijekavian accent only). However, due to discontent in Croatian intellectual circles, beginning in the late 1960s Croatian cultural workers started to refer to the language exclusively as 'the Croatian literary language', or sometimes 'the Croatian or Serbian language', as was common before Yugoslavia. The language was regarded as one common language with different variants and dialects. The unity of the language was emphasized, making the differences not an indicator of linguistic divisions, but rather factors enriching the 'common language' diversity. In addition, Yugoslavia had two other official languages on the federal level, Slovenian and Macedonian, reflecting Yugoslavia's acceptance of diversity with regards to language use. No attempts were made to assimilate those languages into the Serbo-Croatian language. With the breakup of the Federation, in search of additional indicators of independent and separate national identities, language became a political instrument in virtually all of the new republics. With a boom of neologisms in Croatia, an additional emphasis on Turkisms in the Muslim parts of Bosnia and a privileged position of the Cyrillic script in Serb-inhabited parts of the new states, every state and entity showed a 'nationalization' of the language. The language in Bosnia started developing independently after Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence in 1992. The independent development of the language in Montenegro became a topic among some Montenegrin academics in the 1990s. Serbian and Bosnian language standards tend to be inclusive, i.e. to accept a wider range of idioms and to use loanwords (German and Turkish), whereas the Croatian language policy is more purist and prefers neologisms (ÖNB). to loan-words, as well as the re-use of neglected older words. Yet there is criticism of the puristic language policy even in Croatia. These approaches are, again, due to the different cultural, historical and political development of the three variants and the societies they are found in. Though all of the language variants could theoretically use either, the scripts differ: All standard languages have the same set of 30 regular phonemes, so the Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian Latin and Serbian Cyrillic alphabets map one to one with one another and with the phoneme inventory. Some linguists analyze the yat reflexes  and , commonly realized as  in Croatian and Bosnian dialects, as a separate phoneme – "jat diphthong" – or even two phonemes, one short and one long. There are even several proposals by Croatian linguists for an orthography reform concerning these two diphthongs, but they have not been seriously considered for implementation. The ongoing standardization of Montenegrin has introduced two new letters,  and , for the sounds  and  respectively. These are optional spellings of the digraphs  and . Critics note that  and  are merely allophones of  and  in Herzegovinian dialects such as Montenegrin, so the new letters are not required for an adequate orthography Most dialects of Serbia originally lack the phoneme , instead having , , or nothing (silence).  was introduced with language unification, and the Serbian standard allows for some doublets such as snaja–snaha and hajde–ajde. However, in other words, especially those of foreign origin,  is mandatory. In some regions of Croatia and Bosnia, sounds for letters  (realized as  in most other dialects) and   merged or nearly merged, usually into . The same happened with their voiced counterparts, i.e.  and  merged into . As result, speakers of those dialects often have difficulties distinguishing these sounds. Serbian language usually phonetically transcribes foreign names and words (although both transcription and transliteration are allowed), whereas the Croatian standard usually transliterates. Bosnian also usually follows the Serbian model. Also, when the subject of the future tense is omitted, producing a reversal of the infinitive and auxiliary "ću", only the final "i" of the infinitive is orthographically elided in Croatian and Bosnian, whereas in Serbian the two have merged into a single word: In general, the Shtokavian dialects that represent the foundation of the four standard languages have four pitch accents on stressed syllables: falling tone on a short vowel, written e.g.  in dictionaries; rising tone on a short vowel, written e.g. ; falling tone on a long vowel, written e.g. ; and rising tone on a long vowel, written e.g. . In addition, the following unstressed vowel may be either short, , or long, . In declension and verb conjugation, accent shifts, both by type and position, are very frequent. The distinction between four accents and preservation of post accent lengths is common in vernaculars of western Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, in parts of Serbia, as well as in parts of Croatia with strong Serb immigration. In addition, a distinct characteristics of some vernaculars is stress shift to proclitics, e.g. phrase u Bosni (in Bosnia) will be pronounced  instead of  as in northern parts of Serbia. The northern vernaculars in Serbia also preserve the four-accent system, but the unstressed lengths have been shortened or disappeared in some positions. However, the shortening of post-accent lengths is in progress in all Shtokavian vernaculars, even in those most conservative in Montenegro. Stress shift to enclitics is, however, in northern Serbia rare and mostly limited to negative verb constructs (ne znam = I don't know > ). The situation in Croatia, is however, different. A large proportion of speakers of Croatian, especially those coming from Zagreb, do not distinguish between rising and falling accents.A Handbook of Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian, Wayles Brown and Theresa Alt, SEELRC 2004Lexical, Pragmatic, and Positional Effects on Prosody in Two Dialects of Croatian and Serbian, Rajka Smiljanic, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-97117-9 This is considered to be a feature of the Zagreb dialect, which has strong Kajkavian influence, rather than Standard Croatian. Regardless of vernacular differences, all three standard languages exclusively promote the Neo-Shtokavian four-accentual system. Both dialects that are considered to be the basis of Standard Serbian (Eastern Herzegovinian and Šumadija-Vojvodina dialects) have four accents. There are three principal "pronunciations" (izgovori/изговори) of the Štokavian dialect that differ in their reflexes of the proto-Slavic vowel jat vowel. Illustrated by the Common Slavic word for "child", dětę, they are: The Serbian language recognizes Ekavian and Ijekavian as equally valid pronunciations, whereas Croatian and Bosnian accept only the Ijekavian pronunciation. In Bosnia and Herzegovina (regardless of the official language) and in Montenegro, the Ijekavian pronunciation is used almost exclusively. Ikavian pronunciation is nonstandard, and is limited to dialectal use in Dalmatia, Lika, Istria, central Bosnia (area between Vrbas and Bosna), Western Herzegovina, Bosanska Krajina, Slavonia and northern Bačka (Vojvodina). So, for example: A few Croatian linguists have tried to explain the following differences in morphological structure for some words, with the introduction of a new vowel, "jat diphthong". This is not the opinion of most linguists. Sometimes this leads to confusion: Serbian poticati (to stem from) is in Croatian and Bosnian "to encourage". Croatian and Bosnian "to stem from" is potjecati, whereas Serbian for "encourage" is podsticati. Standard Bosnian allows both variants, and ambiguities are resolved by preferring the Croatian variant; this is a general practice for Serbian–Croatian ambiguities. The phoneme /x/ (written as h) has been volatile in eastern South Slavic dialects. In Serbian dialects, it has been replaced with /j/, /v/, or elided, and subsequent standardization sanctioned those forms: However, /x/ and /ɛf/ have been kept in many words as a distinct feature of Bosnian speech and language tradition, particularly under influence of Turkish and Arabic, and even introduced in some places where it etymologically did not exist. Those forms are now also accepted in standard Bosnian: Because the Ijekavian pronunciation is common to all official standards, it will be used for examples on this page. Other than this, examples of different morphology are: Also many internationalisms and transliterations are different: (cf. German organisieren,  konstruieren, analysieren) Historically, modern-age internationalisms entered Bosnian and Croatian mostly through German and Italian, whereas they entered Serbian through French and Russian, so different localization patterns were established based on those languages. Also, Greek borrowings came to Serbian directly, but through Latin into Croatian: Most of terms for chemical elements are different: for international names, Bosnian and Croatian use -ij where Serbian has -ijum (uranij–uranijum). In some native names, Croatian have -ik where Serbian has -(o)nik (kisik–kiseonik 'oxygen', vodik–vodonik 'hydrogen') and Bosnian accepts all variants. Yet others are totally different (dušik–azot 'nitrogen', kositar–kalaj 'tin'). Some element names are the same: srebro (silver), zlato (gold), bakar (copper). Some other imported words differ by grammatical gender, feminine words having an -a suffix and masculine words having a zero-suffix: In Serbian and Bosnian, the pronoun what is što when used as a relative, but šta when used as an interrogative; the latter applies also to relative sentences with interrogative meaning. Croatian uses što in all contexts. This is applicable only to the nominative and the accusative – in all other cases, the standards have the same forms: čega, čemu etc. for što. In Croatian, the pronoun who has the form tko, whereas in Serbian, Bosnian and Montenegrin it has ko. The declension is the same: kome, koga, etc. In addition, Croatian uses komu as an alternative form in the dative case. Usage of locative pronouns gd(j)e, kuda, and kamo differs between Serbian and Croatian (the latter not being used in Serbian): With modal verbs such as ht(j)eti (want) or moći (can), the infinitive is prescribed in Croatian, whereas the construction da (that/to) + present tense is preferred in Serbian. This subjunctive of sorts is possibly an influence of the Balkan sprachbund. Again, both alternatives are present and allowed in Bosnian (the first one is preferred in orthography, the latter is more common in colloquial language). The sentence "I want to do that" could be translated with any of This difference partly extends to the future tense, which in Serbo-Croatian is formed in a similar manner to English, using (elided) present of verb "ht(j)eti" → "hoću"/"hoćeš"/... > "ću"/"ćeš"/... as auxiliary verb. Here, the infinitive is formally required in both variants: However, when da+present is used instead, it can additionally express the subject's will or intention to perform the action: This form is more frequently used in Serbia and Bosnia. The nuances in meaning between two constructs can be slight or even lost (especially in Serbian dialects), in similar manner as the shall/will distinction varies across English dialects. Overuse of da+present is regarded as Germanism in Serbian linguistic circles, and it can occasionally lead to awkward sentences. However, Croatians seldom naturally use da+present form. Instead, a different form can be used to express will: (The sentence would sound more Croatian, but keep the same meaning, if it stated: "Želim to učiniti.", as "uraditi" is uncommon in Croatian). In interrogative and relative constructs, Croatian uses the interrogative participle li after the verb, whereas Serbian also allows forms with da li. (A similar situation exists in French, where a question can be formed either by inversion or using est-ce que, and can be stretched in English with modal verbs): In addition, non-standard je li ("Is it?"), usually elided to je l' , is vernacular for forming all kinds of questions, e.g. Je l' možeš?. In standard language, it is used only in questions involving auxiliary verb je (="is"): In summary, the English sentence "I want to know whether I'll start working" would typically read: although many in-between combinations could be met in vernacular speech, depending on speaker's dialect, idiolect, or even mood. In formal Croatian, verb trebati (need or should) is transitive, as in English. In Serbian and Bosnian, it is impersonal, (as French il faut, or English construct is necessary (to)); the grammatical subject is either omitted (it), or presents the object of needing; the person that needs something is an indirect grammatical object, in dative case. (Such usage is, however, also encountered in Croatian, especially spoken.):  The greatest differences between the standards is in vocabulary. However, most words are well understood, and even occasionally used, in the other standards. In most cases, common usage favors one variant and the other(s) are regarded as "imported", archaic, dialectal, or simply more rarely used. The preference for certain words depends on the speaker's geographic origin rather than ethnicity; for example, Serbs from Bosnia use "mrkva" and "hlače" rather than "šargarepa" and "pantalone". 1 Bosniak linguists claim that word "nogomet" is used in Bosnian (same as in Croatian); still, the form "fudbal" is in majority use among Bosniaks (see FK Sarajevo, FK Mladost Doboj Kakanj and FK Velež). Note that there are only a few differences that can cause confusion, for example the verb "ličiti" means "to look like" in Serbian and Bosnian, but in Croatian it is "sličiti"; "ličiti" means "to paint (a house)". The word "bilo" means "white" in the Ikavian accent, "pulse" in official Croatian, and "was" in all official languages, although it is not so confusing when pronounced because of different accentuation (bîlo or bílo = white, bı̏lo = pulse, bílo = was). In Serbian and Bosnian, the word izvanredan (extraordinary) has only the positive meaning (excellent), vanredan being used for "unusual" or "out of order"; however, only izvanredan is used in Croatian in both contexts. Also note that in most cases Bosnian officially allows almost all of the listed variants in the name of "language richness", and ambiguities are resolved by preferring the Croatian variant. Bosnian vocabulary writers based their decisions on usage of certain words in literary works by Bosnian authors. The months have Slavic-derived names in Croatian, wheres Serbian and Bosnian have almost the same set of international Latin-derived names as English. The Slavic-derived names may also be used in Bosnian, but the international names are preferred. The international names of the months are well understood in Croatia and are used in several fixed expressions such as Prvi Maj (May 1), Prvi April (April Fools' Day) or Oktobarska revolucija (October Revolution), although it is becoming more common to switch to Croatian names of the months. In spoken Croatian and in western Bosnia it is common to refer to a month by its number. Therefore, many speakers refer to the month of May as peti mjesec ("the fifth month"). Saying sedmi peti (seventh of fifth) would be the equivalent of May 7. Outside of a context where the month is already implied, such usage may lead to confusion. This is one of the arguments for claiming it is all one and the same language: there are more differences within the territories of the official languages themselves than there are between the standards (all three of which are based on the same Neo-Štokavian dialect). This is not surprising, of course, for if the lines between the varieties were drawn not politically but linguistically, then there would be no borders at all. As Pavle Ivić explains, the continuous migration of Slavic populations during the five hundred years of Turkish rule has scattered the local dialects all around. The following samples, taken from article 1 to 6 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, are "synonymous texts, translated as literally as possible" in the sense of Ammon designed to demonstrate the differences between the standard varieties treated in this article in a continuous text. Feature Croatian Bosnian Serbian English Opposition -u/e burza berza berza stock exchange porculan porculan porcelan porcelain Opposition -u/i tanjur tanjir tanjir plate Opposition -o/u barun baron baron baron Opposition -io/iju milijun milion/milijun milion million Opposition -i/je after l/t proljev proljev/proliv proliv diarrhoea stjecaj stjecaj/sticaj sticaj concurrence Opposition -s/z inzistirati insistirati insistirati insist Opposition -s/c financije finansije finansije finance Opposition -t/ć plaća plaća plata salary sretan sretan srećan happy Opposition -k/h kor hor hor choir kirurg hirurg hirurg surgeon Opposition -l/-o after o sol so so salt vol vo vo ox kolčić kočić/kolčić kočić stick Serbian often drops or does not add initial or medial 'h': čahura čahura čaura cartridge hrvač hrvač rvač wrestler hrđa hrđa rđa rust Serbian drops final 'r': jučer jučer juče yesterday večer večer veče evening također također takođe also English Ekavian Ijekavian Ikavian wind vetar vjetar vitar milk mleko mlijeko mliko to want hteti htjeti htiti arrow strela strijela strila But: small arrow strelica strelica strilica English Croatian Bosnian Serbian add by pouring* dolijevati dolijevati/dolivati* dolivati diarrhea proljev proliv/proljev proliv gulf, bay zaljev zaliv/zaljev zaliv to influence utjecati utjecati/uticati uticati English Serbian Bosnian and Croatian ear uvo uho fly muva muha to cook kuvati kuhati sister-in-law snaja snaha rust rđa hrđa English BosnianExamples are given by Rječnik bosanskog jezika. Sarajevo, 2007. Rječnik bosanskoga jezika. Sarajevo, 2010.  Croatian Serbian easy lahko or lako lako lako soft mehko or meko meko meko coffee kahva or kafa kava kafa balm mehlem or melem melem melem sheet čaršaf or čaršav plahta čaršav cage kafez or kavez kavez kavez moulder truhnuti or trunuti trunuti trunuti defect mahana or mana mana mana scarf mahrama or marama marama marama English Bosnian Croatian Serbian (Ijekavian) Montenegrin point tačka točka tačka tačka correct tačno točno tačno tačno municipality općina općina opština opština priest svećenik/sveštenik svećenik sveštenik svještenik male student student student student student female student studentica studentica studentkinja studentkinjastudentica male professor profesor profesor profesor profesor female professor profesorica profesorica profesorkaprofesorica profesorkaprofesorica scientist naučnik znanstvenik naučnik naučnik translator prevodilac, prevoditelj prevoditelj prevodilac prevodilac reader čitalac/čitatelj čitatelj čitalac čitalac But: assembly skupština skupština skupština skupština thinker mislilac mislilac mislilac mislilac diver ronilac ronilac ronilac ronilac teacher učitelj učitelj učitelj učitelj writer pisac/spisatelj pisac/spisatelj pisac/spisatelj pisac/spisatelj female writer spisateljica spisateljica spisateljicaspisateljka spisateljica English Bosnian Croatian Serbian to organize organiziratiorganizovati organizirati organizovati to construct konstruiratikonstruisati konstruirati konstruisati But: to analyse analizirati analizirati analizirati English Bosnian Croatian Serbian Note Armenia Armenija Armenija Jermenija Through Latin and Venetian in Croatian, through Greek in Serbian, through Turkish in Bosnian Athens Atina Atena Atina Bethlehem Betlehem Betlehem Vitlejem Crete Krit Kreta Krit Cyprus Kipar Cipar Kipar Europe Evropa Europa Evropa Jerusalem Jerusalem Jeruzalem Jerusalim Latvia Latvija Latvija Letonija Lithuania Litvanija Litva Litvanija Portugal Portugal Portugal Portugalija Romania Rumunija Rumunjska Rumunija Spain Španija Španjolska Španija chlorine hlor klor hlor diplomacy diplomatija diplomacija diplomatija impedance impedanca otpor impedansa All from French impédance,  Italianized ending in Croatian (cf. impedenza) But: license licenca licenca licenca Through Latin in all three tendency tendencija tendencija tendencija English Serbian Croatian Bosnian minute (n.) minut/minuta minuta minuta second (n.) sekund/sekunda sekunda sekunda But: planet planeta planet planeta comet kometa komet kometa territory teritorija teritorij teritorija mystery misterija misterij misterija English Bosnian and Serbian Croatian What did he say? Šta je rekao? Što je rekao? Ask him what he said. Pitaj ga šta je rekao. Pitaj ga što je rekao. What he said was a lie. To što je rekao je laž. To što je rekao je laž. English Bosnian and Serbian (Ijekavian) Croatian Montenegrin Where will you be? Gdje ćeš biti? Gdje ćeš biti? Đe ćeš biti? Where will you go? Gdje ćeš ići??(Gdje ćeš ići?) Kuda ćeš ići? Đe ćeš ići? Which way will you go? Kuda ćeš ići? Kamo ćeš ići? Kuda ćeš ići? Serbian and Bosnian English (literal trans.) Croatian English Petru treba novac. Money [is necessary] to Peter. Petar treba novac. Peter needs money. Ne trebam ti. I [am not necessary] to you Ne trebaš me. You don't need me. Treba da radim. (It) [is necessary] that I work. Trebam raditi. I should work. English Serbian Croatian Bosnian Montenegrin one thousand hiljada tisuća hiljada (preferred)  tisuća (allowed) hiljada JanuaryAll month names are different. See below for full table. januar siječanj januar (preferred)  siječanj (allowed) januar factory fabrika tvornica fabrikatvornica fabrika rice pirinačriža riža riža orizriža carrot šargarepamrkva mrkva mrkva šargarepamrkva trousers pantalone hlače hlačepantalone pantalonehlaće (dialectal, used in south) music muzika glazba muzika/glazba muzika library biblioteka knjižnica biblioteka bread hleb kruh hljeb/kruh hljeb/hleb millennium milenijum milenij milenij milenijum century vek stoljeće vijek/stoljeće vijek spinach spanać špinat špinat spanać football fudbal nogomet fudbalnogomet fudbal train voz vlak voz voz wave talasval (allowed) val valtalas valtalas person liceosoba osoba osoba osobalice uncivil nevaspitan neodgojen neodgojen nevaspitan one's own sopstvenovlastito osobnovlastito vlastitosopstveno vlastitosopstveno road putdrum cestaput cestaput putcesta road toll drumarinaputarina cestarina cestarina putarina But: dad tata tata tatababo tata tomato paradajz rajčica or paradajz paradajz paradajz English Serbian Croatian Bosnian to accept prihvatati prihvaćati prihvaćatiprihvatati happy, lucky srećan sretan sretan to comprehend shvatati shvaćati shvaćatishvatati But: to catch hvatati hvatati hvatati English !! Croatian !! Bosnian !! Serbian January siječanj januar januar February veljača februar februar March ožujak mart mart April travanj april april May svibanj maj maj June lipanj juni jun July srpanj juli jul August kolovoz august avgust September rujan septembar septembar October listopad oktobar oktobar November studeni novembar novembar December prosinac decembar decembar Croatian Bosnian Serbian English Opća deklaracija o pravima čovjeka Opća deklaracija o pravima čovjeka Opšta deklaracija o pravima čov(j)eka Universal Declaration of Human Rights Članak 1. Sva ljudska bića rađaju se slobodna i jednaka u dostojanstvu i pravima. Ona su obdarena razumom i sviješću i treba da jedno prema drugome postupaju u duhu bratstva. Član 1. Sva ljudska bića rađaju se slobodna i jednaka u dostojanstvu i pravima. Ona su obdarena razumom i sviješću i treba da jedno prema drugome postupaju u duhu bratstva. Član 1. Sva ljudska bića rađaju se slobodna i jednaka u dostojanstvu i pravima. Ona su obdarena razumom i sv(ij)ešću i treba da jedno prema drugome postupaju u duhu bratstva. Article 1. All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. Članak 2. Svakome su dostupna sva prava i slobode navedene u ovoj Deklaraciji bez razlike bilo koje vrste, kao što su rasa, boja, spol, jezik, vjera, političko ili drugo mišljenje, nacionalno ili društveno porijeklo, imovina, rođenje ili drugi pravni položaj.  Nadalje, ne smije se činiti bilo kakva razlika na osnovi političkog, pravnog ili međunarodnog položaja zemlje ili područja kojima neka osoba pripada, bilo da je to područje neovisno, pod starateljstvom, nesamoupravno, ili da se nalazi ma pod kojima drugim ograničenjima suverenosti. Član 2. Svakome su dostupna sva prava i slobode navedene u ovoj Deklaraciji bez razlike bilo koje vrste, kao što su rasa, boja, spol, jezik, vjera, političko ili drugo mišljenje, narodnosno ili društveno porijeklo, imovina, rođenje ili drugi pravni položaj.  Nadalje, ne smije se činiti bilo kakva razlika na osnovu političkog, pravnog ili međunarodnog položaja zemlje ili područja kojima neka osoba pripada, bilo da je ovo područje nezavisno, pod starateljstvom, nesamoupravno, ili da se nalazi ma pod kojim drugim ograničenjima suverenosti. Član 2. Svakome su dostupna sva prava i slobode navedene u ovoj Deklaraciji bez razlike bilo koje vrste, kao što su rasa, boja, pol, jezik, v(j)era, političko ili drugo mišljenje, narodnosno ili društveno por(ij)eklo, imovina, rođenje ili drugi pravni položaj. Nadalje, ne sm(ij)e da se čini bilo kakva razlika na osnovu političkog, pravnog ili međunarodnog položaja zemlje ili područja kojima neko lice pripada, bilo da je ovo područje nezavisno, pod starateljstvom, nesamoupravno, ili da se nalazi ma pod kojim drugim ograničenjima suverenosti. Article 2. Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.  Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty. Članak 3. Svatko ima pravo na život, slobodu i osobnu sigurnost. Član 3. Svako ima pravo na život, slobodu i ličnu sigurnost. Član 3. Svako ima pravo na život, slobodu i ličnu bezb(j)ednost. Article 3. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person. Članak 4. Nitko ne smije biti držan u ropstvu ili ropskom odnosu; ropstvo i trgovina robljem zabranjuju se u svim svojim oblicima. Član 4. Niko ne smije biti držan u ropstvu ili ropskom odnosu; ropstvo i trgovina robljem zabranjuje se u svim njihovim oblicima/formama. Član 4. Niko ne sm(ij)e da bude držan u ropstvu ili ropskom odnosu; ropstvo i trgovina robljem zabranjuje se u svim njihovim formama. Article 4. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms. Članak 5. Nitko ne smije biti podvrgnut mučenju ili okrutnom, nečovječnom ili ponižavajućem postupku ili kažnjavanju. Član 5. Niko ne smije biti podvrgnut mučenju ili okrutnom, nečovječnom ili ponižavajućem postupku ili kažnjavanju. Član 5. Niko ne sm(ij)e da bude podvrgnut mučenju ili okrutnom, nečovečnom ili ponižavajućem postupku ili kažnjavanju. Article 5. No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Članak 6. Svatko ima pravo da se svagdje pred zakonom priznaje kao osoba. Član 6. Svako ima pravo da se svagdje pred zakonom priznaje kao osoba. Član 6. Svako ima pravo da svuda bude priznat kao pravni subjekt. Article 6. Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law. Bosnian and Montenegrin use both Latin and Cyrillic. Croatian exclusively uses the Latin alphabet. Serbian uses both the Cyrillic and Latin scripts. Cyrillic is the official script of the administration in Serbia and Republika Srpska, but the Latin script is most widely used in media and especially on the Internet. "Uradit ću to." (Croatian/Bosnian) "Uradiću to." (Serbian/Montenegrin) dete in the Ekavian pronunciation dite in the Ikavian pronunciation dijete in the Ijekavian pronunciation Hoću to da uradim. Hoću to učiniti. Ja ću to uraditi. (I shall do that.) Ja ću to da uradim. (I will do that.) Ja hoću to uraditi. (I want to do that.) Možeš li? (Can you?) (spoken Croatian) Both Možeš li? and Da li možeš? (Can you, Do you can?) are common in Serbian. Je li moguće? (Is it possible?) (spoken Croatian) Both Je li moguće? and Da li je moguće? are common in Serbian. Želim da znam hoću li početi da radim. (spoken Serbian) Želim znati hoću li početi raditi. (spoken Croatian) Pronunciation and vocabulary differs among dialects spoken within Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia themselves. Each larger region has its own pronunciation and it is reasonably easy to guess where a speaker is from by their accent and/or vocabulary. Colloquial vocabulary can be particularly different from the official standards. When Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs talk amongst each other, the other speakers usually understand them completely, save for the odd word, and quite often, they will know what that means (much as with British and American English speakers). Nevertheless, when communicating with each other, there is a habit to use terms that are familiar to everyone, with the intent to avoid not being understood and/or confusion. For example, to avoid confusion with the names of the months, they can be referred to as the "first month", "second month" and so on, or the Latin-derived names can be used if "first month" itself is ambiguous, which makes it perfectly understandable for everyone. In Serbia, the names of the months are the international ones so again they are understandable for anyone who knows English or another Western European language. Even during the time of Yugoslavia it was common for publishers to do some adaptations to "Eastern" or "Western" standard. Especially translations were and are changed by the lectors. It is to be considered that Croatian and Serbian standards have completely different scientific terminology. Jung's masterpiece "Psychology and Alchemy" was translated into Croatian in 1986, and adapted in late 1990s into Serbian. Ivo Andrić had some problems in Croatia with publishers who changed his infinitive constructions and other expressions. Eventually, he managed to forbid that kind of intervention. In Montenegro, the publisher CID switched from the Ekavian to the Ijekavian accent after Montenegro's independence. Abstand and ausbau languages Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Montenegro Language secessionism in Serbo-Croatian Mutual intelligibility Pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language Serbo-Croatian Shtokavian dialect South Slavic dialect continuum Standard language
