   Coquitlam  (2011 census population 126,840) is a city in the Lower Mainland of British Columbia, Canada. Coquitlam, mainly a suburban city, is the sixth-largest city in the province and is one of the 21 municipalities comprising Metro Vancouver. The current mayor of Coquitlam is Richard Stewart.City of Coquitlam: [ ] 15 November 2014 The Coast Salish people were the first to live in this area, and archaeology confirms continuous occupation of the territory for at least 9,000 years. The name Kwikwetlem is said to be derived from a Coast Salish term meaning "red fish up the river".Kwikwetlem First Nation: History & Culture Retrieved on 5 March 2009 Explorer Simon Fraser came through the region in 1808, and in the 1860s Europeans gradually started settling the area. Coquitlam began as a "place-in-between" with the construction of North Road in the mid-19th century to provide Royal Engineers in New Westminster access to the year-round port facilities in Port Moody.City of Coquitlam: History and Heritage Retrieved on 15 February 2009 The young municipality got its first boost in 1889 when Frank Ross and James McLaren opened what would become Fraser Mills, a $350,000, then state-of-the-art lumber mill on the north bank of the Fraser River. The District of Coquitlam was incorporated in 1891. By 1908, a mill town of 20 houses, a store, post office, hospital, office block, barber shop, and pool hall had grown around the mill. A mill manager's residence was built that would later become Place des Arts.Fraser Mills: History Retrieved on 15 February 2009 Over the next two years, several contingents of French Canadian mill workers arrived from Quebec, and Maillardville was born. Named for Father Edmond Maillard, a young Oblate from France, it became the largest Francophone centre west of Manitoba. Maillardville's past is recognized today in street names, the Francophone education system and French immersion programs, French-language guides and scouts, and celebrations such as Festival du Bois.Festival du Bois Retrieved on 1 February 2009 Following World War II, Coquitlam and the rest of the Lower Mainland experienced substantial population growth that continues today. The opening of Lougheed Highway in 1953 made the city more accessible and set the stage for residential growth. In 1971, Coquitlam and Fraser Mills were amalgamated, which gave the city a larger industrial base. The mill closed in 2001, and is now rezoned into a residential area.CitySoup.ca: Coquitlam Regional History Retrieved on 15 February 2009 Coquitlam is situated some  east of Vancouver, where the Coquitlam River connects with the Fraser River and extends northeast along the Pitt River toward the Coquitlam and Pitt lakes. Coquitlam borders Burnaby and Port Moody to the west, New Westminster to the southwest, and Port Coquitlam to the southeast. Burke Mountain, Eagle Ridge, and  tall Coquitlam Mountain form the northern boundary of the city.City of Coquitlam: Location Retrieved on 1 February 2009CitySoup.ca: Topography and Geography Retrieved on 1 February 2009Canadian Mountain Encyclopedia: Coquitlam Mountain Retrieved on 4 March 2009 Coquitlam's area, , dwarfs the other communities in the Tri-Cities; it is about six times larger than either Port Moody or Port Coquitlam.CitySoup.ca: Land Use Patterns Retrieved on 15 February 2009 Like Vancouver, Coquitlam is in the Pacific Time Zone (winter UTC−8, summer UTC−7), and the Pacific Maritime Ecozone.TimeAndDate.com: Time zone in Coquitlam Retrieved on 1 February 2009Government of Canada: Pacific Maritime Ecozone Retrieved on 1 February 2009 Coquitlam's geographic shape can be thought of as a tilted hourglass, with two larger parcels of land with a smaller central section connecting them. Southwest Coquitlam comprises the original core of the city, with Maillardville and Fraser River industrial sector giving way to the large residential areas of Austin Heights, colloquially referred to as "The Bump" due to its high and flat plateau topography. These older residences, with larger property dimensions, are increasingly being torn down and replaced with newer and larger homes. The Poirier Street area was the city's original recreational centre with the Coquitlam Sports Centre, Chimo Aquatic and Fitness Centre, and sports fields located there, while City Hall was previously located further south in Maillardville.City of Coquitlam: City Profile Retrieved on 7 March 2009 The Austin Heights area contains Como Lake, a renowned urban fishing and recreation area, and headwaters for the Como watershed. The watershed represents one of the last urban watersheds in the Tri-Cities that supports wild stocks of coho salmon as well as other species at risk such as coastal cutthroat trout (both sea-run and resident) and bird species such as the great blue heron and green heron.Como Watershed Group: Background Retrieved on 15 February 2009  It also contains Mundy Park, one of the largest urban parks in the Metro Vancouver area.  In 1984, the provincial government sold  formerly attached to Riverview Hospital to Molnar Developments. Shortly afterward, this land was subdivided and became Riverview Heights, with about 250 single family homes. The remaining  of this still-active mental health facility has been the subject of much controversy between developers, environmentalists, and conservationists. In 2005, the city's task force on the hospital lands rejected the idea of further housing on the lands and declared that the lands and buildings should be protected and remain as a mental health facility.City of Coquitlam: Riverview Hospital Lands Retrieved on 15 February 2009 Coquitlam Town Centre, was designated as a "Regional Town Centre" under the Metro Vancouver’s Livable Region Strategic Plan. The concept of a town centre for the area dates back to 1975, and is intended to have a high concentration of high-density housing, offices, cultural, entertainment and education facilities to serve major growth areas of the region, served by rapid transit service. It is in the town centre that many public buildings can be found, including City Hall, a branch of the Coquitlam Public Library, R.C.M.P. station, Coquitlam's main fire hall, the David Lam Campus of Douglas College, the Evergreen Cultural Centre, City Centre Aquatic Complex, Town Centre Park and Percy Perry Stadium. Coquitlam Town Centre is currently undergoing an update of the Town Centre plan.City of Coquitlam: City Centre Area Plan Retrieved on 4 January 2009 In 1989, the provincial government sold  of second-growth forested land on the south slope of Eagle Mountain, known locally as Eagle Ridge, to developer Wesbild. This resulted in the closure of Westwood Motorsport Park in 1990, and the creation of Westwood Plateau, which was developed into 4,525 upscale homes, as well as two golf courses.Wesbild: Westwood Plateau Retrieved on 15 February 2009e-Tracks: Westwood Racing Circuit Retrieved on 15 February 2009 With development on Westwood Plateau completed and the opening of the David Avenue Connector in 2006, Coquitlam's primary urban development has now shifted to Burke Mountain in the northeastern portion of the city.City of Coquitlam: David Avenue Connector Retrieved on 15 February 2009Wesbild: Burke Mountain Retrieved on 15 February 2009Burke Mountain Homes Retrieved on 21 February 2011  Coquitlam Land Use (2001) Total : Like the rest of Metro Vancouver, Coquitlam has a maritime temperate climate, enjoying mild temperatures and sufficient precipitation; warm drier summers and wet mild winters. However, unlike other cities in the area, precipitation is especially heavy in Coquitlam due to its proximity to the mountain slopes. With westward air moving off the Pacific Ocean, the air is forced to flow up the Coast Mountains causing it to cool and condense and fall as precipitation, this process is known as orographic precipitation. The orographic effect is mainly responsible for the massive .) annual average precipitation that Coquitlam receives each year, with most falling as rainfall in the fall and winter months, with .) in November; the summer is usually sunny with minimal precipitation with .) in August. Although the mild temperatures allow for mostly rain to fall during the winter months, occasionally snow will fall. With slightly higher elevation compare to the rest of Metro Vancouver, Coquitlam can receive an average of .) of snow each year, with it rarely staying on the ground for more than a day or two, adding to a very intermittent snow cover during the winter season. On 29 December 1996 over 45&nbsp;cm of snow fell in just 24 hours. One of the most recent snowy winters was 2008–09, when in the last two weeks of December cold temperatures from an arctic front that had just seeped its way into the lower mainland and the Fraser valley collided with moist air from the pacific; almost  of snow fell in Coquitlam, resulting in an extreme snow cover (over 50cms) for Christmas and resulted major traffic and flight issues. In the first week of January 2009, sudden warmer temperatures starting with heavy wet snow and later transitioning into heavy rain from a pineapple express resulted in some flooding in low-lying areas near the Fraser river. As Coquitlam has a slightly higher elevation than most communities in Metro Vancouver most of the precipitation that fell in the first week of January 2009 was heavy wet snow that transitioned into rain much later, resulting in an even deeper snow pack notably for residents on Westwood Plateau where the elevation is anywhere from 100 to 400&nbsp;m above sea level. After the winter of 2008–09 ended, over 175&nbsp;cm of snow had fallen. Coquitlam is also located in the warmest region in Canada where average mean annual temperature is . Temperatures are warm during the summer months with an average high of , and an average low of  in August. During the winter months, the average high is , and the average low is  in January. This relatively mild climate, by Canadian standards, is caused by the warm Alaska current offshore and the many mountain ranges preventing the cold arctic air from the rest of Canada from reaching the southwest corner of British Columbia; however, occasionally it can fall well below freezing (below −5&nbsp;°C/−10&nbsp;°C) for a day or two during the winter.   In the 2011 Census, Statistics Canada originally reported that Coquitlam had a population of 126,456 living in 45,553 of its 48,083 total dwellings, a 10.4% change from its 2006 population of 114,565. Statistics Canada subsequently amended the 2011 census results to a population of 126,840 living in 45,743 of its 48,289 total dwellings, a 10.7% change from 2006. With a land area of , it had a population density of  in 2011. According to the 2006 Canadian census, there were 114,565 people living in the municipality in 43,241 private dwellings. 37% of households contained a married couple with children, 25% contained a married couple without children, and 22% were one-person households. Of the 32,185 reported families: 77% were married couples with an average of 3.2 persons per family, 15% were lone-parents with an average of 2.5 persons per family, and 8% were common-law couples with an average of 2.6 persons per family. The median age of Coquitlam’s population was 39.0 years, slightly younger than the British Columbia median of 40.8 years. Coquitlam had 82.6% of its residents 15 years of age or older, less than the provincial average of 83.5%.Statistics Canada: 2006 Census Highlights for Coquitlam Retrieved on 25 February 2009 The south part of Coquitlam has a pocket of French speakers. In the same 2006 census, about 41% of Coquitlam residents were foreign-born, much higher than the 27% foreign-born for the whole of British Columbia. 61% of respondents claimed to not be a visible minority, while the largest visible minorities included Chinese (17.2%), Korean (5.3%), South Asian and West Asian (both 3.7%), and Filipino (2.7%). 58% of respondents list English as their mother tongue, while 96% state having knowledge of English. Also according to the 2006 census, the median income in 2005 for all families was $67,031, compared to the provincial average of $62,346. 55.7% of respondents 15 years of age and older claim to have a post-secondary certificate, diploma or degree, compared to 52.2% province-wide. The 2001 census found that 20.2% of Coquitlam residents are Protestant and 21.6% are Catholic. 10.8% belong to other Christian denominations, 8.6%  are adherents of other religions, and 35% profess no religion. Only 25.3% of Coquitlam residents who work outside the home work within the city of Coquitlam itself, just over half the provincial average of 48.7% of residents who work within their own municipality, yet 18.2% of Coquitlam residents take public transit or bicycle or walk to work, close to the provincial average of 19.2%. The three most commonly spoken mother tongues reported in Coquitlam as of the 2011 census were Korean (6.1%), Persian (Farsi) (4.9%) and Mandarin (4.7%).[ ], Focus on Geography Series, 2011 Census-Census subdivision of Coquitlam, CY - British Columbia As a bedroom community, the majority of Coquitlam residents commute to work in Vancouver, Burnaby, and other Metro Vancouver suburbs. Coquitlam's main industrial area lies in the southern Maillardville/Fraser Mills area near the Fraser River. Among the largest employers within Coquitlam are the City of Coquitlam with approximately 850 employees, Art in Motion with approximately 750 employees, and Hard Rock Casino with approximately 600 employees.City of Coquitlam: Business Retrieved on 1 March 2009Great Canadian Casinos: Boulevard Casino Quarterly Results 13 February 2006 Other major employers include Coca-Cola, Sony, and the Marine Propulsion division of Rolls-Royce.CitySoup.ca: Coquitlam Employers Retrieved on 22 February 2009Rolls-Royce: Canada Retrieved on 29 March 2009 In 2007, there were 610 retail businesses in Coquitlam, and these provided 8,765 jobs (27% of all jobs) within the city. Most retail businesses are concentrated around Coquitlam Centre in the Town Centre area, and big-box retailers such as IKEA and The Home Depot in the Pacific Reach areas, with the remainder of the city's retail outlets centered around the Austin Heights and North Road sectors.City of Coquitlam: Retail Retrieved on 1 March 2009  The Tri-Cities Chamber of Commerce has over 900 members including businesses, professionals, residents and other community groups, governed by a 14-person volunteer Board of Directors.Tri-Cities Chamber of Commerce: Information Retrieved on 1 March 2009   Federal - Coquitlam is represented by two federal MP's in the Parliament of Canada. Fin Donnelly (New Democratic Party) represents the Port Moody—Coquitlam riding, while Ron McKinnon (Liberal Party) represents Coquitlam—Port Coquitlam.CBC: [ ] Retrieved on 14 November 2015 Provincial - Coquitlam is represented by three provincial MLA's in the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia. Linda Reimer (British Columbia Liberal Party) represents the Port Moody-Coquitlam riding, while Douglas Horne (BC Liberals) represents Coquitlam-Burke Mountain, and Selina Robinson (BC NDP) represents Coquitlam-Maillardville.Elections BC: 2013 Voting Results Retrieved on 24 October 2013 Municipal - In the 2014 civic election, Richard Stewart was elected as mayor of Coquitlam, and Craig Hodge, Terry O'Neill, Brent Asmundson, Dennis Marsden, Mae Reid, Teri Towner, Bonita Zarrillo and Chris Wilson were all elected to Coquitlam City Council. Coquitlam contracts out garbage and recycling services to International Paper Industries for city residents, but local businesses are responsible for their own garbage and recycling arrangements.City of Coquitlam: Garbage and Recycling Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Coquitlam Lake provides residents with a mountain-fed water source, while the city maintains its own sewage management system.City of Coquitlam: Water and Sewer Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Judicial - Supreme Court of British Columbia cases in the Lower Mainland are handled through the Vancouver Law Courts. Provincial Court of British Columbia cases were formerly handled through the Coquitlam Provincial Court, but this was closed in 1996 and moved to the new Port Coquitlam Provincial Court.BC Attorney General: Courts Retrieved on 1 March 2009Port Coquitlam BIA: History Retrieved on 1 March 2009   Coquitlam is served by School District 43 Coquitlam, and offers four public secondary schools, seven middle schools, and dozens of elementary schools. Francophone education in the Tri-Cities is offered by Conseil Scolaire Francophone de la Colombie-Britannique.School District 43: Schools Retrieved on 1 February 2009 Conseil Scolaire Francophone de la Colombie-Britannique Retrieved on 17 February 2009 Coquitlam Town Centre is home to the 4,000-student David Lam Campus of Douglas College, which offers university transfer, career-training and academic-upgrading programs. Therapeutic Recreation, Hotel and Restaurant Management, and Animal Health Technology programs are housed in the original main campus building. The $39 million Health Sciences Centre opened in 2008, with state-of-the-art facilities for Nursing, Psychiatric Nursing and other health-career programs.Douglas College: David Lam Campus Retrieved on 3 March 2009 There are two major universities, University of British Columbia and Simon Fraser University, located in the nearby municipalities. The British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) in neighbouring Burnaby provides polytechnic education and grants degrees in several fields. Vancouver is also home to the Emily Carr University of Art and Design and the Vancouver Film School.WebLibrary.ca: Lower Mainland Post-Secondary Institutions Retrieved on 4 January 2009 The Coquitlam Public Library has two branches: City Centre and Poirier. The library has a collection of over 240,000 items, and an annual budget of over $4 million.Coquitlam Public Library: 2007 Annual Report Retrieved on 3 March 2009    Coquitlam is served by TransLink, which is responsible for both public transit and major roads. There is regular bus service on numerous lines running throughout the city and connecting it to other municipalities in Metro Vancouver, with a major exchange at Coquitlam Central Station. The 97 B-Line express bus service connects the central part of the city to the Lougheed Town Centre SkyTrain station in neighbouring Burnaby.TransLink: 97 B-Line Retrieved on 12 February 2009 The West Coast Express, with a stop at Coquitlam Central Station, provides commuter rail service west to downtown Vancouver and east as far as Mission.West Coast Express: Coquitlam Central Station Retrieved on 12 February 2009 WCE operates Monday to Friday only (excluding holidays), with five trains per day running to Vancouver in the morning peak hours and returning through Coquitlam in the evening peak hours. There are two additional runs via "TrainBus" in the morning (after all trains) and three in the evening (after all trains). There are also three TrainBus departures in each direction on Saturdays and two on Sundays.West Coast Express: Schedule Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Beginning in 2017, Coquitlam will be served by the Evergreen Line, a  long extension of TransLink's SkyTrain system, using Bombardier's Advanced Rapid Transit technology, at a cost of $1.4 billion. The Evergreen Line will run from the Coquitlam Town Centre area, through Coquitlam Central Station and into Port Moody, re-entering Coquitlam on North Road and finally joining the existing SkyTrain system at Lougheed Town Centre. The Evergreen Line is expected to replace the 97 B-Line.TransLink: Evergreen Line Retrieved on 12 February 2009 For motorists, the Trans-Canada Highway provides freeway access to Burnaby, Vancouver, Surrey, and other municipalities in the Lower Mainland. Lougheed Highway is an alternative route to the Trans-Canada, entering Coquitlam through Maillardville, past the Riverview Hospital area, up to Coquitlam Centre where it turns sharply east to Port Coquitlam. Barnet Highway begins at the Coquitlam Centre area and heads directly east through Port Moody and on to Burnaby and downtown Vancouver.City of Coquitlam: Road Network Plan Retrieved on 12 February 2009 Coquitlam has 13.1&nbsp;km of bike routes, including dedicated bike lanes on Guildford Way, David Avenue, and Chilko Drive, plus additional routes through city parks.City of Coquitlam: Bicycle Network Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Future bike routes have been identified for Lougheed Highway and for the southern Maillardville area near the Fraser River.City of Coquitlam: Bike Routes Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Coquitlam is served by two international airports. Vancouver International Airport, located on Sea Island in the city of Richmond to the west, is the second busiest in Canada and provides most of the air access to the region. Abbotsford International Airport, located to the east, is the sixth busiest airport in Canada. Nearby Pitt Meadows Airport provides services for smaller aircraftBritishColumbia.com: Airports Retrieved on 12 February 2009Vancouver Sun: Abbotsford Airport Faces Major Expansion 20 June 2006 and there are also Boundary Bay Airport and Langley Airport for small aircraft. Greyhound Canada has a bus depot in south Coquitlam for both passenger and package service.Greyhound: Coquitlam Retrieved on 12 February 2009 Residents and visitors wishing to travel to Vancouver Island, the Gulf Islands, and other destinations along the Inside Passage may use the BC Ferries car and passenger ferry service from two terminals in the communities of Tsawwassen and Horseshoe Bay, south and north of Vancouver respectively. BC Ferries operates the Queen of Coquitlam, a C class ferry capable of carrying 362 cars and 1,466 passengers, which was launched in 1976. She received an $18 million rehabilitation in November 2002, and currently operates as a secondary vessel on the Departure Bay-Horseshoe Bay route.BC Ferries: Queen of Coquitlam Retrieved on 9 February 2009  Coquitlam is served by Fraser Health, which operates the 106-bed Eagle Ridge Hospital on the Port Moody/Coquitlam city boundary. ERH opened its doors in 1984 and operates a 24-hour emergency department, ambulatory, long-term care and acute care programs. It is a Centre of Excellence for elective surgery for urology, gynaecology, plastics and orthopedics. The hospital also offers public education clinics for asthma, diabetes, rehabilitation services and programs for cardiology, children's grief recovery, youth crisis response and early psychosis prevention.Fraser Health: Tri-Cities Retrieved on 4 January 2009  Fraser Health also operates the 352-bed Royal Columbian Hospital just south of Coquitlam in New Westminster. Coquitlam residents are also served by many privately owned health care clinics, while Tri-Cities Health Services operates 653 residential care beds.Fraser Health: Tri-Cities Community Profile Retrieved on 4 January 2009  Coquitlam is also the home of Riverview Hospital, a large mental health facility, operating under the governance of BC Mental Health & Addiction Services. Riverview opened in 1913 and had 4,630 patients at its peak, but advances in treatment and cutbacks in funding have resulted in fewer people receiving mental health care, and much of the facility has closed over the last few decades.BCMHAS: History Retrieved on 22 February 2009  Coquitlam contracts out its police service to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, with the main police station adjacent to City Hall at Coquitlam Town Centre and community police stations in the Austin Heights and Burquitlam areas. The Coquitlam RCMP detachment also serves the municipalities of Anmore, Belcarra, and Port Coquitlam.Royal Canadian Mounted Police: RCMP in B.C. Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Coquitlam has its own fire service, known as Coquitlam Fire and Rescue, with three main fire halls and three auxiliary stations. The main fire halls are at Town Centre, Austin Heights and Mariner Way near Mundy Park. The auxiliary halls are on Burke Mountain, Mariner Station, and Austin station.City of Coquitlam: Fire and Rescue Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Like all other municipalities in British Columbia, Coquitlam's ambulance service is run by the British Columbia Ambulance Service.BC Ambulance Service: Municipalities Guide Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Coquitlam Search and Rescue is a volunteer search and rescue team operating under the Provincial Emergency Program. Coquitlam SAR is responsible for urban and wilderness search and rescue for the area between Indian Arm and Pitt Lake, and encompasses the local communities of Coquitlam, Burnaby, Port Coquitlam, Port Moody, New Westminster, Belcarra and Anmore. The SAR team is based at Town Centre Fire Hall.Coquitlam Search and Rescue Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Being in close proximity to Vancouver and surrounded by the rest of the Lower Mainland, Coquitlam residents have access to virtually unlimited choice in cultural and leisure activities. Within the city itself are numerous venues that bring these choices closer to home. Coquitlam was designated as a Cultural Capital of Canada in 2009 by the Department of Canadian Heritage.Canadian Heritage: 2009 Cultural Capitals of Canada Retrieved on 10 February 2009 The Theatre, a 1,074-seat multi-purpose venue, opened as part of a $30 million expansion to Coquitlam's Hard Rock Casino in 2006, while Cineplex Entertainment operates the 4,475-seat SilverCity Coquitlam movie complex with 20 screens.BC Economic Development: September 2006 Retrieved on 17 February 2009Simon Fraser University: Red Robinson Show Theatre Retrieved on 11 February 2009Canada.com: Older Tri-Cities Movie Complex Closes 9 November 2007  A partnership of the city, the arts community, private business and senior governments, the Evergreen Cultural Centre in the Town Centre area is a venue for arts and culture, a civic facility designed to host a wide variety of community events. It features a 264-seat black box theatre, rehearsal hall, art studios and art gallery. Evergreen serves as the home venue for the Pacific Symphonic Wind Ensemble, the Coastal Sound Music Academy, and the Stage 43 Theatrical Society. Nearby proscenium theatres include the 336-seat Terry Fox Theatre in Port Coquitlam, and the 206-seat Inlet Theatre in Port Moody.BC Touring Council: Venues Retrieved on 11 February 2009 Place des Arts is a non-profit teaching arts centre in Maillardville founded in 1972, offering programs in visual arts, music, acting, and dance. It features specialized programs for school students and home learners, and presents concerts and exhibitions for the public. Studios are offered for pottery, fibre arts, yoga, ballet, drama, piano, drawing and painting. Place des Arts offers four faculty concerts throughout the year, as well as numerous recitals and presentations by students on an ongoing basis.Place des Arts: Mission Retrieved on 3 March 2009 Place Maillardville is a community centre providing leisure activities for all age groups, with programs on French language, culture, as well as physical activities. Heritage Square offers visitors a wealth of historic sites, gardens, a bike path, and an outdoor amphitheatre; it is also home to the Mackin Heritage Home & Toy Museum.City of Coquitlam: Cultural Centres  Retrieved on 11 February 2009  Coquitlam has a considerable number of open green spaces, with the total area of over . There are over 80 municipal parks and natural areas, with Mundy Park located roughly in the centre of the city being the biggest, and Ridge Park located in the highlands near the city's northern edge. Pinecone Burke Provincial Park, Minnekhada Regional Park, and Pitt Addington Marsh are on the northern and eastern border of the city, while the restricted area of the Metro Vancouver's Coquitlam watershed border Coquitlam to the north. Colony Farm is a 404 hectare park that straddles the Coquitlam and Port Coquitlam boundaries, offering walking trails rich with wildlife and gardens. Town Centre Park is a large city park located in the central area of the city, it provides city residents with many recreational activities.City of Coquitlam: Parks and Trails Retrieved on 1 February 2009CitySoup.ca: Parks and Recreation Facilities Retrieved on 9 February 2009 Como Lake Park is also popular with local residents. Coquitlam does not have any beaches within the city limits, but the Tri-Cities offers freshwater beaches in neighbouring Anmore (Buntzen Lake, Sasamat Lake) and saltwater beaches in Belcarra and Port Moody.BritishColumbia.com: Belcarra Regional Park Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Numerous yearly festivals are staged at various locations throughout Coquitlam,CitySoup.ca: Festivals Retrieved on 9 February 2009 including Festival du Bois (first full weekend in March),Festival du Bois Retrieved on 9 February 2009 the Water's Edge Festival (third full weekend in March),Water's Edge Festival Retrieved on 10 May 2009 Como Lake Fishing Derby (last Sunday in May),Festival Coquitlam: Como Lake Fishing Derby Retrieved on 9 February 2009  BC Highland Games (last Saturday in June),BC Highland Games Retrieved on 9 February 2009 a Canada Day Celebration at Town Centre Park (July 1), and the Blue Mountain Music Festival (mid-July).Festival Coquitlam: Blue Mountain Music Festival Retrieved on 9 February 2009  Professional sports teams in the area include the Vancouver Canucks (National Hockey League), BC Lions (Canadian Football League), Vancouver Whitecaps FC (Major League Soccer), and the Vancouver Canadians (Northwest League baseball). The 2010 Winter Olympics were also staged in the Metro Vancouver and Whistler areas.About.com: Vancouver Sports Retrieved on 4 January 2009    The city is responsible for the maintenance of numerous sports and recreation fields, including 40 grass/sand/soil sports fields, five FieldTurf fields, 35 ball diamonds, several all-weather surfaces, a bowling green, a croquet/bocce court, and a cricket pitch.City of Coquitlam: Sportsfields Retrieved on 4 January 2009 The city also operates Percy Perry Stadium and the Poirier Sport & Leisure Complex.City of Coquitlam: Coquitlam Sports Arena Retrieved on 4 January 2009 Privately owned Planet Ice features 4 additional ice rinks, and more rinks are found throughout the Tri-Cities.Arena Maps: British Columbia Arenas Retrieved on 31 January 2009 The city manages four all-age community centres (Centennial, Pinetree, Poirier, Summit), and two senior community centres (Dogwood Pavilion, Glen Pine Pavilion).City of Coquitlam: Community centres Retrieved on 1 February 2009 Baseball - The Coquitlam Reds of the B.C. Premier Baseball League play their home games at Mundy Park;BCPBL: Coquitlam Reds Home Field Retrieved on 26 March 2009 the Reds' most famous alumnus is former Major League All-Star and National League MVP Larry Walker.Sports Publishing: Larry Walker, Canadian Rocky by Tony DeMarco, Retrieved on 17 April 2009Coquitlam Now: Coquitlam urged to honour its top athletes in sports Hall of Fame Retrieved on 17 April 2009 Coquitlam is also home to Coquitlam Little League, which has been part of Little League International since 1955; Coquitlam finished 3rd at the 1984 Little League World Series.Little League World Series: 1984 Retrieved on 28 January 2010 In 2008, Coquitlam hosted the Junior League Canadian Championships.Coquitlam Little League Retrieved on 4 January 2009 Basketball - Coquitlam is home to the Tri City Youth Basketball Association; formed in 1999, it serves the Tri-Cities with over 1,400 players from grades 2 to 9.Tri City Youth Basketball Association Retrieved on 4 January 2009 The program is part of the Steve Nash Youth Basketball program administered by Basketball BC. It is open to both boys and girls, and operates out of school gyms across the Tri-Cities area.Steve Nash Youth Basketball Retrieved on 4 January 2009Basketball BC Retrieved on 4 January 2009 Cricket - Coquitlam is home to the Windies Cricket Club. The club consists of over 40 members with 3 adult teams playing in the Premier, Second & Fifth Divisions. The club is affiliated with the British Columbia Mainland Cricket League and games are played at Mackin Park. A youth Kanga Cricket Program was formed with the aim of promoting and growing the game of cricket in Coquitlam. The SuperStrikers cricket team is open to boys and girls aged 6 – 16.Windies Cricket Club Retrieved on 4 August 2009SuperStrikers Youth Cricket Club Retrieved on 4 August 2009 Football - Coquitlam is home to the Coquitlam Minor Football Association, which is a member of the Vancouver Mainland Football League. CMFA players range from 6 to 18 years of age, and play against teams from the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island. Coquitlam was also the home of the Tri-City Bulldogs of the Canadian Junior Football League from 1991-2004.Coquitlam Minor Football Association Retrieved on 1 March 2009 Golf - In addition to courses in neighbouring communities in the Tri-Cities, Coquitlam itself is home to several golf facilities. The Vancouver Golf Club, located in southwest Coquitlam, has hosted two major LPGA tour events as well as one Senior PGA Tour event. The Westwood Plateau Golf & Country Club is one of the highest rated golf courses in Canada. Both the Westwood Plateau Golf Academy and Eaglequest Golf Centre are designed as executive learning courses.Score Golf: Coquitlam Golf Courses Retrieved on 31 January 2009 Hockey - Founded in 2001, the Coquitlam Express of the British Columbia Hockey League play at the Poirier Sport & Leisure Complex.BCHL: Express return to Coquitlam receives go-ahead by BCHL Governors 14 January 2010Tri-City News: BCHL Express returning to Coquitlam from Burnaby 14 January 2010Canada.com: BCHL OK's Express' ticket to Coquitlam 15 January 2010 Coquitlam is also home to the Coquitlam Minor Hockey Association, a AAA club in the Greater Vancouver area in the Pacific Coast Division, with almost 1000 members from Initiation Hockey 1 to Juvenile.Coquitlam Minor Hockey Association Retrieved on 4 January 2009 Lacrosse - Coquitlam is home to the Coquitlam Adanacs of the Western Lacrosse Association, who play at the Poirier Sport & Leisure Complex, and to the Coquitlam Minor Lacrosse Association.Coquitlam Minor Lacrosse Association Retrieved on 4 January 2009 In July 2008, Percy Perry Stadium hosted the 2008 ILF Under-19 World Lacrosse Championships. Motorsports - Coquitlam was formerly home to Westwood Motorsport Park, Canada's first purpose-built permanent road course, located on what is now Westwood Plateau. The first race was held in 1959, and over the years hosted many different professional series including Formula Atlantic and Trans-Am. Notable drivers to have raced at Westwood include Formula One World Champion Keke Rosberg, Indianapolis 500 winners Bobby Rahal and Danny Sullivan, Gilles Villeneuve and Michael Andretti. The track finally closed in 1990 due to encroaching development,Modern Motorcycling: Westwood Motorsport Park Retrieved on 31 January 2009 and racing moved to Mission Raceway Park. Soccer -  The city is home to two major soccer associations, including the Coquitlam Metro-Ford Soccer Club which has over 2500 players that range from Under-5 to adult teams including the Women's Premier team which plays in the Pacific Coast Soccer League,Metro Ford Coquitlam Soccer Club Retrieved on 10 April 2011 and the North Coquitlam United Soccer Club.North Coquitlam United Soccer Club Retrieved on 4 January 2009 Swimming - City Centre Aquatic Complex is an indoor aquatic centre built in the Town Centre area at a cost of $8.2 million and opened in 1994. CCAC features a 50m Olympic size swimming pool, wave pool, waterslide,  fitness centre, and physiotherapy clinic. The Chimo Aquatic and Fitness Centre opened in 2008 in the Austin Heights area at a cost of $19.5 million, replacing the older Chimo Pool nearby.Tri-City News: Chimo pool project 10 March 2009 CAFC features a 25m swimming pool, a 20m lap pool, leisure pool, and fitness room. Coquitlam also operates three outdoor swimming pools (Eagle Ridge, Rochester, Spani), two outdoor wading pools (Blue Mountain, Mackin), and three outdoor splash pads (Blue Mountain, Panorama, Town Centre).City of Coquitlam: Swimming Pools Retrieved on 1 February 2009 Track and Field - Coquitlam is home to the Coquitlam Cheetahs track and field club, who train at Percy Perry Stadium, which was named after their former coach who died in 2005. In addition to the other Metro Vancouver media outlets, CKPM-FM was the first radio station dedicated to the Tri-Cities area when it took to the air in 2009.Canada.com: Radio Station Dials In Tri-Cities 11 July 2008 Coquitlam is served by two bi-weekly newspapers, the Tri-City News and Coquitlam Now.CitySoup.ca: Local News Retrieved on 4 January 2009 A significant number of movie and television productions have been partly or completely filmed in Coquitlam in recent years, including 2014's Godzilla, both New Moon and Eclipse from the Twilight series, The X-Files, Juno, Smallville, The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants, Dark Angel, The Day the Earth Stood Still, Romeo Must Die, and Watchmen.imdb.com: endings=on&&locations=Coquitlam,%20British%20Columbia,%20Canada&&heading=18;with+locations+including;Coquitlam,%20British%20Columbia,%20Canada Titles with locations including Coquitlam and Falling Skies Retrieved on 1 February 2009 The city maintains the Coquitlam Film Office to coordinate permits, traffic and crowd control, and insurance for film and television productions.City of Coquitlam: Film Industry Retrieved on 3 March 2009  Juno Award-winning rock musician Matthew Good is from Coquitlam. He graduated from Centennial Secondary in 1989, and became lead singer for the Matthew Good Band, one of Canada's most successful alternative rock bands in the 1990s. Centennial Secondary was featured in the "Alert Status Red" video, and its cheerleading squad recorded for "Giant".Canadaka.com: Matthew Good Retrieved on 12 February 2009 The Matthew Good Band was dissolved in 2002, and Good has since pursued a solo career and established himself as a political activist, blogger, and author of a book of previously published manifestos. Actor Taylor Kitsch graduated from Gleneagle Secondary in 1999,SD43: Taylor Kitsch retrieved on 25 July 2014 and went on to star in movies such as John Carter and Battleship, and the television series Friday Night Lights. Former FA Premier League goalkeeper Craig Forrest is from Coquitlam and attended Centennial Secondary. Forrest appeared in 263 games for Ipswich Town, 30 games for West Ham United, and 3 games for Chelsea. Forrest also earned 56 caps for the Canadian national soccer team, the most of any goalkeeper in team history, and earned the most clean sheets in the country's history. Forrest was elected to Canada’s Soccer Hall of Fame in 2007.CSA: Forrest Named Honorary Chair of WYC 2007 Retrieved on 4 May 2005 CSA: Forrest to Soccer Hall of Fame 4 December 2006 Current Canadian national soccer team midfielder Jeff Clarke and Canadian women's national soccer player Brittany Timko also both attended Centennial Secondary.PaulStalteri.com: Jeff Clarke Retrieved on 15 March 2009CSA: Brittany Timko Retrieved on 12 February 2009  Former National Basketball Association player Lars Hansen was raised in Coquitlam and played his high school basketball at Centennial Secondary. He was a member of the Seattle SuperSonics 1979 NBA Championship team, and was elected to the Canadian Basketball Hall of Fame in 2008.Canada Basketball: 2006 Hall of Fame Inductees 9 January 2008 Model and host of MTV Select and G4techTV Amanda MacKay also attended Centennial Secondary where she started her journalism career writing for the school's student newspaper. American political analyst and former Fox News co-host, Rachel Marsden, was raised in Northeast Coquitlam's Burke Mountain area.Vancouver Province: Rachel Marsden dumped Retrieved on 12 February 2009 Former BC Lions placekicker Lui Passaglia has resided in Coquitlam for over 20 years.Richard Stewart: Endorsements Retrieved on 15 March 2009  Passaglia is a member of the Canadian Football Hall of Fame, and his #5 jersey is one of eight numbers retired by the Lions.BC Lions: Retired Numbers Retrieved on 15 March 2009 Passaglia was voted #30 of the CFL's Top 50 players of the modern era by Canadian sports network TSN.TSN: Top 50 CFL Players Retrieved on 15 March 2009 Playboy Playmate and actress Dorothy Stratten was raised in Coquitlam and attended Centennial Secondary School. Stratten was Playmate of the Year for 1980. She appeared in several movies, including Peter Bogdanovich's They All Laughed, before she was murdered by her estranged husband. Stratten was portrayed twice in biographies of her life, by Jamie Lee Curtis in Death of a Centerfold: The Dorothy Stratten Story, and by Mariel Hemingway in Star 80.American Legends: Dorothy Stratten Retrieved on 13 February 2009 Spoken word poet Chris Tse was raised in Coquitlam though he is based in Ottawa. He was captain of the Ottawa spoken word team that won the Canadian Festival of Spoken Word championships and also placed second overall in the Poetry Slam World Cup in Paris, France.FROM THE PRINT EDITION: A Q&A with slam poetry champion Chris Tse. Ottawa Magazine (12 October 2010). Retrieved on 12 April 2014. Iconic Filipino pop and jazz singer, musician, lyricist, and songwriter Joey Albert is a Coquitlam resident, where she spearheaded fundraising efforts for Typhoon Haiyan. Tickets to her shows were by donation to the Canadian Red Cross."Typhoon Relief: Coquitlam Residents Cook, Sing To Help Out", Huffington Post Canada Coquitlam currently has Sister City relationships with the following:Government of B.C.: Twinnings Retrieved on 15 February 2009    Canada 2011 Census!! Population !! % of Total Population !! % of Non-official language Population English 68,700 54.9 N/A Korean 7,600 6.1 13.9 Persian 6,100 4.9 11.1 Mandarin 5,855 4.7 10.7 Cantonese 5,810 4.6 10.6 Chinese-n.o.s. 5,750 4.6 10.5 French 1,420 2.6 N/A Agricultural Land  Extractive Industry  Harvesting and Research  Residential Single Family  Rural  Town/Low-rise  High-rise  Commercial  Industrial  Institutional  Transport. Comm., Utilities  Recreation / Nature Areas  Open / Undeveloped  GVRD Watershed   Laizhou, People's Republic of China  Ormoc City, Philippines  Paju, South Korea Tri-Cities Metro Vancouver Lower Mainland City of Coquitlam
