 Cornwall is a city in eastern Ontario, Canada, and the seat of the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry. Cornwall is Ontario's easternmost city, located on the Saint Lawrence River, in the Quebec City–Windsor Corridor along Ontario Highway 401, and is the urban centre for surrounding communities, including Long Sault and Ingleside to the west, Mohawk Territory of Akwesasne to the south, St. Andrew's and Avonmore to the north, and Glen Walter, Martintown, Williamstown, and Lancaster to the east. Cornwall lies on the 45th parallel, approximately  southeast of Ottawa,  the national capital,  southwest of Montreal, Quebec's largest city, and  northeast of Toronto, the provincial capital and Canada's largest city. It is named after the English Duchy of Cornwall; the city's coat of arms is based on that of the duchy with its colours reversed and the addition of a "royal tressure", a Scottish symbol of royalty. Aboriginal peoples have lived in and around the area of present day Cornwall for millennia. The first serious European settlement was established in 1784, by United Empire Loyalists, primarily from New York. Disbanded soldiers and their families began to settle at the site of Cornwall, then called New Johnstown.http://www.heritagefdn.on.ca/userfiles/HTML/nts_1_5946_1.html Ontario Heritage Trust Founding of Cornwall They were led by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir John Johnson and were soldiers from the First Battalion King's Royal Regiment of New York and a contingent of the 84th Royal Highland Emigrants. Following the success of rebellious colonists in the American Revolution, the United Empire Loyalists (as they were later called) migrated to Canada. The British government helped them settle there in reward for their loyalty and compensation for their losses in the United States. They founded a settlement on the site formerly called Pointe Maligne by French colonists and renamed it "Royal Settlement #2", and then "New Johnstown". It was later renamed Cornwall by the British for the Duke of Cornwall, by proclamation of Prince George, and in 1834 the town became one of the first incorporated municipalities in the British colony of Upper Canada.5 Star Flags The construction of the Cornwall Canal between 1834 and 1842 accelerated the community's development into a regional and industrial economic "capital" for a growing hinterland of towns and villages. Canal and lock construction in the late 1800s and early 1900s brought work international business. Railway connections, beginning in the 1850s, provided connections between Cornwall and local communities that required to access public services in Cornwall, such as highschools and medical services, and helped cement Cornwall's position as a regional centre.http://lostvillages.ca/history/the-lost-villages/mille-roches/ Situated west of Cornwall, along the St. Lawrence River, were several smaller communities. Now known as the Lost Villages, the communities were permanently flooded in 1958 by the construction of the St. Lawrence Seaway. The massive Moses-Saunders Power Dam at the western end of the city required a reservoir, and the villages were flooded when it was filled. Eastern Ontario has always been a highway or corridor through which people moved, a corridor used by migration and conquest. Prior to European colonization, the Mohawks and Six Nations Iroquois settled and raided through the St. Lawrence valley.Akwesasne#History The French and British fought over the waterway, and after the American revolution, in 1812–14 it became a battleground between Americans and Canadians.http://www.choosecornwall.ca/live-in-cornwall/history/cornwall-and-the-war-of-1812/ Formally founded to be a new home for refugees, it remained a home for refugees and migrants for much of its history. Early settlement of the region is largely undocumented, though oral histories and early accounts suggest that settlers, traders and farmers existed in the area long before formal recognition. The post-contact regional population was a mixture of French Canadian, Ojibwe and Mohawk residents. To this was added an influx of American English loyalists and refugees from the Thirteen Colonies (now the United States), French Canadian and Acadian migrants, and later, poor Scottish and Irish immigrants and refugees. These different groups mixed and integrated over time, with family names and histories reflecting a blending of different backgrounds that was typical of Eastern Ontario.http://www.sunypress.edu/pdf/60871.pdfhttp://www.ontarioarchaeology.on.ca/summary/english.htm Smaller but nevertheless impressive contributions in the region were made by everyone from Jewish traders, craftsmen and merchants, Eastern European refugees and even former slaves. Many of these stories go unreported. A good example is John Baker, who died in Cornwall in 1871 at the age of 93. Born in Lower Canada, he was said to be the last Canadian born into slavery, and had been an active soldier in the War of 1812, fighting in both Canada and Europe.http://my.tbaytel.net/bmartin/jbaker.htmhttp://tubman.info.yorku.ca/files/2013/05/Report-John-Baker-WEB-READY.pdf Slavery was ended in the colony of Upper Canada in stages, beginning in 1793 when importing slaves was banned and culminating in 1819, when Upper Canada Attorney-General John Robinson declared any slaves living in Canada free, making Upper Canada the first place in the British Empire to unequivocally move towards abolition. Most of these former slaves settled and integrated into the same communities where they were freed. By 1833, all slaves in the British Empire were free, and Britain became the first major state in world history to abolish slavery. John Baker, the last slave to be born into slavery in Canada, died in Cornwall.http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/slavery-abolition-act-1833/Abolition of slavery timeline The aftermath of the American Revolution resulted in the formal division of Upper and Lower Canada (later, Ontario and Quebec) to accommodate loyalists fleeing persecution in the new United States, and distribution of land throughout Southern Ontario brought major change to Eastern Ontario. Cornwall and the surrounding area, originally called "Royal Settlement #2" and then "New Jamestown", was initially a rough place, and was largely left to its own devices. This reportedly bred a local culture of self-reliance. Governments have typically neglected the area, treating it as little more than a transit corridor. This began very early, with the founding of the city. "The original 516 settlers arrived in Royal Township #2 with minimal supplies and faced years of hard work and possible starvation. Upon their departure from military camps in Montreal, Pointe Claire, Saint Anne, and Lachine in the fall of 1784, loyalists were given a tent, one month’s worth of food rations, clothes, and agricultural provisions by regiment commanders. They were promised one cow for every two families, an ax, and other necessary tools in the near future. For the next three years, bateaux crews delivered rations to the township, after which residents were left to fend for themselves." The region's spirit of enterprise and fortitude was well known in the 19th century. David Thompson, the Welsh-Canadian explorer who mapped the Far West and was called the greatest land geographer in history, drew many of his traveling companions from Cornwall's rural hinterland, drawing on Scottish and native settlers, and himself lived in Williamstown.David Thompson (explorer) Recently, Cornwall has seen an uptick in the arrival of new immigrants,http://www.city-data.com/canada/Cornwall-City-citizenship.html who tend to integrate and better-off than immigrants in other parts of the country.http://www.eotb-cfeo.on.ca/english/labour-market/update-on-cornwalls-economy.html Cornwall was unusually integrated for a town in Ontario. For hundreds of years, the local population has been characterized by a mix of economic migrants, refugees and opportunists. Mixing of different social classes and ethnic backgrounds was common even early in its history, due to the interdependence demanded by isolation and the lack of support or interference from authorities. The original native population was remarkably welcoming, and the Iroquois were especially known for integrating newcomers into local societies and for adapting to change. Many people in the region have some native ancestry as a result. In the 1780s–1830s, A "Bee" was a social event that pooled local labour resources, and was often a festive occasion. These "Bees" presaged the development of a varied and integrated culture drawing on many different classes, backgrounds and ethnic and linguistic groups forced to work together for common goals, the primary of which was survival. These were extremely common in Eastern Ontario generally, and especially so in the early villages of the St. Lawrence valley. "In her book "Roughing It in the Bush", Susanna Moodie observed that “people in the woods, have a craze for giving and going to bees and run to them with as much eagerness as a peasant runs to a race.” ...  Bees often involved all ranks and nationalities of society. Thomas Need, a saw mill operator in Victoria County, described in From Great Wilderness to Seaway Towns the raising of his facility in 1834 in the following way: “They assembled in great force and all worked together in great harmony and good will not with- standing their different stations in life.” These gatherings exhibited the lack of aristocracy in the rural loyalist settlement along the St. Lawrence River and residents’ disregard for individuals’ former social standing or lineage." "The harshness and isolation of frontier living prevented the development of an aristocracy and, instead, united all members of the community in a struggle for survival. Early loyalists, regardless of the amount of land they owned, depended upon the help of their neighbors to clear land, build homes, and share supplies and food during times of poor harvests." Cornwall is a port-of-entry into Canada  (Canada Border Services abandoned the Cornwall Island post May 31, 2009, but resumed service on July 13, 2009, at temporary facilities on the city's southern edge).  With the completion of the new low-level bridge connecting Cornwall to Cornwall Island the CBSA port was moved to a permanent temporary facility on the canal lands.  The city is connected to the United States at Roosevelttown, near the municipalities of Massena, New York and Malone, New York, via the Three Nations Crossing (Canada, Mohawk, and U.S.A.) which traverses the St. Lawrence River. Cornwall was once home to a thriving cotton processing industry. Courtaulds Canada, Inc.’s rayon manufacturing mill operated until 1992; at one point it employed nearly 3,000 people. Domtar, a Quebec-based company, operated a paper mill in the city for nearly 100 years, ceasing operations on March 31, 2006. At its peak, Domtar employed nearly 1,500 employees. In addition, Canadian Industries Limited (C.I.L.), has operated a plant in Cornwall since 1935. The facility has been converted into a major derivatives plant.  The site has a long history of mercury contamination, given that for decades the chlor-alkali process was carried out here.  This entailed using used mercury cells to convert brine into caustic soda and chlorine. Group suing ICI, others for $40M.  By Kevin Lajoie, Cornwall Standard-Freeholder. Friday, June 20, 2008. Online at http://www.standard-freeholder.com/2008/06/20/group-suing-ici-others-for-40m  Cornwall's industrial base has now shifted to a more diversified mix of manufacturing, automotive, high tech, food processing, distribution centres and call centres. The City hosts the largest SCM (Walmart) distribution centre in Canada, its massive  facility employing nearly 1000 people. Target Canada built a new distribution centre in Cornwall's Business Park on a  parcel of land.  The Target Canada distribution centre is operated by Eleven Points Logistics. StarTek which is now closed and Teleperformance (closing Jan 2013) both operated call centres in Cornwall. Teleperformance provided in excess of 300 jobs. In late 2008, Shopper's Drug Mart built a . distribution facility in Cornwall's Business Park. Over 130 new jobs were created.  Service Canada established a new contact centre which opened in 2010.  Over 170 new jobs were created. Cornwall's unemployment rate is about 4%.http://thereview.ca/story/hawkesbury-and-cornwall-residents-have-lowest-incomes-eastern-ontario MoneySense magazine rated Cornwall as Canada's 167th best place to live (out of 190), in 2012."Canada's best places to live", MoneySense, 2012  Cornwall Square, also known as The Square, is a two-level  shopping mall within Cornwall.[ ][ ] The 2006 census indicates that English is the first language of approximately 68% of the population, while 24% count French as their first native language. The remainder speak numerous mother tongues, including (among others) Mohawk, Greek, Italian, Urdu, Hindi, Arabic, Bosnian, and Tamil. The Cornwall City Council is governed by an elected eleven-member municipal government composed of the Mayor and ten Councillors representing the City as a whole. The Mayor and City Councillors serve four-year terms. The mayor of Cornwall is Leslie O'Shaughnessy, former reeve of the nearby Charlottenburg township.  He secured his position in October 2014 by obtaining 50% of total votes, ending former Mayor Bob Kilger's two term stint. At the 2010 municipal election 56.5% of eligible voters did not vote—out of 30,655 registered voters, 13,338 cast ballots (43.5%). Cornwall is located within the Stormont—Dundas—South Glengarry riding.  Since 2011, the riding has been represented by MPP Jim McDonell (Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario). Stormont—Dundas—South Glengarry is represented federally by MP Guy Lauzon (Conservative). John Sandfield Macdonald, the first Premier of Ontario, was from Cornwall, and is buried in St. Andrews West at the Catholic Church cemetery.  The city of Cornwall hosts festivals and special community events including; Canada Day festivities, and Kinsmen Cornwall Lift Off, an annual hot air balloon and music festival. Cornwall is named after the county of Cornwall in the United Kingdom. Its flag also bears the insignia and colours of the flag of the Duchy of Cornwall. Lift Off was an annual music and hot air balloon festival that took place in July in Lamoureux park. It was run by a board of volunteers and was a non-profit organization 2014 was the final year for the Lift Off festival, as debt from a weather-plagued 2013 event and failure to obtain sponsors forced the cancellation of Lift-Off 2015 and resulted in a decision to discontinue to the festival. Lift Off was the only hot air balloon festival in Ontario. Paying individuals were able to take a 20 or 90 minute ride in one of 25 sponsored balloons. Kinsmen Cornwall Lift Off promoted a variety of local and national talent.  Past acts have included Glass Tiger, Kim Mitchell, Sass Jordan, Tom Cochrane, Trooper, Burton Cummings, David Wilcox and many more. The 2014 Lineup featured Great Big Sea's Alan Doyle, Glass Tiger and 54-40 as headliners. This edition was the first to offer a full day of free entertainment, with Glass Tiger headlining. It was attended by over 9000 people. Cornwall Ribfest is an annual festival organized by Cornwall Seaway Lions, a volunteer organization operating within Lions Club International. Taking place over three days in late July, Ribfest attracts many for Barbecue,  free live music and carnival rides. The 2014 edition of the festival attracted 57 000-60 000 attendees,a number greater than the population of the city. Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School became a grade 7–12 school after amalgamating with General Vanier Intermediate School for the 2011–12 school year.  The school celebrated its bicentennial in 2006 and, is the oldest school in Canada. .  CCVS offers a complete French immersion program in grade 7–12. St. Joseph's Secondary School is a part of the Catholic District Board and offers French immersion education. The newest high school in Cornwall is Holy Trinity Catholic Secondary SchoolHoly Trinity Catholic Secondary School for grades 7 to 12, opened in response to overpopulation at St. Joseph's. Both schools offer French immersion education. Cornwall also has two French high schools: l'École secondaire publique l'Héritage, and l’École secondaire catholique La Citadelle. La Citadelle is part of le Conseil scolaire de district catholique de l'Est ontarien. It is home to students from grade 7 to 12. École secondaire publique l'Héritage is part of the Conseil des écoles publique de l'est de l'Ontario and is home to grade 7 through 12 students. Saint Lawrence Secondary School hosts students from grade 7–12. For years, it originally was a high school, located where La Citadelle is now. Around 2003, it was turned into a school for grades 7–10. Now, it has transitioned back into a high school for grades 7–12. 2012 will be the first year since 2003 that grade 12s will graduate from the school. Al-rashid Islamic Institute is the first Islamic school of any kind in North America, providing higher educations Islamic studies with the boarding facility. Census results from Statistics CanadaEducation Stats indicate that 28.6% of adults (20 – 64 years) did not finish high school. A campus of St. Lawrence College is situated in Cornwall. The St. Lawrence River Institute of Environmental Sciences is located on the College campus, and, among other academic and vocational offerings, provides an Environmental Technician program. The St. Lawrence River Institute of Environmental Sciences is a research centre that carries out ecotoxicological studies on large river systems and, in particular, on the Great Lakes/St. Lawrence River ecosystem.St. Lawrence River Institute of Environmental Sciences – A leader in research, education, & community action. Riverinstitute.ca (2012-06-28). Retrieved on 2013-07-12. Cornwall is home to the Canadian Forces School of Aerospace Control Operations (École des opérations de contrôle aérospatial des Forces canadiennes) also known as CFSACO.CFSACO, CFSACO offers a range of basic and specialty courses and conversion training to Canadian Forces personnel. Military members are trained to become either Air Traffic Controller/Operators or Air Weapons Controller/Operators. Nav Canada, Canada's air navigation service provider, formerly conducted training of domestic Air Traffic Controllers in Cornwall at the Nav Canada Training Institute and Conference Centre; Air Traffic Control training is now limited to international clients. The Centre still hosts training for technical operations, and leadership. The Cornwall Tool Library is situated in Cornwall. Cornwall does not enjoy a positive environmental reputation as a result of decades of industrial pollution in the city, the legacy of which is a riverfront contaminated by mercury, zinc, lead, and copper,International Joint Commission Assessment soil contaminated by coal tar and byproducts,Environment Canada and most evidently, "Big Ben":Big Ben Recreation and Landfill Area a , 80 metre tall dumpsite within the city filled with wood bark, paper mill sludge, demolition waste and asbestos. In September 2008, over public opposition and in spite of Ontario Ministry of Environment (MOE) reports indicating off site leachate impact from the dump and the likelihood of runoff to the St. Lawrence River, the MOE permitted additional dumping at the "Big Ben" site of creosote and bitumen contaminated soils from Domtar's former No-co-rode Ltd. site. Although the area is touted as recreational, it is off-limits until winter when the waste is covered and the odours are subdued. It is then used as a ski hill.  For years, the industrial emissions in the Cornwall area, fuelled public health concern about respiratory disease and cancer. In 1995 Health CanadaInvestigating Human Exposure to Contaminants in the Environment (Published by Health Canada) reported the rate of hospitalization for asthma was approximately double that of cities such as Hamilton, Sudbury and Windsor. Further research, showed that infants under two years of age had four times the expected hospital admission rate for asthma. Lung and male rectal cancer rates were also elevated in comparison with the rest of the province. The shutdown of the Courtaulds rayon fiber operation (1992) and the Domtar paper mill (2006) have been a significant factor in the city's improved air quality. Cornwall now consistently ranks in the top 10 of 40 monitored communities across Ontario. More recently, a Pembina Institute study of 29 communities across Ontario looked at a number of environmental, social and economic factors. Cornwall ranked 13th overall and its air quality was ranked #1 in the province. Cornwall was at one point one of only two cities left in the Province of Ontario with only primary sewage treatment facilities.  But construction was started in May 2012 on the secondary treatment level plant with the governments of Canada and Ontario each covering one-third of an estimated $55.5 million construction cost.  The City picked up the remaining one-third of the cost, at $18.5 million.  The secondary treatment level plant was completed in November 2014. In 2006, the city updated its Strategic Plan including the objective, to develop an environmentally sustainable community.  In 2007, a former city councillor, Naresh Bhargava, began working with the St. Lawrence River Institute of Environmental Sciences on a project called the Community Carbon Reduction Initiative. City council provided $5,000 in start-up funding for the project. Earlier progress in energy conservation was made in the 1990s when a co-generation plant went into operation that provides 4% to 6% of the city's daily electrical needs while at the same time, heating a number of buildings including both hospital sites. Cornwall also converted all of its traffic signals in 2002 to energy efficient LEDs that have reduced power usage by more than 600,000&nbsp;kW, enough to light close to 70 homes. The data was contained in a report prepared by the city's public works department. Similar to most of southern Ontario, Cornwall has a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfa/Dfb) with cold, snowy winters and warm, humid summers. Precipitation is significant year round although the winter months are generally drier than the summer months. With a fleet of 24 buses, Cornwall Transit operates 6 days per week (excluding Sundays and holidays) on fixed routes and supplementary "rush hour" routes. In addition, there is an on-demand "Handi-Transit" service for the disabled. Cornwall Transit also contracts taxi service at a flat rate for Handi-Transit registrants who are ambulatory.  Cornwall Transit transports about 787,000 passengers per year.Mid-Sized Transit Service Helps Change Thinking About Natural Gas At one time Cornwall had a street car systemCornwall Street Railway Cornwall is served by the Cornwall Regional Airport located  east of the City, near Summerstown. It is open year round and licensed for day and night VFR IFR operations. The facilities include a  runway, a terminal, hangar, and the Canada Border Services Agency (on request). Domestic and international charter flying service from the airport is offered by Cornwall Aviation. Cornwall is located on CN Rail's mainline Quebec City-Windsor corridor and served by 4 daily Via Rail runs between Toronto and Montreal. The Station is located in the City's north end. The City of Cornwall is on the St. Lawrence Seaway just east of the Eisenhower and Snell Locks. The Cornwall Harbour and government wharf are located on the north bank of the St. Lawrence River in the city's east end. Cornwall has two indoor arenas, the Cornwall Civic Complex and the Benson Centre with three ice surfaces. Hockey Cornwall has been home to a variety of sports teams, the most notable of which was the Cornwall Royals hockey team which played in both the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League and the Ontario Hockey League before moving to Newmarket in 1992.  The Royals won the Memorial Cup in 1972, 1980 and 1981. Between the years 1993–1996, the Cornwall Aces, an AHL franchise was in town. They were the farm team for the NHL franchise the Quebec Nordiques/Colorado Avalanche. The Cornwall Colts are the current Junior A team playing in the Central Canada Hockey League. Cornwall has hosted several major sporting events in its history, including the Ontario Winter Games and Special Olympics. In 2008, Cornwall hosted the Royal Bank Cup, the National Championship for Junior A hockey teams. The Cornwall Colts finished third in the series winning 2 of 5 games.  The Cornwall Colts will host the Fred Page Cup in 2015.  The Fred Page Cup is the Eastern Canadian Championship.  Today the teams represented in the Fred Page Cup are the Maritime Hockey League Champions (Kent Cup), the Ligue de Hockey Junior AAA du Québec Champions (Napa Cup), the Ottawa District champions of the Central Canada Hockey League (Bogart-Nielsen Cup), and a host team chosen by committee 2 years before the tournament. The Cornwall River Kings of the Ligue Nord-Américaine de Hockey (LNAH) started playing out of the Civic Complex in the fall of 2012. Competitive Swimming Cornwall's competitive swim team is the Cornwall Sea Lions, currently under the coaching of Simon St. Pierre.  Two swimmers, Hannah Riordan  and Tess Simpson competed at junior international level. Riordan and Simpson have also represented Canada at the second FINA World Junior Championships the Tri-Nations Cup, and Riordan competed in the Junior Pan Pacifics, and Simpson in the Australian Youth festival.Four swimmers attained scholarships at NCAA schools (Riordan – Auburn, Simpson – Texas A&M, Megan Suffel – University of New Hampshire and Claudia Dugual at Drexal). These four swimmers all received their fastest club times while under the coaching of Robert Eynon. Soccer Cornwall has three soccer areas, The Kinsmen Junior Soccer Field on Second St west and Haulage Rd, The Benson Centre (for indoor soccer) and Optimist Park on Sunnyside Street and St. Michel Drive. Rugby Cornwall has both competitive Men's and Women's Rugby Clubs. After many years without rugby in the community it saw a resurrection in 2006. Both teams compete in the Eastern Ontario Rugby Union, which is located in Ottawa. The home of the Cornwall Crusaders Rugby Football Club is Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School. The Men's and Women's Teams practice Tuesdays and Thursdays from April until the end of August. The Men's team has found success in recent years winning the Eastern Ontario Men's Division 1 Championship in 2009 and 2010 versus The Napanee Outlaws and the Gatineau Mirage respectively. The sport of rugby continues to grow in the community. Many high schools throughout Stormont, Dundas, and Glengarry have Junior and Senior Boys teams as well as Varsity Girls teams. These high school teams serve as feeders to the Cornwall Crusaders. Many players who play on the Crusaders today come from high schools in the S.D.& G. area. Roller Derby The Seaway Roller Derby Girls Association is the First Roller Derby Flat track roller derby league in Cornwall and SD&G Counties, established in 2011 by Penny Rudderham. The Power Dames is the first official team. Girls' Basketball The United Counties Girls Basketball Team won provincial and international basketball tournaments in the late 1970s and early 1980s. In addition, the city offered girls and women's basketball to females from eight to college graduates. The San Lawrence College Women's team who a college tournament as well. The teams were coached by Adelore Bergeon and Alan Haskvitz. Some of the more famous people to hail from the Cornwall area include: Some stations from other nearby areas, including Ottawa, Montreal and New York's North Country, are also available. Cornwall is twinned with:   Barstool Prophets, 3 of the 4 members of the Canadian rock band hailed from Cornwall where the band had its start (Glenn Forrester, Graham Greer, Bobby Tamas) Malcolm Burn, musician and record producer Doug Carpenter, former NHL coach Alain Chevrier, former NHL goaltender Corbett Denneny, former NHL player Cy Denneny, brother of Corbett, former NHL player, in the Hockey Hall of Fame Lori Dupuis, Olympic gold and silver medalist in women's ice hockey Jacob Gallinger, U.S. politician Peter Gatien, New York nightlife impresario Ryan Gosling, Actor Alan Haskvitz, National Hall of Fame and USA Today All American Educator Christina Julien, current member of the Canadian national women's soccer team. Chad Kilger, retired NHL player Bob Kilger, former NHL referee, former mayor, father of Chad Kilger Ed "Newsy" Lalonde, captained the Montreal Canadiens in the 1910s and helped the team win its first Stanley Cup in 1916. Ryan Leger, drummer for Every Time I Die Jeff Legue Professional ice hockey skater for the Sheffield Steelers Donald Alexander Macdonald, soldier. John Sandfield Macdonald, prominent lawyer and the first Premier of Ontario Maggie MacDonald, playwright and musician Don McKay, Governor General's Award-winning poet and essayist. Duncan McNaughton, gold medalist in the 1932 Olympics in the high jump Ray Miron, hockey player, coach, and executive, inducted into Cornwall Sports Hall of Fame Scott Pearson, former NHL player drafted 6th overall to the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1988 Nathan Phillips, the Toronto mayor known as "mayor of all the people"  George Beverly Shea – noted Gospel Singer, associated with Billy Graham crusades John Strachan, 19th-century Anglican priest and influential Bishop of Toronto Orval Tessier, former NHL player, coach of the Chicago Blackhawks and scout. Colonel The Hon. Philip VanKoughnet, M.P., former landowner of Cornwall John Wensink, former left-winger for the Boston Bruins Jesse Winchester, forward for the Colorado Avalanche NHL team FM 88.1 – CHRI-FM-1, Christian (relays CHRI-FM Ottawa) FM 92.1 – CHOD-FM, Franco-Ontarian community FM 95.5 – CBOC-FM, CBC Radio One (relays CBO-FM Ottawa) FM 97.3 – CKON-FM, First Nations community (from Akwesasne) FM 98.1 – CBOF-FM-6, Première Chaîne (relays CBOF-FM Ottawa) FM 101.9 – CJSS-FM, classic hits FM 104.5 – CFLG-FM, adult top 40 FM 107.7 – CIRG-FM, tourist information Channel 8: CTV CJOH-TV-8 (repeater of CJOH-DT Ottawa; formerly CJSS-TV) TV Cogeco Cornwall Standard Freeholder is the city's main daily newspaper, and is managed by Sun Media, a division of Quebecor. Seaway News is a weekly newspaper owned by Transcontinental. Le/The Journal de Cornwall is another weekly newspaper. Once solely French, the paper is now bilingual. The Seeker is a locally owned weekly newspaper, distributed both door to door and in stores, which focuses on arts, culture and events.  Coventry, United Kingdom Cornwall (disambiguation) List of francophone communities in Ontario Cornwall Street Railway
