   Cyborgs are a prominent staple in the science fiction genre. This article summarizes notable instances of cyborgs in fiction.  "Night of the Steel Assassin" is a January 1966 episode of The Wild Wild West TV series.  "Iron Man" Torres, played by John Dehner- the world's first cyborg, plans to assassinate President Grant in New Mexico. In 1966, Kit Pedler, a medical scientist, created the Cybermen for the TV program Doctor Who, based on his concerns about science changing and threatening humanity. The Cybermen had replaced much of their bodies with mechanical prostheses and were now supposedly emotionless creatures driven only by logic. Isaac Asimov's short story "The Bicentennial Man" explored cybernetic concepts. The central character is NDR, a robot who begins to modify himself with organic components. His explorations lead to breakthroughs in human medicine via artificial organs and prosthetics. By the end of the story, there is little physical difference between the body of the hero, now called Andrew, and humans equipped with advanced prosthetics, save for the presence of Andrew's artificial positronic brain. Asimov also explored the idea of the cyborg in relation to robots in his short story "Segregationist", collected in The Complete Robot. The 1972 science fiction novel Cyborg, by Martin Caidin, told the story of a man whose damaged body parts are replaced by mechanical devices ("bionics"). This novel was adapted into a TV series, The Six Million Dollar Man, in 1973, and a spin-off, The Bionic Woman in 1976. Caidin also addressed bionics in his 1968 novel, The God Machine. In 1974, Marvel Comics writer Rich Buckler introduced the cyborg Deathlok the Demolisher, and a dystopian post-apocalyptic future, in Astonishing Tales No. 25. Buckler's character dealt with rebellion and loyalty, with allusion to Frankenstein's monster, in a twelve-issue run. Deathlok was later resurrected in Captain America, followed by two others in 1990 and 1999. In the novel Man Plus by Frederick Pohl, an able-bodied astronaut, Roger Torraway, is surgically altered in order to augment his fragile human body and allow him to function in the harsh climate of Mars. The result is both "monstrous" (he has bat-like wings, infrared sight, an enhanced brain capable of processing all the new sensory inputs) and "freeing" (his cyborg body is more "naturally" made for Mars, as opposed to his all-human colleagues on the Mars mission). Torraway's cyborg character is reprised in a 1995 sequel, Mars Plus. The 1982 film Blade Runner featured creatures called replicants, bio-engineered or bio-robotic beings. The Nexus series—genetically designed by the Tyrell Corporation—are virtually identical to an adult human, but have superior strength, agility, and variable intelligence depending on the model. Because of their physical similarity to humans a replicant must be detected by its lack of emotional responses and empathy to questions posed in a Voight-Kampff test. A derogatory term for a replicant is "skin-job," a term heard again extensively in Battlestar Galactica. In the opening crawl of the film, they are first said to be the next generation in robotics. The crawl also states genetics play some role in the creation of replicants. The original novel makes mention of the biological components of the androids, but also alludes to the mechanical aspects commonly found in other material relating to robots. The 1987 science fiction action film RoboCop features a cyborg protagonist. After being killed by a criminal gang, police officer Alex Murphy is transformed by a private company into a cyborg cop. The transformation is used to explore the theme of resurrection and identity. There are cyborg kaiju in the Godzilla films such as Gigan and Mechagodzilla. Although frequently referred to onscreen as a cyborg, Terminators might be more properly an android. While it has skin and blood (cellular organic systems), these serve mainly as a disguise and are not symbiotic with the machine components, a trait of true cyborgs. The endoskeletons beneath are fully functional robots and have been seen operating independently, especially during the future segments of the Terminator movies. The T-1000 (which is said to be made completely of a liquid metal) of Terminator 2: Judgment Day is definitely an android. The Terminator Cameron Phillips seen in the TV series Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles is of a previously unseen model, and is once again referred to on screen (including once by another Terminator) as a cyborg. Terminator Salvation introduces Marcus Wright, a death-row convict who donated his body to Cyberdyne Systems, who was later revived as a T-H "Hybrid Human" with his original brain and heart placed into an endoskeleton which was then covered by a copy of his original organic tissue. Cyborgs have also been present in real-time strategy video games. The Command & Conquer video game series had cyborgs as a part of its plot – specifically Cyborgs created by the "Brotherhood of Nod" via Tiberium Infusion experimentation. They were frequently used for anti-personnel, though the Cyborg Commando proved to be useful in most situations. Cyborgs were brought back by the AI named LEGION, (a successor to CABAL) under direct orders from Kane. The 'Marked of Kane' units also contain Cyborgs. The Metal Gear Solid series of video games has a recurring character known as Grey Fox or the "Cyborg Ninja" who is a person wearing a cybernetic exoskeleton (either worn as a suit or grafted directly to the character's body) and wielding a high-frequency blade. The cyborg ninja suit has been donned by multiple characters, most recently by the character Raiden in Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots. He became the newest incarnation of the Cyborg Ninja after he was captured by The Patriots after he stole the body of Big Boss for the Paradise Lost Army. His body was heavily experimented on for the purpose of creating the ultimate soldier and the only remaining organic parts of his original body are his head and spinal cord. His cyborg body is composed of artificial muscle, organs, bones, and blood( a "white" artificial blood that the PLA substituted for his old, nanomachine primed blood). His cyborg body was optimized for war and enabled him to fight on a superhuman level and withstand what would normally be considered fatal injuries. One of the most famous cyborgs is Darth Vader from the Star Wars films. Vader was once Anakin Skywalker, a famous Jedi turned to the Dark Side. After a ferocious battle with his former master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin is left for dead beside a lava flow on Mustafar, and is outfitted with an artificial life support system as well as robotic arms and legs. General Grievous, Lobot, and Luke Skywalker are the three other most prominent cyborgs in the Star Wars universe. In Akira Toriyama's manga and anime series Dragon Ball, a scientist named Dr. Gero created several cyborgs, including villain Cell, sibling cyborgs Android 17 and Android 18, as well as Android 20, who was built from Gero himself. A direct brain-to-computer interface is a valuable, but expensive, luxury in Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle's novel Oath of Fealty. In the manga and anime series Ghost in the Shell, the protagonist Motoko Kusanagi is the fully prosthetic leader of an anti-terrorist force, who lives in a future Japan where the majority of adults are cyborgs and can connect wirelessly to the Internet for real-time communication and data research. The most common augmentations in the series are partly artificial brains called cyberbrains. Bruce Sterling in his universe of Shaper/Mechanist suggested an idea of alternative cyborg called Lobster, which is made not by using internal implants, but by using an external shell (e.g. a Powered Exoskeleton).Sterling, Bruce. Schismatrix. Arbor House. 1985. Unlike human cyborgs that appear human externally while being synthetic internally, a Lobster looks inhuman externally but contains a human internally. The computer game Deus Ex: Invisible War prominently featured the Omar, where "Omar" is a Russian translation of the word "Lobster" (since the Omar are of Russian origin in the game). In the Brain and Brawn series of novels series by Anne McCaffrey and others, beginning with The Ship Who Sang, a "brainship" is a human body, usually one that could not develop normally, encased in the strongest materials available in that universe, and mentally connected to the controls of a spacecraft. Later novels link the brainship to fully functional humanoid androids. In the story The Ablest Man in the World (1879), by Edward Page Mitchell, a computer is inserted into a man's head, turning him into a genius. The Tin Woodman from L. Frank Baum's Oz books (at least before he became entirely metal). Gaston Leroux, the author of The Phantom of the Opera, wrote a 1923 story titled La poupée sanglante – La machine à assassiner (translated as The Machine to Kill in the English edition) in which the brain of a guillotined murderer is inserted into a "clockwork man". "The Machine Man of Ardathia" by George Henry Weiss (published under the name Francis Flagg, a pseudonym for WeissBleiler, Everett Franklin, and Bleiler, Richard. Science-fiction: The Gernsback Years (1998), p. 122.), which appeared in the November 1927 issue of Amazing Stories, featured a time-traveling descendant of humanity from 28,000 years in the future, who lived inside of a transparent cylinder filled with machinery that had been integrated into his body, and who commented that among his people each embryo is placed inside such a cylinder and "the various tubes and mechanical devices are introduced into the body by our mechanics and become an integral part of it." The Mi-go aliens in the Cthulhu Mythos of H. P. Lovecraft, first appearing in the story "The Whisperer in Darkness" (1931), can transport humans from Earth to Pluto (and beyond) and back again by removing the subject's brain and placing it into a "brain cylinder", which can be attached to external devices to allow it to see, hear, and speak. Deirdre, a famous dancer who was burned nearly completely and whose brain was placed in a faceless but beautiful mechanical body, in C. L. Moore's short story of 1944, "No Woman Born". Collected in "The Best of C. L. Moore" in 1975 Jonas the (star) sailor in Gene Wolfe's Book of the New Sun novels. His near light speed ship had been gone so long that on its return to Urth, there were no space port facilities any more, and it crashed. Other crew members patched him up from available parts. (However, he started out as fully robotic, and was repaired with human parts, rather than the more usual reverse). Molly Millions, Henry Dorsett Case, and Peter Riviera all have some sort of cybernetic augmentation in William Gibson's Sprawl trilogy.Gibson, William. Neuromancer Professor Jameson, a cyborg pulp hero by Neil R. Jones, and his allies and benefactors, the Zoromes. Marge Piercy's He, She and It presents a rather feminist view on the cyborg issue with Yod who, however, is provided with some male attributes. Anne McCaffrey wrote short stories and novels known as The Ship Series (1961–) where otherwise crippled humans live on as the brains of starships and large space stations. The genetically engineered and prosthetics-ready warriors of the planet Sauron in the CoDominium series of short stories and novels initiated by Jerry Pournelle and also written by guest authors. In Martin Caidin's novel, Cyborg, a test pilot named Steve Austin is rebuilt after a horrendous crash, given new "bionic" limbs, and becomes a superspy. Followed by several sequel novels and also adapted as the TV series The Six Million Dollar Man. Caidin's retelling of the Buck Rogers story, Buck Rogers: A Life in the Future, has Rogers being partially rebuilt as a cyborg after his hibernation, and includes a reference to Steve Austin. Angus Thermopyle, The Gap Cycle. Haberman and Scanners from Scanners Live in Vain by Cordwainer Smith. The Comprise, a computer-mediated hive mind which has taken over Earth, in the novel Vacuum Flowers by Michael Swanwick. Rat Things in Neal Stephenson's Snow Crash. They are attack-programmed guard dogs whose long hairless tails make them look less like dogs and more like rats. They are powered by nuclear engines that will fatally over-heat if they stop. Technology invented by Mr. Ng and, evidently, made exclusively for the defense of the franchise Mr. Lee's Greater Hong Kong. In William C. Dietz's Legion of the Damned the Legion is made up of a combination of humans and heavily armed cyborgs. Kage Baker has written a series of novels about The Company in which orphans from various eras (who fit certain physical requirements) are recruited by a time-traveling corporation, augmented and turned into immortal cyborgs, and trained to rescue valuable artifacts from history. Shrike in Dan Simmons novel series Hyperion. Hannes Suessi from David Brin's Uplift novels is transformed into a cyborg by the time he re-appears in Infinity's Shore Catherine Asaro's Saga of the Skolian Empire prominently features cyborgs called "Jagernauts", who are empaths or even telepaths, who serve as elite fighter pilots. Many prominent members of the Ruby Dynasty ruling the Skolian Empire are jagernauts. Linda Nagy, a.k.a. Ellen Troy, who has wetware in her brain, spines in her fingers (for linking with computers) and an antenna that lets her shut down machine remotely from the Venus Prime series by Arthur C. Clarke and Paul Preuss Jessamyn 'Krokodil' Bonney, protagonist of Kim Newman's Demon Download series was extensively augmented by Dr. Simon Threadneedle, also a cyborg. The main protagonist of Marissa Meyer's The Lunar Chronicles, Linh Cinder, is a cyborg. Jeremiah Gottwald from Code Geass becomes a cyborg when he barely survives the Battle of Narita and is turned into one when a team of government scientists operate on him experimentally. This results in a half-machine appearance. In R2, most of his mechanical parts are internalized. 8 Man, a manga and anime superhero created in 1963 by writer Kazumasa Hirai and artist Jiro Kuwata. He is considered Japan's earliest cyborg superhero, before even Kamen Rider (the same year, Shotaro Ishinomori created Cyborg 009), and was the inspiration for RoboCop. The Major in the Hellsing manga has recently been discovered to be a cyborg The characters Haine Rammsteiner in the manga Dogs and Dogs/ Bullets & Carnage was experimented on as a child, leaving him with augmented regenerative abilities as well as increased reflexes.Shirow Miwa. Dogs and Dogs/Bullets & Carnage. Published serially in Ultra Jump Baxter Stockman from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles The Brain in DC Comics Cyborgirl Cyberforce is a group of mutant cyborgs in Image Comics. Many of the members of Section 9 in the Ghost in the Shell universe, specifically the main characters Major Motoko Kusanagi and Batou, are cyborgs dependent on regular maintenance; there are several manga (or graphic novel) and artbooks set in the , as well as two feature-length anime films, three television series and three video games. Masamune Shirow's other major work, Appleseed also contains a multitude of cyborg characters, with one of the main characters, Briareos Hecatonchires, the mercenary Sokaku Tatara and his war buddies, and the Mumna Holy Republic diplomat Kainisu, from the fourth chapter, are just a few. Cyborg of the Teen Titans comic book series is a superhero with massive implants and prosthetics. He also appeared in the animated TV series. Not to be confused with Superman supervillain Cyborg Superman, a technopathic entity who prefers cybernetic forms, who is occasionally referred to as merely "The Cyborg." Many of the characters of Battle Angel Alita (also known in Japan as GUNNM) are cyborgs, including the lead, Alita (Gally, Yoko). Cyborgs are a major way of life in the GUNNM universe, with sports, such as Motorball (and crimes, such as spine-stealing), contributing to a culture of cyborgs. The Fugitoid from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. The Metabarons. Metallo from DC Comics In WE3, a group of animals are turned into sentient living weapons. Cyborg 009 features a group of humans unwillingly turned into cyborg weapons by a crime syndicate. The Reavers, a group of villains that regularly clashes with the X-Men. They are led by Donald Pierce. Deathlok, the Demolisher, a series of military cyborgs in Marvel Comics. The original Deathlok was a former soldier in a dystopian future. All members of The Authority have a networking implant that allows for radio-telepathy, head-mail and other communication functions. Android 17, Android 18 and Android 20 from the manga series Dragon Ball. These three (along with the rest of Dr. Gero's artificial creations) are referred to as jinzouningen, which is a blanket term in Japanese science fiction applying to robots and androids, as well as cyborgs. Jinzouningen is usually translated by fans to "artificial human". Freeza is also a cyborg after his defeat on Namek and is saved and rebuilt by his father. Franky (also known as Cutty Flam), of the manga One Piece by Eiichirō Oda, rebuilt most of his body with scrap metal after sustaining serious injuries. Giving him abilities ranging from (but not limited to) air cannons in his hands and rear end, guns in his wrists, and the ability to extend the front part of his lower body outward, making him look like a backwards centaur. However, as Franky did these adjustments to himself, only the front part of his body is cyborg. His backside (which he couldn't reach) is as vulnerable as any human back, rendering this his weak point. His cyborg abilities are powered by cola, stored in a refrigeration unit in Franky's stomach. Henrietta, Triela,Rico, Claes, Angelica,Elsa de Sica, and Elizaveta from Gunslinger Girl are adolescent girls who are made into cyborg assassins to fight for the government. They have adults known as 'handlers' who train them for battle. Death's Head II, MINION, Marvel Comics Karl Ruprecht Kroenen, from Hellboy Supremor, the Kree Supreme Intelligence, of Marvel Comics Spartan WildStorm Comics Tony Stark, better known as Iron Man injected himself with techno-organic virus "Extremis", which installed a computer interface into his nervous system and an Iron Man armor interface into his body. This allows him greater control of the armor. Stark can also remotely operate his armors (more than one Iron Man active at a time). Victor Mancha is an artificial life form with organic parts in Runaways. Cable, a mutant from the future in Marvel Comics. Roughly a third of his body is a "techno-organic" mesh. The Ultimate Marvel version of Deadpool is a cyborg. The Sonic the Hedgehog franchise contains several cyborg characters, most notably Bunnie Rabbot in  Saturday morning TV series and US comic series. The animated series and Sonic Underground also featured a cyborg version of Sonic's long-time foe Dr. Robotnik, while Underground also featured individuals who had been turned into mindless, robotic cyborgs by Robotnik's Roboticizer. The comic series featured additional cyborgs, including the Dark Legion/Dark Egg Legion and Egg Army. Several characters in Spriggan such as the Trident Corporation's agents (except Iwao Akatsuki), including ex-Machiner's Platoon agent Ironarm, have prosthetic limbs. These give them an advantage in combat since the limbs are outfitted with offensive weapons. One group of major antagonists in the manga Blame! are Silicon Creatures, humanoids of a silicon base that are similar to cyborgs. Transmetropolitan features many cyborgian ideas and characters. Spider Jerusalem himself is a cyborg especially when he takes the phone trait. Pinoko from Black Jack is technically a cyborg; as a living Teratoma, she is mostly organs: most of her body was crafted by Blackjack from synthetic fiber. The comic series Concrete (1986–) revolved around the life of an ordinary human whose brain had been placed in a large artificial stone body by aliens. Rom the Space Knight (1979) Axel Pressbutton created by Steve Moore in (1979) The Borg from the film Star Trek: First Contact. Interestingly, the android character Data is transformed into a cyborg in the film too by having organic components integrated into him (the reverse of the Borg, who were organic beings who had synthetic components made part of them). Blind Mag in Repo! The Genetic Opera. Various characters in Star Wars saga, notably Darth Vader, General Grievous, Dengar, Lobot, and Luke Skywalker. Doctor Claw in Inspector Gadget As is the title character Inspector Gadget Dr. Julius No in the James Bond film Dr. No. The wives from the 2004 film version of The Stepford Wives. In the original book and film, they would be closer to androids or gynoids. Ria and various characters from Natural City. The girlfriend in Cyborg She. Del Spooner, from the movie I, Robot Various characters in the Matrix trilogy of movies Gigan from the Godzilla series Isaac from the film Cyborg Soldier. Wang the Perverted from the film Flesh Gordon Meets the Cosmic Cheerleaders (or as he's known for most of the film, "Evil Presence") was brought back from the dead with many cybernetic body parts including a hand that spontaneously flips the bird due to a malfunction Elgar in Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie RoboCop Zigesfeld, a henchman from the film If Looks Could Kill Kiryu, a.k.a. Mechagodzilla 3 Cyborg, a film featuring Jean-Claude Van Damme, tells the story of a post-apocalyptic Earth due to a nuclear disaster, and has a female cyborg as a central character. The sequel, Cyborg 2, stars Angelina Jolie as another cyborg. The second sequel Cyborg 3: The Recycler has Khrystyne Haje replacing Angelina Jolie. SkekTek the Skeksis scientist in The Dark Crystal Dr. Arliss Loveless from Wild Wild West is a steampunk cyborg, along with one of his minions Lt. Parker Barnes from the film Virtuosity. John Silver in Disney's Treasure Planet is a human-like alien cyborg. His robotic parts include an eye with enhanced vision, an arm with tools and weapons stored inside, a leg which stores a mini cannon, and a device where his ear should be. This character is based on Long John Silver from the book Treasure Island. Mr. Igoe, a killer from the movie Innerspace who has an artificial hand. Batty Koda from the animated feature FernGully: The Last Rainforest. Edward Steam, from the anime movie Steamboy, has various parts of his body replaced by machinery following an industrial accident. Jason Voorhees is transformed into a cyborg by a nanotechnology-based medical procedure after being mortally wounded in the latter half of the science fiction/slasher film Jason X. Armitage in the movie Armitage III is a "Third Type" cyborg which was an all female line of cyborgs designed to have conscience, free will and the ability to procreate as a way for a Mars-colony to better sustain a population and thus be able break away from Earth. When Earth and Mars became more united, the Third Types were eliminated by a seeming psychotic so as to avoid offending the feminist-leaning Earth. The Kaalium from Moontrap. They are scavenger pods that build bodies and spaceships for themselves from both mechanical and biological components. In The Colossus of New York (1958), a father transplants the brain of his recently deceased son into a large robotic body. Griff Tannen (and possibly fellow gang members) in Back to the Future Part II. A.R.C.1 is the urban cyborg from "Cybornetics". Ava is a cyborg in the 2013 film "The Machine". Many workmen at the facility in Transcendence (2014). Avery Bullock from American Dad! Astronema from Power Rangers in Space "The Cyborg" episode 4 season 2 from Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (1965) Steve Austin, The Six Million Dollar Man. Originally based on Martin Caidin's novel, Cyborg. The series was very successful, spawning the spin-off The Bionic Woman (Jaime Sommers) which also featured Max (Maxamillion), a bionic dog. Another version of the cyborg Jaime Sommers is featured in a remake series, Bionic Woman, broadcast in 2007. The Daleks, Cybermen and Toclafane from Doctor Who. NOTE: Daleks are a marginal case, in that the artificial portions are actually vehicles for small and physically degenerate beings. Darth Maul, after his supposed demise in the film The Phantom Menace, reappears in Star Wars: The Clone Wars and goes through several sets of mechanical legs. Blitz Borgs from NFL Rush Zone: Guardians Unleashed Inspector Gadget, who is a cyborg with various "gadgets" built into his anatomy, such as Binoculars, Umbrella, Copter, Cuffs and so on. Cash from one episode of Ben 10: Alien Force, Kraab and Max Tennyson from Ben 10 , and Professor Paradox from Ben 10: Omniverse Krang from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles The Raptor Haxx from Extreme Dinosaurs has a cybernetic tail. Richard Nixon and Pickles from Futurama Dr Robotnik from Sonic the Hedgehog Bob Oblong from The Oblongs Emperor Zurg and Agent Z/Warp Darkmatter from Buzz Lightyear of Star Command Cybergirl, a cyber replicant prototype 6000, a "cyborg" from a distant planet who ran away to explore the beings she was created after, human beings. The Rat King from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. Bizarro Debbie and Bizarro Marco from Sealab 2021 Dillon, Tenaya, and other characters from Power Rangers: RPM, who were humans fitted with cybernetics by the evil Venjix computer virus as part of a plan to infiltrate and conquer the last free human city. The Borg from Star Trek, including Seven of Nine from Star Trek: Voyager, a human who was assimilated into a drone and later severed from the collective. Geordi La Forge from Star Trek: The Next Generation, who was born blind and uses optical implants combined with a removable unit called a VISOR, to see. The VISOR was twice replaced temporarily with biological eyes and, in the films, permanently replaced with ocular implants. Jean-Luc Picard from Star Trek: The Next Generation, whose natural heart was irreparably damaged in a bar fight when he was younger and replaced with an artificial heart, which was later replaced twice due to defect or damage. However, the artificial heart is not a major part of his identity and is seldom mentioned, so that most viewers would not consider him a cyborg. He was also at one point briefly conscripted into the Borg (see above). A cyborg secret agent was featured in the "Fumble on the One" episode of The Misfits of Science. Jonas Venture Junior from The Venture Bros. Hannibal McFist from Randy Cunningham: 9th Grade Ninja Master Billy Quizboy from The Venture Bros. Mr. Freeze from The New Batman Adventures Curt Conners from The Spectacular Spider-Man The Jokerz from Justice League Unlimited Mercy Graves and Arsenal in Young Justice Gadget Boy from Gadget Boy & Heather Morticon from Power Rangers: Mystic Force Adam in the series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, who is an amalgamation of human, demon and machine. In Neon Genesis Evangelion the Evangelion mecha are not robots but clones of aliens outfitted with cybernetics to allow their human pilots (or a backup computer, as in the Mass Production Eva series) to control them. Edward Elric (anime series and manga Fullmetal Alchemist) has two prosthetic limbs – the right arm and the left leg – the technology used to create them is called automail. Frank Archer and Paninya also have automail parts. Similar to above mentioned Edward Elric, Folken Fanel from the anime series The Vision of Escaflowne has a prosthetic right arm based on an unnamed technology of the Zaibach Empire. Kidou Keiji Jiban, a metal hero show in Japan, was influenced by RoboCop. The main difference is that Naoto Tamura can transform between his detective identity and his Jiban/Perfect Jiban identity on his own. The Humanoid Cylons, from the series Battlestar Galactica. Their synthetic brains are nearly indistinguishable from humans, but can transmit their programs to new bodies. The Cylon Raider craft also have organic components. Spike Spiegel and Jet Black, respectively bearing a prosthetic eye and arm, from the Cowboy Bebop anime and manga series. Various characters from The King of Braves GaoGaiGar and The King of Braves GaoGaiGar Final Casshern (formerly known as Tetsuya Azuma) from the Shinzo Ningen Casshern 1973 anime series, 1993 OVA and the 2004 live action movie. Bionic Six. Sudden Death from NFL Rush Zone: Guardians Unleashed Stan Smith from American Dad! in the episode May the Best Win only. Technomages, from the Babylon 5 universe, employing a high degree of "organic technology" Alan Gabriel, The Big O. Mechanikat, a villain from Krypto the Superdog. Antoine, Suspected Cyborg of the Upright Citizens Brigade. Bunnie Rabbot, in the Sonic The Hedgehog SatAM TV series and US comic books. The Irkens from the Nicktoon Invader Zim. Simulants from Red Dwarf, as well as Kryten, whose brain is part-organic. Dave Lister has his arm replaced with a cybernetic prosthesis in 'Epideme'  and at least one future version of Lister appears with a cybernetic and arm (one finger on the hand of which serves as a built-in bottle opener). "Riders" from the "Ishinomori era" of the Kamen Rider franchise. Taurus Bulba in the "Steerminator" episode of Darkwing Duck. In the cartoon series Biker Mice from Mars, Modo has a cybernetic arm, Throttle artificial eyes and Stoker a cybernetic tail, all the product of Doctor Karbunkle's experiments. One of the villains, 'Lectromag, was also a Cyborg. In the anime series Afro Samurai, Afro's childhood friend Jinno returns years after his "death" as Kuma, a cybernetic samurai with a teddy bear mask. Kondoru no Joe (Joe Asakura) in the anime series Kagaku ninja tai Gatchaman, who is mortally wounded during the final battle of the first Gatchaman series and rescued by the mysterious Dr. Rafael, and returns to the team as a cyborg in the early episodes of Gatchaman II. In Smallville the character Victor Stone is an incarnation of the comic book superhero Cyborg, appearing in two episodes. Technically, the entire Exofleet personnel in Exosquad were cyborgs, as special cybernetic implants were necessary to pilot combat E-frames. More extensive cybernetic enhancements were also seen in the series (e.g. James Burns in episode 2.18). In the "Trapper Keeper" episode of South Park a cyborg named Bill Cosby is sent back in time to prevent Cartman's Trapper Keeper from taking over the world. Also Chef like Vader was rebuilt into Darth Chef. Cameron Phillips, a new-model of Terminator featured in Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles, a 2008 television series, is explicitly referred to on screen several times as a cyborg, although it has not yet been made explicit that she has living tissue over her robotic endoskeletons like other Terminators. A human version of Cameron is seen in one episode but it is not indicated how much if any of her biological make-up went into the Terminator version. Blackarachnia, Waspinator and Sari Sumdac from Transformers Animated Debbie Burwick from Phil of the Future RoboCable from RoboCop: Prime Directives Simmons from the machinima series Red vs. Blue Codename: Asero Mr. Kat from "Kid vs. Kat". In the "Nip/Duck" episode an X-ray reveals that the alien cat is mostly mechanical, apart from his two brains and his three lungs; it's not clear if his paws are mechanical or not, but they probably are since Mr. Kat has a lot of robotic gadgets inside his hands. Jeremiah Gottwald, a character in the anime series Code Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion, is enhanced with extensive cybernetics after being grievously wounded in battle. His body ultimately comes to feature a highly reactive neural interface and blades in his arms, among other features. Lord Dread and his Bio Dread army from Captain Power and the Soldiers of the Future In the anime Towa no Quon, there is the cyborg army WTOC, which consists of 5 human beings who have gotten operations to turn their bodies into cyborgs. The villains Doc Terror and Hacker from Centurions Vrak from Power Rangers Megaforce Root from the TV series Person of Interest becomes an analog interface for the Machine via a cochlear implant later in the series. The Deus Ex videogame series deals extensively with the near-future rise of cyborgs. In the games the advent of such augmentation that is conducive to previously inhuman feats results in widespread civil unrest, fundamentally challenging the self-perception and identity of humanity. The Mass Effect series contains countless cyborgs: Reaper troops, Reapers themselves, Commander Shepard (certainly after resurrection involving "bio-synthetic fusion"), the Illusive Man, all known non-asari biotics (via biotic amplifier implants), Kasumi Goto, Kai Leng, etc. The Syndicate series deals with a similar theme of people cybernetically enhanced and forced to serve the syndicate. In Warzone 2100, cyborgs can be built once the "Synaptic Link" technology is researched. In the video game Quake III Arena, many of the characters feature 'Cybronic Implants'. Several characters in the G-Police series of games. Big Daddies from BioShock are cyborgs. The "Handyman" from BioShock Infinite is a steampunk cyborg. In Konami's Metal Gear series, 3 characters become a "cyborg ninja". In Metal Gear Solid and Metal Gear Solid: VR Missions the ninja is Gray Fox; in Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty it is Olga Gurlukovich; and in Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, the ninja is Raiden. Captain Tobias Bruckner from Turok: Evolution Coton from Mirage Media's Rise of the Robots and Rise 2: Resurrection (the only cyborg, while all other characters are robots). Cyber-Akuma, final boss from Capcom's Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter (actually a variation on Akuma from the Street Fighter series). Mark IV Cyborg in the "Marathon Trilogy" Cyber Shredder, final boss from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III: Radical Rescue Brad Fang from Contra: Hard Corps Dr. Brackman and the various Symbionts of the Cybran Nation and United Earth Federation from Supreme Commander. The Electrocutioner from Batman Radd (or Ladd) Spencer, lead character from Capcom's Bionic Commando. Brocken from ADK's World Heroes series. Dr. Crygor from the WarioWare, Inc. series of games. The Strogg, a race of cybernetic warriors from the first person shooters Quake II, Quake 4, and Enemy Territory: Quake Wars. Also, Matthew Kane, lead character from Quake 4. A special perk in Fallout 3 allows the main character to become a cyborg. As well, in a subplot, the character can acquire the Wired Reflexes perk from a scientist named Dr. Zimmer, which is implied to be a cybernetic enhancement. Cyrax, Sektor, and Smoke, the three cyborg ninja fighters in the fighting video game series Mortal Kombat. Kano and Major Jackson Briggs from Mortal Kombat. Doctor N. Gin of the Crash Bandicoot video game series. In Final Fantasy Legend III characters could shift between organic, cybernetic and robotic states by eating meat or installing parts. Barret Wallace from Final Fantasy VII The Aparoids, an insect like cyborg race, and the main antagonists of Star Fox: Assault The Combine from Half-Life 2 use transhuman cyborgs and biomechanical "synths" as their main weapons. The Lopers and Super Soldiers from Return to Castle Wolfenstein Master Chief Petty Officer John-117 and the other SPARTAN-II supersoldiers from Halo series.Xbox.com | Halo: Combat Evolved – Game Manual Download at www.xbox.com Also, Captain Jacob Keyes in Halo: Combat Evolved has a neural interface that is forcibly recovered from his skull; Fleet Admiral Lord Terrence Hood in Halo 2 also has a visible implant port at the back of his neck. By extension, Petty Officer Second Class Nicole-458 from Dead or Alive 4, a non-canon SPARTAN-II. The player characters as well as some monsters in the System Shock games. Grobyc ("Cyborg" spelled backwards), a cybernetic assassin in Chrono Cross. He joins the player's party after being defeated. Emerl from Sonic Battle. MegaMan.EXE from the Megaman Battle Network series, also known as Hub Hikari (Hikari Saito), brother to Lan. He was born human, but converted into a NetNavi form by Yuiichiro Hikari, due to his human body having the incurable HBD ailment. This would make him a data-based cyborg, as opposed to the standard machine/organic composite. Dr. Capek from the Red Faction series. Ghor from Metroid Prime 3: Corruption. Weavel from Metroid Prime Hunters. Meta Ridley from Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 3: Corruption The wizard of Wor, the villain from the arcade game of the same name. Xenoborg, from the Aliens vs. Predator series. Yoshimitsu from the Tekken and Soulcalibur series. Bryan Fury from the Tekken games. Robo-Manus, Battletoads video game series. Rex, a cybernetic dog, in Fallout: New Vegas Cyborg Molotov and Molly Ryan from Empire Earth. Ziggurat 8 from Xenosaga. A number of enemies in the Doom series feature both organic and cybernetic parts. Xan Kriegor and a number of playable characters, from Unreal Tournament. Volkov, from Command & Conquer: Red Alert, is a cyborg supersoldier, integrating a large hand cannon in his arm as primary method of attack. He also has a cybernetic animal companion, the cybernetic Attack dog Chitzkoi. Nod's Cyborg units, from Command & Conquer: Tiberian Sun. Also Awakened and Enlightened cyborgs are available in Command & Conquer 3: Kane's Wrath. On Some level, Nod's artificial intelligence CABAL may also apply here as well. Yuri, from Command & Conquer: Red Alert 2, appears to have been cybernetically enhanced to enhance his psychic skills. Cyber-Errol from Jak 3. The Protoss Dragoon from StarCraft and the Stalker and the Immortal in Starcraft II. Flotsam the Clown, from the later parts of Dark Chronicle. Karan S'jet and the Bentusi from the Homeworld universe. Virtual Woman, from the various Virtual Woman releases Lieutenant Jean Razac, commanding officer of Roughnecks in CGI animated television series Roughnecks: Starship Troopers Chronicles has a prosthetic arm. A few other minor characters are also shown with mechanized prosthetics. Godot in Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney Trials and Tribulations. In Space Siege,the player has the option to enhance his body with cybernetic augmentations and become less human and more machine till he is 5% human and 95% machine. Also the Pilot had turned the people in the space ship to cyborgs. In one of the end options you can chose to go with pilot and turn all the people to cyborgs. The Grox in Spore In the TimeSplitters-series there are many cyborgs featured Many Space Marine and other characters in the Warhammer 40,000 universe are frequently given bionic limbs and eyes to replace those they lose in battle, culminating in almost entirely cybernetic bodies, or entombment in Dreadnoughts, combat mecha with life support sarcophagi and cybernetic controls. The members of the Iron Hands Space Marine chapter receive an arm prothetic upon induction, and look forward to more amputations and prosthetics due to their disgust for the "weakness of the flesh", which they share with the similarly bionics-obsessed Adeptus Mechanicus. Iron Tager in the BlazBlue series for having magnetically-charged hands. In Xenoblade Chronicles, the character Fiora returns in the later stages of the game as a cyborg due to an event that left her mortally wounded earlier. In the game Anarchy Reigns, most of the characters are cyborgs, even those who only have robotic limbs, including Jack Cayman, Blacker Baron, Mathilda, Big Bull, Leonhardt "Leo" Victorian, Nikolai Dmitri Bulygin, Durga, Douglas Williamsburg and Maximillian Caxton. In XCOM: Enemy Within, XCOM troopers can have their limbs amputated in order to be able to be built into massive Mechanized Exoskeleton Cybersuits, a bipedal combat platform, and control them as extension of their own bodies. The aliens field an extremely similar unit in the form of the Mechtoid, a normally diminutive Sectoid in a combat cybersuit In Crysis people who are wearing nanosuit technology are cyborgs. Cybernetically enhanced soldiers in Call of Duty: Black Ops III. Psychotron, a part human, part computer killing machine from Megadeth's song Psychotron. Several incarnations of Iron Maiden's mascot Eddie the Head are cyborgs. The "Cybernetic Queen" from the song of the same name by Iron Savior. The Sex With Strangers album The Tokyo Steel contains a narrative concerning cyborgs. The Cyborg Noodle replica that appears in artwork from the Gorillaz album, Plastic Beach. Mike Power, Atomic Man, a G.I. Joe version of Steve Austin, the Six Million Dollar Man In the Warhammer 40,000 universe, various races make use of bionics and prosthetics, chiefly the Imperium of Man. It is not uncommon for Space Marines and Imperial Guardsmen to be given artificial limbs and/or organs to replace those lost or irreparably damaged in battle, enabling them to continue their service to the Imperium. Members of the Inquisition sometimes acquire bionics for the same reasons, or adopt them voluntarily for various reasons. In particular, members of the Adeptus Mechanicus – the cult of the Machine God – make extensive use of bionics, often to the point that very little of them can be defined as "human". Adepts of the Adeptus Mechanicus revere technology above all things, and believe that machines are vastly superior to human beings. The high level of bionics and prosthetics common in Tech-Priests has led to Imperial Guardsmen coining a number of slang terms for them, chiefly "cogboys". The name not only refers to the fact that Tech-Priests are mostly machines themselves, but is also a reference to the icon of the Mechanicum, a golden machine cog with an augmented skull emblazoned upon it. Several characters from the Masters of the Universe original line, including Extendar, Man-E-Faces (uncertain), Mekaneck, Rio Blast, Rotar, Sy-Klone, Trap-Jaw, Tri-Klops, and Twistoid. The Phyrexians, from Magic: The Gathering. In The Mechanoid Invasion (1981–), the Mechanoids are a race of formerly biological organisms with psychic abilities who have had their brains placed in mechanical bodies. They have since become genocidal towards all bipeds. The Rifts role-playing game makes extensive use of cybernetics in many Occupational Character Classes. Cybernetics are divided into normal cybernetics, realistic-looking bio-systems, and deadly, combat-oriented bionics. It also organizes Cyborgs into two categories: Partial Conversion, where most of a person's limbs are all that are replaced, and Full Conversion, where the entire body, save for the brain, spinal cord, and a few other organs are replaced by bionics. Almost every character in the Bionicle franchise by Lego Doctor Octopus from the Secret Wars toy line. Two Lego Agents sets included cyborg animals Remote controlled crocodiles (8632 swamp raid) and laser guided cyborg sharks (8633 Speadboat Rescue) The Spartans from the Halo series Cyrax, Sektor & Smoke from Mortal Kombat Max Steel, a Mattel action figure who receives multiple super powers due to an accidental infusion of nanobots Robots in literature Isolated brains in fiction Transhumanism in fiction
