   Đà Nẵng () is one of the major port cities in Vietnam (in addition to Ho Chi Minh City and Hai Phong) and the biggest city on the Central Vietnam; the city is situated on the coast of the Eastern Sea, at the opening end of the Hàn River. Đà Nẵng  is the commercial and educational center of Central Vietnam, with a well-sheltered, easily accessible port; its location on the path of National Route 1A and the North–South Railway makes it a hub for transportation. It is located within 100&nbsp;km of several UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the Imperial City of Huế, the Old Town of Hội An, and the Mỹ Sơn ruins. The city was previously known as Cửa Hàn during early Đại Việt settlement, and as Tourane (or Turon) during French colonial rule. It is the third biggest economic center in Vietnam (after Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi). Before 1997, the city was part of Quảng Nam-Đà Nẵng Province. On 1 January 1997, Đà Nẵng was separated from Quảng Nam Province to become one of five independent (centrally controlled) municipalities in Vietnam. Đà Nẵng is listed as a first class city,Quyết định số 145/2003/QĐ/TTg ngày 15/7/2003 and has a higher urbanization ratio than any of Vietnam's other provinces or centrally governed cities."Đà Nẵng - Trung tâm vùng kinh tế trọng điểm miền Trung" In terms of urban population, Đà Nẵng is the fifth largest city in Vietnam.  Most of the names by which Đà Nẵng has been known make reference to its position at the Hàn River estuary. The city's present name is generally agreed to be a Vietnamese adaptation of the Cham word da nak, which is translated as "opening of a large river".  Other Chamic sources, with similar definitions, have been proposed. Inrasara (aka Phú Trạm), a researcher specializing in Champa, suggests Đà Nẵng is a variation of the Cham word daknan (lit. "the large water"); Sakaya (aka Văn Món), another Champa researcher, claims a connection with the Raglai word danang, meaning "river source".Báo Đà Nẵng Another name given to Đà Nẵng was Cửa Hàn (lit. "mouth of the Han [river]"). The name used by the French, Tourane, is said to derive from this name, by way of a rough transliteration. Notably, this name (spelled "Cua han") appears on maps of the area drafted by Alexandre de Rhodes in 1650. The name Kean (cf. Kẻ Hàn, roughly "Han market") was another name purportedly used during the 17th century to refer to the land situated at the foot of the Hải Vân Pass. The Chinese name, 峴港 (), translates to either "port having many mussels" or "port by a small but dangerous mountain". The latter interpretation is taken as a reference to nearby Sơn Trà Mountain. Other names referring to Đà Nẵng include: The city's origins date back to the ancient Champa Kingdom, established in 192 AD. At its peak, the Chams' sphere of influence stretched from Huế to Vũng Tàu. The city of Indrapura, at the site of the modern village of Dong Duong in Quảng Nam Province (about  from Da Nang), was the capital of Champa from about 875 to about 1000 AD. Also in the region of Da Nang were the ancient Cham city of Singhapura ("City of the Lion"), the location of which has been identified with an archeological site in the modern village of Trà Kiệu, and the valley of Mỹ Sơn, where a number of ruined temples and towers can still be viewed. In the latter half of the 10th century, the kings of Indrapura came into conflict with the Đại Việt, who were then based at Hoa Lư near modern Hanoi.Lê Thành Khôi, Histoire du Vietnam, p.122, 141. In 982, three ambassadors sent to Champa by King Lê Hoàn of the Đại Việt (founder of the Early Lê Dynasty) were detained in Indrapura. Lê Hoàn decided to go on the offensive, sacking Indrapura and killing the Cham King Parameshvaravarman I. As a result of these setbacks, the Cham eventually abandoned Indrapura around 1000 AD.Ngô Vǎn Doanh, Champa, p.34; Ngô Vǎn Doanh, Mỹ Sơn Relics, p.75-76. The Đại Việt campaign against Champa continued into the late 11th century, when the Cham were forced to cede their three northern provinces to the rulers of the Lý Dynasty. Soon afterwards, Vietnamese peasants began moving into the untilled former Cham lands, turning them into rice fields and moving relentlessly southward, delta by delta, along the narrow coastal plain. The southward expansion of Đại Việt (known as Nam Tiến) continued for several centuries, culminating in the annexation of most of the Cham territories by the end of the 15th century.  One of the first Europeans to visit Đà Nẵng was Portuguese explorer António de Faria, who anchored in Đà Nẵng in 1535. Faria was one of the first Westerners to write about the area and, through his influence, Portuguese ships began to call regularly at Hội An, which was then a much more important port than Đà Nẵng.History of Hội An, a World Heritage Site Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, French and Spanish traders and missionaries regularly made landfall at Hội An, just south of Đà Nẵng. An American, John White, arrived at Da Nang (then called Turon) on 18 June 1819 in the brig Franklin of Salem, Massachusetts, and was advised that the country was recovering from devastating wars, and that what little produce there had already been promised. Other American ships arriving shortly after were the Marmion of Boston, and the Aurora and Beverly of Salem.. Conditions were such that they were unable to conduct trade, and the subsequent missions of British East India Company agent John Crawfurd in 1823Nicholas Tarling (editor), The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia: Vol. 2, The nineteenth and twentieth centuries (1992), p. 42; Google Books. and the two missions of Andrew Jackson's agent, diplomatist Edmund Roberts, in 1833 and 1836 were unable to secure trade agreements. Following the edict of Emperor Minh Mạng in 1835, prohibiting European vessels from making landfall or pursuing trade except at Hàn Port, Đà Nẵng quickly surpassed Hội An, becoming the largest commercial port in the central region.  In 1847, French vessels dispatched by Admiral Cécille bombarded Đà Nẵng, ostensibly on the grounds of alleged persecution of Roman Catholic missionaries. In August 1858, once again ostensibly on the grounds of religious persecution, French troops, led by Admiral Charles Rigault de Genouilly, and under the orders of Napoleon III, landed in Đà Nẵng as part of the punitive Cochinchina Campaign. The French overpowered the Vietnamese stationed in Đà Nẵng, swiftly occupying the city and Tiên Sa peninsula (present-day Sơn Trà peninsula). Despite their initial success, the occupying forces were quickly placed under siege by the Vietnamese army under the command of Nguyễn Tri Phương, and were eventually forced to retreat in March 1860. Conversely, however, the French were able to capture the southern stronghold of Saigon and, in June 1862, several provinces of southern Vietnam were ceded to the French as Cochinchina with the signing of the Treaty of Saigon. Through two more decades of conflict, the French gradually strengthened their hold on Vietnam, culminating in the establishment of French Indochina () in October 1887. Two years later, in 1889, the French colonists renamed the city Tourane, placing it under the control of the Governor General of Indochina. It came to be considered one of Indochina's five major cities, among Hanoi, Saigon–Cholon, Hải Phòng, and Huế. During the Vietnam War, the city was home to a major air base that was used by both the South Vietnamese and United States air forces. The base was considered one of the world's busiest airports during the war, reaching an average of 2,595 air traffic operations daily, more than any airport in the world at that time. The final U.S. ground combat operations in Vietnam ceased on 13 August 1972, when a residual force of the 196th Light Infantry Brigade stood down in Đà Nẵng. B Battery 3rd Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery Regiment fired the final U.S. artillery round and the 3rd Battalion, 21st Infantry Regiment finished their final patrols. This residual force was known as "Operation Gimlet". - After the US-retreat, in the final stage of the conquering of South Vietnam by North Vietnam, Da Nang fell to the communist forces March 29/30, 1975. The posts of the Vietnam issued two special postage stamps to commemorate this event, within its "total liberation" stamp set issued Dec. 14, 1976. à Nẵng is the largest city in central Vietnam and one of the country's most important ports. Ringed by mountains on one side and the South China Sea on the other, Đà Nẵng borders Thừa Thiên–Huế Province across the Hải Vân Pass to the north, Quảng Nam Province to the south and west, and the ocean to the east. It is  south of Hanoi, and  north of Hồ Chí Minh City.Danang People's Committee website Geologically, Đà Nẵng is situated at the edge of a Paleozoic fold belt known as the Truong Son Orogenic Zone, whose main deformation occurred during the early Carboniferous period. Đà Nẵng's topography is dominated by the steep Annamite mountain range to the north and northwest, featuring peaks ranging from  in height, and low-lying coastal plains with some salting to the south and east, with several white sand beaches along the coast.Danang People's Committee website Đà Nẵng has a tropical monsoon climate with two seasons: a typhoon & wet season lasting from September through March and a dry season lasting from April through August. Temperatures are typically high, with an annual average of . Temperatures are highest between June and August (with daily highs averaging ), and lowest between December and February (highs averaging ). The annual average for humidity is 81%, with highs between October and December (reaching 84%) and lows between June and July (reaching 76–77%). On average, Đà Nẵng receives  of rainfall. Rainfall is typically highest between October and November (ranging from ) and lowest between January and April (ranging from ). Đà Nẵng receives an average of 2156 hours of sunlight annually, with highs between 234 and 277 hours per month in May and June and lows between 69 and 165 hours per month in November and December.Danang People's Committee website  Đà Nẵng is susceptible to damage from typhoons that cross into the South China Sea. In  2006, the landfall of Typhoon Xangsane near the city of Huế caused 26&nbsp;deaths in Đà Nẵng, damaging and destroying homes, downing trees and power lines and flooding major streets. Authorities in Đà Nẵng estimated the damage caused by Xangsane at around US$200&nbsp;million, with more than 5,000 houses washed away, 166,000 homes damaged and 19 boats sunk."Toll rises from Vietnam typhoon". BBC. 2 October 2006. Three years later, Typhoon Ketsana made its landfall about  south of Đà Nẵng, again causing widespread flooding. Ketsana left eight people dead and 96 injured in Đà Nẵng, and caused an estimated VND 495&nbsp;billion (US$25&nbsp;million) in damage.200 tonnes of rice for Đà Nẵng's Ketsana victims. Đà Nẵng People's Committee. 10 June 2009. Shortly after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake, which triggered a powerful tsunami, the People's Committee of Đà Nẵng approved the installation of 10 early tsunami warning stations throughout the city, the first of their kind in Vietnam. Officials expected the stations would provide at least thirty minutes of warning in case of a tsunami. According to Le Huy Minh, Director of the Earthquake and Tsunami Warning Centre at the Vietnam Institute of Geophysics, a powerful earthquake (≥8 MW) in the waters north of the Philippines could pose a significant danger to the Vietnamese coastline, particularly the area around Đà Nẵng. Đà Nẵng is the fifth most populated city in Vietnam, with an area of 1,255.53&nbsp;km² and a population of 951,700 as of 2011.General Statistics Office (2012): Statistical Yearbook of Vietnam 2011. Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi Women make up 50.7% of Đà Nẵng's population.The 2009 Vietnam Population and Housing census: General Statistics Office of Vietnam Đà Nẵng's population has been growing at rates of between 2.5% and 3% during most of the years between 2005 and 2011, significantly exceeding the national average of 1% to 1.2%. The growth rate briefly rose to 3.6% in 2010 before returning to its long-term trend with 2.68% in 2011. This is the third fastest growth rate in the country after the two southern manufacturing centers Bình Dương Province (4.41%) and Đồng Nai Province (3.5%). Đà Nẵng's population is estimated to reach one million inhabitants by 2014.Statistical Handbook of Vietnam 2014, General Statistics Office Of Vietnam Migration has been the dominant factor in the city's population growth at least since 2009, contributing 1.6% to 2.7% (2010) between 2009 and 2011. Out-migration has been relatively high in 2011 at 0.79% compared to 0.34% and 0.55% in previous years, while the in-migration rate has been exceeding 2% since 2009 and was at 2.28% in 2011. Đà Nẵng's natural population growth is only slightly higher than the national average. Its crude birth rate was recorded at 18 live births per 1000 persons; the crude death rate was measured at 6.7 per 1000 persons in 2011. Life expectancy at birth was estimated at 77.4 years for women and 72.4 years for men, or 74.8 years overall in the 2009 population census. The infant mortality rate was measured at 9.9 infant deaths per 1000 live births, less than two points above the nation's average for urban areas. The city has the highest urbanization ratio among provinces and municipalities in Vietnam,"Đà Nẵng - Trung tâm vùng kinh tế trọng điểm miền Trung"  containing only   11 rural communes, the fewest of any province-level unit in Vietnam.The data of local administrative subdivisions till 31/12/2008 by Vietnam Statistics General Office. As of 2009, 86.9% of Đà Nẵng's population lived in urban areas; average annual urban population growth was 3.5%. The executive branch of the city is the People's Committee of Da Nang City. The current Chairman is Huỳnh Đức Thơ. The legislative branch of the city is the People's Council of Da Nang City. The current Chairman is Trần Thọ. The judiciary branch of the city is the People's Court of Da Nang City. The current Judge is Nguyễn Thành. The leading organ of the Communist Party in Da Nang City is the Executive Committee of the Communist Party. The current Secretary is Nguyễn Xuân Anh. Đà Nẵng is subdivided into 8 district-level sub-divisions: They are further subdivided into 1 commune-level town (or township), 14 communes, and 45 wards. Before 1997, the city was part of Quảng Nam–Đà Nẵng Province. On 1 January 1997, Đà Nẵng was separated from Quảng Nam Province to become one of five independent (centrally-controlled) municipalities in Vietnam. Đà Nẵng is the leading industrial center of central Vietnam. Its GDP per capita was 19 million VND in 2007, one of the highest in Vietnam (after Hồ Chí Minh City, Hanoi, Bình Dương Province, and Đồng Nai Province).calculations based on General Statistics Office (2009): Socio-economical Statistical Data of 63 Provinces and Cities. Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi By 2009, this had increased to 27.3 million VND.Bình Định Statistics Office (2010): Bình Định Statistical Yearbook 2009. Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi Đà Nẵng led the Provincial Competitiveness Index rankings in 2008, 2009, and 2010 (and was second after Bình Dương Province in the three years before that), benefiting mostly from good infrastructure, good performance in labour training, transparency, proactive provincial leadership and low entry costs.Vietnam Provincial Competitiveness Index 2009 Exports increased to 575 million US$ in 2008, but fell back to 475 million US$ in 2009. Despite its status as a city, 37,800 people in Đà Nẵng were employed in agriculture, forestry and fishing as of 2007, producing 45,000t of rice and 41,000t of fish.General Statistics Office (2009): Socio-economic Statistical Data of 63 Provinces and Cities, Vietnam. Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi However, employment in these sectors had a clear negative trend in the first decade of the 21st century. Gross output has also been decreasing during the second half of the decade. Given Đà Nẵng's lack of agricultural land (9200ha as of 2007) and its location at the coast, fishing has been contributing more to the economy than agriculture, with a gross output more than twice that of agriculture. Đà Nẵng is a diversified industrial center, including industries such as machinery, electrics, chemicals, shipbuilding, and textiles.Atlat Dia li Viet Nam (Geographical Atlas of Vietnam). NXB Giao Duc, Hanoi: 2010 Specific industrial products include aquatic products, fabric, clothes, bricks, fertilizer, cement, soap, paper, and medical tablets. The city's industry may diversify further. EADS is planning to set up an industrial park focused on the aviation industry in Đà Nẵng. As of 2007, Đà Nẵng industry was dominated by the state sector, which made up 57% of gross output. This is about the same as its share in 2000. Interestingly, over 80% of the state industry is centrally managed (in other words: belongs to state corporations headquartered in Hanoi). Almost half of the rest is contributed by the foreign-invested sector, while the private domestic sector is still relatively small and has not been able to significantly increase its share compared to the state sector. Industry grew by an average 14.8% per year from 2000 to 2007, making it the main engine of economic growth. However, it has the second lowest industrial growth rate in the South Central Coast (behind only Khánh Hòa Province). Employment has grown at an average 5.75%, reaching 118,900 in 2007.  Historically, Đà Nẵng's main marketplace has been the Hàn Market (), which is located downtown near the western bank of the Hàn River, between Tran Phu and Bạch Đằng streets. This market, much like Bến Thành Market in Saigon, offers a wide variety of goods sold by many different vendors, such as clothing, silk, jewelry, flowers, foodstuffs such as dried fruit and fish, as well as coffee, tea and wine (including Vietnamese snake wine), etc.  Many new construction projects are underway in Đà Nẵng, including several beachfront resorts such as the US$130 million Hyatt Regency Danang Resort & Spa, and the Beach Resort complex (including Ocean Villas and Marriott Hotel) in Ngũ Hành Sơn."Đà Nẵng: Coastal real estate market bustling" Another ambitious project, the US$250 million Da Phuoc International New Town aims to construct an entirely new urban area on reclaimed land on the city's north sea coast, making it the first major land reclamation project in Central Vietnam. Plans for the Đa Phước project include the erection of a hotel and several smaller resorts, a 33-story apartment block and 60-story office block, an 18-hole golf course, a marina, as well as villas and international schools.US$250-million for Daphuoc International New Town Project in Đà Nẵng City"Daewon breaks ground for first urban area on reclaimed land"     The tourism sector is a vital component of Da Nang's economy. Its status as a transportation hub for Central Vietnam and its proximity to several UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the Imperial City of Huế, the Old Town of Hội An, and the Mỹ Sơn ruins fuels much of its tourist activity. Mỹ Sơn is an archaeological site dating back more than a thousand years, in Quảng Nam. Located in a remote forested valley some 70&nbsp;km west of Đà Nẵng, this former capital and religious center of the Champa kingdom once contained in excess of 70 style temples and stupas. Although badly damaged by bombing raids in the 1960s, the site still has more than 20 structures and was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1999. Many statues, sculptures and reliefs recovered from Mỹ Sơn are kept in the Museum of Cham Sculpture, near the Hàn River in the heart of Đà Nẵng. Dating from the fourth to the 14th centuries, the sensual artwork on these works depicts daily activities as well as Hindu and Buddhist religious themes. The Marble Mountains are rocky limestone outcrops jutting out of the beach just south of Đà Nẵng. Paths lead to the top of the forested cliffs, affording spectacular views of Non Nuoc Beach and the South China Sea. The caves nestled in the cliffs were originally inhabited by the Cham people. Later, the Nguyễn Dynasty built numerous pagodas among the caves. The Marble Mountains are home to various artisans producing sculpture and artwork at its base at Non Nước Village. Non Nuoc Beach is a white sandy beach on the outskirts of Đà Nẵng is renowned for both its spectacular beauty and for its history as an R&R destination for American troops during the Vietnam War, when it was known as "China Beach". Today, the beach, along with My Khê beach to the north, are home to expensive resorts, surfing and entertainment facilities. Bà Nà Hills is a mountain resort with a 5&nbsp;km-long cable car system which carries guests up to Bà Nà's peak at 1487m above sea level. Sơn Trà Mountain, just some miles away from downtown with some wild streams and resorts along the seaside.  The Central Vietnamese cuisine in general and Da Nang cuisine in particular are not only well known in the country but also all over the world. This is the region where you can find the strongest and boldest flavor foods available in Vietnam such as Mì Quảng, Bún chả cá (Fish ball noodle soup), Bún mắm, Cánh gà chiên mắm (Fried chicken wings in fish sauce), Mít trộn (a salad mixed with jack-fruit and pork rind). Đà Nẵng's football club, SHB Đà Nẵng F.C., plays in the V-League, Vietnam's top professional football league. They are currently one of the most highly ranked teams in that league, having emerged from competition as champions of the 2009 V-League. In the same year, they were also champions at the Vietnamese Cup playoffs. They also qualified for the 2010 AFC Champions League and the 2010 AFC Cup; although they did not advance past the qualifying play-off in the Champions League, they advanced to the quarter-finals of the AFC Cup after defeating Becamex Bình Dương in extra time. Several Đà Nẵng F.C. players also play on Vietnam's national football team, including defender Võ Hoàng Quảng and midfielder Phan Thanh Hưng. SHB Đà Nẵng F.C. plays its home games at the Chi Lăng Stadium, a 30,000-seat stadium in Hải Châu District.  There are several universities located in Đà Nẵng, with campuses in many locations throughout the city, as well as satellite campuses in surrounding regions. The city has 17 high schools, of which Le Quy Don High School for the Gifted is notably among the leading high schools in Vietnam. There is sizable presence of overseas education representatives in Da Nang. Notably, Campus France, a French-government agency, in Da Nang city which promotes the learning of French language and supports students in Da Nang city and the neighborhood province in the seeking study opportunities for higher education system in France. The consultation service provided by CampusFrance is free-of-charge. English Language Institute is a learning center built by University of Queensland, Australia, targeting at English teaching in general in addition to IELTS testing provider. Singapore International School is an international school in Da Nang. Đà Nẵng has a number of hospitals, including: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) is also known as "Da Nang lung" as many cases occurring during the Vietnam War were treated at a medical centre in Đà Nẵng.  Đà Nẵng is on the end of the East–West Economic Corridor (EWEC) which stretches over Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, and Burma (Myanmar).  Đà Nẵng International Airport, located at the center of the city, is the third largest international airport in Vietnam. It is an important gateway to access central Vietnam. The airport was known as Đà Nẵng Air Base during the Vietnam War, during which time it was described as the world's busiest airport. During the month of May 1968, the base reached an average of 2,595 air traffic operations daily, more than any airport in the world. As of June 2011, the airport has domestic connections to Hanoi, Hồ Chí Minh City, Hải Phòng, Vinh, Buôn Ma Thuột, Đà Lạt, Nha Trang, and Pleiku, as well as international connections to Guangzhou (China), Siem Reap (Cambodia), Singapore, and Taipei (Taiwan). Beginning 16 December 2011, a Malaysian low-cost carrier- Air Asia, began offering four flights a week between Đà Nẵng and Kuala Lumpur. A new international terminal opened in December 2011 and which is expected to allow further connections to destinations such as Phnom Penh (Cambodia), Thailand, Hong Kong, Japan, and South Korea."Malaysian low cost carrier opens new international terminal in December 2011" As of November 2015, Da Nang International airport has been undergoing extensive renovations.   Đà Nẵng is a major station along the North–South Railway, also known as the Reunification Express. National Highways 1A and 14B run through the city, providing road connections to Hanoi in the north and Hồ Chí Minh City in the south, as well as the Central Highlands and Laos to the west. The Hải Vân Pass is a mountain pass separating Đà Nẵng and Thừa Thiên–Huế Province, where Highway 1A road passes through. To cut down on transit time and the danger to motorists from navigating the twisting mountain road, the Hải Vân Tunnel was built, opening in 2005. It is the longest tunnel in Southeast Asia at 6.28&nbsp;km, and allows motorists to save between 30 minutes and an hour on traveling times over the old Hải Vân Pass route. An expressway between Đà Nẵng and nearby Quảng Ngãi is also in the planning stages.  Several bridges cross the Han River and its tributaries in Đà Nẵng, including the iconic Han River Bridge, Trần Thị Lý Bridge, Nguyễn Văn Trỗi Bridge, Tuyen Son Bridge and the recently completed Thuận Phước Bridge, which is the longest suspension bridge in Vietnam. The Dragon River Bridge will cross the Han River at the Le Dinh Duong/Bạch Đằng roundabout, offering tourists coming from Đà Nẵng International Airport a more direct route to Mỹ Khế and Non Nuoc beaches, along the city's eastern edge.   Đà Nẵng's port system is the third largest in Vietnam after Hồ Chí Minh City and Hải Phòng. In 2008, Đà Nẵng's port handled 2.7 million tons of cargo, of which 1.2 million tons were exports, 525,900 tons were imports, and 985,600 tons were domestic cargo. Over 29,600 passengers passed through the port in 2008, a significant increase over previous years. The port system consists of two areas: Tiên Sa Seaport, and Song Hàn Terminal. Tiên Sa Seaport has a navigation depth of 11m, and is able to receive medium range tankers of up to 45,000 DWT, as well as container ships and large cruise ships. The approach to Song Hàn Terminal is  long with a navigation depth of 6-7m, and can accommodate vessels of up to 5,000 DWT. Vietnam National Shipping Lines (Vinalines) is the port authority for Đà Nẵng's port system.World Port Source: Đà Nẵng port Despite the fact that the port's infrastructure is not specifically designed to accommodate cruise ships, the number of large cruise ships docking at Đà Nẵng Port has increased in recent years. In the first two months of 2010 alone, 12 cruise ships docked in Đà Nẵng, carrying 6,477 passengers.     District Subdivisions Area Population (2007)Danang population. Danang People's Committee. Pop. density (km²) (mile²) (persons/km²) (persons/mile²) Cẩm Lệ 6 wards 68,320 Hải Châu 13 wards 195,106 Hòa Vang 14 communes, 1 township 106,910 Liên Chiểu 5 wards 95,088 Ngũ Hành Sơn 4 wards 54,066 Sơn Trà 7 wards 119,969 Thanh Khê 10 wards 167,287 Hoàng Sa — 0 Total 45 wards, 14 communes, 1 township 806,744 Exports million US$ (2007) Imports million US$ (2007) Total 469.6 Total 522.1 Textiles 139.8 Machinery, equipment 237.2 Aquatic products 75.2 Materials for garments 77 Handicraft products 51.6 Iron, steel 41.6 Coffee 47.6 Medicaments 24.9 Footwear 17.7 Chemical fertilizer 22.5 Rice 8 Motorbikes 0.45 Vũng Thùng, a colloquial name which survives in folklore."Hearing the sudden gunfire, we know that the Western ships anchored at Vung Thung yesterday" ("Tai nghe súng nổ cái đùng, Tàu Tây đã lại Vũng Thùng hôm qua").  Trà Úc, Trà Áo, Trà Sơn and Đồng Long Loan, literary names used by Confucian scholars. In Sino-Vietnamese script, used until 1945, "Đà Nẵng" is written as . Thái Phiên, a name used briefly after the 1945 August Revolution, commemorating Thái Phiên, the leader of popular revolts during the 1916 Duy Tân Resistance. 2 rural districts: Hòa Vang Hoàng Sa (Paracel Islands) 6 urban districts: Cẩm Lệ Hải Châu Liên Chiểu Ngũ Hành Sơn Sơn Trà Thanh Khê University of Đà Nẵng, with a number of member colleges: Technology Economics Pedagogy Foreign Languages Engineering Information Technology Kon Tum campus English Language Institute Da Nang University of Medical Technology, Medicine and Pharmacy (newly upgraded from college) Duy Tân University, private university Dong A University, private university Da Nang University of Architecture The American University of Vietnam, private university Đà Nẵng Hospital C Hospital Women's Hospital Dermatology and Venerology Traditional Medicine  Semarang, IndonesiaMarzuki: Hubungan Indonesia-Vietnam Harus Ditingkatkan - Yahoo! News Indonesia  Kawasaki, Japan  Iwaki, Japan  Shizuoka, Japan  Kagoshima, Japan  Okinawa, Japan  Shandong, China  Jiangsu, China  Qingdao, China  Macau, China  Kaohsiung, Taiwan  Hai Phong, Vietnam  Oakland, California, United States  Tacoma, Washington, United States  San Francisco, United States  Jersey City, New Jersey, United States   Pittsburgh, United States   Timișoara, Romania  Newcastle, Australia  İzmir, Turkey  Yaroslavl, RussiaRussian and Vietnamesee partnership  Toluca, MexicoToluca y ciudad vietnamita Da Nang firman acuerdo de hermandad Daughter from Đà Nẵng is a 2002 award-winning documentary film about an Amerasian woman who returns to visit her biological family in Đà Nẵng after 22 years of separation and living in the United States. Nikita Meers of the CW program Nikita is revealed upon discovering her true parents to have been born in Đà Nẵng. Đà Nẵng government portal
