    Ralph Dale Earnhardt, Jr. (born October 10, 1974); known professionally as Dale Earnhardt, Jr., Dale, Jr. or just Junior; is an American professional stock car racing driver and champion team owner. He is the son of NASCAR Hall of Famer Dale Earnhardt, Sr. He is also the grandson of both NASCAR driver Ralph Earnhardt and stock car fabricator Robert Gee, the brother of Kelley Earnhardt-Miller, the half-brother of former driver Kerry Earnhardt, the uncle of driver Jeffrey Earnhardt, the stepson of Teresa Earnhardt, and the older half-brother of Taylor Nicole Earnhardt-Putnam. Earnhardt's success at Daytona International Speedway throughout his career, has earned him the nickname "Pied Piper" of Daytona. He is a two-time Daytona 500 winner, having won the race exactly 10 years apart (2004 and 2014), and has won the Most Popular Driver Award twelve times (consecutively from 2003–2014). He has an estimated net worth of $300 million. He currently drives the No. 88 Chevrolet SS in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series for Hendrick Motorsports and drives the No. 88 Chevrolet Camaro for his own team, JR Motorsports, in select events in the Xfinity Series. He had previously driven the No. 8 Chevrolet for Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI), his father's team. Earnhardt was born and raised in Kannapolis, North Carolina, the son of Brenda Lorraine (née Gee; born January 2, 1952) and Dale Earnhardt, Sr. His maternal grandfather, Robert Gee, Sr., was a NASCAR car builder. He is of part German ancestry. Earnhardt attended the high performance driving school run by Andy HillenburgGreg Roza, Dale Earnhardt Jr.: Nascar Driver, 2006, page 9 and began his racing career at the late age of 17 with his dad Dale Earnhardt, competing in the Street Stock division at Concord, North Carolina's Motorsport Park. His first race car was a 1979 Monte Carlo that he co-owned with his older half-brother, Kerry Earnhardt. Within two seasons, Earnhardt had honed his driving abilities to the point of joining the Late Model Stock Car division. He competed on the North and South Carolina short tracks driving a No. 3 Chevrolet. While he did run various tracks during this time, Earnhardt primarily focused his efforts at the Myrtle Beach Speedway in South Carolina and the East Carolina Motor Speedway in Robersonville, North Carolina, where he captured the pole for the Greenville Merchants 300 on October 28, 1994. There he developed an in-depth knowledge of chassis setup and car preparation, while racing against his older brother Kerry and his sister Kelley. He worked at his father's dealership as a mechanic while he went to Mitchell Community College to earn an associate degree in automotive technology.James MacDonald, Dale Earnhardt Jr.: Racing's Living Legacy, 2008, pages 34-35 Earnhardt ran nine Busch Series races between 1996 and 1997 for Dale Earnhardt, Inc., and Ed Whitaker, respectively, before driving for his father's team in the Busch Series full-time in 1998, in which he started the season with an amazing blowover after contact with Dick Trickle and Buckshot Jones at Daytona, on the same weekend that his father had his first and only Daytona 500 win. Earnhardt won consecutive NASCAR Busch Series Championships in 1998 and 1999 barely edging Matt Kenseth. In 1998 he made his first start in the Winston Cup Series, at the exhibition race held in Motegi, Japan. Also in 1999, he drove in 5 Winston Cup races in the No. 8 Budweiser-sponsored Chevrolet for Dale Earnhardt, Inc., and then in 2000, he went full-time in the Winston Cup series. 2000 was Earnhardt's breakout year in the Cup Series. He competed for the Raybestos NASCAR Rookie of the Year Award in 2000. His primary competitor for the award was Matt Kenseth. Kenseth outran Earnhardt in the season-opening Daytona 500. Earnhardt scored his first win in the DirecTV 500 at Texas Motor Speedway, breaking the record held by his father Earnhardt, Sr. for fewest starts by a driver to earn his first victory in NASCAR's "Modern Era" by winning in just his 12th start, and also at Richmond International Raceway. He became the first rookie to win the All-Star exhibition race. Earnhardt played a part in recreating one Winston Cup milestone in 2000 when he competed with his father and half-brother Kerry in the Pepsi 400 at Michigan International Speedway. That occasion was only the second time that a father had raced against two sons — Lee Petty and his two sons Richard and Maurice had previously accomplished the feat.Kerry Earnhardt website Earnhardt ended the year with 2 wins, 3 Top 5's, 5 Top 10's, and 2 Bud Poles.  In 2001, the major event of the season occurred on February 18, in the final corner of the final lap of the 2001 Daytona 500. As Earnhardt and his teammate Michael Waltrip raced to the finish line, he finished second to Waltrip. His father had crashed in turn 4 after Sterling Marlin made contact with his left rear bumper. Earnhardt, Sr. shot up the track into the outside wall behind Waltrip and his son and collected Ken Schrader in the process. Earnhardt, Sr. was pronounced dead at 5:16pm due to a basilar skull fracture. In the aftermath, many disgruntled fans sent death threats to Marlin and his family, blaming him for the crash; Earnhardt and Waltrip both requested that fans stopped blaming anybody for Earnhardt, Sr.'s death and both the local police and NASCAR investigations into the crash cleared Marlin of any involvement. Earnhardt raced at Rockingham the following weekend, but finished in 43rd-place after a wreck on the first lap that looked eerily similar to his father's wreck just a week earlier. Later in the season, Earnhardt made a comeback, beginning with an emotional win at the Pepsi 400, which was also the first race held at Daytona since his dad's death. Earnhardt had the dominant car of the race, leading 115 out of 160 laps. On the last restart, he managed to make a move from sixth to first place in the span of two laps, with Waltrip holding off the field as Earnhardt took the checkered flag. He won the MBNA Cal Ripken Jr. 400 at Dover, which was the first Cup race following the September 11 attacks as the original scheduled race at New Hampshire Motor Speedway was postponed until the end of the season. After the race, he performed a Polish victory lap while holding a large American flag out the driver's side window. In the fall, Earnhardt took his second restrictor plate win as he won the EA Sports 500 at Talladega as a crash unfolded on the back straightaway that caused Bobby Labonte to flip over and also collected 15 other cars. The Talladega victory earned Earnhardt a Winston No Bull 5 $1 million bonus. He was docked 25 points, however, after his car failed post-race inspection. With this win, DEI swept three of the four restrictor plate races for 2001, only failing to win the spring Talladega race. He finished the 2001 season eighth in the points standings with three wins, nine Top 5's, and fifteen Top 10's, as well as two poles. In 2002, Earnhardt had a roller-coaster season. He struggled after enduring a concussion at the Fontana race in April&nbsp;— an injury he did not admit to until mid-September. In the three races following Fontana, he finished no better than 30th. However, Earnhardt rallied to sweep both Talladega races (leading a dominating 133 of 188 laps in the spring race), a pair of Bud Pole Awards and an 11th-place finish in the standings with eleven Top 5's and sixteen Top 10 finishes. In 2003, he became a true title contender, scoring a record-breaking fourth consecutive win at Talladega, after being involved in a 27-car crash on lap 4. He struggled for most of the race, and was at points a half-lap down, only catching back up to the pack through a caution. The win was controversial because with 5 laps to go, it appeared that Earnhardt went below the yellow line to gain position, but NASCAR ruled that Matt Kenseth had forced him below the line, making it a clean pass. He later scored a victory at Phoenix in October, recording a career best 3rd-place effort in the standings, with thirteen Top 5s and twenty-one Top 10 finishes. He also took home the NMPA Most Popular Driver award for the first time in his career. In 2004, Earnhardt won the Daytona 500, six years to the day after his father won his only title in the Great American Race (and 3 years after his father was killed in the 2001 race). Earnhardt came very close to sweeping Speedweeks, as in addition to the Daytona 500, he also won his Gatorade Duel and the Busch Series race. However, he finished 2nd in the Budweiser Shootout to Dale Jarrett. On July 18, during the summer off-weekend, Earnhardt crashed a Chevrolet Corvette C5-R during a practice for the American Le Mans Series Grand Prix of Sonoma at Infineon Raceway. The car slid off course and hit a concrete barrier during warm-up the day of the race, rupturing a fuel line and causing the car to burst into flames with him still inside. He suffered second and third degree burns on his neck, chin, and legs partially due to not wearing a protective balaclava with his helmet. The burns prevented him from finishing two races where he was relieved by Martin Truex, Jr. (at New Hampshire) and his DEI teammate John Andretti (at Pocono) in the middle of the races. In the fall, Earnhardt became the first driver to sweep a weekend at Bristol by winning both the Busch and Cup races in the same weekend.   Earnhardt was able to qualify for the NASCAR 10-race playoff, and had his 5th NEXTEL Cup win of the season (a career high) at Talladega. However, he was penalized 25 points for use of an obscenity during the television broadcast, in violation of a new NASCAR rule prohibiting participants from using obscene language (the rule had been created the week after the Daytona 500, in the wake of the Super Bowl half-time show controversy). That incident, combined with two consecutive DNF's in the Chase, eventually dropped him out of the running, and he finished fifth in the 2004 NEXTEL Cup Chase despite a career-high 6 wins at Daytona, Atlanta, Richmond, Bristol, Talladega and defending his fall win at Phoenix (though under the non-Chase points system, Earnhardt would have tied his third-place points finish of the previous year). He closed off the 2004 season with 6 wins, sixteen Top 5s, and twenty-one Top 10 finishes. He also picked up his 2nd consecutive Most Popular Driver Award.  At the close of the 2004 season, it was revealed that Tony Eury, Sr. would be promoted to the team manager position for the DEI corporation, while Tony Eury, Jr. became the crew chief for Michael Waltrip for the 2005 season. Peter Rondeau, a Chance 2 employee who also helped Earnhardt win the Busch Series race at Bristol in August, became the crew chief for Earnhardt in 2005. Rondeau served as Earnhardt's crew chief until the Coca Cola 600 weekend, when he was replaced with DEI chief engineer Steve Hmiel, who helped Earnhardt score his lone win of 2005 at Chicagoland in July, when he took the lead from Matt Kenseth on the last cycle of pit stops. Earnhardt was eliminated from any possible competition for the NEXTEL Cup championship after suffering an engine failure at the California Speedway. Earnhardt was reunited with his cousin, Tony Eury, Jr., after the fall Richmond weekend, and results improved immediately. Earnhardt finished the season 19th in points. For the 3rd straight year, he took home the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award. Earnhardt's proficiency as a car owner continued. His race team outside of DEI, JR Motorsports, in 2005 fielded a car in the USAR Hooters ProCup Series, winning once and qualifying for the Four Champions playoff. Mark McFarland moved to the Busch Series in 2006, driving the No. 88 JR Motorsports US Navy Chevrolet, with Richard Childress Racing providing  assistance; however, he was fired before the fall Michigan race, the Carfax 250. He was replaced by Robby Gordon and Martin Truex, Jr. for the rest of the year. Long-time short track racer Shane Huffman drove Earnhardt's USAR Hooters ProCup car in 2006. In 2006, during the spring weekend at Talladega Superspeedway, Earnhardt and other DEI drivers drove with special black paint schemes on their cars, reminiscent of his late father's famous No. 3 paint scheme. On Father's Day in 2006, he drove a vintage Budweiser car at Michigan International Speedway to honor both his grandfather (Ralph Earnhardt) and his father, who at one point in both their careers used the #8 car. After rain caused the race to be ended early, Earnhardt finished 3rd with Kasey Kahne winning the race. After 17 races in the 2006 season, Earnhardt sat 3rd in the championship standings with 1 win, coming at Richmond in May 2006.  During the race at New Hampshire, he experienced the second engine failure of his 2006 season, ultimately leading to a 43rd-place finish. Following New Hampshire was the race at Pocono, where he was running in the middle of the pack when he crashed in turn 2. These two events catapulted him to 11th in the points standing, out of the Chase for the Cup. At Indianapolis Motor Speedway, Earnhardt and his crew made a critical decision to stay out on the final pit stop to get a much needed Top 10 finish to move him up to 10th in the points. He made the 2006 Chase for the NEXTEL Cup after finishing 17th in the Chevy Rock and Roll 400 at Richmond International Raceway on September 9, 2006. He came close to winning at Talladega, and was leading on the last lap when Brian Vickers made contact with Earnhardt's future teammate Jimmie Johnson, sending Johnson into Earnhardt and spinning both of them out. His points position going into the Chase was 6th. He finished the season 5th in the point standings, 147 points behind leader Jimmie Johnson.    Earnhardt began the 2007 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series season by finishing 32nd at the Daytona 500 as the result of a late race crash. His first Top 10 came at Bristol Motor Speedway in the Food City 500, where he finished 7th. His first Top 5 came at Martinsville Speedway in the Goody's Cool Orange 500. He led 136 laps and finished 5th. He collected his third Top 10 of the season and his 8th at Talladega Superspeedway with his 7th-place performance in the 2007 Aaron's 499. On May 14, he was docked 100 driver championship points, car owner Teresa Earnhardt was docked 100 owner points, and his crew chief, Tony Eury, Jr., was fined $100,000 and suspended for 6 races due to the use of illegal mounting brackets used to attach the wing to his car. During the April race at Texas Motor Speedway he drove the last 10 laps in the No. 5 car of Kyle Busch owned by Rick Hendrick. On May 27, 2007, Earnhardt rode a camouflage No. 8 car in the Coca-Cola 600 on Memorial Day to raise money for the families of military troops. Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, Greg Biffle, Mark Martin, Ward Burton, Denny Hamlin, Casey Mears, Shane Huffman and Jon Wood also changed their paint schemes for the occasion.Fox Sports on MSN&nbsp;– NASCAR&nbsp;– Dale Jr. camo car, other schemes honor troops He finished eighth, after leading with seven laps to go, but he had to pit for fuel and Casey Mears finished with the win. On August 5, 2007, Earnhardt earned his first pole position in a race since 2002 at Pocono Raceway. Although Kurt Busch won the race, Earnhardt had a dramatic comeback to finish 2nd after spinning out and experiencing shock troubles. Earnhardt led for eight laps before Busch took over.ESPN&nbsp;– Kurt Busch makes statement with dominating win at Pocono&nbsp;– Nascar On August 12 at Watkins Glen International, Earnhardt was making the push into the Top 12 of the Nextel Cup standings from his No. 13 position. After being at the No. 2 position during the race, Earnhardt had engine problems on lap 64 and had to end his race day. After the Glen, he tried furiously to reach the 12th spot in standings. However, a resurgence by Kurt Busch and a blown engine during the final race at Richmond ended his Chase hopes. That was his last chance to participate for the Championship at Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI). After the 2007 season, Dale Jr. won the NMPA Chex Most Popular Driver award for the 5th consecutive time. After much speculation, Earnhardt announced on May 10, 2007, that he would leave Dale Earnhardt Inc., the company founded by his father, to drive for another team in 2008. Earnhardt expressed that his decision was based entirely on his desires to achieve his career goal of a Sprint Cup Championship, and his apparent belief that he would not be able to attain that objective while driving for DEI. He said that unless he could gain majority ownership, and therefore control, of DEI, that he was not confident in the organization’s ability to field the elite level equipment that would yield the elusive title."Dale Earnhardt Jr., the Gravest Loss in the History of NASCAR?" On June 13, 2007, he announced at a press conference that he had signed a five-year contract with Hendrick Motorsports, replacing Kyle Busch. At the time, Hendrick consisted of Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, and Casey Mears. One month later, on July 13, it was announced that his long-time primary sponsor Budweiser would not be with Earnhardt when he made the move to Hendrick. Other contractual agreements in place at Hendrick Motorsports are said to have prevented a relationship with Bud."This Bud's for ... ? Dale Jr., longtime sponsor to split" On August 15, 2007, it was announced that Earnhardt would not be taking his familiar No. 8 with him to Hendrick Motorsports in 2008. His late grandfather, Ralph Earnhardt, used that number, while Earnhardt picked it when he entered the Cup Series in 1999. His father also used No. 8 early in his career. Earnhardt, Jr. blamed his stepmother for not allowing the No. 8 to move with him to Hendrick Motorsports. Earnhardt said negotiations broke down when Teresa Earnhardt asked for part of the licensing revenue, along with wanting the number back after he retired. (The No. 8 team, after a successful season in 2008 with co-drivers Mark Martin and Aric Almirola, would end up being shut down in 2009 after DEI's merger with Ganassi Racing.) Earnhardt moved to the No. 88 car with Tony Eury, Jr. coming to Hendrick to remain as his crew chief. On September 19, the official announcement was made that Earnhardt would be driving the No. 88 Mountain Dew AMP/National Guard Chevrolet Impala for the 2008 season. The No. 88, according to NASCAR archives, was driven by Ralph Earnhardt, his paternal grandfather, in 1957. His maternal grandfather, Robert Gee, was one of the first employees of All Star Racing, initially a Late Model Sportsman (now Nationwide Series) team with Gee as Hendrick's partner, which is now Hendrick Motorsports. Hendrick said about Earnhardt and his uncles, "I can look at Robert Gee Jr., or Jimmy Gee, or Dale Jr., and all I see is Robert Gee. They're the spitting image of him. I go back and look and pictures from when we did things together, and I have to say, I owe Robert a lot." Starting in the 2008 season, Hendrick Motorsports merged its Nationwide Series team to Earnhardt's JR Motorsports, with the cars coming from Earnhardt's shop, which employs his mother and uncles.    Earnhardt started the season by winning the 2008 Budweiser Shootout a non-points paying exhibition. It was his first race for Hendrick. He led for a total of 47 out of 70 laps, a Budweiser Shootout record. He followed that up five days later with a win in the Gatorade Duel. This was his third career win in the duels, however he was unable to follow it up with victory in the Daytona 500, finishing 9th. Ryan Newman was the winner of the event. Earnhardt was docked 50 points because his rear spoiler did not meet the specified height in the Nationwide Series. His crew chief Chad Walter was fined $35,000, suspended for 6 races and was placed on probation until December 31, 2008. Team owner Rick Hendrick was also docked 50 owner points along with Earnhardt."Post-Daytona penalties handed down" by Jaymes Song, Seattle Times, February 21, 2008 At Michigan, Earnhardt broke his 76-race winless streak, managing to stretch his fuel mileage enough to allow him to win under a caution on the last lap of a green-white-checkered (overtime) finish. He did not find much success after the Michigan win. He then went back to Talladega Superspeedway for the AMP Energy 500 where he was en route to a possible win before being caught up in "The Big One" late in the race. He headed to Martinsville Speedway where he finished 2nd to teammate Jimmie Johnson. He ended the season in the garage area at Homestead Miami Speedway in The Ford 400 after losing his brakes with just a few laps to go in the race. Earnhardt finished the season 12th in points, 557 points behind champion Jimmie Johnson. In the season-opening Daytona 500, Earnhardt began well, even leading for a lap. However multiple misfortunes, including a missed pit stop and a 1-lap penalty for pitting outside of his pit box, sent him far into the back of the running order. Earnhardt was then directly involved in a controversial crash on lap 124, when, while fighting to return to the lead lap, he came in contact with Brian Vickers while fighting to be the first driver one lap down (who gets a free pass should the caution flag come out), causing a 10-car pileup which included Denny Hamlin, Scott Speed, Jimmie Johnson, Kyle and Kurt Busch, Robby Gordon, Jamie McMurray, and Carl Edwards. Vickers and Kyle Busch later criticized Earnhardt, who denied purposely clipping Vickers. Earnhardt criticized Vickers for blocking him on the inside. When the race concluded early due to the rain, Earnhardt ended with a 27th-place finish. Earnhardt later apologized for his actions but maintains to this day that he never intended to wreck Vickers. After a blown engine at California and falling to 35th in the owners points, he finished 10th at Las Vegas and reached 29th place in points. He finished 8th at Martinsville. He had a string of poor finishes including 20th at Texas, and 31st at Phoenix after being spun out by Casey Mears. He gained confidence in his team with a very strong performance at Talladega, leading for 20 laps, and finishing 2nd to his protege Brad Keselowski after Keselowski sent Carl Edwards flying into the catch fence in one of the year's biggest upsets. However, two weeks later at Richmond, Earnhardt finished 27th. He was again spun out late in the race at Darlington and ended the race in 27th place. He then finished 10th in the All-Star race at Lowe's Motor Speedway. Earnhardt's poor performance continued as he finished in 40th at the Coca Cola 600 due to an ill-handling race car. On May 28, 2009, Tony Eury, Jr. was let go as crew chief of the No. 88 team. Lance McGrew was named interim crew chief and was scheduled to take over, starting with the June 2009 Pocono Race with team manager Brian Whitesell calling the shots at Dover the previous week. McGrew was scheduled to work with Brad Keselowski at Dover, but after a failed qualifying attempt by Keselowski, was able to take on his duties for the No. 88 team a week early. Dale Jr. managed to finish 12th at Dover for the Autism Speaks 400 with his new crew chief after contending for the lead. At Pocono Raceway, however, he again ended with a 27th-place finish. After the change in crew chiefs, Earnhardt was consistently better, finishing fifteenth at Chicagoland Speedway; however, during that time he also had one DNF at Daytona International Speedway where he was taken out of the race early in a large pileup. At the Carfax 400 at Michigan, Earnhardt charged to the front near the end of the race and managed to finish 3rd; he also earned his second Top 5 finish this season in the same race. One week later at Bristol, Earnhardt finished 9th in the Sharpie 500, but his bad luck continued at the Auto Club Speedway, when he was involved in a multi-car incident. After a 39th qualifying run at Lowe's Motor Speedway, he said "I'm about to the end of my rope". At the fall Talladega race, Earnhardt had a solid run, including leading several laps, before finishing in 11th place. Lance McGrew had the "interim" taken off of his title, and he continued working with the No. 88 team through the end of the 2010 season. Earnhardt ended 2009 winless, and finished a career low 25th in the standings. On Saturday, February 6, 2010, Earnhardt qualified second overall for the 52nd Daytona 500 after losing the pole position to teammate Mark Martin. He started 1st in the Gatorade Duel No. 2 on February 11 of that year. He finished 11th in the 2010 Budweiser Shootout after struggling with an ill-handling car for most of the race. On February 13, 2010, while running in the front of the pack at the Daytona Nationwide Series race, Earnhardt was caught up in a multi-car wreck, causing his car to flip upside down on the backstretch. He walked away from the wreck uninjured. His driver Danica Patrick was caught up in another wreck before Earnhardt flipped. On July 2, 2010, Earnhardt raced the No. 3 blue and yellow Wrangler Chevrolet (painted to pay tribute to his father and fans) and drove it to victory lane in the Nationwide Series Subway Jalepeño 250 at Daytona. He finished the 2010 Season on November 21, 2010, ranking 21st. Hendrick Motorsports then did a major crew chief shuffle, pairing Earnhardt's crew chief McGrew with Mark Martin, while Gordon's crew chief Steve Letarte moved to the 88 team, and Gordon got Martin's crew chief, Alan Gustafson. On December 2, 2010, it was announced that Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver award for the 8th consecutive time.   He began the season by drawing the pole position at the 2011 Budweiser Shootout, where he finished 19th in the race. On February 13, he earned his first pole position at Daytona International Speedway, as well as his first at a track that uses restrictor plates. Due to a practice crash, he had to start at the back of the field for both the duel race and the 500. He finished 24th in the Daytona 500 after being wrecked with 4 laps to go.  Over the next seven races, Earnhardt would achieve five Top 10 finishes, including a 2nd-place finish at Martinsville after losing the lead to Kevin Harvick with 4 laps to go, and a 4th-place finish at Talladega in a photo finish with Jimmie Johnson, Jeff Gordon, Mark Martin, Clint Bowyer, and Kevin Harvick. Earnhardt came within half a lap of snapping his then-104 race winless streak at the Coca-Cola 600 at the Charlotte Motor Speedway, when he ran out of fuel during a green-white-checkered finish, finishing 7th. The following week at Kansas, Earnhardt finished 2nd to Brad Keselowski. He followed this up with a solid 6th-place finish at Pocono. Over the course of the next three races, Earnhardt would slide to 7th in the Championship points, finishing 21st at Michigan, 41st at Infineon, and 19th at Daytona. On September 1, 2011 Earnhardt announced he had signed a 5-year contract extension with Hendrick Motorsports to drive the #88 until 2017. On September 19, 2011, Earnhardt made his first Chase for the Sprint Cup appearance since 2008 at Chicagoland. At the season finale at Homestead, he finished 11th and finished 7th in the final points standings. On December 1, 2011, it was announced that Earnhardt won the Most Popular Driver award for the 9th consecutive time. Earnhardt started 8th in the Budweiser Shootout, led for several laps, and finished 20th after being caught up in a six-car crash on lap 55 that also involved Matt Kenseth, Joey Logano and Kevin Harvick. In the Gatorade Duel, Earnhardt performed strong, starting on the outside pole in the first duel race. He led a few laps in the early part of the race before finishing second to Tony Stewart after his Nationwide Series teammate Danica Patrick smashed hard into the inside wall in a last lap crash on the back straightaway. In the postponed Daytona 500, he finished in 2nd place behind Matt Kenseth, after passing Greg Biffle on the last lap. At Phoenix, Earnhardt's car struggled most of the race and came out with a 14th-place finish. At Las Vegas, Earnhardt led 70 laps early but finished 10th based on bad pit strategy. At Bristol, Earnhardt finished 15th following a late race contact with teammate Jeff Gordon, and a speeding penalty. Earnhardt would back this up with a pair of back to back 3rd-place finishes at Auto Club and Martinsville Speedway, leaving him second in the standings. In the following weeks, Earnhardt would bring a string of Top 10's: 10th at Texas, 7th at Kansas, 2nd at Richmond, and 9th at Talladega, where he led 10 laps. The following week, Earnhardt struggled for most of the race at Darlington, and had to settle with a 17th-place finish. At the All-Star Race, Earnhardt won the Sprint Showdown, leading all 40 laps to race his way into the big event. In the event, Earnhardt won the 4th segment and in the final 10 lap shootout, had to settle for a 5th-place finish. The following two weeks, Earnhardt would post of finishes of 6th at Charlotte and 4th at Dover heading into the summer months. At the newly repaved Pocono Raceway, Earnhardt led 36 laps during the race, but made a late race fuel pit stop from 3rd place with just over 20 laps to go, finishing 8th and standing 2nd in points. At the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 at Michigan, Earnhardt dominated the race, leading 95 laps, and won, snapping a 143-race winless streak, almost four years to the day after his last win on June 15, 2008.  Earnhardt would suffer a 23rd-place finish at Sonoma after being wrecked in a green-white-checkered finish, but was still able to cross the finish line intact and on the lead lap, continuing his streak of being the only driver to finish all races on the lead lap. He would back this up with a fourth-place finish in the Quaker State 400 at Kentucky Speedway. The following week at Daytona, a last lap crash resulted in a 15th-place finish for Earnhardt but still kept his streak of being the only driver to finish every single lap in every race. Earnhardt backed up with a couple of Top 5 finishes, finishing 4th at both Loudon and Indianapolis, where he gained the points lead for the first time since 2004, after points leader Matt Kenseth was taken out in a late race crash.  Back at Pocono, Earnhardt was running in the 2nd position, but a break in the transmission sent the 88 to the garage, but he came back out 18 laps down and finished 32nd, due to rain that came and ended the race and a late race wreck involving Jimmie Johnson, Matt Kenseth, and Denny Hamlin. His streak of completing on the lead lap came to an end, but he still maintained the points lead with 5 races until the chase cutoff. At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt had a steady Top 10 going in the final laps but a late race spin resulted in a 28th-place finish, this would drop the 88 team from 1st to 4th in the points.  Returning to Michigan for the Pure Michigan 400, Earnhardt had to start in 42nd place after a crash in practice forced him to move to a backup car. He led for a number of laps mid-race and finished on the lead lap in 4th place. Earnhardt; Ryan Newman; and Kasey Kahne also escaped engine difficulties that plagued Jimmie Johnson, Jeff Gordon, and Tony Stewart. At Bristol Motor Speedway, Earnhardt started 16th after a qualifying rainout; he led 13 laps in the race before pit road penalties resulted in a 12th-place finish. The finish locked him into the 2012 Chase for the Sprint Cup, alongside Greg Biffle, and teammate Jimmie Johnson. At Atlanta Motor Speedway, Earnhardt went a lap down early but recovered to earn a 7th-place finish. The following week at Richmond International Raceway, Earnhardt earned his first pole of the season. He would go on to lead 69 laps, but a late race pit stop resulted in the 88 team getting a 14th-place finish, and being seeded 7th in the standings. In the first race of the chase at Chicagoland Speedway, Earnhardt finished 8th despite having to start at the rear of the field due to an engine change. Finishes of 13th and 11th at Loudon and Dover left the 88 team 7th in the standings. On the morning of October 11, Hendrick Motorsports announced that Earnhardt would have to sit out the Bank of America 500 at Charlotte and the Hollywood Casino 400 at Kansas due to a concussion from a 23-car crash on the last lap at Talladega on October 7. That weekend, Earnhardt finished 20th at Talladega when he took a hard lick in a crash after making contact with Bobby Labonte. Prior to this, Earnhardt had suffered a concussion during an August 29 test at Kansas Speedway. Regan Smith was announced to replace him at those two races. Prior to the concussion, Earnhardt had competed in 461 consecutive races, dating back to the 1999 Atlanta event. The 2012 Bank of America 500 marked the first race since the 1979 Southern 500 that an Earnhardt had not competed in the Sprint Cup Series as Dale Earnhardt had competed in every race from that one up until his death in the 2001 Daytona 500. On October 23, Earnhardt was cleared for the Tums Fast Relief 500 at Martinsville after missing two races. He started strong in the race, but a late race spin with Carl Edwards placed for a 21st-place finish. His first top ten finish after returning to the track was a seventh-place finish at Texas. At Phoenix, Earnhardt fought an ill-handling car, and finished 21st. At the season finale, at Homestead-Miami Speedway, Earnhardt would finish 10th. This is his first top 10 finish at the 1.5-mile track, and his 20th this season. He closed the season 12th in the final standings. On November 29, 2012, it was announced that Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award for the 10th consecutive year. This ties Bill Elliott's streak of 10 consecutive wins in the award.   Earnhardt started the 2013 season with an 8th-place finish in the rechristened Sprint Unlimited. He qualified 11th for the Budweiser Duel, but he blew an engine in practice, he was forced to drop to the rear of the field. After narrowly missing a 3-car wreck between Carl Edwards, Trevor Bayne, and Regan Smith, he finished 9th. He finished fourth at the DRIVE4COPD 300 after submarining under Alex Bowman's car in a violent last lap wreck. In the Sprint Cup Series, Earnhardt hit a slight resurgence, and in the first five races of the season recorded three Top 5's and five Top 10 finishes. It began with a second-place finish to teammate Jimmie Johnson at the Daytona 500, Earnhardt's third runner up finish in the 500 since 2010. The following week at Phoenix, he led for 47 laps, but was shuffled back in traffic during a cycle caution flag pit stops, which allowed Carl Edwards to assume the lead while Junior finished in fifth place. This was followed by two more Top 10 finishes: 7th at Las Vegas and 6th at Bristol. At Fontana, Earnhardt started mid-pack and after a couple of mistakes including a lengthy pit stop caused by missed lug nuts on a right rear tire, he came home in 2nd-place finish, assuming the points lead as a result of Brad Keselowski going off pace and falling back. Two weeks later in Martinsville, Earnhardt struggled throughout the race, and spun out after Danica Patrick was hit by Brian Vickers and sent into Earnhardt and ended up finishing 24th, 2 laps down, losing the points lead to Jimmie Johnson. At Texas, Earnhardt ran near the front until lap 187, when his battery alternator quit and he ended up finishing 29th. At Kansas, he ran near the front until a debris caution happened while he, Ricky Stenhouse, Jr., and Carl Edwards were all on pit road. Earnhardt would go a lap down, take the wave-around, and finish 16th. At Richmond, he finished 10th. At Talladega, he went a lap down early after some banging with Joe Nemechek. However, with a caution for a crash on lap 43, Earnhardt got the free pass to get back on the lead lap. He made his way back up through the field to the Top 5, but slipped back to 17th at the end. The following week at Darlington, Earnhardt raced inside the Top 10 much of the night before settling for a 9th-place finish. He was one of only a few cars who were able to avoid being put a lap down by Kyle Busch. The following week in the Sprint All-Star Race, Earnhardt battled a tight handling car much of that night before finishing 7th. The following week for the Coca-Cola 600, Earnhardt lost an engine and finished 39th, giving him his first DNF since 2011. The next two weeks saw a rebound, with finishes of 10th at Dover and 3rd at Pocono. At the Quicken Loans 400, Earnhardt led 23 laps but suffered an engine failure, and finished 37th in what was the lowest point of the season for the Hendrick Motorsports teams as a whole (Kasey Kahne and Jeff Gordon both had DNFs due to crashes, and Jimmie Johnson cut a tire with 5 laps to go). After the low of Michigan, Earnhardt had a 12th-place finish at Sonoma. At Kentucky, Earnhardt won the pole and set a new track qualifying speed record with lap time of 29.406 seconds and a speed of . Though he started on the pole, he lost the lead to Carl Edwards early. However, while Earnhardt was leading after the restart from a competition caution (due to a rain delay), Denny Hamlin cut a tire and the carcass came up the track and was struck by Earnhardt's splitter and also by Jimmie Johnson's car, causing significant damage. Earnhardt had to make several charges through the field to salvage a 12th-place finish. He then took an 8th-place finish at the Coke Zero 400. He, Johnson, and Ryan Newman were the only three drivers to sweep the Top 10 in both Daytona races. Earnhardt then battled a struggling car at New Hampshire, where he finished 14th. After the final off week, he found some consistency with finishes of 6th at Indianapolis and 5th at Pocono, while battling loose wheels and vibrations in a span of two weeks. The #88 team then had two bad weeks, with a 30th-place finish at Watkins Glen due to a late race crash with Kasey Kahne. The next week, Earnhardt blew a right front tire while running in the Top 10. The damage was enough that he finished 26 laps down, in 36th place. This evaporated his Chase cushion, but with finishes of 10th at Bristol and 8th at Atlanta, he was able to rebuild this cushion. At Richmond, the last race of the regular season, Earnhardt only needed to finish 32nd or better to make the Chase. A 13th-place finish did this, and he entered the Chase seeded in ninth place. This was the first time in Earnhardt's career that he had made three straight Chase appearances. In the first Chase race at Chicagoland Speedway, Earnhardt suffered an engine failure, placing him last in Chase competition. He bounced back at New Hampshire Motor Speedway, leading 17 laps and finishing 6th. The result was good enough to move Earnhardt up to 11th in Chase for the Sprint Cup standings with eight races left in the season. At Dover, Earnhardt won his second pole of the season, setting a new qualifying speed record of 161.849&nbsp;mph. This was the first time since 2002 that he had recorded more than one pole during a season. During the race, Earnhardt would lead 80 laps, but would finish 2nd to Jimmie Johnson. The following week at Kansas, he finished 8th. Making his 500th Cup start at Charlotte, Earnhardt led 19 laps early, but finished 15th while battling a tight race car. The following week at Talladega, Earnhardt led 38 laps and was about to receive a push from Austin Dillon to overtake Jamie McMurray on the last lap when Ricky Stenhouse, Jr. tapped Dillon, causing that driver to spin out and then get hit by Casey Mears, leaving Earnhardt with a 2nd-place finish. The following week at Martinville, Earnhardt earned an 8th-place finish. The next week at Texas, he had a solid night, finishing 2nd to Johnson for the third time in the season (after Daytona and Dover). The next week at Phoenix, Earnhardt started by being forced to pit with a loose wheel early, putting him a lap down. However, a caution allowed him to use the free pass to get back on the lead lap and salvage a 4th-place finish. At the season finale, the last 67 laps saw a tight battle for the lead between Earnhardt; Matt Kenseth; and Denny Hamlin. Hamlin won while Earnhardt finished 3rd, giving him his first Top 5 at Homestead. He finished off the season 5th in the points, with two pole positions, ten Top 5's, and a career-high 22 Top 10 finishes. On December 5, 2013, it was announced that Earnhardt had won the Most Popular Driver Award for the 11th consecutive time, thus breaking Bill Elliott's record.  The #88 team made headlines even before the start of the season. During the regular Daytona Winter test in January, it was announced that crew chief Steve Letarte would step down from the pit box after the season to become a full-time member of the upcoming NASCAR on NBC broadcast team, alongside Jeff Burton and Rick Allen. Earnhardt and Letarte reassured that this move would not interfere from them winning races and competing for the championship at season's end. In the Sprint Unlimited, Earnhardt led for 7 laps, but in the last segment, contact with Marcos Ambrose caused him to hit the wall in turn 1, finishing 9th. In the first Budweiser Duel, Earnhardt started 4th, and led 14 laps, before fading back to finish where he started. In the Daytona 500, Earnhardt started 9th. His car hung around mid-pack for most of the first quarter of the race. After a six-hour and 22-minute red flag, Earnhardt's car came alive, taking the lead with 70 laps remaining. He led 54 of the last 70 laps and he held off Denny Hamlin and Brad Keselowski to win his second Daytona 500, just 10 years after his first one. The following week at Phoenix, Earnhardt continued his momentum, finishing 2nd to Kevin Harvick. At Las Vegas, Earnhardt gambled on fuel in the remaining 40 laps, but he ran out of gas while leading on the last lap, finishing 2nd to eventual race winner Brad Keselowski. At Bristol, he was strong early, and had a chance to become the first driver since Richard Petty to start a season with four straight Top 2 finishes, until tire problems forced him to make an unscheduled stop, leaving him to finish 24th, four laps down. At Auto Club Speedway, Earnhardt started 15th. However, on lap 44, his car lost a right front tire and hit the outside wall in turn 2, bringing out a caution, making him one of several victims of tire failures that plagued the race. After being repaired and falling to the back of the lead lap, Earnhardt made several charges through the field to salvage a 12th-place finish, keeping him at 2nd place in the points. The following week at Martinsville, Earnhardt battled inside the Top 5 all day, leading 25 laps, and finished 3rd, giving him his 4th Top 3 finish of the season, and regained the points lead. At Texas, he crashed on Lap 13 and caught on fire. He finished last and fell 5 positions in points and dropped to 31 points behind new points leader Jeff Gordon. The following week at Darlington, Earnhardt raced among the Top 5 all night, and was leading on a green-white-checkered finish, before finishing 2nd to Kevin Harvick. At Richmond, after the Easter off week, Earnhardt was strong in the race, racing among the Top 3 late, and led 7 laps, but a green-white-checkered, and bad brakes forced Earnhardt to a 7th-place finish. The following week at Talladega, Earnhardt raced among the pack until the middle of the race, when he took the lead. He led for 26 laps, but the last 30 laps saw the car take a conservative pace, and was never able to regain any track position, and finished 26th. At Kansas, for the first night race at the track, Earnhardt ran solidly in the Top 5, even leading a few laps, before finishing 5th. For the Sprint All-Star Race, Earnhardt started 6th, but battled a tight car all night, and was never a real contender. Earnhardt crossed the finish line 4th. The following week at the Coca-Cola 600, he raced inside the Top 5 for most of the night, before making an unscheduled pit stop for an engine vibration. This resulted into a 19th-place finish, only two laps down. The following week at Dover, Earnhardt raced inside the Top 10 all day, and was running in the Top 5 late, but a mistake on pit road left them with a 9th-place finish. At Pocono, Earnhardt started eighth and stayed inside the Top 10 most of the afternoon. On the last restart, he was behind Brad Keselowski. In a reversal of the events at Las Vegas, with 5 laps to go, Keselowski tried to move behind the lap down car of Danica Patrick to get a piece of trash off his grille, which caused Earnhardt to slip by and never look back en route to his first victory at Pocono and second of the season. The win marked the first time since 2004 that he had won multiple races in a season. The next week at Michigan, Earnhardt started inside the Top 5, but finished 7th, after several cars had different pit strategies. The next week at Sonoma, saw Earnhardt have his statistical best road course finish, staying in the top ten for most of the race, and finished 3rd. The following week at Kentucky, Earnhardt finished 5th. Returning to Daytona, Earnhardt was involved in an early 16-car pileup on the front straightaway on lap 20, but was able to salvage a 14th-place finish by the time the race was called for rain after 112 of 160 laps. Earnhardt was able to bounce back the following week at New Hampshire with a 10th-place finish. With the finish, he clinched a Chase berth, with him being enough inside the Top 30 and having two victories. The following week, he finished 9th at Indianapolis. The questions referring to the replacement of Steve Letarte were finally answered on July 30, for it was announced that Greg Ives, Chase Elliott's Nationwide Series crew chief at JR Motorsports, would return to Hendrick Motorsports, and take over Earnhardt's pit box for 2015. Returning to Pocono, Earnhardt started 9th. He ran inside the Top 10 for most of the race, and took the lead from Greg Biffle with 14 laps to go. Earnhardt had built up a lead in excess of three seconds when the caution came out for Kurt Busch's cut tire on lap 154, erasing his lead. He then sweated out a four lap shootout on the last restart to take his 3rd win of the year, marking the first time since 2006 that a driver swept both Pocono races (Denny Hamlin was the last driver). This win tied Earnhardt with Jimmie Johnson and Brad Keselowski for most wins of the season up to that point. At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt finished 11th, and due to Jeff Gordon struggling, assumed the points lead, for the first time since Martinsville in April. The following week at Michigan, he made contact with Kyle Larson on pit road, but through hard work from his pit crew, was able to lead four laps and salvage a 5th-place finish. The following week at Bristol, while running 5th, leader Denny Hamlin was wrecked by Kevin Harvick while racing for the lead, which then sent Hamlin's car into the inside wall. Hamlin's car then slid right back up in front of the #88 and slammed into the left-side door of the car, and the contact was bad enough to send Earnhardt behind the wall, and suffer a 39th-place finish. This was his second DNF of the year, after the early exit in the spring Texas race. In the final race of NASCAR's regular season at Richmond, Earnhardt made his first debut with a Nationwide-sponsored #88. He raced to a 12th-place finish, after what was a long, difficult night for the team. Despite struggling at the 3/4-mile track, Earnhardt seeded third in the Chase grid, behind series leader Brad Keselowski, and tied with Jeff Gordon, Jimmie Johnson, and Joey Logano for 2nd place. He started the Challenger Round of the Chase with an 11th-place finish in Chicago. The following week at New Hampshire, Earnhardt finished a solid 9th-place finish, giving him a comfortable advantage to make the Contender Round after Dover. At Dover, he finished 17th to make it to the next round. At Kansas, after a 5th-place run in the spring, Earnhardt was looking to repeat this feat to start off the contender with a solid finish to help his chances to extend his run for the championship. After leading 45 laps in the same car he used to win both Pocono races earlier in the season, a cut right front tire resulted in a 39th-place finish. That finish caused him to fall to 11th place in points, 25 points behind 8th place. He came to Charlotte needing a win or a good finish. He led early but around lap 133, his shifter broke due to a vibration (a similar problem had befallen Jimmie Johnson at Michigan in August). He had to make multiple pit stops to fix the problem and never recovered, ending up 20th. He fell to last in the Chase standings, 26 points behind 8th. At Talladega, Earnhardt started 28th and led for 31 laps. However, a crash on the back straightaway when he was turned by Greg Biffle ended his title contention chances and left him with a 31st-place finish. Despite being knocked out of the Chase, Earnhardt continued to be consistent. At Martinsville, he led 79 laps and was leading with ten laps to go when a caution came out for a wreck between Kyle Larson and Marcos Ambrose. On the resulting restart, Earnhardt was running 5th. During the restart, he slipped through the pack and overtook Tony Stewart for the lead in turn 4. He continued to hold the lead to win the race ahead of Jeff Gordon. It was Earnhardt's first career win at Martinsville. Returning to Texas, Earnhardt had a rather average run, starting 12th and finishing 6th. At Phoenix, he had a solid day and got another Top 10, finishing 8th. At Homestead, Earnhardt had a tire problem early. He got the free pass and managed to crack the Top 5 at one point but fell back late to finish 14th. He finished 8th in the final standings with what was the best season for Earnhardt  since 2004 with 4 wins, twelve Top 5's, twenty Top 10's, and an average finish of 12.2. For the 12th straight year, Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award.  At the end of the 2014, Earnhardt, Jr.'s crew chief Steve Letarte departed Hendrick Motorsports to join NASCAR on NBC's broadcasting team. Letarte was replaced by Chase Elliott's 2014 Xfinity crew chief Greg Ives. Due to National Guard dropping their motorsports sponsorships, Earnhardt, Jr. also got a new sponsor in the form of Nationwide Insurance.  Earnhardt, Jr. kicked off 2015 with a ninth-place finish in the Sprint Unlimited. On February 19, he won Budweiser Duel #1 in what was his fourth triumph in the Budweiser Duels. In the Daytona 500, he led for over 30 laps but on one of the last restarts, he made a move that mired him in the middle without help, and fell back to 16th with 15 laps to go, but managed to make his way back to third place by the last lap. This was his fifth Top 3 finish in the Daytona 500 in six years, after his runner-up finishes in 2010, 2012 and 2013, and his win in 2014. At Atlanta, Earnhardt, Jr. came home with another third-place finish and at Las Vegas, he finished fourth, scoring his third Top 5 finish after taking two tires during green flag pit-stops with 30 laps to go. At Phoenix, he had his worst finish of the year, with a last place finish after a tire-blowout. At Auto Club, he finished 6th. At Martinsville, he also ran inside the Top 20 until a tire-blowout made him get involved in a massive pileup that destroyed the front end of his car. Because of this crash, he would go on to finish 36th. At Texas, he narrowly was beaten by Kevin Harvick for second place. At Bristol, he ran as high as third until a loose wheel put him down two laps down. Although he never got them back, he was able to bring home a 16th-place finish only two laps down. At Richmond, he ran in the Top 10 all day until he and Tony Stewart made contact but managed to finish 14th. At Talladega, Earnhardt, Jr. started in row 2. He stayed near the front of the pack for most of the day, taking the lead with 27 laps to go and sailing away to his sixth win at the track and his first since October 2004, tying him with teammate Jeff Gordon for most wins among active drivers at Talladega. At Kansas, he finished third after staying out on the last caution. At Charlotte, he gambled on fuel and barely beat out Matt Kenseth and Martin Truex, Jr. for another third-place finish. Earnhardt led three laps at Dover but a penalty for speeding on pit road cost him, although he was able to finish 14th two laps down. At Pocono, Earnhardt ran in the top ten all day. On a late restart, he and Brad Keselowski cut their tires from incidental contact and a caution flew seconds later when Keselowski hit the wall after making contact with Brett Moffitt. Earnhardt, Jr. pitted and restarted 29th with 20 laps to go and salvaged an 11th-place finish. Earnhardt finished second in the rain-shortened Michigan race after he could not pass Kurt Busch on the last restart before the race was called for rain on lap 138. Earnhardt also had another solid Top 10 run at Sonoma, finishing 7th. Returning to Daytona, Earnhardt, Jr. won the pole for the Coke Zero 400 after qualifying was rained out and the starting lineup was set by opening practice times. In the race itself, after enduring a rain delay, he took the lead early on lap 8, and after leading 97 laps, held off multiple charges from Jimmie Johnson and Denny Hamlin in the closing laps to take his second win of the year. The win itself, however, was overshadowed by the last lap crash that saw Austin Dillon's car fly into the catch fence. Earnhardt, Jr. also became only the 23rd driver in NASCAR Sprint Cup history to lead over 8,000 laps. He achieved this milestone, when he led 97 laps. This brought his career total laps led count to 8,051. At Kentucky, Earnhardt, Jr. struggled with overheated brakes, and even caused a caution when he brushed the outside wall in turns 3 and 4 halfway through the race. Later, on lap 206, he would be the subject of controversy when he rear-ended Danica Patrick and spun her out, in part because of his faulty brakes. Patrick retaliated by cursing at Earnhardt on the radio and ramming him on pit road. Earnhardt was perplexed with Patrick's reaction, saying  "I mean, what am I supposed to say other than the truth? We didn't have any brakes going into the corner. I know better than to run into her because it gets so much attention. There wasn't nothing I could do. I mean, as hard as I hit her, what the hell did she think I was doing? Trying to wreck her? We ain't got no problem. It's not like we were having a problem out on the racetrack with her. It's not like I just drew her name out of a hat and decided she was the one I was going to run into tonight." At New Hampshire, Earnhardt, Jr. started 19th and finished 5th. At Indianapolis, Earnhardt, Jr. was running well until lap 147, when he got forced into the grass in turn 1 and spun out. He was able to salvage a 22nd-place finish. Returning to Pocono, Earnhardt, Jr. was involved in a spin on a restart on lap 72 that also involved Kurt Busch. His car did not take severe damage, however, and despite running mid-pack for most of the second half of the race and running 17th with four laps to go, he ended up finishing in fourth place after many other drivers including the leaders at four laps to go ran out of fuel. At Watkins Glen, Earnhardt was able to start 7th and finished 11th after running in the top 10 all day, but running out of fuel on the last lap. Returning to Michigan, Earnhardt Jr. started inside the top 10 and was running in the top 3 in the early part of the race. After battling an ill-handling racecar, he was able to finish 10th. Earnhardt returned to Bristol looking for his first win at that track since 2004. He qualified 26th and after the first caution came out he would pit. During the pit stop the crew would leave a wheel loose and Earnhardt would pit again. After going a lap down multiple times in the race, he got the Lucky Dog and got back on the lead lap. After moving up to the top 5 later on in the race, he would settle for a 9th-place finish. The series would take an off week and return to Darlington. Again Earnhardt would have to start mid-pack. He would run outside the top 10 most of the day, but the crew would make right adjustments and they would finish 8th. The regular season finale would take place at Richmond for the 26th race. Earnhardt would qualify 29th and was puzzled in his interview afterwards. During the race, Earnhardt made steady climbs and by halfway had cracked the top ten. Earnhardt would climb as high as 4th and end up finishing 5th. He made the chase for the 8th time in his career and was seeded 6th for the first Chase race. Earnhardt, Jr. opened the Challenger Round with a 12th-place finish at Chicagoland. At New Hampshire, he ran up front for most of the day, but an emergency fuel stop with two laps to go led him to finish 25th, two laps down, and at the bottom of the Chase cutline. At Dover, despite falling back at a few points, Earnhardt, Jr. was locked in a battle with Jamie McMurray for control of the final transfer spot into the Contender Round. He almost did not make it into the next round, with his chances being saved thanks to a caution for Brett Moffitt's crash on lap 357 keeping him from having to make a green flag pit stop to replace a loose wheel. On the last restart, Earnhardt, Jr. overtook McMurray on the outside, and finished third, clinching the final transfer spot and bumping McMurray out of the Chase. At Charlotte, Earnhardt, Jr was battling for a position inside the top 10 when he made contact Carl Edwards and hit the wall ending up 29th. At Kansas, Earnhardt, Jr had to pit for a loose wheel under green and ended up finishing 21st, 2 laps down. Heading into Talladega, he basically needed to win to advance. He led 61 laps, but he slid his tires coming onto pit road and ended up having to take 2 tires instead of fuel only while others were taking fuel only. He ended up on the front row, heading into the only GWC. But a wreck behind him ended up cutting it short and he ended up 2nd upon a review, eliminating him from the championship. At Martinsville, the week after he was eliminated from chase contention, he was strong all race taking home a 4th-place finish at the track.   At Texas the following week Earnhardt recovered from an early spin to finish 6th. Earnhardt, Jr. managed to get his 3rd victory of the season at Phoenix, after the race was called for rain. At the season finale at Homestead Earnhardt crashed early in the race, winding up 40th. For the 13th consecutive year, Earnhardt won the NMPA Most Popular Driver Award. On top of his 26 career Sprint Cup regular season victories, Earnhardt has also won 8 exhibition races. He won the 2003, 2004, 2008 and 2015 Budweiser Duels, the 2000 Sprint All Star Race, the 2003 and 2008 Budweiser Shootout and the 2012 Sprint Showdown. He finished 2nd in the 1999 IROC race from Michigan International Speedway, barely losing to his father. In 1998, he was one of a select few of drivers invited to race in the NASCAR Thunder/Motegi 500 in Motegi Japan. He achieved a 6th-place finish in this overseas race.  Earnhardt is also the current co owner of JR Motorsports, a NASCAR Xfinity and Truck Series team. In 2014, the team won their first NASCAR national championship, as Chase Elliott drove the #9 NAPA Auto Parts car to the 2014 NASCAR Nationwide Series championship. In 2015, JR Motorsports began fielding a part-time team in the Truck Series, with Cole Custer driving the #00 Haas Automation Chevrolet in 10 races. Kasey Kahne also drove part-time in the Truck Series, with the two drivers winning at Gateway Motorsports Park and Charlotte, respectively.  JR Motorsports also has a very successful regional late model program, with Josh Berry capturing the 2012 Motor Mile Championship in the Whelen All-American series. Josh was also able to win a 2nd track championship at Hickory Motor Speedway.  In 2003, Dale and his stepmother Teresa Earnhardt founded Chance 2 Motorsports. The company was able to hire Martin Truex, Jr. to drive in the 2004 Busch Series season. Truex would later win the 2004 and 2005 Busch Series Championships. Earnhardt was the co owner of these XFINITY Series Championship Seasons. The company would later endure financial struggles and go out of business in 2006. Earnhardt owns Hammerhead Entertainment, a media production company that created and produces the TV show Back In the Day, which aired on SPEED. Hammerhead also produced "Shifting Gears", a show on ESPN2 that chronicled his 2008 team switch. He is partners with a group of investors who are building Alabama Motorsports Park, a Dale Earnhardt, Jr. Speedway.Alabama Motorsports Park website, alabamamotorsportspark.com; accessed June 29, 2015. The track is located near Mobile, Alabama and will feature stock car racing, kart racing and a road course. This will join with his partial ownership of Paducah International Raceway. He has also opened a bar named Whisky River in downtown Charlotte in April 2008; he later opened a second Whisky River in Jacksonville, Florida."Earnhardt Jr. branches out into bar business", nbcsports.msnbc.com; accessed June 29, 2015. As of 2013, Earnhardt has his own signature line of eyeglass frames, partnering with NY Eye Inc. In August 2012, he entered the automobile dealer business, opening Dale Earnhardt, Jr. Chevrolet and Dale Earnhardt, Jr. Buick-GMC-Cadillac in Tallahassee, Florida in association with car owner Rick Hendrick. He was featured in the video Playboy: Celebrity Photographers (2003) where he photographed The Dahm Triplets.Playboy:Celebrity Photographers(2003) He appeared in the 2006 film Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby. In the movie, he is seen asking Ricky Bobby (Will Ferrell) for his autograph, and tells Ricky "don't tell any of the other drivers." There is also a deleted scene on the DVD where he calls Ricky a "dirty liar" and asks him for money he owed him. The No. 8 car also appeared in Herbie: Fully Loaded in the final race where Herbie overtook him. His No. 88 car also appeared in the 2011 film Transformers: Dark of the Moon as Roadbuster of the Wreckers, a trio of NASCAR stock cars equipped with armor on the front that can transform into heavy artillery tanks (the other Wreckers were based on the No. 42 and No. 48 cars driven respectively by Juan Pablo Montoya and Jimmie Johnson). The Wrecker versions of these cars circled the track during the opening pace laps of the 2011 Daytona 500 (Josh Duhamel, Rosie Huntington-Whiteley and Michael Bay were also the grand marshals for that race, in which Earnhardt crashed on lap 203 after making contact with Ryan Newman). He hosted Back in the Day a show that took a step back in time to races in the '60s and '70s with trivia and information. The show debuted on the Speed Channel on February 6, 2007. He has also appeared in an episode of the TV show Yes, Dear. He has also been on two episodes of MTV Cribs.  The first episode originally aired in 2001.  The second episode featuring the Western town Earnhardt built originally aired in 2009. His production company Hammerhead Entertainment also assisted in creating a DirecTV special called "Fast Lane For Fun", in which Earnhardt's Whisky River was shown in one episode. He appeared in an episode of Shaq Vs., where he was racing against Shaquille O'Neal. Until its rebranding in 2015, the band Dale Earnhardt Jr. Jr. was named after Earnhardt. He has made appearances in several music videos, including: Earnhardt hosted a show on Sirius XM Radio's Sirius XM Sports Nation called Dale Earnhardt, Jr.'s Unrestricted. Beginning the 2013 season, Earnhardt's Hammerhead Entertainment began producing Dirty Mo Radio, a weekly podcast recapping his race weekend. It is hosted by Taylor Zarzour and Mike Davis. Earnhardt has been featured on the cover of NASCAR-themed video games twice; he appeared on the cover of EA Sports' NASCAR Thunder 2003, and also was voted to be on the cover of NASCAR The Game: Inside Line in 2012. Earnhardt is a passionate Washington Redskins fan and has been known to have Redskins scores relayed to him during races. "During the race season, [if] I'm under caution, I'm getting stats and numbers told to me over the radio during the race," Earnhardt said. "I've got to know. I can't concentrate on what I'm doing if I don't know what the Redskins are doing. My fans tell me if I lose, it ruins their week. But if the Redskins lose, it ruins my week." Earnhardt once dreamed of playing football for the Redskins, but states that he "wasn't built" for it. "I was 5–3 when I got my driver's license at the age of 16," he said, "so I wasn't going to make much of a football player." He currently owns a Learjet 60 private jet with the tail number N8JR. Earnhardt also owns a graveyard of wrecked race cars on a property in North Carolina. Some of the most notable cars include Juan Pablo Montoya's 2012 Daytona 500 car that collided with a jet dryer, David Gilliland's 2014 5-hour Energy 400 car that was destroyed in a violent impact with the tri-oval wall, and Earnhardt's own 2014 Duck Commander 500 car that was wrecked from incidental contact with wet infield grass on lap 12 that cut a tire. On June 17, 2015, Earnhardt announced his engagement to his longtime girlfriend Amy Reimann. (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics&nbsp;– Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.) * Season still in progress 1 Ineligible for series points (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.) (key)                 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 Pts Ref 1999 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 8 Chevy DAY CAR LVS ATL DAR TEX BRI MAR TAL CAL RCH CLT16 DOV MCH POC SON DAY NHA43 POC IND GLN MCH24 BRI DAR RCH10 NHA DOV MAR CLT TAL CAR PHO HOM ATL14 48th 500 2000 DAY13 CAR19 LVS10 ATL29 DAR40 BRI38 TEX1* MAR26 TAL42 CAL12 RCH1 CLT4* DOV10 MCH13 POC19 SON24 DAY35 NHA21 POC13 IND13 GLN40 MCH31 BRI21 DAR11 RCH13 NHA31 DOV16 MAR36 CLT19 TAL14 CAR34 PHO27 HOM13 ATL20 16th 3516 2001 DAY2 CAR43 LVS23 ATL15 DAR34 BRI31 TEX8 MAR11 TAL8 CAL3 RCH7 CLT25 DOV3 MCH39 POC20 SON19 DAY1* CHI11 NHA9 POC2 IND10 GLN12 MCH12 BRI14 DAR17 RCH3 DOV1* KAN33 CLT4 MAR27 TAL1 PHO37 CAR15 HOM15 ATL7* NHA24 8th 4460 2002 DAY29 CAR26 LVS16 ATL2 DAR4 BRI4* TEX42 MAR5 TAL1* CAL36 RCH36 CLT35 DOV30 POC12 MCH22 SON30 DAY6 CHI10 NHA23 POC37 IND22 GLN35 MCH10 BRI3 DAR16 RCH4 NHA11 DOV24 KAN6 TAL1* CLT9 MAR4 ATL5 CAR34 PHO5 HOM21 11th 4270 2003 DAY36 CAR33 LVS2* ATL3 DAR6* BRI16 TEX2 TAL1 MAR3* CAL6 RCH3 CLT41 DOV11 POC4 MCH7 SON11 DAY7 CHI38 NHA6 POC3 IND14 GLN3 MCH32 BRI9 DAR25 RCH17 NHA5 DOV37 TAL2 KAN18 CLT9 MAR4 ATL6 PHO1 CAR13 HOM24 3rd 4815 2004 DAY1 CAR5 LVS35 ATL1 DAR10 BRI11 TEX4 MAR3 TAL2 CAL9 RCH1 CLT6 DOV3 POC6 MCH21 SON11 DAY3 CHI22 NHA31 POC25 IND27 GLN5 MCH21 BRI1 CAL34 RCH2 NHA3 DOV9 TAL1 KAN9 CLT3 MAR33 ATL33 PHO1 DAR11 HOM23 5th 6368 2005 DAY3 CAL32 LVS42 ATL24 BRI4 MAR13 TEX9 PHO4 TAL15 DAR8 RCH14 CLT33 DOV22 POC33 MCH17 SON42 DAY3 CHI1 NHA9 POC32 IND43 GLN10 MCH18 BRI9 CAL38 RCH20 NHA5 DOV31 TAL40 KAN34 CLT42 MAR18 ATL4* TEX8 PHO40 HOM19 19th 3780 2006 DAY8* CAL11 LVS27 ATL3 BRI11 MAR4 TEX12 PHO23 TAL31 RCH1 DAR5 CLT11 DOV10 POC14 MCH3 SON26 DAY13 CHI5 NHA43 POC43 IND6 GLN18 MCH6 BRI3 CAL2 RCH17 NHA13 DOV21 KAN10 TAL23* CLT4 MAR22 ATL3 TEX6 PHO9 HOM19 5th 6328 2007 DAY32 CAL40 LVS11 ATL14 BRI7 MAR5 TEX36 PHO19 TAL7 RCH13 DAR8 CLT8 DOV22 POC12 MCH5 SON13 NHA4 DAY36 CHI19 IND34 POC2 GLN42 MCH12 BRI5 CAL5 RCH30 NHA16 DOV3 KAN10 TAL40 CLT19 MAR23 ATL25 TEX14 PHO43 HOM36 16th 3929 2008 Hendrick Motorsports 88 Chevy DAY9 CAL40 LVS2 ATL3 BRI5 MAR6* TEX12 PHO7 TAL10 RCH15 DAR4 CLT5* DOV35 POC4 MCH1 SON12 NHA24 DAY8* CHI16 IND12 POC12 GLN22 MCH23 BRI18 CAL11 RCH4 NHA5 DOV24 KAN13 TAL28 CLT36 MAR2 ATL11 TEX20 PHO6 HOM41 12th 6127 2009 DAY27 CAL39 LVS10 ATL11 BRI14 MAR8 TEX20 PHO31 TAL2 RCH27 DAR27 CLT40 DOV12 POC27 MCH14 SON26 NHA13 DAY39 CHI15 IND36 POC28 GLN39 MCH3 BRI9 ATL17 RCH21 NHA35 DOV20 KAN36 CAL25 CLT38 MAR29 TAL11 TEX25 PHO35 HOM28 25th 3422 2010 DAY2 CAL32 LVS16 ATL15 BRI7 MAR15 PHO12 TEX8 TAL13 RCH32 DAR18 DOV30 CLT22 POC19 MCH7 SON11 NHA8 DAY4 CHI23 IND27 POC27 GLN26 MCH19 BRI13 ATL22 RCH34 NHA4 DOV23 KAN22 CAL16 CLT29 MAR7 TAL39* TEX25 PHO14 HOM27 21st 3953 2011 DAY24 PHO10 LVS8 BRI11 CAL12 MAR2 TEX9 TAL4 RCH19 DAR14 DOV12 CLT7 KAN2 POC6 MCH21 SON41 DAY19 KEN30 NHA15 IND16 POC9 GLN14 MCH14 BRI16 ATL19 RCH16 CHI3 NHA17 DOV24 KAN14 CLT19 TAL15 MAR7 TEX7 PHO24 HOM11 7th 2290 2012 DAY2 PHO14 LVS10 BRI15 CAL3 MAR3 TEX10 KAN7 RCH2 TAL9 DAR17 CLT6 DOV4 POC8 MCH1* SON23 KEN4 DAY15 NHA4 IND4 POC32 GLN28 MCH4 BRI12 ATL7 RCH14 CHI8 NHA13 DOV11 TAL20 CLTINJ KANINJ MAR21 TEX7 PHO21 HOM10 12th 2245 2013 DAY2 PHO5 LVS7 BRI6 CAL2 MAR24 TEX29 KAN16 RCH10 TAL17 DAR9 CLT39 DOV10 POC3 MCH37 SON12 KEN12 DAY8 NHA14 IND6 POC5 GLN30 MCH36 BRI10 ATL8 RCH13 CHI35 NHA6 DOV2 KAN8 CLT15 TAL2 MAR8 TEX2 PHO4 HOM3 5th 2363 2014 DAY1* PHO2 LVS2 BRI24 CAL12 MAR3 TEX43 DAR2 RCH7 TAL26 KAN5 CLT19 DOV9 POC1 MCH7 SON3 KEN5 DAY14 NHA10 IND9 POC1 GLN11 MCH5 BRI39 ATL11 RCH12 CHI11 NHA9 DOV17 KAN39 CLT20 TAL31 MAR1 TEX6 PHO8 HOM14 8th 2301 2015 DAY3 ATL3 LVS4 PHO43 CAL6 MAR36 TEX3 BRI16 RCH14 TAL1* KAN3 CLT3 DOV14 POC11 MCH2 SON7 DAY1* KEN21 NHA5 IND22 POC4 GLN11 MCH10 BRI9 DAR8 RCH5 CHI12 NHA25 DOV3 CLT28 KAN21 TAL2* MAR4 TEX6 PHO1 HOM40 12th 2310 2016 DAY ATL LVS PHO CAL MAR TEX BRI RCH TAL KAN DOV CLT POC MCH SON DAY KEN NHA IND POC GLN BRI MCH DAR RCH CHI NHA DOV CLT KAN TAL MAR TEX PHO HOM Year Team Manufacturer Start Finish 2000 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. Chevrolet 8 13 2001 6 2 2002 5 29 2003 2 36 2004 3 1 2005 5 3 2006 7 8 2007 5 32 2008 Hendrick Motorsports Chevrolet 3 9 2009 14 27 2010 2 2 2011 1 24 2012 5 2 2013 18 2 2014 9 1 2015 3 3 2016 NASCAR Xfinity Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 Pts Ref 1996 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 31 Chevy DAY CAR RCH ATL NSV DAR BRI HCY NZH CLT DOV SBO MYB14 GLN MLW NHA TAL IRP MCH BRI DAR RCH DOV CLT CAR HOM 77th 121 1997 DAY CAR RCH ATL LVS DAR HCYDNQ TEX BRI NSV39 TAL NHA NZH CLT DOV SBO GLN39 MLW MYB GTY38 IRP MCH7 CLTDNQ CAR16 HOM13 47th 684 Wellrich Motorsports 7 Chevy BRI22 DAR RCH DOV CAL34 1998 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 3 Chevy DAY37 CAR16 LVS2 NSV3 DAR10 BRI2 TEX1 HCY8 TAL32 NHA10 NZH28 CLT30 DOV1* RCH2* PPR10 GLN8 MLW1* MYB5 CAL1* SBO13* IRP1* MCH5 BRI15 DAR2 RCH1* DOV8 CLT3* GTY1 CAR14 ATL2* HOM42 1st 4469 1999 DAY14 CAR35 LVS6 ATL3 DAR11 TEX10 NSV9 BRI2 TAL6 CAL3* NHA34 RCH32 NZH2 CLT2 DOV1* SBO1 GLN1 MLW3 MYB25 PPR36 GTY1* IRP5 MCH1* BRI3 DAR12 RCH1 DOV33 CLT5 CAR13 MEM2 PHO2 HOM2* 1st 4647 2001 NEMCO Motorsports 87 Chevy DAY CAR LVS ATL DAR BRI TEX NSH TAL CAL RCH NHA NZH CLT29 DOV KEN MLW GLN CHI GTY PPR IRP MCH BRI DAR RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM PHO CAR HOM 118th 76 2002 Richard Childress Racing 3 Chevy DAY1* CAR LVS DAR BRI TEX NSH TAL CAL RCH NHA NZH CLT36 DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY CHI GTY PPR IRP MCH BRI DAR 60th 425 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 8 Chevy RCH1* DOV KAN CLT MEM ATL CAR PHO HOM 2003 DAY1* CAR LVS DAR BRI TEX TAL1* NSH CAL RCH GTY NZH CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY1* CHI NHA PPR IRP MCH BRI DAR RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM ATL PHO CAR HOM 66th 555 2004 Chance 2 Motorsports DAY1* CAR LVS DAR BRI TEX NSH 49th 677 81 TAL2* CAL GTY RCH NZH CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY17 CHI NHA PPR IRP MCH BRI1* CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM ATL PHO DAR HOM 2005 DAY3 CAL MXC LVS ATL NSH BRI TEX PHO TAL DAR RCH CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY40 CHI NHA PPR GTY IRP GLN MCH BRI7 CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT39 MEM TEX PHO HOM 75th 410 2006 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 8 Chevy DAY17 CAL MXC LVS ATL BRI TEX NSH PHO TAL RCH DAR CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY1* CHI15 NHA MAR GTY IRP GLN MCH1 BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM7 53rd 761 2007 DAY7 CAL MXC LVS ATL BRI6 NSH TEX PHO TAL29 RCH DAR CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA CLT3 MEM TEX PHO HOM 60th 668 JR Motorsports 88 Chevy DAY14 CHI GTY IRP CGV GLN MCH BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN 2008 5 DAY3 CAL7 LVS ATL15 BRI NSH TEX7 PHO MXC TAL6 RCH DAR DAY3 CHI GTY IRP CGV GLN30 MCH BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM3 42nd 1235 83 CLT4 DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA 2009 5 DAY7 CAL LVS5 BRI TEX20 NSH PHO TAL5 RCH DAR CLT13 DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA DAY40 CHI GTY IRP IOW GLN MCH BRI CGV ATL3 RCH DOV KAN CAL CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM 51st 901 2010 88 DAY29 CAL LVS BRI NSH PHO TEX TAL RCH DAR DOV CLT NSH KEN ROA NHA BRI4 CGV ATL RCH DOV KAN CAL CLT GTY TEX PHO HOM 73rd 436 Richard Childress Racing 3 Chevy DAY1* CHI GTY IRP IOW GLN MCH 2011 JR Motorsports 5 Chevy DAY4 PHO LVS BRI3 CAL TEX 105th 01 7 TAL8 NSH RCH DAR DOV IOW CLT CHI MCH ROA DAY KEN NHA NSH IRP IOW GLN CGV BRI ATL RCH CHI DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 2012 5 DAY15 PHO LVS BRI5 CAL TEX14 RCH TAL4 DAR IOW CLT DOV MCH ROA KEN DAY NHA CHI IND IOW GLN CGV BRI ATL RCH CHI KEN DOV CLT KAN TEX PHO HOM 117th 01 2013 88 DAY4 PHO LVS14 BRI CAL TEX4 RCH TAL DAR CLT DOV IOW MCH ROA KEN DAY NHA CHI IND IOW GLN MOH BRI ATL RCH CHI5 KEN DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 103rd 01 2014 DAY11 PHO LVS4 BRI CAL TEX5 DAR RCH TAL IOW CLT DOV MCH3 ROA KEN DAY NHA CHI IND IOW GLN MOH BRI ATL RCH CHI KEN DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 88th 01 2015 DAY10 ATL LVS12 PHO CAL TEX3 BRI RCH TAL IOW CLT DOV MCH CHI DAY KEN8 NHA IND IOW GLN MOH BRI ROA DAR RCH CHI KEN DOV CLT KAN TEX PHO HOM 91st 01 International Race of Champions results Year Make 1 2 3 4 Pos. Pts Ref 1999 Pontiac DAY10 TAL12 MCH2 IND11 9th 29 2000 DAY5 TAL11 MCH8 IND9 10th 29 24 Hours of Daytona results Year Class No Team Car Co-drivers Laps Position Class Pos. 2001 GTO 3  Corvette Racing Chevrolet Corvette  Andy Pilgrim Dale Earnhardt Kelly Collins 642 4 2 2004 DP 2  Howard-Boss Motorsports Chevrolet Crawford DP  Andy Wallace Tony Stewart 519 5  3  His voice is featured in the video game Scarface: The World is Yours. He voiced himself in Disney/Pixar's movie Cars as a No. 8 car (painted in resemblance to Earnhardt's actual car) named "Junior" with the DEI logo on the hood. The Budweiser logos were censored from the No. 8 to prevent alcoholic advertising to gain a "G" (General) rating. His voice was used for the character Chase Davis in an episode of the Disney Channel's Handy Manny. Chase helps Manny compete in the Wood Valley 500 auto race in "Handy Manny's Big Race". "Show Me What You Got" with Jay-Z along with Danica Patrick. Matthew Good Band's video for Anti-Pop, as he is friends with band frontman, Matthew Good. Sheryl Crow's "Steve McQueen" music video Trace Adkins video entitled "Rough and Ready". 3 Doors Down's "The Road I'm On" along with Tony Stewart. O.A.R.'s "Right on Time". Nickelback's "Rockstar". "Warrior" by Kid Rock. JR Nation
