 Dark matter is a hypothetical kind of matter that cannot be seen with telescopes, but accounts for most of the universe's mass. The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter, on radiation, and on the universe's large-scale structure. Dark matter has not been directly detected, leaving it an astrophysical mystery. Dark matter neither emits nor absorbs electromagnetic radiation at any significant level. According to the Planck mission team, and based on the standard model of cosmology, the total mass–energy of the known universe contains 4.9% ordinary (baryonic) matter, 26.8% dark matter and 68.3% dark energy. Thus, dark matter is estimated to constitute 84.5%Since dark energy, by convention, does not count as "matter", this is 26.8/(4.9 + 26.8)=0.845 of its total mass, while dark energy plus dark matter constitute 95.1% of its total mass–energy content.Sean Carroll, Ph.D., Cal Tech, 2007, The Teaching Company, Dark Matter, Dark Energy: The Dark Side of the Universe, Guidebook Part 2 page 46, Accessed Oct. 7, 2013, "...dark matter: An invisible, essentially collisionless component of matter that makes up about 25 percent of the energy density of the universe... it's a different kind of particle... something not yet observed in the laboratory..." Astrophysicists hypothesized the presence of dark matter to account for discrepancies between the mass of astronomical objects measured by their gravitational effects and as calculated from observable matter (stars, gas and dust) that they visibly contain. Their gravitational effects suggest that their masses are much greater than the observable matter survey suggests. Invisible matter was postulated by Jan Oort in 1932 to account for the orbital velocities of stars in the Milky Way. In 1933, Fritz Zwicky was the first to use the virial theorem to infer its existence, which he referred to as dunkle Materie 'dark matter'. See also  More robust evidence from galaxy rotation curves was discovered by Horace W. Babcock in 1939, but was not then attributed to dark matter. Vera Rubin and Kent Ford in the 1960s–1970s were the first to postulate "dark matter" based upon robust evidence, using galaxy rotation curves.First observational evidence of dark matter. Darkmatterphysics.com. Retrieved 6 August 2013. A stream of further observations indicated its presence, including gravitational lensing of background objects by galaxy clusters, the temperature distribution of hot gas in galaxies and clusters and the pattern of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background. According to consensus among cosmologists, dark matter is composed primarily of a not yet characterized type of subatomic particle.   The search for this particle, by a variety of means, is one of the major efforts in particle physics.  Although the existence of dark matter is generally accepted, alternative theories, such as MOND and TeVeS try to account for the observations without invoking additional matter. However, these theories cannot account for the properties of galaxy clusters.  Dark matter is invoked to explain gravitational effects on visible matter and gravitational lensing of background radiation, and to account for discrepancies between calculations of the mass of galaxies, clusters of galaxies and the entire universe made through dynamical and general relativistic means, and calculations based on the mass of the visible "luminous" matter these objects contain: stars and the gas and dust of the interstellar and intergalactic medium.  The most widely accepted explanation for these phenomena is that dark matter exists and that it is most probably composed of weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) that interact only through gravity and the weak force. Evidence is insufficient to confirm or disconfirm either dark matter or various alternative explanations, such as modified gravitational laws and quantum gravitational laws. Many experiments to detect proposed dark matter particles through non-gravitational means are under way. One alternative theory suggests the existence of a “Hidden Valley”, a parallel world made of dark matter having little in common with ordinary matterDark matter. CERN. Retrieved on 17 November 2014. and that interacts with the visible universe only through gravity.Extra dimensions, gravitons, and tiny black holes. CERN. Retrieved on 17 November 2014. According to observations of structures larger than star systems, as well as Big Bang cosmology interpreted under the Friedmann equations and the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric, dark matter accounts for 26.8% of the mass-energy content of the observable universe. In comparison, ordinary (baryonic) matter accounts for only 4.9% of the mass-energy content of the observable universe, with the remainder attributable to dark energy. From these figures, ordinary matter accounts for 31.7% of its mass-energy content and 84.5% of the matter is dark. Dark matter plays a central role in state-of-the-art modeling of cosmic structure formation and galaxy formation and evolution and has measurable effects on the anisotropies observed in the cosmic microwave background (CMB). All these lines of evidence suggest that galaxies, clusters of galaxies and the universe as a whole contain far more matter than that which is visible with electromagnetic radiation.  For many decades, astronomers assumed that dark matter was made of the same baryons (protons and neutrons) as all other known matter, but in a form that had been overlooked because it was non-luminous. It could not be in the form of a diffuse gas or dust, as that would be apparent when backlit by visible stars, but searches were organized for other astronomical bodies emitting little or no electromagnetic radiation such as massive compact halo objects. Evidence eventually accumulated that baryonic dark matter could only account for a small fraction of the missing mass. The study of nucleosynthesis in the Big Bang gives an upper bound on the amount of baryonic matter,  which indicates that the vast majority of dark matter cannot be baryons and thus does not form atoms. It also cannot interact with ordinary matter via electromagnetic forces; in particular, dark matter particles do not carry electric charge. Three separate lines of evidence suggest the majority of dark matter is not made of baryons: Candidates for nonbaryonic dark matter are hypothetical particles such as axions, or supersymmetric particles; neutrinos can only form a small fraction of the dark matter, due to limits from large-scale structure and high-redshift galaxies. Unlike baryonic dark matter, nonbaryonic dark matter did not contribute to the formation of the elements in the early universe ("Big Bang nucleosynthesis") and so its presence is revealed only via its gravitational effects. In addition, if the particles of which it is composed are supersymmetric, they can undergo annihilation interactions with themselves, possibly resulting in observable by-products such as gamma rays and neutrinos ("indirect detection").  Nonbaryonic dark matter is classified in terms of the mass of the particle(s) that is assumed to make it up, and/or the typical velocity dispersion of those particles (since more massive particles move more slowly). The three prominent hypotheses on nonbaryonic dark matter are cold dark matter (CDM), warm dark matter (WDM), and hot dark matter (HDM); some combination of these is also possible. The most widely discussed models for nonbaryonic dark matter are based on cold dark matter. The corresponding particle is most commonly assumed to be a weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP). Hot dark matter may include (massive) neutrinos, but observations imply that only a small fraction of dark matter can be hot. Cold dark matter leads to a "bottom-up" formation of structure while hot dark matter would result in a "top-down" formation scenario; since the late 1990s, the latter has been ruled out by observations of high-redshift galaxies such as the Hubble Ultra-Deep Field. The first to suggest using stellar velocities to infer the presence of dark matter was Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn in 1922. (emphasis in original)  Fellow Dutchman Jan Oort, a pioneer in radio astronomy, applied this technique to evidence and thereby made the inference, in 1932.Oort, J.H. (1932) “The force exerted by the stellar system in the direction perpendicular to the galactic plane and some related problems,” Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of the Netherlands, 6 : 249-287.  Oort was studying stellar motions in the local galactic neighborhood and found that the mass in the galactic plane must be greater than what was observed, but this measurement was later determined to be erroneous. In 1933, Swiss astrophysicist Fritz Zwicky, who studied galactic clusters while working at the California Institute of Technology, made a similar inference.  Zwicky applied the virial theorem to the Coma cluster and obtained evidence of unseen mass. Zwicky estimated its mass based on the motions of galaxies near its edge and compared that to an estimate based on its brightness and number of galaxies. He estimated that the cluster had about 400 times more mass than was visually observable. The gravity effect of the visible galaxies was far too small for such fast orbits, thus mass must be hidden from view. Based on these conclusions, Zwicky inferred that some non-visible form of matter provided the mass and associated gravitation attraction to hold the cluster together. This was the first formal inference about the existence of dark matter.Some details of Zwicky's calculation and of more modern values are given in  Zwicky's estimates were off by more than an order of magnitude. The same calculation today shows a smaller fraction, using greater values for luminous mass. However, Zwicky did correctly infer that the bulk of the matter was dark. Much of the evidence comes from the motions of galaxies.  Many of these appear to be fairly uniform, so by the virial theorem, the total kinetic energy should be half the galaxies' total gravitational binding energy. Observationally, the total kinetic energy is much greater. In particular, assuming the gravitational mass is due to only visible matter, stars far from the center of galaxies have much higher velocities than predicted by the virial theorem. Galactic rotation curves, which illustrate the velocity of rotation versus the distance from the galactic center, show the "excess" velocity. Dark matter is the most straightforward way of accounting for this discrepancy. The distribution of dark matter in galaxies required to explain the motion of the observed matter suggests the presence of a roughly spherically symmetric, centrally concentrated halo of dark matter with the visible matter concentrated in a central disc. Low surface brightness dwarf galaxies are important sources of information for studying dark matter. They have an uncommonly low ratio of visible to dark matter, and have few bright stars at the center that would otherwise impair observations of the rotation curve of outlying stars. Gravitational lensing observations of galaxy clusters allow direct estimates of the gravitational mass based on its effect on light coming from background galaxies, since large collections of matter (dark or otherwise) gravitationally deflect light. In clusters such as Abell 1689, lensing observations confirm the presence of considerably more mass than is indicated by the clusters' light. In the Bullet Cluster, lensing observations show that much of the lensing mass is separated from the X-ray-emitting baryonic mass. In July 2012, lensing observations were used to identify a "filament" of dark matter between two clusters of galaxies, as cosmological simulations predicted.   The first robust indications that the mass to light ratio was anything other than unity came from measurements of galaxy rotation curves. In 1939, Horace W. Babcock reported the rotation curve for the Andromeda nebula, which suggested that the mass-to-luminosity ratio increases radially.Babcock, H, 1939, "The rotation of the Andromeda Nebula", Lick Observatory bulletin ; no. 498 He attributed it to either light absorption within the galaxy or modified dynamics in the outer portions of the spiral and not to missing matter. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Vera Rubin was the first to both make robust measurements indicating the existence of dark matter and attribute them to dark matter. Rubin worked with a new spectrograph to measure the velocity curve of edge-on spiral galaxies with greater accuracy.  Together with fellow staff-member Kent Ford, Rubin announced that most stars in spiral galaxies orbit at roughly the same speed, which implied that the mass densities of the galaxies were uniform well beyond the regions containing most of the stars (the galactic bulge), a result independently found in 1978.  An influential paper presented Rubin's results in 1980. Rubin found that most galaxies must contain about six times as much dark as visible mass. Other evidence:  LSB galaxies are probably totally dominated by dark matter, with visible matter making only a small contribution to total mass. Such a property avoids the difficulties associated with the deprojection and disentanglement of the dark and visible matter contributions to the rotation curves.  Rotation curves of both low and high surface luminosity galaxies suggest a universal rotation curve that can be expressed as the sum of an exponential distribution of visible matter that is maximum at the center and tapers to zero with distance from the center, and a spherical dark matter halo with a flat core of radius r0 and density ρ0 = 4.5 × 10−2(r0/kpc)−2/3 pc−3.  X-ray images reveal the presence of extended atmospheres of hot gas that fill the dark haloes of isolated elliptical galaxies and whose hydrostatic support provides evidence for dark matter. Other ellipticals have low velocities in their outskirts (tracked for example by the motion of embedded planetary nebulae) which was interpreted as not involving dark matter haloes. However, simulations of disk-galaxy mergers suggest that stars may have been torn by tidal forces from their original galaxies during the first close passage and put on outgoing trajectories, explaining the low velocities of the remaining stars even in the presence of a halo.  Simulated haloes have significantly steeper density profiles (and central cusps) than observations support, which challenges cosmological models with dark matter at the smallest scale of galaxies. This may be a problem of resolution: star-forming regions that might alter the dark matter distribution via gas outflows have been too small to resolve and model with larger dark matter clumps. A simulation  of a dwarf galaxy that included these star-forming regions, reported that strong outflows from supernovae remove low-angular-momentum gas, which inhibits the formation of a galactic bulge and decreases the dark matter density to less than half of what it would have been in the central kiloparsec. These simulation predictions—bulgeless and with shallow central dark matter density profiles—correspond closely to dwarf galaxy observations. No such discrepancies appear at the larger scales of clusters of galaxies and greater, or in the outer regions of galactic haloes. The exceptions to this general picture appear to be galaxies with mass-to-light ratios that are close to that of the stars they contain. Otherwise, observations support the presence of dark matter in various parts of the cosmos, such as observations of the cosmic microwave background, of supernovas used as distance measures, of gravitational lensing at various scales, and many types of sky survey. Starting with Rubin's findings for spiral galaxies, such robust observational evidence for dark matter has collected over the decades to the point that by the 1980s most astrophysicists had accepted its existence. As a unifying concept, dark matter is one of the dominant features considered in the analysis of structures on the order of galactic scale and larger. Velocity curve measurements in spiral galaxies were followed by velocity dispersion estimates of elliptical galaxies. While some display lower mass-to-light ratios, measurements of ellipticals generally indicate a relatively high dark matter content. Likewise, Diffuse interstellar gas measurements found at the galactic edges indicate not only dark matter distributions that extend beyond the visible boundary, but that the galaxies are virialized (i.e., gravitationally bound and orbiting each other with velocities that disproportionately correspond to predicted orbital velocities of general relativity) up to ten times their visible radii. This has the effect of pushing up the dark matter as a fraction of the total matter from 50% as measured by Rubin to the now accepted value of nearly 95%. Dark matter seems to be a small component or absent in some places. Globular clusters show little evidence of dark matter,  except that their orbital interactions with galaxies do support galactic dark matter. Star velocity profiles seemed to indicate a concentration of dark matter in the disk of the Milky Way. It now appears, however, that the high concentration of baryonic matter in the disk (especially in the interstellar medium) can account for this motion. Galaxy mass and light profiles appear to not match. The typical model for dark matter galaxies is a smooth, spherical distribution in virialized halos. This avoids small-scale (stellar) dynamical effects. A 2006 study explained the warp the Milky Way's disk by the interaction of the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds and the 20 fold increase in predicted mass from dark matter.  In 2005, astronomers claimed to have discovered a galaxy made almost entirely of dark matter, 50 million light years away in the Virgo Cluster, which was named VIRGOHI21.  Unusually, VIRGOHI21 does not appear to contain visible stars: it was discovered with radio frequency observations of hydrogen. Based on rotation profiles, the scientists estimate that this object contains approximately 1000 times more dark matter than hydrogen and has a mass of about 1/10 that of the Milky Way. The Milky Way is estimated to have roughly 10 times as much dark matter as ordinary matter. Models of the Big Bang and structure formation suggested that such dark galaxies should be very common, but VIRGOHI21 was the first to be detected. The velocity profiles of some galaxies such as NGC 3379 indicate an absence of dark matter.  Galaxy clusters are especially important for dark matter studies since their masses can be estimated in three independent ways: Generally these three methods support the "missing matter" hypothesis. A gravitational lens is formed when the light from a more distant source (such as a quasar) is "bent" around a massive object (such as a cluster of galaxies) lying between the source object and the observer. The galaxy cluster Abell 2029 is composed of thousands of galaxies enveloped in a cloud of hot gas, and an amount of dark matter equivalent to more than . At the center of this cluster is an enormous, elliptical galaxy likely formed from many smaller galaxies.  The measured orbital velocities of galaxies within galactic clusters are consistent with dark matter observations. Another important tool for future dark matter observations is gravitational lensing. Lensing relies on the bending of light, as described by general relativity, to predict masses without relying on observations of dynamics, and so is a completely independent means of measuring mass. Strong lensing, the observed distortion of background galaxies into arcs when their light passes through such a gravitational lens, has been observed around a few distant clusters including Abell 1689 (pictured).  By measuring the distortion geometry, the mass of the intervening cluster can be obtained. In the dozens of cases where this has been done, the mass-to-light ratios obtained correspond to the dynamical dark matter measurements of clusters.  Weak gravitational lensing investigates minute distortions of galaxies, using statistical analyses of vast galaxy surveys, caused by foreground objects. By examining the apparent shear deformation of the adjacent background galaxies, astrophysicists can characterize the mean distribution of dark matter and have found mass-to-light ratios that correspond to dark matter densities predicted by other large-scale structure measurements.  The correspondence of the two gravitational lens techniques to other dark matter measurements has convinced almost all astrophysicists. The most direct observational evidence to date for dark matter comes from a system known as the Bullet Cluster. In most regions dark and visible matter are found together,  as expected due to their gravitational attraction. In the Bullet Cluster however, a collision between two galaxy clusters appears to have split dark from baryonic matter. X-ray observations show that much of the latter (in the form of 107–108&nbsp;Kelvin gas or plasma) is concentrated in the center. Electromagnetic interactions between passing gas particles caused them to slow and settle near the point of impact. However, weak gravitational lensing observations show that much of the mass resides outside the central region. Because dark matter does not interact electromagnetically, it would not have been slowed as was the X-ray visible gas, so the dark matter components of the two clusters passed through each other without slowing substantially, throwing the dark matter further out than that of the baryonic gas. This accounts for the separation. Unlike the galactic rotation curves, this evidence for dark matter is independent of the details of Newtonian gravity, so it is claimed to be direct evidence of dark matter.  Dark matter's observed behavior constrains whether and how much it scatters off other dark matter particles, quantified as its self-interaction cross section. If dark matter has no pressure, it can be described as a perfect fluid that has no damping. The distribution of mass in galaxy clusters has been used to argue both for and against the existence of significant self-interaction. Specifically, the distribution of dark matter in merging clusters such as the Bullet Cluster shows that dark matter scatters off other dark matter particles only very weakly if at all. An ongoing survey using the Subaru telescope uses weak lensing to analyze background light, bent by dark matter, to determine how dark matter is distributed in the foreground. This analysis could determine how dark matter assembled over time, which could be related to the universe's expansion, and could reveal dark energy's physical properties, its strength and how it has evolved. The survey studies galaxies more than a billion light-years distant, across an area greater than a thousand square degrees (about one fortieth of the entire sky).    Angular CMB fluctuations provide evidence for dark matter. Many CMB measurements  supported and constrained this theory. The NASA Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) found the CMB spectrum to be a blackbody spectrum with a temperature of 2.726 K. In 1992, COBE detected CMB fluctuations (anisotropies) at a level of about one part in 105.  In the following decade, CMB anisotropies were investigated by ground-based and balloon experiments. Their primary goal was to measure the angular scale of the first acoustic peak of the anisotropies' power spectrum, for which COBE had insufficient resolution. 2000–2001 experiments, most notably BOOMERanG  found the universe to be almost spatially flat by measuring the anisotropies' typical angular size. During the 1990s, the first peak was measured with increasing sensitivity and by 2000 the BOOMERanG experiment reported that the highest power fluctuations occur at scales of approximately one degree. These measurements were able to rule out cosmic strings as the leading theory of cosmic structure formation, and suggested cosmic inflation was the correct theory. Ground-based interferometers provided fluctuation measurements with higher accuracy, including the Very Small Array, the Degree Angular Scale Interferometer (DASI) and the Cosmic Background Imager (CBI). DASI first detected the CMB polarization,   and CBI provided the first E-mode polarization spectrum with compelling evidence that it is out of phase with the T-mode spectrum.  COBE's successor, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) provided the most detailed measurements of (large-scale) anisotropies in the CMB in 2009. ESA's Planck spacecraft returned more detailed results in 2012-2014. WMAP's measurements played the key role in establishing the Standard Model of Cosmology, namely the Lambda-CDM model, which posits a dark energy-dominated flat universe, supplemented by dark matter and atoms with density fluctuations seeded by a Gaussian, adiabatic, nearly scale invariant process. Its basic properties are determined by matter density, atom density, the universe's age (or equivalently, the Hubble constant), the initial fluctuation amplitude and their scale dependence. A successful Big Bang cosmology theory must fit available astronomical observations, including the CMB. In cosmology, the CMB is explained as relic radiation from shortly after the Big Bang. The CMB's anisotropies are explained as the result of acoustic oscillations in the photon-baryon plasma (prior to the CMB's emission after photons decouple from baryons 379,000 years after the Big Bang) whose restoring force is gravity.  Ordinary matter interacts strongly via radiation whereas dark matter particles (WIMPs) do not; both affect the oscillations by way of their gravity, so the two forms of matter have different effects. The typical angular scales of CMB oscillations, measured as the power spectrum of the CMB anisotropies, thus reveal the different effects of baryonic and dark matter. The CMB power spectrum shows a large first peak and smaller successive peaks, with three peaks resolved as of 2009. The first peak tells mostly about the density of baryonic matter and the third peak mostly about the density of dark matter, measuring the density of matter and the density of atoms. The early universe's acoustic oscillations affected visible matter by way of Baryon Acoustic Oscillation (BAO) clustering, in a way that can be measured with sky surveys such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey.  These measurements are consistent CMB metrics derived from the WMAP spacecraft and further constrain the Lambda CDM model and dark matter. Note that CMB data and the BAO adopt different distance scales. Type Ia supernovae can be used as "standard candles" to measure extragalactic distances, and extensive data sets of these supernovae can be used to constrain cosmological models.  They constrain the dark energy density ΩΛ = ~0.713 for a flat, Lambda CDM universe and the parameter w for a quintessence model. The results are roughly consistent with those derived from the WMAP observations and further constrain the Lambda CDM model and (indirectly) dark matter. In astronomical spectroscopy, the Lyman-alpha forest is the sum of the absorption lines arising from the Lyman-alpha transition of neutral hydrogen in the spectra of distant galaxies and quasars. Lyman-alpha forest observations can also constrain cosmological models.  These constraints agree with those obtained from WMAP data.   Dark matter corresponds directly to measurements of the parameters associated with Friedmann cosmology solutions to general relativity. In particular, measurements of the cosmic microwave background anisotropies correspond to a cosmology where most matter interacts with photons more weakly than the forces that couple light to baryonic matter. Likewise, a significant amount of dark matter is necessary to explain the universe's large-scale structure. Observations suggest that structure formation  proceeds hierarchically, with the smallest structures collapsing first, followed by galaxies and then clusters of galaxies. As the structures collapse in the evolving universe, they begin to "light up" as baryonic matter heats up through gravitational contraction and approaches hydrostatic pressure balance. Originally, baryonic matter had too high a temperature and pressure left over from the Big Bang to collapse and form smaller structures, such as stars, via the Jeans instability. Dark matter acts as a compactor, allowing the creation of structure that otherwise could not form. This model corresponds with statistical surveys of the visible structure and precisely to CMB predictions. This model of structure formation requires something like cold dark matter to succeed. Computer simulations of billions of dark matter particles confirmed that the cold dark matter model of structure formation is consistent with the structures observed through galaxy surveys, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey, as well as observations of the Lyman-alpha forest. These studies were crucial in constructing the Lambda-CDM model that measures cosmological parameters, including the relative proportions of baryons and dark matter. The recent discovery of the structure of Laniakea, a 500 million light year structure is currently the limit to structural formation. Laniakea is not gravitationally bound and is projected to be torn apart by dark energy. Several points of tension separate observation and simulations. Observations have turned up 90-99% fewer small galaxies than permitted by dark matter-based predictions.   In addition, simulations predict dark matter distributions with a dense cusp near galactic centers, but the observed halos are smoother than predicted.   Although dark matter had historically been inferred from astronomical observations, its composition long remained speculative. Early theories of dark matter concentrated on hidden heavy normal objects (such as black holes, neutron stars, faint old white dwarfs, and brown dwarfs) as possible candidates, collectively known as massive compact halo objects or MACHOs. Astronomical surveys for gravitational microlensing, including the MACHO, EROS and OGLE projects, along with Hubble telescope searches for ultra-faint stars, found too few MACHOs. Observations found too few cases to support speculations about hard-to-detect baryonic matter such as MACHOs and some forms of gas.Wyrzykowski, Lukasz et al. (2011) The OGLE view of microlensing towards the Magellanic Clouds – IV. OGLE-III SMC data and final conclusions on MACHOs, MNRAS, 416, 2949 Data from other lines of evidence, including galaxy rotation curves, gravitational lensing, structure formation, the fraction of baryons in clusters and cluster abundance combined with independent evidence for baryon density, indicated that 85–90% of the mass  does not interact with the electromagnetic force. This "nonbaryonic dark matter" is evident through its gravitational effect. This matter is made of elementary particles other than the usual electrons, protons, neutrons and known neutrinos. The most commonly proposed particles were weakly interacting massive particles, including neutralinos, axions, or sterile neutrinos, along with many others. Dark matter candidates can be divided into cold, warm and hot categories. These categories refer to velocity rather than temperature, indicating how far they moved due to random motions in the early universe, before they slowed due to expansion&nbsp;– this is an important distance called the "free streaming length" (FSL). Primordial density fluctuations smaller than this length get washed out as particles spread from overdense to underdense regions, while larger fluctuations are unaffected; therefore this length sets a minimum scale for structure formation. The categories are divided in comparison to the size of a protogalaxy (an object that later evolves into a dwarf galaxy). Cold dark matter's FSL is much smaller, warm's is similar and hot's is much larger. A fourth category called mixed dark matter was discarded (in the 1990s) following the discovery of dark energy. Davis et al. wrote in 1985: Another approximate dividing line is that warm's became non-relativistic when the universe was approximately 1 year old and 1 millionth of its present size and in the radiation-dominated era (photons and neutrinos), with a photon temperature 2.7 million K. Standard physical cosmology gives the particle horizon size as 2ct in the radiation-dominated era, thus 2 light-years. A region of this size would ultimately expand to 2 million light years (absent structure formation). The actual FSL is roughly 5 times larger than the above length, since it continues to grow slowly as particle velocities decrease inversely with the scale factor after they become non-relativistic; therefore, in this example the FSL would correspond to 10 million light-years or 3 Mpc today, around the size containing an average large galaxy. 2.7 million K gives a typical photon energy of 250 electron-volts, thereby setting a typical mass scale for "warm" dark matter: particles much more massive than this, such as GeV&nbsp;– TeV mass WIMPs, would become non-relativistic much earlier than 1 year after the Big Bang and thus have FSL's much smaller than a proto-galaxy, making them cold. Conversely, much lighter particles, such as neutrinos with masses of only a few eV, have FSL's much larger than a proto-galaxy, thus qualifying them as hot. Cold dark matter offers the simplest explanation for most cosmological observations. It is dark matter composed of constituents with an FSL much smaller than a protogalaxy. This is the focus for dark matter research, as hot dark matter does not seem to be capable of galaxy or galaxy cluster formation, and most particle candidates slowed early. The constituents of cold dark matter are unknown. Possibilities range from large objects like MACHOs (such as black holes) or RAMBOs (such as clusters of brown dwarfs), to new particles such as WIMPs and axions. Studies of big bang nucleosynthesis and gravitational lensing have convinced most scientistsOlive, Keith A. (2003). "TASI Lectures on Dark Matter". p. 21 that MACHOs including black holes cannot make up more than a small fraction of dark matter. According to A. Peter: "... the only really plausible dark-matter candidates are new particles." The DAMA/NaI experiment and its successor DAMA/LIBRA claimed to directly detect dark matter particles passing through the Earth, but many scientists remain skeptical, as negative results from similar experiments seem incompatible with the DAMA results. Many supersymmetric models offer dark matter candidates in the form of the Lightest Supersymmetric Particle (LSP). Separately, heavy sterile neutrinos exist in non-supersymmetric extensions to the standard model that explain the small neutrino mass through the seesaw mechanism. Warm dark matter refers to particles with an FSL comparable to the size of a protogalaxy. This leads to predictions that are similar to those for cold dark matter on large scales, including the CMB, galaxy clustering and large galaxy rotation curves, but with less small-scale density perturbations. This reduces the predicted abundance of dwarf galaxies and may lead to lower density of dark matter in the central parts of large galaxies; some researchers consider this to be a better fit to observations. A challenge for this model is the lack of particle candidates with the required mass ~ 300 eV to 3000 eV. No known particles can be categorized as warm dark matter. A postulated candidate is the sterile neutrino: a heavier, slower form of neutrino that does not interact through the weak force (unlike other neutrinos). Some modified gravity theories, such as scalar-tensor-vector gravity, require warm dark matter to make their equations work. Hot dark matter consists of particles whose FSL is much larger than the size of a protogalaxy. The neutrino qualifies. They were discovered independently, long before the hunt for dark matter: they were postulated in 1930, and detected in 1956. Neutrinos' mass is less than .000001 that of an electron. Neutrinos interact with normal matter only via gravity and the weak force, making them difficult to detect (the weak force only works over a small distance, thus a neutrino triggers a weak force event only if it hits a nucleus head-on). This makes them 'weakly interacting light particles' (WILPs), as opposed to cold dark matter's theoretical candidates, the WIMPs. The three different known flavors of neutrinos are the electron, muon, and tau. Their masses are slightly different. The resolution to the solar neutrino problem demonstrated that neutrinos oscillate among the flavors as they move. It is hard to determine an exact upper bound on the collective average mass of the three neutrinos (or for any of the three individually). For example, if the average neutrino mass were over 50 eV/c2 (less than .00001 of the mass of an electron), just by the sheer number of them, the universe would collapse due to their mass. Other observations have served to estimate an upper-bound for the neutrino mass. Using CMB data and other methods, their average mass probably does not exceed 0.3 eV/c2. Thus, the normal forms of neutrinos cannot explain dark matter. Hot dark matter was popular in the early 1980s, but it suffers from a severe problem: because galaxy-size density fluctuations get washed out by free-streaming, hot dark matter implies that the first objects that can form are huge supercluster-size pancakes, which then fragment into galaxies. Deep-field observations show instead that galaxies formed first, followed by clusters and superclusters as galaxies clump together. Mixed dark matter is an obsolete model, with a specifically chosen mass ratio of 80% cold and 20% hot content. The two do coexist in nature. However, this ratio was chosen because, during the early 1990s COBE and large-scale galaxy clustering observations excluded a universe with critical density of cold dark matter; the 80/20 mixed dark matter model could reconcile the two. The discovery of the accelerating universe (from supernovae) and more accurate measurements of CMB anisotropy and galaxy clustering then excluded this model (leaving LambdaCDM). If the dark matter within the Milky Way is made up of WIMPs, then millions, possibly billions, of WIMPs must pass through every square centimeter of the Earth each second.  Many experiments (current and planned), aim to test this hypothesis. Although WIMPs are popular dark matter search candidates, other experiments search for other particle candidates; the Axion Dark Matter eXperiment (ADMX) searches for the dark matter axion. Another candidate is heavy hidden sector particles which only interact with ordinary matter via gravity. These experiments can be divided into two classes: direct detection experiments, which search for the scattering of dark matter particles off atomic nuclei within a detector; and indirect detection, which look for the products of WIMP annihilations. An alternative approach to the detection of WIMPs in nature is to produce them in the laboratory. Experiments with the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) may be able to detect WIMPs produced in collisions of the LHC proton beams. Because a WIMP has negligible interaction with matter, it may be detected indirectly as (large amounts of) missing energy and momentum that escape the detectors, provided other (non-negligible) collision products are detected. These experiments could show that WIMPs can be created, but a direct detection experiment must still show that they exist in sufficient numbers to account for dark matter. Direct detection experiments operate in detectors deep underground to reduce the interference from cosmic rays. These include: the Stawell mine (Australia); the Soudan mine; the SNOLAB underground laboratory at Sudbury, Ontario (Canada); the Gran Sasso National Laboratory (Italy); the Canfranc Underground Laboratory (Spain); the Boulby Underground Laboratory (United Kingdom); the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory, South Dakota (United States); and the Particle and Astrophysical Xenon Detector (China). These experiments mostly use one of two detector technologies: cryogenic detectors, operating at temperatures below 100mK, detect the heat produced when a particle hits an atom in a crystal absorber such as germanium. Noble liquid detectors detect the flash of scintillation light produced by a particle collision in liquid xenon or argon. Cryogenic detector experiments include: CDMS, CRESST, EDELWEISS, EURECA. Noble liquid experiments include ZEPLIN, XENON, DEAP, ArDM, WARP, DarkSide, PandaX, and LUX, the Large Underground Xenon experiment. Both of these detector techniques distinguish background particles (which scatter off electrons) from dark matter particles (which scatter off nuclei). Other experiments include SIMPLE and PICASSO. The DAMA/NaI, DAMA/LIBRA experiments detected an annual modulation in the event rate, which they claim is due to dark matter. (As the Earth orbits the Sun, the velocity of the detector relative to the dark matter halo will vary by a small amount depending on the time of year). This claim is so far unconfirmed and difficult to reconcile with the negative results of other experiments. Directional detection of dark matter is a search strategy based on the motion of the Solar System around the Galactic Center.     A low pressure time projection chamber makes it possible to access information on recoiling tracks (3D reconstruction if possible) and constrain WIMP-nucleus kinematics. WIMPs coming from the direction in which the Sun is travelling (roughly towards Cygnus) may then be separated from background, which should be isotropic. Directional dark matter experiments include DMTPC, DRIFT, Newage and MIMAC. On 17 December 2009, CDMS researchers reported two possible WIMP candidate events. They estimate that the probability that these events are due to background (neutrons or misidentified beta or gamma events) is 23%, and conclude "this analysis cannot be interpreted as significant evidence for WIMP interactions, but we cannot reject either event as signal." On 4 September 2011, researchers using the CRESST detectors presented evidence [ ] of 67 collisions occurring in detector crystals from subatomic particles, calculating a less than 1 in 10,000 chance that all were caused by known sources of interference/contamination. It is possible that many were caused by WIMPs (and/or other unknown particles). Indirect detection experiments search for the products of WIMP annihilation/decay. If WIMPs are Majorana particles (their own antiparticle) then two WIMPs could annihilate to produce gamma rays or Standard Model particle-antiparticle pairs. If the WIMP is unstable, WIMPs could decay into standard model (or other) particles. These processes could be detected indirectly through an excess of gamma rays, antiprotons or positrons emanating from high density regions. The detection of such a signal is not conclusive evidence, as the sources of gamma ray production are not fully understood. The EGRET gamma ray telescope observed more gamma rays than expected from the Milky Way, but scientists concluded that this was most likely due to incorrect estimation of the telescope's sensitivity. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, launched 11 June 2008, is searching for similar gamma rays. In April 2012, an analysis of previously available data from its Large Area Telescope instrument produced strong statistical evidence of a 130 GeV line in the gamma radiation coming from the center of the Milky Way. WIMP annihilation was the most probable explanation for that line. At higher energies, ground-based gamma-ray telescopes have set limits on the annihilation of dark matter in dwarf spheroidal galaxies and in clusters of galaxies. The PAMELA experiment (launched 2006) detected excess positrons. They could be from dark matter annihilation or from pulsars. No excess anti-protons was observed. The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station is designed to directly measure the positron fraction of cosmic rays. The first results, published in 2013, indicate excess high-energy cosmic rays that could be due to dark matter annihilation. A few of the WIMPs passing through the Sun or Earth may scatter off atoms and lose energy. Thus WIMPs may accumulate at the center of these bodies, increasing the chance of collision/annihilation. This could produce a distinctive signal in the form of high-energy neutrinos. Such a signal would be strong indirect proof of WIMP dark matter. High-energy neutrino telescopes such as AMANDA, IceCube and ANTARES are searching for this signal. WIMP annihilation from the Milky Way Galaxy as a whole may also be detected in the form of various annihilation products. The Galactic Center is a particularly good place to look because the density of dark matter may be higher there. In some multidimensional theories, the force of gravity is the only force with effect across all dimensions. This would explain the relative weakness of gravity compared to the other forces of nature that cannot cross into extra dimensions: electromagnetism, strong interaction and weak interaction. In that case, dark matter would be a candidate for matter that would exist in other dimensions and that could only interact with the matter in our dimensions through gravity. That dark matter could potentially aggregate in the same way as ordinary matter, forming other-dimensional galaxies. Dark matter could consist of primordial defects ("birth defects") in the topology of quantum fields, which would contain energy and therefore gravitate. This possibility may be investigated by the use of an orbital network of atomic clocks, which would register the passage of topological defects by changes to clock synchronization. The Global Positioning System may be able to operate as such a network. Alternative theories have been proposed to explain these observations without dark matter. Most of these theories modify the laws of gravity. The earliest was Mordehai Milgrom's Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) in 1983, which adjusts Newton's laws to create a stronger gravitational field when gravitational acceleration becomes tiny (such as near the rim of a galaxy). It had some success explaining rotational velocity curves of elliptical galaxies, and dwarf elliptical galaxies, but not galaxy cluster gravitational lensing. MOND was not relativistic: it was an adjustment of the Newtonian account. Attempts were made to bring MOND into conformity with general relativity; this spawned competing MOND-based hypotheses—including TeVeS, MOG or STV gravity and the phenomenological covariant approach. In 2007, John W. Moffat proposed a modified gravity hypothesis based on the nonsymmetric gravitational theory (NGT) that claims to account for the behavior of colliding galaxies. This model requires the presence of non-relativistic neutrinos, or other candidates for (cold) dark matter, to work. Another proposal uses a gravitational backreaction from a theory that explain gravitational force between objects as an action, a reaction, and then a back-reaction. Simply, an object A affects an object B, and the object B then re-affects object A, and so on: creating a feedback loop that strengthens gravity. In 2008, another group proposed "dark fluid", a modification of large-scale gravity. It hypothesized that attractive gravitational effects are instead a side-effect of dark energy. Dark fluid combines dark matter and dark energy in a single energy field that produces different effects at different scales. This treatment is a simplification of a previous fluid-like model called the generalized Chaplygin gas model in which the whole of spacetime is a compressible gas. Dark fluid can be compared to an atmospheric system. Atmospheric pressure causes air to expand and air regions can collapse to form clouds. In the same way, the dark fluid might generally disperse, but it could collect around galaxies. Applying relativity to fractal non-differentiable spacetime, Laurent Nottale suggests that potential energy may arise due to the fractality of spacetime, which would account for the missing mass-energy observed at cosmological scales. Mention of dark matter is made in some video games and other works of fiction. In such cases, it is usually attributed extraordinary physical or magical properties. Such descriptions are often inconsistent with the hypothesized properties of dark matter in physics and cosmology.      The theory of Big Bang nucleosynthesis predicts the observed abundance of the chemical elementsAchim Weiss, "Big Bang Nucleosynthesis: Cooking up the first light elements" in: Einstein Online Vol. 2 (2006), 1017 and that baryonic matter accounts for around 4–5 percent of the universe's critical density. In contrast, evidence from large-scale structure and other observations indicates that the total matter density is about 30% of the critical density. Large astronomical searches for gravitational microlensing, including the MACHO, EROS and OGLE projects, have shown that only a small fraction of the dark matter in the Milky Way can be present in dark compact objects; the excluded range covers objects above half the Earth's mass up to 30 solar masses, excluding nearly all the plausible candidates. Detailed analysis of the small irregularities (anisotropies) in the cosmic microwave background observed by WMAP and Planck shows that around five-sixths of the total matter is in a form that does not interact significantly with ordinary matter or photons except through gravitational effects. Low-surface-brightness (LSB) galaxies. Spiral galaxies. Elliptical galaxies. Some elliptical galaxies display strong gravitational lensing. Radial velocity scatter of the galaxies within the clusters (as in Zwicky, but with more accurate measurements and larger samples) X-rays emitted by hot gas. The gas' temperature and density can be estimated from the X-ray energy and flux, and hence the gas pressure derived; assuming pressure and gravity balance, this enables the cluster's mass profile to be derived. Many  Chandra X-ray Observatory experiments use this technique to independently determine cluster mass. These observations generally indicate that baryonic mass is approximately 12–15 percent, in reasonable agreement with the Planck spacecraft cosmic average of 15.5–16 percent. Gravitational lensing usually on more distant galaxies. This is observed as "strong lensing" (multiple images) near the cluster core and weak lensing (shape distortions) in the outer parts. Several large Hubble projects used this method to measure cluster masses. Chameleon particle Conformal gravity General Antiparticle Spectrometer Illustris project Light dark matter Mirror matter Multidark (research program) Scalar field dark matter Self-interacting dark matter SIMP Unparticle physics What is dark matter? at cosmosmagazine.com The Dark Matter Crisis 18 August 2010 by Pavel Kroupa, posted in General The European astroparticle physics network Helmholtz Alliance for Astroparticle Physics Video lecture on dark matter by Scott Tremaine, IAS professor Science Daily story "Astronomers' Doubts About the Dark Side ..."
