   Dasmariñas, officially the City of Dasmariñas (often shortened to Dasma; Filipino: Lungsod ng Dasmariñas), is the largest city, both in terms of area and population in the province of Cavite, Philippines. It is located approximately  south of Manila. As of 2010, Dasmariñas is now the largest component city and the 12th largest city in the country in terms of population with 575,817 people. It is classified as "first-class" city in terms of income classification and has a land area of . The growing congestion and outward urban expansion of the Metropolitan Manila Area has set up a favorable atmosphere for the development of the city. This inevitable growth is manifested by the influx of industries,the presence of large educational and health institutions, and the growing number of subdivisions elevating its economy. Dasmariñas was named after Gómez Pérez Dasmariñas, the 7th Spanish governor-general of the Philippines who served from 1590 to 1593. After his death, his son Luis Pérez Dasmariñas became the governor-general from 1593 to 1596. Pérez Dasmariñas came from San Miguel das Negradas, Viveiro, Galicia, Spain. Dasmariñas literally means "from As Mariñas" (coastal region of Lugo combining the comarcas of A Mariña Occidental, A Mariña Central and A Mariña Oriental), coming itself from mariño ("of the coast, seaside or shore" in the Galician language, the native tongue from Viveiro Galicia, Spain), and this from mar ("sea"). In the 19th century during the Spanish Colonial Period, Dasmariñas was originally called Tampus meaning "end of the forest." In the beginning stages,it was  a part of its mother town of Imus. It was once a part of a vast Recollect Hacienda that supported all the various missionary activities of the Recollects in the Philippines and in Spain. On April 9, 1864, a council composed of the Archbishop of Manila, the politico military governor of Cavite, the Prior Provincial of the Augustinian Recollect Order and the parish priest of Imus met to discuss the creation of the new town and parish separated from Imus. At that time, there were only 643 inhabitants in Tampus, the heart of the community. After thorough discussions, the Gobierno Civil Superior of the Islands approved the creation of the new town on May 12, 1864 with Don Juan Ramirez elected as gobernadorcillo (town head). An ensemble of nipa houses in the other barrios of the hacienda like Malinta, Nancaan, Salacay, Paliparan, Malagasang and Salitran were grouped and migrated into a reduccion (reduction) in Tampus in 1866. Reduccion  originally meant the religious and civic aspects of  missionary activities. Later it came to mean the process of resettling and unifying a community, thereby creating a newly organized town. For the Spanish missionaries and friars, this process was  advantageous not only for evangelization but also for bringing people under the Spanish rule. A new town called  Tampus was formed. From that time on, the people of Tampus built their houses within the hearing distance of the church bells – "bajo las toques de campana". The new town could be reached through a good network of roads and bridges built by the best architects and engineers of the Recollect Order.http://www.geocities.ws/dasmacity/histo1.html In the same year, the new town was rechristened Perez-Dasmariñas to honor the 7th Governor General of the Philippines, Don Gómez Pérez Dasmariñas (1590-1593). Governor Dasmariñas, a Knight of Santiago, was a native of Galicia, Spain and a former magistrate of Murcia and Cartagena, Spain who brought a lot of economic improvements during the early days of colonization. Toward the end of 1866, the new town Perez-Dasmariñas had complied with the requirements of a typical Philippine town. A spacious town plaza at the center of the town with the church and the convent made of stone and bricks, a casa tribunal (courthouse) made of wood and nipa, a primary school for children and various houses made of nipa were built in designated areas. A cemetery was located around 200 yards away from the church and surrounded with wooden fence. The foundation of the town Perez-Dasmariñas was  unique from most other towns of Cavite. For the first time, a town was created not by a preceding petition of the barrio people and its local officials as required by legal procedures and custom at that time. Instead, high ranking church officials and the Cavite politico military governor were the prime initiators of its foundation. For the sake of the people of the growing town and for their own interest, the Recollects sent a petition to Madrid for the creation of a new parish of Dasmariñas, independent from Imus. Queen Isabella II signed the Royal Order creating the new parish of Perez-Dasmariñas on October 21, 1866. The following year, the construction of the stone parish church of Dasmariñas dedicated to the Virgin Mary as Our Lady of Immaculate Conception was started. The old town of Perez-Dasmariñas was made up of several barrios. Salitran was considered the most important and famous during the Spanish regime because it was the site of the Recollect casa hacienda (estate house). Salitran came from the Tagalog word "sal-it" meaning "people from another town". It was also once named as Bayanan because of the large concentration of people there. Since it was a part of the Recollect Hacienda de Imus, there were a many people from different provinces who lived there working as farmhands. Layong Iloko, a place in Salitran, strengthens the belief that there were Ilocanos who settled there. Pasong Santol in Salitran got its name because of the abundance of santol trees. Tampus, the center of the newly formed town was located at the end of the deep forest in contrast with one of the sitios which was called "Pintong gubat" or gate of the forest. Sometimes, the name of a barrio is taken from its location, as in the case of Barrio Burol which suggests the high location of the barrio. Sabang on the other hand means "crossroad" or "crossing". Barrio Salawag is believed to be the old barrio Salacay. The word "salawag" refers to long bamboo poles to which nipa roofing are tied up. Salawag is sometimes also called "crossing" because it serves as a crossroad between Paliparan and Salitran. Nancaan, now called Langkaan, was derived from the Tagalog word "langka" (jackfruit). It is the biggest fruit tree in the Philippines which was reportedly brought from India to Malaysia and found its way to our country. The presence of lot of jackfruit trees may be the reason  it was called Nancaan. Malinta or Malintaan, on the other hand was derived from the Tagalog word "linta" which means leech. The abundance of leeches in the place accounted for its name. On July 18, 1899, three more sitios of Perez-Dasmariñas were raised to the rank of barrios. Barrio Sampaloc owing to the abundance of tamarind trees in the place; barrio Tamban was renamed San Jose and Barrio Lucsuhin became San Agustin. By June 1896, the Spanish authorities in Cavite province had become suspicious of the local elite's activities. There were alleged top hierarchy meetings of the Recollects in the casa hacienda of Salitran and San Nicolas. Included in the meeting were General Bernardo Echaluce and other top military officials. The purpose of the meeting was to determine whether it was just to apprehend the notable elites who were "Masons". At the time, "Masons" were bitter enemies of the church and their liberal ideas coming from their counterpart in Spain were beginning to awaken the natives to fight for their rights and even for their freedom. Fortunately for the elites, no decision was during the meeting. Thus, the local leaders freely but quietly continued their subversive activities. As soon as the revolution of 1896 broke out, leaders of Perez-Dasmariñas took no time in taking up arms against the Spanish rule. Don Placido Campos, the gobernadorcillo at the time and Don Francisco Barzaga, the municipal secretary, gathered the people to liberate their town from Spanish control at the beginning of September 1896. They captured the casa tribunal and casa hacienda in Salitran, killing the religious clergies who lived there. Eventually, the town was freed.http://www.geocities.ws/dasmacity/histo1.html As towns in Cavite fell into the hands of Filipino revolutionaries, the Spanish government in Madrid felt that Governor General Ramon Blanco's offensive against the natives was ineffective. Thus, a more aggressive person took over the command of the islands, Camilo de Polavieja, with Gen. José de Lachambre as the head of the campaign. Gradually, the Spaniards regained the control of the province. After the fall of Silang, the Spaniards turned their eyes to Perez-Dasmariñas. Knowing the strength of resistance he might encounter, Gen. Lechambre decided to surround the whole town. He sent to advance units headed by Brigadier Gen. Jose Molina who went to take the left. The troop under Col. Arutos who had taken Paliparan, went westward to cut the escape of the Filipinos to Imus and Carmona. Gen. Lechambre sent the main force toward the south. The Caviteños suffered terrible defeat because of lack of arms and ammunition. As the Spaniards approached the Poblacion, the revolutionaries retreated the stone building of the town. On February 25, 1897, the Spaniards decided to encircle the Poblacion rather go directly to the interior. They started burning all houses except the church. Seeing they were surrounded by fire, some of the rebels went out of hiding but were immediately met by open fire. Those who took refuge at the casa tribunal refused to come out and were all burned alive. Even those who took refuge in the church did eventually yield to the advancing Spanish forces. By March, Perez-Dasmariñas had fallen back into the Spanish hand. Then Lechambre returned to Salitran. He was expecting a heavy resistance from the revolutionaries who occupied the casa hacienda but to his great surprise, they were able to take the place without any resistance. They hoisted the red and gold flag of Spain and converted it as their headquarters. However, news came that there was a heavy concentration of Filipino rebels at Pasong Santol a short distance beyond Salitran. The Battle of Pasong Santol was one of the most significant in the Caviteños' desire to keep their province under their control. It was the bloodiest battle fought in Cavite. It was during these series of battles in Cavite when Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo was elected in absentia as President of the newly formed revolutionary government. While some leaders of Magdalo faction of the Katipunan were busy fighting in Pasong Santol, members of the Magdiwang and Magdalo faction were discussing the form of government and elected its officers in the Tejeros Convention in Rosario, Cavite. In said Convention, Bonifacio was traitorously ousted from the Katipunan leadership by the combined Caviteño revolutionaries. Bonifacio and his brother Procopio were later executed by Aguinaldo's men. The Filipino casualties was enormous according to Lachambre. There were 150 men inside the "tribunal" or town hall when Spaniards set fire to the building and all 150 were killed. Others took refuge in the convent. This also was set on fire and the men were shot as they emerged. Others had shut themselves up in the church. With the church surrounded, the mountain artillery was brought up into position and from a distance of 35 meters, the strong doors of the church were bombarded and the troops went in through the breach. At the height of the Battle of Perez Dasmarinas, Gen. Flaviano Yengko, Gen. Crispulo Aguinaldo, Lucas Camerino, Arturo Reyes and many more revolutionaries lost their lives fighting for their motherland. With the signing of the Treaty of Paris on December 10, 1898 (ratified Washington on February 6, 1899), the Philippines was ceded to America by Spain. The American regime brought to Dasmariñas, as it did to other parts of the country, several fundamental changes in the system of government, in language, and in educational system. In the month of February, 1899, the Philippine-American War began. General Henry Ware Lawton's brigade operated south of Manila including the province of Cavite in the middle of June 1899. The Americans could not land directly at Bacoor because Zapote river was defended by the Filipino revolutionists who built trenches as tactical defenses forming three sides of an angle which made the Filipinos hardly visible. The American's 14th Infantry Battalion swam across the during the Battle of Zapote River and under the cover of military artillery, charged against the Filipinos who then retreated to the woods. Moving southward, the Americans encountered more Filipino revolutionists in the town of Bacoor, Imus and Perez-Dasmariñas, a battalion of infantry narrowly escaped annihilation. News had been brought to the American camp that the Filipino soldiers had evacuated the town and that the native mayor was disposed to surrender it formally to the Americans. The battalion thus went there to take possession, but before reaching the place, the Filipino revolutionists closed in on all sides, and a heavy firefight went on for hours. The Americans were saved from destruction by a desperate bayonet charge when they were rescued by General Weaton's brigade. Placido Campos, who sided with General Emilio Aguinaldo since the beginning of the Filipino-American war in 1899, was captured together with his nephew Guillermo Campos. They were imprisoned at the Provost Political Prison on Postigo St., Intramuros, Manila where they were kept for six months. The Americans established the Military Government in 1900. By order of the Colonel of the American Battalion stationed in Perez-Dasmariñas, the residents of the town nominated a president and a vice-president. Elected through the raising of hands were Francisco Barzaga as president and Conrado Malihan as vice-president. They served their office until the civil government was established by the Americans in 1901. On January 31, 1901, in accordance with President McKinley's instructions that the Filipinos be allowed to manage their own municipal governments, the Second Philippine Commission enacted the Act Number 82, the new Municipal Code, placing each municipal government under the following officials: the municipal president, the vice-president, and the municipal council, who were elected by qualified voters every two years. In line with this, Placido Campos was again elected as the head of the municipality of Perez-Dasmariñas in October 1901. Francisco Barzaga then became the Treasurer of Dasmariñas. The two were re-elected in 1903. In 1903, the American government made the first census in the Philippines. Francisco Barzaga and the secretary, Esteban Quique, made census enumerators for Perez-Dasmariñas under the leadership of Placido Campos. When the census was finished, the total population of the town was only 3,500. Before the revolution of 1898, the population was 12,000. (There were 20 Cabezas de Barangay (barangay head) and each of which had 200 persons with ages ranging from 18 to 59 years, men and women, the number of children estimated at 6,000 giving atotal of 12,000.) Comparing the population prior to the revolution with that of 1948, there has been a decrease in the population of Perez-Dasmariñas. The 1948 census accounted to only 9,700 while that of the pre-revolutionary period totaled 12,000. From 1905 to 1916, the law which was passed in 1901 took effect. It combined the municipalities of Imus, Perez-Dasmariñas and Bacoor into one, with the seat of government located at Imus. Consequently, on January 5, 1905, Perez-Dasmariñas became a part of Imus. The reason for this was to punish the insurrectos for not surrendering. Besides, the inability of the people to work outside from fear of being suspected by the Constabulary greatly decrease the income of the municipalities to the detriment of the employees and the policemen. In 1917, under Governor General Francis Burton Harrison (1913-1921), Perez-Dasmariñas was again declared a separate municipality. The provincial governor of Cavite, Antero S. Soriano, convened the local leaders, including Placido Campos, Francisco Barzaga, and Felipe Tirona. Together, they agreed to delete the word "Perez" and retain "Dasmariñas" as the new name of the town. For the second time, Placido Campos headed the rechristened town of Dasmariñas. The town of Dasmariñas is a town in the province of Cavite that shed blood and has given up many lives for the sake of our country. There were many times when the Japanese conducted zonifications in the town. The barrios of Paliparan and Salawag suffered the most number of deaths. Being remote places and thinking that guerrillas were hiding there, these two barrios were zonified two times giving up several lives. The Japanese Imperial Army made the schools as their garrison. On December 17, 1944, another zonification was conducted in the town proper. The church was used as garrison and all suspected male residents involved in the guerrilla movement were brought at the back of the Dasmariñas Elementary School and were tortured. Some were hanged at the old mango tree near the school canteen, whipped and forced to say something about the movement. There were those who experienced the so-called "tinutubig" (wherein the head is immersed in a drum of water). Aside from these, raid after raid were made and male residents were shot to death. Some were killed because they were mistaken as guerrillas. Some fought face to face, during encounters in Burol, Malinta, Paliparan and Langkaan. Others were killed in other towns. Most male residents of Dasmarineños were among those who fought with the Japanese in Bataan and Corregidor. Sad to state too, there were those who joined the Death March, some of whom are already dead and some are still living. In 1945, Filipino troops of the 4th and 42nd Infantry Divisions of the Philippine Commonwealth Army liberated the town of Dasmariñas and aided the local Caviteño resistance in their fight against the Imperial Japanese Army, marking the end of the Second World War. After the war, the Philippines became independent and Dasmariñas started to develop. The population increased because of the mass exodus of families from Metro Manila and nearby provinces. The Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan (DBB), also known as Dasmariñas Resettlement Area, was established in 1975 by Letter of Instruction No. 19 issued by the then President Ferdinand Marcos. From 1983 to 1998, Dasmariñas had an economic boom. Different factories and establishments sprouted in the town which gave way for the growth in population. From a sixth-class municipality, the town became a first-class municipality. As of 2007, the City has a population in excess of over 556,000. Dasmariñas served as a catalyst for major economic development and sustained growth for the Metro Manila urban area since the 1990s. The influx of industries, academia, and real estate developments is significant of in a town outside of a major financial district. Located at Dasmariñas are the First Cavite Industrial Estate with 81 foreign and domestic corporations employing 20,000, and the University Town in Cavite, with a student population of 15,000 centered on the De La Salle University-Dasmariñas. There have been several attempts to convert Dasmariñas into a city. The first attempt was in 1997, when HB08931http://www.congress.gov.ph/bis/hist_show.php?save=1&journal=1&switch=0&bill_no=HB08931 was filed by Congresman Renato P. Dragon with other cityhood bills of Imus (HB 08960)http://www.congress.gov.ph/bis/hist_show.php?save=1&journal=1&switch=0&bill_no=HB08960 and Bacoor (HB 08959).http://www.congress.gov.ph/bis/hist_show.php?save=1&journal=1&switch=0&bill_no=HB08959 It was filed last February 11, 1997 and read last February 13, 1997. Committee Report N0. 01361 was submitted on December 17, 1997. It was approved on the third reading by the House last January 10, 1998. It did not push through as a Republic Act and no plebiscite happened. The second attempt was in 2000, when HB099883http://www.congress.gov.ph/bis/hist_show.php?save=1&journal=1&switch=0&bill_no=HB07478 was filed by Congressman Erineo Maliksi last March 13, 2000. It was first read last March 13, 2000. It was approved on the Second and Third reading of House last March 15, 2000 and March 27, 2000. It was transmitted to the senate on March 28, 2000 and received on March 31, 2009. It did not push through as a Republic Act and no plebiscite happened. The idea of converting Dasmariñas into a component city was again proposed for the third time after failure in 1997 and 2000. House Bill no. 5258 converting the municipality of Dasmariñas into a component city was filed by Congressman Elpidio F. Barzaga, Jr. last October 3, 2008. It was read last October 6, 2008. It was approved by the House on Second and Third Reading on October 7 and November 17, 2008. It was transmitted and received by the Senate last November 17 and 20 2008. It was passed by the senate on Second and Third Reading last October 28 and November 5, 2009. It is received by the President of the Philippines last October 14, 2009 and signed as Republic Act 9723 last October 15, 2009.http://www.congress.gov.ph/bis/hist_show.php?save=1&journal=1&switch=0&bill_no=HB05258http://www.senate.gov.ph/lis/bill_res.aspx?congress=14&q=HBN-5258 COMELEC Resolution No. 8682 in connection with the November 25, 2009 plebiscite to ratify the conversion of the municipality of Dasmariñas province of Cavite into a component city pursuant to Republic Act 9723 dated October 15, 2009.http://www.comelec.gov.ph/resolutions/2010natl_local/res_8682.html Republic Act No. 9723 was ratified by the registered voters of Dasmariñas through a plebiscite conducted last November 25, 2009, converted the municipality of Dasmariñas in the Province of Cavite into a component city to be known as the City of Dasmariñas. There were about 44,000 voters who cast the plebiscite ballot in the town’s 1,508 polling precincts. The yes votes won overwhelmingly. The yes votes got 36,559 while the no votes got 8,141.http://www.mb.com.ph/articles/231329/dasmari-now-cavites-4th-cityRepublic Act No. 9723, "Charter of the City of Dasmariñas"http://www.comelec.gov.ph/results/Plebiscite/2009_mun_dasma.html The current mayor, Jennifer Austria-Barzaga elected in 2007, is both the first woman mayor and first city mayor of Dasmariñas since its incorporation as a city. Since 1892, when Don Placido N. Campos became the first mayor, there have been 23 mayors of the city. On 2011, the Paro-Paro Festival was first celebrated. It is celebrated every 26 November to commemorate the incorporation of the city of Dasmariñas with people dancing and parading in the streets in butterfly costumes. On November 2013, the Paro-Paro Festival was cancelled, instead the allocated funds will be donated to the Typhoon Yolanda victims.  Dasmariñas City is about 8,234 hectares, 12 kilometers from Metro Manila or the National Capital Region and 27 kilometers south of the center of the City of Manila. It is bounded by the city of Imus and the municipality of Silang, both in Cavite at the north and south respectively, at the east by the towns of San Pedro and Biñan by the side of Laguna and Carmona and at the west, it is bounded by General Trias, also in Cavite and a little further from this boundary is Trece Martires City. It is strategically located at the intermediate zone of the Metropolitan Manila area. With adequate accessibility, Dasmariñas is within the urbanizing development influence of Metro Manila area. It is composed of the Poblacion and the barangays. The Poblacion which is now divided into four zones is on the westernmost section of the city, Sabang, Salawag and Salitran are to the north and to the south are San Agustin, Langkaan and Sampaloc. Burol, Paliparan, and the Resettlement Area are on the eastern side of the city. The city of Dasmariñas is landlocked. However, it is not too far from the coastal towns of Rosario, Kawit, Bacoor, Noveleta and Cavite City whose average distance from Poblacion is less than 30 kilometers. It is about the same distance from Laguna de Bay and about 27 kilometers from the resort city of Tagaytay and the famous Taal Lake. At present, Dasmariñas is served by corridors traversing the central areas which provide linkages to the Metropolitan Manila area core in the north and the developing nodes of Laguna and Batangas. Dasmariñas is partly lowland and partly hill. The Poblacion itself is elevated. From an elevation of 80 meters at the Poblacion, the land rises to 250 meters towards Silang. Generally, land near rivers and creeks are rugged. Dasmariñas is outside the typhoon belt and has no fault line constraints. Further, it is served by natural drainage system since it is traversed by several rivers and water tributaries draining to the Manila Bay. The city has yet to experience floods. Strongly sloping to elevated areas cover approximately 1,532.16 hectares or 18.61% of the total area.  These are dispersed among Burol, Langkaan, Paliparan, Salawag, Sampaloc and San Agustin. Areas with slopes 10.1 to 18% cover about 575.72 hectares of land in portions of Salawag, Salitran, Burol, and other parts. On the other hand, gently sloping or undulating areas comprise merely 710.4 hectares or 8.62% of the total land area while undulating areas with a slope of 2.6 to 5% account for the biggest percentage of 50.59% of the total land area equivalent to 4, 165.64 hectares of land which are dispersed over the municipality except Sabang and San Jose. Dasmariñas has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen climate classification: Aw) with two pronounced seasons: wet season and dry season. Wet season covers the period from May to December of each year and dry season covers the period from January to April.   From the original 643 inhabitants of the old Perez-Dasmariñas, the population grew and so did the town. By 1888, there were already more than 4,576 people living in Perez-Dasmarinas. Gradually, the economic life of the people improved. The inquilinos (lessees) of the hacienda rose to become the middle class. Dasmariñas, 8,664 hectares were all farmed in 1890 except for 3,770 hectares (including parcels at Gatdula and Balimbing). Lessees paid the usual land rent base on the measurement of lowland and upland riceland set up by the "uldog" (friar administrator) of casa hacienda de Salitran. In the 1880s, there were 200 quinones of dry and 50 quinones of wet ricelands yielding some 2,300 cavanas of palay, 5,000 piculs of mucavado sugar, 50 cavans of corn and camote, 60 piculs of tao and 25 piculs of peanuts. Dasmariñas was a highly advanced town where not only textiles from Batangas and Bulacan looms, but also imported European cloth from Manila reached the town elites. Fish and other staple food however still came from nearby towns. Surprisingly until 1880, there was no public market in the town. There was a principal public dirt road in Perez-Dasmariñas that went to Silang which was passable to all kinds of vehicle only during dry season, but reachable only by foot and horseback during wet season. By 1870, mails from Manila were received at a central station in Cavite Puerto where it was sorted. Mails were brought via Kawit, then Imus then Dasmariñas. Culturally, Perez-Dasmariñas was not too behind for by 1874 there were already two competing brass bands in the town. Don Valeriano Campos, an inquilino and a former gobernadorcillo of the town (1879 to 1881) organized one of the brass bands. He was popularly known as Capitang Vale. He was the highest taxpayer and owned a house made of cogon and wood on Calle Real with an appraised value of P300. His son Placido Campos learned his trade and also considered a man of means. Manuela Monzon, another well to do woman owned a house at the town's main street. The house made of nipa and wood was valued at P200 and was rented as a boys' school for P72. Nonetheless in 1892, there was a noticeable decrease of the male population. As conflict between the friar-hacenderos, the inquilinos and casamas multiplied more people went into hiding in the deep forest of Perez-Dasmariñas. The rise of tulisanismo in Cavite was often connected with agrarian problems in the hacienda town owned by the friars. Dasmariñas has the largest population in the entire province with over 575,000 people living within its borders. The city has 75 barangays, has more than 170 subdivisions and the biggest resettlement area in the Philippines, the Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan (DBB). Most affluent families from Metro Manila and nearby towns and provinces have chosen Dasmariñas to be their home due to its proximity to the National Capital Region. The mass exodus of people here in Dasmariñas is also brought about by the industrial boom which brought about more jobs. There are also a big number of foreign residents such as Koreans, Chinese, Japanese, Americans, Hindus, Britons and Eurasians. Because of this, Dasmariñas can be also considered as the "Melting Pot" of Cavite. Christianity is the predominant religion, and the majority of the people are Roman Catholics. The city is the seat of the Vicariates of Immaculate Conception and Our Mother of Perpetual Help under the jurisdiction of Diocese of Imus. Other prominent religious groups include Jesus Miracle Crusade International Ministry (Dasma Outstation, Iglesia Ni Cristo, United Church of Christ in the Philippines (UCCP), Jesus Is Lord Church (JIL), Evangelica Unida De Cristo, Victory Christian Fellowship, World Mission Church, The United Methodist Church, Salitran Covenant Bible Church, Presbyterian Churches, Baptist and Bible Fundamental churches, Seventh Day Adventist Churches, Members of Church of God International known as Ang Dating Daan, The Lord's Hand Family Apostolic Church, Apostolic (Oneness) churches such as The Pentecostals of Dasmariñashttp://www.thepentecostalsofdasmarinas.comand other United Pentecostal Churches (UPC), Lighthouse Apostolic Ministry of Pentecost, Family Tabernacle of Jesus Christ, etc., and other denominations. A considerable percentage of the population are also composed of Muslims. Religious tolerance exists among members of different sects. The city has a majority of English and Filipino speakers. Almost all households in the city are bilingual and know how to speak English. Due to its proximity to Metro Manila and being part of the Greater Manila Area, there is also a considerable amount of speakers of the Bicolano, Cebuano, Ilocano, Pangasinan and Chavacano. There are also a number of Spanish and Arabic speakers in the city.The 1987 Philippine constitution specifies, "Spanish and Arabic shall be promoted on a voluntary and optional basis." The City of Dasmariñas is divided into eleven unofficially-defined administrative districts and is subdivided into 75 barangays. The Poblacion is the city center which is home to Dasmariñas' old residents. The newly renovated old church of the Parish of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception, Dasmariñas Library, Dasmariñas Elementary School and the Immaculate Conception Academy-Science High School are located in the town's plaza. Municipal Government's municipio or the town hall is located a few meters away from the plaza. Near the Poblacion is the De La Salle University-Health Sciences Campus and the DLSU-Medical Center, the 1st ISO Certified Hospital in the Philippines. Divided into four zones, the town's center is mostly residential area but is still lined with many business establishments. Celebrations, shows and gatherings are being held at the plaza. Every 8 December, the town's Poblacion celebrates the Feast of the Immaculate Conception wherein colorful banderitas, loud marching bands and expectacular display of fireworks are seen and is being visited by many people coming from the different towns in Cavite. Cultural shows and many celebrations are happening here almost weekly so it has the rightful claim to be called "The Liveliest City in Cavite". Five barangays are located in this district. Kasuyan is its first name of this place, during the Spanish period, because of the presence of many cashew trees on the area. After many years, its name became Luksuhin and on July 18, 1889, it was renamed again by the petition passed by Don Juan Bautista requesting the place be named after San Agustin. The place is lying between the Poblacion and Sampaloc in the north. Farming was the chief source of income of the people here. San Agustin is blessed with rich soil that can be planted with rice, sugarcane, fruits and vegetables. Here, vast lands with big mango trees can be found. There was a continuous flow of water coming from Bucal to the Poblacion during the Spanish period which they call Simbro. However, due to the town's development, most lands are now being converted into subdivisions and other business establishments. On December 17, 1944, three persons living here were killed at the sona (zonification) in the Poblacion. They were Conrado Aledia, Primitivo Sango and Matiaga Ramirez. Today, the place is on development. The Dasmariñas Central Market and the business establishments such as the Walter Mart and FSC are located here. Three barangays are located in this district. This barangay is situated between the Poblacion and Sabang. On April 13, 1889, a petition was passed appealing the sitio, once known Sitio Tamban, to be transformed into a barangay. The place was renamed on July 18, 1889, and was given the name San Jose in commemoration of their patron saint, St. Joseph. Cumpuerta is the name of the hide-out of the Filipino revolucionarios during the revolution against Spain. This is a deep canal of flowing water which still exists until now. The families of Cantada, Camañag, Ramos and Pastor are the first ones who settled here. Only one barangay is located in this district, its namesake, Barangay San Jose." This place is known for the name "Salitran" even during the Spanish period. There are no exact historical accounts for the origin of the name. Some says that such name was given because the early settlers of this place were from Pampanga, Visayas, Tagalog region and some Chinese that served the Spanish friars. However, according to the original settlers here, the place was originally called "Bayanan". They said that this has numerous big Spanish houses which is like in a small town. An old house in the eastern part of Salitran was used by the Spanish friars as the storage place for the rice and was called "Makina". It was also used as a headquarters by the Guardia Civil. When the revolution ignited, the "Makina" became the center of attack by the revolucionarios from the Poblacion and this barrio. The friars weren't aware of the said assault. On March 7, 1897, the Spanish went to Salitran where the Magdalo soldiers led by Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo hid. General Emilio Aguinaldo received help from one thousand men and formed a greater force and even the Spanish troops led by General Lechambre didn't penetrate Salitran. Because of the rebelry, the Spanish burned all the houses and establishments in the barrio. There were only left three houses unburned. During the World War II, Simplicio Lara and Teodorico Timbang were killed by the Japanese soldiers. Now, Salitran is on vast development due to the presence of numerous subdivisions and villages. Schools located here are the St. Jude College, the Immaculate Conception Academy-North Campus, and many others. There are also many business establishments here. Four barangays are located in this district. On the northern part of Dasmariñas is where this barangay can be found. The word "Sabang" means "to overflow"; wherein the creeks running from Malagasang, Imus tend to overflow in this place. This were made by the Spanish friars to irrigate the vast ricefields in the barangay. The diversion in the direction of the waterflow made a big change in the agriculture during the Spanish period. There were rich production of rice and because of this, a bodega was made here for the storage of rice and was called "Kamalig ng Pare" (Silo of the Priest). This place is considered to be the richest land in Dasmariñas during the Spanish period. Residents here where known to be industrious. Agriculture is still a source of income in this barangay though it diminish due to the development of the lands into subdivisions and schools. More than 85% of the population are professionals and have a high standard of living. In this place, the Madona Charity Clinic is located which is owned by Mrs. Bracia Tengko. This clinic is a big help to the less fortunate residents of the barangay which seeks medical help. Only one barangay is located in this district, its namesake, Barangay Sabang. On the eastern part of Dasmariñas, we can find Barangay Burol which is 3 kilometers away from the city center. The complete name of barrio Burol is Pansol-Burol. Pansol is a Tagalog word meaning aqueduct, while Burol, also a native word, means mound. Even though there are no historical records about its establishment, it is safe to say that it was formed during the Spanish period due to the presence of ruins of old Spanish houses and sugarmills. The families of Quillao and Beltran are the first ones to settle in this place. This barangay became the hide-out of the Katipuneros/revolucionarios. During the Japanese occupation, there are some Dasmarineños who were killed in this place. They were Alfredo Purificacion, Pedro Calupad, Jose Yñota, Victor de Jesus and Angel Olaes. The Japanese soldiers also planted several cotton trees on the area. Now, this place is considered one of the richest barangay in Dasmariñas. Many schools and colleges can be found here such as the Southern Luzon College, International English Center, Asian Trinity School, and many others. Adjacent to the place is the Emilio Aguinaldo College. Numerous subdivisions and villages are also located here. Four barangays are located in this district, these are: This place is located on the south-western part of Dasmariñas. The name "Langkaan" came from the word "langka" meaning jackfruit; which is believed to be planted in many parts of this barangay during the 1900, the year of its foundation. Barangay Langkaan was a part of a vast hacienda during the Spanich period that's why there are numerous water systems for ricefields that can be found here. The San Agustin Dam was constructed in 1855. On the last part of the 19th century, the Spaniards erected an indigo plantation here. The stone-made grinder of indigo still exists until now and it is the mark of the Spanish influence in the place. The Spaniards are the first ones who planted sugar canes and became the primary source of income during the 18th century. During those times, tarapiche and carabaos are used to make panucha and paldo. Don Placido Campos and Andres Medina are the ones who owned these tarapiche. When the Americans arrived, this place attracted residents from the Poblacion. The families Quillao, Bautista, Sarabusab, Reyes, Remulla, Sango, Laudato, Empeño, Satsatin, Medina, de Lima and others transferred here during those times. During the Second World War, the Japanese had a big plantation of cotton trees in Langkaan. Dasmarineños were forced to work here. A Japanese concentration camp was also established in this area. Now, this is considered to be a backbone of the economic progress of Dasmariñas. The presence of numerous factories in different industrial estates in this area, such as the First Cavite Industrial Estate, serves as the working place for the workers living in Dasmariñas and other towns of Cavite as well. Two barangays are located in this district, these are: Paliparan is situated at the southeastern part of Dasmariñas. In the easternmost part, is surrounded by the municipalities of Gen. Mariano Alvarez, Cavite and San Pedro, Laguna. This place was a grassy land with no trees growing on its wide space providing an excellent place for flying kites during summer. In fact, this was what used to be - a paliparan - meaning an airfield for flying kites. During the Spanish period, the Spaniards used to go to this place during weekends to fly kites of different designs and colors. The first settlers here came from the town of Imus. Among them are the families of Faustino Alvarez, Flaviano Pakingan, Gregorio de la Cruz, Pablo Papa, Dominguez and the Martinez. On 1911, most of the residents here are said to be uneducated because there were only eight persons who can vote. Also during the Spanish period, this place became a hiding place for the Katipuneros/revolucionarios. During the Japanese occupation, some hide-outs of the guerillas were found here such as of "P.Q.O.G., R.C.T.C. Hunters, Reyes Regimen and Saulog Regimen". On June 1943, the Japanese ordered the residents to assemble in front of the school wherein they were not given food and water from morning until evening. Suspected guerrilla members were killed. This barangay is sub divided into six sitios which are Nyugan (on the west), Crossing, Paliparan (on the north), Paliparan Ilaya (also on the north), Pook and Burol (on the north-east). Today, it is considered to be one of the richest barangay in Dasmariñas because of the many factories and industrial estates that are located here. Among them are the Monterey, Reynold's Corporation, Molave Industrial Estate and many others. Three barangays are located in this district, these are: Barangay Salawag is located in the north-eastern part of Dasmariñas. Such name was given to this place due to the presence of bamboo trees made for the construction of houses. This barangay has many names during the olden times. The Spanish called this "Pasong Tinta" because there were many plants called "tinta-tintahan" used as an ink. This was also called "Horong Bato" because the early settlers believed that there is a treasure here buried under a large rock. The first families to live here are the Macalinao, Pacifico, Purificacion and Paras. While the richest families living here are the Acuzar, Panerio, Muncada. During the arrival of the Americans, the place was called "Mataas na Sampalok" because there were numerous tall sampaloc (tamarind) trees planted here. Today, the barangay boasts of the "world class" Orchard Golf and Country Club, the site of the past Johnnie Walker Golf Tournament" and a state university, the Technological University of the Philippines. Many subdivisions are also located here. Such as San Marino Heights, San Marino City and Villa Vocerenata. Only one barangay is located in this district, its namesake, Barangay Salawag. There were numerous sampaloc (English: tamarind) trees in this place that's why it was given such name. It has the largest land area in Dasmariñas. The Central Business District of the city is located in this barangay. Sitios formed here on 1896 were Palapala, Bukal, Malinta, Manalo, Piela and Talisayan. In this barangay, the Philippine Christian University and the Union Theological Seminary can be found. Hella Phils. is located in Malinta, EuroMed Laboratories and New Era Village of Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of Christ) are in Bucal. More than half of the land is owned by the International Institute of Rural Reconstruction. Five barangays are located in this district, these are: DBB or the Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan was established on 1975 under the government of Pres. Ferdinand Marcos. At first, it occupies 234 hectares of land in the town and is 8 kilometers away from the town's Poblacion. This land was bought by the PHHC or the People Homesite Housing Corporation to the owners at two million and four hundred thousand pesos (P2,400,000) which then became the resettlement area for the less-privileged families living in the depressed areas of Metro Manila. The families of Eduardo Coronel, Rogelio Tomas, Ruben Alvarez, Manuel Rabang, Isabela de la Cruz and Diosdado Alto were the first ones to live here. Diosdado Alto, Rodolfo Urubia, Danilo Serrano, Maximo Esteban, Manuel Macuto and Francisco Gonzales became the first barangays leaders. After some years, DBB was divided into 30 barangays with a population of 100,000 living in more than 600 hectares of land. Each families were given 90-200 square meters which they loan from the NHA or the National Housing Authority. On September 12, 1990, the Sangguniang Bayan (Municipal Council) passed Order 108-90 ordering DBB to be divided into 47 barangays which then was approved by the authority. Today, the Congressional South Avenue is lined with numerous schools and business establishments. The Kadiwa market offers goods at cheaper price which then serve as an alternative market for the town. Schools such as the Dasmariñas Elementary School and the Dasmariñas National High School are just nearby the market. Subdivisions are also located in here like the Windward Hills Subdivision which serves most La Salle students. Just in front of the avenue is the DLSU or the De La Salle University-Dasmariñas Campus. This district has the most number of barangays, 42.      Dasmariñas City has been a municipality and later a component city with a mayor-council form of government since its establishment in 1866. The mayor is the chief executive of the city. She is elected to serve a three-year term, with a maximum of three terms. The incumbent mayor is Jennifer Austria-Barzaga, the wife of the previous mayor, now congressman, Rep. Elpidio F. Barzaga, Jr. and daughter of San Simon Barangay Captain, Anicia Movido Narvaez-Austria, she also elected as Barangay Kagawad of San Simon from 1997 to 2002. She was elected last 2007. The vice mayor is the presiding officer of the Sangguniang Panglungsod ng Dasmariñas (English: City Council of Dasmariñas). He is also the chief executive of the city whenever the mayor is out of the city. He is elected to serve a three-year term, with a maximum of three terms. The incumbent vice mayor is Valeriano Saraza Encabo, incumbent since 2007. The Sangguniang Panglungsod ng Dasmariñas (English: City Council of Dasmariñas) is composed of 12 members with 2 ex officio members which are the Association of Liga ng mga Barangay ng Dasmariñas (English: League of Barangays of Dasmariñas) President and the Sangguniang Kabataan (English: Youth Council) Federation President. There are 20 committees in the city each headed by a chairman who is a city councilor. They are elected to serve a three-year term, with a maximum of three terms. The city officials from June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2016. They were elected last May 13, 2013 during the 2013 Philippine national and local elections, which since 2007, all candidates from the Barzaga's group sweep the Municipal/City council. Except for lack of dates of the terms of the gobernadorcillos (also popularly referred to as captain) during the Spanish regime, the list of town heads of Dasmariñas is complete from its founding to the present. Gobernadorcillos, (1868-1895) Capitan Municipal, (1895-1896)http://sinupan.blogspot.sg/2008/05/history-of-dasmarias.html, Capitan Municipal Municipal Presidents, (1900-1935)http://sinupan.blogspot.sg/2008/05/history-of-dasmarias.html, Municipal President Municipal Presidents under Imus Government, (1905-1916) Effectivity of the law passed in 1901 combining the municipalities of Imus, Dasmariñas and Bacoor with its seat of government in Imus. Municipal Presidents, (1917-1935) Municipal Mayors, (1935-2009)http://sinupan.blogspot.sg/2008/05/history-of-dasmarias.html, Municipal Mayors City Mayors, (2009–present) Dasmariñas is politically subdivided into 75 barangays or villages. This table shows the barangays, barangay captains, SK chairmen and population of each barangay in Dasmariñas.http://www.cavite.gov.ph/home/index.php/cities-and-municipalities/district-iv/city-of-dasmarinashttp://calabarzon.dilg.gov.ph/LGUDirectory/BODS_Cavite_CityofDasmarinas.pdf The Legislative district of Dasmariñas is the representation of the city in the House of Representatives of the Philippines. The district corresponds to the 4th Legislative District of Cavite, which was created on October 22, 2009 just right before the ratification of the Charter of the City of Dasmariñas on November 25, 2009. Prior to being entitled its own representation, the municipality of Dasmariñas was represented in Congress as part of the lone district of Cavite from 1907 to 1972, and as part of Region IV-A in the Interim Batasang Pambansa from 1978 to 1984. From 1984 to 1986, it was represented at the Batasang Pambansa as part of the at-large district of Cavite, and was part of the second district of Cavite in the restored House of Representatives from 1987 to 2010. The congressman of the Legislative district of Dasmariñas is the representative of the city in the lower house of the Philippine Congress. He is elected to serve a three-year term, with a maximum of three terms. Elpidio F. Barzaga, Jr. is the incumbent congressman. Despite of its own representation in the congress, it still an ordinary component city, meaning its citizens still elect provincial officials. The city has two representatives to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan ng Cavite (English: Provincial Board of Cavite). The board members are elected to serve a three-year term, with a maximum of three terms. Both Rex Mangubat and Rudy Lara were re-elected unopposed on May 2013, which Lara is the most higher votes in the entire provincial board, he is also as the Senior board member. The seal was the winner of the City Logo making competition sponsored by the City Government.The competition started from February 26, 2010 until March 26 of the same year. Ryan Suarez, an alumnus of University of Santo Tomas | College of Fine Arts and Design created the city seal. The winning seal underwent minor revisions and for the celebration of the 1st Cityhood Anniversary and the 143rd Feast of the Immaculate Conception, from November 25 - December 8, the new city logo was unveiled on November 26, 2010 in the City Quadrangle.   The city of Dasmariñas is one of the fastest growing local government units in the province of Cavite. Numerous commercial establishments, which include major shopping malls, fast foods, groceries, convenient stores, restaurants and other service-oriented businesses, are mostly concentrated in the City Centre and the Central Business District. Industrial establishments are located in the outskirts of the city. It has the greatest number of universities in the province. From an agricultural-based economy, the town of Dasmariñas has evolved into a highly urbanized, commercialized and industrialized city. It now boasts of three industrial estates, namely: First Cavite Industrial Estate (FCIE) in Barangay Langkaan, Dasmariñas Technopark located in Barangay Paliparan I and NHA Industrial Park in Bagong Bayan. Aside from these industrial areas, there are 240 other factories/business establishments scattered in the different barangays that sum up to a total of 309 operational industries in the city. Dasmariñas is home to hundreds of thousands of residents who occupy the more than 70 residential subdivisions in the city. It also serves as a haven to investors with its industrial estates and diverse pool of manpower. The rapid growth of the city's population near universities, industrial estates and factories provides a ready market for real estate ventures such as subdivisions, apartments and other support services. Its infrastructure projects involving major road construction and widening support the city in its functional role as one of the residential, commercial, industrial and university centers of Cavite. To protect its environment, Dasmariñas has adopted its Luntiang (English: Green) Dasmariñas program, which is envisioned to plant 100,000 seedlings planted over the town during the year 2000.  Commerce and trade transactions are intensively undertaken in the identified commercial areas along P. Campos Avenue, Camerino Avenue, Emilio Aguinalo Highway, University Avenue, the Congressional South Avenue and other areas. Commercial establishments are lined along major thoroughfares. A strip pattern of commercial growth are evident at other places in Dasmariñas. Commercial developments along Aguinaldo Highway from Silang to Pala-Pala junction particularly within areas adjacent to the Congressional Avenue shows the nature and extent of commercial activities in Dasmariñas. The presence of local commercial centers or shopping centers such as the Highway Plaza, CM Plaza and a branch of a Metro Manila-based shopping center, the Walter Mart which houses different local and nationwide known commercial establishments sets the trend of commercial developments in that part of the city. These are further enhanced by the presence of banks, financial centers and other establishments. There are also commercial establishments supportive of or are offshoots of the educational and medical services being rendered by the De La Salle University Medical Center and the Dr. Jose P. Rizal National Medical Research Center. These makes the area a financial and commercial district of the municipality. The old commercial developments within the Poblacion area (Zone I, I-B, II, III and IV) provides for the needs of the old town residents and the subdivision migrants on the Southern portion of the municipality. The nature of commercial activity being that of a neighborhood commercial center supports the daily needs of the population. The new location of the public market opens the city to the neighboring marketing population of other settlement areas. It likewise make the public market accessible to all the population both from the reselttlement areas ang the old townsite. Thus, the financial and commercial activity in the Poblacion, the Dasmariñas Central Market, the Highway Plaza, the Dasmariñas Commercial Complex, SM City Dasmariñas, SM Marketmall Dasmariñas, Robinsons Place Dasmariñas, Robinsons Place Dasmariñas#Terraza Dasma, Walter Mart Dasmariñas, Central Mall Dasmariñas, The District - Dasmariñas enhance the commercial center role of Dasmariñas. Dasmariñas is an industrial city. The growth has been greatly influenced by its proximity to Metro Manila and the national government's industrial boom. It becomes the choice location for business enterprises being in a crossroad of development south of Manila. Industrial developments along the Governor's Drive (Carmona-Ternate Road) specifically the First Cavite Industrial Estate, the Reynold's Phils. and different industries dotting the road from Carmona and Silang boundaries to Gen. Trias as well as those at the Southeastern portion along the Aguinaldo Highway provides employment and livelihood opportunities to the local as well as adjacent municipalities labor force. Since these industries are of national or multi-national corporate capitalization and are enjoyed both on local and export marketing. Taxes are being paid by these industries help provide for the basic services and amenities needed by the government as well as the constituents of the municipality. Thirty kilometers from Manila is First Cavite Industrial Estate, a 283 hectare industrial subdivision located at Langkaan provides adequate facilities to light/medium industries. It is a joint project of the National Development Company, Marubeni Corporation, and the Japan International Development Organization Ltd. Situated in Dasmariñas, the estate is complete with power supply, water system, and telecommunication facilities, with 1,500 lines. The estate includes a General Industrial Zone, which has a customs office and warehouse. Preferred locators are those involved in non-pollutive small and medium-scale industries. Presently, 48 companies have located their business in this state. The Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan – NHA Industrial Estate is all of 8.6 hectares in Dasmariñas. The Local Waterworks Utilities Administration manages the water system. Its 18 pumps and its 18 elevated storage tanks, having an average capacity of 60,000 gallons each, can very well serve the needs of the occupants. Labor-intensive, export-oriented, non- hazardous, and non-pollutive industries are best situated in the area. GMA-NHA Industrial Estate The General Mariano Galvez – NHA Industrial Estate compromises 10 hectares of land in the municipality of Gen. Mariano Alvarez. Types of industries preferred for this estate are those, which are non-pollutive, labor-intensive, export-oriented, and non-hazardous such as the 6 companies that have located therein. Other industrial estates located in Dasmariñas are the Dasmariñas Techno Park and City Land Industrial Estate Dasmariñas. Tourism plays a large part in the city's economy. The presence of Aguinaldo Highway and Governor's Drive makes the city a stop over for those who are travelling to Tagaytay and Batangas from Metro Manila and to Laguna from the towns on the western part of Cavite. The city has a large selection of hotels and resorts catering to tourists. The Kadiwa Park located on Congressional Road is a large park featuring sculptures and animatronics of animals and dinosaurs attracts tourists from nearby towns and provinces. The Museo De La Salle, located within the campus of the De La Salle University-Dasmariñas, is a unique, cultural, cross-disciplinary institution serving as a permanent museum of the De La Salle University System. As a resource center for both indoor and outdoor collections, it dedicates itself to the gathering of collectible objects of intrinsic value significant to the preservation of certain aspects of the Philippine ilustrado lifestyle.http://www.cavite.gov.ph/home/index.php/tourism/primary-attraction/museums It envisions itself to be a leading contributor to the Philippine University museums' movement. It seeks to form productive partnerships that serve communities in creative ways. It vows to assist the member schools of the System in the core areas of teaching, research, community outreach, and administration. Through active collaboration with other museums in the nation, it promotes the interests of museology and upholds appreciation of the arts and culture.http://www.dlsud.edu.ph/offices/museo/vision_mission.htm The scenic zigzag Daño Street offers a great view of the city's fields and becomes a 'tiangge' or a bazaar during the holiday season. Dasmariñas City has numerous fiestas and events, from the barangay religious feasts all the way to a city-wide fiesta. The city itself has six main events which are secular, cultural, and religious in nature. The City Government of Dasmariñas in coordination with the Kababaihan ng Dasmariñas sa Bagong Milenyo (KDBM) celebrates the month of hearts through the annual Mass Wedding. This is the largest mass wedding being held in the province of Cavite which is one of the City’s annual commitments to promote the sanctity of marriage. It is commemorated by Catholic Dasmarineños with street processions, the Way of the Cross, and a Passion play called the Sinakulo. The Church keeps the day solemn by not tolling the church bells, and no mass will be celebrated. It is an annual project of the City Government of Dasmariñas that recognizes the academic and personal achievements of outstanding Dasmarineño students in the elementary, secondary and tertiary levels. The Tanim Lusog Program is a backyard gardening contest for the nutritionally depressed barangays with highest number of underweight children. This program spearheaded by the City Nutrition Council aims to teach families and communities the food production technology suited to their environment. Lectures on meal management, health care practices and related activities are also given to address the incidence of hunger and malnutrition. The contest has two categories: the home garden and community garden. It has been a meaningful tradition of the City Government of Dasmariñas to sponsor a flower offering to commemorate Dasmariñas Day on October 5. This important activity pays tribute our local heroes who gallantly served the town of Dasmariñas consequently paving the way to our success as a city today. It is celebrated to commemorate the incorporation of the city of Dasmariñas with people dancing in the busy streets with butterfly costumes. There are 104 covered courts in 75 barangays and 10 public schools in the city. There are also free sports clinics in the city, such as chess, baseball, and taekwondo. The first Inter–Barangay Sports Tournament was held in 1999 where only two (2) events were played Basketball and Volleyball. Since then it became a regular feature in the annual program of the local government of Dasmariñas.http://www.dasmarinas.gov.ph/downloads/sdo_inter_brgy.pdf The City Employees' Sportsfest caters to the employees of the City Government of Dasmariñas. It started in 2005 and since then, it has become a very much awaited event. Department Heads and rank and file employees compete in a friendly competition where talent, skills and perseverance are displayed in a manner comparable to a high level tournament. Dasmariñas Private Schools Athletic Association commonly known as DPSAA started as an experimental project in 2001 to select athletes who will represent Private Schools in the Municipal Meet (now City Meet). After ten (10) years in existence, DPSAA has become a breeding ground for athletes who hail from private schools.http://www.dasmarinas.gov.ph/downloads/sdo_dpsaa.pdf There is a proposed Dasmariñas Arena. However, its location and other information is yet to be announced.   Dasmariñas is a recipient of the dispersal thrusts of several universities of Metro Manila to widen their coverage and bring education closer to the people. Different known Manila-based universities has part up branches in the city, thus bestowing to the city the nickname, "The University City of Cavite."  the De La Salle University which offers medical courses and other social science and business courses and at the same time operates and manages a hospital, the DLSU Medical Center, the 1st ISO (International Organization for Standardization) Certified Hospital in the Philippines, catering the health need of the population. Other university and college branches are from the Technological University of the Philippines, the Philippine Christian University, National College of Science and Technology, Emilio Aguinaldo College, St. Paul College and many others. These means that the city can service the tertiary education needs of its population as well as those of the neighboring towns and provinces. The city also has its own newspaper, Usaping Bayan, the official newspaper of Dasmariñas. Radio and television channels are received clearly in the city. Cable television provider, DASCA Cable Services, is also available. With its first of its kind in our country, Dasmariñas has its own TV channel (Channel 3) available when you subscribe to DASCA Cable Services. Here, upcoming events, projects, announcements, finished projects, etc. are reached out to the Dasmariñas residents. The radio station in the city is Green FM on 95.9, operated by the De La Salle University-Dasmariñas.   Six roads connect Dasmarinas to other cities and towns. A future expressway, the Cavite-Laguna Expressway, will pass through the western and southern borders of the city. It will be the first freeway in the city.http://www.dpwh.gov.ph/bureau_services/PPP/projects/cala_cavite.htm Jeepneys can be found around the city, like other cities and town in the Philippines. Jeepney terminals are located in SM City Dasmariñas and Robinsons Place Dasmariñas, both in the Central Business District. It has fixed routes and you can just hail and ride anywhere in the route. Jeepneys are cheaper than buses and taxis. Tricycles are commonly seen in the busy streets of the city. Tricycle terminals are scattered around the city, such as intersections of small streets. Taxis are commonly seen in the Central Business District, in SM City Dasmariñas and Robinsons Place Dasmariñas. Taxis will take you to any part of Luzon island. Taxis are more expensive than tricycles. There are many bus routes in the city. They will take you to Metro Manila, Batangas, Laguna, and other surrounding provinces, cities and towns. There is a planned extension of the Manila Light Rail Transit System Line 1 or the LRT-1 to Imus and Dasmariñas, instead of ending in Niog, Bacoor. This extension will be a separate rapid transit line to be known as the Manila Light Rail Transit System Line 6 or LRT-6 which will have three stations in the city with its terminus at Governor's Drive.http://www.mb.com.ph/articles/371223/lrt-extension-to-dasmari-mulledhttp://www.abs-cbnnews.com/business/08/26/12/extension-lrt-dasmari%C3%B1-cavite-mulled The nearest operating railway station is the Alabang PNR Station. It is about 30 minutes away via Daang Hari Boulevard. The airport nearest to the city is Ninoy Aquino International Airport (IATA: MNL, ICAO: RPLL), about 40 to 60 minutes depending on traffic condition on the Aguinaldo Highway and CAVITEx. Another airport close to the city is the Clark International Airport (IATA: CRK, ICAO: RPLC), about 2 to 4 hours depending on traffic condition on the EDSA, NLEx and the SCTEx. There are seven major hospitals in Dasmariñas. Establishment of a Drug Testing Center where municipal employees, public school teachers, barangay officials, and policemen are randomly checked free of charge to ensure that they are fit to provide public service. This is also open to the public for 150 pesos. The Dasmariñas Lying-In Clinic in Barangay Victoria Reyes established in 2001 offers free childbirth services to indigent mothers. To date, 9,372 mothers have already given birth there. Operation Tule in all barangays is being held every summer which had already provided free services to 23,146 residents as of March 15, 2011. Operation of Animal Bite Center has been established where free vaccination against rabies are given to residents bitten by dogs and cats. Established in April, 2003, it operates with a budget of Php1 million annually and has benefited 16,395 residents. Free anti-rabies vaccination for pet dogs which now total to 25,385. The Pagamutan ng Dasmariñas (English: Dasmariñas Hospital) is currently under construction. Its construction is expected to be completed by 2014. Dasmariñas rely upon agencies for their communication needs. These are the Bureau of Posts, the Bureau of Telecommunications, the RCPI, the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (PLDT), Digital Telecommunications (DIGITEL), GLOBE Telecom, ISLACOM, etc. The town has the rightful claim to be tagged as "the internet hub of Cavite" due to the presence of numerous Internet Service Providers (ISP) in Dasmariñas. Computer Centers and Internet Cafes, which provides access to the information super highway, are lined along the busy avenues of the town. All three major telecommunications companies in the Philippines has 3G and voice coverage in the city, including the rural areas. LTE is to be rolled out in the city soon.  AT&T has both 3G and voice coverage in the city, including the rural areas. Sprint, like AT&T, also has 3G and voice coverage in the city, including the rural areas. The city hymn is called the "Dasmariñas Hymn". It is sung at public schools after the national anthem or after the Cavite hymn. There are two versions of the hymn, the first version was written before the cityhood and the second version afterwards to reflect the new city status. There is no available documentation where the official lyrics can be found however, the hymn is now widely taught in schools and universities. Dasmariñas ika’y aking mahal Uliran kang duyan ng aking buhay Pag-iisip diwa’t karunungan Sa paghubog mo’y nasimulan pagtahak ko sa kinabukasan Taglay ko'y iyong kasaysayan Dasmariñas oh aking bayan Ikararangal ka kahit saan man Kapaligiran mo’y sakdal ganda Likas na yaman amin ang pamana Dasmariñas tinubos ng luha Kalayaan ang hinadhika Kagitingan ng mga bayani Sa paglaban sa pang-aapi Mahal kong lungsod oh Dasmariñas Ikararangal ka kahit saan man Mahal kong lungsod oh Dasmariñas Ikararangal ka kahit saan man Position Name Chief Executive of the City of Dasmariñas Mayor Jennifer Austria-Barzaga Presiding Officer of the City Council of Dasmariñas Vice Mayor Valeriano Saraza Encabo Councilors of the City of Dasmariñas Hon. Robin Chester J. Cantimbuhan Hon. Reynaldo C. Canaynay Hon. Restituto M. Encabo Hon. Jacinto B. Frani, Jr. Hon. Roderick Marquinez Atienza, Sr. Hon. Peter-Tom B. Antonio Hon. Nicanor N. Austria, Jr. Hon. Tagumpay P. Tapawan, D.M.D. Hon. Fulgencio C. de la Cuesta, Jr. Hon. Teofilo F. Campaño Hon. Napoleon F. Gonzales Hon. Angelo C. Hugo President of the League of Barangays- Dasmariñas Chapter Hon. Mamerto B. Noora, Jr. (Sta. Fe) President of the Youth Council Federation- Dasmariñas Chapter Vacant Barangay !! Barangay Captain !! Population (2010) Burol Main Elizalde M. Lara 9,526 Burol I Mary Ann E. Castor 14,912 Burol II Nora L. Allada 4,442 Burol III Edwin R. Camerino 8,473 Datu Esmael (Bago-A-Ingud) Dirimpasan U. Pagandag 9,079 Emmanuel Bergado I Winefredo Dedase, Sr. 6,653 Emmanuel Bergado II Renie A. Raymundo 2,714 Fatima I Elsie A. Felismino 5,855 Fatima II Jose E. Embiado 3,864 Fatima III Ramiro M. Dela Cruz 3,658 H-2 (Sta. Veronica) Ramiro Mabini L. Podaca 9,182 Langkaan I Teodorico S. Remulla 13,629 Langkaan II (Humayao) Fernando T. Laudato 25,350 Luzviminda I Bernardo A. Abelar, Jr. 3,080 Luzviminda II Dennis D. Abayon 4,346 Paliparan I Remigio P. Beberino 5,971 Paliparan II Ernesto M. Santiago 15,233 Paliparan III Eleuterio A. Guimbaolibot 59,838 Sabang Isagani B. Sapida, Sr. 13,332 Salawag Enrico S. Paredes 61,441 Saint Peter I Norberto A. Villaruz 2,347 Saint Peter II Teodoro M. Anciano 2,238 Salitran I Neri J. Lara 3,694 Salitran II Felisimo C. Ilano 9,524 Salitran III Benigno S. Beltran 14,681 Salitran IV Prudencio R. España 5,984 Salitran V Sampaloc I (Pala-Pala) Cirila A. Santarin 5,539 Sampaloc II (Bucal/Malinta) Senando D. Mojica 10,170 Sampaloc III (Piela) Gregorio A. Upo 8,035 Sampaloc IV (Talisayan/Bautista) Romeo E. Joson 35,655 Sampaloc V (New Era) Rebecca E. Ordiales 3,146 San Agustin I Engr. Edwin C. Robles 9,523 San Agustin II (R. Tirona) Fernando H. Narvaez 9,271 San Agustin III Joel M. Ricasata 10,046 San Andres I Edwin L. Astorga 3,132 San Andres II Siegfred V. Yorac 3,294 San Antonio De Padua I Carter P. Manzano 3,052 San Antonio De Padua II Fernando D.C. Muli 2,880 San Dionisio (Barangay 1) Dominador C. Narido, Jr. 6,342 San Esteban (Barangay 4) Rolando L. Viray 4,300 San Francisco I Virgilio D. Delfin 2,732 San Francisco II Arnulfo M. Fatalla 3,288 San Isidro Labrador I Joaquin A. Rillo 4,278 San Isidro Labrador II Roderick C. Olaes 2,090 San Jose Edmundo M. Dela Cruz 10,702 San Juan (San Juan I) Atanacio G. Cantimbuhan Jr. 3,521 San Lorenzo Ruiz I Reynaldo S. Dinero 3,059 San Luis I Edna E. Andalajao 3,417 San Luis II Erlindino J. Patalbo 4,042 San Manuel I Levi B. Fructouso 2,580 San Manuel II Jorge Carlo D. Magno 2,186 San Mateo Josefina S. Gallego 4,512 San Miguel I Virgilio H. Ortega 3,661 San Miguel II James Abner B. Magno 2,742 San Nicolas I Jovito A. Paciones Sr. 1,937 San Nicolas II Teresita P. Yap 4,595 San Roque Miguel V. Pamatian 2,623 San Simon (Barangay 7) Rodolfo Q. Berlon 7,095 Santa Cristina I Rafael C. Oriarte 3,237 Santa Cruz I Kirby A. Andrada 4,664 Santa Cruz II Jesus D.G. Manalang 2,222 Santa Fe Mamerto B. Noora, Jr. 6,263 Santa Lucia (San Juan II) Francisco S. Cornejo, Jr. 5,762 Santa Maria (Barangay 20) Nelson P. Velasquez 4,785 Santo Cristo (Barangay 3) Lolita V. Federio 4,380 Santo Niño I Alvin C. Gimpes 2,693 Santo Niño II Jean G. Teves 2,566 Victoria Reyes Leonila C. Bucao 14,631 Zone I Wilfredo C. Austria 3,405 Zone I-A Aquino I. Garcia 4,314 Zone II Demetrio C. Dela Rea, Jr 1,104 Zone III Eric S. Aledia 3,206 Zone IV Medardo P. Hayag 2,947 Total population (2010) 575,817 Position Name Representatives to the Provincial Board of Cavite Hon. Raul Rex D. Mangubat Hon. Teofilo B. Lara Zone I Zone I-A (A stands for Aguinaldo because of its location along Aguinaldo Highway) Zone II Zone III Zone IV San Agustin I San Agustin II San Agustin III Salitran I Salitran II Salitran III Salitran IV Salitran V (proposed) Burol I Burol II Burol III Burol Main Langkaan I Langkaan II Paliparan I Paliparan II Paliparan III Sampaloc I Sampaloc II Sampaloc III Sampaloc IV Sampaloc V DBB-A-1 San Dionisio San Esteban Sto. Cristo Sto. Niño I Sto. Niño II DBB-A-2 San Juan Sta. Lucia DBB-A-3 San Manuel I San Manuel II San Miguel I San Miguel II St. Peter I St. Peter II DBB-B Burol I Burol II DBB-C Parts of Burol III San Andres I San Andres II San Roque San Simon Sta. Cristina I Victoria Reyes DBB-D Bautista Property (part of Sampaloc IV) Luzviminda I Luzviminda II San Nicolas I San Nicolas II San Mateo DBB-E Emmanuel Bergado I Emmanuel Bergado II San Lorenzo Ruiz I San Luis I San Luis II Sta. Cruz I Sta. Cruz II DBB-F Fatima I Fatima II Fatima III DBB-G San Isidro Labrador I San Isidro Labrador II DBB-H H-2 (Sta. Veronica) Sultan Esmael (H-1) DBB-I San Francisco I San Francisco II Sta. Fe DBB-J San Antonio de Padua I San Antonio de Padua II Sta. Maria DBB-K Fatima I Juan Ramirez Adriano Llano Eduardo Bautista Anastacio Paulme Valeriano Campos Eugenio Ambalada Ligario Malihan Leon Mangubat Lino Alcantara Fausto Bautista Gregorio Baustista Placido Campos, 1895-1896 Francisco Barzaga, 1900 Placido Campos, 1901 Cesar A. Fontanilla, 1905-1913 Felipe Topacio, 1912-1915 Cecilio Kamantigue, 1915-1916 Placido Campos, 1917-1918 Felipe Tirona, 1919-1921 Francisco Barzaga, 1922-1924 Isidro Mangubat, 1925-1927 Emilio Aledia Ramirez, 1928-1931 Estanislao Carungcong, 1931-1934 Doroteo Mangubat, 1934-1937 Teodorico Sarosario, 1937-1940 Felicisimo Carungcong, 1941-1945 Maximo de la Torre, 1946, appointed Gaudencio Geda, 1946, appointed Fermin de la Cruz, 1947, appointed Arturo Carungcong, 1948-1950 Emiliano de la Cruz, 1951-1955 Tomas Hembrador, 1956-1963 Remigio Carungcong, 1964-1971 Narciso M. Guevarra, 1972-1982 Recto M. Cantimbuhan, 1982-1986 Elpidio Barzaga, Jr., 1986-1987, appointed Mariano Veluz, March-November 1987 "appointed" Roberto Cantimbuhan, November-December 1987 "appointed" Leonardo Javier, January 13-February 2, 1988 "appointed" Recto M. Cantimbuhan, 1988-1998 Elpidio Barzaga, Jr., 1998-2007 Jennifer Austria-Barzaga, 2007-2009 Jennifer Austria-Barzaga, 2009–present The buildings, houses and the gear originate from the old seal which now represents the growing community and work force. The church symbolizes the historic Immaculate Conception Church in the Poblacion since it was the site of Battle of Perez-Dasmariñas during the Philippine Revolution against Spain. The sun is from the Philippine flag where each rays represents the provinces including Cavite with significant involvement in the 1896 Revolution. The people represents the family and the people of Dasmariñas. The two rice stalks and the farmer represents agriculture that reminds us that the city was once a farming community before evolving into an urbanized city. The globe symbolizes the city's global competitiveness while the green leaf represents the city's environmental advocacy. Mass Weddings - February 14 Holy Week - date varies Gawad Karangalan - date varies Nutrition Month - July Dasmariñas Day - October 5 Paruparo Festival - November 26 Emilio Aguinaldo Highway, also known as, Radial Road 1 and Cavite-Batangas Road is a major four lane,  north-south highway in the province passes through the city from Salitran on the north all the way down to Malinta in the south. It connects Dasmariñas to the cities and towns of Las Piñas, Bacoor, Imus, Silang and Tagaytay. It also connects the city to the Manila-Cavite Expressway and the Tagaytay-Nasugbu Highway. Governor's Drive, also known as, Dasmariñas-Carmona Road (on the east of R-1), and Dasmariñas-Trece Martires-Naic Road is a major two to six lane,  east-west highway passes through the city from the Dasmariñas Techno Park to the FCIE in Langkaan. It connects Dasmariñas to the cities and towns of Biñan, Carmona, General Mariano Alvarez, General Trias, Trece Martires, Naic, Maragondon and Ternate. It also connects the city to the Bacao Highway, C.M. Delos Reyes Avenue and the A. Soriano Highway. Paliparan Road, alo known as, Zapote-Molino-Paliparan Road, is a major two to four lane road. It is the main thoroughfare of Paliparan. It connects Dasmariñas with Molino. It starts at the T intersection with Governor's Drive near Petron and continues northwards to Molave Industrial Estate, Mabuhay Homes, Paliparan and Salawag before it meets with Salitran Road and will continue northwards as Molino-Paliparan Road. It connects Governor's Drive to Paliparan, Salawag, and Molino. Don Placido Campos Avenue is a major two to four lane road. It branches from Aguinaldo Highway at San Agustin 2 and passes through San Agustin 3, the city center, San Jose and Sabang continuing northwards to Imus as Malagasang Road. It connects Dasmariñas to Barangay Malagasang in Imus City. Crispulo Aguinaldo Street, also known as, Anabu Road and Pasong Bayog Road is a major two to four lane road. It acts as an alternative road from Salitran to DLSU. It starts at the T intersection with Congressional Avenue South and passes through Barangay San Luis, San Lorenzo Ruiz, Santa Cruz, Emmanuel Bergado, San Antonio de Padua, Santa Maria and Summerwind Village and intersects with Congressional Road near Asian Trinity College in Burol Main before it passes through several subdivisions and resorts and intersects with Salitran Road and passes through the Orchard overpass and continues northwards to Anabu in Imus. It connects Salitran and Burol Main to Anabu. Paliparan-Silang Road, also known as, Nyugan Road and Sabutan Road is a major two lane road that connects Paliparan to Silang. It is alternative route to the traffic-prone, Aguinaldo Highway. It passes through Baranagay Paliparan 1, Greenwoods Heights, Sabutan and continues to Silang. Paliparan-Langgam Road, is a major two lane road that connects Paliparan 2 to St. Joseph Village in Langgam, San Pedro City in Laguna, this is the only road that connects Dasmariñas and San Pedro. Asia Medic Family Hospital and Medical Center - Sitio Palapala, Sampaloc II DBB Municipal Hospital - San Esteban De La Salle University Medical Center - Congressional Ave. Emilio Aguinaldo College Medical Center Cavite - Salitran II St. Paul Hospital Cavite, Inc. - Burol II, Bagong Bayan Dasmariñas City Medical Center, Inc. - Crossing, Salawag Pagamutan ng Dasmariñas - Burol I Dasmariñas Resettlement Area Legislative district of Dasmariñas City Official Website of the City of Dasmariñas, Cavite Official Website of the Provincial Government of Cavite Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information
