  The organization Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) is a  lineage-based membership service organization for women who are directly descended from a person involved in United States' struggle for independence. A non-profit group, they work to promote historic preservation, education, and patriotism. The DAR has chapters in all 50 U.S. states and in the District of Columbia. DAR chapters have been founded in Australia, Austria, the Bahamas, Bermuda, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Spain, and the United Kingdom. As of 2012, over 850,000 women have been able to trace their lineage to join this organization. Although it is referred to as the DAR, the official name of this organization is the National Society Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR). The organization's membership is limited to direct lineal descendants of soldiers or others of the Revolutionary period who aided the cause of independence; applicants must have reached 18 years of age and are reviewed at the chapter level for admission. In the late 20th century the society's membership totaled approximately 180,000, with some 3,000 local chapters throughout the United States and in several other countries.Daughters of the American Revolution. (2013). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from [ ] Its motto is "God, Home, and Country." Since the late 20th century, the DAR has expanded its circle of those who are considered to have aided the Revolution, recognizing more ways that people served, including women. It has also recognized minority contributions, publishing a book and making it available online: Forgotten Patriots: African American and American Indian Patriots in the Revolutionary War,, an extensive resource with the names of thousands of minority patriots, to enable family and historical research. Its Genealogical Research System (GRS) provides access online to an extensive database, and it is digitizing family Bibles to collect more information for research. In 2007, the DAR posthumously honored Mary Hemings Bell as a patriot; she was a former slave of Thomas Jefferson when he was governor of Virginia, and was among those taken prisoner of war. Her female descendants are eligible for DAR membership.  In 1889 the centennial of President George Washington's inauguration was celebrated, and Americans looked for additional ways to recognize their past. Out of the renewed interest in United States history, numerous patriotic and preservation societies were founded. On July 13, 1890, after the Sons of the American Revolution refused to allow women to join their group, Mary Smith Lockwood published the story of patriot Hannah White Arnett in the Washington Post, asking, "Where will the Sons and Daughters of the American Revolution place Hannah Arnett?"  On July 21 of that year, William O. McDowell, a great-grandson of Hannah White Arnett, published an article in the Washington Post offering to help form a society to be known as the Daughters of the American Revolution. The first meeting of the society was held August 9, 1890. The first DAR chapter was organized on October 11, 1890, at the Strathmore Arms, the home of Mary Smith Lockwood, one of the DAR's four co-founders. Other founders were Eugenia Washington, a great-grandniece of George Washington, Ellen Hardin Walworth, and Mary Desha. They had also held organizational meetings in August 1890. Other attendees in October were Sons of the American Revolution members Registrar General Dr. George Brown Goode, Secretary General A. Howard Clark, William O. McDowell (SAR member #1), Wilson L. Gill (secretary at the inaugural meeting), and 18 other people. The First Lady, Caroline Lavina Scott Harrison, wife of President Benjamin Harrison, lent her prestige to the founding of DAR, and served as its first President General. Having initiated a renovation of the White House, she was interested in historic preservation. She helped establish the goals of DAR, which was incorporated by congressional charter in 1896. In this same period, such organizations as the Colonial Dames of America, the Mary Washington Memorial Society, Preservation of the Virginia Antiquities, United Daughters of the Confederacy, and Sons of Confederate Veterans were also founded. This was in addition to numerous fraternal and civic organizations flourishing in this period. The DAR chapters raised funds to initiate a number of historic preservation and patriotic endeavors. They began a practice of installing markers at the graves of Revolutionary War veterans to indicate their service, and adding small flags at their gravesites on Memorial Day. Other activities included commissioning and installing monuments to battles and other sites related to the War. The DAR recognized women patriots' contributions as well as those of soldiers. For instance, they installed a monument at the site of a spring where Polly Hawkins Craig and other women got water to use against flaming arrows, in the defense of Bryan Station (present-day Lexington, Kentucky). In addition to installing markers and monuments, DAR chapters have purchased, preserved and operated historic houses and other sites associated with the war. See "DAR Historic Sites and Database" for a map and database of DAR sites. Membership in the DAR today is open to all women, regardless of race or religion, who can prove lineal bloodline descent from an ancestor who aided in achieving United States independence. The National Society DAR is the final arbiter of the acceptability of the documentation of all applications for membership. Qualifying participation in achieving independence includes the following: Their common bond is their lineal descent from patriots of the American Revolution – any woman, regardless of race, religion or ethnic background, who can prove this lineage is eligible to join. They are women who care about fostering good citizenship, want to honor their ancestors, are devoted to educating our youth, and want to preserve our past for future generations Many enjoy: learning about American history, researching genealogy, coordinating local community service projects, sharing in family DAR traditions, and participating in commemorative events DAR members provided more than 3.5 million hours of community service across the world in 2013.  http://www.dar.org/ The DAR contributes more than $1 million annually to support six schools that provide for a variety of special student needs. Supported schools: In addition, the DAR provides $70,000 to $100,000 in scholarships and funds to American Indian youth at Chemawa Indian School, Salem, Oregon; Bacone College, Muskogee, Oklahoma; and the Indian Youth of America Summer Camp Program. DAR members participate in a variety of veteran and citizenship-oriented projects, including: Each year, the DAR conducts a national American history essay contest among students in grades 5 through 8.  A different topic is selected each year.  Essays are judged "for historical accuracy, adherence to topic, organization of materials, interest, originality, spelling, grammar, punctuation, and neatness."  The contest is conducted locally by the DAR chapters.  Chapter winners compete against each other by region and nationally; national winners receive a monetary award. The DAR awards $150,000 per year in scholarships to high school graduates, and music, law, nursing, and medical school students. Only two of the 20 scholarships offered are restricted to DAR members or their descendants. In 1989, the DAR established the NSDAR Literacy Promotion Committee, which coordinates the efforts of DAR volunteers to promote child and adult literacy. Volunteers teach English, tutor reading, prepare students for GED examinations, raise funds for literacy programs, and participate in many other ways. There are nearly 180,000 members of the DAR, serving in approximately 3,000 chapters across the nation and in several foreign countries. More than 940,000 women have joined the organization since its founding 125 years ago. “Interest in membership is at all-time highs due to both the ability to share genealogical information through the internet and the fact that we offer today’s busy woman a meaningful opportunity to express her love of country and to complete the joyful responsibilities of citizenship,” said National Society DAR President General Lynn Forney Young. Coinciding with the 125th anniversary celebration, the organization issued a challenge to complete 10 million hours of service to America. DAR members from coast to coast will also participate in the National DAR Day of Service on October 11, 2015. This one day of nationwide service is just an example of the work that Daughters have been completing for 125 years in communities across the nation. DAR members provided more than 3.5 million hours of community service across the world in 2013. The DAR maintains an extensive genealogical library at its headquarters in Washington, DC and provides guides for individuals doing family research. Its bookstore presents the latest scholarship on United States and women's history. Temporary exhibits in the galleries have featured women's arts and crafts, including items from the DAR's valuable quilt and embroidery collections. Exhibit curators provide a social and historical context for girls' and women's arts in such exhibits, for instance, explaining practices of mourning reflected in certain kinds of embroidery samplers, as well as ideals expressed about the new republic. Permanent exhibits include American furniture, silver and furnishings.  Washington, D.C., had segregated facilities as of 1932 under laws established by a Southern-dominated Congress, which administered the city at the time. The DAR adopted a rule excluding African-American musicians from performing at Constitution Hall in response to complaints by some members against "mixed seating," as both blacks and whites were attracted to concerts of black artists. In 1936, Sol Hurok, the manager of noted singer Marian Anderson, an African-American contralto, tried to book her at the DAR Constitution Hall. Owing to the "white performers only" policy, the DAR refused the booking. As the issue became public, Anderson performed at a Washington-area black high school instead. The First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt invited her to the White House to perform especially for her and President Roosevelt. During this time, Anderson came under considerable pressure from the NAACP not to perform for segregated audiences. In 1939, Hurok, along with the NAACP and Howard University, petitioned the DAR to make an exception to the "white performers only" policy for Anderson, which the organization declined. Hurok tried to find a local high school for a performance, but the only suitable venue was an auditorium at a white high school (the public schools were segregated). The school board refused to allow Anderson to perform there. In response, Eleanor Roosevelt immediately resigned her membership in the DAR. The organization later apologized to Anderson and welcomed her to Constitution Hall on a number of occasions, starting in 1942 with a benefit concert for war relief during World War II. The DAR did not officially reverse its "white performers only" policy until 1952, which was years before the city integrated its public facilities.Kennedy Center, "Biography of Marian Anderson". In 1945, African-American jazz singer Hazel Scott (then the wife of New York Democratic congressmen Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.) was excluded from performing at Constitution Hall. In October 1945, the DAR invited First Lady Bess Truman to a tea at the hall, which she accepted. Congressman Powell protested and asked Truman not to attend the tea; she chose to go, but said that she opposed discrimination (as did her husband). The White House received letters asking Bess Truman to resign from the DAR; she declined to do so. Other letters supported her having attended the tea."D.A.R. Refuses Auditorium to Hazel Scott; Constitution Hall for 'White Artists Only'", New York Times, 12 October 1945, accessed 5 August 2012Sale, Sara L. Bess Wallace Truman: Harry's White House "Boss", University Press of Kansas, 2010. ISBN 9780700617418 In 1964, Anderson chose Constitution Hall as the place to launch her farewell American tour. In 1992, at the opening night ceremonies of the DAR annual convention, the DAR awarded Marian Anderson the Centennial Medallion, which honors women who gave outstanding service to the nation. Due to health reasons, Anderson was unable to attend, so the medallion and certificate were delivered to her at her home. On January 27, 2005, the DAR co-hosted the first "day of issue" dedication ceremony with the U.S. Postal Service, at which the Marian Anderson commemorative stamp was introduced and Anderson's family was honored. In October 1977, Karen Batchelor Farmer (now Karen Batchelor) of Detroit, Michigan was admitted as the first known African-American member of the DAR."Karen Farmer", American Libraries 39 (February 1978), p. 70; Negro Almanac, pp. 73,1431; Who's Who among Africans, 14th ed., p. 405. Batchelor started her genealogical research in 1976 as a young mother who wanted to commemorate the American bicentennial year in a way that had special meaning for her family. Within 26 months, she had traced her family history back to the American Revolution—a completely unexpected result. Batchelor traced her ancestry to a patriot, William Hood, who served in the colonial militia in Pennsylvania during the Revolution in the defense of Fort Freeland.Northumberland County in the American Revolution, 1976, pp. 156, 171. With the help of the late James Dent Walker, head of Genealogical Services at the National Archives in Washington, D.C., Batchelor was contacted by the Ezra Parker Chapter in Royal Oak, Michigan, who invited her to join their chapter; she officially became DAR member #623,128. In December 1977, Batchelor's admission as the first known African-American member of DAR sparked international interest after it was featured in a story on page one of the New York Times. She was invited to appear on Good Morning America, where she was interviewed by the regular guest host John Lindsay, former mayor of New York. Batchelor co-founded the Fred Hart Williams Genealogical Society in 1979, an organization in Detroit for African-American family research. She continues to research her own family history and inspire others to do the same. In March 1984, a controversy arose when Lena Lorraine Santos Ferguson said she had been denied membership in a Washington, D.C. chapter of the DAR because she was black. The reporter Ronald Kessler quoted Ferguson's two white sponsors, Margaret M. Johnston and Elizabeth E. Thompson, as saying that although Ferguson met the lineage requirements and could trace her ancestry to Jonah Gay, fellow DAR members told them that Ferguson was not wanted because she was black. Sarah M. King, the President General of the DAR, told Kessler that the DAR's chapters have autonomy in determining members. Asked if she thought this acceptable, she said, "If you give a dinner party, and someone insisted on coming and you didn't want them, what would you do?" King continued, "Being black is not the only reason why some people have not been accepted into chapters. There are other reasons: divorce, spite, neighbors' dislike. I would say being black is very far down the line&nbsp;... There are a lot of people who are troublemakers. You wouldn't want them in there because they could cause some problems." After her comments were reported, the D.C. City Council threatened to revoke the DAR's real estate tax exemption. King said that Ferguson should have been admitted, and her application to join the DAR was handled "inappropriately".  Representing Ferguson pro bono, lawyers from the Washington law firm of Hogan & Hartson began working with King to develop positive ways to ensure that blacks would not be discriminated against when applying for membership. The DAR changed its bylaws to bar discrimination "on the basis of race or creed". King announced a resolution to recognize "the heroic contributions of black patriots in the American Revolution". As a result of the Washington Post story, Ferguson, a retired school secretary, was admitted to the DAR chapter. "I wanted to honor my mother and father as well as my black and white heritage," Ferguson said after being admitted. "And I want to encourage other black women to embrace their own rich history, because we're all Americans."  She became chairwoman and founder of the D.C. DAR Scholarship Committee.  She died in March 2004 at the age of 75. Since the mid-1980s, the organization has supported a project to identify the names of African Americans, Native Americans, and individuals of mixed race who were patriots of the American Revolution, expanding their recognition beyond soldiers. In 2008, DAR published 978-1-892237-10-1.pdf Forgotten Patriots: African American and American Indian Patriots in the Revolutionary War. This is available for free online, as is a supplement published in 2012. In 2007, the DAR posthumously honored Mary Hemings Bell, a former slave of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello, as a "Patriot of the Revolution." During the war, Hemings and other household slaves had been taken by Jefferson to the state capital Richmond to work for him after he was elected governor of Virginia. When the British invaded the city, they took Hemings and the other slaves at the governor's house as prisoners; Hemings and the other slaves were later released. (The American government officials had already escaped to Monticello and Charlottesville.) After the war, Hemings gained informal freedom when her common-law husband, Thomas Bell, a white merchant from Charlottesville, purchased her and their two mixed-race children from Jefferson. She was forced to leave her two older children, Joseph Fossett and Betsy Hemmings (as she spelled it), enslaved at Monticello. After Bell's death, Mary and their two children inherited his estate. She kept in touch with her large extended family, still enslaved at Monticello, and aided her children there. When Jefferson's slaves were sold after his death in 1826 to settle his debts, she purchased family members to help keep families intact.Annette Gordon-Reed, The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family, New York: W. W. Norton & Co., pp. 410, 484 Since Hemings Bell has been honored as a Patriot, all of her female descendants qualify for membership in the DAR.American Spirit Magazine, Daughters of the American Revolution, January–February 2009, p. 4 In June 2012, Wilhelmena Rhodes Kelly and Dr. Olivia Cousins became charter members of a chapter with numerous African-American members, in Queens, New York; five of the 13 charter members are African American. Kelly, who organized the diverse chapter, was installed as the Charter Regent and Dr. Cousins as a chapter officer. Two of Dr. Cousins' sisters, Collette Cousins, who lives in Durham, North Carolina, and Michelle Wherry, who lives in Lewis Center, Ohio, pledged to travel to Queens for the monthly chapter meetings. A memorial to the Daughters of the American Revolution's four founders, at Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated on April 17, 1929. It was sculpted by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, a DAR member.    Signatories of the United States Declaration of Independence; Military veterans of the American Revolutionary War, including State navies and militias, local militias, privateers, and French or Spanish soldiers and sailors who fought in the American theater of war; Civil servants of provisional or State governments, Continental Congress and State conventions and assemblies; Signers of Oath of Allegiance or Oath of Fidelity and Support; Participants in the Boston Tea Party; Prisoners of war, refugees, and defenders of fortresses and frontiers; doctors and nurses who aided Revolutionary casualties; ministers; petitioners; and Others who gave material or patriotic support to the Revolutionary cause. Kate Duncan Smith DAR School, Grant, Alabama Tamassee DAR School, Tamassee, South Carolina Crossnore School, Crossnore, North Carolina Hillside School, Marlborough, Massachusetts Hindman Settlement School, Hindman, Kentucky Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia Providing more than 200,000 hours of volunteer time annually to veterans in Veterans Administration hospitals and non-VA facilities Offering support to America’s service personnel in current conflicts abroad through care packages, phone cards and other needed items Sponsoring special programs promoting the Constitution during its official celebration week of September 17–23 Participating in naturalization ceremonies The DAR Museum was founded in 1890 as a repository for family treasures. Today, the museum contains over 30,000 historical relics that form a collective memory of the decorative and fine arts in America from 1700-1850. The DAR Library was founded in 1896 as a collection of genealogical and historical publications for the use of staff genealogists verifying application papers for the National Society Daughters of the American Revolution. Shortly after 1900 the growing collection was opened to the public and has remained so ever since. The U.S. Army appointed DAR member, Dr. Anita Newcomb McGee, as Acting Assistant Surgeon, U.S. Army, in charge of nurses. She organized the DAR Hospital Corps, Army Nurse Corps, and served as NSDAR's first Librarian General. The DAR Hospital Corps certified 1,081 nurses for service during the Spanish–American War. DAR later funded pensions for many of these nurses who did not qualify for government pensions. During the Spanish–American War, DAR purchased a ship's tender for the USS Missouri to be used as a hospital launch for transporting the wounded from shore to ship. To help with the war effort during World War I, DAR loaned its National Headquarters land to the United States. The federal government used the land to erect a temporary war office building that provided office space for 600 people. After World War I, DAR funded the reconstruction of the water system in the village of Tilloloy, France, and donated more than $130,000 for the support of 3,600 French war orphans. DAR provided materials for sewing, wood, and leatherwork to the immigrants detained for processing on Ellis Island. This helped to alleviate the depression and anxiety of these men and women who were strangers in a new land.  In 1921, DAR compiled and published the "DAR Manual for Citizenship." DAR distributed this guide to American immigrants at Ellis Island and other ports of entry. To date, more than 10 million manuals have been distributed. From November 1921 until February 1922, world leaders met in DAR Memorial Continental Hall for the Conference on Limitation of Armaments, a groundbreaking meeting for peace. The Americana Collection, founded in the early 1940s, brought together rare manuscripts and imprints previously scattered among the holdings of the DAR Museum and DAR Library. Today, the collection flourishes from more than 60 years of actively seeking out and acquiring artifacts that reflect a unique image of our nation. DAR raised thousands of dollars to assist in the re-forestation project of the U.S. Forestry Service during the 1940s. During World War II, DAR provided 197,000 soldiers with care packages and sponsored all 89 crews of Landing Craft Infantry ships. During World War II, the use of the DAR buildings was given to the American Red Cross. A children's day nursery was set up in the basement of Constitution Hall for enlisted men's wives who had to go to work. The tradition of celebrating the Constitution was started many years ago by the Daughters of the American Revolution. In 1955, the DAR petitioned Congress to set aside September 17–23 annually to be dedicated for the observance of Constitution Week. The resolution was later adopted by the U.S. Congress and signed into Public Law #915 on August 2, 1956, by President Dwight D. Eisenhower.http://www.dar.org/ Susan B. Anthony, American suffragist Clara Barton, American Red Cross founder Estelle Skidmore Doremus, supporter of the New York Philharmonic Mary Baker Eddy, founder of Christian Science church Infanta Eulalia of Spain, Spanish princess and authorHunter, Ann Arnold, A Century of Service: The Story of the DAR, p. 63 Lillian Gish, actress Caroline Scott Harrison, former First Lady of the United States Moina Michael, educator and originator of Memorial Day Poppies Grandma Moses, folk artist Ginger Rogers, actress and dancer Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, sculptor, art patron and collector, and founder in 1931 of the Whitney Museum of American Art Alice Stokes Paul, American suffragist Anita Newcomb McGee, founder of the Army Nurse Corps Jane Addams, Activist and Nobel Peace Prize winner Margaret Chase Smith, US Congressman & US Senator Grace Murray Hopper, Rear Admiral, USNR Eleanor Roosevelt, First Lady of the United States Sarah Childress Polk, First Lady of the United States Suzanne Bishopric, Director of Investment Management Division of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund Dr. Betsy Boze, American academic, Chief Executive Officer and Dean, Kent State University StarkMeet Our Deans Laura Welch Bush, former First Lady of the United States Rosalynn Smith Carter, former First Lady of the United States, politician, political and social activist Bo Derek, actress, former model, and conservative political activist Elizabeth Hanford Dole, former U.S. Senator from North Carolina, former transportation secretary, labor secretary, American Red Cross president, Federal Trade Commissioner, presidential candidate, and presidential advisor Candace Whittemore Lovely, painter Janet Reno, former Attorney General of the United States Phyllis Schlafly, conservative political activist and writer Margaret Rhea Seddon, NASA astronaut Judsen Culbreth, journalist Grant Wood used the DAR as the subject for his 1932 painting Daughters of Revolution. At that time, he thought the group was characterized by elitism and class distinction. In the musical The Music Man, the lyrics to "Wells Fargo Wagon" include "The D.A.R. have sent a cannon for the courthouse square." In Sinclair Lewis's 1935 novel It Can't Happen Here, the DAR is portrayed as "composed of females who spend one half of their waking hours boasting of being descended from the seditious American colonists of 1776, and the other and more ardent half in attacking all contemporaries who believe in precisely the principles for which those ancestors struggled." In chapter 39 of Thomas Wolfe's novel You Can't Go Home Again (1940), the German character Franz Heilig lumps the DAR in with salon Communists, the Chamber of Commerce, and the American Legion. He said they all repressed dissent. In the play The Glass Menagerie by Tennessee Williams, the character Amanda, who refers to her cultivated Southern past, is asked by her daughter if she attended the DAR meeting. The fictional character Lovey Howell of Gilligan's Island is a member of the DAR. The fictional character Margaret Houlihan of M*A*S*H is blackballed in the 1950s by her mother-in-law from being admitted to the DAR. Zoey Bartlet, the first daughter in the fictional television drama The West Wing, was a member of the DAR. A running joke in the movie The American President (1995) is that President Shepard (Michael Douglas) accidentally skipped a paragraph during a speech to the DAR. The fictional characters Emily and Rory Gilmore of the TV series Gilmore Girls are members of the DAR. At the end of Stan Freberg Presents The United States of America Volume One The Early Years, a member of the DAR (played by June Foray) tries to protest the recording. Phil Ochs's song "Love Me, I'm a Liberal" mentions "put[ting] down the old D.A.R, D.A.R.: that's the Dykes of the American Revolution." The Black Crowes have a song, "Goodbye Daughters of the Revolution". Walter Matthau's final line in Grumpy Old Men is, "The Daughters of the American Revolution are having a dance at the VFW Hall." In Pan Am, a historical TV series, the mother of characters Kate and Laura Cameron, belongs to the DAR. The band Jets to Brazil has the lyric "daughters of the revolution you're freezing in your furs" in the song "Lemon Yellow Black". The Chad Mitchell Trio song, "The John Birch Society," features the line: "Do you want Mrs. Khrushchev in there with the DAR?" In the novel The Help (2009), Skeeter's mother Charlotte tells her that she fired Constantine while the DAR chapter was meeting at their house. The Daughters of the American Revolution Library and Genealogical Research System (GRS) are featured on several episodes of NBC's acclaimed series, Who Do You Think You Are? Actors Rob Lowe and Bill Paxton venture into their respective pasts, and experts gain genealogical information from the DAR Library. Children of the American Revolution Colonial Dames of America The National Society of the Colonial Dames of America Sons of the American Revolution Sons of the Revolution Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War The United Empire Loyalists Association of Canada United Daughters of the Confederacy United States Daughters of 1812 Anderson, Peggy. The Daughters (1972) Bailey, Diana L. American Treasure: The Enduring Spirit of the DAR, Walsworth Publishing Company (2007) Julie Des Jardins, Women and the Historical Enterprise in America: Gender, Race, and the Politics of Memory, 1880-1945, University of North Carolina Press (2003) Strayer, Martha. The D.A.R.: An Informal History, Washington, DC. Public Affairs Press (1958) (critically reviewed by Gilbert Steiner as covering personalities but not politics, Review, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, v.320, "Highway Safety and Traffic Control" (Nov. 1958), pp.&nbsp;148–49.) Hunter, Ann Arnold. A Century of Service: The Story of the DAR. Washington, DC: National Society Daughters of the American Revolution (1991). Simkovich, Patricia Joy. Indomitable Spirit: The Life of Ellen Hardin Walworth, Washington, DC: National Society Daughters of the American Revolution  (2001). (The life story of Ellen Hardin Walworth, one of the NSDAR founders.) 125 Years of Devotion to America, Washington, DC: National Society Daughters of the American Revolution.  DAR publication that includes reflections, prayers and ceremonial excerpts to capture material about the DAR and its members' service. National Society Daughters of the American Revolution, Official website "DAR Historic Sites and Database", includes national map 978-1-892237-10-1.pdf Forgotten Patriots: African American and American Indian Patriots in the Revolutionary War, DAR, extensive information about minority patriots Daughters of the American Revolution (David Reese Chapter) Collection (MUM00098), University of Mississippi "Daughters of the American Revolution Library", FamilySearch Research Wiki, for genealogists "Daughters of the American Revolution", image by Grant Wood [ ] James Madison University's Massanutten Chapter, National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution Collection, 1885-2005
