 Dazzler (Alison Blaire) is a fictional superheroine appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics, usually associated with the X-Men. She first appeared in Uncanny X-Men #130 (February 1980). A mutant with the ability to convert sound vibrations into light and energy beams, Dazzler was originally developed as a cross-promotional, multi-media creation between Casablanca Records and Marvel Comics until the tie-ins were dropped in 1980. The character was created by a committee of Marvel staff, principally writer/editor Tom DeFalco and illustrator John Romita, Jr. Despite the fact that Dazzler was originally commissioned as a disco singer, the character shifted to other musical genres, including rock and adult contemporary. She starred in a self-titled solo series in the early 1980s which lasted forty-two issues, a Marvel Graphic Novel titled Dazzler: The Movie, a four-issue limited series co-starring The Beast titled Beauty and the Beast, and later joined the cast of the X-Men. She was briefly a member of the spin-off group Excalibur but has since re-joined the X-Men.  Dazzler was originally a project commissioned by Casablanca Records in the mid-to-late 1970s to be a cross-promotion in the mold of KISS, who had two successful comic book tie-in super-specials by the end of 1977. Marvel Comics would develop a singing superhero, while Casablanca would produce a singer. The two companies would then work with Filmworks and produce a tie-in motion picture; Marvel Comics Editor-in-Chief Jim Shooter wrote a treatment for the project.[ ]Comic Book Urban Legends Revealed #161, Comic Book Resources, June 26, 2008 The character was originally conceptualized as "The Disco Queen" with the power to make people tell the truth. Initially, it proved difficult to attract creators to the project. Marvel Comics appointed former Archie Comics writer Tom DeFalco to the character and he developed some changes to the character, namely suggesting light-based powers. Roger Stern conceived of the character's name, Dazzler, while John Romita, Jr. provided pencils. Romita, Jr. originally intended for the character to resemble model, actress, and singer Grace Jones, as seen in early depictions.[ ][Modern Masters Volume Eighteen: John Romita Jr. TwoMorrows Publishing July 2008] However, representatives from Filmworks &ndash; wanting to promote model and actress Bo Derek &ndash; insisted on design changes to reflect Derek's features.[ ] [Modern Masters Volume Eighteen: John Romita Jr. TwoMorrows Publishing July 2008] To promote Dazzler, Casablanca wanted it cross-promoted within several key Marvel Comics titles: The X-Men,  The Fantastic Four, and Spider-Man in particular, with Dazzler debuting in The Uncanny X-Men #130 (February 1980) by writer Chris Claremont and artist John Byrne) because she was a mutant character. However, Casablanca continued to request conceptual changes to the character's appearance and personality, leading to several cancellations of the project. Eventually, Casablanca Records backed out of the Dazzler project altogether due to financial concerns. Marvel Comics decided to launch the project as a monthly series. According to writer Tom DeFalco, Dazzler was canceled "five or six times" prior to its launch in March 1981. At the time, Marvel Comics was looking for other filmmakers to invest in a Dazzler cross-promotion. However, Jim Shooter and Stan Lee decided to launch the series without such a partnership because of their "faith in the character." By this time, Dazzler #1 was edited to reflect changes in the Marvel Comics universe and to fit the new twenty-two page publication format. X-Men member Cyclops was edited out of the issue, and Kitty Pryde inserted, and an additional "origin of the Dazzler" sequence was added to fill new pages. Also, Dazzler distanced its character from the disco genre, as the creators recognized the disco fad was fading by 1980. In a revolutionary move, Shooter decided to release Dazzler #1 exclusively to comic specialty shops, bypassing the wider circulation market. This was the first comic exclusively delivered to comic shops - a relatively new industry for 1981. Over 400,000 copies of issue 1 were pre-sold, more than double the average comic sales amount. Dazzler proved a success, largely due to the many Marvel Comics characters in its first few issues; Spider-Man, the Human Torch, Doctor Doom, Galactus, the Hulk, the X-Men, and Klaw were just a few of the several guest stars who placed Dazzler squarely into the Marvel Universe. Dazzler herself also guest starred in Marvel titles, such as The Uncanny X-Men, The Avengers, and the Marvel crossover, Contest of Champions. The series, however, was not free from critique. Several readers disapproved of the "real life" focus of Dazzler, including the focus on "soft plots" — career, family, relationships — rather than action-based and more traditional superhero plot devices. Dazzler's "superhero" outfit was her performance outfit, which also serves as a major disconnect from the superhero staples of the day. Years later, DeFalco reflected on these criticisms as an inherent hypocrisy with the readership: on one hand, readers clamored for something "new", which was how Dazzler was conceived. Yet on the other, they wanted Dazzler to be a superhero in the mold of Phoenix and conform to other superheroic stereotypes. John Romita, Jr. left Dazzler in issue #3, and was replaced by Frank Springer, who penciled most of the Dazzler series. DeFalco stayed on as chief writer through issue #6, and helped successive writer Danny Fingeroth with several of the following issues. Fingeroth and Springer remained the Dazzler stable team through issue #27. Eventually, Dazzler failed to adequately create its own cast and began to lose commercial appeal. With issue #25, Dazzler became a bi-monthly publication. This schedule, along with extreme character changes and a lackluster spin-off miniseries, further complicated the character and series’ appeal to both existing and new readers. Springer changed Dazzler from a singer in New York to an aspiring actress in Los Angeles. To promote this new direction, Marvel had artist Bill Sienkiewicz do painted artwork pieces for several Dazzler covers, from issues #27 through #35. Springer left Dazzler with issue #32, and returned briefly for issue #35 and the Dazzler: The Movie graphic novel. Marvel attempted to jump-start the series with a tie-in graphic novel and miniseries that would highlight the character's career struggles in a prejudiced world. While the graphic novel received acclaim, the miniseries and regular Dazzler series suffered. In a final attempt, Archie Goodwin and Paul Chadwick were assigned to Dazzler with issue #38, ditching the singer-subtext and making Dazzler more of a generic superhero with an official costume. It did not save the series, and Dazzler was eventually canceled in 1985. After that, she was briefly considered as a possible X-Factor founding member, but the decision to resurrect Jean Grey put that idea aside.http://www.uncannyxmen.net/secrets-behind-the-x-men/jean-greys-return-in-x-factor After this, the character would go on to a notable run as an X-Men member, before disappearing completely for much of the 1990s and early 2000s, barring occasional cameos. With the launch of New Excalibur, she returned to monthly publication for the first time as a prominent cast member in over fifteen years. When Marvel canceled New Excalibur, Dazzler was brought back as a supporting character in Uncanny X-Men written by Matt Fraction. In February 2010, Marvel published a one-shot Dazzler special by writer Jim McCann and artist Kalman Andrasofszky. The 2012 series X-Treme X-Men features Dazzler as the leader of a dimension-hopping X-Men team. Dazzler appeared in the 2012 volume of Uncanny X-Men as an agent of superspy outfit S.H.I.E.L.D.Uncanny X-Men Issue 6. May 2013. Marvel Comics Beginning in May 2015, Dazzler appears as one of the main characters in A-Force, an all-female Avengers launched by G. Willow Wilson, Marguerite Bennett, and Jorge Molina during Marvel's "Secret Wars" storyline.http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/2015/02/06/marvel-comics-a-force-female-avengers/22970157/ Alison Blaire was born in Gardendale, New York to Carter Blaire and Katherine Blaire. Her mutant powers first manifested when she was in high school. An aspiring singer, she volunteered to perform at her school dance when her light-generating abilities first appeared. Everyone at the dance assumed it was a technologically generated special effect, an assumption commonly made before she reveals herself to be a mutant later in her life. Using the stage name "Dazzler", Alison sets out to make a name for herself in the music industry, using her light powers and dancing ability to enhance her performances. It is at one of her shows that Alison first meets the X-Men while they are attacked by the forces of the Hellfire Club. Angry at the interruption of her show, Alison lashes out in anger at the Hellfire intruders, unintentionally making one member catatonic. Alison subsequently aids the X-Men in finding Kitty Pryde. She had always assumed that life as a disco queen would be exciting but finds the fight with the X-Men's enemies going a bit too far. Thus she turns down their offer to join the team.Uncanny X-Men #130-131 Dazzler hides her status as a mutant from all but those closest to her. After acquainting herself with the various Marvel Comics superheroes, Alison finds herself continually using her abilities to fight both ordinary criminals and rogue superhumans — often at the expense of her career ambitions. On one occasion, she meets Spider-Man, teaming up against the Lightmaster.Amazing Spider-Man #203 She later battles the Enchantress,Dazzler #1-2 is overwhelmed by Doctor Doom, the Absorbing Man and then fights off Nightmare.Dazzler #3-4 She briefly allies with the Blue Shield,Dazzler #5 and aids the X-Men and Spider-Woman against the misguided Caliban.Uncanny X-Men #148 On another occasion, she battles and defeats the Hulk,Dazzler #6-7 and establishes a long-standing feud with the then-mentally unstable Rogue.Dazzler #22-23 She also had a romantic affair with Warren Worthington III.Dazzler # 17-28 In the course of her inadvertent adventures, she even encounters the planet-devouring Galactus initially thinking she is of little notice and generally ignores her. Nevertheless, Galactus temporarily endows her with cosmic energy so she can retrieve the herald Terrax.Dazzler #10 In addition to being offered membership into the X-Men,Uncanny X-Men v.1 #131 Alison is also asked to audition for a place in the Avengers. She declines while facing Fabian Stankowicz (who is ultimately easily defeated by the Wasp), saying that the superhero "trip wasn't for [her]".Avengers v.1 #221 Dazzler moved to Los Angeles in a vain attempt to help her half-sister Lois London that has the mutant ability to kill anyone with a touch, but has little to no control over the ability.Dazzler v. 1 #26-27 While in Los Angeles, Alison attempts careers in fitness training, dancing, modeling, and acting. Influenced both by her lover Roman Nekoboh, and her desire to abate the growing anti-mutant sentiment, Alison publicly declares her mutant identity. The revelation backfires, destroying her reputation and career and inflaming anti-mutant sentiment, which sends Alison into a depressive state.Marvel Graphic Novel #12: Dazzler: The Movie Forced again into hiding, she spends some time as a keyboard player and back-up vocalist in rock singer and fellow mutant Lila Cheney's band.New Mutants v. 1 #29Uncanny X-Men v.1 #214 While on tour, the band's plane crashes, which leads to Dazzler, Lila, and a bandmate being successfully rescued by Cannonball and Joshua. Lila has been knocked out so Dazzler uses the music Joshua plays at the scene to blast a hole through the wreckage.New Mutants v.1 #42 Alison is later possessed by the psychic mutant Malice; after an encounter with the X-Men coming to warn her about the Marauders, Dazzler is freed from possession and becomes a member of the team.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #214 During her tenure with the X-Men, Dazzler receives training, attains greater control over her powers, and develops a romance with the extra-dimensional Longshot.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #214-247 She is also forced to work alongside the now-reformed Rogue. This causes considerable tension between them at first, due to Alison's difficulty in getting over Rogue's attempts to kill her in the past, as well as Rogue's own strong feelings for Longshot. Over time, she eventually believes Rogue is genuinely remorseful and forgives her teammate.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #221-222 Dazzler struggles with her career ambitions and personal insecurities, and eventually she and her team-mates in the X-Men enter the mystical Siege Perilous.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #248 Discovered in an amnesiac state washed up on a beach by her former bodyguard Guido, she is nursed back to health by Guido and Lila, though their efforts prove unsuccessful in helping restore her memory.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #260 Her memory is eventually restored when she is found by Longshot.X-Men v. 2 #5 Devastated by the loss of her career, Alison ventures to Longshot's native "Mojoworld", and remains there to help fight in the ongoing rebellion against the tyrant Mojo along with Lila.X-Men v. 2 #11 Dazzler eventually returns to Earth without Longshot after an unfortunate series of events, including an apparent miscarriageX-Men v. 2 #47 and war.Uncanny X-Men v. 1 #393 She helps Jean Grey in the fight against a repowered Magneto backed by an army of Genoshans. She and Jean lead a small band of mutants to back up the original X-Men that are in Genosha already. Dazzler faces down Magneto who turns her powers against her and apparently incinerates her. As Magneto arrogantly boasts about this triumph, Dazzler reveals herself to be alive and well. She and Jean had concocted a plan for Alison to generate a hard-light hologram of herself to distract Magneto, then gravely wounded by Wolverine. After the conclusion of this incident, the X-Men offer Alison support for her personal problems, but she declines.X-Men v. 2 #113 Characters in the Marvel Universe who are counted among her fans are Juggernaut,Uncanny X-Men #217 teammate Colossus,Dazzler #38 the Hulk,Dazzler #6 Northstar,Uncanny X-Men #392 the Rhino,Deadpool #67 Molly Hayes,Runaways vol. 2 #19 Shadowcat, and Pixie.Uncanny X-Men #500  The Dazzler later re-establishes her musical career, marketing her trademark disco image as part of the Techno/Trance genre. Alison moved her career abroad to England and joined with X-Men allies such as the Juggernaut and Captain Britain.New Excalibur #1 She was reunited with Longshot in the X-Men: Die by the Sword miniseries, although Longshot was suffering from amnesia and did not remember her. However, during the course of the miniseries he regained his feelings for her and some of his memories.X-Men: Die by the Sword #4-5 Longshot left the Exiles to reestablish a relationship with Dazzler but the couple split ways due in part to Dazzler's frustration with other women's attraction to Longshot, but mainly because of the realization that Longshot was no longer the man she loved because of Longshot's amnesia.X-Factor vol. 5 #35 Alison Blaire rejoins the X-Men in San Francisco after leaving Longshot, due to the fact that their relationship was just not the same after Longshot's loss of memory. Pixie is seen leaving a club with a friend where Alison has recently performed. Dazzler has established a career as a musician, finally landing a big break and completely revitalizing her music career.http://comicnewsi.com/reviews.php?catid=252&itemid=12137 Dazzler has also been shown to take part in the X-Men: Secret Invasion mini-series, which is part of Marvel Comics' 2008 crossover Secret Invasion.Secret Invasion: X-Men # 1  Returning home with Northstar and Pixie, after taking her out to get drunk, despite her being underage, Dazzler and the team are unprepared for a brutal attack on the mansion by the Sisterhood. In retaliation, Dazzler later accompanies Emma Frost, Storm and Karma for the revenge-attack on the Sisterhood in San Francisco where she engages a mind controlled Psylocke, in her own body, in battle. While Psylocke gains the upper hand, Dazzler points out that Storm blew out all the windows when they entered. This was so she could absorb all the sound from the city outside, which she turned into a beam of light that burns the right side of Psylocke's face off. After the Sisterhood retreats, Dazzler is happily reunited with Psylocke regaining control of her Japanese body.Uncanny X-Men #511 Dazzler, along with Gambit, Anole, Northstar, Cannonball, Pixie and Trance travel to Limbo to rescue Magik. Things go wrong when the ground starts to tremble and an army of monstrous demons attack the team. Dazzler calls upon Gambit for help during the attack, but Gambit sinks into the darkness, claiming "Remy's not home right now" leading the X-Men to be overwhelmed by the demons.X-Men: Hellbound #1 Dazzler ends up alone and is rescued by Northstar just as she is about to lose her fight against the demons. Northstar and Dazzler encounter Gambit shortly after, unfortunately Gambit has reverted to the Death persona, seemingly attacking Northstar who easily evades Gambit's cards. Northstar avoids the attack, realizing the cards were meant for Dazzler and she is transformed into a state much like Gambit's Death persona. Northstar was infected soon after. Dazzler, infected by Gambit (now completely consumed by the concept of survival of the fittest), joins to infect the other X-Men in Limbo as well.X-Men: Hellbound #2 Dazzler and Northstar were soon freed thanks to Magik's Soulsword.X-Men: Hellbound #3 During the Schism between Cyclops and Wolverine, Dazzler chooses to remain in San Francisco with Cyclops's side. Dazzler is then asked to lead a "Street Team" of X-Men, to which she agrees.X-Men: Regenesis Although never seen, she was paired with Boom Boom and Lifeguard.Uncanny X-Men vol. 2' #1 Dazzler is later summoned to Utopia to help Cyclops and Danger with a Ghost Box. When the Ghost Box is opened, several alternate reality X-Men are seen fighting an evil version of Professor X.X-Treme X-Men, Volume 2 #1 When Dazzler tries to help them, she gets sucked through a portal and is whisked away from Earth-616, narrowly avoiding the events of Avengers vs. X-Men. She becomes team leader after Emmeline Frost opts to stay on a world where mutants are gods.X-Treme X-Men, Volume 2 #3 Dazzler was later reunited with her New Excalibur teammate Sage when she tries to rescue a kid version of Nightcrawler.X-Treme X-Men, Volume 2 #6-7 Dazzler's leadership skills and abilities impress both CyclopsX-Treme X-Men vol. 2 #7.1 and Wolverine, the latter of whom offers her a position at Wolverine's school believing she would be an invaluable resource to the students.X-Termination #2 Reluctant to accept the invitation after having spent a year traversing and saving the multiverse (concluding with the "X-Termination" crossover storyline), as well as witnessing the death of some of her friends, Dazzler opts instead to make a decision at a later time; Wolverine advises the offer still stands and to contact when she figures things out. In "The End of X-Factor" storyline, the conclusion of the X-Factor team with whom Dazzler had not previously had contact, Shatterstar and Rictor encounter a past-version of Dazzler while time-traveling through Mojoworld. At this point in her life, Dazzler and Longshot are still married and active in the revolt against Mojo. Rictor discovers Dazzler just as she is about to give birth to the child that had been believed to result in a miscarriage. The surviving infant was revealed to be Shatterstar, resolving nearly two decades of speculation that Shatterstar actually was the biological child of Dazzler and Longshot. Exhausted from her ordeal, Dazzler passes out, and Shatterstar reveals the necessity of wiping both her and Longshot's memories of the event, presumably to be replaced with memory of the miscarriage that Dazzler had referenced in the past, and taking his infant self a century into Mojoworld's future, to be raised as a warrior away from his birth parents.X-Factor #259 In an attempt to better understand the mutant community and Cyclops's talk of mutant revolution, Maria Hill personally asks Dazzler to become an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D., a proposition Alison accepts.Uncanny X-Men vol. 3 #6 After her first encounter with Cyclops's X-Men team, Dazzler is poisoned and replaced by the shapeshifter Mystique.Uncanny X-Men vol. 3 #9 Dazzler is rescued by Magneto and she was told how she was kidnapped and put in a coma-like state so that Mystique could use her to generate Mutant Growth Hormone; afterwards she joins Cyclops's Uncanny X-Men team with a new appearance.Uncanny X-Men, Volume 3 #24 Dazzler is a mutant with the ability to transduce sonic vibrations which reach her body into various types of light. This ability seems to operate over a great range of frequencies, including the audible spectrum, and a great variation of sound pressure levels regardless of the complexity, dissonance, or randomness of the sound.  Sounds as different as a car crash and a symphonic passage both produce convertible incoming acoustic vibrations. Dazzler prefers utilizing the sound of music, particularly that which is rhythmically sustained. Not only is music more pleasant to her ears, but the steady beat of contemporary music provides a more constant source of sound to convert. The precise means by which this conversion process works is as yet unknown. Dazzler has been shown to create a "null space" of sound in a certain radius of her person, as a result of "pulling" the sound in her area to her person, to either protect a crowd of people or to supercharge her power reserves.Dazzler: The Movie Marvel Graphic Novel #12 Left undirected, Dazzler's light will radiate from her body in all directions, producing regular flashes of white light. By conscious control over the light she produces, she can control its direction, frequency (color), amplitude (intensity), and duration. Dazzler can produce numerous effects. She can create simple patterns out of rays of light or combinations of patterns which produce trance-like effects in her targets. She can create a pulse of light on the order of several thousand watts of power, which temporarily blinds people with its brilliance. She can create a chaotic cascade of sparkling lights and colors that severely upsets other people's equilibrium, or a pulsating strobe-light effect. Dazzler can generate a coherent beam of light, approximating a laser beam. Dazzler can generate a shield from laser energy that can deflect projectiles or energy beams. Dazzler has polarizing eyes and cannot be blinded or dazzled by light.Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe vol. 2 #3 With effort, she can create holograms of human beings and other three-dimensional beings and objects. She can also use light energy to generate flight. She generally directs lasers from a single finger when she requires precision. She most often uses her hands for directing her light effects, but she could also use other parts of her body. Since studying with the X-Men, she has become adept at directing her blinding strobe light blast from her eyes. The most powerful manifestation of her laser abilities are a concentrated stream of solid photons she usually fires from her index finger but can emit from her entire body. The beam is extremely powerful and as a consequence uses a great deal of her energy reserves. She has also demonstrated the ability to stretch the electromagnetic spectrum to produce devastating microwave energy.Dazzler #29 She has since learned how to produce these blasts without draining herself, while still providing them with considerable power. When Galactus enlisted her to retrieve his wayward herald Terrax from the heart of a black hole he had her exposed to unimaginable sounds, including the explosion of an entire galaxy, to boost her to sufficient levels. Since the events of Dazzler: The Movie, Alison's body can store sound energy for future discharge as light. Thanks to Professor X, Dazzler's costume contains devices that enable her to store sonic energy more efficiently and to gauge and focus the light she generates with greater skill. She has also demonstrated on at least one occasion the ability to expel the stored sound into a devastating wave of sonic energy that destroyed her foe Silence.Dazzler #42 Dazzler is immune to the injurious effects of her light transducing abilities. Her ability to transduce sound also protects her from being deafened by loud sounds; In Dazzler vol. 2 #1, it was indicated that her ears are highly developed allowing her to detect sounds on frequencies that others cannot register.^ Richards, Dave (2010-02-08). "MCCANN MAKES DAZZLER SING ONCE MORE". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved 2010-03-19. In X-Treme X-Men, Vol. 2, No. 4, she demonstrates the ability to use sound waves for echolocation before absorbing them for energy.X-Treme X-Men, Vol. 2, No. 4 Dazzler is a highly skilled athlete, and has become an excellent hand-to-hand combatant thanks to her training with the X-Men, and with the Gladiators.Beauty and the Beast #3 In addition, she is a talented singer, actress, and dancer. She is also a highly accomplished roller skater and can move at high speed; she occasionally wears a pair of roller skates which magnetically adheres to her boots.  Dazzler appears as a member of the X-Men. She is a chain smoker, having no use for a singing voice in this timeline. She is also more skilled with her powers, being able to create hard-light constructs, as well as manipulate both light and sound energies. With this new power-set, Dazzler serves as a one-woman training facility, as well as a messenger via holographic transmissions.Nicieza, Fabian and Andy Kubert. Amazing X-Men #1-2.  She was romantically involved with Exodus,Amazing X-Men v.1 #1 and did not accompany the main team of X-Men in the final assault on Apocalypse. Dazzler was one of the characters involved in the original Age of Apocalypse to be brought back for the Age of Apocalypse 10th Anniversary miniseries. Like many of the other X-Men, Dazzler's costume in the 10th anniversary reflects an updated take on her original costume: the silver jumpsuit. Against the battle with Mr. Sinister's Sinister Six, Dazzler was swallowed within Cloak's dark dimension, but is ultimately saved by a lightning bolt from Storm which forces Cloak to spit her back out.Age of Apocalypse #6 In X-Men: The End, a series about the X-Men's hypothetical future, Dazzler reverted her costume to reflect her classic, silver design, continuing her career as a singer. Dazzler, an occasional "reserve" team member, joined Storm and X-Men members Iceman, Bishop, Psylocke, and Sage for Xavier's "Plan B" team. Co-piloting the ship to the extraterrestrial Shi'ar homeworld, Dazzler uses her powers to create a light show, calming the passions of the battling X-Men and Shi'ar Imperial Guard. The series' primary villain — Cassandra Nova — then manifests, slaying the Imperial Guard and leaving the remaining X-Men as her sole adversaries. Dazzler attempts to subdue Cassandra along with Storm and Iceman. While she uses her ability to laser a hole through Cassandra's head, Storm strikes her with lightning, giving Iceman a chance to freeze her. Bishop then shatters her in order to prevent her from returning. However, Cassandra simply reforms and, as a form of retaliation, blasts a hole through Dazzler, strikes Storm with energy, and freezes Iceman. She successfully killed Storm and Dazzler, but Iceman survived the ordeal. Dazzler is believed to be among the slain X-Men that were invited to a plane of higher existence by the Phoenix.Claremont, Chris and Sean Chen. X-Men: The End: Book 3 #5-6. When Wanda Maximoff, the Scarlet Witch, used her reality-altering powers to change the world, Dazzler became one of the most famous mutants on Earth. After having a successful singing career as a teenager, Dazzler continued her career as the world's primary media personality via her syndicated talk show.Bendis, Brian Michael and Oliver Coipel. House of M #2. The House of M newsprint special featured a tabloid-esque blind article, indicating that Alison's signature lightshow was fading due to a rare blood disorder, which was causing her to lose her mutation. Storm used Alison's popular talk show to sound off on her disapproval of Magneto's handling of mutant affairs and Mister Sinister was seen watching the Alison show when Deadpool went to rescue an infant Cable.Cable and Deadpool #17 Author Brian Michael Bendis originally scripted for this version of Dazzler to be this altered reality's answer to Oprah. Dazzler appears as one of the few uninfected heroes in the limited series Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness. There, she is almost eaten by an infected Winter Soldier until he is killed by Ash Williams.Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness vol. 1 #2 Ash is attracted to Dazzler, but she does not reciprocate his feelings. As a thanks for saving her, Dazzler agrees to help Ash find the Necronomicon book that might put an end to the zombies. The duo pair up with the Scarlet Witch to discover that the Necronomicon is being kept at Doctor Doom's fortress in Latveria.Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness v1. #3 Ash discovers the Necronomicon, but unfortunately it has nothing to do with this world's infection. On his way back, he meets an imprisoned Enchantress. Because of the unusual nature of her powers, Ash believes the Enchantress is unaffected.Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness vol. 1 #4 In a confrontation with Dazzler, the Enchantress bites off her finger, infecting her with the zombification virus. Before she is transformed, Doctor Doom and Ultron appear, and each of the two metal villains destroys both zombified women.Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness vol. 1 #5 However, another zombified Dazzler is quite visible in the bottom left corner of the large center cell on page 13 of Issue #23 of Ultimate Fantastic Four &ndash; part 3 of the three-part arc that introduced the "Marvel Zombies" Universe [the three part arc consisted of Ultimate Fantastic Four issues 21-23]. As noted, Dazzler was destroyed - disintegrated - by Doctor Doom and Ultron in the "Marvel Zombies Vs. Army of Darkness" limited series and hence, never lived to become a zombie. The Ultimate Marvel incarnation of Dazzler is introduced as a punk rock singer in Ultimate X-Men #42. She briefly joins Emma Frost's Academy of Tomorrow when promised a record deal, but joins the X-Men after they rescue her from a Sentinel attack. There she is called "Dazzler" after the name of her band. She often shows a lack of enthusiasm for the X-Men and their endeavors, but after learning of a proposed public execution of a mutant, she convinces a group of teammates to go on a rescue mission. When the mission goes astray and Angel is captured, Dazzler takes initiative and leads the team in a recovery operation. This leads to the accidental release of Longshot.Ultimate X-Men vol. 1 #57 Later, she and Angel go out on a presumed 'date' (really an effort to get themselves involved with the X-Men's latest mission) preventing the Academy of Tomorrow students from attacking the Triskelion. During the incident, power is lost and one of the inmates, Deathstrike, impales Dazzler through the chest. Ironically, Deathstrike is defeated by the very killer Dazzler has assisted before.Ultimate X-Men #65 Dazzler stays in a coma for several weeks, visited many times by Nightcrawler having an unrequited crush on her. Unfortunately, many factors have combined to unhinge Nightcrawler and as soon as she is able to be moved, she is fooled into thinking they must escape. Initially trusting Nightcrawler, she cooperates until the rest of the X-Men rescue her.Ultimate X-Men Annual #2 The others, understanding Nightcrawler is mentally ill, plan to rehabilitate. Dazzler does not accept this and quits the team in protest. She has since been labeled as one of the "most important" mutants to the X-Men's cause by the future Bishop.Ultimate X-Men #82 Dazzler later joins Bishop's new team in Ultimate X-Men #82. When Bishop dies in Ultimate X-Men #90, Dazzler returned to the Xavier Institute to be with Angel and on Xavier's X-Men team once again. She is seen to be on Colossus's enhanced team, using the drug Banshee to boost her powers. The drug enhanced team battles Xavier's main X-Men and eventually leave their drug-filled lives and return to the X-Mansion.Ultimate X-Men #97 When Magneto's worldwide devastation hits the X-Men,Ultimatum vol. 1 #1 Dazzler is revealed by Jean Grey to have been killed along with teammates Beast and Nightcrawler.Ultimate X-Men #98 The Ultimate iteration of Dazzler does not convert sound into light in this continuity. Her powers are defined as "Matter Detonation"; by detonating small particles in the air, she is able to create brilliant photokinetic effects, controlling the color and intensity of the light created.Ultimate X-Men vol. 1 #84 Under the influence of the drug Banshee, Dazzler's powers are vastly increased, and she is able to create solid light constructs such as a sword, a tiger for her to ride into battle, and even a copy of Wolverine's claws, which she uses to fight Wolverine.Ultimate X-Men vol. 1 #95-97 Dazzler's true powers are shown when she detonates the matter making up Sentinel robots, completely destroying them with her sheer power.Ultimate X-Men vol. 1 #85Ultimate X-Men vol. 1 #87 Some while later, May Parker's house is being sold by a realtor named Alison Blaire.Ultimate Comics Spider-Man #11 A woman from Earth-721 was given the powers and appearance of Dazzler by Interlocking Technologies. She came to Earth-616 and impersonated the original Alison. She toured the Western States of the USA in Dazzler's original costume. However, she was ultimately discovered, stripped of her powers and returned to Earth-721.She-Hulk vol. 2 #21 A member of the X-Babies is based on Dazzler. It is unknown if she is still alive or has been terminated since Alison left the X-Men.Uncanny X-Men Annual #12 In the Earth X timeline, Dazzler had her heart torn out by Mephisto though due to the "death" of Death, she lives on in constant agony.Paradise X #2 In a two-part What If? story (What if Cable had destroyed the X-Men? and What if Magneto took over the U.S.A.?) based on Uncanny X-Men #269, Dazzler is an agent of Magneto.What If...? vol. 2 #46  She is ultimately killed by a Sentinel warhead.What If...? vol. 2 #47 In What If (1st series) #33 (June 1982), Dazzler decides to stay Galactus’ herald after she defeats Terrax. After many years of servitude, during which she guides Galactus to feed on uninhabited worlds in order to spare the lives of beings on other planets, she is free to return to Earth. When she arrives, Dazzler discovers the Earth had become a barren wasteland and, with nowhere else to go, she returns to Galactus who welcomes her return.What If...? vol. 1 #33 In X-Men: Battle Of The Atom, Dazzler becomes the first mutant President of The United States in the future. However, during her Inauguration speech, she is assassinated by fire from flying demons along with Jamie Madrox, and several audience members.All-New X-Men #17 In November 2005, writer Brian K. Vaughan stated the Ultimate incarnation of Dazzler "may very well be [Brian Michael] Bendis’ single greatest contribution to the free world". In August 2009, TIME listed Dazzler as one of the "Top 10 Oddest Marvel Characters". Dazzler was ranked 83rd in Comics Buyer's Guide's "100 Sexiest Women in Comics" list in 2011.    Dazzler appeared in the X-Men: Pryde of the X-Men animated pilot, voiced by Alexandra Stoddart. She appears as part of the X-Men's main roster. Dazzler guest starred in the X-Men animated series. Dazzler first appeared as a background character in the episode "Mojovision" where she was Longshot's make-up artist. However, Dazzler was central to the plot of the episode "The Dark Phoenix Saga Part 1: Dazzled", in which Donald Pierce tries to kidnap her in order to force her to join the Inner Circle of the Hellfire Club. Dazzler appears in the Wolverine and the X-Men cartoon series. In the episode "X-Calibre", she is seen aboard the ship traveling to Genosha. In the episode "Greetings from Genosha", she is briefly seen performing a concert. In the episode "Badlands", she is shown in Polaris's alternate future flashback to be among the mutants killed when Genosha is destroyed by the Phoenix Force's fire. In the early 1980s, screenwriter Gary Goddard was commissioned to write a script for a film based on Dazzler to star Bo Derek. The project fell though, and Goddard instead wrote the film Tarzan, the Ape Man for Derek. During development for the 2014 film X-Men: Days of Future Past, it was announced that Lady Gaga was to portray Dazzler before it was revealed to be a April Fools' Day prank. Dazzler was a playable character in the X-Men arcade game released by Konami in 1992. Dazzler was also a playable character in two early PC X-Men games by Paragon Software: X-Men: Madness in Murderworld and X-Men II: The Fall of the Mutants. Dazzler appears as a NPC in the PC version of X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse. Raven Software designed an online-exclusive "Dazzler's Nightclub" level for a mission which reenacts Uncanny X-Men #130, where the X-Men must protect Dazzler from the Hellfire Club's guards. Closer inspection of the game's files reveals a dialogue portrait, HUD head, and unique character select animations for Dazzler&mdash;indicating that at some stage of development Raven Software had intended her to be a playable character. Dazzler has a cameo in Felicia's ending in Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds. "Dissecting the Dazzler", Interview with DeFalco, Simonsen, and Stern Dazzler Series Synopsis, William George Ferguson UncannyXmen.net Spotlight on Dazzler The Debut of the Dazzler
