   In naval terminology, a destroyer is a fast maneuverable long-endurance warship intended to escort larger vessels in a fleet, convoy or battle group and defend them against smaller powerful short-range attackers. They were originally developed in the late 19th century as a defence against torpedo boats, and by the time of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, these "torpedo boat destroyers" (TBD) were "large, swift, and powerfully armed torpedo boats designed to destroy other torpedo boats."Gove p. 2412 Although the term "destroyer" had been used interchangeably with "TBD" and "torpedo boat destroyer" by navies since 1892, the term "torpedo boat destroyer" had been generally shortened to simply "destroyer" by nearly all navies by the First World War.Lyon p. 8, 9 Before World War II, destroyers were light vessels with little endurance for unattended ocean operations; typically a number of destroyers and a single destroyer tender operated together. After the war, the advent of the guided missile allowed destroyers to take on the surface combatant roles previously filled by battleships and cruisers. This resulted in larger and more powerful guided missile destroyers more capable of independent operation. At the start of the 21st century, destroyers are the heaviest surface combatant ships in general use, with only three nations (including the United States, Russia, and Peru) operating the heavier class cruisers, with no battleships or true battlecruisers remaining.Although the Russian  are sometimes classified as battlecruisers, due to their displacement they are described by Russia as large missile cruisers. Modern destroyers, also known as guided missile destroyers, are equivalent in tonnage but vastly superior in firepower to cruisers of the World War II era, capable of carrying nuclear tipped cruise missiles. Guided missile destroyers such as the Arleigh Burke class are actually larger and more heavily armed than most previous ships classified as guided missile cruisers, due to their massive size at  long, displacement (9200&nbsp;tons) and armament of over 90 missiles.Northrop Grumman christened its 28th Aegis guided missile destroyer, William P. Lawrence (DDG 110) April 19th, 2010. Retrieved August 29th, 2014.  The emergence and development of the destroyer was related to the invention of the self-propelled torpedo in the 1860s. A navy now had the potential to destroy a superior enemy battle fleet using steam launches to launch torpedoes. Fast boats armed with torpedoes were built and called torpedo boats. The first seagoing vessel designed to fire the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was the 33-ton  in 1876. She was armed with two drop collars to launch these weapons; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow. By the 1880s, the type had evolved into small ships of 50–100 tons, fast enough to evade enemy picket boats. At first, the danger to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor, but as faster and longer-range torpedoes were developed, the threat extended to cruising at sea. In response to this new threat, more heavily gunned picket boats called "catchers" were built which were used to escort the battle fleet at sea. They needed significant seaworthiness and endurance to operate with the battle fleet, and as they necessarily became larger, they became officially designated "torpedo boat destroyers", and by the First World War were largely known as "destroyers" in English. The anti-torpedo boat origin of this type of ship is retained in its name in other languages, including French (contre-torpilleur), Italian (cacciatorpediniere), Portuguese (contratorpedeiro), Czech (torpédoborec), Greek (antitorpiliko,αντιτορπιλικό), and Dutch (torpedobootjager).Lyon p.  8 Once destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage, it was realized that they were also ideal to take over the role of torpedo boats themselves, so they were fitted with torpedo tubes as well as guns. At that time, and even into World War I, the only function of destroyers was to protect their own battle fleet from enemy torpedo attacks and to make such attacks on the battleships of the enemy. The task of escorting merchant convoys was still in the future.  An important development came with the construction of HMS Swift in 1884, later redesignated TB 81. This was a large (137 ton) torpedo boat with four 47&nbsp;mm quick-firing guns and three torpedo tubes. At , while still not fast enough to engage torpedo boats reliably, the ship at least had the armament to deal with them. Another forerunner of the torpedo boat destroyer was the Japanese torpedo boatJentschura p. 126  (Falcon), built in 1885. Designed to Japanese specifications and ordered from the London Yarrow shipyards in 1885, she was transported in parts to Japan, where she was assembled and launched in 1887. The  long vessel was armed with four 1-pounder (37&nbsp;mm) quick-firing guns and six torpedo tubes, reached , and at 203&nbsp;tons, was the largest torpedo boat built to date. In her trials in 1889, Kotaka demonstrated that she could exceed the role of coastal defense, and was capable of accompanying larger warships on the high seas. The Yarrow shipyards, builder of the parts for the Kotaka, "considered Japan to have effectively invented the destroyer".   The first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat. Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats. By the end of the 1890s torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the torpedo boat destroyers, which were much faster. The first example of this was , designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885, and commissioned in response to the Russian War scare. The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats. Exactly  long and  in beam, she displaced 550 tons. Built of steel, Rattlesnake was un-armoured with the exception of a -inch protective deck. She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four  torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo dropping carriages on either side. Four torpedo reloads were carried. A number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the Grasshopper class, the , the  and the  - all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s. Fernando Villaamil, second officer of the Ministry of the Navy of Spain, designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat.Biography of Villaamil He asked several British shipyards to submit proposals capable of fulfilling these specifications. In 1885 the Spanish Navy chose the design submitted by the shipyard of James and George Thomson of Clydebank, near the Yarrow shipyards.  (Destroyer in Spanish) was laid down at the end of the year, launched in 1886, and commissioned in 1887. She displaced 348 tons, and was equipped with triple-expansion engines generating , for a maximum speed of ,Contratorpedero Destructor  which made her one of the faster ships in the world in 1888.Illustrated Naval and Military Magazine: A monthly journal devoted to all subjects connected with Her Majesty's land and sea forces, 1888, v 9, page 280 She was armed with one  Spanish-designed Hontoria breech-loading gun,Fitzsimmons, Bernard: The Illustrated encyclopedia of 20th century weapons and warfare. Columbia House, 1978, v. 8, page 835 four  (6-pounder) Nordenfelt guns, two  (3-pdr) Hotchkiss cannons and two  Schwartzkopff torpedo tubes. The ship carried three torpedoes per tube. She was manned by a crew of 60. In terms of gunnery, speed and dimensions, the specialised design to chase torpedo boats and her high seas capabilities, Destructor was an important precursor to the torpedo boat destroyer.From an article about the American Greyhounds The torpedo gunboats in practice failed in their primary objective, as they were not fast enough to keep up with torpedo boats. They were phased out with the introduction of the first destroyers in the 1890s.  The first ships to bear the formal designation "torpedo boat destroyer" (TBD) were the  of two ships and  of two ships of the Royal Navy. Early torpedo gunboat designs lacked the range and speed to keep up with the fleet they were supposed to protect. In 1892, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral Jackie Fisher ordered the development of a new type of ships equipped with the then novel water-tube boilers and quick-firing small calibre guns. Six ships to the specifications circulated by the Admiralty were ordered initially, comprising three different designs each produced by a different shipbuilder:  and  from John I. Thornycroft & Company,  and  from Yarrows, and  and  from Laird, Son & Company. These torpedo boat destroyers all featured a turtleback (i.e. rounded) forecastle that was characteristic of early British TBDs.  and  were both built by Thornycroft, displaced 260 tons (287.8 tons full load) and were 185 feet in length. They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount abaft the two funnels. Later the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added instead. They produced 4,200&nbsp;hp from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet. In common with subsequent early Thornycroft boats, they had sloping sterns and double rudders. The French navy, an extensive user of torpedo boats, built its first torpedo boat destroyer in 1899, with the  'torpilleur d'escadre'. The United States commissioned its first torpedo boat destroyer, , Destroyer No. 1, in 1902 and by 1906 there were 16 destroyers in service with the US Navy.Simpson p. 151  Torpedo Boat Destroyer designs continued to evolve around the turn of the 20th century in several key ways. The first was the introduction of the steam turbine. The spectacular unauthorized demonstration of the turbine powered Turbinia at the 1897 Spithead Navy Review, which, significantly, was of torpedo boat size, prompted the Royal Navy to order a prototype turbine powered destroyer,  of 1899. This was the first turbine warship of any kind and achieved a remarkable  on sea trials. By 1910 the turbine had been widely adopted by all navies for their faster ships. The second development was the replacement of the torpedo-boat-style turtleback foredeck by a raised forecastle for the new s built in 1903, which provided better sea-keeping as well as more space below deck. The British experimented with oil propulsion for the  of 1905 but switched temporarily back to coal for the later  in 1909. Other navies also adopted oil, for instance the USN with the  of 1909. In spite of all this variety, destroyers adopted a largely similar pattern. The hull was long and narrow, with a relatively shallow draft. The bow was either raised in a forecastle or covered under a turtleback; underneath this were the crew spaces, extending 1/4 to 1/3 the way along the hull. Aft of the crew spaces was as much engine space as the technology of the time would allow: several boilers and engines or turbines. Above deck, one or more quick-firing guns were mounted in the bows, in front of the bridge; several more were mounted amidships and astern. Two tube mountings (later on, multiple mountings) were generally found amidships. Between 1892 and 1914 destroyers became markedly larger: initially 420&nbsp;tons with a length of  for the US Navy's first  of torpedo boat destroyers,Lyon p. 121 up to the First World War with  long destroyers displacing 1000&nbsp;tons was not unusual. However, construction remained focused on putting the biggest possible engines into a small hull, resulting in a somewhat flimsy construction. Often hulls were built of steel only 1/8&nbsp;in thick. By 1910 the steam-driven displacement (that is, not hydroplaning) torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type. Germany nevertheless continued to build such boats until the end of World War I, although these were effectively small coastal destroyers. In fact Germany never distinguished between the two types, giving them pennant numbers in the same series and never giving names to destroyers. Ultimately the term torpedo boat came to be attached to a quite different vessel – the very fast hydroplaning motor driven MTB. The torpedo boat destroyer's initial purpose was to protect against torpedo boats, but navies soon appreciated the flexibility of the fast, multi-purpose vessel that resulted. Vice-Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker laid down destroyer duties for the Royal Navy:Brett, Bernard: "History of World Sea Power", Deans International (London) 1985. ISBN 0-603-03723-2 Early destroyers were extremely cramped places to live, being "without a doubt magnificent fighting vessels... but unable to stand bad weather."Grant p. 136 During the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, the commander of the torpedo boat destroyer IJN AkatsukiGrant, image, frontispieceLyon p. 58Jentschura p. 132 (Akatsuki built by Yarrow & Co. in 1902; 224' long, displaced 415 tons, two 18" , two 3" guns, four 57&nbsp;mm Quick Firing Guns, complement 60 officers/men. Sunk by mine at Port Arthur on 17 May 1904) described "being in command of a destroyer for a long period, especially in wartime... is not very good for the health." Stating that he had originally been strong and healthy, he continued, "life on a destroyer in winter, with bad food, no comforts, would sap the powers of the strongest men in the long run. A destroyer is always more uncomfortable than the others, and rain, snow, and sea-water combine to make them damp; in fact, in bad weather there is not a dry spot where one can rest for a moment."Grant p. 102, 103 The Japanese destroyer commander finished with, "Yesterday I looked at myself in a mirror for a long time; I was disagreeably surprised to see my face thin, full of wrinkles, and as old as though I were fifty. My clothes (uniform) cover nothing but a skeleton, and my bones are full of rheumatism." Although officially classified as a torpedo boat in 1898 by the US Navy, , a  long all steel vessel displacing 165 tons, was described by her commander, LT. John C. Fremont, as "...a compact mass of machinery not meant to keep the sea nor to live in... as five sevenths of the ship are taken up by machinery and fuel, whilst the remaining two sevenths, fore and aft, are the crew's quarters; officers forward and the men placed aft. And even in those spaces are placed anchor engines, steering engines, steam pipes, etc. rendering them unbearably hot in tropical regions."Simpson p. 100  The torpedo boat destroyer's first major use in combat came during the Japanese surprise attack on the Russian fleet anchored in Port Arthur at the opening of the Russo-Japanese War on 8 February 1904. Three destroyer divisions attacked the Russian fleet in port, firing a total of 18 torpedoes. However, only two Russian battleships were seriously damaged due to the proper deployment of torpedo nets. The Russian flagship, the battleship , which had her nets deployed, had at least four enemy torpedoes "hung up" in them,Grant p. 42 and other warships were similarly saved from further damage.Grant p. 33, 34, 40 While capital ship engagements were scarce in World War I, destroyer units were almost continually engaged in raiding and patrol actions. The first shot of the war at sea was fired on 5 August 1914 by a destroyer of the 2nd Flotilla, , in an engagement with the German auxiliary minelayer . Destroyers were involved in the skirmishes that prompted the Battle of Heligoland Bight, and filled a range of roles in the Battle of Gallipoli, acting as troop's transports and fire support vessels, as well as their fleet-screening role. Over 80 British destroyers and 60 German torpedo-boats took part in the Battle of Jutland, which involved pitched small-boat actions between the main fleets, and several foolhardy attacks by unsupported destroyers on capital ships. Jutland also concluded with a messy night action between the German High Seas Fleet and part of the British destroyer screen.  The threat evolved by World War I with the development of the submarine, or U-boat. The submarine had the potential to hide from gunfire and close underwater to fire torpedoes. Early-war destroyers had the speed and armament to intercept submarines before they submerged, either by gunfire or by ramming. Destroyers also had a shallow enough draft that torpedoes would find it difficult to hit them.  The desire to attack submarines underwater led to rapid destroyer evolution during the war; they were quickly equipped with strengthened bows for ramming, depth charges and hydrophones for identifying submarine targets. The first submarine casualty to a destroyer was the German , rammed by  on 29 October 1914. While U-19 was only damaged, the next month  successfully sank . The first depth-charge sinking was on 4 December 1916, when U-Boats Destroyed, Paul Kemp (1997), ISBN 1-85409-515-3 was sunk by HMS Llewellyn. The submarine threat meant that many destroyers spent their time on anti-submarine patrol; once Germany adopted unrestricted submarine warfare in January 1917, destroyers were called on to escort merchant convoys. US Navy destroyers were among the first American units to be dispatched upon the American entry to the war, and a squadron of Japanese destroyers even joined Allied patrols in the Mediterranean. Patrol duty was far from safe; of the 67 British destroyers lost in the war, collisions accounted for 18, while 12 were wrecked. At the end of the war the state-of-the-art was represented by the British W-class.  The trend during World War I had been towards larger destroyers with heavier armaments. A number of opportunities to fire at capital ships had been missed during the War, because destroyers had expended all their torpedoes in an initial salvo. The British V and W classes of the late war had sought to address this by mounting six torpedo tubes in two triple mounts, instead of the four or two on earlier models. The 'V' and 'W's set the standard of destroyer building well into the 1920s. The next major innovation came with the Japanese  or 'special type', designed in 1923 and delivered in 1928. The design was initially noted for its powerful armament of six five-inch (127&nbsp;mm) guns and three triple torpedo mounts. The second batch of the class gave the guns high-angle turrets for anti-aircraft warfare, and the  oxygen-fueled 'Long Lance' Type 93 torpedo. The later  of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure, allowing reloading within 15 minutes. Most other nations replied with similar larger ships. The US  adopted twin five-inch (127&nbsp;mm) guns, and the subsequent  and  (the latter of 1934) increased the number of torpedo tubes to 12 and 16 respectively.  In the Mediterranean, the Italian Navy's building of very fast light cruisers of the  prompted the French to produce exceptional destroyer designs. The French had long been keen on large destroyers, with their  of 1922 displacing over 2,000&nbsp;tons and carrying 130&nbsp;mm guns; a further three similar classes were produced around 1930. The  of 1935 carried five  guns and nine torpedo tubes, but could achieve speeds of , which remains the record speed for a steamship and for any destroyer. The Italians' own destroyers were almost as swift, most Italian designs of the 1930s being rated at over , while carrying torpedoes and either four or six 120&nbsp;mm guns. Germany started to build destroyers again during the 1930s as part of Hitler's rearmament program. The Germans were also fond of large destroyers, but while the initial Type 1934 displaced over 3,000&nbsp;tons, their armament was equal to smaller vessels. This changed from the Type 1936 onwards, which mounted heavy  guns. German destroyers also used innovative high-pressure steam machinery: while this should have helped their efficiency, it more often resulted in mechanical problems. Once German and Japanese rearmament became clear, the British and American navies consciously focused on building destroyers that were smaller but more numerous than those used by other nations. The British built a series of destroyers (the  to ) which were about 1,400&nbsp;tons standard displacement, had four  guns and eight torpedo tubes; the American  of 1938 similar in size, but carried five  guns and ten torpedo tubes. Realizing the need for heavier gun armament, the British built the  of 1936 (sometimes called Afridi after one of two lead ships). These ships displaced 1,850&nbsp;tons and were armed with eight  guns in four twin turrets and four torpedo tubes. These were followed by the J-class and L-class destroyers, with six  guns in twin turrets and eight torpedo tubes. Anti-submarine sensors included sonar (or ASDIC), although training in their use was indifferent. Anti-submarine weapons changed little, and ahead-throwing weapons, a need recognized in World War I, had made no progress.   During the 1920s and 1930s destroyers were often deployed to areas of diplomatic tension or humanitarian disaster. British and American destroyers were common on the Chinese coast and rivers, even supplying landing parties to protect colonial interests. By World War II the threat had evolved once again. Submarines were more effective, and aircraft had become important weapons of naval warfare; once again the early-war fleet destroyers were ill-equipped for combating these new targets. They were fitted with new light anti-aircraft guns, radar, and forward-launched ASW weapons, in addition to their existing dual-purpose guns, depth charges, and torpedoes. In most cases torpedo and/or dual-purpose gun armament was reduced to accommodate new anti-air and anti-submarine weapons. By this time the destroyers had become large, multi-purpose vessels, expensive targets in their own right. As a result, casualties on destroyers were among the highest. The need for large numbers of anti-submarine ships led to the introduction of smaller and cheaper specialized anti-submarine warships called corvettes and frigates by the Royal Navy and destroyer escorts by the USN. A similar programme was belatedly started by the Japanese (see ). These ships had the size and displacement of the original torpedo boat destroyers that the contemporary destroyer had evolved from.  Some conventional destroyers were completed in the late 1940s and 1950s which built on wartime experience. These vessels were significantly larger than wartime ships and had fully automatic main guns, unit Machinery, radar, sonar, and antisubmarine weapons such as the Squid mortar. Examples include the British , US , and the Soviet s. Some World War II–vintage ships were modernized for anti-submarine warfare, and to extend their service lives, to avoid having to build (expensive) brand-new ships. Examples include the US FRAM I programme and the British Type 15 frigates converted from fleet destroyers. The advent of surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles, such as the Exocet, in the early 1960s changed naval warfare. Guided missile destroyers (DDG in the US Navy) were developed to carry these weapons and protect the fleet from air, submarine and surface threats. Examples include the Soviet , the British , and the US .  In the US Navy, fleet destroyers operate in support of carrier battle groups, surface action groups, amphibious groups and replenishment groups. The destroyers currently in use by the US Navy are the . Destroyers (with a DD hull classification symbol) primarily perform anti-submarine warfare duty while guided missile destroyers (DDGs) are multi-mission (anti-submarine, anti-aircraft and anti-surface warfare) surface combatants, with an emphasis on anti-surface warfare. The addition of cruise missile launchers has greatly expanded the role of the destroyer in strike and land-attack warfare. As the expense of heavier surface combatants has generally removed them from the fleet, destroyer tonnage has grown (a modern Arleigh Burke-class destroyer has the same tonnage as a World War II light cruiser). Many modern destroyer designs delegate their anti-submarine role to embarked helicopters, which in addition to anti-submarine warfare can also be used for maritime rescue and vertical replenishment. In October 2013 the first of three U.S.  of destroyers left dry dock, the destroyer built with specific structural angles and a superstructure wrapped in a carbon fiber composite canopy to reduce its radar detectability by a factor of 50. The ship, with 80 missiles and a crew of 150, will include two Advanced Gun Systems (AGS) that can fire rocket-powered, computer-guided shells to destroy targets  away. The Royal Navy operates the Type 45, or Daring class, stealth destroyer which displaces roughly 7,200 tonnes. A class of six ships is envisaged. They are equipped with the UK variant of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System (PAAMS) and BAE Systems SAMPSON radar. The Royal Navy also operates a Type 82 destroyer for training use. The Italian Navy and the French Navy each operate two s and operate new FREMM multipurpose frigates. These stealthy ships are armed with anti-ship missiles and Aster surface-to-air missiles. The Italian navy also operates two s. The French navy also operates six s and two s. The French Navy applies the term "first-class frigate" to Georges Leygues, Cassard, Horizon, and FREMM class ships and uses the NATO hull classification symbol "D 6xx" to place them in the destroyer type. Italy classifies the FREMM with the NATO designation of "F" for frigate.  The Royal Canadian Navy operates the s, a class of four helicopter-carrying, anti-aircraft, guided missile destroyers (with one remaining in service). They were originally fitted out for anti-submarine warfare, but the entire class underwent major retrofits in the 1990s which re-purposed the ships as area air-defence destroyers.  The Indian Navy operates two s. These ships are armed with Brahmos missiles, which have a range of , in the anti-ship role. (Barak-8) system is installed to counter airborne threats. Along with the Kolkata class, Indian Navy operates, the  and  destroyers. These destroyers also carry anti-submarine rockets and torpedoes. The destroyers have the capability to carry two Sea King helicopters. The Kolkata class will be augmented by the new P15B class of destroyers (Visakhapatnam-class destroyer) the construction of which was started in 2014.  Since 2003, the Chinese People's Liberation Army Navy has launched the Luyang I, Luyang II and Luzhou classes. The latter two are armed with long range air defense missiles, the indigenous HQ-9 and the Russian S-300 respectively. China also operates three Luyang III-class destroyers, six Luda-class destroyers, two Luhu-class destroyers, and one Luhai-class destroyer. Japan's Maritime Self-Defense Force operates the  and  destroyers which both employ the Aegis combat system. Japan also operates a , two  destroyers, four  destroyers, five  destroyers, nine  destroyers, eight  destroyers, three  destroyers, six  destroyers, and three  destroyers for training use. The Republic of Korea Navy operates several classes of destroyers including the  (KDX-III), the  (KDX-II) and  (KDX-I) of destroyers. The KDX-III is equipped with the Aegis combat system, Goalkeeper CIWS, Hyunmoo cruise missile and the Hae Sung anti-ship missile.  The Russian Navy and the People's Liberation Army Navy of the People's Republic of China operate the , a class of large multi-purpose missile destroyers. They are powered by pressure-fired boilers, making them capable of speeds in excess of . Their armament consists of eight SS-N-22 Sunburn anti-ship missiles, launchers for SA-N-7 Gadfly anti-air missiles and two AK-130 twin-barreled 130&nbsp;mm automatic naval guns which can fire laser-guided shells. While they also carry 533&nbsp;mm torpedo tubes and RBU-6000 rocket launchers for use against submarines, their primary mission is to attack surface ships. Their anti-aircraft missiles have a surface attack mode, and both the 130&nbsp;mm guns and the torpedoes are useful against ships at close range. The modern  destroyers of the Russian Navy can displace about 7,900 tonnes, can travel at , and have a maximum range of 10,500&nbsp;nm (19,450&nbsp;km) at . The original class (Udaloy I) was designed for anti-submarine warfare, which can be seen in their two quadruple launchers of the Metel Anti-Ship Complex (SS-N-14), two quadruple  launchers equipped with either the Type 53 torpedo on the Udaloy I class or RPK-2 Viyuga (SS-N-15) on the Udaloy II class, and the two RBU-6000 anti-submarine launchers. The II class is Russia's only multipurpose destroyer. The armament of the class has been modified. The Metal Anti-Ship Complex is replaced with eight P-270 Moskit (SS-N-22 Sunburn) supersonic sea-skimming anti-ship missile. For air defense, each Udaloy is armed with four AK-630 CIWSs, mounted parallel to each other mid ship. They also have two Kashtan CIWSs, each capable of engaging six targets automatically by either its armament of two GSh-6-30 Gatling guns or four 9M311 (SA-N-11) surface-to-air missiles. Finally, 64 3K95 Kinzhal (SA-N-9) medium-range point defense SAMs can be fired from vertical launching system. Russia also operates a single . The Argentine Navy operates four s and a single modified Type 42 destroyer. The Islamic Republic of Iran Navy operates two s. These ships are internationally regarded as frigates or destroyer escorts, but are classified as destroyers by Iran.https://newwars.wordpress.com/2010/02/19/irans-new-ahem-destroyer/ The Mexican Navy operates single , purchased from the United States. The Pakistani Navy operates five s, purchased from the Royal Navy. The Philippine Navy operates a single , purchased from the United States. The Spanish Navy operates five s. These ships are classified as frigates by Spain and carry the NATO hull classification symbol "F 1xx" for frigate, but are described destroyers by other navies.http://www.defence.gov.au/media/download/2007/Mar/20070314/index.htm The design of these ships were inspired by the United States's  destroyers and carry the AEGIS Combat System. The Republic of China Navy operates four s, purchased from the United States. The German Navy operates three s. These ships are classified by Germany as frigates, but are destroyers in terms of size and strength, and are usually labeled as such by other navies.http://www.helis.com/database/sys/172_F_124_Sachsen_class/ The Royal Netherlands Navy operates four s. These ships are classified by the Netherlands as frigates, but are destroyers in "all but name."http://www.seaforces.org/marint/Netherlands-Navy/Frigate/De-Zeven-Provincien-class.htm The Royal Norwegian Navy operates five s. These ships are classified by Norway as frigates, but they are more capable than a ship the US Navy would classify as a frigate.http://aviationweek.com/awin-only/us-studies-norwegians-manning-mindset These ships are a subclass of Spain's Alvaro de Bazan-class frigates and carry the AEGIS Combat System. The Royal Moroccan Navy operates a single FREMM multipurpose frigate. The Egyptian Navy operates a single FREMM multipurpose frigate purchased from France, with the hull classification FFG for guided missile frigate.The FREMM multipurpose frigate is classified as a destroyer by France and a frigate by Italy, but both are the same ship with the same capabilities, leaving the true type of this ship subject to debate.   The last US Navy  in service, , was decommissioned on September 21, 2005. The  is planned to replace them; on November 1, 2001, the US Navy announced the issuance of a revised Request for Proposal (RFP) for the Future Surface Combatant Program. Formerly known as DD 21, the program was renamed DD(X) (and later renamed to DDG-1000) to more accurately reflect the program purpose, which is to produce a family of advanced technology surface combatants, not a single ship class. DD(X), also called Zumwalt class, is much larger than traditional destroyers, nearly three thousand tons heavier than a  (15,610&nbsp;long tons,Destroyers – DDG fact file. U.S. Navy, 4 April 2013. larger than most heavy cruisers from the World War II era). It will potentially employ advanced weaponry and an all-electric Integrated Power System; however, the construction program was subsequently reduced to just two vessels, and there is currently only funding for three in total. With the retirement of the Spruance class, the US Navy began commissioning an advanced variant of the Arleigh Burke class with expanded ASW capabilities, the Arleigh Burke Flight IIA, beginning with . , 34 of these vessels are in service, with more under construction. The Royal Australian Navy is currently building three s. These ships are to replace the aging s. Their design is similar to that of the Arleigh Burke-class destroyer and the Alvaro de Bazan-class destroyer. They will also use the AEGIS Combat System. The first unit, , will be commissioned in June 2017. The German Navy is currently building four s. Although classified by Germany as frigates, they are destroyers in terms of size and strength. They are to replace the aging s. The first unit, FGS Baden-Wurttemberg F125, will be commissioned in 2016 with "F" being the NATO hull classification for a frigate. The People's Liberation Army Navy is currently adding ten more ships of the Type 052D destroyer class. Three more units scheduled to be delivered by 2016. Development has also begun for the Type 055 destroyer. These ships are expected to carry a Chinese version of the AEGIS combat system. The Islamic Republic of Iran Navy is currently adding four more  frigates to its fleet. India is constructing the  which is an improved version of the Kolkata class. Additionally, one more  is being constructed. The Royal Saudi Navy is currently negotiating plans to receive a number of s from the United States.http://bangordailynews.com/2011/08/31/business/could-saudi-arabia-be-bath-iron-works%E2%80%99-next-big-customer/ The Israeli Navy is due to receive two s from Germany within the coming years.http://www.jpost.com/Defense/Report-Germany-to-sell-Israel-2-battleships-for-1-billion-euros-334259 France and Italy are each adding six more FREMM multipurpose frigates to their fleets, while also negotiating plans to export a number of units to the Hellenic Navy and attempting to sell units to the Royal Canadian Navy.http://www.naval-technology.com/features/feature-dcns-showcases-fremm-frigate-canada-video/ The Russian Navy has begun development into its . (). These ships will be the first destroyers built in Russia since the collapse of the Soviet Union and will be nuclear powered. The first unit is expected to enter service in 2023, with 11 more units to follow in the coming years.http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/ddg-newcon.htm The Royal Canadian Navy has begun development into its Single Class Surface Combatant Project. These ships are to replace the s and the s. The design of these ships will be based on Denmark's s. The Republic of Korea Navy has begun development of its KDX-IIA destroyers. These ships are to be a subclass of South Korea's  destroyers. The first unit is expected to enter service in 2019. Additionally, three more  destroyers are being built. The Royal Norwegian Navy is planning construction of an additional five  frigates.https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/upload/fd/temadokumenter/acquisitions-2012-2020_juni-2012.pdf The Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Force is currently developing plans for its 25DD destroyershttps://medium.com/war-is-boring/japans-new-destroyers-are-intentional-missile-magnets-69dc6baad9cf and its DDR Destroyer Revolution Project. Japan is also planning the construction of four new AEGIS equipped destroyers, whose class is yet to be named.http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/07/07/national/japan-eyes-two-new-aegis-destroyers-to-counter-n-korea-missile-threat/#.VclOZPlVikr Additionally, plans have been laid out for Japan's new 30FF anti-submarine destroyer. These ships are expected to enter service between 2018-2019.http://www.navyrecognition.com/index.php/news/defence-news/year-2015-news/june-2015-navy-naval-forces-defense-industry-technology-maritime-security-global-news/2821-mitsubishi-heavy-industries-unveiled-30ff-or-dex-next-generation-vessel-concept-for-the-jmsdf.html A number of countries have destroyers preserved as museum ships. These include:     Screening the advance of a fleet when hostile torpedo craft are about Searching a hostile coast along which a fleet might pass Watching an enemy's port for the purpose of harassing his torpedo craft and preventing their return Attacking an enemy fleet  in Boston, Massachusetts.  in Buffalo, New York.  in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  in Albany, New York.  in Galveston, Texas.  in Lake Charles, Louisiana.  in Bremerton, Washington.  in Jacksonville, Florida.  in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.  in Bay City, Michigan.  in Fall River, Massachusetts.  in Qingdao, China.  in Rushan, China  in Dalian, China China has four Luda-class destroyers on display, the Jinan, Yinchuan, Nanjing, & Xining BNS Bauru, formerly the  in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  in Gdynia, Poland.  in Wilhelmshaven, Germany.  in Sydney, New South Wales.  in Chatham, Kent.  in Hamilton, Ontario.  in Gothenburg, Sweden. HS Velos (D-16), formerly  in Palaio Faliro, Greece.Velos is still a commissioned warship within the Hellenic Navy, but is strictly ceremonial and no longer sees action. TCG Gayret (D352), formerly  in Izmit, Turkey. ROKS Jeong Buk (DD-916), formerly   in Gangneung, South Korea. ROKS Kang Won (DD-992), formerly  in Gyeongsangnam-do, South Korea.  in Nantes, France. ARA Santisima Trinidad is currently being restored and will be preserved in Puerto Belgrano, Argentina. List of destroyer classes United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification Bombardment of Cherbourg Evans, David C. Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1887–1941, Mark R. Peattie. Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland ISBN 0-87021-192-7 Gardiner, Robert (Editor). Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships (1860–1905): Naval Institute Press, 1985. Gove, Philip Babock (Editor in Chief). Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged. (2002) Merriam-Webster Inc., Publishers, Massachusetts, USA. Grant, R. Captain. Before Port Arthur in a Destroyer; The Personal Diary of a Japanese Naval Officer. London, John Murray; first and second editions published in 1907. Howe, Christopher. Origins of Japanese Trade Supremacy: Development and Technology in Asia from 1540 to the Pacific War, The University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-35485-7 Jentschura, Hansgeorg. Warships of the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1869–1945. United States Naval Institute, Annapolis, Maryland, 1977. ISBN 0-87021-893-X. Lyon, David, The First Destroyers. Chatham Publishing, 1 & 2 Faulkner's Alley, Cowcross St. London, Great Britain; 1996. ISBN 1-55750-271-4. Sanders, Michael S. (2001) The Yard: Building a Destroyer at the Bath Iron Works, HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-06-092963-3 Simpson, Richard V. Building The Mosquito Fleet, The US Navy's First Torpedo Boats. Arcadia Publishing, (2001); Charleston, South Carolina, USA. ISBN 0-7385-0508-0. Preston, Anthony. Destroyers, Bison Books (London) 1977. ISBN 0-600-32955-0 Van der Vat, Dan. The Atlantic Campaign. DD-963 Spruance-class Navy Designates Next-Generation Zumwalt Destroyer
