     Dhule is a city and a municipal corporation in Dhule District in the northwestern part of Maharashtra state, India. It is one of the very few well-planned cities of India. Dhule is widely known across the country for its architecture and urban design. The town planning of this city was done by Sir Mokshagundam Visvesvaraya. Dhule is largely emerging as one of the biggest upcoming hubs of Textile, Edible oil, and Power-loom across the state and has gained a strategic advantage for being on the junction of three National Highways viz. NH-3, NH-6, and NH-211. Dhule is also a part of Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project, India's most ambitious infrastructure program, aiming to develop new industrial cities as 'Smart Cities' and converging next generation technologies across infrastructure sectors.http://www.dmicdc.com/http://delhimumbaiindustrialcorridor.com/ Dhule city is well known across the state for its quality education institutes.http://www.tourismguideindia.com/dhule(dhulia).htm Dhule is also famous for the production of pure milk. Milk cattle used to be fed with cotton pend (cattle feed made by using cotton extract), which would produce rich quality milk. Customers in Delhi once upon a time used to wait for the delivery of milk from Dhule District. Dondaicha in this district is the only town in the State to produce glucose, sugar, and other products from maize. Dhule District is also famous for production and market of chilies.Dondaicha-Warwade Dhule is located at .Falling Rain Genomics, Inc - Dhule It has an average elevation of 250 metres (787&nbsp;feet). Dhule lies in the Khandesh region, which forms the northwest corner of the Deccan Plateau. The Dhule district is bordered in the west by the Gujarat State and in the north by Madhya Pradesh along with Nandurbar, and in the east and south by Jalgaon and Nasik respectively. It is situated in a valley of the Tapi River along the banks of the Panzara River.  The Devi Ekveera (Goddess Ekveera) temple is a well known temple, situated on the banks of the Panzara river. Throughout the district the neem trees have been planted as avenue trees on roadsides. Less common is the tamarind and other trees are seldom to be found.  India census, Dhule had a population of 376,093. At the 2001 census, males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Dhule has an average literacy rate of 85%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 80% and, female literacy is 69%. 13% of the population is under 6 years of age. Until the beginning of the 19th century, Dhule was an insignificant village, subordinate to Laling, the capital of the Laling or Fatehabad  Subdivision. Under the rule of the Nizam, Laling was incorporated with the District of Daulatabad. The town passed successively through the hands of the Arab kings, the Mughals, and the Nizam, and into the power of the Peshwas about 1795. In 1803, it was completely deserted by its  inhabitants on account of the ravages of Holkar and the terrible famine of that year. In the following year, Balaji Balwant, a dependant of the Vinchurkar, to whom the parganas of Laling and Songir had been granted by the Peshwa, repeopled the town, and received from the Vinchurkar, in return for his services, a grant of inam land and other privileges. He was subsequently entrusted with the entire management of the territory of Songir and Laling, and fixed his headquarters at Dhule, where he continued to exercise authority till the occupation of the country by the British in 1818. Dhule was immediately chosen as the headquarters of the newly formed District of Khandesh by Captain John Briggs. In January 1819, he obtained sanction for building public offices for the transaction of revenue and judicial business. Artificers were brought from distant places, and the buildings were erected at a total cost of £2700. Every encouragement was offered to traders and others to settle in the new town. Building sites were granted rent free in perpetuity, and advances were made both to the old inhabitants and strangers to enable them to erect substantial houses. At this time, Captain Briggs described Dhule as a small town, surrounded by garden cultivation, and shut in between an irrigation channel and the river. The town was located on the southern bank of the Panzara River with an area of about one square mile. In 1819, the population numbered only 2509 persons, living in 401 houses. In 1863, there were 10,000 inhabitants; while by 1872 the number had further increased to 12,489, with 2620 houses. From the date of its occupation by the British, the progress of Dhule had been steady. Towards the end of the 19th century the town had already become significant trading centre due to the trade in cotton and linseed. Coarse cotton, woolen cloths and turbans were manufactured for local use around this time. In 1872, Dhule was visited by a severe flood, which did much damage to houses and property. Dhule was a cantonment town, and in year 1881 had two hospitals, telegraph and post offices. In 1873-74 there were four Government schools, with 551 pupils. Historically, the town has been divided into New and Old Dhule. In the latter, the houses were irregularly built, the majority being of a very humble description. Dhule city is renowned for its educational heritage. Dhule hosts a big number of educational institutes. Following table names a few of them: Oil cake, edible oil, fatty acids, ropes are the most exported products from the city. Dhule is emerging as one of the biggest edible oil, power-loom, and a textile clusters in the state. There are various agro, forest, plastic, chemical, and oil based industries in MIDC. It is expected that the growth of MSMEs will boost up in and around Dhule District due to its connectivity to the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project (DMIC). Dhule is well known for ‘milk-ghee’ production, maximum cultivable land, and production of groundnut, foremost in agro-based industries, leader in wind power generation.http://www.downtoearth.org.in/node/4854 Knitting units of durries and blankets are located all over the district. Agro-based industries like Daal mills, ginning and pressing are also flourishing in the district. Raw materials for paper mills, cotton mills and readymade garment industry are also available from this region. Groundnut is the district’s main crop. The district is also a major producer of ground nut, leading in the State in groundnut production. Sorghum, Spiked Millet, Sesame, Cotton, green gram are also cultivated in the district. Fruits like Banana, Guava, Papaya and melon are also cultivated. There are co-operative sugar mills at Bhadane, Sakri Taluka (Panzarkana Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana), at Shivajinagar in Shirpur Taluka (Shirpur Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana) and at Vikhurle (Dondaicha) in Shindkheda Taluka (Shindkheda Taluka Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana). Milk and milk products are the other major agricultural produce of the district. Milk chilling centres are located at Dhule City, Shirpur, and Nardana. Dondaicha in Shindkheda taluka is famous for the chilly market. There is also a Starch factory here. Many cottage industries are operational in the district. Beedi rolling, pottery, brick making, knitting saris on handlooms, oil extraction from ground nut and sesame are few of them. Wood cutting units are operated at Dhule, Shirpur and Pimpalner.https://www.manase.org/en/maharashtra.php?mid=68&smid=22&did=35&dsid=9 Many small as well as large scale industries are shaping up day by day and few of the industries set in Dhule City are enlisted below: Aagra road is the main street in the city where many important businesses/shops are located. Paach-Kandil is the main wholesale market for fruits and vegetables. Pat-bazaar is another old vegetable market near an old canal (in Marathi canal is called Pat). Suzlon Energy, which is world's fifth largest wind power companies, is developing a wind park site near Dhule. It is spread across a vast, undulating expanse. At 1,000 MW Suzlon’s Dhule wind park will be one of the largest installed facilities for the generation of wind power in the world. Being centrally located on about to complete Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project (DMIC), Safexpress has established India's largest Logistics Park in the outskirts of Dhule City on National Highway No. 6.http://www.financialexpress.com/article/pharma/pharma-ally/safexpress-opens-logistics-parks-in-dhule-and-jammu-2/60479/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LkxiLvim6IE Node- 17 of DMIC: Dhule-Nardana Investment Region (DNIR): Under proposed DMIC, high impact/ market driven nodes- integrated Investment Region (IRs) and Industrial Areas (IAs) have been identified within the corridor to provide transparent and investment friendly facility regimes. These regions are proposed to be self-sustained industrial townships with world-class infrastructure, road, and rail connectivity for freight movement to and from ports and logistics hubs, served by domestic/ international air connectivity, reliable power, quality social infrastructure, and provide a globally competitive environment conducive for setting up businesses. An Investment Region (IR) would be a specifically delineated industrial region with a minimum area of over 200 square kilometers (20,000 hectares), while an Industrial Area (IA) would be developed with a minimum area of over 100 square kilometers (10,000 hectares). 24 such nodes- 11 IRs and 13 IAs spanning across six states have been identified after wide consultations with the stakeholders i.e. the State Governments and the concerned Central Ministries. One of the proposed Investment Region (IR) under Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project (DMIC) is "Dhule- Nardana Investment Region (DNIR)" which would be located close to the intersection of three national highways namely NH-3 (Mumbai-Agra), NH-6 (Surat-Kolkata), and NH-211 (Dhule-Solapur). As this region is strategically located with respect to connectivity with ports and hinterland. Government of Maharashtra has proposed development of Textile Park at Nardana, over 600 Ha of land parcel. With an abundant supply of raw materials and human resources, this region is also strategically located for the manufacturing of textile products. It is important to note that though this region has good potential in textile/ agro-processing industries, this region has been so far unattractive to industrial investments because of drought proneness of the region and absence of requisite irrigation infrastructure in the region resulting in unemployment. As part of the successful development of the region under DMIC, there is a need to focus on ensuring requisite irrigation infrastructure for ensuring availability of water throughout the year. Reasons for selecting Dhule- Nardana Investment Region (DNIR): Keep apart proposed DNIR, snapshot of existing Dhule M.I.D.C. is as under:http://dhule.nic.in/html/industry.htm 1) Dhule Industrial Area: M.I.D.C. has planned to develop an industrial area on 400.35 Hect. of land.  About 278.08 Hect. of land has came in possession of MIDC.  MIDC has provided all the basic infrastructure such as roads, street lights, water supply pipe lines in this area. MIDC has constructed an earthen dam on Motinala to fulfill the requirement of water of the industrial area. MIDC has provided water supply scheme of 4.50 MLD capacity.  Presently the consumption of the water is about 2.20 MLD.  The rate of allotment of industrial plot is Rs. 100.00 per sqm. The Association namely "Dhule Avdhan Manufacturers Association Avadhan, Dhule" has been established for development of Industries in MIDC Dhule Industrial Area. The expansion of existing MIDC has been proposed vide Phase- II in Raver area, situated in outskirts of the city, which is having area of more than 1600 acres (643 hectares) and currently this proposal is under consideration of State Government. It is also worthwhile to note that, planned Manmad-Dhule-Indore Railway line have also been considered in the original proposal of DMIC (Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project), which will boost Industrial growth in and around city.http://www.deshdoot.com/enewspapers.php?region=Dhule&date=1428258600&id=108190http://maharashtratimes.indiatimes.com/maharashtra/jalgaon-north-maharashtra/industrial-corridor/articleshow/46832672.cms 2) Nardana Central Government sponsored Growth Centre: MIDC has planned to develop an industrial area on 750.09 Hect. of land.  About 648.56 Hect. of land has came in possession of MIDC.  The reservation of water for 4.38 MM3 per year has been granted by Irrigation Department.  MIDC has provided the water supply scheme for this industrial area.  This scheme includes Jackwell, 600&nbsp;mm dia PSC raw water rising main (13.50&nbsp;km.), 400&nbsp;mm dia PSC pure water rising main (9.50&nbsp;km.) water treatment plant of 6 MLD capacity & 1000 cum capacity ESR.  Presently MIDC is developing phase I having land 480 Hect.  MIDC has completed 7.22&nbsp;km. WBM roads, out of which asphalting of 2.10&nbsp;km road is completed.  MIDC has also provided the water supply distribution pipe lines. The rate of allotment of industrial plot is Rs. 50.00 per Sqm. Under proposed DMIC, The Nardana Textile Park is being set up 30&nbsp;km from Dhule City. The total area of the park will be approximately 648 hectares, on which 72 plots will be demarcated. The Dhule airstrip, just 30&nbsp;km away from the industrial area, will provide accessibility to the park and facilitate a quick movement of material.http://delhimumbaiindustrialcorridor.com/industrial-investments-in-maharashtra.html 3) Brahmanwel Industrial Area: MIDC has developed wind energy project on 438.00 Hect. of land & generation of energy is started from January 2002. 4) Ubharandi & Raipur Industrial Area: 158.84 Hect. of land has came in possession of MIDC & the same land is allotted to wind energy project. Dhule city is famous for its town planning since the British were ruling India and it stands third in the country, immediately after Chandigarh and Jaipur as one of the very few well planned cities in India. Town planning of Dhule has been done by Sir Mokshagundam VisvesvarayaVisvesvaraya According to sources, the only sand bed water filtration plant in India is located at Dedargaon Pool near Dhule City. Dhule is surrounded with various old heritage forts like Laling, Songir, Bhamer.http://www.deshdoot.com/news.php/news_details/4343078 Dhule has a lot to offer to tourists. The district is strewn with a number of temples, many of them ancient, which are much visited by the pilgrims. The prominent tourist attractions in the district can be found in the form of temples and forts. There are many temples in the classical Hemadpanthi-style here. Apart from the many temples, the district abounds in forts. There are numerous forts that the tourists in the district can visit. Some of the worth visiting places in Dhule are: 1) Rajwade Museum:  Sir Vishwanath Kashinath Rajwade, the great historian of Maharashtra, died on 31 December 1926, leaving behind a good collection of Sanskrit and Marathi manuscripts numbering about 3500 and also a collection of historical documents and papers. The Mandal was established on 9 January 1927 at Dhulia with the object of erecting a fire proof building to house the late Shri Rajwade’s collection for safe keep and making it available to scholars and students working in the field of history, sociology and literature. The object of building a fire proof building was achieved on 5 January 1932, when the building of Rajwade Sanshodhan Mandal was opened. The Mandal is interested in carrying out research work and publication. Soon the mandal published "Dhatu Kosh" and "Namadi Shabda Vyutpati Kosh". The Mandal runs a journal ‘Sanshodhak’ through which much of the writing of the late Rajwade has been published. The Mandal maintains a modest museum containing copper plates, coins, acroliths miniatures, painting, fine manuscript. There is also a picture gallery exhibiting large portraits of many historical personages a well as research scholars. The Mandal has a fairly good library containing books on history, philosophy, education, politics, biology etc. 2) Ekvira Mata Temple:  The Ekvira Mata temple is very famous in Dhule City. Situated on the banks of the Panjhara river, the temple houses the idol of Great Goddess Ekvira Mata, where devotees throng to offer prayers daily. The Ekvira Devi Temple is the pride of Dhule City. Here every year in Chaitrya and Ashwin month of Marathi Calendar a Yatra or Jatra is held. This is very calm and beautiful place. A big fair is held during occasion of 'Navaratri'. 3) Shri Samartha Vagdevta Mandir: The Shri Samartha Vagdevta Mandir is an invaluable and priceless treasure house of manuscripts, letters and chronicles of history importance. It is a glorious branch of the mother Institute- SATKARYOTTEJAK SABHA and is established in 1935. The founder of this institute, the late Shri. Nana-Saheb Deo then leading legal practitioner of Dhule began his work of collection, research and publication of the literature of about 300 saints. This collection is kept, preserved and studied in this institution and hence is a place of worship of the Goddess of Literature Vagdevta. This treasure of manuscripts contains researched and non-researched as well the manuscripts, papers, letters and badas. This collection is kept here to welcome the scholars, the learned and learners coming from all over the country and even from abroad. The manuscripts are in different languages and on different subjects. 4) Shiv Teerth Circle:  This a place for people's recreation which also has a statue of Shivaji and Shahid Smarak in memories of Shahid Abdul Hamid, who was Hero of Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. Shahid Abdul Hamid was posthumously awarded by the India's highest military decoration Param Vir Chakra. One of the captured Pakistani Patton tanks by him is being displayed here. 5) Gurudwara of Dhule  The place where the Guru Granth Sahib is installed and treated with due respect according to Sikh code of conduct and convention can be referred to as a Gurdwara, whether it is a room in one’s own house or a separate building. This gurudwara "Gurunanak Saheb ji" is situated on the Mumabi Agra national highway. This Gurdwara was built in the year 1965 by Late Shri Sant Baba Sadhusinghji Muni. After him, it was managed by Shri Sant Baba Niranjansinghji from Agra and now it is managed by Shri Sant Baba Dhirajsinghji. Local transportation such as auto rickshaws is available to reach to this place. Peculiar to this place is that it is open to people of all religions. The birth anniversaries of the first guru, Guru Nanakdevji and tenth guru, Guru Govindsinghji are celebrated as festivals with great enthusiasm. This Gurdwara is developed on 7 acres of land. This Gurdwara have a huge ‘Langar’ hall which is opened 24 hours a day. People from all religion & tradition visit this holy place for blessings, to offer services and to attend festival celebrations. Gurdwara has a beautiful inner golden roof with hanging Jhoomar at the centre. Gurdwara is one of the centers of attraction of the of Dhule city, situated on bypass of NH-3 near Mohadi Upnagar. People from Manmad, Amalner, Nasik and Shirdi visit in large numbers during festivals. Most people heading for Nanded take a halt at this holy place. There is a big Garden on the Gurdwara premises. Children are provided with the knowledge of Bhajan–Kirtan, spiritual learning. It is identified from a distance by tall flag-poles bearing the Nishan Sahib, the Sikh flag. 6) Laling Fort:  Dhulia is known for an old and ruined fort occupying the top of the hill, presently managed by the grandson of Malik Raja Faruqui, this fort is believed to be constructed during his reign. It is a place of considerable antiquity and the fort is supposed to have been built during the region of Malik Raja Faruqui, who subsequently granted to it to his eldest son. It was in this fort that, Nasir Khan and his son Miran Adil Khan were besieged in 1437 by the Bhanrnani general till they were relieved by an army advancing from Gujarat. Laling has also two Hemadpanti temples who are in a bad condition and a rained hemadpanti well. Present Condition of Laling Fort: Presently, Laling Fort is lying in a ruined and dilapidated state. It is now being developed as a tourist destination. The structure is maintained by the Government of India.http://trekshitiz.com/trekshitiz/marathi/Laling-Trek-L-Alpha.html Landor Bungalow, Dhule: It was originally a Government Rest House and later this cottage has become one of the most frequently visited outdoor tourist spot for the localities. It is located around 12&nbsp;km South West of Dhule City and is based on a cliff in a forest area and overhangs a beautiful waterfall based on a small stream. It is believed that, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, who was a social reformer and Independent India's first law minister and the principal architect of the Constitution of India, stayed at this place. His belongings have been preserved here till date. It is very much a quiet place to find solace from the crowded city. The surrounding forest has a pretty decent variety of birds, a pleasure for bird watchers. Proposed Butterfly Garden at Laling: Laling forest area has spread over an area of 4200 hectares and have got status of "forest region" during 2014. A very big and unique butterfly garden has been proposed in this green, calm, mountain area, which will be dedicated to different and rare species of butterflies and will be an array of displays depicting the unique life pattern, paintings, culture, and traditions of Adivasi. An artificial waterfall/ fountain shall also be formed in the center of garden. The proposed butterfly garden shall not only be interesting from the tourist's angle but also from the educational aspect so as to provide information about species of butterfly, various flowers, and shall feature Adivasi culture.http://divyamarathi.bhaskar.com/news/MAH-NMAH-JAL-be-butterfly-garden-in-jalgaon-dhule-5050958-NOR.html 7) Dhamma Sarovara :  Dhamma Sarovara, meaning Lake of Dhamma, is near the Dedargaon water plant on the Mumbai-Agra Road, occupying a very calm and peaceful 35-acre site. The Centre can presently serve about 80 students (50 male and 30 female), with a Dhamma Hall that can comfortably seat 80 and a pagoda with 40 cells. Double and triple-sharing accommodation is available. The dining hall and kitchen are presently temporary structures. 8) Gajanan Maharaj Temple: A replica of the temple of Gajanan Maharaj of Shegaon, Maharashtra has been built on Gondur Road, leading towards the airport and near the district stadium. 9) Swami Narayan Mandir/ Swaminarayan Sanstha : BAPS Swami Narayan Mandir, Dhule is one of the first things that comes to the mind of many people, while discussing Dhule. It’s true that there are quite a few other interesting things to see and do too. However, like all other attractions, the BAPS Swami Narayan Mandir in Dhule also has its own brand of unique charm. 10) Tower Garden/ Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel Udyan:  Garden for masses & good place for old people to meetup and perfect picnic spot for children's. 11) Ichhapurti Mandir: Temple of Lord Ganesh, also known as Wish fulfilling temple has been built on NH-6 towards Sakri. 12) Santoshi Mata Mandir: Temple in heart of city & Friday is observed rush period. 13) Lal Baugh Maruti Mandir: Temple of Shri Hanuman ji in heart of city. 14) Badi Jama Masjid: Place for Muslims to pray. 15) Deopur Church: Place for Christians to pray. 16) Seventh Day Adventist Church: Place for Christians to pray. 17) Sambhavnath Bhagwan Temple: Jain temple located near Shiv Teertha Circle. 18) Shai Jama alias Khuni Mosque Place for Muslims to pray. 19) Shree Vimalnath Bhagwan Tirth, Balsana, Sakri, Dhule: Pratima (Idol) of Shree Vimalnath Bhagwan was found by a farmer while ploughing his field. This 77 inches pratima was kept in the farmers house at the village Balsana, in Dhule District of Maharashtra. Param Pujya Acharya Shrimad Vijay Vidyanand Surishwarji, who was then a Muni and was in the vicinity of Dhule, heard about this. He went to Balsana and visited the farmer. Param Pujya Shree convinced the farmer to hand over the Pratima to the Jains, so that proper care and puja according to Jain Rituals could be performed. The farmer agreed. Param Pujya Shree Vidyanandji Maharaj Saheb then called a meeting of many Jain Sanghs. After careful deliberations and upon suggestions of all Jain Sanghs present, he decided and declared that Shree Shitalnath Bhagwan Sanstha, Dhule will own, build and manage temple of Shree Vimalnath Bhagwan, at Balsana. Till date this temple is owned and governed by Dhule Sangh. 20) Shirud Temple: Shirud is famous for a temple devoted to the Goddess Kali, which was built in Hemadpanthi Style. Located on the confluence of two rivers, this village lies in outskirts of city at about 21&nbsp;km on NH-211. The holy place where the Kali Devi temple is located has been declared as a protected site because of its historical importance. As per history, this temple was constructed in 1200 AD, which was later reconstructed at the time Maratha regime. Major attraction of this temple is the celebration of the famous Navratri Festival. Celebrated for almost a period of 10 days, a fair known as Jatra is held during February. 21) Anerdam Wildlife Sanctuary: Anerdam Wildlife Sanctuary is situated on southwestern range of Satpura range in Shirpur Tehsil of Dhule District. It shares boundaries with Yawal sanctuary other sanctuaries in Madhya Pradesh. The sanctuary was once very rich in wildlife, now it is trying to regain its previous status. The best time to visit the sanctuary is November to February. Common animals and birds found in this area are: -Animals: Barking Deer's, Chikaras, Hares, Porcupines and Jungle Cats. Monitor Lizard is the common reptile in this sanctuary. -Migrant Animals: Hyenas, jackals, wolves and wild boars -Birds: Peafs, qualis, partridges, egrets, herons, cormorants, corts, spot bills and owls -Migrant Birds: Brahminy Ducks, cranes, stokes and waders. 22) Songir Fort: The Songir Fort consists of an old well and a reservoir alongside the ruins of an old water system. Dhule is recognized for its Songir Fort, constructed in the year 1820 and contains inscription of Ugrasen, son of Raja Mansingh presenting the bravery of Ugrasen at its entrance gate. Songir in known for its antique fort. It was previously the chief town of Songir Sub division which was subsequently, abolished and Songir incorporated in Dhule Taluka in 1820. It is of same manufacturing importance with skilled workers in brass and copper. The historic fort has easy access and is entered through a stone gate still in good order. An inscription on this gate dated 'Shake' 1497 (1575A.D.) only state that 'Ugrasen, son of Mansingh was very brave'. Inside the fort there is a handsome old reservoir and a fine old well. Remains of broken pipes of the old water systems that must have existed on the fort in the days gone could still be seen. 23) Dedargaon Spot: Place for nature lovers. Also, a cool place for photography. 24) Gondur Garden: Place for boating. Also, a cool place to have conversations. 25) Haranmal Spot: Place for peace. Also, a cool place to chill with friends. 26) Nakane Spot: Place for water lovers. Also, a cool place to hangout with friends. 27) Gondur Tekdi: Place for singing. Also, a cool place for peace. 1) Dhule Airport: Dhule Airport (ICAO: VA53) is located at Gondur in outskirts of Dhule City. It is suitable for smaller planes due to its relatively short runway length of 1400 meters and is being used by the Bombay Flying Club for training activities. Nearby international airports are at Aurangabad (148&nbsp;km), Pune (340&nbsp;km), and Mumbai (350&nbsp;km). This airstrip was constructed in 1974 by the Public Works Department and was transferred to the Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC) after its formation in 2002. The Bombay Flying Club leased the airstrip from the MADC and shifted its training operations here in 2009 to avoid the congested air-space of Mumbai. A 150-metre-long taxiway connects the runway to a small terminal building and a hangar. No navigational aids nor night landing facilities are available on the airstrip. 2) Dhule Terminus:  Dhule Railway Station is connected to nearest Chalisgaon Junction Railway Station under Central Railways. A Dhule - Chalisgaon Passenger Train runs between the two stations four times a day. The train also carries reserved coaches for Mumbai, which are connected to another train from Chalisgaon onwards. On 15 August 1900 Dhule–Chalisgaon Railway was started. Chalisgaon - Dhule Railway Line was opened in 1900 and this lines serves between Chalisgaon (Jalgaon District) to Dhule City in the Indian state of Maharashtra. The total length of this section is 56 Kilometers, which includes a total of 7 stations. The line includes a Single Line system, with traction of Diesel. Chalisgaon is well connected by rail network to many major cities like Mumbai, Nashik, Pune, Nagpur, Manmad, Bhusawal, etc. Station code of Dhule is DHI and of Chalisgaon is CSN. Taking into account a long-pending request from the local citizens, railways have recently started Dhule–Mumbai Express (Train Number: 01152 & 01153), which will depart on 05:20 hrs of every Tuesday from Dhule Terminus reaching Mumbai CST by 13:45 hours. Request for extending services of Panchvati Express (Train Number: 12109) and Pune-Manmad Passenger (Train Number: 51401) up to Dhule Terminus (instead of Manmad) is under consideration with Central Railways.http://epaperdivyamarathi.bhaskar.com/jalgaon/dhule-city/255/07042015/0/1/http://m.indiarailinfo.com/news/post/indian-railways-news/219617http://www.deshdoot.com/news.php/news_details/4348502 3) Dhule by Road:  Dhule is one of the few cities in the Maharashtra State which is located on the junction of three National Highways viz. NH-3, NH-6, and NH-211. Through the Asian Highway project, portions of NH3 and NH6 passing through Dhule have been converted into numbered Asian Highways AH47 & AH46 respectively. There are many convenient ways to reach Dhule by road. It is approximately 160&nbsp;km from Nashik, 125&nbsp;km from Shirdi, 146&nbsp;km from Aurangabad, 261&nbsp;km from Indore, 322&nbsp;km from Pune and 324&nbsp;km from Mumbai and 503&nbsp;km from Bhopal. It is well connected with all major cities of the state and country like Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur, Nashik, Aurangabad, Kolhapur, Amravati, Solapur, Ahmedabad, Surat, Vadodara, Indore, Belgaon, Mount Abu, etc. by Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation (MSRTC) from Central Bus Stand of Dhule. Timetable of Buses  Taking into account the increased load on Central Bus Stand and traffic congestion within city, one more bus stand has been built in Deopur area, which has become fully operational from March 23, 2015. From this newly constructed Deopur Bus Stand, nearly on 118 routes buses are running on daily basis.http://epaperdivyamarathi.bhaskar.com/jalgaon/dhule/259/24032015/0/1/http://www.deshdoot.com/enewspapers.php?region=Dhule&date=1425925800&id=106420http://maharashtratimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/46519513.cms 4) Connectivity between Central Bus Stand and Deopur Bus Stand:  Central Bus Stand is connected to Deopur Bus Stand by four 25 seater mini-buses called as "Yashwanti" by MSRTC. These buses runs from Central Bus Stand to Nagav and from Deopur Bus Stand to Laling.http://deshonnati.digitaledition.in/464557/Dhule/24th-Mar-Dhule#page/9/1 5) Intra-city Connectivity: Looking at to the ongoing expansion of the city and increased population, MSRTC has planned to start City-Bus connecting towns located in outskirts to city. However, currently it is pending in the offices of Municipal Corporation and Police Department for formal approval. Under better administration of Shri Rajendra Devre (Depot controller), Dhule Division of MSRTC has ranked first in the state generating highest total revenue, supported by latest financial statements for year 2014-15. Formation of new bus-stand in Deopur has also led to increase in total number of trips to various destinations, and efforts are on for earliest resuming intra-city bus service by MSRTC.http://epaperdivyamarathi.bhaskar.com/jalgaon/dhule/259/01042015/0/1/http://epaperdivyamarathi.bhaskar.com/jalgaon/dhule/259/23052015/0/1/ 1) TarkaTeerth LaxmanShastri Balaji Joshi: TarkaTeerth LaxmanShastri Balaji Joshi was the founder of the Marathi Vishvakosh, the language encyclopaedia. He is known as a prominent litterateur, Sanskrit Pandit (scholar) and an encyclopaedic. He was born at Pimpalner in the district. He was chairperson of Maharashtra Rajya Sahitya Sanskrutik Mandal, an apex body of all Marathi literature and cultural associations. In 1973, he was awarded the National Sanskrit Pandit Award and in 1976 was felicitated by Padma Vibhushan Award by the Government of India. Adhunik Marathi Sahitya, Samiksha ani Rasasiddhant and Vaidic Sanskruticha Vikas were some of his important literary contributions. 2) Raghunath Balkrishna Kelkar: The first cartoonist of Marathi language, Raghunath Balkrishna Kelkar was born in Dhule. His first cartoon was published in the Kirloskar magazine in 1929. His cartoons are displayed in many museums the world over. 3) Janardan Maharaj Valavi: Janardan Maharaj Valavi was a great social worker with a mission for development of tribal people. Born at Mundalwad in a tribal family, he was a board member of the West Khandesh Bhil Seva Mandal, an NGO founded by Nanasaheb Thakar. In 1963, he founded the Satpura Shikshak Prasarak Mandal, a society for propagation of education. The Maharashtra State Government felicitated him with Dalit Mitra and Adivasi Sevak awards for his contributions towards development of tribal communities and backward classes. 4) Late Shri Shankar ShriKrishna Dev: Late Shri Shankar ShriKrishna Dev was born in Dhule. He discovered Shivthar Ghal in 1960, the place where Samarth Ramdas Swami wrote Daasbodh (a philosophical masterpiece).https://www.manase.org/en/maharashtra.php?mid=68&smid=22&did=35&dsid=14 5) Smita Patil: Shirpur in district is the hometown (Bhatpure- Village) of Bollywood actress Smita Patil. 6) Lata Mangeshkar's Mother (Mai): Thalner Village which comes under Shirpur tahsil, is the hometown of Smt. Shudhhamati, Lata Mangeshkar's mother, affectionately called 'Mai'. She was the daughter of Seth Haridas Ramdas Lad - a prosperous businessman of the town of Thalner. 7) Ram V Sutar: Ram Vanji SutarRam V Sutar  is an Indian sculptor. In 1999 he received the Padma Shri award and later in 2016 he received Padma Bhushan award from the Government of India. He has created more than fifty monumental sculptures in the last forty years of his career. The most well known among his works is the bust of Mahatma Gandhi that he sculpted, which is instantly recognizable worldwide, and copies of it were presented by the Government of India to other countries like France, Italy, Argentina, Barbados, Russia, England, Italy, and Argentina where they have been put on display on the occasion of the Gandhian Centenary Celebrations. 8) Vishwnath Kashinath Rajwade : Vishwanath Kashinath Rajwade was the History researcher. He was known for his deep research in Indian History. He is known as "Itihasacharya". In Dhule RSM build an museum known as Rajwade Vastu Sangrahalaya. Which contain many old documents, books and things.  On April 22, 2015, Dr. Namdev Kondiba Bhosale, native of Maan, Satara District, is appointed as a commissioner of Dhule Municipal Corporation, who is known to be unimpeachable across the state. Immediately after joining, Dr. Bhosale have taken steps towards reformation and development of the city to make it "smart-clean-green" and few of them are enlisted below: The massive and constructive steps taken by Dr. Bhosale for development of the city have been hugely applauded by citizens, workers, and various NRIs hailing from city, and he is being regarded as  modern "Naayak" as well as "Singham" amongst public. There are lot other hopes banking on Dr. Bhosale, starting city-bus service at the earliest being one of the most prominent. NH-6 in outskirts of Dhule City Shivtharghal, where Samartha Ramdas Swami wrote the book Dasbodh, was (re) discovered by Late Shri. Shankar Shrikrushna Dev, of Dhule in 1930. Agra Road in Dhule on the eve of Lakshmi-Poojan, Diwali 2007 NH-3 in outskirts Gol Police Chouki, Old AB Road, Dhule Siddheshwar Ganesh Mandir on the bank of Panjhara river in Dhule Statue of Shivaji Raje at Shiv Tirth, Dhule City Zilla Parishad, Dhule 754 MW Wind Farm at Dhule Way to Mohadi Upnagar.jpg RTO Office, Dhule Type Names Schools Chavara Vidyaniketan, Chavara English Medium School and Chavara High School ( SSC + CBSE ) Holy Child English School Garud High School Podar International School Swami Teunram High School Sadhvi Preeti Sudhaji Model School NSB Day School Maharana Pratap High SchoolK. S. K. New City High SchoolJ.R. City SchoolShree Ekvira Devi Madyamic High SchoolR. K. Chitale Madhyamik VidhyalayUnnati Madhyamik VidhyalayJai Hind High SchoolRajeev Gandhi Madhyamik VidyalayKamalabai Shankarlal Kanya ShalaJijamata Kanya High SchoolL.M. Sardar Urdu High School & Jr. CollegeHaji Badlu Sardar High SchoolSt. Xavier's Canossa Convent SchoolCanossa Convent High SchoolNew City High SchoolS.T.T.K Mahajan High SchoolR.R. Padvi Nutan High School & Jr. CollegeNorth Point High SchoolSwami Teuram High SchoolAgrasen Maharaj High SchoolNavjeewan English Medium SchoolSindhuratna Sanstha's English SchoolLittle Angels NurserySant Shri Asharamji Gurukul />st.annsWKDSPM's Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar High School  Nanasaheb Z.B. Patil High School, Deopur Dhule. Colleges Jai Hind Junior College of Arts, Commerce and Science Z.B. Patil College, Dhule (Formerly, Jai Hind College Of Arts, Science & Commerce)SSVPS's College NIT ( Nikam Institute Of Technology )L.M. Sardar Urdu Jr. College Vidya Vardhini College Palesha College of Commerce Institute of Management Education (Palesha Campus) Sanmati Educational Trust's Institute of Information Technology, Deopur, Dhule WKDSPM's Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Memorial College of Law, Dhule  Engineering Colleges SSVPS College of Engineering and PolytechnicSES College of EngineeringGangamai College of EngineeringGovernment Polytechnic Industrial Training of institute Mukesh Patel Technology Park - Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies (Shirpur Campus) Mukesh Patel School of Technology Management & Engineering School of Pharmacy & Technology Management Medical Colleges Shri Bhausaheb Hire Government Medical CollegeJMF's ACPM Medical CollegeJMF's ACPM Dental College Others College of Agriculture, DhuleSSVPS's Lalit Kala Mahavidhyalay [Fine Art College] Annasaheb Ramesh Ajmera College of Pharmacy  KMRC's Bss Community College M/s. Suzlon Energy Limited M/s. Safexpress Group M/s. Sanjay Cotton Seed Inds. Ltd. M/s. Sinic Group M/s. Ujwal Automotives Pvt Ltd. M/s. Shree J M Industries M/s. Maharashtra Extraction Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Deesan Agro Tech. Ltd. M/s. Om Shree Agro Tech Ltd. M/s. Lazeez Frozen Foods Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Everonn Steel And Power Ltd. M/s. The Kisan Sahkari Starch Manufacturing M/s. Jawahar Shetkari Sah. Soot Girni Ltd. M/s. R. M. Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Laurel Wires Ltd. M/s. Isuta Electronics (India) Ltd. M/s. Jain Industries M/s. Suyog Industries M/s. Five Star Weighing Systems M/s. Nitiraj Engineers Private Limited M/s. Ram Poly Industries M/s. Laural Wires Limited Being located close to the intersection of NH-6, NH-3 and NH-211, this region enjoys advantage of excellent connectivity to ports and hinterland. With abundant supply of raw materials and human resources, this region has wide potential for setting up of manufacturing units for textile products. Dhule Airport is also located close to the proposed region. This region is served by the major rive basin formed by Tapi Riverhttp://delhimumbaiindustrialcorridor.com/dmic-maharashtra.htmlhttp://www.ilfsindia.com/downloads/bus_rep/DMIC_brief.pdfhttp://dipp.nic.in/English/Schemes/DMIC/About_DMIC.aspx Complete ban on usage of plastic bags having thickness of less than 50 microns Searching and discontinuation of illegal tap connections Recovery of old dues along with penalties on property taxes, so as to increase revenue generation Cleaning of Panjhara river basin, tree plantation, and adornment of city Solid waste management Demolition of encroachments and displacement of illegal hawkers occupying Agra Road, known to be busiest path in market Development of garbage depot at Varkhedi road Revival of municipal corporation from financial crisis Recovery of LBT from traders Optimised use of high-mast lamps to save on electricity bills Underground sewage treatment plant E-Governance Cyber Connectivity Dhule City Gov. Site Dhule.biz Dhule Online News Website DhuleCity.info Shirpur.in information about Shirpur
