   Dick and Dom in da Bungalow is a CBBC entertainment television series presented by the duo Dick and Dom (Richard McCourt and Dominic Wood). The series was broadcast on weekend mornings on various BBC television channels for five series, running between 31 August 2002 and 11 March 2006. Much of the programme revolved around a loose game show format involving studio contestants (or Bungalow Heads). Points were earned through success in various games throughout the show, although points could be awarded or taken away at any time by the hosts. Although they threatened to do this, for example, when a particular child was being troublesome, this was mostly never carried out. Occasionally, at the end of the show, a phone call was taken from The Almighty Kid. The Almighty Kid's identity was unknown, but changed each time they called. The Almighty Kid could award or take away points from one Bungalow Head for no reason at all. He could also decide to cover them in "creamy muck muck". The first and second prizes were usually desirable items such as a TV or games console, but the third prize was always a 'booby prize' like a hubcap, a cake made of carpet, a hairy cheese, bottled water from the River Hull or a chocolate tea pot. At the very end, the Bungalow Head with the least points was gunged, sitting on the toilet - though for the last series this practice was largely dropped, possibly because the contestants were already covered in "creamy muck muck" as the finale round (itself featuring parodies of other TV game shows). The show's games were broken up by random features and cartoons. During Series 1 to 4, the points total at the end of Saturday - with an extra prize for the winner on Saturday - was carried over to the Sunday show, and prizes were awarded at the end of that show. Each week, Dick and Dom had a famous celebrity's picture on a picture frame with a moving mouth. One week, for example, the picture in the frame was of Tony Blair. Usually the person in the frame said something silly, for example when Noel Edmonds was in the frame and started singing "I'm Roly, I'm Poly...", or Michael Parkinson said 'Wiggity wiggity wah!'. Series 5 saw the picture frame being used less than in previous series and in addition, there were attempts to implement numerous tricks with the picture frame, including firing gunge and pushing out small objects like bouquets of flowers. e.g. when Huw Edwards was in the picture frame he said "News just in, this just out" before the person operating the mouth hosed gunge out of his mouth. In accordance with UK children's television tradition, many games involved the participants being gunged. This was particularly true of the final game of every show, and the final end game is called Creamy Muck Muck. Creamy Muck Muck was always played just before the end of every Saturday show. Throughout the series, the precise theme varied. The games were sometimes presented by the other members of the cast - Dave Chapman, Ian Kirby and Melvin O'Doom. If not, then they were featured somewhere in the background, often chucking "creamy muck muck" (custard) at whoever was currently answering a question. Bungalow Heads were also equipped with their own buckets of muck muck, which they could flick at each other. Towards the end, the words "Go! Go! Go!" were shouted (usually by Dick) and a gunge-fest began, accompanied by the song "Ace of Spades" by Motörhead. There followed a minute's frenetic creamy muck muck throwing, as a lead into the end of the show. By the end of the process, it was extremely rare to see anything or anyone on the set not completely covered in "muck muck". During Series 1 to 4 (2002–2005), there was no precise nature or specific theme to Creamy Muck Muck, except for its ending. It has seen simple pie throwing in earlier series, various sport based themes, a murder mystery, and many where they have pretended that they were not going to be throwing muck muck. For the end of Series 3, there was a surprise This Is Your Muck Muck sketch (a spoof of This Is Your Life), which involved many of Dick and Dom's family and friends, In Series 4 a Creamy Muck Muck bingo game was hosted by Dancing Brian (Played by Ian Kirkby. For Series 5 (2005–2006), the theme was normally a parody of a traditional game show, most of which aired many years earlier, long enough for the contestants not to be old enough to know them. In whatever format the game took, the current 1st, 2nd and 3rd placed Bungalow Heads (The Prize Winners) competed against the 4th, 5th and 6th placed Bungalow Heads (The Prize Losers). If the Prize Winners won, then they would keep their current positions, and win the three prizes on offer. If the Prize Losers won, then they became the new 1st, 2nd and 3rd, and take the prizes off the previous Prize Winners. Featured gameshow parodies included Catchphrase,  Blockbusters, Telly Addicts, Name That Tune, The Crystal Maze, Call My Bluff, Countdown and Deal or no Deal. The Forfeit Auction was featured on the Sunday editions of Dick and Dom in da Bungalow. Dick and Dom had "traditional" culinary objects to throw at the Bungalow Heads. Dick dressed up as 'Tomdickunharry', a Cockney geezer, and auctioned forfeits "for hard earned bungalow points, to stitch up your bungalow mates". His catchphrase was "Alright me darlin's?" Usually, these forfeits included a Bungalow Head being covered in different foods, known as 'the usual', including Creamy Muck-Muck and 'Dirty Norris' (originally a Marmite-like substance, later replaced by chocolate custard), chopped tomatoes and mushy peas. The forfeits were of two types: the first that was auctioned was usually a task for a Bungalow Head that lasted the whole show, for example 'The Clockwork Kid', or 'The Caveman Kid'. The second involved a Bungalow Head dressing up and being covered in the items explained above. For example, in one instance where a Bungalow Head was transported back to Victorian London, he had to ask for more from characters like "Jack The Let One Ripper", "Florence Nightingale", "Victorian Barry Manilow" and "Queen Victoria" (who made him king). For series 5, due to the reduction in broadcast time, only the messy forfeit remained. Also 'blind bidding' was introduced where the Bungalow Heads would write their bids down, this was done to help save time. At the end of the final Sunday episode (5 March 2006), 'Tomdickunharry' revealed himself to have been Dick all along on-screen. The Baby Race started in series 4 and continued through to series 5. In the game, six babies and their parents were brought into the studio. Each parent sat at one end of a mat and the first baby to get from one parent to the other was the winner. Usually the parent on the far side held an object or toy that the baby liked, or found interesting. The race was treated much like a horse race (to get points the Bungalow Heads had to bet on which baby they thought would win) up to and including the humorous commentary where other 'race tracks' are referred to as if baby racing was a popular sport. During one of the races in the fifth series, a baby stopped crawling and took their first steps live on the show. On the final ten Saturday shows Dick and Dom replayed their favourite games on the bungalow ever. These were: Some other games featured include: Bungalow Features normally took place outside the Bungalow, and were shown in short film segments during the show. They were mostly for entertainment purposes and had no bearing on the points totals of the Bungalow Heads. These included Dick and Dom's Dirty Day in which the two competed to get as messy as possible with help from the general public, Public Transport in which Dick and Dom had to be transported somewhere via the public, for example via piggy backs or being carried. The most infamous part of Dick and Dom in da Bungalow was a pre-recorded game called Bogies. In this game, Dick and Dom situated themselves in a quiet public place such as a museum or restaurant and took turns to shout "bogies" at gradually increasing volumes, until one of them did not shout as loud as the other (judged by the Bogeyometer, or Snotometer, which appears on screen to rank the bogey), or quit due to embarrassment. Variants of this game, such as Pro-Celebrity Bogies - involving a challenge from a minor celebrity to Dick or Dom - were seen in Series 5. Series 4 also included Premier League Bogies, which involved playing the game in extremely intense circumstances, such as a during a performance of a play in a theatre, and during a session of yoga. Euro Bogies saw the game being played in prominent places throughout continental Europe, often resulting in Dick and Dom being ejected from the premises involved.  The term used for "bogies" in French was "crotte de nez" (literally "nose droppings"), and in Italian "moccio" (Italian for "snot"). The feature attracted some controversy outside of its target audience, mainly due to the public nature of the game and concerns over imitation by the show's young audience.http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/4723470.stm The commentary for Bogies was provided by the show's producer, Steve Ryde. Inside the Bungalow was a large purple cupboard, and once or twice during each show, away from the attention of Dick, Dom and the Bungalow Heads, the cupboard doors would open to show the adventures of Diddy Dick and Dom. These were short pre-recorded sketches, no more than a minute in length, with Dick and Dom donning black clothes and attaching a small puppet's body around their necks. Both Diddy Dick and Diddy Dom spoke with very squeaky voices, edited in post production. The sketches involving Diddy Dick and Diddy Dom tended to be either slapstick humour, puns or, more often than not, toilet humour. Eamonn Holmes was a guest inside the cupboard on two occasions, both times appearing as a head inside Diddy Dick and Dom's TV. According to the final episode, Diddy Dick and Dom left the cupboard to go to Hollywood. It was not until the final episode that Dick and Dom discovered their Diddy counterparts, and reacted in exaggerated terror. "Eeny Meeny Macka Racka Rare Are Dominacka Shickeypoppa Dickywhoppa Om Pom Stick" took place in the streets of a random town. It involved Dick and Dom placing stickers of their own faces of increasing size on the backs, or other places, of unsuspecting members of the public. The game was over when a member of the public discovered that they had been a victim, and the loser was the one who placed that sticker. Classic strategies of ensuring a successful "lay" (sticker placement) involved asking members of the public for the time, and as they turned giving them a tap on the small of their back, thus delivering the sticker. Hoods of coats were also a common target. Commentary was provided by "Alan Sanchez" (Ian Kirkby) in a very convincing Northern Irish accent, who often became excited about any attempts at a "lay-on-lay" - where Dick or Dom placed a sticker on top of an existing sticker placed by their opponent. The game returned for Series 5 (with the name misspelled as Eeny Meeny Macka Racka Rari Dominacka Shickapappa Dickapoppo Om Pom Stick) and it saw some remarkable "lays", including a very large sticker on a pregnant woman's stomach, and a large sticker on a businessman's tie. Until Series 5 of 'Da Bungalow', each week a short, five-minute feature would be shown of the travels of  'next door's cat', who would visit the Bungalow to recount the tales of his adventures. The Cat has never been named. It was puppeteered and voiced by Dave Chapman, with a gruff West Yorkshire accent. The film was normally a short segment about a town, full of irreverent comments about the people and the monuments that the Cat came across. Such towns included Uckfield, Ely, Goring-on-Thames, Sandwich, Wetwang, Letchworth, Pangbourne and Stoke-on-Trent, a song about which was one of the highlights of the third series. Cat's Britain was also referred to as 'The Pussycat's Travels' in the fourth series of the show. This feature was repeated on Sundays in the fifth series, with the Cat claiming he visited the same places again, met the same people and made exactly the same films. This short lived feature during series 5 followed Dick and Dom's neighbour, The Prize Idiot (played by Lee Barnett), in his attempts to get a job. He tried several professions—including being a farmer, a librarian, a baker, an airline steward for Jet2.com—without much success and invariably being let go at the end of the day. Towards the end of the programme, the Bungalow Head with the fewest bungalow points had to do "The Pants Dance", in which he or she danced with a pair of underpants on the head, singing: I've got my head in my pants  I'm in a groovy disco trance  They were clean on just last week  Yeah, yeah baby, look at me  You gotta dance in your pants  Just like they do in France  You gotta take a chance  And do the knickers on your noodle prance  And dance in your pants! Although the second line is "I'm in a groovy disco trance", Dick & Dom sing the line "I've got a groovy disco trance". This has previously been brought up on the show. And loads more silliness dance crazes. The show also featured a wide variety of characters. While some were one off characters, appearing as part of the games or features, others made regular appearances. These multitude of characters were usually played  Da Bungalow's resident actors; Dave Chapman, Ian Kirkby, Melvin Odoom and Lee Barnett, along with Dick and Dom themselves. In a somewhat Monty Python style, the six actors would portray majority of the outrageous characters appearing in the show, including the females (dressed in drag). Additionally Steve Ryde, the series producer provided several voiceovers for the show, though he never appeared on screen. Some recurring characters included: The first two series were broadcast on the CBBC Channel in 2002/3, with each programme lasting three hours (9am-12pm, and repeated later the same day from 1-4pm). Recommissioned for 2003/4, the show was cut to two hours on both days. Series 3, beginning on 20 September 2003, saw the Saturday edition moved to BBC One, replacing The Saturday Show for six months of the year. However, the Sunday edition remained only on the CBBC Channel. The new series saw many new characters being introduced, some of which became regulars to the show. At the start of the series they tried a number of ways of bringing in the prizes before using the Prize Idiot.  A number of other short-term characters, used mainly for just one game were played by both Dick and Dom.  The basement set was used as an alternative place for some of the games, as well as containing a celebrity 'locked up' in the cage. Series 4, broadcast 2004/2005, retained the same format as the previous series. Notable additions to this series was the addition of an attic to the bungalow, which was mainly used for the 'Drop Your Guts' game (see games section). During this series, the Sunday edition switched from live to pre-recorded production. During the week leading up to Red Nose Day 2005, a short spin-off series was produced allowed six celebrities each day into their bungalow to raise money for Comic Relief. The programme was broadcast live from Monday 7 March to Thursday 10 March 2005 at 4:30pm on BBC One and at 6:00pm on BBC Two. A highlights compilation was aired on Friday 11 March 2005 on the CBBC Channel. Series 5 started broadcasting on 10 September 2005, and saw many noticeable changes. The Saturday edition remained two hours long on both BBC One and the CBBC Channel; however, the Sunday edition was cut to one hour on the CBBC Channel. Most of the games were changed, and some features were removed. Other significant changes to this series saw the bungalow getting a garden, which replaced the basement set. Additionally, Series 5 saw the replacement of the sixth child Bungalow Head with an adult replacement. On Saturday the final Bungalow Head was a celebrity, and on Sunday it tended to be someone who the other Bungalow Heads knew (e.g. relative, teacher, etc.). This drew some controversy as Dick and Dom previously mentioned that one of the main "rules of The Bungalow" was that no celebrities were allowed in. This rule was seemingly forgotten after Series 4. From the beginning of 2006, the Saturday show was moved to BBC Two while the BBC experimented with their Saturday morning lineup - BBC Two shows were moved to BBC One in return. The final episode was broadcast live on BBC Two on Saturday 11 March 2006. From the end of the previous Sunday and throughout the final episode they built up to the big finale, which involved all the cast members singing a song and getting covered in "creamy muck muck". Then, for the first time ever, viewers were shown the outside of the bungalow, which subsequently collapsed under creamy muck muck before being kicked over by a giant foot. A final post-credits scene shows that the whole show was actually just a dream that the "Big BBC Boss" (Alan Yentob) was having. The episode ends with him waking up in bed and saying to the camera, "Oh, what a terrible dream!" Dick and Dom then sit up either side of him and end the show with a theatrical cackle, as a homage to the finale of Newhart. Highlights shows of Dick and Dom were shown the next day and on the following weekend. Further highlights compilations are broadcast the next day and over the following weekend. In 2004 the programme was the subject of a reprimand by media watchdog Ofcom after a viewer complained that Dom's T-shirt with the slogan "Morning Wood" referred to a state of male sexual excitement (rather than "(good) Morning (Dominic) Wood").OFCOM Programme Complaints Bulletin, 20 September 2004 regarding 'Morning Wood'. The show was further investigated for a second time in the same year by Ofcom, after a parent (whose son appeared as one of the show's 'Bungalowheads') complained that his son was "ridiculed" by the presenters and unfairly gunged after he lost a game. However, the complaint was rejected on the grounds that the boy's parents were already aware about the programme's format and had willingly given their consent for the boy to participate. On 17 January 2005 the programme was debated in parliament when Peter Luff (Conservative MP for Mid Worcestershire) attacked it for its "lavatorial" content.Parliament debate, criticism by Peter Luff MP  Referring to the show's web site, he invited the Culture Secretary to "join me in playing How Low Can You Bungalow, a test to see your response to grossly embarrassing personal situations, largely of a lavatorial nature; Pants Dancers in the Hall of Fame, photos of children with underwear on their heads; Make Dick Sick, a game which I think speaks for itself; and finally Bunged Up, in which you play a character in a sewage system avoiding turtles' poos coming from various lavatories". He added, "Is that really the stuff of public service broadcasting?" Additionally, 40 people complained about the last episode of series 4. During the finale, Richard McCourt was seen to give birth to a countless number of babies, though they were dolls covered in "muck muck". The main rule of "da Bungalow" for most of its run was that there were no celebrities allowed, except for Comic Relief and the final series. The lack of celebrity was symbolised in earlier series by the presence of a minor, and often somewhat cult, celebrity, locked up in a cage in the dungeon of the Bungalow. In later series, the celebrity would sit in the attic. In both cases they would say nothing and often do nothing. Some people who have been in the cage or the attic included Vince Earl, Sarah Greene, John Kettley, Hugo Myatt (as Treguard from Knightmare [ ]), Su Pollard, Bodger and Badger, and Peter Simon. For the final series, however, this rule was changed, and five Bungalow Heads were joined by a Celebrity Bungalow Head. The first celebrity to enter the Bungalow was Rachel Stevens, who refused to take part in the show's Creamy Muck Muck finale, Muckversity Challenge. Reports at the time suggested that the presenters have banned Stevens from any live broadcast they do in the future. Comic Relief in Da Bungalow In order of appearance; Pro Celebrity Bogies In order of appearance; (* indicates they won the game) Series 5 In order of appearance; On 18 October 2004, a DVD and Video was released under the title Dick and Dom in Da Bungalow - The Dirty Norris Files.  This contains several 'best of' clips from the third series of the show. On 30 April 2006 Dick and Dom did a show for the charity Myeloma UK, [ ], in the Bloomsbury Theatre, London There were two shows (one at 2pm and another at 5pm), which consisted of games from the show including the Outboard Motor Gob Game, Sloppy Ploppy Choosy Pops and the Cereal Race. The 5pm show was filmed and is available on DVD. Short five-minute compilations of the Diddy Dick and Dom sketches were aired as filler programmes on BBC Two and the CBBC Channel after the programme's demise. A new series of compilations began airing during weekday mornings on BBC2 from  Monday 26 January to Friday 20 February 2009 featuring newly recorded material from the original cast and the creamy muck muck finale towards the end of each episode. Regular segments included: Notice the deliberate spelling mistake in the title (Dairies-Diaries), which is pointed out in the final episode of Da Dick and Dom Dairies. Make Dick Sick (or Make Dom Vom) Musical Splatues Do Not Laugh Or You Will Lose Heads Shoulders Knees and Toast Don't Go Daddy Fairly Hairy Fizzogs The Mucky Puddle Power Shower Game Sweet Face The Bungalow Small Change Hunt What A Sweaty Flap A Question Of Muck Baby Race Baldy Slap Heads Balloon Bang-a-Bang Bangers and Dash Barky Cluckinson's Alfresco Pie Challenge Blind Man's Buff Man Bogey Cars Bogies Brum Brum Ding Ding Sing Sing Bungalow Battle Bots (including many variations of this game) Bungalow Boffin (where they played a game invented by a viewer) Bungalow Bingo (but in a later series called Creamy Muck Muck Bingo) Bungalow Head Bungalow Heads Bungalow Head Household Appliances Bungalow Rodeo Cat Mad Do Caution! Wet Wildlife Celebrity Two Word Tango (later appeared as a feature on The Chris Moyles Show on BBC Radio 1) Cereal Race Creamy Muck Muck DC Harry Batt's Interrogation Game Do I Know You Or Snot? Do Not Laugh or You Will Lose Don't Drop Your Guts / Don't Drop The Sausage Don't Go Daddy (later series called Don't Go Mummy) Don't Turn Off The TV Daddy Euugghhhh... Yum Yum Eeenymeanymackerrackerraridominackashickapoppadickywhopperrompomstick [Series 5 It was called Eeenymeanymackerrackerraridominackashickapoppadickapoppaompomstick] Fat On Your Back Ferrity Trousers Get Out Of That! Grasping Rasping Wrinklies Harry Batt's Interrogation Game Make Dick Sick (or Make Dom Vom as seen in the last ever episode) Melvin Odoom's Gurn Baby Gurn Musical Buckets Mince Pie Mouthfuls Muck or No Muck? Muck Spell Musical Splatues My Gang Nae Body Move Nae Buzzy Move Painty Painty Paint Paint Painty Paint Paint Pop My Saggy Bags Pumpy Rumpy Push Plop Protein Question Muck (A Spin-off Version of Question Time (TV series)) Raymond Farmer's Farmyard Races Repetition Competition Run Prize Idiot Run Santa's Sack Race Shave and Vac Short Change Hunt Sloppy Feet Snot Danglies Splat and Scatter Strictly Come Muck Muck (A Spin-off Version of Strictly Come Dancing) That's the Stuff The All Electric Granny Snog Quiz The Big Bad Blooming Bungalow Bonus Bonanza Banging Booty Break Game The Crying Game The Crystal Muck The Dubbing Game The Electric Granny Snog Game The Mash Potato Grandad Snowman Game The Mucky Puddle Power Shower Game The Weakest Muck Muck (Spin-off of The Weakest Link) There's a Face in My Bucket There's a Famous Face in My Bucket (with the end face tending to represent Rachel Stevens ) Toddler Tug of War Translation Game Tricky Training Two Word Tango Wappy Feet (Variations include hoppy and sloppy feet) What a Sweaty Flap What's In The Box Watch Out, Yeti's about X-Mas Factor Muck Muck (A Spin-off Version Of The X-Factor) Yes I Have Trifle* Trousers (* or mini-meringue, or pies, or jelly and ice cream-birthday cake etc.) You'll Never Do That With a Carcass On Your Hands Yum Yum Yack Bungalow World Record Attempt Dirty Day Public Transport Strangely talented The Butt Dance The Wee Wee Dance The Energy Walk Dance Melvin Odoom, a breakdancer and a regular extra who played many characters and was referred to by Dick and Dom as "tomorrows star". He famously replaced Rachel Stevens on the first edition of Series 5 when she refused to take part in the Creamy Muck Muck finale. It was an open joke that many of the characters where in fact played by Melvin, despite his efforts to conceal his identity. He was the only actor who was mentioned by his actual name. DC Harry Batt (sometimes DI or DCI Harry Batt), a policeman with a broad Geordie accent (played by Ian Kirkby), known for his catchphrase "Ner body move!", who would address crimes in the Bungalow. One notable example in when during a game of "That's the stuff" in which Dick, Dom or one of the regulars had to eat copious amounts of disgusting items, Dom replaced Garlic Mayonnaise with yoghurt. DI Batt uncovered this (in reality he was stitched up by a crew member) and for the rest of the series, Batt would randomly appear to try and force Dom to consume mayonnaise. It was not until the very last episode where he gained success by forcing Dom to eat a mixture of disgusting foods. Another game led by Harry Batt was "The Interrogation Game", where Bungalow Heads gained 20 points every time they said a secret word. But, if Batt detected the word they would not get the points and would have to perform "the pants dance" (a humiliating dance with underpants on their head). The Prize Idiot, played by Lee Barnett. The next door neighbour of Dick and Dom's bungalow. As the name implied, the character often came out with strings of logical errors and tautologies. Most notably, in series 5, he starred in the regular sketch, "Prize Idiot on the Job". Here he would take on a seemingly normal job, such as a baker or a librarian, in an idiotic manner. Diddy Dick and Dom are miniature versions of Dick and Dom, who live in the eponymous duo's cupboard. They appeared in short five minute filler sketches where they fight, dance, argue, burp, fart and get themselves into various other comical situations. They were portrayed by Dick and Dom with their real heads on puppet bodies, speaking high pitched voices. Raymond, played by Ian Kirkby. Three different incarnations, of the character appeared being named Raymond Duck, Raymond Farmer, and Raymond Newsreader respectively. This character often provided links between cartoons that had been split in two, often commenting on the action, in the style of a news program. Raymond Farmer was also involved in several games in earlier series. In the Raymond Newsreader sketches, Bungalow regulars such as Melvin Odoom were invited to discuss the severity of the situation (relating to the cartoons) and often cartoon characters' self-proclaimed biggest fans would make an appearance. Tomdickunharry, the cockney auctioneer of the Forfeit Auction (played by Richard McCourt). Known for his catchphrase "Alright me darlins!", he often appeared in ludicrous fashion, such as from underneath a cow or out of a golden statue. He was always dressed in a flat cap and overcoat with large hammer and at the end of each skit, he would say "I've had enough of this, I'm going on the other side to have a bath". It was a long running joke that Tomdickunharry was in fact Dick in disguise but nobody, including Dom, knew. In the final episode Dick finally revealed that it was him all along, much to Dom's surprise. The Cat, a puppet cat operated and voiced by Dave Chapman who appeared in his own travel featurette entitled, "Cat's Britain", where he would visit often very obscure locations. He also regularly appeared from behind the cat-flap, and other locations, usually singing a song or receiving abuse from Dick and Dom. The Toilet Turtle, a green, cockney, puppet Turtle who lived down the Bungalow's WC. Whenever a Bungalow Head, Dick or Dom went to use the Lavatory, The Toilet Turtle would emerge from it and tell an often corny joke, laughing after every punch line. Whoever was planning to use the toilet would then go on to hit him repeatedly over the head with a huge mallet, until he gave in and disappeared back down the toilet. Toni and Tony, a vulgar married couple played by Dick and Dom, who are often arguing. They are always dressed in their wedding clothes and are addicted to wedding cake. The Talking Pictures, usually photographs of celebrities  that hung on the wall. They have cardboard moving mouths, making them appear to speak. Voiced by various members of the cast, the pictures provide running commentary as well as delivering punchlines and wisecracks. Death played by Dave Chapman. Often appearing on the show, Death was shown to have a rather gentle disposition despite his fearsome reputation. He most notably took part in the running gag "The Balloon of Doom", where one of the Bungalow Heads would have to pop a balloon filled with creamy muck muck. Various other non speaking characters where also staple of the show, including; The Burping Reindeer (a wall mounting reindeer's head that burped) who was later replaced by The Croc, a crocodile head, that spewed a brown watery substance from his mouth (a running gag included many Bungalow heads being tricked into "kissing the croc", resulting them getting soaked); Barky Cluckinson, a bizarre chicken-dog hybrid creature who appeared along with his cohort, a horse named Bumface Jones; and Mr Choosy, a character with a balloon for a head. Mr Choosy was a particularly popular character, his routine was to come in then run around to his theme song and burst his head with a pin with different substances coming out, such as glitter or "muck muck". Brian Conley Fearne Cotton Rowland Rivron Siân Lloyd Ed Byrne Michelle Heaton Andy Scott-Lee Antony Worrall Thompson Pooja Shah Colin McAllister Justin Ryan Sheila Ferguson Kirsten O'Brien Chris Calhoun Gina Yashere Tom Fletcher Danny Jones Dougie Poynter Iwan Thomas Lisa Scott-Lee Will Mellor Chris Parker Fran Cosgrave Timmy Mallett Rachel Stevens Rupert Grint* Craig Doyle Carol Vorderman Sara Cox* Chris Moyles* Lady Isabella Hervey John McCririck Jodie Marsh* Keith Harris and Orville Lisa Scott-Lee Dani Harmer* Rachel Stevens Eugene Sully Paul Danan Dani Harmer Andy McNab Gina Yashere Kate Lawler Adam Woodyatt Al Murray Tony Christie David Grant Keith Bishop Ryan Moloney Freddie Starr Bobby Davro Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen Brian Conley Julia Winter Oliver Skeete Charlie Higson Fearne Cotton David Schneider Lizo Mzimba Sara Cox Dick & Dom In Da Bungalow: Da Book 2006 (book) Dick & Dom In Da Bungalow: Da Book 2007 (book) Dick & Dom's Joke Book (book) Dick & Dom's Guide to Life (book) Dick and Dom's Mucktivity Book (book) Dick & Dom's Doodle Book (book) Dick & Dom's Stinky Sleepover Kit (book) Dick and Dom Funfax (Funfax) Dick & Dom In Da Bungalow: Muck-azine (released by DeAgostini) Dick & Dom Birthday Cards (6 different cards) Da Board Game (Bungalow board game) Dick & Dom in da Bungalow Music CD (Audio CD - 2 discs) Game or No Game in which Little Noely (a parody of Noel Edmonds played by Ian Kirkby who appeared in the Bungalow on two occasions) presents a parody of Deal or No Deal in order to determine whether or not a game will be shown or not. Little Noely invited viewers to pick one of two boxes. We are led to believe that if the "No Game" box is picked the show will end. If the "Game" box is picked the name of the game shown in the box is played. Good Game Good Game Gamey Game Game in which parodies of Bruce Forsyth and Tess Daly pick random cards each enlisting a game until a pair is found. The game which is the subject of the pair is subsequently shown, after "Bruce" says "What do we do with a pair?" and "Tess" says something like "Eat it!" (referring to the fruit). For some reason in this feature Tess Daly is just a mini spinning cardboard cut out which talks with a gruff northern accent. Batt Files in which Harry Batt interrogates former Bungalow Heads and relieves classic Bungalow moments. The Prize Idiot also features who we are now told is a Police Constable working for DI Batt. Good Bungalows Go Bad - Melvin O Doom features in a sketch in which he relieves some of his personal favourite Bungalow moments. BBC: Da Dick and Dom Diaries audio/video clips, schedule of reruns Dick and Dom at Saturday Mornings Da Bungalow Online fan site
