   Dinesh Joseph D'Souza (; born April 25, 1961) is an Indian-American political commentator, author, and practitioner of Christian apologetics. D'Souza is affiliated with a number of conservative organizations and publications, including the American Enterprise Institute, the Heritage Foundation, the Hoover Institution, and Policy Review. In 2010–2012, he served as president of The King's College, a Christian school in New York City. Born in Bombay, D'Souza came to the United States as an exchange student, graduating from Dartmouth College. He became a naturalized citizen in 1991. He is the author of several New York Times best-selling books, including on Christian apologetics, such as What's So Great About Christianity and Life After Death: The Evidence. D'Souza has also been a critic of New Atheism. In 2012, D'Souza released 2016: Obama's America, a documentary film based on his 2010 book The Roots of Obama's Rage. Both posit that Barack Obama's attitude toward America derives from his father's anti-colonialism and from a psychological desire to fulfill his father's dream of diminishing the power of Western imperial states.  The film has been the highest-grossing conservative documentary film produced in the United States.Grady Smith, "How 2016: Obama's America became a box office hit – and where it goes from here", Entertainment Weekly, August 28, 2012 In January 2014, D'Souza was indicted on charges of making illegal political contributions to a 2012 United States Senate campaign, a felony under U.S. law.David Millward, "Right wing critic of Obama accused of campaign offences", Telegraph (24 January 2014); Daniel Beekman, "Political pundit Dinesh D’Souza cops plea to making illegal campaign donations", New York Daily News (20 May 2014); Jonathan Mahler, "Heady Summer, Fateful Fall for Dinesh D’Souza, a Conservative Firebrand", New York Times (24 July 2014). On May 20, 2014, D'Souza pled guilty in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York to a charge of using "straw donors" to make illegal political campaign donations. On September 23, D'Souza was sentenced to eight months in a halfway house near his home in San Diego, five years probation, and a $30,000 fine. D'Souza was born in Bombay in 1961. His parents were Roman Catholics from GoaProfiles of eminent Goans, past and present (1997), J. Clement Vaz, Concept Publishing Company, ISBN 9788170226192, p. 332 in Western India: his father, an executive of Johnson & Johnson; his mother, a housewife.Helen Zia, "Notable Asian Americans", 1995, p 72  D'Souza attended the Jesuit St. Stanislaus High School in what then was Bombay.Chidanand Rajghatta, "Indian-American scholar's anti-Obama film storms US box-office", The Economic Times, 29 August 2012 He graduated in 1976 and completed his 11th and 12th years at Sydenham College, also in Bombay.Dinesh D'Souza biography, St. Stanislaus Ex-Students Association He went to the United States as an exchange student in 1978 through a Rotary International program. He attended Patagonia Union High School in Patagonia, Arizona. He attended Dartmouth College, where he graduated with a B.A. in English in 1983 and was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa Society. At Dartmouth, D'Souza became the editor of a monthly called The Prospect. The paper and its writers ignited much controversy during D'Souza's editorship by, among other things, criticizing the College's affirmative action policies. He was also a writer for The Dartmouth Review, an independent student publication subsidized by alumni and organizations not affiliated with Dartmouth College. After his time in Dartmouth, D'Souza moved to Washington, D.C., where he served from 1985 to 1987 as an editor of Policy Review, a journal then published by The Heritage Foundation (and since acquired by the Hoover Institution). In his  September 1985 article "The Bishops as Pawns", D'Souza theorized that Catholic bishops in the United States were being manipulated by American liberals in agreeing to oppose the U.S. military buildup and use of power abroad when, D'Souza believed, they knew very little about these subjects to which they were lending their religious credibility:  He served as a policy adviser to President Ronald Reagan between 1987 and 1988. In 1991, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. In August 2010, D'Souza was named president of The King's College, a Christian liberal arts college then housed in the Empire State Building in Manhattan. The college relocated to a larger space in Fall 2012, next door to the New York Stock Exchange in Lower Manhattan's financial district.The King's College press release (July 23, 2012). "The King's College Occupies Wall St." Accessed August 29, 2012. On October 18, 2012, after claims became public that he had stayed in a hotel with a new girlfriend though not yet divorced from his wife, D'Souza resigned his post at The King's College.Melissa Steffan, Dinesh D'Souza Resigns as President of The King's College, Christianity Today, October 18, 2012  D'Souza is a neoconservative,D'Souza is labeled a "neoconservative", for instance, in Paul V. Murphy, The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American Conservative Thought (University of North Carolina Press, 2001, p. 247) and Viet Thanh Nguyen, Race and Resistance: Literature and Politics in Asian America (Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 13.) and defines conservatism in the American sense as "conserving the principles of the American Revolution".D'Souza (2002), Letters to a Young Conservative, p. 5 In Letters to a Young Conservative, written as an introduction to conservative ideas for youth, D'Souza argues that it is a blend of classical liberalism and ancient virtue, in particular, "the belief that there are moral standards in the universe and that living up to them is the best way to have a full and happy life". He also argues against what he calls the modern liberal belief that "human nature is intrinsically good", and thus that "the great conflicts in the world...arise out of terrible misunderstandings that can be corrected through ongoing conversation and through the mediation of the United Nations".D'Souza (2002), Letters to a Young Conservative, p. 9 D'Souza challenges beliefs and projects such as affirmative action and social welfare. In the book Illiberal Education, D'Souza argued that intolerance of conservative views is common at many universities. He has attributed many modern social problems to what he calls the "cultural left". In his 2007 book, The Enemy at Home: The Cultural Left and Its Responsibility for 9/11 he wrote that: In a review of D'Souza's 2003 book, What's So Great About America, economist Thomas Sowell wrote that D'Souza's book exposed the fallacies and hypocrisies of various criticisms of the United States by the Islamic world, "domestic multiculturalist cults", those who seek reparations for slavery, and the worldwide intelligentsia. Sowell states that D'Souza truly understands the blessings that constitute the greatness of America. The reviewer also notes that D'Souza also takes this a step further and challenges the notion that all world cultures are equal: D'Souza has also criticized aspects of feminism: In a 2003 interview, he said same-sex marriage did not work:  D'Souza attended the evangelical church Calvary Chapel from 2000 at least until 2010.Carl E. Olson. October 16, 2012. "Then: Dinesh D’Souza leaves Catholic Church. Now: He leaves wife." Catholic World Report D'Souza says that his Catholic background is important to him, but he is also comfortable with Protestant Reformation theology; he identifies as a nondenominational Christian.D'Souza's Now Evangelical, or is he? by Scot McKnight He often writes and discusses Christian apologetics and has debated against prominent atheists and critics of Christianity, including Dan Barker, Christopher Hitchens, Peter Singer,"Can There Be Morality without God?" Retrieved November 29, 2010. Daniel Dennett, Michael Shermer,  David Silverman,David Silverman Debates Dinesh D'souza, Richard Dawkins Foundation and Bart D. Ehrman"Debating 'God's Problem': Why We Suffer" Retrieved November 29, 2010. on religious and moral issues. In a Christian Science Monitor article, he wrote, "the moral teachings of Jesus provide no support for – indeed they stand as a stern rebuke to – the historical injustices perpetrated in the name of Christianity."Dinesh D'Souza, "Atheism, not religion, is the real force behind the mass murders of history", Christian Science Monitor, November 21, 2006 D'Souza often speaks out against atheism, nonbelief, and secularism. He elaborated his views in his 2007 book, What's so Great about Christianity. In 2009, he published Life After Death: The Evidence, which attempts to use scientific and philosophical arguments to support the concept of the afterlife. He also relies on theoretical physics to support the concept of God and the anthropic principle and to refute atheist arguments. In 2012, D'Souza published Godforsaken, which addresses questions of how a benevolent God could allow evil and suffering in the world. D'Souza says "living creatures are the products of intelligent design," but he is not a proponent of the intelligent design (ID) movement, as he does not consider ID to be a satisfactory alternative to the theory of evolution by natural selection.D'Souza, Dinesh (April 7, 2008) The Failure of Intelligent Design, Town Hall, April 7, 2008 He argues that belief in the afterlife and in a Supreme Being are reasonable conclusions given the evidence available, and that atheists have misrepresented the case for Christianity on many fronts. In a Catholic Education Resource Center article, he shared his belief on the separation of church and state: "Groups like the ACLU, with the acquiescence if not collusion of the courts, are actively promoting a jurisprudence of anti-religious discrimination. In a way the Supreme Court has distorted the Constitution to make religious believers of all faiths into second-class citizens." D'Souza argues that current jurisprudence unfairly promotes secularism. More clearly, D'Souza states, "Today courts wrongly interpret separation of church and state to mean that religion has no place in the public arena, or that morality derived from religion should not be permitted to shape our laws. Somehow freedom for religious expression has become freedom from religious expression. Secularists want to empty the public square of religion and religious-based morality so they can monopolize the shared space of society with their own views."D'Souza, Dinesh (2007). What's So Great About Christianity. Tyndale, p. 56. D'Souza has also commented on Islam. He stated in 2007, "I've been studying radical Islamic thought — specifically, the thinkers who have influenced contemporary radical Muslims. When you read their work, you find that there are no denunciations of modernity, no condemnations of science, no condemnations of freedom. In fact, their whole argument seems to be that the United States — through our support of secular dictators in the region — is denying Muslims freedom and control over their own destiny." He has debated Serge Trifkovic  and Robert Spencer, who both deem Islam "inherently aggressive, racist, violent, and intolerant". He has labelled Spencer an "Islamophobe" and "an effective polemicist" in his writings on Islam. Retrieved 2012-10-18, from secondary site New Age Islam In the second chapter of What's So Great About America, D'Souza defends colonialism, arguing that the problem with Africa is not that it was colonized, but rather that it was not colonized long enough. He supports the European colonization of India and other countries, claiming that Christian colonization was a good thing for India because it was a way for Indians to escape the caste system, superstitions and poverty. D'Souza has argued that the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal was a result of "the sexual immodesty of liberal America". He further asserted that the conditions of prisoners at Abu Ghraib "are comparable to the accommodations in midlevel Middle Eastern hotels".Michiko Kakutani, "Dispatch from Gomorrah, Savaging the Cultural Left", The New York Times, 6 February 2007 D'Souza has appeared on numerous national television networks and programs. Six days after the September 11, 2001 attacks, D'Souza appeared on Politically Incorrect hosted by Bill Maher. He disputed the assertion that terrorists were cowards by saying, "Look at what they did. You have a whole bunch of guys who were willing to give their life; none of them backed out. All of them slammed themselves into pieces of concrete. These are warriors." Maher agreed with D'Souza's comments and said, "We have been the cowards. Lobbing cruise missiles from two thousand miles away". Maher's comments ultimately led to advertisers ending their support and his show being cancelled. During an interview on The Colbert Report on January 16, 2007, while promoting his book, The Enemy At Home: The Cultural Left and Its Responsibility for 9/11, D'Souza maintained that liberals had some responsibility for the September 11 attacks. He says liberals' "penchant for interference" had a decided effect in convincing the Carter administration to withdraw support from the Shah, which brought on Muslim fundamentalists control of the Iranian government. He also said that the distorted representation of American culture on television is one source of resentment of the United States by Muslims worldwide. D'Souza believes that traditional Muslims are not too different from traditional Jews and Christians in America. Towards the end of the interview, he admitted that he and Islamic militants share some of the same negative beliefs about liberal Americans.Dinesh D'Souza, The Colbert Report In early 2007, D'Souza published The Enemy at Home: The Cultural Left and its Responsibility for 9/11, in which he argues that the American cultural left was in large part responsible for the Muslim anger that led to the September 11 attacks. He argues that Muslims do not hate America because of its freedom and democracy, but because they perceive America to be imposing its moral depravity (support for sexual licentiousness) on the world.Eyeing the Enemy. Nationalreview.com. Retrieved on May 20, 2012. D'Souza's conclusion is that, "[t]he [George W.] Bush administration and the conservatives must stop promoting American popular culture because it is producing a blowback of Muslim rage. With a few exceptions, the right should not bother to defend American movies, music, and television. From the point of view of traditional values, they are indefensible. Moreover, why should the right stand up for the left's debased values? Why should our people defend their America? Rather, American conservatives should join the Muslims and others in condemning the global moral degeneracy that is produced by liberal values."The Enemy At Home: The Cultural Left and It's Responsibility for 9/11 | Dinesh D'Souza. | (April 7, 2012). Retrieved on May 20, 2012. The book was criticized in major American newspapers and magazines and described as, among other things, "the worst nonfiction book about terrorism published by a major house since 9/11" and "a national disgrace". D'Souza's book caused a controversy in the conservative movement. His conservative critics widely mocked his thesis that the cultural left was responsible for 9/11. In response, D'Souza posted a 6,500-word essay on National Review Online,The Closing of the Conservative Mind, Dinesh D'Souza, National Review Online, March 12, 2007   and NRO subsequently published a litany of responses from conservative authors who accused D'Souza of character assassination, elitism and pseudo-intellectualism.An NRO Symposium on The Enemy at Home on National Review Online. Article.nationalreview.com (March 16, 2007). Retrieved on May 20, 2012.   His Christian apologetics books, What's So Great About Christianity and Life After Death: The Evidence, were both on The New York Times Best Seller list.The New York Times Bestsellers, 11/11/2007Life After Death website At the conclusion of a September 2010 opinion article in Forbes about President Barack Obama, titled "How Obama Thinks", D'Souza wrote:  D'Souza's book, The Roots of Obama's Rage, of which the Forbes article was a condensed version, was published in September 2010 by Regnery Publishing. The book presents his interpretation of President Barack Obama's past and how it formed his beliefs; it was on The New York Times Best Seller list for four weeks in October/November 2010. D'Souza appeared on the Glenn Beck Program in September 2010 to discuss some of his theories.Glenn Beck 9/30/2010 transcript. Foxnews.com (September 30, 2010). Retrieved on May 20, 2012. Several commentators strongly disputed the assertions about Obama, made in the book and article, including Media Matters for America, which pointed out the errors in an article entitled The Roots of Obama's Rage rooted in lies.D'Souza's The Roots of Obama's Rage rooted in lies Media Matters October 4, 2010 Ryan Chittum, in an article in the Columbia Journalism Review, described the Forbes article as "a fact-twisting, error-laden piece of paranoia … the worst kind of smear journalism — a singularly disgusting work". Some conservative publications also criticized D'Souza's theory. In "Obama, Anticolonial Hegemonist?", Daniel Larison of The American Conservative states, "Dinesh D'Souza has authored what may possibly be the most ridiculous piece of Obama analysis yet written... All in all, D'Souza's article reads like a bad conspiracy theory." Larison also criticizes D'Souza's suggestion that Obama is anti-business, noting his lack of evidence. Andrew Ferguson of The Weekly Standard wrote, "D'Souza always sees absence of evidence as evidence of something or other... There is, indeed, a name for the beliefs that motivate President Obama, but it's not anticolonialism; it's not even socialism. It's liberalism!" The magazine published D'Souza's letter, in which he expressed surprise "at the petty, vindictive tone of Andrew Ferguson's review".  D'Souza later wrote and co-directed the documentary polemical film 2016: Obama's America.Betsy Sharkey, "2016: Obama's America' goes by the book", Los Angeles Times, 26 August 2012 Through interviews and reenactments, the film compares the similarities in the lives of D'Souza and President Barack Obama. D'Souza suggested that early influences on Obama were affecting the decisions he made as president. The film's tagline is "Love him or hate him, you don't know him." The film has been criticized on the grounds that what D'Souza claims to be an investigation of Obama includes considerable projection and speculation and selective borrowing from Obama's autobiography to prove his own psychobiography. The Obama administration described the film as "an insidious attempt to dishonestly smear the president".Obama Campaign Responds After a limited release on July 13, 2012, the release was expanded to over 1,000 theaters in late August 2012 and reached more than 2,000 theaters before the end of September 2012. As of October 19, 2012, the film had grossed more than $33.4 million,Box Office Mojo top documentaries making it the 4th highest-grossing documentary of all time and the 2nd highest-grossing political documentary of all time in the United States.Box Office Mojo top political documentaries  In March 2013, D'Souza announced work on a film titled America: Imagine the World Without Her for release in 2014. America was marketed to political conservatives and through Christian marketing firms. In America, D'Souza seeks to portray United States history in a more positive light in contrast to perceived liberal critiques of its history, including the theft of Native American and Mexican lands, black slavery, contemporary foreign policy, and its capitalist system. The Washington Times states that D'Souza is saying that Americans no longer have past heroes like Washington, Lincoln and Reagan, but "we do have us” in “our struggle for the restoration of America.” Lions Gate Entertainment released America in three theaters on June 27, 2014 and expanded its distribution on the weekend of the U.S. holiday Independence Day on July 4, 2014. CinemaScore reported that the opening-weekend audiences gave the film an "A+" grade.Weekend Report: 'Transformers' Repeats On Weak Independence Day Weekend – Box Office Mojo The film grossed , which made it the highest-grossing documentary in the United States in 2014. The film review website Metacritic surveyed  and assessed 10 reviews as negative and 1 as mixed, with none being positive. It gave an aggregate score of 15 out of 100, which indicates "overwhelming dislike". The similar website Rotten Tomatoes surveyed  and, categorizing the reviews as positive or negative, assessed 22 as negative and 2 as positive. Of the , it determined an average rating of 2.9 out of 10. The website gave the film an overall score of 8% and said of the consensus, "Passionate but poorly constructed, America preaches to the choir." The Hollywood Reporters Paul Bond said the film performed well in its limited theatrical release, "overcoming several negative reviews in the mainstream media". USA Todays Bryan Alexander said, "America was savaged by mainstream critics... It received an 8% critical score on RottenTomatoes.com... But the film received an 88% positive audience score on the same website." Bond reported, "Conservatives... seem thrilled with the movie." John Fund of National Review said the documentary was a response to U.S. progressive critique of the country, "D'Souza's film and his accompanying book are a no-holds-barred assault on the contemporary doctrine of political correctness." Fund said D'Souza's message was "deeply pessimistic" but concluded, "Most people will leave the theater with a more optimistic conclusion: Much of the criticism of America taught in the nation’s schools is easily refuted, America is worth saving, and we have the tools to do so in our DNA, just waiting to be harnessed." National Reviews Jay Nordlinger said, "Dinesh is the anti-Moore: taking to the big screen to press conservative points... The shame narrators (let’s call them) focus on maybe 20 percent of the American story. Dinesh simply puts the other 80 percent back in." In a second article, Jay Nordlinger said, "The second movie confirms for me that one of Dinesh’s great advantages is that he is absolutely clear-eyed about the Third World. While liberal Americans romanticize it, he has lived it." D'Souza wrote the book America: Imagine the World Without Her, on which the film is based. When the warehouse club Costco pulled the book from its shelves shortly before the film's release, conservative media and fans on social media criticized the move. Costco said it pulled the book due to low sales. D'Souza disputed the explanation, saying the book had only been out a few weeks and had surged to #1 on Amazon.com, while Costco stocked hundreds of much lower-selling books. He and other conservatives asserted it was pulled because one of Costco's co-founders, James Sinegal, supported Obama's politics. Costco reordered the book and cited the documentary's release and related interest for the reorder. D'Souza's film America features scenes depicting a 14 year old Hillary Clinton meeting Saul Alinsky. On July 7, 2015 D'Souza circulated a photoshopped image of Hillary Clinton, purporting that it showed her with a confederate flag in the background. The original image had no such flag. In January 2014, D'Souza was indicted by federal prosecutors for campaign finance law violations.http://www.justice.gov/usao/nys/pressreleases/January14/DineshDSouzaCharges.php He was arraigned in a Manhattan federal court on January 24. The two charges were for making $20,000 in illegal campaign contributions to the New York Senate campaign of Wendy Long and causing false statements to be made to the Federal Election Commission. D'Souza's attorney argued that D'Souza "did not act with any corrupt or criminal intent whatsoever" and described the incident as "at most...an act of misguided friendship". His co-producers alleged that the indictment was politically motivated retribution for the success of his 2016 movie.'2016: Obama's America' Filmmaker Indicted for Violating Campaign Finance Laws In May, United States District Judge Richard M. Berman rejected that contention, stating, "The court concludes the defendant has respectfully submitted no evidence he was selectively prosecuted." In May 2014, D'Souza pleaded guilty to one felony count of making illegal contributions in the names of others. D'Souza told Judge Berman, "I knew that causing a campaign contribution to be made in the name of another was wrong and something the law forbids. I deeply regret my conduct." During sentencing, D'Souza submitted a letter to the court arguing that prosecutors purposefully neglected to present an honest comparison of past sentences for the same offensehttp://townhall.com/tipsheet/katiepavlich/2014/09/23/documents-federal-prosecutors-misled-judge-in-pursuit-of-prison-time-for-dinesh-dsouza-n1895285 and in September 2014, the court sentenced D'Souza to five years probation, eight months in a halfway house (referred to as a "community confinement center") and a $30,000 fine, rejecting the prosecutor's recommendations of prison time.  He is also required to perform a day (eight hours) of community service each week during his probation and must undergo therapy on a weekly basis. D'Souza's claim of selective prosecution has received support from some conservative media legal scholars and commentators. Liberal  Harvard law professor Alan Dershowitz, said in an interview, “The idea of charging him with a felony for this doesn’t sound like a proper exercise of prosecutorial discretion.... I can’t help but think that [D'Souza's] politics have something to do with it.... It smacks of selective prosecution.” He went on to say such alleged campaign violations are common in politics. However, D'Souza's admission of guilt upon which he was convicted has been cited as enough evidence of the appropriateness of conviction, with prosecutorial bias considered unlikely given that the sentence did not include any jail time despite a request for 10–16 months of incarceration by the prosecution. Judge Berman also made explicit reference in his sentencing remarks to claims of persecution that D'Souza made publicly outside of court proceedings. According to the New York Times, "While the judge said that Mr. D’Souza had an “absolute right” to express his opinions, he described his claims of political persecution as “nonsense,” and scolded the defendant, saying that he continued to “deflect and minimize” the seriousness of his crime". In 1992, D'Souza married Dixie Brubaker, whom he first met when he worked in Washington, D.C. They have one daughter, born in 1995. In his book Life After Death: The Evidence, D'Souza stated that Dixie had a near-death experience at the age of 19.D'Souza, Dinesh (2009). Life After Death: The Evidence, Regnery Publishing: Washington, DC, pp. 1–2 The couple lived together in California until D'Souza moved to New York as president of King's College. He maintained a residence near San Diego, where his wife and daughter remained. In an October 16, 2012 article in World Magazine, author Warren Cole Smith reported on D'Souza's activities after a September 28 talk that year in Spartanburg, South Carolina.  Smith said that D'Souza, who was married at the time, checked into a hotel with another woman, and left with her the following day. In his rebuttal, D'Souza said that he and his wife had separated. He confirmed that he had been engaged to Denise Odie Joseph, noted in the article. After an investigation by officials at King's College, he suspended the engagement to Joseph. Subsequently, D'Souza officially divorced Dixie Brubaker. After D'Souza's engagement became public, the trustees of The King's College announced after meeting on October 17, 2012, that D'Souza had resigned his position as president of the university in order "to attend to his personal and family needs". On September 1, 2015 at the Wynn Las Vegas, D'Souza proposed to Deborah Fancher, a conservative political activist and mother of two. Fancher, born in Venezuela and a resident of Houston, Texas, is an advisor at the Spirit of Freedom Republican Women's PAC. Books authored by D'Souza include: D'Souza has also contributed to: 1984: Falwell, Before the Millennium: A Critical Biography, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 0-89526-607-5) 1986: The Catholic Classics (ISBN 0-87973-545-7) 1987: My Dear Alex: Letters From The KGB (with Gregory Fossedal), Regnery Publishing (ISBN 0-89526-576-1) 1991: Illiberal Education (ISBN 0-684-86384-7) 1995: The End of Racism (ISBN 0-684-82524-4) 1997: Ronald Reagan: How An Ordinary Man Became an Extraordinary Leader (ISBN 0-684-84823-6) 2000: The Virtue of Prosperity (ISBN 0-684-86815-6) 2002: What's So Great About America, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 0-89526-153-7) 2002: Letters to a Young Conservative (ISBN 0-465-01734-7) 2007: The Enemy At Home: The Cultural Left and Its Responsibility for 9/11 (ISBN 0-385-51012-8) 2007: What's So Great About Christianity, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 1-596-98517-8) 2009: Life After Death: The Evidence (ISBN 978-1596980990) 2010: The Roots of Obama's Rage, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 9781596986251) 2012: Godforsaken: Bad things happen. Is there a God who cares? YES. Here's proof, Tyndale House (ISBN 978-1414324852) 2012: Obama's America: Unmaking the American Dream, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 1596987782) 2014: America: Imagine a World without Her, Regnery Publishing (ISBN 978-1-62157-203-9) 2008: Foreword to Conspiracies and the Cross by Timothy Paul Jones, Frontline Books (ISBN 1-599-79205-2) 2004: Michael Moore Hates America, co-star. 2012: 2016: Obama's America, executive producer, co-director, co-writer, and star. 2014: America: Imagine the World Without Her, executive producer, director, co-writer, and star.
