   The Order of Preachers (, hence the abbreviation OP used by members), more commonly known after the 15th century as the Dominican Order or Dominicans, is a Roman Catholic religious order founded by the Spanish priest Saint Dominic de Guzman in France and approved by Pope Honorius III (1216–27) on 22 December 1216. Membership in this "mendicant" Order includes friars,The word friar is etymologically related to the word for brother in Latin.  nuns, active sisters, and lay or secular Dominicans (formerly known as tertiaries, though recently there has been a growing number of Associates, who are unrelated to the tertiaries) affiliated with the Order. Founded to preach the Gospel and to combat heresy, the teaching activity of the order and its scholastic organization placed the Preachers in the forefront of the intellectual life of the Middle Ages. The order is famed for its intellectual tradition, having produced many leading theologians and philosophers. The Dominican Order is headed by the Master of the Order, who is currently Bruno Cadoré.http://curia.op.org/roma2010/ Members of the order generally carry the letters O.P., standing for Ordinis Praedicatorum, meaning of the Order of Preachers, after their names. In the year 2000, there were 5,171 Dominican friars in solemn vows, 917 student brothers, and 237 novices.[ ]  By the year 2013 there were 6,058 Dominican friars, including 4,470 priests. A number of other names have been used to refer to both the order and its members.  The Dominican Order came into being in the Middle Ages at a time when religion began to be contemplated in a new way. Men of God were no longer expected to stay behind the walls of a cloister. Instead, they travelled among the people, taking as their examples the apostles of the primitive Church. Out of this ideal emerged two orders of mendicant friars: one, the Friars Minor, was led by Francis of Assisi; the other, the Friars Preachers, by Dominic of Guzman. Like his contemporary, Francis, Dominic saw the need for a new type of organization, and the quick growth of the Dominicans and Franciscans during their first century of existence confirms that the orders of mendicant friars met a need. argues the Dominicans and other mendicant orders were an adaptation to the rise of the profit economy in medieval Europe. Dominic sought to establish a new kind of order, one that would bring the dedication and systematic education of the older monastic orders like the Benedictines to bear on the religious problems of the burgeoning population of cities, but with more organizational flexibility than either monastic orders or the secular clergy. Dominic's new order was to be a preaching order, trained to preach in the vernacular languages. Rather than earning their living on vast farms as the monasteries had done, the new friars would survive by begging, "selling" themselves through persuasive preaching. Dominic inspired his followers with loyalty to learning and virtue, a deep recognition of the spiritual power of worldly deprivation and the religious state, and a highly developed governmental structure.Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 7. At the same time, Dominic inspired the members of his Order to develop a "mixed" spirituality. They were both active in preaching, and contemplative in study, prayer and meditation.  The brethren of the Dominican Order were urban and learned, as well as contemplative and mystical in their spirituality. While these traits had an impact on the women of the Order, the nuns especially absorbed the latter characteristics and made those characteristics their own. In England, the Dominican nuns blended these elements with the defining characteristics of English Dominican spirituality and created a spirituality and collective personality that set them apart. The Order's origins in battling heterodoxy influenced its later development and reputation. Many later Dominicans battled heresy as part of their apostolate. Indeed, many years after St. Dominic reacted to the Cathars, the first Grand Inquistor of Spain, Tomás de Torquemada, would be drawn from the Dominican order.  As an adolescent, he had a particular love of theology and the Scriptures became the foundation of his spirituality.Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 17. During his studies in Palencia, Spain, he experienced a dreadful famine, prompting Dominic to sell all of his beloved books and other equipment to help his neighbors.Tugwell, 53 After he completed his studies, Bishop Martin Bazan and Prior Diego d'Achebes appointed Dominic to the cathedral chapter and he became a regular canon under the Rule of St. Augustine and the Constitutions for the cathedral church of Osma. At the age of twenty-four or twenty-five, he was ordained to the priesthood.Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 19. In the spring of 1203, Dominic joined Prior Diego de Acebo on an embassy to Denmark for the monarchy of Spain, to arrange the marriage between the son of King Alfonso VIII of Castile and a niece of King Valdemar II of Denmark.Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "St. Dominic" At that time the south of France was the stronghold of the Cathar or Albigensian heresy, named after the Duke of Albi, a Cathar sympathiser and opponent to the subsequent Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229). Dominic was fired by a reforming zeal after they encountered Albigensian Christians at Toulouse. The Albigensians, more commonly known as the Cathars, were a heretical gnostic sect, holding that matter was evil and only spirit was good; this was a fundamental challenge to the notion of incarnation, central to Roman Catholic theology. Dominic saw the need for a response that would attempt to sway members of the Albigensian movement back to mainstream Christian thought. Prior Diego saw immediately one of the paramount reasons for the spread of the unorthodox movement: the representatives of the Holy Church acted and moved with an offensive amount of pomp and ceremony. On the other hand, the Cathars lived in a state of self-sacrifice that was widely appealing. For these reasons, Prior Diego suggested that the papal legates begin to live a reformed apostolic life. The legates agreed to change if they could find a strong leader. The prior took up the challenge, and he and Dominic dedicated themselves to the conversion of the Albigensians.Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 23. Despite this particular mission, in winning the Albigensians over by persuasion Dominic met limited success, "for though in his ten years of preaching a large number of converts were made, it has to be said that the results were not such as had been hoped for." Dominic became the spiritual father to several Albigensian women he had reconciled to the faith, and in 1206 he established them in a convent in Prouille. This convent would become the foundation of the Dominican nuns, thus making the Dominican nuns older than the Dominican friars. Prior Diego sanctioned the building of a monastery for girls whose parents had sent them to the care of the Albigensians because their families were too poor to fulfill their basic needs.Tugwell, 54-55 The monastery was at Prouille would later become Dominic's headquarters for his missionary effort there.Woods, 29-30 After two years on the mission field, Prior Diego died while traveling back to Spain. When his preaching companions heard of his death, all save Dominic and a very small number of others returned to their homes. The history of the Order may be divided into three periods: Saint Dominic established a religious community in Toulouse in 1214, to be governed by the rule of St. AugustineRule of St. Augustine (pdf) and statutes to govern the life of the friars, including the Primitive Constitution. (The statutes borrowed somewhat from the Constitutions of Prémontré.Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Order of Preachers") The founding documents establish that the Order was founded for two purposes: preaching and the salvation of souls. In July 1215, with the approbation of Bishop Foulques of Toulouse, Dominic ordered his followers into an institutional life. Its purpose was revolutionary in the pastoral ministry of the Catholic Church. These priests were organized and well trained in religious studies. Dominic needed a framework—a rule—to organize these components. The Rule of St. Augustine was an obvious choice for the Dominican Order, according to Dominic's successor, Jordan of Saxony, because it lent itself to the "salvation of souls through preaching".Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 44. By this choice, however, the Dominican brothers designated themselves not monks, but canons-regular. They could practice ministry and common life while existing in individual poverty.Hinnebusch, The History of the Dominican Order, 44. See also Tugwell, 55. Dominic's education at Palencia gave him the knowledge he needed to overcome the Manicheans. With charity, the other concept that most defines the work and spirituality of the Order, study became the method most used by the Dominicans in working to defend the Church against the perils that hounded it, and also of enlarging its authority over larger areas of the known world.Bennett,52. In Dominic's thinking, it was impossible for men to preach what they did not or could not understand. When the brethren left Prouille, then, to begin their apostolic work, Dominic sent Matthew of Paris to establish a school near the University of Paris. This was the first of many Dominican schools established by the brethren, some near large universities throughout Europe.The women of the Order also established schools for the children of the local gentry. The Order of Preachers was approved in December 1216 and January 1217 by Pope Honorius III in the papal bulls Religiosam vitam and Nos attendentes.  On January 21, 1217 Honorious issued the bull Gratiarum omniumFor the Latin text see Omnia disce: medieval studies in memory of Leonard Boyle, O.P. by Anne Duggan, Joan Greatrex, Brenda Bolton, Leonard E. Boyle, 2005, p. 202.  https://books.google.com/books?id=2X-DsLOjoMIC&pg=PA202&lpg=PA202&dq=%22Honorius#v=onepage&q=%22Honorius&f=false Accessed 7-2-2011  recognizing St. Dominic's followers as an Order dedicated to study and universally authorized to preach, a power formerly reserved to local episcopal authorization.J.-P. Renard, La formation et la désignation des prédicateurs au debut de l'Ordre des Prêcheurs, Freiburg, 1977. On August 15, 1217 Dominic dispatched seven of his followers to the great university center of Paris to establish a priory focused on study and preaching.  The Convent of St. Jacques, Accessed June 1, 2012 would eventually become the Order's first studium generale. Saint Dominic was to establish similar foundations at other university towns of the day, Bologna in 1218, Palencia and Montpellier in 1220, and Oxford just before his death in 1221.http://www.domcentral.org/study/opstudy.htm Accessed June 2, 2012 In 1219 Pope Honorius III invited Saint Dominic and his companions to take up residence at the ancient Roman basilica of Santa Sabina, which they did by early 1220. Before that time the friars had only a temporary residence in Rome at the convent of San Sisto Vecchio which Honorius III had given to Dominic circa 1218 intending it to become a convent for a reformation of nuns at Rome under Dominic's guidance.  In May 1220 at Bologna the Order's first General Chapter mandated that each new priory of the Order maintain its own studium conventuale thus laying the foundation of the Dominican tradition of sponsoring widespread institutions of learning.William Hinnebusch, The Dominicans: A Short History, 1975, Chapter 1: "By requiring that each priory have a professor it laid the foundation for the Order's schools." http://www.domcentral.org/trad/shorthistory/short01.htm Accessed 6-9-2011.  See also Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Volume 10, p. 701.  "In each convent there was also a studium particulare. https://books.google.com/books?id=pf4hAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA701#v=onepage&q&f=false Accessed 6-9-2011  The official foundation of the Dominican convent at Santa Sabina with its studium conventuale occurred with the legal transfer of property from Honorius III to the Order of Preachers on June 5, 1222.Pierre Mandonnet, O.P., St. Dominic and His Work, Translated by Sister Mary Benedicta Larkin, O.P., B. Herder Book Co., St. Louis/London, 1948, Chapt. III, note 50: "If the installation at Santa Sabina does not date from 1220, at least it is from 1221. The official grant was made only in June, 1222 (Bullarium O.P., I, 15). But the terms of the bull show that there had been a concession earlier. Before that concession the Pope said that the friars had no hospitium in Rome. At that time St. Sixtus was no longer theirs; Conrad of Metz could not have alluded to St. Sixtus, therefore, when he said in 1221: "the Pope has conferred on them a house in Rome" (Laurent no. 136). It is possible that the Pope was waiting for the completion of the building that he was having done at Santa Sabina, before giving the title to the property, on June 5, 1222, to the new Master of the Order, elected not many days before."  http://www.domcentral.org/trad/domwork/domwork03.htm Accessed 2012-5-20.  This studium was transformed into the Order's first studium provinciale by Saint Thomas Aquinas in 1265.  Part of the curriculum of this studium was relocated in 1288 at the studium of Santa Maria sopra Minerva which in the 16th century world be transformed into the College of Saint Thomas ().  In the 20th century the college would be relocated to the convent of Saints Dominic and Sixtus and would be transformed into the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum. The Dominican friars quickly spread, including to England, where they appeared in Oxford in 1221.  In the 13th century the order reached all classes of Christian society, fought heresy, schism, and paganism by word and book, and by its missions to the north of Europe, to Africa, and Asia passed beyond the frontiers of Christendom. Its schools spread throughout the entire Church; its doctors wrote monumental works in all branches of knowledge, including the extremely important Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas. Its members included popes, cardinals, bishops, legates, inquisitors, confessors of princes, ambassadors, and paciarii (enforcers of the peace decreed by popes or councils).  The order was appointed by Pope Gregory IX the duty to carry out the Inquisition.  In his Papal Bull Ad extirpanda of 1252, Pope Innocent IV authorised the Dominicans' use of torture under prescribed circumstances. The expansion of the Order produced changes. A smaller emphasis on doctrinal activity favoured the development here and there of the ascetic and contemplative life and there sprang up, especially in Germany and Italy, the mystical movement with which the names of Meister Eckhart, Heinrich Suso, Johannes Tauler, and St. Catherine of Siena are associated. (See German mysticism, which has also been called "Dominican mysticism.") This movement was the prelude to the reforms undertaken, at the end of the century, by Raymond of Capua, and continued in the following century. It assumed remarkable proportions in the congregations of Lombardy and the Netherlands, and in the reforms of Savonarola at Florence. At the same time the Order found itself face to face with the Renaissance. It struggled against pagan tendencies in Renaissance humanism, in Italy through Dominici and Savonarola, in Germany through the theologians of Cologne but it also furnished humanism with such advanced writers as Francesco Colonna (probably the writer of the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili) and Matteo Bandello.  Many Dominicans took part in the artistic activity of the age, the most prominent being Fra Angelico and Fra Bartolomeo.  Bartolomé de Las Casas, as a settler in the New World, was galvanized by witnessing the brutal torture and genocide of the Native Americans by the Spanish colonists. He became famous for his advocacy of the rights of Native Americans, whose cultures, especially in the Caribbean, he describes with care. Gaspar da Cruz (c.1520–1570), who worked all over the Portuguese colonial empire in Asia, was probably the first Christian missionary to preach (unsuccessfully) in Cambodia. After a (similarly unsuccessful) stint in Guangzhou, China, he eventually returned to Portugal and became the first European to publish a book on China in 1569/1570. The modern period consists of the three centuries between the religious revolution at the beginning of the 16th century (the Protestant Reformation) and the French Revolution and its consequences. The beginning of the 16th century confronted the order with the upheavals of Revolution. The spread of Protestantism cost it six or seven provinces and several hundreds of convents, but the discovery of the New World opened up a fresh field of activity. In the 18th century, there were numerous attempts at reform, accompanied by a reduction in the number of devotees. The French Revolution ruined the order in France, and crises that more or less rapidly followed considerably lessened or wholly destroyed numerous provinces. The contemporary period of the history of the Preachers begins with restorations in provinces, undertaken after revolutions destroyed the Order in several countries of the Old and New World. This period begins more or less in the early 19th century. During this critical period, the number of Preachers seems never to have sunk below 3,500. Statistics for 1876 show 3,748, but 500 of these had been expelled from their convents and were engaged in parochial work. Statistics for 1910 show a total of 4,472 nominally or actually engaged in proper activities of the Order. In the year 2000, there were 5,171 Dominican friars in solemn vows, 917 student brothers, and 237 novices. By the year 2013 there were 6058 Dominican friars, including 4,470 priests. In the revival movement France held a foremost place, owing to the reputation and convincing power of the orator, Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire (1802–1861). He took the habit of a Friar Preacher at Rome (1839), and the province of France was canonically erected in 1850. From this province were detached the province of Lyon, called Occitania (1862), that of Toulouse (1869), and that of Canada (1909). The French restoration likewise furnished many laborers to other provinces, to assist in their organization and progress. From it came the master general who remained longest at the head of the administration during the 19th century, Père Vincent Jandel (1850–1872). Here should be mentioned the province of St. Joseph in the United States. Founded in 1805 by Edward Fenwick, afterwards first Bishop of Cincinnati, Ohio (1821–1832), this province has developed slowly, but now ranks among the most flourishing and active provinces of the order. In 1910 it numbered seventeen convents or secondary houses. In 1905, it established a large house of studies at Washington, D.C., called the Dominican House of Studies.  There are now four Dominican provinces in the United States. The province of France has produced a large number of preachers. The conferences of Notre-Dame-de-Paris were inaugurated by Père Lacordaire. The Dominicans of the province of France furnished Lacordaire (1835–1836, 1843–1851), Jacques Monsabré (1869–1870, 1872–1890), Joseph Ollivier (1871, 1897), Thomas Etourneau (1898–1902). Since 1903 the pulpit of Notre Dame has been occupied by a succession of Dominicans. Père Henri Didon (d. 1900) was a Dominican. The house of studies of the province of France publishes L'Année Dominicaine (founded 1859), La Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theologiques (1907), and La Revue de la Jeunesse (1909). French Dominicans founded and administer the École Biblique et Archéologique française de Jérusalem founded in 1890 by Père Marie-Joseph Lagrange O.P. (1855–1938), one of the leading international centres for Biblical research. It is at the École Biblique that the famed Jerusalem Bible (both editions) was prepared. Likewise Yves Cardinal Congar, O.P. was a product of the French province of the Order of Preachers.  Doctrinal development has had an important place in the restoration of the Preachers. Several institutions, besides those already mentioned, played important parts. Such is the Biblical school at Jerusalem, open to the religious of the Order and to secular clerics, which publishes the Revue Biblique. The faculty of theology at the University of Fribourg, confided to the care of the Dominicans in 1890, is flourishing, and has about 250 students. The Pontificium Collegium Internationale Angelicum, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum established at Rome in 1908 by Master Hyacinth Cormier, opened its doors to regulars and seculars for the study of the sacred sciences. In addition to the reviews above are the Revue Thomiste, founded by Père Thomas Coconnier (d. 1908), and the Analecta Ordinis Prædicatorum (1893). Among numerous writers of the order in this period are: Cardinals Thomas Zigliara (d. 1893) and Zephirin González (d. 1894), two esteemed philosophers; Alberto Guillelmotti (d. 1893), historian of the Pontifical Navy, and Heinrich Denifle, one of the most famous writers on medieval history (d. 1905). The Friars, Nuns, Sister and Dominican Laity together form the Order of Preachers.http://www.dominicanwitness.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/RULELatinEnglish_2007.pdf The Dominican nuns were founded by St. Dominic even before he had established the friars. They are contemplatives in the cloistered life.  Properly speaking, the friars and nuns together form the Order of Preachers. The nuns celebrated their 800th anniversary in 2006. Dominican sisters carry on a number of apostolates. They are distinct from the nuns. The sisters are a way of living the vocation of a Third Order Dominican. As well as the friars, Dominican sisters live their lives supported by four common values, often referred to as the Four Pillars of Dominican Life, they are: community life, common prayer, study and service. St. Dominic called this fourfold pattern of life the "holy preaching". Henri Matisse was so moved by the care that he received from the Dominican Sisters that he collaborated in the design and interior decoration of their Chapelle du Saint-Marie du Rosaire in Vence, France.  Dominican laity are governed by their own rule, the Rule of the Lay Fraternities of St. Dominic, promulgated by the Master in 1987.[ ] It is the fifth Rule of the Dominican Laity; the first was issued in 1285.See also the Lay Dominican Web Library.  The two greatest saints among them are St. Catherine of Siena and St. Rose of Lima, who lived ascetic lives in their family homes, yet both had widespread influence in their societies. Today, there is a growing number of Associates who share the Dominican charism. Dominican Associates are Christian women and men; married, single, divorced, and widowed; clergy members and lay persons who were first drawn to and then called to live out the charism and continue the mission of the Dominican Order - to praise, to bless, to preach. Associates do not take vows, but rather make a commitment to be partners with vowed members, and to share the mission and charism of the Dominican Family in their own lives, families, churches, neighborhoods, workplaces, and cities. [ ] The spiritual tradition of Dominic's Order is punctuated not only by charity, study and preaching, but also by instances of mystical union. The Dominican emphasis on learning and on charity distinguishes it from other monastic and mendicant orders. As the Order first developed on the European continent, learning continued to be emphasized by these friars and their sisters in Christ. These religious also struggled for a deeply personal, intimate relationship with God. When the Order reached England, many of these attributes were kept, but the English gave the Order additional, specialized characteristics. This topic is discussed below.  Dominic's search for a close relationship with God was determined and unceasing. He rarely spoke, so little of his interior life is known. What is known about it comes from accounts written by people near to him. St. Cecilia remembered him as cheerful, charitable and full of unceasing vigor. From a number of accounts, singing was apparently one of Dominic's great delights.Woods, 31-32. Dominic practiced self-scourging and would mortify himself as he prayed alone in the chapel at night for 'poor sinners.' He owned a single habit, refused to carry money, and would allow no one to serve him.Woods, 32. The spirituality evidenced throughout all of the branches of the Order reflects the spirit and intentions of its founder, though some of the elements of what later developed might have surprised the Castilian friar. Fundamentally, Dominic was "...&nbsp;a man of prayer who utilized the full resources of the learning available to him to preach, to teach, and even materially to assist those searching for the truth found in the gospel of Christ. It is that spirit which [Dominic] bequeathed to his followers".Woods, 34. Humbert of Romans, the Master General of the Order from 1254 to 1263, was a great administrator, as well as preacher and writer. It was under his tenure as Master General that the sisters in the Order were given official membership. Humbert was a great lover of languages, and encouraged linguistic studies among the Dominicans, primarily Arabic, because of the missionary work friars were pursuing amongst those led astray or forced to convert by Muslims in the Middle East. He also wanted his friars to reach excellence in their preaching, and this was his most lasting contribution to the Order. The growth of the spirituality of young preachers was his first priority.Woods, 35. He once cried to his students: "...&nbsp;consider how excellent this office [of preaching] is, because it is apostolic; how useful, because it is directly ordained for the salvation of souls; how perilous, because few have in them, or perform, what the office requires, for it is not without great danger&nbsp;... , vol. xxv. (Lyon, 1677) Humbert is at the center of ascetic writers in the Dominican Order. In this role, he added significantly to its spirituality. His writings are permeated with "religious good sense," and he used uncomplicated language that could edify even the weakest member.Woods, 37. Humbert advised his readers, "[Young Dominicans] are also to be instructed not to be eager to see visions or work miracles, since these avail little to salvation, and sometimes we are fooled by them; but rather they should be eager to do good in which salvation consists. Also, they should be taught not to be sad if they do not enjoy the divine consolations they hear others have; but they should know the loving Father for some reason sometimes withholds these. Again, they should learn that if they lack the grace of compunction or devotion they should not think they are not in the state of grace as long as they have good will, which is all that God regards".Woods, 37. Quoted from Benedict Ashley, The Dominicans (Collegeville, MN, 1990). The English Dominicans took this to heart, and made it the focal point of their mysticism, as seen below.  Another who contributed significantly to the spirituality of the Order is Albertus Magnus, the only person of the period to be given the appellation "Great". His influence on the brotherhood permeated nearly every aspect of Dominican life. Albert was a scientist, philosopher, astrologer, theologian, spiritual writer, ecumenist, and diplomat. Under the auspices of Humbert of Romans, Albert molded the curriculum of studies for all Dominican students, introduced Aristotle to the classroom and probed the work of Neoplatonists, such as Plotinus.Woods, 38. Indeed, it was the thirty years of work done by Thomas Aquinas and himself (1245–1274) that allowed for the inclusion of Aristotelian study in the curriculum of Dominican schools.Bennett, 66. One of Albert's greatest contributions was his study of Dionysus the Areopagite, a mystical theologian whose words left an indelible imprint in the medieval period. Magnus' writings made a significant contribution to German mysticism, which became vibrant in the minds of the Beguines and women such as Hildegard of Bingen and Mechthild of Magdeburg.Woods, 39. Mysticism, for the purposes of this study, refers to the conviction that all believers have the capability to experience God's love. This love may manifest itself through brief ecstatic experiences, such that one may be engulfed by God and gain an immediate knowledge of Him, which is unknowable through the intellect alone.Ross, 162 Albertus Magnus championed the idea, drawn from Dionysus, that positive knowledge of God is possible, but obscure. Thus, it is easier to state what God is not, than to state what God is: "...&nbsp;we affirm things of God only relatively, that is, casually, whereas we deny things of God absolutely, that is, with reference to what He is in Himself. And there is no contradiction between a relative affirmation and an absolute negation. It is not contradictory to say that someone is white-toothed and not white".Tugwell, 153. See also, Wood, 41. Albert the Great wrote that wisdom and understanding enhance one's faith in God. According to him, these are the tools that God uses to commune with a contemplative. Love in the soul is both the cause and result of true understanding and judgement. It causes not only an intellectual knowledge of God, but a spiritual and emotional knowledge as well. Contemplation is the means whereby one can obtain this goal of understanding. Things that once seemed static and unchanging become full of possibility and perfection. The contemplative then knows that God is, but she does not know what God is. Thus, contemplation forever produces a mystified, imperfect knowledge of God. The soul is exalted beyond the rest of God's creation but it cannot see God Himself.Hinnebusch, History of the Dominican Order, 299. See also, Tugwell, 40-95, 134-98. As the image of God grows within man, he learns to rely less on an intellectual pursuit of virtue and more on an affective pursuit of charity and meekness. Meekness and charity guide Christians to acknowledge that they are nothing without the One (God/Christ) who created them, sustains them, and guides them. Thus, man then directs his path to that One, and the love for, and of, Christ guides man's very nature to become centered on the One, and on his neighbor as well.Ross, 169. Charity is the manifestation of the pure love of Christ, both for and by His follower. Although the ultimate attainment for this type of mysticism is union with God, it is not necessarily visionary, nor does it hope only for ecstatic experiences; instead, mystical life is successful if it is imbued with charity. The goal is just as much to become like Christ as it is to become one with Him. Those who believe in Christ should first have faith in Him without becoming engaged in such overwhelming phenomena. The Dominican Order was affected by a number of elemental influences. Its early members imbued the order with a mysticism and learning. The Europeans of the Order embraced ecstatic mysticism on a grand scale and looked to a union with the Creator. The English Dominicans looked for this complete unity as well, but were not so focused on ecstatic experiences. Instead, their goal was to emulate the moral life of Christ more completely. The Dartford nuns were surrounded by all of these legacies, and used them to create something unique. Though they are not called mystics, they are known for their piety toward God and their determination to live lives devoted to, and in emulation of, Him. Dartford Priory was established long after the primary period of monastic foundation in England had ended. It emulated, then, the monasteries found in Europe—mainly France and German—as well as the monastic traditions of their English Dominican brothers. As already stated, the first nuns to inhabit Dartford were sent from Poissy Priory in France. Evidence for the strength of the English Dominican nuns' vocation is strong itself. Even on the eve of the Dissolution, Prioress Jane Vane wrote to Cromwell on behalf of a postulant, saying that though she had not actually been professed, she was professed in her heart and in the eyes of God. This is only one such example of dedication. Profession in Dartford Priory seems, then, to have been made based on personal commitment, and one's personal association with God.Lee, "Monastic and Secular Learning," 61. Throughout the centuries, the Holy Rosary has been an important element among the Dominicans.See Guy Bedouelle, Saint Dominic. The Grace of the Word (Ignatius 1987). Pope Pius XI stated that: The Rosary of Mary is the principle and foundation on which the very Order of Saint Dominic rests for making perfect the life of its members and obtaining the salvation of others.Robert Feeney, The Rosary: "The Little Summa" ISBN 0-9622347-1-0 Histories of the Holy Rosary often attribute its origin to Saint Dominic himself through the Blessed Virgin Mary.Catherine Beebe, St. Dominic and the Rosary ISBN 0-89870-518-5 Our Lady of the Rosary is the title received by the Marian apparition to Saint Dominic in 1208 in the church of Prouille in which the Virgin Mary gave the Rosary to him. For centuries, Dominicans have been instrumental in spreading the rosary and emphasizing the Catholic belief in the power of the rosary.History of the Dominicans http://www.domcentral.org/study/ashley/ds02ital2.htm On January 1, 2008, the Master of the Order declared a year of dedication to the Rosary.Re-discovering the Rosary as a means of contemplation International Dominican Information By 1300, the enthusiasm for preaching and conversion within the Order lessened. Mysticism, full of the ideas Albertus Magnus expostulated, became the devotion of the greatest minds and hands within the organization.Bennett, 71. This was especially true of the Dominicans in Germany and France. It became a "powerful instrument of personal and theological transformation both within the Order of Preachers and throughout the wider reaches of Christendom.Woods, 44. Albertus Magnus helped shape English Dominican thought through his idea that God is knowable, but obscure. Additionally, the English friars shared his belief that wisdom and understanding enhance one's faith in God. The English Dominicans also studied classical writers. This was also part of his legacy. Although Albertus Magnus did much to instill mysticism in the Order of Preachers, it is a concept that reaches back to the Hebrew Bible. In the tradition of Holy Writ, the impossibility of coming face to face with God is a recurring motif, thus the commandment against graven images (Exodus 20.4-5). As time passed, Jewish and early Christian writings presented the idea of 'unknowing,' where God's presence was enveloped in a dark cloud. These images arose out of a confusing mass of ambiguous and ambivalent statements regarding the nature of God and man's relationship to Him.Woods, 45-47. Other passages attest to the opposite circumstance: that of seeing God and talking with Him. The conflict between seeing and not-seeing exists in early texts as well as later ones. It also permeates the Law, the Prophets, and the Writings. The consequence is a paradox that emerges repeatedly throughout Christian Scripture and the mysticism found in the early foundations of the Church.Woods, 48.  All of these ideas associated with mysticism were at play in the spirituality of the Dominican community, and not only among the men. In Europe, in fact, it was often the female members of the Order, such as Catherine of Siena, Mechthild of Magdeburg, Christine of Stommeln, Margaret Ebner, and Elsbet Stagl,Woods, 110. that gained reputations for having mystical experiences. Notable male members of the Order associated with mysticism include Meister Eckhart and Henry Suso. Although Dominic and the early brethren had instituted female Dominican houses at Prouille and other places by 1227, some of the brethren of the Order had misgivings about the necessity of female religious establishments in an Order whose major purpose was preaching, a duty in which women could not traditionally engage. In spite of these doubts, women's houses dotted the countryside throughout Europe. There were seventy-four Dominican female houses in Germany, forty-two in Italy, nine in France, eight in Spain, six in Bohemia, three in Hungary, and three in Poland.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 13. Many of the German religious houses that lodged women had been home to communities of women, such as Beguines, that became Dominican once they were taught by the traveling preachers and put under the jurisdiction of the Dominican authoritative structure. A number of these houses became centers of study and mystical spirituality in the 14th century. There were one hundred and fifty-seven nunneries in the Order by 1358. In that year, the number lessened due to disasters like the Black Death.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 14. In places besides Germany, convents were founded as retreats from the world for women of the upper classes. These were original projects funded by wealthy patrons, including other women. Among these was Countess Margaret of Flanders who established the monastery of Lille, while Val-Duchesse at Oudergern near Brussels was built with the wealth of Adelaide of Burgundy, Duchess of Brabant (1262).Hinnebusch, History of the Dominican Order, 337. Female houses differed from male Dominican houses in a lack of apostolic work for the women. Instead, the sisters chanted the Divine Office and kept all the monastic observances.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 70-73. Their lives were often much more strict than their brothers' lives. The sisters had no government of their own, but lived under the authority of the general and provincial chapters of the Order. They were compelled to obey all the rules and shared in all the applicable privileges of the Order. Like the Priory of Dartford, all Dominican nunneries were under the jurisdiction of friars. The friars served as their confessors, priests, teachers and spiritual mentors.Hinnebsch, History of the Domiican Order, 382  Women could not be professed to the Dominican religious life before the age of thirteen. The formula for profession contained in the Constitutions of Montargis Priory (1250) demands that nuns pledge obedience to God, the Blessed Virgin, their prioress and her successors according to the Rule of St. Augustine and the institute of the Order, until death. The clothing of the sisters consisted of a white tunic and scapular, a leather belt, a black mantle, and a black veil. Candidates to profession were tested to reveal whether they were actually married women who had merely separated from their husbands. Their intellectual abilities were also tested. Nuns were to be silent in places of prayer, the cloister, the dormitory, and refectory. Silence was maintained unless the prioress granted an exception for a specific cause. Speaking was allowed in the common parlor, but it was subordinate to strict rules, and the prioress, subprioress or other senior nun had to be present.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 30. Because the nuns of the Order did not preach among the people, the need to engage in study was not as immediate or intense as it was for men. They did participate, however, in a number of intellectual activities.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 31. Along with sewing and embroidery, nuns often engaged in reading and discussing correspondence from Church leaders. In the Strassburg monastery of St. Margaret, some of the nuns could converse fluently in Latin. Learning still had an elevated place in the lives of these religious. In fact, Margarette Reglerin, a daughter of a wealthy Nuremberg family, was dismissed from a convent because she did not have the ability or will to learn.Hinnebusch, History of the Dominican Order, 384 As heirs of the Dominican priory of Poissy in France, the Dartford sisters were also heirs to a tradition of profound learning and piety. Sections of translations of spiritual writings in Dartford's library, such as Suso's Little Book of Eternal Wisdom and Laurent du Bois' Somme le Roi, show that the "ghoostli" link to Europe was not lost in the crossing of the Channel. It survived in the minds of the nuns. Also, the nuns shared a unique identity with Poissy as a religious house founded by a royal house. The English nuns were proud of this heritage, and aware that many of them shared in England's great history as members of the noble class, as seen in the next chapter. Devotion to the Virgin Mary was another very important aspect of Dominican spirituality, especially for female members. As an Order, the Dominicans believed that they were established through the good graces of Christ's mother, and through prayers she sent missionaries to save the souls of nonbelievers.Lee, Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality, 152. All Dominicans sang the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin each day and saluted her as their advocate. In England, the Dominican Province began at the second general chapter of the Dominican Order in Bologna during the spring of 1221. Dominic dispatched twelve friars to England under the guidance of their English prior, Gilbert of Fresney. They landed in Dover on August 5, 1221. The province officially came into being at its first provincial chapter in 1230.William Hinnebusch. The Early English Friars Preachers, 1. The English Province was a component of the international Order from which it obtained its laws, direction, and instructions. It was also, however, a group of Englishmen. Its direct supervisors were from England, and the members of the English Province dwelt and labored in English cities, towns, villages, and roadways. English and European ingredients constantly came in contact. The international side of the province's existence influenced the national, and the national responded to, adapted, and sometimes constrained the international.William Hinnebusch. The Early English Friars Preachers, 2. The first Dominican site in England was at Oxford, in the parishes of St. Edward and St. Adelaide.William Hinnebusch. The Early English Friars Preachers, 4. The friars built an oratory to the Blessed Virgin MaryHinnebusch, Early English Friars Preachers, 6. There was a dispute over this oratory in 1228. and by 1265, the brethren, in keeping with their devotion to study, began erecting a school. Actually, the Dominican brothers likely began a school immediately after their arrival, as priories were legally schools.Hinnebusch, Early English Friars Preachers, 8-9. Information about the schools of the English Province is limited, but a few facts are known. Much of the information available is taken from visitation records.Maura O'Carroll, "The Educational Organisation of the Dominicans in England and Wales 1221–1348: A Multidisciplinary Approach," Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 50 (1980): 32. The "visitation" was a section of the province through which visitors to each priory could describe the state of its religious life and its studies to the next chapter. There were four such visits in England and Wales—Oxford, London, Cambridge and York.O'Carroll,33 All Dominican students were required to learn grammar, old and new logic, natural philosophy and theology. Of all of the curricular areas, however, theology was the most important. This is not surprising when one remembers Dominic's zeal for it.O'Carroll,57. English Dominican mysticism in the late medieval period differed from European strands of it in that, whereas European Dominican mysticism tended to concentrate on ecstatic experiences of union with the divine, English Dominican mysticism's ultimate focus was on a crucial dynamic in one's personal relationship with God. This was an essential moral imitation of the Savior as an ideal for religious change, and as the means for reformation of humanity's nature as an image of divinity. This type of mysticism carried with it four elements. First, spiritually it emulated the moral essence of Christ's life. Second, there was a connection linking moral emulation of Christ's life and humanity's disposition as images of the divine. Third, English Dominican mysticism focused on an embodied spirituality with a structured love of fellow men at its center. Finally, the supreme aspiration of this mysticism was either an ethical or an actual union with God.Ross, 160 For English Dominican mystics, the mystical experience was not expressed just in one moment of the full knowledge of God, but in the journey of, or process of, faith. This then led to an understanding that was directed toward an experiential knowledge of divinity. It is important to understand, however, that for these mystics it was possible to pursue mystical life without the visions and voices that are usually associated with such a relationship with God. They experienced a mystical process that allowed them, in the end, to experience what they had already gained knowledge of through their faith only.Ross, 163 The center of all mystical experience is, of course, Christ. English Dominicans sought to gain a full knowledge of Christ through an imitation of His life. English mystics of all types tended to focus on the moral values that the events in Christ's life exemplified. This led to a "progressive understanding of the meanings of Scripture--literal, moral, allegorical, and anagogical"Ross, 164—that was contained within the mystical journey itself. From these considerations of Scripture comes the simplest way to imitate Christ: an emulation of the moral actions and attitudes that Jesus demonstrated in His earthly ministry becomes the most significant way to feel and have knowledge of God. The English concentrated on the spirit of the events of Christ's life, not the literality of events. They neither expected nor sought the appearance of the stigmataThe appearance of St. Francis's and Catherine of Siena's stigmata is well known. or any other physical manifestation. They wanted to create in themselves that environment that allowed Jesus to fulfill His divine mission, insofar as they were able. At the center of this environment was love: the love that Christ showed for humanity in becoming human. Christ's love reveals the mercy of God and His care for His creation. English Dominican mystics sought through this love to become images of God. Love led to spiritual growth that, in turn, reflected an increase in love for God and humanity. This increase in universal love allowed men's wills to conform to God's will, just as Christ's will submitted to the Father's will.Clark, 83 Concerning humanity as the image of Christ, English Dominican spirituality concentrated on the moral implications of image-bearing rather than the philosophical foundations of the imago Dei. The process of Christ's life, and the process of image-bearing, amends humanity to God's image.Clark, 90-98. See also, Ross, 165 The idea of the "image of God" demonstrates both the ability of man to move toward God (as partakers in Christ's redeeming sacrifice), and that, on some level, man is always an image of God. As their love and knowledge of God grows and is sanctified by faith and experience, the image of God within man becomes ever more bright and clear.Ross, 166-167 The following people belonging to the Order have been proclaimed saints throughout history:    Numerous Dominicans were included in the canonization of the 117 martyrs of Vietnam and a group of martyrs in Nagasaki, including St. Lorenzo Ruiz. Numerous Dominicans have been beatified, including: Four Dominican friars have served as Bishop of Rome: , there are three Dominicans in the College of Cardinals: Other notable Dominicans include:   Their identification as Dominicans gave rise to the pun that they were the Domini canes, or Hounds of the Lord.The reference to "hounds" draws on the tradition that St. Dominic's mother, while pregnant with him, had a vision of a black and white dog with a torch in its mouth; wherever the dog went, it set fire to the earth. It was explained that the vision was fulfilled when Dominic and his followers went forth, clad in black and white, setting fire to the earth with the Gospel. In English, the word "hound" has two further meanings that may be drawn upon. A hound is loyal, and the Dominicans have a reputation as obedient servants of the faith. And a hound pursues its quarry ("hounds"), with perhaps a sometimes negative connotation or reference to the order's involvement with the Holy Inquisition. In England and other countries the Dominican friars are referred to as Black Friars because of the black cappa or cloak they wear over their white habits.Oxford English Dictionary, s.v. "Black friar" Dominicans were Blackfriars, as opposed to Whitefriars (i.e., Carmelites) or Greyfriars (i.e., Franciscans). They are also distinct from the Augustinian Friars (the Austin friars) who wear a similar habit. In France, the Dominicans were known as Jacobins because their convent in Paris was attached to the church of Saint-Jacques, now disappeared, on the way to Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, which belonged to the Italian Order of San Giacomo dell AltopascioOxford English Dictionary, s.v. "Jacobin"(1) (St. James) Sanctus Iacobus in Latin. The Middle Ages (from their foundation to the beginning of the 16th century); The Modern Period up to the French Revolution; The Contemporary Period. Laudare, Benedicere, Praedicare :To praise, to bless and to preach : (from the Dominican Missal, Preface of the Blessed Virgin Mary) Veritas :Truth Contemplare et Contemplata Aliis Tradere :To study and to hand on the fruits of study (or, to contemplate and to hand on the fruits of contemplation) One in faith, hope, and love St. Dominic (d. 1221) St. Peter Martyr (d. 1252) St. Zedislava Berkiana (d. 1252) St. Hyacinth (d. 1257) St. Margaret of Hungary (d. 1271) St. Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) St. Raymond of Peñafort (d. 1275) St. Albert the Great (d. 1280) St. Agnes of Montepulciano (d. 1317) St. Catherine of Siena (d. 1380) St. Vincent Ferrer (d. 1419) St. Antoninus (d. 1459) Pope St. Pius V (d. 1572) St. Louis Bertrand (d. 1581) St. Catherine de Ricci (d. 1590) St. John of Cologne (d. 1600) St. Rose of Lima (d. 1617) St. Domingo Ibáñez de Erquicia (d. 1633) St. Lorenzo Ruiz (d. 1637) St. Martin de Porres (d. 1639) St. John Macias (d. 1645) Thomasian Martyrs (Asia and Spain, 17th and 18th centuries) St. Louis de Montfort (d. 1716) St. Francisco Coll Guitart (d. 1875) St. Thomas Khoung (d. 1600+) Blessed Jordan of Saxony Blessed Mannes de Guzman, Brother of St. Dominic de Guzman Blessed Alanus dela Rupe Blessed Peter González Blessed Margaret of Castello Blessed Sadok and 48 Dominican martyrs from Sandomierz Blessed Ceslaus, Blessed Pier Giorgio Frassati Blessed Henry Suso Blessed Fra Angelico Pope Blessed Innocent V Pope Blessed Benedict XI Blessed Robert Nutter, English Reformation martyr Blessed Reginald of Orleans (also known as Reginald of Saint-Gilles) Blessed Jan Franciszek Czartoryski Blessed Gonçalo de Amarante, priest and hermit Blessed Joan of Aza, mother of St. Dominic de Guzmán Blessed Giuseppe Girotti Blessed Bartolo Longo Blessed Imelda Lambertini Blessed Catherine of Racconigi Blessed Lucy Brocadelli Blessed Jordan of Pisa Blessed Adrian Fortescue (martyr) Blessed Columba of Rieti Blessed Stephana de Quinzanis Blessed Osanna of Mantua Blessed Osanna of Cattaro Blessed Anthony Neyrot Blessed John of Vercelli Blessed Margaret of Savoy Pope Innocent V Pope Benedict XI Pope St. Pius V Pope Benedict XIII Georges Marie Martin Cardinal Cottier (Swiss theologian emeritus of the Pontifical Household; he is over 80 and therefore would not be able to participate in any future Conclave) Christoph Cardinal Schönborn Austrian Archbishop of Vienna Dominik Duka,  Czech Archbishop of Prague Gabriel Barletta Matteo Bandello Frei Betto, (1944) Brazilian friar, theologian, political activist and former government adviser Meister Eckhart (c.1260–c.1328) German mystic and preacher Giordano Bruno (1548–1600), scientist as a haeretic condemned and burned in Rome Anne Buttimer, University College Dublin Oliviero Carafa Brian Davies (Distinguished Professor of Philosophy, Fordham University; former Regent of Blackfriars, Oxford) Francisco de Vitoria (one of the founders of International Law) Bartolomé de las Casas (1484–1566) Spanish bishop in the West, Protector of the Indians Nicholas Eymerich Marie-Dominique Chenu (1895–1990) French theologian of the Nouvelle Théologie Yves Congar (1904–1995) French theologian of the Nouvelle Théologie, later cardinal Anthony Fisher (b.1960) Archbishop of Sydney, Australia Bernard Gui (1261–1331) French bishop and inquisitor of the Cathars Jean Jérôme Hamer (1916–1996) Belgian theologian and Curia official, cardinal Henrik Kalteisen, the 24th Archbishop of Nidaros Heinrich Kramer (1430–1505) German author of the Malleus Maleficarum (Hammer of Witches), handbook of witch hunting Dominique Pire (George) (1910–1969) Nobel Peace Prize Vincent McNabb (1868–1943) Anglo-Irish scholar, apologist and ecumenist Timothy Radcliffe (1945) 85th Master of the Order of Preachers Girolamo Savonarola (1452–1498) Italian pre-reformation theologian, dictatorial ruler of Florentine Republic, burned by the Inquisition Edward Schillebeeckx (1914–1998) Belgian theologian Johann Tetzel Tomás de Torquemada (1420–1498) Spanish theologian, Grand-Inquisitor, expelled the Jews Gustavo Gutierrez (1928) Peruvian liberation theologian Herbert McCabe (1926–2001) English theologian and scholar Jeanine Deckers, "The Singing Nun" (1933–1985) shortly famous Belgian nun and chanson singer; left the order, lived with her girlfriend, both committed suicide Croatian Dominican Province Dominicans in Ireland Dominican Order in the United States Albertus Magnus College, New Haven, Connecticut, USA - est.1925 Angelicum College, Quezon City, Philippines - est. 1972 Angelicum School Iloilo, Iloilo City, Philippines - est. 1978 Aquinas College (Michigan), Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA - est. 1886 Aquinas Institute of Theology, St. Louis, Missouri, USA - est. 1939 Aquinas School, San Juan, Metro Manila, Philippines - est. 1965 Aquinas University, Legazpi City, Philippines Blackfriars Hall, Oxford, United Kingdom Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Intramuros, Philippines - est. 1620 Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Calamba, Philippines Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Bataan, Abucay, Bataan, Philippines Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Manaoag (formerly Our Lady of Manaoag College), Manaoag, Pangasinan, Philippines Colegio Lacordaire, Cali, Colombia - est. 1956 Dominican College of Santa Rosa, Santa Rosa, Laguna, Philippines - est. 1994 Dominican College of Tarlac, Capas, Tarlac, Philippines - est. 1947 Dominican International School, Taipei City, Taiwan - est. 1957 Dominican School Manila, Sampaloc, Manila, Philippines - est. 1958 Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology, Berkeley, California, USA - est. 1861 Dominican University (Illinois), River Forest, Illinois, USA - est. 1901 Dominican University College,Dominican University College Ottawa, Ontario, Canada -est. 1900 Dominican University of California, San Rafael, California, USA - est. 1890 Edgewood College, Madison, Wisconsin, USA - est. 1927 Fenwick High School, Oak Park, Illinois, USA - est. 1929 Holy Trinity University, Puerto Princesa City, Philippines - est. 1940 Marian Catholic High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois, USA - est. 1958 Mount Saint Mary College, Newburgh, New York, USA Ohio Dominican University, Columbus, Ohio, USA Pontifical Faculty of the Immaculate Conception Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas Providence College San Pedro College, Davao City Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of Taytay, Taytay, Rizal St Dominic's College, Henderson, Auckland, New Zealand St Dominic's College, Wanganui, New Zealand St. Catharine College, St. Catharine, Kentucky, USA St. Mary's Dominican High School, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas The Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomas, The Catholic University of the Philippines - est. 1611 Universidad Santo Tomas de Aquino, Bogota, Colombia Anglican Order of Preachers Blackfriars (disambiguation) (many name places in Britain testifying to former Dominican presence) Chinese Rites controversy Community of the Lamb (a new branch of the Dominican Order, founded in 1983) Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament Dominican Rite - The Separate Use for Dominicans in the Latin Church Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Malaueg Church in Rizal, Cagayan, Philippines - The famous Dominican Church in the Philippines Master of the Order of Preachers Mexican Inquisition Osmund Lewry Sainte Marie de La Tourette, modernist Dominican monastery designed by Le Corbusier St Dominic's Priory Church the residence of the Provincial of the Dominican friars in England and Scotland Spanish Inquisition The Blackfriars of Shrewsbury Third Order of St. Dominic Thomas Aquinas and the Sacraments Thought of Thomas Aquinas Order of Preachers Homepage - Available in English, French and Spanish The Dominican Monastery Pius XII in Fátima, Portugal The Dominican Monastery of St. Jude in Marbury, Alabama Our Lady of the Holy Rosary Monastery in Buffalo NY (A Dominican contemplative monastery with Latin chant) Order of Preachers or Dominicans - Catholic Encyclopedia article Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Lectures in Dominican History The Mysticism of Catherine of Siena The Dominican Way Siena Retreat Center, A sponsored ministry of the Racine Dominican Sisters Online Resource Library
