   E‑ZPass is an electronic toll-collection system used on most tolled roads, bridges, and tunnels in the midwestern and northeastern United States, south to North Carolina, and west to Illinois. Currently, there are 25 agencies spread across 14 states that make up the E‑ZPass Interagency Group (IAG).E-ZPass Group - Home All member agencies use the same technology, allowing travelers to use the same E‑ZPass transponder throughout the IAG network. Various independent systems that use the same technology have been integrated into the E‑ZPass system. These include I&#8209;Pass in Illinois and NC Quick Pass in North Carolina. Other interoperable systems retained their own branding for some time, but have all since been rebranded simply as E-ZPass.     E‑ZPass tags are activeNJTA-E-ZPass  RFID transponders, made exclusively by Kapsch TrafficCom (formerly Mark&nbsp;IV Industries Corp—IVHS Division). They communicate with reader equipment built into lane-based or open-road toll collection lanes by transmitting a unique radio signature. The most common type of tag is an internal tag that can be mounted on the inside of the vehicle's windshield in proximity to the rear-view mirror. Some vehicles have windshields that block RF signals; for those vehicles, historical vehicles, and customers who have aesthetic concerns, an external tag is offered, typically designed to attach to the vehicle's front license plate mounting points.E-ZPass® New York - Tags. E-zpassny.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-23. Although a tag can be used with a motorcycle, there are usually no official instructions given for mounting due to the numerous variations between bike designs and the small area of a motorcycle windshield which could prove a hindrance if the transponder is attached following automobile instructions. Transponders may be put in a shirt or jacket pocket, if necessary.http://www.massdot.state.ma.us/highway/TrafficTravelResources/EZPassMAProgram/FrequentlyAskedQuestions.aspx#21 Most E‑ZPass lanes are converted manual toll lanes and must have fairly low speed limits for safety reasons (between 5 and 15&nbsp;mph is typical), so that E‑ZPass vehicles can merge safely with vehicles that stopped to pay a cash toll and, in some cases, to allow toll workers to safely cross the E‑ZPass lanes to reach booths accepting cash payments. In some areas, however (typically recently built or retrofitted facilities), there is no need to slow down, because E‑ZPass users can utilize dedicated traffic lanes ("Express E&#8209;ZPass") that are physically separate from the toll-booth lanes. Examples include: In October 2006, Illinois completed open road tolling for I‑Pass and E‑ZPass users; it was the first U.S.&nbsp;state to have done so.First state to complete ORT http://www.illinoistollway.com/portal/page?_pageid=54,1373776&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL Each E-ZPass tag is specifically programmed for a particular class of vehicle; while any valid working tag will be read and accepted in any E‑ZPass toll lane, the wrong toll amount will be charged if the tag's programmed vehicle class does not match the vehicle. This will result in a violation and possible large fine assessed to the tag holder, especially if a lower-class (e.g.,&nbsp;passenger car) tag is being used in a higher-class vehicle such as a bus or truck. In an attempt to avoid this, E‑ZPass tags for commercial vehicles are blue in color, contrasting with the white tags assigned to standard passenger vehicles. The blue E‑ZPass is also used in government employee vehicles. In New York, an orange E‑ZPass tag is issued to emergency vehicles as well as to employees of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and New York State Thruway Authority. For purposes of interoperability, all agencies are connected to each other by a secure network (the "reciprocity network"). This network provides the means to exchange tag data and process toll transactions across the various agencies.  Tag data is exchanged among the agencies on a nightly basis. This data can take up to 24 hours on the primary network the unit is issued by (e.g.,&nbsp;i‑Zoom, i‑Pass, E‑ZPass), but may be delayed by as much as 72&nbsp;hours on other networks.E-ZPass Group - File Specifications. E-zpassiag.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-23.E-ZPass MA Frequently Asked Questions - Highway Division - MassDOT. Massdot.state.ma.us. Retrieved on 2013-07-23. The E‑ZPass transponder works by listening for a signal broadcast by the reader stationed at the toll booth. This 915&nbsp;MHz signal is sent at 500 kbit/s using the TDM (formerly IAG) protocol in 256‑bit packets.  Transponders use active Type&nbsp;II read/write technology. In April 2013, Kapsch (purchasers of Mark IV Industries) made the protocol available to all interested parties royalty-free in perpetuity and is also granting the right to sublicense the protocol.Kapsch.net. Kapsch.net (2013-04-25). Retrieved on 2013-07-23. Some issuing agencies offer a packaged E‑ZPass transponder preloaded with toll funds sold over-the-counter at a retail setting (such as a supermarket or pharmacy service desk) that are valid immediately.http://www.paturnpike.com/ezpass/retail.htm A portion of the balance is available instantly; customers can access the remaining balance when they register their transponders with the issuing E‑ZPass agency within several days of first using their tags.   The notion of electronic tolling had been considered as early as the 1980s, particularly in the New York metropolitan area. The tolling agencies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania—which constitute two-thirds of the United States' $3&nbsp;billion-a-year toll industry—sought to create a compatible electronic-tolling technology that could be used on the toll roads and bridges of the three states, in an effort to reduce congestion on some of the busiest roadways and toll plazas in the United States. In 1991, the E‑ZPass IAG was created to develop an interoperable system, and involved the participation and cooperation of seven independent toll agencies—The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, The New Jersey Turnpike Authority, The New Jersey Highway Authority—which, at the time, operated the Garden State Parkway—the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the New York State Thruway Authority, The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, and the South Jersey Transportation Authority (operator of the Atlantic City Expressway). The E‑ZPass trademark, however, belongs to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. The Port Authority has been aggressive at protecting its trademark, including forcing the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority to rename the "EZ&nbsp;Pass" regional transit pass to "EZ transit pass" to protect its rights.[ ] On January 1, 1991, the Oklahoma Turnpike Authority's Pikepass became the first electronic toll collection system in the United States. Under the direction of Peter Tufo, chairman of the New York State Thruway from 1989 to 1996, E‑ZPass was first deployed on the Thruway at the Spring Valley toll plaza on August 3, 1993. Over the following three and a half years, the New York State Thruway Authority (NYSTA) installed electronic toll-collection equipment, in stages, along the Thruway. By February 6, 1997, E‑ZPass had been installed along the entire length of the corridor. The Pennsylvania Turnpike had planned to adopt E-ZPass by 1998; however, implementation of the system was postponed until December 2, 2000, when E-ZPass debuted on the turnpike between Harrisburg West and the Delaware River Bridge. By December 15, 2001, E-ZPass could be used on the entire length of the mainline Pennsylvania Turnpike. Commercial vehicles were allowed to use the system beginning on December 14, 2002, and the entire Turnpike system was taking E-ZPass by 2006. On October 6, 1998, a U.S.&nbsp;patent for an "automated toll collection system" was issued to Fred Slavin and Randy J. Schafer. Meanwhile, various other agencies began work on similar electronic toll collecting facilities. This resulted in the emergence of other networks: Originally, these systems were not interchangeable with E‑ZPass. However, since most of them use the same technology (or have since converted over to a compatible technology), all of them have been incorporated into the E‑ZPass network. Though several still retain their own brand name for their own facilities, users of those systems can use E‑ZPass and vice versa. This allows, for example, travelers to drive on various toll roads in several states from Chicago, Illinois, to Atlantic City, New Jersey, with only an E‑ZPass tag. The E‑ZPass system continues to expand. The Indiana Toll Road Concessions Corporation has upgraded its toll plazas to include E‑ZPass functionality on the Indiana East–West Toll Road, while the Ohio Turnpike Commission has upgraded its toll plazas in October 2009 for the Ohio Turnpike (I‑76, I‑80, I‑90). The Indiana Toll Road Concession Company brands its E‑ZPass program as I&#8209;Zoom; Ohio will use the E‑ZPass brand name. On December 16, 2008, Rhode Island joined the network by activating E‑ZPass lanes in the state's only toll booth, at the Claiborne Pell Newport Bridge.  The Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, which had a toll road system pre-dating the E-ZPass system which was ended in 2006, announced at the end of July 2015 their entrance into the E-ZPass system as part of the financing for the Louisville area Ohio River Bridges Project involving the new Downtown Crossing and East End bridges. E‑ZPass ETC transponders do not work on all toll roads in the United States. Currently, the E-ZPass electronic toll-collection system (as well as the other ETC systems that are part of the E‑ZPass network) are not compatible with Florida systems (including SunPass and E‑Pass), California's FasTrak, Kansas's K&#8209;Tag, Oklahoma's Pikepass, Texas's TxTag, Utah's Express Pass, Puerto Rico's AutoExpreso, Georgia's Peach Pass and Cruise Card, or other ETC systems outside of E‑ZPass operating regions. Under MAP-21, passed in 2012, all ETC facilities in the United States must reach some form of interoperability by October 1, 2016. In 2009 an organization called the Alliance for Toll InteroperabilityATI - Alliance for Toll Interoperability. Tollinterop.org (2013-07-19). Retrieved on 2013-07-23. stated that it was exploring the option of using high-speed cameras to take photographs of the cars passing through non-E‑ZPass lanes in other states. The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, which has been studying going towards all-electronic tolling in order to cut costs, plans to implement such a system for non-E-ZPass users by 2018. Until 2005, drivers crossing the Peace Bridge between Fort Erie, Ontario, and Buffalo, New York, paid a toll before crossing to Canada.  Following upgrades to the border crossings in 2005, drivers instead pay a toll on the Canadian side of the Peace Bridge after clearing Canadian customs. This is the first E‑ZPass toll booth located outside of the United States. The toll goes to the Buffalo and Fort Erie Public Bridge Authority, a bi-national agency responsible to maintain the international bridge. On August 11, 2014, E-ZPass began to be accepted at the Lewiston–Queenston Bridge, Rainbow Bridge, and Whirlpool Rapids Bridge.  The toll for the Lewiston-Queenston Bridge is paid in Canada after clearing Canadian customs, whereas the toll is paid before leaving the United States at the other two bridges.  The toll from these three bridges goes to the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission. For E-ZPass subscribers who replenish their accounts with a major credit card the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey offers an E-ZPass option to pay for parking at three Port Authority airports—John F. Kennedy International Airport, LaGuardia Airport, and Newark Liberty International Airport—through a program known as E-ZPass Plus.[ ]  This program is also available in New York at the Albany International Airport in Albany, Syracuse Hancock International Airport in Syracuse, and the parking lots at the New York State Fair when the fair is in progress; as well as in Atlantic City, New Jersey at the Atlantic City International Airport, the New York Avenue Parking Garage, and the Atlantic City Surface Lot. The parking payment is debited from the prepaid E‑ZPass account if the parking fee is less than $20. If it is $20 or more, the amount is charged directly to the credit card used to replenish the E‑ZPass account. The Port Authority reports that drivers save an average of 15 seconds by opting to pay for airport parking using E‑ZPass. Subscribers who replenish their E‑ZPass accounts with cash or check cannot participate in this program. Additionally, this service is only available, as of 2013, to customers of the DelDOT, Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission, or Delaware River and Bay Authority, or of the New Hampshire DOT; to customers in Maryland and in New Jersey; to customers of the PANYNJ, the New York MTA, or the NYS Thruway; and to customers of the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission. In late 2012, the I‑495 HOT (high occupancy toll) lanes in Virginia started to support E‑ZPass Flex transponders. These work similarly to regular transponders, but let the driver switch between HOV and toll-paying modes. When a transponder is switched to HOV mode (with three or more passengers in the vehicle), it is read by the HOT lane's toll equipment but no toll is charged. E-ZPass Flex also works like a standard E-ZPass on all other toll roads where E-ZPass is accepted, regardless of the position of the switch. A study published in the American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E&#8209;ZPass”, compared fetal health outcomes for mothers living near congested and uncongested toll plazas on three major highways in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. The researchers focused on areas where toll plazas had instituted E‑ZPass, which, because cars travel through more efficiently, diminishes congestion and pollution. The study drew its conclusions by looking at the health outcomes of nearly 30,000 births among mothers who lived within two kilometers of an E‑ZPass toll plaza. The researchers state that their findings “suggest that the adoption of E-ZPass was associated with significant improvements of infant health”. The study's specific findings were: 1) In areas where E‑ZPass was adopted, rates of infant prematurity decreased by between 6.7% and 9.1%; this means that, out of the sample studied, 255 preterm births were avoided; 2) Introduction of E‑ZPass was correlated with a reduction in the incidence of low birth weight by between 8.5% and 11.3%; that means 275 cases of low birth weight were avoided.  Civil liberties and privacy rights advocates have expressed concern about how the position data gathered through E‑ZPass is used. As of August 2007, several states that employ E‑ZPass have provided electronic toll information in response to court orders in civil cases, including divorces and other non-criminal matters. Position data is collected by antennas at locations in addition to fee collection locations. The New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT), for example, collect transponder information to provide real-time estimates of travel times between common destinations. By subtracting the time when vehicles pass under the first sign from the current time, the sign can display the expected travel time between the sign and the destination point ahead. This information is also used to determine the best times to schedule lane maintenance-related lane closures and for other traffic management purposes. According to NYSDOT, the individual tag information is encrypted, is deleted as soon as the vehicle passes the last reader, and is never made available to the Department. Within the IAG, each member agency has its own billing and customer service center, and each establishes its own fee and discount structures. The agencies also set their own customer account policies. Areas of variation include the refundable deposit or nonrefundable charge for a tag, periodic maintenance fees, paper statement fees, the low account threshold, and replenishment amounts. E‑ZPass is usually offered as a debit account: tolls are deducted from prepayments made by the users. Users may opt to have prepayments automatically deposited when their account is low, or they may submit prepayments manually, either by phone or a toll authority's web portal, depending on the agency. For commercial accounts, some agencies allow postpaid plans with a security deposit (which effectively renders them prepaid accounts, with a different replenishment policy). Some agencies have imposed periodic account maintenance fees on their subscribers. After New Jersey began losing money with the E‑ZPass system, a monthly account fee of one dollar was implemented on July 15, 2002Tri-State Transportation Campaign: Mobilizing the Region 386, E-ZPass Gains New Customers and is still in effect for both individual and business accounts.New Jersey E-ZPass - Individual and Business Terms and Conditions The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey also charges a monthly individual account fee of one dollar.E-ZPass® New York - Terms & Conditions - Individual Accounts On July 1, 2009, the Maryland Transportation Authority began charging a fee of $1.50 a month to accountholders which, as of July 1, 2015, only applies to non-residents and is waived if three Maryland E‑ZPass tolls were incurred during the previous month.http://www.mdta.maryland.gov/News/MDTA_News_Releases/governor-hogan-rolls-back-tolls-statewide-saving-marylanders-54-million-a-year The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority (TBTA) in New York City once imposed a monthly account fee starting on July 1, 2005, claiming to defray the administrative costs. However, New York State Assembly Bill A06859A in 2005 and 2006 and Senate Bill S6331 in 2006 both considered such a fee threatening the efficiency to move traffic faster with lower tolls and sought to ban it. When the New York State Law started to ban the monthly account fee, the TBTA repealed it on June 1, 2006, and those, especially New Jerseyans, seeking New York accounts and avoiding the monthly fee still imposed by New Jersey and Port Authority, would have to apply for the TBTA or the New York State Thruway accounts at an E‑ZPass New York Service Center.AAA New York: Car and Travel: March 2007 Several agencies offer discounted tolls to E-ZPass customers. The details vary widely, and can include general discounts for all E‑ZPass users, variable pricing discounts for off-peak hours, commuter plans with minimum usage levels, flat rate plans offering unlimited use for a period of time, carpool plans for high-occupancy vehicles, and resident plans for those living near particular toll facilities. Many of these plans are available only to customers whose tags are issued by the agency that owns the toll facility in question (reciprocity applies to tag acceptance, not to discounts). Eight authorities in the Northeast (Maine,Maine Turnpike: Toll Charts the Massachusetts Turnpike,Massachusetts Turnpike Toll / Mileage Calculator shows that E-ZPass discount tolls are limited to FAST LANE users. the New Hampshire Turnpike, Rhode Island, NYC TBTA,MTA Bridges and Tunnels Crossing Charges limit E-ZPass discounts for tags issued by New York E-ZPass Customer Service Center only. New Jersey Turnpike, DelDOTThe Frequent User Plan is limited to Delaware tags. Otherwise, the cash and E&#8209;ZPass tolls are the same.) and Maryland restrict their general discounts to their own respective tagholders. The Delaware Memorial Bridge restricts its discount plans to New Jersey tags despite its toll plaza being located in Delaware (DelDOT-issued tags cannot obtain the discount plans). Some agencies charge a one-time fee between $20 and $30 for each new transponder, including the Delaware Department of Transportation, the New Hampshire Department of Transportation, and the Maine Turnpike Authority. At least two agencies, the Delaware River and Bay Authority and the Maryland Transportation Authority, once charged multiple fees. In a press release dated July 17, 2007, the DRBA stated: "Beginning January 1, 2008, all DRBA E-ZPass account holders will be charged an account management fee of $1.50 per month. The transponder cost will also be passed on to E&#8209;ZPass customers for each new transponder." E‑ZPass New York charges a monthly fee of 50&nbsp;cents for each tag in connection with a business account.E-ZPass® New York - Terms & Conditions - Business Accounts The DRBA since merged its service center with New Jersey's E-ZPass service center. On July 1, 2015, a plan put forth by Governor Hogan eliminated Maryland's monthly fee (except accounts without a Maryland address, unless using Maryland toll facilities at least three times in the previous statement period) along with decreasing some toll rates especially for Maryland-issued E-ZPass tags. E‑ZPass users are not required to maintain their account with an agency in their home state. Subscribers can open an E‑ZPass account with any member of the IAG regardless of residency. This means that users have the option of choosing an agency based on the fees that it charges, effectively allowing them to circumvent transponder and account maintenance fees.  As listed on its website, the E-ZPass Interagency Group includes "26 members in 15 states". A twenty-seventh member, the Kentucky Public Transportation Infrastructure Authority is also listed on the Group's website, although its Ohio River Bridges Project is still under constructions and it currently does not operate any toll facilites. Although the Virginia Department of Transportation is Virginia's sole member of the E-ZPass Interagency Group, not all E-ZPass facilities in Virginia are operated by the Department of Transportation. Each of the fifteen E-ZPass states operate their own E-ZPass Service Center. NJ E-ZPass manages accounts for the Burlington County Bridge Commission, Delaware River and Bay Authority, Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission and Delaware River Port Authority. The E-ZPass New York Service Center operates accounts for the Buffalo and Port Erie Public Bridge Authority, the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission, and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.  The following tolled roads, bridges, tunnels, and airports accept E‑ZPass. Crossings between jurisdictions are listed in the state or province where the toll collection point is located. Note: These are international bridges between Ontario and New York.  Some toll plazas are in New York and some are in Ontario. Although not part of the E‑ZPass-Plus program, E‑ZPass users may also pay for parking at Pittsburgh International Airport. The E‑ZPass transponder is used for identification only. The Southern Beltway, which also uses E-ZPass, has its western terminus at the airport. E‑ZPass was tested in a since-discontinued program by some McDonald's restaurants on Long Island, New York, at which drive-through customers were given the option to pay using their E‑ZPass accounts to test out cardless payment platforms.Fast Food Drive-Thrus Are Getting E-ZPass System So You Don’t Have to Exhaust Yourself Digging for Change Time (12/26/2013) In late 2013, Wendy's started a similar system called iDriveThru that is E-ZPass compatible, and is currently undergoing testing at five Staten Island Wendy's locations. The New York State Fair offered E‑ZPass Plus as a payment option at two of its parking lots for the first time in 2007, and offered the service again for subsequent seasons.[ ]  The service was administered by the New York State Thruway Authority (NYSTA), and motorists' E‑ZPass accounts were charged the same $5 parking fee that cash customers were charged. Unlike other E‑ZPass Plus implementations, the State Fair systems charged motorists at the parking lot entrances; drivers opting to pay by E‑ZPass Plus used dedicated "E&#8209;ZPass Plus Only" lanes. Since the lots only charge for parking during the twelve days of the State Fair, mobile, self-contained E-ZPass units were used to process vehicles. The units were mounted on trailers with a collapsible gantry for the E‑ZPass antennas, used a cellular wireless connection to send transactions to the NYSTA backoffice system, and were powered by batteries that were kept replenished by photovoltaic solar panels, with a generator for backup. E‑ZPass can also be used to pay for parking at the Route 128 station in Westwood, Massachusetts; this is available for Massachusetts customers only. E‑ZPass transponders are also used to monitor traffic. A transponder reader is placed above the roadway at various intervals, and the time a particular tag takes between scans at each interval provides information about the speed of traffic between those points. This transit time information is often relayed back to motorists via electronic signs on the roadway. The individual tag data is not collected or used for ticketing purposes, as some sources have suggested. There are a few toll facilities, mostly bridges run by independent authorities, that are not part of the E-ZPass network even though they are in a state that is in the E-ZPass region. These facilities include: According to P.J. Wilkins, executive director of the E-ZPass Interagency Group, bridges of the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission and the Thousand Islands Bridge Authority, both in Western New York, will join the E-ZPass system in 2014. Kentucky will join the consortium officially when the Ohio River Bridges Project linking it with Indiana, an existing E-ZPass state is completed. Also, with Congress seeking a national electronic toll-collection system in place by mid-2016 for federal highways, E-ZPass officials are talking to other states that have electronic tolls "to find a common way to do business". State Monthly/Annual Fee(s) Deposit Minimum Balance Discounts DelawareE-ZPass Delaware: FAQ $0 for email/web statements, $8/year for quarterly paper statements $15 per internal or external transponder (non-refundable) $10 minimum balance (Account charged a replenishment amount based on monthly toll usage, with a minimum of $25). 50% off cash rates for Delaware SR‑1 when 30 or more qualifying trips are made by a two-axle passenger vehicle within a 30-day rolling period. Illinois (I-PASS)[ ]  $0 per month $10 per internal transponder (refundable) $10 minimum balance (Account charged a minimum replenishment amount of $20 or an amount 10% of average monthly usage, whichever is higher). 50% off cash rate for all transponders (ISTHA tolls and passenger cars only) Indiana (formerly i‑Zoom) $1 per month/transponder $10 per internal transponder (refundable) $2.50 minimum balance (first 90 days), then $2.50 minimum balance or 25% of average monthly usage, whichever is greater (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $10 in the first 90&nbsp;days, after which the minimum replenishment amount is based on the previous three months of usage on one's account and is recalculated on the first of each month, the minimum amount being $10.). Manual replenishment for any amount is available via ITR website. Discounts available to all transponders. Percentage varies by exit. MaineE-ZPass Information - Frequently Asked Questions $0 per month $10 per internal transponder (non-refundable)$17 per external transponder (non-refundable) $15 minimum balance (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $20 when one's account drops below minimum balance). Discounts based on travel volume: 30-39 account trips per month will equal a 25% discount applied to monthly account trips. 40+ account trips per month will equal a 50% discount applied to monthly account trips. For less than 30 account trips per month, Maine E-ZPass customers pay slightly less than cash rate. Other transponders pay cash rate. Marylandhttp://www.ezpassmd.com/en/about/Attention_E-ZPass_Customers_2.pdfhttp://www.mdta.maryland.gov/Toll_Increase/documents/Customer_Letter.pdf $0 per month ($1.50 fee for non-residents only, effective July 1, 2015, waived if three Maryland E‑ZPass tolls incurred during the previous month) $9 per internal transponder (non-refundable)$33 per external transponder (non-refundable)$40 per internal FUSION CVO (PrePass & E-ZPass all-in-one) transponder$18 per internal E-ZPass Flex transponder (For use on I-495 Express Lanes) $10 minimum balance (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $25 or an amount equal to one's average monthly usage, whichever is higher). Discounts available to Maryland E‑ZPass users only. 10-37.5% discount off the passenger vehicle cash rate at all Maryland toll facilities.Maryland EZPass - New Lower Toll Rates Effective July 1, 2015 Various other plans available for bridges and regions. Massachusetts (formerly Fast Lane)E-ZPass MA Program - Highway Division - MassDOT $0 per month if monthly statements by e-mail $0 per internal transponder $20 minimum balance (Account is charged a replenishment amount whenever the balance falls below $10, replenishing the account to a balance of $20). For "Fast Lane"/"E-Z Pass MA" subscribers (from any state): 25¢ discount at Allston-Brighton tolls, 50¢ discount at Sumner and Ted Williams tunnels and Tobin Memorial Bridge.E-ZPass MA Program - Highway Division - MassDOThttp://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=1219859601790298718&hl=en&as_sdt=2&as_vis=1&oi=scholarr With special transponder obtained by application: Residents of Charlestown and Chelsea pay $0.30 on Tobin Bridge.  Residents of East Boston, South Boston, and North End pay $0.40 at Sumner and Ted Williams tunnels.  Carpools with 3 or more passengers receive discount.http://www.massdot.state.ma.us/highway/TrafficTravelResources/EZPassMAProgram/FormsApplications.aspx Turnpikes | NH Department of Transportation] $1 per month for paper statements after year 1[ ] $8.90 per internal transponder (non-refundable)$15.19 per external transponder (non-refundable) $.50 per month to lease transponder $30 minimum balance (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $30 in the first 35&nbsp;days, after which the minimum replenishment amount is based on the previous three months of usage on one's account, the minimum amount being $30). 30% off cash rate for NH transponders only. Other transponders pay cash rate. New Jersey $1 per month membership fee + $1 bimonthly for print/email statements $10 per internal transponder (refundable) or $0 if credit or direct debit replenishment. $10 or 25% of one's replenishment threshold, whichever is greater (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $25 in the first 90&nbsp;days, after which the minimum replenishment amount is based on the previous three months of usage on one's account, the minimum amount being $25). Various discounts for NJ transponders only. Other transponders pay cash rate. New YorkE-ZPass® New York - Terms & Conditions - Individual Accounts $1 per month PANYNJ account service fee (no fee for MTA, Thruway, or Bridge Authority accounts) + $6/yr for monthly paper statements (bimonthly statements are free) $10 per internal transponder (refundable) or $0 if auto-replenish or pay per trip with a credit card backup $30 minimum balance (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $25 or an amount equal to one's average usage in a 90‑day period, whichever is higher) or $0 minimum balance for pay per trip. At all Port Authority facilities, E‑ZPass discounts are available. At MTA Bridges and Tunnels, $2.17 off cash tolls. $4.34 off round-trip at the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and $1.75 discount at the Marine Parkway-Gil Hodges Memorial and Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridges. At all New York State Thruway and New York State Bridge Authority facilities, E‑ZPass discounts apply.  Discount rates apply only to customer tags issued by a New York E-ZPass Customer Service Center (discounts don't apply to out-of-state E-ZPass holders). NY now also offers a Pay-Per-Trip option for total tolls to transact on a daily basis directly via the Checking Account linked per tag. It is optional (yet recommended) that a Credit Card be kept on file, but monthly balances are not required under this new payment option in New York.e-zpassny.com North Carolina (Quick Pass)NC Quick Pass. Myncquickpass.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-23. $0 per month, $1 per month after 12 consecutive months of no toll transactions. $20 per internal (hard case) transponder(Sticker transponders are available for $5 but these are incompatible with E-ZPass and will only work in North Carolina, Florida, and Georgia). $20 minimum balance for first two transponders, $10 for each additional transponder, up to five transponders total. (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $10 or when account balance is 25% of one's replenishment threshold, based on the previous three months of usage, whichever is greater.) Discounts available to all E-ZPass, NC Quick Pass, SunPass, and Peach Pass users; percentage varies by exit. cleveland.com]. Blog.cleveland.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-23. 75¢ per month (waived for those who use their E-ZPass for 30 or more trips in a month on the Ohio Turnpike) $0 per internal transponder ($25 replacement fee within first four years) $25 minimum balance per transponder (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount based on the previous three months of usage, or the amount needed to return the account balance to $25.00 per transponder, whichever is greater). Ohio discount available to all transponders. Percentage varies by exit (0-35%). PennsylvaniaPA Turnpike E-ZPass - Personal Account - FAQ $3 per year/transponder, $4 per month for monthly paper statements $10 per internal transponder (refundable) or $0 if credit or direct debit replenishment $10 per transponder. Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $35 whenever the balance reaches a total value of $10 or less ($15 or less for manual replenishment accounts) per transponder.  If one's account requires more than the allowed replenishments in a one-month cycle (2 times for credit cards and 3 times for ACH), the amount of replenishment will switch to average usage. 35% discount off cash rate to all E-Z Pass transponders. Rhode Island[ ]  $0 per month if monthly statements by e‑mail $20.95 per internal transponder (purchase required)$33.04 per external transponder (purchase required) $25 minimum balance per transponder (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount based on the previous 45-days of usage and is recalculated every 90-days, or the amount needed to return the account balance to $25.00 per transponder, whichever is greater). $0.83 per car on the Claiborne Pell Newport Bridge toll for Rhode Island residents only (as opposed to the normal $2/axle) Virginiahttps://www.ezpassva.com/forms/agreement.pdf $0 per month, as of July 1, 2014. $35 per internal transponder $10 minimum balance per transponder (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $35 per transponder or an amount equal to one's average monthly usage, whichever is higher). West VirginiaE-Z Pass FAQ $5 per year for "prepaid" plan (Includes free use of the North Beckley ramp on the West Virginia Turnpike).  Flat rate, unlimited use plans range from $5 to $285 for various parts of the West Virginia Turnpike. $10 per internal transponder $10 minimum balance. (Account is charged a minimum replenishment amount of $20. No balance needed with annual WV unlimited plan.) 35% off cash rate and free use of the US-19 North Beckley exit for WV transponders only (non-WV transponders pay cash rate) Delaware Route&nbsp;1, Virginia's Pocahontas Parkway, Hampton toll plaza on I&#8209;95 in New Hampshire, Hooksett toll plaza on I&#8209;93 in New Hampshire, Interstate&nbsp;78 Toll Bridge, Newark Toll Plaza on the Delaware Turnpike, Express lanes of the Atlantic City Expressway, Three locations on the New Jersey Turnpike (near the Delaware Memorial Bridge (Exit 1), near Exit 18W, and the Pennsylvania Extension, which connects to the Pennsylvania Turnpike (Exit 6)), Garden State Parkway, Pennsylvania Turnpike's Gateway, Warrendale, Neshaminy Falls and Mid-County (I&#8209;476) toll plazas, New sections of the Mon–Fayette Expressway, New York State Thruway at the Woodbury toll barrier The MassPass system used in Massachusetts, changed to the compatible Fast Lane in 1998 and rebranded E‑ZPass in 2012. The I-Pass system used in Illinois. The I-Zoom system used in Indiana, rebranded E‑ZPass in 2012. The Smart Tag system used in Virginia, merged with E-ZPass in 2004.http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A3665-2004Oct27.html The TransPass system used in Maine, since replaced by the E‑ZPass system. The M&#8209;Tag system used in Maryland, integrated into and rebranded E‑ZPass in 2001. The Quick Pass system used in North Carolina, partially integrated in 2013North Carolina and E-ZPass interoperable from January 3, 2013 | TOLLROADSnews and integrated into Florida's SunPass system. Buffalo and Fort Erie Public Bridge Authority (New York/Ontario) Burlington County Bridge Commission (New Jersey/Pennsylvania) Delaware Department of Transportation Delaware River and Bay Authority (Delaware/New Jersey) Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission (New Jersey/Pennsylvania) Delaware River Port Authority (New Jersey/Pennsylvania) Illinois State Toll Highway Authority Indiana Toll Road Concession Company Maine Turnpike Authority Kentucky Public Transportation Infrastructure Authority (Kentucky/Ohio) Maryland Transportation Authority Massachusetts Department of Transportation Metropolitan Transportation Authority Bridges and Tunnels (New York) New Hampshire Department of Transportation New Jersey Turnpike Authority New York State Bridge Authority New York State Thruway Authority Niagara Falls Bridge Commission North Carolina Turnpike Authority Ohio Turnpike and Infrastructure Commission Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (New Jersey/New York) Rhode Island Turnpike and Bridge Authority Skyway Concessions Company (Illinois) South Jersey Transportation Authority (New Jersey) Virginia Department of Transportation West Virginia Parkways Authority Ontario Peace Bridge Queenston-Lewiston Bridge Rainbow Bridge (Niagara Falls) Whirlpool Rapids Bridge (NEXUS Only) Delaware Delaware Turnpike/Interstate 95 Delaware Route 1 Delaware Memorial Bridge/Interstate 295 Illinois Chicago Skyway/Interstate 90 Jane Addams Memorial (Northwest) Tollway/Interstate 90 Ronald Reagan Memorial (East-West) Tollway/Interstate 88 (west) Tri-State Tollway/Interstate 80, Interstate 94, and Interstate 294 Veterans Memorial (North-South) Tollway/Interstate 355 Indiana Indiana Toll Road/Interstate 80, Interstate 90 Kentucky Ohio River Bridges Project (Downtown Connector/Interstate 65 & East End Bridge/Interstate 265), future Maine Maine Turnpike/Interstate 95 Maryland Baltimore Harbor Tunnel/Interstate 895 Fort McHenry Tunnel/Interstate 95 Francis Scott Key Bridge/Interstate 695 Maryland Route 200 (Intercounty Connector) John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway/Interstate 95 William Preston Lane, Jr. Memorial Bridge (aka the Chesapeake Bay Bridge)/U.S. Route 50 and U.S. Route 301 Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial Bridge/U.S. Route 301 Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge/U.S. Route 40 Massachusetts Massachusetts Turnpike/Interstate 90 Boston Extension Ted Williams Tunnel/Interstate 90 Sumner Tunnel/Massachusetts Route 1A Tobin Bridge/U.S. Route 1 New Hampshire New Hampshire Turnpike/Interstate 95 (aka the Blue Star Turnpike) Spaulding Turnpike/New Hampshire Route 16 Everett Turnpike/U.S. Route 3, Interstate 293, New Hampshire Route 3A, and Interstate 93 New Jersey Holland Tunnel/Interstate 78 Lincoln Tunnel/New Jersey Route 495, New York State Route 495 George Washington Bridge/Interstate 95 New Jersey Turnpike/Interstate 95 and Interstate 78 Garden State Parkway Atlantic City Expressway Easton-Phillipsburg Toll Bridge/U.S. Route 22 Delaware River-Turnpike Toll Bridge/Interstate 95 and Interstate 276 Burlington-Bristol Bridge/New Jersey Route 413 and Pennsylvania Route 413 Tacony-Palmyra Bridge/New Jersey Route 73 and Pennsylvania Route 73 Betsy Ross Bridge/New Jersey Route 90 Benjamin Franklin Bridge/Interstate 676 Commodore Barry Bridge/U.S. Route 322 New York Avenue Garage, Atlantic City Atlantic Avenue Parking Lot, Atlantic City Atlantic City International Airport Newark Liberty International Airport New York Bronx-Whitestone Bridge/Interstate 678 Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel/Interstate 478 Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge Henry Hudson Bridge/Henry Hudson Parkway and New York Route 9A Marine Parkway–Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge Queens-Midtown Tunnel/Interstate 495 Throgs Neck Bridge/Interstate 295 Robert F. Kennedy (Triborough) Bridge/Interstate 278 Verrazano-Narrows Bridge/Interstate 278 Rip Van Winkle Bridge/New York Route 23 Kingston-Rhinecliff Bridge/New York Route 199 Mid-Hudson Bridge/U.S. Route 44 and New York Route 55 Newburgh-Beacon Bridge/Interstate 84 and New York Route 52 Bear Mountain Bridge/U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 202 New York State Thruway/Interstate 87, Interstate 287, and Interstate 90 New England Thruway/Interstate 95 Tappan Zee Bridge/Interstate 87 and Interstate 287 Bayonne Bridge/New Jersey Route 440 and New York Route 440 Goethals Bridge/Interstate 278 Outerbridge Crossing/New Jersey Route 440 and New York Route 440 John F. Kennedy International Airport LaGuardia Airport Albany International Airport Syracuse Hancock International Airport North Grand Island Bridge/Interstate 190 South Grand Island Bridge/Interstate 190 North Carolina Triangle Expressway Ohio Ohio Turnpike (sections of Interstate 76, Interstate&nbsp;80, and Interstate&nbsp;90) Pennsylvania Pennsylvania Turnpike/Interstate&nbsp;76, Interstate&nbsp;70, Interstate&nbsp;276, Interstate&nbsp;476, and Interstate&nbsp;95 Mon–Fayette Expressway/PA Turnpike 43 Amos K. Hutchinson Bypass/PA Turnpike 66 James E. Ross Highway/Interstate 376 Findlay Connector/PA Turnpike 576 Milford-Montague Bridge/U.S. Route 206 Pittsburgh International Airport Grant Oliver Launches Online Sign Up for Go Fast Pass - PITTSBURGH, March 24 /PRNewswire/. Prnewswire.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-23. Delaware Water Gap Toll Bridge/Interstate 80 Portland-Columbia Toll Bridge Interstate 78 Toll Bridge/Interstate 78 New Hope-Lambertville Toll Bridge/U.S. Route 202 Trenton-Morrisville Toll Bridge/U.S. Route 1 Delaware River-Turnpike Toll Bridge/Interstate 95 and Interstate 276 Walt Whitman Bridge/Interstate 76 Benjamin Franklin Bridge/Interstate 676 and U.S. Route 30 Rhode Island Pell Bridge/Rhode Island Route 138 Virginia Boulevard Bridge/Virginia State Route 161 Dulles Toll Road/Virginia State Route 267 Dulles Greenway/Virginia State Route 267 495 Express Lanes/Interstate 495 (HOT Lanes) Powhite Parkway/Virginia State Route 76 George P. Coleman Memorial Bridge/U.S. Route 17 Chesapeake Expressway/Virginia State Route 168 Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel/U.S. Route 13 Pocahontas Parkway/Virginia State Route 895 South Norfolk Jordan Bridge/Virginia State Route 337 Downtown Tunnel/Interstate 264 Midtown Tunnel/U.S. Route 58 95 Express Lanes on Interstate 95 (HOT Lanes) West Virginia West Virginia Turnpike/Interstate 64, Interstate 77 St. Francisville Bridge - Old Wabash Cannonball Railroad (Illinois-Indiana) Fort Madison Toll Bridge (Illinois/Iowa) Downbeach Express (New Jersey) Ocean Drive (New Jersey) Dingman's Ferry Bridge (New Jersey/Pennsylvania) Atlantic Beach Bridge (New York) Ogdensburg-Prescott International Bridge (New York/Ontario, Canada) Seaway International Bridge (New York/Ontario, Canada) Thousand Islands Bridge (New York/Ontario, Canada) Anderson Ferry (Ohio/Kentucky) Augusta Ferry (Ohio/Kentucky) Whites Ferry (Virginia/Maryland) Memorial Bridge (West Virginia/Ohio) Newell Toll Bridge (West Virginia/Ohio) - Privately owned, not operated by the Ohio Turnpike nor the West Virginia Parkways Authority Low Water Toll Bridge (West Virginia/Maryland) Moseywood Road (Lake Harmony, Pennsylvania) - Toll paid upon entry to community. Provides a shortcut to Lake Harmony from Pennsylvania Route 940 to Pennsylvania Route 903 List of toll bridges List of electronic toll collection systems List of toll roads Drivewyze - weigh station bypassing of commercial vehicles at participating state highway locations NORPASS - weigh station bypassing, partner of E-ZPass PrePass - weigh station bypassing, commercial vehicles at participating state highway locations E-ZPass network map
