   Eddie Vedder (born Edward Louis Severson; December 23, 1964) is an American musician, singer and songwriter best known as a member of the rock band Pearl Jam, with whom he performs lead vocals and is one of three guitarists. He is known for his powerful baritone vocals. He is also involved in making music and contributes to albums by other artists. In 2007, Vedder released his first solo album as a soundtrack for the film Into the Wild (2007). His second album Ukulele Songs and a live DVD titled Water on the Road were 2011. Vedder was born Edward Louis Severson&nbsp;III in the Chicago suburb of Evanston, Illinois, on December 23, 1964, to Karen Lee Vedder and Edward Louis Severson, Jr. His parents divorced in 1965, when Vedder was an infant. His mother soon remarried, to a man named Peter Mueller. Vedder was raised believing that Mueller was his biological father, and he went by the name Edward Mueller for a time.Hinckley, David. "Eddie Vedder on the Record: Pearl Jam's Private Front Man Opens Up About Rock Stardom and Where His Music Is Heading". New York Daily News. August 10, 1999. Vedder's ancestry includes German and Danish. While living in Evanston, Vedder's family fostered seven younger children in a group home.Greene, Jo-Ann. "Intrigue and Incest: Pearl Jam and the Secret History of Seattle" (Part 2). Goldmine. August 20, 1993. In the mid-1970s, the family, including Vedder's three younger half-brothers, moved to San Diego County, California. It was at this point that Vedder, who had received a guitar from his mother on his twelfth birthday, began turning to music (as well as surfing) as a source of comfort. He particularly found solace in The Who's 1973 album, Quadrophenia.Kot, Greg. "Rebels With a Cause". Chicago Tribune. July 9, 1995. He said, "When I was around 15 or 16... I felt all alone... I was all alone—except for music." His mother and Mueller divorced when Vedder was in his late teens. His mother and brothers moved back to the Chicago area, but Vedder remained with his stepfather in California so he would not have to change high schools. After the divorce, Vedder learned the truth about his parentage: Mueller was really his stepfather. Vedder had met his biological father briefly as a child, but had believed that Severson was merely an old friend of his parents. By the time Vedder learned the truth, Severson had died of multiple sclerosis. By his senior year at San Dieguito High School, Vedder was on his own, living in an apartment and supporting himself with a nightly job at a drug store in Encinitas. He eventually dropped out of high school in his senior year due to the pressures of balancing school with working. He joined the rest of his family in Chicago, and it was at this time that he changed his name to Eddie Vedder, Vedder being his mother's maiden name. In the early 1980s, while working as a waiter, Eddie earned his high school GED, and briefly attended a community college near Chicago.Macdonald, Patrick. "The Most Popular Band In The World – After Screaming Their Way To The Top Of The Rock World, Pearl Jam And A Silent Eddie Vedder Are Headed Home To Seattle". The Seattle Times. December 5, 1993. In 1984, Vedder returned to San Diego, with his girlfriend, Beth Liebling. He kept busy recording demo tapes at his home and working various jobs, including a position as a contracted security guard at the La Valencia Hotel in La Jolla.Donoho, Ron. "La Valencia Hotel". San Diego Magazine. February 2001. Vedder had several stints in San Diego area bands, including Surf and Destroy and The Butts. One of those bands, called Indian Style,Cross, Alan. "Alt-Rock's Greatest Rhythm Sections – Seg. 2". ongoinghistory.com. included future Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave drummer Brad Wilk.Bad Radio – I BelievePatrick. "IntBad Radio – I Believeerview with Brad Wilk, Drummer for Audioslave". digital-noise.net. 2003. In 1988, Vedder became the vocalist for the San Diego progressive funk rock band Bad Radio. The music of the original incarnation of the band was influenced by Duran Duran; however, after Vedder joined Bad Radio, the band moved on to a more alternative rock sound influenced by the Red Hot Chili Peppers.Colapinto, John. "Pearl Jam's Mystery Man". Rolling Stone. November 28, 1996.  After leaving Bad Radio, Vedder was without a band, and for the rest of the 1980s he worked part-time as a night attendant at a local gas station.Farley, Christopher John. "Rock's Anxious Rebels". Time. October 25, 1993. Through the Southern California music scene, Vedder met former Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons, who became a friend of Vedder and who would play basketball with him.Wall, Mick. "Alive". Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. Q p. 95 Later in 1990, Irons gave him a demo tape from a band in Seattle, Washington that was looking for a singer. He listened to the tape shortly before going surfing, where lyrics came to him. Vedder wrote lyrics for three of the songs in what he later described as a "mini-opera" entitled Momma-Son. The songs tell the story of a young man who, like Vedder, learns that he had been lied to about his paternity and that his real father is dead, grows up to become a serial killer, and is eventually imprisoned and sentenced to death. Vedder recorded vocals for the three songs, and mailed the demo tape back to Seattle. The three songs would later become Pearl Jam's "Alive", "Once", and "Footsteps". After hearing Vedder's tape, former Mother Love Bone members Stone Gossard and Jeff Ament invited Vedder to come to Seattle to audition for their new band. They were instantly impressed with his unique sound. At the time, Gossard and Ament were working on the Temple of the Dog project founded by Soundgarden's Chris Cornell as a musical tribute to Mother Love Bone's frontman Andrew Wood, who died of a heroin overdose at age 24. Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron and newcomer Mike McCready were also a part of the project. The song "Hunger Strike" became a duet between Cornell and Vedder. Cornell later said of Vedder that "he sang half of that song not even knowing that I'd wanted the part to be there and he sang it exactly the way I was thinking about doing it, just instinctively." Vedder would provide background vocals on several other songs as well. In April 1991, Temple of the Dog was released through A&M Records.  Pearl Jam was formed in 1990 by Ament, Gossard, and McCready, who then recruited Vedder and three different drummers in sequence.The three early drummers of Mookie Blaylock were: Dave Krusen until May 1991, followed by Matt Chamberlain for a few shows and "Alive" video, finally followed by Dave Abbruzzese. The band originally took the name Mookie Blaylock, but was forced to change it when the band signed to Epic Records in 1991, instead calling their debut album Ten, after Blaylock's jersey number. Ten broke the band into the mainstream, and became one of the best selling alternative albums of the 1990s, being certified 13x Platinum. The band found itself amidst the sudden popularity and attention given to the Seattle music scene and the genre known as grunge. The single "Jeremy" received Grammy Award nominations for Best Rock Song and Best Hard Rock Performance in 1993. Pearl Jam received four awards at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards for its music video for "Jeremy", including Video of the Year and Best Group Video. Ten ranks number 207 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time, and "Jeremy" was ranked number 11 on VH1's list of the 100 greatest songs of the '90s. Following an intense touring schedule, the band went into the studio to record what would become its second studio album, Vs., released in 1993. Upon its release, Vs. set the record at the time for most copies of an album sold in a week, and spent five weeks at number one on the Billboard 200. Vs. was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 1995. From Vs., the song "Daughter" received a Grammy nomination for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and the song "Go" received a Grammy nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance. Feeling the pressures of success, with much of the burden of Pearl Jam's popularity falling on Vedder, the band decided to decrease the level of promotion for its albums, including refusing to release music videos.Ashare, Matt. "The Sweet Smell of (Moderate) Success". CMJ. July 2000. Vedder's issue with fame came from what he stated as "what happens when a lot of these people start thinking you can change their lives or save their lives or whatever and create these impossible fuckin' expectations that in the end just start tearing you apart."Jones, Allan. "I'm Not Your Fuckin' Messiah". Melody Maker. May 21, 1994. In 1994, the band began a much-publicized boycott of Ticketmaster, which lasted for three years and limited the band's ability to tour in the United States.DeRogatis, Jim. Milk It!: Collected Musings on the Alternative Music Explosion of the 90's. Cambridge: Da Capo, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81271-1, pg. 58 During the mid-1990s, Vedder faced what he called a "pretty intense stalker problem."Weisbard, Eric, et al. "Ten Past Ten". Spin. August 2001. Vedder would refer to the issue in the song "Lukin" from No Code. Later that same year the band released its third studio album, Vitalogy, which became the band's third straight album to reach multi-platinum status. It was at this time that Vedder began to be featured more on rhythm guitar, as well as on back up vocals and some drumming. Many of the songs on Vitalogy appear to be based by Vedder around the pressures of fame.Weisel, Al. "Pearl Jam: Vitalogy". Rolling Stone. December 15, 1994. p. 91–92. The album received Grammy nominations for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album in 1996. Vitalogy was ranked number 492 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. The lead single "Spin the Black Circle" won a Grammy Award in 1996 for Best Hard Rock Performance. Although Dave Abbruzzese performed on the album Vitalogy, he was fired in August 1994, four months before the album was released. The band cited political differences between Abbruzzese and the other members; for example, he disagreed with the Ticketmaster boycott. He was replaced by Jack Irons, a close friend of Vedder and the former and original drummer of the Red Hot Chili Peppers. Regarding the approach Pearl Jam took after its initial success, Vedder stated, "We've had the luxury of writing our own job description...and that description has basically been cut down to just one line: make music."Robinson, John. "It's Getting Vedder (Man!)". NME. January 17, 1998. The band subsequently released No Code in 1996 and Yield in 1998. In 1998, prior to Pearl Jam's U.S. Yield Tour, Irons left the band due to dissatisfaction with touring. Pearl Jam enlisted former Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron as Irons' replacement on an initially temporary basis, but he soon became a permanent replacement for Irons. "Do the Evolution" (from Yield) received a Grammy nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance. In 1998, Pearl Jam recorded "Last Kiss", a cover of a 1960s ballad made famous by J. Frank Wilson and the Cavaliers. It was released on the band's 1998 fan club Christmas single; however, by popular demand, the cover was released to the public as a single in 1999. "Last Kiss" peaked at number two on the Billboard charts and became the band's highest-charting single. In 2000, the band released its sixth studio album, Binaural, and initiated a successful and ongoing series of official bootlegs. The band released seventy-two such live albums in 2000 and 2001, and set a record for most albums to debut in the Billboard 200 at the same time. "Grievance" (from Binaural) received a Grammy nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance. The band released its seventh studio album, Riot Act, in 2002. Pearl Jam's contribution to the 2003 film, Big Fish, "Man of the Hour", was nominated for a Golden Globe Award in 2004. The band's eighth studio album, the eponymous Pearl Jam, was released in 2006. The band released its ninth studio album, Backspacer, in 2009 and its tenth studio album, Lightning Bolt, in 2013. On Pearl Jam records, Vedder uses the pseudonym "Jerome Turner" for his non-musical (usually design and artwork) contributions. He has also at times used the pseudonym of "Wes C. Addle" ("West Seattle"). Vedder has contributed solo material to several soundtracks and compilations, including the soundtracks for the films Dead Man Walking (1995), I Am Sam (2001), A Brokedown Melody (2004), Body of War (2007), and Reign Over Me (2007). Vedder collaborated with Pakistani musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan for his contributions to the Dead Man Walking soundtrack. He covered The Beatles' "You've Got to Hide Your Love Away" for the I Am Sam soundtrack. Vedder wrote "Man of the Hour" that Pearl Jam recorded for Tim Burton's Big Fish Soundtrack (2003). Vedder wrote two songs for the 2007 feature documentary, Body of War, produced by Ellen Spiro and Phil Donahue: "No More" (a song referring to the Iraq War) and "Long Nights". Vedder and the supergroup The Million Dollar Bashers, which includes members from Sonic Youth, Wilco, and Bob Dylan's band, covered Dylan's "All Along the Watchtower" for the biopic film, I'm Not There (2007).  Pearl Jam recorded a cover version of The Who's song "Love, Reign o'er Me" for the film Reign Over Me, which takes its title from the song. In 2010, Vedder recorded a new song, "Better Days", which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2010 film Eat Pray Love.  Vedder contributed an album's worth of songs to the soundtrack for the 2007 film, Into the Wild. The soundtrack was released on September 18, 2007 through J Records. It includes covers of the Indio song "Hard Sun" and the Jerry Hannan song "Society".Cohen, Jonathan. "Vedder Goes Solo For 'Into The Wild' Soundtrack". Billboard. July 4, 2007. Vedder said that having to write songs based on a narrative "simplified things." He said, "There were fewer choices. The story was there and the scenes were there."Cohen, Jonathan. "Q&A: Penn, Vedder go where the "Wild" things are". Reuters. October 26, 2007. Vedder's songs written for the film feature a folk sound. Thom Jurek of AllMusic called the soundtrack a "collection of folksy, rootsy tunes where rock & roll makes fleeting appearances."Jurek, Thom. [ "Into the Wild"]. AllMusic. Vedder won a 2008 Golden Globe Award for the song "Guaranteed" from Into the Wild. He was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award for his contributions to the film's original score.Cohen, Jonathan. "Vedder, Shakira Snag Golden Globe Music Nods". Billboard. December 13, 2007. At the 2008 Grammy Awards, "Guaranteed" received a nomination for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media.Futterman, Erica. "Bizarro Grammys: The White Stripes' USBs, Gerard Way's MCR Packaging, Flaming Lips' Surround Sound". Rolling Stone. December 6, 2007. "Guaranteed" was also nominated a 2008 World Soundtrack Award in the category of Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film. At the 2009 Grammy Awards, "Rise" received a nomination for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo. Vedder promoted the Into the Wild soundtrack with his first solo tour, which began in April 2008. The April leg of the tour, dubbed the "April Fools Tour", began in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada at The Centre on April 2, 2008 and was composed of ten dates focusing on the West Coast of the United States.Reuters. "Eddie Vedder to Start Solo Tour". Entertainment Weekly. February 15, 2008. Vedder continued the tour with a second leg in August 2008 composed of fourteen dates focusing on the East Coast and Canada.Cohen, Jonathan. "Eddie Vedder Plots East Coast Solo Tour". Billboard. July 2, 2008. The second leg of the tour began in Boston, Massachusetts at the Boston Opera House and ended in Chicago, Illinois at the Auditorium Theatre. In June 2009, Vedder followed his 2008 solo tour with another solo tour composed of fourteen dates focusing on the Eastern United States and Hawaii, which began in Albany, New York at the Palace Theatre and continued through to Honolulu at the Hawaii Theatre. Vedder released his second solo album titled Ukulele Songs, a collection of original songs and covers performed on the ukulele, on May 31, 2011. The first single from the album, "Longing to Belong," was released through digital retailers on March 21. A live DVD titled Water on the Road, featuring live performances from two shows in Washington, D.C. during Vedder's 2008 solo tour, was released the same day as Ukulele Songs. In addition to playing with Pearl Jam and Temple of the Dog, Vedder has performed or recorded with numerous well-known artists. He has appeared on albums by The Who, Ramones, Neil Young, R.E.M., Neil Finn, Bad Religion, Mark Seymour, Cat Power, Mike Watt, Fastbacks, Wellwater Conspiracy, Jack Irons, and John Doe, and has also recorded with The Strokes, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Supersuckers, Susan Sarandon, and Zeke. In the months of June and July 2006, Vedder made live performances jamming with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, singing on many tracks, including lead vocals on "The Waiting" and backing vocals on "American Girl". Vedder performed the songs "Break on Through (To the Other Side)", "Light My Fire" and "Roadhouse Blues" with the remaining members of The Doors at the 1993 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony. He also performed with R.E.M. at the 2007 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony and with The Stooges at the 2010 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony.  Vedder made a guest appearance at the Ramones' last show on August 6, 1996 at the Palace in Hollywood. Vedder has also performed live on stage with some of the biggest names in music and film including Pete Townshend, Paul McCartney, Rolling Stones, U2, Bruce Springsteen, Robert Plant, Roger Waters, Flea, Bryan Adams, Ben Harper, Jack Johnson, Roger Daltrey, Jay-Z, Kings of Leon, Dave Grohl, Perry Farrell, Beck, Sheryl Crow, Jerry Cantrell, Andrew Stockdale, Josh Homme, Mike Ness, Neil Young, Guided By Voices, Ace Frehley, Dave Matthews, Elvis Costello, Natalie Maines, Tim Robbins, Johnny Depp, Adam Sandler, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Glen Hansard, Simon Townshend, Joe Elliott and many others. Vedder had a brief acting cameo in the 1992 movie, Singles, along with Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard of Pearl Jam. He appeared as himself, playing drums in lead actor Matt Dillon's backing band, Citizen Dick."Eddie Vedder". Internet Movie Database. He was also interviewed for the 1996 grunge documentary, Hype! He appears in the 2003 Ramones documentary, End of the Century: The Story of the Ramones. In 2007, he made a cameo as himself in the comedy film, Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story. He appears in the 2007 Tom Petty documentary, Runnin' Down a Dream, the 2008 political documentary, Slacker Uprising, and the 2009 Howard Zinn documentary, The People Speak, based upon "A People's History of the United States".[ ]  He was featured in the 2008 Greg Kohs documentary, "Song Sung Blue," performing with Lightning and Thunder. He had a one-scene cameo in the second episode of the second season of the IFC television show Portlandia. He also appears in the 2012 documentary "West Of Memphis", due to his protesting against the case. Vedder is known for his social and political views. Discussing his views on current issues in the United States, Vedder said, "People on death row, the treatment of animals, women's right to choose. So much in America is based on religious fundamentalist Christianity. Grow up! This is the modern world!" In 1992, Spin printed an article by Vedder, entitled "Reclamation," which detailed his views on abortion.Vedder, Eddie. "Reclamation". Spin. November 1992. Vedder and Pearl Jam have consistently supported abortion rights and performed at Rock for Choice in 1994. Vedder was outspoken in support of Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader in 2000 and played at Green Party super rallies in Chicago and New York City. Pearl Jam played a series of concerts on the 2004 Vote for Change tour, supporting the candidacy of John Kerry for U.S. President. Vedder told Rolling Stone magazine, "I supported Ralph Nader in 2000, but it's a time of crisis. We have to get a new administration in." In 2005, during Pearl Jam's first South American tour, Vedder stated, to the immediate and effusive support from the crowd in Rio de Janeiro, that "next time we come to Brazil, the world will be a better place to live, as George Bush will no longer be the President of the United States." Vedder supported the candidacy of Barack Obama in 2008Cross, Alan. "Eddie Vedder and the New Face of America". Metro News Edmonton. January 30, 2009. and 2012.The Associated Press. January 4, 2015. Obama Hangs Out With Pearl Jam's Eddie Vedder in Hawaii. NBC News. Retrieved: 4 January 2015. In his spare time, Vedder is a surfer and active in surf-related conservation efforts, most notably The Surfrider Foundation.Brant-Zawadzki, Alex. "Eddie Vedder Wants You To Save Trestles". OCWeekly.com. April 4, 2006. Vedder shows his support for environmental activism by sporting an Earth First! tattoo on his right calf. The logo is of a pipe wrench crossed with a stone hammer. Vedder is vegetarian. Vedder was a longtime and outspoken supporter for the Free the West Memphis Three movement, a cause that advocated the release of three young men who were convicted in 1994 of the gruesome murders of three boys in West Memphis, Arkansas. In an interview with Larry King on December 19, 2007, Damien Echols, who was then on death row for the murders, said that Vedder had been the "greatest friend a person could have" and that he had collaborated with him while in prison. The song "Army Reserve" on Pearl Jam's 2006 self-titled album features a lyrical collaboration between Vedder and Echols. On August 19, 2011, Vedder and Natalie Maines attended the release hearing and arranged a celebration party for them afterwards. Critic Jim DeRogatis describes Vedder's vocals as a "Jim Morrison-like vocal growl."DeRogatis, Jim. Milk It!: Collected Musings on the Alternative Music Explosion of the 90's. Cambridge: Da Capo, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81271-1, pg. 57 Greg Prato of AllMusic said, "With his hard-hitting and often confessional lyrical style and Jim Morrison-esque baritone, Vedder also became one of the most copied lead singers in all of rock." Vedder has inducted The Doors, Neil Young, the Ramones, and R.E.M. into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and in his induction speeches he has cited them all as influences. Other influences that Vedder has cited include Bruce Springsteen, John Mellencamp, Led Zeppelin, Aerosmith, U2, The Who, Pink Floyd, The Jackson 5, The Beatles, Frank Zappa, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, Elvis Costello, Talking Heads, Sonic Youth, Fugazi, Tom Waits, Huey Lewis, Bob Dylan, and the Pixies.Milner, Greg. "My Life in Music: Eddie Vedder". Spin. July 15, 2003. Eddie Vedder was heavily inspired by the early Jethro Tull sound, stating that: "I'm a big fan of Jethro Tull, and I listen to this record [ Stand Up ] every night before I go on stage!" Vedder's lyrical topics range from personal ("Alive", from Ten; "Better Man", from Vitalogy) to social and political concerns ("Even Flow", from Ten; "World Wide Suicide", from Pearl Jam). His lyrics have often invoked the use of storytelling and have included themes of freedom, individualism, and sympathy for troubled individuals.Tannenbaum, Rob. "Rebels Without a Pause". George. July 2000. Other recurring themes include the use of water metaphors,Lindgren, Hugo. "Music; Pearl Jam Turns Pop Fame on Its Head: Less Is More". The New York Times. November 10, 2002. as well as the idea of leaving everything behind to start again (featured in such songs as "Rearviewmirror", from Vs.; "MFC", from Yield; "Evacuation", from Binaural; and "Gone", from Pearl Jam). Although best known as a vocalist, Vedder also plays guitar on many Pearl Jam songs, beginning with the Vs. songs "Rearviewmirror" and "Elderly Woman Behind the Counter in a Small Town". When the band started, Gossard and McCready were clearly designated as rhythm and lead guitarists, respectively. The dynamic began to change when Vedder started to play more rhythm guitar during the Vitalogy era. McCready said in 2006, "Even though there are three guitars, I think there's maybe more room now. Stone will pull back and play a two-note line and Ed will do a power chord thing, and I fit into all that."Cross, Charles R. "Better Man". Guitar World Presents: Guitar Legends: Pearl Jam. July 2006. Vedder's guitar playing helped the band's sound progress toward a more stripped-down style; the songs "Rearviewmirror" and "Corduroy" (from Vitalogy) feature Vedder's raw, punk-influenced guitar playing. As he had more influence on the band's sound, Vedder sought to make the band's musical output less catchy. He said, "I felt that with more popularity, we were going to be crushed, our heads were going to pop like grapes." He has also contributed performances on the ukulele, harmonica, accordion, and electric sitar to various Pearl Jam recordings. In 2012 his popular black Fender Telecaster was featured in a painting by modern artist Karl Haglund. 'Weird Al' Yankovic wrote the song "My Baby's in Love with Eddie Vedder" for his album Running with Scissors. Local H also wrote a song involving Eddie simply named "Eddie Vedder" which appeared on their 1996 album As Good as Dead. Vedder himself has influenced many musicians including UK Indie Folk Singer-Songwriter David Knowles Throughout Pearl Jam's career, Vedder has interacted with the crowd during the band's concerts. Early in Pearl Jam's existence, Vedder and the band became known for their intense live performances. Vedder participated in stage diving as well as crowd surfing.  During the early part of Pearl Jam's career, Vedder was known to climb the stage lighting rig and hang from the stage roof.  Looking back at this time, Vedder said, "It's hard for us to watch early performances, even though that's when people think we were on fire and young. Playing music for as long as I had been playing music and then getting a shot at making a record and at having an audience and stuff, it's just like an untamed force...a different kind of energy. And I find it kind of hard to watch those early performances because it's so just fucking, semi-testosterone-fueled or whatever. But it didn't come from jock mentality. It came from just being let out of the gates."  Vedder began incorporating social commentary and political criticism into his lyrics and performances early in his career with Pearl Jam. He usually comments on politics between songs, often to criticize U.S. foreign policy. During Pearl Jam's 1992 appearance on MTV Unplugged, Vedder stood atop his stool, took out a marker pen, and wrote "pro-choice" down his arm in large letters when the band performed the song "Porch". During Pearl Jam's 2007 Lollapalooza headlining show, Vedder and the band played a song telling the crowd in Chicago to boycott the oil company B.P. Amoco because they had been polluting Lake Michigan. Vedder has been ranked at #7 on a list of "Best Lead Singers of All Time", compiled by Rolling Stone. Vedder attended San Dieguito High School, now called San Dieguito Academy. Vedder donated proceeds from a 2006 Pearl Jam concert in San Diego toward the construction of a theater for the school in the name of his former drama teacher, Clayton E. Liggett. Liggett was Vedder's mentor in high school. Vedder wrote the song "Long Road" (from Merkin Ball) upon hearing of Liggett's death in 1995.Varga, George. "By finish, Pearl Jam, Vedder had a connection". The San Diego Union-Tribune. July 10, 2006. In 1994, Vedder married his longtime girlfriend, musician Beth Liebling. The couple divorced in 2000. Vedder's music style transformed around this same period with more focus on ukulele and deeper lyrics. Vedder is a friend of The Who guitarist Pete Townshend and former Audioslave and current Soundgarden frontman, Chris Cornell. Vedder had shared vocal duties with the latter in Temple of The Dog. Townshend discouraged Vedder from retiring in 1993.Townshend, Pete. "Pete Townshend Muses on Rock Honors, Smashing Computers, Eddie Vedder in E-Mail to Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. July 23, 2008. In late 2007, Vedder wrote the foreword to a new Pete Townshend biography, Who Are You: The Life of Pete Townshend. The book was published in the UK in March 2008 and in the U.S. in October 2008. Vedder was a close friend of the late Ramones guitarist Johnny Ramone, with Vedder being at his side when he died. Since Ramone's death, Vedder and Pearl Jam have played the Ramones' "I Believe in Miracles" regularly at live shows. While driving home from Ramone's funeral, Vedder wrote the lyrics for the Pearl Jam song "Life Wasted" (from Pearl Jam). He is also a friend of famed surfers Kelly Slater, Laird Hamilton, and fellow musicians Jack Johnson and Ben Harper. He was featured with Laird Hamilton in an episode of the documentary series Iconoclasts in 2006. While surfing with Tim Finn in New Zealand on March 25, 1995, Vedder was carried  off the coast and had to be rescued by lifeguards."Chronicle". The New York Times. March 27, 1995. He also has paddled outrigger canoes on occasion and in 2005 was nearly lost at sea trying to paddle from Moloka'i to Oahu."Vedder Saved From Drowning By Fishermen". Contactmusic.com. Vedder is a Chicago Bulls and Chicago Bears fan and a long-time, die-hard fan of the Chicago Cubs. Vedder also became a fan of the Seattle SuperSonics while he was living in Seattle, and could be spotted at KeyArena many nights attending Sonics games. He is friends with several Chicago sports figures, including former White Sox pitcher Jack McDowell, former Bulls player Dennis Rodman, former Blackhawks player Chris Chelios, Cubs GM Theo Epstein and former Cubs pitcher Kerry Wood. Vedder occasionally wears a Walter Payton jersey while performing onstage.  Vedder was wearing a White Sox hat given to him by McDowell during Pearl Jam's 1992 Saturday Night Live and MTV Unplugged appearances. In November 1993, Vedder and McDowell were involved in a bar room brawl in New Orleans, Louisiana that resulted in Vedder being arrested for public drunkenness and disturbing the peace.Associated Press. "Sports People: Baseball; McDowell Involved in New Orleans Scuffle". The New York Times. November 19, 1993. The Pearl Jam song "Black, Red, Yellow" (from the "Hail, Hail" single) is about the Rodman/Michael Jordan/Phil Jackson-era Chicago Bulls teams."Pearl Jam Concert Chronology: 2005". TwoFeetThick.com. The middle of the song features a voice-mail message Rodman left for Vedder asking Vedder to return his call. Vedder sang the national anthem before the third game of the 1998 NBA Finals in Chicago,Papineau, Lou. "20 Things You Should Know About Pearl Jam". VH1.com. June 30, 2006. and has sung "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" at five Cubs games since 1998. In 2007, a few days before performing with Pearl Jam in Chicago for Lollapalooza, he threw out the first pitch at Wrigley Field, the home of the Cubs. Menconi, D. (2006, May 21). Protest music takes a bow. News & ObserverVedder wrote a song at the request of former Cubs shortstop and first baseman Ernie Banks paying tribute to the Cubs called "All the Way".Brown, David. "Answer Man: Kerry Wood talks Eddie Vedder, bowling, nudity". Yahoo!. June 26, 2008.Koster, Kyle. "Eddie Vedder's song pays tribute to Chicago Cubs". Chicago Sun-Times. September 18, 2008. On September 18, 2008, the song was made available for digital download via Pearl Jam's official website for US$0.99. Vedder married his longtime girlfriend, model Jill McCormick, on September 18, 2010. They have two daughters, Olivia (born 2004) and Harper (born 2008).      Year Album details Peak chart positions US AUS CHE ESP FRA GERPeak chart positions for Eddie Vedder in Germany: ITA NLD NZL UK 2007 Into the Wild 11 39 28 89 31 68 6 30 34 183 2011 Ukulele Songs 4 6 5 23 64 18 6 13 32 49 "—" denotes a release that did not chart. Year Title Label Track(s) 1991 Temple of the Dog A&M "Hunger Strike", "Wooden Jesus", "Pushin Forward Back", "Your Saviour", and "Four Walled World" Year Single Peak chart positions Album USAdult USAlt. USMain. CAN 2001 "You've Got to Hide Your Love Away" 28 30 40 — I Am Sam soundtrack 2007 "Hard Sun" — 13 — 23 Into the Wild soundtrack 2010 "Better Days" — — — — Eat Pray Love soundtrack 2011 "Longing to Belong" — — — — Ukulele Songs "Can't Keep" — — — — "Without You" — — — — "—" denotes a release that did not chart. Year Group Title Label Track(s) 1993 Eddie Vedder and Mike McCready with G. E. Smith The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration Sony "Masters of War" (live) Bad Religion Recipe for Hate Epitaph/Atlantic "American Jesus" and Watch It Die 1995 Mike Watt Ball-Hog or Tugboat? Columbia "Big Train" and "Against the 70's" Neil Young Mirror Ball Reprise "Peace and Love" 1996 Eddie Vedder with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan Dead Man Walking: Music from and Inspired By the Motion Picture Sony "Face of Love" and "Long Road" Eddie Vedder with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan Dead Man Walking: The Score Sony "Face of Love" and "Long Road" Fastbacks New Mansions in Sound  Sub Pop "Girl's Eyes" Gary Heffern Painful Days Y-records "Passin' Thru'" Crowded House Recurring Dream Capitol "Everything Is Good for You" 1997 Eddie Vedder with Hovercraft Kerouac – kicks joy darkness Rykodisc "Hymn" Eddie Vedder and Mike McCready Tibetan Freedom Concert Capitol "Yellow Ledbetter" (live) Ramones We're Outta Here! MCA "Any Way You Want It" 1999 Pete Townshend Pete Townshend Live: A Benefit for Maryville Academy Intersound "Magic Bus" (live) and "Heart to Hang Onto" (live) Eddie Vedder and Susan Sarandon Cradle Will Rock: Music from the Motion Picture Soundtrack RCA "Croon Spoon" 2000 Supersuckers with Eddie Vedder Free the West Memphis 3 Koch "Poor Girl" 2001 Wellwater Conspiracy The Scroll and Its Combinations TVT "Felicity's Surprise" Eddie Vedder and Mike McCready with Neil Young America: A Tribute to Heroes Interscope "Long Road" (live) 2002 Eddie Vedder I Am Sam: Music from and Inspired By the Motion Picture V2 Ada "You've Got to Hide Your Love Away" Neil Finn 7 Worlds Collide Nettwerk "Take a Walk" (live), "Stuff and Nonsense" (live), "I See Red" (live), and "Parting Ways" (live) 2003 Eddie Vedder & Zeke We're a Happy Family - A Tribute to Ramones Columbia "I Believe in Miracles" and "Daytime Dilemma (Dangers of Love)" Cat Power You Are Free Matador "Good Woman" and "Evolution" The Who The Who Live at the Royal Albert Hall Steamhammer US "I'm One" (live), "Gettin' in Tune" (live), "Let's See Action" (live), and "See Me, Feel Me" (live) (with Bryan Adams) 2004 Pete Townshend Magic Bus – Live from Chicago Compendia "Magic Bus" (live) and "Heart to Hang Onto" (live) Jack Irons Attention Dimension Breaching Whale "Shine On You Crazy Diamond" Red Whyte with Eddie Vedder The 5th Symphony Document: Soundtrack Folklore "Lucky Country" 2005 Eddie Vedder and the Walmer High School Choir The Molo Sessions Ten Club "Long Road", "Love Boat Captain" and "Better Man" 2006 Eddie Vedder Dead Man Walking: Dead Man Walking: Music from and Inspired By the Motion Picture: Legacy Edition Sony "Face of Love" (with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan), "Long Road" (with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan), and "Dead Man" Eddie Vedder A Brokedown Melody: Music from and Inspired By the Film Brushfire "Goodbye" Eddie Vedder with The Strokes & Josh Homme You Only Live Once single RCA "Mercy Mercy Me (The Ecology)" 2007 Eddie Vedder & The Million Dollar Bashers I'm Not There: Original Soundtrack Columbia "All Along the Watchtower" Crowded House Seattle, WA January 9, 2007 Kufala "World Where You Live" and "Something So Strong" 2008 Eddie Vedder with Ben Harper Body of War: Songs that Inspired an Iraq War Veteran Sire "No More" (live) John Doe The Golden State Independent "The Golden State Remix" (with Corin Tucker) Crowded House Surf Aid – The Music Loop "World Where You Live" 2010 Eddie Vedder Eat Pray Love Monkeywrench Records "The Long Road" (with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan) and "Better Days" 2011 R.E.M. Collapse into Now Warner Bros. "It Happened Today" 2012 Jimmy Fallon Blow Your Pants Off  Warner Bros. "Balls in Your Mouth" Year !! Title !! Role !! Notes !! Original air date 1992 The Late Show performer* song: "Alive" (season 4, episode 2) February 4, 1992 Saturday Night Live performer* songs: "Alive" and "Porch" ("Sharon Stone/Pearl Jam"; season 17, episode 17) April 11, 1992 MTV Unplugged: Pearl Jam performer* (season 3, episode 4) May 13, 1992 MTV Video Music Awards performer* song: "Jeremy" September 9, 1992 1993 MTV Video Music Awards performer** songs: "Animal" and "Rockin' in the Free World" with Neil Young September 2, 1993 Bob Dylan: 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration performer songs: "Masters of War" with Mike McCready and "Knockin' on Heaven's Door" with entire ensemble (tribute concert for Bob Dylan) October 16, 1993 1994 24 Hours in Rock and Roll himself MTV documentary about one day in the life of rock and roll March 13, 1994 Headbangers Ball himself "Kurt Cobain Tribute Special" (season 8, episode 3) April ?, 1994 Saturday Night Live performer* songs: "Not for You", "Rearviewmirror" and "Daughter" ("Emilio Estevez/Pearl Jam"; season 19, episode 18) April 16, 1994 1996 Late Show with David Letterman performer song: chorus to "Black" with Paul Shaffer & the CBS Orchestra February 27, 1996 38th Grammy Awards himself Pearl Jam won Best Hard Rock Performance for the song, "Spin the Black Circle"^ February 28, 1996 Late Show with David Letterman performer* songs: "Hail, Hail" and "Leaving Here" September 20, 1996 1998 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "Wishlist" May 1, 1998 Late Show with David Letterman himself Behind the Music parody about Paul Shaffer May 21, 1998 1999 Late Show with David Letterman performer songs: "Heart to Hang Onto" and "Magic Bus" with Pete Townshend July 28, 1999 2000 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "Grievance" April 12, 2000 2001 America: A Tribute to Heroes performer songs: "Long Road" with Mike McCready & Neil Young and "America the Beautiful" with Willie Nelson, et al. (benefit concert for the victims of the September 11 attacks) September 21, 2001 2002 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "I Am Mine" November 14, 2002 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "Save You" November 15, 2002 2004 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "Masters of War" September 30, 2004 National Anthem: Inside the Vote for Change Concert Tour performer* Vote for Change finale concert and tour documentary October 11, 2004 2006 Saturday Night Live performer* song: "World Wide Suicide" and "Severed Hand" ("Lindsay Lohan/Pearl Jam"; season 31, episode 16) April 15, 2006 Late Show with David Letterman performer* song: "Life Wasted" May 4, 2006 Later with Jools Holland performer* songs: "Severed Hand", "World Wide Suicide" & "Alive" (season 27, episode 1) May 5, 2006 VH1 Storytellers: Pearl Jam performer* (season 9, episode 1) July 1, 2006 Iconoclasts himself "Eddie Vedder & Laird Hamilton" (season 2, episode 1) October 26, 2006 2008 VH1 Rock Honors: The Who performer* songs: "Love, Reign o'er Me" and "The Real Me" (tribute ceremony for The Who) July 17, 2008 2009 Pearl Jam: Ten Revisited himself VH1 Classic documentary about Pearl Jam's debut album, Ten March 22, 2009 The Kennedy Center Honors: A Celebration of the Performing Arts performer song: "My City of Ruins" with gospel choir (tribute ceremony for Bruce Springsteen) December 29, 2009 2010 Saturday Night Live performer* songs: "Just Breathe" & "Unthought Known" ("Jude Law/Pearl Jam"; season 35, episode 17) March 13, 2010 2011 True Crime with Aphrodite Jones himself "West Memphis Three" (season 2, episode 6) May 5, 2011 Late Show with David Letterman performer song: "Without You" June 20, 2011 Late Night with Jimmy Fallon performer song: "Balls in Your Mouth" with Jimmy Fallon & The Roots September 8, 2011 2012 Portlandia himself "One Moore Episode" (season 2, episode 2) January 13, 2012 Change Begins Within performer songs: "Rise" (solo) / "Under Pressure" with Ben Harper and Relentless7 / "It Don't Come Easy" and "Boys" with Ben Harper and Relentless7 & Ringo Starr / "Yellow Submarine" with Ben Harper and Relentless7, Ringo Starr & Sheryl Crow (benefit concert founded by David Lynch for the promotion of Transcendental Meditation) April 29, 2012 2015 Late Show with David Letterman performer song: "Better Man" May 18, 2015 Year !! Title !! Role !! Notes 1992 Singles himself – Citizen Dick drummer (uncredited) acting debut 1996 Hype! himself documentary about the popularity of the grunge movement 1997 We're Outta Here! performer song: "Any Way You Want It" with the Ramones (documentary and concert film of the Ramones) 1998 Not in Our Name: Dead Man Walking - The Concert performer songs: "Face of Love" and "Long Road" with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan (benefit concert film for the Murder Victims Families for Reconciliation) Pearl Jam: Single Video Theory himself documentary about the making of Pearl Jam's Yield album 2000 The Who & Special Guests: Live at the Royal Albert Hall performer songs: "I'm One" & "Let's See Action" with The Who^^ and "See Me, Feel Me"/"Listening to You" with Bryan Adams & The Who (concert film of The Who with musical guests at the Royal Albert Hall) 2001 7 Worlds Collide: Neil Finn & Friends Live at the St. James performer songs: "Take a Walk", "Stuff and Nonsense", "I See Red" & "Parting Ways" with 7 Worlds Collide (concert film of 7 Worlds Collide in Auckland, New Zealand) Pearl Jam: Touring Band 2000 performer* concert film of Pearl Jam's Binaural Tour Last Party 2000 himself documentary about the last six months of the 2000 presidential election 2003 End of the Century: The Story of the Ramones himself documentary about the Ramones Brian Wilson: On Tour performer concert film of Brian Wilson with musical guests Pearl Jam: Live at the Showbox performer* concert film of Pearl Jam's Showbox Theatre show Pearl Jam: Live at the Garden performer* concert film of Pearl Jam's Madison Square Garden show 2004 Ramones: Raw himself (deleted scenes) documentary about the Ramones 2006 Too Tough to Die: A Tribute to Johnny Ramone performer songs: "I Believe in Miracles" & "Sheena Is a Punk Rocker" (tribute/benefit concert film for Johnny Ramone and cancer research) 2007 Amazing Journey: The Story of The Who himself documentary about The Who Pearl Jam: Immagine in Cornice – Live in Italy 2006 performer* concert film of Pearl Jam's Italian leg of their 2006 World Tour Slacker Uprising himself footage from Michael Moore's 60-city college campus tour Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story himself 2008 Song Sung Blue himself documentary about Mike Sardina and Claire Sardina (Neil Diamond and Patsy Cline impersonators) Into the Wild: The Experience himself documentary short film about the making of Into the Wild Into the Wild: The Story, the Characters himself documentary short film about the making of Into the Wild 2009 Kôkua 2008: 5 Years of Change performer song: "Constellations" with Jack Johnson & Kawika Kahiapo (concert film of the Kôkua Festival) Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Live: Whole Lotta Shakin' himself collection of some of the best speeches, performances and backstage moments of the annual Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ceremonies Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Live: Come Together himself collection of some of the best speeches, performances and backstage moments of the annual Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ceremonies The People Speak performer song: "Masters of War" (documentary about America's struggles with war, class, race and women's rights) 2011 Conan O'Brien Can't Stop himself Conan O'Brien's comedy tour footage and documentary Water on the Road performer concert film of Vedder's Ukulele Songs tour Off the Boulevard himself documentary about the journey and struggle of seven different artists Pearl Jam Twenty himself/performer* documentary about the first twenty years of Pearl Jam Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory himself documentary about the West Memphis Three 2013 Cosmic Psychos: Blokes You Can Trust himself (rumored) documentary about the band Cosmic Psychos Jay-Z: Made in America himself/performer* Ron Howard documentary which follows the musical acts at the Jay-Z founded Budweiser Made in America Festival held on Labor Day weekend in Philadelphia of 2012 Year !! Nominated work !! Category !! Result Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 2008 "Guaranteed" from Into the Wild Best Song SIMA Waterman's Honorees 2007 Eddie Vedder Environmentalist of the Year Golden Globe Awards 2008 "Guaranteed" from Into the Wild Best Original Song Into the Wild (with Michael Brook and Kaki King) Best Original Score Grammy Awards 2008 "Guaranteed" from Into the Wild Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media 2009 "Rise" Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo mtvU Woodie Awards 2008 Eddie Vedder The Good Woodie Satellite Awards 2007 "Rise" from Into the Wild Best Original Song Online Film Critics Society Awards 2008 Into the Wild (with Michael Brook and Kaki King) Best Original Score World Soundtrack Awards 2008 "Guaranteed" from Into the Wild Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film Ten (1991) Vs. (1993) Vitalogy (1994) No Code (1996) Yield (1998) Binaural (2000) Riot Act (2002) Pearl Jam (2006) Backspacer (2009) Lightning Bolt (2013) denotes performance with Pearl Jam note: "Animal" performed with Pearl Jam and "Rockin' in the Free World" performed with Neil Young & Pearl Jam ^note: In the acceptance speech, Eddie notoriously states, "I don't know what this means, I don't think it means anything." ^^note: Vedder also performed the songs: "Mary Anne with the Shaky Hand" & "Getting in Tune" with The Who, but they were not released on the DVD.
