      Elms are deciduous and semi-deciduous trees comprising the genus Ulmus in the plant family Ulmaceae. The genus first appeared in the Miocene geological period about 20 million years ago, originating in what is now central Asia.Richens, R. H. (1983). Elm. Cambridge University Press. These trees flourished and spread over most of the Northern Hemisphere, inhabiting the temperate and tropical-montane regions of North America and Eurasia, presently ranging southward across the Equator into Indonesia. Elms are components of many kinds of natural forests. Moreover, during the 19th and early 20th centuries many species and cultivars were also planted as ornamental street, garden, and park trees in Europe, North America, and parts of the Southern Hemisphere, notably Australasia.  Some individual elms reached great size and age. However, in recent decades, most mature elms of European or North American origin have died from Dutch elm disease, caused by a microfungus dispersed by bark beetles. In response, disease-resistant cultivars have been developed, capable of restoring the elm to forestry and landscaping. There are about 30 to 40 species of Ulmus (elm); the ambiguity in number results from difficulty in delineating species, owing to the ease of hybridization between them and the development of local seed-sterile vegetatively propagated microspecies in some areas, mainly in the field elm (Ulmus minor) group. RackhamRackham, O. (1980). Ancient woodland: its history, vegetation and uses. Edward Arnold, London describes Ulmus as the most difficult critical genus in the entire British flora, adding that 'species and varieties are a distinction in the human mind rather than a measured degree of genetic variation'. Eight species are endemic to North America, and a smaller number to Europe;Bean, W. J. (1981). Trees and shrubs hardy in Great Britain, 7th edition. Murray, London the greatest diversity is found in Asia.Fu, L., Xin, Y. & Whittemore, A. (2002). Ulmaceae, in Wu, Z. & Raven, P. (eds) Flora of China, Vol. 5 (Ulmaceae through Basellaceae). Science Press, Beijing, and Missouri Botanical Garden Press, St. Louis, USA. The classification adopted in the List of elm species, varieties, cultivars and hybrids is largely based on that established by Brummitt.Brummitt, R. K. (1992). Vascular Plant Families & Genera. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew, London, UK. A large number of synonyms have accumulated over the last three centuries; their currently accepted names can be found in the list List of elm Synonyms and Accepted Names. Botanists who study elms and argue over elm identification and classification are called pteleologists, from the Greek πτελέα (:elm).Marren, Peter, Woodland Heritage (Newton Abbot, 1990). As part of the sub-order urticalean rosids they are distant cousins of cannabis, hops, and nettles. The name Ulmus is the classical name for these trees, with the English name "elm" and many other European names derived from it. The genus is hermaphroditic, having apetalous perfect flowers which are wind-pollinated. Elm leaves are alternate, with simple, single- or, most commonly, doubly serrate margins, usually asymmetric at the base and acuminate at the apex. The fruit is a round wind-dispersed samara flushed with chlorophyll, facilitating photosynthesis before the leaves emerge.Heybroek, H. M., Goudzwaard, L, Kaljee, H. (2009). Iep of olm, karakterboom van de Lage Landen (:Elm, a tree with character of the Low Countries). KNNV, Uitgeverij. ISBN 9789050112819 All species are tolerant of a wide range of soils and pH levels but, with few exceptions, demand good drainage. 'Sapporo Autumn Gold', Antella, Florence Wych elm (Ulmus glabra) leaves and seeds Asymmetry of leaf, Slippery Elm U. rubra Mature bark, Slippery Elm U. rubra Flowers of the hybrid elm cultivar 'Columella' Corky wings, Winged Elm U. alata U. laciniata samara U. americana, Dufferin St., Toronto, c. 1914  Dutch elm disease (DED) devastated elms throughout Europe and much of North America in the second half of the 20th century. It derives its name 'Dutch' from the first description of the disease and its cause in the 1920s by the Dutch botanists Bea Schwarz and Christina Johanna Buisman. Owing to its geographical isolation and effective quarantine enforcement, Australia has so far remained unaffected by Dutch Elm Disease, as have the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia in western Canada. DED is caused by a micro-fungus transmitted by two species of Scolytus elm-bark beetle which act as vectors. The disease affects all species of elm native to North America and Europe, but many Asiatic species have evolved anti-fungal genes and are resistant. Fungal spores, introduced into wounds in the tree caused by the beetles, invade the xylem or vascular system. The tree responds by producing tyloses, effectively blocking the flow from roots to leaves. Woodland trees in North America are not quite as susceptible to the disease because they usually lack the root-grafting of the urban elms and are somewhat more isolated from each other. In France, inoculation with the fungus of over three hundred clones of the European species failed to find a single variety possessed of any significant resistance. The first, less aggressive strain of the disease fungus, Ophiostoma ulmi, arrived in Europe from the Far East in 1910, and was accidentally introduced to North America in 1928, but was steadily weakened by viruses and had all but disappeared in Europe by the 1940s. The second, far more virulent strain of the disease Ophiostoma novo-ulmi was identified in Europe in the late 1960s, and within a decade had killed over 20 million trees (approximately 75%) in the UK alone. Approximately three times more deadly, the new strain arrived in Europe from the USA; the hypothesis that it arose from a hybrid between the original O. ulmi and another strain endemic to the Himalaya, Ophiostoma himal-ulmi is now discredited.Brasier, C. M. & Mehotra, M. D. (1995). Ophiostoma himal-ulmi sp. nov., a new species of Dutch elm disease fungus endemic to the Himalayas. Mycological Research 1995, vol. 99 (2), pp. 205–215 (44 ref.) . Elsevier, Oxford, UK. There is no sign of the current pandemic waning, and no evidence of a susceptibility of the fungus to a disease of its own caused by d-factors: naturally occurring virus-like agents that severely debilitated the original O. ulmi and reduced its sporulation.Brasier, C. M. (1996). New horizons in Dutch elm disease control. Pages 20-28 in: Report on Forest Research, 1996. Forestry Commission. HMSO, London, UK. Elm phloem necrosis (elm yellows) is a disease of elm trees that is spread by leafhoppers or by root grafts."Elm Yellows". Elmcare.Com. 19 Mar. 2008. This very aggressive disease, with no known cure, occurs in the Eastern United States, southern Ontario in Canada, and Europe. It is caused by phytoplasmas which infect the phloem (inner bark) of the tree.Price, Terry. "Wilt Diseases". Forestpests.Org. 23 Mar. 2005. 19 Mar. 2008. Infection and death of the phloem effectively girdles the tree and stops the flow of water and nutrients. The disease affects both wild-growing and cultivated trees. Occasionally, cutting the infected tree before the disease completely establishes itself and cleanup and prompt disposal of infected matter has resulted in the plant's survival via stump-sprouts. Most serious of the elm pests is the elm leaf beetle Xanthogaleruca luteola, which can decimate foliage, although rarely with fatal results. The beetle was accidentally introduced to North America from Europe. Another unwelcome immigrant to North America is the Japanese beetle Popillia japonica. In both instances the beetles cause far more damage in North America owing to the absence of the predators present in their native lands. In Australia, introduced elm trees are sometimes used as foodplants by the larvae of hepialid moths of the genus Aenetus. These burrow horizontally into the trunk then vertically down. Sapsucker woodpeckers have a great love of young elm trees. Efforts to develop resistant cultivars began in the Netherlands in 1928 and continued, uninterrupted by World War II, until 1992.Burdekin, D. A. & Rushforth, K. D. (Revised by Webber J. F.  1996). Elms resistant to Dutch elm disease. Arboricultural Research Note 2/96. Arboricultural Advisory and Information Service, Alice Holt, Farnham, UK. Similar programmes were initiated in North America (1937), Italy (1978), and Spain (1990s). Research has followed two paths: In North America, careful selection has produced a number of trees resistant not only to disease, but also to the droughts and extremely cold winters afflicting the continent. Research in the USA has concentrated on the American Elm U. americana, resulting in the release of highly resistant clones, notably the cultivars 'Valley Forge' and 'Jefferson'. Much work has also been done into the selection of disease-resistant Asiatic species and cultivars.Ware, G. (1995). Little-known elms from China: landscape tree possibilities. Journal of Arboriculture, (Nov. 1995). International Society of Arboriculture, Champaign, Illinois, USA.Biggerstaffe, C., Iles, J. K., & Gleason, M. L. (1999). Sustainable urban landscapes: Dutch elm disease and disease-resistant elms. SUL-4, Iowa State University In Europe, the European White Elm Ulmus laevis has received much attention. Whilst this elm has little innate resistance to Dutch elm disease, it is not favoured by the vector bark beetles and thus only becomes colonized and infected when there are no other choices, a rare situation in western Europe. Research in Spain has suggested that it may be the presence of a triterpene, alnulin, which makes the tree bark unattractive to the beetle species that spread the disease.Martín-Benito D., Concepción García-Vallejo M., Pajares J. A., López D. 2005. "Triterpenes in elms in Spain". Can. J. For. Res. 35: 199–205 (2005). However this possibility has not been conclusively proven.Pajares, J. A., García, S., Díez, J. J., Martín, D. & García-Vallejo, M. C. 2004. "Feeding responses by Scolytus scolytus to twig bark extracts from elms". Invest Agrar: Sist Recur For. 13: 217–225. More recently, Field Elms Ulmus minor highly resistant to DED have been discovered in Spain, and form the basis of a major breeding programme.Martin, J. et al. (2013). Seven Iberian Ulmus minor clones resistant to Dutch elm disease registered for their use as forest reproductive material. Proceedings of the 3rd International Elm Conference, Florence, 2013. Owing to their innate resistance to Dutch elm disease, Asiatic species have been crossed with European species, or with other Asiatic elms, to produce trees which are both highly resistant to disease and tolerant of native climates. After a number of false dawns in the 1970s, this approach has produced a range of reliable hybrid cultivars now commercially available in North America and Europe.Santini A., Fagnani A., Ferrini F., Mittempergher L., Brunetti M., Crivellaro A., Macchioni N., "Elm breeding for DED resistance, the Italian clones and their wood properties". Invest Agrar: Sist. Recur. For (2004) 13 (1), 179–184. 2004.Santamour, J., Frank, S. & Bentz, S. (1995). Updated checklist of elm (Ulmus) cultivars for use in North America. Journal of Arboriculture, 21:3 (May 1995), 121–131. International Society of Arboriculture, Champaign, Illinois, USASmalley, E. B. & Guries, R. P. (1993). Breeding Elms for Resistance to Dutch Elm Disease. Annual Review of Phytopathology Vol. 31 : 325–354. Palo Alto, CaliforniaHeybroek, H. M. (1983). Resistant Elms for Europe. In Burdekin, D. A. (Ed.) Research on Dutch elm disease in Europe. For. Comm. Bull. 60. pp 108–113Heybroek, H. M. (1993). The Dutch Elm Breeding Program. In Sticklen & Sherald (Eds.) (1993). Dutch Elm Disease Research, Chapter 3. Springer Verlag, New York, USAMittempergher, L. & Santini, A. (2004) The history of elm breeding. Investigacion agraria: Sistemas y recursos forestales 13(1): 161–177 (2004) However, some of these cultivars, notably those with the Siberian Elm U. pumila in their ancestry, lack the forms for which the iconic American Elm and English Elm were prized. Moreover, several exported to northwestern Europe have proven unsuited to the maritime climate conditions there, notably because of their intolerance of anoxic conditions resulting from ponding on poorly drained soils in winter. Dutch hybridizations invariably included the Himalayan Elm U. wallichiana as a source of anti-fungal genes and have proven more tolerant of wet ground; they should also ultimately reach a greater size. However, the susceptibility of the cultivar 'Lobel', used as a control in Italian trials, to elm yellows has now (2014) raised a question mark over all the Dutch clones.Mittempergher, L., (2000). Elm Yellows in Europe. In: The Elms, Conservation and Disease Management. pp. 103-119. Dunn C.P., ed. Kluwer Academic Press Publishers, Boston, USA. A number of highly resistant Ulmus cultivars has been released since 2000 by the Institute of Plant Protection in Florence, most commonly featuring crosses of the Dutch cultivar 'Plantijn' with the Siberian Elm to produce resistant trees better adapted to the Mediterranean climate. Elms take many decades to grow to maturity, and as the introduction of these disease-resistant cultivars is relatively recent, their long-term performance and ultimate size and form cannot be predicted with certainty. The National Elm Trial in North America, begun in 2005, is a nationwide trial to assess strengths and weaknesses of the 19 leading cultivars raised in the US over a ten-year period; European cultivars have been excluded. Meanwhile, in Europe, American and European cultivars are being assessed in field trials started in 2000 by the UK charity Butterfly Conservation.Brookes, A. H. (2013). Disease-resistant elm cultivars, Butterfly Conservation trials report, 2nd revision, 2013. Butterfly Conservation, Hants & IoW Branch, England. [ ]      One of the earliest of ornamental elms was the ball-headed graft narvan elm, Ulmus minor 'Umbraculifera', cultivated from time immemorial in Persia as a shade tree and widely planted in cities through much of south-west and central Asia. From the 18th century to the early 20th century, elms, whether species, hybrids or cultivars, were among the most widely planted ornamental trees in both Europe and North America. They were particularly popular as a street tree in avenue plantings in towns and cities, creating high-tunnelled effects. Their quick growth and variety of foliage and forms,Elwes, H. J. & Henry, A. (1913). The Trees of Great Britain & Ireland. Vol. VII. 1848–1929. Republished 2004 Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9781108069380 their tolerance of air-pollution and the comparatively rapid decomposition of their leaf-litter in the fall were further advantages. In North America, the species most commonly planted was the American elm (Ulmus americana), which had unique properties that made it ideal for such use: rapid growth, adaptation to a broad range of climates and soils, strong wood, resistance to wind damage, and vase-like growth habit requiring minimal pruning. In Europe, the wych elm (Ulmus glabra) and the Field Elm (Ulmus minor) were the most widely planted in the countryside, the former in northern areas including Scandinavia and northern Britain, the latter further south. The hybrid between these two, Dutch elm (U. × hollandica), occurs naturally and was also commonly planted. In much of England, it was the English Elm which later came to dominate the horticultural landscape. Most commonly planted in hedgerows, it sometimes occurred in densities of over 1000 per square kilometre. In south-eastern Australia and New Zealand, large numbers of English and Dutch elms, as well as other species and cultivars, were planted as ornamentals following their introduction in the 19th century, while in northern Japan Japanese Elm (Ulmus davidiana var. japonica) was widely planted as a street tree. From about 1850 to 1920, the most prized small ornamental elm in parks and gardens was the Camperdown elm (Ulmus glabra 'Camperdownii'), a contorted weeping cultivar of the Wych Elm grafted on to a non-weeping elm trunk to give a wide, spreading and weeping fountain shape in large garden spaces. In northern Europe elms were, moreover, among the few trees tolerant of saline deposits from sea spray, which can cause "salt-burning" and die-back. This tolerance made elms reliable both as shelterbelt trees exposed to sea wind, in particular along the coastlines of southern and western BritainEdlin, H. L., Guide to Tree Planting and Cultivation (London, 1970), p.330, p.316'Salt-tolerant landscape plants', countyofdane.com/myfairlakes/A3877.pdf and in the Low Countries, and as trees for coastal towns and cities.dutchtrig.com/the_netherlands/the_hague.html This belle époque lasted until the First World War, when as a consequence of hostilities, notably in Germany whence at least 40 cultivars originated, and of the outbreak at about the same time of the early strain of Dutch elm disease, Ophiostoma ulmi, the elm began its slide into horticultural decline. The devastation caused by the Second World War, and the demise in 1944 of the huge Späth nursery in Berlin, only accelerated the process. The outbreak of the new, three times more virulent, strain of Dutch elm disease Ophiostoma novo-ulmi in the late 1960s brought the tree to its nadir. Since circa 1990 the elm has enjoyed a renaissance through the successful development in North America and Europe of cultivars highly resistant to the new disease. Consequently, the total number of named cultivars, ancient and modern, now exceeds 300, although many of the older clones, possibly over 120, have been lost to cultivation. Some of the latter, however, were by today's standards inadequately described or illustrated before the pandemic, and it is possible that a number survive, or have regenerated, unrecognised. Enthusiasm for the newer clones often remains low owing to the poor performance of earlier, supposedly disease-resistant Dutch trees released in the 1960s and 1970s. In the Netherlands, sales of elm cultivars slumped from over 56,000 in 1989 to just 6,800 in 2004,Hiemstra et al., (2005). Belang en toekomst van de iep in Nederland. Praktijkonderzoek Plant & Omgeving, Wageningen UR whilst in the UK, only four of the new American and European releases were commercially available in 2008.    Elm wood was valued for its interlocking grain, and consequent resistance to splitting, with significant uses in wagon wheel hubs, chair seats and coffins. The bodies of Japanese Taiko drums are often cut from the wood of old elm trees, as the wood's resistance to splitting is highly desired for nailing the skins to them, and a set of three or more is often cut from the same tree. The elm's wood bends well and distorts easily making it quite pliant.  The often long, straight, trunks were favoured as a source of timber for keels in ship construction. Elm is also prized by bowyers; of the ancient bows found in Europe, a large portion of them are elm. During the Middle Ages elm was also used to make longbows if yew was unavailable. The first written references to elm occur in the Linear B lists of military equipment at Knossos in the Mycenaean Period. Several of the chariots are of elm (« πτε-ρε-ϝα », pte-re-wa), and the lists twice mention wheels of elmwood.Michael Ventris and John Chadwick, Documents in Mycaenean Greek, Cambridge 1959 Hesiod says that ploughs in Ancient Greece were also made partly of elm.Hesiod, Works and Days, 435 The density of elm wood varies between species, but averages around 560&nbsp;kg per cubic metre.Elm. Niche Timbers. Accessed 19-08-2009. Elm wood is also resistant to decay when permanently wet, and hollowed trunks were widely used as water pipes during the medieval period in Europe. Elm was also used as piers in the construction of the original London Bridge. However this resistance to decay in water does not extend to ground contact. The Romans, and more recently the Italians, used to plant elms in vineyards as supports for vines. Lopped at three metres, the elms' quick growth, twiggy lateral branches, light shade and root-suckering made them ideal trees for this purpose. The lopped branches were used for fodder and firewood.Columella, De Re Rustica Ovid in his Amores characterizes the elm as "loving the vine": ulmus amat vitem, vitis non deserit ulmum (:the elm loves the vine, the vine does not desert the elm),Ovid, Amores 2.16.41 and the ancients spoke of the "marriage" between elm and vine.Virgil, Georgica, I.2: ulmis adiungere vites (:to marry vines to elms); Horace, Epistolae 1.16.3: amicta vitibus ulmo (:the elm clothed in the vine); and Catullus, Carmina, 62 The mucilaginous inner bark of the Slippery Elm Ulmus rubra has long been used as a demulcent, and is still produced commercially for this purpose in the United States with approval for sale as a nutritional supplement by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration., quote:"Although Slippery Elm has not been scientifically investigated, the FDA has approved it as a safe demulcent substance." Elms also have a long history of cultivation for fodder, with the leafy branches cut to feed livestock. The practice continues today in the Himalaya, where it contributes to serious deforestation.Maunder, M. (1988). Plants in Peril, 3. Ulmus wallichiana (Ulmaceae). Kew Magazine. 5(3): 137-140. Royal Botanic Garden, Kew, London. As fossil fuel resources diminish, increasing attention is being paid to trees as sources of energy. In Italy, the Istituto per la Protezione delle Piante is (2012) in the process of releasing to commerce very fast-growing elm cultivars, able to increase in height by more than 2&nbsp;m (6&nbsp;ft) per annum.Santini, A., Pecori, F., Pepori, A. L., Ferrini, F., Ghelardini, L. (In press). Genotype × environment interaction and growth stability of several elm clones resistant to Dutch elm disease. Forest Ecology and Management. Elsevier B. V., Netherlands. Elm bark, cut into strips and boiled, sustained much of the rural population of Norway during the great famine of 1812. The seeds are particularly nutritious, containing 45% crude protein, and less than 7% fibre by dry mass.Osborne, P. (1983). The influence of Dutch elm disease on bird population trends. Bird Study, 1983: 27-38.  Elm has been listed as one of the 38 substances that are used to prepare Bach flower remedies, a kind of alternative medicine promoted for its effect on health. However, according to Cancer Research UK, "there is no scientific evidence to prove that flower remedies can control, cure or prevent any type of disease, including cancer".  Chinese elm Ulmus parvifolia is a popular choice for bonsai owing to its tolerance of severe pruning. In 1997, a European Union elm project was initiated, its aim to coordinate the conservation of all the elm genetic resources of the member states and, among other things, to assess their resistance to Dutch elm disease. Accordingly, over 300 clones were selected and propagated for testing.Solla, A., Bohnens, J., Collin, E., Diamandis, S., Franke, A., Gil, L., Burón, M., Santini, A., Mittempergher, L., Pinon, J., and Vanden Broeck, A. (2005). Screening European Elms for Resistance to Ophiostoma novo-ulmi. Forest Science 51(2) 2005. Society of American Foresters, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.Pinon J., Husson C., Collin E. (2005). Susceptibility of native French elm clones to Ophiostoma novo-ulmi. Annals of Forest Science 62: 1–8Collin, E. (2001). Elm. In Teissier du Cros (Ed.) (2001) Forest Genetic Resources Management and Conservation. France as a case study. Min. Agriculture, Bureau des Ressources Genetiques CRGF, INRA-DIC, Paris: 38–39.  Many elm (Ulmus) trees of various kinds have attained great size or otherwise become particularly noteworthy. Many artists have admired elms for the ease and grace of their branching and foliage, and have painted them with sensitivity. Elms are a recurring element in the landscapes and studies of, for example, John Constable, Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller, Frederick Childe Hassam, Karel Klinkenberg,Johannes Christiaan Karel Klinkenberg and George Inness.  File:Constable - Study of an Elm Tree - c1821.jpeg|John Constable, 'Study of an Elm Tree' [1821] File:John Constable 008.jpg|John Constable, 'The Cornfield' [1826] (Ulmus × hollandica) File: John Constable 017.jpg| Constable, 'Salisbury Cathedral from the Bishop's Garden' [1823 version] (Ulmus × hollandica) File:Jacob George Strutt elms.jpg|Jacob George Strutt, Elms at Mongewell, Oxfordshire [1830] (Ulmus minor 'Atinia') File:Waldmüller - Partie aus dem Prater1.jpeg|Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller, 'Alte Ulmen im Prater' (:Old Elms in Prater) [1831] Image:James Duffield Harding - The Great Exhibition of 1851 - Google Art Project.jpg|James Duffield Harding, 'The Great Exhibition of 1851' (Ulmus minor 'Atinia', centre) File:Arthur Hughes - Back from Sea.jpg|Arthur Hughes, 'Home from Sea' [1862] (Ulmus minor 'Atinia' ) File:Brown work.jpg|Ford Madox Brown, 'Work' [1863] (Ulmus minor 'Atinia' ) File:AmCyc Elm - American Elm (tree).jpg|[unknown artist] The American Elm [1879] (Ulmus americana) File:Glaspalast München 1890 165.jpg|Johannes Karel Christiaan Klinkenberg, 'Amsterdam' [1890] (Ulmus x hollandica   ‘Belgica’  ) File:Childe Hassam - Champs Elysées, Paris.JPG|Frederick Childe Hassam, 'Champs Elysées, Paris' [1889] (Ulmus × hollandica,  'orme femelle') File:Hassam Washington Arch Spring.jpg|Frederick Childe Hassam, 'Washington Arch, Spring' [1893] (Ulmus americana) File:Church at Old Lyme Childe Hassam.jpeg|Frederick Childe Hassam, 'Church at Old Lyme' [1905] (Ulmus americana) File:Childe Hassam's 1920 oil, The East Hampton Elms in May.jpg|Frederick Childe Hassam, 'The East Hampton Elms in May' [1920] (Ulmus americana) File:GeorgeInnessOldElmAtMedfield.jpg|George Inness, 'Old Elm at Medfield' (Ulmus americana) File:PSM V65 D491 The cam near trinity college cambridge university.png|Unknown artist, 'The Cam near Trinity College, Cambridge', England (Ulmus atinia)    In Greek mythology the nymph Ptelea (Πτελέα, Elm) was one of the eight Hamadryads, nymphs of the forest and daughters of Oxylos and Hamadryas.Athenaeus, Δειπνοσοφισταί, III The first reference in literature to elms occurs in the Iliad. When Eetion, father of Andromache, is killed by Achilles during the Trojan War, the Mountain Nymphs plant elms on his tomb («περὶ δὲ πτελέoι εφύτεψαν νύμφαι ὀρεστιάδες, κoῦραι Διὸς αἰγιόχoιo»).Iliad, Ζ, 419–420, www.perseus.tufts.edu Also in the Iliad, when the River Scamander, indignant at the sight of so many corpses in his water, overflows and threatens to drown Achilles, the latter grasps a branch of a great elm in an attempt to save himself («ὁ δὲ πτελέην ἕλε χερσὶν εὐφυέα μεγάλην».Iliad, Φ, 242–243, www.perseus.tufts.edu The Nymphs also planted elms on the tomb in the Thracian Chersonese of "great-hearted Protesilaus’’ («μεγάθυμου Πρωτεσιλάου»), the first Greek to fall in the Trojan War. These elms grew to be the tallest in the known world; but when their topmost branches saw far off the ruins of Troy, they immediately withered, so great still was the bitterness of the hero buried below, who had been loved by Laodamia and slain by Hector.Philostratus,  ̔Ηρωικός, 3,1 perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2008.01.0597%3Aolpage%3D672Quintus Smyrnaeus, Τα μεθ' `Ομηρον, 7.458–462Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia, 16.88  The story is the subject of a poem by Antiphilus of Byzantium (1st century AD) in the Palatine Anthology: Θεσσαλὲ Πρωτεσίλαε, σὲ μὲν πολὺς ᾄσεται αἰών, Tρoίᾳ ὀφειλoμένoυ πτώματος ἀρξάμενoν• σᾶμα δὲ τοι πτελέῃσι συνηρεφὲς ἀμφικoμεῦση Nύμφαι, ἀπεχθoμένης Ἰλίoυ ἀντιπέρας. Δένδρα δὲ δυσμήνιτα, καὶ ἤν ποτε τεῖχoς ἴδωσι Tρώϊον, αὐαλέην φυλλοχoεῦντι κόμην. ὅσσoς ἐν ἡρώεσσι τότ᾽ ἦν χόλoς, oὗ μέρoς ἀκμὴν ἐχθρὸν ἐν ἀψύχoις σώζεται ἀκρέμoσιν.Anth. Pal., 7.141 [:Thessalian Protesilaos, a long age shall sing your praises, Of the destined dead at Troy the first; Your tomb with thick-foliaged elms they covered, The nymphs, across the water from hated Ilion. Trees full of anger; and whenever that wall they see, Of Troy, the leaves in their upper crown wither and fall. So great in the heroes was the bitterness then, some of which still Remembers, hostile, in the soulless upper branches.] Protesilaus had been king of Pteleos (Πτελεός) in Thessaly, which took its name from the abundant elms (πτελέoι) in the region.Lucas, F. L., From Olympus to the Styx (London, 1934) Elms occur often in Pastoral Poetry, where they symbolise the idyllic life, their shade being mentioned as a place of special coolness and peace. In the first Idyll of Theocritus, for example, the goat-herd invites the shepherd to sit "here beneath the elm" («δεῦρ’ ὑπὸ τὰν πτελέαν») and sing. Beside elms Theocritus places "the sacred water" («το ἱερὸν ὕδωρ») of the Springs of the Nymphs and the shrines to the nymphs.Theocritus, Eιδύλλιo I, 19–23; VII, 135–40 Aside from references literal and metaphorical to the elm and vine theme, the tree occurs in Latin literature in the Elm of Dreams in the Aeneid.Vergil, Aeneid, VI. 282–5 When the Sibyl of Cumae leads Aeneas down to the Underworld, one of the sights is the Stygian Elm: In medio ramos annosaque bracchia pandit ulmus opaca, ingens, quam sedem somnia vulgo uana tenere ferunt, foliisque sub omnibus haerent. [:Spreads in the midst her boughs and agéd arms an elm, huge, shadowy, where vain dreams, 'tis said, are wont to roost them, under every leaf close-clinging.] Virgil refers to a Roman superstition (vulgo) that elms were trees of ill-omen because their fruit seemed to be of no value.Richens, R. H., Elm (Cambridge 1983) p.155 It has been notedRichens, R. H., Elm, Ch.10 (Cambridge, 1983) that two elm-motifs have arisen from classical literature: (1) the 'Paradisal Elm' motif, arising from pastoral idylls and the elm-and-vine theme, and (2) the 'Elm and Death' motif, perhaps arising from Homer's commemorative elms and Virgil's Stygian Elm. Many references to elm in European literature from the Renaissance onwards fit into one or other of these categories. There are two examples of pteleogenesis (:birth from elms) in world myths. In Germanic and Scandinavian mythology the first woman, Embla, was fashioned from an elm,Heybroek, H. M., 'Resistant Elms for Europe' (1982) in Research on Dutch Elm Disease in Europe, HMSO, London 1983 while in Japanese mythology Kamuy Fuchi, the chief goddess of the Ainu people, "was born from an elm impregnated by the Possessor of the Heavens".Wilkinson, Gerald, Epitaph for the Elm (London, 1978), p.87 The elm occurs frequently in English literature, one of the best known instances being in Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream, where Titania, Queen of the Fairies, addresses her beloved Nick Bottom using an elm-simile. Here, as often in the elm-and-vine motif, the elm is a masculine symbol: Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms. ... the female Ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the Elm. O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act 4, Scene 1 Another of the most famous kisses in English literature, that of Paul and Helen at the start of Forster's Howards End, is stolen beneath a great wych elm. The Elm Tree is also referenced in children's literature.  An Elm Tree and Three Sisters is a children's book about three young sisters that plant a small elm tree in their backyard.  Throughout the years, the sisters begin to realize that the elm tree becomes an integral part of their lives.  The sisters see that the elm tree has been with them through many important milestones through life and they grow old with the tree. The Cutting of the elm was a diplomatic altercation between the Kings of France and England in 1188, during which an elm tree near Gisors in Normandy was felled. In politics the elm is associated with revolutions. In England after the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the final victory of parliamentarians over monarchists, and the arrival from Holland, with William & Mary, of the 'Dutch Elm' hybrid, planting of this cultivar became a fashion among enthusiasts of the new political order.Rackham, O. (1976). Trees and Woodland in the British Landscape J. M. Dent, London.Armstrong, J. V. & Sell, P. D. (1996). A revision of the British elms (Ulmus L., Ulmaceae): the historical background. Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 120: 39-50. In the American Revolution 'The Liberty Tree' was an American white elm in Boston, Massachusetts, in front of which, from 1765, the first resistance meetings were held against British attempts to tax the American colonists without democratic representation. When the British, knowing that the tree was a symbol of rebellion, felled it in 1775, the Americans took to widespread 'Liberty Elm' planting, and sewed elm symbols on to their revolutionary flags.Richens, Elm (Cambridge, 1983)elmcare.com/about_elms/history/liberty_elm_boston.htm Elm-planting by American Presidents later became something of a tradition. In the French Revolution, too, Les arbres de la liberté (:Liberty Trees), often elms, were planted as symbols of revolutionary hopes, the first in Vienne, Isère, in 1790, by a priest inspired by the Boston elm. L'Orme de La Madeleine (:the Elm of La Madeleine), Faycelles, Département de Lot, planted around 1790 and surviving to this day, was a case in point.L'Orme de La Madeleine, giuseppemusolino.it By contrast, a famous Parisian elm associated with the Ancien Régime, L’Orme de Saint-Gervais in the Place St-Gervais, was felled by the revolutionaries; church authorities planted a new elm in its place in 1846, and an early 20th-century elm stands on the site today.L'Orme de St-Gervais: biographie d'un arbre, www.paris.fr Premier Lionel Jospin, obliged by tradition to plant a tree in the garden of the Hôtel Matignon, the official residence and workplace of Prime Ministers of France, insisted on planting an elm, so-called 'tree of the Left', choosing the new disease-resistant hybrid 'Clone 762' (Ulmus 'Wanoux' = ).Ulmus 'Wanoux' (Vada)) freeimagefinder.com/detail/6945514690.html In the French Republican Calendar, in use from 1792 to 1806, the 12th day of the month Ventôse (= 2 March) was officially named «jour de l'Orme», Day of the Elm. Liberty Elms were also planted in other countries in Europe to celebrate their revolutions, an example being L'Olmo di Montepaone, L'Albero della Libertà (:the Elm of Montepaone, Liberty Tree) in Montepaone, Calabria, planted in 1799 to commemorate the founding of the democratic Parthenopean Republic, and surviving till it was brought down by a recent storm (it has since been cloned and 'replanted').calabriaonline.com And after the Greek Revolution of 1821-32, a thousand young elms were brought to Athens from Missolonghi, "Sacred City of the Struggle" against the Turks and scene of Lord Byron's death, and planted in 1839-40 in the National Garden.Ο μοναδικός Εθνικός μας Κήπος, paidevo.gr/teachers/?p=859Νίκος Μπελαβίλας, ΜΥΘΟΙ ΚΑΙ ΠΡΑΓΜΑΤΙΚΟΤΗΤΕΣ ΓΙΑ ΤΟ ΜΗΤΡΟΠΟΛΙΤΙΚΟ ΠΑΡΚΟ ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΟΥ, courses.arch.ntua.gr/fsr/112047/Nikos_Belavilas-Mythoi_kai_Pragmatikotites In an ironic development, wild elms have spread and taken over the grounds of the abandoned Greek royal summer palace at Tatoi in Attica.  File:LibertyTreePlanting.jpg|Planting a Liberty Tree (un arbre de la liberté) during the French Revolution. Jean-Baptiste Lesueur, 1790 File:Balcony St-Gervais.jpg|Balcony with elm symbol, overlooking the 'Crossroads of the Elm', Place Saint-Gervais, Paris File:20061002 d-0312-1-515h.jpg|President George W. Bush and Laura Bush planting a disease-resistant 'Jefferson' Elm before the White House, 2006 File:TATOI PALACE.JPG|Elm suckers spreading before the abandoned summer royal palace in Tatoi, Greece, Μarch 2008   Elm propagation methods vary according to elm type and location, and the plantsman’s needs. Native species may be propagated by seed. In their natural setting native species, such as wych elm and European White Elm in central and northern Europe and Field Elm in southern Europe, set viable seed in ‘favourable’ seasons. Optimal conditions occur after a late warm spring. After pollination, seeds of spring-flowering elms ripen and fall at the start of summer (June); they remain viable for only a few days. They are planted in sandy potting-soil at a depth of one centimetre, and germinate in three weeks. Slow-germinating American Elm will remain dormant until the second season.forestry.about.com/od/treeplanting/qt/seed_elm.htm Seeds from autumn-flowering elms ripen in the Fall and germinate in the spring. Since elms may hybridize within and between species, seed-propagation entails a hybridisation risk. In unfavourable seasons elm seeds are usually sterile. Elms outside their natural range, such as Ulmus procera in England, and elms unable to pollinate because pollen-sources are genetically identical, are sterile and are propagated by vegetative reproduction. Vegetative reproduction is also used to produce genetically identical elms (clones). Methods include the winter transplanting of root-suckers; taking hardwood cuttings from vigorous one-year-old shoots in late winter,http://www.doityourself.com/stry/propagation-root-an-elm-tree-cutting taking root-cuttings in early spring; taking softwood cuttings in early summer;cru.cahe.wsu.edu/CEPublications/pnw0152/pnw0152.html grafting; layering; and micropropagation. A bottom heat of 18 degreesresistantelms.co.uk/elms/ulmus-morfeo/ and humid conditions are maintained for hard- and softwood cuttings. The transplanting of root-suckers remains the easiest and commonest propagation-method for European Field Elm and its hybrids. For 'specimen' urban elms, grafting to wych-elm root-stock may be used to eliminate suckering or to ensure stronger root-growth. The mutant-elm cultivars are usually grafted, the ‘weeping’ elms 'Camperdown' and 'Horizontalis' at 2 – 3&nbsp;m, the dwarf cultivars 'Nana' and 'Jacqueline Hillier' at ground level. Since the Siberian Elm is drought-tolerant, in dry countries new varieties of elm are often root-grafted on this species.Clouston, B., Stansfield, K., eds., After the Elm (London, 1979)  Ripe seeds of Field Elm Rock elm Ulmus thomasii germinating Seedling of wych elm Ulmus glabra (photograph: Mihailo Grbić) Root cuttings of Ulmus 'Dodoens' (photograph: Mihailo Grbić) Rooted hardwood elm-cutting (photograph: Mihailo Grbić) Rooting of softwood elm-cuttings under mist-propagation system (photograph: Mihailo Grbić) Mutant variegated Smooth-leafed Elm graft (photograph: Mihailo Grbić) Root-suckers spreading from Field Elm Ulmus minor 'Pouch' leaf-galls on a wych elm (aphid Tetraneura ulmi), Germany. 'Pouch' leaf-gall on elm leaf (aphid Tetraneura ulmi), Netherlands. 'Cockscomb' leaf-galls (aphid Colopha compressa), Poland. 'Bladder' leaf-galls on elm leaves (aphid Eriosoma lanuginosum), Italy. 'Bladder' leaf-galls on a narrow-leaved elm (aphid  Eriosoma lanuginosum), Italy. Aphids in leaf-gall, Poland. 'Pimple' leaf-galls on a field elm (mite Eriophyes ulmi), Spain. White-letter Hairstreak Satyrium w-album, on (TEMPLATE), Sweden. The larvae feed only on elm. Egg of Satyrium w-album near flower-bud of an elm. Elm-bark beetle Scolytus multistriatus (size: 2–3&nbsp;mm), a vector for Dutch Elm Disease Scolytus multistriatus 'galleries' under elm-bark. Elm-leaf beetle Xanthogaleruca luteola, which causes serious damage to elm foliage. Xanthogaleruca luteola: caterpillar on elm-leaf, Germany. Elm-leaf damage caused by Xanthogaleruca luteola, Germany. Bacterial infection Erwinia carotovora of elm sap, which causes 'slime flux' ('wetwood') and staining of the trunk (here on a Camperdown Elm). List of Elm cultivars, hybrids and hybrid cultivars List of Elm species and varieties by scientific name List of Lepidoptera that feed on elms Fab Tree Hab  A scientific, historical and cultural study, with a thesis on elm-classification, followed by a systematic survey of elms in England, region by region. Illustrated. Heybroek, H. M., Goudzwaard, L, Kaljee, H. (2009). Iep of olm, karakterboom van de Lage Landen (:Elm, a tree with character of the Low Countries). KNNV, Uitgeverij. ISBN 9789050112819. A history of elm planting in the Netherlands, concluding with a 40 - page illustrated review of all the DED - resistant cultivars in commerce in 2009.  A general introduction, with a history of Dutch elm disease and proposals for re-landscaping in the aftermath of the pandemic. Illustrated.  A study of the species, with particular reference to the wych elm in Scotland and its use by craftsmen.  A photographic and pictorial celebration and general introduction. Tree Family Ulmaceae Diagnostic photos of Elm species at the Morton Arboretum
