    Emerson College is located in downtown Boston, Massachusetts. Founded in 1880 by Charles Wesley Emerson as a "school of oratory," Emerson is "the only comprehensive college or university in America dedicated exclusively to communication and the arts in a liberal arts context." Offering more than three dozen degree programs in the area of Arts and Communication, the college is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. Located in Boston's Washington Street Theatre District on the edge of the Boston Common, the school also maintains buildings in Los Angeles and the town of Well, The Netherlands. Emerson College has been named the winner of the Environmental Protection Agency’s College and University Green Power Challenge for the Great Northeast Athletic Conference for 2012–13. Charles Wesley Emerson founded the Boston Conservatory of Elocution, Oratory, and Dramatic Art in 1880, a year after Boston University closed its School of Oratory. Classes were held at Pemberton Square in Boston. Ten students enrolled in the conservatory's first class. The following year, the conservatory changed its name to the "Monroe Conservatory of Oratory," in honor of Charles Emerson's teacher at Boston University's School of Oratory, Professor Lewis B. Monroe. In 1890, the name changed again to "Emerson College of Oratory" and was later shortened to Emerson College in 1939. The college expanded and rented space at 36 Bromfield Street, and moved to Odd Fellows Hall on Berkeley and Tremont Streets in the South End of Boston. With the new location, the college's first library was established in 1892. Henry Southwick, a faculty member and graduate, became a financial partner for the college with Emerson. This financial partnership led to the purchase of the Boston School of Oratory from Moses T. Brown in 1894. At the turn of the century, faculty members Henry and Jessie Southwick and William H. Kenney purchased the college from Dr. Emerson. Soon after, the college rented a new location in Chickering Hall. Dr. Emerson retired in 1903 and William J. Rolfe, a Shakespearean scholar and actor, was named the second President of Emerson College of Oratory. His service as president lasted until his retirement in 1908. As the Student Government Association of the college held its first meeting in 1908, the third president of the college, Henry Lawrence Southwick, was inaugurated. He introduced the study of acting and stagecraft into the college curriculum. During his tenure, the college rented a new building at 30 Huntington Avenue. The college was also granted the right to award Bachelor of Literary Interpretation (B.L.I.) degrees. In addition, Emerson became the first school with a collegiate-level program in Children's theater in 1919. The school offered its first course in Journalism in 1924. The college purchased its first piece of real estate with a new women's dormitory building at 373 Commonwealth Ave. and started intramural sports in 1931 with the organization of volleyball games. In 1930, full charge and control of the college was transferred to the Board of Trustees by William H. Kenney, Henry Lawrence Southwick, and Jessie Southwick. When Harry Seymour Ross was appointed the fourth president of Emerson College in 1931, the first course in radio broadcasting was taught by the program director of WEEI, a Boston AM radio station. The purchase of buildings at 130 Beacon Street and 128 Beacon Street a year later began the presence of Emerson College in Boston's Back Bay. Emerson kept ownership of these buildings until summer 2003. In the following years, a professional training program in Speech Pathology (1935) and the first undergraduate program in broadcasting and broadcast journalism (1937) were offered for the first time in the United States.  Also, construction of a theater behind 128–130 Beacon began, and the institution was granted the right to award Master of Arts degrees. In the post-war era, the G.I. Bill of Rights and the Broadcasting curriculum contributed to the rebalancing of the student body from a primarily-female population to an equally-balanced population of men and women. Boylston Green, the first president to have no prior association with the college, used his background as a dean of students to enhance extracurricular activities, including the establishment of a student activities fee. These efforts led to the first publication of Emerson's student newspaper, The Berkeley Beacon, in 1947. It is still in production today. Emerson also saw major development in its broadcasting program. A one-year Certificate of Broadcasting was offered via evening classes. The FCC awarded the college a 10-watt license in 1949, and WERS, the first educational FM radio station in New England, was born. The station's power was increased to 300 watts three years later, and 18,000 watts by 1953. At the start of the decade, In 1950  Emerson College became a member of the New England Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, an accreditation association for schools and colleges in New England. President Green left the college in 1949 after being selected as president of the University of the South, and Godfrey Dewey served as Acting President until 1951. At that time, Jonathon French was appointed as Acting President, and he became President in December of that year, despite never being formally inaugurated. The college suffered from a severe financial crisis in 1952, and sought $50,000 in emergency funding. At the time, the Chairman of the Corporation stated that without these funds, the college had three alternatives: go broke, sell out, or join up with another institution. Led by the National Alumni Council, a grassroots campaign was launched to improve the financial situation of the college. The efforts led to the resignation of the Council of Trustees, which was then replaced mostly by alumni. The new board elected a former Emerson history professor, S. Justus McKinley, as the fifth President of Emerson College. Pulling out of its financial crisis, the college started to develop its programs with new facilities. In 1953, Emerson opened the Robbins Speech and Hearing Clinic at 145 Beacon Street, furthering the Communication Sciences and Disorders program. A television studio was dedicated at 130 Beacon in 1954, with its first closed-circuit TV program the following year as WERS-TV. The first annual spring musical, Lady in the Dark by Moss Hart, was presented. The school was authorized  to grant Bachelors and Masters of Science in Speech, honorary degrees, and Bachelor of Music in conjunction with the Longy School of Music. As the 1960s started, the building at 373 Commonwealth Avenue was sold to purchase a dormitory at 100 Beacon Street to accommodate an enrollment of 609 undergraduate and 29 graduate students. A year later, a building at 150 Beacon Street was obtained for dorms, dining hall, and administrative offices. With major gifts from Elisabeth Abbot Smith and J.F. Buzzard, the college Library moved from the fourth floor of 130 Beacon Street into its own building at 303 Berkeley Street. In 1964, two buildings were purchased: 96 Beacon Street, which became the student union building, and 132–134 Beacon Street, which became a dormitory. The campus remained primarily in Back Bay until the late 1990s. In 1967, Richard Chapin, former Dean of the Harvard Business School was inaugurated as the seventh president of Emerson College. Shortly afterward, an academic planning committee approved a new course of study for general education requirements.  The first level of this program replaced the college-wide requirements with a two-year interdisciplinary course of study and electives.  In order to accommodate this new program, the building at 67–69 Brimmer Street was purchased.  The Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies was born.  A year later (1972), the college gained authorization to grant BFA, and MFA degrees. Though Emerson College has moved to various locations within the city of Boston, the appointment of Allen E. Koenig (the ninth president of Emerson College) almost took the college completely outside of Boston.  As soon as he was inaugurated in 1979, Koenig initiated talks with Pine Manor College in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts to relocate Emerson and merge the two schools. However, an agreement was never reached and the plan was dropped entirely. At the start of the 1980s, Koenig made a proposal to the Board of Trustees for a major renovation of the college's facilities. The plan allowed for new performance spaces, classrooms, and faculty offices at Brimmer Street; remodeling the Library and Learning Resources Center at 150 Beacon; remodeling the 303 Berkeley building for the Humanities and Social Sciences Division; a new radio/audio complex at 126 Beacon; and construction of two new television studios behind 130 Beacon. In 1984, 335 Commonwealth Avenue was purchased for Administration and the Communication Studies department. The college also received the authorization to grant MFA degrees in Creative Writing. Despite the newly purchased Commonwealth Avenue buildings, Lawrence, Massachusetts was soon being discussed as a new location for Emerson College, about  away from Boston.  The mayor of Lawrence announced that the necessary land would be taken by eminent domain and sold to Emerson for a token payment of $100.  However, the five affected private landowners disagreed with this arrangement and fought the city in court.  Three years later in 1988, Judge John Forte ruled in favor of the City of Lawrence.  The river-front site in Lawrence was proposed as the new campus for the College.  However, as real estate values in Boston dropped and the costs of constructing a new campus increased, the plans were put on hold and eventually abandoned when Koenig resigned as president in 1989.  In 1988, the college bought a building at Zero Marlborough Street (also known as 6 Arlington Street) for dormitories and a dining hall. In an unrelated move, Kasteel Well in the Netherlands was purchased and became the home of Emerson's overseas program (now called External Programs).  John Zacharis became the tenth president of Emerson College and faced a college fractured by the failed move to Lawrence, Massachusetts. Over the course of two years, he moved to restore unity to the campus by purchasing a building at 180 Tremont Street, now called the Ansin Building. This purchase started a transition from Back Bay to the Boston Theater District. Zacharis went on medical leave in 1992 and died of leukemia shortly after. During Zacharis's leave, Jacqueline Weis Liebergott was appointed as Acting President and, a year later, inaugurated to become the first female president of the college. Shortly after, she submitted a 10-year master plan to the Boston Redevelopment Authority which involved moving the college to the Washington Street Theatre District (also known at that time as the Combat Zone). In the mid-1990s, a planning document of the college's future plans was drafted and public hearings were held. The college also extended health care benefits to domestic partners of gay and lesbian faculty, administration and staff. Under the plan, dental coverage and tuition waivers were also available. 1994 was also the year the college started to go online with a $100,000 gift from Mrs. Mary E. Tufte. Financed by the contribution, The Tufte Lab was placed on the fourth floor of the Ansin Building and dedicated in Mrs. Tufte's honor. The lab was the catalyst for a telecommunications / fiber optic network installation, which was completed in October 1995. In addition, the college announced the purchase and restoration of The Little Building (Boston) (1994) across the street from the Ansin Building and next to Emerson's Majestic Theatre. Restoration was completed on the façades of the college's buildings at 126, 128, 130, 132–134, 168 Beacon Street, and 21 Commonwealth Avenue. In 1998, Emerson purchased the Walker Building (Boston) at 120 Boylston. The building currently hosts the school's Department of Television, Radio, Film Production, the Institutional Advancement (Alumni and Development) department, and the Government and Community Relations department. It also contains the school's Library and many of its classrooms.  In 2003, the Tufte Performance Production Center (PPC) at 10 Boylston Place opened. The 11-story steel-and-glass building houses the Department of Performing Arts and includes two theaters (The Semel Theatre and The Greene Theatre), two television studios, makeup and costume labs, faculty offices, and an exhibition area. Also that year, the Cutler Majestic Theatre finished renovations and re-opened as one of the main stages of Emerson Stage productions. In 2004, it was announced that the buildings at 96, 100, and 132 Beacon had been sold and would be vacated by the Fall 2006 semester. Construction of a new 14-story residence hall at 150 Boylston Street began in March 2004, and was completed in September 2006 in time for the new school year. It is the first entirely-new residence hall in Emerson's history. The facility includes residential suites, athletic facilities, offices and meeting rooms for student organizations, informal gathering places for off-campus students, spaces for small-group rehearsals and performances, and dining facilities.  In 2005 the school purchased the historic Paramount Theatre (Boston) on Washington Street, with plans to build a new complex at the site including a 565-seat main stage theater inside the existing Paramount Theater and a 125-seat black box theater in an adjacent new building. Plans also included a 200-seat film screening room, eight rehearsal studios ranging from , six smaller rehearsal spaces, a sound stage for film students, a new scene shop, and a dormitory for 260 students.[ ] On April 3, 2006, a  scaffolding platform on the east side of the 150 Boylston construction project fell to the street below, killing two construction workers and one passing motorist. The scaffolding had been attached to the east side of the building and was in the process of being removed. Investigators found that the construction workers did not properly secure the scaffolding to a crane while dismantling the apparatus, causing the platform to be unstable and resulting in the collapse. Construction was stopped for over a week to allow investigators to determine the cause of the accident, but was resumed in time to meet the project's August 2006 deadline. In May 2006, the Campus Center in the Piano Row building was named the Max Mutchnick Campus Center after a major gift from the 1987 graduate and co-creator of the television sitcom Will & Grace. In the same year, the school exercised its purchase option on the Colonial Theatre adjacent to the Little Building, and then converted the upper floors of the building to a 372-bed dormitory.  With the addition of dorm space here and at the Paramount Theatre, the school hopes to accommodate up to 75% of its students in on-campus housing by the year 2010. In September 2006 a long-running labor dispute between the administrators and faculty union was resolved. The administration limited the union's role in promotion and tenure, and brought department chairs into administrative roles, where they were not covered by the union. In response, the college agreed not to dismantle the union. On December 2, 2009, President Liebergott announced she would step down in June 2011. On September 8, 2010, the college announced she would be succeeded by M. Lee Pelton of Willamette University. On March 18, 2010, the newly renovated Paramount Center officially opened, with Boston Mayor Thomas M. Menino illuminating the Paramount's original art deco marquee, which Emerson had restored. In addition to the 590-seat Paramount Theatre, the Paramount Center also houses an experimental black box theater, the Bright Family Screening Room (for films), a sound stage, a scene/prop production shop, nine rehearsal studios, six practice rooms, four classrooms, 20 faculty offices, and a student gathering area. A commercial restaurant will be located on the street level. , two students are suing the college for mishandling their rape cases and failing to provide their Title IX rights.  Emerson College has completed its move from Boston's Back Bay neighborhood to the historic Washington Street Theatre District, abutting the southeast corner of Boston Common.  The main campus is served by Boylston station on the MBTA Green Line and Chinatown station on the MBTA Orange Line. The College also owns a fourteenth-century castle in The Netherlands (the base for its European programs), and  is constructing a major academic center on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood to house its long-standing Los Angeles programs. Once owned by the Boston Edison Company, the Ansin Building was purchased by Emerson in 1992. The building stands 14 stories high and contains all Visual & Media Arts (VMA) labs and facilities, offices for all VMA and Writing, Literature & Publishing (WLP) departments, and is the home of WERS, WECB, and ETIN (Emerson's Talk and Information Network, an online radio service). It also contains the Tufte and 3D computer labs, Digital Production labs, and the Media Services center. Computer Labs: 3D Lab (3DL), Tufte Lab, Writing & Publishing Lab (WPL), XML (Opened Fall 2006) Production Labs/Facilities: Digital Production Labs 1 & 2 (DPL1, DPL2), Video Editing Lab (VEL), Steenbeck Lab The former Union Bank building at 216 Tremont Street houses the Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders and its clinic for Deaf and Hard of Hearing children. Also located here are the offices of the Registrar, Student Financial Services, Health Services, Career Services, the Counseling Center and the International Student Center. The Bill Bordy Theater and Auditorium on the ground floor is used for lectures, performances, performance classes and special events. Computer Labs: Communication Sciences and Disorders Lab (CSD) Home to classrooms, offices to various non-academic and academic departments, and five computer labs, and the Iwasaki Library. The fifth and sixth floors connect to the Tufte building. Computer Labs: Advanced Projects Lab (APL), Advanced Teaching Lab (ATL), Communication & Marketing Labs (CML) 1, 2, and Journalism Lab (JRL) Production Facilities: Newsroom TV Studio, Newsroom Editing Labs Academic Facilities: Iwasaki Library, Emerson College Archives and Special Collections During the summer of 2008, the Walker building underwent construction to be completed before fall of 2008 to fill in the light-well that provided natural light to floors 2 through 6 to insert the set of popular NBC television show Will & Grace, donated by Emerson alumnus Max Mutchnick, in the Iwasaki Library. The project also provides new study rooms for students on the other floors. Opened in the fall of 2003, the 11-story building is home to two television studios, two performing art theaters, the Huret and Spector Gallery, set and costume studios, classrooms, and the offices of the Department of Performing Arts. The fifth and sixth floors of the building are connected to the Walker Building. Computer Labs: CAD Lab Performance Theaters and Facilities: Semel Theatre, The Kermit and Elinore Greene Theater, The Bobbi Brown and Steven Plofker Design Technology and Makeup Studio Television Studio and Facilities: Di Bona Television Studio & Control Room, Studio B & Control Room  Built originally in 1903, the Majestic Theatre was one of the first in Boston to be pre-wired for electricity, shown by its use of over 4500 light bulbs throughout the building. In the 1920s it converted to vaudeville, straying from its original purpose as an opera house. The 1950s then brought motion pictures to the Majestic, and not long after that the theatre, along with much of the surrounding neighborhood, fell into disrepair. Emerson purchased the theatre in 1983, and began extensive renovations on the building. The theatre is a member of the League of Historic American Theatres. The theatre is home to 2–3 Emerson Stage productions each year, various speaking events, Family Weekend, Open House, and the EVVY Awards, Emerson's own award show and the largest student-run live television production in the country. Opening in 1932 as a movie theatre, seating 1,700 movie-goers, the Paramount Theatre was one of the first movie houses in Boston to play talking motion pictures.  In 2005, Emerson College announced plans to renovate the Paramount Theatre, building an entire performing arts facility in and around the theatre. Construction was completed in January 2010. The project included not only renovating the Paramount Theatre into a 550-seat theater, but building both a new Performance Development Center and a new residence hall for the school in the upper floors of the building. The complex features the 120-seat Liebergott Black Box Theatre, the 174-seat Bright Family Screening Room, nine rehearsal studios ranging from , five practice rooms for individuals and small groups, a sound stage for film production classes, a scene shop, several classrooms; a restaurant, and Emerson faculty and staff offices. The newly renovated Paramount Center was designed by Elkus/Manfredi Architects of Boston and built by Bond Brothers. Construction began in the spring of 2007 and was completed in December 2009. In 2007, Emerson College announced that it had purchased property on Sunset Boulevard (at Gordon St) in Hollywood, on which to build a permanent home to its decades-old Los Angeles program. The international design firm Morphosis, headed by Pritzker Prize winning architect Thom Mayne, has been retained to design a signature building incorporating residential, teaching and administrative spaces. The 10-story building was opened for the college's winter semester in 2014. The new facility accommodates 217 students, approximately twice the number of students that were supported by Emerson's older facility in Burbank.Roger Vincent, "Emerson College is building a new West Coast campus in Hollywood.  The $85-million high-rise on Sunset Boulevard, a potential Hollywood landmark, will be a striking see-through structure where students will live and study the arts."  Los Angeles Times, March 2, 2012. Emerson College owns and operates Kasteel Well in the province of Limburg, the Netherlands, a national historical monument that provides living accommodations, classrooms, a resource center, and related facilities. Located near the German border, Kasteel Well is approximately two hours from Düsseldorf, Amsterdam, and Brussels, and five hours from Paris, Milan, and Madrid. An unusual feature of Emerson College residence halls is their close proximity to many of the major theaters and performance spaces in the heart of the Washington Street Theatre District of Boston. Some of the student rooms are literally on top of a major Boston theater owned by Emerson, and all of them are in close walking distance to the major performance venues of the District. Also nearby are major shopping centers and restaurants of the Chinatown, Downtown, and Back Bay neighborhoods of Boston. The newly constructed building opened in September 2006, replacing residence hall and student union buildings on Beacon and Arlington streets with most offices relocating to the new building. Sited on Boylston St. in the historic Piano Row District, the building is often referred to as "Piano Row." The residence floors consist of seven suites per floor. Each suite consists of three two-person bedrooms and one shared bathroom and living room for the unit. In addition, each floor has at least one residence assistant's room with either a common room or an additional residence assistant's room every other floor. Piano Row is also home to the Max Mutchnick Campus Center, sometimes called "The Max," and the Bobbi Brown and Steven Plofker Gymnasium. The former features several conference, meeting, and rehearsal spaces open to all students, offices for Student Life and the Student Government Association, and storage for any student organization that requires it. The Brown Gymnasium has an NCAA regulation-sized basketball court, with several sets of bleachers and a sky box equipped for events, as well as a workout and fitness center for athletes. Also housing new offices for the Athletics Department, it is Emerson College's first-ever indoor athletic facility. The construction of the gym was controversial at the time of its announcement, considering lack of performing space on campus and the lack of enthusiasm around athletics at Emerson. Since then, with growing appreciation for athletics among the student body, and the development of significant new performance and rehearsal space in the Paramount Center (see below), the Brown Gym has become an important campus feature. The building also features a cafe, which offers several made-to-order food items as well as convenience items, with indoor seating overlooking the Boston Common. In addition to housing a number of administrative offices on the ground floor, the Little Building was once an office and residential space before Emerson College purchased the building in 1994 and opened it for use in September 1995.  The Little Building contains the college's only cafeteria, a  fitness center in its basement and "The Cabaret", a space in the basement used for performances with a maximum capacity of 150 people. The residence hall houses over 750 students in the upper 10 floors of the 12-story building. The housing section of the building comprises singles, doubles, triples, two quads, and suites of between 4 and 6 people made up of various configurations of singles and doubles. The Little Building was originally built to hold 600 offices, 15 stores, 22 shops, and a Post Office. Built in 1917, it was named after its financier, John Mason Little and was designed by famed architect Clarence Blackall. The building's name is often confused as being a descriptive adjective, which leads to surprise upon discovery that it is one of the larger buildings on campus. In 1998 the building was changed from its original red color. Newly renovated in 2009, the upper floors of this 10-story building house 372 students in single and double rooms in three-, four-, five-, or six-person suite-like environments that include a shared bathroom. Residents share common lounges with kitchenettes and a centralized laundry facility.  This was formerly the headquarters of music publishing company, McLaughlin & Reilly Co. Opened in 2010, The Paramount Center is located in the heart of the Boston Theatre district, adjacent to the Boston Opera House and on top of the newly renovated Paramount Theatre, classroom space, a film soundstage, 200 seat screening room, and a black box theatre.  The Residence hall has four floors, on the 6th through 9th floors.  Each floor has a common room, and a mix of doubles and four or six person suites.  All rooms or suites have their own full bathroom, and all floors are coed.  Emerson College is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. Two schools (School of Communications and School of the Arts) and two departments (Department of Professional Studies and Special Programs and Institute for Liberal Arts and Interdisciplinary Studies) offer 27 undergraduate programs and 10 graduate degree programs. In 2008, Emerson admitted 37% of applicants, and is ranked 14th in the Universities-Master's (North) category according to U.S. News & World Report. There are currently 3,453 undergraduate and 837 graduate students. Tuition for the 2009–2010 academic year is $29,408 for a full-time undergraduate student; approximately 65% of students receive financial assistance averaging $15,000 in scholarships and grants, low-interest loans and part-time employment. Emerson College has an extensive film program that is one of the largest in the United States. In 2008/2009, it gave out 368 degrees in Film, Radio, and Television. Students can take advantage of the schools wide course offerings that allows them to major in a wide range of positions within the Visual Media Arts including Film Production, Post Production, Media Studies, Interactive Media, Experimental Media, Documentary Production, Directing, Producing, and Animation among others. In July 2014, Emerson's Visual and Media Arts program was rated #9 in the nation by Hollywood Reporter. The Engagement Game Lab is an applied research lab at Emerson College devoted to getting people involved with civic engagement in innovative ways and studying citizenship in a digital era. It is run by professionals, but also has student helpers and offers its resources to students who want to use them. Emerson College offers a large number of organizations, most of which are highly active and diverse ranging from curriculum based activities to social action organizations. All organizations, (except Greek-lettered organizations and departmental student organizations) are under the control of the Student Government Association and must renew their existence yearly. The largest student run, multi-camera, production in the nation, the EVVY Awards are Emerson College's annual award show. Judged by industry professionals, The EVVYs recognize student's achievements in their chosen discipline. Each May the show is broadcast live from the 1200 seat Cutler Majestic Theatre. Over 500 students are involved with the EVVY Awards, and the organization is run entirely by Emerson students. Emerson's award-winning newspaper on campus, The Berkeley Beacon, is entirely student run and produced. A staff of editors, copy-editors, computer-coders, photographers, columnists, and correspondents produce a weekly print version of the paper and update the website whenever possible. The Beacon also has a professional journalist who meets with them once a week to give advice/criticism on the most recent issue. The paper has also introduced a new video blog called "Beacon Beats" featuring musically inclined students. They also feature sections on news, lifestyle, sports, arts, and opinion. Being Emerson's only newspaper publication on campus, they're the sole medium for the college's print journalism majors to get real newspaper experience at the school. Emertainment Monthly is Emerson College's official entertainment magazine.http://www.emerson.edu/student-life/activities-organizations/print-publishing Modeled after professional entertainment journalism outlets like Entertainment Weekly, Emertainment Monthly has been nominated for several EVVY Awards and participates in major entertainment events as official members of the press. Because of their standing on Google News,http://www.emerson.edu/news-events/emerson-college-today/emertainment-monthly-gets-130k-web-views Emertainment Monthly has drawn a large following on Emerson's campus as one of the only ways to get real entertainment journalism experience at the school. The Emerson Channel is Emerson College's award winning television station. The channel was created in 1999 and is run entirely by Emerson College Students. It airs on campus cable channels 3 and 56 as well as online on their website. The channel currently produces 17 original shows including: EIV has been around since it was founded in 1975 and is Emerson's second largest student run organization below the Emerson channel. With more than 12 shows currently in production, EIV produces both live studio shows and taped field shows. Most notably, EIV is known for the EVVY Awards as well as their Emmy Award winning EIV News at 9:00 professional live news broadcast, as well as their pre-taped News at Six broadcast. CPLA The Communication, Politics and Law Association at Emerson College (CPLA-Emerson) is the oldest non-partisan student run organization on campus and was founded with the purpose to foster interest and involvement in local, national and global politics and policy. CPLA combines grassroots efforts with young idealism to effect change. Using Emerson’s broad network of political alumni, Emerson students, through CPLA, have and will continue to make an impact in the social and political realms, and develop relationships that will benefit them individually in the future. The Emersonian The Emersonian is one of the College's oldest organizations, serving as the permanent annual record of the year's people, places, happenings, and events of Emerson.  Staffed by students, the publication process take approximately eighteen months from inception to final production.  All majors at Emerson are welcomed to join this organization. Emerson College's Greek organizations include: Alpha Epsilon Phi (ΑΕΦ) Alpha Epsilon Phi is a national sorority founded in 1909 to promote esteem and sorority fidelity. AEPhi Beta Alpha Chapter is composed of a diverse group of women brought together by their common values of honesty, philanthropy, scholarship, leadership, tradition, pride, fun, sisterhood, and growth. As a social sorority, AEPhi organizes sister and Emerson events, as well as devotes time to local and national philanthropies. The sisters of the Beta Alpha Chapter at Emerson are especially dedicated to the fight against breast cancer—raising thousands to help the cause. As a national sorority AEPhi works with other local chapters and participates in AEPhi’s annual National Convention. Alpha Epsilon Phi provides a lifetime bond of friendship and sisterhood. Alpha Pi Theta (ΑΠΘ) Alpha Pi Theta is the oldest (and currently the only) local fraternity at Emerson College. The Brotherhood comprises an eclectic mix of personalities, talents and backgrounds, fostering a strong support system for individuals within the organization to grow and develop. Founded in 1946 by veterans returning to college from World War II, Alpha Pi Theta is based on the principles of Brotherhood, Love and Trust. Through open communication and camaraderie, "Theta" strives to promote by way of example the ideals of compassion, understanding, tolerance and service to one's community. From this model, active members and alumni continually work together in an effort to better each other, Emerson College, and the Boston communities as a whole. Zeta Phi Eta (ΖΦΗ) Zeta Phi Eta, established at Emerson College in 1908, is a National Professional Coed Fraternity in the Communication Arts and Sciences. Founded at Northwestern University in 1893, Zeta Phi Eta is the oldest national group of its kind. Since that time, Zeta has bonded together individuals committed to high standards in the communication arts and sciences, while providing opportunities for sharing professional interests through worthwhile activities. The sisters and brothers of Zeta Phi Eta are strongly involved with the campus community, in addition to working with many outside organizations such as the AIDS Action Committee and the American Cancer Society. Kappa Gamma Chi (ΚΓΧ) Kappa Gamma Chi is Emerson College's oldest and only professional sorority, dedicated to the promotion of women's advancement in society, as well as community service. The Alpha Chapter of Kappa Gamma Chi was founded at Ohio Wesleyan University in 1890. In 1902, the Gamma Chapter of Kappa was founded at Emerson, along with our brother fraternity, Phi Alpha Tau. Phi Alpha Tau (ΦΑΤ) Phi Alpha Tau is the nation's oldest and foremost communicative arts fraternity. Established in 1902 by a group of students dedicated to serving the community, fostering brotherhood, furthering the communicative arts, and promoting the aims and ideals of Emerson College, Phi Alpha Tau is compiled of some of the most active and unique gentlemen on campus. Our events include The Public Conversation, a forum that brings administrative officials together to discuss student concerns, the Joseph E. Connor award, an award presented to an outstanding gentlemen in the world today, and Honorary Brother Inductions of faculty, staff and administration, creating a network of brothers on campus. Sigma Alpha Epsilon (ΣΑΕ) Sigma Alpha Epsilon is the largest Fraternity by initiates in the country and the only National Fraternity at Emerson College. Priding themselves on living by their creed, The True Gentlemen, Sigma Alpha Epsilon is an organization which not only strengthens the bonds of brotherhood, but also serves to improve Loyalty, Honor, and Friendship among its members. With distinguished alumni ranging from Presidents, to sports heroes to celebrities, Sigma Alpha Epsilon has a massive network across the country from the past 150 years, and serves as a networking base even after the undergraduate experience is over. Sigma Pi Theta (ΣΠΘ) Sigma Pi Theta was founded in 1979 at Emerson College with the help of their brother fraternity, Alpha Pi Theta. It was established as a place where women can find a true support system, as well as an organization to support the women in both the Emerson and local Boston communities. The Sigma sisters encourage the growth of the individual, the sorority, and the Emerson community through workshops and activities held throughout the year. Sigma Pi Theta is dedicated to the principles of sisterhood, trust and love. Sigma Rho Mu (ΣPM) Sigma Rho Mu was formally founded in 2012 to recognize the existing familial nature of the college's Stage/Production Management major. As both men and women are in the major, the fraternity considers itself co-ed and has had both male and female presidents since its founding. Sigma Rho Mu does not have nor seek formal Student Government Association recognition. The College is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (Division III), the Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC), and the New England Women's and Men's Athletic Conference (NEWMAC). Emerson previously competed as a charter member of the Great Northeast Athletic Conference (GNAC) from 1995 to 2013. The athletic department supports Lacrosse, Tennis, Baseball, Basketball, Cross country running, Golf, Volleyball and Soccer for all students in addition to Softball for women. The school also has an ice hockey club team, a cheerleading squad, and a Quidditch team. In 2012, Emerson's Women's Volleyball team defeated Rivier to become the 2012 GNAC Champions. WECB is the campus student run radio station, overseen by a faculty advisor. WECB broadcasts online at its websitehttp://www.wecb.fm and on closed-circuit campus television (channel 56). The origins of WECB date back over 60 years to when Emerson College obtained an army surplus AM transmitter. The station broadcast via carrier current from the basement of the 132–134 Beacon Street dormitory, and grew in success. including legitimate commercials, news programming and a station-owned van. In 1983–84, WECB was scheduled for demolition without reconstruction, as part of the Mass Communications $1.6M renovation project. Carol Kamerschen, Greg Weremey and Russ Weisenbacher were instrumental in fighting the board of trustees, and convincing them to allow Greg and Russ to design and build new studios at 126 Beacon Street, replacing the former facilities at 130 Beacon Street, 4th floor. This situation ended with the inauguration in 1998 of a new Emerson facility, the Ansin Building, featuring a full studio suite for WERS, Emerson's station of wider general public interest. The less formal WECB operation was left unhoused. After student concerns were raised, WECB was resurrected in a modest studio within the WERS studio suite. ETIN (Emerson's Talk and Information Network), an online talk radio service run by students, is also housed in the same space as WERS and WECB.http://etinradio.org/ The college has a well-developed comedy community, including student groups specializing in various combinations of sketch comedy, improvisation, and short films. In the 2013-2014 school year there were nine recognized comedy organizations: Emerson Comedy Workshop, Chocolate Cake City, Inside Joke, Jimmy's Traveling All-Stars, This is Pathetic, Stroopwafel, Swollen Monkey Showcase, The Girlie Project and Police Geese who revolutionized college sketch comedy through pushing the boundaries of incest based humor. Several comedy classes, including "Comedy Writing for Television", "Intermediate Creative Writing: Comedy", and "Comedy Writers' Room" are a regular part of the curriculum.  In addition, the Emerson College Comedy Scholarship is offered each year to one rising senior who has "demonstrated leadership and talent in the writing, performance, or direction of comedy". The college is also home to the American Comedy Archives, established in 2005 to "acquire, preserve and make available primary source material that documents the professional activities of the ground breaking individuals who have written, produced or performed comedy for radio, television, motion pictures or live performance".      Charles Wesley Emerson (1880–1903) William James Rolphe (1903–08) Henry Lawrence Southwick (1908–32) Harry S. Ross (1932–45) Boylston Green (1945–49) Samuel Justus McKinley (1949–67) Richard Chapin (1967–75) Gus Turbeville (1975–77) presidency empty (1977–79) Allen E. Koenig (1979–89) John Zacharis (1989–92) Jacqueline Liebergott (1992–2011) M. Lee Pelton (2011–present) Breaking News! — satirical news program, inspired by The Daily Show and SNL's Weekend Update Good Morning Emerson (GME) — morning news/talk show. Official athletics website WECB student radio Emerson Independent Video
