  Emmanuel Bernard Le Roy Ladurie (born 19 July 1929) is a French historian whose work is mainly focused upon Languedoc in the ancien regime, particularly the history of the peasantry. One of the leading historians of France, Le Roy Ladurie has been called the "standard-bearer" of the third generation of the Annales school and the "rock star of the medievalists", noted for his work in social history.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Le Roy Ladurie was born in Les Moutiers-en-Cinglais, Calvados.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. His father was Jacques Le Roy Ladurie, minister of Agriculture for Marshal Philippe Pétain and subsequently a member of the French resistance after breaking with the Vichy regime. Le Roy Ladurie described his childhood in Normandy growing up on his family estate's in the countryside as intensely Catholic and royalist in politics. The Le Roy Ladurie family were originally the aristocratic de Roy Laduries-descending from a Catholic priest who fell in love with one of his parishioners, dropped out of the priesthood to marry her and was then ennobled by the Crown-but dropped the aristocratic de from their surname at the time of the French Revolution. Le Roy Ladurie's grandfather was a French Army of Catholic royalist views who was dishonorably discharged from the Army for refusing orders from the anti-clerical government to close Catholic schools. Afterwards, Le Roy Ladurie's grandfather settled in rural Normandy, being elected mayor of Villeray and was active in organising an union for rural workers. During his childhood, Le Roy Ladurie's hero was Marshal Pétain. Marshal Pétain's fall from grace from being the hero of Verdun and one of France's most popular men to the reviled collaborator and one of France's most hated men, sentenced to death for high treason for his collaboration with Germany had a major influence on Le Roy Ladurie. Speaking of the rise and fall of Marshal Pétain from hero to traitor as an example of the vicissitudes of history, Le Roy Ladurie in a 1998 interview in 1998 stated: "I have remained fascinated since with what we call decline and fall. France is full of people who became very important, then became nothing. My fascination is probably due to the fact that my own family was once important and then became zero. There was a contrast between my own career and the feelings in my family." Because his father had been a minister in the Vichy government, his son grew up in an atmosphere of family shame and disgrace. The historian was educated in Caen at the Collège Saint-Joseph, in Paris at the Lycée Henri-IV and in Sceaux at the Lycée Lakanal.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. He was awarded an agrégation in history after studying at the École Normale Supérieure and a doctorat ès lettres from the University of Paris.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Le Roy Ladurie has taught at the Lycée de Montpellier, the University of Montpellier, the École Pratique des Haute Études in Paris, the University of Paris and at the Collège de France, where he occupied from 1973 to 1999 the chair of History of Modern Civilization and became emeritus professor.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Le Roy Ladurie was a member of the French Communist Party (PCF) between 1945 and 1956. His devoutly Catholic parents had expected him to become a Catholic priest and were scandalized that their son should become an ardent Communist and atheist. The Great Depression of the 1930s together with France's defeat in 1940 at the hands of Germany had caused many people in France to lose faith in both capitalism and liberal democracy. The leading role played by the French Communists in the Resistance during the German occupation and the willingness of many of the traditional French elites to support the Vichy regime together with the seemingly success achieved by the Soviet regime's planned economy and its "scientific socialism" led Le Roy Ladurie like many other people of his generation in France to embrace Communism as the best hope for humanity. Christofferson, Michael Scott French Intellectuals Against the Left: The Antitotalitarian Moment of the 1970s, Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2004 page 30. The PCF proudly billed themselves as the "party of 75, 000 shot"-a reference to the claim that the Germans had shot 75, 000 French Communists between 1941-44 (the true figure was actually 10, 000 French Communists executed between 1941-44), but regardless the PCF had acquired tremendous prestige in 1940s France as a result of its role in the Resistance.Bell, David Scott & Criddle, Byron The French Communist Party in the Fifth Republic, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994  page 75.  When the Hungarian writer Arthur Koestler's 1940 novel Darkness at Noon was translated into French in 1949, Le Roy Ladurie at the time saw it as confirming the greatness of Stalinism instead of being the condemnation that Koestler had intended. Christofferson, Michael Scott French Intellectuals Against the Left: The Antitotalitarian Moment of the 1970s, Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2004 page 30. Koestler's novel concerned a prominent Soviet Communist and Old Bolshevik named Rubashov who was arrested and charged with crimes against the Soviet Union that he did not commit, but which he willingly confessed to in a show trial after hearing an appeal to Party discipline. The character of Rubashov is generally believed to be modeled by Koestler after Nikolai Bukharin, a prominent Old Bolshevik and the leader of the "rightist" (i.e moderate) faction in the Communist Party who was shot in 1938 after a show trial in Moscow which Bukharin confessed to a fantastic array of bizarre and improbable charges such as being an agent of foreign powers, sabotage, "wrecking", and working with Leon Trotsky from his exile in Mexico City and the "White Guard" leaders in Paris to overthrow Stalin. Bukharin's real crime had been to oppose Stalin in the post-Lenin succession struggle in the 1920s and for advocating continuing the New Economic Policy-which allocated control of the "commanding heights" of the Soviet economy to the state while allowing free enterprise in the rest of the economy-as a viable model for the future. It was not until 1928 when Stalin brought in the First Five Year Plan that full socialism arrived in the Soviet Union, a policy choice that Bukharin had opposed. The image of the Bukharin-like character Rubashov confessing to crimes that he did not commit in order to uphold the greatness of Communism in Darkness At Noon caused was sensational at the time, but the truth was rather more brutal and sordid in that Bukharin had been psychologically "broken" after months of torture by the NKVD, and had been reduced to such a state that he was willing to "confess" to anything. Le Roy Ladurie wrote in a 1949 essay about Darkness At Noon that: "Rubashov was right to sacrifice his life and especially his revolutionary honor so that the best of all possible regimes could be established one day". Christofferson, Michael Scott French Intellectuals Against the Left: The Antitotalitarian Moment of the 1970s, Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2004 page 30. Le Roy Ladurie was to subsequently to admit that he rather misunderstood the message of Darkness At Noon. At the height of the Cold War in the early 1950s, Le Roy Ladurie described the atmosphere inside the Party as "une intensité liturgique".Hazareesingh, Sudhir Intellectuals and the French Communist Party: Disillusion and Decline, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991 page 139. In 1955, Le Roy Ladurie married Madeleine Pupponi by whom he had one son and one daughter.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712. Le Roy Laduire left the PCF after doubts caused by the 1956 Hungarian Revolution became too much for him. Le Roy Ladurie was later to write that the sight of Soviet tanks crushing the ordinary people of Hungary in 1956 who were merely demanding basic human rights led to reject his optimism of the late 1940s that the Soviet Union represented the best hope of humanity and instead led him to the conclusion that communism was an inhumane, totalitarian ideology that oppressed people in the Soviet Union, Hungary and elsewhere.Hazareesingh, Sudhir Intellectuals and the French Communist Party: Disillusion and Decline, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991 page 139. In November 1956, Le Roy Ladurie resigned from the Communist Party in protest against the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian revolt.Hazareesingh, Sudhir Intellectuals and the French Communist Party: Disillusion and Decline, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991 page 139. Le Roy Ladurie's break with the PCF did not mean a break with the left and leaving the PCF, he joined the Socialist Party, running as a Socialist candidate in Montpellier in 1957, winning 2.5% of the vote. In 1963, a disillusioned Le Roy Ladurie left the Socialists. In January 1978, Le Roy Ladurie was a founding member of the Comité des intellectuals pour l'Europe des libertés, an anti-communist group of liberal French intellectuals opposed to the powerful influence of the French Communist Party on French intellectual life and the alliance of the Socialists and the Communists which they saw as a threat to French democracy. Christofferson, Michael Scott French Intellectuals Against the Left: The Antitotalitarian Moment of the 1970s, Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2004 pages 268 & 275. The Comité des intellectuals pour l'Europe des libertés was not a conservative group, and instead was opposed to Communism from a liberal vantage-point, declaring itself opposed to both "the unarticulated cry and pure revolt on one hand and absolute knowledge and totalizing ideology on the other", damning the "fatal socialist-statist equation" as offering the end of the Republic and everything it stood for. Christofferson, Michael Scott French Intellectuals Against the Left: The Antitotalitarian Moment of the 1970s, Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2004 page 268.  He analysed his political engagement and Communism in Ouverture, société, pouvoir: de l’Édit de Nantes à la chute du communisme (2004) and Les grands procès politiques, ou la pédagogie infernale (2002). Le Roy Ladurie has often written for Le Nouvel Observateur, L'Express, and Le Monde  newspapers, and appeared on French television. In France, historians have far more social prestige than they do in the English-speaking world, and to be a successful historian in France is become something of a celebrity. Le Roy Ladurie first attracted attention with his doctoral thesis, Les paysans de Languedoc, which was published as a book in 1966 and translated into English as The Peasants of Languedoc in 1974.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. In this study of the peasantry of Languedoc over several centuries, Le Roy Ladurie employed a huge range of quantitative information such as tithe records, wage books, tax receipts, rent receipts and profit records, together with the use of the theories of such thinkers as Ernest Labrousse, Michel Foucault, David Ricardo, Fernand Braudel, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Thomas Malthus, François Simiand, Sigmund Freud, and Max Weber, to contend that the history of Languedoc was "l'histoire immobile."Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. He argued that the history of Langudedoc was marked by waves of growth and decline that in essence changed very little over the passage of time.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Le Roy Ladurie acknowledged his debt to Braudel that had argued that it was climate and geography that shaped the course of history, but felt that Braudel had gone too far in using geography and climate as causal agents in history.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Instead, Le Roy Ladurie felt that culture and economics were just as important as causal agents as the nature of the land and the weather over it.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. Influenced by the work of his mentor Fernand Braudel, Le Roy Ladurie set out to write a histoire totale (total history) of Languedoc from the 15th to the 18th centuries that would embrace political, cultural, economic, social history and environmental history all integrated into one.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712. Le Roy Ladurie proposed that the determining feature of life in Languedoc was the culture of the people who lived there. In his book, Le Roy Ladurie maintained that the reason why the people of Languedoc could not break the cycles of advance and decline was not so much technological factors, but was due to culture that prevented the people from developing more progressive technology and farming practices.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 194. In Les paysans de Languedoc, Le Roy Ladurie broke the prevailing Marxist view that dominated French historiography at the time that the history of early modern France from the 15th century to the 18th century was the ever-accelerating accumulation of property and wealthy by capitalists.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Instead, Le Roy Ladurie contended that in Languedoc there were cycles of economic advance and decline from the 15th to the 18th centuries.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. According to Le Roy Ladurie, there were several cycles, namely: At the beginning of the 18th century, Langudoc society was not much different from where it had been two centuries earlier in Le Roy Ladurie's opinion, thus making this entire period one of "l'historie immobile".Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Le Roy Ladurie saw this as the result of the inability of the farmers of Languedoc to increase the productivity of the land, writing: "Some have spoken of a natural ceiling on productive resources. But 'nature' in this case is actually culture; it is the customs, the way of life, the mentality of the people; it is a whole formed by technical knowledge and a system of valus, by the means employed and the ends pursued".Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. As such, Le Roy Ladurie argued that the unwillingness of the peasants of Languedoc to engage in technologically innovative farming techniques to increase the productivity of the land as was happening during the same period in England was the result of the "lack of the conscience, the culture, the morals, the politics, the education, the reformist spirit, and the unfettered longing for success" that characterized the entire culture of Languedoc during these centuries.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. However, Le Roy Ladurie pointed out that he had traced was not a cycle in the proper sense as Languedoc did not return in the 18th century back to where it had been in the 15th century.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Even through this was overall a period of economic stagnation, Le Roy Ladurie noted that were "islands" of growth and change in Languedoc.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Some of the more enterprising farmers started to grow silk and vines, with the latter laying the foundations of the Languedoc wine industry.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Other farmers switched over to cloth manufacture.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. In conclusion, Le Roy Ladurie argued that these economic changes together with the beginning of elementary schools where the sons of farmers acquired some literary, the decline of religious fanaticism and a "a general improvement in behavior" all come together to bring about the "economic takeoff" of the 18th century, where the cycles of decline and advance were finally broken.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. In Le Roy Ladurie's view, there were "structures" comprising long-term and slowly changing material and mental patterns which underlined the more dramatic and, in his opinion, less important "conjoncture" of trends and events, upon which traditionally historians have focused.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 pages 195-196. Le Roy Ladurie wrote that he was studying in Les paysans de Languedoc that was the relationship between the vie culturelle that was the "superstructure" of beliefs, politics and thought as it was changed slowly by the vie matérielle of the environment and geography that was the "base" that the superstructure rested on.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712. Like Braudel, Le Roy Ladurie believes that it is the history of the "structures" that really mattered, but unlike Braudel, Le Roy Ladurie has expressed an interest in biography and the histoire événementielle (history of events), which Braudel dismissed as irrelevant.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. However, Le Roy Ladurie stated that while studying histoire événementielle is interesting, it is the "structures" of French society that explain the course of French history.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Le Roy Ladurie's best-known work is Montaillou, village occitan de 1294 à 1324 (1975), a study of the village of Montaillou in the region of Languedoc in the south of France during the age of the Cathar heresy.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. Montaillou was a bestseller in both France and after its translation into English in the United States and Great Britain, and remains Le Roy Ladurie's most popular book by far.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. As a result of the book, the previously little-known village of Montaillou high up in the Pyrenees on the border with Spain become a popular tourist destination.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. In the 14th century, Montaillou belonged to the County of Foix, an independent country that was later annexed by the kings of France and whose people spoke a now extinct language closely related to French called Occitan. From the 12th to the 14th centuries, a heterodox movement known as Catharism flourished in northern Italy and southern France. The Cathars believed that God had created the spiritual world and Satan had created the earthy worldHuges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. Life on earth was thus intrinsically evil for the Cathars and salvation could only be achieved when the soul was separated from the human flesh with death.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. For these beliefs, the Cathars were condemned by the Catholic Church as heretics and a ferocious campaign of repression was waged by the French Crown and the Catholic Church to stamp out the Cathar movement. The Catholic Church employed the Holy Inquisition to hunt down Cathars and burn them at the stake if they continued to hold onto their beliefs. Montaillou was a stronghold of Catharism and thus of considerable interest to the Holy Inquisition. Indeed, Guillaume Bélibaste whose life-story is recounted by Le Roy Ladurie in Montaillou was burned at the stake by the Inquisition in 1321 for being a Cathar. In Montaillou, Le Roy Ladurie used the meticulous notes of a member of the Holy Inquisition, Jacques Fournier who served as the Bishop of Pamiers between 1318 and 1325 before becoming Pope Benedict XII, to develop a multi-layered study of life in a small French village over the course of several years.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. Fournier had interviewed 25 people from Montaillou and had questioned them about everything in their lives in an attempt to find out what made people believe in Catharism.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. Le Roy Ladurie used the records of interrogations conducted by Fournier to offer a picture of both the material and mental worlds of the villagers. He examined the former as reflected in farming practices, houses, relations with other villages and with both secular and ecclesiastical power, and the latter as reflected in their beliefs about God, fate, sexuality, death, life, marriage, magic, space, time, and salvation.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. In his introduction, Le Roy Ladurie wrote that his book: "is much more than a courageous, but fleeting deviation. It is the factual history of ordinary people. It is Pierre [Clergue] and Beatrice [des Planissoles] and their love; it is Pieree Maury and his flock; it is the breath of life restored through a repressive Lathin register that is a monument of Occitan literature".Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197. Montaillou was much praised by reviewers in both France and the English-speaking world for its vivid, atmospheric recreation of the everyday life of the people of Montaillou in the early 14th century.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 pages 197-198. Many critics have noted that for Le Roy Ladurie, the village priest Father Pierre Clergue, an ardent womanizer whose vow of celibacy meant nothing and who apparently slept with most of the women of Montaillou seemed to be something of hero for the historian. Clergue's affair with the local aristocrat and noted beauty, the Countess Béatrice de Planisoles formed one of the central stories that Le Roy Ladurie related in Montaillou with much sympathy for the doomed couple. Critics of Le Roy Ladurie have argued that the Holy Inquisition was an instrument of judicial repression for whom torture or the threat of torture were routine methods.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. The Canadian historian Norman Cantor argued that none of the people questioned by Fournier had appeared willingly before the Holy Inquisition, and that therefore the Fournier Register which Le Roy Ladurie had used as his main source for Montaillou is not reliable.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. Other critics have noted that the people questioned by Fournier spoke in Occitan, had their remarks written down in Latin and that Le Roy Ladurie had translated the text into French and have wondered if something has been lost in the translation.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. Another work was Le Carnaval de Romans: de la chandeleur au mercredi des cendres (translated into English as Carnival in Romans) which dealt with the 1580 massacre of about twenty artisans at the annual carnival in the town of Romans-sur-Isère, France.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 pages 196-197. In this book, Le Roy Ladurie used the only two surviving eyewitness accounts of the massacre (one of which was hostile towards to the victims of the massacre by Guérin, the other sympathetic yet often inaccurate by Piémond), together with such information as plague lists and tax lists, to treat the massacre as a microcosm of the political, social and religious conflicts of rural society in the latter half of the 16th century in France.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 197.  This book provides an example of a micro-historical approach to the social structure of the town of Romans and tax rebellions in early modern France. Other more recent treatments of social history by Le Roy Ladurie have included La sorcière de Jasmin (translated into English as Jasmin's Witch) and Le siècle des Platter, 1499-1628 (translated into English as The Beggar and the Professor: A Sixteenth Century Family Drama). In Jasmin's Witch, Le Roy Ladurie following the lead of Carlo Ginzburg, who argued that the idea of witchcraft as held by peasants was very different from the idea of witchcraft held by judges and churchmen.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. To understand the "total social fact of witchcraft," Le Roy Ladurie used the 1842 poem Françouneto written by Jacques Boè and based on a traditional French peasant folk tale.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. Le Roy Ladurie contended that the poem contains many authentic traces of popular beliefs about witchcraft in rural France during the 17th and 18th centuries.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. Le Roy Ladurie argued that the "crime" of the "witch" Françouneto was the violation of the unwritten social code of "limited wealth," namely that she increased her own wealth at the expense of others.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. In The Beggar and the Professor, Le Roy Ladurie used the letters and memoirs of the Platter family to examine the social values of the 16th century, especially in regards to religion, medicine, crime, learning, and taxes.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 198. Another work of social history by Le Roy Ladurie was his 1982 book Love, Death, and Money in the Pay d'Oc, The French Peasantry: 1450-1660, which as it title indicates examined the views held by French peasants about love, death and money.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. Though best known for his work in "microhistory", Le Roy Ladurie has also examined the political history of France between 1460 and 1774 in a two-volume history. The first volume was L'Etat royal: de Louis XI à Henri IV, 1460-1610 (translated into English as The French Royal State: 1460-1610).Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. In this book, Le Roy Ladurie argued that the major concerns of the French Crown were the economy, the Reformation and aristocratic politics, and that the main reasons for the growth of the French state was the need to raise revenue to pay for military expansion into Italy, Provence and Burgundy and its rivalry with Spain over mastery of western Europe.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. In the second volume, Ancien Régime: de Louis XIII à Louis XV, 1610-1774 (translated into English as The Ancien Régime), Le Roy Ladurie argued that there was a close connection between the domestic and foreign policies of the French Crown.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. In particular, Le Roy Ladurie argued that periods of authoritarianism in domestic policy coincided with periods of aggression in foreign policy, and that periods of liberalism in domestic policy coincided with periods of a pacific foreign policy.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. In order to pay for war, the French state had to increase taxation to raise the necessary funds. In ancien régime France, society was divided into three legal categories; the First Estate (the Catholic Church), the Second Estate (the nobility) and the Third Estate (the commoners). The first two estates, which comprised the more wealthier elements of French society were exempt from taxation and to make up the shortfall in revenue, the Third Estate was taxed more heavily than what had been the case if the tax burden in French society was spread with greater equality. Le Roy Ladurie argued that because war was so expensive, the French state always had to drastically increase taxation in times of conflict. And that because of the highly unequal nature of the French tax system, the increased taxes had to be accompanied with increased repression to crush the social resistance generated by the higher taxes. The three men who dominated French politics in the 17th century, namely the Cardinal Richelieu, Cardinal Mazarin and King Louis XIV were all obsessed with winning  la gloire (the glory) of making France into the world's greatest power, which meant that the 17th century was a period of constant warfare where France was almost always at war with some other power to win la gloire. As a result, anti-tax revolts frequently broke out all over France in the 17th century as the Third Estate attempted to reject the oppressively heavy taxation needed to pay for the wars intended to win la gloire. All of the anti-tax revolts were crushed with ferocious brutality by the Crown to sent the message that it was folly on the part of ordinary people to challenge the might of the French state. Despite certain lapses in the 1750s, Le Roy Ladurie argued that the reign of King Louis XV was characterized by liberalism at home and peace abroad while the rule of Cardinal Richelieu and King Louis XIV was marked by aggression and authoritarianism.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. At the end of his two-volume history, Le Roy Ladurie stated that the growth of popularity of Enlightenment ideas, anti-clericalism, and liberalism had by 1774 already placed France on the road to the French Revolution.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. The American historian Stuart Carroll commented that in these books of the 1990s, Le Roy Ladurie was according the decisions individuals and histoire événementielle a level of importance in influencing history that he had rejected in his 1973 book Le Territoire de l'historien where he had claimed the quantitative methodology and the study of long-term structural changes had replaced histoire événementielle and biographies as the main focus of the work of a historian.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712 Ladurie's mentor was Fernand Braudel, a prominent member of the Annales School and one of the most prolific contemporary historians. At the beginning of the 1970s, Ladurie founded the movement of the "Nouvelle histoire" (New History). Le Roy Ladurie is a leading champion of "microhistory," in which a historian uses the study of an event, locality, family or life to reveal the "structures" which underlie life in the particular period under study. Some, like Niall Ferguson, have questioned the value of "microhistory," arguing that it is wrong to assume that the study of one village or one incident in one town or one family reveals wider patterns of life in France, let alone the rest of Europe. Another line of criticism has centered around Le Roy Ladurie's use of the term "structures." His critics contend that he has never clearly defined the term, nor explained why "structures" change over time, or even whether the "structures" Le Roy Ladurie purports to find exist. Le Roy Ladurie has also worked on the history of French regions (Histoire de France des régions, 2004) and on anthropometric history as well as on the impact of climate changes on human history. Besides writing books, Le Roy Ladurie is a prolific essayist writing on variety of subjects such as the utility of computers as method of historical research, rates of delinquency in the French Army in the 19th century, the spread of global diseases and the belief of French peasants that magic could be used to generate impotence.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 199. The latter was a reference to the widespread practice of French peasant men in the Middle Ages and the early modern period of paying witches to use their (supposed) magical powers to make their rivals in love go impotent. Le Roy Ladurie is also known as one of the first modern environmental historians because his work focused on human agency in environmental change, as well as environmental factors in human history. "the low water mark" in the 15th century when French society was still recovering from the massive death toll caused by the Black Death of the 14th century which had wiped out most of the population of France.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. As a consequence, there was social pressure on the survivors to have as many children as possible to repopulate France.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. With a growing population in the late 14th and 15th centuries, forests were cut down to make room for farms while poorer land that had been neglected was reclaimed to provide land for the growing number of Languedoc peasants.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Furthermore, the growing population of Languedoc meant that property was constantly being subdivided while wages declined.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. The first phrase in turn led to the second phrase, the "advance" of growing prosperity that lasted until 1530.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. After 1530, Le Roy Ladurie maintained that the "stubborn inelasticity" of farming practices in Languedoc combined with a growing population led to a period of economic decline that lasted for the rest of the 16th century.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Peasants planted more grain, but owning to combination of cultural conservatism, a short of capital and a refusal to innovate, could not increase the productivity of the land to match the increasing population.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. The growing numbers of mouths to feed together with the "stubborn inelasticity" of Languedoc farming methods led a period of social misery with more and more struggling to survive on less and less.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Many peasants moved to other provinces in a search of a better life while those that remained in Languedoc tended to get married at a later age in order to limit family size.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. In the 16th century, ordinary people in Languedoc  were all too aware that they were living in very tough times, but Le Roy Ladurie wrote that they were "preoccupied to the point of self-immolation" with religious issues.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. The Reformation had badly divided ordinary people, and during the French Wars of Religion, Protestants and Catholics fought one another over social domination of Languedoc society.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Between 1562-1598, a series of civil wars took place in France between Catholics and Huguenots to determine whatever France would be a Catholic or Calvinist nation, and as such Frenchmen went about killing each other with much passion and fury; both sides were convinced that their faith was the one true faith and literally France's salvation was in the balance. The Reformed Church had made great gains in the south of France, and as such Languedoc like many provinces in the south was the scene of especially vicious fighting during the Wars of Religion. Le Roy Ladurie argued that it was the devastating effect of the civil wars in France that gave birth to both anti-tax revolts as the peasants objected to the increased taxes that the series of civil wars entitled and a widespread belief in witchcraft, which held out the promise of a more just society.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Le Roy Ladurie wrote that witchcraft represented the lingering survival of the beliefs of the ancient pagan religion before Languedoc had been converted to Christianity. The ancient Celts had thrown valuable objects into the water to appease the powerful water spirits that were believed to live in the waters while later on the Romans had imported the belief in Dryads (woodland nymphs) and Naiads (water nymphs).Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie « Naïades et dryades: Mythe de paysan français au 16ème siècle », in études françaises du 16ème siècles, numéro 9, automne 1964 pg 14. Despite becoming nominally Christian, people in Languedoc for centuries afterwards continued to throw valuable objects into the water to please the spirits that were believed to reside in the waters.Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie « Naïades et dryades: Mythe de paysan français au 16ème siècle », in études françaises du 16ème siècles, numéro 9, automne 1964 pg 14. Peasant folklore had it that certain favored young women could be invited to join the sisterhood of the Naiads and that if they accepted the invitation by diving nude into the magical waters, they would be transformed into a sensuous Naiad who would be forever young.Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie « Naïades et dryades: Mythe de paysan français au 16ème siècle », in études françaises du 16ème siècles, numéro 9, automne 1964 pg 14. Le Roy Ladurie suggested that these folktales about young women turning into Dryads or Naiads reflected both female fantasies of escape from the patriarchal society of 16th century Languedoc and a way of the peasants of explaining away young women who had run away.Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie « Naïades et dryades: Mythe de paysan français au 16ème siècle », in études françaises du 16ème siècles, numéro 9, automne 1964 pg 14.  Given the prevalence of such beliefs, many peasants took it for granted that certain women were witches who had magical powers and could talk to the spirts of the forest and the waters.  During the period of the Wars of Religion, that for many ordinary people repulsed in equal measure both by the brutal fanaticism of the Catholics and the Huguenots turned to these women who claimed to have magical powers, both as a rejection of the bloody mayhem caused by the Wars of Religion and of the existing social order which Christianity, whenever it be Protestantism or Catholicism upheld. Le Roy Ladurie wrote that the appeal of witchcraft with its glorification of sensuous pleasures of the human body held out the promise of a "social inversion", which it failed to deliver upon.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. In studying cultural and religious history of Languedoc, Le Roy Ladurie was very different from many other Annales historians who usually ignored these aspects of history.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712. Le Roy Ladurie wrote that by the end of the 16th century, the "Malthusian curse" had befallen Languedoc as the heavy population growth was not matched by increased productivity of the land to provide enough food for the all the extra mouths to feed.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Starting in 1600, a third phrase that Le Roy Ladurie called "maturity" set in.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. In the 17th century, the population finally grew level with the productivity of the land in Languedoc.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 195. Contrary to Marxist historians, Le Roy Ladurie argued that there was little accumulation of wealth as continuing agrarian conservatism and the drastic increase in what Le Roy Ladurie called "parasitic phenomena" both retarded efforts to build up capital.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. The "parasitic phenomena" were the increasing taxes levied by the French Crown combined with increased tithes demanded by the Catholic Church and increased rents by landlords while at the same time many Languedoc peasants went deeply into debt in an effort to pay all of these taxes, tithes and rents.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. The adverse climate of the 17th century as the Little Ice Age was at its height together with the fact that France was constantly at war in the 17th century further contributed to the increasing misery of the peasantry of Languedoc.Carroll, Stuart "Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel" pages 711-712 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, Volume 1, edited by Kelly Boyd, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999 page 712. In the second half of the 17th century was Le Roy Ladurie called the fourth phrase of "the long period of recession".Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. As the peasants struggled to pay their loans, taxes, tithes and rents, the economy of Languedoc went into a period of steep decline.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. This period of rising unemployment and poverty together with poor hygiene, unsanitary living conditions, emigration to other provinces of France, late marriages and a rise in birth control as many men started to use primitive condoms all led to a dramatic decline in the population of Languedoc.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. During this period, many of the more wealthier families were able to embark upon land consolidation as there were able to buy the land of less successful families on the cheap.Huges-Warrington, Marnie, Fifty Key Thinkers on History, London: Routledge, 2000 page 196. Les Paysans de Languedoc - 1966 Histoire du climat depuis l'An Mil, 1967 Montaillou, village occitan, 1975, ISBN 0-394-72964-1 (English), ISBN 2-07-032328-5 (French) Le Territoire de l'historien Vol. 1 - 1973 Le Territoire de l'historien Vol. 2 - 1978 Le Carnaval de Romans, 1579-1580 - 1980 L'État royal - 1987 L'Ancien Régime - 1991 Le Siècle des Platter (1499-1628), Le mendiant et le professeur - 1995 Saint-Simon, le système de la Cour - 1997 Histoire de la France des Régions - 2001 Histoire  des paysans français, de la peste noire à la Révolution - 2002 Histoire humaine et comparée du climat - 2004 Abrégé d'Histoire du climat - 2007 Barzun, Jacques Clio and the Doctors: Psycho-history, Quanto-history and History, Chicago, II: University of Chicago Press, 1974. Burke, Peter The French Historical Revolution: The Annales School, 1929-1989, Cambridge: Polity Press, 1990. Cantor, Norman Inventing the Middle Ages: the Lives, Works and Ideas of the Great Medievalists in the Twentieth Century, New York: W. Morow, 1991. Carrard, P. "The New History and the Discourse of the Tentative: Le Roy Ladurie's Question Marks" pages 1–14 from Clio, Volume 15, Issue #1, 1985. Carrard, P. Poetics of the New History: French Historical Discourse from Braudel to Chartier, Baltimore, M.D.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992. Hartigan, F.X. "Montaillou" pages 275-283 from Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Western Society for French History, Volume 21, 1994. Himmelfarb, Gertrude The New History and the Old: Critical Essays and Reappraisals, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. Lloyd, Christopher The Structures of History, Blackwell, Oxford, 1993. Newman, E.L. "Le Roy Ladurie's Magic: Jasmin's Witch" pages 285-292 from The Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Western Society for French History, Volume 21, 1994. Sonnino, P. "Les paysans de Languedoc: vingt-sept ans après" pages 293-300 from The Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Western Society for French History, Volume 21, 1994. Stone, Lawrence "In the Alleys of Mentalité" pages 20–23 from New York Review of Books, Volume 26, Issue #17, November 8, 1979. Willis, F.R. "The Contribution of the Annales School to Agrarian History: a Review Essay" pages 538-548 from Agricultural History, Volume 52, Issue #4, 1978.
