    Footscray is a suburb (neighborhood) 5&nbsp;km west of Melbourne, Australia. Its local government area is the City of Maribyrnong. At the 2011 Census, Footscray had a population of 13,203. Footscray is characterised by a very diverse, multicultural central shopping area, which reflects the successive waves of immigration experienced by Melbourne, and by Footscray in particular. Once a centre for Greek, Italian and former Yugoslavian migrants, it later became a hub for Vietnamese and East African immigrants in Melbourne, but has recently begun to undergo gentrification. Footscray is named after Foots Cray, on the River Cray in Kent, England.  Footscray is part of the City of Maribyrnong and was built largely on the traditional lands of the Kulin nation. For thousands of years, Footscray was the meeting place of the lands of the Yalukit-willan, the Marin-balluk and the Wurundjeri. Koories stalked game, collected food and fished along the river junction, estuaries, swamps and lagoons. Within Melbourne's western region, the Marin-balug and Kurung-jand-balug clans of the Woiwurrung cultural group, and the Yalukit willam clan of the Boonwurrung cultural group shared the luscious resources around the Maribyrnong Valley. The first European to visit the area was Charles Grimes in 1803. A park, where he landed, is named after him at Napier St.[ ]  In 1839 a punt was built on the Maribyrnong River, it was the only connecting link between Melbourne and Geelong, Ballarat, Castlemaine and Bendigo. The Punt Hotel opened three years later and was the first building in the area.  During the first decade drovers transporting cattle and sheep provided the only business at the hotel. After 1851, when gold was discovered out west, the pub did a roaring trade with diggers. Part of the old pub still stands and it has been renamed The Pioneer.  (Ref: Charlie Lovett's Footscray) The Post Office first opened on 12 October 1857. Footscray was declared a municipality in 1859 with a population of 300 and 70 buildings. Around the same year the first bridge was built across Saltwater River. (Ref: Charlie Lovett's Footscray) Between 1881 and 1891 Footscray's population more than tripled from almost 6,000 to 19,000. (Ref: Charlie Lovett's Footscray) Footscray developed into an industrial zone in the second half of the nineteenth century, with the manufacturing industry beginning to decline in the 1960s and 70s. Footscray was home to the Aboriginal Woimurrung and Boonwurrung tribes of the Kulin nation.[ ]  In 2011, Footscray's 13,193 residents came from 135 countries. In 2006 less than half the population (41.1%) was born in Australia, the main countries of overseas origin are Vietnam, China, India, United Kingdom and Italy. In the 21st Century, Maribyrnong of which Footscray is a part, saw a major increase in residents from Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Myanmar, including a large proportion of refugees.[ ]  Footscray has Victoria's fourth-highest proportion of residents born in South-East Asia (13.9%). The average person in Footscray is a youthful 33 years of age. Maribyrnong Council predicts a population boom will more than double Footscray resident numbers from 14,100 to 30,500 by 2031, requiring about 7000 new dwellings.http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/story/1483944/growth-to-test-footscray-cbd-infrastructure-council-report-finds/?cs=1216 Footscray falls within the federal electorate of Gellibrand (currently held by Tim Watts from the ALP) and the state electorate of Footscray (currently held by the ALP's Marsha Thomson), and the City of Maribyrnong at local level (currently controlled by four independents). The suburb's historical voting patterns have been fairly typical of a working-class suburb with a high migrant population. Footscray is a very safe state ALP seat, 65% of the vote went to Labor at the 2014 State election.http://www.abc.net.au/news/vic-election-2014/guide/foot/ Consistent with other inner-city electorates in Melbourne, and other state capitals, voter support for the Australian Greens has increased in recent years, the Greens received 17 per cent of the primary vote in Footscray at the 2014 State Election.  One third of voters at the Central Footscray booth voted for the Australian Greens in the 2010 Federal election, almost doubling the Greens vote in one election cycle.http://results.aec.gov.au/15508/Website/HousePollingPlaceFirstPrefs-15508-3681.htm For the first time in over 100 years, Maribyrnong Council is no longer under Labor control. In 2012 voters elected four Independent Councillors and three Labor councillors. Catherine Cummings is the Mayor for 2012–13. At the Federal Election of 2010, the ALP won Gellibrand, which includes Footscray, with 59% of the vote. The Lib/Nat parties got 23%, whilst The Greens saw a swing of +6% with 15% of the vote. Janet Rice of The Greens was elected to Maribyrnong Council in 2003, re-elected in 2005 and then elected Mayor in 2006. Whilst Mayor, Janet had a Mayoral bike instead of a car. The first woman Mayor was Vietnamese born Mai Ho, from 1997 to 1998.http://home.vicnet.net.au/~foothist/migration.htm Mai Ho arrived in Australia in December 1982 with two small daughters and sixteen dollars. By 1997 she was Mayor of Maribyrnong. Twelve months later her daughter, Tan Le, was voted Young Australian of the Year.http://www.womenaustralia.info/biogs/AWE1956b.htm There are over 130 restaurants in Footscray, including; 30 Vietnamese, 20 Indian, 17 Chinese and several; African, Australian, Indonesian, Italian, Thai, Turkish and Japanese. Footscray also has one each of the following restaurants; Korean, Malaysian and Portuguese. Subway and Nandos are the only multi-national corporate foods in downtown Footscray. Notable restaurants include the award winning Station Hotel which was winner of radio 3AW's "Pub of the Year". Lentil as Anything is a series of pay as you feel vegetarian restaurants, located at 233 Barkly Street. Whatever you choose to pay for your meal goes to a range of services that help new migrants, refugees, people with disabilities and the long-term unemployed. The Footscray Market is a large indoor fresh produce and seafood market, with 33 food stalls and 50 general stalls, catering particularly to the various ethnicities and local restaurants. It is located opposite Footscray railway station. The Melbourne Wholesale Market on Footscray Road (often referred to as the Footscray Traders Market) will be moved to Epping by 2015. Another large market in Footscray is Little Saigon, which opened in 1992 to cater to the Asian population growth, but now has customers from all backgrounds. Little Saigon is noisy and crowded, with a wide array of tropical fruits and Asian produce. Footscray has been the setting of several Australian movies, the most notable being Romper Stomper which was filmed in and around Footscray in 1992. It deals with a fictional gang of neo-Nazi skinheads and their battle against Vietnamese immigrants. Not all scenes were filmed locally. The "Footscray Railway Station" featured in the movie has a pedestrian underpass, while the real station has an overpass for foot traffic; the station used for filming was Richmond Station. The film Metal Skin (1994) was also set in and around Footscray. Footscray has some fine 1930s Art Deco buildings, most in disrepair and hidden behind shop signs and awnings. The former Footscray Town Hall is the only American Romanesque civic building in Victoria. The outside is a mix of Art Deco, Moderne, Celtic, Spanish and Medieval. Footscray Park is one of the largest and most intact examples of an Edwardian park in Australia; characteristic features include rustic stonework, ornamental ponds and extensive use of palms. The 15 hectare park is classified as a heritage place on the Victorian Heritage Register.http://vhd.heritage.vic.gov.au/#detail_places;70227 The 'heavily indebted'Costly inheritance for Maribyrnong ratepayers http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/costly-inheritance-for-maribyrnong-ratepayers/ local Council approved a 1.8 million makeover for the park in March 2011.A century on, it's heritage No.1 in Footscray http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/a-century-on-its-heritage-no1-in-footscray/  Asylum Seeker Resource Centre, gives aid, welfare and medical care for thousands of asylum seekers.  218 Nicholson St Footscray. The Australian Croatian Association headquarters is located in Footscray, serving the large Croatian Community in the area. Other Ethnic Community, Migrants and Refugees groups include African, Albanian, Burmese, Chinese, Croatian or Bosnian, Ethiopian, Filipino, Greek, Harari, Hungarian, Italian, Macedonian, Multicultural, Polish, Russian, Spanish and Latin American, Sudanese, Vietnamese.http://www.maribyrnong.vic.gov.au/Directory/s2.asp?S1Key=5&S2key=24&S3Key=162&Show=y&h=0 The Footscray Club is a social club that has been part of Footscray since 1894. This was the original Footscray Cycle Club, when cycling became quite popular in Australia in the 19th century. By 1909 the club had build a permanent site on Paisley Street where it still stands today. Early in the last century the club evolved into a purely local social club where members of the local community meet and socialize to this day. The Footscray Historical Society works on a number of local fronts to record and preserve the history of the area. The Society has an active membership who take part in a range of activities to assist this endeavour. Records such as rare books, business records and correspondence are held at the Society's headquarters at Ercildoune, built in 1876 as a branch of the National Bank of Australasia. The Society owns this historic building and has had the interior and exterior restored. Tours, forums and discussions are held regularly. Footscray is at the centre of the Kariwara Scout district of Scouts Australia. The word 'Kariwara' means 'West' in a local Aboriginal dialect. Started in 1909, the 1st Footscray Scout hall is a historic building next to the Footscray Police Station in Hyde Street. 3rd Footscray is the hall seen from the railway line and no longer has youth programs but is home to adult training. The 2nd Footscray Scout hall has a modern brick hall after the first hall burnt down in 1982. The group has programs for children aged 7 to 26 and meets at Guadion Park in Barkly Street. The 10th Footscray Scout group is in Essex Street next to the YMCA and has programs for 7 to 15-year olds. The 5th Footscray group is opposite Seddon railway station and has programs for 6 to 15-year olds. All are part of Scouts Australia. Maribyrnong Truck Action Group and Less Trucks For Moore work towards cleaning the air in Footscray and surrounding suburbs. Other groups include; Footscray Traders Association, Footscray Asian Business Association, Save Railway Place, Footscray Sings Fair Go for Footscray Rail Residents and Footscray Rotary. Albright Performers dance studio is on Hyde St and has been running for over 70 years, it teaches all ages and levels. Classes are held in Classical Ballet, Jazz Ballet, Hip Hop, Contemporary dance, Tap Dance, Musical Theatre and Acrobatics.  CSTD examinations and competitions. Company of Others Inc a not-for-profit group conducting body, breath and voice projects. Ruffian Gallery operates at 361 Barkly Street. In 2013 the City of Maribyrnong ran a competition for a $170,000 public art installation, the winner features massive rock boulders which foam a circle across roads at the southern end of the Footscray Mall. The work was be installed June 2013. The Dog Theatre opened in September 2008. It is one of the first site specific company/venues in Australia! and was the "Winner of Best Venue: Melbourne Fringe Festival Awards 2009". The venue has a funky cafe with well made coffee, snacks and cool seating under the shade of a huge willow tree. As of 2011, The Dog Theatre is no longer in residence at Albert Street, and now moves all over the western suburbs of Melbourne. Elite Crete Australia holds classes, seminars and workshops for concrete artistry, located adjacent to the Footscray Community Arts Centre, on a monthly bases. Located on the bank of the Maribyrnong River, Footscray Community Arts Centre (FCAC) is a centre for contemporary arts, community engagement, cultural development and multicultural arts. Since its establishment in 1974, it is estimated that over 2 million community members have visited FCAC or directly participated in one or more of its many events, initiatives, projects, workshops and programs. Footscray Community Arts Centre's projects have toured nationally and internationally. FCAC aims to contribute to the transformation of contemporary Australian culture and the ongoing, dynamic debate about the place of 'art' in society. Integrate Stretch – Workshops in movement and performance. NICA Circus – Circus workshops for 7 – 16 yr olds including acrobatics, juggling, stilt walking, balancing and rope work, with artists from the National Institute of Circus Arts. Phoenix Youth Theatre,http://www.heraldsun.com.au/leader/west/new-theatre-group-phoenix-youth-theatre-in-footscray-hones-next-generation-of-performers/story-fngnvmj7-1226928868198 opened in 2014 at Phoenix Youth Centre, 72 Buckley St, Footscray. The historic 'Footscray Drill Hall' is home to the avant garde Snuff Puppets. Their performances, often with taboo subject matter, combine larger than life puppetry with physical theatre. Snuff Puppets have toured the world, with shows and workshops throughout Australasia, Asia, Europe and South America. Snuff Puppets have been part of Footscray since 1992. The Trocadero Art Space is located on Hopkins Street, in Footscray's heart. It comprises both interior and outdoor (street-exposed) exhibition spaces. Ward Acting Studio – where actors abandon outdated and overly analytical acting techniques – 91 Moreland St With One Voice Footscray - You don’t have to be a great singer to join. Singing every Thursday 6pm at the African Australian Community Centre, Red Brick Hall (behind the Bluestone Hall), 30a Pickett Street, Footscray Women's Circus – A community arts and physical theatre company, using circuses as a tool for social change. Footscray has a rich history of music and brass bands, currently being home to the Footscray-Yarraville City Band – FYCB, which rehearses weekly and performs throughout the year locally, nationally and internationally. The FYCB conduct an annual Carols by Candlelight event each December in the Yarraville Gardens. They were the 2010 VBL State Champions. The Hyde Street Youth Band. was established in 1928. The Hyde Street Youth Band contributed to the history of the region as the band played the official theme song for the Footscray Football Club (now the Western Bulldogs) while they were playing at the Whitten Oval. The FYCB is one of five A-Grade Brass bands in Victoria and has been successful in the National Championships. JABULA! – An African Community Choir, and is run by Sudanese singer Ajak Kwai and percussionist Tawanda Gadzikwa. The choir brings together people from broad skill levels and diverse African heritages. The choir meets fortnightly on Saturdays at the Footscray Community Arts Centre. With One Voice Footscray – A community choir made up of the friendliest, most welcoming bunch of people you could ever meet. Rehearsals are packed with music and a lot of laughs. New members always welcome. Rehearsals on Thursdays 6 – 7:15pm, African Australian Community Centre, Red Brick Hall (behind the Bluestone Hall), 30a Pickett Street, Footscray. Emerge in the West  May 17, 2015 (http://www.multiculturalarts.com.au/events2015/emerge_west.shtml) in the City of Maribyrnong reveals emerging African arts, culture and small businesses that have been growing rapidly in Melbourne's West, marking the start of the week long Africa Day Celebrations in Melbourne. Founded in 2011, this annual 'Emerge' event is an outcome of MAV's CCD program for emerging and refugee artists and communities, triggering the founding of the Australian-African Small Business Association in 2014 to represent the growing number of African restaurants and cafes in Melbourne's West. The Big West community arts festival is held every two years in Footscray and surrounding suburbs. In 2011 it was attended by over 37,000 people. The next Big West Festival is on in November 2015. The St Jerome's Laneway Festival is an annual block party held in partnership with the Footscray Community Arts Centre. 15,000 enjoyed the festival in 2015.http://www.heraldsun.com.au/lifestyle/melbourne/a-saint-the-dalai-lama-and-a-festival-that-was-a-slice-of-heaven/story-fnpbvxki-1227213711553 The Western Bulldogs Community Festival and Family Day is held every summer on Whitten Oval. Central Footscray Streets are closed for the all-day-long Chinese New Year celebrations organised by the Footscray Asian Business Association (FABA). The Quang Minh Tet Festival celebrations in neighbouring Braybrook were expanded.http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/traders-hand-lunar-festival-reins-to-council/1980205.aspx The 'Liveable Melbourne' 2011 survey listed Footscray as the 37th-most-liveable suburb in Melbourne.The list: Melbourne suburbs' liveability ranking revealed http://theage.domain.com.au/greater-melbourne/the-list-melbourne-suburbs-liveability-ranking-revealed-20111122-1nrv2.html In 2008, the State Labor Government designated Footscray as one of six Central Activities Districts. Melbourne's CADs were given planning rules aimed at creating lively mixed use CBD-like districts.http://www.dpcd.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/41643/FACTSHEET_-Central_Activities_Districts-1Dec08.pdf The area, according to the local Mayor 'would soon have the second-highest skyline outside the Melbourne CBD'.New mayor for Maribyrnong growth http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/master-plan-for-maribyrnong-growth-fbready/ Examples of the changing face of Footscray include: Transport issues in Footscray: Grasslands Organic Grocery is a non-profit community initiative, established in 1997. All the produce is certified organic/biodynamic; free of animal ingredients; minimally processed/packaged; healthy to use; affordable; locally made; produced by small enterprises that have good working conditions and who are not involved in other unethical or unsustainable practices. Concession card holds get a discount when buying in store, currently only open on Thursdays. Aussie Rules Football Basketball Canoeing Cricket Cycling Football (Soccer) Gridiron (American Football) Gyms Gymnastics Hockey Horse Racing Lacrosse Martial Arts Rowing Rugby Swimming Water Polo While many factories and warehouses are still to be found in and around the suburb of Footscray, many former industrial sites are being transformed into modern housing estates. Perhaps the largest of these is the former Footscray Ammunition Factory in a prime elevated position overlooking the banks of the Maribyrnong River with views across to Flemington Racecourse and the Melbourne city centre. The eastern portion of Footscray, in the fork between the Yarra River and Maribyrnong River, contains railway yards, Appleton and Swanson Docks which were the site of the 1998 Australian waterfront dispute and the Melbourne Wholesale Fruit and Vegetable Market. The market houses 400 businesses, employs 3000 people and supplies 60 per cent of Victoria's fresh produce, it is due to move to Epping in 2013–14.http://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/article/2013/03/19/563773_horticulture.html In 2005, the State Government announced the closure of the Melbourne Wholesale Fruit and Vegetable Market to make way for an extensive redevelopment of the Port of Melbourne and the construction of new freight rail links to the area. The headquarters of Lonely Planet Publications are located in eastern Footscray on the banks of the Maribyrnong River], adjacent to the Hobsons Bay Coastal Trail. Lonely Planet has published over 100 million bookshttp://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/lonely-planet-to-stay-in-footscray-orbit/2091433.aspx and in 2013 the BBC sold Lonely Planet to an American company for $75 Million. Kindergartens Primary Secondary Universities Institutes and more The Footscray Public Library is operated by the Maribyrnong City Council. Services include 'story time' for pre-schoolers, orientation tours, reference and information services to assist with research needs, internet classes, and services for those unable to visit the library. Facilities include public internet, word processing, photocopiers, study carrels, local studies/family history room, conference and discussion rooms, a baby change room and community notice boards. The library is open 7 days (closed public holidays). The Footscray Mechanics' Institute Inc. was established in 1857, and has operated a library in Nicholson Street since 1913. The library is a low cost subscription library, which is open 5 days a week, closed Weekends, Public Holidays and for 3-4 weeks over the Christmas/New Year period. The health needs of Footscray and surrounding residents are served by the Western General Hospital or WHF. The Western General is a large teaching and research hospital responsible for providing a comprehensive range of inpatient and outpatient acute health services. The hospital currently conducts research in gastroenterology, colorectal cancer, emergency care, oncology, respiratory medicine, sleep disorders, and vascular surgery. Key services at the Western Hospital include acute medical and surgical services, intensive and coronary care, emergency services, renal services, specialist drug and alcohol services, aged care and palliative care. The hospital also serves as one of the teaching campuses for the University of Melbourne's medical program. The Western Region Health Centre was established in 1964. Services include an African community worker, refugee health nurse, women's health nurse, dieticians, youth health nurse, diabetic educator, podiatrist, counsellors and physiotherapists. Visiting specialists include a general surgeon and paediatrician. Pathology services and dental services are co-located on site.  60% of Footscray residences admitted to belonging to a religion in 2011, down from 70% in 2006.http://profile.id.com.au/maribyrnong/religion?WebID=110 There are many religious organisations and places of worship in Footscray, including Anglican, Assemblies of God, Baptist, Buddhist, Catholic, Church of Christ, Evangelical Christian, Independent Christian, Lutheran, Muslim, Orthodox, Pentecostal, Presbyterian and Uniting Church. The largest 'Heavenly Queen Temple' in Australia is been built on the banks of the river, see side photo, the temple's grounds include 16-metre gold statue.http://www.heavenlyqueentemple.com Two free suburban weekly newspapers are delivered in Footscray on Wednesdays: In 2014, the Liberal State Planning Minister approved a 28 story tower that will overshadow the Maribyrnong River in Footscray.http://www.maribyrnong.starweekly.com.au/story/1803673/maribyrnong-mayor-blasts-guy-over-28-storey-footscray-apartment-project/ Nearly 9,000 additional dwellings where built in Footscray between 2006 and 2011. Grocon opened the $350 million 'McNab Avenue Development' with residential apartments, Government and commercial offices in 2014.http://www.dpcd.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/51665/FINAL_McNab-Ave-FactSheet_Low-Res.pdf The Banco Group turned the Footscray Plaza into a $45 million apartment block of ten stories, with the old retail space expanded. The property falls within the Priority Development Zone so there were no rights to community consultation. As part of the Footscray City Edge master plan, Maribyrnong Council planned to turn the Paisley Street carpark into a park.Footscray City Edge: Green haven to transform CBD http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/footscray-city-edge-green-haven-to-transform-cbd/2336664.aspx In 2012, a $500million high-density residential and commercial development was approved for over the railway tracks near Footscray Station.Old Footscray car yard on the up and up with high-rise plan http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/old-footscray-car-yard-on-the-up-and-up-with-highrise-plan/2479474.aspx In 2011, the iconic Little Saigon market was approved for a $70 million redevelopment with twin towers, holding 260 apartments and sky gardens.$70 million plan for not-so-Little Saigon http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/70-million-plan-for-notsolittle-saigon/2368122.aspx?storypage=0 The 15 hectare 'Joseph Road Precinct' was approved for higher density residential development in 2009.[ ] The tallest building approved for the area is a $90 million, 25-story apartment block with 222 apartments, construction is due to finish in 2013. A new $6 billion suburb called E-Gate in West Melbourne has been proposed by the state government on a 20-hectare site along Footscray Road. The long-abandoned Kinnears rope factory site on Ballarat Road could be turned into a mini-suburb for 2,500 people including high-rise apartments, increasing the number of homes in Footscray by more than a quarter.'Mini-suburb' touted for old Kinnears site http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/minisuburb-touted-for-old-kinnears-site/2211057.aspx?storypage=1 In 2011, $2 million was spent to revamp Leeds Street with wider footpaths, more trees and less access for cars.FOOTSCRAY RENEWAL http://www.maribyrnong.vic.gov.au/Files/FR_UpdateFlyer_20090303_TP.pdf In 2010, as a part of the Victorian Government's $61.6 million Footscray renewal program,Footscray Footbridge named http://enews.transport.vic.gov.au/link/id/12240974bf4c45066172/page.html a new $15 million rail footbridge opened at Footscray railway station; within months, the government announced that half of the bridge would need to be rebuilt to accommodate new platforms for the Regional Rail Link.The great disconnect http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/the-great-disconnect-20101101-17afe.html Ken Betts, local Liberal candidate says, "the railway station is a complete an utter mess",Wannabe councillors fire on Maribyrnong http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/maribyrnong-council-under-fire/ The canopies on the footbridge have designer holes which allows the rain fall through,Steps taken to name Footscray footbridge http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/steps-taken-to-name-footscray-footbridge/ leaving the steep steps and flat surface of the bridge covered in slippery water,Colander Bridge http://www.ffrr.footscray.org/documents/colander-bridge which ex-Mayor of Maribyrnong, Janet Rice, calls unsafe. Despite the revamping of Footscray, 1,000s of heavy trucks from nearby ports use the suburbs streets. Almost 3,000 trucks a day were recorded going down Buckley Street in central Footscray in 2010.Anger as Footscray trucks total soars http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/anger-as-moore-st-footscray-trucks-total-soar/ Greens Mayor Cr Janet Rice helped get heavy trucks banned from Hopkins, Barkley, Irving, and Nicholson Streets in 2007. Truck bypass protesters from the MTAG have blockaded central Footscray roads during peak hour several times, the last blockade was on Moore St, April 2014.  Protestors called for night and weekend truck curfews. The West Gate Distributor (Northern Section) will be part of a planned multimillion-dollar truck tollway between the port and the Westgate freeway, construction of the Northern section  is expected to commence late in 2015 and take approximately 18 months to complete.https://www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/planning-and-projects/melbourne-road-projects/west-gate-distributor Between 2011–2012 a multimillion-dollar planning study was conducted into building a multibillion-dollar tunnel under Footscray.West Link http://lma.vic.gov.au/pages/about-westlink.asp The tunnel is part of a proposed East West Link toll road, in May 2013 the State Liberal Government pledged $300 million towards the eastern suburbs section of the $8 billion project. Between 2009–12 the former State Labor Government conducted route investigations and consultation to help identify options for removing trucks from local streets under the name  'Truck Action Plan',Truck Action Plan http://www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/Home/RoadProjects/PlanningAndProposals/Melbourne/TruckActionPlan.htm in August 2012 the ruling  Liberal Government put this on hold New link connecting west to the city axed http://brimbank-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/new-link-connecting-west-to-the-city-axed/ and in May 2013 the plan was finally scrapped as the government claims it is been superseded by  east-west link plans. The Maribyrnong Truck Action Group blockaded Shepherd Bridge in March 2013, demanding the state government fast-track work on linking the port with the West Gate Freeway. In 2013, the State and Federal Government is spending $5 Million dollars investigating the possibility of a new interstate freight terminal in Truganina, which would reduce the daily number of trucks in the inner west from 20,000 to 18,000. Footscray railway station is the busiest non-CBD railway station in Melbourne, with 14,000 boardings per day.Stopping all stations as minister backs down http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/stopping-all-stations-as-minister-backs-down-20100908-151c2.html The $5 Billion Regional Rail Link,Rail link delay as bill nears $5bn http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/rail-link-delay-as-bill-nears-5bn-20110404-1cypw.html took out 26 homes and 84 businesses in Central Footscray. .Rail plan with at least one obstacle: Footscray  http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/rail-plan-with-at-least-one-obstacle-footscray-20100506-ugz1.html and will create slower travel times between Geelong and Melbourne, not faster.Regional Rail Link: Many better ways to spend $5bn http://www.ptua.org.au/2011/02/23/regional-rail-link-many-better-ways-to-spend-5bn/ The Regional Rail Link rebuilt the Nicholson Street bridge in central Footscray, all the shops and cafes on this bridge were destroyed, and foot-traffic is now exposed to the diesel trains below.Nicholson Street bridge http://www.transport.vic.gov.au/projects/pt/rrl/station-designs/nicholson-street-bridge In 2008 the Melbourne City Council recommended extending the 86 tram route to Footscray via Docklands.Vision for 'friendlier' Docklands http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/vision-for-friendlier-docklands/2008/01/01/1198949817058.html Footscray is home of the Western Bulldogs, an Australian rules football team which plays in the Australian Football League. The team was formerly known as the Footscray Football Club until 1996, and played its home games at the Whitten Oval on Barkly Street, on the edge of Footscray. In 2014, competitive football returned to the Club's home base with the re-introduction of the Footscray Bulldogs into the Victorian Football League (VFL) competition.http://www.westernbulldogs.com.au/club/venues/victoria-university-whitten-oval In addition, Footscray is also represented in the Western Region Football League by the West Footscray Roosters, the North Footscray Devils and the Parkside Magpies. Footscray Hawks Basketball Club – after a decade break this club, once the biggest in Victoria,http://www.recwest.ymca.org.au/index.asp?menuid=070 returned in 2011.http://maribyrnong-leader.whereilive.com.au/news/story/footscray-set-to-bounce-again/ Footscray Canoe Club, located at 40 Farnsworth Ave (corner of Maribyrnong Boulevard). Sessions usually run on Saturday or Sunday from 7.30am. The Footscray Edgewater Cricket Club (formally Footscray Cricket Club) was founded in 1883 and for the first 113 years of its existence was also located at the Western Oval (now Whitten Oval) until 1996 when combined pressure exerted by the Footscray Football Club and state-government-appointed commissioners to the City of Maribyrnong saw the club relocated to the Mervyn G. Hughes Oval. Until the test cricket debut of the Melbourne Cricket Club's Brad Hodge in December 2005, the Footscray Cricket Club had produced the most Test players of any Melbourne based district cricket club. Footscray's Test representatives in order of debut are Ron Gaunt, Les Joslin, Ken Eastwood, Alan Hurst, Ray Bright, Merv Hughes, Tony Dodemaide and Colin Miller. The club won its only District First Eleven premiership under the captaincy of Lindsay James in 1979/80. The Footscray United Cricket Club was founded in 1934 and won the VTCA North A1 Grand Final for 2010–11. The Footscray Cycling Club promotes road racing and criterium racing, whilst cyclists are represented by the MazzaBUG, the Maribyrnong Bicycle User Group. Nearby bike paths include the Maribyrnong River Trail and the Hobsons Bay Coastal Trail. The football club Melbourne Croatia was founded in Leeds Street, Footscray in 1953, and now bears the name Melbourne Knights FC. Footscray JUST was a soccer club which played at Schintler Reserve. Footscray is home of the Western Crusaders, an American football or Gridiron team which plays in the Gridiron Victoria league. The team was known as the Westside Vikings until 1997, and plays its home games at the Henry Turner Memorial Reserve on Farnsworth Avenue right next door to the iconic Flemington Racecourse, within the Footscray Park area, Maribyrnong River and Victoria University. The Western Crusaders proudly call Footscray its home. Apollo Gym: Hardcore gym in industrial warehouse at 37/91 Moreland St, Footscray – one of the nation's first gyms, opened in the 1930shttp://www.apollogym.com.au The Exercise Room:  24 Hour Gym with after-hours swipe card entry. 88 Buckley Street Footscray White Dog Studio: Pilates, Yoga, meditation and High intensity Fitness training. 34 Moreland Street, Footscray Footscray City Gymnastics Club: The 30-year-old club is home to almost 900 gymnasts and now offers programs to children with disabilities. Footscray Hockey Club (Junior): Run by 90 volunteers, the club is the second-largest hockey club in Melbourne, with playing members from five to 70 years old and a focus on equality for female players.http://www.maribyrnongweekly.com.au/news/local/news/general/2011-city-of-maribyrnong-civic-awards-winners/2064586.aspx Flemington Racecourse, the home of the Melbourne Cup, is across the Maribyrnong River to the northeast in the neighbouring suburb of Flemington, immediately opposite Footscray Park, the second largest botanical garden in Victoria. The Footscray Lacrosse Club is 50 years old and play at Angliss Reserve in Yarraville. In 2011 the club has around 190 members across 15 Men and Women teams. A.I.M. Academy Headquarters, specialising in martial arts, self-defence and fitness programs for teens and adults, at 201 Barkly Street, Footscray. Opened in 2010. Footscray City Rowing Club – This club is over 100 years old and meets at the Footscray Boat Club, Maribyrnong Boulevard. The club is for 14-year olds and up, beginners, novices, seniors and school programs.http://www.maribyrnong.vic.gov.au/Directory/S2_Item.asp?Mkey=392&S3Key=147 Footscray Rugby Union Club – formed in 1928 and one of the oldest rugby clubs south of the (NSW) border. Footscray RUC has produced 5 Wallabies (Australian national team players) and currently plays in the Premier Division of the Victorian Rugby Union. Their home ground is the Dodemaide Oval in Footscray Park, in front of the Vic Uni Ballarat Road campus. The club has men-, women- and junior teams and the players come from a very diverse background. Every year several international students join the club for the duration of their stay. Like many sports clubs in Footscray, the club colours are red, white and blue and the club emblem is a bulldog. A public swimming pool and gym could form part of a 2014 proposed $12 million redevelopment of Whitten Oval.http://www.heraldsun.com.au/leader/west/whitten-oval-upgrade-plans-accidently-put-online-include-public-swimming-pool-and-gym/story-fngnvmj7-1226857166468 Footscray Swimming & Waterpolo Club – formed in 1909 and commenced activities in the Maribyrnong River, then the Footscray Swim Centre. Ambrose Harold Palmer (1910-1990), was a boxer, boxing trainer and Australian rules footballer. Colleen Hartland, Victorian State Government Greens' MP Coral Browne (1913–1991), International award winning film and theatre actor who was raised in Footscray. Doug Chappel, Comedian Edward Graeme Robertson (1903-1975), neurologists and conservationist. Ernie Sigley, former TV presenter and radio compare and TV Week Gold Logie Award winner. Kenneth David (Ken) Green (1917-1987), was an engineer, public servant and soldier. Graduated from the University of Melbourne (BCE, 1937) with honours and the Argus research scholarship. Les Twentyman, youth worker and social campaigner who has received the Order of Australia and was the 2006 Victorian of the Year. Merv Hughes, former Australian cricketer, played in 53 Test matches, now retired with Mervyn G. Hughes Oval named after him. Michael Leunig, cartoonist, poet and an Australian Living Treasure. Ray Borner, former basketballer) and Olympian. Russell Gilbert, TV and film comedian, twice Logie nominated during his nine years on the Hey Hey It's Saturday TV show. Ted Whitten (1933–1995), Hall of Fame footballer and TV personality. A life size statue of 'Mr Football' kicking a ball stands outside Whitten Oval on Barkly Street. William Cooper (1861–1941), Aboriginal rights leader, in 1938 organised the only protest in the world against Kristallnacht (Nazi Night of Broken Glass). Trees have been planted in Jerusalem in his honour and the footbridge at Footscray Station bears his name.http://www.jwire.com.au/news/william-coopers-great-grandson-walks-the-walk/13435 Sarah Watt (1958–2011), was an Australian filmmaker, best known for two feature films "Look Both Ways" (2005) and "My Year Without Sex" (2009). She was a long-time resident of Footscray. Angliss Children's Centre – Corner of Vipont Street & Seelaf Square. Brenbeal Children's Centre – 8 Rayner Street, Footscray. Hyde Street Kindergarten – 10a Hyde Street, Footscray. Kingsville Kindergarten – Hansen Reserve, Roberts Street, Footscray. Bulldogs Community Child Care Centre – 19 Hocking Street, Footscray. Footscray City Primary School. The State Government is closing the Steiner stream in 2012.Handling of Steiner closure criticised http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/handling-of-steiner-closure-criticised-20111128-1o3c4.html Footscray North Primary School, corner Rosamond Rd and Mephan Street, Footscray. Footscray Primary School, previously known as Geelong Road Primary, offers the International Baccalaureate, and Vietnamese Bilingual Programme. St. John's Catholic Primary School, 90% of the Students are from non-English-speaking backgrounds. The 'My School' website revealed that year 5 students at St John's outperformed their peers at Geelong Grammar School in four out of the five NAPLAN tests, which assess reading, writing, spelling, grammar and punctuation, and numeracy. St Monica's Primary School, a Catholic school with around 170 children, big on English Literacy. Footscray City College, previously known as Footscray Technical College, Co-Ed, 1000 students, VCE, TAFE and more offered. Gilmore Girls College, previously known as Footscray Girls Secondary College, government run, academically focussed.. Victoria University, Footscray Park, a seven-hectare site, swimming pool and gym open to the public. Victoria University, Footscray Nicholson, range of TAFE programs. Austwide Institute of Training, Automotive Management Institute. Leonie Khoury School of Music, lessons for Flute, Clarinet, Saxophone, Piano and Violin. Footscray City Films, independent Tertiary Institution offering Certificate IV, Diplomas and Advanced Diplomas in Screen and Media. Over 120 Short Films are produced each year. The Maribyrnong Leader (formerly the Western Times) is published by Leader Community Newspapers and owned by News Corporation. The Maribyrnong & Hobsons Bay Star Weekly is published by Metro Media Publishing, which is owned by Fairfax and the Star News Group. The Independent was a weekly newspaper published from 1883 to 1933. City of Footscray, a former local government area (LGA) of the same name Electoral district of Footscray Romper Stomper, an Australian film set in Footscray. Australian Croatian Association Melbourne Footscray Club social club, on Paisley Street Footscray Community Arts Centre Footscray Cycling Club Footscray Historical Society on Vicnet Footscray-Yarraville City Band Maribyrnong City Council Melbourne Museum of Printing on Vicnet Snuff Puppets theatre group Western Crusaders Gridiron Club Quang Minh Buddhist Centre
