    Malaysia is an active member of various international organisations, including the Commonwealth of Nations, the United Nations, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the Non-Aligned Movement. It has also in recent times been an active proponent of regional co-operation. Malaysia has been a member of the Commonwealth since independence in 1957, when it entered into the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement (AMDA) with the United Kingdom whereby Britain guaranteed the defence of Malaya (and later Malaysia). The presence of British and other Commonwealth troops were crucial to Malaysia's security during the Malayan Emergency (1948–1960) and the Indonesian Confrontation (1962–1966), which was sparked by Malaya's merger with the British colonies of Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo to form Malaysia in 1963. The British defence guarantee ended following Britain's decision in 1967 to withdraw its forces east of Suez, and was replaced in 1971 with the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) by which Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore agreed to co-operate in the area of defence, and to "consult" in the event of external aggression or the threat of attack on Malaysia or Singapore. The FPDA continues to operate, and the Five Powers have a permanent Integrated Area Defence System based at RMAF Butterworth, and organise annual naval and air exercises. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman (up to 1970), Malaysia pursued a strongly pro-Commonwealth anti-communist foreign policy. Nonetheless, Malaysia was active in the opposition to apartheid that saw South Africa quit the Commonwealth in 1961, and was a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967 and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in 1969, with the Tunku as its first Secretary-General in 1971. Under Prime Ministers Tun Abdul Razak and Tun Hussein Onn, Malaysia shifted its policy towards non-alignment and neutrality. Malaysia's foreign policy is officially based on the principle of neutrality and maintaining peaceful relations with all countries, regardless of their ideology or political system, and to further develop relations with other countries in the region. In 1971, ASEAN issued its neutralist and anti-nuclear Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN) Declaration. In the same year, Malaysia joined the Non-Aligned Movement. Consistent with this policy Malaysia established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China in 1974. This policy shift was continued and strengthened by Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohamad, who pursued a regionalist and pro-South policy with at times strident anti-Western rhetoric. He long sought to establish an East Asian Economic Group as an alternative to APEC, excluding Australia, New Zealand and the Americas, and during his premiership Malaysia signed up to an ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and ASEAN+3, a regional forum with China, Japan and South Korea. He was involved with a spat with Australian prime minister Paul Keating, who called him a "recalcitrant" after he refused to attend the APEC summit in Seattle. A strong tenet of Malaysia's policy is national sovereignty and the right of a country to control its domestic affairs. Malaysia views regional co-operation as the cornerstone of its foreign policy. It attaches a high priority to the security and stability of Southeast Asia, and has tried to strengthen relations with other Islamic states. Malaysia was a leading advocate of expanding ASEAN's membership to include Laos, Vietnam, and Burma, arguing that "constructive engagement" with these countries, especially Burma, will help bring political and economic changes. Malaysia is also a member of G-15 and G-77 economic groupings. Despite Mahathir's frequently anti-Western rhetoric he worked closely with Western countries, and led a crackdown against Islamic fundamentalists after the 11 September attacks. Under his successor, Abdullah Badawi, relations with Western countries, particularly Australia, have improved. The current Minister of Foreign Affairs is Datuk Seri Anifah Aman, who assumed office on 18 March 2008. Malaysia has never recognised Israel and has no diplomatic ties with it, with the country ever condemning the Israelis action during their raid over a Gaza humanitarian mission and request the International Criminal Court to take any action against them. Malaysia has stated it will only establish an official relations with Israel once a peace agreement with the State of Palestine been reached and called for both parties to find a quick resolution. Malaysian peacekeeping forces have contributed to many UN peacekeeping missions, such as in Namibia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Somalia, East Timor and Lebanon. Malaysia is a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation). It is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement. Kuala Lumpur was the site of the first East Asia Summit in 2005, and Malaysia has chaired ASEAN, the OIC, and the NAM in the past. A former British colony, it is also a member of the Commonwealth. Malaysia is affiliated with the United Nations and many of its specialised agencies, including UNESCO, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, International Atomic Energy Agency; General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It is also a member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Developing 8 Countries. Asian Development Bank, Five-Power Defense Arrangement, G-77, and South Centre. On 31 October 2011 Malaysia became a party to the Antarctic Treaty. The policy towards territorial disputes by the Malaysian government is one of pragmatism, solving disputes in a number of ways, including some resolved in the International Court of Justice.  Malaysia has asserted sovereignty over the Spratly Islands together with China, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and Brunei. Tensions have eased since the 2002 "Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea". However, it is not the legally binding code of conduct sought by some parties. Malaysia was not party to a March 2005 joint accord among the national oil companies of China, the Philippines and Vietnam on conducting marine seismic activities in the Spratly Islands. Malaysia has maintained a balance relations with the countries involved in this dispute. However, since China has start enroaching its territorial waters, Malaysia has become active in condemning China. ICJ awarded Ligitan and Sipadan islands, also claimed by Indonesia and Philippines, to Malaysia but left the maritime boundary in the hydrocarbon-rich Celebes Sea in dispute, culminating in hostile confrontations in March 2005 over concessions to the Ambalat oil block. Singapore was a part of Malaysia for two years (1963–65), but it ultimately was asked by Tunku to secede after increased racial tensions due to the election campaigns in 1964. Today, disputes continue among other things, over the pricing of deliveries of raw untreated water to Singapore, Singapore's land reclamation causing a negative environmental impact in Malaysian waters, a new bridge to replace the Johor-Singapore Causeway which Singapore does not want to pay for, maritime boundaries, the redevelopment of Malayan Railway lands in Singapore and Pedra Branca. Both parties however, agreed to ICJ arbitration on the island dispute. On 24 May 2008, the International Court of Justice ruled that Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore with the nearby Middle Rocks going to Malaysia. Regarding railway land in Singapore, see also Malaysia-Singapore Points of Agreement of 1990. On introducing budget flights between Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, the stumbling block appears to be Malaysia's sympathy towards flag carrier Malaysia Airlines, and preference for the existing near duopoly with Singapore Airlines.  The Philippines has a dormant claim to eastern Sabah. Malaysia's land boundary with Brunei around Limbang is no longer in dispute. On 16 March 2009, Brunei announced its decision to drop a long-standing claim to Sarawak's Limbang district. This was the result of the two countries resolving their various land and sea territorial disputes. This issue was resolved along with several other disputes with the sealing and signing of letters of exchange by Abdullah and the Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei at Istana Nurul Iman. As of 2010, the two countries are working towards resolving disputes over their maritime boundaries. According to a source, the areas around Ko Kra and Ko Losin in present-day Thailand are once disputed with Malaysia. The Federation of Malaya became an independent native elective monarchy within the Commonwealth on 31 August 1957 with the Yang di-Pertuan Agong as head of state. Malaya united with North Borneo (now Sabah), Sarawak, and Singapore to form Malaysia in 1963. Singapore was expelled from Malaysia in 1965, and became an independent Commonwealth republic.    Country Formal relations began Notes January 1984 Brunei has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in Bandar Seri Begawan. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations. The states of Sarawak and Sabah in East Malaysia are connected to Brunei via the Pan Borneo Highway. Brunei has denounced its claims on Limbang and recognises Malaysia's full sovereignty. In 2003, Brunei and Malaysia ceased gas and oil exploration in their disputed offshore and deep water seabeds and negotiations have stalemated prompting consideration of international adjudication. 2 December 1996 More than 24,000 Cambodians visited Malaysia since the first half of 2012, while Malaysian visited to Cambodia numbered 54,000. In 2011, bilateral trade between the two countries worth over US$319.5 million and in 2010 Malaysia were consider as one of the biggest investors in the country with the total investments were U$2.19 billion while Malaysian investments in Cambodia during the past two years totalling U$118 million. 31 August 1957 During the collapse of the Communist Bloc, the Soviet Union could no longer afford aid for the development of Laos. This made Laos seek aid from other countries to help develop their country and has led the country to adopt a neutral foreign policy. When this policy of neutrality was adopted, relations with Malaysia were established. 1 March 1957 Myanmar has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Relations between the two countries were established on 1 March 1957 and the first Myanmar mission at the legation level was set up in Kuala Lumpur in June 1959 and later raised to the embassy level. Singapore has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in Singapore. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations. See also Malaysia-Singapore border, Pedra Branca dispute Thailand has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Bangkok. Recently, Thai-Malay relations have soured considerably due to the ethnically-Malay Pattani separatists in three southern provinces of Thailand. 30 March 1973 Country Formal relations began Notes  Bahrain has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Manama. 1957 Diplomatic relations between Iran and Malaysia are brotherly and cooperative, with Iran having its Embassy in Kuala Lumpur and Malaysia having its Embassy in Tehran. The two countries are members of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the D8. The Economic trade between Iran and Malaysia is quite sturdy as well, amounting to US$1.43 billion as of 2008. In 2010, ASEAN jointly with Iran opened a trade centre in Malaysia to promote trade ties between Iran and the regional countries. None  Despite initial contact after the independence of Malaya, no diplomatic relations were made. Malaysia consistently rejected relations with Israel as it tried to increase its relations with Arab states and shore up support for its conflict with Indonesia. Malaysia officially declared it did not recognise Israel in 1966. Relations ceased to exist until the 1990s, when limited economic ties were made, although diplomatic ties were explicitly rejected. Malaysia has stated it will open ties with Israel once a final solution been reach with the State of Palestine. Jordan has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Amman. Relations between the two countries are mainly in economic and Islamic affairs. Kuwait has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Kuwait City. Relations are mainly in economic co-operation. Lebanon has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Beirut. 1983 Oman and Malaysia signed an agreement for Oman to import frozen chicken from Malaysia, costing 120 million Malaysian ringgit. Oman imports most of its food, up to 80%.  Palestine has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia is a supporter of the Palestinian bid for UN membership. Malaysia has an embassy in Doha, and Qatar has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Saudi Arabia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Riyadh. Relations, both diplomatic and economic, are quite close between the two Muslim-majority OIC members. Additionally, there is a sizeable population of Malaysian migrant workers in Saudi Arabia. 1958 Syria has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Damascus. Syria and Malaysia negotiated over a $30 billion worth of contracts over Malaysian companies building infrastructure in Syria. 1964 1983 United Arab Emirates has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Abu Dhabi.  Malaysia has an embassy in Sana'a, and Yemen has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Country Formal relations began Notes 5 April 1993 1974 China has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Beijing and a consulate-general in Shanghai and Hong Kong. Diplomatic relations were established in 1974. Following the end of the Cold War, diplomatic foreign relations between China and Malaysia immediately and positively changed although there is some issues arose from China activities in the South China Sea, political and cultural connections between the two nations began to strengthen. Both countries are full members of APEC, and there is a sizeable population of Chinese in Malaysia. East Timor has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Dili. Since 1999, Malaysia has contributed to many UN peacekeeping missions on the country, such as one are the Operation Astute during the 2006 East Timorese crisis. Malaysia also has provided assistance to Timor-Leste in the area of human resources development through various training programmes and providing assistance to East Timor in its nation building efforts. Under the "One Country, Two Systems" law, the People's Republic of China is responsible for diplomatic and defence affair of Hong Kong. However, Hong Kong enjoys significant autonomy in economic, trade, financial and monetary matters. Currently, Malaysia has a consulate general office in Wan Chai and the relations are mostly based on economic co-operation. 1957 1957  Japan has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia has an embassy in Tokyo. Bilateral economic trades between Malaysia and Japan have increased. In 2011, total trade between both countries was at MYR145.3 billion. Japan has increased its import of liquefied natural gas to about 34%. Before 2007, the bilateral rate between both countries were at a deficit. About 1,400 Japanese companies are operating in Malaysia creating more than 11,000 job opportunities. Halal certification endorsement by the Malaysian government has allowed Malaysian companies in the halal food industry to compete well in the Japanese market. The building of a halal park in Japan is also considered. 16 March 1992  Kazakhstan has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur while Malaysia has an embassy in Astana. Both are members of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). March 1992 1968 Malaysia high commission in Colombo is also accredited to Maldives, and Maldives has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur. 8 September 1971 Malaysia has an honorary consulate in Ulaanbaatar, and Mongolia honorary consulate in Bangkok was accredited to Malaysia. However, since 2006, Mongolia has not presented any ambassador to Malaysia for seven years due to the murder of a Mongolian citizen on the country, but later decided to appointing an ambassador on 2014. 1 January 1960 Malaysia has an embassy in Kathmandu, and Nepal has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 1 January 1960, with bilateral relations between Malaysia and Nepal have developed from historic grounds. 30 June 1973 North Korea maintains friendly diplomatic ties with Malaysia. In an effort to boost tourism between the two countries, North Korea announced that Malaysians will not require a visa to visit North Korea. North Korea's flag carrier, Air Koryo has regular flights to Kuala Lumpur. Recently, Malaysia's Bernama News Agency reported that the two countries will enhance co-operation in information-related areas. North Korea maintains an embassy in Kuala Lumpur while Malaysia has an embassy in Pyongyang. Pakistan has its High Commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has its High Commission in Islamabad. Pakistan has strong brotherly relations with Malaysia. Both are members of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Commonwealth of Nations. There is a trade and cultural pact between the two countries, under which the import and export of various goods is done on fairly large scale. The President and the Prime Minister of Pakistan along with other high officials visited Malaysia many times and Malaysian officials also paid a good will visit to Pakistan. Both countries enjoy close relations and military links of mutual friendship and the co-operation has further strengthened. Since the independence of Malaysia, Pakistan has supported the re-unification of Singapore, Pattani and Brunei as integral part of Kuala Lumpur's administration; it also considers the Riau Islands as part of Malaya Federation since its independence in 1960. Pakistan and Malaysia are linked by air transport. Pakistan International Airlines and Malaysia Airlines operate many weekly flights between Karachi and Kuala Lumpur. Both Malaysia and Pakistan were a part of the South east Asian version of Nato called Seato also known as a 'mutual defence pact'. 1960 The two countries established relations in 1960. South Korean president Lee Myung-bak was in Kuala Lumpur from 9–10 December 2010 for a two-day visit to commemorate the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between Malaysia and South Korea. 1957 Malaysia has a high commission in Colombo, and Sri Lanka has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur. The diplomatic relations has been establish since 1957, President Chandrika Kumaratunga made a state visit on 1997 and several memorandum of understanding (MoU) has been signed during the meeting. 1960 (ceased on 1974) The relations are conducted on an unofficial level as Kuala Lumpur has changed to a one-China policy in 1974 and only recognised the People's Republic of China. However, the economic and the cultural relations are still maintained with Malaysia has an trade centre office in Taipei, and Taiwan has an economic and cultural centre in Kuala Lumpur. 11 March 1992 1992 Country Formal relations began Notes See Foreign relations of Albania 6 August 1962 Austria has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Vienna. Malaysia is one of Austria's most important trading partners in Southeast Asia. In 2003, Austrian exports to Malaysia, covering a wide range of products such as machinery and components, especially electrical machinery and parts thereof, paper, paperboard, telecommunication equipment and medical and pharmaceutical products, declined by 10.8% to 82.6 million. Malaysian imports to Austria, consisting mainly of one product group, namely electronic and electrical goods, especially semiconductors, reduced by half to 236.4 million. In Kuala Lumpur, the Austrian Trade office offers support to Austrian and Malaysian companies to assist them in forging new partnerships. Austrian President Heinz Fischer made a state visit to Malaysia on 7–9 November 2010, visiting Kuala Lumpur and Malacca Town. 5 March 1992 Belgium has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Brussels. 4 May 1992 Croatia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Zagreb. 1963 Denmark has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia is represented in Denmark, through its embassy in Stockholm, Sweden. 4 November 1993 See Foreign relations of Estonia The relations started with the 1980 European Commission–ASEAN Agreement and were developed since the formation of European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. In 2011, Malaysia is the European Union second largest trading partner in Southeast Asia after Singapore and the 23rd largest trading partner for the European Union in the world, while the European Union is Malaysia's 4th largest trading partner. 1972 1957 7 May 1993 See Foreign relations of Georgia Germany has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Berlin. 2011 1969 2008 Formal relations between the two countries first began in 2000, when Malaysia became the first Asian country to establish a liaison office in Kosovo.  Kosovo unilaterally declared its independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008 and Malaysia recognised it on 30 October 2008.  Since that time, Malaysia has pledged assistance to Kosovo in several areas. Latvia doesn't have any embassy in Malaysia. while Malaysian embassy in Helsinki is accredited to Latvia. 1994  Lithuania has an honorary consulate in Kuala Lumpur, while Malaysia embassy in Stockholm were also accredited to Lithuania. Netherlands has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in The Hague. The Dutch established relations with the Sultanate of Johor in the early 17th century, and in 1641 they captured the Portuguese colony of Malacca (on the south-western coast of today's Peninsular Malaysia). With a long interruption during the Napoleonic Wars, the Dutch Malacca era lasted until 1824. In the 20th century, the Netherlands established diplomatic relations with Malaysia soon after the Asian state became independent. The erudite Dutch Sinologist and author Robert van Gulik (who was raised in the former Dutch East Indies himself) served as the ambassador of the Netherlands in Kuala Lumpur in the early 1960s. During his diplomatic service there he became closely acquainted with Malaysia's gibbons (he kept a few in his ambassadorial residence) and became sufficiently interested in this ape species to start the study of its role in ancient Chinese culture, the results of which he later published in his last book (Gibbon in China).Robert van Gulik, The gibbon in China. An essay in Chinese animal lore. E.J.Brill, Leiden, Holland. (1967) Malaysia has an embassy in Warsaw, and Poland has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur and a consulate in Kuching. 22 March 1969 Malaysia has an embassy in Bucharest.Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Malaysian in Bucharest Romania has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur.Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Romanian embassy in Kuala Lumpur 1968 (as Soviet Union) Russia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Moscow. 2003 See Foreign relations of Serbia Entry to Malaysia was refused to all Serbian passport holders until 2007, unless they were in possession of a letter of approval from Malaysian Ministry of Home Affairs."Star Alliance Visa Information", Star Alliance. Retrieved 26 August 2007. During the time, citizens of Serbia and Montenegro were banned from participating in Malaysia My Second Home program." However, in August 2008, senior officials of Serbia and Malaysia held their first diplomatic meeting since 1991. Afterwards, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić said that establishing an embassy in Malaysia was a possibility, bilateral agreements between the two nations would be signed, and Malaysia has removed all visa restrictions for Serbian citizens. This meant that now only the citizens of Israel were banned from participating in Malaysia My Second Home program. Currently, Malaysia has an embassy in Belgrade while Serbian embassy in Jakarta was also accredited to Malaysia. 12 May 1967 Malaysia has an embassy in Madrid, and Spain has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Spain established a diplomatic relations with Malaysia in 12 May 1967 with both the Malaysian and Spanish embassy were opened in 1985. 1958 Diplomatic relations were established in 1958. Sweden has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Stockholm. As of 2009, 90 Swedish companies are present in Malaysia and about 450 Swedish citizens live in Malaysia. 1963 Switzerland has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Bern. The diplomatic relations has been established since 1963. 3 March 1992 United Kingdom has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in London. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations. Country Formal relations began Notes 7 June 1967 Argentina has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Buenos Aires. Argentina established diplomatic relations with Malaysia in 7 June 1967. Brazil has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Brasilia. 1957 Canada has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in Ottawa. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations. Canada's trade relationship with Malaysia includes commerce across several sectors. 1979 The Chile–Malaysia relations is mainly based on trade. In 2009, the total trade between Chile and Malaysia is $336 million with the total Malaysian export to Chile were $16.8 million while the import with $148.7 million. 19 August 1987 Ambassador of Colombia in Malaysia also accredited to East Timor, Thailand and Vietnam, while Malaysian Embassy in Lima, Peru, accredited to Colombia. Both are the members of United Nations, Movement of Non-Aligned Cooperation Forum Asia-Latin America (FEALAC) and Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC). 6 February 1975 Malaysia has an embassy in Havana, while Cuba has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. 1994 Their relations covers on political, commercial, cultural and social activities. In 2006, Prime Minister, Portia Simpson Miller and Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dato Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, have expressed satisfaction with the progress of bilateral relations between the two countries and have reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening these relations through the exchange of visits and co-operation in the economic, technological, shipping, health and educational sectors, among other areas. 27 March 1974 Malaysia has an embassy in Mexico City, and Mexico has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Relations between the two countries was established on 27 March 1974. Malaysia is one of the main destination for Peruvian exports with the total trade in 2012 records $235 million. Peruvian exports to Malaysia total around $28 million while Malaysian exports with $207 million. In 1995, an agreement on mutual promotion and protection of investments has been signed between the two countries. Economic ties are robust. The United States is Malaysia's largest trading partner and Malaysia is the tenth-largest trading partner of the US Annual two-way trade amounts to $49 billion. The United States and Malaysia launched negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement (FTA) in June 2006. President Barack Obama visited Malaysia between 26 to 28 April 2014, as part of his four-nation Asia tour. This visit was the first visit by a sitting US President in almost 50 years since President Lyndon Johnson in 1966. Other top US government officials have made visits to Malaysia in the past, such as then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in November 2010,  Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel in August 2013, and current Secretary of State John Kerry  in October 2013. Malaysia has its embassy in Washington, DC with consulates in New York City, NY and Los Angeles, CA and a permanent mission to the United Nations in New York. The United States has its embassy in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 1986 Malaysia has an embassy in Caracas while Venezuela has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Both countries are full members of the Group of 77. Country Formal relations began Notes 1977 New Zealand has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in Wellington. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations. 1986 or 1988 Malaysia has an honorary consul in Solomon Islands while Malaysia high commission in Port Moresby also accredited to the country, and Solomon Islands has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur. Country Formal relations began Notes Algeria has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Algiers. Ethiopia has a consulate-general in Kuala Lumpur, while Malaysia has no embassy in Ethiopia. Malaysia is one of the major trade partner and also one of the largest investors in Ethiopia. Ghana has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in Accra. Kenya has maintained a resident Mission in Kuala Lumpur since in 1996. Malaysia opened a diplomatic Mission in Nairobi in 2005. Libya has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Tripoli. Relations are mainly in economic co-operation. Malaysia together with Malawi are both significant tea producers, and co-operate in tri-national (with India) discussions of market conditions and promotion of the product globally. January 1987 Mauritius has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, while Malaysia embassy in Harare, Zimbabwe also accredited to Mauritius. Both are members of Commonwealth of Nations. Cooperation between the two countries include cultural exchanges, trade in goods, financial assistances and capacity building in various sectors. 1963 Malaysia has an embassy in Rabat, and Morocco has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia has a high commission in Windhoek, and Namibia has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur. Both countries were once part of the British Empire and before Namibia achieved its independence, Malaysia has contributed to some operations in Namibia by sending a group of soldiers to help monitor the Namibia elections and peace process. Today, the relations are much more focused in economic co-operation. 1965 The High Commissioner of Nigeria, Bello Shehu Ringim, speaking with the Yang Dipertua Dewan Negara, Abu Zahar Ujang, expresses the concern of Nigerian students being fooled by Malaysian private-owned universities and social problems. The Nigerian government are serious about the problems by its citizens and the negative perception of its students. Malaysia is committed to Nigeria's concern and will give solutions to the problem. Malaysia has an embassy in Dakar, and Senegal has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. Seychelles has a high commission in Subang Jaya. 8 November 1993 Relations are good between Malaysia and South Africa, who view each other as close partners. Malaysia is the fourth largest new investor in South Africa, and the countries have exchanged High Commissioners. The stability of Sudan has enabled the country to take experiences from Malaysia in law legislation and investor-friendly policies, as claimed by Mahathir Mohammad, former prime minister of Malaysia who visits Khartoum in November 2012. At least seven Memorandum of Understandings have been made, related to Malaysian companies. The expected growth of bilateral trade between Malaysia and Sudan will have a big impact on the import of Sudanese beef. Malaysia has a high commission in Dar es Salaam, and Tanzania has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysian embassy in Dakar is accredited to The Gambia while Gambian embassy in Abu Dhabi is accredited to Malaysia. The relations are friendly warm. 1957 Several agreements were signed since 1969 covering a lot of sectors, including the agreement on suppression of visa and the agreement on economic and technical co-operation which signed in 1994. Several other drafts also are currently under negotiations. 1962 Malaysia does not yet have a high commission in Kampala, while Uganda has a consulate in Kuala Lumpur and Uganda high commission in India were also accredited to Malaysia. List of diplomatic missions in Malaysia List of diplomatic missions of Malaysia Visa requirements for Malaysian citizens Malaysia Ministry of Foreign Affairs
