    The foreign relations of Taiwan, constitutionally and officially the Republic of China (ROC), are the relations between the Republic of China and other countries. The Republic of China is recognized by 21 United Nations member states, as well as by the Holy See. The ROC maintains diplomatic relations with those countries, as well as unofficial relations with other countries via its representative offices and consulates. The Republic of China participated in the Moscow Conference (1943), the Dumbarton Oaks Conference, the United Nations Conference on International Organization, and was a charter member of the United Nations. In 1949, the Nationalists lost the Chinese Civil War in mainland China and retreated to Taiwan. Despite the major loss of territory, the ROC continued to be recognized as the legitimate government of China by the UN and by many non-Communist states. In 1971, the UN expelled the ROC and transferred China's seat to the People's Republic of China (PRC). In addition to the ad tempus recognition of ROC by majority of countries before UN Resolution 2758, the Republic of China lost its membership in all the intergovernmental organizations related to the UN. As the UN and related organizations like International Court of Justice are the most common venues for effective execution of international law and serve as the international community for states in the post-World War II period, a majority of the countries aligned with the West in the Cold War terminated diplomatic relations with the ROC and recognized quid pro quo of the PRC instead. However, the Republic of China fulfills all the requirements in Article 3, 4, 5, 6, 110 and Chapter V of the United Nations Charter. The ROC's de jure seat is currently occupied by the People's Republic of China in the United Nations under the UN Charter (for more, see Chapter II of the United Nations Charter). The ROC continues to maintain de facto relations, including with most of the non-governmental organizations at the United Nations, in addition with the concern from UNESCO. Exclusively, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which is entitled by the founding of the United Nations as the cornerstone of modern-day diplomacy since the Vienna Congress, was signed and ratified by the Republic of China on 18 April 1961 and 19 December 1969 including Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes.http://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/conventions/9_1_1961_disputes.pdf Article 35th of 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties also applies to ROC after 1971.https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%201155/volume-1155-I-18232-English.pdf Due to ROC's insecurity and intolerance in the 1970s and 1980s after being expelled by the UN and the termination of official US-ROC diplomatic relations, but by the American persuasionhttps://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R41263.pdf (when influential James R. Lilley was the Director of American Institute in Taiwan at the time) Taiwan has been gradually democratized and adopting universal suffrage from the one party-military rule under the leadership of President Chiang Ching-kuo. The first direct presidential election was held in 1996 and the incumbent President Lee Teng-hui was elected. As of May Fourth 2015, ROC nationals are eligible for preferential visa treatment from 142 countries and areas. In the context of Superpower and influential diplomacy, ROC's traditional and sober allies includes United States of America, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand.http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2011/09/06/2003512568 The ROC is one of the main supporters of official development assistance. International Cooperation and Development Fund manages ROC's Foreign Assistance and International Cooperation projects.http://www.icdf.org.tw/ct.asp?xItem=5293&CtNode=29880&mp=2 As of 2010, along with other US security allies including Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and South Korea in the Asia-Pacific region with Taiwan Relations Act, officials of the ROC have gained quasi-official level visits to the United States both in the governmental and political level, including the US-Taiwan cooperative military guidance in the annual Han Kuang joint-force exercises. The Common Strategic Objectives of Joint Statement of the U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee of 2005 and 2011 (and reiterated in 2013) included to encourage the peaceful resolution of issues concerning the Taiwan Strait through dialogue and encourage China’s responsible and constructive role in regional stability and prosperity, its cooperation on global issues, and its adherence to international norms of behavior, while building trust among the United States, Japan, and China. Improve openness and transparency with respect to China’s military modernization and activities and, strengthen confidence building measures, with China's rapid expanding military investments. Taiwan's GDP by nominal means is ahead of several G20 economies of global financial governance. In the context of international norm of tabula rasa, there is a variety of forms for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the ROC as a de facto state in readiness to join the international community, and (if applicable) as a sui generis entity of international law abiding by the reference of Ex factis jus oritur   principle and a priori and a posteriori of the Republic of China, to participate in the international organizations as defined by the international organizational norms and Union of International Associations. Taiwan was annexed from China by Japan in 1895 after the First Sino-Japanese War. In the Northern Expedition, the Nationalists defeated the warlords of the Beiyang clique and established a unified government for China in Nanjing. The United States recognized Nationalist China on 25 July 1928, the first government to do so.China White Paper: August 1949, p. 12. The Japanese occupied much of China during World War II. After Japan's defeat in 1945, a civil war between the Nationalists and the Communists followed. The Communists gained control of the mainland in 1949 and proclaimed the People's Republic of China, while the Nationalists fled to Taiwan. In 1952, Taiwan was ceded by Japan in the Treaty of San Francisco. In 1916, A.P. Winston, the author of Chinese Finance under the Republic, said, "chief sources of information on those matters of discussion which have been subjects of diplomacy" were official publications from the United Kingdom.Winston, p. 739. Winston explained that few official reports from the Chinese government aside from the maritime customs sector had appeared at that point, and that the government of the Republic of China was "too poor, perhaps still too secretive, to make regular and full publication of statistics."   The 1970s saw a switch in diplomatic recognition from the ROC to the PRC, with countries like the United States, Japan, and Canada making the switch during that decade. In October 1971, Resolution 2758 was passed by the UN General Assembly, expelling  "the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek" and transferred China's seat on the Security Council to the PRC. The resolution declared that "the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of China are the only lawful representatives of China to the United Nations." However, the Eo ipso nature of Taiwan and weapons of mass destruction has remained as a contentious Ipso facto issue. Many attempts by the ROC to rejoin the UN, in recent years, have not made it past committee, under fierce opposition and threatened vetoes by the PRC. Attempts under President Chen Shui-bian attempted the argument that Resolution 2758, replacing the ROC with the PRC in 1971, only addressed the question of who should have China's seat in the UN, rather than whether an additional seat for the Taiwan Area can be created to represent the 23 million people on Taiwan and other islands. The argument, however, has not been accepted by the UN because the issue of Taiwan Independence was not raised in UN.  and the Holy See officially recognize ROC. On less official terms, Taiwan is involved in a complex dispute for control over the Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; and over the Paracel Islands, occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and by Taiwan. Taiwan claims the Japanese-administered Senkaku Islands, which are called the Diaoyu Islands in Taiwan and China. On 7 November 2003, diplomatic ties were established with Kiribati. However, the ROC did not demand that ties be broken with PRC, and ROC Foreign Minister Eugene Chien said that he would not reject having both sides of the Taiwan Strait recognized simultaneously. PRC also broke precedent by not cutting ties until 29 November and spent the interim lobbying for Kiribati President Anote Tong to reverse his decision. The decision to hold off for weeks was possibly due to the strategic importance of China's satellite tracking base on Kiribati, which had been used for Shenzhou V and thought to have been used to spy on a U.S. missile range in the Marshall Islands.   In the following list, the dates indicate establishment or duration of relations. Among all, only Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have no embassies in Taipei.  Panama established diplomatic relations with Qing dynasty in 1909 and continued to maintain relations with its successor Republic of China until the present.[ ] Taiwan has non-diplomatic, unofficial relations with the European Union and at least 47 states, recognizing the People's Republic of China, that maintain "Economic, Trade and/or Cultural" (or similar) offices in Taiwan. These relations are not inter-governmental nor are they officially diplomatic or political. However, they have many of the functions usually assigned to actual embassies, including the processing of visas, cultural exchanges and to some extent, unofficial diplomatic and governmental exchanges.Ireland, for example, describes the position in the following terms: "Ireland does not maintain diplomatic relations with Taiwan and there is no inter-Governmental contact between the two sides. A Taipei Representative Office, established in Dublin in 1988, has a representative function in relation to economic and cultural promotion, but no diplomatic or political status." (Source: Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs statement Ref No: 3911/07) For example, the American Institute in Taiwan functions as the United States' de facto "embassy" in Taiwan with the chairman and staff acting as "unofficial" government consulate officers who nevertheless perform duties that official embassies would undertake. The following states, recognizing Beijing, do not maintain any representation in Taiwan (including any non-political, non-diplomatic, non inter-governmental representation): The following table includes Bhutan, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and some of the states with limited recognition:       Taiwan has publicly feared that if any one state should switch its recognition to Beijing, it would create a domino effect, encouraging other states to do so as well. The Holy See (Vatican)the only European state to recognize Taiwanmade efforts in 2007 to create formal ties with Beijing. High-ranking bishops in the Catholic Church have implied that such a diplomatic move was possible, predicated on China's granting more freedom of religion and interfering less in the hierarchy of the Chinese Catholic church. Kiribati established diplomatic relations with the ROC on 7 November 2003, switching recognition from the PRC. Saudi Arabia ended its diplomatic relations with the ROC in 1990. South Korea was the last country in Asia which had official diplomatic relations with the ROC, but also ended its diplomatic relations in 1992. South Africa switched recognition to the PRC in 1998. Liberia switched from PRC to ROC in 1989, and back to PRC in October 2003. On 31 March 2004, Dominica ended its recognition, which began in 1983, because of offers from the PRC to provide $117 million over six years. The Republic of Macedonia recognized the ROC in 1999 but switched diplomatic recognition in 2001 after the PRC imposed economic sanctions and used a rare veto on the UN Security Council to block peacekeeping efforts. The Gambia recognized Taiwan from 1968 until 1974, and then once more from 1995 until 14 November 2013, when President Yahya Jammeh's office announced it had cut diplomatic ties with immediate effect. On Tuesday March 18, 2014 Guatemalan former President Alfonso Portillo pleaded guilty in the Federal District Court in Manhattan, United States to a charge that he accepted bribes in exchange for diplomatic recognition of Taiwan. President Perez Molina said that Guatemala's relations with Taiwan were and are strong and that the Portillo confession will not affect the diplomatic relations between the two nations.http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/19/world/americas/guatemala-ex-president-admits-taking-taiwan-bribes.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&_r=0 "Guatemala: Ex-President Admits Taking Taiwan Bribes" Villegas, Paulina (March 18, 2014). New York Times. MARCH On Wednesday March 19, 2014 Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs declined to comment on the matter.http://focustaiwan.tw/news/aipl/201403190050.aspx Taiwan mum on bribery claims by Guatemala's ex-president . Focus Taiwan News Channel.  Relations between Taiwan and mainland China, or the argument between ROC and PRC on the legal ground of Status quo ante, as referring to the Double Tenth Agreement signed on 10 October 1945 as the only existing legal document between the two belligerents to this date, with the following Political Consultative Conference,http://ap6.pccu.edu.tw/Encyclopedia/data.asp?id=3783 having been engulfed by Cold War history and the American foreign policy of containment in East Asia after the Korean War broke out by not "letting the dust settles of the Chinese Nationalist on Formosa".Acheson: The Secretary of State Who Created the American World. Books.google.com.tw. p. 217. Before the Korean War broke out, United States was preparing for a concerted coup d'état in mid-1950 to replace Chiang Kai-Shek for Hu Shih and Sun Li-jen and neutralize Taiwan's legal status under UN Trusteeship to block any legal claim of the PRC on Taiwan, as proposed by State Department official Dean Rusk at the time. In 1955, Formosa Resolution of 1955http://library.cqpress.com/cqalmanac/document.php?id=cqal71-1253311 was passed unanimously by the United States Congress. Taiwan would take whatever it can to put aside the unification issue indefinitely, but China is not.http://ips.cap.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/COG-8.pdf Resolving the cross-Strait relationship will take a very long time and will also probably require both sides to rethink definitions of basic concepts such as “one China,” sovereignty and unification.http://www.cscap.org/uploads/docs/CRSO/CRSO2014.pdf In modern days, the two polities of accession  have resulted in the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries of People's Republic of China in Mainland China, the lifting of martial law (Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion)  by the Republic of China on the territory of the People's Republic of China, and more recently the enactment of Anti-Secession Law by People's Republic of China towards the Republic of China. The two sides currently lack any cross-strait military confidence-building measures (CBM) "to improve military-to-military relations in ways that reduce fears of attack and the potential for military miscalculation."  Nuclear tensions have risen since the PRC promulgated the Anti-Secession Law against military intervention from United States of America on Taiwan independence.http://www.nytimes.com/2005/07/15/international/asia/15china.html?_r=0&adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1405177293-UqsKr8psvi7Pa/H5g6PI4w Neither Taipei nor Beijing sees their relations as foreign relations.  The government position that both Taiwan and mainland China are parts of the same state is not universally accepted in Taiwan. In particular, the pro-independence Pan-Green Coalition considers Taiwan and China to be different countries. By contrast, the pro-reunification Pan-Blue Coalition take the view that both Taiwan and mainland China are parts of the same state, the Republic of China. Former president Lee Tung-hui described these relations as "Special State-to-State Relations"."Taiwan won't broach state-to-state concept again". "The press reports quoted Taiwan's incoming top China policy-maker Tsai Ing-wen as saying Thursday that the special state-to-state label was an adequate description of Taiwan's current ties with China."  "'The two-states theory is a good thing. It is a way to describe the current (cross-strait) situation,'" "Tsai said on local television. 'We can refrain from using it as a description, although we cannot deny the existence of the situation described by it,' Tsai said on local television." The subsequent administrations of President Chen Shui-bian described Taiwan and China by saying "...with Taiwan and China on each side of the Taiwan Strait, each side is a country.". Current President Ma Ying-jeou has returned to the government position of the early 1990s, calling relations with Beijing special relations between two areas within one state. That state according to Taiwan is the Republic of China, and due to constitutional reasons, neither Taipei nor Beijing recognises each other as a legitimate government. The term preferred by Taiwanese and Chinese governments is "cross-strait relations", referring to the geographical separator, the Taiwan Strait. The constitutional position of Taipei is that the territory of the Republic of China is divided into the "Mainland Area" and the "Free Area" (also known as "Taiwan Area"). Administratively, cross-strait relations are not conducted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Taiwan, but by the Mainland Affairs Council, an instrumental of the Executive Yuan. The relations with Hong Kong and Macau are also conducted by the Mainland Affairs Council, although not all regulations applicable to mainland China are automatically applied to those territories. Consistently with the policies of both governments, Taiwanese and Chinese governments do not directly interact. Talks are conducted by China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) and Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF), formally privately constituted bodies that are controlled and directly answerable to the executive branch of their respective governments. Until the late 1990s Hong Kong and Macau were British and Portuguese colonies respectively. They provided neutral detour points for people and goods moving from one side of the strait to the other. They, as well as Singapore, also served as venues for talks between the two sides at that time. One Modus vivendi outcome of such talks in neutral venues was the 1992 Consensus, arising from a meeting in Hong Kong in 1992. Under this consensus, the two sides agree that both Taiwan and mainland China are under the same single sovereignty of China, but the two sides agree to disagree on which side is the legitimate representative of that sovereignty. Setting aside that disagreement, the two sides agreed to co-operate on practical matters, such as recognising certifications authenticated by the other side. Relations between Taipei and Beijing have warmed since the election of President Ma Ying-jeou of the Kuomintang in 2008 as Republic of China presidential election, 2008, with the promotion of cross-strait links and increased economic and social interchanges between the two sides, but with new implications from Taiwan local elections, 2014 will diverge the cross-strait relations.http://origin.www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/Staff%20Report_Taiwan%27s%20Local%20Elections--Implications%20for%20Cross-Strait%20Relations%20_12%2030%202014.pdf Official high-level meeting was held on 11 February 2014 in Nanjing that marked the first time China recognized Taiwan's top government officials on matters across the Taiwan Strait. The thawed tensions across the Taiwan Strait is not welcomed by the Pan-Green Coalition in Taiwan for the Taiwan independence movement after Republic of China presidential election, 2000 and to the Ex injuria jus non oritur basis  of PRC's Anti-Secession Law to Taiwan. 2015 Ma–Xi meeting was held on 7 November 2015 to affirm the 1992 Consensus before Republic of China general election, 2016 and in the midst of U.S. Navy Tests China's two governmnts (PRC and ROC) Over Sea Claims.http://www.wsj.com/articles/china-says-it-warned-u-s-warship-in-south-china-sea-1445928223 Bangladesh has had limited bilateral exchanges with Taiwan since it declared independence in 1971, from China's ally Pakistan. Formerly known as East Pakistan, Bangladesh is located at a pivotal position on the South Asian subcontinent between East India and Myanmar. Bangladesh, which is the second largest South Asian partner of Taiwan, witnessed bilateral trade jumped by 38% last year in spite of a global slump. Bangladesh mainly exports garments, knit wear, jutes, leathers and handicrafts to Taiwan and buy an assortment of textiles, machines, electronics, steels, plastics from the same. Trade with Bangladesh is expected to expand in the coming years as more Taiwanese companies set up manufacturing bases there.  Burkina Faso has recognized Taiwan since 1994.  South Korea was the last Asian country that had an official diplomatic relations with Taiwan.  Taiwan recognized the formal establishment of the First Republic of the Republic of Korea in 1948. On 4 January 1949 the Taiwan  set up an embassy in Myeongdong, Seoul Republic of Korea.  However, on 23 August 1992 Taiwan severed diplomatic relations with South Korea in advance of their formal recognition of and establishment of Diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. Soon after Taiwan and South Korea established the unofficial tie.    Commercial  (such as Trade and Investment Framework Agreement signed in 1994,http://www.ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/reports/2008/NTE/asset_upload_file508_14610.pdf TIFAhttp://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/press-releases/2014/April/United-States-and-Taiwan-Enhance-Trade-Ties[ ]  ), cultural, and other substantial relations of the existence of Taiwan between "the people of the United States" and "the people on Taiwan" are currently governed, inter alia, by the Taiwan Relations Act. The Act does not recognize the terminology of "Republic of China" after 1 January 1979 as US recognizes People's Republic of China instead of Republic of China. With de-recognition of ROC, the unofficial name of Taiwan has been mentioned in the Three Communiqués between the United States and China. Consistent with the United States' One China policy, Taiwan is not allowed to raise its national flag in the US soil, unless otherwise certain legal approval could be taken into consideration based on international law. Taiwanese passport holders are included in the US Visa Waiver Program for the stay of 90 days that commences on 1 November 2012. The United States of America does not support Taiwan Independence. After 1979, US-Taiwan Business Council continues to provide the commercial avenue (mostly semiconductor technology related) and arms sales service from United States of America to Republic of China. The United States State Department has close bilateral cooperation with Taiwan through Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs' Fulbright Program. Recent disputes between the US and Taiwan include Taiwan's ban on the import of US beef and US pork, but it was resolved nevertheless after Taiwan relented Codex Alimentarius Commission, in which Taiwan is not a member of, adopted by the new standard of a narrow margin a maximum residue limit for ractopamine in both beef and pork.http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/foreign-affairs/2014/09/23/417820/Pork-not.htm Similar positions on Taiwan are taken by a majority of countries. Twenty-three states recognize the ROC only. During the 1990s, the ROC actively encouraged such recognition through generous grants of foreign aid. In the 2000s, this strategy was abandoned because the PRC could outbid the ROC with foreign aid, and the spending of large sums of money to buy recognition became quite unpopular in Taiwan. In the 2000s, the diplomatic strategy of the ROC appears to have shifted to encourage "democratic solidarity" with major powers, such as the United States, Europe, and Japan. In 2007, a measure was introduced into the United States Congress that would dramatically strengthen U.S. ties with Taiwan. The United States House of Representatives passed a resolution calling for the lift of United States government curbs on visits by high-ranking or top ROC officials. The Resolution noted that "whenever high-level visitors from Taiwan, including the President, seek to come to the United States, their requests result in a period of complex, lengthy and humiliating negotiations."  In an additional note on the resolution, it said: "Lifting these restrictions will help bring a friend and ally of the United States out of its isolation, which will be beneficial to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific Region." A bill was also introduced by U.S. lawmakers to back the UN bid by Taiwan. The bill stated that Taiwan and its 23 million people "deserve membership in the United Nations" and that the United States should fulfill a commitment "to more actively support Taiwan's membership in appropriate international organizations." The bill was introduced on 8 November 2007, at the House Foreign Affairs Committee by 18 Republican legislators and one Democrat. Congressional records show that the move was led by New Jersey Republican Representative Scott Garrett.[ ] Official diplomatic relations are currently nonexistent, as the United States ended them in 1979 as a prerequisite for establishing ties with the PRC. Unofficial diplomatic relations are nevertheless maintained on both sides by means of de facto embassies, which are technically "private organizations" staffed by career diplomats who are formally "on leave". The ROC's de facto embassy network is the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office (TECRO) with offices in Washington, D.C., and 12 other U.S. cities, as well as many other countries without official ties to the ROC.  The Americans' analogous organization is the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT).  As of 2010, officials of the ROC have gained quasi-official level visits to the United States both in the governmental and political level.     Egypt maintained relations until 1956, when Gamal Abdel Nasser cut off relations and established them with the People's Republic of China instead. Ma Bufang, who was then living in Egypt, then was ordered to move to Saudi Arabia, and became the ROC ambassador to Saudi Arabia. Ambassador Wang Shi-ming was a Chinese Muslim, and the ROC ambassador to Kuwait. The ROC also maintained relations with Libya, and Saudi Arabia.  Leadership meetings between Republic of China and India were carried out even before Indian independence from Great Britain in the early 1940s.http://www.ace.lu.se/images/Syd_och_sydostasienstudier/working_papers/Samarani.pdf Taiwan is included in the Look East policy by India. The bilateral relations between India and Taiwan have improved since the 1990s despite both nations not maintaining official diplomatic relations.Taiwan Commercial Relations India recognizes only the People's Republic of China. However, India's economic and commercial links as well as people-to-people contacts with Taiwan have expanded in recent years.[ ] Like the People's Republic of China, Taiwan has border disputes with India over Arunachal Pradesh. The Constitution of the Republic of China declares this area a part of South Tibet, and disputes the validity of the McMahon Line based on which Arunachal Pradesh is presently a state of India.  On 1 June 1920, a friendship agreement was signed between the governments of China and Iran. Ratifications were exchanged on 6 February 1922, and the agreement went into effect on the same day. These relations came to an end in 1971, and Tehran recognized Beijing.  Japan-Taiwan relations are guided by the 1972 Japan-PRC Joint Communique. Japan has maintained non-governmental, working-level relations with Taiwan ever since.  The relations are conducted on an unofficial level as Kuala Lumpur has changed to a one-China policy in 1974 and only recognised the People's Republic of China. However, economic and cultural relations are still maintained with Malaysia has a trade centre office in Taipei, and Taiwan has an economic and cultural centre in Kuala Lumpur.  Until 1945 Nationalist China claimed sovereignty over Mongolia, but under Soviet pressure and as part of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of August 1945, it recognized Mongolian independence. In 1953, due to the deterioration of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, it revoked this recognition and kept considering it a part of mainland China.Times, MOI rethinks Mongolia, 20 August 2002, p. 2, Accessed 2 June 2009 On 3 October 2002 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that Taiwan recognizes Mongolia as an independent country, although no legislative actions were taken to address concerns over its constitutional claims to Mongolia. A Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office was opened in Ulaanbaatar, and Taipei excluded Mongolia from the definition of the "mainland area" for administrative purposes. In 2006, old laws regulating the formation of banners and monasteries in Outer Mongolia were repealed. Offices established to support Taipei's claims over Outer Mongolia, such as the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission, lie dormant.[ ][ ]   However, the official borders of the Republic of China have not been changed via a vote of the National Assembly (as required by the Constitution prior to 2005) or via a referendum (as required by the Constitution after amendments made in 2005). The official status of recognition is currently ambiguous, though in practice Mongolia is treated as an ordinary foreign power.  The partnership between the anti-communist governments of General Alfredo Stroessner and Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek was quite natural. Many Paraguayan officers went for training in Fu Hsing Kang College in Taiwan.Marks, Thomas A., Counterrevolution in China: Wang Sheng and the Kuomintang, Frank Cass (London: 1998), ISBN 0-7146-4700-4.Partial view on Google Books. pp 289. 293. The ousting of Stroessner in 1989,  and his successor Andrés Rodríguez's reinventing himself as a democratically elected president, were immediately followed by invitations from Beijing to switch diplomatic recognition.Marks, p. 301 However, the Taiwanese ambassador, Wang Sheng, and his diplomats were able to convince the Paraguayans that continuing the relationship with Taiwan, and thus keeping Taiwan's development assistance and access to Taiwan's markets, would be more advantageous for Paraguay. The Philippines recognizes the One China Policy but has relations with Taiwan through the Manila Economic and Cultural Office in Taipei and the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Manila. Both offices were established in 1975 and were organized as non-profit and non-stock private corporations.  In the Chinese Civil War, the Soviet Union had a tumultuous yet strategic relations with the Kuomintang-led Nationalist China until 1949 with the proclamation of the People's Republic of China and the subsequent military takeover of Mainland China by the Chinese Communist Party. In the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis, the Soviet Union under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev recommended the internationalization of the Taiwan Question and appealed to the United Nations and other multilateral organizations to erase the crisis, further, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union called for the Ten Nations Summit in New Delhi to discuss the issue and eradicate the military tension on 27 September 1958 and undermined as one of the precursors of the latter Sino-Soviet split. Since the formation of the Russian Federation, Taiwan has exported many ferric materials to Russia in 2004–2005. In 2005, the total amount of the trade between the two economies was $2,188,944,473. Russia also has a representative office in Taipei, and Republic of China has a representative office in Moscow.[ ]   According to the data, Russia keeps a positive balance in its trade relations with Taiwan mainly from crude oil, cast iron and steel, nonferrous metals, petrochemical products, ferroalloys, coking coal, timber, and chemical fertilizers. Russia imports mostly electronics and electronic parts, computers and computer parts, and home appliances. The two countries cooperate closely and intensely by establishing unofficial diplomatic relations since 1993~1996. Taipei is targeting Russia for exporting opportunities and marketing potentials and this mutually-beneficial relationship is effective, especially under the framework of APEC. Singapore had maintained unofficial relations with both the ROC and the PRC until 1992. It was decided in the Second Ministerial Meeting of APEC as chaired by Singapore in 1990 for the inclusion of the ROC commencing from the Third Ministerial Meeting in Seoul. After the establishment of diplomatic ties between Singapore and PRC on 3 October 1992, it continues to maintain close economic and military ties with Taiwan as part of its attempt to position itself as a neutral party to both sides. This is, however, a diplomatically delicate situation which has flared up occasionally. A severe diplomatic row broke out between China and Singapore when Lee Hsien Loong visited Taiwan a month before being sworn-in as the Prime Minister of Singapore on 12 August 2004. Singapore's Ministry of Defence took great pains to correct an erroneous report in the Liberty Times on a joint military exercise between the Singapore and Taiwan in March 2005.[ ]  Still, Singapore is the only foreign country to maintain military training camps in Taiwan, and continues to regularly send infantry, artillery, and armoured personnel there for training annually. There has been talk in recent years, however, of the possibility of moving some or all of these facilities to Hainan following an offer by the PRC, although this may not be taken up due to sensitivities in diplomatic relations between Singapore and its defence ally, USA.PROFILE On the issue of United Nations participation for Taiwan, there was a heated exchange of views between George Yeo and Mark Chen in 2004 between the two Foreign Ministers of the two countries. On the economic front, with Beijing's insistence that FTA can only be concluded among sovereign states, under a different name by the Ma Administration of ROC, Singapore and Taiwan signed the Agreement between Singapore and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu on Economic Partnership (ASTEP) on November 2013. Taiwan has an embassy in Mbabane. Vanuatu currently recognises the People's Republic of China. In November 2004, Prime Minister Serge Vohor briefly established diplomatic relations with Taiwan, before being ousted for that reason in a vote of no confidence the following month."Chinese influence corrupting government: opposition leader", Vanuatu Daily, 12 March 2006  In 2007 Venezuela decided not to renew visas for five members of the ROC commercial representation in Caracas.International Herald TribuneTaiwanese diplomats may have to leave Venezuela (18 July 2007). Accessed 19 December 2007 Relations with Venezuela have worsened because of the increasing partnership between the government of Venezuela and China.  ROC–Vietnam relations are conducted on an unofficial level, as Hanoi adheres to a one-China policy and officially recognises the People's Republic of China only. However, this has not stopped bilateral visits and significant flows of migrants and investment capital between the ROC and Vietnam. The ROC is an important Foreign Direct Investment partner to Vietnam. Vietnam is the only communist country that has an unofficial foreign relationship with the ROC.  The ROC maintains diplomatic relations with six countries in Oceania: Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, the Solomon Islands and Tuvalu. China has relations with eight others (including Australia, Papua New Guinea, New Zealand and Fiji). The Pacific is an area of intense and continuous diplomatic competition between Beijing and Taipei, with several countries (Nauru, Kiribati, Vanuatu) having switched diplomatic support from one to the other at least once. Both the PRC and the ROC provide development aid to their respective allies. In exchange, ROC allies support its membership bid in the United Nations. The ROC is one of Tuvalu and Nauru's most important economic partners. In May 2008, ROC Foreign Minister James Huang resigned, along with two other top officials of the out-going Chen Shui-bian Administration, after wasting over €19 million in a failed attempt to win diplomatic recognition for the ROC from Papua New Guinea. The misuse of the money caused public outrage, forcing Huang's resignation."Taiwan foreign minister resigns over diplomatic blunder", Jonathan Adams,International Herald Tribune, 6 May 2008 Papua New Guinea's foreign minister Sam Abal subsequently confirmed that his country had no intention of recognising the ROC."PNG dismisses Taiwan's diplomatic moves", ABC Radio Australia, 7 May 2008 In September 2006, the first regional summit of all Taiwan's Pacific Island allies took place, and was hosted by Palau, in Koror. The meeting brought together ROC President Chen Shui-bian and delegates from the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands and Kiribati."Marshall Islands president set to visit", Ko Shu-ling, Taipei Times, 26 June 2007 It was to become a regular event, known as the Taiwan-Pacific Allies Summit."Taiwan-Pacific Allies Summit to highlight regional issues", China Post, 10 October 2007"What Really Counts", Taiwan Review (government website), 30 November 2006 A second regional meeting was hosted by the Marshall Islands in October, and President Chen attended."Chen not planning any transit stops on way to Marshalls", Ko Shu-ling, Taipei Times, 3 October 2007 This resulted in the Majuro Declaration, in which Taiwan's six Pacific allies re-stated their recognition of the ROC's sovereignty, and promised to support the ROC's attempts to join the United Nations."Taiwan signs Majuro Declaration with South Pacific allies", Radio Taiwan International, 12 October 2007 Also in June 2007, the ROC donated an aid package of € 700,000, distributed among eight Pacific regional organisations."Taiwan injects over US$1m into regional development", Matangi Tonga, 27 June 2007 In January 2008, following the victory of the Kuomintang in the ROC's elections, Kuomintang MP Yang Li-huan stated that under the new government Taiwan's interest in the Pacific could decrease. Three days later, however, it was confirmed that ROC Vice-President Annette Lu would lead a diplomatic visit to the Marshall Islands, Nauru and Solomon Islands."Vice president to visit three allies in South Pacific: official", China Post, 28 January 2008 In March 2008, new President-elect Ma Ying-jeou was reported as saying that his government would put an end to Taiwanese "cheque-book diplomacy" in the Pacific (or more specifically, similar to the condition of cestui que use diplomacy)."Taiwan president-elect vows to end Pacific 'cheque-book diplomacy'", ABC Radio Australia, 26 March 2008 In May of that same year, Ma called for what he referred to as a "cease-fire" in the competition between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China for diplomatic allies. This followed a scandal due to allegations that Taiwan's Foreign Minister James Huang had attempted to buy Papua New Guinea's diplomatic allegiance."Taiwan's next leader urges truce in cash diplomacy battle", AFP, 6 May 2008 In October, Taiwan cancelled a scheduled summit between itself and its Pacific Island allies. Although the authorities cited "preparation problems", Radio Australia commented that "the decision appears to be an attempt by the new administration of President Ma Ying-jeou to keep the island's diplomatic activities low-profile and avoid offending China"."Taiwan cancels Pacific islands summit", ABC Radio Australia, 8 October 2008 Taiwanese authorities later stated that the summit had been "postponed" rather than cancelled."Taiwan committed to Pacific allies", ABC Radio Australia, 15 October 2008 In June 2009, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that President Ma would "attend a [...] leadership summit between Taiwan and its South Pacific allies" in autumn. The summit, hosted by Solomon Islands, would be attended by the "heads of state of Taiwan’s six allies in the region" and would focus on "countering the current economic contraction, climate change and how to strengthen the fisheries industry". Upon announcing the summit, the Ministry added that Ma had "developed a fondness for the Pacific region during his previous visit to Solomon Islands when he saw a handful of children at a market selling betel nuts and watermelons while wearing shirts donated by the people of Taiwan"."Ma plans to visit South Pacific allies", Taipei Times, 10 June 2009 In July 2009, the ROC donated over €40,000 in a scholarship scheme benefiting students from a number of Pacific countries, including those -such as Fiji or Papua New Guinea- which do not grant it diplomatic recognition. It also donated €288,000 for regional development assistance programmes, to be used notably on access to water, sanitation and hygiene, renewable energy, solar photovoltaic assessments, fisheries management, education and youth training."Taiwan gives to the region", Solomon Star, 14 July 2009 Taiwan has asked to be recognised as an official dialogue partner of the Pacific Islands Forum. That status is currently awarded to the PRC. Ma Ying-jeou, the President of the Republic of China is calling for what he referred to as a "cease-fire" in the competition between ROC and PRC for diplomatic allies. On 10 July 2013, New Zealand and Republic of China (Taiwan) signed a bilateral Economic Cooperation Agreement.[ ]   In February 2008, Australia reportedly "chastised Taiwan for its renewed push for independence" and "reiterated its support for a one-China policy". For Australia-Taiwan relations that Australia does not object Taiwan's participation in international organization where such consensus has already achieved,http://dfat.gov.au/geo/taiwan/pages/taiwan-country-brief.aspx and Australia-Taiwan relations are commercially and unofficially-driven, such as the Australia-Taiwan Business Council,  which is based in Sydney, and with the understanding of people-to-people contacts in areas of education, science, sports and arts, see.[ ]   Republic of China has an official, government co-sponsored branch office of Taiwan External Trade Development Council in Sydney.  Australian Consulate-General in Hong Kong is responsible for Visa and Citizenship matters for applicants in Taiwan. Perth has sister city relations with Taipei City and Brisbane has sister city relations with Kaohsiung City. Kiribati, under the current government of President Anote Tong, recognises the Republic of China. From 1980 to 2003, Kiribati recognised the PRC. Relations between China and Kiribati then became a contentious political issue within Kiribati. I-Kiribati President Teburoro Tito was ousted in a parliamentary vote of no confidence in 2003, over his refusal to clarify the details of a land lease which had enabled Beijing to maintain a satellite-tracking station in the country since 1997, and over Chinese ambassador Ma Shuxue's acknowledged monetary donation to "a cooperative society linked to Tito". In the ensuing election, Anote Tong won the presidency after "stirring suspicions that the station was being used to spy on US installations in the Pacific". Tong had previously pledged to "review" the lease."Freedom in the World – Kiribati (2004)", UNHCR In November 2003, Tarawa established diplomatic relations with Taipei -a decision which The Age referred to as "play[ing] the Taiwan card"-, and Beijing severed its relations with the country. For the PRC, the presence of the satellite-tracking station had made relations with Kiribati relatively important; the station had, in particular, been used to track Yang Liwei's spaceflight."Currency of Persuasion", New Zealand Listerner, May 2005 Therefore, for three weeks the PRC called upon I-Kiribati President Anote Tong to break off relations with Taiwan and re-affirm his support for the "One China" policy. Only after those three weeks did the PRC sever relations,"China ceases diplomatic relations with Kiribati", PRC embassy in Estonia, 29 November 2003 thereby losing the right to maintain its satellite-tracking base in Kiribati. The Republic of China began providing economic aid to Kiribati, while Kiribati began supporting Taiwan in the United Nations. In 2004, President Tong said he believed the PRC was still trying to exert influence over his country."Kiribati Plays The Game: Taiwan vs. China Battle Continues", Mac William Bishop, Pacific Magazine, 1 September 2004 The comment was mainly due to the PRC's refusal to remove all its personnel from its closed embassy. Tong stated that the Chinese personnel, who remained in Kiribati against his wishes, were handing out anti-government pamphlets; he told New Zealand journalist Michael Field: "I am sure if we did this in Beijing we would be in jail in half a second"."Chinese refuse to leave Kiribati", Michael Field, 26 October 2005 Tong's brother and main political opponent, Harry Tong, responded by accusing Taiwan of having too much influence on Kiribati, and notably of influencing the country's clergy. In 2008, Taiwan settled Kiribati's unpaid bills to Air Pacific, enabling the airline to maintain its services from Tarawa to Kiritimati."Taiwan $3M Keeps Air Pacific Charters Going To Kiritimati Island", Pacific Magazine, 28 September 2008 In November 2010, despite their lack of diplomatic relations, the People's Republic of China was one of fifteen countries to attend the Tarawa Climate Change Conference in Kiribati, and one of twelve to sign the Ambo Declaration on climate change issued from the conference."Kiribati climate change conference calls for urgent cash and action", The Guardian, 16 November 2010 The Marshall Islands recognise the Republic of China, and is one of the few countries to maintain an embassy in Taipei. The magazine Islands Business reported that President Litokwa Tomeing, elected in January 2008, might break off his country's diplomatic relations with Taiwan, and turn instead to the PRC."New Marshall Islands president elected", Islands Business, 7 January 2008 However, in office Tomeing expressed continued support for ties with Taiwan and met with the Vice President of the ROC, Annette Lu, when she visited the Marshall Islands on 29 January 2008."President Litokwa Tomeing welcomes Vice President Annette Lu of the Republic of China (Taiwan) to the Marshall Islands", Office of the President of the Marshall Islands, 30 January 2008 Nauru, under the current government of President Marcus Stephen, recognises the Republic of China. In 1980, Nauru first established official relations with the Republic of China. In 2002, however, the government of Rene Harris established relations with the PRC,PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 9 December 2003 which entailed a solemn recognition of the "One China" policy by Nauru."Joint Communiqué of the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Nauru on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations", 22 July 2002 Consequently, Taiwan severed its relations with Nauru, and accused the PRC of having bought Nauru's allegiance with a financial aid gift of over €90,000,000. A reporter for The Age agreed, stating that "Beijing recently bought off a threat by Nauru to revert to Taiwan only six months after opening ties with the mainland, offering a large loan to Nauru's near-destitute Government". In 2003, however, Nauru closed its newly established embassy in Beijing. Two years later, ROC President Chen Shui-bian met Nauruan President Ludwig Scotty in the Marshall Islands. In May 2005, the ROC and Nauru re-established diplomatic relations,"ROC restores ties with Nauru after 3 years", The China Post, 15 May 2005 and opened embassies in each other's capitals. The PRC consequently severed its relations with Nauru. The Republic of China is one of Nauru's two foremost economic aid partners (the other being Australia). In return, Nauru uses its seat in the United Nations to support the ROC's admittance bid. Taiwan also provides regular medical assistance to Nauru, sending specialised doctors to the tiny country's only hospital. In 2007, Scotty was re-elected President of Nauru, amidst claims that his electoral campaign had been funded by Taiwan."Claims Nauru election won with Taiwan money", ABC Radio Australia, 21 September 2007 Scotty's opponents claimed that the ROC wanted to ensure that a pro-Taiwan government remained in power. Scotty was replaced by Marcus Stephen in December 2007. Following Stephen's election, ROC President Chen Shui-bian telephoned him to congratulate him, assure him of the ROC's continued assistance for Nauru, request Nauru's continued support in return, and invite him to visit Taiwan."Chen calls new heads of Nauru, Solomon Islands", Taipei Times, 29 December 2007 Nauru has retained its relations with the ROC under the new government. Given that it has already changed its foreign policy twice, Nauru remains the focus of diplomatic competition between Beijing and Taipei. In 2006, according to the New Statesman, President Scotty "was allegedly accosted by a horde of screaming Chinese officials who tried to drag him on to a plane to Beijing just as he was boarding one bound for Taipei"."Why Beijing cares about tiny Nauru", Lindsey Hilsum, New Statesman, 20 September 2007 In 2008, Nauru co-submitted a proposal to the United Nations, requesting that the United Nations General Assembly consider enabling "Taiwan's participation in the activities of UN specialized agencies". The proposal was rejected."Taiwan's UN bid rejected", People's Daily, 19 September 2008 In 2011 it was revealed via Wikileaks that Taiwan had been paying a "monthly stipend" to Nauruan government ministers in exchange for their continued support, as well as a smaller sum to other Members of Parliament, as "project funding that requires minimal accounting". Reporting on the story, the Brisbane Times wrote: "One MP reportedly used his Taiwanese stipend to buy daily breakfast for all schoolchildren in his district, while others were happy to just pocket the cash". A "former Australian diplomat with close knowledge of politics in Nauru" stated that Nauruan President Marcus Stephen, Foreign Minister Kieren Keke and former President Ludwig Scotty, among others, had all accepted "under the counter" funding from Taiwan. The leaks revealed that "Chinese [PRC] agents had also sought to influence Nauru's elections through cash payments to voters, with at least $40,000 distributed in one instance in 2007"."Nauru officials' 'friendly payoffs'", Brisbane Times, 29 August 2011 Wikileaks also revealed that Australia had, at one time, been "pushing" Nauru to break its relations with Taiwan and establish relations with the PRC instead. Then President Ludwig Scotty had reportedly resisted on the grounds that it was "none of Australia's business". In late 2011, Taiwan "doubled it health aid" to Nauru, notably providing a resident medical team on a five-year appointment."Nauru gets more health aid from Taiwan", Radio New Zealand International, 28 November 2011 Palau recognises the Republic of China, and is one of the few countries to maintain an embassy in Taipei. The ROC provides scholarships to Palauan students, as well as computers for Palauan schools. In 2008, Mario Katosang, Palau’s Minister of Education, stated: "We were given 100 Windows-based computers by Taiwan. The education sector uses  Apple Macintosh computers, so I mentioned that we may also need software. Taiwan immediately delivered 100 brand new copies of Windows XP, and offered to train our computer technicians.""Wooing the Islands", Andre Vltchek, 15 January 2008 In 1999, the government of Prime Minister Bill Skate recognised Taiwan. Skate lost power less than a week later, and Papua New Guinea's diplomatic recognition reverted to China."Spending money where it matters", Bruce Jacobs, Taipei Times, 14 May 2008 In 2005, Papua New Guinea, along with Fiji, supported Taiwan's wish to join the World Health Organization. In May 2008, Taiwan's Foreign Minister James Huang resigned, along with two other top officials, after wasting over €19&nbsp;million in a failed attempt to win diplomatic recognition for the Republic of China from Papua New Guinea. The misuse of the money caused public outrage, forcing Huang's resignation."Taiwan foreign minister resigns over diplomatic blunder", Jonathan Adams, International Herald Tribune, 6 May 2008 Papua New Guinea's foreign minister Sam Abal subsequently confirmed that his country had no intention of recognising Taiwan. Solomon Islands recognises the Republic of China, and is one of the few countries to maintain an embassy in Taipei. The two countries established diplomatic relations on 23 May 1983."PM hails ties with Taiwan", Solomon Star, 10 February 2010 A Republic of China consulate general was set up in Honiara, and upgraded to an embassy two years later."We got your back; DPM assures Taiwan", Solomon Star, 9 April 2012 Since 2011, the Republic of China's ambassador to the Solomons is Laurie Chan, a Solomon Islands national of Chinese ethnic background, and a former Solomon Islands Minister of Foreign Affairs who supported his country's continued relations with Taiwan."Chan slams Wikileaks report, vows to seek legal action", Solomon Star, 28 October 2011 Despite a lack of diplomatic recognition, however, Solomon Islands trades more with the People's Republic than with Taiwan. In 2009, over half the country's exports went to the People's Republic of China, and Solomon Islands maintained a trade surplus of A$161m in its trade relations with that country. In 2010, that surplus increased to a record A$258."Pacific trade with China", Solomon Star, 17 February 2011 In 2006, Honiara's Chinatown suffered extensive damage as it was looted and burned by rioters, following a contested election result. It had been alleged that ethnic Chinese businessmen had bribed members of Solomon Islands' Parliament."The Pacific Proxy: China vs Taiwan", Graeme Dobell, ABC Radio Australia, 7 February 2007 Joses Tuhanuku, President of the Solomon Islands Labour Party, stated that the election "has been corrupted by Taiwan and business houses owned by Solomon Islanders of Chinese origin". Many Chinese-Solomon Islanders left the country. After pro-Taiwan Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare was ousted in a vote of no confidence in December 2007, and replaced by Derek Sikua, ROC President Chen Shui-bian telephoned Prime Minister Sikua, offering his congratulations and Taiwan's continued aid, and requested the Sikua government's continued diplomatic support. Chen also invited Sikua to visit Taiwan, which he did in March 2008. Sikua was welcomed with military honours by Chen, who stated: "Taiwan is the Solomon Islands' most loyal ally. [...] Taiwan will never forsake the people or government of the Solomon Islands.""Solomon Islands Prime Minister visits Taiwan", Radio Taiwan International, 3 March 2008 Solomon Islands has continued to recognise the Republic of China under Sikua's leadership. Later that same month, Taiwan's president-elect Dr. Ma Ying-Jeou met Australia's former Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, and reportedly promised to put an end to Taiwanese "cheque book diplomacy" in the Solomons. This led Downer to comment: "Under the Chen Shui-bian regime there has been a lot of Taiwanese cheque book diplomacy in Solomon Islands. So I'm glad to hear that's coming to an end.""New Taiwan president could help Aust in Solomons: Downer", ABC, 23 March 2008 Sikua, however, criticised Downer for interfering in relations between Honiara and Taipei: “The Government of Solomon Islands will continue to work closely with the Government of Taiwan and other development partners as it strives to provide a better quality of life for its people. I hope that Mr Downer will find something more appropriate to comment on than on issues that are within the sovereign jurisdiction of independent states and governments to deal with and decide on.”"Downer lacks respect says PM", Solomon Star, 27 March 2008 The editor of the Solomon Star reacted irritably to Downer's comments: "Just when we thought he’s gone and good riddance, he’s back. Alexander Downer is now in Taipei and telling the Taiwanese how to run their relations with the Solomon Islands. [...] Just who does Mr Downer think he is? [...] Relations between Taiwan and the Solomon Islands are none of this yesterday man’s business. Taipei should tell Mr Downer to butt out.""Cheque book diplomacy", Solomon Star (editorial), 27 March 2008 The Taiwanese government subsequently stated, through its deputy director-general of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Department of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Victor Yu, that Downer had "misunderstood" Ma: "Cooperation and development programs are an obligation and the responsibility of every advanced nation in the international community. They should not be described as 'checkbook diplomacy'. [...] All the resources that the nation has contributed are project-oriented and have generated substantial positive effects on the local economy and on society. Downer distorted what Ma actually meant.""MOFA rejects Downer's criticism of its diplomacy", Taipei Times, 28 March 2008 On 17 April 2008, the editorial of the Solomon Star was devoted to the Solomons' relationship with Taiwan, which it described as follows: "First, thanks to Taiwan, for all the support it is providing to help bring better health services here. There’s always suspicion about Taiwan’s aid in this country despite the fine sounding intentions under which it is given. [...] Our politicians undoubtedly exploit Taiwan’s need to keep Solomon Islands as one of the nations recognising it as a country in its own right. But there should be no doubts about this week’s launch of the Taiwan Medical Centre at the National Referral Hospital. This is tangible, beneficial and transparent help. It underscores Taiwan’s role as a true, democratic friend of Solomon Islands. May there be more such help given this way.""Thank you, thank you, thank you", Solomon Star (editorial), 17 April 2008 In July, it was announced that Taiwanese doctors would be providing free medical care to Solomon Islands villagers,"Taiwanese medical team in the Solomons", ABC Radio Australia, 28 July 2008 and that unskilled Solomon Islands workers would be granted access to the Taiwanese labour market."Solomons and Taiwan finalising labour scheme", ABC Radio Australia, 30 July 2008 At the same time, Taiwan was funding rural development projects in the Solomons."Taiwan Donates Money to Support Rural Advancement", Solomon Times, 1 September 2008 Taiwan has also pledged to provide SI$ 10&nbsp;million to Solomon Islands in 2009 and 2010, to enable the government to abolish school fees paid by parents and provide free primary and secondary education to Solomon Islands children."Government Receives First Payment for Fee Free Education", Solomon Times, 15 January 2009 During the campaign for the 2010 general election, candidate and former Prime Minister Francis Billy Hilly announced that, if elected, he would break off relations with the ROC and establish them with the PRC. Dr Tarcisius Tara Kabutaulaka, of the University of Hawaii, commented that Taiwan funded constituency development programmes in the Solomons, and that Members of Parliament were thus unlikely to support any severing of diplomatic relations with the ROC."Solomons unlikely to support switch to China from Taiwan", ABC Radio Australia, 19 July 2010 Billy Hilly was unsuccessful in regaining a seat in Parliament. Tuvalu recognises the Republic of China (RoC). Taiwan maintains the only resident foreign embassy in Tuvalu. This is located in Funafuti. Tuvalu supports the RoC's bid to join the United Nations, and Taiwan has provided Tuvalu with "several mobile medical missions". In 2006, Taiwan reacted to reports that the People's Republic of China was attempting to draw Tuvalu away from the Republic of China. Taiwan consequently strengthened its weakening diplomatic relations with Tuvalu."Taiwan: Seeking to Prevent Tuvalu from Recognizing China", UNPO, 9 October 2006 The European Union has earnestly emphasized Human Rights in its relations with ROC. European Union is the largest source of Foreign Direct Investment to Taiwan.http://www.taiwanembassy.org/public/Attachment/391216575571.pdfhttp://www.chinapost.com.tw/editorial/taiwan-issues/2014/05/19/407984/Europe-Taiwan-partnership.htm The European Union has unofficial relations with Taiwan through European Economic and Trade Office which was opened on 10 March 2003.http://www.taiwanembassy.org/BE/ct.asp?xItem=80426&CtNode=460&mp=102&xp1= Taipei is one of the major trading partners with European Free Trade Association, and in sum a potential trading partner with the Eurozone. The European Parliament voted 559 votes to 40 with 13 abstentions and approved Taiwanese passport holders with identity card number are exempted and do not require Schengen visa whilst visiting the Schengen Area on 11 November 2010 with similar Schengen granting to Hong Kong, Macau, Japan, South Korea and Singapore, and reciprocally the ROC exempted visa for individuals from the Schengen Area.[ ]   For the debate concerning EU-Taiwan relations in the European Parliament, see. Currently, there are 16 member states of the European Union that have established offices in Taipei, as well as several functional offices established by different member states. Taipei Representative Office in the EU and Belgium is the unofficial diplomatic representation of Taiwan in the EU. British relations with Taiwan  with the formality of British Trade and Cultural Office and the British Council in Taipei of United Kingdom are represented in Republic of China. Chinese Taipei is an observer [ ]   in the OECD, which is headquartered in Paris, France. ROC's Civil Service Protection and Training Commission (CSPTC) and the Belgian Training Institute of the Federal Administration (TIFA) signed Memorandum of Understanding on 7 November 2014 for workshop attendance of public servants that highlighted leadership, innovation and conflict management, as well as global competitiveness strategies in Brussels. Under pressure from the People's Republic of China, the ROC has been excluded from, or downgraded in, many international organizations. In other cases, ROC may retain full participation, due to the usage of names such as "Chinese Taipei" or "Taiwan, China". Below is a list of such international organizations and the names by which Taiwan is known:  Taiwan has been a party to several major international treaties, including: ROC claims islands in the South China Sea on the same basis as its claim to historical Chinese territory. Unlike its claims on the Asian mainland, however, ROC actively pursues and defends some of its claims to these islands. These include all of the Spratly Islands, the Paracel Islands, Macclesfield Bank and Scarborough Shoal. These islands are administered by a number of governments around the South China Sea. ROC also claims the Senkaku Islands, currently administered by Japan. The People's Republic of China, in turn, asserts itself as the sole legitimate government of China, and claims all territories administered by ROC. The dispute over Taiwan's status has also affected the island's air links with the outside world, particularly Europe, North America and Australia. For many years, Mandarin Airlines, a subsidiary of Taiwan's national airline, China Airlines (CAL), served many international destinations that CAL did not, owing to political sensitivities. However, in 1995 CAL dropped the national colours from its livery, and now flies to international destinations under its own name. Many countries' national airlines similarly set up special subsidiaries to operate services to Taipei, with a different name, and livery omitting national symbols. For example, British Airways' now defunct subsidiary, British Asia Airways, operated flights to London, KLM's subsidiary, KLM Asia, operated flights to Amsterdam, and Swissair's subsidiary, Swissair Asia, operated flights to Zurich, Air France Asie operated flights to Paris while Qantas had a subsidiary called Australia Asia Airlines, which operated flights to Sydney. Other countries' flag carriers, such as Germany's Lufthansa, operated flights to Taipei using an existing subsidiary (in Lufthansa's case, Condor). Japan Air Lines established a subsidiary called Japan Asia Airways to operate flights to Tokyo. Before the completion of the second runway at New Tokyo International Airport (now Narita International Airport) near Tokyo, Japan, airlines from Taiwan were required to fly to Tokyo International Airport (commonly known as Haneda Airport) in Ota, Tokyo in order not to offend the airlines from the People's Republic of China that flew to Narita. , charter flights between mainland China and Taiwan, which were traditionally only allowed on special holidays such as Chinese New Year, were expanded greatly.  Under current plans, the opening of these flights may eventually reach a capacity of 3,000 mainland Chinese tourists per day entering Taiwan. International dialing codes are assigned by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) to its member states and their dependencies. However, as ROC was not an ITU member state, it had to be allocated the code 886 unofficially, with the ITU listing the code as 'reserved'. Until the late 1970s, ROC used the code 86, but the code was reassigned to the People's Republic of China in conformity with ITU's official membership, forcing ROC to utilize another code for countries that wished to maintain direct dial connections. PRC has reserved part of its numbering plan for calls to Taiwan, using the prefix 06. But despite this, calls from Mainland China to Taiwan are still currently made by using the international dialing code +886.     Africa (3 states) Europe (1 state) Oceania (6 states) Latin America (12 states) Name Recognized by Taiwan Notes No Recognized by four UN member states. Yes Bhutan has no diplomatic relations with either the PRC or the ROC, but voted in favour of Beijing's entry into the UN in 1971 and conducts relations with China through their respective missions in IndiaMinistry of the PRC: Bilateral relations with Bhutan and has honorary consulates in Hong Kong and Macau. Yes After abruptly severing ties with Taiwan in November 2013, The Gambia plans to have ties with PRC.The official Facebook page of The Gambia's President says: "We are proud that we have been a very strong and reliable partner of Taiwan for the past 18 years and look forward to friendly future dealings but declare that the People's Republic of China will be only the only China to be recognized diplomatically by The Gambia going forward." See entry on 19 November 2013 Yes[ ] Recognized by , Republic of China (Taiwan) and Sovereign Military Order of Malta. No No Recognized by 34 UN states, claimed by Morocco. No No Recognized by four UN member states. Yes A sovereign entity without territory, established diplomatic relations with 104 states. No No– 國家與地區 Entity Period of recognition of the Republic of China  Albania  Afghanistan  Bulgaria , ,  ,  ,  ,  Tietoa Kiinasta. Retrieved 2013-11-18. Relations between Finland and ROC broke off in 1934. Finland recognized PRC in 1950. ,   Hungary  Iran ,  ,  , ,  News – Malawi severs links with Taiwan as of 28 December 2007. ,   Romania ,  Diplomatic relationship between South Vietnam and Taiwan ceased upon the collapse of the South Vietnamese government in 1975. Political Relations with China, Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Timeline of diplomatic relations of the Republic of China Recognition lasted seven days. Began 3 November, agreement withdrawn 10 November.  Yemen Country Period of recognition Year Recognition of ROCMichael Y.M. Kao, "Taiwan's and Beijing's Campaigns for Unification," in Harvey Feldman, Michael Y.M. Kao, eds., Taiwan in a Time of Transition (New York: Paragon House, 1988), 188. Recognition of PRC 1969 71 48 1971 68 53 1973 31 89 1978 21 112 1986 23 134 1990 28 139 2012 23 172 2013 22 172 Africa: Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Eritrea, Djibouti, Somalia, Ethiopia, Central African Republic, Cameroon, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Congo-Brazzaville, DR Congo, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Malawi, Mozambique, Madagascar, Seychelles, Mauritius, Comoros, Botswana, Namibia, Lesotho Asia: Lebanon, Syria, Bahrain, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Kuwait, Iraq, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, North Korea Europe: Iceland, Andorra, San Marino, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Luxembourg, Malta, Cyprus, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Lithuania, Estonia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia Oceania: Timor-Leste, Cook Islands, Samoa, Tonga, Niue, Papua New Guinea, Micronesia, Vanuatu Americas: Bahamas, Barbados, Costa Rica, Cuba, Jamaica, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Trinidad and Tobago Guyana, Suriname, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay Academic Council of the United Nations System (ACUNS) (participates as "Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in New York") Association of Asia Pacific Airlines (AAPA) (included as Member Airlines) Afro-Asian Rural Development Organization (AARDO) (participates as "Republic of China (Taiwan)") Agency for international trade information and cooperation (AITIC) (participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu") Amnesty International (AI) (participates as "Taiwan",  ROC's Legislative Yuan debated and ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on 31 March 2009.) Asian Federation of Biotechnology (AFOB) (participates as Biochemical Engineering Society of Taiwan (BEST)) Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact (AIPP) (NGO in Special Consultative Status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council, participates as Taiwan) Asia News Network (ANN) (participates as The China Post) Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural Research Institutions (APAARI)http://www.fao.org/docs/eims/upload/209600/apaari01report.pdf(participates by Council of Agriculture (Republic of China)) Asia Pacific Forum (APF) (monitored as Taiwan (Republic of China))http://www.asiapacificforum.net/about/annual-meetings/12th-australia-2007/downloads/ngo-reports/ANNI%20-%20Monitoring%20Report%20-%20Taiwan.pdf/viewhttp://www.asiapacificforum.net/about/annual-meetings/8th-nepal-2004/downloads/ngo-statements/ngo_taiwan.pdf/viewhttp://www.asiapacificforum.net/about/annual-meetings/8th-nepal-2004/downloads/asia-pacific-regional-cooperation/government_taiwan.pdf/view Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG) (participates as Chinese Taipei) Asia Pacific Regional Internet Conference on Operational Technologies (APRICOT)(participates as the economy of Taiwan) Asian and Oceanian Stock Exchanges Federation (AOSEF) (participates as "Taiwan Stock Exchange Corp.") Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA) (participates by Taiwan Association for Human Rights)  Asian Network of Major Cities 21 (ANMC21) (participates as Taipei City)  Association of Asian Social Science Research Councils(AASSREC)(participates as associate member of Academia Sinica - Taipei) Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) (presents the Turing Award, participates as "Taiwan") Association for Financial Professionals (AFP) (provide country-specific information as "Taiwan") Association of Future Markets (AFM) (participates as "Taiwan Futures Exchange" (TAIFEX)) Association Montessori Internationale  (AMI) (officially participates as "Taiwan/China", according to UN's definition of the territory of Taiwan and Taiwan, Province of China, which is separated from China) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (referred to as "Taiwan (ROC)")  Asian Productivity Organization (APO) (participates as Republic of China)[ ]  Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) (on the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding of 1991 and partaking APEC Business Travel Card scheme) (participates as "Chinese Taipei") Asian Development Bank (ADB) (participates as "Taipei, China") Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI) (located in the Kasumigaseki Building, participates as Taipei, China)  Association for Information Systems (AIS) (participates as "Taiwan")  Association of Asian Election Authorities (AAEA) (participates as "Republic of China (Taiwan)") Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) (participates as the economy of Taiwan by Taiwan Network Information Center) Asian-Pacific Parliamentarians' Union (APPU) (held the 16th and 40th plenary meeting, participates as Republic of China) Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (referred to as "Taiwan")http://www.bis.org/publ/work431.pdf Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI) (participates as "Taiwan") Boao Forum for Asia (BFA) (participates as "Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation") Banco Centralamericano de Integración Economico (BCIE or CABEI) (participates as Republic of China) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) (with Member States of Belize, Haiti, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recognizing Republic of China) Centre for Energy Environment Resources Development (CEERD)  (in contact with as "Chinese Taipei")http://www.ceerd.net/dsp_page.cfm?view=page&select=108 Consumers International (CI) (participates as "Consumers Foundation Chinese Taipei")  Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) (participates as "participant with individual capacity" http://www.aec.gov.tw/webpage/policy/cooperation/files/cooperation_02_b-9.pdf in this "Track Two of Asia-Pacific Diplomacy" http://www.rsis.edu.sg/publications/others/CSCAP%20book.pdf)http://iiro.nccu.edu.tw/attachments/journal/add/4/189-215.pdfhttp://www.cscap.org/uploads/docs/CRSO/CRSO2013.pdf Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH) (participates as Taiwan, China)http://skyscrapercenter.com/country/taiwan-china Citizen Cyberscience Centre (CCC)  (founded by United Nations Institute for Training and Research, participates by Academia Sinica) Cumulus  (Recognized by UNESCO since 2011, participates as Taiwan(China))  Education International (EI) (participates as Taiwan) Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units (participates as "Taiwan") European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) (has a long-standing cooperation with the EBRD as "Taipei China") European Patent Office (EPO) (included in the Asian Patent Information as Chinese Taipei) European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) (has scientific contacts as China (Taipei))http://international-relations.web.cern.ch/International-Relations/nms/taipei.html Food and Fertilizer Technology Center (FFTC) (participates as "Taiwan") Free Access to Law Movement (FALM) (participates as Taiwan Legal Information Institute)http://140.123.5.6/~taiwanlii/en/index.php/component/content/frontpagehttp://www.fatlm.org/members/current/ European Pharmacopoeia (participates as an observer by Taiwan Food and Drug Administration (TFDA) of the Ministry of Health and Welfare (Republic of China))  European Research Council (ERC) (a member of National Contact Points of ERC funding opportunities, participates as Taiwan)  European Southern Observatory (ESO) (participates the Atacama Large Millimeter Array/submillimeter Array (ALMA) project by Academia Sinica (AS) in Taiwan, and the National Science Council of Taiwan (NSC) (now (Ministry of Science and Technology (Republic of China)))) Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International (FLO) (participates as Fairtrade Taipei City)http://www.fairtrade.net/single-view+M53d8bd027b2.html Fédération Internationale de Philatélie (FIP) (in partnership with United Nations Postal Administration and Universal Postal Union, participates as Chinese Taipei) Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) (due to PRC's political pressure, participates in various subsidiary organizations as "China – Taipei", including Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural Research Institutions, International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, Asia and Pacific Seed Association) FIABCI http://www.fiabci.org/ (participates as "Chinese Taiwan")http://www.fiabci.org/search_chapters_map_more.aspx?cha_number=45 FreedomInfo.org http://www.freedominfo.org/(links the efforts of freedom of information advocates globally, included as Taiwan)http://www.freedominfo.org/regions/east-asia/taiwan/ Institute of International Education (IIE) (participates through the Fulbright program  of Council for International Exchange of Scholars  as Taiwan (Republic of China)) International Basketball Federation (FIBA) (participates as Chinese Taipei) Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) (participates as Chinese Taipei)  Human Rights Watch (HRW) (involved as "Taiwan")  IFEX (spotlighted as Taiwan)  International Association of Horticultural Producers (AIPH) (participates as Chinese Taipei)  International Association of Public Transport (UITP) (participates as "Taiwan") International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (included as "Taiwan, China" as a separate identity which maintains official non-governmental relations with the IAEA in the Model Additional Protocol apart from the People's Republic of China). International Association of Judges (IAJ) (as a professional and non-political international organization, that the Association has consultative status with the United Nations (namely the International Labour Office and the U.N. Economic and Social Council) and with the Council of Europe, participates as "Republic of China (Taiwan)") International Air Transport Association (IATA)(included as Taiwan/Chinese Taipei)http://www.iata.org/policy/Documents/Benefits-of-Aviation-Taiwan-2011.pdf International Association of Universities (UAI) (founded in 1950, is the UNESCO-based worldwide association of higher education institutions, participates institutionally by Tamkang University and officially as "China-Taiwan") International Bar Association (IBA) (participates section-ally as "Taiwan") International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO) (There are 4 IB World Schools in Taiwan offering one or more of the three IB programmes, and currently there is no university in Taiwan recognizing IB, which is deflecting from the global trend of educational development.) International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) (included as Taiwan CBL) International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) (ICC participates in the activities of UNCTAD, including International Court of Arbitration, participates as Chinese Taipei)  International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) (affiliates by the Taipei Bar Association) International Competition Network (ICN) (participates as Taiwan Fair Trade Commission)  International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) (participates as Chinese Taipei)  International Council of Museums (ICM) (participates as Taiwan in the Board of ICM) International Cospas-Sarsat Programme (Cospas-Sarsat) (participates as International Telecommunication Development Company (Chinese Taipei) (ITDC))  International Council on Social Welfare (ICSW) (participates as "Taiwan" in the ICSW North East Asia Region) International Council of Women (ICW) (participates as Taiwan, Republic of China) International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) (originally associated from the UNESCO, participates as "Chinese Taipei".) International Council for Information Technology in Government Administration (ICA) (participates as "Taiwan")  International Council for Science (ICSU) (participates as China: Taipei, Academy of Sciences located in Taipei) International Council of Graphic Design Associations (Icograda) (with international alliances of ISO, UNESCO's Global Alliance for Cultural Diversity, UNIDO and WIPO,http://www.icograda.org/about/about/articles147.htm participates as Taiwan (Chinese Taipei)) http://www.icograda.org/members/members.htm International Council of Societies of Industrial Design (ICSID) (participates as Taiwan (Chinese Taipei))  International Energy Agency (IEA) (included as a non-member country as "Chinese Taipei") International Federation of Reproduction Rights Organization  (IFRRO) (participates as Chinese Oral & Literary Copyright Collective Management Association) http://www.ifrro.org/members/chinese-oral-literary-copyright-collective-management-association International Institute of Administrative Sciences (IIAS) (participates as "Taiwan, China") International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance(International IDEA)(listed in the voter turnout data as Taiwan) International Renewable Energy Agency (IREA) (referred to as "Taiwan" as IREA is co-hosted in the Steering Committee in the REN21) International Press Institute(IPI)(participates as Taiwan (ROC)) Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (participates as "IEEE Taipei Section" and "IEEE Tainan Section") Institute of International Finance (IIF) (participates as Mega International Commercial Bank, "Taiwan, China") International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) (participates as "Taiwan Provincial Farmers Association") International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) (participates as "Taiwan") International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) (participates as "Taiwan") International Labour Organization (ILO) (referred to as "Taiwan, Province of China") International Maritime Organization (IMO) (referred to as "Taiwan, Province of China") International Monetary Fund (IMF) (referred to as "Taiwan Province of China" and enhances ROC's sovereignty by indirectly channeling IMF through the Special Exchange Rate Agreement signed with the WTO "Siegel". IMF.org. 2002.) International Network for Quality Assurance Agencies in Higher Education (INQAAHE) (participates as observer as "Taiwan") International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) (referred to as "Taiwan Province of China") http://www.incb.org/documents/PRECURSORS/TECHNICAL_REPORTS/2011/PARTITION/ENGLISH/PR2011E_ExtentOfLicitTradeAndLatestTrendsInTraffickingPrecursors.pdf International Olympic Committee (IOC) (participates as "Chinese Taipei" and bid for 2019 Asian Games by the Taipei City Government) International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) remains unofficial relations with the ICRC and referred as the "Taiwan Red Cross Organization" under the category of Public Sources. (see page 476) International Federation of Audit Bureaux of Circulations (IFABC) (participates as "Chinese Taipei") International Institute of Business Analysis (IIBA) (Endorsed Education Provided by Maestro Project Management Consultants Co., Ltd)http://www.iiba.org/Learning-Development/Endorsed-Education-Provider-Training/EEP-Listing-M-O.aspx International Law Association (ILA) (participates as "Chinese (Taiwan) branch")  International Police Executive Symposium  (IPES) (IPES is in special consultative status by the United Nations, contains World Police Encyclopedia, assigned as "Taiwan")  InterAcademy Panel (IAP) (participates as Academia Sinica, Taipei, China)  International Social Security Association (ISSA) (participates as "Taiwan")  International Telecommunication Union (ITU) (referred to as "Taiwan, China") International Trade Centre (ITC) (participates as "Chinese Taipei") International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) (participates as Taiwan)  International Transport Workers' Federation (ITF) (participates as Taiwan)  International Union of Railways (UIC) (participates as "Taiwan (China)") International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO) (participates as "China -Taipei")[ ]  Internet Society(ISoc)(participates as ISOC Taiwan Chapter) International Organization of Securities Commissions(IOSCO)(works intensively with the G20 and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) on the global regulatory reform agenda, participates as Affiliate Members of IOSCO as Chinese Taipei) International Union of Pure and Applied Physics(IUPAP)(participates as China: The Physical Society located in Taipei) League of Historical Cities (participates as Tainan, "Chinese Taipei") London Metal Exchange (LME) (the largest metal stock exchange in the world, approved Kaohsiung, Taiwan as a good delivery point for primary aluminium, aluminium alloy, copper, lead, nickel, tin and zinc and as the LME’s ninth location in Asia on 17 June 2013.) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (participates as National Space Organization) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (referred to as "Taiwan") North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC) (participates as "Chinese Taipei" as a fishing entity)http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/foreign-community/2015/08/26/444241/Taiwan-officially.htm Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (participates as "Chinese Taipei" as an observer)[ ]  Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) (listed by economic cooperation as "Taiwan") Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) (conducts regular dialogue as Taiwan/ROC Forum countries dialogue and issues diplomatic Joint Statement at each dialogue conference) Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) (participates as "Chinese Taipei") Public Services International (PSI) (participates as Taiwan)http://www.world-psi.org/sites/default/files/attachment/page/ap_affiliates_directory_18.pdf Regional Fisheries Management Organisation (RFMOs) (participates as a fishing entity on the basis of United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement) Reporters Without Borders (RWB) (included as "Taiwan") Sistema de Integración Centroamericana (SICA) (participates as Republic of China as the Extra-regional Observer)http://www.sica.int/miembros/miembros_en.aspx Sustainable Development Goals(SDGs)(to replace the UN Millennium Development Goals once they expire at the end of 2015, included as Taiwan in the World Happiness Report of United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network)http://81c27a5d9c3263e8ebcc-2da201d1ba4d5004cb235610c26ba057.r67.cf5.rackcdn.com/WHR15.pdf SEACEN (participates as Central Bank, "Chinese Taipei") Seoul Accord (participates as IEET(Chinese Taipei)) South East Asia Regional Computer Confederation (SEARCC) (SEARCC is an affiliate member of the International Federation for Information Processing, participates as Taiwan-Computer Society of Republic of China) Study Group on Asian Tax Administration and Research (SGATAR)https://www.sgatar2014.org/#sgatar-members (participates as Chinese Taipei) Transparency International (TI) (to lend impetus on the formation of United Nations Convention against Corruption and OECD Anti-Bribery Convention, participates as "Chinese Taipei") United Nations Academic Impact (UNAI) (participates as "China")http://academicimpact.org/currentmemberlist.pdf United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) (referred to as "Taiwan") United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) (to be considered separately from People's Republic of China, but has not attained neither CISG status nor Model Law status United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (referred to as "Taiwan Province of China") United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN/DESA) (assorted as "Taiwan Province of China") United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) (over-sighted as "Taiwan Province of China") United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN–HABITAT) (included as "Taiwan Province of China") United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) (referred to as "Taiwan Province of China") http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Publications/Research_and_statistics/Branch_publications/Research_and_Policy/Files/Working_Papers/2009/WP%2024%20Structural%20Change%20in%20the%20World%20Economy%20-%20Main%20Features%20and%20Trends.pdf United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) (researched and referred as "Taiwan")http://www.unidir.org/files/medias/pdfs/universal-compliance-report-eng-0-70.pdfhttp://www.unidir.org/files/publications/pdfs/north-east-asian-security-en-339.pdf United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) (covered as Taiwan (China))  United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (referred to as "Taiwan Province of China") United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) (researched as "Taiwan Province of China")http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BB128/(httpAuxPages)/3FF094D9DA3D187EC125775000519715/$file/TaiwanWeb.pdf United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) (referred to as Taiwan, Province of China)  Universal Postal Union (UPU) (removed and excluded by UPU in 1972; "Taiwan's" Chunghwa Post continually providing the postal services as a non-recognized postal entity) Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO) (participates as "Taiwan") Washington Accord (International Engineering Alliance) (participates as Chinese Taipei) World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts (WAGGGS) (participates as "Taiwan", also note that there is no national member of WAGGGS in PRC) World Bank (WB) (covered in the Private Sector section, included as the economy of Taiwan, China)  World Confederation of Labour (WCL) (participates as "Taiwan") World Economic Forum (WEF) (officially listed as "Taiwan, China") World Energy Council (WEC) (participates as "Taiwan, China")  World Federation of Exchanges (WFE) (participates as "Taiwan Stock Exchange" and "Taiwan Futures Exchange")[ ] [ ]  Under the umbrella of World Federation of Exchanges, MSCI includes Taiwan as MSCI Taiwan Index. In addition, London Metal Exchange is participated under London Stock Exchange in association with the World Federation of Exchanges in relation with Taiwan Future Exchange.[ ]  World Health Organization (WHO) (In the outbreak of Severe acute respiratory syndrome and with the concern of Disease surveillance, was invited as "Chinese Taipei" on the case-by-case basis. with its relations with the WHO being governed by a Memorandum of Understanding dated 14 May 2005 between the PRC and the WHO. The health insurance scheme in Taiwan is referenced on the WHOpublication.) Worldwatch Institute (WI) (in partnership as Taiwan Watch)  World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (not a signatory of the Patent Cooperation Treaty and Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, referred to as "Taiwan, Province of China") World Medical Association (WMA) (participates as "Taiwan" by the Taiwan Medical Association) World Meteorological Organization (WMO) (signed and ratified the Convention of the World Meteorological Organization on 2 March 1951, cited as "Taiwan region") World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) (participates as "Chinese Taipei") World Organization of the Scout Movement (WOSM) (participates as "Scouts of China") World Tax (founded by Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC, participates as "Taiwan") World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (referred as "Taiwan (province of China)")http://dtxtq4w60xqpw.cloudfront.net/sites/all/files/pdf/unwto_highlights14_en_hr_0.pdf World Trade Centers Association (WTCA) (participates as World Trade Center Taipei, World Trade Center Taichung and World Trade Center Kaohsiung) World Trade Organization (WTO) (full membership as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu" (Chinese Taipei) and delegated by the Permanent Mission of the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Mastu to the WTO in Geneva.[ ]  ) World Veterans Federation (WVF) (participates as "(ROC on) Taiwan")  Metre Convention (associate as "Chinese Taipei") Free trade agreements with Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama (as Republic of China (Taiwan)) Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement with PRC (signed between Straits Exchange Foundation and Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits – for ROC and PRC respectively and includes the topic of the realization of direct flights[ ] and with the improving relations between Mainland China and Taiwan that Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong is officially launched and Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office is sighted in Taiwan) China and the United Nations List of diplomatic missions of Taiwan Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Republic of China) Taiwan passport Visa policy of Taiwan "Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of China (Taiwan)" "Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations signed and ratified by Republic of China" "Relations between China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and the US" from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives "Act Governing Relations with Hong Kong and Macau" "Taiwan's Chen raises Libya visit", BBC News "America and Taiwan, 1943–2004" "China, Taiwan, and the Battle for Latin America" (PDF), 21 pages
