      Fox News Channel (FNC), also known as Fox News, is an American basic cable and satellite news television channel that is owned by the Fox Entertainment Group subsidiary of 21st Century Fox. As of February 2015, approximately 94,700,000 American households (81.4% of cable, satellite & telco customers) receive the Fox News Channel. The channel broadcasts primarily from studios at 1211 Avenue of the Americas. The channel was created by Australian-American media mogul Rupert Murdoch, who hired former Republican Party media consultant and NBC executive Roger Ailes as its founding CEO. It launched on October 7, 1996, to 17 million cable subscribers. It grew during the late 1990s and 2000s to become the dominant cable news network in the United States.Gillette, Felix (October 1, 2008). "Viewers Continuing to Flock to Cable News Networks". The New York Observer. Fox News Channel has been accused of biased reporting and promoting the Republican Party. The channel has also been cited as detrimental to the integrity of news overall. Fox News Channel employees have responded that news reporting operates independently of its opinion and entertainment, and have denied bias in news reporting.   In May 1985, Australian publisher Rupert Murdoch announced that he and American industrialist and philanthropist Marvin Davis intended to develop "a network of independent stations as a fourth marketing force" to compete directly with CBS, NBC, and ABC through the purchase of six television stations owned by Metromedia.Lenzner, Robert (May 5, 1985). "Murdoch, partner plan 4th network". The Boston Globe. Section: National/Foreign; Page 1 (the six stations cover many of the nation's major markets – New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston and Washington) In July 1985, 20th Century Fox announced that Murdoch had completed his purchase of 50 percent of Fox Filmed Entertainment, the parent company of 20th Century Fox Film Corporation."$55.9 Million Fox Film Loss". The New York Times. July 11, 1985. p. D19. A year later, 20th Century Fox earned $5.6 million in its fiscal third period ended May 31, 1986, in contrast to a loss of $55.8 million in the third period of the previous year."Turnaround for Fox Film". Chicago Tribune. July 17, 1986.  Section: Business; p. 1.   Prior to founding FNC, Murdoch had gained experience in the 24-hour news business when News Corporation's BSkyB subsidiary began Europe's first 24-hour news channel (Sky News) in the United Kingdom in 1989.Shah, Saeed (September 24, 2002). "Business Analysis: Unstoppable Sky machine rolls on as ITV troubles worsen Dawn Airey's free-to-air television experience will be invaluable to BSkyB as it moves beyond its pay-TV model". The Independent.  Section: Business; p. 21. With the success of his fourth network efforts in the United States,Schulberg, Pete. (July 15, 1994) "Fox is a business, if not artistic, success". The Oregonian. Section: Television; Page E1.Braxton, Greg (April 6, 1997). "How Fox broke from the pack to become cutting-edge network". Chicago Sun-Times. experience gained from Sky News and the turnaround of 20th Century Fox, Murdoch announced on January 31, 1996, that News Corp. would launch a 24-hour news channel on cable and satellite systems in the United States as part of a News Corp. "worldwide platform" for Fox programming: "The appetite for news – particularly news that explains to people how it affects them – is expanding enormously".Williams, Scott (January 31, 1996). "Murdoch taps Ailes for new network; Former CNBC chief set to direct 24-hour news channel, take on CNN". Associated Press.   In February 1996, after former U.S. Republican Party political strategist and NBC executive Roger Ailes left cable television channel America's Talking (now MSNBC), Murdoch asked him to start Fox News Channel. Ailes demanded five months of 14-hour workdays and several weeks of rehearsal shows before its launch on October 7, 1996. At its debut 17 million households were able to watch FNC; however, it was absent from the media markets of New York City and Los Angeles. According to published reports, many media reviewers had to watch the first day's programming at Fox News' studios because it was not readily available via cable. Rolling news coverage during the day consisted of 20-minute single-topic shows such as Fox on Crime or Fox on Politics, surrounded by news headlines. Interviews featured facts at the bottom of the screen about the topic or the guest. The flagship newscast at the time was The Schneider Report, with Mike Schneider's fast-paced delivery of the news. During the evening, Fox featured opinion shows: The O'Reilly Report (now The O'Reilly Factor), The Crier Report (hosted by Catherine Crier) and Hannity & Colmes. From the beginning, FNC has placed heavy emphasis on visual presentation. Graphics were designed to be colorful and attention-getting; this helped the viewer to grasp the main points of what was being said, even if they could not hear the host (with on-screen text summarizing the position of the interviewer or speaker, and "bullet points" when a host was delivering commentary). Fox News also created the "Fox News Alert," which interrupted its regular programming when a breaking news story occurred. To accelerate its adoption by cable providers, Fox News paid systems up to $11 per subscriber to distribute the channel. This contrasted with the normal practice, in which cable operators paid stations carriage fees for programming. When Time Warner bought Ted Turner's Turner Broadcasting System, a federal antitrust consent decree required Time Warner to carry a second all-news channel in addition to its own CNN on its cable systems. Time Warner selected MSNBC as the secondary news channel, not Fox News. Fox News claimed that this violated an agreement (to carry Fox News). Citing its agreement to keep its U.S. headquarters and a large studio in New York City, News Corporation enlisted the help of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration to pressure Time Warner Cable (one of the city's two cable providers) to transmit Fox News on a city-owned channel. City officials threatened to take action affecting Time Warner's cable franchises in the city.  A lawsuit was filed by Time Warner against the City of New York, claiming undue interference with (and inappropriate use of) the city's educational channels for commercial programming. News Corporation countered with an antitrust lawsuit against Time Warner for unfairly protecting CNN. This led to an acrimonious battle between Murdoch and Turner, with Turner publicly comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler; Murdoch's New York Post ran an editorial questioning Turner's sanity. Giuliani's motives were also questioned, since his wife was a producer at Murdoch-owned Fox station WNYW. In the end, Time Warner and News Corporation signed a settlement agreement permitting Fox News to be carried on New York City cable systems beginning in October 1997, and on all Time Warner Cable systems by 2001 (although Time Warner still does not carry Fox News in all areas). During the September 11, 2001 attacks, Fox News was the first news organization to run a news ticker on the bottom of the screen to keep up with the flow of information that day. The ticker has remained, informing viewers about additional news which reporters may not mention on-screen and repeating news mentioned during a broadcast; it has proven popular with viewers.  FNC maintains an archive of most of its programs. This archive also includes Fox Movietone newsreels. Licensing for the Fox News archive is handled by ITN Source, the archiving division of ITN.  FNC presents a variety of programming, with up to 15 hours of live broadcasting per day in addition to programming and content for the Fox Broadcasting Company. Most programs are broadcast from Fox News headquarters in New York City (at 1211 Avenue of the Americas), in its streetside studio on Sixth Avenue in the west wing of Rockefeller Center, sharing its headquarters with sister channel Fox Business Network. Fox News Channel has seven studios at its New York City headquarters that are used for its and Fox Business' programming: Studio B (used for Fox Business programming), Studio D (which has an area for studio audiences; and is used by The Five and Outnumbered), Studio E (used for Fox & Friends, Happening Now, Your World with Neil Cavuto, Red Eye, and certain editions of America's News HQ), Studio G (which houses Fox Business shows), Studio H (Fox News Deck used for Shepard Smith Reporting and breaking news coverage), Studio J (used for Fox & Friends First, America's Newsroom, The Real Story with Gretchen Carlson, The Kelly File, Hannity and Justice with Judge Jeanine) and the Web Studio (used for Fox News Live internet shows). The remaining programs (such as Special Report with Bret Baier, On the Record w/ Greta Van Susteren, and editions of America's News HQ not broadcast from the New York City studios) are broadcast from Fox News's Washington, D.C. studio, located on Capitol Hill across from Union Station in a secured building shared by a number of other television networks (including NBC News and C-SPAN). Audio simulcasts of the channel are aired on XM Satellite Radio and Sirius Satellite Radio.  In an October 11, 2009 New York Times article, Fox articulated that its hard-news programming runs from "9 a.m. to 4 p.m. and 6 to 8 p.m. on weekdays" and "[is] objective"; however, it makes no such claims for its other broadcasts, which primarily consist of editorial journalism and commentary.Stelter, Brian. "Fox's Volley With Obama Intensifying." NYT. Oct.11, 2009. Retrieved via nytimes.com on Nov.16, 2009. Fox News Channel began broadcasting in the 720p resolution format on May 1, 2008. This format is available on all major cable and satellite providers.  With the growth of FNC, the company introduced a radio division, Fox News Radio, in 2003. Syndicated throughout the United States, the division provides short newscasts and talk radio programs featuring personalities from the television and radio divisions. In 2006, the company also introduced Fox News Talk, a satellite radio station featuring programs syndicated by (and featuring) Fox News personalities. Introduced in December 1995, the Fox News website features the latest coverage (including columns by FNC television, radio and online personalities). Video clips are also available on Foxnews.com and Foxbusiness.com. Fox News Latino is the version aimed at the Hispanic audience, although presented almost entirely in English, with a Spanish section. In September 2008, FNC joined other channels in introducing a live streaming segment to its website: The Strategy Room, designed to appeal to older viewers. It airs weekdays from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. and takes the form of an informal discussion, with running commentary on the news. Regular discussion programs include Business Hour, News With a View and God Talk."For Talking Heads, a Spot to Relax and Sip Coffee, on Webcam " The New York Times. February 15, 2009. In March 2009, The Fox Nation was launched as a website intended to encourage readers to post, commenting on the news.Welcome to the Fox Nation Foxnews.com, March 30, 2009 Fox News Mobile is the portion of the FNC website dedicated to streaming news clips formatted for video-enabled mobile phones.  FNC saw a large ratings jump during the early stages of the US invasion of Iraq. According to some reports, at the height of the conflict Fox News had as much as a 300-percent increase in viewership (averaging 3.3 million viewers daily). In 2004, FNC's ratings for its broadcast of the Republican National Convention exceeded those of the three major broadcast networks. During President George W. Bush's address, Fox News attracted 7.3 million viewers nationally; NBC, ABC, and CBS had a viewership of 5.9 million, 5.1 million and 5.0 million respectively. In late 2005 and early 2006, FNC saw a brief decline in ratings. One decline was in the second quarter of 2006, when Fox News lost viewers for every prime-time program compared with the previous quarter. The audience for Special Report with Brit Hume, for example, dropped 19 percent. Several weeks later, in the wake of the North Vietnamese missile crisis and the 2006 Lebanon War, Fox saw a surge in viewership and remained the #1-rated cable news channel.FNC's 25–54 Prime "Downward Spiral", TV NewserCable TV: Content Analysis, The State of the News Media 2005 Fox produced eight of the top ten most-watched nightly cable news shows, with The O'Reilly Factor and Hannity & Colmes finishing first and second respectively.April 2005 Competitive Program Ranker (M-F 6a-11p programs), TV Newser FNC ranked #8 in viewership among all cable channels in 2006, and #6 in 2007. The channel ranked #1 during the week of Barack Obama's election (November 3–9) in 2008, and reached the top spot again in January 2010 (during the week of the special Senate election in Massachusetts).Fox News Channel tops USA in cable ratings Reuters January 27, 2010 Comparing Fox to its 24-hour-news-channel competitors, in May 2010 the channel drew an average daily prime-time audience of 1.8 million viewers (versus 747,000 for MSNBC and 595,000 for CNN).'Fox News North' primed for launch The Globe and Mail June 15, 2010 In September 2009, the Pew Research Center published a report on the public view of national news organizations. In the report, 72 percent of polled Republican Fox viewers rated the channel as "favorable", while 43 percent of polled Democratic viewers and 55 percent of all polled viewers shared that opinion. However, Fox was given the highest "unfavorable" rating of all national outlets studied (25 percent of all polled viewers). The report went on to say, "partisan differences in views of Fox News have increased substantially since 2007". On the night of October 22, 2012, Fox set a record for its highest-rated telecast ever, with 11.5 million viewers for the third U.S. presidential debate. In prime time the week before, Fox averaged almost 3.7 million viewers with a total day average of 1.66 million viewers. A Public Policy Polling poll concluded in 2013 that perceptions of FNC had declined from 2010. 41% of polled voters said they trust it, down from 49% in 2010, while 46% said they distrust it, up from 37% in 2010. It was also called the "most trusted" network by 34% of those polled, more than had said the same of any other network.Fox News' Credibility Declines Public Policy Polling February 6, 2013 In primetime and total day ratings for the week of April 15 to 21, 2013, Fox News, propelled by its coverage of the Boston Marathon bombing, was the highest-ranked network on U.S. cable television, for the first time since August 2005, when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast of the United States. January 2014 marked Fox News's 145th consecutive month as the number one rated cable news channel. During that month, Fox News beat CNN and MSNBC combined in overall viewers in both prime time hours and the total day. In the third quarter of 2014, the network was the most-watched cable channel during prime time hours. During the final week of the campaign for the United States elections, 2014, Fox News had the highest ratings of any cable channel, news or otherwise. On election night itself, Fox News' coverage had higher ratings than that of any of the other five cable or network news sources among viewers between 25 and 54 years of age. The network hosted the first prime-time GOP candidates' forum of the 2016 campaign on August 6. The debate reached a record-breaking 24 million viewers, by far the largest audience ever for any cable news event. As indicated by a New York Times article, based on Nielsen statistics, Fox appears to have a mostly aged demographic. In 2008, in the 25-54 age group, Fox News had an average of 557,000 viewers, but dropped to 379,000 in 2013 while increasing its overall audience from 1.89 million in 2010 to 2.02 million in 2013. The median age for Fox News viewers is listed as 65+ as Nielsen does not give exact figures for ages over 65.  "Fair & Balanced" is a trademarked slogan used by the broadcaster, originally used in conjunction with the phrase "Real Journalism". Comedian Al Franken used the slogan in the subtitle for his 2003 book Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right. In the book, he cites examples of what he claims to be Fox News' bias. On August 7, 2003, Fox News sued for trademark infringement.de Moraes, Lisa (August 12, 2003). Three Little Words: Fox News Sues. Washington Post The lawsuit was dropped three days later, after Judge Denny Chin refused its request for an injunction. In his decision, Chin ruled that the case (Fox v. Franken) was "wholly without merit, both factually and legally". He went on to suggest that Fox News' trademark on the phrase "fair and balanced" could be invalid.Phil Hirschkorn (August 22, 2003). Fox News loses attempt to block satirist's book. CNN In December 2003, FNC won a legal battle concerning the slogan, when AlterNet filed a cancellation petition with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to have FNC's trademark rescinded as inaccurate. AlterNet included the documentary film Outfoxed as supporting evidence in its case.Coyle, Jake (July 19, 2004). Advocacy Groups Challenge Fox News Slogan. Associated Press After losing early motions, AlterNet withdrew its petition; the USPTO dismissed the case.Official Documentation of Petitioned Cancellation of "Fair & Balanced" trademark phrase, Trademark Trial and Appeal Board Inquiry System In 2008, FNC used the slogan "We Report, You Decide", referring to "You Decide 2008" (FNC's original slogan for its coverage of election issues).     Fox News Channel has long been accused of promoting conservative political positions and it has been widely criticized for biased reporting.  Critics of the channel have stated Fox News has a bias favoring the political right and the Republican Party. Fox News host Chris Wallace has said, "I think we are the counter-weight [to NBC News] ... they have a liberal agenda, and we tell the other side of the story." Timothy Noah stated in an editorial in Slate Magazine that Fox News had a conservative bias.Timothy Noah, Fox News admits bias!, Slate, May 31, 2005. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Fox News has publicly denied such statements.Interview transcript: Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes, Financial Times, October 6, 2006 Murdoch and Ailes' replies have included Murdoch's statement that Fox has "given room to both sides, whereas only one side had it before".News Corp denies Fox News bias Australian Associated Press, October 26, 2004Interview transcript: Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes, Financial Times, October 6, 2006 In 2004, director Robert Greenwald produced the documentary film Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism, which argues that Fox News has a conservative bias. The film includes clips from Fox News and internal memos from editorial vice president John Moody directing Fox News staff on how to report certain subjects. A leaked memo from Fox News vice president Bill Sammon to news staff at the height of the health care reform in the United States debate has been cited as an example of the pro-Republican Party bias of Fox News. His memo asked the staff to "use the term 'government-run health insurance,' or, when brevity is a concern, 'government option,' whenever possible". The memo was sent shortly after Republican pollster Frank Luntz advised Sean Hannity on his Fox show that "If you call it a public option, the American people are split. If you call it the government option, the public is overwhelmingly against it". A Pew Research poll released on October 29, 2009 found that Fox News is viewed as the most ideological channel in America. 47 percent of those surveyed said Fox News is "mostly conservative", 14 percent said "mostly liberal" and 24 percent said "neither". In comparison, MSNBC had 36 percent identify it as "mostly liberal", 11 percent as "mostly conservative" and 27 percent as "neither". CNN had 37 percent describe it as "mostly liberal", 11 percent as "mostly conservative" and 33 percent as "neither". A 2004 Pew Research Center survey showed that FNC was cited (unprompted) by 69 percent of national journalists as a conservative news organization. The survey showed that 34 percent of national journalists describe themselves as liberal, compared with 7 percent who describe themselves as conservative. A poll by Rasmussen Reports found that 31 percent of Americans felt that Fox News has a conservative bias, and 15 percent that it has a liberal bias. The poll also reported that 36 percent believed Fox News delivers news with neither a conservative or liberal bias, compared with 37 percent who said NPR delivers news with no conservative or liberal bias and 32 percent who said the same of CNN. A 2007 study looked at the introduction of Fox News into local U.S. markets between 1996 and 2000, and found that in the 2000 presidential election "Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points in the towns that broadcast Fox News". The study's estimates "imply that Fox News convinced 3 to 28 percent of its viewers to vote Republican, depending on the audience measure".Stefano DellaVigna and Ethan Kaplan (2007), "The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting", Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007, Vol. 122, No. 3, Pages 1187–1234 A 2010 study by Sean Aday comparing Fox News Channel's Special Report With Brit Hume and NBC's Nightly News coverage of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan during 2005 found that both underplayed bad news; it concluded that "Fox News was much more sympathetic to the administration than NBC", suggesting that "if scholars continue to find evidence of a partisan or ideological bias at FNC...they should consider Fox as alternative, rather than mainstream, media". Aday also stated, however, that the data used in his study may have come late enough in the war to be consistent with accepted practice.Aday, S. (2010), "Chasing the bad news: An analysis of 2005 Iraq and Afghanistan war coverage on NBC and Fox News channel", Journal of Communication 60 (1), pp. 144–164 David Carr, media critic for The New York Times, praised the 2012 presidential election results coverage on Fox News for the network's response to Republican adviser and Fox News contributor Karl Rove challenging its call that Barack Obama would win Ohio and the election. Fox's prediction was correct. Carr wrote:  Media Matters for America, which bills itself as a "progressive research and information center dedicated to comprehensively monitoring, analyzing, and correcting conservative misinformation in the U.S. media," cataloged what it called the ten most "egregious examples" of "distortion" by both Fox News and its TV personalities. Criticism includes several examples of cropping quotes from President Obama, Vice President Biden and Vice President Gore so they appear out of context, using image-manipulation software to edit the appearance of reporters from The New York Times and using footage from other events during a report on the November 5, 2009 Tea Party rally in Washington, D.C.; Media Matters said the intention of Fox News was to make it appear as if a larger number of protesters attended the event. The group also called attention to the December 4, 2009 edition of Fox and Friends, accusing the program of misleading its viewers with a "questionable graphic" showing the result of a Rasmussen Reports climate-change poll totaling 120 percent. Fox News disputed the claim that the graph was in error, saying that they merely took three pieces of polling data from Rasmussen Polls on the screen, and also pointed out that they never explicitly said on the screen that the climate change graph was supposed to equal 100%. In November 2009, Fox News anchor Gregg Jarrett told viewers that a Sarah Palin book signing in Grand Rapids, Michigan had a massive turnout, showing footage of Palin with a large crowd. Jarrett stated that the former Republican vice-presidential candidate is "continuing to draw huge crowds while she's promoting her brand-new book", adding that the images being shown were "some of the pictures just coming in to us.... The lines earlier had formed this morning". The video was actually taken from a 2008 McCain-Palin campaign rally. Fox senior vice president for news Michael Clemente issued a statement saying, "This was a production error in which the copy editor changed a script and didn't alert the control room to update the video". Fox offered an on-air apology the following day during the same Happening Now segment, expressing regrets for what it described as a "video error" with no intent to mislead. Fox also apologized for fabricated quotes attributed to John Kerry in an article on its website during the 2004 presidential campaign,Burkeman, Oliver. "Fox News apologises for Kerry fabrication." The Guardian, October 4, 2004. stating that the piece was a joke which accidentally appeared on the website. In September 2009, the Obama administration engaged in a verbal conflict with Fox News Channel. On September 20, President Obama appeared on all major news programs except Fox News, a snub partially in response to remarks about the president by commentators Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity, and Fox coverage of Obama's health-care proposal. In late September 2009, Obama senior advisor David Axelrod and Roger Ailes met in secret to attempt to smooth out tensions between the two camps. Two weeks later, White House officials referred to FNC as "not a news network", communications director Anita Dunn stating that "Fox News often operates as either the research arm or the communications arm of the Republican Party". President Obama observed, "If media is operating basically as a talk radio format, then that's one thing, and if it's operating as a news outlet, then that's another". White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel stated that it was important "to not have the CNNs and the others in the world basically be led in following Fox". Within days, it was reported that Fox had been excluded from an interview with administration official Ken Feinberg, with bureau chiefs from the White House press pool (ABC, CBS, NBC, and CNN) coming to Fox's defense. A bureau chief stated, "If any member had been excluded it would have been the same thing, it has nothing to do with Fox or the White House or the substance of the issues". Shortly after the story broke, the White House admitted to a low-level mistake, saying that Fox had not made a specific request to interview Feinberg. Fox White House correspondent Major Garrett responded by stating that he had not made a specific request, but that he had a "standing request from me as senior White House correspondent on Fox to interview any newsmaker at the Treasury at any given time news is being made". On November 8, 2009, the Los Angeles Times reported that an unnamed Democratic consultant was warned by the White House not to appear on Fox News again. According to the article, Anita Dunn claimed in an e-mail to have checked with colleagues who "deal with TV issues" and had been told that nobody had been instructed to avoid Fox. Patrick Caddell, a Fox News contributor and former pollster for President Jimmy Carter, said he had spoken with other Democratic consultants who had received similar warnings from the White House. On October 2, 2013, Fox News host Anna Kooiman cited on the air a fake story from the National Report parody site, which claimed that President Obama had offered to keep the International Museum of Muslim Cultures open with cash from his own pocket. The FNC feed is available internationally via a number of providers, while Fox Extra segments provide alternate programming. Initially, U.S. advertisements were replaced on FNC with viewer e-mail and profiles of FNC anchors set to music. In 2002, these were replaced with international weather forecasts. In 2006, the weather forecasts were replaced with Fox Extra (originally Fox News Extra, prior to the international launch of Fox Business) segments, narrated reports from Fox on a variety of topics. These reports generally concern lighter issues unrelated to current news events, and the segments are repeated. FNC also shows international weather forecasts when Fox Extra segments run short. In the United Kingdom, after a period when local commercials were inserted into breaks, Fox Extra now fills most breaks. In Australia, FNC is broadcast on the three major pay television providers: Foxtel, its regional subsidiary Austar and Optus Television. Foxtel is 50% owned by News Corp Australia, the Australian arm of News Corp which is the sister company of 21st Century Fox which owns FNC. Local Australian channel Sky News Australia, which is one-third owned by British Sky Broadcasting whose parent company is also owned by 21st Century Fox, is therefore FNC's sister channel. Since 2002, FNC has been broadcast to Brazil; however, commercials are replaced with Fox Extra. It is available in digital packages of NET. In 2003, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) rejected a Canadian Cable Telecommunications Association (CCTA) application to bring Fox News to Canada due to concerns that Fox News U.S. and the Global Television Network were planning to create a combined American-Canadian news network. In 2004, after a Fox News U.S. executive said there were no plans to create a combined channel, the CRTC approved an application to bring Fox News to Canada. Fox News Channel is currently offered by Access Communications, Bell TV, Cogeco, Eastlink, Manitoba Telecom Services, Rogers Cable, SaskTel, Shaw Cable, Shaw Direct and Telus TV. Vidéotron, Canada's third-largest cable provider, has not added Fox News Channel to its lineup. Fox News is available on cable through French internet providers Free and Orange. In Indonesia, It is available in Channel 335 in pay TV provider Indovision. FNC is carried in the Republic of Ireland by the British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) satellite television network (Sky), which is 40-percent owned by FNC's parent company, 21st Century Fox. It is run as a sister channel to BSkyB's popular Sky News. FNC is usually broadcast as a VideoGuard-encrypted channel; during major news stories, it may be simulcast on Sky Active, which is free-to-air. As of September 2006, the channel has carried UK-specific advertising, headlines and weather provided by Sky News during its breaks. These run under the brand of Fox News International. Due to the shared ownership of Fox and Sky, Fox News and Sky News share bureaus and reporters for breaking news stories worldwide. In Israel, FNC is broadcast on Channel 105 of the satellite provider yes. It is also broadcast on channel 71 on cable operator HOT. In Italy, FNC was launched on the now-defunct Italian digital satellite television platform Stream TV in 2001. Part of its programming was translated into Italian and broadcast on the defunct Italian news channel Stream News. In 2003, it moved to SKY Italia, with U.S. commercials replaced by Fox News Extra segments. It is available to 4.6 million subscribers and 160,000 hotel rooms. SKY TG 24 is a sister channel to Fox News. In the Netherlands, Fox News has been carried by cable providers UPC and CASEMA, and satellite provider Canaldigitaal; all have dropped the channel in recent years. At this time, only cable provider Caiway (available in a limited number of towns in the central part of the country) is broadcasting the channel. In New Zealand, FNC is broadcast on Channel 088 of pay satellite operator SKY Network Television's digital platform. It was formerly broadcast overnight on free-to-air UHF New Zealand TV channel Prime (owned by SKY); this was discontinued in January 2010, reportedly due to an expiring broadcasting license. Fox News' former parent company News Corporation has a stake in both SKY and Prime. In Pakistan, Fox News Channel is available on PTCL Smart TV and a number of cable and IPTV operators. In the Philippines, Fox News Channel was available on cable operator Global Destiny channel 21. Now on Skycable Philippines Channel 112 it is available only on digital platform. And now on Skycable available on High Definition Channel 211. It is also seen on Cignal Digital TV channel 41. Between 2003 and 2006, in Sweden and the other Scandinavian countries, FNC was broadcast 16 hours a day on TV8 (with Fox News Extra segments replacing U.S. advertising). Fox News was dropped by TV8 and replaced by German news channel Deutsche Welle in September 2006. In Singapore, FNC is broadcast on channel 702 on pay cable operator StarHub TV digital platform. It also broadcasts its sister channel, Sky News. In South Africa, FNC is broadcast on channel 405 of pay satellite operator TopTV's digital platform. FNC is also carried in the United Kingdom by Sky, the British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) satellite television network, which is 40-percent owned by FNC parent 21st Century Fox. It is run as a sister channel to BSkyB's own Sky News. FNC is usually broadcast as a VideoGuard-encrypted channel; during major news stories, it may be simulcast on Sky Active, which is free-to-air. , the channel has carried UK-specific advertising, headlines and weather provided by Sky News during its breaks. These run under the brand of Fox News International. Beginning in winter 2011, most breaks resumed Fox Extra. Due to the shared ownership of Fox and Sky, Fox News (and Fox Business) and Sky News share bureaus and reporters for breaking news stories worldwide.  Fox News Channel is carried in more than 40 other countries. Although service to Japan ceased in summer 2003, it can still be seen on Americable (distributor for American bases), Mediatti (Kadena Air Base) and Pan Global TV Japan. David Asman Bret Baier Julie Banderas Ainsley Earhardt Eric Bolling Brenda Buttner Gretchen Carlson Tucker Carlson Neil Cavuto Jamie Colby Steve Doocy Paul Gigot Kimberly Guilfoyle Greg Gutfeld Sean Hannity Bill Hemmer Gregg Jarrett Megyn Kelly Brian Kilmeade Mort Kondracke Anna Kooiman Howard Kurtz Jenna Lee Martha MacCallum Clayton Morris Bill O'Reilly Dana Perino Jeanine Pirro Jon Scott Shepard Smith Greta Van Susteren Andrea Tantaros Chris Wallace Juan Williams Kelly Wright Jim Angle Shannon Bream Patti Ann Browne Carl Cameron Christine Clayburg Claudia Cowan Janice Dean Mike Emanuel Harris Faulkner Lea Gabrielle Trace Gallagher Anna Gilligan Wendell Goler Lauren Green Jennifer Griffin Molly Henneberg Catherine Herridge Adam Housley Brit Hume Laura Ingle Gregg Jarrett Griff Jenkins Phil Keating Amy Kellogg Douglas Harriman Kennedy Rick Leventhal Molly Line Dagen McDowell Andrew Napolitano Heather Nauert Kate Obenshain Katie Pavlich Uma Pemmaraju James Rosen Eric Shawn Casey Stegall Anita Vogel Dr. Keith Ablow Arthur L. Aidala Julia Allison Dr. Manny Alvarez Dr. Michael Baden Mike Baker John R. Bolton Tammy Bruce Pat Caddell Tucker Carlson Amanda Carpenter Liz Cheney Alan Colmes Dr. Cynara Coomer David Corn Ann Coulter Steven Crowder Monica Crowley Stacey Dash Lanny Davis Nina Easton Susan Estrich Steve Forbes Kinky Friedman Mark Fuhrman Brigitte Gabriel Newt Gingrich Bernard Goldberg John Gray Jehmu Greene Kimberly Guilfoyle Mary Katharine Ham Stephen Hayes Ellis Henican Jonathan Hoenig Tamara Nora Holder Brit Hume Mansoor Ijaz Laura Ingraham Alireza Jafarzadeh Tom Jones Gary Kaltbaum Mort Kondracke Anna Kooiman Charles Krauthammer John "Bradshaw" Layfield Andrew Levy Mara Liasson Commander Kirk Lippold Rich Lowry Frank Luntz Michelle Malkin Leslie Marshall Meghan McCain Angela McGlowan Dennis Miller Judith Miller Lisa Kennedy Montgomery Stephen Moore Father Jonathan Morris Lt. Col. Oliver North Kate Obenshain Charles Payne Lt. Col. Ralph Peters Walid Phares Jim Pinkerton Kirsten Powers Laurie Puhn Tonya Reiman Julie Roginsky Karl Rove Bill Sammon Michael Scheuer Bill Schulz Sherrod Small Ben Stein John Stossel John Tantillo Joe Trippi Liz Trotta Paul E. Vallely Stuart Varney Lis Wiehl Howard Wolfson Louis Aguirre (former morning host, now at FOX 7 WSVN in Miami, Florida) Dari Alexander (now at FOX 5 WNYW in New York City) Dr. Jennifer Ashton (now on CBS Early Show) Tiki Barber (now with NBC News and NBC Sports) Rudi Bakhtiar (no longer active in cable news industry, now Director of Public Relations for the Public Affairs Alliance of Iranian Americans) Glenn Beck (former afternoon host; now on TheBlaze) Lisa Bernhard (entertainment correspondent) Tony Blankley  (deceased) Dave Briggs (now at NBC Sports Network co-host The Crossover with Beadle and Briggs) Eric Burns (not renewed) Joseph A. Cafasso (stepped down over allegations he over represented his military record) Alisyn Camerota (now at CNN) Steve Centanni  (retired in August 2014) Kiran Chetry (was at CNN now an Atlanta Realtor) Wesley Clark (now at CNN as contributor) Rita Cosby (was at MSNBC; now a Washington, DC Realtor) Catherine Crier (now at TruTV) S.E. Cupp  (now at CNN co-host of Crossfire and TheBlaze co-host of Real News) Jill Dobson (left network, final appearance on July 16, 2010) Laurie Dhue (not renewed) Matt Drudge Darby Dunn (now at CNBC) Donna Fiducia (no longer active in cable news industry, went into Georgia real estate) Rick Folbaum (now at WFOR-TV) Harold Ford, Jr.  (now at MSNBC) Courtney Friel – KTTV-TV Neal Gabler Major Garrett (now at CBS) Alexis Glick (Left Fox Business in December 2009, used to contribute on Fox News since 2006).  Now at CNN Elisabeth Hasselbeck E. D. Hill (now at CNN) Marc Lamont Hill  (now at BET and CNN) Kit Hoover (now at TLC) Margaret Hoover  (left network 2012) Page Hopkins (left network 2008-09-26) (now at MSNBC) Mike Huckabee (left January 2015) Carol Iovanna (no longer active in cable news industry, runs production company) Mike Jerrick (former co-host of The Morning Show with Mike and Juliet, currently co-hosts Fox 29's (WTXF-TV) Good Day Philadelphia and weekend fill-in on Fox & Friends weekend edition) Terry Keenan  (deceased) Greg Kelly (now at Fox 5 WNYW in New York City) Dana Lewis (now at WSAW-TV in Wausau) G. Gordon Liddy Rachel Marsden (contributor and Red Eye panelist; now a panelist on CNN's The Situation Room) Bill McCuddy Zell Miller Dick Morris (contributor not renewed) Robert Novak  (deceased) Barbara Olson (killed in the September 11 attacks in 2001) Julian Phillips Judith Regan Mike Schneider (no longer at Bloomberg Television) Laura Schwartz Bob Sellers (now morning co-anchor at WZTV in Nashville) Suzanne Sena (not renewed) Now with HLN David Shuster (now at Al Jazeera America) Jane Skinner Tony Snow (became White House Press Secretary, deceased) Linda Vester (left to be a stay-at-home mom) Brian Wilson  (resigned in September 2010; presently morning drive time host on WMAL-FM in the Washington, DC area. Paula Zahn (was at CNN) Bob Beckel (In October 2015, Beckel was hired by CNN) Fox Business Network Fox effect The Fox Nation The Fifth Estate: "Sticks and Stones", CBC – Bob McKeown investigates Fox News for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 45 min.
