   Freeman John Dyson FRS (born 15 December 1923) is an English-born American theoretical physicist and mathematician, known for his work in quantum electrodynamics, solid-state physics, astronomy and nuclear engineering.Freeman Dyson: Disturbing the universe, pg 131, "I had finally become an American&nbsp;... The decision to abjure my allegiance to Queen Elizabeth might have been a difficult one, but the Queen's ministers made it easy for me." He is professor emeritus at the Institute for Advanced Study, a Visitor of Ralston College, and a member of the Board of Sponsors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.Board of Sponsors | Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Retrieved 7 January 2013. Born on 15 December 1923, at Crowthorne in Berkshire, Dyson is the son of the English composer George Dyson, who was later knighted. His mother had a law degree, and after Dyson was born she worked as a social worker.. Wild River Review Interview by Joy E. Stocke Although not known to be related to the early 20th-century astronomer Frank Watson Dyson, as a small boy Dyson was aware of him and has credited the popularity of an astronomer sharing his surname with helping to spark his own interest in science. Freeman Dyson. From Eros to Gaia 1992  p.vii At the age of five he calculated the number of atoms in the sun.  As a child, he showed an interest in large numbers and in the solar system, and was strongly influenced by the book Men of Mathematics by Eric Temple Bell. Politically, Dyson says he was "brought up as a socialist". From 1936 to 1941, Dyson was a Scholar at Winchester College, where his father was Director of Music. On 25 July 1943, he entered the Operational Research Section (ORS) of the Royal Air Force’s Bomber Command,  where he developed analytical methods to help the Royal Air Force to bomb German targets during the Second World War."A Failure of Intelligence", Essay in Technology Review (November–December 2006) After the war, Dyson was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge,Fractals in Physics: Essays in Honour of Benoit B. Mandelbrot : Proceedings of the International Conference Honouring Benoit B. Mandelbrot on His 65th Birthday, Vence, France, 1–4 October 1989, p. 66 where he obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in mathematics.  From 1946 to 1949, he was a Fellow of his college, occupying rooms just below those of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, who resigned his professorship in 1947.Dyson, F., "What Can You Really Know", New York Review of Books (10 Nov 2011) In 1947 he published two papers in number theory."The Approximation to Algebraic Numbers by Rationals," Acta Mathematica (Uppsala), 89, 1947, pp. 225–240. "On Simultaneous Diophantine Approximations," Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 49, 1947, pp. 409–420. In 1947, Dyson moved to the United States as a Commonwealth Fellow to earn a physics doctorate with Hans Bethe at Cornell University (1947&ndash;48). Within a week, however, he had made the acquaintance of Richard Feynman. The budding English physicist recognized the brilliance of the flamboyant American, and attached himself as quickly as possible. He then moved to the Institute for Advanced Study (1948&ndash;49), before returning to England (1949–51), where he was a teaching fellow at the University of Birmingham. Dyson never got his PhD. In 1949, Dyson demonstrated the equivalence of two then-current formulations of quantum electrodynamics (QED): Richard Feynman's diagrams and the operator method developed by Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga. He was the first person after their creator to appreciate the power of Feynman diagrams, and his paper written in 1948 and published in 1949 was the first to make use of them. He said in that paper that Feynman diagrams were not just a computational tool, but a physical theory, and developed rules for the diagrams that completely solved the renormalization problem. Dyson's paper and also his lectures presented Feynman's theories of QED in a form that other physicists could understand, facilitating the physics community's acceptance of Feynman's work. Robert Oppenheimer, in particular, was persuaded by Dyson that Feynman's new theory was as valid as Schwinger's and Tomonaga's. Oppenheimer rewarded Dyson with a lifetime appointment at the Institute for Advanced Study, "for proving me wrong", in Oppenheimer's words.Freeman J. Dyson, Disturbing the Universe, 1979 Also in 1949, in related work, Dyson invented the Dyson series. It was this paper that inspired John Ward to derive his celebrated Ward identity.. [Note: this Ward letter opens with "It has been recently proven by Dyson&nbsp;..."] In 1951, Dyson joined the faculty at Cornell as a physics professor, although still lacking a doctorate, and in 1953 he received a permanent post at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, where he has now lived for more than fifty years. In 1957, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States and renounced his British nationality. One reason he gave decades later is that his children born in the US had not been recognized as British subjects. From 1957 to 1961 he worked on the Orion Project, which proposed the possibility of space-flight using nuclear pulse propulsion. A prototype was demonstrated using conventional explosives, but the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty (which Dyson was involved in and supported) permitted only underground nuclear testing, so the project was abandoned. In 1958 he led the design team for the TRIGA, a small, inherently safe nuclear reactor used throughout the world in hospitals and universities for the production of medical isotopes. A seminal paper by Dyson came in 1966, when, together with Andrew Lenard and independently of Elliott H. Lieb and Walter Thirring, he proved rigorously that the exclusion principle plays the main role in the stability of bulk matter. Hence, it is not the electromagnetic repulsion between outer-shell orbital electrons which prevents two wood blocks that are left on top of each other from coalescing into a single piece, but rather it is the exclusion principle applied to electrons and protons that generates the classical macroscopic normal force. In condensed matter physics, Dyson also analysed the phase transition of the Ising model in 1 dimension and spin waves.F. J. Dyson, E. H. Lieb, Selected papers by Freeman Dyson, AMS (1996). Dyson also did work in a variety of topics in mathematics, such as topology, analysis, number theory and random matrices. There is an interesting story involving random matrices. In 1973, the number theorist Hugh Montgomery was visiting the Institute for Advanced Study and had just made his pair correlation conjecture concerning the distribution of the zeros of the Riemann zeta function. He showed his formula to the mathematician Atle Selberg who said it looked like something in mathematical physics and he should show it to Dyson, which he did. Dyson recognized the formula as the pair correlation function of the Gaussian unitary ensemble, which has been extensively studied by physicists. This suggested that there might be an unexpected connection between the distribution of primes 2,3,5,7,11,&nbsp;... and the energy levels in the nuclei of heavy elements such as uranium.John Derbyshire, Prime Obsession, 2004, ISBN 0309085497. Around 1979, Dyson worked with the Institute for Energy Analysis on climate studies. This group, under the direction of Alvin Weinberg, pioneered multidisciplinary climate studies, including a strong biology group. Also during the 1970s, he worked on climate studies conducted by the JASON defense advisory group. Dyson retired from the Institute for Advanced Study in 1994. In 1998, Dyson joined the board of the Solar Electric Light Fund.  he was president of the Space Studies Institute, the space research organization founded by Gerard K. O'Neill;  he is on its Board of Trustees. Dyson is a long-time member of the JASON group. Dyson has won numerous scientific awards but never a Nobel Prize. Nobel physics laureate Steven Weinberg has said that the Nobel committee has "fleeced" Dyson, but Dyson himself remarked in 2009, "I think it's almost true without exception if you want to win a Nobel Prize, you should have a long attention span, get hold of some deep and important problem and stay with it for ten years. That wasn't my style." Dyson is a regular contributor to The New York Review of Books. In 2012, he published (with William H. Press) a fundamental new result about the Prisoner's Dilemma in PNAS."Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma contains strategies that dominate any evolutionary opponent". William H. Press and Freeman Dyson. PNAS vol. 109 no. 26 pp 0409–10413 With his first wife, the mathematician Verena Huber-Dyson, Dyson has two children, Esther and George. In 1958 he married Imme Jung, a masters runner, and they eventually had four more children, Dorothy, Mia, Rebecca, and Emily Dyson.Dawidoff, Nicholas. The Civil Heretic. The New York Times. 25 March 2009 Dyson's eldest daughter, Esther, is a digital technology consultant and investor; she has been called "the most influential woman in all the computer world."http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-26858383  His son George is a historian of science,See excerpt from Digerati: Encounters with the Cyber Elite by John Brockman (HardWired Books, 1996) one of whose books is Project Orion: The Atomic Spaceship 1957–1965. Friends and colleagues describe Dyson as shy and self-effacing, with a contrarian streak that his friends find refreshing but his intellectual opponents find exasperating. "I have the sense that when consensus is forming like ice hardening on a lake, Dyson will do his best to chip at the ice", Steven Weinberg said of him. His friend, the neurologist and author Oliver Sacks, said: "A favorite word of Freeman's about doing science and being creative is the word 'subversive'. He feels it's rather important not only to be not orthodox, but to be subversive, and he's done that all his life."  In The God Delusion (2006), biologist Richard Dawkins criticized Dyson for accepting the religious Templeton Prize in 2000; "It would be taken as an endorsement of religion by one of the world's most distinguished physicists." However, Dyson declared in 2000 that he is a (non-denominational) Christian,Progress In Religion, Edge.org (2000-05-16). Retrieved on 2014-11-18. and he has disagreed with Dawkins on several occasions, as when he criticized Dawkins' understanding of evolution. Dyson was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1952. Dyson was awarded the Lorentz Medal in 1966, Max Planck Medal in 1969, the J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Prize in 1970, and the Harvey Prize in 1977. In the 1984–85 academic year he gave the Gifford lectures at Aberdeen, which resulted in the book Infinite In All Directions. In 1989, Dyson taught at Duke University as a Fritz London Memorial Lecturer. In the same year, he was elected as an Honorary Fellow of Trinity College, University of Cambridge. Dyson has published a number of collections of speculations and observations about technology, science, and the future.  In 1996 he was awarded the Lewis Thomas Prize for Writing about Science. In 1993, Dyson was given the Enrico Fermi Award. In 1995 he gave the Jerusalem-Harvard Lectures at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, sponsored jointly by the Hebrew University and Harvard University Press that grew into the book Imagined  Worlds. In 2000, Dyson was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion. In 2003, Dyson was awarded the Telluride Tech Festival Award of Technology in Telluride, Colorado. In 2011, Dyson was received as one of twenty distinguished Old Wykehamists at the Ad Portas celebration, the highest honour that Winchester College bestows. Dyson cheerfully admits his record as a prophet is mixed, but "it is better to be wrong than to be vague."Dyson, 1999, The Sun, the Genome, and the Internet "To answer the world's material needs, technology has to be not only beautiful but also cheap."Dyson, FJ, "The Greening of the Galaxy" in Disturbing the Universe, 1979 Dyson favors the dual origin concept: Life first formed cells, then enzymes, and finally, much later, genes. This was first propounded by the Russian Alexander Oparin.Oparin, A. I. The Origin of Life, Moscow Worker publisher, 1924 (Russian) J. B. S. Haldane developed the same theory independently.The Origin of Life, J.B.S.Haldane, The Rationalist Annual, 1929 Dyson has simplified things by saying simply that life evolved in two stages, widely separated in time. He regards it as too unlikely that genes could have developed fully blown in one process, because of the biochemistry. He proposes that in a primitive early cell containing ATP and AMP, DNA was invented accidentally because of the similarity of the two. Current cells contain adenosine triphosphate or ATP and adenosine 5'-monophosphate or AMP, which greatly resemble each other but have completely different functions. ATP transports energy around the cell, and AMP is part of RNA and the genetic apparatus. Dyson proposes that in a primitive early cell containing ATP and AMP, RNA and replication were invented accidentally because of the similarity of the two. He suggests that AMP was produced when ATP molecules lost two of their phosphate radicals, and then one cell somewhere performed Eigen's experiment and produced RNA. Unfortunately there is no direct evidence for the dual origin concept, because once genes developed, they took over, obliterating all traces of the earlier forms of life. In the first origin, the cells were probably just drops of water held together by surface tension, teeming with enzymes and chemical reactions, and a primitive kind of growth or replication. When the liquid drop became too big, it split into two drops. Many complex molecules formed in these "little city economies" and the probability that genes would eventually develop in them was much greater than in the prebiotic environment.Freeman Dyson, Origins of Life,,. Second Edition, Cambridge University Press, 1999   In 1960 Dyson wrote a short paper for the journal Science, entitled "Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation".  In it, he theorized that a technologically advanced extraterrestrial civilization might completely surround its native star with artificial structures in order to maximize the capture of the star's available energy. Eventually, the civilization would completely enclose the star, intercepting electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths from visible light downwards and radiating waste heat outwards as infrared radiation. Therefore, one method of searching for extraterrestrial civilizations would be to look for large objects radiating in the infrared range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dyson conceived that such structures would be clouds of asteroid-sized space habitats, though science fiction writers have preferred a solid structure: either way, such an artifact is often referred to as a Dyson sphere, although Dyson himself used the term "shell". Dyson says that he used the term "artificial biosphere" in the article meaning a habitat, not a shape.20 minutes into a video The general concept of such an energy-transferring shell had been advanced decades earlier by author Olaf Stapledon in his 1937 novel Star Maker, a source that Dyson has credited publicly. Dyson has also proposed the creation of a Dyson tree, a genetically-engineered plant capable of growing on a comet. He suggested that comets could be engineered to contain hollow spaces filled with a breathable atmosphere, thus providing self-sustaining habitats for humanity in the outer solar system. Dyson has been interested in space travel since he was a child, reading such science fiction classics as Olaf Stapledon's Star Maker. As a young man, he worked for General Atomics on the nuclear-powered Orion spacecraft. He hoped Project Orion would put men on Mars by 1965, Saturn by 1970. He's been unhappy for a quarter-century on how the government conducts space travel:  He still hopes for cheap space travel, but is resigned to waiting for private entrepreneurs to develop something new—and cheap. Dyson also proposed the use of bioengineered space colonies to colonize the Kuiper Belt on the outer edge of our Solar System. He proposed that habitats could be grown from space hardened spores. The colonies could then be warmed by large reflector plant leaves that could focus the dim, distant sunlight back on the growing colony. This was illustrated by Pat Rawlings on the cover of the National Space Society's Ad Astra magazine.  Dyson also has some credits in pure mathematics. His concept "Dyson's transform" led to one of the most important lemmas of Olivier Ramaré's theorem that every even integer can be written as a sum of no more than six primes. The Dyson series, the formal solution of an explicitly time-dependent Schrödinger equation by iteration, and the corresponding Dyson time-ordering operator \mathcal T\,, an entity of basic importance in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, are also named after Dyson. Dyson and Hugh Montgomery discovered together an intriguing connection between quantum physics and Montgomery's pair correlation conjecture about the zeros of the Zeta function. The primes 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, ... are described by the Riemann Zeta function, and Dyson had previously developed a description of quantum physics based on m by m arrays of totally random numbers.  What Montgomery and Dyson discovered is that the eigenvalues of these matrices are spaced apart in exactly the same manner as Montgomery conjectured for the nontrivial zeros of the Zeta function. Andrew Odlyzko has verified the conjecture on a computer, using his  Odlyzko–Schönhage algorithm to calculate many zeros. Dyson recognized this connection because of a number-theory question Montgomery asked him. Dyson had published results in number theory in 1947 while a Fellow at Trinity College, Cambridge and so was able to understand Montgomery's question. If Montgomery had not been visiting the Institute for Advanced Study that week, this connection might not have been discovered. There are in nature one, two, and three dimensional quasicrystals. Mathematicians define a quasicrystal as a set of discrete points whose Fourier transform is also a set of discrete points. Andrew Odlyzko has done extensive computations of the Fourier transform of the nontrivial zeros of the Riemann Zeta function, and they seem to form a one dimensional quasicrystal. This would in fact follow from the Riemann hypothesis.Freeman Dyson, Selected papers, 1990-2014, pp. 41-42, World Scientific, 2015 Dyson has suggested a kind of cosmic metaphysics of mind. In his book Infinite in All Directions he writes about three levels of mind: "The universe shows evidence of the operations of mind on three levels. The first level is the level of elementary physical processes in quantum mechanics. Matter in quantum mechanics is [...] constantly making choices between alternative possibilities according to probabilistic laws. [...] The second level at which we detect the operations of mind is the level of direct human experience. [...] [I]t is reasonable to believe in the existence of a third level of mind, a mental component of the universe. If we believe in this mental component and call it God, then we can say that we are small pieces of God's mental apparatus" (p.&nbsp;297). Dyson agrees that anthropogenic global warming exists, and has written that "[one] of the main causes of warming is the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere resulting from our burning of fossil fuels such as oil and coal and natural gas."dl However, he believes that existing simulation models of climate fail to account for some important factors, and hence the results will contain too much error to reliably predict future trends:  and, in 2009: He is among signatories of a letter to the UN criticizing the IPCC. Open Letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. National Post. 13 December 2007Wiggles, Open Mind, 16 December 2007  and has also argued against ostracizing scientists whose views depart from the acknowledged mainstream of scientific opinion on climate change, stating that "heretics" have historically been an important force in driving scientific progress. "[H]eretics who question the dogmas are needed&nbsp;... I am proud to be a heretic. The world always needs heretics to challenge the prevailing orthodoxies." Dyson says his views on global warming have been strongly criticized. In reply, he notes that "[m]y objections to the global warming propaganda are not so much over the technical facts, about which I do not know much, but it’s rather against the way those people behave and the kind of intolerance to criticism that a lot of them have.""Freeman Dyson Takes On The Climate Establishment", interview published 2 June 2009 by Yale University's Environment 360 In 2008, he endorsed the now common usage of "global warming" as synonymous with global anthropogenic climate change, referring to "measurements that transformed global warming from a vague theoretical speculation into a precise observational science."Dyson in The New York Review of Book, 12 June 2008. Nybooks.com (2008-06-12). Retrieved on 2011-10-07. He has, however, argued that political efforts to reduce the causes of climate change distract from other global problems that should take priority:  In an opinion piece in the Boston Globe of 3 Dec 2015 he writes,"The good news is that the main effect of carbon dioxide on the ecology of the planet has nothing to do with climate. The main effect of carbon dioxide is to make the planet greener, feeding the growth of green plants of all kinds, increasing the fertility of farms and fields and forests." Since originally taking interest in climate studies in the 1970s, Dyson has suggested that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere could be controlled by planting fast-growing trees. He calculates that it would take a trillion trees to remove all carbon from the atmosphere.Freeman J. Dyson, "Can we control the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere?", Energy, Volume 2, Issue 3, September 1977, Pages 287–291.  In a 2014 interview, he said that "What I'm convinced of is that we don't understand climate ...  It will take a lot of very hard work before that question is settled."  From his 1988 book Infinite in All Directions, he offered some criticism of then current models predicting a devastating nuclear winter in the event of a large-scale nuclear war:  At the British Bomber Command, Dyson and colleagues proposed ripping out two gun turrets from the RAF Lancaster bombers, to cut the catastrophic losses due to German fighters in the Battle of Berlin. A Lancaster without turrets could fly  faster and be much more maneuverable.  On hearing the news of the bombing of Hiroshima:   In 1967, in his capacity as a military adviser Dyson wrote an influential paper on the issue of possible US use of tactical nuclear weapons in the Vietnam War. When a general said in a meeting, "I think it might be a good idea to throw in a nuke now and then, just to keep the other side guessing..."Dyson, Freeman, Disturbing the Universe, Chapter 13, The Ethics of Defense, p.149, Basic Books, 1979, Dyson became alarmed and obtained permission to write an objective report discussing the pros and cons of using such weapons from a purely military point of view. (This report, Tactical Nuclear Weapons in Southeast Asia, published by the Institute for Defense Analyses, was obtained, with some redactions, by the Nautilus Institute for Security and Sustainability under the Freedom of Information act in 2002.)Tactical Nuclear Weapons in Southeast Asia, published March 1967 (declassified December 2002)  It was sufficiently objective that both sides in the debate based their arguments on it. Dyson says that the report showed that, even from a narrow military point of view, the US was better off not using nuclear weapons. Dyson stated on the Dick Cavett show that the use of nuclear weaponry was a bad idea for the US at the time because "our targets were large and theirs were small." (His unstated assumption was that the Soviets would respond by supplying tactical nukes to the other side.) Dyson opposed the Vietnam War, the Gulf War and the invasion of Iraq. He supported Barack Obama in the 2008 US presidential election and The New York Times has described him as a political liberal. He was one of 29 leading US scientists who wrote a strongly supportive letter to Obama regarding his administration's 2015 nuclear deal with Iran. While teaching for a few weeks in Zurich, Dyson was visited by two officials from the Swiss civil defense authority. Their experts were telling them that fairly simple shelters on a large scale would enable them to survive a nuclear attack, and they wanted confirmation. They knew that Dyson had a security clearance. Dyson reassured them that their shelters would do the job. The US does not build such shelters because it would be contrary to the doctrine of mutual assured destruction, since the US would be able to launch a first strike but survive retaliation.Weapons and Hope, Chapter 8, Shelters, Freeman Dyson, Harper Collins, (Reprinted 1985) He is a non-denominational Christian and has attended various churches from Presbyterian to Roman Catholic. Regarding doctrinal or Christological issues, he has said, "I am neither a saint nor a theologian. To me, good works are more important than theology."Templeton Prize Lecture. Edge.org (2000-05-16). Retrieved on 2011-10-07. Dyson partially disagrees with the famous remark by his fellow physicist Steven Weinberg that "With or without religion, good people can behave well and bad people can do evil; but for good people to do evil—that takes religion."NYRB 22 June 2006. Nybooks.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-07. While Dyson has labeled himself a Christian, he identifies himself as agnostic about some of the specifics of his faith. For example, here is a passage from Dyson's review of The God of Hope and the End of the World from John Polkinghorne: The fictional character Gordon Freeman from the Half-Life video game series is named after Freeman Dyson. A Dyson sphere was a significant plot device in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "Relics". A "Freeman Dyson Planetary Spin Motor" was used in The Long Utopia, the fourth book in the Long Earth series, to destroy a planet.     Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle Physics, 1966 (Academic-oriented text) Interstellar Transport, Physics Today 1968 Disturbing the Universe, 1979, ISBN 0-06-011108-9.  Review Weapons and Hope, 1984 (Winner of the National Book Critics Circle Award). Review Origins of Life, 1986. Second edition, 1999.  Review Infinite in All Directions, 1988, ISBN 0-14-014482-X. Review From Eros to Gaia, 1992 Selected Papers of Freeman Dyson, (Selected Works up to 1990) American Mathematical Society, 1996. Imagined Worlds, Harvard University Press 1997, ISBN 978-0-674-53908-2.  Review The Sun, the Genome and the Internet, 1999.  Review L'mportanza di essere imprevedibile, Di Renzo Editore, 2003 The Scientist as Rebel, 2006. Review Advanced Quantum Mechanics, World Scientific, 2007, ISBN 978-981-270-661-4.  Freely available at: arXiv:quant-ph/0608140. (Dyson's 1951 Cornell lecture notes transcribed by David Derbes) A Many-Colored Glass: Reflections on the Place of Life in the Universe, University of Virginia Press, 2007. Review Birds and Frogs: Selected Papers, 1990-2014, World Scientific Publishing Company, 2015. A.I. Shlyakhter Astrochicken Dyson conjecture Dyson's eternal intelligence Dyson number List of science and religion scholars The 2005 Global Intellectuals Poll The Day After Trinity (1980) Thue–Siegel-Dyson-Roth theorem Rank of a partition Crank of a partition Freeman Dyson, "By the Book," New York Times Sunday Book Review, April 16, 2015Freeman Dyson, "By the Book", New York Times Sunday Book Review, April 16, 2015. "Birds and Frogs"&nbsp;&ndash; Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 2009 Brower, Kenneth, 1978.  The Starship and the Canoe, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Schweber, Sylvan S., 1994. QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga. Princeton University Press: chpt. 9. ISBN 978-0-691-03327-3. Schewe, Phillip F., 2014. Maverick Genius: The Pioneering Odyssey of Freeman Dyson. St. Martin's Griffin:  ISBN  978-1250042569. To Mars by A-Bomb: The Secret History of Project Orion History Undercover: Code Name Project Orion The Oakes Atomic Dream 2001: The Science of Futures Past Cool It Nuclear Dynamite Gaia Symphony III The Spaceship & Canoe The Day After Trinity "Is A Graviton Detectable?", by Freeman Dyson, invited talk given at the Conference in Honour of the 90th Birthday of Freeman Dyson, Institute of Advanced Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 26–29 August 2013 "The Question of Global Warming", by Freeman Dyson,  12 June 2008 Comments on "The Question of Global Warming", with a reply by Dyson, 25 September 2008 "Our Biotech Future", essay by Freeman Dyson, 19 July 2007 Comments on "Our Biotech Future", with a reply by Dyson,27 September 2007 Another comment on "Our Biotech Future", with a reply by Dyson, 11 October 2007 "In Praise of Open Thinking", audio from a panel discussion with his son George Dyson, recorded 07-29-2004 Templeton Prize acceptance lecture 2000, by Freeman Dyson Imagined Worlds by Freeman Dyson, 1996: Chapter 1 A radio interview with Freeman Dyson Aired on the Lewis Burke Frumkes Radio Show in 2009. Tactical Nuclear Weapons in Southeast Asia, published March 1967 (declassified December 2002) Suzan Mazur interviewing Dyson, 2012 "Pushing the Boundaries - A Conversation with Freeman Dyson", Ideas Roadshow, 2014 "The Civil Heretic ", profile at the New York Times Magazine by Nicholas Dawidoff, 25 March 2009 Interview, 4 June 2009, Dyson comments on the misleading overemphasis of his climate-change views in the NYT profile. , biography, circa 2000 Dyson biographical outline, circa 2005 Dyson author page and archive, from The New York Review of Books "The Scientist as Rebel", 2005 interview at Wild River Review NPR interview of Freeman Dyson, audio, All Things Considered, 2 November 2004 Google video: interviewer: Robert Wright, video, 44:55,  30 June 2001 Freeman Dyson wins $1m religion prize, 9 May 2000 "Freeman Dyson's Brain", interview by Stewart Brand at Wired, 1998 Oral History interview transcript with Freeman J. Dyson 17 December 1986, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library and Archives "Disturbing the Universe": BBC interview with Freeman Dyson, audio, 18 January 1980 To Mars by A-bomb. BBC Airdate 8 February 2006. 2008 Video Interview with Freeman Dyson by Atomic Heritage Foundation Voices of the Manhattan Project Freeman Dyson: Let's look for life in the outer solar system (TED2003)
