   The Freie Universität Berlin (lit. "Free University of Berlin", often abbreviated as FU Berlin or simply FU) is a research university located in Berlin and one of the most prominent universities in Germany. It is internationally known for its research in the humanities and social sciences, as well as in the field of natural and life sciences. Founded in West Berlin during the early Cold War period and born out of the increasingly Communist-controlled Humboldt University, its name refers to West Berlin's status as part of the free world, as opposed to the Soviet-occupied "unfree" areas surrounding the city. Freie Universität Berlin was one of nine German universities to win in the German Universities Excellence Initiative, a national competition for universities organized by the German federal government. Winning a distinction for five doctoral programs, three interdisciplinary research clusters (some of them in cooperation with other universities) and its overall institutional strategy as an "International Network University", Freie Universität Berlin is one of the most successful universities in the initiative. Freie Universität Berlin was established by students and scholars on 4 December 1948. The foundation is strongly connected to the beginning of the Cold War period. The University of Berlin was located in the former Soviet sector of Berlin and was granted permission to continue teaching by the Soviet Military Administration in Germany (SMAD) in January 1946. The universities were increasingly influenced by communism as they were ground for the political disputes of the postwar period. This led to protests by students critical of the prevailing system. Between 1945 and 1948, more than 18 students were arrested or persecuted, some even executed by the soviet secret police (NKVD).  At the end of 1947, first students demanded a university free from political influence. The climax of the protests was reached on 23 April 1948: after three students were expelled from the university without a trial, about 2,000 students protested at the Hotel Esplanade. By the end of April, the governor of the United States Army Lucius D. Clay gave the order to legally check for the formation of a new university in the western sectors. On 19 June 1948 the "preparatory committee for establishing a free university" consisting of politicians, professors, administrative staff members and students, met. With a manifesto titled "Request for establishing a free university in Berlin" the committee appealed to the public for support. The municipal authorities of Berlin granted the foundation of a free university and requested the opening for the coming winter semester 1948/49. Meanwhile, the students committee in the German Democratic Republic protested against the formation, the GDR described the new university as the "so-called free university" in official documents until the fall of the Berlin Wall.  The Council-manager government accepted the by-law on 4 November 1948. The by-law achieved prominence under its alias  "the Berlin model": Freie Universität was founded as a statutory corporation (Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts) and was not directly subjected to the state, as it was controlled by a supervisory board consisting of six representatives of the state of Berlin, three representatives of the university and students. This form was unique in Germany at that time, as the students had much more influence on the system than before. But until the 1970s, the involvement of the students in the committees was slowly cut back while adapting to the model of the western German universities in order to be fully recognized as an equivalent university. On 15 November 1948, the first lectures were held in the buildings of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science. The actual foundation took place on 4 December 1948 in the Titania palace, the film theater with the biggest hall available in the western sectors of Berlin. Attendants of the event were not only scientists, politicians (the Governing Mayor Ernst Reuter amongst others) and students, but also representatives of American universities, among them Stanford University and Yale University. The first elected president of the FU Berlin was the historian Friedrich Meinecke.   In 1949, Freie Universität already registered 4,946 students. Until the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961, many students came from the soviet sector, often supported through the "Währungsstipendium" of the senate. On 26 June 1963, the same day he held his famous Ich bin ein Berliner speech at Rathaus Schöneberg, John F. Kennedy was awarded honorary citizen by the Freie Universität and held a ceremonial speech in front of the Henry Ford building in which he addressed the future of Berlin and Germany under the consideration of the motto of the FU. Amongst the attendant crowd are also the Governing Mayor of Berlin Willy Brandt and the Chancellor of Germany Konrad Adenauer. His brother, Robert F. Kennedy visited Freie Universität in 1962 for the first time and in June 1964 for receiving his honorary degree from the Department of Philosophy. The speech he held at the event was dedicated to John F. Kennedy, who was assassinated just the year before. In the late 1960s, Freie Universität was one of the main scenes of the German student movement of 68 as a reaction to the global student protests during that time. After the assassination of student Benno Ohnesorg and the attempt on Rudi Dutschke's life, protests quickly escalated to violence in all of Germany. The events of the 68-movement provided the impulse for more openness, equality, and democracy in German society.  During the 1970s and the 1980s, the university became a "Massenuniversität" (mass/mega university) with 50,298 registered students in 1983. After reunification, Freie Universität was the second largest university in Germany (after the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich) with 62,072 students in the winter term of 1991/92. Shortly thereafter, the senate of Berlin decided to drastically reduce the places until 2003, the number of students shrank to 43,885 in the winter term of 2002/03. Since 2000, the Freie Universität Berlin has revamped itself. The university's research performance increased markedly with regard to the number of graduates, PhDs granted, and publications. Underlying this successful trend were fundamental reforms such as the introduction of modern management systems in the administration, a reorganization of the departments, and an efficient utilization of resources. The Prognos AG, the renowned economic consulting corporation founded by the University of Basel, Switzerland, presented Freie Universität with an award for its good entrepreneurial principles. Since 2003, the FU Berlin has been regrouping its research capacities into interdisciplinary research focus areas called clusters. Due to financial cutbacks and restructuring of medical schools in the same year, the medical institutions of Freie Universität and the Humboldt University merged to create a joint department, the Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin. The year 2007 was another crucial year for the Freie Universität as it was the university with the most approved funding applications in the German Universities Excellence Initiative, and it is now one of nine elite German universities to receive funding for its future development strategy. In the same year, Freie Universität dedicated a monument to the founding students who were murdered during the protests. The university presents its Freedom Award to personalities who have made a special contribution toward the cause of freedom. In 2012, Freie Universität successfully entered the third period of the initiative. Based on its founding tradition, the Freie Universität's seal to this day bears the Latin terms for Truth, Justice, and Liberty. The designer of the seal was art historian and former president of the Freie Universität Edwin Redslob.  Most of the facilities of Freie Universität are located in the residential garden district of Dahlem in southwestern Berlin.  Around the beginning of the 20th century, Dahlem was established as a center for research of the highest caliber. Academic activity in Dahlem was supported by Friedrich Althoff, Ministerial Director in the Prussian Ministry of Culture, who initially proposed the foundation of a "German Oxford". The first new buildings housed government science agencies and new research institutes of the University of Berlin. The Kaiser Wilhelm Society – forerunner of the present-day Max Planck Society – was founded in 1911 and established several institutes in Dahlem.  A dynamic group of researchers carried out pioneering research resulting in numerous Nobel Prizes. Since its foundation, Freie Universität has been using buildings formerly belonging to the Kaiser Wilhelm Society and, in addition, has added numerous architecturally innovative buildings. Freie Universität's central campus consists of building ensembles within walking distance of each other (about 1.5&nbsp;km radius). The planners oriented themselves along the type of campus found in the United States – a novelty in post-war Germany. The first independent structure to be completed on campus was the Henry Ford building, funded by the Ford Foundation. To that point, the university was housed in several older structures around the neighborhood, including the Otto Hahn building, which houses the Department of Biochemistry to this day. Thanks to further donations from the United States, Freie Universität was able to construct several new central building complexes including the Benjamin Franklin university clinic complex. The largest single complex of university buildings is the Rost- und Silberlaube, which translates roughly to the "Rust and Silver Lodges". This complex consists of a series of interlinked structures corresponding to either a deep bronze (hence, "rust") or shiny white ("silver") hue, surrounding a variety of leafy courtyards.  It has been complemented in 2005 by a new centerpiece, the brain-shaped Philological Library, designed by British architect Lord Norman Foster.  With 43&nbsp;ha and around 22,000 species of plants, the botanical garden of the FU in the east of Dahlem is one of the biggest of its kind. The main campus can be reached by public transportation: With the U-Bahn line U3, various busses and the S-Bahn line S1, students can reach the centers of Berlin in under 15 minutes. The campus in Lankwitz, formerly part of a teacher training college, is now home to the department of Earth sciences and a part of the university archives. Until their move to Dahlem in 2008, the Institute for Media and Communication Studies was located there. Most of the divisions of the Department of Veterinary Medicine are based in Düppel. It is 2&nbsp;km southwest of the main campus and consists of numerous clinics and institutes, amongst them a small animal clinic, a clinic for horses and an institute of poultry diseases. Since the formation of the FU in 1948, it has used public hospitals as part of the medical faculty. Between 1959 and 1969, the "Steglitz Clinic", about 3&nbsp;km southeast of Dahlem, was built with large financial supports of the United States. The medical center became one of the biggest European medical establishments unifying all institutes, clinics and lecture halls. In honor of the support by the United States, the clinic was renamed "University Clinic Benjamin Franklin". In 1994, it consists of 36 scientific institutes and 1,200 hospital beds. After the merger in 2003, it became part of the Charité medical school.   During the 1960s, a student village with 27 buildings was constructed near Schlachtensee lake serving as housing opportunities for students.  Today, the district of Dahlem is a hotspot for research and culture: Beside several institutes of the renowned Max Planck Society (amongst others: The Max Planck Institute for Research in Education (MPIB), the MPI for the History of Science, the MPI for Molecular Genetics, the Fritz Haber Institute (FHI) working in the fields of molecular physics and physical chemistry and the archive of the MPG), the campus is also home to the Zuse Institute Berlin as well as some federal institutions like the Federal Institute for Materials Research (BAM) and the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR).  The Berlin Geography Society founded in 1828, the Berlin University for Professional Studies and the German Archeological Institute (DAI) are also located on the campus. In addition, Dahlem is an important location for the Berlin State Museums group, housing the Ethnological Museum of Berlin and the Museum of Asian Art.   With an inventory of 8.5 million volumes and over 25,000 journals distributed in the central university library (UB) and 49 specialized libraries of the institutes, the library system of the FU is the biggest in Germany. Items published since 1990 are fully digitalized and accessible through an OPAC. The UB is granted the status United Nations Depository Library and is linked to the global library system of the UN under direction of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in New York. The European Union also uses the UB as a European Documentation Center. As part of the library of the UN and the EU, it contains all publications of the UN General Assembly, the UN Security Council, the International Court of Justice as well as publications from the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.  Although the UB is generally a lending library, some smaller libraries of the departments are so called Präsenzbibliotheken, where students are only able to read books or journals. Since 2005, the FU creates a new library with about 12,250 m2 of usable space. It is planned to include all libraries of the natural science departments and the smaller institutes in the humanities (e.g. Egyptology). The projected costs are around 51 million euros. Construction work started in March 2012 with plans on finishing at the end of 2014. With 33,000 applicants for the undergraduate programs (Bachelor) in 2013, admissions at Freie Universität remain highly competitive as the university only offers about 4,300 places each year. Due to the high numbers of applicants, most undergraduate programs at Freie Universität have limitations determined through the NC. The general deadline for students directly from high school applying to limited programs in the coming winter semester is 15 July every year at all universities in Germany. In some cases (especially Medicine and Psychology), the NC every year is as high as 1.0 (see Grades in Germany and Abitur). Critical applicants which just scored slightly below the NC can be invited to an selective interview or an entry exam, depending on the department/faculty. Applicants at Charité medical school who do not directly fulfill the NC-criteria have to pass an entry exam, which covers the basic fields of Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry and Physics in addition to passing a selective interview. Both results are then added to the Abitur grade. The final decision depends on the results of the competitors. The executive board consists of the president (Prof. Dr. Peter-André Alt), an executive vice president (Dr. Monika Schäfer-Korting) and three other vice presidents, as well as the Director of Administration and Finance (Peter Lange). There are also supporting offices for Public Affairs and the General Counsel for legal affairs.  For accomplishing administrative tasks within the university, the central administration is split into multiple divisions:  There are currently eight central service institutions (ZE) of the FU: The ISQ ("Institut für Schulqualität der Länder Berlin und Brandenburg", Institute for Quality of Schools in Berlin and Brandenburg) is an independent facility on the campus. It consults local schools and the senate to achieve and develop a high standard of school quality in Berlin and Brandenburg and closely cooperates with the Department of Education and Psychology of the FU. The Collegium Musicum of Freie Universität was founded during the first semester in 1948/49. Under conductor Karl Forster, it merged with the ensemble of the Technical University Berlin in 1954. Today, the Collegium Musicum has around 500 members from all fields of studies who spend their leisure time making music. It currently consists of five ensembles: a big choir, a chamber choir, two smyphony orchestras and a big band. There are frequently events on which the Collegium Musicum plays, for instance on ceremonies. With 12 departments (FB) and three interdisciplinary central institutes, the university can be seen as an universitas litterarum (a traditional university where studies in all basic sciences is possible).   Despite the variety of subjects, apart from computer science, studies in the field of engineering can only be done at the Technical University or universities of applied science (Fachhochschulen).   Freie Universität operates on a semester calendar where the winter term begins on 1 October and ends on 31 March. The exact same model can be found at almost every university in Germany. The time where lectures are being held varies each year, normally beginning around mid-October and ending as early as mid-February. Freie Universität offers a broad spectrum of subjects in over 190 degree programs.  A speciality of the FU is the possibility to study a vast amount of "small subjects" (e.g. theater and film studies, Egyptology, Byzantine studies, Jewish studies, Turkology, Sinology, Communication studies, Meteorology, Bioinformatics, Biochemistry) with a high level of specialization. Due to the Bologna process, most of the undergraduate programs are now leading to the three-year Bachelor's degree with 180 ECTS. At Freie Universität, Bachelor programs are generally divided into three categories: a regular Bachelor called "Mono-Bachelor", a combined Bachelor ("Kombi-Bachelor") consisting of two fields of studies and a combined Bachelor with a teaching option. Besides the core subject(s), all students are required to complete a series of courses related to general professional skills (ABV). The old Diplom and Magister artium programs are still running, but do not accept new admissions anymore. In the fields of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine, Dentistry, Pharmacy and the law, students enroll in programs with Staatsexamen. Freie Universität also offers a variety of graduate degrees, from the master's degree to doctoral degrees. Apart from the regular Master's programs, there are a variety of international programs taught in English, especially in the life sciences:  Freie Universität does not charge any tuition fees in the classical sense. Since 2003, public universities in Berlin introduced the model of semester contributions (Semesterbeiträge). It consists of an enrollment/re-registration fee, a contribution to the student union (Studentenwerk), a contribution for the student government and the fee for the semester ticket (public transportation pass) for the current semester. The fees for the semester ticket is defined by a contract with the local transportation company, the Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg and allows students to move freely in the ABC zones of Berlin. In the winter semester of 2013/14, students are required to pay €285.83 in total. Since 2011, Freie Universität participates in the national "Germany Scholarship" program organized by the federal government, universities and numerous private companies. Highly talented and committed students can get €300 each month. The annual national and international rankings, the various collaborative research centers funded by German Research Foundation DFG and the state and the numerous laureates make Freie Universität one of the most successful and prominent establishments of research in Germany. In terms of external endowments by the DFG, Freie Universität ranks third behind the RWTH Aachen University and LMU Munich. Between 2009 and 2013, 289 foreign guest researchers came to the university through fellowships granted by the renowned Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, making the FU the most popular destination for foreign researchers in Germany. In the field of natural sciences, research focuses on basic research with a strong emphasis on interdisciplinarity, whereas research in the humanities focuses on the current economical, political and cultural development of society (transformation processes, effects of globalization and environmental politics). In the field of Earth sciences, the FU has contributed to various aeronautical missions, e.g. the Mars Express and the Cassini-Huygens to Saturn. Excluding the Charité medical school, which is co-administered by the university with the Humboldt University, Freie Universität is currently the lead university for eight collaborative research centers of the German Research Foundation and also has five DFG research units. As part of the MATHEON – Mathematics for Key Technologies research center of the DFG, Freie Universität together with the TU Berlin, HU Berlin and the Zuse Institute Berlin is working on the mathematical modeling, simulation and optimization of real-world process. Twice every year, the "Dahlem Conferences" are held at Freie Universität. Over the course of one week, international renowned scientists and Nobel laureates come together and discuss current problems in all fields of studies. The annual "Einstein Lectures Dahlem" hosted by the university and several external institutions since 2005 are dedicated to Albert Einstein, who was the director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Physics for more than 15 years. It is an colloqium which presents fields in science which were influenced by Einstein's thinking. Freie Universität maintains wide-ranging international contacts to top universities and organizations which provide key impulses for research and teaching. In the 1950s, the Freie Universität had already established partnerships with leading universities in the United States such as the University of California System (including University of California, Berkeley, University of California, Los Angeles), University of Chicago, Cornell University, Stanford University (which also has a small campus within the FU ), Duke University, Princeton University, Yale University, and Columbia University, as well as with Western European universities like the University of Oxford, University of Cambridge, University College London, and École Normale Supérieure in Paris.  The university is a founding member of the global educational center for the study of transnational law, the Centre for Transnational Legal Studies in London. First contacts with universities in Eastern Europe were made in the 1970s. In the 1990s, links were in particular extended to include growing numbers of institutions in Canada (McGill University, University of Alberta, York University), Eastern Europe, and the Far East (China: Peking University, Fudan University, Nanjing University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University; Japan: University of Tokyo, Kyoto University, Nagoya University, Waseda University; South Korea: Korea University, Yonsei University, Seoul National University). The newly established Centre for International Cooperation (CIC) concentrates on identifying new strategic partners for international projects. Today, Freie Universität has established over 400 partnerships in five continents, many of them as part of the European ERASMUS program. Every year, about 600 visiting scientists contribute to the university teaching and research. For the grant programs in Germany, Freie Universität is one of the first choices both for the ERASMUS and Tempus as well as for the Fulbright program and the international programs of the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). An International Summer and Winter University (FUBiS) has been set up for international students offering (semi-)intensive German courses and numerous subject courses. The Freie Universität Berlin operates foreign branch offices in New York City, Brussels, Moscow, Beijing, Cairo, and New Delhi. The foreign branch offices work to expand upon cooperation partnerships already existing with universities in the country. In April 2005, the Freie Universität Berlin, in conjunction with Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU Munich), opened a joint representative office in New York. This German University Alliance, located in German House, the seat of the German Consulate General and the German UN Mission, represents the interests of the two universities in the United States and Canada and works to increase the exchange of students and scientists. In addition, Freie Universität Berlin, as the first German institution of higher education, founded an alumni- and fundraising organization, the Friends of the Freie Universität Berlin (FFUB) in New York. Since 2003 this alumni- and fundraising organization has maintained close contact to alumni and scientists of the Freie Universität in the U.S. and attempts to gain alumni and friends as sponsors, to strengthen the long-lasting trans-Atlantic relations. Some of the proceeds from these fundraising activities were contributed to the renovation of the Henry Ford Building. With additional branch offices in Moscow (since 2004), Peking, and New Delhi (opened in February 2008), operated in cooperation with strong partners, large research institutions, or universities, the Freie Universität Berlin is strategically extending its radius of action as an international network university. In April 2006 Peking University opened its first branch in Germany. Its objectives include the promotion of knowledge of Chinese culture, the cultivation of Chinese-German cooperation, and the spread of Chinese language. Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, has a Berlin program (Duke in Berlin), that is held in cooperation with the Freie Universität and Humboldt Universität. The University of California System organizes programs for American students in Berlin and Potsdam. At the Freie Universität the UC System maintains an office to attend to the needs of the exchange students from California. The Office of Global Programs of Columbia University in New York administrates the Berlin Consortium for German Studies. Students from Columbia University and the other colleges and universities included in the consortium (University of Chicago, Cornell University, Johns Hopkins University, University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, and Vassar College) can attend classes at the Freie Universität for one or two semesters as external students. This temporary enrollment is preceded by a six-week intensive language program. Freie Universität Berlin is consistently ranked among Germany's top universities overall, with particularly strong showing in the arts & humanities followed by the social sciences internationally. For instance, the 2009 THE-QS World University Rankings subject rankings in arts and humanities place the university 1st in Germany, 6th best in Europe, and 27th in the world.THE-QS World University Ranking 2009 The 2011 QS World University Rankings ranked the university at 66th internationally.http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/world-university-rankings/2011?page=1 The 2011 QS World University Rankings for law ranked the FU at 41st internationally, 12th best in Europe and 2nd in Germany. In the QS World Reputation Ranking 2014, Freie Universität was placed at the 81–90 slot being the fifth German university ranked in the list. According to the 2014 Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, the university ranks 130th worldwide and 35th in Europe. The CWTS Leiden Ranking ranks Freie Universität at 167th worldwide and 68th in Europe in 2013. In the "ExcellenceRanking" of the CHE (Center for Higher Education Development), Freie Universität ranks top in the fields of Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Political science. In the CHE "SubjectRanking", Freie Universität has been evaluated as one of Germany's best universities in Earth sciences, Computer science and Philosophy and also ranks among the Top 5 in Psychology, English studies and Education. Notable rival German universities in terms of rankings, particularly in the fields of the arts and humanities as well as the Social sciences include the University of Munich, the University of Heidelberg and the Humboldt University. Because of an unresolved dispute over the Nobel laureates before the Second World War (both Humboldt and Freie Universität claim to be the rightful successor of the University of Berlin), they do not appear in the ARWU rankings anymore. Alumni of Freie Universität include many scientists, philosophers and politicians, amongst them five Nobel Prize winners and 15 Leibniz laureates. The DFG has awarded the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize to outstanding German scientists every year since 1985. As the most acclaimed award for research achievements in Germany, it comes with a research grant of 2.5 million € to be used within seven years. During its history, Freie Universität has awarded various people with an honorary degree, amongst them:     Year !! International Ranking !! Regional (Europe) Ranking !! National Ranking !! Global Arts & Humanities Ranking !! Global Physical Sciences Ranking !! Global Social Sciences Ranking !! Global Life Sciences Ranking 2007 146 – 7 38 – – – 2008 137 – 4 24 – 62 – 2009 94 – 3 27 – 47 – 2010 – – – 34 – – – 2011 151 61 6 29 – – – 2012 128 48 6 25 – – – 2013 86 28 4 22 – 87 94 2014 81 27 5 24 – 75 89 2015 72 26 5 24 – 75 89 Year !! International Ranking !! National Ranking !! Global Arts & Humanities Ranking !! Global Natural Sciences Ranking !! Global Social Sciences & Management Ranking !! Global Life Sciences & Medicine Ranking 2006 149 – – – – – 2007 146 – 38 102 61 132 2008 137 4 24 82 62 177 2009 94 3 27 77 47 137 2010 70 4 25 66 53 64 2011 66 4 30 60 56 72 2012 87 4 26 59 52 74 2013 109 5 28 106 96 188 Year !! International Ranking 2003 95 2004 – 2005 – 2006 99 2007 83 Division I: Personnel Division II: Finances Division III: Engineering and Utilities Division IV: International Affairs Division V: Academic Affairs Division VI: Research Division VIII: Center for Digital Systems (CeDiS) Electronic Administration and Services (eAS) Botanical Garden Berlin and Botanical Museum Berlin Center for Academic Advising, Career and Counselling Services Center for Continuing Studies Center for Recreational Sports Center for the Promotion of Woman's and Gender Studies§ Computing Services (ZEDAT) Language Center Academic library Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy The department is split into three different institutes: The Institute of Biology, which specializes primarily in molecular botany, microbiology, neurobiology, ecological processes and biodiversity, the Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, where research is focused on structural formation, function and chemical reactivity, stereoselective/macromolecular synthesis and molecular, medical and structural biochemistry and the Institute of Pharmacy, the largest pharmaceutical training facility in Germany. Department of Earth Sciences The department is divided into the Institute of Geographical Sciences, the Institute of Geological Sciences and the Institute of Meteorology. Research focuses mainly on the interactive physical, chemical, and biological processes taking place within the Earth, on the Earth's surface, and the Earth's atmosphere, as well as on the interactions between humans and the environment. Since 1954, the Institute of Meteorology is the only institution apart from the National Weather Service of the US, who names the low and high pressure systems of the world. Department of History and Cultural Studies, which consists of eight subunits, the Friedrich Meinecke Institute of History, the Art History Department, the Department of Ancient Studies, the Department of East Asia and the Middle East, the Institute of Jewish Studies, the Seminar for Catholic Theology, the Institute of Comparative Ethics and the Institute for the Scientific Study of Religion Department of Law The Department of Law is organized into three academic units: civil law/private law, criminal law and public law. Key topics of research in legal studies include Europeanization and international interlinking of law, with emphases in the European and international law and comparative law, but also in the international economic and regulatory law, the law in social practice and age and demographic change within the field of law. School of Business and Economics, which contains two academic units Business Administration, which is divided into the departments of Finance, Accounting and Taxation, Information Systems, Management and Marketing Economics consisting of the departments of Economic Policy, Economic Theory, Public Economics and Statistics/Econometrics Department of Mathematics and Computer Science The department consists of the Institute of Mathematics and the Institute of Computer Science. The department is the only one in the Berlin-Brandenburg region offering degree programs in Bioinformatics. Research activities of the Institute of Mathematics focus on numerical mathematics, algebra, analysis, discrete mathematics and geometry, cooperating with the Institute of Computer Science, which focuses in the fields of artificial intelligence, robotics, scientific computing, telematics and information processing in neural and computer networks. The "FU-Fighters", a team of scientists and students of the Institute of Computer Science developing autonomous football-playing robots, were very successful in the international RoboCup competition, placing second in 1999, 2000 and 2003. They won in the "smallsize" league in 2004 and 2005. Since 2006, the "FUmanoids" team are competing in the category "humanoid kidsize" and placed second in the 2009 and 2010 RoboCup, winning the "Technical Challenge" in 2010. Department of Education and Psychology The Department of Education consists of 19 subdivisions and lies its emphasis in research on the anthropology of education, empirical research on education, schooling, and classroom instruction, school development research and intercultural education studies. The Department of Psychology is split into 16 subunits with a wide spectrum of research. Department of Philosophy and Humanities The department contains the Institute of Philosophy, the Institute of Greek and Latin Languages and Literatures, the Peter Szondi Institute of Comparative Literature, the Institute of German and Dutch Languages and Literatures, the Institute of Romance Languages and Literatures, the Institute of English Language and Literature, the Institute of Theater Studies and the Institute of Arts and Media Management. Department of Physics Traditionally rooted in fundamental research, the Department of Physics is divided into the institutes of experimental physics, theoretical physics and physics education. Major areas of focus in the research activities within the department are solid-state physics, cluster physics, surface physics, biophysics and physics education. Department of Political and Social Science The Otto-Suhr-Institute for Political Science is the biggest political-science institution in Germany. Divided into nine units, research at the Institute of Media and Communication Studies focuses on media change, uncertainty, crisis, and risk communication and political communication and transformation of the public sphere. Institute of Sociology and the Institute for Social and Cultural Anthropology Medical School Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin The joint department with the Humboldt University Berlin is now one of Europe's largest university hospitals. Department of Veterinary Medicine The department is one of five sites in Germany offering veterinary education and training and contains 20 academic units. The veterinary research performed within the department traditionally lies in emphasis especially on food safety and product quality in foods from animal sources. John F. Kennedy Institute for North American Studies Institute for Eastern European Studies Institute for Latin American Studies Natural Science and Mathematics Master in Mathematics, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Bioinformatics, Physics, and Computer Science Master in Polymer Science, a joint program of the "Big 3" (FU, TU, HU in Berlin) and the University of Potsdam Master in Statistics, a joint program of the "Big 3" and the Charité Life Sciences Master in Applied Epidemiology at Chartié in cooperation with the Robert Koch Institute (RKI). Master in Cerebrovascular Medicine at Chartié in cooperation with the Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC). Master in Consumer Health Care at Chartié Master in International Health at Chartié Master in Epidemiology at Chartié taught in German Master in Medical Neurosciences at Chartié Master in Molecular Medicine at Chartié Master in Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience (SCAN) Master in Toxicology at Chartié and University of Potsdam Earth Sciences Master in Environmental Earth Sciences Master in Geographical Sciences Political Science and Law Master in European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law, a double degree program with the Institut d'études politiques de Strasbourg Master in Political Science – European and International Affairs, a double degree program with the renowned Institut d'études politiques de Paris. Master in Public Policy & Management, a double degree program with the HEC Paris Humanities Master in English studies: Literature, Language, Culture Master in Global History Master in North American studies Master in Sociology – European Societies Master in Visual and Media Anthropology Veterinary Medicine Master in Veterinary Public Health (MVPH), a joint program with the Chiang Mai University in Thailand. "Ancient World" "Art and Aesthetics" "Ecosystem Dynamics in Central Asia" "Efficient Mathematical modeling" "European Languages: Structures – Development – Comparison" (ZEUS) "Historical Anthropology" "Middle Ages – Renaissance – Early Modern Times" "Research on Teaching and Learning" "Social and Cultural History of the Middle East" "Berlin Center for European Studies (BEST)" "Berlin Center for Caspian Region Studies" Berlin Mathematical School Graduate School of North American Studies Friedrich Schlegel Graduate School of Literary Studies Muslim Cultures and Societies Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative Therapies Berlin School of Integrative Oncology Graduate School of East Asian Studies Languages of Emotion Topoi – The Formation and Transformation of Space and Knowledge in Ancient Civilizations NeuroCure – Towards a Better Outcome of Neurological Disorders Unifying Concepts in Catalysis (together with the TU Berlin, HU Berlin and the University of Potsdam) Herta Müller, novelist and Nobel Prize in Literature (2009) (Professor) Gerhard Ertl, physicist and Nobel Prize in Chemistry (2007) (Professor) Ulrich Cubasch, Nobel Peace Prize (2007) (Professor) Reinhard Selten, economist and Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (1994) (Professor) Ernst Ruska, physicist and Winner of Nobel Prize in Physics (1986) (Professor) Prof. Dr. Volker Erdmann, Biochemistry (1987) Prof. Dr. Wolfram Saenger, Crystallography (1987) Prof. Dr. Randolf Menzel, Neuroscience (1991), member of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina Prof. Dr. Irmela Hijiya-Kirschnereit, Japanese Studies (1992) Prof. Dr. Jürgen Kocka, History (1992) Prof. Dr. Johann Mulzer, Organic chemistry (1994) Prof. Dr. Peter Schaefer, Jewish Studies (1994) Prof. Dr. Emo Welzl, Computer science (1995) Prof. Dr. Onno Oncken, Geology (1998) Prof. Dr. Regine Hengge-Aronis, Microbiology (1998) Prof. Dr. Joachim Küpper, Romance studies (2001), member of the Leopoldina Prof. Dr. Günter M. Ziegler, Mathematics (2001), member of the Leopoldina Prof. Dr.-Ing. Rupert Klein, Mathematics (2003) Prof. Dr. Gabriele Brandstetter, Theater studies (2004), member of the Leopoldina Prof. Dr. Gyburg Radke, Ancient Greek (2006) Johannes Agnoli, political scientist Arnulf Baring, historian and political scientist Peter Bieri, philosopher and writer Dieter Claessens, sociologist and anthropologist Gordon A. Craig, historian and writer Peter Eigen, Founder of Transparency International Ernst Fraenkel, political scientist Günter Faltin, economist Paul Feyerabend, philosopher Roman Herzog, President of Germany (1994–1999) Klaus Jacob, political scientist Jürgen Kocka, historian Herbert Marcuse, sociologist Yann Martel, writer Friedrich Meinecke, historian Ernst Nolte, historian Jacob Taubes, sociologist of religion, philosopher, and scholar of Judaism Irmela Hijiya-Kirschnereit, Japanologist Reinhard Furrer, scientist and astronaut Péter Szondi, literary scholar Wolfgang Rautenberg, mathematician Stefan Rinke, historian Thomas Risse, political scientist Raúl Rojas, computer scientist Gesine Schwan, political scientist and candidate for the German presidential election, 2004 Günter M. Ziegler, mathematician Georges Tamer, Islamic studies scholar Lorenz Weinrich, historian Andrea Fischer, Federal Ministry of Health (1998–2001) Annette Groth, politician in the German Left Party Eberhard Diepgen, Mayor of (West) Berlin (1984–1989, 1991–2001) Fritz Teufel, political activist in the 1960s, founder of Kommune 1 Günter Rexrodt, Economics Minister of Germany (1993–1998) Hans Eichel, Federal Ministry of Finance (1999–2005) Hans-Christian Ströbele, vice-leader of the German Green Party in the Bundestag Hans-Jürgen Papier, Federal Constitutional Court of Germany (2002–2010) Helga Zepp-LaRouche, German political activist, wife of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche Herta Däubler-Gmelin, Justice Minister of Germany (1998–2002) Ingeborg Gräßle, Member of the European Parliament Jan-Marco Luczak, politician and lawyer Jutta Limbach, President of the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany (1994–2002), President of Goethe-Instituts (2002–2008) Klaus Hänsch, President of the European Parliament (1994–1997) Klaus Uwe Benneter, German politician Mario Laserna Pinzón, Columbian politician Marion Caspers-Merk, politician Otto Schily, Federal Ministry of the Interior (1998–2005) Vassilios Skouris, President of the Court of Justice of the European Communities (since 2003) Walter Momper, Mayor of West Berlin (1989–1991) Volkmar Braunbehrens, German musicologist Reinhold Brinkmann, musicologist Christopher Clark, historian Mario Kopić, Croatian philosopher and author Jonathan Franzen, novelist Elmar Kraushaar, journalist and author Roman Inderst, economist Parag Khanna, Indian American author and analyst in the field of international relations Edwin Gentzler, American Germanist and translation scholar Lars Clausen, German sociologist Shoucheng Zhang, theoretical physisist Amity Shlaes, Senior fellow in economic history at the Council on Foreign Relations and syndicated columnist Wolfgang Becker, German film director and writer Markus Büchler, surgeon and physician Götz Aly, journalist, sociologist and historian Peter Loewenberg, historian, psychologist and professor at UCLA Stefan Heidemann, orientalist Jacques de Caso, American historian Frank W. Stahnisch, historian Gregor Thum, historian Michael Stürmer, historian Alexander von Roon, actor and director Carsten Niemitz, anatomist and ethologist José María Pérez Gay, information scientist Julian Voss-Andreae, sculptor and physicist Bertram Gawronski, social psychologist Michael Roes, writer and filmmaker Hartmut Zinser, scholar in the field of religious studies and ethnology Gudrun Ensslin, Terrorist David Madden (Jeopardy! contestant), Jeopardy! contestant and art historian 1949: Ernst Reuter, Theodor Heuss 1956: Lise Meitner by the Department of Physics 1963: Walter Gropius by the Department of Philosophy 1964: Robert F. Kennedy by the Department of Philosophy 1998: Paul Krugman by the JFK Institute for North American Studies 1999: Bronislaw Geremek by the Otto Suhr Institute, Salman Rushdie by the Department of Philosophy and Humanities 2001: Kofi Anan by the Department of Political and Social Sciences 2005: Günther Grass and Imre Kertesz by the Department of Philosophy and Humanities 2006: Marcel Reich-Ranicki by the Department of Philosophy and Humanities, Theodor W. Hänsch by the Department of Physics 2007: Orhan Pamuk by the Department of Philosophy and Humanities 2008: Cees Nooteboom by the  Department of Philosophy and Humanities 2010: Ed Diener by the Department of Education and Psychology, Jagdish Bhagwati by the School of Business and Economics 2012: Homi K. Bhabha by the Department of Philosophy and Humanities, George M. Whitesides by the Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy Humboldt University of Berlin Technical University of Berlin University of Potsdam Official Homepage Berlin Consortium for German Studies Berlin Mathematical School (BMS) Berlin-Dahlem Botanical Garden
