    Gdańsk (, English pronunciation , (German: Danzig) , also known by other alternative names) is a Polish city on the Baltic coast, the capital of the Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland's principal seaport and the centre of the country's fourth-largest metropolitan area. The city lies on the southern edge of Gdańsk Bay (of the Baltic Sea), in a conurbation with the city of Gdynia, spa town of Sopot, and suburban communities, which together form a metropolitan area called the Tricity (Trójmiasto), with a population near 1,400,000. Gdańsk itself has a population of 460,427 (December 2012), making it the largest city in the Pomerania region of Northern Poland. Gdańsk is the historical capital of Gdańsk Pomerania and the largest city of Kashubia. The city was close to the former late medieval boundary between West Slavic and Germanic seized lands and it has a complex political history with periods of Polish rule, periods of German rule, and extensive self-rule, with two spells as a free city. Between the World Wars, the Free City of Danzig was in a customs union with Poland and was located between German East Prussia and the "Polish corridor" to the sea where the harbour of Gdynia grew up. Gdańsk has been part of modern Poland since 1945. Gdańsk is situated at the mouth of the Motława River, connected to the Leniwka, a branch in the delta of the nearby Vistula River, whose waterway system supplies 60% of the area of Poland and connects Gdańsk to the national capital in Warsaw. This gives the city a unique advantage as the focus of Poland's sea trade. Together with the nearby port of Gdynia, Gdańsk is also an important industrial centre. Historically an important seaport and shipbuilding centre, Gdańsk was a member of the Hanseatic League. The city was the birthplace of the Solidarity movement which, under the leadership of Lech Wałęsa, played a major role in bringing an end to Communist rule across Central Europe. The city's name is thought to originate from the Gdania River,From the history of Gdańsk city name, as explained at Gdańsk Guide the original name of the Motława branch on which the city is situated. Like many other Central European cities, Gdańsk has had many different names throughout its history. The name of a settlement was recorded after St. Adalbert's death in AD 997 as urbs Gyddanyzc and later was written as Kdanzk in 1148, Gdanzc in 1188, Danceke in 1228, Gdansk in 1236,Also in 1454, 1468, 1484, and 1590 Danzc in 1263, Danczk in 1311,Also in 1399, 1410, and 1414–1438 Danczik in 1399,Also in 1410, 1414 Danczig  in 1414, and Gdąnsk in 1656. In Polish the modern name of the city is pronounced . In English (where the diacritic over the "n" is frequently omitted) the usual pronunciation is  or . The German name, "Danzig", is pronounced as . The city's Latin name may be given as either Gedania, Gedanum or Dantiscum; the variety of Latin names reflects the mixed influence of the city's Polish, German and Kashubian heritage. Other former spellings of the name include Dantzig, Dantsic and Dantzic. On special occasions the city is also referred to as "The Royal Polish City of Gdańsk" (Polish Królewskie Polskie Miasto Gdańsk, Latin Regia Civitas Polonica Gedanensis, Kashubian Królewsczi Polsczi Gard Gduńsk).Gdańsk, in: Kazimierz Rymut, Nazwy Miast Polski, Ossolineum, Wrocław 1987Hubert Gurnowicz, Gdańsk, in: Nazwy miast Pomorza Gdańskiego, Ossolineum, Wrocław 1978Baedeker's Northern Germany, Karl Baedeker Publishing, Leipzig 1904 In the Kashubian language the city is called Gduńsk. Kashubians also use the name "Our Capital City Gduńsk" (Nasz Stoleczny Gard Gduńsk) or "The Kashubian Capital City Gduńsk" (Stoleczny Kaszëbsczi Gard Gduńsk).  The origins of the city are subject to ongoing research. The first written record thought to refer to Gdańsk is the vita of Saint Adalbert. Written in 999, it describes how in 997 Saint Adalbert of Prague baptised the inhabitants of urbs Gyddannyzc, "which separated the great realm of the duke [i.e. Boleslaw the Brave of Poland] from the sea."Loew, Peter Oliver: Danzig. Biographie einer Stadt, Munich 2011, p. 24. No further written sources exist for the 10th and 11th centuries. Based on the date in Adalbert's vita, the city celebrated its millennial anniversary in 1997.Wazny, Tomasz; Paner, Henryk; Golebiewski, Andrzej; Koscinski, Bogdan: Early medieval Gdansk/Danzig revisited (EuroDendro 2004), Rendsburg 2004, pdf-abstract. Archaeological evidence for the origins of the town was largely retrieved between 1948 and 1978, after World War II had laid 90% of the city centre in ruins and extensive surveys and excavations were carried out.Loew (2011), p. 24; Wazny et al. (2004), abstract. The oldest seventeen settlement levels were dated to between 980 and 1308. It is generally thought that Mieszko I of Poland erected a stronghold in the 980s, thereby connecting the Polish state ruled by the Piast dynasty with the trade routes of the Baltic Sea. The dates assigned to the oldest finds have been questioned, resulting in a verification survey in 2003, re-evaluating old finds and also examining new sites on the basis of dendrochronology. None of the remains of the medieval stronghold date to before the 1050s/1060s.Loew (2011), p. 27; Wazny et al. (2004), abstract. Loew (2011) asked if there maybe was an earlier, not yet located stronghold, and said that the identified stronghold site, consisting of a fort and a suburbium covering 2.7 ha which may have held 2,200 to 2,500 inhabitants, does not only lack finds from before 1060, but that no material from after the mid-12th century has been retrieved from the fort.Loew, Peter Oliver: Danzig. Biographie einer Stadt, Munich 2011, p. 27. Loew adds that traces of settlement dating to the 10th century have been found in parts of today's Gdańsk outside said stronghold.Loew, Peter Oliver: Danzig. Biographie einer Stadt, Munich 2011, pp. 27–28.  The site was ruled on behalf of Poland by the Samborides' duchy and consisted of a settlement at the modern Long Market, craftsmen settlements along the Old Ditch, German merchant settlements around the St Nicolas church and the old Piast stronghold. In 1186, a Cistercian monastery was set up in nearby Oliwa, which is now within the city limits. In 1215, the ducal stronghold became the centre of a Pomerelian splinter duchy. In 1224/25, German merchants from Lübeck established a presence in the area of the earlier fortress as "guests" (hospites) but were soon forced to leave by Swantopolk II of the Samborides in 1238 during a war between Swantopolk and the Teutonic Knights, during which Lübeck supported the latter. Migration of German merchants to the town resumed in 1257. Significant German influence did not appear until the 14th century, after the takeover of the city by the Teutonic Knights. About 1235, the town was granted city rights under Lübeck law by Pomerelian duke, Swantopolk II. It was an autonomy charter similar to that of Lübeck, which was also the primary origin of many settlers. In 1300, the town had an estimated population of 2,000. While overall the town was not a very important trade centre at that time, it had some relevance in the trade with  Eastern Europe. Low on funds, the Samborides lent the settlement to Brandenburg, although they planned to take the city back and give it to Poland. Poland threatened to intervene, and Brandenburg left the town. Subsequently, the city was taken by Danish princes in 1301. The Teutonic Knights were hired by the Polish nobles to clear out the Danes. In 1308, the town was taken by Brandenburg and the Teutonic Knights were hired by the Polish prince (later king) Władysław I the Elbow-high to restore order. Subsequently, the Knights took over control of the town. Primary sources record a massacre carried out by the Teutonic Knights on the local population, of 10,000 people, but the exact number killed is subject of dispute in modern scholarship.Hartmut Boockmann, Ostpreussen und Westpreussen, Siedler, 2002, p.158, ISBN 3-88680-212-4 Some authors accept the number given in the original sources,James Minahan, One Europe, Many Nations: A Historical Dictionary of European National Groups, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2000, ISBN 0-313-30984-1, p.376 Google Books while others consider 10,000 to have been a medieval exaggeration, although scholarly consensus is that a massacre of some magnitude did take place. The events were used by the Polish crown to condemn the Teutonic Knights in a subsequent papal lawsuit.Thomas Urban: "Rezydencja książąt Pomorskich".  The knights colonised the area, replacing local Kashubians and Poles with German settlers.  In 1308, they founded Osiek Hakelwerk near the town, initially as a Slavic fishing settlement. In 1340, the Teutonic Knights built a large fortress, which became the seat of the knights' Komtur. In 1343, they founded Rechtstadt, which in contrast to the pre-existing town (thence Altstadt, "Old Town" or Stare Miasto) was chartered with Kulm Law. In 1358, Danzig joined the Hanseatic League, and became an active member in 1361. It maintained relations with the trade centers Bruges, Novgorod, Lisboa and Sevilla. In 1377, the Old Town's city limits were expanded. In 1380, the New Town was founded as the fourth, independent settlement. After a series of Polish-Teutonic Wars, in the Treaty of Kalisz (1343) the Order had to acknowledge that it would hold Pomerelia as an alm from the Polish Crown. Although it left the legal basis of the Order's possession of the province in some doubt, the city thrived as a result of increased exports of grain (especially wheat), timber, potash, tar, and other goods of forestry from Prussia and Poland via the Vistula River trading routes, despite the fact that after its capture, the Teutonic Knights tried to actively reduce the economic significance of the town. While under the control of the Teutonic Order German migration increased. A new war broke out in 1409, ending with the Battle of Grunwald (1410), and the city came under the control of the Kingdom of Poland. A year later, with the First Peace of Thorn, it returned to the Teutonic Order.Historia Gdanska In 1440, the city participated in the foundation of the Prussian Confederation which was an organisation opposed to the rule of the Teutonic Knights. This led to the Thirteen Years' War of independence from the Teutonic Monastic State of Prussia (1454–1466). On May 25, 1457, the city – jointly with Royal Prussia – became part of the Crown of Poland while maintaining its rights and independence as an autonomous city.Poland. Chronology.Danzig – Gdańsk until 1920  On 15 May 1457, Casimir IV of Poland granted the town the Great Privilege, after he had been invited by the town's council and had already stayed in town for five weeks. With the Great Privilege, the town was granted a measure of autonomy within the Kingdom of Poland.: "Geben wir und verlehen unnsir Stadt Danczk das sie zcu ewigen geczeiten nymands for eynem herrn halden noc gehorsam zcu weszen seyn sullen in weltlichen sachen." The privilege removed tariffs and taxes on trade within Poland, Lithuania and Ruthenia (present day Belarus and Ukraine) and conferred on the town independent jurisdiction, legislation and administration of her territory, as well as the right to mint its own coin. Furthermore, the privilege united Old Town, Osiek and Main Town, and legalizsd the demolition of New Town, which had sided with the Teutonic Knights. By 1457, New Town was demolished completely, no buildings remained. Gaining free and privileged access to Polish markets, the seaport prospered while simultaneously trading with the other Hanseatic cities. After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) with the Teutonic Monastic State of Prussia the warfare between the latter and the Polish crown ended permanently. After the Union of Lublin between Poland and Lithuania in 1569 the city continued to enjoy a large degree of internal autonomy (cf. Danzig Law). In the 1575 election of a king to the Polish throne, Gdańsk supported Maximilian II against Stephen Báthory. It was the latter who eventually became monarch but the city, encouraged by the secret support of Denmark and Emperor Maximilian, shut its gates against Stephen. After the Siege of Danzig (1577), lasting six months, the city's army of 5,000 mercenaries was utterly defeated in a field battle on 16 December 1577. However, since Stephen's armies were unable to take the city by force, a compromise was reached: Stephen Báthory confirmed the city's special status and her Danzig Law privileges granted by earlier Polish kings. The city recognised him as ruler of Poland and paid the enormous sum of 200,000 guldens in gold as payoff ("apology"). Beside the large number of German-speakers, whose elites sometimes distinguished their German dialect as Pomerelian,Bömelburg, Hans-Jürgen, Zwischen polnischer Ständegesellschaft und preußischem Obrigkeitsstaat: vom Königlichen Preußen zu Westpreußen (1756–1806), München: Oldenbourg, 1995, (Schriften des Bundesinstituts für Ostdeutsche Kultur und Geschichte (Oldenburg); 5), zugl.: Mainz, Johannes Gutenberg-Univ., Diss., 1993, 549 pp. the city was home to a large number of Polish-speaking Poles, Jewish Poles, Latvian speaking Kursenieki, Flemings and Dutch. In addition, a number of Scots took refuge or migrated to and received citizenship in the city. During the Protestant Reformation, most German-speaking inhabitants adopted Lutheranism. Due to the special status of the city and significance within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the city inhabitants largely became bi-cultural sharing both Polish and German culture and were strongly attached to the traditions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.Historia Polski 1795–1815 Andrzej Chwalba Kraków 2000, page 441 The city suffered a last great plague and a slow economic decline due to the wars of the 18th century, when it was taken by the Russians after the Siege of Danzig in 1734. Danzig was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1793, in the Second Partition of Poland. During the era of Napoleon Bonaparte the city became a free city in the period extending from 1807 to 1814. In 1815, after France's defeat in the Napoleonic Wars, it again became part of Prussia and became the capital of Regierungsbezirk Danzig within the province of West Prussia. The city's longest serving president was Robert von Blumenthal, who held office from 1841, through the revolutions of 1848, until 1863. With the unification of Germany under Prussian hegemony, the city became part of Imperial Germany (the German Empire) in 1871, and remained so until 1919, after Germany's defeat in World War I.  When Poland regained its independence after World War I with access to the sea as promised by the Allies on the basis of Woodrow Wilson's "Fourteen Points" (point 13 called for "an independent Polish state", "which should be assured a free and secure access to the sea"), the Poles hoped the city's harbour would also become part of Poland. However, since Germans formed a majority in the city, with Poles being a minority,In the 1923 census 7,896 people out of 335,921 gave Polish, Kashubian or Masurian as their native language. . Polish estimates of the Polish minority during the interwar era, however, range from 37,000 to 100,000 (9%–34%). Studia historica Slavo-Germanica, Tomy 18–20page 220 Uniwersytet Adama Mickiewicza w Poznaniu. Instytut Historii Wydawnictwo Naukowe imienia. Adama Mickiewicza, 1994. the city was not placed under Polish sovereignty. Instead, in accordance with the terms of the Versailles Treaty, it became the Free City of Danzig, an independent quasi-state under the auspices of the League of Nations with its external affairs largely under Polish control. Poland's rights also included free usage of the harbour, a Polish post office, a garrison in Westerplatte district, customs union with Poland etc. This led to a considerable tension between the city and the surrounding Republic of Poland. The Free City had its own constitution, national anthem, parliament (Volkstag), and government (Senat). It issued its own stamps as well as currency. The German population of the Free City of Danzig favoured reincorporation into Germany.  In the early 1930s the local Nazi Party capitalised on pro-German sentiments and in 1933 garnered 50% of vote in the parliament. Thereafter, the Nazis under Gauleiter Albert Forster achieved dominance in the city government, which was still nominally overseen by the League of Nations' High Commissioner. The German government officially demanded the return of Danzig to Germany along with an extraterritorial (meaning under German jurisdiction) highway through the area of the Polish Corridor for land-based access between those parts of Germany. Hitler used the issue of the status of the city as a pretext for attacking Poland and on May 1939, during a high level meeting of German military officials explained to them: "It is not Danzig that is at stake. For us it is a matter of expanding our Lebensraum in the east", adding that there will be no repeat of the Czech situation, and Germany will attack Poland at first opportunity, after isolating the country from its Western Allies.The history of the German resistance, 1933–1945 Peter Hoffmann page 37 McGill-Queen's University Press 1996Hitler Joachim C. Fest page 586 Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2002Blitzkrieg w Polsce wrzesien 1939 Richard Hargreaves page 84 Bellona, 2009A military history of Germany, from the eighteenth century to the present dayMartin Kitchen page 305 Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1975International history of the twentieth century and beyond Antony Best page 181 Routledge; 2 edition (July 30, 2008) As Nazi demands increased, German-Polish relations rapidly deteriorated. Germany invaded Poland on September 1 after having signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union in late August. The German attack began in Danzig, with a bombardment of Polish positions at Westerplatte by the German battleship Schleswig-Holstein, and the landing of German infantry on the peninsula. Outnumbered Polish defenders at Westerplatte resisted for seven days before running out of ammunition. Meanwhile, after a fierce day-long fight (1 September 1939), defenders of the Polish Post office were tried and executed then buried on the spot in the Danzig quarter of Zaspa in October 1939. In 1998 a German court overturned their conviction and sentence. The decision was based on the fact that Danzig law did not have a death penalty and therefore any crimes committed by the defenders of the post could not be punished by death. The city was officially annexed by Nazi Germany and incorporated into the Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia. About 50 percent of members of the Jewish Community of Danzig had left the city within a year after a Pogrom in October 1937,Gdansk at Jewish Virtual Library after the Kristallnacht riots in November 1938 the community decided to organize its emigration and in March 1939 a first transport to Palestine started.shoa.de  By September 1939 barely 1,700 mostly elderly Jews remained. In early 1941 just 600 Jews were still living in Danzig most of whom were later murdered in the Holocaust.Encyclopedia of Jewish Communities in Poland, Volume VI Out of the 2,938 Jewish community in the city 1,227 were able to escape from the Nazis before the outbreak of war.Żydzi na terenie Wolnego Miasta Gdańska w latach 1920–1945:działalność kulturalna, polityczna i socjalnaGrzegorz Berendt Gdańskie Tow. Nauk., Wydz. I Nauk Społecznych i Humanistycznych, 1997 page 245 Nazi secret police had been observing Polish minority communities in the city since 1936, compiling information, which in 1939 served to prepare lists of Poles to be captured in Operation Tannenberg. On the first day of the war, approximately 1,500 ethnic Poles were arrested, some because of their participation in social and economic life, others because they were activists and members of various Polish organisations. On 2 September 1939, 150 of them were deported to the Sicherheitsdienst camp Stutthof some  from Danzig, and murdered.Museums Stutthof in Sztutowo. Retrieved January 31, 2007. Many Poles living in Danzig were deported to Stutthof or executed in the Piaśnica forest. In 1941, Hitler ordered the invasion of the Soviet Union, eventually causing the fortunes of war to turn against Germany. As the Soviet Army advanced in 1944, German populations in Central and Eastern Europe took flight, resulting in the beginning of a great population shift. After the final Soviet offensives began in January 1945, hundreds of thousands of German refugees converged on Danzig, many of whom had fled on foot from East Prussia, some tried to escape through the city's port in a large-scale evacuation involving hundreds of German cargo and passenger ships. Some of the ships were sunk by the Soviets, including the Wilhelm Gustloff after an evacuation was attempted at neighbouring Gdynia. In the process, tens of thousands of refugees were killed.  The city also endured heavy Allied and Soviet air raids. Those who survived and could not escape had to face the Soviet Army, which captured the heavily damaged city on 30 March 1945,Gdansk, history. Official website. followed by large-scale rapeBrady, Tara. 2013. Polish town tears down statue marking the rape of millions of German women by Russian soldiers. Mail Online (October 14). and looting.Biskupski, Mieczysław B. The History of Poland. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, p. 97.Tighe, Carl. Gdańsk: National Identity in the Polish-German Borderlands. London: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 199. In line with the decisions made by the Allies at the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the city became part of Poland. The remaining German residents of the city who had survived the war fled or were forcibly expelled to postwar Germany, and the city was repopulated by ethnic Poles; up to 18 percent (1948) of them had been deported by the Soviets in two major waves from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union, i.e. from the eastern portion of pre-war Poland. Parts of the historic old city of Gdańsk, which had suffered large-scale destruction during the war, were rebuilt during the 1950s and 1960s. The reconstruction was not tied to the city's pre-war appearance, but instead was politically motivated as a means of culturally cleansing and destroying all traces of German influence from the city. Any traces of German tradition were ignored, suppressed, or regarded as "Prussian barbarism" only worthy of demolition, while Flemish/Dutch, Italian and French influences were used to replace the historically accurate Germanic architecture which the city was built upon since the 14th century. Boosted by heavy investment in the development of its port and three major shipyards for Soviet ambitions in the Baltic region, Gdańsk became the major shipping and industrial center of the Communist People's Republic of Poland. In December 1970, Gdańsk was the scene of anti-regime demonstrations, which led to the downfall of Poland's communist leader Władysław Gomułka. During the demonstrations in Gdańsk and Gdynia, military as well as the police opened fire on the demonstrators causing several dozen deaths. Ten years later, in August, 1980, Gdańsk Shipyard was the birthplace of the Solidarity trade union movement, whose opposition to the Communist regime led to the end of Communist Party rule in 1989, and sparked a series of protests that successfully overturned the Communist regimes of the former Soviet bloc. Solidarity's leader, Lech Wałęsa became President of Poland in 1990. In 2014 the European Solidarity Centre, a museum and library devoted to the history of the movement, opened in Gdańsk. Gdańsk native Donald Tusk became Prime Minister of Poland in 2007, and President of the European Council in 2014. Today Gdańsk is a major shipping port and tourist destination. Gdańsk has a temperate climate, with cold, cloudy, moderate winters and mild summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms. Average temperatures range from  and average rainfall varies from 17.9&nbsp;mm/month to 66.7&nbsp;mm/month. In general it is a maritime climate and therefore damp, variable and mild. The seasons are clearly differentiated. Spring starts in March and is initially cold and windy, later becoming pleasantly warm and often very sunny. Summer, which begins in June, is predominantly warm but hot at times (with temperature reaching as high as 30-35C at least once per year) with plenty of sunshine interspersed with heavy rain. The average annual hours of sunshine for Gdańsk are 1700. July and August are the hottest months. Autumn comes in September and is at first warm and usually sunny, turning cold, damp and foggy in November. Winter lasts from December to March and includes periods of snow. January and February are the coldest months with the temperature sometimes dropping as low as . The industrial sections of the city are dominated by shipbuilding, petrochemical & chemical industries, and food processing. The share of high-tech sectors such as electronics, telecommunications, IT engineering, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals is on the rise. Amber processing is also an important part of the local economy, as the majority of the world's amber deposits lie along the Baltic coast. The Pomeranian Voivodeship, including Gdańsk, is also a major tourist destination in the summer months, as millions of Poles and other European tourists flock to the beaches of the Baltic coastline. Major companies in Gdańsk:  The city has some buildings surviving from the time of the Hanseatic League. Most tourist attractions are located along or near Ulica Długa (Long Street) and Długi Targ (Long Market), a pedestrian thoroughfare surrounded by buildings reconstructed in historical (primarily during the 17th century) style and flanked at both ends by elaborate city gates. This part of the city is sometimes referred to as the Royal Road, since it was once the former path of processions for visiting kings.     Walking from end to end, sites encountered on or near the Royal Way include: Gdańsk has a number of historical churches: The National Museum contains a number of important artworks, including Hans Memling's Last Judgement The museum ship SS Soldek is anchored on the Motława River and was the first ship built in post-war Poland. The Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre is a Shakespearean theatre built on the historical site of a 17th-century playhouse where English travelling players came to perform. The new theatre, completed in 2014, hosts the annual Gdańsk Shakespeare Festival. The Danzig Research Society founded in 1743 was one of the first of its kind. The city's 17th-century fortifications represent one of Poland's official national Historic Monuments (Pomnik historii), as designated September 16, 1994 and tracked by the National Heritage Board of Poland. Other main sights in the historical city centre include: Main sights outside the historical city centre include: In 2011-2015 the Warsaw-Gdańsk-Gdynia railway route underwent a major upgrading costing $3 billion, partly funded by the European Investment Bank, including track replacement, realignment of curves and relocation of sections of track to allow speeds up to , modernization of stations, and installation of the most modern ETCS signalling system, which was completed in June 2015. In December 2014 new Alstom Pendolino high-speed trains were put into service between Gdańsk, Warsaw and Kraków reducing the rail travel time from Gdańsk to Warsaw to 2 hours 58 minutes,Polish Pendolino launches 200 km/h operation, Railway Gazette International, 15 December 2014Pendolino z Trójmiasta do Warszawy further reduced in December 2015 to 2 hours 39 minutes.';Jeszcze szybciej z Warszawy do Gdańska,' Kurier Kolejowy 9 01 2015  http://www.kurierkolejowy.eu/aktualnosci/22716/Jeszcze-szybciej-z-Warszawy-do-Gdanska.html Gdańsk is the starting point of the EuroVelo 9 cycling route which continues southward through Poland, then into the Czech Republic, Austria and Slovenia before ending at the Adriatic Sea in Pula, Croatia.   There are many popular professional sports teams in the Gdańsk and Tricity area. Amateur sports are played by thousands of Gdańsk citizens and also in schools of all levels (elementary, secondary, university). The city's professional football club is Lechia Gdańsk. Founded in 1945, they play in the Ekstraklasa, Poland's top division. Their home stadium, PGE Arena, was one of the four Polish stadiums to host the UEFA Euro 2012 competition. Other notable clubs include rugby club Lechia Gdańsk (12 times Polish Champion) and motorcycle speedway club Wybrzeże Gdańsk.  Contemporary Gdańsk is the capital of the province called Pomeranian Voivodeship and is one of the major centers of economic and administrative life in Poland. Many important agencies of the state and local government levels have their main offices here: the Provincial Administration Office, the Provincial Government, the Ministerial Agency of the State Treasury, the Agency for Consumer and Competition Protection, the National Insurance regional office, the Court of Appeals, and the High Administrative Court. Gdańsk Voivodeship was extended in 1999 to include most of former Słupsk Voivodeship, the western part of Elbląg Voivodeship and Chojnice County from Bydgoszcz Voivodeship to form the new Pomeranian Voivodeship. The area of the region was thus extended from  and the population rose from 1,333,800 (1980) to 2,198,000 (2000). By 1998, Tricity constituted an absolute majority of the population; almost half of the inhabitants of the new region live in the centre. Gdańsk is divided into 34 administrative divisions: 6 dzielnicas and 28 osiedles. Gdańsk dzielnicas include: Chełm, Piecki-Migowo, Przymorze Wielkie, Śródmieście, Wrzeszcz Dolny, Wrzeszcz Górny Osiedles: Aniołki, Brętowo, Brzeźno, Jasień, Kokoszki, Krakowiec-Górki Zachodnie, Letnica, Matarnia, Młyniska, Nowy Port, Oliwa, Olszynka, Orunia-Św. Wojciech-Lipce, Osowa, Przeróbka, Przymorze Małe, Rudniki, Siedlce, Sobieszewo Island, Stogi, Strzyża, Suchanino, Ujeścisko-Łostowice, VII Dwór, Wzgórze Mickiewicza, Zaspa-Młyniec, Zaspa-Rozstaje, Żabianka-Wejhera-Jelitkowo-Tysiąclecia    There are 14 higher schools including 3 universities. In 2001 there were 60,436 students, including 10,439 graduates. Gdańsk is twinned with:[in chronological order] Market Hall Hala Targowa Gdańsk John III Sobieski Monument in Gdańsk John III Sobieski's Coat of Arms Golden Gate Złota Brama The medieval port crane Żuraw Gdańsk downtown Hotel Admirał in Gdańsk Modern blocks in Obrońców Wybrzeża Street Pier Molo in Brzeźno-Gdańsk Mariacka st. Wisłoujście Fortress Oliwa Cathedral St. Catherine church in Gdańsk Westerplatte – Monument nearby Gdańsk Old Town Hall Gdańsk University – Faculty of Law and Administration The Abbot's Palace in Oliwa Gdańsk – Townhouses, Długi Targ street Gdańsk – Townhouses Gdańsk – Neptun/ref>  Gdańsk – Old Town Gdańsk – Old Town, Mariacka street Monument to the Fallen Shipyard Workers of 1970 in Gdańsk Stągiewna Gate Saint Barbara church Swan Tower Baszta Łabędź Horse tram Herbrand, 1873 Monument to Pope Saint John Paul II Monument Gdańsk-Zaspa Port of Gdańsk from mainmast of Fryderyk Chopin Arabian camel with young in Gdańsk ZOO Wisłoujście Fortress Gdańsk Westerplatte beach Gdańsk University of Technology by night Tugboats in Remontowa Shipyard Cycling day in Gdańsk    Acxiom – IT Arla Foods – food processing Bayer Shared Service Centre - finance & accounting Cognor – steel, engineering, capital goods Coleman Research - knowledge broker Crist – shipbuilding Delphi – automotive parts Dr. Oetker – food processing Grupa Lotos - energy, petrol refinery Energa Trading – electrical and heat energy Bank BPH – finance Gdańska Stocznia Remontowa – shipbuilding Elektrociepłownie Wybrzeże – energy LPP – retail Polnord Energobudowa – construction company Petrobaltic – energy, oil drilling Intel – IT IBM – IT IVONA (Amazon company) – IT Fineos – IT Fineos Locations Wirtualna Polska – internet service Kainos – IT Lufthansa Systems – IT Jeppesen - IT Compuware – IT Thomson Reuters – media ThyssenKrupp – steel, engineering, capital goods Maersk Line – services & pick-up Transcom WorldWide – business processing outsourcing Jysk – retail Meritum Bank – finance Glencore – raw materials Orlen Morena – energy Fosfory Ciech – chemical company Hydrobudowa – construction company Llentabhallen – steel constructions Ziaja – cosmetics and beauty company Stabilator – construction company Skanska – construction company Flügger – paints manufacturing HD heavy duty – retail Dresser Wayne – retail fueling systems First Data – finance Masterlease – finance Transcom WorldWide – business processing outsourcing Weyerhaeuser Cellulose Fibres – cellulose fibre manufacturing Gdańsk Shipyard – shipbuilding Remontowa Shipbuilding – shipbuilding OIE Support – education services (part of Laureate International Universities) PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP - professional services Kemira - chemical industry group BreakThru Films - animated film studio Schibsted - IT Regus - business support services Mango Media - home shopping channel MOL Europe - shipping VB Leasing - finance Metsä Group - forest industry Competence Call Centre - call centre EPAM Systems - IT Esotiq&Henderson - retail Bayer - chemical and pharmaceutical company Playsoft - IT Staples Advantage - office products Deloitte - professional services KPMG - professional services Comarch - IT ESO Audit - professional services TF Bank - finance Upland Gate (Brama Wyżynna) Torture House (Katownia) Prison Tower (Wieża więzienna) Golden Gate (Złota Brama) Long Street (Ulica Długa) Uphagen House (Dom Uphagena) Main Town Hall (Ratusz Głównego Miasta) Long Market (Długi Targ) Artus' Court (Dwór Artusa) Neptune Fountain (Fontanna Neptuna) Golden House (Złota kamienica) Green Gate (Zielona Brama) St. Bridget St. Catherine St. John St. Mary (Bazylika Mariacka), a municipal church built during the 15th century, is the largest brick church in the world. St. Nicholas' Church Gradowa Hill Granaries on the Ołowianka and Granary Islands Great Armoury John III Sobieski Monument Old Town Hall Royal Chapel Żuraw - medieval port crane Abbot's Palace in the Oliwa Park Lighthouse in Nowy Port Oliwa Cathedral Pachołek Hill - an observation point in Oliwa Pier in Brzeźno Westerplatte Wisłoujście Fortress Zoo in Oliwa Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport – an international airport located in Gdańsk; The Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity), (SKM) the 'Fast Urban Railway,' functions as a Metro system for the Tricity area including Gdańsk, Sopot and Gdynia, operating frequent trains to 27 stations covering the Tricity.SKM Passenger Information, Map http://www.skm.pkp.pl/  The service is operated by electric multiple unit trains at a frequency of 6 minutes to 30 minutes between trains (depending on the time of day) on the central section between Gdańsk and Gdynia, and less frequently on outlying sections. The SKM system has been extended northwest of the Tricity, to Wejherowo, Lębork and Słupsk, 110&nbsp;km west of Gdynia, and to the south it has been extended to Tczew, 31&nbsp;km south of Gdańsk. Railways:  The principal station in Gdańsk is Gdańsk Główny railway station, served by both SKM local trains and PKP long distance trains. In addition, long distance trains also stop at Gdańsk Oliwa railway station, Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station, Sopot and Gdynia. Gdańsk also has nine (9) other railway stations, served by local SKM trains; Long distance trains are operated by PKP Intercity which provides connections with all major Polish cities, including Warsaw, Kraków, Łódź, Poznań, Katowice and Szczecin, and with the neighbouring Kashubian Lakes region. A new railway, Pomorska Kolej Metropolitalna (PKM, the 'Pomeranian Metropolitan Railway'), commenced service on 1 September 2015, connecting Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport with Wrzeszcz and downtown Gdańsk. It connects to the Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity) (SKM) which provides further connections to the entire area served by SKM. City buses and trams are operated by ZTM Gdańsk (Zarząd Transportu Miejskiego w Gdańsku). Port of Gdańsk – a seaport located on the southern coast of Gdańsk Bay within the city; Obwodnica Trojmiejska – part of expressway S6 that bypasses the cities of Gdańsk, Sopot and Gdynia. The A1 motorway connects the port and city of Gdańsk with the southern border of the country. As of 2014, some fragments of the A1 motorway are still incomplete. Gdańsk University (Uniwersytet Gdański) Gdańsk University of Technology (Politechnika Gdańska) Gdańsk Medical University (Gdański Uniwersytet Medyczny) Academy of Physical Education and Sport of Gdańsk (Akademia Wychowania Fizycznego i Sportu im. Jędrzeja Śniadeckiego) Musical Academy (Akademia Muzyczna im. Stanisława Moniuszki) Arts Academy (Akademia Sztuk Pięknych)ASP.gda.pl Instytut Budownictwa Wodnego PAN AteneumSzkoła Wyższa Gdańska Wyższa Szkoła Humanistyczna Gdańska Wyższa Szkoła Administracji Wyższa Szkoła Bankowa Wyższa Szkoła Społeczno-Ekonomiczna Wyższa Szkoła Turystyki i Hotelarstwa w Gdańsku Wyższa Szkoła Zarządzania Gdańsk Scientific Society Baltic Institute (Instytut Bałtycki), established 1925 in Toruń, since 1946 (?) in Gdańsk TNOiK – Towarzystwo Naukowe Organizacji i Kierowania (Scientific Society for Organization and Management) O/Gdańsk IBNGR – Instytut Badań nad Gospodarką Rynkową (The Gdańsk Institute for Market Economics)  Bremen, Germany (since 1976)  Turku, Finland (since 1987)  Barcelona, Spain (since 1990)  Cleveland, Ohio, United States (since 1990)  Kalmar, Sweden (since 1991)  Helsingør, Denmark (since 1992)  Marseille, France (since 1992)  Rouen, France (since 1992)  Kaliningrad, Russia (since 1993)  Sefton, England, United Kingdom (since 1993)  St. Petersburg, Russia (since 1993)  Astana, Kazakhstan (since 1996)  Odessa, Ukraine (since 1996)  Rotterdam, Netherlands (since 1998)  Vilnius, Lithuania (since 1998)  Nice, France (since 1999)  Shanghai, China (since 2004)  Palermo, Italy (since 2005)  Šilutė, Lithuania (since 2004)  Le Havre, France Tourism in Poland 764 Gedania – a minor planet orbiting the Sun Danzig Highflyer Father Eugeniusz Dutkiewicz SAC Hospice Kashubians Kursenieki List of corporations in Gdańsk List of neighbourhoods of Gdańsk St. Mary's Church, Gdańsk Laznia Centre for Contemporary Art Ronald Reagan Park Live in Gdańsk Official website Extensive Danzig, East & West Prussian Historical Materials  &  Regional Tourist Board website Local Tourist Board website  Virtual Gdańsk (portal)  Danzig(portal) Mariacka Street Panoramic Photo  Gdanskmiasto.pl
