   The Georgian scripts are the three writing systems used to write the Georgian language: Asomtavruli, Nuskhuri and Mkhedruli. Their letters are equivalent, sharing the same names and alphabetical order and all three are unicameral (make no distinction between upper and lower case). Although each continues to be used, Mkhedruli (see below) is taken as the standard for Georgian and its related Kartvelian languages. The scripts originally had 38 letters.Machavariani, p. 329  Georgian is currently written in a 33-letter alphabet, as five of the letters are obsolete in that language.  The Mingrelian alphabet uses 36: the 33 of Georgian, one letter obsolete for that language, and two additional letters specific to Mingrelian and Svan.  That same obsolete letter, plus a letter borrowed from Greek, are used in the 35-letter Laz alphabet.  The fourth Kartvelian language, Svan, is not commonly written, but when it is it uses the letters of the Mingrelian alphabet, with an additional obsolete Georgian letter and sometimes supplemented by diacritics for its many vowels.Standard Languages and Multilingualism in European History, Matthias Hüning, Ulrike Vogl, Olivier Moliner, John Benjamins Publishing, 2012, p.299 Georgian scripts hold the national status of cultural heritage in Georgia and are currently nominated for inclusion in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.ქართული ანბანის სამი სახეობის ცოცხალ კულტურას არამატერიალური კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლის სტატუსი მიენიჭა Government of Georgia  The origins of the Georgian script are to this date poorly known, and no full agreement exists among Georgian and foreign scholars as to its date of creation, who designed the script and the main influences on that process. The first version of the script attested is Asomtavruli; the other scripts were formed in the following centuries. Most scholars link the creation of the Georgian alphabet to the process of Christianisation of a core Georgian-speaking kingdom, that is, Kartli (or Iberia in Classical sources). The alphabet was therefore most probably created between the conversion of Iberia under King Mirian III (326 or 337) and the Bir el Qutt inscriptions of 430,Hewitt, p. 4 contemporaneously with the Armenian alphabet. It was first used for translation of the Bible and other Christian literature into Georgian, by monks in Georgia and Palestine. Professor Levan Chilashvili's dating of fragmented Asomtavruli inscriptions, discovered by him at the ruined town of Nekresi, in Georgia's easternmost province of Kakheti, in the 1980s, to the 1st or 2nd century has not been universally accepted.Stephen H. Rapp. Studies in medieval Georgian historiography: early texts and Eurasian contexts. Peeters Publishers, 2003. ISBN 90-429-1318-5. p. 19. A point of contention among scholars is the role played by Armenian clerics in that process. According to a number of scholars and medieval Armenian sources, Mesrop Mashtots, generally acknowledged as the creator of the Armenian alphabet, also created the Georgian and Caucasian Albanian alphabets. This tradition originates in the works of Koryun, a fifth century historian and biographer of Mashtots,Koryun's Life of Mashtots and has been quoted in some Western sources,Donald Rayfield The Literature of Georgia: A History (Caucasus World). RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 0-7007-1163-5. P. 19. "The Georgian alphabet seems unlikely to have a pre-Christian origin, for the major archaeological monument of the 1st century 4IX the bilingual Armazi gravestone commemorating Serafua, daughter of the Georgian viceroy of Mtskheta, is inscribed in Greek and Aramaic only. It has been believed, and not only in Armenia, that all the Caucasian alphabets — Armenian, Georgian and Caucaso-Albanian — were invented in the 4th century by the Armenian scholar Mesrop Mashtots. The Georgian chronicles The Life of Kartli - assert that a Georgian script was invented two centuries before Christ, an assertion unsupported by archaeology. There is a possibility that the Georgians, like many minor nations of the area, wrote in a foreign language — Persian, Aramaic, or Greek — and translated back as they read."Glen Warren Bowersock, Peter Robert Lamont Brown, Oleg Grabar. Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World. Harvard University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-674-51173-5. P. 289. James R. Russell. Alphabets. "Mastoc' was a charismatic visionary who accomplished his task at a time when Armenia stood in danger of losing both its national identity, through partition, and its newly acquired Christian faith, through Sassanian pressure and reversion to paganism. By preaching in Armenian, he was able to undermine and co-opt the discourse founded in native tradition, and to create a counterweight against both Byzantine and Syriac cultural hegemony in the church. Mastoc' also created the Georgian and Caucasian-Albanian alphabets, based on the Armenian model." but has been criticized by scholars, both GeorgianGeorgian: ივ. ჯავახიშვილი, ქართული პალეოგრაფია, გვ. 205-208, 240-245 and Western, who judge the passage in Koryun unreliable or even a later interpolation. Other scholars quote Koryun's claims without taking a stance on its validity.Stephen H. Rapp. Studies in medieval Georgian historiography: early texts and Eurasian contexts. Peeters Publishers, 2003. ISBN 90-429-1318-5. P. 450. "There is also the claim advanced by Koriwn in his saintly biography of Mashtoc' (Mesrop) that the Georgian script had been invented at the direction of Mashtoc'. Yet it is within the realm of possibility that this tradition, repeated by many later Armenian historians, may not have been part of the original fifth-century text at all but added after 607. Significantly, all of the extant MSS containing The Life of Mashtoc* were copied centuries after the split. Consequently, scribal manipulation reflecting post-schism (especially anti-Georgian) attitudes potentially contaminates all MSS copied after that time. It is therefore conceivable, though not yet proven, that valuable information about Georgia transmitted by pre-schism Armenian texts was excised by later, post-schism individuals." Many agree, however, that Armenian clerics, if not Mashtots himself, must have played a role in the creation of the Georgian script.Greppin, John A.C.: Some comments on the origin of the Georgian alphabet. — Bazmavep 139, 1981, 449-456 A competing Georgian tradition, first attested in medieval chronicles such as the Lives of the Kings of Kartli (ca. 800), assigns a much earlier, pre-Christian origin to the Georgian alphabet, and names King Pharnavaz I (3rd century BC) as its inventor. This account is now considered legendary, and is rejected by scholarly consensus, as no archaeological confirmation has been found. Georgian linguist Tamaz Gamkrelidze offers an alternate interpretation of the tradition, in the pre-Christian use of foreign scripts (alloglottography in the Aramaic alphabet) to write down Georgian texts. Another controversy regards the main influences at play in the Georgian alphabet, as scholars have debated whether it was inspired more by the Greek alphabet, or by Semitic alphabets such as Aramaic. Recent historiography focuses on greater similarities with the Greek alphabet than in the other Caucasian writing systems, most notably the order and numeric value of letters. Some scholars have also suggested as a possible inspiration for particular letters certain pre-Christian Georgian cultural symbols or clan markers.  Asomtavruli () is the oldest Georgian script. The name Asomtavruli means "capital letters", from aso (ასო) "letter" and mtavari (მთავარი) "principal/head". It is also known as Mrgvlovani () "rounded", from mrgvali (მრგვალი) "round", so named because of its round letter shapes. Despite its name, this "capital" script is unicameral, just like the modern Georgian script, Mkhedruli.Peter T. Daniels, The World's Writing Systems, p. 367 The oldest Asomtavruli inscriptions found so far date from the 5th centuryMachavariani, p. 177 and are Bir el Quttქსე, ტ. 7, თბ., 1984, გვ. 651-652 and the Bolnisi inscriptions.შანიძე ა., ქართული საბჭოთა ენციკლოპედია, ტ. 2, გვ. 454-455, თბ., 1977 წელი From the 9th century, Nuskhuri script starting becoming dominant, and the role of Asomtavruli was reduced. However, epigraphic monuments of the 10th to 18th centuries continued to be written in Asomtavruli script. Asomtavruli in this later period became more decorative. In the majority of 9th-century Georgian manuscripts which were written in Nuskhuri script, Asomtavruli was used for titles and the first letters of chapters.კ. დანელია, ზ. სარჯველაძე, ქართული პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1997, გვ. 218-219 Although, some manuscripts written completely in Asomtavruli can be found until the 11th century.ე. მაჭავარიანი, მწიგნობრობაჲ ქართული, თბილისი, 1989 In early Asomtavruli, the letters are of equal height. Georgian historian and philologist Pavle Ingorokva believes that the direction of Asomtavruli, like that of Greek, was initially boustrophedon, though the direction of the earliest surviving texts is from left to the right.პ. ინგოროყვა, „შოთა რუსთაველი“, „მნათობი“, 1966, № 3, გვ. 116 In most Asomtavruli letters, straight lines are horizontal or vertical and meet at right angles.  The only letter with acute angles is  (ჯ jani). There have been various attempts to explain this exception. Georgian linguist and art historian Helen Machavariani believes jani derives from a monogram of Christ, composed of the  (ი ini) and  (ქ kani).Machavariani, pp. 121-122 According to Georgian scholar Ramaz Pataridze, the cross-like shape of letter jani indicates the end of the alphabet, and has the same function as the similarly shaped Phoenician letter taw (), Greek chi (Χ), and Latin X,რ. პატარიძე, ქართული ასომთავრული, თბილისი, 1980, გვ. 151, 260-261 though these letters do not have that function in Phoenician, Greek, or Latin.  Coins of Queen Tamar of Georgia and King George IV of Georgia minted using Asomtavruli script, 1200–1210 AD. From the 7th century, the forms of some letters began to change. The equal height of the letters was abandoned, with letters acquiring ascenders and descenders.ივ. ჯავახიშვილი, ქართული დამწერლობათა-მცოდნეობა ანუ პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1949, 185-187ე. მაჭავარიანი, ქართული ანბანი, თბილისი, 1977, გვ. 5-6 Note: Some fonts show "capitalized" (tall) variants of Mkhedruli letters rather than Asomtavruli. In Nuskhuri manuscripts, Asomtavruli are used for titles and illuminated capitals. The latter were used at the beginnings of paragraphs which started new sections of text. In the early stages of the development of Nuskhuri texts, Asomtavruli letters were not elaborate and were distinguished principally by size and sometimes by being written in cinnabar ink. Later, from the 10th century, the letters were illuminated. The style of Asomtavruli capitals can be used to identify the era of a text. For example, in the Georgian manuscripts of the Byzantine era, when the styles of the Byzantine Empire influenced Kingdom of Georgia, capitals were illuminated with images of birds and other animals.ელენე მაჭავარიანი, ენციკლოპედია „ქართული ენა“, თბილისი, 2008, გვ. 403-404   Decorative Asomtavruli capital letters, მ (m), ნ (n) and თ (t), 12–13th century. From the 11th-century "limb-flowery", "limb-arrowy" and "limb-spotty" decorative forms of Asomtavruli are developed. The first two are found in 11th- and 12th-century monuments, whereas the third one is used until the 18th century.ვ. სილოგავა, ენციკლოპედია „ქართული ენა“, თბილისი, 2008, გვ. 269-271ივ. ჯავახიშვილი, ქართული დამწერლობათა-მცოდნეობა ანუ პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1949, 124-126 Importance was attached also to the colour of the ink itself.Machavariani, p. 120 Asomtavruli letter დ (doni) is often written with decoration effects of fish and birds.Machavariani, p. 129 The "Curly" decorative form of Asomtavruli is also used where the letters are wattled or intermingled on each other, or the smaller letters are written inside other letters. It was mostly used for the headlines of the manuscripts or the books, although there are compete inscriptions which were written in the Asomtavruli "Curly" form only.ივ. ჯავახიშვილი, ქართული დამწერლობათა-მცოდნეობა ანუ პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1949, 127-128 The title of Gospel of Matthew in Asomtavruli "Curly" decorative form. The following table shows the stroke order and direction of each Asomtavruli letter:Mchedlidze, p. 105  Nuskhuri () is the second Georgian script. The name nuskhuri comes from nuskha (ნუსხა), meaning "inventory" or "schedule". Nuskhuri was soon augmented with Asomtavruli illuminated capitals in religious manuscripts. The combination is called Khutsuri (, "clerical", from khutsesi (ხუცესი) "cleric"), and it was principally used in hagiography.კ. დანელია, ზ. სარჯველაძე, ქართული პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1997, გვ. 219 Nuskhuri first appeared in the 9th century as a graphic variant of Asomtavruli.B. George Hewitt, 1995, Georgian: A Structural Reference Grammar, p. 4 The oldest inscription is found in the Ateni Sioni Church and dates to 835 AD.გ. აბრამიშვილი, ატენის სიონის უცნობი წარწერები, "მაცნე" (ისტ. და არქეოლოგ. სერია), 1976, №2, გვ. 170 The oldest surviving Nuskhuri manuscripts date to 864 AD.კ. დანელია, ზ. სარჯველაძე, ქართული პალეოგრაფია, თბილისი, 1997, გვ. 218 Nuskhuri becomes dominant over Asomtavruli from the 10th century. Nuskhuri letters vary in height, with ascenders and descenders, and are slanted to the right. Letters have an angular shape, with a noticeable tendency to simplify the shapes they had in Asomtavruli. This enabled faster writing of manuscripts.ე. მაჭავარიანი, ქართული ანბანი, თბილისი, 1977  →  → Asomtavruli letters ო (oni) and ჳ (vie).  A ligature of these letters produced a new letter in Nuskhuri, უ uni. Note: Without proper font support, you may see question marks, boxes or other symbols instead of Nuskhuri letters. The following table shows the stroke order and direction of each Nuskhuri letter:Mchedlidze, p. 107 Asomtavruli is used intensively in iconography, murals, and exterior design, especially in stone engravings.About Georgian calligraphy Lasha Kintsurashvili Georgian linguist Akaki Shanidze made an attempt in the 1950s to introduce Asomtavruli into the Mkhedruli script as capital letters to begin sentences, as in the Latin script, but it didn't catch on.Gillam, Richard Unicode Demystified: A Practical Programmer's Guide to the Encoding Standard p.252Julie D. Allen Unicode standard, version 5.0 p.249 Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri are officially used by the Georgian Orthodox Church alongside Mkhedruli. Patriarch Ilia II of Georgia called on people to use all three Georgian scripts. ილია მეორე ერს ქართული ენის დაცვისკენ კიდევ ერთხელ მოუწოდებს საქინფორმ.გე  Mkhedruli () is the third and current Georgian script. Mkhedruli, literally meaning "cavalry" or "military", derives from mkhedari (მხედარი) meaning "horseman", "knight", "warrior"Writing Systems of the World, Akira Nakanishi, p. 22 and "cavalier".Georgica: A Journal of Georgian and Caucasian Studies, Issues 4-5, William Edward David Allen, A. Gugushvili, S. Austin and Sons, Limited, 1937, p. 324 Like the two other scripts, Mkhedruli is purely unicameral. Mkhedruli first appears in the 10th century. The oldest Mkhedruli inscription is found in Ateni Sioni Church dating back to 982 AD. The second oldest Mkhedruli-written text is found in the 11th-century royal charters of King Bagrat IV of Georgia. Mkhedruli was mostly used then in the Kingdom of Georgia for the royal charters, historical documents, manuscripts and inscriptions.ატენის სიონის უცნობი წარწერები, აბრამიშვილი, გვ. 170-1 Mkhedruli was used for non-religious purposes only and represented the "civil", "royal" and "secular" script.The Languages of the World, Kenneth Katzner, p. 118Chambers's encyclopaedia: a dictionary of universal knowledge, Volume 5, Chambers, David Patrick, William Geddie, W. & R. Chambers, Limited, 1901, page 165 Mkhedruli became more and more dominant over the two other scripts, though Khutsuri (Nuskhuri with Asomtavruli) was used until the 19th century. Since the 19th century, with the establishment and development of the printed Georgian fonts, Mkhedruli became universal writing Georgian outside the Church.T. Putkaradze, History of Georgian language, Development of the Georgian writing system, paragraph II, 2.1.5. 2006 Mkhedruli inscriptions of the 10th and 11th centuries are characterized in rounding of angular shapes of Nuskhuri letters and making the complete outlines in all of its letters. Mkhedruli letters are written in the four-linear system, similar to Nuskhuri. Mkhedruli becomes more round and free in writing. It breaks the strict frame of the previous two alphabets, Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri. Mkhedruli letters begin to get coupled and more free calligraphy develops.მაჭავარიანი, თბილისი, 1977  Example of one of the oldest Mkhedruli-written texts found in the royal charter of King Bagrat IV of Georgia, 11th century. "Gurgen : King : of Kings : great-grandfather : of mine : Bagrat Curopalates"  Coin of Queen Tamar of Georgia in Mkhedruli, 1187 AD. The modern Georgian alphabet consists of 33 letters: The Society for the Spreading of Literacy among Georgians, founded by Prince Ilia Chavchavadze in 1879, discarded five letters from the Georgian alphabet that had become redundant:The World's Writing Systems, Peter T. Daniels, The Georgian Alphabet, p. 367 All but ჵ (hoe) continue to be used in the Svan alphabet; ჲ (hie) is used in the Mingrelian and Laz alphabets as well, for the y-sound . Several others were used for Abkhaz and Ossetian in the short time they were written in Mkhedruli script. Mkhedruli has been adapted to languages besides Georgian.  Some of these alphabets retained letters obsolete in Georgian, while others required additional letters: The following table shows the stroke order and direction of each Mkhedruli letter:Aronson, pp. 21-25Stefano Paolini, Nikoloz Cholokashvili, Dittionario giorgiano e italiano, Palazzo di Propaganda Fide, Rome, 1629Mchedlidze, p. 110 ზ, ო, and ხ (zeni, oni, khani) are almost always written without the small tick at the end, while the handwritten form of ჯ (jani) often uses a vertical line,  (sometimes with a taller ascender, or with a diagonal cross bar); even when it's written at a diagonal, the cross-bar is generally shorter than in print.   There is individual and stylistic variation in many of the letters.  For example, the top circle of ზ (zeni) and the top stroke of რ (rae) may go in the other direction than shown in the chart (that is, counter-clockwise starting at 3 o'clock, and upwards – see the external-link section for videos of people writing).  Other common variants: გ (gani) may be written like ვ (vini) with a closed loop at the bottom. დ (doni) is frequently written with a simple loop at top, . კ, ც, and ძ (k'ani, tsani, dzili) are generally written with straight, vertical lines at the top, so that for example ც (tsani) resembles a U with a dimple in the right side. ლ (lasi) is frequently written with a single arc, .  Even when all three are written, they're generally not all the same size, as they are in print, but rather riding on one wide arc like two dimples in it. Rarely, ო (oni) is written as a right angle, . რ (rae) is frequently written with one arc, , like a Latin . ტ (t'ari) often has a small circle with a tail hanging into the bowl, rather than two small circles as in print, or as an O with a straight vertical line intersecting the top.  It may also be rotated a bit clockwise, with the small circles further to the right and not as close to the top. წ (ts'ili) is generally written with a round bowl at the bottom, . ჭ (ch'ari) may be written without the hook at the top, and often with a completely straight vertical line. ჱ (he) may be written without the loop, like a conflation of ს and ჰ. Several letters are similar and may be confused at first, especially in handwriting.  Asomtavruli is often highly stylized and writers readily formed ligatures, intertwined letters, and placed letters within letters.Ingorokva, Pavle ქართული დამწერლობის ძეგლები ანტიკური ხანისა (The monuments of ancient Georgian script)  A ligature of the Asomtavruli initials of King Vakhtang I of Iberia, Ⴂ Ⴌ (გნ, GN)  A ligature of the Asomtavruli letters Ⴃ Ⴀ (და, da) "and" Nuskhuri, like Asomtavruli is also often highly stylized. Writers readily formed ligatures and abbreviations for nomina sacra, including diacritics called karagma, which resemble titla. Because writing materials such as vellum were scarce and therefore precious, abbreviating was a practical measure widespread in manuscripts and hagiography by the 11th century.  A Nuskhuri abbreviation of რომელი (romeli) "which"  A Nuskhuri abbreviation of იესუ ქრისტე (iesu kriste) "Jesus Christ" Mkhedruli, in the 11th to 17th centuries also came to employ digraphs to the point that they were obligatory, requiring adhesion to a complex system.შანიძე, 2003  A Mkhedruli ligature of და (da) "and"   Mkhedruli calligraphy of Prince Garsevan Chavchavadze and King Archil of Imereti Georgian scripts come in only a single type face, though word processors can apply automatic ("fake")Fake vs True Italics oblique and bold formatting to Georgian text.  Traditionally, Asomtavruli was used for chapter or section titles, where Latin script might use bold or italic type. In Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri punctuation, various combinations of dots were used as word dividers and to separate phrases, clauses, and paragraphs. In monumental inscriptions and manuscripts of 5th to 10th centuries, these were written as dashes, like &minus;, = and =&minus;. In the 10th century, clusters of one (·), two (:), three (჻) and six (჻჻) dots (later sometimes small circles) were introduced by Ephrem Mtsire to indicate increasing breaks in the text. One dot indicated a "minor stop" (presumably a simple word break), two dots marked or separated "special words", three dots for a "bigger stop" (such as the appositive name and title "the sovereign Alexander", below, or the title of the Gospel of Matthew, above), and six dots were to indicate the end of the sentence. Starting in the 11th century, marks resembling the apostrophe and comma came into use. An apostrophe was used to mark an interrogative word, and a comma appeared at the end of an interrogative sentence. From the 12th century on, these were replaced with the semicolon (the Greek question mark). In the 18th century, Patriarch Anton I of Georgia reformed the system again, with commas, single dots, and double dots used to mark "complete", "incomplete", and "final" sentences, respectively.Georgian Soviet Encyclopedia, V. 8, p. 231, Tbilisi, 1984 For the most part, Georgian today uses the punctuation as in international usage of the Latin script.Unicode Demystified: A Practical Programmer's Guide to the Encoding Standard, Richard Gillam, p. 252  Signature of King Alexander II of Kakheti, with the divider ჴლმწიფე ჻ ალექსანდრე"The sovereign Alexander"  This table lists the three scripts in parallel columns, including the letters that are now obsolete in all alphabets (shown with a blue background), obsolete in Georgian but still used in other alphabets (green background), or additional letters in languages other than Georgian (pink background).  The "national" transliteration is the system used by the Georgian government, whereas "Laz" is the Latin Laz alphabet used in Turkey. The table also shows the traditional numeric values of the letters.Aronson (1990), pp. 30–31.   Old Avar crosses with Avar inscriptions in Asomtavruli script. The first Georgian script was added to the Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the release of version 1.0. In creating the Georgian Unicode block, important roles were played by German , a linguist of Kartvelian studies, and American-Irish linguist and script-encoder Michael Everson, who created the Georgian Unicode for the Macintosh systems.უნიკოდში ქართულის ასახვის ისტორია (History of the Georgian Unicode) Georgian Unicode fonts by BPG-InfoTech Significant contributions were also made by Anton Dumbadze and Irakli Garibashvili.Font Contributors Acknowledgements Unicode (not the current Prime Minister of Georgia Irakli Garibashvili) Georgian Mkhedruli script received an official status for being Georgia's internationalized domain name script for (.გე). საქართველოში საინტერნეტო მისამართები მხედრული ანბანით დაიწერება Rustavi 2 The Unicode block for Georgian is U+10A0&ndash;U+10FF. Mkhedruli (modern Georgian) occupies the U+10D0&ndash;U+10FF range and Asomtavruli occupies the U+10A0&ndash;U+10CF range. The Unicode block for Georgian Supplement is U+2D00&ndash;U+2D2F and it encodes Nuskhuri.    Below is the standard Georgian-language keyboard layout, the traditional layout of manual typewriters. Gallery of Asomtavruli, Nuskhuri and Mkhedruli scripts. packed heights=200px Asomtavruli of the 6th and 7th centuries Asomtavruli at Barakoni Asomtavruli Doliskana inscriptions Asomtavruli at Ishkhani Asomtavruli at Nikortsminda Cathedral packed heights=200px Nuskhuri of 8th to 10th centuries Nuskhuri of Jruchi Gospels, 13th century Nuskhuri of the 11th century Nuskhuri of Mokvi Nuskhuri Iadgari of Mikael Modrekili, 10th century Nuskhuri by Nikrai, 12th century packed heights=200px Mkhedruli of King Bagrat IV of Georgia Mkhedruli of King George II of Georgia Mkhedruli of King David IV of Georgia Mkhedruli of King George III of Georgia Mkhedruli of Queen Tamar of Georgia Mkhedruli of King George IV of Georgia Mkhedruli of King George V of Georgia   ani bani gani doni eni vini zeni he tani ini k'ani lasi mani nari hie oni p'ari zhani rae sani t'ari vie uni pari kani ghani q'ari shini chini tsani dzili ts'ili ch'ari khani qari jani hae hoe ani bani gani doni eni vini zeni he tani ini k'ani lasi mani nari hie oni p'ari zhani rae sani t'ari vie uni pari kani ghani q'ari shini chini tsani dzili ts'ili ch'ari khani qari jani hae hoe აani ბbani გgani დdoni ეeni ვvini ზzeni თtani იini კk'ani ლlasi მmani ნnari ოoni პp'ari ჟzhani რrae სsani ტt'ari უuni ფpari ქkani ღghani ყq'ari შshini ჩchini ცtsani ძdzili წts'ili ჭch'ari ხkhani ჯjani ჰhae ჱhe ჲhie ჳvie ჴqari ჵhoe ჶfi ჷshva ჸelifi ჹturned gani ჺaini Letters Unicode(mkhedruli) Name IPA Transcriptions Numericvalue asomtavruli !! nuskhuri !! mkhedruli National !! ISO 9984 !! BGN !! Laz ა U+10D0 ani , Svan  A a A a A a 1 ბ U+10D1 bani B b B b B b 2 გ U+10D2 gani G g G g G g 3 დ U+10D3 doni D d D d D d 4 ე U+10D4 eni E e E e E e 5 ვ U+10D5 vini V v V v V v 6 ზ U+10D6 zeni Z z Z z Z z 7 ჱ U+10F1 he , Svan  — Ey ey — 8 თ U+10D7 tani T t T' t' T t 9 ი U+10D8 ini I i I i I i 10 კ U+10D9 k'ani K' k' K k Ǩ ǩ 20 ლ U+10DA lasi L l L l L l 30 მ U+10DB mani M m M m M m 40 ნ U+10DC nari N n N n N n 50 ჲ U+10F2 hie , Mingrelian, Laz, & Svan  — J j Y y 60 ო U+10DD oni , Svan  O o O o O o 70 პ U+10DE p'ari P' p' P p Ṗ ṗ 80 ჟ U+10DF zhani Zh zh Zh zh J j 90 რ U+10E0 rae R r R r R r 100 ს U+10E1 sani S s S s S s 200 ტ U+10E2 t'ari T' t' T t Ť ť 300 ჳ U+10F3 vie , Svan  — — — 400ჳ and უ have the same numeric value (400) უ U+10E3 uni , Svan  U u U u U u 400 ჷ U+10F7 yn, schva Mingrelian & Svan  — — — — — ფ U+10E4 pari P p P' p' P p 500 ქ U+10E5 kani K k K' k' K k 600 ღ U+10E6 ghani Gh gh Gh gh Ğ ğ 700 ყ U+10E7 q'ari Q' q' Q q Q q 800 — — ჸ U+10F8 elif Mingrelian & Svan  — — — — — შ U+10E8 shini Sh sh Sh sh Ş ş 900 ჩ U+10E9 chini Ch ch Ch' ch' Ç ç 1000 ც U+10EA tsani Ts ts Ts' ts' Ts ts 2000 ძ U+10EB dzili Dz dz Dz dz Ž ž 3000 წ U+10EC ts'ili Ts' ts' Ts ts Ts’ ts’ 4000 ჭ U+10ED ch'ari Ch' ch' Ch ch Ç̌ ç̌ 5000 ხ U+10EE khani Kh kh Kh kh X x 6000 ჴ U+10F4 qari, hari , Svan  — q' — 7000 ჯ U+10EF jani J j J j C c 8000 ჰ U+10F0 hae H h H h H h 9000 ჵ U+10F5 hoe — — — 10000 — — ჶ U+10F6 fi Laz  — F f — F f — ჱ (he), sometimes called "ei"Akaki Shanidze, The Basics of the Georgian language grammar, Tbilisi, 1973/1980, p. 18 or "e-merve" ("eighth e"),Otar Jishkariani, Praise of the Alphabet, 1986, Tbilisi, p. 1 was equivalent to ეჲ ey, as in ქრისტჱ ~ ქრისტეჲ krist'ey 'Christ'. ჲ (hie), also called iota, appeared instead of ი (ini) after a vowel, but came to have the same pronunciation as ი (ini) and was replaced by it.  Thus ქრისტჱ ~ ქრისტეჲ krist'ey "Christ" is now written ქრისტეი krist'ei. ჳ (vie) came to be pronounced the same as ვი vi and was replaced by that sequence, as in სხჳსი > სხვისი skhvisi "others'". ჴ (qari, hari) came to be pronounced the same as ხ (khani), and was replaced by it. e.g. ჴლმწიფე became ხელმწიფე "sovereign". ჵ (hoe) was used for the interjection hoi! and is now spelled ჰოი. ჶ (fi "phi") is used in Laz and formerly in Ossetian and Abkhazian.Unicode Standard, V. 6.3. U10A0, p. 3 It derives from the Greek letter Φ (phi). ჷ (shva "schwa"), also called yn, is used for the schwa sound in Svan and Mingrelian, and formerly in Ossetian and Abkhazian. ჸ (elifi "alif") is used in for the glottal stop in Svan and Mingrelian.  It is a reversed  (q'ari). ჹ (turned gani) was once used for  in evangelical literature in Dagestanian languages. ჺ (aini "ain") is occasionally used for  in Bats.  It derives from the Arabic letter  (‘ain). Only four letters are x-height, with neither ascenders nor descenders:  ა, თ, ი, ო. Thirteen have ascenders, like b or d in English: ბ, ზ, მ, ნ, პ, რ, ს, შ, ჩ, ძ, წ, ხ, ჰ An equal number have descenders, like p or q in English: გ, დ, ე, ვ, კ, ლ, ჟ, ტ, უ, ფ, ღ, ყ, ც Three letters have both ascenders and descenders, like þ in Old English:  ქ, ჭ, and (in handwriting) ჯ. წ has both ascender and descender in print, and sometimes in handwriting. For ვ (vini) and კ (k'ani), the critical difference is whether the top is a full arc or a (more-or-less) vertical line. For ვ (vini) and გ (gani), it is whether the bottom is an open curve or closed (a loop).  The same is true of უ (uni) and შ (shini); in handwriting, the tops may look the same.  Similarly ს (sani) and ხ (khani). For კ (k'ani) and პ (p'ari), the crucial difference is whether the letter is written below or above x-height, and whether it's written top-down or bottom-up. ძ (dzili) is written with a vertical top. Ossetian language during the 1940s.The Politics of Ethnic Separatism in Russia and Georgia, Julie A. George, p. 104 Abkhaz language during the 1940s.The Abkhazians: A Handbook, George Hewitt, p. 171 Ingush language (historically), later replaced in the 17th century by Arabic and by the Cyrillic script in modern times.Язык, история и культура вайнахов, И. Ю Алироев p.85, Чех-Инг. изд.-полигр. об-ние "Книга", 1990 Chechen language (historically), later replaced in the 17th century by Arabic and by the Cyrillic script in modern times.Чеченский язык, И. Ю. Алироев, p.24, Академия, 1999 Avar language (historically), later replaced in the 17th century by Arabic and by the Cyrillic script in modern times.Грузинско-дагестанские языковые контакты, Маджид Шарипович Халилов p.29, Наука, 2004История аварцев, М. Г Магомедов p.150, Дагестанский гос. университет, 2005 Turkish language and Tatar language. A Turkish Gospel, dictionary, poems, medical book dating from the 18th century.Enwall, Joakim (2010), "Turkish texts in Georgian script: Sociolinguistic and ethno-linguistic aspects", in Boeschoten, Hendrik; Rentzsch, Julian (eds.), Turcology in Mainz, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, ISBN 3-447-06113-8, pp. 144–145 Persian language. The 18th-century Persian translation of the Arabic Gospel is kept at the National Center of Manuscripts in Tbilisi. Armenian language. In the Armenian community in Tbilisi, the Georgian script was occasionally used for writing Armenian in the 18th and 19th centuries, and some samples of this kind of texts are kept at the Georgian National Center of Manuscripts in Tbilisi.Hendrik Boeschoten, Julian Rentzsch (2010) Turcology in Mainz, p. 137 Russian language. In the collections of the National Center of Manuscripts in Tbilisi there are also a few short poems in the Russian language written in Georgian script dating from the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Other Northeast Caucasian languages. The Georgian script was used for writing North Caucasian and Dagestani languages in connection with Georgian missionary activities in the areas starting in the 18th century.Enwall, Joakim (2010), "Turkish texts in Georgian script: Sociolinguistic and ethno-linguistic aspects", in Boeschoten, Hendrik; Rentzsch, Julian (eds.), Turcology in Mainz, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, ISBN 3-447-06113-8, pp. 137–138 Javakhishvili, I. Georgian palaeography Tbilisi, 1949 Barnaveli, T. Inscriptions of Ateni Sioni Tbilisi, 1977 Pataridze, R. Georgian Asomtavruli Tbilisi, 1980 Machavariani, E. Georgian manuscripts Tbilisi, 2011 Gamkrelidze, T. Writing system and the old Georgian script Tbilisi, 1989 Kilanawa, B. Georgian script in the writing systems Tbilisi, 1990 Hewitt, B.G. (1995). Georgian: A Structural Reference Grammar. John Benjamins Publishing. ISBN 978-90-272-3802-3. Mchedlidze, T. The restored Georgian alphabet, Fulda, Germany, 2013 , produced by the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia. Gives the sound of each letter, illustrates several fonts, and shows the stroke order of each letter. .  Speaks the name of each letter, with some words that contain it, while writing them on ruled paper. Lasha Kintsurashvili and Levan Chaganava, submissions to the 2014 International Exhibition of Calligraphy Reference grammar of Georgian by Howard Aronson (SEELRC, Duke University) Georgian transliteration + Georgian virtual keyboard
