    Georgism (also known as geoism and geonomics) is an economic philosophy holding that the economic value derived from land, including natural resources and natural opportunities, should belong equally to all residents of a community, but that people own the value that they create themselves.  The Georgist paradigm offers solutions to social and ecological problems, relying on principles of land rights and public finance which attempt to integrate economic efficiency with social justice.Gaffney, Mason, and Harrison, Fred (1994).  The Corruption of Economics.  London: Shepheard-Walwyn. ISBN 978-0-85683-244-4Hudson, Michael; Feder, Kris; and Miller, George James (1994).  A Philosophy for a Fair Society. Shepheard-Walwyn, London. ISBN 978-0-85683-159-1. Georgism is concerned with the distribution of economic rent caused by natural monopolies, pollution, and the control of commons, including title over natural resources and other contrived privileges (e.g., intellectual property).  Any natural resource, which is inherently limited in supply, can generate economic rent, but the classical and most significant example of 'land monopoly' involves the extraction of common ground rent from valuable urban locations. Georgists argue that taxing economic rent is efficient, fair, and equitable.  The main Georgist policy tool is a tax assessed on land value. Georgists argue that revenues from a land value tax (LVT) can reduce or eliminate existing taxes on labor and investment that are unfair and inefficient.  Some Georgists also advocate for the return of surplus public revenue back to the people through a basic income or citizen's dividend. Economists since Adam Smith have observed that, unlike other taxes, a public levy on land value does not cause economic inefficiency. A land value tax is often said to have progressive tax effects, in that it is paid primarily by the wealthy (the landowners), and it cannot be passed on to tenants, workers, or users of land. Land value capture would reduce economic inequality, increase wages, remove incentives to misuse real estate, and reduce the vulnerability that economies face from credit and property bubbles.Land Value Taxation: An Applied Analysis, William J. McCluskey, Riël C. D. Franzsen The philosophical basis of Georgism dates back to several early proponents such as John Locke, Baruch Spinoza, and Thomas Paine, but the concept of gaining public revenues from natural resource privileges was widely popularized by the economist and social reformer Henry George and his first book, Progress and Poverty, published in 1879. Georgist ideas were popular and influential in the late 19th and early 20th century.The Forgotten Idea That Shaped Great U.S. Cities by Mason Gaffney & Rich Nymoen, Commons magazine,October 17, 2013. Political parties, institutions and communities were founded based on Georgist principles during that time.  Early followers of Henry George's economic philosophy called themselves Single Taxers, associated with the idea of raising public revenue exclusively from land and privileges, but the term is now considered a misnomer because Georgists usually support multiple mechanisms for government funding. In classical and Georgist economics, the term 'land' is defined as all locations, natural opportunities, resources, physical forces, and government privileges over economic domains, which is closely related to the concept of commons. Georgism was coined later, and some prefer the term geoism or geonomics to distinguish their beliefs from those of Henry George.   Many people have observed that privately created wealth is socialized via the tax system (e.g., through income and sales tax), while socially created wealth in land values are privatized in the price of land titles and bank mortgages. The opposite would be the case if land rent replaced taxes on labor as the main source of public revenue; socially created wealth would become available for use by the community, while the fruits of labor would remain private.http://earthsharing.ca/page/poverty Henry George is best known for popularizing these classical arguments in favor of effecting this reform in land title and tax policy. In Progress and Poverty George argues that people justly own what they create, but that natural opportunities and land belong equally in common to all. George believed there was an important distinction between common and collective property.Common Rights vs. Collective Rights Although equal rights to land might be achieved by nationalizing land and then leasing it to private users, George preferred taxing unimproved land value and leaving the control of land mostly in private hands. George's reasoning for leaving land in private control and slowly shifting to land value tax was that it would not penalize existing owners who had improved land and would also be less disruptive and controversial in a country where land titles have already been granted. George believed that although scientific experiments could not be carried out in political economy, theories could be tested by comparing different societies with different conditions and through thought experiments about the effects of various factors.Progress and Poverty – "Introduction: The Problem of Poverty Amid Progress Applying this method, George concluded that many of the problems that beset society, such as poverty, inequality, and economic booms and busts, could be attributed to the private ownership of the necessary resource, land. In Georgism, a land value tax is seen as fitting the definition of a user fee instead of a tax, since it is tied to the market value of socially created locational advantage, the privilege to exclude others from locations. Assets consisting of commodified privilege can be viewed as wealth since they have exchange value, similar to taxi medallions. A land value tax, charging fees for exclusive use of land, as a means of raising public revenue is also a progressive tax tending to reduce economic inequality, since it falls entirely on ownership of valuable land, which is highly correlated to incomes, and there is no means by which landlords can shift the tax burden onto tenants or laborers.   Standard economic theory suggests that a land value tax would be extremely efficient – unlike other taxes, it does not reduce economic productivity. Nobel laureate Milton Friedman described Henry George's tax on unimproved value of land as the "least bad tax", since unlike other taxes, it would not impose an excess burden on economic activity (leading to zero or even negative "deadweight loss"); hence, a replacement of other more distortionary taxes with a land value tax would improve economic welfare.Foldvary, Fred E. "Geo-Rent: A Plea to Public Economists". Econ Journal Watch (April 2005)[ ] As land value tax can improve the use of land and redirect investment toward productive, non-rentseeking activities, it could even have a negative deadweight loss that boosts productivity. Because land value tax would fall on foreign land speculators, the Australian Treasury estimated that land value tax was unique in having a negative marginal excess burden, meaning that it would increase long-run living standards. It was Adam Smith who first noted the efficiency and distributional properties of a land value tax in his book, The Wealth of Nations:  Ben Franklin and Winston Churchill made similar distributional and efficient arguments for publicly capturing land rents. They noted that the costs of taxes and the benefits of public spending always eventually fall on and enrich, respectively, the owners of land. Therefore, they believed it would be best to defray public costs and recapture value of public spending by placing public charges directly on owners of land titles, rather than harming public welfare with taxes on trade and labor. Henry George wrote that his plan would call upon people "to contribute to the public, not in proportion to what they produce . . . but in proportion to the value of natural [common] opportunities that they hold [monopolize]." He went on to explain that "by taking for public use that value which attaches to land by reason of the growth and improvement of the community," it would, "make the holding of land unprofitable to the mere owner, and profitable only to the user." Under George's plan, it would be impossible for speculators to hold valuable natural opportunities like urban real estate unused or only partly used.  George claimed this would have many benefits, including the reduction or removal of tax burdens from poorer neighborhoods and agricultural districts; the removal of a multiplicity of taxes and expensive obsolete government institutions; the elimination of corruption, fraud, and evasion in the collection of taxes; the enablement of true free trade; the destruction of monopolies; the elevation of wages to the full value of labor; the transformation of labor saving inventions into blessings for all; and the equitable distribution of comfort, leisure, and other advantages that are made possible by an advancing civilization. Income flow resulting from payments for restricted access to natural opportunities or for contrived privileges over geographic regions is called economic rent.  Georgists argue that economic rent of land, legal privileges, and natural monopolies should accrue to the community, rather than private owners.  In economics, "land" is everything that exists in nature independent of human activity.  While the philosophy of Georgism does not say anything definitive about specific policy interventions needed to address problems posed by various sources of economic rent, the common goal among modern georgists is to capture and share (or reduce) rent from all sources of natural monopoly and legal privilege. Henry George shared the goal of modern Georgists to socialize or dismantle rent from all forms of land monopoly and legal privilege.  However, George focused mainly on his preferred policy tool known as land value tax, which targeted a particular form of unearned income called ground rent.  George focused on ground-rent because basic locations were more valuable than other monopolies and everybody needed locations to survive, which he contrasted with the less significant streetcar and telegraph monopolies, which George also spoke out against.  George likened the problem to a laborer traveling home who is waylaid by a series of highway robbers along the way, each who demand a small portion of the traveler's wages, and finally at the very end of the road waits a robber who demands all that the traveler has left.  George reasoned that it made little difference to challenge the series of small robbers when the final robber remained to demand all that the common laborer had left.  George predicted that over time technological advancements would increase the frequency and importance of lesser monopolies, yet he expected that ground rent would remain dominant.  George even predicted that ground-rents would rise faster than wages and income to capital, a prediction that modern analysis has shown to be plausible, since the supply of land is fixed.Mattauch, Linus; Siegmeier, Jan; Edenhofer, Ottmar; Creutzig, Felix (2013) : Financing Public Capital through Land Rent Taxation: A Macroeconomic Henry George Theorem, CESifo Working Paper, No. 4280 http://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/77659/1/cesifo_wp4280.pdf Common ground rent is still the primary focus of Georgists because of its large value and the known diseconomies of misused land. However, there are other sources of rent that are theoretically analogous to ground-rent and are highly debated topics within Georgism.  The following are some sources of economic rent. nineteenth century focus on land can be found in the twentieth century concern with  the establishment of intellectual property rights that fence off a portion of the creative  commons in order to construct temporary monopolies." Where free competition is impossible, such as telegraphs, water, gas, and transportation, George wrote, "[S]uch business becomes a proper social function, which should be controlled and managed by and for the whole people concerned." Georgists were divided by this question of natural monopolies and often favored public ownership only of the rents from common rights-of-way, rather than public ownership of utility companies themselves. The early conservationist movement of the Progressive Era was inspired by Henry George and his influence extended for decades afterward.Fox, Stephen R. The American Conservation Movement: John Muir and His Legacy. Madison, WI: U of Wisconsin, 1985.  Some ecological economists still support the Georgist policy of land value tax as a means of freeing or rewilding unused land and conserving nature by reducing urban sprawl.Daly, Herman E., and Joshua C. Farley. Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications. Washington: Island, 2004. Pollution degrades the value of what Georgists consider to be commons.  Because pollution is a negative contribution, a taking from the commons or a cost imposed on others, its value is economic rent, even when the polluter is not receiving an explicit income.  Therefore, to the extent that society determines pollution to be harmful, most Georgists propose to limit pollution and then capture the resulting rents for public use, restoration, or a citizen's dividend. Georgism is related to the school of ecological economics, since both propose market based restrictions on pollution.Backhaus, Jurgen, and J. J. Krabbe. "Henry George's Contribution to Modern Environmental Policy: Part I, Theoretical Postulates." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 50.4 (1991): 485-501. Web. 14 Aug. 2014.  The schools are compatible in that they advocate using similar tools as part of a conservation strategy, but they emphasize different aspects.  Conservation is the central issue of ecology, whereas economic rent is the central issue of geoism.  Ecological economists might price pollution fines more conservatively to prevent inherently unquantifiable damage to the environment, whereas Georgists might emphasize mediation between conflicting interests and human rights. Geolibertarianism, a market oriented branch of geoism, tends to take a direct stance against what it perceives as burdensome regulation and would like to see auctioned pollution quotas or taxes replace most command and control regulation. Since ecologists are primarily concerned with conservation, they tend to put less emphasis on the issue of equitably distributing scarcity/pollution rents, whereas Georgists insist that unearned income not be captured by those who hold title to natural assets and pollution privilege.  To the extent that geoists recognize the impact of pollution or share conservationist values, they will agree with ecological economists about the need to limit pollution, but geoists will also crucially insist that pollution rents generated from those conservation efforts are not captured by polluters and are instead used for public purposes or to compensate those who suffer the negative effects of pollution.  Ecological economists advocate similar pollution restrictions but, placing conservation first, might be willing to grant private polluters the privilege to capture pollution rents.  To the extent that ecological economists share the geoist view of social justice, they would advocate auctioning pollution quotas instead of giving them away for free.  This distinction can be seen clearly in the difference between basic cap and trade and the geoist variation, cap and share, a proposal to auction temporary pollution permits, with rents going to the public, instead of giving pollution privilege away for free to existing polluters or selling perpetual permits. The revenue can allow the reduction or elimination of taxes), greater public investment/spending, or the direct distributed of funds to citizens as a pension or basic income/citizen's dividend In practice, the elimination of all other taxes implies a very high land value tax, higher than any currently existing land tax. Introducing a high land value tax that is greater than the value of existing taxes would cause the price of land titles to eventually decrease. George did not believe landowners should be compensated, and described the issue as being analogous to compensation for former slave owners.  Other geoists disagree on the question of compensation; some advocate complete compensation while others support only enough compensation required to achieve Georgist reforms. Geoists have also long differed from George as to the degree of rent capture needed. Historically, those who advocated for public rent capture only high enough to replace other taxes were known as supporters of single tax limited. Most early advocacy groups described themselves as Single Taxers, and George reluctantly accepted "single tax" as an accurate label for the movement's main political goal—the replacement of all unjust or inefficient taxes with the capture of land-rents, primarily using a land value tax (LVT). In the modern era, some groups inspired by Georgism emphasize environmentalism, while others emphasize its egalitarian free market philosophy; utilitarians and urbanists emphasize the economic and social benefits of efficiently utilizing land. Some modern proponents are dissatisfied with the name Georgist. While Henry George was well known throughout his life, he has been largely forgotten by the public and the idea of a single tax of land predates him. Some now prefer the term geoism,Socialism, Capitalism, and Geoism – by Lindy Davies with the meaning of geo (earth, in Greek) deliberately ambiguous.  The terms Earth Sharing,Introduction to Earth Sharing,  geonomics,Geonomics in a Nutshell and geolibertarianismGeoism and Libertarianism by Fred Foldvary (see Libertarianism) are also used by some Georgists. These terms represent a difference of emphasis, and sometimes real differences about how land rent should be spent (citizen's dividend or just replacing other taxes); but all agree that land rent should be recovered from its private recipients. Compulsory fines and fees related to land rents are the most common Georgist policies, but some geoists prefer voluntary value capture systems that rely on methods such as non-compulsory or self-assessed location value fees, community land trusts, and purchasing land value covenants.http://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/wrigley-adrian_location-value-covenants-2010-06.pdfhttp://www.sfrgroup.org/Home/location-value-covenants Some geoists believe that partially compensating landowners is a politically expedient compromise necessary for achieving reform.  For similar reasons, others propose capturing only future land value increases, instead of all land rent. Though Georgism has historically been viewed as a radically progressive or socialist ideology, some libertarians and minarchists take the position that limited social spending should be financed using Georgist concepts of rent value capture, but that not all land rent should to be captured. Today, this relatively conservative adaptation is usually considered incompatible with true geolibertarianism, which requires that excess rents be gathered and then distributed back to residents. During Henry George's time, this position was known as "single tax limited", as opposed to "single tax unlimited".  Henry George disagreed with the limited interpretation but accepted its adherents (e.g., Thomas Shearman) as legitimate "single-taxers" [Georgists]. (See Milton Friedman in "Critical reception") Georgist ideas heavily influenced the politics of the early 20th century. Political parties that were formed based on Georgist ideas include the Commonwealth Land Party, the Justice Party of Denmark, the Henry George Justice Party, and the Single Tax League. In the UK in 1909, the Liberal Government included a land tax as part of several taxes in the People's Budget aimed at redistributing wealth (including a progressively graded income tax and an increase of inheritance tax). This caused a crisis which resulted indirectly in reform of the House of Lords. The budget was passed eventually—but without the land tax. In 1931, the minority Labour Government passed a land value tax as part III of the 1931 Finance act. However, this was repealed in 1934 by the National Government before it could be implemented. In Denmark, the Georgist Justice Party has previously been represented in Folketinget. It formed part of a centre-left government 1957–60 and was also represented in the European Parliament 1978–79. The influence of Henry George has waned over time, but Georgist ideas still occasionally emerge in politics.  In the 2004 Presidential campaign, Ralph Nader mentioned Henry George in his policy statements. Several communities were also initiated with Georgist principles during the height of the philosophy's popularity. Two such communities that still exist are Arden, Delaware, which was founded in 1900 by Frank Stephens and Will Price, and Fairhope, Alabama, which was founded in 1894 by the auspices of the Fairhope Single Tax Corporation.Fairhope Single Tax Corporation The German protectorate of Jiaozhou Bay (also known as Kiaochow) in China fully implemented Georgist policy. Its sole source of government revenue was the land value tax of six percent which it levied on its territory. The German government had previously had economic problems with its African colonies caused by land speculation. One of the main aims in using the land value tax in Jiaozhou Bay was to eliminate such speculation, an aim which was entirely achieved. The colony existed as a German protectorate from 1898 until 1914, when seized by Japanese and British troops. In 1922 the territory was returned to China. Georgist ideas were also adopted to some degree in Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, and Taiwan. In these countries, governments still levy some type of land value tax, albeit with exemptions. Many municipal governments of the USA depend on real property tax as their main source of revenue, although such taxes are not Georgist as they generally include the value of buildings and other improvements, one exception being the town of Altoona, Pennsylvania, which only taxes land value. Various organizations still exist that continue to promote the ideas of Henry George. According to the The American Journal of Economics and Sociology, the periodical Land&Liberty, established in 1894, is "the longest-lived Georgist project in history".The American Journal of Economics and Sociology, vol. 62, 2003, p. 615 Also in the U.S., the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy (established in 1974) was founded based on the writings of Henry George. It "seeks to improve the dialogue about urban development, the built environment, and tax policy in the United States and abroad". The Henry George Foundation continues to promote the ideas of Henry George in the UK. The IU is an international umbrella organisation that brings together organizations worldwide that seek land value tax reform. Richard T. Ely, known as the "Father of Land Economics", agreed with the economic arguments for Georgism but believed that correcting the problem the way Henry George wanted (without compensation) was unjust to existing landowners.  In explaining his position, Ely wrote that "If we have all made a mistake, should one party to the transaction alone bear the cost of the common blunder?" Karl Marx viewed the Single Tax platform as a step backwards from the transition to communism and referred to Georgism as "Capitalism’s last ditch."  Marx argued that, "The whole thing is... simply an attempt, decked out with socialism, to save capitalist domination and indeed to establish it afresh on an even wider basis than its present one."Karl Marx – Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge in Hoboken Marx also criticized the way land value tax theory emphasizes the value of land, arguing that, "His fundamental dogma is that everything would be all right if ground rent were paid to the state." Fred Harrison replies to these Marxist objections in "Gronlund and other Marxists – Part III: nineteenth-century Americas critics", American Journal of Economics and Sociology.14 Gronlund and other Marxists – Part III: nineteenth-century Americas critics | American Journal of Economics and Sociology, The | Find Articles at BNET George has also been accused of exaggerating the importance of his "all-devouring rent thesis" in claiming that it is the primary cause of poverty and injustice in society.Critics of Henry George  George argued that the rent of land increased faster than wages for labor because the supply of land is fixed.  Modern economists, including Ottmar Edenhofer have demonstrated that George's assertion is plausible but was more likely to be true during George's time than today. Contemporaries such as Frank Fetter and John Bates Clark argued that it was impractical to distinguish land from capital, and used this as a basis to attack Georgism. Mark Blaug, a specialist in the history of economic thought, credits Fetter and Clark with influencing mainstream economists to abandon the idea "that land is a unique factor of production and hence that there is any special need for a special theory of ground rent" claiming that "this is in fact the basis of all the attacks on Henry George by contemporary economists and certainly the fundamental reason why professional economists increasingly ignored him."Blaug, Mark. Interview in Andelson, Robert V. Critics of Henry George: An Appraisal of Their Strictures on Progress and Poverty. Blackwell Publishing. 1979. p. 686. An early criticism of Georgism was that it would generate too much public revenue and lead to unwanted growth of government. Joseph Schumpeter later concluded his analysis of Georgism by stating that, "It is not economically unsound, except that it involves an unwarranted optimism concerning the yield of such a tax."  Economists who study land conclude that Schumpeter's criticism is unwarranted because the rental yield from land is likely much greater than what modern critics such as Paul Krugman suppose.  Krugman agrees that land value taxation is the best means of raising public revenue but asserts that increased spending has rendered land rent insufficient to fully fund government.http://www.psmag.com/politics/this-land-is-your-land-3392 "urban economics models actually do suggest that Georgist taxation would be the right approach at least to finance city growth."/ Georgists have responded by citing studies and analyses implying that land values of nations like the US, UK, and Australia are more than sufficient to fund all levels of government.Mason Gaffney, (2009) "The hidden taxable capacity of land: enough and to spare", International Journal of Social Economics, Vol. 36 Iss: 4, pp. 328 - 411Steven, Cord, "How Much Revenue would a Full Land Value Tax Yield? Analysis of Census and Federal Reserve Data." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 44 (3) (July 1985), pages 279-93Steven Cord, "Land Rent is 20% of U.S. National Income for 1986," Incentive Taxation, July/August 1991, pages 1-2.Miles, Mike. 1990. "What Is the Value of all U.S. Real Estate?" Real Estate Review 20 (2)(Summer): 69-75.Nicolaus Tideman and Florenz Plassman, "Taxed Out of Work and Wealth: The Costs of Taxing Labor and Capital," in The Losses of Nations: Deadweight Politics versus Public Rent Dividends (London: Othila Press, 1988), pages 146-174. Anarcho-capitalist political philosopher and economist Murray Rothbard criticized Georgism in Man, Economy, and State as being philosophically incongruent with subjective value theory, and further stating that land is irrelevant in the factors of production, trade, and price systems, but this critique is generally seen, even by other opponents of Georgism, as relying on false assumptions and flawed reasoning. Chicago school libertarian economist Milton Friedman agreed with "the Henry George argument" as being "the least bad" means of raising whatever public revenue was needed."Microeconomics"; N. Gregory Mankiw, Mark P. Taylor – 2006 – 474 pages  Georgists agree with Friedman that land titles should remain private and not be socialized.  However, Friedman viewed Georgism as partially immoral, due to a difference of opinion about the validity of vested property rights in land. Georgists believe that the private capture of unimproved land-rents is inherently unjust, drawing comparisons to slavery. Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek credited early enthusiasm for Henry George with developing his interest in economics.  Later, Hayek said that the theory of Georgism would be very strong if assessment challenges didn't lead to unfair outcomes, but he believed that they would. Hayek wrote, "It was a lay enthusiasm for Henry George which led me to economics."   extractable resources (minerals and hydrocarbons)Harriss, C. Lowell. "Nonrenewable Exhaustible Resources and Property Taxation." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 65.3 (2006): 693-699. severables (forests and stocks of fish) Address delivered on 18 February 1884 at the City Hall, Glasgow extraterrestrial domains (geosynchronous orbits and airway corridor use) legal privileges tied to location (taxi medallions, billboard and development permits, or the monopoly of electromagnetic frequencies) restrictions/taxes on pollution or severance (tradable emission permits and fishing quotas) Right-of-way (transportation) used by railroads, utilities, and internet service providers issuance of legal tender (see seigniorage) privileges that are less location dependent but that still exclude others from natural opportunities (patents) "A modern counterpart to the Harry Gunnison BrownBrown, H. G. "A Defense of the Single Tax Principle." The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 183.1 (1936): 63-69. John R. CommonsHarter, Lafayette G. John R. Commons, His Assault on Laissez-faire. Corvallis: Oregon State UP, 1962. Pages 21, 32, 36, 38."Two Centuries of Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents." In Richard Lindholm and Arthur Lynn, Jr., (eds.), Land Value Taxation in Thought and Practice. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 1982, pp. 151-96. "After reading Henry George's Progress and Poverty," Commons "became a single-taxer." Raymond Crotty Herman Daly Paul Douglass Ottmar Edenhofer Edenhofer writes, "Extending and modifying the tenet of georgism, we propose that this insight be called hypergeorgism." "From a historical perspective, our result may be closer to Henry George’s original thinking than georgism or the neoclassical Henry George Theorems." Fred FoldvaryFred Foldvary's website Mason GaffneyMason Gaffney's homepage Max HirschAirlie Worrall, The New Crusade: the Origins, Activities and Influence of the Australian Single Tax Leagues, 1889–1895 (M.A. thesis, University of Melbourne, 1978). Wolf LadejinskyAndelson Robert V. (2000). Land-Value Taxation Around the World: Studies in Economic Reform and Social Justice Malden. MA:Blackwell Publishers, Inc. p. 359. Donald ShoupShoup, Donald C. "The Ideal Source of Local Public Revenue." Regional Science and Urban Economics 34.6 (2004): 753-84. Herbert A. SimonQuotes from Nobel Prize Winners Herbert Simon stated in 1978: "Assuming that a tax increase is necessary, it is clearly preferable to impose the additional cost on land by increasing the land tax, rather than to increase the wage tax – the two alternatives open to the City (of Pittsburgh). It is the use and occupancy of property that creates the need for the municipal services that appear as the largest item in the budget – fire and police protection, waste removal, and public works. The average increase in tax bills of city residents will be about twice as great with wage tax increase than with a land tax increase."Herbert Simon. (2014). The Famous People website. Retrieved 12:59, Oct 30, 2014, from http://www.thefamouspeople.com/profiles/herbert-simon-293.php. Robert Solow Joseph Stiglitz Nicolaus Tideman William VickreyBill Vickrey – In Memoriam Léon Walras Philip WicksteedBarker, Charles A., 1955. Henry George. New York: Oxford University Press John Ballance Winston Churchillhttp://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/churchill-winston_mother-of-all-monopolies-1909.html Alfred Deakin Andrew Fisher George GreyThe Life of Henry George, Part 3 Chapter X1 Rutherford B. Hayes William Morris Hughes"Hughes, William Morris (Billy) (1862–1952)". Australian Dictionary of Biography: Online Edition. Robert Stout Woodrow Wilson Sun Yat-sen Warren Worth Bailey Newton D. Baker Willie Brown Clyde Cameron George F. Cotterill John W. Davis William Jay GaynorGaynor, William Jay. Some of Mayor Gaynor's Letters and Speeches. New York: Greaves Pub., 1913. 214-21. https://books.google.com/books?id=-7kMAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA219#v=onepage&q&f=false Keir Hardie Hardie states, "I was a very enthusiastic single-taxer for a number of years." Frederic C. HoweHowe, Frederic C. The Confessions of a Reformer. Kent, OH: Kent State UP, 1988. Blas InfanteArcas Cubero, Fernando: El movimiento georgista y los orígenes del Andalucismo : análisis del periódico "El impuesto único" (1911–1923). Málaga : Editorial Confederación Española de Cajas de Ahorros, 1980. ISBN 84-500-3784-0 Tom L. Johnson"Single Taxers Dine Johnson". New York Times May 31, 1910. Samuel M. Jones"Henry George". Ohio History Central: An Online History of Ohio History. Frank de Jong Franklin Knight Lane Hazen S. Pingree Philip Snowden Josiah C. Wedgwood William Bauchop Wilson Jane Addams Louis Brandeis Brandeis said, "I find it very difficult to disagree with the principles of Henry George... I believe in the taxation of land values only." Clarence DarrowHow to Abolish Unfair Taxation: An Address Before a Los Angeles Audience, Delivered March 1913 https://books.google.com/books/about/How_to_Abolish_Unfair_Taxation.html?id=rlOFHAAACAAJ Sara Bard FieldBeth Shalom Hessel. "Field, Sara Bard";  http://www.anb.org/articles/15/15-00220.html;  American National Biography Online April 2014.  Access Date: Sun Mar 22 2015 14:24:04 GMT-0700 (Pacific Daylight Time) Michael DavittLane, Fintan. The Origins of Modern Irish Socialism, 1881–1896.Cork University Press, 1997 (pp. 79, 81). Samuel Gompers Bolton HallLeubuscher, F. C. (1939).  Bolton Hall. The Freeman. January issue. Hubert Harrison John Haynes Holmes Holmes said, "The passing years have only added to my conviction that Henry George is one of the greatest of all modern statesmen and prophets." Stewart HeadlamThompson, Noel. Political economy and the Labour Party: The economics of démocratic socialism (1884-2005). Routlegde Ed., 2006, pp. 54-55. Benjamin C. MarshCaves, Roger W. Encyclopedia of the City. Abingdon, Oxon, OX: Routledge, 2005.Marsh, Benjamin Clarke. Lobbyist for the People; a Record of Fifty Years. Washington: Public Affairs, 1953. James Ferdinand Morton Thomas Mott OsborneJorgensen, Emil Oliver. The next Step toward Real Democracy: One Hundred Reasons Why America Should Abolish, as Speedily as Possible, All Taxation upon the Fruits of Industry, and Raise the Public Revenue by a Single Tax on Land Values Only. Chicago, IL: Chicago Singletax Club, 1920.Gorgas, William Crawford, and Lewis Jerome Johnson. Two Papers on Public Sanitation and the Single Tax. New York: Single Tax Information Bureau, 1914. https://books.google.com/books?id=v3NHAAAAYAAJWare, Louise. George Foster Peabody, Banker, Philanthropist, Publicist. Athens: U of Georgia, 1951. http://dlg.galileo.usg.edu/ugapressbks/pdfs/ugp9780820334561.pdf Amos Pinchot Louis Freeland Post Terence V. Powderly "It would be far easier to levy a "single tax," basing it upon land values." "It is because [...] a single land tax would prove to be the very essence of equity, that l advocate it. Samuel Seabury Catherine Helen Spence Thomas SpenceThomas Spence was a self-taught militant who believed that the land had been stolen from the people and should be returned to them. This idea was the corner stone of his Plan. http://thomas-spence-society.co.uk/2.html Helen Taylor (feminist) William Simon U'Ren Ida B. Wells Frances Willard (suffragist) Frank Chodorov Ernest Howard Crosby Charles Eisenstein Hamlin Garland Fred Harrisonhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vviBboUXhuA Fred Harrison speaks at ALTER Spring Conference 2014 James A. Herne Ebenezer Howard Fannie Hurst Aldous HuxleyHarrison, F. (May–June 1989).  "Aldous Huxley on 'the Land Question'". Land & Liberty.  "Huxley redeems himself when he concedes that, if he were to rewrite the book, he would offer a third option, one which he characterised as 'the possibility of sanity.'  In a few bold strokes he outlines the elements of this model: 'In this community economics would be decentralist and Henry Georgian, politics Kropotkinesque and co-operative.'" James Howard Kunstler William D. McCrackan Albert Jay NockLora, Ronald; Longton, William Henry, eds. (1999).  The Conservative Press in Twentieth-century America.  Greenwood Publishing, Inc.  p. 310.  "Thus, the Freeman was to speak for the great tradition of classical liberalism, which [Albert Jay Nock and Francis Nielson] were afraid was being lost, and for the economics of Henry George, which both men shared." Kathleen Norris Upton SinclairSinclair was an active georgist but eventually gave up on explicitly advocating the reform because, "Our opponents, the great rich bankers and land speculators of California, persuaded the poor man that we were going to put all taxes on this poor man's lot." Leo TolstoyA Great Iniquity.. Leo Tolstoy once said of George, "People do not argue with the teaching of George, they simply do not know it". Charles Erskine Scott Wood Wood had "strong leanings toward the single-tax theory of Henry George". William F. Buckley, Jr.Buckly says, "The location problem is, of course, easily solved by any Georgist, and I am one." Timothy Thomas Fortune Theodor Herzl Michael KinsleyKinsley reiterates that George is his favorite economist and that land taxes are the best source of revenue.In The New Republic (February 12, 1992) Kinsley advocates removing all taxes and collecting land rent instead. Suzanne La Follette Dylan Matthewshttps://twitter.com/dylanmatt/status/414149160775204864 Dylan Matthews's verified account states, "I think we've both been Georgists for a while now." Raymond Moley Reihan Salam Horace Traubel Martin Wolf Merryn Somerset Webbhttps://twitter.com/iddqkfa/status/468204465057566720 Brand WhitlockMiller, Joseph Dana (ed.), 1917. Single Tax Year Book. NY: Single Tax Review Publishing Company Tim Worstall Matthew Yglesiashttps://twitter.com/mattyglesias/status/313754546486796288 "WSJ story on Georgism fails to note that it’s clearly correct" David BachrachWineapple, Brenda. Sister Brother: Gertrude and Leo Stein. Lincoln: U of Nebraska, 2008. John Wilson BengoughMills, Allen. "Single Tax, Socialism and the Independent Labour Party of Manitoba: The Political Ideas of F.J. Dixon and S.J. Farmer." Labour / Le Travail 5 (1980): 33-56. JSTOR. Web. 04 Dec. 2014.  Daniel Carter Beard Matthew BellamyMuse return with new album The Resistance  "Sure, he has already launched into a passionate soliloquy about Geoism (the land-tax movement inspired by the 19th-century political economist Henry George)". Walter Burley GriffinCo-founder of the Henry George Club, Australia. John Hutchinson George Inness Emma Lazarus Author of "The New Colossus", on the Statue of Liberty, and the poem "Progress and Poverty", named after George's book, of which she said, “The life and thought of no one capable of understanding it can be quite the same after reading it.” Lazarus "supported Henry George's single tax". Agnes de Mille Henry Churchill de Mille William C. deMille Francis Neilson"Henry George, The Scholar" – A Commencement Address Delivered by Francis Neilson at the Henry George School of Social Science, June 3, 1940. Banjo PatersonMcQueen, Humphrey. A New Britannia. St. Lucia, Qld.: U of Queensland, 2004. Louis Prang Will Price Frank Stephens (sculptor) Frank Lloyd Wright Ralph BorsodiCarlson, Allan. The New Agrarian Mind: The Movement Toward Decentralist Thought in Twentieth-Century America Transaction Publishers, 2004 (p. 51). Nicholas Murray Butler John B. Cobb John Deweyhttp://www.wealthandwant.com/HG/PP/Dewey_Appreciation_HG.html Silvio GesellOnken, Werner. "The Political Economy of Silvio Gesell: A Century of Activism." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 59.4 (2000): 609-22. Web. 16 Aug. 2014. Leon MacLaren Jose Marti Franz Oppenheimer Philippe Van Parijs Bertrand Russellhttp://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/russell-bertrand_admiration-for-henry-george-1960.jpg Letter addressed to a Mr. Krumreig Hillel SteinerVallentyne, Peter.  Left-libertarianism: A Primer.  In Vallentyne, Peter; Steiner, Hillel (2000).  "Left-libertarianism and Its Critics: The Contemporary Debate".  Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Publishers Ltd.  "Georgist libertarians—such as eponymous George (1879, 1892), Steiner (1977, 1980, 1981, 1992, 1994), and Tideman (1991, 1997, 1998)—hold that agents may appropriate unappropriated natural resources as long as they pay for the competitive value of the rights they claim." Roger Babson Albert EinsteinTwo lettrs written in 1934 to Henry George's daughter, Anna George De Mille. In one letter Einstein writes, "The spreading of these works is a really deserving cause, for our generation especially has many and important things to learn from Henry George." Henry Ford Henry Ford says, "[. . .]every American family can have a piece of land. We ought to tax all idle land the way Henry George said — tax it heavily, so that its owners would have to make it productive" Spencer Heath Mumia Abu-JamalJustice for Mumia Abu-Jamal Margrit Kennedy John C. Lincoln Elizabeth MagieMagie invented The Landlord's Game, predecessor to Monopoly Edward McGlynn Buckey O'Neill George Foster Peabody Raymond A. Spruance Silvanus P. Thompson Fiske Warren Alfred Russel Wallace Wallace described Progress and Poverty as “Undoubtedly the most remarkable and important book of the present century.” Joseph Fels Robert Schalkenbach Foundation
