    Gilligan's Island is an American sitcom created and produced by Sherwood Schwartz via  United Artists Television. The show had an ensemble cast that featured Bob Denver, Alan Hale, Jr., Jim Backus, Natalie Schafer, Russell Johnson, Tina Louise, and Dawn Wells.  It aired for three seasons on the CBS network from September 26, 1964, to April 17, 1967. Originally sponsored by Philip Morris & Co and Procter & Gamble, the show followed the comic adventures of seven castaways as they attempted to survive the island on which they had been shipwrecked. Most episodes revolve around the dissimilar castaways' conflicts and their unsuccessful attempts, for whose failure Gilligan was frequently responsible, to escape their plight.Gilligan's Island - Me TV Gilligan's Island ran for a total of 98 episodes. The first season, consisting of 36 episodes, was filmed in black and white. These episodes were later colorized for syndication. The show's second and third seasons (62 episodes) and the three television movie sequels were filmed in color. The show enjoyed solid ratings during its original run, then grew in popularity during decades of syndication, especially in the 1970s and 1980s when many markets ran the show in the late afternoon after school. Today, the title character of Gilligan is widely recognized as an American cultural icon. The two-man crew of the charter boat SS Minnow and five passengers on a "three-hour tour" from Honolulu run into a tropical storm and are shipwrecked on an uncharted island somewhere in the Pacific Ocean.  The island was close enough to Hawaii to clearly pick up Hawaiian AM radio transmissions on a portable receiver. Due to the three significant character and casting changes between the pilot episode and the first series, the pilot was not shown when the first series was aired in 1964. Four of the original seven pilot characters were identical to those of the series (including the actor/actress cast for each role): Gilligan, the Skipper, and the two Howells. The three remaining original pilot characters differed from those of the series (including the actor/actress cast): In the pilot, the Professor was instead a high school teacher played by John Gabriel; Ginger the movie star was instead Ginger, a practical secretary with red hair, played by Kit Smythe; and Mary Ann the Kansas farm girl was instead Bunny, a stereotypically cheerful "dumb blonde" secretary, played by Nancy McCarthy. The pilot's opening and ending theme songs, two similar Calypso-styled tracks written by John Williams and performed by Sherwood Schwarz himself impersonating Sir Lancelot with differing lyrics, were quite different from those of the actual series. The short scenes during the opening theme song (which is longer than the series opening theme song) include Gilligan taking the Howells' luggage to the boat before cast-off and Gilligan attempting to give a cup of coffee to the Skipper during the storm that would ultimately maroon the boat. After the opening theme song and opening credits end, the pilot proper begins with the seven castaways waking up on the beached SS Minnow and continues with them performing various tasks including exploring the island, attempting to fix the transmitter, building huts, and finding food. Contrary to some descriptions, no detailed accounts of the pilot characters' backgrounds were written into the pilot storylines. The pilot then ends with the ending theme song and ending credits. Lastly, the background music and even the laugh tracks of the pilot appear all but identical to those used during the series. The first episode actually broadcast, "Two on a Raft," is sometimes wrongly referred to as the series pilot. This episode begins with the same scene of Gilligan and the Skipper awakening on the boat as in the pilot (though slightly differently cut, to eliminate most shots of the departed actors) and continues with the characters sitting on the beach listening to a radio news report about their disappearance. There is no equivalent scene or background information in the pilot, except for the description of the passengers in the original theme song. Rather than re-shooting the rest of the pilot story for broadcast, the show just proceeded on. The plot thus skips over the topics of the pilot; the bulk of the episode tells of Gilligan and the Skipper setting off on a raft to try to bring help but unknowingly landing back on the other side of the same island. The scene with the radio report is one of two scenes that reveal the names of the Skipper (Jonas Grumby) and the Professor (Roy Hinkley); the names are used in a similar radio report early in the series. The name Jonas Grumby appears nowhere else in the series except for an episode in which the Maritime Board of Review blames the Skipper for the loss of the ship. The name Roy Hinkley is used one other time when Mr. Howell introduces the Professor as Roy Huntley and the professor corrects him, to which Mr. Howell replies, "Brinkley, Brinkley." The plot for the pilot episode would eventually be recycled into that season's Christmas episode, "Birds Gotta Fly, Fish Gotta Talk", in which the story of the pilot episode, concerning the practical problems on landing, is related through a series of flashbacks. Footage featuring characters that had been recast was reshot using the current actors. For scenes including only Denver, Hale, Backus, and Schafer the original footage was reused. The last episode of the show, "Gilligan the Goddess", aired on April 17, 1967, and ended just like the rest, with the castaways still stranded on the island. It was not known at the time that it would be the series finale, as a fourth season was expected but then cancelled. In its last year Gilligan's Island was the lead-in program for the CBS Monday night schedule. It was followed for the first sixteen weeks by the sitcom Run, Buddy, Run. The timeslot from 7:30 to 8:30 Eastern was filled in the 1967–68 season by Gunsmoke, moved from its traditional Saturday 10&nbsp;pm timeslot. The shipwrecked castaways want to leave the remote island, and various opportunities present themselves. They typically fail owing to some bumbling error committed by Gilligan (with the exception of "The Big Gold Strike", where everyone except Gilligan is responsible for their failed escape). Sometimes this would result in Gilligan saving the others from some unforeseen flaw in their plan.Gilligan Trivia - Me TV Recurring elements center on one of five primary themes. The first deals with life on the island. A running gag is the castaways' ability to fashion a vast array of useful objects from bamboo and other local material. Some are simple everyday things, while others are stretches of the imagination. Russell Johnson noted in his autobiography that the production crew enjoyed the challenge of building these props. Some bamboo items include framed huts with thatched grass sides and roofs, along with bamboo closets strong enough to withstand hurricane-force winds and rain; the communal dining table and chairs, pipes for Gilligan's hot water, a stethoscope, and a pedal-powered car. Many scenes occur at the dining table, where the castaways enjoy a large number of dishes that Ginger and Mary Ann prepare while the radio provides news and entertainment. Gilligan and the Skipper often catch fish, and the island has citrus trees to avoid scurvy and a good supply of fresh water to drink and to prepare refreshing tropical drinks with. Naturally, despite their obvious skill and inventiveness, the castaways never quite manage to put together a functional raft out of bamboo (or repair the hole in their original ship as the ship itself fell to pieces when they tried that in one episode), although in the television movie Rescue from Gilligan's Island they do end up tying their huts together and using that as a raft for escape. The second theme involves visitors to the "uncharted" island. One challenge to a viewer's suspension of disbelief is the frequency with which the castaways are visited by people who do nothing to assist them. Some have hidden motives for not assisting the castaways. Others are simply unable to help, incompetent, or are foiled in their efforts to help the castaways by Gilligan's bumbling. Bob Denver, Jim Backus, and Tina Louise each had feature episodes in which look-alikes come to the island (who were, of course, played by themselves in dual roles). The island itself is also home to an unusual assortment of animal life, some native, some visiting. The third recurring theme is the use of dream sequences in which one of the castaways "dreams" he or she is some character related to that week's storyline. All of the castaways would appear as other characters within the dream. In later interviews and memoirs, almost all of the actors stated that the dream episodes were among their personal favorites. The fourth recurring theme is a piece of news concerning the castaways arriving from the outside world that causes discord among them. Then a second piece of news arrives that says the first was incorrect. An exception to the latter part of this statement is the episode "The Postman Cometh", where Gilligan and the Skipper hear over the radio that Mary Ann's boyfriend eloped and the three single men try to cheer her up by wooing her; Mary Ann actually lied about having a boyfriend, and she created a romance with "a real creep" so that the others would think she had someone waiting for her back home. The fifth recurring theme is the appearance or arrival of strange objects, like a WWII mine or a "Mars Rover" that the scientists back in the USA think is sending them pictures of Mars, and in one episode a meteorite. Most of the slapstick comedic sequences between Hale and Denver were heavily inspired by Laurel and Hardy particularly by Hale breaking the fourth wall by looking directly into the camera expressing his frustration with Denver's clumsiness as Oliver Hardy often did.. Filming of the show took place at the CBS Radford Studios complex in Studio City, Los Angeles California. The same stage was later used for The Mary Tyler Moore Show and Roseanne (which featured Gilligan's Island prominently on one episode). The lagoon was drained and used as a parking lot during the show's off-season and was the last surviving element of the show when it was demolished in 1997 as part of an expansion project. Four different boats played the part of the S.S. Minnow. One was used in the opening credits and rented in Ala Wai Yacht Harbor in Honolulu, Hawaii. Another boat, the Bluejacket, was used in the opening credits shown during the second and third seasons and eventually turned up for sale on Vancouver Island in August 2006, after running aground on a reef in the Hecate Strait on the way south from Alaska. One boat was used for beach scenes after being towed to Kauai in Hawaii. The fourth Minnow was built on the CBS Studios set in the second season. The Minnow was named in reference to Newton Minow, chairman of the U.S. FCC, who was most famous for describing television as "a vast wasteland". The final day of filming of the scenes of the pilot episode was Friday, November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.Russell Johnson with Steve Cox, Here on Gilligan's Isle, page 20 (1993). The cast and crew found out about the assassination late that morning, Hawaii time. Between the filming of scenes, they crowded around a radio, listening to news bulletins. A reminder of the tragedy appears in the opening sequence of the show's first season, when the theme song is played. As the Minnow is leaving the harbor and heading out to sea, an American flag flying at half staff can be seen briefly in the background.First season opening sequence of Gilligan's Island From YouTube. Retrieved on November 6, 2011. The United States Coast Guard occasionally received telegrams from concerned citizens, who apparently did not realize it was a scripted show, pleading for them to rescue the people on the deserted island. The Coast Guard would simply forward these telegrams to producer Sherwood Schwartz. The music and lyrics for the theme song, "The Ballad of Gilligan’s Isle", were written by Sherwood Schwartz and George Wyle.  One version was used for the first season and another for the second and third. In the original song, the Professor and Mary Ann, originally considered "second-billed co-stars", were referred to as "and the rest," but with the growing popularity of those characters, their names were inserted into the lyrics. The "Gilligan" theme song underwent this one major change thanks to star Bob Denver, who personally went to the studio and asked that Johnson and Wells be added to the theme song's opening credits. When the studio at first refused, saying it would be too expensive to reshoot, Denver insisted, even saying that if Johnson and Wells weren't included, he wanted his name out of the song as well. The studio caved in, and "the Professor and Mary Ann" were added. Wells elaborated that star Denver went to the studio executives to get her and Johnson added to the opening credits. The first season version was recorded by the folk group The Wellingtons. The second season version, which incorporated more of a sea shanty sound, was uncredited, but according to Russell Johnson in his book Here on Gilligan's Isle, it was performed by a group called the Eligibles. The show's original pilot episode featured a calypso theme song by future film composer John Williams, and different lyrics. The original length of the voyage was "a six-hour ride", not "a three-hour tour". John Williams (or Johnny Williams as he was often listed in the show credits) also started out as the composer of the incidental music for the show (from 1964 to 1965) but was replaced by Gerald Fried for the remaining seasons (1965–67). The band Little Roger and the Goosebumps recorded "Stairway to Gilligan's Island," a parody of Led Zeppelin's "Stairway to Heaven", substituting the words to the Gilligan's Island theme song. "Weird Al" Yankovic recorded a song called "Isle Thing", a parody of Tone Lōc's "Wild Thing", about a rapper whose girlfriend introduces him to the show. Yankovic also used one verse from the closing theme lyrics in "Amish Paradise" (1996), a parody of Coolio's "Gangsta's Paradise" (1995). The song has also been covered by many bands, including Bowling for Soup for the TBS show The Real Gilligan's Island.   Israel Kamakawiwo'ole also recorded a comic tribute to the theme song on his album E Ala E. During the 1966&ndash;67 television season, Gilligan's Island aired on Monday nights at 7:30&nbsp;p.m. Even though the sitcom's ratings had fallen out of the top 30 programs, during the last few weeks of its third season, the series was still doing very well and more than holding its own against its chief competitor, The Monkees, which aired at the same time on NBC-TV. Therefore, CBS assured Sherwood Schwartz that Gilligan's Island would definitely be picked up for a fourth year. However, under pressure from network president William S. Paley and his wife Babe, along with many network affiliates and longtime fans of Gunsmoke (which had been airing late on Saturday nights), to reverse its threatened cancellation, CBS rescheduled the western series to an earlier time slot on Monday evenings at 7:30&nbsp;p.m. As a result, Gilligan's Island was unceremoniously cancelled at practically the last minute even though the cast members were all on vacation. Some of the cast had bought houses based on Sherwood Schwartz's verbal confirmation that the series would be renewed for a fourth season. In a 1978 made-for-television movie, Rescue from Gilligan's Island, the castaways do successfully leave the island, but have difficulty reintegrating back into society. During a reunion cruise on the first Christmas after their rescue, fate intervenes and they find themselves wrecked on the same island at the end of the film. It starred the original cast except for Tina Louise, who refused to participate due to her disputes with the producers and was replaced by Judith Baldwin. The plot involved Soviet agents seeking a memory disc from a spy satellite that landed on the island and facilitated their rescue. In a 1979 sequel, The Castaways on Gilligan's Island, they are rescued once again, and the Howells convert the island into a getaway resort with the other five castaways as "silent partners". Ginger was again played by Judith Baldwin. This sequel was intended as a pilot for a possible new series in which the castaways would host new groups of tourists each week, using the all-star cast anthology format made popular by Fantasy Island and The Love Boat. The series never materialized, though the premise was the basis of a short-lived 1981 series titled Aloha Paradise. In a second sequel, The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan's Island (1981), villains played by Martin Landau and then-wife Barbara Bain (who also appeared together on Mission: Impossible and Space: 1999) try to take over the island to gain access to a vein of Supremium, a valuable but volatile element. This time, Ginger was played by Constance Forslund. They are thwarted by the timely intervention of the Harlem Globetrotters. Jim Backus, who was in poor health at the time, only appeared at the very end, arriving back on the island. David Ruprecht played the role of Thurston Howell IV, even though the series had established that the Howells were childless. Unlike the previous two movies, The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan's Island utilized a laugh track like the original series. The New Adventures of Gilligan was a Filmation-produced animated remake that aired on ABC Saturday Morning from September 7, 1974, to September 4, 1977, for 24 episodes (16 installments airing in 1974–75 and eight new ones combined with repeats in 1975–76). The voices were done by the original cast except for Ginger and Mary Ann (both were voiced by Jane Webb). Dawn Wells could not voice her own character due to an on-the-road play. An additional character was Gilligan's pet Snubby the Monkey. Gilligan's Planet was an animated science fiction version produced by Filmation and starring the voices of the Gilligan's Island cast, save for Tina Louise (Dawn Wells voiced both Mary Ann and Ginger). In a follow-up to The New Adventures of Gilligan, the castaways escape from the island by building a spaceship, and get shipwrecked on a distant planet. Only 12 episodes aired on CBS between September 18, 1982, and September 3, 1983. In the episode "Let Sleeping Minnows lie", they travel to an island, get shipwrecked there, and Gilligan observes, "First we were stranded on an island, then we were stranded on a planet, and now we're stranded on an island on a planet." "Dusty's Trail" was a series produced and created by Sherwood Schwartz. Based on characters from Gilligan's Island, it also starred Bob Denver as Dusty, a mumbling, bumbling scout for a wagon train, with Forrest Tucker as the wagon master, a rich couple (Mr. and Mrs. Brookhaven), a smart science professor, a school teacher and a saloon girl. The series aired from September 11, 1973 to March 12, 1974 in broadcast syndication. The series was canceled after its first season, having run for 26 episodes. In the series, a wagon and stagecoach are separated from a wagon train and must find their way to California, facing troubles along the way.  ALF featured an episode in 1987 called "The Ballad of Gilligan's Island" in which the alien dreams he is on the island after getting familiar with the show and meets the featured castaways. Bob Denver, Alan Hale, Dawn Wells, and Russell Johnson portray darkly-skewed versions of their characters after being stuck on the island for 23 years. During ALF's dream, it was shown that Gilligan was getting tired of being called "Little Buddy" and the Professor argues with Skipper on how his ideas to get off the island being ruined were Gilligan's fault. The Howells are explained as having set up a camp on the other side of the island with no references to Ginger. Skipper puts ALF to work digging a hole for their mini-golf course (the opposite of ALF's order from Willie Tanner to fill in the lagoon he dug in his backyard) to compete with the Howells' golf course. The Professor was also shown to have successfully made a television where they watch sitcom versions of the Tanner Family. Baywatch season 2 episode 16 "Now Sit Back and You'll Hear a Tale" (1992) features Bob Denver and Dawn Wells as Gilligan and Mary Ann as part of Eddie's dream. In an unaired episode of the short-lived 1997 CBS sitcom Meego (TV series), Gilligan, the Professor, and Mary Ann all appear, played by the original actors, and Gilligan yells, "We've been trapped here for 35 years!" This episode did not air in the US because CBS canceled the series after six episodes aired. Roseanne (which was shot on the same Studio City sound stage as Gilligan's Island) had an episode titled "Sherwood Schwartz: A Loving Tribute". Part of the episode is a fantasy sequence parodying this series. Most of the regular/recurring Roseanne cast portrayed the Gilligan's Island characters: During the end credits, Tina Louise, Bob Denver, Russell Johnson and Dawn Wells appeared as their Roseanne character counterparts. Sherwood Schwartz also appeared as himself, although his appearance is edited out in syndication.  Good Morning America featured a Gilligan's Island reunion presided over by guest host Kathie Lee Gifford on November 26, 1982. This was the first time that the entire cast had been reunited (including Tina Louise), even though Jim Backus was not able to be physically present. He was able to join the cast via a live video remote from Los Angeles, California. The original cast members (along with Sherwood Schwartz) reunited on television for one last time on a 1988 episode of The Late Show with Ross Shafer. Gilligan's Island: Underneath the Grass Skirt is a 1999 documentary featuring Denver and Louise. E! True Hollywood Story presented a backstage history of the show in 2000, featuring interviews with some of the stars or their widows. Surviving Gilligan's Island (2001) was a docudrama in which Bob Denver, Dawn Wells, and Russell Johnson reminisce about the show. Currently, syndication is handled by Warner Bros. Television (under Turner Entertainment Co., who in 1986 acquired UA's share of the series as part of the classic MGM library). It has aired on TBS from 1990 to 2003, where it also aired with colorization on season one for a while. TNT aired it at some point in the 1990s, and also aired the colorized season one. Nick at Nite later aired the series from 2000 to 2001. It then shifted to TV Land, where it aired from 2001 to 2003 (and again from January to June 2014). Then, in 2004, it quietly aired on Hallmark Channel. As of 2015, the show airs nationally on both TV Land and Me-TV. Warner Home Video released all three seasons of Gilligan's Island on DVD in Region 1 between 2004 and 2005. The Complete First Season features all 36 episodes unedited with the original theme song. And, unlike other releases of older sitcoms, the episodes are in their original black-and-white format. The special features include the rare pilot episode with commentary with creator Sherwood Schwartz, and three other featurettes. The Complete Second Season includes all 32 season two episodes and mentions in an interesting way that this season is in color. Bonuses for this set include: a season two intro with Russell Johnson and Sherwood Schwartz and audio commentary on the season's third episode, "The Little Dictator". The Complete Third Season includes all 30 season three episodes and uses words from the theme song on the back: "Just sit right back... for the final season!" Special features include a season intro with Russell Johnson and Sherwood Schwartz, commentary on the season's fourth episode, "The Producer", guest starring Phil Silvers, and a fifteen-minute documentary entitled Gilligan's Island: A Pop Culture Phenomenon. The Complete Series Collection contains all the same bonuses and featurettes, no added features for a complete series box set. All these releases were double-sided discs, and came in box sets. In April 2012, the series was re-issued new DVD releases, with six episodes per disc and six discs per season, except for season 3, which only has five. A video game based on the series called "The Adventures of Gilligan's Island", was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System in July 1990. The game features the likenesses of all the original castaways except for Ginger, who is completely absent from the game. A pinball machine based on the show was released in May 1991. Rights to the series were purchased, with an eye towards creating a movie scheduled for release March 30, 2012.IMDB When Sherwood Schwartz, creator of Gilligan's Island, signed a deal granting all rights to the movie, he reportedly said, "[It] just happened in the last 48 hours. I can’t take this much excitement at my age." Schwartz also said he would love to see Michael Cera as Gilligan and Beyoncé Knowles as Ginger. On December 17, 2013, Deadline.com reported that Josh Gad would star and co-write the film with Benji Samit and Dan Hernandez.Warner Bros Sets ‘Gilligan’s Island’ As Star Feature Vehicle For Josh Gad The question of which of these two characters men prefer has endured long after the end of the series. (HighBeam subscription may be required) The question has inspired commercials,Budweiser Ginger or Mary Ann Retrieved on 2011-09-07 essays, videos, and a sermon. By most accounts, the wholesome, down-to-earth Mary Ann has consistently outpolled Ginger by a sizable margin. Bob Denver admitted he was a Mary Ann fan. According to Bob Denver in a 2001 interview, Wells received 3000&ndash;5,000 fan letters weekly, whereas Louise may have gotten 1,500 or 2,000.   Season Ep# Season premiere Season finale Timeslot Rank Rating Households 1) 1964&ndash;65 36 September 26, 1964 June 12, 1965 Saturday nights at 8:30 P.M. 24.7 (tie) 13,227,700 2) 1965&ndash;66 32 September 16, 1965 April 28, 1966 Thursday nights at 8:00 P.M. 22.1 11,900,850 3) 1966&ndash;67 30 September 12, 1966 April 17, 1967 Monday nights at 7:30 P.M. N/A N/A DVD name Ep# Release date The Complete First Season 36 February 3, 2004 The Complete Second Season 32 January 11, 2005 The Complete Third Season 30 July 26, 2005 The Complete Series Collection 98 November 6, 2007 Bob Denver as First Mate Gilligan, the bumbling, accident-prone crewman (affectionately known as "Little Buddy" by "the Skipper") of the SS Minnow. Denver was not the first choice to play Gilligan; actor Jerry Van Dyke was offered the role, but he turned it down, believing that the show would never be successful. He chose instead to play the lead in My Mother the Car, which premiered the following year and was cancelled after one season. The producers looked to Bob Denver, the actor who had played Maynard G. Krebs, the goofy but lovable beatnik in The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis. None of the show's episodes ever specified Gilligan's full name or clearly indicated whether "Gilligan" was the character's first name or his last.  In the DVD collection, Sherwood Schwartz states that he preferred the full name of "Willy Gilligan" for the character. Denver, on various television/radio interviews (The Pat Sajak Show; KDKA radio), said that "Gil Egan" was his choice. The actor reasoned that because everyone yelled at the first mate, it ran together as "Gilligan." In the unaired pilot episode, it is unclear whether Lovey Howell refers to Gilligan as "Stewart" or steward. On Rescue from Gilligan's Island, the writers artfully dodged Gilligan's full name when the other names are announced. Little is revealed about Gilligan's past, except his occasional reference to best friend Skinny Mulligan. Alan Hale, Jr. as The Skipper/Captain Jonas Grumby, the captain of the S.S. Minnow. Alan Hale Jr. was a longtime actor in B-westerns and the look-alike son of Alan Hale, Sr., a legendary movie character actor. Hale so loved his role that, long after the show went off the air, he would still appear in character in his Los Angeles restaurant, Alan Hale's Lobster Barrel. Although the Skipper was a father figure to Gilligan, Hale was only 14 years older than Denver. Gilligan pushed the Skipper out of the way of a loose depth charge when they were both serving in the United States Navy.  Skipper is a World War II veteran, and served in the Seventh Fleet. In one episode, he describes his participation in the Battle of Guadalcanal.  In the episode "They're Off and Running" (Season 1 Episode 28) Ginger is reading from a horoscope magazine and asks The Skipper his birthday to which he responds, "May 5th." In moments of exasperation, the Skipper would swat Gilligan on the head with his cap. Just as often, the Skipper would endearingly call Gilligan "Little Buddy." In addition, Hale wore his Skipper outfit when he and four other Gilligan's cast appeared on a few celebrity Family Feud shows. Jim Backus as Thurston Howell III, the millionaire. Backus was already a well known character actor when he took the part. The origin of the super rich Howell character dates back to 1949 radio when Backus portrayed "Hubert Updike III" on The Alan Young Show.  Also, in the inaugural 1962/63 season (episode 31) of The Beverly Hillbillies Backus basically plays the same character; this time it's the eccentric millionaire Martin von Ransohoff. In the 1963 movie It's a Mad Mad Mad Mad World Backus played Tyler Fitzgerald, a boozy and rich airplane owner who briefly gets caught up in the race for the money.  He was perhaps best known as the voice of the cartoon character Mr. Magoo.  He reused some of the voice inflections and mannerisms of Magoo in the role. He was well known for his ad-libs on the set. The character Howell was a Harvard graduate, a Republican, and a multi-billionaire until his losses in the Great Depression left him a multi-millionaire. Natalie Schafer as Eunice Lovelle Wentworth Howell, Thurston's wife, whom he affectionately called "Lovey". Schafer had it written into her contract that there were to be no close-ups of her, perhaps because of her age. Schafer was 63 when the pilot was shot, although reportedly no one on the set or in the cast knew her real age and she refused to divulge it. Originally, she only accepted the role because the pilot was filmed on location in Hawaii. She looked at the job as nothing more than a free vacation, as she was convinced that a show this silly would "never go." Tina Louise as Ginger Grant, the movie star. Louise clashed with producer Sherwood Schwartz because she believed that she was hired as the central character. Her character was originally written as a hard nosed, sharp tongued temptress, but Louise argued that this portrayal was too harsh and refused to play it as written. A compromise was reached; Louise agreed to play her as a Marilyn Monroe/Jayne Mansfield type. The evening gowns and hairstyle used were designed to re-create the look of Myrna Loy.  Louise continued to clash with producers over her role and was the only cast member who refused to return for any of the post-series TV movies, saying that the role had killed her career as a serious actress. However, she did appear in a reunion of the cast on a late night television talk show in 1988 and on an episode of Roseanne in 1995 when the Roseanne cast re-enacted Gilligan's Island. In the first season, Ginger often wore gowns that looked as if they were tailored from SS Minnow tarpaulins or similar substitute cloth (some had the name of the vessel stenciled on them). In the pilot episode, the character of Ginger (then a secretary) was played by actress Kit Smythe. Russell Johnson as Professor Roy Hinkley, Ph.D.. John Gabriel was originally cast, but the network thought he looked too young to have all the degrees attributed to the Professor. Actually, "the Professor" was in fact a high school science teacher, not a university professor.  In the first episode, the radio announcer describes him as a research scientist and well known Scoutmaster. Johnson, who served as a bombardier in the Pacific during World War II, stated that he had some difficulty remembering his more technically oriented lines.  Johnson's role in the series was spoofed in a Bloom County comic strip for the Professor's technical expertise being unable to get the castaways off the island. This odd contradiction was played up in "Weird Al" Yankovic's parody song, Isle Thing, when the Professor, who is brilliant enough to "make a nuclear reactor from a couple of coconuts" cannot "build a lousy raft".  In his autobiography, Here On Gilligan's Isle, Russell Johnson admitted the Professor indeed for all his smarts could not build a boat, but, despite popular beliefs stated in the aforementioned Bloom County strip or the "Weird Al" parody song, firmly added the Professor also did not build a nuclear reactor from coconuts nor a satellite dish from clam shells. Dawn Wells as Mary Ann Summers. Wells was a former Miss Nevada when she auditioned for the role.  Her competition included Raquel Welch and Patricia Ann Priest.  The pilot episode had a different character ("Bunny") played by actress Nancy McCarthy. After it was shot, the network decided to recast the roles of the Professor and the two young women. Mary Ann became a simple farm girl from Winfield, Kansas.  In 1993, Wells published Mary Ann's Gilligan's Island Cookbook with co-writers Ken Beck and Jim Clark, including a foreword by Bob Denver. In February 2007, she starred as Lovey Howell in Gilligan's Island: The Musical, a musical stage adaptation of the TV show. Charles Maxwell was the uncredited voice of the "Radio Announcer" (1964&ndash;65).  The castaways would listen to his plot-advancing radio bulletins in many episodes and always with perfect timing to hear the exact news they needed to know. Maxwell would often pause between sentences allowing the characters to react to his news and sometimes even responding to their comments. Jackie (Laurie Metcalf) / Gilligan Dan (John Goodman) / Skipper Leon (Martin Mull) / Mr. Howell Bev (Estelle Parsons) / Mrs. Howell Roseanne (Roseanne Barr) / Ginger Mark (Glenn Quinn) / Professor Darlene (Sara Gilbert) / Mary Ann Gilligan's Island: The Musical was first produced in the early 1990s, with a script by Lloyd Schwartz, Sherwood Schwartz's son, and songs by Schwartz's daughter and son-in-law, Hope and Laurence Juber. After extensive revisions, since 2001 it has been produced at various theaters around the U.S. "Weird Al" Yankovic used one verse verbatim from the Gilligan's Island theme in his single and video "Amish Paradise" (1996), which was a parody of Coolios "Gangsta Paradise" (1995).  The verse was: "There's no phone, no lights, no motorcar/Not a single luxury/Like Robinson Caruso/It's as primitive as can be..." In 2000, the Comedy Channel series, The Man Show, explored the long-standing controversy "Mary Ann vs. Ginger". Dawn Wells portrayed herself in island attire, while the Man Show gave their version of the issue. The episode was "The Beach Show", Season 2, Episode 7. Gilligan's Wake is a 2003 parallel novel loosely based on the 1960s CBS sitcom, from the viewpoints of the seven major characters, written by Esquire film and television critic Tom Carson. The title is derived from the title of the TV show and Finnegans Wake, the seminal work of Irish novelist James Joyce. On November 30, 2004, the TBS network launched a reality series titled The Real Gilligan's Island, which placed two groups of people on an island, leaving them to fend for themselves à la Survivor&nbsp;– the catch being that each islander matched a character type established in the original series (a klutz, a sea captain, a movie star, a millionaire's wife, etc.). While heavily marketed by TBS, the show turned out to be a flop with a very Survivor-like feel but little of its success. A second season began June 8, 2005, with two-hour episodes for four weeks. TBS announced in July 2005 that a third season of the show would not be produced. Gilligan's Island&nbsp;– The Complete First Season (DVD), 2004, Turner Home Entertainment, UPC 053939673425. Gilligan's Island&nbsp;– The Complete Second Season (DVD), 2005, Turner Home Entertainment, UPC 053939692624. Gilligan's Island&nbsp;– The Complete Third Season (DVD), 2005, Turner Home Entertainment, UPC 053939733129. Official Gilligan's Island Fan Club Sept 2014 interview with Dawn Wells
