    The following list consists of notable concepts that are derived from both Islamic and Arab tradition, which are expressed as words in the Arabic language. The main purpose of this list is to disambiguate multiple spellings, to make note of spellings no longer in use for these concepts, to define the concept in one or two lines, to make it easy for one to find and pin down specific concepts, and to provide a guide to unique concepts of Islam all in one place. Separating concepts in Islam from concepts specific to Arab culture, or from the language itself, can be difficult. Many Arabic concepts have an Arabic secular meaning as well as an Islamic meaning. One example is the concept of dawah. Arabic, like all languages, contains words whose meanings differ across various contexts. The word Islam is itself a good example. Arabic is written in its own alphabet, with letters, symbols, and orthographic conventions that do not have exact equivalents in the Latin alphabet (see Arabic alphabet). The following list contains transliterations of Arabic terms and phrases; variations exist, e.g. din instead of deen and aqidah instead of aqeedah. Most items in the list also contain their actual Arabic spelling. Eid al-Fitr (عيد الفطر) Marks the end of Ramadan, the Islamic holy month of fasting (sawm). servant, worshipper, slave. Muslims consider themselves servants and slaves of God. Common Muslim names such as Abdullah (Servant of God), Abdul-Malik (Slave of the King), Abdur-Rahmān (Slave of the most Beneficent), Abdus-Salām (Slave of Peace), Abdur-Rahîm (Slave of the Merciful), all refer to names of Allah. Traditionally describes good manners, as in etiquette. For example, being courteous is good ʾadab. However, the term can be used very broadly, and the proper translation would be "the proper way to go about something," as in the example, ʾĀdāb al Qitāl, or, "The Proper Ways of Fighting in War," (Qitāl in Arabic means mortal combat) in which the word "etiquette" does not befit the context. A secondary meaning of ʾAdab is "literature". call to salat (prayer), sometimes alternatively spelled and pronounced Azan, Athan and Adhan. justice, especially distributive justice: social, economic, political, environmental. Anno Hegirae The Islamic calendar starts counting years starting from the time when Muhammad had to leave Mecca and go to Medina, an event known as the Hijra. The first day of the first Islamic year is 1 Muḥarram 1 (AH) and corresponds to 16 July 622 (CE). literally "one." Islamically, ahad means One Alone, unique, none like God. Al-Wahid is one of the names of God. rulings and orders of the Qu'ran and Sunnah. Five kinds of orders: Wajib, Mustahab, Muharram, Makruh, and Halal. Singular Ḥukm. members of Muhammad's Household. Also known among Shia as the Maʿṣūmūn (معصومون) (infallibles; spiritually pure). people who live in ignorance of the teachings of a revealed religion, but according to the "Fitra", the "Natural Religion" innate to human nature as created by God. "People of the Book", or followers of pre-Islamic monotheistic religions with some form of scripture believed to be of divine origin which were mentioned in Quran: Jews, Christians. hereafter or eternal life The practice of virtue. Morals. Genuineness in religious beliefs. Piety and righteousness and every act of obedience to Allah. Literally "worlds", humankind, jinn, angels and all that exists. "Peace be upon him" This expression normally follows after naming a prophet (other than Muhammad), or one of the noble Angels (i.e. Jibreel[Gabriel], Mikaeel[Michael], etc.) "Praise be to God!" Qur'anic exclamation and also same meaning as hallelujah. The Arabic name of God. "O God." "Allah is the Greatest." Islamic expression. One who knows. A scholar (in any field of knowledge); a scientist (who knows science) or a theologian (who knows religion); similar to Japanese sensei, "teacher". the trust. Of all creation, only human beings & jinns carry the "trust", which is free will. Amen. In some countries like Morocco, a  or Commander of the faithful is the religious chief. Muhammad's mother. Aminah fell sick and died in Abwa, near Madina (then Yathrib) when Muhammad was six years old. Islamic doctrine of enjoining right. There exists in Islam the (obligatory) principle of encouraging other people to do the right thing. Spoils of war. (See Sūrat al-ʾAnfāl (8:1)) (سورة الأنفال)Sūrat al-ʾAnfāl corpus.quran.com "Helpers." The Muslim converts at Medina who helped the Muslims from Mecca after the Hijrah. Article of faith, tenet, creed, or dogma. Islamic practice of shaving the head of the newborn male and contributing the weight in silver for charity as well as 2 lambs. One lamb is slaughtered for a baby girl. Intelligence, intellect, mind, understanding The five rukn "pillars" of Islam. (See rukn) This acronym evokes a blessing and is appended to the names of the prophets who came before Muhammad. It will also be applied to the mothers of those prophets. When following a woman's name, the feminine form is ʿAlayha s-salām. Root, origin, source; principle. "Submit to Islam" (See dawah) List of God's 99 names. According to a hadith, the one who enumerates them all will enter Paradise. The third salat prayer. The time of the day before sunset and after noon. also means "era". The bridge by crossing which it is determined (judged) whether a person would go to heaven or hell. How a person crosses the Sirat depends on what they have done in their life and what they have believed in. The ten companions of Muhammad who were promised paradise (only in Sunni Islam) Tenth day of the month of Muharram. It is the day God saved Moses and the children of Israel from the Pharaoh. The grandson of the prophet Muhammad, Imam Hussayn sacrificed his life along with 72 of his companions on the sand dunes of Karbala. Sunni Scholars recommended to fast during this day. To the Shias, it is also a day on which they mourn the death of the third Shia Imam, Husayn ibn Ali, along with his family and companions, who were killed in the famous battle in Karbala. They cry and weep and organize lamentating programmes where they not only learn how to live a proper Islamic life and improve their Spiritual Self but also cry at the end of the ritual to show their true love and faith towards imam Hussayn. The Islamic greeting; literally "Peace be upon you"; In addition,  (ورحمة الله وبركاته) means "and the Mercy of God and His blessing". The response to this greeting is  (وعليكم السلام ورحمة الله وبركاته) --"And on you be the Peace and Mercy of God and His Blessing". "I seek forgiveness from God." Islamic expression. "I seek refuge in God". This is a paraphrase on the beginnings of the two last suras in the Qur'an. Friends, protectors, helpers, caretaker, maintainer. (singular: wali) The parts of the body, male or female, must be covered in public but not between spouses, such as, body parts must be concealed of a woman before non-related men.(non-related men means she can marry those men lawfully). A sign. More specifically, a verse in the Qur'an. Sign of God Title given to highly ranked religious scholars in Sh'ia sect. See  see Bāṭil A mosque, literally "house of God". Specifically means the Ka'aba at Makkah (Mecca). a form of blessing. may Allah bless you; response to expression of thanks. Barrier. Used in the Qur'an to describe the barrier between sweet and salty water. In theology, the one-way barrier between the mortal realm and the spirit world which the deceased soul crosses and waits for qiyamah judgment. humankind, mankind, man, human(s), etc. Insight, discernment, perceptivity, deep knowledge. Sometimes used by Sufis to denote the ability to directly perceive a transcendental Truth. void The interior or hidden meaning. A person who devotes himself to studying such hidden meanings is a batini. Blessed be His Name – acronym for S.A.W.S. See P.B.U.H (Peace Be Upon Him). Innovation in religion, i.e. inventing new methods of worship. Bad Bidʿahs in Islam are considered a deviation and a serious sin by many Muslims. Inquiry prohibited in Islam. "In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful".First line in Qurʾān In general terms, it means a "cloak" or "outer garment".  Specific reference is to the "burda" of the Prophet Muḥammad (see Qaṣīda al-Burda). an oath of allegiance to a leader, traditionally the Caliph or Imam. literally successor; refers to the successor of the Prophet Muhammad, the ruler of an Islamic theocracy. atheist – from the root ad dahr meaning time. In Islam, atheists are seen as those who think that time only destroys, hence the term ad dahriyyah for the concept of atheism. an Islamic figure similar to the Antichrist; means "liar" or "deceiver". going astray. the Ottoman Empire's relationship with its Christian tributary states. means house of safety; refers to status of a Muslim living in some of the Western world. a region where Islam has recently been introduced. means house of war; refers to areas outside Muslim rule at war with Muslim states. the abode, or land, of Islam. means domain of disbelief; the term originally refers to the Quraish-dominated society of Mecca between Prophet Mohammed's (s.a.w.s.) flight to Medina (the Hijra) and the city's conquest. domain of agreement See Dar al-Amn blessing the call to Islam, proselytizing. an initiate of the Sufi Path, one who practices Sufism A devotional practice whereby the name of God is repeated in a rhythmical manner. Remembrance of God; spiritual exercise; Muslims believe that the primary function of prophets is to remind people of God. "protected person"; Jews and Christians (and sometimes others,USC-MSA Compendium of Muslim Texts such as Buddhists, Sikhs, Hindus, and Zoroastrians), living in an Islamic state who must pay special taxes and whose right to practice their religion is subject to strict control under Islamic law. the second obligatory daily prayer. (literally 'religion') the way of life based on Islamic revelation; the sum total of a Muslim's faith and practice. Dīn is often used to mean the faith and religion of Islam. "blood money", recompense for loss of a life. personal prayer, supplication The physical Universe, as opposed to the Hereafter; sometimes spelled Dunia. Wicked evil doers. Plural of "fājir" (فاجر). dawn, early morning, and the morning prayer. The time of the day when there is light in the horizon before sunrise. deliverance, salvation, well-being. "philosophy" The methods and content of Greek philosophy which were brought into Islam. A person who tries to interpret Islam through rationalist philosophy was called a faylasuf (فيلسوف), "philosopher". Sufi term meaning extinction – to die to this life while alive. Having no existence outside of God. One who has a deep understanding of Islam, its laws, and jurisprudence. (see fiqh) the return of the Shia Mahdi a religious duty, or an obligatory action: praying 5 times a day is fard Neglecting a fard will result in a punishment in the hereafter. (See wajib) obligatory on every individual Muslim to aid in any way he can. an obligation on the Muslim community as a whole, from which some are freed if others take it up such as for jihad. corrupt, invalid/violable (in Islamic finance) anyone who has violated Islamic law; usually refers to one whose character has been corrupted (plural "fāsiqūn"). the short, opening sura of the Qur'an, which begins "In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds..." These words hold an important place in Muslim liturgies and forms the core of the salat. legal opinion of an (alim) binding on him and on those who follow his taqlid "In the protection of God". Said when a person departs. jurisprudence built around the shariah by custom (al-urf). Literally means "deep understanding", refers to understanding the Islamic laws. (see faqih) for the sake of Allah; common Islamic expression for performing acts such as charity or Jihad and for 'qatlu' (fighting in mortal combat for the sake of Allah) trial or tribulation; also refers to any period of disorder, such as a civil war, or the period of time before the end of the world or any civil strife. innate disposition towards virtue, knowledge, and beauty. Muslims believe every child is born with fitrah. the criterion (of right and wrong, true and false); for example, the Qur'an as furqan. vermin, evil from the root fasaqa meaning to deviate from the right way (verb in past tense) to forgive, to cover up (sins). A characteristic of God. heedlessness, forgetfulness of God, indifference the unseen, unknown. spoils of war, booty. possessed unlawfully (archaic) roughly, "raider": a holy warrior; a mujahid full ablution of the whole body (see wudu). Ghusl janaba is the mandatory shower after having sexual discharge. major ritual impurity which requires Niyyat for cleaning. minor ritual impurity Qur'anic expression and phrase meaning This is by the Grace of my Lord. a guide, one who guides; A Muslim name for God is The Guide, or Al-Hadi. literally "speech"; recorded saying or tradition of the Prophet Muhammad validated by isnad; with sira these comprise the sunnah and reveal shariah Well-known hadith; a hadith which reported by one, two, or more Companions from the Prophets or from another Companion, but has later become well-known and transmitted by an indefinite number of people during the first and second generation of Muslims. someone who knows the Qur'an by heart. Literal translation = memorizer or Protector. menstruation Pilgrim, one who has made the Hajj. pilgrimage to Mecca. Sunnis regard this as the fifth Pillar of Islam. See Dhu al-Hijjah. performing ʿUmrah during the Hajj season, and on the Day of Tarwiah a pilgrim gets into the state of Ihram for Hajj. Before making ʿUmrah, approach the Miqat and declare the intention. End by sacrificing an animal. At Miqat, declare intention to perform both Hajj and 'Umrah together. After throwing the Jamrah of Al-'Aqabah, and getting hair shaved or cut that take off his Ihram garments and sacrifice animal. At Miqat, declare intention for Hajj only. Maintain Ihram garments up to the Day of Sacrifice. No offering is required from him. a ruler's or governor's title; in some Muslim states, a judge. See Ahkam. sovereignty, governance. lawful, permitted, good, beneficial, praiseworthy, honourable. (See mustahabb, mandub) A gathering or meeting for the primary purpose of learning about Islam. Shaving of the head, particularly associated with pilgrimage to Mecca pre-Islamic non-Jewish or non-Christian monotheists. Plural:  (حنفاء). truth, reality, right, righteousness. Al-Haqq is one of 99 names of God. sinful sanctuary. Good, beautiful, admirable. Also a categorization of a hadith's authenticity as "acceptable". (other categorizations include authentic and fabricated). Vain or egotistical desire; individual passion; impulsiveness. guidance from God. literally "cover". It describes the covering of the body for the purposes of modesty and dignity; broadly, a prescribed system of attitudes and behaviour regarding modesty and dignity. (See abayah, al-amira, burqa, chador, jilbab, khimar, milfeh, niqab, purdah, shayla) Muhammad and his followers' emigration from Mecca to Medina. Literally, "migration". This holiday marks the beginning of the Muslim New Year on the first day of the month of Muharram. See Rabi' al-awwal and abbreviation AH. Literally this means "wisdom" and refers to the highest possible level of understanding attainable by a Muslim. In particular, it refers to the illuminative, mystical sort of wisdom that a Gnostic or Sufi might attain. Crescent moon. wilderness reserve, protected forest, grazing commons; a concept of stewardship One half of a juz', or roughly 1/60th of the Qur'an Guidance. Truce. Cease-fire (often temporary) Literally, limits or boundaries. Usually refers to limits placed by Allah on man; penalties of the Islamic law (sharia) for particular crimes described in the Qur'an – intoxication, theft, rebellion, adultery and fornication, false accusation of adultery, and apostasy. (See ta'zeer) ruling in the Qur'an or Sunnah. Also spelled Hukum. beautiful and pure young men and women that Muslims believe inhabit Paradise, or Heaven. submission, worship, but not limited to ritual: all expressions of servitude to Allah, including the pursuit of knowledge, living a pious life, helping, charity, and humility, can be considered ibadah. a jinn banished to Hell for his arrogance and disobedience; aka Satan :  He is the equivalent of Lucifer. festival or celebration. Alternatively transliterated Eid. "the Festival of Sacrifice." The four day celebration starting on the tenth day of Dhul-Hijja. "the Festival of Fitr (Breaking the fast)." A religious festival that marks the end of the fast of Ramadan. a meal eaten by Muslims breaking their fast after sunset during the month of Ramadan. state of consecration for hajj. Includes dress and or prayer. perfection in worship, such that Muslims try to worship God as if they see Him, and although they cannot see Him, they undoubtedly believe He is constantly watching over them. Also Ahwat. A Precaution, either obligatory or optional. A preferred precaution. An obligatory precaution. miracle, the character of the Qur'an in both form and content. a certificate authorizing one to transmit a subject or text of Islamic knowledge the consensus of either the ummah (or just the ulema) – one of four bases of Islamic Law. More generally, political consensus itself. Shi'a substitute obedience to the Imam; opposite of ikhtilaf During the early times of Islam, the possibility of finding a new solution to a juridical problem. Has not been allowed in conservative Islam since the Middle Ages. However, Liberal movements within Islam generally argue that any Muslim can perform ijtihad, given that Islam has no generally accepted clerical hierarchy or bureaucratic organization. The opposite of ijtihad is taqlid (تقليد), Arabic for "imitation". disagreement among the madhhabs (scholars) of a religious principle; opposite of ijma. honouring, hospitality, generosity – Dhul jalaali wal ikraam is one of the 99 names of Allah. mental or physical force. deity, a god; including gods worshiped by polytheists. all varieties of knowledge, usually a synonym for science literally, leader; e.g. a man who leads a community or leads the prayer; the Shi'a sect use the term only as a title for one of the twelve Allah-appointed successors of Prophet Muhammad. successorship of Prophet Muhammad and the leadership of mankind. personal faith To Allah we belong and to Him is our return – said to mourners the habitual inclination to give rather than take in life; the basis for charity Arabic term for the holy book called The Gospel said to have been given to Jesus, who is known as Isa in Arabic; Muslims believe the holy book has been lost and the New Testament gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) are not the word of Allah, only Christian stories about Jesus. "If God wills"; Inshallah is "resigned, accepting, neutral, passive. It is neither optimistic nor pessimistic."[ ] [ ] the second call to prayer. Similar to the azhan. apostasy (see murtadd). Also riddah ردة Jesus – 'Isa ibn Maryam (English: Jesus son of Mary), (a matronymic since he had no biological father). The Qur'an asserts that Allah has no sons and therefore, 'Isa is not the son of Allah. Muslims honor 'Isa as a nabi and rasul. night; the fifth salat prayer "reform". This term may mean very different things, depending on the context. When used in reference to reform of Islam, it may mean modernism, such as that proposed by Muhammad Abduh; or  Salafi literalism, such as that preached by Muhammad Nasiruddin al-AlbaniHabib Ali Jifri on Shaykh al-Buti Marifah forum "submission to God". The Arabic root word for Islam means submission, obedience, peace, and purity. chain of transmitters of any given hadith the night journey during which Muhammad (محمّد)is said to have visited Heaven. See miraj. requesting forgiveness vaginal bleeding except Haid and Nifas public interest – a source of Islamic Law. martyrdom. Negative reward for bad deeds that is tallied on qiyamah(judgment day.) Opposite of thawab. seclusion in the masjid for the purpose of worship usually performed during the last 10 days of Ramadan. clarification of truth in its ultimate form. command to fear God or to be pious to Allah. That which is allowed or permissible. As a rule, everything that is not prohibited is allowed. (See halal, mustahabb, mandub) the Hell-fire; Hell the time of ignorance before Islam was realized. Describes polytheistic religions. ignorance, foolishness. "gathering"; i.e. a university, a mosque, or more generally, a community or association. A state of spiritual impurity that occur due to sexual intercourse or ejaculation and necessitates major ritual ablution (ghusl), Funeral.  Ṣalāt al-Janāzah is a funeral prayer. Paradise, Heaven, the Garden "May God reward you with good." Islamic expression of gratitude. struggle. Any earnest striving in the way of God, involving personal, physical, for righteousness and against wrongdoing; Offensive jihad declared by caliph. Offensive jihad. Defensive jihad. Financial jihad. literally 'struggle by the sword'; holy war. (pl. jalabib) a long, flowing, garment worn by some as a more conservative means of fulfillment of sartorial hijab. (See also: abaya. burka, chador) An invisible being of fire A tax specified in the Koran (9:29) to be paid by non-Muslim males living under Muslim political control. To deny. Jaahid (the denier). Disbelief out of rejection. When there comes to them that which they [should] have recognized, they refuse to believe in (kafaru) it. ( 2:89) Accordingly, juhud includes rejection (kufr at-taktheeb) and resistance (kufr al-'inaad) Friday prayer an unclean state of body as in breaking Wudu one of thirty parts of the Qur'an cube-house; the cube-shaped building, i.e., in Mecca toward which Muslims pray. from the word kafara, "to hide." Those who deliberately hide the truth; unbelievers, truth-concealers; one who is ungrateful. Plural: Kāfirūn. Extreme care ought to be taken with this word, as it is was (and is) occasionally misused as an offensive term for black people by white South Africans. Literally, "words" or "speech," and referring to oration. The name applied to the discipline of philosophy and theology concerned specifically with the nature of faith, determinism and freedom, and the nature of the divine attributes. Every kind of good Caliph, more generally, one performing the duties of khilafa. devoted friend Creation – the act of measuring; determining, estimating and calculating. Khalq is the noun form of the verb khalaqa (see bara, sawwara). The Creator, Allah. Intoxicant, wine. the speaker at the Friday Muslim prayer, or Jumu'ah prayer. Complete recitation of the Qur'an. a land tax. goodness. See birr (righteousness) See qist (equity) See 'adl (equilibrium and justice) See haqq (truth and right) See ma'ruf (known and approved) See taqwa (piety.) Controversy, dispute, discord. Man's trusteeship and stewardship of Earth; Most basic theory of the Caliphate; Flora and fauna as sacred trust; Accountability to; God for harms to nature, failure to actively care and maintain. Three specific ways in which khalifa is manifested in Muslim practice are the creation of haram to protect water, hima to protect other species (including those useful to man), and by resisting infidel domination over Muslim lands, in jihad. four first caliphs, believed by most Muslims to be most righteous rulers in history headcovering (Q. 24:31). Male circumcision. ethics humility, devotion, concentration (especially in prayer). the sermon at Jumu'ah prayer. pride, arrogance old age book; The Qurʾān is often referred to as "Al-Kitāb" (The Book). Unbelief, infidelity, blasphemy; also hubris. See Kafir and Kuffar Disbelief from judgment. Disbelief out of stubbornness Disbelief out of arrogance and pride. Disbelief because of trying to substitute Allaah's Laws. Disbelief out of trying to make HARAM into HALAL. Disbelief due to mockery and derision Disbelief from not being aware of or not understanding. Disbelief from obstinacy after being presented with truth. Disbelief out of hypocrisy. Disbelief due to avoidance. God's command to the universe, 'Be!' is sufficient to create it. "There is no god but God." The most important expression in Islam. It is part of the first pillar of Islam. According to Islam, this is the message of all the Prophets, such as Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad. God, I obey you (said during hajj) Dirty, false, evil vain talk Curse, execration, or imprecation. the Night of Power, towards the end of Ramadan, when Muhammad received the first revelation of the Qur'an. school, university the fourth daily salat prayer "a guide". More specifically al-Mahdi (the guide) is a figure who will appear with Prophet Jesus before the end of time, when God allows it, to bring world peace, order and justice, after it has been overcome with injustice and aggression. he whose blood must be wasted a relative of the opposite gender usually described as being "within the forbidden limits"; a better description is "within the protected limits". means relatives who one can appear before without observing hijab and who one cannot marry. Means "detested", though not haraam (forbidden); something that is disliked or offensive. If a person commits the Makruh, he does not accumulate ithim but avoiding the Makhruh is rewarded with thawab. angels (Sing. Malak). It was one of these mala'ika, Jibril (Gabriel) who delivered Allah's revelation to Muhammad. one's rightful spouse (literally: what your right hands possess) the rules specifying the requirements of a legally valid hajj commendable or recommended. Failure to do it would not be a sin. (See halal mustahabb) the methodology by which truth is reachedQuintan Wiktorowicz. Radical Islam rising: Muslim extremism in the West. Rowman & Littlefield, 2005. ISBN 0-7425-3641-6, ISBN 978-0-7425-3641-8. Pg 18 That which is abrogated. The doctrine of al-Nasikh wal-Mansukh (abrogation) of certain parts of the Qur'anic revelation by others. The principle is mentioned in the Qur'an (2:106) see naskh one of seven equal parts of the Qur'an consensus of the community goals or purposes; such as the purposes of Islamic law public interests Allah has willed it the (Biblical) Messiah, Jesus Christ place of prayer; mosque the mosque surrounding the Kaʿbah in Mecca. pl. Madhāhib (مذاهب) school of religious jurisprudence, school of thought;Mawali or mawala (موالي): Non-Arab Muslims protector or master an Arabic word literally meaning "our lord" or "our master". It is used mostly as a title preceding the name of a respected religious leader, in particular graduates of religious institutions. The term is sometimes used to refer to Rumi. an honorific Islamic religious title often, but not exclusively, given to Muslim religious scholars or Ulema preceding their names. Maulvi generally means any religious cleric or teacher the holiest city in Islam "city"; Medinat-un-Nabi means "the City of the Prophet." See Hijra (Islam) the Resurrection; God will resurrect all of humankind to be judged. Shi'as regard this as the fifth Pillar of Islam. a niche in the wall of all mosques, indicating the direction of prayer In Arabic, millah means "religion," but it has only been used to refer to religions other than Islam, which is din. (see Millah) (Turkish word also meaning a nation, community, or a people). In an Islamic state, "Ahl al Kitab" may continue to practice their former religion in a semi-autonomous community termed the millet. a tower built onto a mosque from the top of which the call to prayer is made a raised pulpit in the mosque where the Imam stands to deliver sermons methodology, e.g. methods, rules, system, procedures. intended place the Ascension to the Seven Heavens during the Night Journey See also: isra a person who performs the call to prayer treaties suras Al-Falaq and an-Nas, the "Surahs of refuge", should be said to relieve suffering (also protect from Black Magic) literally permissible; neither forbidden nor commended. Neutral. (See halal) person who recites Qur'an an Islamic scholar who is an interpreter or expounder of Islamic law (Sharia), capable of issuing fataawa (plural of "fatwa"). woman who wears hijab (polite form of hijabi). unequivocal verses of Qur'an. (See mutashabehat.) a person who wages war against God "Muhammad is the messenger of God." This statement is the second part of the first pillar of Islam. This is the second most important statement in Islam. evil-doer a person who wages jihad (war) not in accordance with the Qur'an. Plural mufsideen. a person who performs good deed. Plural muhsineen. Opposite of Mufsidun. The first Muslims that accompanied Muhammad when he traveled to Medina. heretic. a fighter for Islam. Plural Mujāhidūn (مجاهدون). a scholar who uses reason for the purpose of forming an opinion or making a ruling on a religious issue. Plural: Mujtahidun. are Islamic clergy. Ideally, they should have studied the Qur'an, Islamic traditions (hadith), and Islamic law (fiqh). A Muslim who observes the commandments of the Qur'an. hypocrite. Plural: Munafiqun woman who wears niqab a type of sharia-compliant mortgage (see Ijara) a Sufi teacher apostate (see irtidad see mahdur ad-damm.) a copy, codex or redaction of the Qur'an. One who associates others in worship with God; a polytheist. a follower of the religion of Islam. One who submits their will to Allah (God) commendable or recommended. (See halal, mandub) literally enjoyment; compensation paid to a divorced woman; when used in the phrase nikāḥ al-mutʿah (نكاح المتعة) it refers to temporary marriage. equivocal verses of Qur'an. (See Muhakkamat.) fanatics religious man in certain regions, a volunteer teacher Religious police. "agreed upon"—used to describe hadith that were narrated by many witnesses through different narration chains (isnads) leading back to Muhammad literally, prophets. In the Islamic context, a Nabi is a man sent by God to give guidance to man, but not given scripture. The Prophet Abraham was a Nabi. This is in contrast to Rasul, or Messenger. Plural: Anbiya. See: Rasul. soul, the lower self, the ego/id An optional, supererogatory practice of worship, in contrast to farida Impurity impure two malaikah who test the faith of the dead in their graves advice The doctrine of al-Nasikh wal-Mansukh (abrogation) of certain parts of the Qur'anic revelation by others. The principle is mentioned in the Qur'an (2:106) see mansukh. a known, clear legal injunction the bleeding after childbirth (see Haid) falsehood; dishonesty; hypocrisy the matrimonial contract between a bride and bridegroom within Islamic marriage veil covering the face intention prophethood. Shi'as regard this as the third Pillar of Islam. a great munkar – prohibited, evil, dreadful thing. light. Muslims believe angels were created from light and jinn from fire. an acronym that stands for "peace be upon him" a blessing which is affixed to Muhammad's name whenever it is written. In some circles and English writings, Sufis regard PBUH to signify "Peace and Blessings Upon Him" (the Rasul or Messenger of Allah). These are the primary English explications of the P.B.U.H. acronym. The Arabic version is S.A.W. false imputation of unchastity specifically punished by sharia. predestination. judge of Islamic Law Heart the direction Muslims face during prayer fight in the cause of Allah. resurrection; return of the dead for the Day of Judgment equitable retribution – a fine for murder if the heirs forgive the perpetrator. (See hudud, tazeer) to stand, a position of salat prayer analogy – foundation of legal reasoning and thus fiqh classification of a hadith that are believed to be narrated by Muhammad from God. closeness to God. Term is associated with Sufism. The word Qur'an means recitation. Muslims believe the Qur'an (Koran) to be the literal word of God and the culmination of God's revelation to mankind, revealed to prophet Muhammad in the year AD 610 in the cave Hira by the angel Jibril. Lord, Sustainer, Cherisher, Master. May Allah be pleased with him. Variants are ʿanhā (her) and ʿanhum (them). Merciful; Ar-Rahman (الرحمن) means "The Most Merciful" compassionate; Ar-Rahim (الرحيم) means "The Most Compassionate" as in the Basmala May Allah have mercy on him. Usually used after mentioning the companions of Muhammad Mercy of Allah. Sometimes used as an alternative to Rahimahullah after mentioning a righteous person by saying, rahmatullahi ʿilayh (رحمة الله علیه): Mercy of Allah be upon him/her the practice of stoning one unit of Islamic prayer, or Salat. Each daily prayer is made up of a different number of raka'ah. month of fasting when the Qur'an was first revealed Sunnis consider the first four caliphs as the "orthodox" or "rightly guided" caliphs. They were Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman and 'Ali. messenger; Unlike prophets (Nabi), messengers are given scripture. Moses (as), David (as), Jesus (as) and Mohammed (as) are considered messengers. All messengers are considered prophets, but not all prophets are given scripture. See: Nabi. interest, the charging and paying of which is forbidden by the Qur'an Guarding Muslims from infidels apostasy, in which a person abandons Islam for another faith or no faith at all. literally, message or letter. Used both in common parlance for mail correspondences, and in religious context as divine message. spirit; the divine breath which God blew into the clay of Adam. means what is inevitable. One of the five pillars of Islam. (See fard, wajib) the bowing performed during salat. blasphemy: insulting God (sabb Allah) or Muhammad (sabb ar-rasūl or sabb an-nabī). patience, endurance, self-restraint charity; voluntary alms above the amount for zakat. companions of Muhammad. A list of the best-known Companions can be found at List of companions of Muhammad. "Sound in isnad." A technical attribute applied to the "isnad" of a hadith. divine "tranquility" or "peace" which descends upon a person when the Qur'an is recited. (righteous) predecessors/ancestors. In Islam, Salaf is generally used to refer to the first three generations of Muslims. Anyone who died after this is one of the khalaf or "latter-day Muslims". any one of the daily five obligatory prayers. Sunnis regard this as the second Pillar of Islam Prayer for guidance is done in conjunction with two rakaahs of supererogatory prayer. peace (see sulh) "May Allah bless him and grant him peace." The expression should be used after stating Prophet Muhammad's name. See abbreviation: S.A.W. or S.A.W.S. also P.B.U.H. eternal, absolute; Muslims believe Allah is "The Eternal." a river in heaven (al-firdaus) awakening, revival Sallallahu alayhi wa sallam (صلى الله عليه و سلم). See P.B.U.H. fasting during the month of Ramadhan. The word sawm is derived from Syriac sawmo. (in everyday usage, equivalent to 'Mr.') a descendant of a relative of Muhammad, usually via Husayn. refer to some of the ceremonies used by various sufi orders The testimony of faith: La ilaha illa Allah. Muhammadun rasulullah. ("There is no god but Allah. Muhammad is the messenger of Allah."). Sunnis regard this as the first Pillar of Islam. Also may be used as a synonym for the term Istish'hād meaning martyrdom. witness, martyr. Usually refers to a person killed whilst fighting in "jihād fī sabīl Allāh" (jihad for the sake of Allah). Often used in modern times for deaths in a political cause (including victims of soldiers, deaths in battle, et cetera) which are viewed by some Muslims as a spiritual cause not just a political cause. But the real meaning of Jihad is to defend Islam in any way; thus, it could be in an economic way or could refer to fighting for the rights of the oppressed or the believers; most often it refers to mastering one's own inclination for evil and shirk. a spiritual master, Muslim clergy "the path to a watering hole"; the eternal ethical code and moral code based on the Qur'an and Sunnah; basis of fiqh a title bestowed upon the descendants of Muhammad through Hasan, son of his daughter Fatima Zahra and son-in-law Ali ibn Abi Talib Satan, the Devil; also known as Iblis A branch of Islam who believe in Imam Ali and his sons (Hassan and Hussayn) as custodians of Islam by the will of the Prophet Mohammed. idolatry; polytheism; the sin of believing in any divinity except God and of associating other gods with God. consultation ; Majlis ash-shūrā (مجلس الشورى) : advisory council in a Caliphate a lotus tree that marks the end of the seventh heaven, the boundary where no creation can pass. life or biography of the Prophet Muhammad; his moral example – with hadith this comprises the sunnah the Straight Path true dawn expression used following written name or vocalization of Allah in Arabic meaning highly praised and glorified is He. "Glory to God" – this phrase is often used when praising God or exclaiming awe at His attributes, bounties, or creation. a Muslim mystic; See: Sufism (tasawwuf). the meal eaten by fasting Muslims just before dawn. kneeling down, a position of salat. bond that generates revenue from sales, profits, or leases rather than interest. A condition of peace, an armistice, or treaty.  It is related to the word muṣālaḥah (مصالحة) which means peace, conciliation,  or compromise. the "path" or "example" of the Prophet Muhammad, i.e., what the Prophet did or said or agreed to during his life. He is considered by Muslims to be the best human moral example, the best man to follow. the largest denomination of Islam. The word Sunni comes from the word Sunnah (Arabic: سنة), which means the words and actions or example of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad. chapter; the Qur'an is composed of 114 suras Almighty followers of the Ṣaḥābah exegesis, particularly such commentary on the Qur'an originally Aramaic, meaning "false god"; also tyranny. optional (supererogatory), late-night (pre-dawn) prayer purification from ritual impurities by means of wudu or ghusl pure, ritually clean Uttering the formula of faith: "Lā ilāha illā -llāh", (i.e. "There is no god but God") 'Tahnik' is an Islamic ceremony of touching the lips of a newborn baby with honey, sweet juice or pressed dates. corruption, forgery. Muslims believe the Bible Scriptures were corrupted but the Qur'an is in its original form. to purify and reform society in order to move it toward greater equity and justice, literally meaning to make new in present tense blasphemy a special manner of reciting the Qur'an according to prescribed rules of pronunciation and intonation. Based on sharia Islamic law, it is a form of mutual insurance. See retakaful. a proclamation of the greatness of Allah; a Muslim invocation. declaration of individual or group of previously considered Muslim as kaffir. The science of hadith extraction and authentication, including validation of chains of transmitters of a hadith by this science's scholars and grading hadith validity. Ontological divorce fate, predestination to follow the scholarly opinion of one of the four Imams of Islamic Jurisprudence. a principle that one is allowed to hide his true beliefs in certain circumstances or to lie to save himself of being killed or harmed or to further the cause of Islam. righteousness; goodness; Piety: Taqwa is taken from the verbe Ittaqua, which means Avoiding, Fearing the punishment from Allah for committing sins. It is piety obtained by fearing the punishment of Allah. extra prayers in Ramadan after the Isha prayer. the study of Arabic grammar issued from the Qur'an a Muslim religious order, particularly a Sufi order slow, meditative recitation of the Qur'an Uttering the formula: "Subhan Allah", i.e. (Glory be to Allah) vocalization of Arabic text by means of diacritical marks. An integral part of the Arabic writing system. Literally meaning to form or arrange salutation at the end of prayer Shia Ashura ceremony of self-flagellation by hitting head with sword. total reliance on Allah. asking Allah Almighty through the medium and intercession of another person. circumambulating the Ka'bah during Hajj. Divine help in getting to the purpose to one who deserves. repentance monotheism; affirmation of the Oneness of Allah. Muslims regard this as the first part of the Pillar of Islam, the second part is accepting Muhammad as rasoul (messenger). The opposite of Tawheed is shirk the Torah as revealed to Musa (Moses.) all that is good as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc. Means "pure." The Shahaddath is tayyib. Discretionary punishment – a sentence or punishment whose measure is not fixed by the Shari'ah. (See hudud, qisas) Purification of the Soul. Reward for good deeds that is tallied on qiyamah (judgment day.) Opposite of ithim. ritual recitation of passages of the Qur'an. state of motionlessness, calm worship sacrifice the leaders of Islamic society, including teachers, Imams and judges. Singular alim. (literally 'nation') the global community of all Muslim believers the lesser pilgrimage performed in Mecca. Unlike hajj,  can be performed throughout the year. the branch of sharia that deals with punishment. (See hudud, qisas, tazeer) custom of a given society, leading to change in the fiqh Principles, origins. the study of the origins and practice of Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh) Wa 'Alaykum as-Salaam!, meaning "and upon you be peace". (see As-Salamu Alaykum) death. (Barah-wafat) Muhammad was born on the twelfth day of Rabi-ul-Awwal, the third month of the Muslim year. His death anniversary also falls on the same day, the word 'barah' standing for the twelve days of Muhammad's sickness. "unity of being". Philosophical term used by some Sufis. Related to fanaa revelation or inspiration of God to His prophets for all humankind literal meaning is "weakness" or "feebleness".  According to one hadith,hadith about wahn searchtruth.com the Prophet explained it as "love of the world and dislike of death" obligatory or mandatory see fard friend, protector, guardian, supporter, helper An endowment of money or property: the return or yield is typically dedicated toward a certain end, for example, to the maintenance of the poor, a family, a village, or a mosque. Plural: awqaf traditional scribe, publisher, printer, notary and book copier the middle way, justly balanced, avoiding extremes, moderation the means by which one achieves nearness to Allah (see tawassul ) a voluntary, optional night prayer of odd numbers rakaats. ablution for ritual purification from minor impurities before salat (see ghusl) O, God! O, Messenger of God!. Term used by companions when interacting with Prophet Mohammad. Gog and Magog certainty, that which is certain "May God have mercy on you", said when someone sneezes; the same as "(God) bless you" in English "May God have mercy of his/her soul", (said when someone dies) Day of Reckoning, Awe Day of Rage, Wrath "Day of the Resurrection"; Day of Judgement the Psalms revealed to King Daoud (David) عليه السلام Islamic method of slaughtering an animal. Using a sharp knife the animal's windpipe, throat and blood vessels of the neck are severed without cutting the spinal cord to ensure that the blood is thoroughly drained before removing the head. See halal Exterior meaning Islamic sub-sect of Shi'ah, popularly found in Yemen, with similarities to Sunni tax, alms, tithe as a Muslim duty; Sunnis regard this as the fourth Pillar of Islam. Neither charity nor derived from Islamic economics, but a religious duty and social obligation. Charity given at the end of Ramadan. polytheists, wrong-doers, and unjust. heresy sexual activity outside of marriage (covering the English words adultery and fornication) heretic, atheist Sword of Ali رضي الله عنه, presented to him by Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم Arabic words are created from three-letter "roots" which convey a basic idea. For example, k-t-b conveys the idea of writing. Addition of other letters before, between, and after the root letters produces many associated words: not only "write" but also "book", "office", "library", and "author". The abstract consonantal root for Islam is s-l-m. Some Islamic concepts are usually referred to in Persian or Turkic. Those are typically of later origin than the concepts listed here; for completeness it may be best to list Persian terms and those unique to Shi'a on their own page, likewise Turkic terms and those unique to the Ottoman period on their own page, as these are culturally very distinct. The word "crusade" in English is usually translated in Arabic as "ḥamlah ṣalībīyah" which means literally "campaign of Cross-holders" (or close to that meaning). In Arabic text it is "حملة صليبية" and the second word comes from "ṣalīb" which means "cross." The verses in the Qur'an that Christians usually refer to as jihād verses have the phrase "Qitāl fī sabīl allāh" (fighting for the sake of Allah). 99 Names of God List of English words of Arabic origin List of Christian terms in Arabic Prophets of Islam Islamic eschatology History of Islam Suzanne Haneef, What Everyone Should Know about Islam and Muslims, (Kazi Publications, Chicago), popular introduction Muzaffar Haleem, The Sun is Rising In the West, (Amana Publications, Beltsville, MD 1999). Ziauddin Sardar, Muhammad for Beginners, Icon Books, 1994, some sloppiness, from very modern Sufi point of view. Hans Wehr, A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic (Spoken Language Services, Ithaca, NY, 1976). ed. J. Milton Cowan. ISBN 0-87950-001-8. Islam in the World by Malise Ruthven (Gantra Publications, 2006) ISBN 1-86207-906-4 99 Names of God List of English words of Arabic origin List of Christian terms in Arabic Prophets of Islam Islamic eschatology History of Islam [ ] free expressions with audio Voiced Dictionary of Islamic and Arabic Key Words Glossary of Islamic terms
