 This is a glossary of some terms used in the branch of mathematics known as topology. Although there is no absolute distinction between different areas of topology, the focus here is on general topology. The following definitions are also fundamental to algebraic topology, differential topology and geometric topology. See also: Glossary of algebraic topology. See the article on topological spaces for basic definitions and examples, and see the article on topology for a brief history and description of the subject area. See Naive set theory, Axiomatic set theory, and Function for definitions concerning sets and functions. The following articles may also be useful.  These either contain specialised vocabulary within general topology or provide more detailed expositions of the definitions given below. The list of general topology topics and the list of examples in general topology will also be very helpful. All spaces in this glossary are assumed to be topological spaces unless stated otherwise. 1 and T2 are topologies on X, then T1 is coarser (or smaller, weaker) than T2 if T1 is contained in T2. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term stronger. The function d is a metric on M, and d(x, y) is the distance between x and y. The collection of all open balls of M is a base for a topology on M; this is the topology on M induced by d. Every metric space is Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff). Every metric space is first-countable. Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.23  Paracompact Hausdorff spaces are normal.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.25 For all subsets A, B and C of X, #A δ B implies B δ A #A δ B implies A is non-empty #If A and B have non-empty intersection, then A δ B #A δ (B&nbsp;∪&nbsp;C) iff (A δ B or A δ C) #If, for all subsets E of X, we have (A δ E or B δ E), then we must have A δ (X − B) &nbsp;-1(U) is open in X.  In other words, Y has the f-strong topology.  Equivalently, f is a quotient map if and only if it is the transfinite composition of maps X\rightarrow X/Z, where Z\subset X is a subset. Note that this doesn't imply that f is an open function. Here are some facts about submaximality as a property of topological spaces: # The empty set and X are in T. # The union of any collection of sets in T is also in T. # The intersection of any pair of sets in T is also in T. The collection T is a topology on X. # if U is in Φ, then U contains { (x, x) | x in X }. # if U is in Φ, then { (y, x) | (x, y) in U } is also in Φ # if U is in Φ and V is a subset of X × X which contains U, then V is in Φ # if U and V are in Φ, then U ∩ V is in Φ # if U is in Φ, then there exists V in Φ such that, whenever (x, y) and (y, z) are in V, then (x, z) is in U. The elements of Φ are called entourages, and Φ itself is called a uniform structure on U. See H-closed See T_1. See limit point. The topology of a space X is an Alexandrov topology (or is finitely generated) if arbitrary intersections of open sets in X are open, or equivalently, if arbitrary unions of closed sets are closed, or, again equivalently, if the open sets are the upper sets of a poset.Vickers (1989) p.22 A space is almost discrete if every open set is closed (hence clopen). The almost discrete spaces are precisely the finitely generated zero-dimensional spaces. An approach space is a generalization of metric space based on point-to-set distances, instead of point-to-point. This has two distinct common meanings: #A space is a Baire space if the intersection of any countable collection of dense open sets is dense; see Baire space. #Baire space is the set of all functions from the natural numbers to the natural numbers, with the topology of pointwise convergence; see Baire space (set theory). A collection B of open sets is a base (or basis) for a topology \tau if every open set in \tau is a union of sets in  B . The topology \tau is the smallest topology on X containing B and is said to be generated by B. See Base. The Borel algebra on a topological space  (X,\tau) is the smallest \sigma-algebra containing all the open sets. It is obtained by taking intersection of all \sigma-algebras on  X  containing  \tau . A Borel set is an element of a Borel algebra. The boundary (or frontier) of a set is the set's closure minus its interior.  Equivalently, the boundary of a set is the intersection of its closure with the closure of its complement. Boundary of a set  A  is denoted by  \partial A or bd A. A set in a metric space is bounded if it has finite diameter. Equivalently, a set is bounded if it is contained in some open ball of finite radius. A function taking values in a metric space is bounded if its image is a bounded set. The category Top has topological spaces as objects and continuous maps as morphisms. A sequence {xn} in a metric space (M, d) is a Cauchy sequence if, for every positive real number r, there is an integer N such that for all integers m, n > N, we have d(xm, xn)  A subset A of a space X is comeagre (comeager) if its complement X\A is meagre. Also called residual. A space is compact if every open cover has a finite subcover. Every compact space is Lindelöf and paracompact. Therefore, every compact Hausdorff space is normal. See also quasicompact. The compact-open topology on the set C(X, Y) of all continuous maps between two spaces X and Y is defined as follows: given a compact subset K of X and an open subset U of Y, let V(K, U) denote the set of all maps f in C(X, Y) such that f(K) is contained in U. Then the collection of all such V(K, U) is a subbase for the compact-open topology. A metric space is complete if every Cauchy sequence converges. See complete space. A space is completely normal if any two separated sets have disjoint neighbourhoods. A completely normal Hausdorff space (or T5 space) is a completely normal T1 space. (A completely normal space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T1, so the terminology is consistent.) Every completely normal Hausdorff space is normal Hausdorff. A space is completely regular if, whenever C is a closed set and x is a point not in C, then C and {x} are functionally separated. See Tychonoff. See Connected component/Path-connected component. A space is connected if it is not the union of a pair of disjoint nonempty open sets. Equivalently, a space is connected if the only clopen sets are the whole space and the empty set. A connected component of a space is a maximal nonempty connected subspace. Each connected component is closed, and the set of connected components of a space is a partition of that space. A function from one space to another is continuous if the preimage of every open set is open. A space is called a continuum if it a compact, connected Hausdorff space. A space X is contractible if the identity map on X is homotopic to a constant map. Every contractible space is simply connected. If {Xi} is a collection of spaces and X is the (set-theoretic) disjoint union of {Xi}, then the coproduct topology (or disjoint union topology, topological sum of the Xi) on X is the finest topology for which all the injection maps are continuous. A continuous image of some separable metric space. A space X satisfies the countable chain condition if every family of non-empty, pairswise disjoint open sets is countable. A space is countably compact if every countable open cover has a finite subcover. Every countably compact space is pseudocompact and weakly countably compact. A collection of subsets of a space X is countably locally finite (or σ-locally finite) if it is the union of a countable collection of locally finite collections of subsets of X. A collection of subsets of a space is a cover (or covering) of that space if the union of the collection is the whole space. See Cover. If X is a connected space with more than one point, then a point x of X is a cut point if the subspace X − {x} is disconnected. A set is dense if it has nonempty intersection with every nonempty open set. Equivalently, a set is dense if its closure is the whole space. A set is dense-in-itself if it has no isolated point. the minimal cardinality of a dense subset of a topological space.  A set of density ℵ0 is a separable space.Nagata (1985) p.104 If X is a space and S is a subset of X, the derived set of S in X is the set of limit points of S in X. A topological space with a development. A countable collection of open covers of a topological space, such that for any closed set C and any point p in its complement there exists a cover in the collection such that every neighbourhood of p in the cover is disjoint from C. If (M, d) is a metric space and S is a subset of M, the diameter of S is the supremum of the distances d(x, y), where x and y range over S. The discrete metric on a set X is the function d : X × X &nbsp;→&nbsp; R such that for all x, y in X, d(x, x) = 0 and d(x, y) = 1 if x ≠ y. The discrete metric induces the discrete topology on X. A space X is discrete if every subset of X is open. We say that X carries the discrete topology.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.41 See discrete space. See Coproduct topology. If X is a connected space with more than one point, then a point x of X is a dispersion point if the subspace X − {x} is hereditarily disconnected (its only connected components are the one-point sets). See metric space. See Uniform space. The exterior of a set is the interior of its complement. An Fσ set is a countable union of closed sets. A filter on a space X is a nonempty family F of subsets of X such that the following conditions hold: # The empty set is not in F. # The intersection of any finite number of elements of F is again in F. # If A is in F and if B contains A, then B is in F. On a set X with respect to a family of functions into X, is the finest topology on X which makes those functions continuous. On Euclidean space \R^n, the coarsest topology making all subharmonic functions (equivalently all superharmonic functions) continuous. If X is a set, and if T1 and T2 are topologies on X, then T2 is finer (or larger, stronger) than T1 if T2 contains T1. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term weaker. See Alexandrov topology. See Meagre. A space is first-countable if every point has a countable local base. See T1. See Boundary. A compact subset K of the complex plane is called full if its complement is connected. For example, the closed unit disk is full, while the unit circle is not. Two sets A and B in a space X are functionally separated if there is a continuous map f: X &nbsp;→&nbsp; [0, 1] such that f(A) = 0 and f(B) = 1. A Gδ set or inner limiting set is a countable intersection of open sets.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.162 A space in which every closed set is a Gδ set. A generic point for a closed set is a point for which the closed set is the closure of the singleton set containing that point.Vickers (1989) p.65 A Hausdorff space (or T2 space) is one in which every two distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. Every Hausdorff space is T1. A space is H-closed, or Hausdorff closed or absolutely closed, if it is closed in every Hausdorff space containing it. A space is hereditarily P for some property P if every subspace is also P. A property of spaces is said to be hereditary if whenever a space has that property, then so does every subspace of it.Steen &amp; Seebach p.4 For example, second-countability is a hereditary property. If X and Y are spaces, a homeomorphism from X to Y is a bijective function f :&nbsp;X&nbsp;→&nbsp;Y such that f and f−1 are continuous. The spaces X and Y are then said to be homeomorphic. From the standpoint of topology, homeomorphic spaces are identical. A space X is homogeneous if, for every x and y in X, there is a homeomorphism f : X &nbsp;→&nbsp; X such that f(x) = y. Intuitively, the space looks the same at every point. Every topological group is homogeneous. Two continuous maps  f, g : X &nbsp;→&nbsp; Y are homotopic (in Y) if there is a continuous map H : X × [0, 1] &nbsp;→&nbsp; Y such that H(x, 0) = f(x) and H(x, 1) = g(x) for all x in X. Here, X × [0, 1] is given the product topology. The function H is called a homotopy (in Y) between f and g. See Homotopic maps. A space is hyper-connected if no two non-empty open sets are disjoint  Every hyper-connected space is connected. See Quotient map. See Quotient space. See Trivial topology. See Hilbert manifold and Q-manifolds, i.e. (generalized) manifolds modelled on the Hilbert space and on the Hilbert cube respectively. A Gδ set. The interior of a set is the largest open set contained in the original set. It is equal to the union of all open sets contained in it. An element of the interior of a set S is an interior point of S. See Interior. A point x is an isolated point if the singleton {x} is open. More generally, if S is a subset of a space X, and if x is a point of S, then x is an isolated point of S if {x} is open in the subspace topology on S. If M1 and M2 are metric spaces, an isometric isomorphism from M1 to M2 is a bijective isometry f : M1 &nbsp;→&nbsp; M2. The metric spaces are then said to be isometrically isomorphic. From the standpoint of metric space theory, isometrically isomorphic spaces are identical. If (M1, d1) and (M2, d2) are metric spaces, an isometry from M1 to M2 is a function f : M1 &nbsp;→&nbsp; M2 such that d2(f(x), f(y)) = d1(x, y) for all x, y in M1. Every isometry is injective, although not every isometry is surjective. See T0. The Kuratowski closure axioms is a set of axioms satisfied by the function which takes each subset of X to its closure: # Isotonicity: Every set is contained in its closure. # Idempotence: The closure of the closure of a set is equal to the closure of that set. # Preservation of binary unions: The closure of the union of two sets is the union of their closures. # Preservation of nullary unions: The closure of the empty set is empty. If c is a function from the power set of X to itself, then c is a closure operator if it satisfies the Kuratowski closure axioms. The Kuratowski closure axioms can then be used to define a topology on X by declaring the closed sets to be the fixed points of this operator, i.e. a set A is closed if and only if c(A) = A. TKol = {R, \varnothing}∪{(a,∞): a is real number}; the pair (R,TKol) is named Kolmogorov Straight. An L-space is a hereditarily Lindelöf space which is not hereditarily separable.  A Suslin line would be an L-space. See Finer topology. A point x in a space X is a limit point of a subset S if every open set containing x also contains a point of S other than x itself. This is equivalent to requiring that every neighbourhood of x contains a point of S other than x itself. See Weakly countably compact. A space is Lindelöf if every open cover has a countable subcover. A set B of neighbourhoods of a point x of a space X is a local base (or local basis, neighbourhood base, neighbourhood basis) at x if every neighbourhood of x contains some member of B. See Local base. There are two definitions for a space to be "locally (P)" where (P) is a topological or set-theoretic property: that each point has a neighbourhood with property (P), or that every point has a neighourbood base for which each member has property (P).  The first definition is usually taken for locally compact, countably compact, metrisable, separable, countable; the second for locally connected.Hart et al (2004) p.65 A subset of a topological space that is the intersection of an open and a closed subset.  Equivalently, it is a relatively open subset of its closure. A space is locally compact if every point has a compact neighbourhood: the alternative definition that each point has a local base consisting of compact neighbourhoods is sometimes used: these are equivalent for Hausdorff spaces.  Every locally compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff. A space is locally connected if every point has a local base consisting of connected neighbourhoods. A collection of subsets of a space is locally finite if every point has a neighbourhood which has nonempty intersection with only finitely many of the subsets.  See also countably locally finite, point finite. A space is locally metrizable if every point has a metrizable neighbourhood. A space is locally path-connected if every point has a local base consisting of path-connected neighbourhoods.  A locally path-connected space is connected if and only if it is path-connected. A space is locally simply connected if every point has a local base consisting of simply connected neighbourhoods. If x is a point in a space X, a loop at x in X (or a loop in X with basepoint x) is a path f in X, such that f(0) = f(1) = x. Equivalently, a loop in X is a continuous map from the unit circle S1 into X. If X is a space and A is a subset of X, then A is meagre in X (or of first category in X) if it is the countable union of nowhere dense sets.  If A is not meagre in X, A is of second category in X.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.7 A space is metacompact if every open cover has a point finite open refinement. See Metric space. A metric invariant is a property which is preserved under isometric isomorphism. If X and Y are metric spaces with metrics dX and dY respectively, then a metric map is a function f from X to Y, such that for any points x and y in X, dY(f(x), f(y)) ≤ dX(x, y). A metric map is strictly metric if the above inequality is strict for all x and y in X. A metric space (M, d) is a set M equipped with a function d :&nbsp;M&nbsp;×&nbsp;M&nbsp;→&nbsp;R satisfying the following axioms for all x, y, and z in M: # d(x, y) ≥ 0 # d(x, x) = 0 # if &nbsp; d(x, y) = 0 &nbsp; then &nbsp; x = y &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; (identity of indiscernibles) # d(x, y) = d(y, x)  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; (symmetry) # d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  (triangle inequality) A space is metrizable if it is homeomorphic to a metric space. Every metrizable space is Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff). Every metrizable space is first-countable. Every non-empty ultra-connected compact space X has a largest proper open subset; this subset is called a monolith. A Moore space is a developable regular Hausdorff space.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.163 A neighbourhood of a point x is a set containing an open set which in turn contains the point x. More generally, a neighbourhood of a set S is a set containing an open set which in turn contains the set S. A neighbourhood of a point x is thus a neighbourhood of the singleton set {x}. (Note that under this definition, the neighbourhood itself need not be open. Many authors require that neighbourhoods be open; be careful to note conventions.) See Local base. A neighbourhood system at a point x in a space is the collection of all neighbourhoods of x. A net in a space X is a map from a directed set A to X. A net from A to X is usually denoted (xα), where α is an index variable ranging over A. Every sequence is a net, taking A to be the directed set of natural numbers with the usual ordering. A space is normal if any two disjoint closed sets have disjoint neighbourhoods.  Every normal space admits a partition of unity. A normal Hausdorff space (or T4 space) is a normal T1 space. (A normal space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T1, so the terminology is consistent.) Every normal Hausdorff space is Tychonoff. A nowhere dense set is a set whose closure has empty interior. An open cover is a cover consisting of open sets. If (M, d) is a metric space, an open ball is a set of the form B(x; r) := {y in M : d(x, y)  A partition of unity of a space X is a set of continuous functions from X to [0, 1] such that any point has a neighbourhood where all but a finite number of the functions are identically zero, and the sum of all the functions on the entire space is identically 1. A path in a space X is a continuous map f from the closed unit interval [0, 1] into X. The point f(0) is the initial point of f; the point f(1) is the terminal point of f.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.29 A space X is path-connected if, for every two points x, y in X, there is a path f from x to y, i.e., a path with initial point f(0) = x and terminal point f(1) = y. Every path-connected space is connected. A path-connected component of a space is a maximal nonempty path-connected subspace. The set of path-connected components of a space is a partition of that space, which is finer than the partition into connected components. The set of path-connected components of a space X is denoted π0(X). a normal space which is also a Gδ. A collection B of nonempty open sets is a π-base for a topology τ if every nonempty open set in τ includes a set from B.Hart, Nagata, Vaughan Sect. d-22, page 227 A point is an element of a topological space. More generally, a point is an element of any set with an underlying topological structure; e.g. an element of a metric space or a topological group is also a "point". See Closure. A space is Polish if it is separable and completely metrizable, i.e. if it is homeomorphic to a separable and complete metric space. A space is polyadic if it is the continuous image of the power of a one-point compactification of a locally compact, non-compact Hausdorff space. A point of a topological space is a P-point if its filter of neighbourhoods is closed under countable intersections. See Relatively compact. The prodiscrete topology on a product AG is the product topology when each factor A is given the discrete topology. If {Xi} is a collection of spaces and X is the (set-theoretic) product of {Xi}, then the product topology on X is the coarsest topology for which all the projection maps are continuous. A continuous function f from a space X to a space Y is proper if f−1(C) is a compact set in X for any compact subspace C of Y. A proximity space (X,&nbsp;δ) is a set X equipped with a binary relation δ between subsets of X satisfying the following properties: A space is pseudocompact if every real-valued continuous function on the space is bounded. See Pseudometric space. A pseudometric space (M, d) is a set M equipped with a function d :&nbsp;M&nbsp;×&nbsp;M&nbsp;→&nbsp;R satisfying all the conditions of a metric space, except possibly the identity of indiscernibles. That is, points in a pseudometric space may be "infinitely close" without being identical.  The function d is a pseudometric on M. Every metric is a pseudometric. A punctured neighbourhood of a point x is a neighbourhood of x, minus {x}. For instance, the interval (−1, 1) = {y : −1  If X is a space, Y is a set, and f :&nbsp;X&nbsp;→&nbsp;Y is any surjective function, then the quotient topology on Y induced by f is the finest topology for which f is continuous. The space X is a quotient space or identification space. By definition, f is a quotient map. The most common example of this is to consider an equivalence relation on X, with Y the set of equivalence classes and f the natural projection map. This construction is dual to the construction of the subspace topology. A cover K is a refinement of a cover L if every member of K is a subset of some member of L. A space is regular if, whenever C is a closed set and x is a point not in C, then C and x have disjoint neighbourhoods. A space is regular Hausdorff (or T3) if it is a regular T0 space.  (A regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T0, so the terminology is consistent.) A subset of a space X is regular open if it equals the interior of its closure; dually, a regular closed set is equal to the closure of its interior.Steen & Seebach (1978) p.6  An example of a non-regular open set is the set  U =  ∪  in R with its normal topology, since 1 is in the interior of the closure of U, but not in U. The regular open subsets of a space form a complete Boolean algebra. A subset Y of a space X is relatively compact in X if the closure of Y in X is compact. If X is a space and A is a subset of X, then A is residual in X if the complement of A is meagre in X. Also called comeagre or comeager. A topological space is called resolvable if it is expressible as the union of two disjoint dense subsets. A space is rim-compact if it has a base of open sets whose boundaries are compact. An S-space is a hereditarily separable space which is not hereditarily Lindelöf. A space X is scattered if every nonempty subset A of X contains a point isolated in A. The Scott topology on a poset is that in which the open sets are those Upper sets inaccessible by directed joins.Vickers (1989) p.95 See Meagre. A space is second-countable or perfectly separable if it has a countable base for its topology. Every second-countable space is first-countable, separable, and Lindelöf. A space X is semilocally simply connected if, for every point x in X, there is a neighbourhood U of x such that every loop at x in U is homotopic in X to the constant loop x. Every simply connected space and every locally simply connected space is semilocally simply connected. (Compare with locally simply connected; here, the homotopy is allowed to live in X, whereas in the definition of locally simply connected, the homotopy must live in U.) A space is semiregular if the regular open sets form a base. A space is separable if it has a countable dense subset. Two sets A and B are separated if each is disjoint from the other's closure. A space is sequentially compact if every sequence has a convergent subsequence. Every sequentially compact space is countably compact, and every first-countable, countably compact space is sequentially compact. See metric map A space is simply connected if it is path-connected and every loop is homotopic to a constant map. See Coarser topology. In a sober space, every irreducible closed subset is the closure of exactly one point: that is, has a unique generic point.Vickers (1989) p.66 The star of a point in a given cover of a topological space is the union of all the sets in the cover that contain the point. See star refinement. Let f\colon X\rightarrow Y be a map of topological spaces.  We say that Y has the f-strong topology if, for every subset U\subset Y, one has that U is open in Y if and only if f^{-1}(U) is open in X See Finer topology. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term weaker topology. A collection of open sets is a subbase (or subbasis) for a topology if every non-empty proper open set in the topology is a union of finite intersections of sets in the subbase. If B is any collection of subsets of a set X, the topology on X generated by B is the smallest topology containing B; this topology consists of the empty set, X and all unions of finite intersections of elements of B. See Subbase. A cover K is a subcover (or subcovering) of a cover L if every member of K is a member of L. See Subcover. A topological space is said to be submaximal if every subset of it is locally closed, that is, every subset is the intersection of an open set and a closed set. If T is a topology on a space X, and if A is a subset of X, then the subspace topology on A induced by T consists of all intersections of open sets in T with A. This construction is dual to the construction of the quotient topology. A space is T0 (or Kolmogorov) if for every pair of distinct points x and y in the space, either there is an open set containing x but not y, or there is an open set containing y but not x. A space is T1 (or Fréchet or accessible) if for every pair of distinct points x and y in the space, there is an open set containing x but not y. (Compare with T0; here, we are allowed to specify which point will be contained in the open set.) Equivalently, a space is T1 if all its singletons are closed. Every T1 space is T0. See Hausdorff space. See Regular Hausdorff. See Tychonoff space. See Normal Hausdorff. See Completely normal Hausdorff. See Category of topological spaces. A topological invariant is a property which is preserved under homeomorphism. For example, compactness and connectedness are topological properties, whereas boundedness and completeness are not. Algebraic topology is the study of topologically invariant abstract algebra constructions on topological spaces. A topological space (X, T) is a set X equipped with a collection T of subsets of X satisfying the following axioms: See Coproduct topology. Completely metrizable spaces (i. e. topological spaces homeomorphic to complete metric spaces) are often called topologically complete; sometimes the term is also used for Čech-complete spaces or completely uniformizable spaces. See Topological space. A metric space M is totally bounded if, for every r > 0, there exist a finite cover of M by open balls of radius r. A metric space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded. A space is totally disconnected if it has no connected subset with more than one point. The trivial topology (or indiscrete topology) on a set X consists of precisely the empty set and the entire space X. A Tychonoff space (or completely regular Hausdorff space, completely T3 space, T3.5 space) is a completely regular T0 space.  (A completely regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T0, so the terminology is consistent.) Every Tychonoff space is regular Hausdorff. A space is ultra-connected if no two non-empty closed sets are disjoint. Every ultra-connected space is path-connected. A metric is an ultrametric if it satisfies the following stronger version of the triangle inequality: for all x, y, z in M, d(x, z) ≤ max(d(x, y), d(y, z)). If X and Y are uniform spaces, a uniform isomorphism from X to Y is a bijective function f : X → Y such that f and f−1 are uniformly continuous. The spaces are then said to be uniformly isomorphic and share the same uniform properties. A space is uniformizable if it is homeomorphic to a uniform space. A uniform space is a set U equipped with a nonempty collection Φ of subsets of the Cartesian product X × X satisfying the following axioms: See Uniform space. The weak topology on a set, with respect to a collection of functions from that set into topological spaces, is the coarsest topology on the set which makes all the functions continuous. See Coarser topology. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term stronger topology. A space is weakly countably compact (or limit point compact) if every infinite subset has a limit point. A property of spaces is said to be weakly hereditary if whenever a space has that property, then so does every closed subspace of it. For example, compactness and the Lindelöf property are both weakly hereditary properties, although neither is hereditary. The weight of a space X is the smallest cardinal number κ such that X has a base of cardinal κ. (Note that such a cardinal number exists, because the entire topology forms a base, and because the class of cardinal numbers is well-ordered.) See Ultra-connected. (Some authors use this term strictly for ultra-connected compact spaces.) A space is zero-dimensional if it has a base of clopen sets.Steen &amp; Seebach (1978) p.33 Compact space Connected space Continuity Metric space Separated sets Separation axiom Topological space Uniform space Every door space is submaximal. Every submaximal space is weakly submaximal viz every finite set is locally closed. Every submaximal space is irresolvable  Also available as Dover reprint. A glossary of definitions in topology
