     Rail terminology is a form of technical terminology. The difference between the American term railroad and the international term railway (used by the International Union of Railways and English-speaking countries outside the US) is the most significant difference in rail terminology. There are also others, due to the parallel development of rail transport systems in different parts of the world. Various terms are presented here; where a term has multiple names, this is indicated. The note "US" indicates a term peculiar to North America, or "CA" may represent Canada while "UK" refers to terms originating in the British Isles and normally also used in former British colonies outside North America (such as Australia "AU", New Zealand "NZ", etc.). The abbreviation "UIC" refers to standard terms adopted by the International Union of Railways in its official publications and thesaurus. Exceptions are noted; terms whose currency is limited to one particular country, region, or railway are also included.   A British signalling scheme designed to ensure the safe operation of a railway by allowing only one train to occupy a defined section of track (block) at a time The most common type of railway, where power is applied by driving some or all of the wheels of the locomotive The weight on the driving wheels of a locomotive, which determines the frictional grip between wheels and rail, and hence the drawbar pull which a locomotive can exert A power braking system with compressed air as the operating medium Similar to the dead man's switch other than it does not require the operator's constant interaction. Instead, an alarm is sounded at a preset interval in which the operator must respond by pressing a button to reset the alarm and timer if no other controls are operated. If the operator does not respond within a preset time, the prime mover is automatically throttled back to idle and the brakes are automatically applied. The adhesion available during traction mode with 99% reliability in all weather conditions An electrical generator that converts mechanical energy to electrical energy in the form of alternating current The second largest builder of steam locomotives in the United States A steam locomotive with a 4-4-0 wheel arrangementWhite (1968), p. 46. A valve affixed to each end of a piece of rolling stock that, when opened, admits compressed air to the brake pipe (or vents it to the atmosphere if air hose is detached) Tubes connected to the water-space of the boiler provided in and across the firebox in order to add extra high-temperature heating surface. They also serve to support the brick arch or equivalent. A steam locomotive with one or more engine units that can move relative to the main frame The sharing of one truck by adjacent ends of two rail vehicles A feature of a locomotive which has the some form and purpose as the domestic variety (i.e. to collect the ashes which fall through the bars of the grate). The only significant difference is the size, measured in feet rather than inches. An alternating current electric motor whose speed varies with load and has no fixed relation to the frequency of the supply A steam locomotive with a 4-4-2 wheel arrangement A system that consists of a series of signals that divide a railway line into a series of blocks and then functions to control the movement of trains between them through automatic signals A general class of train protection systems for railways that involves a speed control mechanism in response to external inputs An operational safety enhancement device used to help automate operations of trains Either of two implementations of a train protection system installed in some trains in order to help prevent collisions through a driver's failure to observe a signal or speed restriction A branch-line train consisting of a steam locomotive and passenger carriages that can be driven from either end by means of rodding to the regulator and an additional vacuum brake valve. The fireman remains with the locomotive and, when the driver is at the other end, the fireman controls the cut off and vacuum ejectors in addition to his usual duties. # The housing that holds the axle bearings of a locomotive # The housing attaching the end of the axle to the bogie which contains the bearing allowing the axle to rotate. See also journal box below. A tag or note applied to a defective piece of equipment. Generally, equipment tagged as bad order is not to be used until repairs are performed and the equipment is inspected and approved for use. To release the locomotive brakes while the train brakes are being applied in order to permit smoother handling and prevent excessive slack, wheel slide and flat wheels The reciprocation and revolving masses of any steam, diesel or electric locomotive need balancing, if it is to work smoothly. Revolving masses can easily be balanced by counterweights, but the balancing of reciprocating parts is a matter of compromise and judgement. An American locomotive manufacturer in business from 1825 to 1972 Aggregate stone, gravel, or cinders forming the track bed on which sleepers (ties) and track are laid to ensure stability and proper drainage See Tamping machine. A looped length of track, usually at the end of a spur or branch, which allows trains to turn around for the return trip without reversing or shunting. Can be used as part of a freight installation to allow the loading or unloading of bulk materials without the need to stop the train (see merry-go-round train (MGR)). A platform and track arrangement where the train pulls into a siding, or dead-end, when serving the platform A one-of-a-kind switcher locomotive (also referred to as the SWBLW) built by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway in 1970 A widening of an underground rail tunnel, in preparation for future connection or expansion of service. Used particularly in subway nomenclature. A steam locomotive with a 2-8-4 wheel arrangement A part of a steam locomotive that discharges exhaust steam from the cylinders into the smokebox beneath the chimney in order to increase the draught through the fire A locomotive with a four-wheel per truck configuration, each individually powered, as opposed to a six-wheel "Co-Co" configuration. A cylindrical container adjacent to the firebox in which steam is produced to drive a steam locomotiveWhite (1968). A transverse floating beam member of truck suspension system supporting the weight of vehicle body A barrier at a level crossings An extra set of cylinders that can be engaged on a steam locomotive to drive a trailing truck or tender truck to give additional tractive effort at starting and low speeds A small hut at one end of a railway wagon to protect the brakeman from the elements The main air pipe of a train's air brake system A secondary railway line that splits off from a main line A brick or concrete baffle provided at the front of a locomotive firebox below the tubes, in order to extend the flame path. Early Locomotives burnt coke; provision of a brick arch was necessary before coal could be used without producing excessive smoke. A type of platform trolley found on stations all over the UK rail network from the late 1960s to the early 1980s Track where the rails are spaced more widely apart than  (which is called standard gauge). Many early railroads were broad gauge, for example the Great Western Railway in the UK which adopted  gauge until it was converted to standard gauge in the 1860s - 1890s. Russia still has over  of broad gauge () railroads. Broad gauge is also normal in Spain and Portugal ( Iberian gauge), in India ( Indian gauge), as well as Ireland and used in some parts of Australia ( Irish gauge). A British Rail Class 121 railcar A side operated version of the top or bottom operated Janney coupler A device that cushions the impact of rail vehicles against each other The barrier installed at the end of a dead-end track to prevent rail vehicles from proceeding further The nameplate on locomotives and rolling stock An open-top flatcar with a wall at each end The housing for signals and communications computers that control switches, crossings, and other such controls, relaying information to and from the RTC (rail traffic control) The practice of replacing train service, whether light rail, tram/streetcar systems, or full-size railway systems, with a bus service, either on a temporary or permanent basis. Somewhat derogatory and mainly used in the UK, Canada, USA, and Australia. The word is a portmanteau of the words "bus" and "substitution". The control room of a locomotive housing the engine crew and their control consoles A steam locomotive with its cab at the leading end of the boiler, rather than the usual trailing end adjacent to the tender. The best known example is the Southern Pacific Railroad's AC type, built to handle drag freights through the SP's many tunnels and snow sheds without the danger of the exhaust asphyxiating the engine crew. A locomotive without a cab. Commonly referred to as a B unit or a Slug, although not all Slugs are cabless. A railroad car attached usually to the end of a train, in which railroad workers could ride and monitor track and rolling stock conditions. Largely obsolete, having been replaced by the electronic end-of-train device (ETD), or flashing rear-end device (FRED). The angle of an individual rail relative to vertical (e.g. around curves) A locomotive which derives its structural strength from a bridge-truss design framework in the sides and roof, which cover the full width of the locomotive The overhead wire system used to send electricity to an electric locomotive or multiple unit, tram or light rail vehicle A bulkhead flatcar with a braced beam bisecting its length, used to transport lumber products A steam locomotive with a 4-6-6-4 wheel arrangement A heavier duty locomotive with six wheels per bogie (all axles being separately driven) configuration as opposed to a four-wheel "Bo-Bo" configuration. The correct classification is Co'Co', but Co-Co is used more often. A steam-operated device in the tender intended to push coal forward to a point where it can be shovelled directly into the fire A signal in which the colour of the light determines the meaning of the aspect shown A signaling system that uses both colour and light position to determine the meaning of the aspect shown A handle or lever which controls both the throttle and the dynamic braking on the locomotive: on a desktop-type control stand, forward (away from operator) past center operates the dynamic brake, backward (toward operator), past center, is throttle up A steam locomotive passing steam through two sets of cylinders. One set uses high pressure steam, then passes the low pressure exhausted steam to the second.White (1968), p 209-210. A steam locomotive with a 2-8-0 wheel arrangement The loading of a shipping container onto a simple flat car A form of track in which the rails are welded together by utilising the thermite reaction or flash butt welding to form one continuous rail that may be several kilometres long A passenger coach which has a full set of train controls at one end, allowing for the use of push-pull train operation Effective length of piece of rolling stock Rods between crank pins on the wheels, transferring power from a driving axle to a driven axle of a locomotiveWhite (1968), p 465-466. A type of rolling stock with a flat bottom enclosed on all sides and top, which is loaded and unloaded from sliding doors on each side A diesel locomotive with a crew cab permanently coupled to and acting as a controller for a similar slave diesel locomotive without a crew cab, primarily used for switching/shunting duties for large groups of rolling stock. Also known as master and slave, as in the British Rail Class 13 shunters at Tinsley Marshalling Yard. A pin protruding from a wheel into a main or coupling rod In a steam locomotive, the moving member of a sliding guide which absorbs upward and downward forces from the connecting (main) rod, which otherwise would tend to bend the piston rodWhite (1968), p 186-187. # To uncouple one or more cars from a train (i.e. to "make a cut") # Same as "cutting" A manual lever which releases the pin of an automatic coupler when pulled to separate cars or locomotives A variable device on steam locomotives which closes the steam valve to the steam cylinder before the end of the piston stroke, thus conserving steam while allowing the steam in the cylinder to expand under its own energy. See also: Reverser handle. A channel dug through a hillside to enable rail track to maintain a shallow gradient. See also embankment. Making repeated service brake reductions in short succession to maintain a constant speed on short but steep grades. Each reduction must be at least 5 PSI lower than the previous one in order to keep the brakes applying regularly, but excessive cycle braking can deplete the air supply and require an emergency application. A cavity in a reciprocating engine in which a piston travels On steam locomotives, this appurtenance allows condensed water to be drained from the steam cylinders when the throttle is opened, thus preventing damage to the pistons, running gear, and cylinder heads A block signal that is displaying no discernible aspect, often due to burned out lamps or local power failure. Most railroads require that a dark signal be treated as displaying its most restrictive aspect (e.g. stop and stay for an absolute signal). A section of track without block signals  A safety mechanism on a train controller which automatically applies the brake if a lever is released. It is intended to stop a train if the driver is incapacitated. In some forms, this device may be pedal-actuated. A steam locomotive with a 2-10-0 wheel arrangement A track side device used to detect various defects such as hotboxes (overheated axle bearings), dragging equipment, leaning cars, overloaded cars, overheight cars, seized (locked) wheels, etc. A monetary charge levied by a railroad to a customer for excessive delay in loading or unloading cars A safety device that will derail vehicles passing it, often used to prevent rolling stock from unintentionally entering the mainline from a siding Small explosive charges placed on the running rail which detonate when run over—used to warn drivers in following trains of an incident ahead Track which allows a rail line to cross another at grade A set of diesel-powered self-propelling passenger rail vehicles able to operate in multiple with other such sets. Such units, especially those consisting of a single vehicle, are sometimes termed railcars. A system in which train dispatchers communicate directly with train crews via radio to authorize track occupancy in predefined blocks A practice employed to move large trains through the mountains. Consists of the locomotives on the head end, a "swing" (mid-train) helper or two, and pusher locomotive(s) on the rear; today, all units are remotely controlled by the engineer in the lead unit. The power distribution alleviates stress on the couplers and relieves the lead units of the full weight of the train, making it easier to move on grades. A pair of lights, usually found on modern locomotives, located several feet below and outboard of the main headlight, that may alternately flash when the train is sounding its horn The trackage area under the jurisdiction of a railway superintendent A spike with a slightly altered head shape for easier extraction when the spike has become too loose in the sleeper A self-powered gasoline-electric passenger car used for small capacity rural commuter service. Also a British Rail Class 153 DMU. If a train has insufficient power to climb a grade and no helpers are available, the train will be split into two sections and run separately to the top. A configuration in which two steam locomotives are coupled head-to-tail in order to haul a heavy train up a long or steep hill. In the present day, double heading (and occasionally triple heading) are done primarily on large passenger trains or as a show for railfans. A long, heavy freight train moving at low speed See Defect detector. The part of a coupler that attaches to the frame of the car or locomotive; may be equipped with a pneumatic cushion depending on a freight car's design cargo (e.g. an autorack). Alternately, the pinned double bars coupling a steam locomotive to its tender. The operator of a locomotive Operation of a train by the engineer or driver only. Also known as one person train operation (OPTO) A wheel in contact with the rail that also propels a locomotive A signal light that is considerably smaller and closer to the ground than a high-mast signal; often absolute, and placed within interlocking limits, its aspects tend to differ from those conveyed by a taller signal for certain indications. Also called 'pot' or 'jack'. The use of a traction motors' output, working as generators, to retard train speed without relying solely on the air brakes # A component of vacuum brake system. Steam passing through a cone sucks air from the train pipe to create the vacuum. Usually fitted in pairs. # A small ejector running continuously to overcome leaks and to restore the vacuum after light braking and a large ejector operated when needed to release the brakes quickly after a heavy application or to create the initial vacuum ("making a brake" – UK) after coupling. A set of electrically powered self-propelling passenger rail vehicles able to operate in multiple with other such sets The world's second largest builder of railroad locomotives. EMD was previously Electro-Motive Division of General Motors before being sold. A railway built on supports over city streets A raised pathway on which rail tracks are placed to maintain a shallow gradient when passing over depressions in the terrain. See also cutting. A train used to bring carriages into (or out of) service. They usually run between sidings and main stations, with the carriages then forming a service train to another destination. They are often worked under freight train rules (e.g. without needing a guard in the UK). A switching locomotive with no short hood, thus having its cab forming one end of its carbody A small air reservoir in a locomotive control stand. When the automatic brake valve is operated, this reservoir responds by reducing or increasing the air pressure in the brake pipe. A device that continuously captures analog and digital train systems information and stores that data for a minimum of 48 hours. This data is used to evaluate incidents and accidents. Typical stored data includes speed, brake pressure, dynamic brake, horn activation, track signal, etc. In the U.S., event recorders are mandated by the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) for freight, passenger and commuter rail. Regulations for railroad outside the U.S. vary by country. Transit operations are not generally required to have event recorders, but have begun to add them voluntarily. A train that passes selected stations without stopping A train not included in the normal schedule of a railroad They often run during busy holiday travel periods in order to handle larger crowds and reduce the number of passengers that are forced to stand or are stranded at a station. In train order territory, extras are required to clear the main line for scheduled trains to pass. A turnout that can select which way to diverge a train—the opposite of trailing A type of articulated locomotive, typically (but not exclusively) with two boilers and connected fireboxes in a central cab A heavy, hinged steel plate attached in a horizontal position to the rear of the locomotive footplate or front of a locomotive tender. When the tender is attached to its locomotive the plate is allowed to fall to cover the gap in the "floor" between the two units. The sliding edge is not fixed and has a smooth chamfer so as to avoid a trip hazard. A device to preheat the water for a steam locomotive to improve efficiency A valve which controls the amount of air pressure being channelled from the locomotive's main reservoir to the brake pipe, in accordance with the set pressure in the equalizing reservoir A concealed group of sidings used in model railways to provide more realistic operation in limited space In steam railroading, a chamber in which a fire would produce sufficient heat to create steam once the hot gases from the firebox were carried into the adjacent boiler via tubes or fluesWhite (1968), p102-108. A worker whose primary job is to shovel coal into the firebox and ensure that the boiler maintains sufficient steam pressure A wheel defect where the tread of a wheel has a flat spot and is no longer round; flats can be heard as regular clicking or banging noises when the wheel passes by. This is caused either by a locked bearing, or a brake that was not fully released before the car was moved, dragging the wheel without turning. A railway junction that has a track configuration in which merging or crossing railroad lines provide track connections with each other without requiring trains to cross over in front of opposing traffic The point of a switch turnout where a car or locomotive on one track will obstruct movement on the adjacent track The area between the running rails of a standard gauge track. The actual distance between the rails is . See also six-foot and ten-foot. A type of boom barrier A type of modular layout in model railroading A car designed to transport freight The maximum air pressure that can be exerted against brake pistons in a normal brake application. To increase pressure beyond this point, the brakes must be placed in emergency. A pyrotechnic device similar to an automotive flare that is used for signalling A threaded plug, with a soft metal core, that is screwed into the crown plate of a firebox. If the water level gets too low the core melts and the noise of the escaping steam warns the enginemen. A type of steam locomotive that is articulated into three parts The width between the inner faces of the rails Any of the GP ("general-purpose") series of Electro-Motive four-axle diesel locomotives; originally applied only to EMD GP7, GP9, and GP18 models The control switch of a diesel-electric locomotive that opens or closes the circuit between the main generator and the traction motors A nickname for General Electric's Evolution series of modern diesel locomotives A quick coupling and uncoupling connector at the end of a trainline air hose that resembles a pair of shaking hands when hoses are connected A hand-powered railroad car (see Handcar and Draisine), or a small gasoline powered railroad car A handle on the side of a car to allow switching personnel to hold on A colour associated with go or proceed The condition of locomotives and cars swaying in opposite directions when traversing depressions on the roadbed. A potentially dangerous condition that can cause coupler damage, lading damage, or derailments at slower speeds. A scheme whereby the locomotive engine or a separate generator provides hotel power to carriages A sign attached to a locomotive to identify a named train or charter, or for other special occasions A transverse structural member located at the extreme end of a rail vehicle's underframe. The headstock supports the coupling at that end of the vehicle, and may also support buffers, in which case it may also be known as a "buffer beam". Heavy freight operations The upper rail in a curve or superelevation which typically experiences the higher lateral loads and greater wear A passing siding. Inferior trains "lay over in the hole" to let superior ones pass. See absolute signal. Plates lining the axlebox cut-outs in a locomotive frame to allow smooth vertical movement under control of the springs The action of shuttling a locomotive from the yard to the engine house or vice versa An axle bearing that has become excessively hot due to friction A device attached to the track which monitors passing trains for hot axles, and then reports the results via a radio transmission (typical in the US) or a circuit to the signal box (typical in the UK). See defect detector. A steam locomotive with a 4-6-4 wheel arrangement A raised section in a rail sorting yard that allows operators to use gravity to move freight railcars into the proper position within the yard when making up trains of cars. This is faster and requires less effort than moving cars with a switching engine. Swaying motion of a railway vehicle or bogie caused by the coning action on which the directional stability of an adhesion railway depends. The truck or bogie wanders from side to side between the rails, "hunting" for the optimum location based on the forces at play. The braking system that applies or releases the brakes of a locomotive independently from its train A train station built on an existing passenger line to address demand in a location between existing stations A device to force water into a steam locomotive's boiler by steam pressure Rail joints incorporating insulation to isolate individual track circuits Any track or yard where rail cars are transferred from one carrier to another Any location that includes a switch or crossing of two tracks, derived from the early practice of installation of a system of mechanical equipment called an interlocking plant to prevent collisions. See also signal box. Interlocking is also the term for the actual mechanical or electrical apparatus that prevents switch/points and signals from being operated in ways that would allow for conflicting train movements. Moving goods by more than one type of vehicle. Intermodal freight can be transported using shipping containers which can easily be transferred among railroad flatcars, ships, airplanes, and tractor-trailer trucks. Moving people by more than one type of vehicle A railway platform that has tracks along the full lengths of both sides To break a train in two, usually by shearing the knuckle pin in a coupler, often caused by the application of excessive head end power at startup On a locomotive, a long, heavy lever that operates the reversing gear A metal plate that joins the ends of rails in jointed track Track in which the rails are laid in lengths of around 20&nbsp;m and bolted to each other end-to-end by means of fishplates or joint bars A bearing without rolling-elements; a plain bearing The housing of a journal bearing A steam locomotive with a 4-4-4 wheel arrangement A point at which two lines or separate routes diverge from each other A padlock or hook securing the lever of a hand-operated switch, thereby preventing the switch points from moving as rolling stock passes over them To shove a car a short distance and uncouple it in motion, allowing it to roll free under gravity and/or its own inertia onto a track. Commonly practiced in bowl or hump yards to make up or break down trains or classify large numbers of cars in an expedient fashion. Differs from a flying switch in that the locomotive is pushing the car rather than pulling it when the cut is made. A freight car with a defect in its brake valve that causes the entire train's brake system to go into emergency when any application is made The outline of the space beside and above the track that must be kept clear of obstructions for the train to pass. This can be larger than the static clearance around an unmoving engine or car. See also: loading gauge and structure gauge The articulating part of a coupler that locks automatically in its closed position to join rail cars; so named because its movement resembles that of the human finger A non-main track from which several others branch within a short distance, such as within a rail yard or engine terminal A crossing on one level ("at-grade intersection")—without recourse to a bridge or tunnel—generally of a railway line by a road or path A locomotive travelling on its own, or perhaps with just a caboose (brake van) attached A city-based rail system based on tram design standards that operates mostly in private rights-of-way separated from other traffic but sometimes, if necessary, mixed with other traffic in city streets. Light rail vehicles (LRV) generally have a top speed of around  though mostly operating at much lower speeds, more akin to road vehicles. Light rail vehicles usually run on trackage that weighs less per foot (due to a smaller track profile) than the tracks used for main-line freight trains; thus they are "light rail" due to the smaller rails usually used. An obsolete method of coupling rail cars, consisting of manually dropping the coupling pin into the drawbar as the cars joined. Extremely hazardous to the brakemen of its day, it was outlawed by the Railroad Safety Appliance Act of 1893. A train that stops at most, if not all, stations along its route. Often referred to in North America as a "" or "milk run" (usage from the days when trains stopped at every station and stop along their route to pick up fresh milk brought to the stations daily from local dairy farms). An off-white color of railway signal light, like the Moon, achieved by the use of a clear lens of very light blue, to make it distinct from a light that has a broken lens. In UK practice, it is the color used for the type of junction indicator known as a feather, so-called for its resemblance to a popular inn sign. The electric generator in a diesel-electric locomotive that is coupled directly to the prime mover and feeds electrical energy to the traction motors The compressed-air tank of a locomotive containing source air for the brakes and other pneumatic appliances A type of articulated locomotive designed by Anatole Mallet. See Compound engine. An express freight train carrying a variety of general merchandise A signal in which the aspect is conveyed by moving an arm A steam locomotive with a 2-8-2 wheel arrangement A aggregator for transporting milk from farms to dairies, such as British Railways Milk Trains A locomotive manufacturer that was bought by Bombardier and closed An inter-modal car A steam locomotive with a 2-6-0 wheel arrangementWhite (1968), p 62-65. A steam locomotive with a 4-8-2 wheel arrangement The bottom of the water space surrounding a steam locomotive's firebox that collects solid deposits distilled from the water supply during the boiling process A system of colour-light signalling in which signals may show three or four aspects A self-propelled rail vehicle that can be joined with compatible others and controlled from a single driving station. The sub-classes of this type of vehicle; Diesel Multiple Unit (DMU), Diesel-Electric Multiple Unit (DEMU) and Electric Multiple Unit (EMU) are more common terms. These may also be termed railcars. Railroad track where the rails are spaced less than  apart. There are many common gauges narrower than standard, amongst them  widely in Africa and Asia; , which was the most common narrow gauge in the U.S.; , used in various locations across Europe, Asia and elsewhwere, South America and Australia, and , which saw widespread use in the UK. Meter gauge  is also widely used in Asia and Africa. Narrow-gauge lines are often found in mountainous terrain where the cost savings of building a smaller railroad can be considerable. (Historically, the term "narrow gauge" was once used in Britain for what is now called standard gauge, as the only other gauge then in common use was the Great Western Railway's  broad gauge.) A steam locomotive with a 4-8-4 wheel arrangement, also known in North America as "Pocono", "Niagara", "Confederation", "Greenbrier", and "Potomac" The eighth notch of the throttle control, indicating full power A form of freight hauling car for bulk goods When equipment is placed ahead of the fouling point of a switch turnout A steam locomotive with a 4-6-2 wheel arrangement A tank locomotive with the water tanks mounted on the boiler like panniers A linkage to pick up current from overhead lines Colloquially, a track warrant, train order or other movement permit that is dictated by a dispatcher and copied in writing by a train crew member # Abbreviation for the former Pennsylvania Railroad # A nickname for the PRR's K-4 class steam locomotive # A fee paid by a rail company to the owner of a car (or wagon) for the time it spends on the company's property # An authorized living expense payment for some workers forced away from their home terminal A block signal whose most restrictive indication is stop and proceed. A permissive signal is identified by the presence of a number plate affixed to the mast or supporting structure. Proceeding beyond a permissive signal at stop is allowed at restricted speed if operating conditions enable a train operator to stop before reaching any train or obstruction. # A deflective shield affixed to the front of a locomotive to protect its wheels from on-track debris; archaically called a "cowcatcher" See also: Pilot (locomotive) # An employee qualified on the operating rules and physical characteristics of a certain section of the railroad, assisting a crew who is not so qualified See also: Railroad engineer # The leading locomotive during a double heading operation, attached in front of another train engine also known as a helper (US) # An unattached locomotive driven a specified distance in front of a special train Where it is necessary to temporarily work a section of line as single track (for instance if the other track of a double track line is out of use), a person (the pilot man) acts as the single track token. The moving component in the cylinder of a steam engine or internal combustion engine that translates into motion the force exerted by pressurised steam or quickly-burning fuelWhite (1968), p 207-208. A specified distance that a brake piston may move from its cylinder to the brake rigging. If the travel exceeds or falls short of this distance, the equipment must be set out for repair. The measurement of a freight car's vertical clearance. Plate F and above is considered excess height, and such cars must avoid low-clearance routes. See also: Loading gauge A two-wheel truck or bogie at the front of a locomotiveWhite (1968), p 174. The extended walkway at either end of a U.S. locomotive There are various types of porter: * A baggage porter assisted with luggage. * An operating porter assisted with safeworking duties. * A station porter assisted with general station duties. * A lad porter was a junior station porter. The practice of coupling two or more passenger trains together over common sections of their respective routes, but otherwise operating the trains separately A block signal in which the position of the lights determine the meaning of the aspect shown A system of functional requirements for monitoring and controlling train movements to provide increased safety A period of time when one or more tracks are closed for maintenance. For the duration of work a person in charge of possession (PICOP) has control of the line. When work is complete the possession is relinquished and control of the line handed back to the signaller. The weight (and thus the cross section) of a length of rail. A heavier rail can carry heavier loads with less distortion and less damage to the rails themselves and the roadbed. A locomotive or group of connected (MU'd) locomotives serving as the motive power for a train Pulling against the train brakes at the higher end of the locomotive's power output (e.g. notches five through eight on a conventional throttle). This is considered wasteful of fuel and brake shoes, and is therefore discouraged by most operating departments. A steam locomotive with a 2-6-2 wheel arrangement The internal combustion engine of a diesel locomotive A rail broken from cold-related contraction A pole about  long and having a diameter of . They were placed in receptacles called push pole pockets. The pole was placed between the locomotive and the freight car, and used to push the car on or off a siding or to another track. Used between 1870 and the mid-1960s. A mode of operation whereby a locomotive-hauled train may be driven with the locomotive at the front, middle or back of the train. See also: Auto train. See Top and tail for train with locomotives at both front and back. A federally mandated safety inspection performed on a locomotive every 92 operating days A designation by the Federal Railroad Administration that removes the requirement for train operators to sound their horn when approaching each public crossing in a certain area, often near residential neighborhoods who have asked for the status. Because the train does not sound its horn while approaching the crossings, safety upgrades to all of the crossings must be made in order to compensate. These upgrades usually include double gates, additional signage, lights, and bells, if they are not already present. Additionally, the residents requesting the status must indemnify the railroad from any resulting crossing mishaps. A steep-grade railway with a toothed rack rail (usually between the running rails), used when adhesion is insufficient A passenger rail vehicle (typically non-articulated or rigid frame) that was derived from bus propulsion and construction technology, but which may evolve into larger dimensions, performance, and characteristics similar in appearance to a light DMU railcar A powered single unit or articulated passenger car, usually “railroad-derived” light DMU or EMU, with a driver's cab at one or both ends A hobbyist or enthusiast of trains A machine used to remove irregularities in the surface of the rails that may be self-powered or part of a consist The cross section shape of rail. There are many rail profiles which are often specific to individual railroads. Rails need to be periodically scanned electronically, the data inspected and analysed, then re-profiled with rail grinding machines to maintain the safe and proper "rail profile". Rails that cannot be brought back to the proper rail profile are condemned and replaced. A form of wheel chock that slips onto the rail under the wheel of rolling stock which prevents the vehicle from rolling A screeching train-track friction sound, most commonly occurring on sharp curves or heavy braking A small petrol (gas) or diesel shunting (switcher) locomotive Any railroad vehicle other than a locomotive Artifacts of railways around the world # A railway route connecting two or more places or other railway routes # A railway route constructed by an organization, usually one formed for that purpose # A railway route which has been given the line name officially (e.g. by engineers line references in the UK) # A set of railway routes which are bundled for publicity purposes (e.g. a UK train operating company) # A set of railway routes without official standing, on which railfans have bestowed a title A train station, a stopping point for trains, usually with passenger access A building for passengers at the end of a railway line A colour generally associated with stop, when shown by signals or flags The area between, under, or within a few feet of cars and locomotives. To enter the zone, a ground employee must obtain protection from the locomotive engineer (if a locomotive is coupled) or a blue signal (if no locomotive is coupled). A refrigerated railcar, used to transport perishable goods A siding used as a passing place on a main line, where slow trains may be held whilst an express passes—a simpler, but less convenient, form of the passing loop A two- to four-letter code, assigned by the Association of American Railroads, that is applied to equipment operating on North American railroads to identify the owner A metal casting slotted over the rail near the wheel of a derailed train car. The engine then pushes or pulls the car so that the derailed wheel runs up the rerailer and back onto the track. A speed not exceeding 20&nbsp;mph which allows stopping within half the range of vision short of an obstruction on the tracks A device installed in a classification yard used to reduce the speed of freight cars as they are sorted into consists The handle that controls the directional control on a locomotive. See also Cut off. Continuously welded rail A failure in a signalling or other safety critical system which leaves the system in a safe condition A highway trailer, or semi-trailer, that is specially equipped for direct use on a railroad Visual inspection of railroad equipment while it is in motion # In UK parlance, any railway vehicle that is not capable of moving under its own power # In US parlance, any railroad car or locomotive See Trainee. Short for rotary snowplow, an extreme-duty railroad snowplow used mainly in the mountain ranges of the American West A circular or semi-circular structure used for storage and running maintenance of locomotives A box or panel adjacent to a rail line at an interlocking, with several buttons for train operators to select a desired route, which is then either communicated to a signal tower where an operator fulfills the request, or switched automatically The universal rule prohibiting the use of drugs and alcohol The longest or steepest grade on a division, thus setting the standard for track speeds, locomotive tonnage ratings, and train handling instructions A heavy train that has lost speed control while descending a steep grade, due to either brake failure or poor preparation by the crew An other-than-main track, typically providing access to a yard or industry and governed by the requirements of restricted speed The practice of detaching a locomotive from its train, driving it to the other end of the train and re-attaching it, to allow the train to proceed in the direction it has just come from (e.g. when it reaches its destination and forms a service in the other direction). See headshunt for diagram of a 'run-round loop'. Locomotives that remain attached to a manifest or unit train from their home rails over the tracks of a receiving railroad until the train reaches its final destination A tank locomotive with the water tank mounted on top of the boiler like a saddle A law mandating air brakes, grab bars, and automatic couplers The system of rules and equipment designed to ensure the safe operation of trains A granular material sprayed onto the rail just in front of the drive wheels to improve traction A container on locomotives and self-propelled multiple units, or trams, that run on tramways and adhesion railways. The container holds sand which can be dropped onto the rail to improve rail adhesion under wet, steep, or slippery rail conditions. The sandbox and operating mechanism are collectively known as sanding gear. Consists of a mixture of sand, aluminium, and a unique type of adhesive, used instead of plain sand for extreme slippery rail conditions A steam locomotive with a 2-10-2 wheel arrangement, named for the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway—the first railroad to use such a configuration A steam locomotive not equipped with a superheater; the steam thus remains at the same temperature as the water in the boiler Solid debris distilled from boiling water in a steam locomotive. To prevent corrosion damage from scale build-up, the locomotive must undergo a boiler wash once each operating month. A specialized type of freight car for extra heavy and over sized loads where the car is loaded in such a way that the load forms part of the car superstructure A signal with a single light source usually capable of displaying three different colors. An internal mechanism governs the color displayed. A division of track for tracking occupation A type of signal that has a moving arm to change the indication A type of geared steam locomotive built to the patents of Ephraim Shay In UK and Australian parlance, to make up and divide trains in sidings, to move trains to or from sidings, or to move trains between platforms in a station In US parlance, to electrically bond the rails or power feeds between sections on light-rail or trolley systems, so as to temporarily bridge past dead areas A train, usually a passenger service, that runs back and forth, usually over a relatively short distance, such as between a junction station and a branch-line terminus. A tank locomotive with water tanks mounted each side of the boiler A section of track off the main line. Sidings are often used for storing rolling stock or freight. A siding is also used as a form of rail access for warehouses and other businesses, where the siding will often meet up with loading docks at rail car height in the building. In the U.S. the term is also used to cover the British term: loop. Also, a passing track in the U.S. A device that indicates the condition of the line ahead to the driver of a train The information conveyed to a railroad vehicle operator by a block signal. Signals may use colored lights, position-significant lights or mechanical semaphores to generate various aspects. A building or room which houses signal levers (usually in a frame), a control panel or a VDU-based control system A person in charge of the signalling at a station or junction, often in a signal box The narrow corridor between a pair of closely spaced tracks, nominally six feet wide. See also four-foot and ten-foot. The condition of fallen leaves or other debris lying on and clinging to a railroad track that could cause train wheel slippage, resulting in premature wheel wear and train delays A local speed restriction below the track's normal speed limit often designated by yellow and green flags. Slow orders can be imposed on a temporary basis to protect, for example, maintenance of way employees while sections of track are under repair. Widely used in areas where track is substandard and in need of repair. A locomotive that contains traction motors yet lacks the diesel engine to create its own power, which is instead supplied by a connected mother locomotive An enclosed (normally cylindrical) space attached to the end of the boiler opposite the firebox on a steam locomotive (normally the front). Supports the stack/chimney; steam pipes to and from the cylinders pass through here; contains the blastpipe/exhaust nozzle where the exhaust steam is used to provide draft for the fire. In superheated locomotives, also contains the superheater header and (optionally) a front-end throttle. A smokebox door allows access for cleaning. A rail service vehicle used for snow removal from train tracks A long shelter erected over a railroad track on the side of a mountain to protect the line from avalanches and drifting The beam between two bogies A bolt, pin, or nail used to hold rails, or plates connected to the rails (known as tie plates), to sleepers (ties) See Track transition curve. Also known as tangent lead-in. Maintenance of way equipment designed to spread or shape ballast profiles, remove snow, clean and dig ditches as well as trim embankments A self-propelled rail-defect detector car A method of safeworking involving a token A gauge where the rails are spaced  apart—by far the most common gauge worldwide The person in charge of a station A device generally used in passenger trains to create steam for heating. The steam generator is usually in the locomotive but may also be located in other cars. A reversing gear worked by a steam cylinder controlled from the cab A person in a dining car with a role similar to that of a Maitre d’Hotel Pulling against train brakes at the lower end of a locomotive's power output (e.g. notches one through four) of a conventional throttle, thus keeping coupler slack stretched and permitting smoother train handling. This is considered most effective on undulating track profiles or when dynamic braking is not available. The trackage area within a division covered by a single timetable A mechanical device that boosts the pressure of engine intake air to above atmospheric level, causing an increase in power. Not to be confused with the blower used to scavenge the cylinders of a naturally aspirated two-stroke Diesel engine. A device in a steam locomotive that raises the temperature of saturated steam substantially beyond the boiling point of water, increasing power and efficiency To determine the position of constructed objects, including rail infrastructure, in relation to the earth's surface. This is accomplished by measuring angles and distances based on the principles of triangulation. A person assigned to perform survey work A railroad worker responsible for assembling trains and switching railroad cars in a yard Generally, a locomotive used in track maintenance and equipped with track lifting facilities, and paddles enabling ballast to be pushed beneath a rail track so as to assure its level and cant A type of rolling stock designed to transport liquid and gaseous commodities A spur or siding for loading freight, often used by firms not having their own direct rail access A specialized rail car attached to a steam locomotive to carry its fuel and water supplies, along with tools and flagging equipment An area, usually at least ten feet wide, between a pair of widely spaced tracks, wide enough to form a place of safety in which railway workers can stand while a train goes past. See also four-foot and six-foot. A company in the United States that owns no cars of its own and transports only the railroad cars of other companies around a specific terminal stationJudicial and statutory definitions of words and phrases. Second series West Publishing Company - St. Paul, Minnesota - 1914 A steam locomotive with a 2-10-4 wheel arrangement A nickname for Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA)—the Subway service through Boston, Massachusetts An electrified rail that runs along the tracks, giving power to trains. Used mostly in subways and rapid transit systems. A passenger coach that is disconnected from one train and attached to another before continuing on with its journey, thus avoiding the need for passengers themselves to switch trains The standard platform and track arrangement at a station. The train pulls alongside the platform, arriving from one end of the station, and may pass out the other end of the station by continuing along the same track Combining two or more different railways onto a common length of track. This is often done to eliminate redundant trackage or improve service. A plate which is bolted to sleepers, holding the rails in place The general compass direction of a railroad or subdivision, as specified by its official timetable rulebook. Only the four cardinal compass points may be used to state a train's direction of travel. Intermodal freight transport A physical object given to a locomotive driver to authorize use of a particular stretch of single track The foundation of rail tracks A form used by railroad employees that shows the locations of slow orders, maintenance of way work locations, and other conditions affecting the track and movement of trains An electrical circuit that detects the presence of locomotives or cars (as their wheelsets electrically bond the rails) in a block of track, and provides real-time input to signaling logic The gradual application of superelevation and tighter curve radius, calculated with reference to the anticipated line speed and the final curve radius, on the approach to a bend. Also known as the transition spiral and spiral easement. A system for authorizing main track occupancy using defined points such as mileposts, switches, or stations See Wayobjects. A large electric motor that powers the driving wheels of an electric or diesel-electric locomotive The electric source for the traction motors of electric trains The pulling or pushing force exerted by a locomotive or other vehicle A turnout is trailing if the two legs of that turnout merge in the direction of travel. See Facing. An employee assigned to train service, such as a conductor, brakeman, or switchman A dispatcher—the person in charge of all traffic within assigned blocks A system for authorizing main track occupancy using telephone, telegraph, and wayside stations to pass authority to train crews A group of rolling stock that is permanently or semi-permanently coupled together to form a unified set of equipment. Trainsets are most often used in passenger train configurations. A city-based rail system that typically shares its operational space with other vehicles and often runs on, across, or down the center of city streets Trams that are designed to run both on the tracks of a city-based rail system and on the existing railway networks. Tram-trains' dual-voltage capability makes it possible to operate at lower speeds on city streets and at over  on main line tracks allowing travel in an extended geographical area without changing the method of transport. A mechanical or electrical device for detecting the presence of a rail vehicle with pin-point accuracy, unlike a track circuit, which provides detection over an arbitrary distances A switch A section of track that can rotate, allowing locomotives and rolling stock to be reversed, and also allow a large number of engine maintenance sidings to be accessed in a small area A train in which all cars (wagons) carry the same commodity and are shipped from the same origin to the same destination, without being split up or stored en route The common name and reporting mark for the Union Pacific Railroad A continuous train brake which is fail-safe in operation; the brake is powered by a vacuum from the locomotive but the application is actually by atmospheric pressure when the vacuum is released. Now largely superseded by the air brake. The linkage mechanism that operates the valve for a driving cylinder, to alternately admit steam to the cylinder and then exhaust it when the piston's stroke is nearly complete A device used for delivering a large volume of water into the tank or tender of a steam locomotive A device showing the level of water in the boiler An alternate term for a caboose used by the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad, Chicago and North Western Railway, and Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway See Local train. Trackside objects or any structures at the wayside or beside the rail tracks usually within the right-of-way, such as railway signals, third rails, overhead lines and their supports, electrification systems, platforms, or boom barriers Trackside A type of tank locomotive. The water tank is mounted between the frame plates, beneath the cab and boiler. A flat wagon with a depressed centre used for carrying extra tall loads The rolling component typically pressed onto an axle and mounted on a rail car or locomotive truck or bogie. Wheels are cast or forged (wrought) and are heat treated to have a specific hardness. New wheels are trued to a specific profile before being pressed onto an axle. All wheel profiles need to be periodically monitored to insure proper wheel to rail interface. Improperly trued wheels increase rolling resistance, reduce energy efficiency and may create unsafe operation. A railroad wheel typically consists of two main parts: the wheel itself, and the tire around the outside.  A railway tire is itself steel, and is typically heated and pressed onto the wheel, where it remains firmly as it shrinks and cools. The process of a wheel climbing up and often off the inside or gauge side of the rail. It is a major source of derailments. Wheel climb is more likely to occur in curves with wheels whose flanges are worn or have improper angles. See Rail adhesion. The inner section of a wheel that rides between the two rails. The angle between the wheel tread and flange is often specific to the rail to prevent wheel climb and possible derailments. See Rail adhesion. The wheel flange is part of the wheel tire. The on-contact interaction between wheels and rails. The term is used in connection with the design and management of their interaction. The loss of traction due to a slippery rail or wheel. Wheel slip was common with steam engines as they started to move due to the excessive torque often generated at low speed. Steam engines carried sand dispensing gear to increase traction at the start of motion. An historical railway occupation; people employed to tap train wheels with hammers and listen to the sound made to determine the integrity of the wheel; cracked wheels, like cracked bells, do not sound the same as their intact counterparts. The job was associated with the steam age, but they still operate in some eastern European countries. Modern planned maintenance procedures have mostly obviated the need for the wheel-tapper. The slightly conical section (often with a 1 in 20 slope) of a railroad wheel that is the primary contact point with the rail. See Rail adhesion. Train whistles are used as a safety warning and also by the engineer to communicate to other railroad workers. See train whistle for a description of the whistle code used to communicate. Also a nickname for an air horn on a diesel locomotive. Steam engine whistles were historically known as chimes in the US during the 19th century. An advance warning to the engineer of an upcoming grade crossing. It is the point at which the engineer should begin sounding the whistle or horn. A system of describing steam locomotive wheel arrangements (e.g. 4-6-4, 2-10-2). The first number indicates the number of "pilot" wheels that help lead the engine into turns. The second is the number of coupled wheels ("drivers"). Third are the trailing idler wheels, usually to provide support to larger fireboxes. Articulated locomotives are similarly described. For example, a Union Pacific "Big Boy" would be described as a 4-8-8-4, wherein the pilot has four wheels, followed by two sets of drivers, eight wheels per set, and a four-wheel trailing bogie under the firebox. The numbers include the wheels on both sides of the engine, so a 2-8-2 engine would have one idler, four drivers, and a final idler on each side of the engine. A largely superseded Level or Grade Crossing Warning Signal consisting of a swinging disc facing road traffic with a red light in the centre. The disc normally hangs straight down, but an approaching train will set it swinging from side to side, the red light will illuminate or flash, and a bell will ring. The condition of a steam locomotive drawing water through its throttle valve, cylinders, and smokestack, often causing damage to the cylinders or running gear A failure in a signalling system that leaves the system in a dangerous condition Crossing A location where rolling stock is switched to and from trains, freight is loaded or unloaded, and consists made up The person responsible for conducting all traffic within the yard in order to assemble or disassemble consists A colour associated with a warning or a need to slow down when used by flags or signals, but the exact meaning varies from railway to railway A steam locomotive with a 2-8-8-4 wheel arrangement A method of climbing and descending steep gradients, where shallow-gradient track reverses direction for a while, and then reverses again to continue in the original direction Glossary of Australian railway terms Glossary of New Zealand railway terms Glossary of North American railway terms Glossary of United Kingdom railway terms Passenger rail terminology Railroad nicknames Transmodel Canadian National Railways: Linguistic Services. Freight Car Inspection & Maintenance: English-French Vocabulary = Surveillance et entretien des wagons: vocabulaire anglais-français. Montréal: Canadian National Railways, 1973. Without ISBN or SBN British Railways compared to American Railroads
