     Gold, also called golden, is one of a variety of yellow-orange color blends used to give the impression of the color of the element gold. The web color gold is sometimes referred to as golden to distinguish it from the color metallic gold. The use of gold as a color term in traditional usage is more often applied to the color "metallic gold" (shown below). The first recorded use of golden as a color name in English was in 1300 to refer to the element gold and in 1423 to refer to blond hair.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 195 Metallic gold, such as in paint, is often called goldtone or gold-tone. In heraldry, the French word or is used. In model building, the color gold is different from brass. A shiny or metallic silvertone object can be painted with transparent yellow to obtain goldtone, something often done with Christmas decorations.  At right is displayed a representation of the color metallic gold (the color traditionally known as gold) which is a simulation of the color of the actual metallic element gold itself—gold shade. The source of this color is the ISCC-NBS Dictionary of Color Names (1955), a color dictionary used by stamp collectors to identify the colors of stamps—See color sample of the color Gold (Color Sample Gold (T) #84) displayed on indicated web page: The first recorded use of gold as a color name in English was in the year 1400.  The American Heritage Dictionary defines the color metallic gold as "A light olive-brown to dark yellow, or a moderate, strong to vivid yellow." Of course, the visual sensation usually associated with the metal gold is its metallic shine. This cannot be reproduced by a simple solid color, because the shiny effect is due to the material's reflective brightness varying with the surface's angle to the light source. This is why, in art, a metallic paint that glitters in an approximation of real gold would be used; a solid color like that of the cell displayed in the box to the right does not aesthetically "read" as gold. Especially in sacral art in Christian churches, real gold (as gold leaf) was used for rendering gold in paintings, e.g. for the halo of saints. Gold can also be woven into sheets of silk to give an East Asian traditional look. More recent art styles, e.g. art nouveau, also made use of a metallic, shining gold; however, the metallic finish of such paints was added using fine aluminum powder and pigment rather than actual gold. The color pale gold is displayed at right. This has been the color called gold in Crayola crayons since 1903. Pale gold is one of the Lithuanian basketball club Lietkabelis Panevėžys primary colors.     Golden yellow is the color halfway between amber and yellow on the RGB color wheel. It is a color that is 87.5% yellow and 12.5% red. The first recorded use of golden yellow as a color name in English was in the year 1597.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 195; Color sample of golden yellow: Page 43--Plate 10 Color Sample L7  The color sunglow is displayed at right. This is a Crayola crayon color formulated in 1990.   Golden poppy is a tone of gold that is the color of the California poppy—the official state flower of California—the Golden State. The first recorded use of golden poppy as a color name in English was in 1927.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 196; Color Sample: golden poppy Page 41 Plate 9 Color Sample L12  This is a shade of gold identified by the University of California, Berkeley in their graphic style guide for use in on-screen representations of the gold color in the university's seal. For print media, the guide recommends to, "[u]se Pantone 874 metallic or Pantone 139 yellow and 540 or 294 blue".  Cal Poly Pomona gold is one of the two the official colors of California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona). The official university colors are green (PMS 349) and gold (PMS 131). The Cal Poly Pomona Office of Public Affairs created the Cal Poly Pomona colors for web development and has technical guidelines, copyright and privacy protection; as well as logos and images that developers are asked to follow in the University's Guidelines for using official Cal Poly Pomona logos. If web developers are using gold on a university website, they are encouraged to use Cal Poly Pomona gold. It is notable for its prominent use representing Cal Poly Pomona's athletic teams, the Cal Poly Pomona Broncos.   The color was approved by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Chancellor in October 2013. This is a shade of gold identified by the university for use in their printed publications.   MU Gold is used by the University of Missouri as the official school color along with black. Mizzou Identity Standards designated the color for web development as well as logos and images that developers are asked to follow in the University's Guidelines for using official Mizzou logos.  The color harvest gold is displayed at right. This color was originally called harvest in the 1920s. The first recorded use of harvest as a color name in English was in 1923.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 196; Color Sample of Harvest: Page 47 Plate 12 Color Sample H9 Harvest gold was a common color for metal surfaces (including automobiles and household appliances), as well as the color avocado, during the whole decade of the 1970s. They were both also popular colors for shag carpets. Both colors (as well as shag carpets) went out of style by the early 1980s    Displayed at right is the web color goldenrod. The color goldenrod is a representation of the color of some of the deeper gold colored goldenrod flowers. The first recorded use of goldenrod as a color name in English was in 1915.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 196; Color Sample of Goldenrod: Page 43 Plate 10 Color Sample L5    Old gold is a dark yellow, which varies from heavy olive or olive brown to deep or strong yellow. The widely accepted color old gold is on the darker rather than the lighter side of this range. The first recorded use of old gold as a color name in English was in the early 19th century (exact year uncertain).Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 200; Color Sample of Old Gold Page 51 Plate 14 Color Sample K5 The Pi Kappa Alpha fraternity's colors are Garnet and Old Gold. Old Gold is one of two official colors of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity. Maroon and old gold are the colors of Texas State University's intercollegiate sports teams. Old gold and black are the team colors of Purdue University Boilermakers intercollegiate sports teams. The Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets wear white and old gold. The Wake Forest Demon Deacons, UCF Knights, and Vanderbilt Commodores wear old gold and black. The New Orleans Saints list their official team colors as black, old gold and white.  Displayed at right is the color Vegas gold. Vegas gold, rendered within narrow limits, is associated with the glamorous casinos and hotels of the Las Vegas Strip, United States. Vegas gold is one of the official athletic colors for the Notre Dame Fighting Irish, Boston College Eagles, Colorado Buffaloes, Pittsburgh Panthers, South Florida Bulls, UAB Blazers, Pittsburgh Penguins (formerly yellow), Vanderbilt Commodores and Western Carolina University Catamounts.  At right is displayed the color satin sheen gold. This is the name of the color of the Starfleet command personnel uniform worn by Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise in the TV show and movies Star Trek.Photo of Captain Kirk: At right is displayed the color golden brown. The first recorded use of golden brown as a color name in English was in the year 1891.Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930 McGraw-Hill Page 195; Color sample of golden brown: Page 51--Plate 14 Color Sample F12  Golden brown is commonly referenced in recipes as the desired color of properly baked foods. Source of color: ISCC-NBS Dictionary of Color Names (1955)--Color Sample of golden brown (color sample #74)(matches color called golden brown in A Dictionary of Colorby Maerz and Paul):  Protista Plants Animals Uncle Scrooge #24 December 1958—February 1959 Published quarterly by Dell Publishing Co.  The Twenty Four Carat Moon Sororities which use gold as an official color include:       The golden algae or chrysophytes are a large group of heterokont algae, found mostly in freshwater. Golden bamboo (Phyllostachys aurea) is a bamboo species. The golden poppy and goldenrod are popular flowers to cultivate in horticulture. The golden bamboo lemur (Hapalemur aureus) is a medium-sized bamboo lemur endemic to southeastern Madagascar. The golden eagle is a Northern Hemisphere bird of prey. The goldfish was one of the earliest fish to be domesticated, and is still one of the most commonly kept aquarium fish and water garden fish. The golden retriever is a medium-sized breed of dog that is one of the most popular companion animals. The golden toad was an amphibian that used to live in Costa Rica that is now extinct. The Golden House was a 300-room palace in which the Roman Emperor Nero held parties organized by his official party planner Petronius. Lions are colored golden in art as a symbol of monarchy. The golden lion was the symbol of the British Empire and is on the coat of arms of the United Kingdom. The artist Gustav Klimt often used the color metallic gold in his paintings. Metallic gold was often used in Byzantine art. The golden ratio is often used in art, graphic design, and architecture, as well as appearing in nature among living things. The highest award for achievement in many fields is called the Gold medal. In stock market terminology, a golden share is a nominal share which is able to outvote all other shares in certain specified circumstances, often held by a government organization, in a government company undergoing the process of privatization and transformation into a stock-company. In marketing, the term Gold Standard refers to a product that so satisfies the consumer that it functions as a standard for all other products of the same type. In human resources, a business executive or professional who has an employment contract that gives them a generous severance pay is said to have a golden parachute. In executive compensation, a golden coffin is a package of benefits that continues to accrue to the heirs of a CEO even after the CEO has died. In advertising for the Union Pacific Railroad in the 1950s, the southwestern states of the United States served by the Union Pacific were collectively called The Golden Empire because the railroad's diesel engines were and are colored golden, red, and black. Ads with maps showing the Union Pacific's Golden Empire colored golden were placed in many popular mass-circulation magazines. Blonde hair in women (or sometimes men) is sometimes referred to poetically as golden. It is estimated by geneticists that the gene for blonde hair originated about 3000 BC in the area now known as Lithuania among the recently arrived  Proto-Indo-European settlers of the area (Lithuania is still the country that has the highest percentage of people with blonde hair); it is thought the gene spread quickly through sexual selection into Scandinavia when that area was settled because men found women with blonde hair attractive.Cavalli-Sforza, L. Luca; Menozzi, Paolo; and Piazza Alberto The History and Geography of Human Genes Princeton, New Jersey: 1994 Princeton University Press Page 266Gentlemen Prefer Blondes A past era during which the highest quality art was produced or in mythology during which humans were believed to have lived a Utopian lifestyle, is called a golden age. The Golden Triangle and the Golden Crescent are areas in Asia where large quantities of opium are grown. The Golden Triangle of Mexico is composed of the three Mexican states of Sinaloa, Durango, and Chihuahua, where Mexican drug lords engage in a murderous rivalry for control of the drug importation routes north into the United States. Au nanoparticles loaded on cerium oxide will kill cancer cells and protect normal cells. Color codes for resistors use the color gold (different from yellow) for 5% tolerance. On 26 September 1580, Sir Francis Drake returned to England, becoming the second person to circumnavigate the globe. His ship was called the Golden Hinde. The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs is one of many fables attributed to Aesop. Common golden foods include maize (the grain that is called corn in America), sweet potatoes (their interior flesh), butternut squash, and so-called white wine and "white" grape juice. Golden rice is a variety of rice produced through genetic engineering to biosynthesize the precursors of beta-carotene (pro-vitamin A) in the edible parts of rice. The Yukon Gold potato is a variety of potato recognizable through its smooth eyes and golden interior. Golden Oreos are composed of vanilla instead of chocolate cookies with a vanilla cream filling. Golden raisins are dried grapes that have been treated with sulfur dioxide and flame-dried. South Sea Pearls, which have historically been cultured in the Indian and Pacific Oceans, in the countries of Myanmar, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Northern Australia but mostly attributed to the former thalassocratic Sultanate of SuluThe sultanate of Sulu in the Philippines pioneered the pearl culture of the South Sea Pearls  have a gold colored variety from the Pinctada maxima Pearl oyster. This golden pearl is the national gemstone of the Philippines.President Ramos issues Proclamation No. 905. declaring that the golden strain of the South Sea Pearls is to be the Philippines' national gemstone. This can now be manufactured in the laboratory at a much lower cost.National Geographic magazine, August 2006, page 31 Citrines often come in shades of yellow, especially gold. "Golden Country": An epithet of Iran appearing in its national anthem. "Golden State": California, from the Gold Rush of the 1840s and 50s. "Golden Gate": The strait connecting San Francisco Bay to the Pacific Ocean, an English calque of Frémont's original name  intended to compare it with the Golden Horn. The bridge across it, painted international orange, is claimed as one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World by the American Society of Civil Engineers. "Golden Horn" (, Khrysókeras; ): The estuary of the Alibeyköy and Kağıthane Rivers forming the northern shore and sheltered harbor of central Istanbul (formerly Constantinople). "Gold Coast": A section of coast named for its communication with the West African gold fields, particularly the former British colony there which became Ghana in 1957 "Golden Triangle" (, Jīn Sānjiǎo): The opium-producing area around the borders of Burma, Laos, and Thailand. "Golden Triangle": The area around Beaumont, Texas, that was home to the massive Spindletop oil strike in 1901. "Golden Triangle": Downtown Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, from its position at the confluence of the Alleghany and Monongahela and its importance as the headquarters of U.S. Steel. "Golden Triangle": The Yangtze River Delta, from the shape of the Shanghai Peninsula and the economic success of its megalopolis of around 50 million people centered on Shanghai. "Golden Chersonese" (, Chrysḗ Chersónēsos; ): The name of the Malay Peninsula in Marinus and Ptolemy's influential works on geography, from the earlier Golden Island (below). "Golden Island" (Sanskrit: Suvarnadvipa): Originally the name of Indian geographers for Sumatra, from its rich gold fields, but later applied broadly by the Indians to both mainland and maritime Southeast Asia.Bharati, Agehananda The Tantric Tradition New York:1965 Samuel Weiser Page 62 The earlier, restricted sense appeared in Eratosthenes and other Greek and Roman geographers before Marinus and Ptolemy's replacement of the island with a peninsula (above). "Old Gold Mountain" (t&nbsp;, s&nbsp;, p&nbsp;Jiùjīnshān): The colloquial Chinese name for San Francisco, California, from the California Gold Rush. "New Gold Mountain" (, p&nbsp;Xīnjīnshān): A colloquial Chinese name for Melbourne, Australia, from its gold rush. Golden: The capital of Jefferson Territory during the Colorado Gold Rush of 1858–61 and today a suburb of Denver, Colorado. A senior citizen is sometimes called a golden ager. The Golden Gate (Porta Aurea) was the Imperial entrance gate of the Walls of Constantinople and the largest among the 55 gates around the city walls which protected Constantinople (present-day Istanbul). It had three arches and was plated in solid gold.Norwich, John Julius Byzantium:The Early Centuries (Volume I of three volume History of the Byzantine Empire) New York:2001 Alfred A. Knopf Page 301 The Golden Horde was a Mongol khanate that ruled southern Russia in the 13th century. The Chrysotriklinos (golden reception hall) was the main reception and ceremonial hall and throne room of the Byzantine Emperor in the Great Palace of Constantinople from its construction, in the late 6th century, until the 10th century The Queen's Bedchamber in the Grand appartement de la reine in the Versailles Palace is decorated in the color gold. This room was where Marie Antoinette, wife of King Louis XVI of France, slept. Golden is a warm color that can both provide not only a bright and cheerful feeling but also a somber, traditional, and religious aura. Golden tends to go well with earth colors, but it can also enrich a palette of red or burgundy. The Lei Áurea (Golden Law), adopted on May 13, 1888, was the law that abolished slavery in Brazil. The capital city of Atlantis is said to have been called The City of the Golden Gates.Powell, A.E. The Solar System (A complete outline of the Theosophical scheme of evolution) Wheaton, Illinois:1930 Theosophical Press Page 228 Because of this (and because of the existence of the Transamerica Pyramid, which is like the pyramid that is said to have existed as one of the major structures in the City of the Golden Gates), it is thought by some New Age people that a number of the inhabitants of San Francisco (the City by the Golden Gate) are reincarnated from Atlantis.Maupin, Armistead Tales of the City New York:1978 Harper and Row The Golden Ass by Lucius Apuleius, written in the 2nd century AD, is a classic satire of life in the Roman Empire The Golden Legend, compiled around the year 1260 by Jacopo da Varagine is a collection of fanciful hagiographies or lives of the saints, that became a late medieval bestseller. In the science fiction space opera the Lensman series heptalogy by E.E. Smith, in Volume One of the series, the 1948 book Triplanetary, the Golden Meteor is the insignia that was initially adopted as the symbol of the Galactic Patrol.  (It was later replaced by the Lens of Arisia.)Ellik, Ron and Evans, Bill (Illustrations by Bjo Trimble) The Universes of E.E. Smith Chicago:1966 Advent Publishers Page 129Smith, E.E. Triplanetary Reading, Pennsylvania, USA:1948 &ndash; Fantasy Press Page 140 The Golden Apples of the Sun is a 1953 collection of thirty-two of the most famous short stories by Ray Bradbury. The Golden Man is a 1954 science fiction short story by Philip K. Dick. The story is set in a post-apocalyptic future, where the existence of potentially powerful mutants has become a reality. The Golden Notebook is a 1962 novel by British Nobel Prize-winning author Doris Lessing. Goldfinger is a 1958 novel by British author Ian Fleming in the James Bond series. The story concerns a villain, named Auric Goldfinger whose obsessive love for gold inspires him to rob Ft. Knox gold depository. The subsequent 1964 film adaptation is one of the most notable films of the decade, in particular the famous image of the "golden girl", portrayed by actress Shirley Eaton. Heart of Gold is a fictional starship in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series by Douglas Adams. In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows the Polyjuice Potion with Harry Potter's hair turned "clear, bright gold". The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was an occult order founded in 1888. The 50th wedding anniversary is called the Golden Anniversary and one is expected to give gifts made of gold to a couple celebrating that anniversary. By extension, the 50th anniversary of any important event is called the golden jubilee. The Gold Star Mothers Club is a club in the United States to provide support for mothers that have lost sons or daughters in military combat. The gold color is one of two colors of Bosnia and Herzegovina Air Forces and Anti-Aircraft DefenceVazduhoplovstvo i Protiv-vazdusna odbrana Oruzanih snaga Bosne i Hercegovine A gold record is a recording that achieves sales of a million copies or more. "Heart of Gold" is a famous song by Canadian folk rock artist Neil Young. The song "The Golden Road to Unlimited Devotion" is one of the most popular songs on the 1967 debut album of the Grateful Dead, The Grateful Dead. "Golden Brown" is a hit single by the English rock band The Stranglers Golden is an American rock band formed in 1993. The Gold Experience is an album released by Prince (his stage name at that time being an unpronounceable symbol) on September 26, 1995. The album included the song "Gold". Golden Millennium was a glam rock revival supergroup formed in 1999. Golden is a 2004 album by the space rock group Failure. In Greek mythology, Jason and the Argonauts sailed to Colchis to find the golden fleece. King Midas, in Greek Mythology, was said to have the Midas touch, i.e., the ability to turn everything into gold (the golden touch). This ability became a curse for him after he turned his daughter to gold, and he was cured by Dionysus. Comic books published between 1938 (the first ones) and 1945 are called Golden Age comic books.Overstreet, Robert M. Official Overstreet Comic Book Price Guide 38th Edition New York:2008 (Glossary Pages--1026-1031) Page 1028 In Uncle Scrooge comic books, Scrooge McDuck searches throughout the world and even outer space for gold and other treasures to further increase his wealth. Paintings of Scrooge by Carl Barks often show him with piles of golden money. In one Carl Barks story, The 24 Karat Moon, Scrooge McDuck builds a rocket ship, travels to the asteroid belt and finds an asteroid made of solid gold: [ ] "The Golden Helmet" is a Donald Duck comic strip story written by Carl Barks in July 1952. Don Rosa wrote a sequel to The Golden Helmet, called The Lost Charts of Columbus. Nova (Frankie Raye) is a fictional character colored golden sometimes appearing in the Marvel Comics universe with the Silver Surfer. Psychics who claim to be able to observe the aura with their third eye report that great spiritual teachers usually have golden auras.Swami Panchadasi The Human Aura: Astral Colors and Thought Forms Des Plaines, Illinois, USA:1912--Yogi Publications Society Page 34Oslie, Pamalie Life Colors: What the Colors in Your Aura Reveal  Novato, California:2000--New World Library Golden Auras: Page 341 People who have gold auras are said to be those whose pure intellect is applied to abstract philosophy and mathematics.Arthur E. Powell The Astral Body and Other Astral Phenomenon Wheaton, Illinois:1927—Theosophical Publishing House Page 12 In the philosophy of Ancient Greece, the golden mean (moderation in all things) was accepted as a basic tenet of most Greek philosophy. In moral philosophy, the Golden Rule means to act towards others as you wish them to act towards you. A king or queen's crown is usually gold. The Golden Stool is the throne of the king of the Ashanti people in Ghana. Golden Liberty was a form of aristocratic democracy practiced in Poland from 1569 to 1795. The Knights of the Golden Circle was an organization founded in 1854 to vastly increase the power of the Southern slave holding class by proposing that the United States annex Middle America, northern South America and Cuba and the rest of the Caribbean, which they called the Golden Circle, and divide it into dozens of new slave states.Woodward, Colin American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America New York:2011 Penguin Page 207 The Gold shirts were a Mexican fascist party in the 1930s. Gold is often used as an official color by laissez-faire or libertarian political parties, such as the United States Libertarian Party, as well as ideologies such as voluntaryism and anarcho-capitalism due to their frequent support for Austrian School Economics and the gold standard. A person who attains notoriety at a young age in a their chosen profession is called a golden boy or a golden girl. The color golden is associated with Buddhism: Statues of Buddha are usually painted metallic gold, are made of the metal gold, or have gold plating. Theravada Buddhist monks wear saffron robes, a color close to golden. The Shwedagon Pagoda, also known as the Golden Pagoda, is a Buddhist pagoda in Yangon, Burma that is plated in solid gold. The Golden Pavilion is a notable Buddhist temple in Kyoto, Kinki, Japan. The Doctrine of the Golden Mean is a chapter in the Li Ji, one of the Four Books of Confucianism. The Secret of the Golden Flower is an important religious text in Daoism. The Golden Temple in Amritsar, Punjab, India, is the holiest site of the Sikh religion. The Golden Mosque in Samarra, Iraq, a Shiite Muslim holy site constructed in 944, was the target of the Golden Mosque bombing on 22 February 2006. The Golden Calf of the Old Testament, in Judaism and Christianity, is generally thought to symbolically represent the false worship of the god Mammon (i.e., wealth), instead of the true God of the Bible, Jehovah. The color golden has an important place in the Latter Day Saint movement: The Golden plates are claimed to have been a set of engraved plates, bound into a book, that Joseph Smith said was his source material for the Book of Mormon, a scripture of the Latter Day Saint movement. LDS Temples are commonly topped with a gold statue of the Angel Moroni on its tallest tower. In the New Age Ascended Master Teachings of the Church Universal and Triumphant (which are based on Theosophy) it is believed that the Master Kuthumi has a special organization around him called the Order of the Brothers of the Golden Robe that is dedicated to the enlightenment of humanity through the second ray of wisdom."Kuthumi" (Channeled through Elizabeth Clare Prophet) Studies of the Human Aura Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA:1975 Summit University Press Page 20 In Scientology, The Gold Base is the informal name of the international headquarters of the Church of Scientology,Affidavit of Andre Tabayoyan United States District Court, Central District of California case no. CV 91 6426 HLH (Tx)Affidavit of Jesse Prince United States District Court, Central District of California, San Jose Division case no. C-95-20091 RMW (EAI) located on a  parcel of land near Hemet, California. The area is the home of Golden Era Productions, the media and publications division of the church. In all world religions, the golden rule is promulgated as a basic standard of human conduct. In Dungeons & Dragons, the gold dragon is one of the metallic dragons. Alpha Sigma Tau Delta Phi Epsilon Sigma Gamma Rho In Major League Baseball, the Milwaukee Brewers, Oakland Athletics, and Pittsburgh Pirates use gold as one of their team's primary colors. The Brewers' shade was more metallic, while the Athletics and Pirates' shade was more yellowish. A Gold Glove Award is given to the best player at each fielding position in each major league. In the NBA, the Boston Celtics use "old gold" as an accent color. The Cleveland Cavaliers, Los Angeles Lakers, Indiana Pacers, Denver Nuggets, Golden State Warriors, Memphis Grizzlies, New Orleans Hornets, Utah Jazz and Oklahoma City Thunder also use gold as an accent color, although the shade is mostly yellowish in appearance. Fans of the National Football League will note the Pittsburgh Steelers, Washington Redskins, Minnesota Vikings, and Green Bay Packers as having gold as a color. The gold they use, however, is a distinctly more yellow color (akin to the non-metallic web color version) than the traditional "old gold" used by the New Orleans Saints, San Francisco 49ers, and Los Angeles Rams. In both cases, the color is referred to as "gold", with the yellow shade sometimes referred to as "athletic gold" when distinguishing it from the metallic shades. In the NHL, eleven teams currently use a form of gold in their color schemes. The Boston Bruins are the oldest team to do so, and have always used a yellow "athletic" gold; they have even worn several gold sweaters throughout the years. Other teams using athletic gold include the St. Louis Blues, Buffalo Sabres (excluding the 1996-2006 period), Calgary Flames, Florida Panthers (who use a darker, more metallic shade in their logo) and Nashville Predators. Teams that have switched from athletic gold to a metallic shade include the Minnesota North Stars (now the Dallas Stars), Pittsburgh Penguins, and Anaheim Ducks. The Ottawa Senators and Minnesota Wild have always used metallic gold. In addition, the Los Angeles Kings and Vancouver Canucks have used versions of athletic gold in the past. The Kings, Canucks, and Penguins have also worn gold sweaters color in the past. For the 2014-15 season, the Penguins revived the black uniform the team wore during its first two championship seasons in 1991 and 1992, with the team's old shade of gold as an alternate uniform. When the team first switched from shades of blue to black and gold in 1980, the color scheme was similar to that of the Bruins, who protested the Penguins' new uniforms. The protest failed, and Pittsburgh wore the shade of gold, now dubbed "Pittsburgh gold", until 2002 and once again in 2014. In college sports, the U.S. Military Academy and the U.S. Naval Academy use gold as a primary color. The Golden Gloves is the name given to annual competitions for amateur boxing in the United States. The University of Notre Dame features Vegas Gold to go along with their Navy Blue for their school colors and for the university's athletic uniforms. The Congressional Gold Medal is the highest civilian award which may be bestowed by the United States Congress, the legislative branch of the United States government. The Gold Star was the highest state decoration in the Soviet Union and remains so in several post-Soviet states. Gold (or names containing the word Gold) is a common surname among people of Jewish ancestry of European ancestry (Ashkenazi Jews). Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Belgium, Bhutan, China, Colombia, Egypt, Ecuador, Germany, Malaysia, the Philippines Spain, Sri Lanka, Venezuela, Vietnam are examples of modern nations that use the color golden in their national flags. The Holy Roman Empire, which existed from 800 to 1806, had a golden flag with a black double-headed Imperial Eagle on the field, the origin of the use of the color golden in the German and Belgian flags. The Byzantine Empire from 1261 until its collapse in 1453 had a flag that had a black double-headed eagle on a field of golden. This flag is still used today as the flag of the Mount Athos autonomous region in Greece. The Hispanic Flag (Bandera de la Raza) is an ethnic flag that is golden and deep lilac on a white background. It is also used as the Flag of Hispanic America. (This flag is sometimes also called the Flag of the Americas when used on a non-ethnic basis to symbolically represent the combined geographical area of North America and South America together.) Or List of colors
