  Gornji Milanovac (Serbian Cyrillic: Гoрњи Милановац, ) is a town and municipality located in central Serbia. Its name means "Upper Milanovac" (there is a Lower Milanovac as well, while Milanovac stems from the name Milan in Serbian). The population of the town is 24,216, while the population of the municipality is 44,406. The city was founded in 1853. Before 1859 the original name of the city was Despotovac, after the Despotovica river passing by the city. In 1859 the name was changed to Gornji Milanovac at the request of the Prince of Serbia Miloš Obrenović. Primarily Gornji Milanovac (before 1853) was situated in the area of today's village Brusnica. Because inexpediency of the field where should be found new municipality. New municipality should be called Despotovac after the river Despotovica (river name comes from Serbian despot, Đurađ Branković) which pass through this municipality. Despotovac (later Gornji Milanovac) will be located in place called Divlje Polje by the decision of Mladen Žujović, Trivun Novaković, Stevan Knićanin and Gaja Riznić. Despotovac was moved on the 22nd of April 1852 on new location Divlje Polje. Notable buildings and roads (for example: "Zgrada starog suda – Old Court building") are the work of German engineer Indižir Schultz from Pančevo. Today's name Gornji Milanovac was formalized by the warrant of Miloš Obrenović I, Prince of Serbia 1859, after his brother Milan Obrenović.Djura Vrbavac "Nikola Milicevic Lunjevica", Lybrary "Brothers Nastasijevic", Gornji Milanovac, 2009; COBISS.SR-ID 157333004 The location of Gornji Milanovac confirms that this area was settled in the prehistory and we can find settlements of Illyrians, Thracians, Dacians, small groups of Celts and Goths and bigger settlements of the Romans. On the mountain Rudnik, besides older miners grove there are remains of a Roman temple dedicated to the Terra Mater ("Mother Earth").http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/istorija-rtk.html|Prehistory of Gornji Milanovac, December 2014 There is little information about Slavs and their settlements. Even in the Middle Ages and the time of the Roman Empire, the area around Gornji Milanovac was significant in economical, agronomy, infrastructure and military sense. There are sites from the Neolithic period (in village Gojna Gora) and pre/post Roman governance period (Rudnik), also ruins and sites from Byzantine administration, Medieval Serbian Principality/Kingdom, Serbian Empire and Ottoman Empire  (on mountain Rudnik, in villages Brusnica, mountain Treska, Jablanica and Gornji Milanovac parts of mountain Vujan ). This town was significant during the First Serbian Uprising against Ottoman Empire rule, but more so during the  Second Serbian Uprising. In 1814. at Takovo has reached historical agreement about the Second Serbian Uprising. In front of family house of Obrenović in the village Gornja Crnuća he raised a flag (red Greek cross on the white background) and said:  In the World War I occupation, the population in Gornji Milanovac was subjected to war terror and crimes, while during World War II the infrastructure was destroyed and the population of this town suffered as before. At the time of sanctions and breakup of Yugoslavia, industry of municipality exported their products to the Western and Eastern markets through offshore companies. In 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia, Gornji Milanovac was bombed once (only television repeater was damaged). People from nearby town and municipalities in joke said, that when NATO planned which town to bomb, they put a cup of coffee on the Gornji Milanovac place at the map. Important years and dates:Milomir Glišić, Dušan Ilić,Aleksandar Lazarević, Radmilo Lale Mandić, Miroslav Laf Marković, Miodrag Ristić: ,,Stari Milanovac (The old Milanovac)", third edition. 2003. ISBN 978-86-7152-018-8. r.r   Cultural Monuments of Great Importance in Gornji Milanovac are: The first library in Gornji Milanovac was established in 1857 and is called "Braća Nastasijević" (English: "Brothers Nastasijević").http://www.bibliotekagm.com/BN/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=52&Itemid=34| Library "Brothers Nastasijević", October, 2014 Headquarters is in the building of Old District Administration. It has separate classes in Rudnik (the oldest), Pranjani, Brdjani and Vraćešnica. Librarian fond has over 100,000 books. Also "Braća Nastasijević" library is engaged in the publishing business. Museum of Rudnik and Takovo area is subsidiary of the culture center of Gornji Milanovac. It has established the Gallerie of Arts in 2008, and a modern gallery in the building of old district administration. In this municipality there are two folklore groups: "Tipoplastika"-Folklore ensemble and Culture-Arts Community "Šumadija". There are also rock bends that were established in this town, like: "Bjesovi", "An Fas", ″Pastir Pan″, "GM Undergrounders",https://www.youtube.com/user/GMUndergrounders GM Undergrounders official Youtube page "Skarlet" and "Čudna Šuma". As for punk-rock bands in '90s and 80's there are: "Trula koalicija", In '00s there were established new rock and reggae music bands and groups: "Plišani mališan",Плишани малишан, победник Јелен Демофеста "Morbid Cow", "Parnasus", "Strah od Džeki ČenaWinner of Demo Fest 2014 |Demo Fest Live 2014: Pobednici - Strah od Džeki Čena",IMT 666 (Featuring Bjesovi band's singers child,Stevan Marinkovic) etc. Whilst part of Yugoslavia, Gornji Milanovac was known as the "economic miracle" and "Beli Labud" (English: "White Swan") as ecologically cleanest city. There is great potential for further rural and spa (Svračkovci, Brdjani, Mlakovac and Savinac) tourism progress in future times. Today's Gornji Milanovac on its territory has the lot of small, categorized rural hotels and motels. Close to Gornji Milanovac is spa and resort Donja Trepča. Gornji Milanovac was a pioneer in the application of sorting waste, recycling and water purification in Serbia and previously in Yugoslavia. Also, Gornji Milanovac is a great antagonist of GM food why it has adopted declaration and municipality statute about prohibition of this type of food.Gornji Milanovac and 72 municipalities in Serbia are great atagonist of GM food and they adopted prohibition | http://www.studiob.rs/info/tema.php?id=459| Retrieved: February, 2015 Every year tourists from around the world visit this municipality for its clean air, small and quiet places, inner and family vacations. In Gornji Milanovac every year is the host International Biennial of Miniature Art. In village Takovo is the host of World Music Festival, every July. Known trip places are: Takovo, Grabovica (peak of Ždreban), Savinac and Rudnik. These places are popular during celebration of the May 1st or world known International Workers' Day as collegial picnic in union organization. Other significant cultural and tourism events on its territory are: World Testicle Cooking Championship, "Milanovac bowl tournament" (Fish soup cooking) and Goulash tournament ("Gulašijada"). Gornji Milanovac in touristic sense has to offer to the lovers of bright staring nights (at December–January and May–June) and beautiful sunrises, various monuments, clean air, healing water resources and much more. It has a reputation for offering a vibrant nightlife which is also developed and safer then in the rest of Serbia. Also in Gornji Milanovac are 3 fairs per year, on May 22, August 2 and October 15. Locals are advocating to build a mini cable car system for Rudnik and biathlon stadium on the Ravna Gora, given that project had failed during the 90's economical and international politics problems. Gornji Milanovac lies between mountainshttp://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/sr/geografskeodlike/index.htm Rudnik to the north and Vujan to the south. Relief of this area is hilly and mountainous. Gornji Milanovac with all his territory is located between these mountains: Rudnik (1,132m or 3,714&nbsp;ft), Maljen (970m or 3,182&nbsp;ft), Jesevac (902m or 2,959&nbsp;ft), Suvobor (866m or 2,841&nbsp;ft), Rajac (848m or 2,782&nbsp;ft) and Bujna (845m or 2,772&nbsp;ft). Gornji Milanovac boundaries with: Ljig (on the North) and Mionica (on North-West), Topola and Aranđelovac (both on the North-East) Čačak (on the South) and Lučani (on the South West), Požega, Serbia (on the West), Kragujevac (on the East) and Knić (on theSouth-East). The center of the city is situated along western side of European route E763 (motorway), between the cities Ljig to the north and Čačak to the south and the villages Majdan to the north and Preljina to the south. Main city crossroad branches: Rivers that flow through Gornji Milanovac are: Despotovica, Gruza, Dičina, Čemernica and Kamenica. There is variety of groundwater sources and thermo-mineral water sources like in village areas, like in: Svrackovci, Brdjani, Mlakovac, Trepca and Savinac. Gornji Milanovac is instructed to use civil and military airport in nearby Morava Airport-Lajdevci, Kraljevo , Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport  and Užice-Ponikve Airport . Gornji Milanovac does not have conditions for development of water traffic transportation. In 1969 narrow and regional railway Čačak-Gornji Milanovac – Topola was abolished because it was unprofitable. In 2014, Government of Serbia will consider the spatial plan of new electrified railways line Belgrade–Sarajevo, where Gornji Milanovac could be one of regional centers.http://www.camping.rs/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Nacrt-Prostornog-plana-opstine-Gornji-Milanovac-2011.pdf Gornji Milanovac has Humid continental climate.http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/sr/geografskeodlike/klima.htm Mildest parts (Sub-Humid) of Gornji Milanovac are Brdjani, Trudelj and Dragolj. The coldest parts (humid) are peaks of Rudnik, Rajac, parts of villages Majdan, Svrackovci, Gojna Gora, Gornji Branetici,Brajic, Polom and in north-west part of village Bogdanica. Moderately humid parts of municipality are in parts of Majdan and the rest parts of mountain Rudnik, Rajac and peaks of Suvobor. The average annual temperature of air are in range of 8&nbsp;°C (46.4&nbsp;°F) in the parts of Rudnik and Suvobor and 11&nbsp;°C (51.8&nbsp;°F) at 250m (820.21 feet). Average daily (in %) humidity 78.5% during the year, in winter 85%, in summer periods 75% (excludining Rudnik mountain where it is 65%, which is good for relaxation and vacation). The hottest month of the year is July, and the coldest is January. Autumn is warmer than the spring for 1&nbsp;°C (33.8&nbsp;°F). The average annual precipitation height are in the range of  and 985&nbsp;mm (38.81&nbsp;in). Minimum mean wind speed is 1.7–2.6&nbsp;m/s (3.11-5.05 knots) and maximum 13.8–20.7&nbsp;m/s (26.83-40.24 knots). These maximum speed occurs he southeastern, southwestern and southern winds. On the territory of Gornji Milanovac prevails southeastern, northern and eastern winds. Vegetation period lasts 220–260 days. During these period precipitation rate is 55% which is which is favorable for plants. Annual average daily global sun radiation energy on a horizontal surface on territory of municipality Gornji Milanovac is between 3.8–4.0 kWh/m2 (0.33-0.35 BTU/ft 2). Daily mean values of the ambient dose rate ( background radiation) on the area around this municipality are ≈ 100 nSv/h.Background radiation on territory of Serbia | http://www.srbatom.gov.rs/srbatom/doc/monitoring-izvestaj-2011.pdf | Retrieved: April 2015 On the territory of Gornji Milanovac there is represented the following type of soil:http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/sr/geografskeodlike/zemljiste.htm According to Serbian Geology Institute, on Gornji Milanovac territory has solid reserves of Antimony, Mercury, Copper, Lead, Zinc and Gold (in small amounts).Ores in Gornji Milanovac | http://srbin.info/2014/06/09/sumadijski-auto-put-otkrio-zlato/| Retrieved: January, 2015 Gornji Milanovac and the villages of Varnice, Zagradje, Dragolj and Trudelj are dominated by the Ostrvica Massif. The elevation of Ostrvica is . Ostrvica is actually the remains of destroyed vulcanic cone. In May 2009, Ostrvica was declared a natural monument. In the middle of the last century, this massif was significant for its military fortifications and watchtower. Land that is not cultivated makes 14.6%, arable land 47%, barren land makes 4.4%. Erosion process was active in the past, which is why today some parts of the territory have barren land. These processes have caused degradation of the land. According to Republic Seismological Institution of Serbia, Gornji Milanovac is on the scale 8°-8.9° magnitude of earthquake and probability that this can happened once in 50–1000 years is 63%. In major territory there is good protection from erosion process and solid protection from floods. Population doesn't have good protection from wind storms and radiation, but new standards in house and building construction stipulates even that. Most of the population has a good thermal insulation in their homes and companies. Forest vegetation is various: willow, poplar, oak, ash, etc. Forest plantations make 10% of his territory and 90% are nature wood. Meadow grass vegetation occupies 26,656 hectares (11,960&nbsp;ft²) which is 32%, meadows 15% and grasslands 17%. Terrain of Gornji Milanovac is highland. Total terrain is diveded by rivers Kamenica, Čemernica, Gruža and Despotovica. Characteristic of terrain are that, they are vulcanic origin. Today terrain is result of combined effects of tectonics movements and fluvial erosion process in the past. Morphological traits of municipalities, we can distinguished two different zones:Terrain traits of municipality of Gornji Milanovac | http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/geografske-odlike.html | Retrieved: April 2015 Dominant position in municipality and Šumadija have mountain Rudnik. As specific shape of terrain have Ostrvica which has conical shape and it is positioned north-western from mountain and settlement Rudnik. Mountain massif Ješevac is positioned on the east side of municipality. Mountain Vujan is liying southwards from river Despotovica to Brdjani pit. Western parts of the area covers Rajac, Suvobor and Maljen. Westernmost parts includes Pranjani pit. According to the last official census done in 2011, the Municipality of Gornji Milanovac has 44,406 inhabitants. Population density on the territory of the municipality is 53.1 inhabitants per square kilometer. This census recorded decline of the population compered to the previous censuses. In 1991 census, population of this municipalite was approximately 51,000 citizens. The reasons for this trend is bad economic conditions in Serbia, negative natural increase rate and majority of the older population. In Gornji Milanovac there are 637 migrants.Population in Serbia by number of migrants| http://webrzs.stat.gov.rs/WebSite/repository/documents/00/01/63/41/Dem.pdf| Retrieved:  March 2015 Estimated composition of population by sex and average age are:Population in Republic Serbia, Census 2011| http://webrzs.stat.gov.rs/WebSite/repository/documents/00/01/61/97/03Stanovnistvo.pdf|Retrieved: March 2015 Ethnic composition of the municipality: Religion structure of Gornji Milanovac as it follows in the table:http://pod2.stat.gov.rs/ObjavljenePublikacije/Popis2011/Knjiga4_Veroispovest.pdf| Relligion and mother tongue structure of Serbian (December, 2014) Mother tongue structure of Gornji Milanovac is displayed by the following table:http://pod2.stat.gov.rs/ObjavljenePublikacije/Popis2011/Knjiga4_Veroispovest.pdf| List of Mother tongue population in Serbia (December, 2014) 1890 was significant as journalism began in this area. After World War I, Gornji Milanovac was connected with the other and important areas and cites in Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes thanks to narrow gauge railway. Before World War II the population was involved in mining, agronomy and with a few industrial workers (conditory and graphic-printing industry). After World War II Gornji Milanovac was destroyed, but in the 50's Gornji Milanovac begin with rapid progress, the rest of SFR Yugoslavia called this area an economic miracle. In that time there were established two industrial zones (in the South and South-West part). Companies and coorporations thath were established in these zones were: Zvezda (now known as Zvezda-Helios), Metalac, PIK Takovo (now known as Swisslion-Takovo), MK Rudnik (Fashion Stationery), FAD (Automotive Parts for all European cars), Tipoplastika (Plastics, Paper products), Metal Seko (now known as Mersteel), GRO Graditelj (Construction Company), Minos (railway equipment), Rudnik Flotation (mining production), Dečje novine (popular youth newspaper and publisher in SFR Yugoslavia), Proleter (department store), Kablar (cooperative agronomy company), Sigma (cardboard producer), Šipad Sarajevo-Gornji Milanovac (construction carpentry), Imlek (milk products; subsidiary), Mlinsko-Pekarska Industrija Beograd (food industry; subsidiary), JTv Gornji Milanovac (Local Broadcasting Company), KDS "Despotovica" (Cable TV distribution systems) etc. Gornji Milanovac in the 80's and 90's was real "nursery" of mixed economy. Despite 90's break up of SFR Yugoslavia and UN sanctions, Gornji Milanovac was the only city in thath time in newly formed FR Yugoslavia whose companies were operated with a profit. New date companies are: "9. Septembar" , "Tetra Pak", "Papir Print", "Spektar", "Flint Group Balkan", "Planeta računari", "FOKA", "S-group", "Semix Techno", "Interplet Gradnja", "Rapid", "AzVirt", "Alfa Support", etc. After 2001 and 2002 most workers organisations (that was the name for companies who were state and/or workers owned) from period of 1950-1990 (mentioned above) were privatized. Only few bankrupted: GRO Graditelj, Mlinsko-Pekarska Industrija Beograd (subsidiary), Imlek (subsidiary), Dečje novine, Minos and JTv Gornji Milanovac. Here department stores, two mini-supermarkets, elegant boutiques and restaurants can be found. Also, there is 1 flea markets, where local farmers are selling vegetables, products and 1 market of farm animals. Today Gornji Milanovac valid for the bigest exporter of goods, services and products in Republic of Serbia and one of the few cities and municipalities with the budget surplus. During the period of June 2014 unemployment rate in Gornji Milanovac was 25.28%.http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/lat/za-investitore.html Most of municipality economy relies on:Industry of Gornji Milanovac|http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/privreda.html|Retrieved in January 2014  Gornji Milanovac has four primary schools: OŠ "Sveti Sava", OŠ Desanka Maksimović, OŠ "Kralj Aleksandar I" (before "Takovski-Partizanski bataljon") and OŠ "Momčilo Nastasijević". Also it has one high school: Gimnazija "Takovski ustanak.  Two professional schools (four or three-year): ETŠ "Knjaz Milos" and TŠ "Jovan Žujović". As regard as kindergarten and nurseries in this municipality there is three of these. Gornji Milanovac had one department for higher education from Novi Sad, which was private owned and this department dissolved. In future periods was planned to open new departments of University of Kragujevac Faculty of Economics for business administration, taxes and accounting. Also and Faculty of Architecture University of Belgrade had negotiations about opening new departments for local students. Health protection in Gornji Milanovac is widespread on all territory. Citizens can rached basic health protection even in rural parts of municipality. Health care is organized like: General Hospital, Neurology Hospital, Gynaecology department, Intensive care unit, Labour health protection unit (there are departmans and units in two industrial zones), Surgical and physiatrically department, Dentistry, Dermatology, Psychiatric ward, Rehabilitation services, Village Health Protection Units and Physical therapy. Common support units include a dispensary, pathology, and radiology, and on the non-medical side, there are medical records departments, release of information departments, financial and HR department, Patient lawyers, Clinical Engineering, Facilities Management, Dining Services and Security Departments. There is an emergency service in place. On the property of Gornji Milanovac Hospital, there is built infrastructure for mini spa and rehabilitation center for skin and musculoskeletal diseases from watter resources, mentioned above (see section Geography and Infrastructure). As for health protection of animals, Gornji Milanovac has several privately owned veterinary stations.  "Dečje novine" was the famous and largest publishing house of books, comics, magazines and sticker albums in former Yugoslavia, based in this municipality. They had exclusive copyrights to publish comics of Walt Disney, Marvel and DC Comics. This publisher bankrupted in 90's and then the remains of company assets was divided among creditors. Creditors established new companies in the sector of publishing books, newspapers, design and art, graphical services and enigmatic-revival editions. But these independent companies did not have the same success as "Dečje novine" had. This town had 3 private owned radio station and 1 local broadcasting station. In the 80's at Gornji Milanovac was establishedexperimental radio station for travelers highway information services and among the first cable television systems in Yugoslavia, called Cable Distibutive Systems "Despotovica". Due the technological advance these radio station was called off during 1990. At the time of NATO bombing of Yugoslavia (during 1999), former JTv Gornji Milanovac broadcast television and radio signal to the world (because Radio Television of Serbia was bombed and destroyed on April 23, 1999.) for the short time until NATO air force bombed radio and television repeater at mountain Rudnik and nearby Kablar. Now Gornji Milanovac has 2 radio station, "Gogi" and "Stari Milanovac" radio local broadcasting company, which both broadcasts folk music, information and news in the Serbian language.  Meanwhile, radio station "Stari Milanovac" bankrupted. Until 2014, Gornji Milanovac did not have television broadcasting, after series of unsuccessful privatization of former JTv Gornji Milanovac. Now this municipality has regional television and cable television broadcasting company "Telemark Systems". Telemark bought old cable television KDS Despotovica. This television company provides: cable television, regional television broadcasting for several municipalities ( besides Gornji Milanovac there are providing in Čačak, Lučani, Arilje, Požega, Kosjerić and Kraljevo), broadband internet, IT services, advertising services, fixed telephony, MMDS, dealership of digital and cable TV equipment and other services. Also Gornji Milanovac has newspaper company "Takovske Novine", while "GM Press" bankrupted. There are one police station, Ministry of Internal Affairs of Serbia administration unit, Military post, Post office, branch of FedEx for Serbia, Customs substation and Fire-Rescuers department. Settlement are organized as Council of Settlements and Gornji Milanovac are divided in 63 settlements. Each of them have responsibility (infrastructure, election/referendum and legal obligations) for that part of territory. Aside from the town of Gornji Milanovac, the municipality of Gornji Milanovac includes the following 60 settlements and 3 smaller towns :    Gornji Milanovac from its establishment had modern district court. Today it has Basic People Court and Magistrates Court. Also, it is among the safest municipalities in Serbia. According to National Statistical Institute of Serbia in 2013 Gornji Milanovac had 148 convicted adults and 16 juvenile.National Instute of Serbia-Convicted crimes in Serbia for 2013|http://webrzs.stat.gov.rs/WebSite/repository/documents/00/01/62/45/20Pravosudje.pdf|Retrieved in January 2014 Safety index of this municipality is among the highest then in other municipalities in Serbia 98.63%.Criminal rate of Serbia-2013|http://www.numbeo.com/crime/country_result.jsp?country=Serbia According to the Law on Local Self-Government head of municipality (for this status they need population 10,000-99,000 citizens) is called "president" and for larger cities (100,000 and above population), they are called "mayors". Gornji Milanovac has/had 29 presidents in his history. In the following table are named presidents and not precise dates of their mandate:Milorad Glišić, Dušan Ilić, Aleksandar Lazarević, Radmilo Lale Mandić, Miroslav Laf Marković, Miodrag Ristić: "Stari Milanovac ", Third amended edition, 2003, ISBN 978-86-7152-018-8  Gornji Milanovac is twinned with:  The most popular sport in the city, besides Basketball, Handball and Volleyball, is definitely football (soccer). Governing body for sport is Sportski Savez Opštine Gornji Milanovac (engl. Sport Union of Municipality of Gornji Milanovac-SSOGM). Besides New Metalac Stadium, Gornji Milanovac have: Sport Hall "Breza" (multi-purpose); Indoors Sport Swimming pool "Tipoplastika" (currently under reconstruction); Sport and recreative centers for workers, students and public in industry zones of Tipoplastika, Autoprevoz and Swisslion-Takovo companies; Outdoors Olympic pool;http://www.togm.org.rs/sport/gradski-bazen-u-gornjem-milanovcu two sport halls in Pranjani and at Rudnik; Sport Hall in Primmary schools at Gornji Milanovac; two bowling hall (one at Metalac Stadium and one in area of professional school "Jovan Žujović"); one beach soccer (football) and volleyball ground; Ice skating rink and one outdoors gym (nearby Sport Hall "Breza"); and "Takovo" Stadium (multipurpose). Notable sport society from Gornji Milanovac are shown in following table: Also there are multisport activities and organizations in this municipality.Takovske novine, "Sport activities and awards", year LII, special edition: May 21st 2015, Retrieved: May, 2015, ISSN 0350-4867 Such as: DTV Partizan (physical training club for children/school children and workers) and four junior football (soccer) clubs: "Poletarac", "Junior soccer", "Srpski orlovi" and "Sportic". As far as municipality association football (soccer) league, Gornji Milanovac has 12 members: Majdan, Jablanica, Šumadija, Ozrem PMH, Šilopaj, Velereč '94, Ozremica, Mladi Rudar, Mladost '09, Takovski ustanak, Brezak, Sparta Grabovica and Omladinac. Every municipality football senior game is well covered by local residents. In Morava District league (5th level in Serbian Football league system) there are some Gornji Milanovac clubs, as: FK Napredak Svračkovci, FK Backovac United, FK Donja Vrbava and FK Lunjevica. Postcard of the old District court in Gornji Milanovac Royal Weekend Cottage of Royal family Obrenović in Takovo (Gornji Milanovac) Church of Holy Trinity. Old Court, first building in the newly founded city in 1854. Winter view of the Gornji Milanovac. Monument on the hill of peace. House of the Serbo-Norwegian friendship (kol. "Norway House" or "Yugoslav-Norway House"). Mural with the old Coat of arms of Gornji Milanovac on a building . Prince Mihailo Square. City park. Gymnasium “Takovo uprising”. Fountain in city park. First adopted solution of emblem for municipality of Gornji Milanovac (1961-1998) Second adopted solution of coat of arms for municipality of Gornji Milanovac (used in periods: 2000-2004 and 2005-2007) Metalac Stadium, opened in 2012.  Sport Hall "Breza", opened in 2008  Center of Gornji Milanovac for New Year's holidays Takovo complex of the Second Serbian Uprising; Old Oak is the monument where is accomplished historical agreement about Second Serbian Revolution, 1814. Peak Ostrvica and panorama view on surrounding House of Municipality Gornji Milanovac Gornji Milanovac-night panorama (2015) This municipality has numerous of deserving citizens who have contributed to the progress of Serbia and Yugoslavia.http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/istorija-milanovcani.html | Notable people of Gornji Milanovac  Ethnic group Population Serbs 43,453 Roma 178 Montenegrins 81 Macedonians 49 Croats 34 Yugoslavs 31 Others 580 Total 44,406 Religions !! Number of citizens Serbian Ortodox 43,179 Atheist 109 Catholics 65 Islam 53 Group of Eastern religions 11 Protestants 8 Agnostics 5 Other religions 18 Did not declare 347 Unknown 53 Mother tongue !! Number of cizens Serbian and Serbo-Croatian 43,884 Romani (Balkan-Romani dialect) 84 Macedonian 34 Croatian 23 Other languages 118 Did not declare according with 43 Article of the Constitution of Serbia 72 Unknown 191 Presidents of Municipalitie!! Political Party !! Mandat period Jovan Andrić People's Radical Party End 19th century Maksim Sretenović Stanoje Marinković Beginning of the 20th century Dragoljub Skubic Yugoslav Radical Union 1930s Svetozar Čivović 1941-1945 Branko Knežević League of Communists of Yugoslavia http://www.gornjimilanovac.rs/istorija.html | Retrieved: March 2015 Lazar Djordjević 1945-1947 Zdravko Radojević 1947 Uroš Ivanović 1947 Branko Petrović 1947 Mihailo Mile Tešić 1947-1950 Milovan Milovanović 1950-1951 Hristivoje Popović 1951- 1955 Djordje Djoka Cajić 1955-1960 Milojko Veljović 1960-1963 Borivoje Novaković 1963-1965 Slobodan Stanojević 1965-1967 Dragoljub Dragan Pavlović 1967-1969 Živojin Simović 1969-1974 Stanimir Jovanović 1974-1978; 1978-1982 Dušan M. Papić 1982-1984 Jovan Tomović 1984-1986 Todor Popović 1986-1988 Pantelija Gačić 1989-1993 Dražimir Marušić First mandate as League of Communists of Yugoslavia, next three mandates as Socialist Party of Serbia 1992-1993, 1993-1997, 1997-2000 and 2004-2010 (as independent political candidate) Aleksandar Pravdić Democratic Party of Serbia 2000-2001 Milutin M. Prodanović 2001-2004 Vladimir Simović 2004 Milisav Mirković Socialist Party of Serbia 2010–2012 and 2012–present Club Sport Venue League Description FK Metalac Gornji Milanovac Soccer (Football) Metalac Stadium Serbian SuperLiga Men's football team. Established 1961. FK Takovo SD Takovo stadium Morava Zone League Men's football team. Established 1911. SD Dragan Jeftic Skepo Shooting Shooting range SD Dragan Jeftić Škepo SSS Cup Men and women's shooting team.http://www.naslovi.net/2010-09-25/pr-objave/za-titule-papovkom-i-vojnickom-puskom-u-subotu-i-nedelju-u-lazarevcu/2002112 ŽRK Metalac AD Handball SC "Breza" Serbian First League (West) for Women Women's handball team RK Tipoplastika Sport and recreation center of Tipoplastika company None Men's handball team. Dissolved, 2000. RK Omladinac SC "Breza" Serbian First League West Dissolved in the 1980s. Reestablished 2012 KAF Metalac American Football Takovo Stadium Ex Second Serbian and Montenegrian American Football National League (NLS) Men's American football team. Dissolved. KK Metalac Bowling Atomsko Sklonište and at Metalac Stadium Serbian Super League (bowling) Men's bowling team KMF Metalac-Kolorado Footsal SC "Breza" Second Futsal League-West Men's futsal team OK Takovo-Zvezda-Helios (Women); Takovo-Metalac (Men) Volleyball SC "Breza" Serbian First League (women), Serbian First League (men) Men and women's volleyball team AK Takovo Athletics Takovo stadium Serbian Athletic League Men and women's athletic team AK Veteran MK Lonely Riders Motorcycles SAS Parac AMSS championship Men and Women motorcycle club OKK Takovo Basketball Hall of TŠ "Jovan Žujović" and SC "Breza" Junior Regional Basketball League-West Men's basketball team KK Ikar Gornji Milanovac SC "Breza" None Men and Women's basketball club for children with special needs GM032 SC "Breza" Summer Senior Basketbal league Men's basketball team KK Takovo Karate SC "Breza" No data Men and Women's karate club TK Takovo Tennis "Takovo" Stadium complex Unknown Men and women's tennis club PK Kupidon Darts Various Second national league Men darts club JK Grabovica Sailing None None (dissolved, 2009) Men sailing club DK Arasi Judo Various Unknown Men's and women judo club PSD Rudnik Mountaineering Rudnik mountain complex PSS Expeditions Men's and women mountaineering sport association ŠK Metalac-Takovo Chess Various Serbian Super League Men and women chess club 1814- The beginning of the Second Serbian Uprising was agreed in Takovo village 1852- Gornji Milanovac (in that time Despotovica) becomes first town in Serbia with completed map of the city and with the streets at an angle of 90°; 1853- establishment municipality of Despotovica; 1857- establishment of the first men's and girls' primary school and the first library; 1859- changing the name of municipality in Gornji Milanovac; 1879- establishment of the First High School; 1890- first printing company start to work; 1892- establishment of county hospital; 1912- commencement of construction of narrow-gauge railway; 1914- during the First World War in this town was settled headquarters of Živojin Mišić; 1921- finished electrification and construction of low voltage network; 1922- started with work of the narrow gauge railway and establishment of the first conditory company "Rudnik"; 1923- first coal power plant; 1927- first X-ray machine; 1928- started with work of the first cinema in municipality; 1933- HRH King Alexander I of Yugoslavia opens first mixed primary school; 1937- establishment of the second factory of conditory products "Sumadija"; 1941- Yugoslav Partisans and Yugoslav army in homeland (known as Chetniks) in joint action release Gornji Milanovac from the Nazi- German occupation. Gornji Milanovac was merged with the other released towns in occupied Kingdom of Yugoslavia and formed short-lived Republic of Uzice (first released area in Europe). At the head of that joint action was Zvonimir Vučković. During that battle two German tanks were trapped and now one of those is monument on the exit from the town in village Nevade, while the other is a monument in Uzice (Hotchkiss H35); 1945- Gornji Milanovac was released from Nazi-German occupation and began industrialization 1965- two municipalities Pranjani and Rudnik merged to Gornji Milanovac. Church of the Holy Trinity. Church of St. Nicholas in the village of Brusnica and family tomb of Obrenović dynasty. District Building ("The Old Court building"). Monuments in the center of municipality. "Hill of Peace" (Brdo mira) Memorial Park. Tank as monument of liberation in Nevade from the Second World War (Sherman Firefly). Orthodox Christian monasteries of Vraćevšnica, Šilopaj and Vujan. Takovo complex devoted to the heroes from Second Serbian Uprising. Ruins of Ortodox monasteries "Ješevac", Catholic church "Misa" (later mosque) on Rudnik. Ruins of Irene Kantakouzene on Treska Hill. Family house of Miloš Obrenović in Gornja Crnuća. Family house of national hero Dragan Jeftić-Škepo. Family house of the Lunjevica family (Revolutionary Nikola, politician Panta and Queen consort Draga Obrenović). Family house of Djordjevic built in old Serbian architectal style. Family house and inheritance of Archibald Reiss's son- "Dobro polje II". Monument on city cemetery of fallen soldiers of Austro-Hungary and Serbian Army in World War I. Monument for the participants in Operation Halyard and the others monuments in the rest of municipality.. To the North, onto road Gornji Milanovac-Kragujevac (see Kragujevac) that crosses with E763 and turns East; the nearest village on the road is Donja Vrbava. To the East, turns South then East through the city, crosses E763 and then goes south through the village of Donja Trepča onto the route 23. To the South, towards E763. To the West, quickly turns North and after 5&nbsp;km (3.11&nbsp;mi)  branches into road Gornji Milanovac-Čestobrodica (see Čestobrodica) to the West; the nearest village on the road is Takovo, where Takovo Uprising begun; and into Road Gornji Milanovac – Donji Banjani (see Gornji Banjani) to the North; the nearest village on the road is Kalimanići; South of Milanovac, villages Brdjani to the West and Prislonica to the East are connected to E763 with local roads On the West and South side of municipalities is situated new highway A2 (Corridor XI) which is currently under the construction; this is the most primary project on the field of transport and turism in the future, because Gornji Milanovac good geographic position to the coast of Adriatic Sea. Brown acid soil-which is whidespread in areas like Rudnik, from the west of Gruza river to Boljkovci; Brown earth on serpentine-at Vujan, Suvobor and Maljen mountines; Cambisol-in region of Lipovac, Prnjavor, Donja Crnuca, Belo Polje; Brown earth on limestone- in area of Ravna Gora; Brown earth on diabase-in region of Belo Polje, Gornja Vrbava, Donja Vrbava, Grabovica, Jablanica, in some village area like Brezovica, Rudnik, Zagradje, Gornji Branetici, Donji Branetici and Ozrem. Mountain rims of the south piedmonts on Maljen, Suvobor and south-western on Rudnik, Central-valley basin are charasteristic on north-western parts and north of Ješevac and Vujan. Male- 21,802 (42.4 years) and Female- 22,604 (43.7 years). 329 Small business, 22 Medium size business, 9 Big business. Belo Polje Beršići Bogdanica Boljkovci Brajići Brdjani Brezna Brezovica Brusnica Varnice Velereč Vrnčani Gojna Gora Gornja Vrbava Gornja Crnuća Gornji Banjani Gornji Branetići Gornji Milanovac, center Grabovica Davidovica Donja Vrbava Donja Crnuća Donji Branetići Dragolj Drenova Družetići Zagradje Jablanica Kalimanići Kamenica Klatičevo Koštunići Kriva Reka Leušići Lipovac Lozanj Ločevci Lunjevica Ljevaja Ljutovnica Majdan Mutanj Nakucani Nevade Ozrem Polom Pranjani Prnjavor Reljinci Rudnik Ručići Svračkovci Semedraž Sinoševići Srezojevci Takovo Teočin Trudelj Ugrinovci Cerova Šarani Šilopaj  Gmunden, Austria  Travnik, Bosnia and Herzegovina  Vlasenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina  Pleven, Bulgaria  Plovdiv, Bulgaria  Slavonska Požega, Croatia  Edessa, Greece  Bitola, Republic of Macedonia  Kavadarci, Republic of Macedonia  Staro Nagoričane, Republic of Macedonia  Strumica, Republic of Macedonia  Budva, Montenegro  Kotor, Montenegro  Mosjøen, Norway  Nowogard, Poland  Brăila, Romania  Herăști, Romania  Kamnik, Slovenia  Sežana, Slovenia  Slovenj Gradec, Slovenia  Bursa, Turkey Hadži-Prodan Gligorijević, Serbian military commander in First Serbian Uprising Jovan Žujović, anthropologist, a founder of geology in Serbia Mija Aleksić, Serbian actor Momčilo Nastasijević, a Serbian poet and novelist Uroš Petrović, literate Bjesovi, alternative rock band Čedomir Mirković, Serbian writer and editor Draga Mašin,  queen and wife of King Aleksandar Obrenović of the Kingdom of Serbia Ljubica Vukomanović, Princess consort of the Principality of Serbia, wife of Miloš Obrenović Jelena Abbou, née Jelena Djordjevic Fitness and figure competition Dragan Todorović, Serbian politician and president of political party "Istočna alternativa (East Alternative)" Milomir Marić, Serbian journalist, writer, and television presenter Bojan Dimitrijević , Serbian politician and ex-minister of Trade, Tourism and Services in Serbian government Dragiša Vasić, Serbian and Yugoslavian lawyer, writer, publicist, soldier Arsenije Loma, Serbian duke during the First and Second Serbian Uprising of the Serbian revolution Ljubica Otašević, Serbian and Yugoslavian actor and women basketball player Čedomir Mirković,  writer and critic Uroš Petrović, poet Dobrica Matković, chief of the Royal Department for State Protection and Ban of Danube Official site GM032.net Internet Portal of the Municipality of Gornji Milanovac Tourist Organisation of the Municipality of Gornji Milanovac Weather forecast for Gornji Milanovac
