   Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land is a nine-county metropolitan area defined by the Office of Management and Budget. It is located along the Gulf&nbsp;Coast region in the U.S. state of Texas. The metropolitan area is colloquially referred to as "Greater&nbsp;Houston" and is situated in . Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land is the fifth-largest metropolitan area in the United&nbsp;States and the second-largest in Texas with a population of 6,490,180, as of U.S. Census Bureau's July 1, 2010 estimates.Ura, Alexa. Texas Counties, Metros Among Fastest-Growing in U.S., Texas Tribune, March 26, 2015 The population of the metropolitan area is centered in the city of Houston—the largest economic and cultural center of the , with a population of 2.1&nbsp;million.[ ]  Houston is among the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in the United States. The Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land metro area was the fastest growing metro area numerically during the 2013-2014 census year, with 156,371 people added  The area grew 25.2% between the 1990 and 2000 censuses—adding more than 950,000 people—while the nation's population increased 13.2% over the same period. From 2000 to 2007, the area grew by 912,994 people.Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX Metropolitan Statistical Area (CBSA) Population and Components of Change From 2000 to 2030, the metropolitan area is projected by Woods & Poole Economics to rank fifth in the nation in population growth—adding 2.66&nbsp;million people.[ ] In 2009, Milken Institute/Greenstreet Real Estate Partners ranked the then-named Houston–Sugar&nbsp;Land–Baytown MSA as the fifth-best performing metropolitan area; the Houston area had moved up 11 spaces from the previous year's ranking."Houston makes best-performing city list." Houston Business Journal. Wednesday November 11, 2009. Retrieved on November 11, 2009. It is a part of the Texas Triangle megapolitan area.   According to the United States Census Bureau, the Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan statistical area has a total area of 10,062 square miles (26,060&nbsp;km²),  is land area, while  is water area, slightly smaller than Massachusetts and slightly larger than New Jersey.City of Houston eGovernment Center The OMB lumps the Houston-The Woodlands-Sugarland MSA with four micropolitan statistical areas to form the Houston-The Woodlands, TX Combined Statistical Area.: Bay City, Brenham, El Campo, and Huntsville. The metropolitan area is located in the Gulf Coastal Plains biome, and its vegetation is classified as temperate grassland. Much of the metro area was built on forested land, marshes, swamp, or prairie—all of which can still be seen in surrounding areas. Much of the Houston metropolitan area is very flat, making flooding a recurring problem for some areas. Underpinning Houston's land surface are unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands up to several miles deep. The region's geology developed from stream deposits formed from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains. These sediments consist of a series of sands and clays deposited on decaying organic matter that, over time, transformed into oil and natural gas. Beneath these tiers is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt. The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward. As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into dome shapes, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands. This thick, rich soil also provides a good environment for rice farming in suburban outskirts into which the city continues to grow near Katy. Evidence of past rice farming is even still evident in developed areas as an abundance of rich, dark, loamy top soil exists. The Houston region is generally earthquake-free. While the city of Houston contains over 150 active surface faults (some have estimated as many as 300 active faults)al.pdf Mapping Active Faults in the Houston area Using LIDAR. Richard Engelkeimer, Shuhab Khan, Carl Norman. University of Houston. with an aggregate length of up to 310 miles (500&nbsp;km),Faults in Parts of North-Central and Western Houston Metropolitan Area, Texas. Earl R. Verbeek, Karl W. Ratzlaff, Uel S. Clanton. U.S. Geological Survey.Principal Active Faults. Houston Area, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1984. the clay below the surface precludes the buildup of friction that produces ground-shaking in earthquakes. These faults generally move at a smooth rate in what is termed "fault creep".   As defined by the Office of Management and Budget, the metropolitan area of Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land encompasses nine counties in Texas. They are listed below with population figures as of the 2010 U.S. Census.U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 to 2007 Population Estimates[ ]  Five "principal" communities are designated within Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area.  The Woodlands is a CDP; the rest are cities: As of 2011 Greater Houston has four of Texas's ten wealthiest communities, which include the wealthiest community, Hunters Creek Village, the fourth-wealthiest community, Bunker Hill Village, the fifth-wealthiest community, West University Place, and the sixth-wealthiest community, Piney Point Village."Houston holds some of Texas’ most wealthy communities." Houston Business Journal. September 13, 2011. Retrieved on September 20, 2011.  Among the ten most populous metropolitan areas in the U.S., Houston ranked first in employment growth rate and second in nominal employment growth.Microsoft Word – 10A W001 Employment Comparisons.doc In 2006, the Houston metropolitan area ranked first in Texas and third in the U.S. within the category of "Best Places for Business and Careers" by Forbes. The Houston–The Woodlands-Sugar Land MSA's gross metropolitan product (GMP) in 2005 was $308.7&nbsp;billion, up 5.4% from 2004 in constant dollars—slightly larger than Austria's gross domestic product. By 2012, the GMP has risen to $449&nbsp;billion, the fourth-largest of any metropolitan area in the United States.[ ] Only 26 nations other than the United States have a GDP exceeding Houston's GAP. Mining, which in Houston is almost entirely oil and gas exploration and production, accounts for 11% of Houston's GAP—down from 21% as recently as 1985. The reduced role of oil and gas in Houston's GAP reflects the rapid growth of other sectors—such as engineering services, health services, and manufacturing. The area's economic activity is centered in Houston, the county seat of Harris&nbsp;County. Houston is second to New York City in Fortune 500 headquarters. The city has attempted to build a banking industry, but the companies originally started in Houston have since merged with other companies nationwide. Banking, however, is still vital to the region. Galveston Bay and the Buffalo Bayou together form one of the most important shipping hubs in the world. The Port of Houston, the Port of Texas City, and the Port of Galveston are all major seaports located in this Greater Houston area. Texas State Historical Association. The area is also one of the leading centers of the energy industry, particularly petroleum processing, and many companies have large operations in this region. Texas State Historical Association. The metropolitan area also comprises the largest petrochemical manufacturing area in the world, including for synthetic rubber, insecticides, and fertilizers.Weisman (2007), p. 132. The area is also the world's leading center for building oilfield equipment. The region is also a major center of biomedical research, aeronautics, and high technology. Texas State Historical Association. Much of the metro area's success as a petrochemical complex is enabled by its busy man-made ship channel, the Houston Ship Channel.  Because of these economic trades, many residents have moved to the Houston area from other U.S. states, as well as hundreds of countries worldwide. Unlike most places, where high fuel prices are seen as harmful to the economy, they are generally seen as beneficial for Houston, as many are employed in the energy industry. Baytown, Pasadena/La Porte, and Texas City have some of the area's largest petroleum/petrochemical plants, though major operations can be found in Houston, Anahuac, Clute, and other communities. Galveston has the largest cruise ship terminal in Texas (and the 12th-largest in the world). The island, as well the Clear Lake Area, are major recreation and tourism areas in the region.  Houston is home to the Texas Medical Center—the largest medical center in the world.Houston Texas Medical Center | Greater Houston Partnership Galveston is home to one of only two national biocontainment laboratories in the United States.University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston National Laboratory – Home Page  The University of Houston System's annual impact on the Houston-area's economy equates to that of a major corporation: $1.1&nbsp;billion in new funds attracted annually to the Houston area, $3.13&nbsp;billion in total economic benefit, and 24,000 local jobs generated. This is in addition to the 12,500 new graduates the UH&nbsp;System produces every year who enter the workforce in Houston and throughout Texas. These degree-holders tend to stay in Houston; after five years, 80.5% of graduates are still living and working in the region. Sugar Land is home to the second-largest economic activities and third-largest city in the metropolitan area. Sugar Land has the most important economic center in Fort Bend County. The city holds the Imperial Sugar (its namesake), Nalco Champion, and Western Airways headquarters. Engineering firms and other related industries have managed to take the place as an economic engine. Greater Houston is home to five NCAA Division I programs, with four located within Houston proper. The University of Houston and Rice University play in Division I (FBS).http://www.deseretnews.com/article/695207634/H-E-L-P-Is-it-1-AA-FBS-FCS-or-LOL.html The University of Houston plays in the American Athletic Conference, while Rice belongs to Conference USA. Both schools were once part of the Southwest Conference. Texas Southern University, which is a member of the Southwestern Athletic Conference, plays in Division I (FCS). Houston Baptist University currently plays in Division I (FCS), mainly in the Southland Conference.http://www.hbuhuskies.com/news/2011/11/21/GEN_1121110809.aspx Rice and Houston Baptist are widely noted for their student-athlete graduation rates, which number at 91% for Rice (tied for highest in the nation according to a 2002 Sports Illustrated issue on best college sports programs) and 80% for HBU. Houston is or has been home to various nationally known sporting events. The most notable is the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, which is the world's largest livestock exhibition and rodeo event. Other events of importance on greater Houston include the Shell Houston Open (a PGA Tour event), the U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships (ATP tour), the Houston Marathon, and the Texas Bowl college football bowl game. Houston has also played host to two Super Bowls (VIII) and (XXXVIII), the 1968, 1986, and 2004 MLB All-Star Games, the 2005 World Series, and the 1989 and 2006 NBA All-Star Games. Houston has also played host to various high school and college sporting events, including the Big 12 Championship Game and hosted the 2011 NCAA Men's Final Four, 2010 NCAA Men's Regional Finals, and 2010 MLS All-Star Game. Houston was also considered a candidate for the 2012 and 2016 Olympic Games. Houston's concentration of consular offices ranks third in the nation and first in the South, with 90 countries represented. Houston has a sizable Hispanic community. CNN/Money and Money magazine have recognized cities in the Greater Houston area the past three years as part of its 100 Best Places to Live in the United States. In 2005, Sugar Land, southwest of Houston in northeast Fort Bend County, was ranked 46th in the nation, and one of only three Texas cities among the Top 100. In 2006, the magazine recognized Sugar Land again, this time as the third-best city on its list. Also making the 2006 list were League City (65th) in northern Galveston County and The Woodlands (73rd) in southern Montgomery County. In 2007, another Houston suburb, Friendswood, made the list ranked 51st in the nation. The 2006 list only includes cities with at least 50,000 residents, and the 2007 list contains only cities with less than 50,000 residents. Greater Houston is widely noted for its ethnic diversity and strong international community. In its 2010 publication "Urban Elite",http://www.atkearney.com/images/global/pdf/Urban_Elite-GCI_2010.pdf A.T. Kearney added the city to their list of the 65 most important world cities and ranks Houston 35th, as "...a magnet for a diverse population and business services...". The Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network ranks Houston as a Beta- World City, "an important world city instrumental to linking their region or state to the world economy."  Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area is served by a public television station and two public radio stations. KUHT (HoustonPBS) is a PBS member station and is the first public television station in the United&nbsp;States. Houston Public Radio is listener-funded radio and comprises two NPR member stations: KUHF (KUHF News) and KUHA (Classical 91.7).  The University of Houston System owns and holds broadcasting licenses to KUHT, KUHF, and KUHA. The stations broadcast from the Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting, located on the campus of the University of Houston. The Houston area is served by the Houston Chronicle, its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. The Hearst Corporation, which owns and operates the Houston Chronicle, bought the assets of the Houston Post—its long-time rival and main competition—when Houston Post ceased operations in 1995. The Houston Post was owned by the family of former Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby of Houston. The only other major publication to serve the city is the Houston Press—a free alternative weekly with a weekly readership of more than 300,000. The Galveston County Daily News, founded in 1842, is that city's primary newspaper and the oldest continuously printed newspaper in Texas. It currently serves as the newspaper of record for Galveston, as well as Galveston County. Radio station KGBC, on air since 1947, has also served as a local media outlet.    Five separate and distinct state universities are located within Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area. The University of Houston is a nationally recognized Tier&nbsp;One research university, and is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System. The third-largest university in Texas, the University of Houston has nearly 40,000 students on its 667-acre campus in southeast Houston. The University of Houston–Clear&nbsp;Lake and the University of Houston–Downtown are stand-aloneuniversities; they are not branch campuses of the University of Houston. The metropolitan area is home to two historically black colleges and universities: Texas Southern University and Prairie View A&M University. The University of Texas Medical Branch and Texas A&M University at Galveston, a branch campus of Texas A&M University, are located in Galveston. Several private institutions of higher learning—ranging from liberal arts colleges to a nationally recognized research university—are located within the metropolitan area. The University of St. Thomas is a Catholic institution known for small classes (an average of 14 students per class). Houston Baptist University, located in the Sharpstown area, was founded in 1960. Rice University is one of the leading teaching and research universities of the United States and ranked the nation's 17th-best overall university by U.S. News & World Report. Three community college districts exist with campuses in and around Houston. The Houston Community College System serves most of Houston. The northwestern through northeastern parts of the metropolitan area are served by various campuses of the Lone Star College System, while the southeastern portion of the city and some surrounding areas are served by San Jacinto College. Eastern portions of the area and small sections of the city are served by Lee College. Portions of Fort Bend County are served by Wharton County Junior College. Portions of Galveston County are served by College of the Mainland and Galveston College. Portions of Brazoria County are served by Alvin Community College and Brazosport College. Blinn College serves portions of Austin County. The Houston Community College and Lone Star College systems are within the 10 largest institutions of higher learning in the United&nbsp;States.   Houston’s freeway system includes  of freeways and expressways in the 10-county metro area. The State of Texas plans to spend $65&nbsp;billion on Houston area highways by 2025. Houston freeways are heavily traveled and often under construction to meet the demands of continuing growth. The Greater Houston area has a hub-and-spoke freeway structure with multiple loops. The innermost is Interstate 610, forming a roughly -diameter loop around downtown. The nearly square Loop 610 is quartered into "North Loop", "South Loop", "West Loop", and "East Loop". The roads of Beltway 8 and their freeway core, the Sam Houston Tollway, are the next loop, at a diameter around . A proposed highway project, State Highway 99 (the Grand Parkway), would form a third loop outside of Houston. Currently, a completed portion of State Highway 99 runs from U.S. Highway 290, northwest of Houston, to U.S. Highway 59 in Sugar Land, southwest of Houston, and was completed in 2013. Another segment of State Highway 99 from Interstate 10 south to Farm-to-Market Road 1405 in Chambers County was completed in 2008. The next portion to be constructed is from the current terminus at U.S. Highway 290 to U.S. Highway 59 in Montgomery County. Freeways also include the Westpark Tollway, which runs from U.S. Hwy 59 to Texas Hwy 99 and the Fort Bend Parkway, which runs from U.S. Hwy 90-A to Texas Hwy 6 in Missouri City. A new interstate, Interstate 69, will start at the Mexican border, go through the Greater Houston area, and continue on to Michigan at the Canadian border. About 35 miles of Interstate 69 have been completed in the Greater Houston area.  The Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County, Texas, or METRO, provides public transportation in the form of buses, trolleys, and lift vans. METRO began running light rail service (METRORail) on January 1, 2004. Currently, the track is rather short — about 12.8 miles (20.6&nbsp;km) from Northline Transit Center Station through downtown Houston to the Texas Medical Center and Reliant Park. Still, the Red Line is traveled by about 45,000 people daily, giving it the second-highest ridership per track mile in the nation. METRO's various forms of public transportation still do not connect many of the suburbs to the greater city, causing Houstonians to rely on the automobile as a primary source of transportation. Prior to the opening of METRORail, Houston was the largest city in the United States without a rail transit system by a very large margin. Following a successful referendum held locally in 2004, METRO is currently in the beginning design phases of a 10-year expansion plan to add five more sections to connect to the current rail system. An 8.3-mile (13.4-km) expansion has been approved to run the service from Uptown through Texas Southern University, ending at the University of Houston campus.   Houston's largest airport (and Texas's second-largest), George Bush Intercontinental Airport, is located in north Houston. Continental Airlines was headquartered in downtown Houston. The southeast of Houston has William P. Hobby Airport, the second-largest commercial passenger airport. Houston's third-largest airport is Ellington Field, which houses several National Guard and Air National Guard units, as well as a United States Coast Guard air station and the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center's fleet of jets that are used to train astronauts. Sugar Land has the Sugar Land Regional Airport, which is the fourth-largest airport in the metropolitan area. Both Sugar Land Regional and Ellington Field serve as reliever airports for the Houston Airport System. Amtrak provides intercity rail service to the Houston station.Houston Amtrak Station Greyhound Bus Lines operates services from three bus stations in the City of Houston: In addition, Greyhound operates services from two stopshttp://www.greyhound.com/scripts/en/TicketCenter/locations.asp?state=tx Greyhound also operates services to stops within other cities in the Greater Houston area, including: Three Megabus stations additionally serve the Houston area:  Politically, the Greater Houston area has historically been divided between areas of strength of the Republican and Democratic parties.Election result maps The city of Houston has historically voted Democratic except for its affluent western and west-central portions, including the River Oaks, Westchase, Memorial, and Uptown areas, as well as the Kingwood and Clear Lake City master-planned communities on Houston's far northeast and southeast sides, respectively. All these areas, populated mostly by wealthy WASPS, favor and are almost entirely represented both in Congress and in the Texas Legislature by Republicans. Democrats' strongest areas are within Loop 610, and in the largely poor and minority northern, eastern, and southern portions of Houston. Most of these areas have sizable Hispanic populations, though some northern and southern parts of the city have mostly notable African American communities. Democrats are also stronger in the more liberal Neartown area, which is home to a large artist and LGBT community, and Alief, which houses a sizable Asian American population. In 2008, almost every county in the region voted for Republican John McCain; only Harris County was won by Democratic candidate Barack Obama, by a small margin (51%–49%). Galveston has long been a staunch Democratic stronghold, with the most active Democratic county establishment in the state.:: The Galveston County Democratic Party Online – www.DemocratsWin.com :: Houston's suburbs are also politically divided. Such examples:    Club Sport Founded League Venue Houston Astros Baseball 1962 MLB Minute Maid Park Houston Rockets Basketball 1967 NBA Toyota Center Houston Texans Football 2002 NFL NRG Stadium Houston Dash Women's soccer 2014 NWSL BBVA Compass Stadium Houston Dynamo Soccer 2005 MLS BBVA Compass Stadium Club Sport Founded League Venue Sugar Land Skeeters Baseball 2010 ALPB Constellation Field Houston Energy Football 2001 WPFL The Rig Houston Red Storm Basketball 2006 ABA John H. Reagan HS Galveston Tidalwave Football 2008 IIFA Galveston Island Convention Center Houston Aces Women's soccer 2012 WPSL Carl Lewis Stadium Houston Dutch Lions Soccer 2011 PDL HDLFC Soccer Complex School Founded Nickname Conference University of Houston 1927 Houston Cougars American Athletic Conference Houston Baptist University 1960 Houston Baptist Huskies Southland Conference Prairie View A&M University 1876 Prairie View A&M Panthers Southwestern Athletic Conference Rice University 1912 Rice Owls Conference USA Texas Southern University 1927 Texas Southern Tigers Southwestern Athletic Conference Senators Name Party First Elected Level &nbsp; Senate Class 1 Ted Cruz Republican 2012 Junior Senator &nbsp; Senate Class 2 John Cornyn Republican 2002 Senior Senator Representatives Name Party First Elected Area(s) of Greater Houston Represented &nbsp; District 2 Ted Poe Republican 2004 Kingwood portion of Houston, Spring, northeast Harris County (including Baytown, Humble and La Porte), western and southern Liberty County &nbsp; District 7 John Culberson Republican 2000 West Houston, Memorial Villages, Bellaire, West University Place, west and northwest Harris County &nbsp; District 8 Kevin Brady Republican 1996 Montgomery and San Jacinto counties; northern Liberty County &nbsp; District 9 Al Green Democratic 2004 Alief, Southwest Houston, Houston’s Southside, portions of Fort Bend County (Mission Bend, eastern portion of Stafford, northern and eastern portions of Missouri City, county’s entire share of Houston) &nbsp; District 10 Michael McCaul Republican 2004 Northwest Harris County; Austin and Waller counties; most of the Greater Katy area &nbsp; District 18 Sheila Jackson Lee Democratic 1994 Downtown Houston, Bush IAH, northwest and northeast Houston, inner portions of Houston’s Southside &nbsp; District 22 Pete Olson Republican 2008 most of Fort Bend County (Sugar Land, Rosenberg, the southern portion of Greater Katy, plus western and southern portions of Missouri City), northern Brazoria County (including Pearland), portions of Galveston County (La Marque), southern and central Pasadena, Deer Park) &nbsp; District 29 Gene Green Democratic 1992 East Houston, northern Pasadena, Galena Park, Channelview (all Harris County) &nbsp; District 36 Brian Babin Republican 2014 Southeastern and eastern parts of Harris County (including the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center) District Name Party First Elected Area(s) of Greater Houston Represented &nbsp; 3 Robert Nichols Republican 2006 Northern and western Montgomery County (including Conroe), San Jacinto County &nbsp; 4 Tommy Williams Republican 2003 Southern Montgomery County (including The Woodlands), Kingwood, Liberty County, Chambers County, far eastern portions of Baytown &nbsp; 6 Sylvia R. Garcia Democratic 2013 (special election) Houston Ship Channel, eastern portions of Houston, Jacinto City, Galena Park, northern Pasadena, western portion of Baytown &nbsp; 7 Dan Patrick Republican 2007 Memorial Villages, Memorial/Spring Branch area, Addicks Reservoir, Northwest Harris County &nbsp; 11 Mike Jackson Republican 1999 Northern and central Brazoria County, southeastern portions of Houston and Harris County, the Galveston County mainland, and all areas roughly north of SH 87 on Galveston Island. &nbsp; 13 Rodney Ellis Democratic 1990 Downtown Houston, Texas Medical Center, southwest and northeast Houston, Houston’s Southside, northern portions of Missouri City, Stafford &nbsp; 15 John Whitmire Democratic 1983 Northwest Houston, Bush IAH, southern portion of Humble, eastern Harris County &nbsp; 17 Joan Huffman Republican 2008 Meyerland, Bellaire, West University Place, much of Katy area, far west Houston, Barker Reservoir, portions of Fort Bend County (Sugar Land and southern Missouri City) southern Brazoria County, the area of Galveston Island south of SH 87, entire Bolivar Peninsula, and Port Arthur. &nbsp; 18 Glenn Hegar Republican 2006 Austin, Waller and Wharton counties; western Fort Bend County District Name Party First Elected Area(s) of Greater Houston Represented &nbsp; 12 Jim McReynolds Democratic 1996 San Jacinto County &nbsp; 13 Lois Kolkhorst Republican 2000 Austin County &nbsp; 15 Mark Keough Republican 2014 The Woodlands, southern Montgomery County &nbsp; 16 C. Brandon Creighton Republican 2006 Northern and central Montgomery County (including Conroe) &nbsp; 18 John Otto Republican 2004 Liberty County, southeastern Montgomery County &nbsp; 23 Craig Eiland Democratic 1994 Galveston, Texas City, Bolivar Peninsula, Chambers County &nbsp; 24 Larry Taylor Republican 2002 Hitchcock, La Marque, Santa Fe, Dickinson, League City, Friendswood (all in Galveston County) &nbsp; 25 Dennis Bonnen Republican 1996 Southern Brazoria County (Lake Jackson, Angleton, Freeport) &nbsp; 26 Charlie Howard Republican 1994 Sugar Land &nbsp; 27 Ron Reynolds Democratic 2010 Eastern Fort Bend County (including Rosenberg, most of Missouri City, county’s share of Houston) &nbsp; 28 John Zerwas Republican 2006 Wharton and Waller Counties, western Fort Bend County &nbsp; 29 Mike O'Day Republican 2007 Matagorda County, part of Brazoria County (Pearland, Alvin) &nbsp; 126 Patricia Harless Republican 2006 Champions/FM 1960 &nbsp; 127 Dan Huberty Republican 2011 Kingwood, Lake Houston, Crosby, Wallisville &nbsp; 128 Wayne Smith Republican 2002 East Harris County (Baytown, Deer Park, La Porte) &nbsp; 129 John Davis Republican 1998 Southeast Harris County (Clear Lake City Area, NASA Johnson Space Center) &nbsp; 130 Corbin Van Arsdale Republican 2002 Northwest Harris County (including Tomball and Cypress-Fairbanks areas) &nbsp; 131 Alma Allen Democratic 2004 Outer portions of Houston’s Southside &nbsp; 132 Bill Callegari Republican 2000 West Harris County (including county’s share of Katy and unincorporated western parts of the Katy area) &nbsp; 133 Jim Murphy Republican 2006 West Houston, western portion of Memorial/Spring Branch, part of the Energy Corridor &nbsp; 134 Ellen Cohen Democratic 2006 Inner western portions of Houston (including Meyerland, River Oaks and Memorial Park), Texas Medical Center, West University Place, Bellaire, Southside Place &nbsp; 135 Gary Elkins Republican 1994 Parts of northwest Harris County (including Jersey Village) and southeastern segments of the Champions/FM 1960 area &nbsp; 136 Beverly Woolley Republican 1994 Memorial Villages and surrounding areas &nbsp; 137 Scott Hochberg Democratic 1992 Southwest Houston (including Sharpstown, Westwood and Fondren Southwest) &nbsp; 138 Dwayne Bohac Republican 2002 Northwest Houston and parts of the Memorial/Spring Branch area north of I-10, Addicks Reservoir &nbsp; 139 Sylvester Turner Democratic 1988 North Houston and Aldine west of I-45 &nbsp; 140 Armando Walle Democratic 2008 North Houston and Aldine east of I-45 &nbsp; 141 Senfronia Thompson Democratic 1972 Northeast Houston, Bush IAH, Greenspoint, southern portion of Humble &nbsp; 142 Harold Dutton, Jr. Democratic 1984 East Houston, Northshore &nbsp; 143 Ana Hernandez Democratic 2005 (special election filling the unexpired term of Joe Moreno) East Houston within Loop 610, Houston Ship Channel, Galena Park, Jacinto City, northern Pasadena &nbsp; 144 Robert Talton Republican 1992 Southern Pasadena, far southeast Houston &nbsp; 145 Rick Noriega Democratic 1998 Inner southeastern portions of Houston (mainly east of I-45), South Houston (not part of the city of Houston) &nbsp; 146 Borris Miles Democratic 2006 Inner portions of Houston’s Southside &nbsp; 147 Garnet Coleman Democratic 1991 (special election filling the unexpired term of Larry Evans) Downtown Houston, inner southeastern portions of Houston (mainly west of I-45) &nbsp; 148 Jessica Farrar Democratic 1994 Northwest Houston mainly within Loop 610 (including Houston Heights) &nbsp; 149 Hubert Vo Democratic 2004 Far west Houston, Alief, unincorporated portions of Katy area east of Fry Rd, Barker Reservoir &nbsp; 150 Debbie Riddle Republican 2002 Northern Harris County (Spring, Klein, northern Humble) Harris County – 4,092,459 Fort Bend County – 585,375 Montgomery County – 455,746 Brazoria County – 313,166 Galveston County – 291,309 Liberty County – 75,643 Waller County – 43,205 Chambers County – 35,096 Austin County – 28,417 Houston – 2,242,193 The Woodlands - 109,679 Sugar Land – 80,704 Baytown – 70,330 Conroe – 71,592 Houston Greyhound Station at 2121 South Main StreetHouston Greyhound Station Americanos U.S. L.L.C. (Houston Southeast) at 7218 Harrisburg Blvd.Houston Southeast Greyhound Station Agencia Autobuses (Houston Southwest) at 6590 Southwest FreewayHouston Southwest Greyhound Station Houston Aau Houston (Amtrak station) Angleton (at Save Step Food Mart)Angleton Greyhound Station Baytown (at Baytown Travel Express)Baytown Greyhound Station Conroe (at Shell)Conroe Greyhound Station Katy (at Sunmart Texaco)Katy Greyhound Station Prairie View (at Unco Food Store)Prairie View Greyhound Station Rosenberg (at Shell-McDonalds)Rosenberg Greyhound Station Downtown - a parking lot located at 815 Pierce St across the street from METRO's Downtown Transit Center Northwest Houston - a Shell gas station located at 13250 FM 1960. Katy Mills Mall - at Entrance 5, 5000 Katy Mills Circle. Pasadena, which went for Barack Obama, is heavily Hispanic and lower-middle class on its north side, which favors Democrats, and slightly more affluent on its south side, which favors Republicans. A northwestern section of the city is represented by Democrat Ana Hernandez (District 143), while the city's central core, which contains most of its population, is represented by Republican Robert Talton (District 144). A small, largely unincorporated southeastern section of the city is represented by Republican John Davis (District 129), who also represents the NASA Johnson Space Center. Hernandez's district is also home to Galena Park and Jacinto City, which also have large Hispanic populations who favor Democrats. In Fort Bend County, southwest of Houston, Democrats are strongest in northern Missouri City and older sections of Rosenberg, which are home to large numbers of African American and Hispanic voters, while more affluent and white areas of the county, such as Sugar Land, Katy, and Sienna Plantation, are heavily Republican. These areas house sizable Asian American populations, many but not the majority are largely probusiness and favor Republicans, though a sizable community of Democratic business owners does exist among the area's Asian caucuses. In the 2008 election, John McCain won the county by 51% to 49%. Republicans control every county-wide elected office.. Montgomery County, north of Houston, is a Republican stronghold, supported by voters in affluent communities on Lake Conroe and in The Woodlands. Rural residents of the county, though primarily lower- and middle-class, tend to be very socially conservative and also have a substantial Republican following. However, the city of Conroe proper, the county seat, tends to lean Democratic. Although The Woodlands is home to many corporate transplants from Europe, Japan, Canada, and Australia, who tend to be of a more liberal persuasion, most of these people are not U.S. citizens, thus have little impact on the voting trends of the county. The mainland areas of Galveston County, north of Galveston Island, have also become increasingly divided on political issues. Democrats have a presence in La Marque and Texas City, both of which are home to large numbers of unionized refinery workers and African Americans, a traditionally Democratic voting bloc. However, Democrats' strength in this area is increasingly being superseded by newer developments in the northern areas of the county around Friendswood and League City that favor Republicans. Brazoria County, south of Houston, is heavily Republican, especially in rural areas and in central portions of the county, such as Manvel, Alvin, and Angleton. However, Democrats perform strongly in southern portions of the county such as Lake Jackson, Clute, and Freeport due to its large Hispanic population, as well as its large base of unionized refinery workers. Additionally, the northern areas of the county around fast-growing Pearland have recently become more moderate and even Democratic compared to the rest of the county due to its ethnic diversity, as well as large numbers of Northern and West Coast transplants. In Liberty County, east of Houston, Republicans are represented at the state and federal levels, and the county went strongly for John McCain in 2008. However, Democrats hold a near-monopoly in county politics, though in 2006, it elected a countywide Republican (the County Treasurer position) for the first time since Reconstruction. Chambers County, between Harris and Jefferson Counties, is one of the most Republican counties in the area. According to the Office of the Secretary of State, in 2008, Republicans carried all of the candidates except for one Democratic judge, who ran unopposed. The county went 75% for John McCain over Barack Obama. The same held true in 2010, when Republicans won all county-wide elections ranging from 71% to 91%. "Regional Growth Forecast 2035." (Archive) Houston-Galveston Area Council (H-GAC). August 2006. Greater Houston Partnership The Center for Houston's Future
