       Grimsby (or archaically Great Grimsby) is a large town and seaport situated on the South Bank of the Humber Estuary, in England, close to where it reaches the North Sea. The town was traditionally in Lincolnshire, until it was absorbed into the new county of Humberside in 1974. After the abolition of Humberside in 1996, the town was returned to Lincolnshire, and it now serves as the administrative centre of the North East Lincolnshire unitary authority. Grimsby developed as a major sea port on the east coast of England, hosting the largest fishing fleet in the world by the mid twentieth century. The fishing industry dramatically declined following the Cod Wars of the 1970s, and since then the town has battled with post-industrial decline. Since the 1990s the local council has encouraged food manufacturing, promoting the town as "Europe's food town". As one of the largest centres of population in Lincolnshire the Grimsby-Cleethorpes conurbation acts as the cultural, shopping and industrial centre for a large area of northern and eastern Lincolnshire.  The town was previously titled "Great Grimsby" to distinguish it from Little Grimsby, a village about 14&nbsp;miles (22&nbsp;km) to the south, near Louth. People from Grimsby are called Grimbarians; the term  (plural codheads) is also used jokingly or disparagingly, often with reference to Grimsby football supporters. The town had a population of 88,243 in 2011.http://www.citypopulation.de/php/uk-england-yorkshireandthehumber.php?cityid=E35001320 - City Population. Retrieved 10 December 2014. It is physically linked to and forms a conurbation with the adjoining town of Cleethorpes. Some 11,000 of its residents live in the village of Scartho, which was absorbed into Grimsby before 20th-century laws on the green belt were passed. All three areas come under the jurisdiction of the same unitary authority, North East Lincolnshire. It is close to the main terminus of the A180, which ends in Cleethorpes. 22 January is Great Grimsby Day. Grimsby lies in the national character areas of the Humber, and the Lincolnshire coast and Marshes and is predominantly low in topography. The town was historically settled on low-lying islands and raised areas of the Humber marsh, and subsequently expanded onto the surrounding marshes as they were drained. The town still has areas named East Marsh and West Marsh. The Lincolnshire Wolds are situated to the south west of the town, from  which the town's River Freshney rises. There is some archeological evidence of a small town of Roman workers sited in the area in the second century. Located on the River Haven, which flowed into the Humber, this provided an ideal location for ships to shelter from approaching storms. It was also well situated to exploit the rich fishing grounds in the North Sea. According to legend, Grimsby was first founded by Grim, a Danish fisherman. Grimsby was settled by Danes sometime in the 9th century AD. The name Grimsby originates from Grim's by, derived from the name Grim, the Danish "Viking," and the suffix -by being the Old Norse word for village. The legendary founding of Grimsby is described in Lay of Havelock the Dane, but historians consider this account to be myth. In Norse mythology, Grim (Mask) and Grimnir (Masked One) are names adopted by the deity Odin (Anglo-Saxon Woden) when travelling incognito amongst mortals, as in the short poem known as 'Grimnir's Sayings' (Grimnismal) in the Poetic Edda.Grimnir's Sayings (verses 46,49), The Poetic Edda The intended audience of the Havelock tale (recorded much later in the form of The Lay of Havelock the Dane) may have understood the fisherman Grim to be Odin in disguise. The Odinic name 'Grimr/Grim' occurs in many English placenames within the historical Danelaw and elsewhere in Britain, examples being the numerous earthworks named Grimsdyke.Mysterious Britain, Janet and Colin Bord, (1972) Garnstone Press Ltd., p. 88 As other British placenames containing the element Grim are explained as referring to Woden/Odin (e.g. Grimsbury, Grimspound, Grime's Graves, Grimsditch, Grimsworne), Grimsby is likely to have the same derivation. Grimsby is listed in the Domesday Book as having a population of around 200, a priest, a mill and a ferry. During the 12th century, Grimsby developed into a fishing and trading port, at one point ranking twelfth in importance to the Crown in terms of tax revenue. The town was granted its charter by King John in 1201. The first mayor was installed in 1202. Grimsby is noted in the Orkneyinga Saga in this Dróttkvætt stanza by the Viking Rǫgnvald Kali:   Grimsby does not have town walls. It was too small and was protected by the marshy land around it. However, the town did have a ditch. In medieval times, Grimsby had two parish churches, St Mary's and St James. Only St James, now known as Grimsby Minster, remains. St James is associated with a folk tale of an Imp who played tricks in the church and was turned into stone by an angel (a similar story is told for Lincoln Cathedral; see Lincoln Imp). In the mid-14th century, the town benefited from the generosity of Edmund de Grimsby, a local man who became a senior Crown official and judge in Ireland. In the 15th century, The Haven began to silt up, preventing ships in the Humber from docking. As a result, Grimsby entered a long period of decline which lasted until the late 18th century. By 1801, the population of Grimsby numbered 1,524, around the same size that it had been in the Middle Ages. The Grimsby Haven Company was formed by Act of Parliament in May 1796 (the Grimsby Haven Act) for the purpose of "widening, deepening, enlarging, altering and improving the Haven of the Town and Port of Great Grimsby". After dredging of The Haven and related improvement, in the early 19th century, the town grew rapidly as the port was revived. Grimsby's port boomed, importing iron, timber, wheat, hemp and flax. New docks were necessary to cope with the expansion. The Grimsby Docks Act of 1845 allowed the necessary building works. The arrival of the railway in 1848 made it easier to transport goods to and from the port to markets and farms. Coal mined in the South Yorkshire coal fields was brought by rail and exported through Grimsby. Rail links direct to London and the Billingsgate Fish Market allowed for fresh 'Grimsby Fish' to gain renown nationwide. The first true fish dock opened in Grimsby in 1856, and the town became a centre for the development of the commercial fishing industry. The Dock Tower was completed in 1851, followed by the Royal Dock in 1852. No.1 Fish Dock was completed in 1856, followed by No.2 Fish Dock in 1877. Alexandra Dock and Union Dock were completed in 1879. During this period, the fishing fleet was greatly expanded. In a rare reversal of the usual trends, large numbers of fishermen from the South-East and Devon travelled North to join the Grimsby fleet. Over 40% of these newcomers came from Barking in East London, and other Thames-side towns.  In 1857 there were 22 vessels in Grimsby. Six years later there were 112.Leslie Herman, Grimsby Fish Docks Centenary, 1956 The first two legitimate steam trawlers ever built in Great Britain were based in Grimsby. By 1900, a tenth of the fish consumed in the United Kingdom was landed at Grimsby, despite the many smaller coastal fishing ports and villages that also supplied the nation. The demand for fish in Grimsby grew to such an extent that, at its peak in the 1950s, Grimsby laid claim to the title of 'the largest fishing port in the world'."Grimsby", Enjoy England The population of Grimsby grew from 75,000 in 1901 to 92,000 by 1931.    But, the Great Depression and the restructuring of the fishing industry caused a severe decline in employment. The population was fairly stable for the rest of the 20th century.[ ]  The Royal Dock was used as the UK's largest base for minesweepers to patrol the North Sea. The Admiralty requisitioned numerous trawlers to serve as minesweepers for the Royal Naval Patrol Service. In many cases, their crew were ex-trawlermen, as well as men from the Royal Naval Reserve and Royal Navy volunteers. Trawlers would use the winches and warps from fishing operations to tow a paravane with a cutting jaw through the water in what was known as a 'sweep' to bring mines to the surface and allow for their removal. − The dangers faced by the 'Patrol Service' ensured that it lost more vessels than any other branch of the Royal Navy during the Second World War with 2385 lives lost.Brown, Jimmy, Harry Tate's Navy – One Man's Story of the Royal Naval Patrol Service, 1994 Grimsby’s Royal Naval Patrol Service veterans financed the construction of a memorial beside the Dock Tower to ensure that the bravery and sacrifice of their comrades is never forgotten. HMS Grimsby is a Sandown class minehunter (commissioned in 1999) currently in service in the Royal Navy. On 14 June 1943, an early morning air raid by the Luftwaffe dropped several 1,000&nbsp;kg bombs, 6,000 incendiary bombs and more than 3,000 Butterfly Bombs in the Grimsby area. Second World War bombing raids in Grimsby and Cleethorpes killed a total of 196 persons, 99 that night. In addition 184 people were seriously injured. The Butterfly Bombs, which littered the area, hampered fire-fighting crews trying to reach locations damaged by the incendiary bombs. The search for recovery of bodies continued for a month after the raid. Following the pressures placed on the industry during the Cod Wars, many Grimsby firms decided to cease trawling operations from the town. The sudden demise of the Grimsby fishing industry brought an end to a way of life and community that had lasted for generations. Huge numbers of men became redundant, highly skilled in jobs that no longer existed, and they struggled to find work ashore. As with the Ross Group, some firms concentrated on expanding industries within the town, such as food processing. Grimsby's trawling days are remembered through the artefacts and permanent exhibits at the town's Fishing Heritage Centre. The preserved 1950s trawler, Ross Tiger, is located here. Few fishing vessels still operate from Grimsby's docks, but the town maintains a substantial fish market important in Europe. Since the mid-1980s, the former Humber ferry, PS Lincoln Castle, has been moored in Alexandra Dock. She was used during this time as a pub\restaurant. Although her design and status as Britain's last coal-fired paddle steamer was unique, these operations no longer yielded a profit, and the ship was broken up in 2010. Berthed in the Alexandra Dock is the Ross Tiger, the last survivor of what was once the world's largest fleet of sidewinder trawlers. The town was described in The Daily Telegraph in 2001 as a town "subjected to...many crude developments over the past 30-odd years" and as a town which  "seemingly shuns the notion of heritage".  Redevelopment was planned as part of Yorkshire Forward's Renaissance Towns Programme; however Yorkshire Forward was abolished in 2012. In the early part of the 21st century the town faced the challenges of a post-industrial economy that was also affected by a decline in the fishing industry: the East Marsh ward of the town is the second most deprived in the country, according to the governmental statistics. Since May 2015 Melanie Onn (Labour) has been the Member of Parliament for the Great Grimsby constituency. Previously, veteran MP Austin Mitchell held the seat between 1977 and 2015.  Great Grimsby formed an ancient Borough in the North Riding of Lindsey.Vision of Britain – Great Grimsby It was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 and became a Municipal Borough in that year.Vision of Britain – Grimsby MB/CB (historic map) In 1889 a County Council was created for Lindsey, but Great Grimsby was outside its area of control and formed an independent County Borough in 1891. The Borough expanded to absorb the adjacent hamlet of Wellow (1889), also the neighbouring parishes of Clee-with-Weelsby (1889), Little Coates (1928), Scartho (1928), Weelsby (1928) and Great Coates (1968). It had its own police force until 1967 when it merged with the Lincolnshire force.A History of the Lincolnshire Branch – Chapter One – The First Ten Years In 1974, the County Borough was abolished and Great Grimsby was reconstituted (with the same boundaries) as the Grimsby non-metropolitan district in the new county of Humberside by the Local Government Act 1972. The district was renamed Great Grimsby in 1979. Local government in the area came under the review of the Local Government Commission for England and Humberside was abolished in 1996. The former area of the Great Grimsby district merged with that of Cleethorpes to form the unitary authority of North East Lincolnshire.The Humberside (Structural Change) Order 1995 SI 1995/600 The town does not have its own town council, instead there is a board of Charter Trustees. During 2007, in the struggle for identity, it was suggested that the district could be renamed to something like Great Grimsby and Cleethorpes to give a stronger indication of the towns the district consists of. This did not meet with favour among local residents, and the Council Leader dropped the idea a year later.North East Lincolnshire Council – Council to consult on possible name change Council Wards North East Lincolnshire Council has eight Council Wards within the area of Grimsby.   The main sectors of the  Grimsby economy are ports and logistics; food processing, specifically frozen foods and fish processing. To the east Cleethorpes has a tourist industry, and to the west, along the Humber bank to Immingham is large scale industrial activity, established from the 1950s onwards, focused on chemicals, and more recently (1990s) gas power electrical generation. Grimsby is strongly linked with the sea fishing industry, which once generated wealth for the town. At its peak in the 1950s, it was the largest and busiest fishing port in the world. As a result of the Cod Wars with Iceland, this industry has been in decline for many years. In 1970 around 400 trawlers were based in the port, by 2013 only 5 trawlers remain based there. By comparison, 15 vessels are used to maintain offshore wind farms in the North Sea. The town still has the largest fish market in the UK, but most of what is sold is now brought overland from other ports or Iceland via containerisation. Of the 18,000 tonnes of fresh fish sold in Grimsby fish market in 2012, almost 13,000 tonnes, mainly cod and haddock, came from Iceland. Today, Greater Grimsby is home to around 500 food-related companies, giving it one of the largest concentrations of food manufacturing, research, storage, and distribution in Europe. The local council has promoted the city as Europe's Food Town for nearly twenty years.North East Lincolnshire Council, "Regeneration Strategy 2006–2022" http://www.nelincs.gov.uk/NR/rdonlyres/5EE4CA3B-2A6E-4695-9FA9-3045AECDE78E/0/newhorizons.pdf In 1999, it was revealed that more pizzas were produced in the town than anywhere else in the world, including Italy.Grimsby nets a 'pizza' the action - BBC News. Retrieved 9 December 2014. Grimsby is recognised as the main centre of the UK fish-processing industry; 70% of the UK's fish processing industry is located there. In recent years, this expertise has led to diversification into all forms of frozen and chilled foods. The town is one of the largest centres of fish processing in Europe. More than 100 local companies are involved in fresh and frozen fish production, the largest of which is the Findus Group (see Lion Capital LLP), comprising Young's Seafood and Findus. Its corporate headquarters are in the town. Young's is a major employer in the area, with some 2,500 people based at its headquarters. From this base, Young’s has a global sourcing operation supplying 60 species from 30 countries."Youngs Seafood", website Traditional Grimsby smoked fish has been awarded a Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) in 2009 by the European Union. The traditional process uses overnight cold smoking using sawdust in tall chimneys, roughly  square and 10m high. Other major seafood companies include the Icelandic-owned Coldwater Seafood, employing more than 700 people across its sites in Grimsby; and Five Star Fish, a supplier of fish products to the UK foodservice market. The £5.6&nbsp;million Humber Seafood Institute[ ]  opened in 2008 and is the first of its kind in the UK. Backed by Yorkshire Forward, North East Lincolnshire Council, and the European Regional Development Fund, the HSI is managed by the local council. Tenants include the Seafish Industry Authority and Grimsby Institute and University Centre. Greater Grimsby is a European centre of excellence in the production of chilled prepared meals, and the area has the largest concentration of cold-storage facilities in Europe. The Port of Grimsby has been in use since the medieval period. The first enclosed dock, later known as the Old Dock was built in the 1790s by the Grimsby Haven Company. Major expansion came with the coming of the railways, and construction of the Royal Dock, Grimsby in the 1840s. A Fish Dock was added in 1857, and the fish docks expanded over the next 80 years, with Grimsby becoming a major fishing center. The Old dock was expanded to form Alexandra Dock in the 1880s. Fishing activities were reduced to a fraction of former levels in the second half of the twentieth century. The current port is a center for car import (and export), since 1975, handles general cargo, and has developed as a wind farm maintenance based in the early 21st century.  The award-winning Freshney Place Shopping CentreRoSPA Silver Award  in the heart of the town boasts over 70 stores, including Marks and Spencer, House of Fraser, and BHS. Constructed between 1967 and 1971 in a joint venture between the old Grimsby Borough Council and developers Hammerson's UK Ltd., it was known as the Riverhead Centre (so named as the development was adjacent to where the two local rivers, the Freshney and the Haven, meet). Victoria Street is the main shopping street. The Riverhead Centre development caused some controversy as it replaced old architecture with new, as was typical in the 1960s. It demolished much of the old town centre, including the historic Bull Ring (which is now where Wilkinson's, the Halifax Bank and the St James Hotel are based), and streets going back many centuries, including Flottergate (located at the present day entrance to Freshney Place between British Home Stores and the market), Brewery Street (located at the present-day entrance to Freshney Place between Barclays and the offices of the Cheltenham and Gloucester), and East St Mary's Gate (no trace remains). During this reconstruction, the ornate Victorian branch of the Midland Bank was demolished; a building of contemporary design was incorporated into the new shopping centre. In 1983 Marks and Spencer purchased the local department store Lawsons and Stockdale, whose frontage ran along Victoria Street; they demolished the building and constructed a new store, linked to the centre. In 1990 the council agreed to sell the surface parking area around the shopping centre to Hammerson's UK Ltd. The development owner and Humberside County Council, the highway authority, agreed to the sale of the area of Baxtergate, the road which ran to the rear of the shopping centre, between the shopping centre and the surface car park. Baxtergate was relocated alongside the River Freshney and became phase one of the Peaks Parkway. Hammerson's UK Ltd began a £100&nbsp;million redevelopment of the retail centre, doubling it in size. The expanded centre was covered in a glass roof. Two multi-storey car parks were constructed at each end of the centre; with this development, the old Top Town area of Grimsby was effectively privatised and roofed over. Stores are serviced at the first floor by ramps at the western end, which can accommodate even large vehicles.  The ramp also provides access to the car park on the roof of the indoor market, which is operated by the local council. Freshney Place won a design commendation in the Refurbishment Category of the 1993 BCSC awards.https://www.bdp.com/Documents/Publications/Places%20for%20Shopping%20by%20BDP.pdf  Other developments near the town centre include a new Tesco Extra (the second in the area); the Victoria Mills Retail Park off the Peaks Parkway A16, which is home to several chain stores, including Next and a B&Q Depot.  Unlike towns where shopping was built on the outskirts, these (and similar developments) were constructed in and around Grimsby's town centre. This keeps shopping in a compact area, making it easier for pedestrians and public transport users. Other major retailers include the supermarket chains Tesco, Marks & Spencers, Sainsbury's, Asda on Holles Street and Morrisons. The Morrisons store is located just outside the town boundary, in the parish of Laceby. It is known as Morrisons Cleethorpes. This anomalous name is derived from the period when the area was part of the now defunct Cleethorpes Borough. Most major supermarkets have expanded in the early 21st century, including Asda, and Tesco at Hewitts Circus (this store is technically in the neighbouring conurbation, Cleethorpes). Numerous local, independent stores operate in town, several at the Abbeygate Centre (off Bethlehem Street). Formerly the head office of local brewers, Hewitt Brothers, the building was renovated in the mid-1980s and is home to a number of restaurants and designer clothing stores. The town also has two markets, one next to Freshney Place and the other in Freeman Street (B1213). This was a dominant shopping area with close connections to the docks, but industry and demographic changes have caused it to struggle since the late 1970s. In March 2007, Henry Boot properties announced a new £30&nbsp;million shopping development adjacent to the existing Freshney Place site. The project will create  of retail space and 290-car parking places on land between the River Freshney and Sainsbury's, presently occupied by the former Travis Perkins builders' merchants. As of November 2011 no work has commenced on the proposed development. A further retail development is planned alongside the planned new stadium for Grimsby Town FC at Great Coates adjacent to the A180, scheduled for completion in mid-2010. As of November 2011 no work has commenced on the proposed development. Such is the quality of shopping in the area that bus services bring in shoppers from across Lincolnshire, especially from smaller towns such as Louth,http://www.stagecoachbus.com/GetUpload.ashx?Id=375 Brigg, and Scunthorpe.http://www.stagecoachbus.com/GetUpload.ashx?Id=2574   There are numerous primary schools in Grimsby. Secondary schools in Grimsby include Havelock Academy, Oasis Academy Wintringham and Ormiston Maritime Academy. Many pupils from the town also attend secondary education institutions in Cleethorpes, Healing, Humberston and Waltham, and further afield Caistor Grammar. Independent schools in Grimsby include St James' School and St Martin's Preparatory School. Franklin College is a sixth form college located in Grimsby, while the Grimsby Institute offers further and higher education courses mostly for vocational courses, the Institute achieves respectable examination results at all levels of adult education. The Institute has over recent years attracted a sizeable number of Chinese students to study business studies courses. Grimsby's bus service is provided by Stagecoach which took over the original Grimsby-Cleethorpes Transport in 1993. Grimsby-Cleethorpes Transport had been formed in 1957, with the merger of the previously separate Grimsby and Cleethorpes transport (GCT) undertakings. Stagecoach had all the buses resprayed to their standard livery to replace the buses previous colour-scheme of orange and white. Prior to this, the buses were painted blue and white until 1981, when the colours were changed to caramel and cream. The orange and white livery was introduced in 1987. Until 1982 GCT ran a mixture of crewed and one-person operated services. However, in that year the job of conductor was abolished and the company changed entirely to driver-only services. In 2005, Stagecoach bought out Lincolnshire Road Car, who provided buses to South Killingholme, Louth, Barton-upon-Humber and the Willows Estate. The company is now known as Stagecoach in Lincolnshire. Joint ticketing was allowed with Stagecoach Grimsby-Cleethorpes from May 2006. From September 2006, a new fleet of low-floor single-decker was introduced, making the fleet an unprecedented 85% low-floor. Grimsby also has rail links via Grimsby Town railway station and Grimsby Docks railway station. There is a level crossing in the centre of the town across Wellowgate. TransPennine Express provide direct trains to Manchester Airport via Doncaster and Sheffield whilst Northern Rail operate services to Barton-upon-Humber (for buses to Hull) and a Saturday only service to Sheffield via. Retford. Lincoln and Newark are served by East Midlands Trains services which can go on to Nottingham on Sunday in the summer months. The service to Cleethorpes runs at least hourly during the day, along a single track, passing stations at Grimsby Docks and New Clee. Grimsby was home to two tramway networks: the Grimsby District Light Railway and the Grimsby & Immingham Electric Railway. The Grimsby Electric was a normal gauge tramway opened in 1912 between Corporation Bridge at Grimsby and Immingham. There was no physical connection with the railway system. The tramway served the town with a passenger service between Grimsby and Immingham until closure in 1961. It is claimed that once this was controlled by the Corporation, they were more interested in supporting the motorbus service, now number&nbsp;45. The Grimsby Light Railway opened in 1881 using horse-drawn trams. In 1901, these were replaced with electric tramways. In 1925 the Grimsby Transport Company bought the tramway company and in 1927 moved the depot to the Victoria Street Depot, an old sea plane hangar. This system closed in 1937. The depot continues to be used by Stagecoach, though the old Grimsby Tramways livery is still visible on the front of the building. Operating in the area until the 1950s was a network of electrically operated trolley buses which received their power from overhead power lines.  west of Grimsby is Humberside Airport, which mainly caters for charter holidays, and is popular for general aviation, with five flying clubs based there.  The football team is Grimsby Town F.C., nicknamed 'The Mariners', who play in the National League. Their ground is Blundell Park in Cleethorpes. Due to the club's football ground being in the neighbouring town it is often joked by locals that it is the only British club that plays away every game. It is the oldest professional football team in the county of Lincolnshire (and one of the oldest in the country being formed in 1878 as Grimsby Pelham with a home ground on land off Ainslie Street, Grimsby). During the 1930s they played in the English First Division, then the highest level of the domestic game in England. They also appeared in two FA Cup semi-finals in the 30s, in 1936 (against Arsenal) and in 1939 (against Wolverhampton Wanderers). The latter semi-final was held at Old Trafford, Manchester, and the attendance (76,962) is still a record for that stadium. Grimsby Town were relegated on 7 May 2010 to the Football Conference, losing their status as a league club. They also reached the FA Cup quarter-finals in 1987 and in 1998 won the Auto Windscreens Shield and the second division play-off final. Notable former managers include Bill Shankly, Lawrie McMenemy and Alan Buckley. Blundell Park has the oldest stand in English professional football, the Main Stand. It was first opened in 1899 although only the present-day foundations date from this time. There have been plans to relocate the club to a new stadium, including one to move to land at the side of Peaks Parkway in Grimsby. Grimsby Borough F.C. is a football club established in 2003 and based in Grimsby. They are members of the Northern Counties East League Division One. An ice hockey club has been based in Grimsby since 1936. The current club has teams playing at different levels throughout the English Ice Hockey Association structure, all under the name of the Grimsby Red Wings. In 2009 the club added a Sledge Hockey team to ensure that it was able to offer a fully inclusive sport to the NE Lincolnshire area. The area has an amateur rugby union side, the Grimsby RUFC, and an amateur cricket side, the Grimsby Town Cricket Club, both of which attract reasonable levels of support. Tennis teams from local clubs have been successful in various inter-County competitions with the Men's Team from Grimsby Tennis Centre winning the Lincolnshire Doubles League again in 2005. Tennis players from the town represent the County on a regular basis at all age levels. Grimsby Tennis Centre underwent a major redevelopment of facilities in 2005 and is now entirely accessible to the disabled. The town had one of the largest table tennis leagues in the countryGrimsby & District Table Tennis League with over 120 teams competing during the 1970s, but, like the game of squash, the sport has declined in the town during recent years.  Aside from the nightclubs in nearby Cleethorpes, the town centre has undergone a renaissance in the last decade. A number of national pub chains have redeveloped or opened new outlets, including a specially-built complex at the Riverhead which is home to three (originally five) such operations. Prior to the late 1960s many public houses in the area were owned by the local brewer Hewitt Brothers and gave a distinctive local touch but following a takeover in 1969 by the brewer Bass-Charrington these have been re-badged (many times), closed or sold off. Musical entertainment is found at the Grimsby Auditorium, built in 1995, on Cromwell Road in Yarborough near Grimsby Leisure Centre. The smaller Caxton Theatre is on Cleethorpe Road (A180) in East Marsh near the docks. The Caxton Theatre provides entertainment by adults and youths in theatre. A notable theatre company in the area is the Class Act Theatre Company run by local playwright David Wrightam.. North East Lincolnshire Council has installed a Wi-Fi network covering Victoria Street in central Grimsby. The service provides access to the Internet for the general public on a yearly subscription. Grimsby is the site of a Blue Cross Animal Hospital, one of only four in the country; the other three are situated in London. The Grimsby hospital was previously in Cleethorpe Road, but in 2005 it moved to a new building called 'Coco Markus House' in Nelson Street. The Grimsby Telegraph, with an audited circulation of 40,533 copies (January – June 2004), has the highest circulation of a local newspaper in Grimsby and the surrounding area since it is the only daily newspaper. Its headquarters are on Cleethorpe Road next to the A180. The local radio stations are BBC Radio Humberside (which has a studio on Victoria Street manned by Lara King), Lincs FM, Viking FM and the exclusively North East Lincolnshire-based Compass FM. The transmitter for Compass FM and EMAP Humberside (Lincs FM DAB) is on top of a block of flats in East Marsh. Terrestrial television coverage based in the area are the BBC who share the radio facilities on Victoria Street and ITV Yorkshire who have a news unit based in Immingham. Estuary TV (formerly Channel 7 Television) broadcast on Freeview channel 8 and on Virgin Media channel 159 from studios based at the Grimsby Institute.  The Environment Agency has awarded Sheffield-based telemetry company CSE Seprol a contract to supply flood warning devices for risk areas in East Anglia. The 18 sirens, at various locations around the flood risk area of Grimsby and Cleethorpes, should reach 25,500 households to warn of portending floods. The sirens will be sounded only in the event of the Environment Agency issuing a severe flood warning for tidal flooding, or if there is a likelihood of the sea defences being breached. The sirens make a variety of sounds, from the traditional wailing sound to a voice message. Grimbarians (natives of Grimsby) were mainly born at the former Grimsby Maternity Hospital in Second Avenue, Nunsthorpe, Grimsby. Many Grimbarians were born at the now defunct Croft Baker Maternity Hospital in nearby Cleethorpes. Those born and/or brought up in the area include: People with a connection to the town Grimsby's twin cities include: As a port with extensive trading ties to Continental Europe, the Nordic nations and Baltic Europe, the town plays host to honorary consulates of Denmark, Iceland, and Norway. Swedish and Finnish honorary consulates are located in Immingham, and that of Germany at Barrow-upon-Humber. The people of Norway send a tree to the town of Grimsby every Christmas since the end of the Second World War. The Norwegian city of Trondheim sent a tree for 40 years until 2003, since then the tree has been donated by the northern Norwegian town of Sortland, and placed in the town's Riverhead Square. During redevelopment of Riverhead Square the tree was placed in the Old Market Place in 2013.       Freshney Ward Heneage Ward Scartho Ward South Ward East Marsh Ward Park Ward West Marsh Ward Yarborough Ward Corporation Bridge Fisherman's Memorial Grimsby Docks Grimsby Dock Tower Grimsby Ice Factory – built in 1898–1901 to provide crushed ice to preserve fish stored in ships at Grimsby's seaport Grimsby Institute Grimsby Marina Grimsby Minster Grimsby Town Hall Humber Forts National Fishing Heritage Centre Waltham Windmill Weelsby Woods Bernie Taupin, who lived in Humberston and Tealby (near Market Rasen) when in his teens, wrote the lyrics to Elton John's 1974 song, "Grimsby" in the Album "Caribou". The town has been used as a film location: Scartho Hospital (now Diana, Princess of Wales Hospital), and the Scartho Cemetery entrance, were used in the 1985 film Clockwise;"Clockwise (1986) Filming Locations", Internet Movie Database, Retrieved 30 November 2015 the 2006 film, This Is England  was partially set and filmed in Grimsby and other surrounding locations such as Nottingham; as was the television serial sequel, This is England 86, set in 1986.. Grimsby is an upcoming comedy film  starring Sacha Baron Cohen and Mark Strong. It is scheduled to be released by Columbia Pictures in 2016. The town was the setting for the second series of the Channel 4 documentary Skint in 2014. The programme follows families and individuals living with the "devastating effects of long-term unemployment". John Anderson (born 1936), Conservative politician and M.P. Shirley Bloomer (born 1934), winner of the French Open Singles and Doubles titles in 1957, and the French Open Mixed title in 1958. Kevin Clifton (born 1982), professional dancer who appears on the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing alongside his sister Joanne Clifton (see below). Joanne Clifton (born 1983), professional dancer on the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing as of 2014 Quentin Cooper, presenter of Radio 4's Material World, and film correspondent for BBC Radio 2 grew up in the town, attending Wintringham School Peter "Mars" Cowling – Bass player in the Pat Travers Band for many years. Steve Currie (1947 – 1981) bass player and long-term member of the English glam rock band T. Rex. Keeley Donovan, weather presenter for BBC North Michele Dotrice (born 1948), actor, Betty Spencer in the 1970s comedy Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em Arthur Drewry (1891-1961), Football administrator and businessman. Drewry was the chairman of Grimsby Town F.C., and later President of the Football League, Chairman of the Football Association, and President of FIFA Brenda Fisher (born 1927), cross-Channel and long-distance swimmer"Brenda Ready To Swim Anything Provided It's Made Worthwhile"; The Montreal Gazette, 15 August 1956. Retrieved 11 June 2012"60 years on, record-breaker Brenda recalls her race to British shores"; Grimsby Telegraph, 16 August 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2012"Brenda Fisher"; Solo Swims of Ontario Inc. Hall of Fame. Retrieved 11 June 2012 Helen Fospero, newsreader for Sky News and Five News Freddie Frinton (1909–1968), comedian, actor in 1960s BBC comedy Meet the Wife. Freddie Frith (born 1909) – former Grand Prix motorcycle racing world champion. Phil Gladwin (born 1963), television screenwriter, Warriors of Kudlak' Edmund de Grimsby, judge and clergyman, was born in Grimsby and probably died here in 1354. Dan Haigh (born 1981), bass guitarist in rock group Fightstar, was born and brought up in the town Patricia Hodge (born 1946), actor, Miranda, Rumpole of the Bailey and Jemima Shore Investigates. Her parents used to manage the Royal Hotel in the town. She attended Wintringham School in Grimsby. Ian Huntley (born 1974), Soham double child murderer, was born at Grimsby and lived there until the late 1990s. Madge Kendal (1848–1935), theatrical actor. Dame Kendal Grove, in Nunsthorpe, is named after her. Matt Kennard (born 1982), television actor, best known for starring n UK daytime drama Doctors, as nurse Archie Hallam. Duncan McKenzie (born 1950), footballer, Nottingham Forest, Leeds United and Everton. Amy Monkhouse (born 1979) lawn bowler. Darren Pattinson (born 1978), England Test cricketer, born in Grimsby Michael Pearce (born 1965), artist, born in Grimsby Julie Peasgood (born 1956), actor, Fran in soap opera Brookside, grew up in Grimsby and attended Wintringham School Matthew Stiff (born 1979), opera singer Thomas Turgoose (born 1992), actor notably This is England. John Whitgift (1530–1604), Archbishop of Canterbury under Queen Elizabeth I Patrick Wymark (1926–1970), actor. Wymark View was named after him. Numerous well-known snooker players come from the town, the best-known being Ray Edmonds (born 1936), Dean Reynolds (born 1963), Mike Hallett (born 1959), and Sean Storey (born 1971) John Hurt (born 1940) – actor, spent his formative years in the town while his father was a minister at St Aidan, Cleethorpes. Norman Lamont (born 1942), Conservative MP and former Chancellor of the Exchequer, was brought up in the town David Ross – businessman, co-founder of Carphone Warehouse was brought up in the town. Ernest Worrall (1898–1972), painter known for works depicting Grimsby during the Second World War, lived in the town from 1932 until the 1960s. Tromsø, Norway, since 1961 Bremerhaven, Germany, since February 1963 Banjul, The Gambia Dieppe, France Akureyri, Iceland. In 2007, a friendship and fisheries agreement was signed with Akureyri which according to Ice News, might lead to a twin cities designation in the future. Grimsby class sloops, in service from the 1930s until 1966. St Mary's Church, Grimsby
