       Gwalior () is a historic and major city in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh and one of the Counter-magnet cities. Located  south of Delhi the capital city of India, Gwalior occupies a strategic location in the Gird region of India. The city and its fortress have been ruled by several historic northern Indian kingdoms. From the Tomars in the 13th century, it was passed on to the Mughals, then to the Marathas in 1754 followed by the Scindias in 18th century. Besides being the administrative headquarters of Gwalior district and Gwalior division, Gwalior has many administrative offices of Chambal Division of northern Madhya Pradesh. Several administrative and judicial organizations, commissions and boards have their state, as well as national, headquarters situated in the city. Gwalior was the winter capital of the state of Madhya Bharat which later became a part of the larger state of Madhya Pradesh. Before Indian Independence on 15 August 1947, Gwalior remained a princely state of the British Raj with Scindias as the local ruler. High rocky hills surround the city from all sides, on the north it just forms the border of the Ganga- Yamuna Drainage Basin. The city however is situated in the valley between the hills. Gwalior's metropolitan area includes Lashkar Gwalior (Lashkar Subcity), Morar Gwalior (Morar Subcity), Thatipur and the city center. Gwalior was one of the major sites of rebellion during the 1857 uprising. Post-independence, Gwalior has emerged as an important tourist attraction in central India while many industries and administrative offices came up within the city. Before the end of the 20th century it became a million plus agglomeration and now it is a metropolitan city in central India. Gwalior is surrounded by industrial and commercial zones of neighbouring districts (Malanpur – Bhind, Banmor – Morena) on all three main directions. A 2014 report of the World Health Organization found Gwalior to be the third-most air-polluted city in the world. Gwalior has been selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under PM Narendra Modi's flagship Smart Cities Mission. http://www.firstpost.com/business/why-only-98-cities-instead-of-100-announced-all-questions-answered-about-smart-cities-project-2410576.html According to local tradition, Gwalior owes its name to a sage of former times. Suraj Sen, a prince of the gurjar-pratihar clan of the eighth century, is said to have lost his way in the forest. On a secluded hill, he met an old man, the sage Gwalipa, whose influence almost took him by surprise. Upon asking the sage for some drinking water, he was led to a pond, where the waters not only quenched his thirst but cured him of leprosy. Out of gratitude, the prince wished to offer the sage something in return, and the sage asked him to build a wall on the hill to protect the other sages from wild animals which often disturbed their yajnas (or pujas). Suraj Sen later built a palace inside the fort, which was named "Gwalior" after the sage, and eventually the city that grew around the fort took the same name.  After being founded by Maharaj Suraj Sen, Gwalior Fort saw many different rulers ruling the city and suburbs around it. Gwalior became a prominent place for religious practices, cultures and other disciplines coming up during that time in the country. During 6th century BC Gwalior was ruled by the Naad dynasty of Pataliputra. During the first century AD Gwalior came under Naga Dynasty.http://ruturaj.net/history-of-gwalior-ii/ From the carving found at Pawaya it has been discovered that the kushanas ruled the city till the 3rd century AD. After that it came under the Guptas till 467 AD. During the 5th century, The Kannauj of  Gurar-Pratihara Dynasty ruled Gwalior and played a prominent role in shaping its history. From 700–740 AD Gwalior (fondly called then as Gopal Giri) became the capital of Kannauj. A Magnificent Sun Temple was created at the fort hill during that period.  Later Kachwaha became the rulers of Gwalior. The Padavali Group of Monuments near Morena, Sahastrabahu Temple at the Fort, Kankadmad, were built under their rule. During 1195–96 Mahhamed Gauri invaded Gwalior and created a mass destruction with attempts to capture Gwalior. But he failed as the fort of Gwalior was unconquerable under the brave efforts of Parihars. In 1231 Itutmish captured Gwalior after an 11-month-long effort and from then till the 13th century it remained under Muslim Rule. In 1375, Raja Veer Singh was made the ruler of Gwalior and he founded the rule of the tomars in Gwalior. During those years, Gwalior saw its golden period. The Jain Sculptures at Gwalior Fort were built during Tomar's rule Raja Man Singh made his dream palace the Maan Mandir Palace which is now the centre of attraction of Gwalior Fort. Babur described this Palace as a pearl in the necklace of forts in India and said that not even the winds could touch its masts.The daily Light and Sound Show tells about the beautiful history of the Gwalior Fort and Man Mandir Palace. Later during the 1730s the Scindia Captured Gwalior and it remain a princely state during the British Rule. Ganesh temple at Gwalior Fort has the very first occurrence of zero as a written number in the world. By the 15th century, the city had a noted singing school which was attended by Tansen. Gwalior was ruled by the Mughals and then the Marathas.    Gwalior is also known for not participating in the 1857 rebellion, mainly due to non cooperation with Rani Lakshmibai. After Kalpi (Jhansi) fell into the hands of the British on 24May 1858, Lakshmibai sought shelter at Gwalior Fort. The Maharaja of Gwalior was not willing to give up his fort without a fight as he was a strong ally of the British, but after negotiations, his troops capitulated and the rebels took possession of the fort. The British wasted no time in attacking Gercest, the battle was fought by Lakshmibai, the bloodiest battle ever fought on Indian soil. Indian forces numbered around 20,000, and British forces around 1600 assisted by Maharaja of Gwalior troops. Lakshmibai's example is remembered to this day by Indian nationalists. She died fighting, and Gwalior was free from rebels. Tatya Tope and Rao Sahib escaped. Tatya Tope was later captured and hanged in April 1859. Scindia is a Maratha clan in India. This clan included rulers of the Gwalior State in the 18th and 19th centuries, collaborators of the colonial British government during the 19th and the 20th centuries until India became independent, and politicians in independent India. The Scindia state of Gwalior became a major regional power in the second half of the 18th century and figured prominently in the three Anglo-Maratha Wars. (Gwalior first fell to the British in 1780.) The Scindias held significant power over many of the Rajput states, and conquered the state of Ajmer. During the Indian Rebellion of 1857 the city was briefly held by rebel forces in 1858 until they were defeated by the British.Columbia-Lippincott Gazetteer, p. 740 The Scindia family ruled Gwalior until India's independence from the United Kingdom in 1947, when the Maharaja Jivajirao Scindia acceded to the Government of India. Gwalior was merged with a number of other princely states to become the new Indian state of Madhya Bharat. Jivajirao Scindia served as the state's rajpramukh, or appointed governor, from 28 May 1948 to 31 October 1956, when Madhya Bharat was merged into Madhya Pradesh. In 1962, Rajmata Vijayraje Scindia, the widow of Maharaja Jivajirao Scindia, was elected to the Lok Sabha, beginning the family's career in electoral politics. She was first a member of the Congress Party, and later became an influential member of the Bharatiya Janata Party. Her son, Maharaja Madhavrao Scindia was elected to the Lok Sabha in 1971 representing the Congress Party, and served until his death in 2001. His son, Jyotiraditya Scindia, also in the Congress Party, was elected to the seat formerly held by his father in 2004.   's India census, Gwalior has a population of 1,564,981. Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Gwalior has an average literacy rate of 87.20%, higher than the national average of 74%: male literacy is 90.85%, and female literacy is 78.82%. In Gwalior, 13% of the population is under 6 years of age. Hinduism is practised by the majority of the people in Gwalior (88.84%). Other religions practised include Islam (8.58%), Jainism (1.41%), Sikhism (0.56%) and Christianity (0.29). Hindi in its standard form is widely spoken in Gwalior. Marathi is the second biggest language of the city,spoken by the 20% of the population. There is strong Marathi influence in Gwalior due to Maratha Rule over the centuries. Gwalior is located at . in northern Madhya Pradesh 300&nbsp;km (186&nbsp;miles) from Delhi. It has an average elevation of 197&nbsp;metres (646&nbsp;feet). Most part of it comes under Bundelkhand area.  Gwalior has a sub-tropical climate with hot summers from late March to early July, the humid monsoon season from late June to early October, and a cool dry winter from early November to late February. Under Köppen's climate classification the city has a humid subtropical climate. The highest recorded temperature was 48&nbsp;°C and the lowest was −1&nbsp;°C. Summers start in late March, and along with other cities like Jaipur and Delhi, are among the hottest in India and the world. Temperatures peak in May and June with daily averages being around 33–35&nbsp;°C (93–95&nbsp;°F), and end in late June with the onset of the monsoon. Gwalior receives 900&nbsp;mm (35&nbsp;in) of rain on average per year, most of which is concentrated in the monsoon months from late June to early October. August is the wettest month with about 310&nbsp;mm (12&nbsp;in) of rain. Winter in Gwalior starts in late October, and is generally very mild with daily temperatures averaging in the 14–16&nbsp;°C (58–62&nbsp;°F) range, and mostly dry and sunny conditions. January is the coldest month with average lows in the 0&nbsp;°C range (32&nbsp;°F) and occasional cold snaps that plummet temperatures to close to freezing.  Gwalior Municipal Corporation is responsible for the civic infrastructure and administration of the city, which is divided into 66 wards. Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar is the Mayor of Gwalior Municipal Corporation from the Bharatiya Janata Party. Gwalior Municipal Corporation covers an area of  including the areas of Lashkar, Morar up to Deen Dayal Nagar (Gwalior Airport). The municipality was created on 6 June 1887 with two divisions for Lashkar and Morar, which later were merged with a single constitutional body. Gwalior is a major railway junction in Northern central region. The Gwalior Junction (Station code: GWL) is the part of the Jhansi division of the North Central Railways. Gwalior is one of the few places where both narrow gauge and broad gauge railways tracks are still operational.Gwalior is the terminus for the Longest narrow gauge route operational in the world, covering a distance of 198&nbsp;km from Gwalior Junction to Sheopur. Gwalior Junction is a five Railway Track intersection Point.Gwalior won the award of best and clean station of North central railway. 1. Goes to Agra (AGC), 2. Goes to Jhansi (JHS), 3. Goes to Shivpuri (SVPI), 4. Goes to Bhind (BIX), 5. Goes to Sheopur Kalan (SOE) on Narrow Gauge Line. Gwalior is one of the major commercial railway stations of the North Central Railway, whose zonal headquarters is centered in Allahabad. The station has won awards from Indian Railways for excellent clean infrastructure in 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1992. It is already in the Adrash Station Category of Indian Railways. The government has decided to build escalators at this station, and the construction has since started. Gwalior narrow gauge railway connects to the Kuno National Park in sheopur and it is the junction point to reach tourist destinations like Shivpuri, Dholpur and Bhind. Gwalior is on the Main train line between Delhi (Station Code: NDLS) and Mumbai (Bombay) (Station Code: CSTM) and between Delhi and Chennai (Station Code: MAS). Some trains starting here and travelling towards Eastern India via Gwalior Junction – Jhansi Junction, provide direct connections to points in Eastern India including Kolkata (Calcutta), Barauni, Varanasi, and Allahabad. There are about 50 trains to New Delhi and Agra every day, and around the same number of trains to Bhopal and Nagpur stations. However, fewer trains are available for long routes like Mumbai and Chennai.The luxury trains – the Maharaja Express and the India on Wheels – also stop at Gwalior on their week-long round trip of tourist destinations in Central India. Gwalior is fairly well-connected to other parts of Madhya Pradesh and India by national and state highways. The proposed North-south-Corridor of the Golden-Quadrilateral Highway project passes through the city. The Agra-Bombay national highway (NH3) passes through Gwalior, connecting it to Shivpuri on one end and Agra on the other. The city is connected to the Jhansi by the National Highway 75, towards the south of the city. The northern part of the city is connected to the holy city of Mathura via National Highway 3. There are bus services to and from all major and minor cities near Gwalior, including Bhopal, Agra, Delhi, Jabalpur, Jhansi, Bhind, Morena, Dholpur, Etawah, Datia, Jaipur, and Indore. Gwalior Airport , also called Rajmata Vijya Raje Scindia Vimantal, is the airport of Gwalior. It has an Indian Air Force Base which stations Mirage fighters. Gwalior's public transport system mainly consists of Tempos, auto rickshaw taxis, and micro-buses. Municipal Corporation's "Gwalior City Bus" covers some routes in the city. Blue Radio taxis are also available in Gwalior. The Tempos and auto rickshaws are often cited as a cause of pollution and road congestion, and the local government has plans to replace the Tempos with vans that will run on liquefied petroleum gas.  Recently, a 3&nbsp;km cycle track has been built in the city, and the city became the fourth in India to have this type of facility. The Gwalior Metro is the proposed project for Gwalior city. The project was announced by state CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan on October 17, 2014. Hence district administration is preparing DPR(Detailed Project Report) for The Gwalior Metro. Gwalior is a well acknowledged place of art, associated with historic as well as contemporary evidence. In August 2005 a mural created by Aasutosh Panigrahi and five other artists was acknowledged as the World's Largest Indoor Mural by Guinness World Records.http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/largest-indoor-mural Marathi Sahitya Sammelan, the conference on Marathi Literature was held in Gwalior in 1961. It was presided over by writer Kusumavati Deshpande (and wife of Kavi Anil). She was the first female president of the annual Sammelan since its inception in 1878. Culturally Gwalior is the confluence of two rich cultures Bundeli and Braj. Bundelkhand covers Gwalior, Bhind, Morena, Sagar, Shivpuri, Guna, Sheopur and adjoining areas. Raja Man Singh Tomar, the King of Gwalior between 1486–1516 AD, was a patron of Dhrupad. Drupad (Hindi: ध्रुपद) is a vocal genre in Hindustani classical music, said to be the oldest still in use in that musical tradition. Its name is derived from the words "dhruva" (fixed) and "pada" (words). The term may denote both the verse form of the poetry and the style in which it is sung.  Gwalior holds an unparalleled reputation in Sangeet and has retained Indian traditions and the wealth of music intact over the years. The Gwalior Gharana is one of the oldest Khayal Gharanas and the one to which most classical Indian musicians can trace the origin of their style. The rise of the Gwalior Gharana started with the reign of the great Mughal emperor Akbar (1542–1605). The favorite singers of this patron of the arts was Miyan Tansen. Tansen was first amongst the vocalists at the mughal court of Akbar and came from the town of Gwalior. Miyan Tansen, born in Behat, trained in music at Vrindavan, served Raja Ramchandra Waghela of Bandhawgarh, then went to Agra under the patronage of Akbar. An exponent of the Hindustani classical music's dhrupad style, he was counted among the Nine Jewels of the Royal Court.  After the death of Tansen in Fatehpur Sikri and cremation in Agra, his ashes were buried in Gwalior. In remembrance of this artist there is a tomb constructed in Gwalior called the Tansen Tomb. Tansen Festival started in the 1930s. At present, artists from all over the country come to perform in the festival. Baijnath Prasad (alias Baiju Bawra) was a classical singer (Dhrupadiya) who lived in Gwalior for his whole life under the patronage of Man Singh. Baiju was born in Chanderi and was cremated there. He received his musical training in Vrindaban under Swami Guru Haridas Ji. He was the court musician of Gwalior along with Nayak Charju, Bakshu, and others. Sarod player Amjad Ali Khan is also from the city of Gwalior. His grandfather, Ghulam Ali Khan Bangash, became a court musician in Gwalior.  Print media: There are number of newspapers, magazines, local TV stations and four FM Radio stations in Gwalior. SouLSteer Magazine is a bi-monthly lifestyle and automotive magazine in Gwalior. Patrika is the leading Newspaper and Dainik Bhaskar is one of the oldest and most widely read newspapers. Swadesh and Naidunia are other well established newspapers. More newspapers published in Gwalior are BPN Times, Raj Express, Dainik Madhya Raj, Nav Bharat,Youth Engine, Dainik Jagran, People's Samachar, Dainik Adityaz.Evening newspapers : Sandhya Samachaar,Gwalior Sandesh, Sudarshan. The radio industry has expanded with a number of private FM channels being introduced. The FM radio channels that broadcast in the city include  Big FM (92.7&nbsp;MHz), Chaska FM (95&nbsp;MHz), My FM (94.3&nbsp;MHz), and Lemon (91.9&nbsp;MHz). State-owned company, Doordarshan, transmits two terrestrial television channels. The city has local TV stations from various companies. Major local channels include Hathway Win, Harsh Networks, KMJ Communications, and DEN networks. Lakshmibai National University for Physical Education (operational since 1957) is one of the largest physical education institutions in the country.http://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/100%20Days%20Progress%20Report.pdf Gwalior also has the Railway Hockey Stadium with artificial turf. Roop Singh Stadium is a cricket ground with a capacity of 45,000. The stadium has hosted 10 One Day International (ODI) matches. Of the 10 matches played so far, the first one was played between India and West Indies on 22 January 1988. The ground has flood lights and has also hosted day-night encounters. One match of the 1996 Cricket World Cup was also played on this ground, between India and West Indies. Dhyan Chand was a famous hockey player from Gwalior. It was even told that he miraculously kept the ball stuck to his stick and was often referred to as a Jaadugar of Hockey. Ankit Sharma is a cricketer from Gwalior and playing in the Indian Premier League. Athletics is also played in this city, Vishal Kaim was the youngest hammer thrower of India when he participated in National Athletics Games in 2006 at the age of 14 years.  During last few years, Gwalior has been developed into a significant centre of education. It hosts many prominent government as well as private universities and institutions. Numerous colleges and universities are located in Gwalior including IIITM Gwalior, IITTM Gwalior, Jiwaji University, Raja ManSingh Tomar Music University, Scindia School, and JC Mills School, Birlanagar. There are five Kendriya Vidyalayas (Under Min. of HRD, GOI) named No. 1 through 5,several Engineering and Technological Institutes in Gwalior, India. More than 30 affiliated engineering colleges are within the city.  Gwalior is surrounded by 3 Industrial areas – Sitholi, Banmore and Malanpur. All three of these sectors are on NH 75, NH-3 and NH 92 respectively, with Malanpur being the largest. The city used to have big manufacturing industries, such as Gwalior Grasim and J.C. MILLS of Birlanagar, but now this sector is left with only one major factory – J.B.Mangharam Ltd. But the other 3 sectors have many industries. The important ones are from dairy, chemical, manufacturing, textiles, and other industries. Handicraft and small industries are also found like Gwalior potteries. Gwalior is also an important historical and tourism sector of the country. Therefore, the tourism sector also puts an effect into the city's economy. Gwalior is part of NCR. The Gwalior Trade Fair is an annual trade fair showcasing the economy of Gwalior. There are some manufacturing set-ups of some companies like UFlex (Flex Industries Ltd), SRF, Ranbaxy Laboratories, Cadbury, J. K. Tyres, Surya Bulbs, SiyaRam and Railway spring factory Sitholi.' Most of the Local population is involved with trading firms or are self-employed. Many run OMEs and SMEs with Gwalior and Agra as the local market. The city is scattered with coaching institutes and Educational institutions which provide employment to a large section of city's population. The old town of Gwalior, commonly called Kila Gate is around  from Hazira, the largest area in old town, which is of considerable size but irregularly built. It lies at the eastern base of the rock and contains the tomb of the Sufi saints, Khwaja Khanoon and Muhammad Ghaus, erected during the early part of Mughal emperor Akbar’s reign, and the tomb of Mian Tansen, a great singer and one of the 'Nine Jewels' of Akbar's court. A town called by his name Ghauspura situated near the tomb of Mohaommed Ghaus.reold town consisted of some streets and mohallas which are presumed to be 700 to 800 yrs old areas in gwalior which are still backward areas in gwalior due to improper management of new town. these old areas are as follows.  The name of Lashkar is a Persian word meaning 'army' or 'camp', as this was originally the camp, and later the permanent capital, of the Scindia dynasty of Gwalior state. Lashkar was the capital of Madhya Bharat from 1950 to 1956. Jayaji Chowk is the central focus of Lashkar, with a large square, a former opera house, banks, tea, coffee and juice stands and a municipal market building. Thriving bazaars surround the chowk. Many jewellery shops are situated near Jayaji Chowk, also known as Maharaj Bada. A source of water for the city is Tighra Dam, built on the Saank river 20&nbsp;km to the north. The Gajra Raja Medical College, founded in 1946 by the Maharaja Jiwaji Rao Scindia and the Maharani Vijayaraje Scindia, is situated in Lashkar on Palace Road, near Katora Taal, together with a group of many hospitals. Jai Vilas Palace, patterned on the French palace of Versailles, is located here. Morar Gwalior (Morar Subcity) formerly a separate town, lies  east of the old city. It was formerly a British military cantonment. Morar is generally considered a rural farming town. The area is known as the "green part" of Gwalior because much of the area is still rural. Morar was the scene of the most serious uprising in Central India. On 1 June 1858, Jayajirao led his forces to Morar to fight a rebel army led by Tatya Tope, Rani Lakshmibai and Rao Sahib. This army had 7,000 infantry, 4,000 cavalry and 12 guns while he had only 1,500 cavalry, his bodyguard of 600 men and 8 guns. In this attack, the rebel cavalry took the guns and most of the Gwalior forces except the bodyguard went over to the rebels (some deserted). The Maharaja and the remainder fled without stopping until they reached the British garrison at Agra.Edwardes, Michael (1975) Red Year. London: Sphere Books; p. 124 By 1900 it had become a centre for local trade and had an important training industry, with a population of 19,179 in 1901. One of the sun temples of India is situated in Morar at Residency Road. This Sun Temple was built by the Aditya Birla Trust. The cantonment area makes up a large area of Morar which contains official residences for the Indian Army. It has many canteens for Army personnel. Saint Paul's School and Pragati Vidyapeeth School are nearby. There is an air force base in the Pinto Park region. Thatipur is said to have got its name from State Army Unit 34, which once resided there. Gandhi Road divides Thatipur into two areas. Morar at one end of the road and Balwant Nagar on the other. It primarily consists of Residential areas as Darpan Colony, Madhav Rao Scindhiya Enclave, the government blocks, Vivek Nagar, and Suresh Nagar. Places of note are the Dwarikadhish Mandir, Bhagwan colony, Tomar building, Chauhan Pyaau(The Chauhan's family), Galla Kothar, Ramkrishna Aashram, Saraswati Nagar, Govindpuri, Gayatri Vihar, Shakti Vihar, Shakuntalapuri,Dushyant Nagar, Shanti Vihar, and Mayur market along with Sai Baba Mandir in Shakti Vihar Colony. The prominent hospitals of Gwalior include Gajara Raja Medical College and the associated J.A. Hospital, Kamla Raja Hospital, Sahara Hospital, Mascot Hospital, Birla Hospital, Cancer Hospital & Research Institute and many good private doctor clinics. The Cancer Hospital & Research Institute is a nationally acclaimed medical center in Oncology. There is also a charitable hospital named SATCH (Shri Anandpur Trust Charitable Hospital) which provides free treatment. There is a government Ayurvedic college and a private homoeopathic college (Vasundhara Raje Homoeopathic Medical College) which is run by the Biochemic and Homoeopathic Association of Gwalior, also providing health care education and services. The SADA Counter Magnet City, under the Indian urban development NCR plan, has been introduced to increase investment in education, industry and real estate. This is hoped to counteract the closing of manufacturers such as Hotline, Cimmco and Grasim Gwalior.The Gwalior Master PLAN launched by the local collector and municipal corporation initiates to improve the basic civic infrastructure of the city to meet the growing population of the city as well as to make the city beautiful for the tourists. Gwalior is the third largest city of Madhya Pradesh and it is the biggest city of North Madhya Pradesh.  At the heart of Gwalior is Gwalior Fort of the Tomara Dynasty. This formidable structure was reputed to be one of the most structurally sound forts of India, having been improved by Raja Man Singh Tomar where a previous structure existed. It occupies an isolated rock outcrop. The hill is steepened to make it virtually unscalable and is surrounded by high walls which enclose buildings from several periods. The old town of Gwalior lies at the eastern base of the fortress. Lashkar, founded by Daulat Rao Scindia, formerly a separate town that originated as a military camp, lies to the south, and Morar, also a formerly separate town, lies to the east. Gwalior, Lashkar and Morar are part of the Gwalior Municipal Corporation. The Fort, popularly called "the Gibraltar of India", overlooks the city. The Emperor Babur reputedly described it as "the pearl in the necklace of the forts of Hind". This fort's architecture is unique. It displays a Chinese influence on Indian architecture, as Chinese dragons have been crafted at the hilt of the pillars. This influence was due to trade between China and India at the time of the fort's construction.  After the death of Sher Shah Suri in 1545, who was ruling North India at that time, his son Islam Shah shifted his capital from Delhi to Gwalior and constructed 'Sher Shah Mandir' (or 'Sher Shah Fort') in his father's memory. Islam Shah operated from Gwalior until his death in 1553. Islam Shah had appointed the Hindu warrior 'Hemu' or Hem Chandra Vikramaditya as his Prime Minister in Sher Shah Fort for the first time, who later on became the Hem Chandra Vikramaditya king at Delhi and established 'Hindu Raj' in North India, by virtue of winning 22 battles continuously from Punjab to Bengal and defeating Akbar's army in Agra and Delhi on 6 October 1556. In the east of the city are two examples of early Mughal architecture: the mausoleum of the 16th century Sufi Saint Ghous Mohammed and the tomb of Mian Tansen, a great singer and one of the 'Nine Jewels' of the Mughal Emperor Akbar's court. Right next to them is the Gujari Mahal, built by Tomar Rajput King Man Singh Tomar on demand of his consort Gujar princess "Mrignayani" (meaning "having eyes like deer"). The Mughal Emperor Akbar is also known to have organised hunting parties near Gwalior. Close to the heart of the city is Jai Vilas Palace of the Scindia dynasty, patterned on the palace of Versailles. It combines Tuscan, Italian and Corinthian styles of architecture. Historically and architecturally, Gwalior is interesting first as an ancient seat of Jain worship; second for its example of palace architecture of the Hindu period between 1486 and 1516; and third as an historic fortress. Many historical places are found near the Dabra-Bhitarwar Road. Prior to the founding of Gwalior, the region was also known by its ancient name of Gopasetra. The great Apabhramsha poet Pandit Raighu lived in Gwalior. Gwalior had an institutional seat of the Bhattarakas of Kashtha Sangh and later Mula Sangh. According to history, the original fort of Gwalior was founded by the Bargujar Kings during the 34th/35th century of Kali yuga as per puranas available with them. His palace is the most interesting example of early Hindu work of its class in India. Another palace of even greater extent was added to this in 1516. The Mughal emperors, Jahangir and Shah Jahan, added palaces to these two, the whole making a group of edifices unequaled for picturesqueness and interest by anything of their class in central India. Among the apartments in the palace was the celebrated chamber, named the Baradari, supported on 12 columns, and 45&nbsp;ft (15&nbsp;m) square, with a stone roof, forming one of the most beautiful palace-halls in the world. It was, besides, singularly interesting from the expedients to which the Hindu architect was forced to resort to imitate the vaults of the Muslims. Of the buildings, however, which so excited the admiration of the first Mughal emperor Babur, probably little now remains.   Also called Jai Vilas Palace, is the residential palace turned museum of the Maratha rulers of Gwalior - the Scindias. It is in the heart of the city. The palace has notable collections of antiques and also some of the old time gadgets and collections that can't be easily seen.The museum is one of the largest in Madhya Pradesh and has the world's largest chandelier and the complex is a mixture of British as well as Hindu architecture. The palace was made in 1874 as an attempt to bring the palace of Versailles to Gwalior. This castle is one of the finest tourist spots in Gwalior. located close to the collectorate of Gwalior. It is also called Chingaupan castle. It is known for its reunion of Berehams. The Berehams are a highly intellectual breed of humans who reunite every few months. This group was created after Lord Mithun's instructions and has garnered a cult status ever since. Punjabi castle offers a diverse variety of exotic cuisine ranging from chilly kuta, kuta chingapaun, hawaiin salsa fetal twist to khao-phuck-jaye. The ride to the top of this castle is a treat to the eyes in itself. On 10 November 2014, UNESCO declared it a world heritage site. Speaking to the world media gathered to commemorate the event, the Bereham-in-chief  Hailoo Gunjabi said "This castle is mecca to all berehams and was installed by the gunda god Lamba aata himself after much deliberation with bulla and khotey".  A temple built by Birla group is dedicated to the Sun god, the Sun Temple is located near residency at Morar, Gwalior. It is a facsimile of the Sun temple of Konark, Odisha and now this sun temple is one among the significant pilgrimage centres in Gwalior. It is the place which gives best examples of peace and neatness in Gwalior. The temple is located in a serene ambience and a well-maintained garden within the temple premises is very attractive. This holy temple draws the locals and tourists alike who gather here to render their prayers. It makes one astounded that a shrine of comparatively modern origin holds such a highest regard, and became one among the most sought after pilgrimage centers in the city. This is one of the most lively and beautiful zoological parks of Madhya Pradesh. Its main attractions include Jamuna, 3 white tigers, serpents, golden pheasants, sambhar, hyena, bison, and others.  Tighra dam is located on the outskirts of the city, Tighra is a nice place for an outing. The dam is now being used to store water from the Sank river and supply water to the whole of the city.There is boating as well as adventure sports' facilities. Swarna Rekha river is a reconstructed part of the Swarna Rekha river which was dried during the British raj. A boat ride is taken from Padav in central Gwalior to Gwalior Zoo. The Lashkar part of Gwalior has many beautiful parks including the Phool Bagh or the garden of flowers build for the welcome of prince of Cambridge and the Italian Garden - the garden which was used by the Scindias as a place of relaxation, is build in Italian texture with a water pool surrounded by musical fountains.  Ambedkar Park and Gandhi Park are the other prominent parks.    Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary or Palpur-Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary (between latitudes of 25°30'- 25°53'N & longitude of 77°07'-77°26'E) lies in the Sheopur district of north western Madhya Pradesh, a state in central India. It is about 120 kilometres from Gwalior. An area of 344.686 square kilometres was set aside as a Wildlife Sanctuary in 1981. Since then this has been elevated to the Kuno Wildlife Division with an additional area of 900 square kilometres as a buffer area around the Sanctuary. The park is home to many species of wild animals including wolves, monkeys, leopards and nilgai.  Madhav National Park is situated in Shivpuri District of Gwalior region in northwest Madhya Pradesh, India. It is the ancestral home of the line of ęAli Khan, a region based in Punjab, and noted for the laws of commonly credited with defining modern day jurisprudence. Shivpuri town is located at 25°40' North, 77°44' East on Agra to Bombay National Highway-3. Shivpuri is steeped in the royal legacy of its past, when it was the summer capital of the Scindia rulers of Gwalior. Earlier its dense forests were the hunting grounds of the Mughal emperors. Emperor Akbar captured herds of elephants for his stables while returning from Mandu in year 1564. This National Park has a varied terrain of forested hills and flat grasslands around the lake. It is very rich in Biodiversity.  Bateshwar (Hindi:बटेश्वर), 25&nbsp;km from Morena town, is an archaeological site comprising about 200 ancient shrines in Morena district in Madhya Pradesh. This site is located on the north-western slope of a range of hills near Padavali, a village about 30&nbsp;km from Gwalior. The shrines of Bateshwar temple-complex are dedicated mostly to Shiva and a few to Vishnu. The temples are made of sandstone and belong to the 8–10th century CE.[1] They were built during the reign of Gurjara-Pratihara Dynasty,[2] 300 years before Khajuraho temples were built. The National Chambal Sanctuary lies between 24°55′ to 26°50′ N and 75°34′ to 79°18′E in Dholpur,60&nbsp;km from Gwalior. It consists of the large arc described by the Chambal between Jawahar Sagar Dam in Rajasthan and the Chambal-Yamuna confluence in Uttar Pradesh. Over this arc, two stretches of the Chambal are protected as the National Chambal Sanctuary status - the upper sector, extending from Jawahar Sagar Dam to Kota Barrage, and the lower sector, extending from Keshoraipatan in Rajasthan to the Chambal-Yamuna confluence in Uttar Pradesh.  Sonagiri (Hindi: सोनागिरी) about 60&nbsp;km from Gwalior, has scores of Jain temples of 9th & 10th century on little hills. This sacred place is popular among devotees & ascetic saints to practice for self-discipline, austerity and to attain Nirvana since the time of Chandraprabhu (the 8th Teerthankar), five & half crores of ascetic saints have achieved Moksa from here.   Datia is the district headquarters of the Datia District in the north central Madhya Pradesh state of Central India. It is an ancient town, mentioned in the Mahabharata as Daityavakra. The town is 69&nbsp;km from Gwalior, 325&nbsp;km south of New Delhi and 320&nbsp;km north of Bhopal. About 15&nbsp;km from Datia is Sonagiri, a sacred Jain hill. Datia is also about 34&nbsp;km from Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh and 52&nbsp;km from Orchha. The nearest airport is at Gwalior. It was formerly the seat of the eponymous princely state in the British Raj. A popular picnic location near Ghatigaon,  from the city. 120px" heights="100px" perrow="5 Sun Temple Tighra Dam Statue Guarding Entrance to Gujari Mahal One of the Seven Gates of the Gwalior Fort Gujari Mahal, now a museum, inside Gwalior Fort Sas-Bahu Ka Mandir at Gwalior Fort Former central press at Gwalior  Beautiful Chinese hand craft work on the walls of Gwalior Fort Former Vidhan Sabha when Gwalior was capital of Madhya Bharat       University !! Type !! Location Jiwaji University Government University road, City Centre Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwavidyalaya (RVSKVV)http://www.rvskvv.net/ Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwavidyalaya (RVSKVV) Government Racecourse Road Raja Mansingh Tomar Music & Arts Universityhttp://www.rmtmusicandartsuniversity.com/ Raja Mansingh Tomar Music & Arts University Government Achaleshwar Road Lakshmibai National University of Physical EducationLakshmibai National University of Physical Education Government Racecourse Road Amity UniversityAmity University Private Airport Road, Maharajpura ITM UniversityITM University Private University Opp. Sithouli Railway Station, NH-75 Sithouli, Jhansi Road,Gwalior Institute !! Type !! Location Atal Bihari Vajpayee Indian Institute of Information Technology and Management (IIITM) Government Morena Link road Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management Government Govindpuri Institute of Hotel Managementhttp://www.ihmgwalior.net/ Institute of Hotel Management Government Airport road,Maharajpura Madhav Institute of Technology and Science(MITS) Government aided Gola ka mandir,Racecourse road Gajara Raja Medical College(GRMC) Government Heritage theme road, Lashkar Kamla Raja girls College (KRG College)http://www.krgcgwalior.org/ Kamla Raja girls College Government Kampoo Rustamji Institute of Technology(RJIT) Government/Border Security Force BSF Academy, Tekanpur Maharani Lakshmi Bai College of Excellence (MLB College) Government Katora taal,Heritage theme road Shrimant Madhavrao Scindia Government Model Science Collegehttp://www.sciencecollegegwl.org/ Govt. Model Science College Government Naka Chandrabani,Jhansi road Central Ayurvedic Research Institute and Hospital Government Aamkho College of Agriculture Government Racecourse Road Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Polytechnic College Government Jhansi road Govt. Girls Polytechnic College Government MLB Road, Padav Arena Animationhttp://www.arena-multimedia.com/ Arena Animation Private Madhav Rao Scindia Road, City Center 1727–1745 : Rânojî Râo Sindhia (+1745) 1745–1755 : Jayapaji Râo Sindhia (v. 1720–1755) 1755–1761 : Jankojî Râo Ier Sindhia (+1761) 1761–1764 : Kandarji Râo Sindhia (+ap.1764) 1764–1768 : Manaji Rao Sindhia 1768–1794 : Mahadji Rao Sindhia (1729–1794), Radjah de Gohad en 1765 puis Maharadjah de Gwalior  1794–1827 : Daulat Râo Sindhia (1779–1827) 1827–1843 : Jânkojî Râo II Sindhia (Mukki Râo) (1805–1843) 1843–1886 : Jayâjî Râo Sindhia (Jiajî Râo) (1835–1886) 1843–1844 : Dada Khasjiwallah - en rébellion 1886–1925 : Mâdhav Râo Sindhia (1876–1925) 1925–1961 : George Jîvâjî Râo Sindhia (1916–1961) 1961-2001 : Madhav Rao II Scindia (1945-2001) 2001-.... : Jyotiraditya Rao Scindia (1971–Present) (Present Maharaja of Gwalior) The High Court of Madhya-Pradesh (Gwalior Bench) Office of The Accountant-General (AG) of Madhya-Pradesh Office of The President-Board of Revenue of Madhya-Pradesh Office of The Transport-Commissioner of Madhya-Pradesh Office of The Commissioner-Land Records & Settlements Madhya-Pradesh Office of The State Excise Commissioner of Madhya-Pradesh Defense Research & Development Establishment (DRDE) Border Security Force (BSF) Academy National Cadet Corps (NCC) Officer's Training Academy (OTA) Indian Air Force (IAF) Station (Maharajpura Airbase). Office of The Narcotics Commissioner of India (Central Bureau of Narcotics) Central Intelligence Bureau HO Indian Army Cantonment (Morar Cantonment) Central Potato Research Institute, Gwaliorhttp://cpri.ernet.in/?q=node/172 Tansen Music Festival- The Tansen Sangeet Samaroh, (Tansen Music Festival), is celebrated every year on the Tansen Tomb in Gwalior during the month of December. Tansen Samaroh is a platform where artists from all over India gather and participate to deliver vocal and instrumental performances. Gwalior's environment during the festival turns mystical with melodious music echoing. Music lovers from far and wide make it a point to be a part of this event at any cost, as it is a memorable experience for them. The Tansen Sangeet Samaroh is organised by the government of Madhya Pradesh, in association with the Academy of the Department of Culture. During the festival, music lovers and artists from all over the world gather to offer their tribute to Tansen. The academy offers honours to senior celebrities and junior artists by including them in the Samaroh through their music of performance. Sarod Ghar - This Museum of Music has been set up in the old ancestral house of musician Hafiz Ali Khan. It houses ancient instruments of the Indian masters of the past. It also houses an impressive collection of photographs and documents. Sarod Ghar is a unique institution devoted to promoting Indian classical music, heritage and culture. Through this 'window' to the past, music lovers can gain a better understanding of the evolution and history of our classical music and a deeper perspective and insight into the context of the art as it exists today. Captain Roop Singh Stadium is a cricket ground in Gwalior. The stadium has hosted 10 One Day International (ODI) matches. Of the 10 matches played so far, the first one was played between India and West Indies on 22 January 1988. The ground has flood lights and has hosted day-night encounters. It can hold 45,000 people at a time. It was originally a hockey stadium named after great Indian hockey player Roop Singh, brother of hockey player Dhyan Chand. The ground has flood lights and has hosted day-night encounters as well. One match of the 1996 Cricket World Cup was also played on this ground, between India and West Indies. This ground is notable for hosting the ODI between India and South Africa in which Sachin Tendulkar scored a double century. The Lakshmibai National University of Physical Education (LNIPE), Gwalior was established by the Ministry of Education & Culture, Government of India as Lakshmibai College of Physical Education (LCPE) in August 1957, the centenary year of the War of Independence. It is located at Gwalior, where Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi, a heroine of the war, died during the rebellion in 1857. The Institute started as an affiliated college of the Vikram University, Ujjain and then came to the folds of Jiwaji University, Gwalior in 1964. The Institute was given the status of National importance, and hence it was renamed as Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education (LNCPE) in1973. In recognition of its unique status and character and to facilitate its further growth, the college was conferred the status of an ′Autonomous College′ of Jiwaji University, Gwalior in 1982. A new international stadium at Shankarpur village near Ghatigaon tehsil has been proposed by Madhya Pradesh Cricket Association (MPCA). The proposed stadium will be built on  a land of 30 acres, which has been taken over by Gwalior District Cricket Association (GDCA). The construction of the proposed stadium is expected to be completed in 2017. It will have a seating capacity of around 100,000 spectators. It will also be equipped with flood lights for night matches, a swimming pool, sauna bath, modern gym, dressing room, and 30 corporate boxes. Gwalior trade fair was started in 1905 by Maharaja Madho Rao Scindia, King of Gwalior. It has become the biggest fair of Madhya Pradesh and one of the most colourful fairs of India. It starts in the second week of January and continues until February. Maharaj Bada is the biggest and most important market of Gwalior. Seven ancient buildings of different styles of architecture (Italian, Russian, Maratha, Mughal, Rajputi, Chinese, etc.) can be viewed. Ghas Mandi- this area is presumed to be 700 years old it was established around the 15th century this place was used by local population for business by selling grass for feeding animals for king and other rich persons. Loha Mandi- this place is also 600yrs old in gwalior. this place was used for buying iron materials. Hazira- it was the main market place of gwalior that time nowadays this place is too much congested because of its irregular and unplanned structure which was made by old merchants in the 15th century. Gwalior has three shopping malls, DD City Mall with Fun Cinemas multiplex, Maya-Gitanjali Mall with Gold Digital Multiplex and the Central Mall. Salasar Mall City Centre, similarly to DD City Mall, also contains a multiplex. There are several gaming zones, three Discothèques (DnD, Barcode, and Spectrum), and a water park in Gwalior. "Sun City Amusement Park" is a family entertainment center in Gwalior. The DD City Mall, one of the biggest malls of Madhya Pradesh. A multi-storeyed structure, it houses shops and showrooms of many national and international brands and has a number of eateries, as well as a Fun Cinemas multiplex. There are also some international and well known fast food restaurants like Domino's Pizza and McDonald's in DD City Mall. Pizza Hut is adjacent to DD Mall. Gwalior is also known for child genius and prodigy Haarsh Dubey who is currently researching on underpants. Koteshwar Temple. This temple is a 700-year-old temple of Lord Shiva whose shivling was on Gwalior Fort, but when the Mughals conquered it they ordered the shivling thrown out. When the troops did that, the shivling was automatically established in a field below the fort without any harm. Muslim qazi told the emperor not to harm the shivling. In the late 18th century Scindians built a temple for that shivling, now known as Koteshwar Mahadev. Baba Kapoor- this place is 500 meters away from ghas mandi. This place was named Baba Kapoor because of saint shah Abdul Gafoor. Kashi Naresh ki gali- this a 600 yrs old residential street in Gwalior it was given name as Kashi Naresh ki gali because in the 14th century when the emperor of Kashi was defeated in war he was sent to exile by oppositions at that time gwalior emperor and Kashi's emperor were good friends when kashi's emperor told Gwalior's emperor whole story, emperor gave him an entire street for living at that time which is now known as kashi naresh ki gali. their family is even now resides there in Kashi Naresh ki gali in RAJAJI KA BADA. (Meanings: naresh = king = rajaji; gali = street in Hindi language; bada = big area.) Gopachal Parvat is situated on the mountainous terrain at the slopes of Gwalior Fort. Gopachal Parvat contains unique statues of Jain Tirthankaras. The idol of Lord Parshvanath seated on a lotus (carved out of a single stone) is the largest in the world, towering at 47&nbsp;feet in height and 30&nbsp;feet in breadth. There is a series of 26 Jain statues in a single line. Built between 1398 and 1536 by Tomar kings, these Jain Tirthankar statues are one of a kind in architecture and a treasure trove of old Indian heritage and culture. Gopachal Parvat is located approximately 2&nbsp;km from the railway station and bus stand. Municipality Museum, one of the more important museums of the city, is situated a little distance from Rani Lakshmibai's tomb.  Vivsvaan Mandir (Sun Temple), A newly built temple dedicated to the Sun god, the Sun Temple is located near the residency at Morar, Gwalior. It is a facsimile of the Sun temple of Konark, Orissa and now this sun temple is one among the significant pilgrimage centres in Gwalior. The temple is located in a serene ambiance and a well-maintained garden within the temple premises is very attractive. This holy temple draws the locals and tourists alike who gather here to render their prayers. It makes one astounded that a shrine of comparatively modern origin is held in such high regard, and became one among the most sought after pilgrimage centres in the city. Modern 5D is Madhya Pradesh's first multi-dimensional theatre launched in the 2011 trade fair of Gwalior. It was built by Gwalior's leading enterprise Modern Techno Projects (P) Ltd. Modern 5D is recognised as India's first own multi-dimensional theatre. Shyam Vatika is a banquet hall which has the world's largest indoor mural, as recognised by Guinness World Records. Within the fort are some marvels of medieval architecture. The 15th century Gujari Mahal is a monument to the love of Raja Mansingh Tomar for his intrepid Gujar Queen, Mrignayani. The outer structure of Gujari Mahal has survived in an almost total state of preservation; the interior has been converted into an archaeological museum housing rare antiquities, some of them dating back to the 1st century A.D. Even though many of these have been defaced by the iconoclastic Mughals, their perfection of form has survived the ravages of time. Particularly worth seeing is the statue of Shalbhanjika from Gyraspur, the tree goddess, the epitome of perfection in miniature. The statue is kept in the custody of the museum's curator, and can be seen on request. Sas-bahu Temple - A 9th-century shrine, Sas-Bahu temple in the fort allures not only the devotees but also the tourists with its artistic value. Despite what its name may suggest, these temples are not dedicated to Sas (mother-in-law) and Bahu (daughter-in-law) but rather the short form of Shashtra Bahu, another name of Lord Vishnu. These temples situated adjacent to each other and the larger one is elaborately decorated with beautiful carvings and sculptures. The roof of the larger temple is adorned with a marvelous lotus carving which is very fascinating. These ancient temples display exceptional architectural brilliance and are a perfect destination for pious people. Teli Ka Mandir (Telangana Mandir) - A structure of about 100 feet, Teli Ka Mandir in Gwalior Fort distinguishes itself from the other compositions of its time because of its unique architecture. Though the roof of the temple holds a Dravidian look, the sculptures are typically North Indian. The temple bears a close resemblance to the temple of Prathihara Vishnu, and is filled with images of coiled serpents, passionate couples, river goddesses, and a flying Garuda. The temple architecture follows the Indo-Aryan and Nagara styles that exhibit superior artistic calibre. A marvelous temple, believed to be among the oldest constructions in the fort, gives an enchanting experience to the visitor. The Telikā Mandir, or 'oil-man's temple', owes its name to Teli, a term for an oil grinder or oil dealer. Many suggestions have been put forward to explain this name historically, but in fact the name is not old, the temple being used for processing oil before the British occupied the fort and used the building, albeit temporarily, as a coffee shop. The Telikā Mandir is the loftiest temple among all the buildings in Gwalior Fort with a height of about 30m. The temple consists of a garba griha, that is, sanctum proper for the deity, and an antarala to enter into the temple. It can be approached by a flight of steps provided on the eastern side. The most striking feature of the temple is the wagon-vaulted roof, a form used over rectangular shrines which normally accommodated a row of Mother Goddesses.M. Willis, Temples of Gopakṣetra: A Regional History of Architecture in Central India (London, 1996). The goddesses from the interior vanished centuries ago and have not been traced, even in fragments. The exterior walls of the temple are richly decorated with sculptures, many of which are damaged; the niches, shaped like temples, are empty. The building carries a dedicatory inscription to the goddess in a niche on the southern side, but otherwise does not have any history.Willis, Inscriptions of Gopakṣetra: Materials for the History of Central India (London, 1995), illustration. The architectural style, discussed by a number of architectural historians, points to a date in the late 8th Century.Willis, Temples of Gopakṣetra. The building was erected just as the Gurjara Pratihāras were asserting their power over central India. The entrance gateway on the eastern side is a later addition of the British period, made by Major Keith in 1881. It was built as a way of saving various historic pillars and other pieces no longer in their original context. Jain rock-cut sculptures - A striking part of the Jain remains at Gwalior is a series of caves or rock-cut sculptures, excavated in the rock on all sides, and numbering nearly a hundred, great and small. Most of them are mere niches to hold statues, though some are cells that may have been originally intended for residences. According to inscriptions, they were all excavated within a short period of about thirty-three years, between 1441 and 1474. One of the colossal figures is 57&nbsp;ft (17&nbsp;m) high, taller than any other in northern India. Gurudwara Datta Bandi Choodh- Gwalior Fort also has the Gurudwara, built in the memory of the sixth Sikh, Guru Har Gobind. This Gurudwara is particularly large and grand, built entirely of marble with coloured glass decorating the main building. Recital of the Guru Granth Sahib creates a peaceful and sacred atmosphere. Mughal kings used to visit Gwalior regularly. There is a Gurdwara that was converted to a mandir of "kalli devi" and process is on to take it back by Sikhs. Chatris of Scindias is situated close to the city near Achaleshwar temple and is the burial place for the Scindias who ruled the city for many years. Designated persons like Maharaja Madhavrao Scindia, Vijayaraje Scindia and His Highness Jivajirao Scindia were cremated here. Tansen's tomb: Gwalior is the birthplace of the musician Tansen. He was one of the "Nine Gems of Akbar". Gaus Mohammad's tomb: The tombs of Great Gaus Mohammad and Tansen are situated on the same territory. Tomb of Rani Lakshmibai, a famous freedom fighter, at Phoolbag area. It is here where the she died in 1858 fighting against the British. It is also her burial place. Amjad Ali Khan; sarod player and musician Atal Bihari Vajpayee; former Prime Minister of India Kartik Tiwari;Actor of Pyaar Ka Panchnama,Born in Gwalior Piyush Mishra; Indian film and theatre actor, Music Director, Lyricist, Singer, Scriptwriter. Sneha Khanwalkar;Music Director and Singer,Born in Gwalior Mamta Sharma;Singer [Munni Badnam,Fevicol etc.] born in Gwalior Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi; Famous Hindi writer; born in Gwalior Jyotiraditya Scindia; Former Minister of Power Madhavrao Scindia; Indian politician and minister Nida Fazli; famous Urdu writer and poet Roop Singh; Indian hockey player and Olympian Shivendra Singh; Indian national hockey player; born and lives in Gwalior Tansen; court musician of Akbar Salman Khan; Studied in Scindia School Narendra Singh Tomar : Minister of Steel in Union Cabinet Pran Kumar Sharma : Cartoonist and comic creator of Chacha Chaudhary fame moved here after the Partition Sunil Bharti Mittal : CEO of Bharti Airtel. He first joined the Wynberg Allen School in Mussoorie, but later attended Scindia School at Gwalior Anurag Kashyap; is an Indian film director,screenwriter,producer and actor.He did his early schooling from Green School Dehradun and,age eight onwards,at the Scindia School in Gwalior Jivaji Rao Scindia : last king of Gwalior State Gwalior Metro Morar Subcity Lashkar Subcity Morar Cantonment Gwalior State Gwalior Fort Maratha Empire List of Maratha dynasties and states IIITM Gwalior Guru Radha Kishan Gajara Raja Medical College Gir Forest National Park In-situ conservation Jiwaji University Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary Muhammad Ghawth MITS Gwalior Shyam Vatika Aditya College Scindia Kanya Vidyalaya ITM University, Gwalior No. 1 Air Force School, Gwalior ITM Global School Kendriya Vidyalaya No. 4, Gwalior Shahzad A. Rizvi Official Website of Gwalior Gwalior Municipal Corporation Satellite map of Gwalior Junction and nearby railway stations Gwalior Information Centre Under Construction Website of Gwalior city R. Nath Mughal Architecture Image Collection, Images from Gwalior - University of Washington Digital Collection
