    The Hebrew alphabet (, ), known variously by scholars as the Jewish script, square script, block script, is used in the writing of the Hebrew language, as well as of other Jewish languages, most notably Yiddish, Ladino, and Judeo-Arabic. There have been two script forms in use; the original old Hebrew script is known as the paleo-Hebrew script (which has been largely preserved, in an altered form, in the Samaritan script), while the present "square" form of the Hebrew alphabet is a stylized form of the Aramaic script and was known by Israel's sages as the Ashuri script (Assyrian script), since its origins were alleged to be from Assyria.Babylonian Talmud (Sanhedrin 21b–22a); Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 10a). Cf. Mishnah (Megillah 1:8): "The Books [of Scripture] differ from phylacteries and Mezuzahs only in that the Books may be written in any language, while phylacteries and Mezuzahs may be written in the Assyrian writing only."  See: The Mishnah,(ed. Herbert Danby), Oxford University Press: London 1977, p. 202. Various "styles" (in current terms, "fonts") of representation of the letters exist. There is also a cursive Hebrew script, which has also varied over time and place. The Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters. It does not have case, but five letters have different forms when used at the end of a word. Hebrew is written from right to left. Originally, the alphabet was an abjad consisting only of consonants. As with other abjads, such as the Arabic alphabet, scribes later devised means of indicating vowel sounds by separate vowel points, known in Hebrew as niqqud. In rabbinic Hebrew, the letters  are also used as matres lectionis (the use of certain consonants to indicate a vowel) to represent vowels. When used to write Yiddish, the writing system is a true alphabet (except for borrowed Hebrew words). In modern usage of the alphabet, as in the case of Yiddish (except that  replaces ) and to some extent modern Israeli Hebrew, vowels may be indicated. Today, the trend is toward full spelling with these letters acting as true vowels.  According to contemporary scholars, the original Hebrew script developed during the late second and first millennia BCE alongside others used in the region. A distinct Hebrew variant of the Phoenician script, called by scholars the paleo-Hebrew alphabet, emerged by the 10th century BCE,Ancient Scripts.com: Old Hebrew examples of which are represented in the Gezer calendar and the Siloam inscription. (The Phoenician script probably also gave rise to the use of Greek alphabetic writing in Ancient Greece). The paleo-Hebrew alphabet was commonly used in the ancient Israelite kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Following the exile of the Kingdom of Judah in the 6th century BCE, in the Babylonian exile, Jews began using a form of the Assyrian Aramaic script, which was another offshoot of the same family of scripts. The Samaritans, who remained in the Land of Israel, continued to use the paleo-Hebrew alphabet. During the 3rd century BCE, Jews began to use a stylized, "square" form of the Aramaic alphabet that was used by the Persian Empire (and which in turn had been adopted from the Assyrians), while the Samaritans continued to use a form of the paleo-Hebrew script, called the Samaritan script. After the fall of the Persian Empire in 330 BCE, Jews used both scripts before settling on the Assyrian form. For a limited time thereafter Jews retained the paleo-Hebrew script only to write the Tetragrammaton, but soon that custom was also abandoned. The square Hebrew alphabet was later adapted and used for writing languages of the Jewish diaspora – such as Karaim, Judeo-Arabic, Ladino, Yiddish, etc. The Hebrew alphabet continued in use for scholarly writing in Hebrew and came again into everyday use with the rebirth of the Hebrew language as a spoken language in the 18th and 19th centuries, especially in Palestine.    In the traditional form, the Hebrew alphabet is an abjad consisting only of consonants, written from right to left. It has 22 letters, five of which use different forms at the end of a word.  In the traditional form, vowels are indicated by the weak consonants Aleph (), He (), Vav (), or  Yodh () serving as vowel letters, or matres lectionis: the letter is combined with a previous vowel and becomes silent, or by imitation of such cases in the spelling of other forms. Also, a system of vowel points to indicate vowels (diacritics), called niqqud, was developed. In modern forms of the alphabet, as in the case of Yiddish and to some extent modern Israeli Hebrew, vowels may be indicated. Today, the trend is toward full spelling with the weak letters acting as true vowels. When used to write Yiddish, vowels are indicated, using certain letters, either with or without niqqud-diacritics (e.g., respectively: "אָ", "יִ" or "י", "ע"), except for Hebrew words, which in Yiddish are written in their Hebrew spelling. To preserve the proper vowel sounds, scholars developed several different sets of vocalization and diacritical symbols called niqqud (, literally "applying points"). One of these, the Tiberian system, eventually prevailed. Aaron ben Moses ben Asher, and his family for several generations, are credited for refining and maintaining the system. These points are normally used only for special purposes, such as Biblical books intended for study, in poetry or when teaching the language to children.  The Tiberian system also includes a set of cantillation marks, called "trope", used to indicate how scriptural passages should be chanted in synagogue recitations of scripture (although these marks do not appear in the scrolls). In everyday writing of modern Hebrew, niqqud are absent; however, patterns of how words are derived from Hebrew roots (called shorashim, or root letters) allow Hebrew speakers to determine the vowel-structure of a given word from its consonants based on the word's context and part of speech. Neither the old Hebrew script nor the modern Hebrew script have case, but five letters have special final forms, called sofit (, meaning in this context "final" or "ending") form, used only at the end of a word, somewhat as in the Greek or in the Arabic and Mandaic alphabets. These are shown below the normal form in the following table (letter names are Unicode standardChart of Hebrew glyphs at unicode.orgUnicode names of Hebrew characters at fileformat.info.). Although Hebrew is read and written from right to left, the following table shows the letters in order from left to right. The following table displays typographic and chirographic variants of each letter. For the five letters that have a different final form used at the end of words, the final forms are displayed beneath the regular form. The three lettering variants currently in use are block, cursive and Rashi. Block and Rashi are used in books. Block lettering dominates, with Rashi lettering typically used for certain editorial inserts (as in the glosses of Isserles to the Shulchan Aruch) or biblical commentaries (as in the commentary of Rashi) in various standard literary works. Cursive is used almost exclusively when handwriting, unless block lettering is desired for stylistic purposes (as in signage). Hebrew letters are used to denote numbers, nowadays used only in specific contexts, e.g. denoting dates in the Hebrew calendar, denoting grades of school in Israel, other listings (e.g. שלב א׳, שלב ב׳ – "phase a, phase b"), commonly in Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism) in a practice known as gematria, and often in religious contexts. The numbers 500, 600, 700, 800 and 900 are commonly represented by the juxtapositions ק״ת, ר״ת, ש״ת, ת״ת, and ק״תת respectively. Adding a geresh ("׳") to a letter multiplies its value by one thousand, for example, the year 5769 is portrayed as ה׳תשס״ט, where ה represents 5000, and תשס״ט represents 769. The following table lists transliterations and transcriptions of Hebrew letters used in Modern Hebrew. Clarifications: Note: SBL's transliteration system, recommended in its Handbook of Style,Resources for New Testament Exegesis – Transliteration Standards of The SBL Handbook of Style differs slightly from the 2006 precise transliteration system of the Academy of the Hebrew Language; for "צ" SBL uses "" (≠ AHL ""), and for בג״ד כפ״ת with no dagesh, SBL uses the same symbols as for with dagesh (i.e. "b", "g", "d", "k", "f", "t"). A1234In transliterations of modern Israeli Hebrew, initial and final ע (in regular transliteration), silent or initial א, and silent ה are not transliterated. To the eye of readers orientating themselves on Latin (or similar) alphabets, these letters might seem to be transliterated as vowel letters; however, these are in fact transliterations of the vowel diacritics – niqqud (or are representations of the spoken vowels). E.g., in אִם ("if", ), אֵם ("mother", ) and אֹם ("nut", ), the letter א always represents the same consonant:  (glottal stop), whereas the vowels /i/, /e/ and /o/ respectively represent the spoken vowel, whether it is orthographically denoted by diacritics or not. Since the Academy of the Hebrew Language ascertains that א in initial position is not transliterated, the symbol for the glottal stop &nbsp;&nbsp; is omitted from the transliteration, and only the subsequent vowels are transliterated (whether or not their corresponding vowel diacritics appeared in the text being transliterated), resulting in "im", "em" and "om", respectively. B123The diacritic geresh – "׳" – is used with some other letters as well (ד׳, ח׳, ט׳, ע׳, ר׳, ת׳), but only to transliterate from other languages to Hebrew – never to spell Hebrew words; therefore they were not included in this table (correctly translating a Hebrew text with these letters would require using the spelling in the language from which the transliteration to Hebrew was originally made). The non-standard "ו׳" and "וו"  are sometimes used to represent , which like ,  and  appears in Hebrew slang and loanwords. C12The Sound  (as "ch" in loch) is often transcribed "ch", inconsistently with the guidelines specified by the Academy of the Hebrew Language: חם  → "cham"; סכך  → "schach". DAlthough the Bible does include a single occurrence of a final pe with a dagesh (Book of Proverbs 30, 6: ""), in modern Hebrew  is always represented by pe in its regular, not final, form "פ", even when in final word position, which occurs with loanwords (e.g. שׁוֹפּ  "shop"), foreign names (e.g. פִילִיפּ  "Philip") and some slang (e.g. חָרַפּ  "slept deeply").  The descriptions that follow are based on the pronunciation of modern standard Israeli Hebrew. Shin and sin are represented by the same letter, , but are two separate phonemes. They are not mutually allophonic. When vowel diacritics are used, the two phonemes are differentiated with a shin-dot or sin-dot; the shin-dot is above the upper-right side of the letter, and the sin-dot is above the upper-left side of the letter. Historically, left-dot-sin corresponds to Proto-Semitic *, which in biblical-Judaic-Hebrew corresponded to a voiceless alveolar lateral fricative  , as is evident in Greek transliteration of Hebrew words such as Balsam () (the ls - 'שׂ') as is evident in the Targum Onkelos. Rendering of proto-semitic * as , is still evident in the Soqotri language.  Historically, the consonants  beth,  gimel,  daleth,  kaf,  pe and  tav each had two sounds: one hard (plosive), and one soft (fricative), depending on the position of the letter and other factors. When vowel diacritics are used, the hard sounds are indicated by a central dot called dagesh (), while the soft sounds lack a dagesh. In modern Hebrew, however, the dagesh only changes the pronunciation of  beth,  kaf, and  pe, and does not affect the name of the letter.  The differences are as follows: In other dialects (mainly liturgical) there are variations from this pattern. In Israel's general population, many consonants have the same pronunciation. They are as follows: * Varyingly Some of the variations in sound mentioned above are due to a systematic feature of Ancient Hebrew. The six consonants  were pronounced differently depending on their position. These letters were also called BeGeD KeFeT letters . The full details are very complex; this summary omits some points. They were pronounced as plosives  at the beginning of a syllable, or when doubled. They were pronounced as fricatives  when preceded by a vowel (commonly indicated with a macron, ). The plosive and double pronunciations were indicated by the dagesh. In Modern Hebrew the sounds  and  have reverted to  and , respectively, and  has become , so only the remaining three consonants  show variation.  resh may have also been a "doubled" letter, making the list BeGeD KePoReS. (Sefer Yetzirah, 4:1) The following table contains the pronunciation of the Hebrew letters in reconstructed historical forms and dialects using the International Phonetic Alphabet. The apostrophe-looking symbol after some letters is not a yud but a geresh. It is used for loanwords with non-native Hebrew sounds. The dot in the middle of some of the letters, called a "dagesh kal", also modifies the sounds of the letters ב, כ and פ in modern Hebrew (in some forms of Hebrew it modifies also the sounds of the letters ג, ד and/or ת; the "dagesh chazak" – orthographically indistinguishable from the "dagesh kal" – designates gemination, which today is realized only rarely – e.g. in biblical recitations or when using Arabic loanwords).  alef,  he,  vav and  yod are letters that can sometimes indicate a vowel instead of a consonant (which would be, respectively, ). When they do,  and  are considered to constitute part of the vowel designation in combination with a niqqud symbol – a vowel diacritic (whether or not the diacritic is marked), whereas  and  are considered to be mute, their role being purely indicative of the non-marked vowel. Niqqud is the system of dots that help determine vowels and consonants. In Hebrew, all forms of niqqud are often omitted in writing, except for children's books, prayer books, poetry, foreign words, and words which would be ambiguous to pronounce. Israeli Hebrew has five vowel phonemes, , but many more written symbols for them: Note 1: The symbol "ס" represents whatever Hebrew letter is used. Note 2: The pronunciation of zeire and sometimes segol – with or without the letter yod – is sometimes ei in Modern Hebrew. This is not correct in the normative pronunciation and not consistent in the spoken language. Note 3: The dagesh, mappiq, and shuruk have different functions, even though they look the same. Note 4: The letter ו (vav) is used since it can only be represented by that letter. By adding a vertical line (called Meteg) underneath the letter and to the left of the vowel point, the vowel is made long. The meteg is only used in Biblical Hebrew, not Modern Hebrew. By adding two vertical dots (called Sh'va) underneath the letter, the vowel is made very short.  The symbol  is called a gershayim and is a punctuation mark used in the Hebrew language to denote acronyms. It is written before the last letter in the acronym, e.g. . Gershayim is also the name of a note of cantillation in the reading of the Torah, printed above the accented letter, e.g. . The sounds , , , written "", "", "", and , non-standardly sometimes transliterated  or , are often found in slang and loanwords that are part of the everyday Hebrew colloquial vocabulary. The apostrophe-looking symbol after the Hebrew letter modifies the pronunciation of the letter and is called a geresh. (As mentioned above, while still done, using  to represent  is non-standard; standard spelling rules allow no usage of  whatsoever). The pronunciation of the following letters can also be modified with the geresh diacritic, the represented sounds are however foreign to Hebrew phonology, i.e., these symbols only represent sounds in foreign words or names when transliterated with the Hebrew alphabet, and never loanwords. A geresh is also used to denote acronyms pronounced as a string of letters, and to denote a Hebrew numeral. Geresh also is the name of one of the notes of cantillation in the reading of the Torah, but its appearance and function is different. The letters of the Hebrew alphabet have played varied roles in Jewish religious literature over the centuries, primarily in mystical texts. Some sources in classical rabbinical literature seem to acknowledge the historical provenance of the currently used Hebrew alphabet and deal with them as a mundane subject (the Jerusalem Talmud, for example, records that "the Israelites took for themselves square calligraphy", and that the letters "came with the Israelites from Ashur [Assyria]");Jerusalem Talmud, Tractate Sanhedrin 21b others attribute mystical significance to the letters, connecting them with the process of creation or the redemption. In mystical conceptions, the alphabet is considered eternal, pre-existent to the Earth, and the letters themselves are seen as having holiness and power, sometimes to such an extent that several stories from the Talmud illustrate the idea that they cannot be destroyed.Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Pesach 87b, Avodah Zarah 18a. The idea of the letters' creative power finds its greatest vehicle in the Sefer Yezirah, or Book of Creation, a mystical text of uncertain origin which describes a story of creation highly divergent from that in the Book of Genesis, largely through exposition on the powers of the letters of the alphabet. The supposed creative powers of the letters are also referenced in the Talmud and Zohar.Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Berachot 55cZohar 1:3; 2:152  Another book, the 13th-century Kabbalistic text Sefer HaTemunah, holds that a single letter of unknown pronunciation, held by some to be the four-pronged shin on one side of the teffilin box, is missing from the current alphabet. The world's flaws, the book teaches, are related to the absence of this letter, the eventual revelation of which will repair the universe.The Book of Letters. Woodstock, Vermont: Jewish Lights Publishing, Woodstock. 1990 Another example of messianic significance attached to the letters is the teaching of Rabbi Eliezer that the five letters of the alphabet with final forms hold the "secret of redemption". In addition, the letters occasionally feature in aggadic portions of non-mystical rabbinic literature. In such aggada the letters are often given anthropomorphic qualities and depicted as speaking to God. Commonly their shapes are used in parables to illustrate points of ethics or theology. An example from the Babylonian Talmud (a parable intended to discourage speculation about the universe before creation): Extensive instructions about the proper methods of forming the letters are found in Mishnat Soferim, within Mishna Berura of Yisrael Meir Kagan. See aleph number and beth number and gimel function. In set theory, \aleph_0, pronounced aleph-naught or aleph-zero, is used to mark the cardinal number of an infinite countable set, such as \mathbb Z, the set of all integers. More generally, the \aleph_n (aleph) notation marks the ordered sequence of all distinct infinite cardinal numbers. Less frequently used, the \beth_n (beth) notation is used for the iterated power sets of \aleph_0. The 2nd element \beth_1 is the cardinality of the continuum. Very occasionally, gimel is used in cardinal notation.   The Unicode Hebrew block extends from U+0590 to U+05FF and from U+FB1D to U+FB4F. It includes letters, ligatures, combining diacritical marks (niqqud and cantillation marks) and punctuation. The Numeric Character References is included for HTML. These can be used in many markup languages, and they are often used in Wiki to create the Hebrew glyphs compatible with the majority of web browsers. a"Alef-bet" is commonly written in Israeli Hebrew without the  (, "[Hebrew] hyphen"), , as opposed to with the hyphen, . bThe Arabic letters generally (as six of the primary letters can have only two variants) have four forms, according to their place in the word. The same goes with the Mandaic ones, except for three of the 22 letters, which have only one form. cIn forms of Hebrew older than Modern Hebrew, כ״ף, בי״ת and פ״א can only be read b, k and p, respectively, at the beginning of a word, while they will have the sole value of v, kh and f in a sofit (final) position, with few exceptions. In medial positions, both pronunciations are possible. In Modern Hebrew this restriction is not absolute, e.g. פִיזִיקַאי  and never  (= "physicist"), סְנוֹבּ  and never  (= "snob"). A dagesh may be inserted to unambiguously denote the plosive variant: בּ = , כּ = , פּ =; similarly (though today very rare in Hebrew and common only in Yiddish) a rafé placed above the letter unambiguously denotes the fricative variant: בֿ = , כֿ =  and פֿ = . In Modern Hebrew orthography, the sound  at the end of a word is denoted by the regular form "פ", as opposed to the final form "ף", which always denotes  (see table of transliterations and transcriptions, comment). dHowever, וו (two separate vavs), used in Ktiv male, is to be distinguished from the Yiddish ligature װ (also two vavs but together as one character). e1e2e3e4e5The Academy of the Hebrew Language states that both  and  be indistinguishably represented in Hebrew using the letter Vav. issued by the Academy of the Hebrew Language. Sometimes the Vav is indeed doubled, however not to denote  as opposed to  but rather, when spelling without niqqud, to denote the phoneme /v/ at a non-initial and non-final position in the word, whereas a single Vav at a non-initial and non-final position in the word in spelling without niqqud denotes one of the phonemes /u/ or /o/. To pronounce foreign words and loanwords containing the sound , Hebrew readers must therefore rely on former knowledge and context.    Alef Bet Gimel Dalet He Vav Zayin Het Tet Yod Kaf Lamed Mem Nun Samekh Ayin Pe Tsadi Qof Resh Shin Tav letter Name of letter Established pronunciationin EnglishMerriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary standard Israelipronunciation colloquial Israelipronunciation (if differing) Yiddish / Ashkenazipronunciation MW Unicode HebrewKaplan, Aryeh. Sefer Yetzirah: The Book of Creation. pp. 8, 22. Aleph Alef ,  &nbsp; Beth Bet ,  &nbsp; Gimel Gimel &nbsp; Daleth Dalet ,  He He Waw Vav ,  &nbsp; Zayin Zayin Heth Het ,  Teth Tet ,  &nbsp; Yod Yod Kaph Kaf &nbsp; ,  Final Kaf ,  Lamed Lamed &nbsp; Mem Mem &nbsp; Final Mem Nun Nun &nbsp; Final Nun Samekh Samekh ְ ,  &nbsp; Ayin Ayin Pe Pe Final Pe ,  Sadhe Tsadi ,  &nbsp; , ,  Final Tsadi Qoph Qof Resh Resh ,  Shin Shin ,  &nbsp; ,  &nbsp; Taw Tav ,  ,  ,  Lettername(Unicode) Variants Modern Hebrew Ancestral Serif Sans-serif Mono-spaced Cursive Rashi Phoenician Paleo-Hebrew Aramaic Alef א א א Bet ב ב ב Gimel ג ג ג Dalet ד ד ד He ה ה ה Vav ו ו ו Zayin ז ז ז Het ח ח ח Tet ט ט ט Yod י י י Kaf כ כ כ Final Kaf ך ך ך Lamed ל ל ל Mem מ מ מ Final Mem ם ם ם Nun נ נ נ Final Nun ן ן ן Samekh ס ס ס Ayin ע ע ע Pe פ פ פ Final Pe ף ף ף Tsadi צ צ צ ,  Final Tsadi ץ ץ ץ Qof ק ק ק Resh ר ר ר Shin ש ש ש Tav ת ת ת Symbol Explanation These are intended for Yiddish. They are not used in Hebrew, aside from in loan words. The rafe () diacritic is no longer regularly used in Hebrew. In masoretic manuscripts and some other older texts the soft fricative consonants and sometimes matres lectionis are indicated by a small line on top of the letter. Its use has been largely discontinued in modern printed texts. It is still used to mark fricative consonants in the YIVO orthography of Yiddish. letter!!numeric value letter!!numeric value letter!!numeric value א 1 י 10 ק 100 ב 2 כ 20 ר 200 ג 3 ל 30 ש 300 ד 4 מ 40 ת 400 ה 5 נ 50 ך 500 ו 6 ס 60 ם 600 ז 7 ע 70 ן 700 ח 8 פ 80 ף 800 ט 9 צ 90 ץ 900 Click&nbsp;"show"&nbsp;to&nbsp;view&nbsp;extended&nbsp;table&nbsp;including&nbsp;examples. Hebrew letter example Translation StandardIsraelitransliteration– regularTransliteration guidelines by the Academy of the Hebrew Language, November 2006 example standardIsraelitransliteration– precise example IPA&nbsp;phonemictranscription example IPA&nbsp;phonetictranscription example אconsonantal, ininitial wordpositions אִם if none im אconsonantal, innon initial wordpositions שָׁאַל asked ' sha'ál אsilent רִאשׁוֹן first none rishón בּ בֵּן son b ben ב טוֹב good v tov גּ גַּג roof g gag g ג ג׳ ג׳וּק roach Transliteration guidelines preceding 2006-update, p. 3 Academy of the Hebrew Language דּ דּוּד boiler d dud d ד הconsonantal הֵד echo h hed הsilent פֹּה here none po וconsonantal וָו hook v vav w waw וּ הוּא he u hu וֹ לוֹ to him o lo  or  ז זֶה this z ze ז׳ זָ׳רְגוֹן jargon ח חַם hot    or  dialectical ט קָט tiny t kat יconsonantal יָם sea y yam יpart of hirik male(/i/&nbsp;vowel) בִּי in me i bi יpart of tsere male(/e/&nbsp;vowel or/ei/&nbsp;diphthong) מֵידָע information e medá é médá  or   or   or   or  כּ, ךּ כֹּה so k ko כ, ך סְכָךְ branch-roofing kh  skhakh  or  ל לִי to me l li מ, ם מוּם defect m mum נ, ן נִין great-grandson n nin ס סוֹף end s sof עin initial or finalword positions עַדְלֹאיָדַע Purim-parade none adloyáda only in initialword position dialectical עin medialword positions מוֹעִיל useful ' mo'íl dialectical פּ טִיפּ tip p tip פ, ף פִסְפֵס missed f fisfés צ, ץ צִיץ bud ts tsits צ׳, ץ׳ ריצ׳רץ׳ zip ק קוֹל sound k kol q qol ר עִיר city r ir  or   or  dialectical or   or  שׁ שָׁם there sh sham שׂ שָׂם put s sam תּ תּוּת strawberry t tut ת Hebrew letter StandardIsraelitransliteration– regular standardIsraelitransliteration– precise IPA&nbsp;phonemictranscription IPA&nbsp;phonetictranscription אconsonantal, ininitial wordpositions none אconsonantal, innon initial wordpositions ' אsilent none בּ b ב v גּ g g ג ג׳ דּ d d ד הconsonantal h הsilent none וconsonantal v w וּ u וֹ o  or  ז z ז׳ ח  or  dialectical ט t יconsonantal y יpart of hirik male(/i/&nbsp;vowel) i יpart of tsere male(/e/&nbsp;vowel or/ei/&nbsp;diphthong) e é  or   or  כּ, ךּ k כ, ך kh  or  ל l מ, ם m נ, ן n ס s עin initial or finalword positions none only in initialword position dialectical עin medialword positions ' dialectical פּ p פ, ף f צ, ץ ts צ׳, ץ׳ ק k q ר r  or  dialectical or  שׁ sh שׂ s תּ t ת Letters (non-standard) IPA ,  ,  ~ ~ Letters IPA ~,  ~ Symbol Name Transliteration IPA Example  (right dot) shin sh shop  (left dot) sin s sour Name With dagesh Without dagesh Symbol Transliteration IPA Example Symbol Transliteration IPA Example beth b /b/ bun v /v/ van kaf "ךּ" is rare but exists, e.g. last word in Deuteronomy 7 1 (דברים פרק ז׳ פסוק א׳) in the word "" – see תנ״ך מנוקד, דברים פרק ז׳. There is a single occurrence of "ףּ", see this comment. k /k/ kangaroo kh/ch/x /χ/ loch pe p /p/ pass f/ph /f/ find Letters !! Transliteration !! Pronunciation (IPA) Alef*  Ayin* nottransliterated Usually when in medial word position:(separation of vowels in a hiatus) When in initial or final word position, sometimes also in medial word position:silent alternatingly ' or ’ (glottal stop) Bet (without dagesh) Vav v Het Kaf (without dagesh) kh/ch/h Tet Tav t Kaf (with dagesh) Qof k Samekh Sin (with left dot) s Tsadi* Tav-Samekh* and Tav-Sin* ts/tz Tsadi (with geresh) Tet-Shin* and Tav-Shin* ch/tsh (chair) Symbol Pronunciation Israeli Ashkenazi Sephardi Yemenite Reconstructed Tiberian !! Mishnaic !! Biblical א [ - ] בּ ב גּ ג ג׳ N/A N/A N/A דּ ד ד׳ N/A N/A N/A ה ו וּ ? ? ? וֹ ? ? ? &rlm;(וו), ו׳(non-standard) issued by the Academy of the Hebrew Language states that both  and  be indistinguishably represented in Hebrew using the letter Vav. Sometimes the Vav is indeed doubled, however not to denote  as opposed to  but rather, when spelling without niqqud, to denote the phoneme  at a non-initial and non-final position in the word, whereas a single Vav at a non-initial and non-final position in the word in spelling without niqqud denotes one of the phonemes  or . To pronounce foreign words and loanwords containing the sound , Hebrew readers must therefore rely on former knowledge and context, see also pronunciation of Hebrew Vav. N/A N/A N/A ז ז׳ N/A N/A N/A ח ט  (1)  (2)  (3) י ִי ? ? ? כּ כ ך ל מ ם נ ן ס ע , -&nbsp;] [ - ]  -&nbsp;] ע׳ N/A N/A N/A פּ פ ף צ ץ  (1)  (2)  (3) צ׳ ץ׳ N/A N/A N/A ק , ,   (3) ר ~ ~ ~ שׁ שׂ תּ ת ת׳ N/A N/A N/A Letter!!Nameof letter!!Consonant indicatedwhen letterconsonantal Voweldesignation!!Name ofvowel designation IndicatedVowel alef — — ê, ệ, ậ, â, ô he — — ê, ệ, ậ, â, ô vav ô û yud î ê, ệ Name Symbol Israeli Hebrew IPA Transliteration Englishexample Hiriq i week Zeire , ( withsucceeding yod) e, (ei withsucceeding yod) men, main Segol e men Patach a father Kamatz סָ&lrm; , (or ) a, (or o) father, more Holam Haser o more Holam Male וֹ Shuruk u moon Kubutz Name Symbol Israeli Hebrew IPA Transliteration Englishexample Shva  or  apostrophe, e,or nothing h as pronounced in heir Reduced Segol e men Reduced Patach a father Reduced Kamatz סֳ&lrm; o more Vowel comparison table Hebrew lessons for Christians Vowel Length(phonetically not manifested in Israeli Hebrew) IPA Transliteration Englishexample Long Short Very Short a far e men o more n/a u soon i ski Note I: By adding two vertical dots (sh'va)  the vowel is made very short. Note II: The short o and long a have the same niqqud. Note III: The short o is usually promoted to a long oin Israeli writing for the sake of disambiguation Note IV: The short u is usually promoted to a long uin Israeli writing for the sake of disambiguation Hebrew slang and loanwords Name Symbol IPA Transliteration Example Gimel with a geresh Zayin with a geresh Tsadi with a geresh  (treat) Vav with a gereshor double Vav  or (non standard) w awánta (boastful act) Transliteration of non-native sounds Name Symbol IPA Arabic letter Example Comment Dalet with a geresh  (ذ) Voiced th  (ذو الحجة)&lrm; Tav with a geresh  (ﺙ)Voiceless th Thurston  with a geresh  (خ) Sheikh (شيخ)&lrm; Resh with a geresh  or   (غ)  (غجر) Sometimes an ʻayin with a geresh () is used to transliterate  – inconsistently with the guidelines specified by the Academy of the Hebrew Language For some letters, the Academy of the Hebrew Language offers a precise transliteration that differs from the regular standard it has set. When omitted, no such precise alternative exists and the regular standard applies. The IPA phonemic transcription is specified whenever it uses a different symbol from the one used for the regular standard Israeli transliteration. The IPA phonetic transcription is specified whenever it differs from IPA phonemic transcription. In some Sephardi and Mizrahi dialects, bet without dagesh is pronounced , like bet with dagesh In Syrian and Yemenite Hebrew, gimel without dagesh is pronounced . In Yemenite Hebrew, and in the Iraqi pronunciation of the word "Adonai", dalet without dagesh is pronounced  as in "these" In Ashkenazi Hebrew, tav without dagesh is pronounced  as in "silk" In Iraqi and Yemenite Hebrew, and formerly in some other dialects, tav without dagesh is pronounced  is in "thick"  chet and  ayin represented pharyngeal fricatives,  tsadi represented the emphatic consonant ,  tet represented the emphatic consonant , and  qof represented the uvular plosive . All these are common Semitic consonants.  sin (the  variant of  shin) was originally different from both  shin and  samekh, but had become  the same as  samekh by the time the vowel pointing was devised. Because of cognates with other Semitic languages, this phoneme is known to have originally been a lateral consonant, most likely the voiceless alveolar lateral fricative  (the sound of modern Welsh ll) or the voiceless alveolar lateral affricate  (like Náhuatl tl). velarized or pharyngealized pharyngealized sometimes said to be ejective but more likely glottalized. Hebrew Biblical Hebrew orthography Gershayim Hebrew braille Hebrew diacritics Hebrew keyboard Hebrew punctuation Help:Hebrew History of the Hebrew language Inverted nun Koren Type Rashi script Romanization of Hebrew Significance of numbers of Judaism  ff. Hoffman, Joel M. 2004. In the Beginning: A Short History of the Hebrew Language. New York: New York University Press. Saenz-Badillos, Angel. 1993. A History of the Hebrew Language. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Steinberg, David. History of the Hebrew Language. Mathers table Hebrew Alphabet Guide The Hebrew alphabet, meanings, and spiritual symbolism How to draw letters Official Unicode standards document for Hebrew Transliterate your English name into Hebrew Letters Hebrew Alphabet Charts Interactive Hebrew Alphabet Lesson Mobile OCR Hebrew Dictionary LiteType.com – Virtual & Interactive Hebrew Keyboard Hebrew calligraphy alphabet Model Hebrew calligraphy Alphabet Mikledet.com – For typing Hebrew with an English keyboard (Hebrew keyboard|Hebrew layout) Hebrew Writing – Typing Hebrew and Nikud using extended English keyboard (Hebrew keyboard|Hebrew Writing layout) Prize Find: Oldest Hebrew Inscription Biblical Archaeology Review
