   Sir Henry Vane (baptised 26 March 1613 – 14 June 1662), son of Henry Vane the Elder (often referred to as Harry Vane to distinguish him from his father), was an English politician, statesman, and colonial governor.  He was briefly present in North America, serving one term as the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, and supported the creation of Roger Williams' Rhode Island Colony and Harvard College.  A proponent of religious tolerance, he returned to England in 1637 following the Antinomian controversy that led to the banning of Anne Hutchinson from Massachusetts. He was a leading Parliamentarian during the English Civil War and worked closely with Oliver Cromwell.  He played no part in the execution of King Charles I, and refused to take oaths that expressed approval of the act.  Vane served on the Council of State that functioned as the government executive during the Interregnum, but split with Cromwell over issues of governance and removed himself from power when Cromwell dissolved Parliament in 1653.  He returned to power during the short-lived Commonwealth period in 1659–1660, and was arrested under orders from King Charles II following his restoration to the throne.  After long debate, Vane was exempted from the Indemnity and Oblivion Act, and was thus denied amnesty granted to most people for their roles in the Civil War and Interregnum. Although he was formally granted clemency by Charles II, he was charged with high treason by Parliament in 1662.  In a court proceeding in which he was denied counsel and the opportunity to properly prepare a defence, he was convicted by a partisan jury.  Charles withdrew his earlier clemency, and Vane was beheaded on Tower Hill on 14 June 1662. Vane was recognised by his political peers as a competent administrator and a wily and persuasive negotiator and politician.  His politics was driven by a desire for religious tolerance in an era when governments were used to establish official churches and suppress dissenting views.  Although his views were in a small minority, he was able to successfully build coalitions to advance his agenda.  His actions were often ultimately divisive, and contributed to both the rise and downfall of the English Commonwealth.  His books and pamphlets written on political and religious subjects are still analyzed today, and Vane is remembered in Massachusetts and Rhode Island as an early champion of religious freedom.  Henry Vane was baptised on 26 May 1613 at Debden, Essex.  He was the eldest child of Sir Henry Vane the Elder, who came from the landed gentry, and Frances Darcy, who came from minor nobility.Ireland, pp. 33–35  The elder Vane used the family's money to purchase positions at court, rising by 1629 to be Comptroller of the Household.  Vane was educated at Westminster School, where his classmates included Arthur Heselrige and Thomas Scot, two other men who would figure prominently in English politics.Ireland, p. 36  Vane's friend and biographer George Sikes wrote that Vane was "[ignorant] of God" and of a temperament that made him "acceptable to those they call good fellows", but that he had a religious awakening at 14 or 15, after which he "and his former jolly company came to a parting blow."Ireland, p. 37  Vane then enrolled at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he studied in spite of his refusal to take the necessary matriculation oaths.  He then traveled to Europe, where he was reported to be studying at Leiden and possibly in France and at Geneva. Vane's father had been upset by his open adoption of Puritan views, fearing this would hamper his opportunities for advancement at court.  In 1631 he sent the young Vane to Vienna as an assistant to Robert Anstruther, the English ambassador.  This was apparently a quite privileged role, for Vane's writings of the time include messages written in French and in cipher.Ireland, p. 40  During this trip the elder Vane was sent to negotiate with Swedish King Gustavus for an alliance; King Charles' unwillingness to act in the matter meant the effort was in vain.Adamson and Folland, p. 35  He was introduced to the king after returning to England, and encouraged by his father to seek a position in the privy chamber.Ireland, pp. 45–46  His father engaged in numerous attempts to get him to give up his nonconformist views, without success.  In order to worship as he chose, Vane then decided to go the New World, joining the Puritan migration.Ireland, p. 54 Vane left for the Massachusetts Bay Colony, arriving in Boston in October 1635 on a ship also carrying John Winthrop the Younger and Hugh Peter.Ireland, p. 57  The elder John Winthrop described Vane as "a young gentleman of excellent parts", and by the following month he had already been admitted as a freeman in the colony.  He began playing a role in its judicial administration, deciding whether legal disputes had sufficient merit to be heard by a full court.Adamson and Folland, pp.65–66  Vane was instrumental in brokering the resolution to a dispute between the elder Winthrop and Thomas Dudley concerning matters of judicial conduct.Ireland, p. 69  In the spring of 1637 Vane was elected governor of the colony, succeeding John Haynes.Ireland, pp. 69–70  The situation he faced was complex, with issues on religious, political and military fronts.  His biographers describe his term in office as "disastrous".Adamson and Folland, p. 69  The colony was split over the actions and beliefs of Anne Hutchinson.  She had come with her husband and children to the colony in 1634, and began holding Bible sessions at home, gaining a wide audience and sharing her opinions that the colonial leaders labeled as Antinomianism, the view that existing laws and practices were not necessary for salvation.Anderson, pp. 477,482  Most of the older colonial leadership, including Dudley and Winthrop, espoused a more Legalist view.  Vane was a supporter of Hutchinson, as was at first the influential pastor John Cotton, and this was the faction that propelled Vane into the governor's seat in 1636.Moore, pp. 287–288  Vane, however, immediately alienated some of the colonists by insisting on flying the English flag over Boston's fort.Moore, p. 318  The flag had recently been the subject of controversy, since its depiction of the Cross of St George was seen by many colonists as a symbol of papacy, and John Endecott had notoriously cut the cross out of the Salem militia's flag.Moore, p. 317  Vane's popularity went down further when he learned in December 1636 that there were issues in England requiring his presence, and he attempted to resign.  Although the court of assistants accepted his resignation, he withdrew it upon the request of the congregation of the Boston church.Ireland, pp. 81–82 During Vane's tenure a dispute with the Pequot tribe of present-day southeastern Connecticut boiled over into war.  In 1636 the boat of a Massachusetts trader named John Oldham was found near Block Island, overrun by Indians.  Further examination by the discoverers (after the Indians fled in canoes) uncovered Oldham's body on board.Cave, p. 104  The attackers were at the time believed to be from tribes affiliated with the Narragansetts, but Narragansett leaders claimed that those responsible had fled to the protection of the Pequots.Moore, p. 267Cave, pp. 105–107  The Pequots were aggressively expansionist in their dealings with the surrounding native tribes (including the Narragansett), but had until then generally kept the peace with nearby English colonists.  Massachusetts authorities were already angry that the Pequots had failed to turn over men implicated in the killing of another trader on the Connecticut River; the slaying of Oldham led to calls for action.Cave, pp. 100, 107–109  Despite the fact that Roger Williams had warned him that the Narragansetts were more likely responsible for Oldham's slaying, Governor Vane in August 1636 placed John Endecott at the head of a 90-man force to extract justice from the Pequots.Cave, p. 109  Endecott's heavy-handed expedition did little more than destroy Pequot settlements, and sparked a military backlash.  The Pequots struck back at settlements recently established on the Connecticut River by colonists from Massachusetts, and at the Saybrook Colony of the younger John Winthrop.Cave, pp. 135–136  In April 1637 the ostensibly pacifist Vane called a session of the general court that authorized the colonial militia to assist the other New England colonies in continuing the war, which resulted in the destruction of the Pequots as a tribal entity.Adamson and Folland, p. 98  Vane lost his position to the elder John Winthrop in the 1637 election.Doherty, p. 93 The contentious election was marked by a sharp disagreement over the treatment of John Wheelwright, another Hutchinson supporter.Bremer, pp. 276–277  Winthrop won in part because the location of the vote was moved to Cambridge, reducing the power of Vane's Boston support.Ireland, p. 82  In the aftermath of the election Anne Hutchinson was put on trial, and eventually banished from the colony.  Many of her followers seriously considered leaving after the election.  At the urging of Roger Williams, some of these people, including Hutchinson, founded the settlement of Portsmouth on Aquidneck Island in the Narragansett Bay (later named Rhode Island and joined to Providence to form the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations).  Vane decided to return to England, apparently with the notion that he would acquire a royal governorship to trump the colonial administration.Winship, p. 9  Before his departure, he published A Brief Answer to a Certain Declaration, a response to Winthrop's defense of the Act of Exclusion; this act was passed after the election to restrict the immigration of people with views not conforming to the colony's religious orthodoxy.Adamson and Folland, p. 104 Despite their political differences, Vane and Winthrop developed an epistolary relationship in the following years.Ireland, p. 96  Vane's legacy from his time in the New World includes the colonial legislation appropriating £400 for the establishment of an institute of higher learning now known as Harvard University,Hosmer (1888), p. 52 and his support of Roger Williams in the acquisition of Aquidneck Island from the local Indians that resulted in the formal beginnings of Rhode Island.  The surviving accounts do not say that Vane provide the funds for the acquisition; Williams credits Vane as being "an instrument in the hand of God for procuring this island".Hosmer (1888), p. 67 According to historian Michael Winship, Vane's experiences in Massachusetts significantly radicalized his religious views, in which he came to believe that clergy of all types, including Puritan ministers, "were the second beast of Revelations 13:11", "pretending to visible Saintship".Winship, p. 245  This conviction drove his political activities in England, where he sought to minimize the power and influence of all types of clergy.  Biographer Violet Rowe writes that "Vane's guiding principles in religious policy seem to have been two: a rooted distrust of clerical power, whether of bishops or presbyters, and a belief that the State should abstain from interference in church matters altogether."Rowe, p. 200 Vane's stance can be seen in the way the first Rhode Island patent was drafted in 1643, when he sat on the Parliamentary committee charged with colonial affairs.King, pp. 110–113  Unique among all of the early English colonial charters, it contains provisions guaranteeing freedom of religion.King, p. 115  (Vane assisted Roger Williams again in 1652, when the latter sought a confirmation of the Rhode Island charter and the revocation of a conflicting charter that had been issued to William Coddington.)King, pp. 117–124 On his return to England, he procured, with the assistance of the Earl of Northumberland and his father, a position as Treasurer of the Royal Navy in 1639.Adamson and Folland, p. 130  In this position he had the personally distasteful yet highly profitable task of collecting the hated ship money (a tax to support the Navy imposed by Charles I without Parliamentary approval).Adamson and Folland, pp. 130–131  In June 1640 he was awarded a knighthood by King Charles.Adamson, pp. 138–139  He married Frances Wray, daughter of Sir Christopher Wray, on 1 July 1640, after which his father settled upon him most of the family's holdings.  These included Fairlawn in Kent, and Raby Castle, where Vane would make his home.Adamson and Folland, p. 140  According to his biographers, the relationship with Frances was anchored by shared spiritual goals and intimacy, and was happy and fulfilling.Adamson and Folland, pp. 140–141  The connection with the admiralty secured for him election to the Short and Long Parliaments representing Hull.  Vane had already formed or renewed associations with prominent opponents of Charles' policies, including John Pym and John Hampden.  In the Short Parliament he was noted to be "capable of managing great affairs", with a "penetrating judgment" and an "easy and graceful manner of speaking."Hosmer (1888), p. 100  With others like Nathaniel Fiennes, he represented a younger generation of Puritans in the leadership of the Long Parliament that effectively managed affairs: as identified by Clarendon in his history, these included Hampden, Pym, and Oliver St John in the Commons, and Earl of Bedford and Viscount Saye and Sele in the Lords.Clarendon, p. 1:362 Vane was instrumental in the 1641 impeachment and execution of the Earl of Strafford, a member of the Privy Council. Vane discovered some confidential notes his father had made of a council meeting, and passed them to John Pym.  The wording in those notes could be interpreted to mean that Strafford had proposed that Charles use the Irish Army to subjugate England.Hosmer (1888), pp. 126–127 The evidence against Strafford was weak, and the impeachment failed.Purkiss, p. 115  Pym consequently orchestrated the passage of a bill of attainder against Strafford, who was then executed in May 1641.Purkiss, p. 116  The illicit means by which Pym acquired the notes caused a rift between the Vanes that only healed when the elder Vane eventually came to oppose the king.Adamson and Folland, p. 148 In the Root and Branch petition debate in the Commons, from December 1640 and into 1641, Vane supported, as did Nathaniel Fiennes, the call for radical reforms in the Church of England, a position that put Vane in opposition to his father.Ireland, p. 159  Amid a sea of complaints about church governance, he and Fiennes in February 1641 were added to a committee that had been established the previous November to draft a report on the state of the kingdom.Shaw, pp. 18–26,42  Their efforts led Vane to introduce the Root and Branch Bill in May 1641.Shaw, p. 99  The debate on the bill was acrimonious, and resulted in a clear indication of parliamentary support for church reform. In its wake mobs invaded churches, removing "scandalous images" and other signs of "popery".Adamson and Folland, p. 159  Vane made an impassioned speech that brought him to the front of his faction, claiming episcopacy (the governing structure of the Church of England) was a corrupt doctrine "hastening us back again to Rome."Adamson and Folland, p. 157 The bill died without a vote in August, when more critical matters arose to occupy Parliament.Ireland, pp. 160,163  When Charles went to Scotland to rally Scottish forces to the royalist cause, the Commons began drafting what became known as the Grand Remonstrance.  Many historians have claimed Vane had a role in drafting some of its language; this matter is disputed, but either way Vane did not participate in the debate.Adamson and Folland, p. 164  Narrowly passed by the Commons in November 1641, the document catalogued many grievances against the king and church, and served to further polarize political affairs.Ireland, p. 165  The king refused to enact any of the requested reforms.  Upon his return from Scotland, the king also deprived both Vanes, father and son, of their administrative posts, in revenge for their roles in the execution of Strafford.Ireland, p. 166  In the first six months of 1642, relations between the king and Parliament broke down completely, and factions supporting both sides took up arms.  Parliament returned Vane to his post as Treasurer of the Navy, where he used connections to bring significant naval support to the Parliamentary side after Charles attempted to arrest five MPs on charges of high treason in December 1641.Adamson and Folland, pp. 169–176Ireland, p. 173  In June 1642 Charles rejected the Nineteen Propositions, the last substantive set of demands made by Parliament prior to the outbreak of the First English Civil War.Adamson and Folland, p. 173  After hostilities began that June with the Siege of Hull, Vane was given a seat on the Committee of Safety, which oversaw Parliamentary military activities.Adamson and Folland, p. 177  After the failure of the Root and Branch Bill, Parliament in 1643 called together the Westminster Assembly of Divines, a body of lay politicians, lords, and clergy whose purpose was to reform church governance.Moore, p. 323  Vane sat on this body, which met periodically until 1648, as one of the lay representatives of the Independent faction.Shaw, pp. 145–365Hosmer (1888), p. 172  Not long after its first meeting in July, Vane was sent at the head of a Parliamentary commission seeking military assistance from the Scots.Adamson and Folland, p. 193  The Scots, who had been opposed to Charles in the Bishop's Wars (1639–40) over religious issues,Adamson and Folland, pp. 134–140 were willing to assist the English Parliament if the latter were willing to allow the extension of the Presbyterian system of church polity to England.Hosmer (1888), p. 177  Vane was opposed to both Presbyterianism and Episcopalianism, but found a way to finesse an agreement.Adamson and Folland, p. 196  He proposed that the agreement, which covered a combination of religious and political topics, be called the Solemn League and Covenant, and he introduced slippery language into the agreement concerning "the example of the best Reformed churches".  This language permitted the Scots to believe that their ideas would be adopted, while the English could interpret it to mean that English (i.e. Independent) practices could be adopted.  The league and covenant were eventually approved by authorities in Scotland, England, and Ireland, and paved the way for Scottish entry into the war.Adamson and Folland, pp. 197–199 Following Vane's success in negotiating the Scottish agreement, the death of John Pym at the end of 1643 propelled Vane into the leadership of Parliament, along with Oliver St John, Henry Marten, and Arthur Heselrige.Adamson and Folland, pp. 202–209  He promoted, and became a chief member of, the Committee of Both Kingdoms, established in February 1644 as a point were English and Scottish authorities could coordinate war activities.Adamson and Folland, p. 214  Vane was then sent to York in June 1644, then besieged by three Parliament armies, to urge Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Earl of Manchester to divert some of those forces to face Prince Rupert of the Rhine, who had recently taken Liverpool and was pillaging properties of Parliamentary supporters in Lancashire.Ireland, pp. 226–227Adamson and Folland, p. 216  While there he also proposed to the generals the establishment of a government without the king.  This idea was roundly rejected by the old guard generals who believed Charles could still be accommodated, but found support with the rising star of Oliver Cromwell.Ireland, p. 226Adamson and Folland, p. 217 On 13 September 1644 Vane acted with St John and Cromwell in the Commons to set up a "Grand Committee for the Accommodation", designed to find a compromise on religious issues dividing the Westminster Assembly.  He sought in its debate to identify loopholes for religious tolerance on behalf of the Independents.Cliffe, pp. 109–110  This exposed Vane's opposition to Presbyterianism, and created a rift between the pro-war Independents, led by Vane and Cromwell, and the pro-peace Scots and other supporters of Presbyterianism.Adamson and Folland, pp. 222–223  The latter included the Earl of Essex, whose failures in the west of England reduced popular support for his cause, even as the military success of Cromwell at Marston Moor raised his profile.Ireland, pp. 236–237Adamson and Folland, p. 220  Robert Baillie, on the realization that the Parliamentary Independents, despite previous claims of support by Vane, were not on the side of the Scots, wrote "Sir Henry Vane and The Solicitor [St John]... without any regard for us, who have saved their nation and brought their two persons to the height of power now they enjoy and use to our prejudice".Adamson and Folland, p. 223 Overtures for peace talks were begun in November 1644 between king and Parliament.  Vane was one of many negotiators sent to Uxbridge in a failed attempt to negotiate peace.Ireland, pp. 245–246  Vane and the Independents were seen by some as a principal reason for the failure of these talks, because the Scots and Charles were prepared to agree on issues of church polity and doctrine and the Independents were not.Adamson and Folland, p. 230  The talks, which lasted from late January through most of February 1645, were overshadowed by the execution after impeachment by attainder of Archbishop Laud.Ireland, pp. 246–248  Parliament began discussing a reorganization of its military as early as November 1644, in part to remove some poorly-performing commanders, and to eliminate the regional character of the existing forces.Adamson and Folland, p. 229  In debate that principally divided the Commons from the Lords, Vane and Cromwell supported passage of the Self-denying Ordinance, forbidding military officers from serving in Parliament, and the establishment of the New Model Army, which would be capable of fighting anywhere in the country.Ireland, pp. 254–256  The provisions of the Self-denying Ordinance also extended to individuals (like Vane) who held civil service posts, but included exceptions for those (like Vane) who had been turned out office by Charles and restored by Parliament.Adamson and Folland, pp. 232–233  Vane then began drawing on fees and stipends that he had previously refused, and failed to pay half of his treasurer's fees to Parliament, as required by the law.Adamson and Folland, p. 233 Following the decisive Parliamentary victory at Naseby in June 1645, the first phase of the civil war was effectively over, but it dragged on for another year,Adamson and Folland, p. 235 before Charles surrendered to Scottish army commanders.Ireland, p. 271  During this time, a new political faction began to rise within the military.  Known as Levellers and led by John Lilburne and others, this populist force was in favour of greater press freedoms, and was opposed to at least some of the privileges of the aristocracy, including the existence of the House of Lords.Adamson and Folland, p. 237 In January 1646, amid ongoing peace negotiations, Charles attempted to separate the Independents from other factions by proposing in letters to Vane an alliance with his faction against the Presbyterians.Adamson and Folland, p. 240  Vane was not amused by this, and responded by pointing out that he preferred the rights of "tender consciences" to be granted by Parliament than by the duplicitous king (papers exposing the king's negotiating positions as facades had been captured at Naseby, and had largely silenced the Royalist elements in Parliament).Ireland, p. 266  The Vane estates were not spared in the maelstrom of war; Vane's father reported that Raby Castle had been "visited four times", suffering damages of £16,000.Ireland, pp. 243–244  In September 1645, the Vanes succeeded in getting Parliamentary approval to fortify Raby.Adamson and Folland, p. 238  By the end of the war the Presbyterian group in the Commons, led by Denzil Holles, William Strode, and Sir Philip Stapleton, was slightly stronger than the Independents.Smith, p. 153  They proceeded to introduce legislation hostile to the views on religious tolerance held by Vane and Independents in the army.  Vane apparently came to realize that the Presbyterian actions posed a threat equal to that of the Episcopalians, and that military action, having sidelined the latter, might also work against the former.  There was also mutual distrust between Vane and the Levellers, because Vane held the somewhat aristocratic view that voting rights should be reserved to the propertied gentry.Adamson and Folland, pp. 243–254  The Independents attempted to negotiate terms favourable to them with Charles, but these were unsuccessful.Adamson and Folland, p. 243 In 1647 Vane and Oliver Cromwell, the leader of the army's Independents, came to work closely together.  The Presbyterian majority sought to disband the army to reduce the threat of those Independents, but issues over pay (which was in arrears), widows' pensions, and other grievances, prompted the Presbyterians to enter into negotiations with the army.  A bitter debate over an army petition led Levellers to charge the Independents, Vane among them, with attempting to "oppress the people" and wanting to "hold the reins of power ... not for a year, but forever."Adamson and Folland, p. 251  Cromwell was eventually able to appease the army, but a Parliamentary purge of Independent officers followed, and the army was ordered to disband.  Some Parliamentary leaders also began negotiating with the Scots for the return of their army, this time to oppose the English army.Adamson and Folland, p. 252  The Parliament army mutinied, and under Cromwell's orders (possibly prompted by a warning from Vane) a detachment of troops seized Charles, who had been placed under a comfortable house arrest at Holmby.  This forced the Presbyterian leadership to meet the army's demands for pay.  They also established a commission to treat with the army, on which they placed Vane, presumably because of his influence with the military.Ireland, pp. 284–285Adamson and Folland, pp. 253–254 The negotiations between the army and Parliament were acrimonious. Mobs in Presbyterian-dominated London threatened Vane and other Independents.  More than 50 Independent MPs, Vane among them, fled the city on 2 August for the protection of the army.  The army then marched on London, with Vane and others at its head, and the Independents were again seated in Parliament.Hosmer (1888), pp. 269–270  The Parliament then debated the army's Heads of Proposals for fixing the term and powers of Parliament and church governance.  Key among its terms of interest to Vane was one that effectively stripped the church, either Episcopal or Presbyterian, of any coercive powers.Adamson and Folland, p. 261  The Heads of Proposals was also sent to Charles, who indicated agreement to some of its terms and opposition to others, and proposed further negotiations.Adamson and Folland, p. 263 The king's proposal split the Independents between those, such as Vane and Cromwell, who were willing to negotiate with the king, and those who were not.  Reverend Hugh Peter spoke out in favor of the "non-addresses" (i.e. no longer negotiating with the king), as did the Levellers.  John Lilburne was particularly critical, saying "I clearly see Cromwell's and Vane's designs, which is to keep the poor people everlastingly (if they can) in bondage and slavery."Adamson and Folland, p. 264  In November 1647, while the debate continued, Charles escaped his confinement at Hampton Court and made his way to the Isle of Wight.  There he was recaptured and imprisoned in Carisbrook Castle.Ireland, p. 287  Offered proposals by the Scots and the Independents, he chose alliance with the Scots.  Sectional violence between royalists, Presbyterians, and Independents, spread throughout the country, although the army maintained a tenuous peace in London.Adamson and Folland, p. 265  Violence flared throughout the country as the various factions armed and organized.  A mutiny in the Royal Navy in May thrust Vane into attempts to prevent it from spreading, and to regain the support of the mutineers, who had declared for Charles.  By mid-July, the army had regained control of most of England, and Cromwell defeated the Scottish army in August at the Battle of Preston.  In the tumult, Vane appeared at times to be in opposition to some of the Independent factions, even having a falling out (quickly healed) with Cromwell, and many factions came to distrust him.  Despite this he was one of the Parliamentary representatives for negotiations with Charles at Newport in September 1648.  He was widely blamed for the failure of those negotiations over his insistence on "an unbounded liberty of conscience".Adamson and Folland, p. 274  In the debates of late 1648 concerning the king's fate, Vane argued that the Parliament should constitute a government without the king "to make themselves the happiest nation and people in the world."Adamson and Folland, p. 276  His forceful speech on 2 December suggesting that the king would need to be eliminated as a political force was opposed by others, including Nathaniel Fiennes, who claimed that the concessions the king had made to date were sufficient that an agreement might be reached.  Others suggested that rather than dividing the house by opposition to the king, it be divided by separating those who had gained in the war from those who had not, and that financial contributions be made from one group to the other.Adamson and Folland, p. 277  After an impassioned conciliatory speech by William Prynne, Parliament finally voted on 5 December that the king's concessions were sufficient, but Clement Walker and other opponents of Vane whispered that both Vanes had abused their positions of power during the war for profit.  Walker compiled a long list of MPs he claimed had acted corruptly, but Vane was not on it.  Instead, Walker charged the Vanes with benefiting by buying at a discount "sleeping pensions", or debts owed by the public purse to individuals, and then pursuing payment of them to enrich themselves.  There is today no substantive way to assess the validity of Walker's charges.Adamson and Folland, pp. 278–280 On 6 December, the military stepped in to take control of matters.  Troops led by Thomas Pride surrounded the Houses of Parliament, and systematically arrested arriving MPs who had been supportive of negotiation with the king.  Vane did not appear that day—he either was aware of what was going to happen, or he may have stayed away because his side had lost the vote.Adamson and Folland, p. 281  This action, known as "Pride's Purge", resulted in the exclusion of more than 140 MPs.Adamson and Folland, pp. 282–283  The Parliament that sat became known as the Rump Parliament, and its first main order of business was the trial and execution of King Charles.  During this process Vane refused to attend Parliament, although he was present as a spectator when the trial began on 20 January 1649.Adamson and Folland, p. 284  He later claimed to oppose putting the king on trial because of "tenderness of blood", and continued to fulfill the duties of his government posts, signing admiralty papers on the day Charles was executed.Adamson and Folland, p. 291 After the execution of Charles, the House of Commons voted to abolish both the crown and the House of Lords.Ireland, p. 298  To replace the executive functions of the crown, it established a Council of State to which Vane was appointed.  He refused to be seated until he could do so without taking any oath, in particular the first one, which required an expression of approval for the regicide.Adamson and Folland, pp. 292–293  Vane served on many of the council's committees.  In his role on committees overseeing the military he directed the provisioning of supplies for Cromwell's conquest of Ireland.Adamson and Folland, p. 296  As a leading member of the committee overseeing the navy (where he was joined by schoolmate Thomas Scot), he directed affairs in the naval First Anglo-Dutch War (1652–1654).Brenner, p. 582  After the navy's disastrous performance against the Dutch in 1652, Vane headed the committee that reformed the navy, drafting new Articles of War and formally codifying naval law.  Vane's reforms were instrumental in the navy's successes later in the war.Adamson and Folland, p. 312  He was also involved in foreign diplomacy, going on a mission to France (whose purpose is unknown) in 1652 to meet with Cardinal de Retz,Adamson and Folland, p. 310 and traveling again to Scotland to organize the government there after Cromwell's victories in the Third English Civil War.Ireland, pp. 321–322  Vane was also active in domestic affairs.  He sat on a committee that disposed of Charles I's art collection, and made many enemies in his role on the committees for Compounding and Sequestration.Adamson and Folland, p. 293  These committees, on which Vane had also sat in the 1640s, were responsible for the distribution of assets seized from royalists and other government opponents, and for negotiating with those who had failed to pay taxes and other government charges.  Some of the enemies he made while engaged in this work would one day sit in judgment against him.Adamson and Folland, pp. 240–242 The process by which the Parliament carried out the duties of the executive was cumbersome, and this became an issue with Cromwell and the army, who sought the ability to act more decisively.Adamson and Folland, p. 314  This attitude drove a wedge between Cromwell and Vane.Adamson and Folland, p. 313  Under pressure from Cromwell for new elections, the Parliament began to consider proposals for electoral reform.  In January 1653 a committee headed by Vane made one such proposal.Aylmer, p. 15  It called for suffrage to be allowed on the basis of property ownership, and it specifically sought to eliminate a number of so-called "rotten boroughs", which had small numbers of voters and were controlled by wealthy patrons.Ireland, p. 341  The proposal also called for some of the current members, whose republican credentials were deemed suitable, to retain their seats, so that the fledgling commonwealth might, as Harry Marten put it, would be shepherded by "the mother that brought it forth".Ireland, p. 340  This latter clause was specifically proposed at the urging of the army by Vane, who realised that those who were charged with its implementation would be able to retain power.  However, Cromwell, seeking a general election, was opposed to this scheme, and the two sides were unable to reconcile.Adamson and Folland, p. 315 Although Parliamentary leaders, Vane among them, had promised Cromwell on 19 April 1653 to delay action on the election bill, Vane was likely one of the ringleaders that sought to have the bill enacted the next day before Cromwell could react.  Cromwell was however alerted by a supporter, and interrupted the proceedings that would otherwise have passed the bill.  Bringing troops into the chamber, he put an end to the debate, saying "You are no Parliament.  I say you are no Parliament.  I will put an end to your sitting."Ireland, p. 350  Vane protested, "This is not honest; yea, it is against morality and common honesty", to which Cromwell shouted in response, "O Sir Henry Vane, Sir Henry Vane; the Lord deliver me from Sir Henry Vane!"  This ended the commonwealth, and Cromwell began to rule as Lord Protector.  Vane, "daily missed and courted for his assistance", was invited to sit on Cromwell's council, but refused.Adamson and Folland, p. 319 Effectively in retirement, Vane wrote the Retired Man's Meditations, published in 1655 amid rumors that Vane was fomenting rebellion against Cromwell, principally among Quakers and Fifth Monarchists.Adamson and Folland, p. 325  This work, a jargon-laden religious treatise in which Vane wanders between literal and symbolic interpretation of Biblical scriptures, was treated by contemporaries and later analysts, including David Hume, as "absolutely unintelligible" and "cloudily formed".Adamson and Folland, pp. 325–326  The same year, after Cromwell called for a fast day to consider methods by which his government might be improved, Vane wrote A Healing Question.Ireland, pp. 373–374  In this more carefully structured political work, he proposed a new form of government, insisting as before upon a Parliament supreme over the Army. He was encouraged to publish it by Charles Fleetwood,Worden, p. 312 who had shown it to Cromwell.Ireland, p. 374  In a postscript to the work Vane wrote the words "the good old cause", a coinage that became a rallying cry in the next few years for Vane's group of republicans.Woolrych, p. 715  A Healing Question was seen by John Thurloe, Cromwell's Secretary of State, as a thinly-veiled attack on Cromwell, and its publication prompted a number of opposition political groups to step up their activities.Adamson and Folland, p. 341  Rumors circulated that protests raised by fringe religious groups like the Anabaptists and Quakers were due to Vane's involvement, prompting Cromwell's council to issue an order on 29 July 1656, summoning Vane to appear.Adamson and Folland, p. 344  Vane was ordered to post a bond of £5,000 "to do nothing to the prejudice of the present government and the peace of the Commonwealth", but refused.  He was arrested shortly afterward and imprisoned in Carisbrooke Castle.Auchter, p. 138Adamson and Folland, pp. 344–345 While there he addressed a letter to Cromwell in which he repudiated the extra-parliamentary authority Cromwell had assumed. Vane was released, still unrepentant, on 31 December 1656.Adamson and Folland, p. 347 During Vane's retirement he established a religious teaching group, which resulted in a group of admirers known as "Vanists".Bremer and Webster, p. 257 The Puritan pastor Richard Baxter classified Seekers, Ranters, Behmenists and Vanists together, as religious wild men.Orme, p. 1:81  He also cultivated pamphleteers and other surrogates to promote his political views.  Henry Stubbe, introduced to Vane by Westminster head Richard Busby, became a supporter, and defended him in his Essay in Defence of the Good Old Cause, and in Malice Rebuked (1659).Peacey, p. 82Cooper and Hunter, p. 223 Following Oliver Cromwell's death in September 1658, his son Richard succeeded him as Lord Protector.Ireland, pp. 388,392  The younger Cromwell lacked the political and military skills of his father, and the political factionalism of the earlier Commonwealth began to resurface.Ireland, pp. 392–393  When elections were called for a new parliament in December 1658, Cromwell attempted to prevent the election of both royalists and republicans.Ireland, p. 393Coward, p. 107  Vane, as a leader of the republican faction, was specifically targeted, but managed to win election representing Whitchurch.Ireland, pp. 393–394  In the parliament's session, the republicans questioned Cromwell's claim to power, argued in favour of limiting it, and spoke against the veto power of the Cromwellian House of Lords, which was packed with supporters of the protector.Ireland, p. 395  The republicans were unsuccessful in enacting any substantive changes.Coward, p. 108  Vane formed an alliance with a group of republican military officers known as the Wallingford House party, who met secretly in violation of laws enacted to limit military participation in political matters.Ireland, p. 402  The Cromwellian factions in the parliament overreached in their attempts to control republican sentiment in the military, and Cromwell was forced to dissolve the parliament in April 1659.Coward, pp. 110–111 Cromwell, with little support in the military, abdicated several days later.Ireland, p. 403  Following a purge of pro-Cromwell supporters from the military and a widespread pamphleteering campaign, Cromwell's council recalled the Rump Parliament in May.Coward, p. 112 In the reconstituted Rump Parliament, Vane was appointed to the new council of state.  He also served as commissioner for the appointment of army officers, managed foreign affairs, and examined the state of the government's finances, which were found to be in dismal condition.Ireland, pp. 407–408, 415  Through his work General John Lambert was sent to quell Booth's Rebellion, a royalist uprising in August 1659.Ireland, p. 415  Lambert's support of non-mainstream religious views like Quakerism, however, ensured his political downfall.Farr, p. 184  After he and other officers were stripped of their command by Parliament in October, they rallied their troops and marched on Parliament, forcibly dissolving it.Farr, p. 197  A committee of safety was formed, composed of the army grandees, and including Vane.  He agreed to serve in part because he feared the republican cause was destined to fail without army support.Ireland, p. 418  This committee only served until December, when the advance of General George Monck's army from Scotland led to the melting away of Lambert's military support, and the restoration of the full Long Parliament.  For taking part in the committee of safety, Vane was expelled (over vocal objections from allies like Heselrige) from the Commons, and ordered into house arrest at Raby Castle.Ireland, p. 422Adamson and Folland, p. 414  He went to Raby in February 1660, but only stayed there briefly, and eventually returned to his house at Hampstead.Adamson and Folland, pp. 415,423  During the tumultuous year of the late 1650s proposals for how the government should be structured and how powers should be balanced were widely debated, in private, in public debates in Parliament, and through the publication of pamphlets.  Vane used all of these methods to promote his ideas.  In 1660 he published A Needful Corrective or Balance in Popular Government.  This open letter was essentially a response to James Harrington's The Commonwealth of Oceana, a 1656 treatise describing Harrington's view of a utopian government, which included limitations on property ownership and a legislature with an elected upper chamber.Ireland, p. 412  Harrington's thesis was that power arose from property ownership, and concentrated land ownership led to oligarchic and monarchic forms of government.Ireland, p. 411  Vane disagreed with this, arguing instead that power came from godliness, and presented a somewhat apocalyptic argument in support of his idea.Parnham, pp. 43–46  Vane supporter Henry Stubbe stated openly in October 1659 that permanent Senators would be required. These proposals caused a terminal split in Vane's alliance with Heselrige, whose followers mostly deserted Vane.Woolrych, Austin, "Last Quests for a Settlement: 1657–1660", p. 197, in Aylmer (ed), The Interregnum (1972). In March 1660 the Long Parliament finally dissolved itself, and elections were held for the Convention Parliament, which sat in May.  This body, dominated by royalists and Presbyterians, formally proclaimed Charles II as king, and he was restored to the throne on 29 May 1660.Adamson and Folland, p. 422  In order to minimize acts of reprisal and vengeance for acts taken during the Interregnum, the parliament passed the Indemnity and Oblivion Act, under whose terms most actions were forgiven.  Specific exceptions were made for those directly involved in the regicide, and after long debate, Vane was also named as an exception.  The act was not passed until August 1660, and Vane was arrested on 1 July 1660 on the orders of the king and imprisoned in the Tower of London.Adamson and Folland, pp. 422–425  The parliament, after passing the Indemnity Act, petitioned Charles to grant clemency to Vane and others, asking that his life might be spared. This petition was granted.Adamson and Folland, p. 426 Despite the clemency, Vane remained in the Tower, and the income from his estates was seized.  He suffered the privations of the prison, and was unable to discharge debts that ran to £10,000.  He was transferred to the Isles of Scilly in October 1661 in order to limit access to him by potential conspirators who might be scheming to free him.Ireland, p. 453Adamson and Folland, p. 437  He continued to write, principally on religious themes, seeking to come to terms with the political state of affairs and his condition.Ireland, p. 454  According to The People's Case Stated, written by Vane in this time, power originated with God, but resided primarily with the people: "The power which is directive, and states and ascertains the morality of the rule of obedience, is in the hand of God; but the original, from whence all just power arises, which is magistratical and co-ercitive, is from the will or free gift of the people, who may either keep the power in themselves or give up their subjection and will in the hand of another." King and people were bound by "the fundamental constitution or compact", which if the king violated, the people might return to their original right and freedom.Yorke, p. 893 Following Vane's move to Scilly, the Cavalier Parliament passed a resolution in November 1661 demanding his return to the Tower for trial.  Charles temporized, and in January 1662 the Parliament renewed the demand.Adamson and Folland, p. 438  Vane was moved back to the Tower in April 1662, and on 2 June 1662 he was arraigned on charges of high treason against Charles II.Hosmer (1888), pp. 510Adamson and Folland, p. 448  The trial began on 6 June before the Court of King's Bench, with four judges headed by Lord Chief Justice Robert Foster presiding, and with the king's attorney general Sir Geoffrey Palmer prosecuting.Adamson and Folland, p. 456  As was typical of those accused of treason, Vane was denied legal representation.  He defended himself against charges of making war against the king during the civil war by asserting the sovereign power of parliament.  Accused of imagining the death of the king in 1659, he argued that it was not possible to commit treason against a king not in possession of the crown.  When the prosecution argued that the king was always in de jure possession, Vane pointed out that this rendered invalid the charges that he conspired to keep Charles II from exercising his power.  The judges stepped in to point out this was irrelevant.Adamson and Folland, pp. 456–461  The jury, which was packed with royalists, convicted him after thirty minutes of debate.Ireland, p. 465Adamson and Folland, p. 461 Vane attempted to appeal his conviction, and tried to get the magistrates to sign a Bill of Exclusion in which Vane catalogued all the problems he saw with his trial.  However, the magistrates refused.  Informed of Vane's conduct before and during the trial,Adamson and Folland, p. 466 Charles II now felt that Vane was too dangerous a man to be left alive, and retracted his clemency.Shifflett, p. 98Robertson, p. 348  (Unlike Vane, John Lambert at his trial had thrown himself on the mercy of the court, and was consequently exiled to Guernsey after his conviction.)  Although Vane had been sentenced to the commoner's death of being hanged and then drawn and quartered, Charles was persuaded to grant him the gentleman's death of beheading.Adamson and Folland, pp. 465,467  On 14 June 1662 Vane was taken to Tower Hill and beheaded. Noted diarist Samuel Pepys was there and recorded the event:Pepys, p. 4:241 In his final days Vane had made his peace with God, and had also carefully prepared the speech he intended to make at the execution.Adamson and Folland, pp. 467–469  In order to preserve the speech, he gave copies to close friends who visited him in those days, which were later printed.Adamson and Folland, p. 478  Many viewed him as a martyr for continuing to espouse his cause, and some thought the king had lost more than he gained by having him executed.  His body was returned to his family, who interred him in the church at Shipbourne, near the family estate of Fairlawn in Kent.Adamson and Folland, p. 477 Vane and his wife Frances had ten children. Of their five sons, only the last, Christopher, had children, and succeeded to his father's estates.  He was created Baron Barnard by William III.Ireland, p. 497   A number of Vane's speeches to Parliament and other bodies were printed during his lifetime or shortly after, including The Speech Intended to Have been Spoken on the Scaffold, published in 1662.Adamson and Folland, p. 481 Vane's other printed works include:Adamson and Folland, p. 482 The last work contains, in addition to his last speech and details relating to the trial, The People's Case Stated, The Valley of Jehoshaphat, and Meditations concerning Man's Life.Yorke, p. 894 Some contemporary works were incorrectly attributed to him.  Clarendon, in his History of the Rebellion, assigns to Vane credit for one speech in support of the Self-Denying Ordinance; later historians find this attribution spurious.  The Speech against Richard Cromwell is probably the composition of a later writer, while The Light Shining out of Darkness may have been written by Henry Stubbe. Vane was widely recognized by contemporary chroniclers as a gifted administrator and a forceful orator. Even the royalist Clarendon had good words for him, and wrote of him as follows:  "He had an unusual aspect, which ... made men think there was something in him of the extraordinary; and his whole life made good that imagination." Also, Clarendon credited Vane with having possessed "extraordinary parts, a pleasant wit, a great understanding, a temper not to be moved", and in debate "a quick conception and a very sharp and weighty expression".  The 1662 biography The Life and Death of Sir Henry Vane the Younger by Vane's chaplain George Sikes included John Milton's "Sonnet 17", written in 1652 in praise of Vane, and presented to Vane that year.Lewalski, p. 287 The religious writings of Vane were so unusual as to have been found difficult to understand, even baffling, by readers as varied as Richard Baxter, Clarendon, Gilbert Burnet and David Hume, and continue to be seen so today.Freeman and Mayer, p. 223 Civil War historian Blair Worden comments that "Vane's opaque political ideas and religious beliefs are now barely intelligible",Worden, p. 363 and biographer David Parnham writes "He presented himself as a 'witness' of light, as a spiritualist, as one dispensing advanced wisdoms in the epistemological setting of an imminent and apocalyptic age of the Spirit".Parnham, p. 12 Vane's reputation was at its height in the nineteenth century, especially in the United States.  English historian John Andrew Doyle wrote of Vane that he had acquired "a more dazzling reputation than has been granted to the lofty public spirit and statesmanlike foresight of Winthrop."Doyle, p. 169  William Wordsworth referenced Vane in his sonnet Great Men Have Been Among Us (1802). Charles Dickens included the exchange between Vane and Cromwell at the end of the Rump Parliament in his A Child's History of England, part-published in the early 1850s.Dickens, p. 267  In English Traits (1856), Ralph Waldo Emerson placed Vane on a list of historical English greats.  Sean Gabb, a modern British libertarian, notes that Vane was in the vanguard on issues of religious freedom.  Although he was "among a small and easily defeated minority", his successors 150 years later "were responsible for the clearest and most solid safeguards of civil and religious freedom ever adopted into a constitution."  In 1897 the Royal Society of the Arts marked Vane's demolished Hampstead house on Rosslyn Hill, Vane House, with a blue plaque. James Kendall Hosmer, editing Winthrop's Journal in 1908, wrote of Vane: ... his heroic life and death, his services to Anglo-Saxon freedom, which make him a significant figure even to the present moment, may well be regarded as the most illustrious character who touches early New England history. While his personal contact with America was only for a brief space, his life became a strenuous upholding of American ideas: if government of, by, and for the people is the principle which English-speaking men feel especially bound to maintain, the life and death of Vane contributed powerfully to cause this idea to prevail.Hosmer (1908), p. 161 The literature on the English Civil War, Commonwealth and Protectorate is immense, and Vane has been a regular subject for biographers in the 19th and 20th centuries.      A Brief Answer to a Certain Declaration, 1637 The Retired Man's Meditations, 1655 A Healing Question Propounded, 1656 Of Love of God and Union with God, 1657? The Proceeds of the Protector ... Against Sir Henry Vane, Knight, 1658 A Needful Corrective or Balance in Popular Government, 1659 Two Treatises: "Epistle General to the Mystical Body of Christ" and "The Face of the Times", 1662 The Cause of the People of England Stated, 1689 (written 1660-1662; the title may have been intended to be "Case" instead of "Cause") A Pilgrimage into the Land of Promise, 1664 The Trial of Sir Henry Vane, Knight, 1662  Contemporary history of the Civil War and Interregnum by a royalist.  Ten volume history covering 17th century England up to the Civil War.  Three volume history of the English Civil War.  Three volume history of the Commonwealth and Protectorate.   Biography and other materials published in the wake of Vane's execution. A Healing Question Official Massachusetts Governor biography
