   Henri Cartier-Bresson (; August 22, 1908&nbsp;– August 3, 2004) was a French photographer considered the master of candid photography, and an early user of 35&nbsp;mm film. He helped develop street photography, and approvingly cited a notion of the inevitability of a decisive moment, a term adopted as the title for his first major book. His work has influenced many photographers. Henri Cartier-Bresson was born in Chanteloup-en-Brie, Seine-et-Marne, France, the oldest of five children. His father was a wealthy textile manufacturer, whose Cartier-Bresson thread was a staple of French sewing kits. His mother's family were cotton merchants and landowners from Normandy, where Henri spent part of his childhood. The Cartier-Bresson family lived in a bourgeois neighborhood in Paris, Rue de Lisbonne, near Place de l'Europe and Parc Monceau. His parents supported him financially so Henri could pursue photography more freely than his contemporaries. Henri also sketched. Young Henri took holiday snapshots with a Box Brownie; he later experimented with a 3×4&nbsp;inch view camera. He was raised in traditional French bourgeois fashion, and was required to address his parents with formal vous rather than tu. His father assumed that his son would take up the family business, but Henri was strong-willed and also feared this prospect. Cartier-Bresson attended École Fénelon, a Catholic school that prepared students for the Lycée Condorcet. A governess called "Miss Kitty" who came from across the Channel, instilled in him the love of - and competence in - the English language.Henri Cartier Bresson - Clément Cheroux / Thames & Hudson 2008 The proctor caught him reading a book by Rimbaud or Mallarmé, and reprimanded him, "Let's have no disorder in your studies!". Cartier-Bresson said, "He used the informal 'tu', which usually meant you were about to get a good thrashing. But he went on, 'You're going to read in my office.' Well, that wasn't an offer he had to repeat." After trying to learn music, Cartier-Bresson was introduced to oil painting by his uncle Louis, a gifted painter. But the painting lessons were cut short when uncle Louis was killed in World War I. In 1927 Cartier-Bresson entered a private art school and the Lhote Academy, the Parisian studio of the Cubist painter and sculptor André Lhote. Lhote's ambition was to integrate the Cubists' approach to reality with classical artistic forms; he wanted to link the French classical tradition of Nicolas Poussin and Jacques-Louis David to Modernism. Cartier-Bresson also studied painting with society portraitist Jacques Émile Blanche. During this period, he read Dostoevsky, Schopenhauer, Rimbaud, Nietzsche, Mallarmé, Freud, Proust, Joyce, Hegel, Engels and Marx. Lhote took his pupils to the Louvre to study classical artists and to Paris galleries to study contemporary art. Cartier-Bresson's interest in modern art was combined with an admiration for the works of the Renaissance masters: Jan van Eyck, Paolo Uccello, Masaccio, Piero della Francesca. Cartier-Bresson regarded Lhote as his teacher of "photography without a camera." Although Cartier-Bresson became frustrated with Lhote's "rule-laden" approach to art, the rigorous theoretical training later helped him identify and resolve problems of artistic form and composition in photography. In the 1920s, schools of photographic realism were popping up throughout Europe but each had a different view on the direction photography should take.  The Surrealist movement, founded in 1924, was a catalyst for this paradigm shift. Cartier-Bresson began socializing with the Surrealists at the Café Cyrano, in the Place Blanche. He met a number of the movement's leading protagonists, and was drawn to the Surrealist movement's technique of using the subconscious and the immediate to influence their work. The historian Peter Galassi explains: Cartier-Bresson matured artistically in this stormy cultural and political atmosphere. But, although he knew the concepts, he couldn't express them; dissatisfied with his experiments, he destroyed most of his early paintings. From 1928 to 1929, Cartier-Bresson studied art, literature, and English at the University of Cambridge, where he became bilingual. In 1930, during conscription in the French Army at Le Bourget near Paris, he remembered, "And I had quite a hard time of it, too, because I was toting Joyce under my arm and a Lebel rifle on my shoulder." In 1929, Cartier-Bresson's air squadron commandant placed him under house arrest for hunting without a license. Cartier-Bresson met American expatriate Harry Crosby at Le Bourget, who persuaded the commandant to release Cartier-Bresson into his custody for a few days. The two men both had an interest in photography, and Harry presented Henri with his first camera. They spent their time together taking and printing pictures at Crosby's home, Le Moulin du Soleil (The Sun Mill), near Paris in Ermenonville, France. Crosby later said Cartier-Bresson "looked like a fledgling, shy and frail, and mild as whey." Embracing the open sexuality offered by Crosby and his wife Caresse, Cartier-Bresson fell into an intense sexual relationship with her that lasted until 1931. Two years after Harry Crosby committed suicide, Cartier-Bresson's affair with Caresse Crosby ended in 1931, leaving him broken hearted. During conscription he read Conrad's Heart of Darkness. This gave him the idea of escaping and finding adventure on the Côte d'Ivoire in French colonial Africa. He survived by shooting game and selling it to local villagers. From hunting, he learned methods which he later used in photography.  On the Côte d'Ivoire, he contracted blackwater fever, which nearly killed him. While still feverish, he sent instructions to his grandfather for his own funeral, asking to be buried in Normandy, at the edge of the Eawy forest while Debussy's String Quartet was played. Although Cartier-Bresson took a portable camera (smaller than a Brownie Box) to Côte d'Ivoire, only seven photographs survived the tropics.Montier, 1996, p. 12 Returning to France, Cartier-Bresson recuperated in Marseille in late 1931 and deepened his relationship with the Surrealists. He became inspired by a 1930 photograph by Hungarian photojournalist Martin Munkacsi showing three naked young African boys, caught in near-silhouette, running into the surf of Lake Tanganyika. Titled Three Boys at Lake Tanganyika, this captured the freedom, grace and spontaneity of their movement and their joy at being alive. That photograph inspired him to stop painting and to take up photography seriously. He explained, "I suddenly understood that a photograph could fix eternity in an instant." He acquired the Leica camera with 50&nbsp;mm lens in Marseilles that would accompany him for many years. The anonymity that the small camera gave him in a crowd or during an intimate moment was essential in overcoming the formal and unnatural behavior of those who were aware of being photographed. He enhanced his anonymity by painting all shiny parts of the Leica with black paint. The Leica opened up new possibilities in photography — the ability to capture the world in its actual state of movement and transformation.  Restless, he photographed in Berlin, Brussels, Warsaw, Prague, Budapest and Madrid. His photographs were first exhibited at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York in 1932, and subsequently at the Ateneo Club in Madrid. In 1934 in Mexico, he shared an exhibition with Manuel Álvarez Bravo. In the beginning, he did not photograph much in his native France. It would be years before he photographed there extensively. In 1934 Cartier-Bresson met a young Polish intellectual, a photographer named David Szymin who was called "Chim" because his name was difficult to pronounce. Szymin later changed his name to David Seymour. The two had much in common culturally. Through Chim, Cartier-Bresson met a Hungarian photographer named Endré Friedmann, who later changed his name to Robert Capa. Cartier-Bresson traveled to the United States in 1935 with an invitation to exhibit his work at New York's Julien Levy Gallery.  He shared display space with fellow photographers Walker Evans and Manuel Álvarez Bravo. Carmel Snow of Harper's Bazaar gave him a fashion assignment, but he fared poorly since he had no idea how to direct or interact with the models. Nevertheless, Snow was the first American editor to publish Cartier-Bresson's photographs in a magazine. While in New York, he met photographer Paul Strand, who did camerawork for the Depression-era documentary The Plow That Broke the Plains. When he returned to France, Cartier-Bresson applied for a job with renowned French film director Jean Renoir. He acted in Renoir's 1936 film Partie de campagne and in the 1939 La Règle du jeu, for which he played a butler and served as second assistant. Renoir made Cartier-Bresson act so he could understand how it felt to be on the other side of the camera. Cartier-Bresson also helped Renoir make a film for the Communist party on the 200 families, including his own, who ran France. During the Spanish civil war, Cartier-Bresson co-directed an anti-fascist film with Herbert Kline, to promote the Republican medical services. Cartier-Bresson's first photojournalist photos to be published came in 1937 when he covered the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, for the French weekly Regards. He focused on the new monarch's adoring subjects lining the London streets, and took no pictures of the king. His photo credit read "Cartier", as he was hesitant to use his full family name. In 1937, Cartier-Bresson married a Javanese dancer, Ratna Mohini. They lived in a fourth-floor servants' flat in Paris at 19, rue Danielle Casanova, a large studio with a small bedroom, kitchen, and bathroom where Cartier-Bresson developed film. Between 1937 and 1939 Cartier-Bresson worked as a photographer for the French Communists' evening paper, Ce Soir. With Chim and Capa, Cartier-Bresson was a leftist, but he did not join the French Communist party. When World War II broke out in September 1939, Cartier-Bresson joined the French Army as a Corporal in the Film and Photo unit. During the Battle of France, in June 1940 at St. Dié in the Vosges Mountains, he was captured by German soldiers and spent 35 months in prisoner-of-war camps doing forced labor under the Nazis. He twice tried and failed to escape from the prison camp, and was punished by solitary confinement. His third escape was successful and he hid on a farm in Touraine before getting false papers that allowed him to travel in France. In France, he worked for the underground, aiding other escapees and working secretly with other photographers to cover the Occupation and then the Liberation of France. In 1943, he dug up his beloved Leica camera, which he had buried in farmland near Vosges. At the end of the war he was asked by the American Office of War Information to make a documentary, Le Retour (The Return) about returning French prisoners and displaced persons. Toward the end of the War, rumors had reached America that Cartier-Bresson had been killed. His film on returning war refugees (released in the United States in 1947) spurred a retrospective of his work at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) instead of the posthumous show that MoMA had been preparing. The show debuted in 1947 together with the publication of his first book, The Photographs of Henri Cartier-Bresson.  Lincoln Kirstein and Beaumont Newhall wrote the book's text. In early 1947, Cartier-Bresson, with Robert Capa, David Seymour, William Vandivert and George Rodger founded Magnum Photos. Capa's brainchild, Magnum was a cooperative picture agency owned by its members. The team split photo assignments among the members. Rodger, who had quit Life in London after covering World War II, would cover Africa and the Middle East. Chim, who spoke a variety of European languages, would work in Europe. Cartier-Bresson would be assigned to India and China. Vandivert, who had also left Life, would work in America, and Capa would work anywhere that had an assignment. Maria Eisner managed the Paris office and Rita Vandivert, Vandivert's wife, managed the New York office and became Magnum's first president. Cartier-Bresson achieved international recognition for his coverage of Gandhi's funeral in India in 1948 and the last stage of the Chinese Civil War in 1949. He covered the last six months of the Kuomintang administration and the first six months of the Maoist People's Republic.  He also photographed the last surviving Imperial eunuchs in Beijing, as the city was falling to the communists. In Shanghai, he often worked in the company of photojournalist Sam Tata, whom Cartier-Bresson had previously befriended in Bombay.Dessureault, Pierre. The Tata Era / L'Epoque Tata. Canadian Museum of Contemporary Photography. Ottawa, 1988. From China, he went on to Dutch East Indies (Indonesia), where he documented the gaining of independence from the Dutch. In 1950, Cartier-Bresson had traveled to the South India. He had visited Tiruvannamalai, a town in the Indian State of Tamil Nadu and photographed the last moments of Sri Ramana Maharishi, Sri Ramana Ashram and its surroundings.https://www.magnumphotos.com/Catalogue/Henri-Cartier-Bresson/1949/INDIA-1950-NN143117.html A few days later he also visited and photographed Sri Aurobindo, Mother and Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry.http://savitrieradevotees.blogspot.in/2012/09/hidden-cartier-bresson-images-exhibited.html Magnum's mission was to "feel the pulse" of the times and some of its first projects were People Live Everywhere, Youth of the World, Women of the World and The Child Generation. Magnum aimed to use photography in the service of humanity, and provided arresting, widely viewed images. In 1952, Cartier-Bresson published his book Images à la sauvette, whose English-language edition was titled The Decisive Moment. It included a portfolio of 126 of his photos from the East and the West. The book's cover was drawn by Henri Matisse. For his 4,500-word philosophical preface, Cartier-Bresson took his keynote text from the 17th century Cardinal de Retz, "Il n'y a rien dans ce monde qui n'ait un moment decisif" ("There is nothing in this world that does not have a decisive moment"). Cartier-Bresson applied this to his photographic style. He said: "Photographier: c'est dans un même instant et en une fraction de seconde reconnaître un fait et l'organisation rigoureuse de formes perçues visuellement qui expriment et signifient ce fait" ("To me, photography is the simultaneous recognition, in a fraction of a second, of the significance of an event as well as of a precise organization of forms which give that event its proper expression."). Both titles came from Tériade, the Greek-born French publisher who Cartier-Bresson admired. He gave the book its French title, Images à la Sauvette, loosely translated as "images on the run" or "stolen images."  Dick Simon of Simon & Schuster came up with the English title The Decisive Moment. Margot Shore, Magnum's Paris bureau chief, translated Cartier-Bresson's French preface into English. "Photography is not like painting," Cartier-Bresson told the Washington Post in 1957. "There is a creative fraction of a second when you are taking a picture. Your eye must see a composition or an expression that life itself offers you, and you must know with intuition when to click the camera. That is the moment the photographer is creative," he said. "Oop! The Moment! Once you miss it, it is gone forever." Cartier-Bresson held his first exhibition in France at the Pavillon de Marsan in the Louvre in 1955. Cartier-Bresson's photography took him to many places, including China, Mexico, Canada, the United States, India, Japan, and the Soviet Union. He became the first Western photographer to photograph "freely" in the post-war Soviet Union. In 1962, on behalf of Vogue, he went to Sardinia for about twenty days. There he visited Nuoro, Oliena, Orgosolo Mamoiada Desulo, Orosei, Cala Gonone, Orani (hosted by his friend Costantino Nivola), San Leonardo di Siete Fuentes, and Cagliari.La fotografia in Sardegna. Lo sguardo esterno 1960-1980, Fondazione Banco di Sardegna, Ilisso Edizioni, 2010. Cartier-Bresson withdrew as a principal of Magnum (which still distributed his photographs) in 1966 to concentrate on portraiture and landscapes. In 1967, he was divorced from his first wife of 30 years, Ratna "Elie". In 1968, he began to turn away from photography and return to his passion for drawing and painting. He admitted that perhaps he had said all he could through photography. He married Magnum photographer Martine Franck, thirty years younger than himself, in 1970. The couple had a daughter, Mélanie, in May 1972. Cartier-Bresson retired from photography in the early 1970s, and by 1975 no longer took pictures other than an occasional private portrait; he said he kept his camera in a safe at his house and rarely took it out. He returned to drawing and painting. He held his first exhibition of drawings at the Carlton Gallery in New York in 1975. Cartier-Bresson died in Montjustin (Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, France) on August 3, 2004, aged 95. No cause of death was announced. He was buried in the local cemetery and was survived by his wife, Martine Franck, and daughter, Mélanie. Cartier-Bresson spent more than three decades on assignment for Life and other journals. He traveled without bounds, documenting some of the great upheavals of the 20th century &mdash; the Spanish civil war, the liberation of Paris in 1944, the 1968 student rebellion in Paris, the fall of the Kuomintang in China to the communists, the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, the Berlin Wall, and the deserts of Egypt. And along the way he paused to document portraits of Camus, Picasso, Colette, Matisse, Pound and Giacometti. But many of his most renowned photographs, such as Behind the Gare St. Lazare, are of seemingly unimportant moments of ordinary daily life. Cartier-Bresson did not like to be photographed and treasured his privacy.  Photographs of Cartier-Bresson are scant. When he accepted an honorary degree from Oxford University in 1975, he held a paper in front of his face to avoid being photographed. In a Charlie Rose interview in 2000, Cartier-Bresson noted that it wasn't necessarily that he hated to be photographed, but it was that he was embarrassed by the notion of being photographed for being famous. Cartier-Bresson believed that what went on beneath the surface was nobody's business but his own. He did recall that he once confided his innermost secrets to a Paris taxi driver, certain that he would never meet the man again. In 2003, he created the Henri Cartier-Bresson Foundation with his wife and daughter to preserve and share his legacy. Cartier-Bresson's photographs were also influential in the development of cinéma vérité film. In particular, he is credited as the inspiration for the National Film Board of Canada's early work in this genre with its 1958 Candid Eye series. Cartier-Bresson nearly always used a Leica 35&nbsp;mm rangefinder camera fitted with a normal 50&nbsp;mm lens, or occasionally a wide-angle lens for landscapes. He often wrapped black tape around the camera's chrome body to make it less conspicuous. With fast black and white film and sharp lenses, he was able to photograph events unnoticed. No longer bound by a 4×5 press camera or an medium format twin-lens reflex camera, miniature-format cameras gave Cartier-Bresson what he called "the velvet hand...the hawk's eye." He never photographed with flash, a practice he saw as "[impolite...like coming to a concert with a pistol in your hand." He believed in composing his photographs in the viewfinder, not in the darkroom. He showcased this belief by having nearly all his photographs printed only at full-frame and completely free of any cropping or other darkroom manipulation. He insisted that his prints were not cropped as they include the first few millimeters of the unexposed negative around the image area, resulting in a black frame around the developed picture. Cartier-Bresson worked exclusively in black and white, other than a few unsuccessful attempts in color. He disliked developing or making his own prints and showed a considerable lack of interest in the process of photography in general, likening photography with the small camera to an "instant drawing". Technical aspects of photography were valid for him only where they allowed him to express what he saw: He started a tradition of testing new camera lenses by taking photographs of ducks in urban parks. He never published the images but referred to them as 'my only superstition' as he considered it a 'baptism' of the lens. Cartier-Bresson is regarded as one of the art world's most unassuming personalities. He disliked publicity and exhibited a ferocious shyness since his days of hiding from the Nazis during World War II. Although he took many famous portraits, his face was little known to the world at large. This, presumably, helped allow him to work on the street undisturbed. He denied that the term "art" applied his photographs. Instead, he thought that they were merely his gut reactions to fleeting situations that he had happened upon. Cartier-Bresson was second assistant director to Jean Renoir in 1936 for La vie est à nous and Une partie de campagne, and in 1939 for La Règle du Jeu. Cartier-Bresson's work is held in the following public collections:   1947: The Photographs of Henri Cartier-Bresson. Text by Lincoln Kirstein. New York: Museum of Modern Art. 1952: The Decisive Moment. Texts and photographs by Cartier-Bresson. Cover by Henri Matisse. New York: Simon & Schuster. French edition 2014: Göttingen: Steidl. ISBN 978-3869307886. Facsimile edition. Includes booklet with an essay by Clément Chéroux, "A Bible for Photographers". 1954: Les Danses à Bali. Texts by Antonin Artaud on Balinese theater and commentary by Béryl de Zoete Paris: Delpire. German edition. 1955: The Europeans. Text and photographs by Cartier-Bresson. Cover by Joan Miró. New York: Simon & Schuster. French edition. 1955: People of Moscow. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German and Italian editions. 1956: China in Transition. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German and Italian editions. 1958: Henri Cartier-Bresson: Fotografie. Prague and Bratislava: Statni nakladatelstvi krasné. Text by Anna Farova. 1963: Photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson. New York: Grossman Publisher. French, English, Japanese and Swiss editions. 1964: China. Photographs and notes on fifteen months spent in China. Text by Barbara Miller. New York: Bantam. French edition. 1966: Henri Cartier-Bresson and the Artless Art. Text by Jean-Pierre Montier. Translated from the French L'Art sans art d'Henri Cartier-Bresson by Ruth Taylor.  New York: Bulfinch Press. 1968: The World of HCB. New York: Viking Press. French, German and Swiss editions. 1969: Man and Machine. Commissioned by IBM. French, German, Italian and Spanish editions. 1970: France. Text by François Nourissier. London: Thames & Hudson. French and German editions. 1972: The Face of Asia. Introduction by Robert Shaplen. New York and Tokyo: John Weatherhill; Hong Kong: Orientations. French edition. 1973: About Russia. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German and Swiss editions. 1976: Henri Cartier-Bresson. Texts by Cartier-Bresson. History of Photography Series. History of Photography Series. French, German, Italian, Japanese and Italian editions. 1979: Henri Cartier-Bresson Photographer. Text by Yves Bonnefoy. New York: Bulfinch. French, English, German, Japanese and Italian editions. 1983: Henri Cartier-Bresson. Ritratti. Texts by André Pieyre de Mandiargues and Ferdinando Scianna, "I Grandi Fotografi". Milan: Gruppo Editoriale Fabbri. English and Spanish editions. 1985: Henri Cartier-Bresson en Inde. Introduction by Satyajit Ray, photographies and notes by Cartier-Bresson. Text by Yves Véquaud. Paris: Centre National de la Photographie. English edition. Photoportraits. Texts by André Pieyre de Mandiargues. London: Thames & Hudson. French and German editions. 1987: Henri Cartier-Bresson. The Early Work. Texts by Peter Galassi. New York: Museum of Modern Art. French edition. Henri Cartier-Bresson in India. Introduction by Satyajit Ray, photographs and notes by Cartier-Bresson, texts by Yves Véquaud. London: Thames & Hudson. French edition. 1989: L'Autre Chine. Introduction by Robert Guillain. Collection Photo Notes. Paris: Centre National de la Photographie. Line by Line. Henri Cartier-Bresson’s drawings. Introduction by Jean Clair and John Russell. London: Thames & Hudson. French and German editions. 1991: America in Passing. Introduction by Gilles Mora. New York: Bulfinch. French, English, German, Italian, Portuguese and Danish editions. Alberto Giacometti photographié par Henri Cartier-Bresson. Texts by Cartier-Bresson and Louis Clayeux. Milan: Franco Sciardelli. 1994: A propos de Paris. Texts by Véra Feyder and André Pieyre de Mandiargues. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German and Japanese editions. Double regard. Drawings and photographs. Texts by Jean Leymarie. Amiens: Le Nyctalope. French and English editions. Mexican Notebooks 1934&ndash;1964. Text by Carlos Fuentes. London: Thames & Hudson. French, Italian, and German editions. L'Art sans art. Text de Jean-Pierre Montier. Paris: Editions Flammarion. English, German and Italian editions. 1996: L'Imaginaire d'après nature. Text by Cartier-Bresson. Paris: Fata Morgana. German and English editions' 1997: Europeans. Texts by Jean Clair. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German, Italian and Portuguese editions. 1998: Tête à tête. Texts by Ernst H. Gombrich. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German, Italian and Portuguese editions. 1999: The Mind's Eye. Text by Cartier-Bresson. New York: Aperture. French and German editions. 2001: Landscape Townscape. Texts by Erik Orsenna and Gérard Macé. London: Thames & Hudson. French, German and Italian editions. 2003: The Man, the Image and the World. Texts by Philippe Arbaizar, Jean Clair, Claude Cookman, , Jean Leymarie, Jean-Noel Jeanneney and Serge Toubiana. London: Thames & Hudson, 2003. German, French, Korean, Italian and Spanish editions. 2006: An Inner SIlence: The portraits of Henri Cartier-Bresson, New York: Thames & Hudson. Texts by Agnès Sire and Jean-Luc Nancy. 1937: Victoire de la vie. Documentary on the hospitals of Republican Spain: Running time: 49 minutes. Black and white. 1938:  L’Espagne Vivra. Documentary on the Spanish Civil War and the post-war period. Running time: 43 minutes and 32 seconds. Black and white. 1938 Avec la brigade Abraham Lincoln en Espagne, Henri Cartier-Bresson ja Herbert Kline. Running time 21 minutes. Black and white. 1944&ndash;45: Le Retour. Documentary on prisoners of war and detainees. Running time: 32 minutes and 37 seconds. Black and white. 1969&ndash;70: Impressions of California. Running time: 23 minutes and 20 seconds. Color. 1969&ndash;70: Southern Exposures. Running time: 22 minutes and 25 seconds. Color. 1956: A Travers le Monde avec Henri Cartier-Bresson. Directed by Jean-Marie Drot and Henri Cartier-Bresson. Running time: 21 minutes. Black and white. 1963: Midlands at Play and at Work. Produced by ABC Television, London. Running time : 19 minutes. Black and white. 1963&ndash;65: Five fifteen-minute films on Germany for the Süddeutscher Rundfunk, Munich. 1967: Flagrants délits. Directed by Robert Delpire. Original music score by Diego Masson. Delpire production, Paris. Running time: 22 minutes. Black and white. 1969: Québec vu par Cartier-Bresson / Le Québec as seen by Cartier-Bresson. Directed by Wolff Kœnig. Produced by the Canadian Film Board. Running time: 10 minutes. Black and white. 1970: Images de France. 1991: Contre l'oubli : Lettre à Mamadou Bâ, Mauritanie. Short film directed by Martine Franck for Amnesty International. Editing : Roger Ikhlef. Running time: 3 minutes. Black and white. 1992: Henri Cartier-Bresson dessins et photos. Director: Annick Alexandre. Short film produced by FR3 Dijon, commentary by the artist. Running time: 2 minutes and 33 seconds. Color. 1997: Série "100 photos du siècle": L'Araignée d'amour: broadcast by Arte. Produced by Capa Télévision. Running time: 6 minutes and 15 seconds. Color. "Henri Cartier-Bresson, point d'interrogation" by Sarah Moon, screened at Rencontres d'Arles festival in 1994 Henri Cartier-Bresson: L'amour Tout Court (70 mins, 2001. Interviews with Cartier-Bresson.) Henri Cartier-Bresson: The Impassioned Eye (72 mins, 2006. Late interviews with Cartier-Bresson.) 1933  Cercle Atheneo, Madrid 1933  Julien Levy Gallery, New York 1934  Palacio de Bellas Artes, Mexico (with Manuel Alvarez Bravo) 1947  Museum of Modern Art, New York, Martin-Gropius-Bau, Berlin, Germany; Museum of Modern Art, Rome, Italy; Dean Gallery, Edinburgh; Museum of Modern Art, New York, U.S.A.; Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Santiago, Chile 1952  Institute of Contemporary Arts, London 1955  Retrospektive &ndash; Musée des Arts décoratifs, Paris 1956   Photokina, Cologne, Germany 1963   Photokina, Cologne, Germany 1964   The Phillips Collection, Washington 1965&ndash;1967 2nd retrospective, Tokyo, Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris, New York, London, Amsterdam, Rome, Zurich, Cologne and other cities. 1970   En France &ndash; Grand Palais, Paris. Later in the US, USSR, Australia and Japan 1971   Les Rencontres d'Arles festival. Movies screened at Théatre Antique. 1972   Les Rencontres d'Arles festival. "Flagrant Délit " (Production Delpire) screened at Théatre Antique. 1974   Exhibition about the USSR, International Center of Photography, New York 1974&ndash;1997 Galerie Claude Bernard, Paris 1975   Carlton Gallery, New York 1975   Galerie Bischofberger, Zurich, Switzerland 1980   Portraits &ndash; Galerie Eric Franck, Geneva, Switzerland 1981   Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, France 1982   Hommage à Henri Cartier-Bresson &ndash; Centre National de la Photographie, Palais de Tokyo, Paris 1983   Printemps Ginza &ndash; Tokyo 1984   Osaka University of Arts, Japan 1984&ndash;1985   Paris à vue d’œil &ndash; Musée Carnavalet, Paris 1985   Henri Cartier-Bresson en Inde – Centre National de la Photographie, Palais de Tokyo, Paris 1985   Museo de Arte Moderno de México, Mexico 1986   L'Institut Français de Stockholm 1986   Pavillon d'Arte contemporanea, Milan, Italy 1986   Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy 1987   Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, UK (drawings and photography) 1987   Early Photographs &ndash; Museum of Modern Art, New York 1988   Institut Français, Athen, Greece 1988   Palais Lichtenstein, Vienna, Austria 1988   Salzburger Landessammlung, Austria 1988   Group exhibition: "Magnum en Chine" at Rencontres d'Arles, France. 1989   Chapelle de l'École des Beaux-Arts, Paris 1989   Fondation Pierre Gianadda, Martigny, Switzerland (drawings and photographs) 1989   Mannheimer Kunstverein, Mannheim, Germany (drawings and photography) 1989   Printemps Ginza, Tokyo, Japan 1990   Galerie Arnold Herstand, New York 1991   Taipei Fine Arts Museum, Taiwan (drawings and photographs) 1992   Centro de Exposiciones, Saragossa and Logrono, Spain 1992   Hommage à Henri Cartier-Bresson &ndash; International Center of Photography, New York 1992   L'Amérique – FNAC, Paris 1992   Musée de Noyers-sur-Serein, France 1992   Palazzo San Vitale, Parma, Italy 1993   Photo Dessin – Dessin Photo, Arles, France 1994  "Henri Cartier-Bresson, point d'interrogation" by Sarah Moon screened at Rencontres d'Arles festival, France. 1994   Dessins et premières photos &ndash; La Caridad, Barcelona, Spain 1995   Dessins et Hommage à Henri Cartier-Bresson – CRAC (Centre Régional d’Art Contemporain) Valence, Drome, France 1996   Henri Cartier-Bresson: Pen, Brush and Cameras &ndash; The Minneapolis Institute of Arts, US 1997   Les Européens &ndash; Maison Européenne de la Photographie, Paris 1997   Henri Cartier-Bresson, dessins &ndash; Musée des Beaux-Arts, Montreal 1998   Galerie Beyeler, Basel, Switzerland 1998   Galerie Löhrl, Mönchengladbach, Germany 1998   Howard Greenberggh Gallery, New York 1998   Kunsthaus Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland 1998   Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen, Düsseldorf, Germany 1998   Line by Line &ndash; Royal College of Art, London 1998   Tête à Tête &ndash; National Portrait Gallery, London 1998&ndash;1999   Photographien und Zeichnungen – Baukunst Galerie, Cologne, Germany 2003&ndash;2005   Rétrospective, Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris; La Caixa, Barcelona; Martin Gropius Bau, Berlin; Museum of Modern Art, Rome; Dean Gallery, Edinburgh; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Santiago, Chile 2004   Baukunst Galerie, Cologne 2004   Martin-Gropius-Bau, Berlin 2004   Museum Ludwig, Cologne 2008   Henri Cartier-Bresson's Scrapbook Photographs 1932-46, National Media Museum, Bradford, UK 2008   National Gallery of Modern Art, Mumbai, India 2008   Santa Catalina Castle, Cadiz, Spain 2009   Musée de l'Art Moderne, Paris 2010   Museum of Modern Art, New York 2010   The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago 2011   Museum of Design ZürichMuseum of Design Zürich 2011   High Museum of Art, Atlanta, GA 2011   Maison de la Photo, Toulon, France 2011   Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, Germany 2011   Queensland Art Gallery, Brisbane, Australia 2011-2012 KunstHausWien, Vienna, Austria 2014   Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris, France De Menil Collection, Houston, Texas, US University of Fine Arts, Osaka, Japan Victoria and Albert Museum, London, United Kingdom Maison Européenne de la Photographie, Paris, France Musée Carnavalet, Paris, France Museum of Modern Art, New York, US The Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois, US J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles, California, US Institute for Contemporary Photography, New York, US The Philadelphia Art Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US The Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, US Kahitsukan Kyoto Museum of Contemporary Art, Kyoto, Japan Museum of Modern Art, Tel Aviv, Israel Moderna Museet, Stockholm, Sweden 1948: Overseas Press Club of America Award 1953: The A.S.M.P. Award 1954: Overseas Press Club of America Award 1959: The Prix de la Société française de photographie 1960: Overseas Press Club of America Award 1964: Overseas Press Club of America Award 1974: The Culture Prize, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Photographie 1981: Grand Prix National de la Photographie 1982  Hasselblad Award 2006: Prix Nadar for the photobook Henri Cartier-Bresson: Scrapbook Assouline, P. (2005). Henri Cartier-Bresson: A Biography. London: Thames & Hudson. Galassi, Peter (2010). Henri Cartier-Bresson: the Modern Century. London: Thames & Hudson. Montier, J. (1996). Portrait: First Sketch. Henri Cartier-Bresson and the Artless Art (p.&nbsp;12). New York: Bulfinch Press. Warren, J (2005), Encyclopedia of Twentieth-Century Photography. Routledge Fondation Henri Cartier-Bresson Cartier-Bresson's portfolio at Magnum Photos Magnum Photos Special Report: Henri Cartier-Bresson (1908–2004) – by Eamonn McCabe in The Guardian Henri Cartier-Bresson's biographic sketch at Find A Grave Tête à Tête: Portraits by Henri Cartier-Bresson at the National Portrait Gallery, Washington DC Tête à Tête: Special Feature by Washington Post of the Exhibition by Henri Cartier-Bresson Henri Cartier-Bresson at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY Henri Cartier-Bresson (1908 – 2004): When photography becomes art List of links concerning Cartier-Bresson on ArtCyclopedia "John Berger pays tribute to his good friend", in The Observer. Henri Cartier-Bresson's Cats
