 The Honda Insight is a hybrid electric vehicle manufactured and marketed by Honda in its first generation as a three-door, two passenger hatchback (1999–2006)  and in its second generation as a five-door, five passenger hatchback (2009–2014). The Insight was the first production vehicle to feature Honda's Integrated Motor Assist system. The first generation Insight was the most fuel efficient gasoline-powered car available in the U.S. without plug-in capability for the length of its production run and up until December 2015, when it was surpassed by the 2016 Toyota Prius Eco. Honda introduced the second-generation Insight in Japan in February 2009 and in the United States on March 24, 2009. The Insight was the least expensive hybrid available in the US.  In December 2010, Honda introduced a less expensive base model for the 2011 model year. The Insight was launched April 2009 in the UK as the lowest priced hybrid on the market and became the best selling hybrid for the month. The Insight ranked as the top-selling vehicle in Japan for the month of April 2009, a first for a hybrid model.Detnews.com | This article is no longer available online | detnews.com | The Detroit News During its first twelve months after first available in the Japanese market, the second-generation Insight sold 143,015 units around the world. In July 2014 Honda announced the end of production of the Insight for the 2015 model, together with the Honda FCX Clarity hydrogen fuel-cell car and the Honda Fit EV electric car. Based on the Honda J-VX concept car unveiled at the 1997 Tokyo Motor Show, the Insight was introduced in Japan in November 1999  as the first production vehicle to feature Honda's Integrated Motor Assist system. In the following month, December 1999, Insight became the first hybrid available in North America, followed seven months later by the Toyota Prius. The Insight featured optimized aerodynamics and a lightweight aluminum structure to maximize fuel efficiency and minimize emissions. As of 2014, the first generation Insight still ranks as the most fuel-efficient United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) certified gasoline-fueled vehicle, with a highway rating of  and combined city/highway rating of .  The Honda Insight is a subcompact hatchback  in length with a wheelbase of  a height of  and a width of . The first-generation Insight was only produced as a two-seater. The model launched with only a single trim level: manual transmission with optional air conditioning. In the second year of production two trim levels were available: manual transmission with air conditioning, and continuously variable transmission (CVT) with air conditioning. The only major change during its life span was the introduction of a trunk mounted, front controlled, multiple-disc CD changer. In addition to the hybrid drive system, the Insight was small, built of light materials and streamlined with a drag-coefficient of 0.25.  The gasoline engine is a , 1.0 litre, ECA series 3-cylinder unit providing lean burn operation with an air-to-fuel ratio that can reach 25.8 to 1. The engine utilizes lightweight aluminum, magnesium, and plastic to minimize weight. The electrical motor assist adds another  and a maximum of 36 pound-feet (49 Nm) of torque when called on, with the aim to boost performance to the level of a typical 1.5 L petrol engine. It also acts as a generator during deceleration and braking to recharge the vehicle's batteries, and as the Insight's starter motor. (This improves fuel efficiency and extends the lifetime and fade resistance of the brakes, without adding unsprung weight). When the car is not moving, for example at a stop light, the engine shuts off. Power steering is electric, reducing accessory drag. The Insight uses the first generation of Honda's Integrated Motor Assist (IMA) hybrid technology. (The next generation, used in the Honda Civic Hybrid, is much more space-efficient.) The Insight's electric assist is an ultrathin 60 mm (about 2.4&nbsp;inches) brushless 10-kW electric motor located on the crankshaft. Located behind the seats are a series of commercial grade "D" sized NiMH batteries wired to provide a nominal 144 V DC. During heavy acceleration, the NiMH batteries drive the electric motor, providing additional power; during deceleration, the motor acts as a generator and recharges the batteries using a process called regenerative braking. A computer control module regulates how much power comes from the internal combustion engine, and how much from the electric motor; in the CVT variant, it also finds the optimal gear ratio. The digital displays on the dashboard display fuel consumption instantaneously. On the manual transmission up and down arrows suggest when to shift gears. Dashboard gauges monitor the current battery status, instantaneous fuel consumption, and mode of the electric motor — standby, engine assist or charging the batteries. High pressure, low rolling resistance tires and the use of low viscosity "0W-20" synthetic oil enhance fuel economy. The original Insight had a conventional manual transmission. Starting with the 2001 model, a CVT variant of the Insight was available; the CVT is similar to that used in the Honda Civic Hybrid and the Honda Logo. A traditional transmission shifts between a fixed set of engine-to-wheel ratios; however, a CVT allows for an infinite set of ratios between its lowest gear and its highest. A feature shared by the two hybrids (and now appearing in others) is the ability to automatically turn off the engine when the vehicle is at a stop (and restart it upon movement). Since it is more powerful than most starters of conventional cars, the Insight's electric motor can start the engine nearly instantaneously. The Integrated Motor Assist is run by an "Intelligent Power Unit (IPU)", a desktop computer-sized box. The Intelligent Power Unit, the Power control Unit, the Electronic Control Unit, the vehicle's batteries, dc-to-dc converter and a high-voltage inverter are all located under the cargo floor of the vehicle, behind the seats. Honda increased the vehicle's fuel efficiency using aluminum and plastic extensively to reduce the vehicle's weight. The basic structure is a new, lightweight aluminum monocoque, reinforced in key areas with aluminum extrusions joined at cast aluminum lugs. Stamped aluminum panels are welded onto this structure to form an extremely light and rigid platform for the drivetrain and suspension. The Insight has a body weight less than half that of the contemporary Civic 3-door, with increased torsional rigidity by 38% and bending rigidity by 13%. Honda built the Insight with aluminum front brake calipers and rear brake drums, and with a largely aluminum suspension, in addition to standard aluminum wheels; reducing the ratio of un-sprung to sprung weight as well as the total weight. The fuel tank is plastic; the engine mounts were aluminum; and the exhaust is a small, thin wall pipe. Its compact spare is also aluminum. The Insight weighed  in manual transmission form without air conditioning,  with manual transmission and air conditioning, or  with CVT and air conditioning. Insight has a coefficient of drag of 0.25e. The absence of a rear seat allows the body to taper just behind the driver and the rear track is 110 mm (approximately 4.3 inches) narrower than the front track. The CVT-equipped Insight is classified as a super-low emissions vehicle. The Insight features low emissions: the California Air Resources Board gave the 5-speed model a ULEV rating, and the CVT model earned a SULEV rating – the 5-speed model's lean-burn ability traded increased efficiency for slightly higher NOx emissions. The Insight was assembled at the Honda factory in Suzuka, Japan, where the Honda NSX and the Honda S2000 were also assembled. The Insight and the NSX are aluminum-bodied, while the S2000 employs a steel body with aluminum hood.http://www.honda.com/newsandviews/article.aspx?id=4098-en At the 2003 Tokyo Motor Show, Honda introduced the concept car Honda IMAS, an extremely fuel-efficient and lightweight hybrid car made of aluminum and carbon fiber, which was perceived by most observers to be the future direction where the Insight was heading. With its aluminum body and frame, the Insight was an expensive car to produce and was never designed for high-volume sales. Instead, it was designed to be a real world test car for hybrid technology and a gauge to new consumer driving habits. With an aerodynamic fuel-saving shape similar to the Audi A2, and some unconventional body colors it was a bit more than mainstream car buyers could handle, preferring more conservative styles. Production halted announced in May 2006, with plans announced to replace Insight with a new hybrid car, smaller than the eighth generation Civic, but not earlier than in 2009. Ahead of this announcement, Honda stopped selling Insight in the UK, for example, as early as December 2005. To fill the market niche void, in 2002 Honda rolled out a hybrid version of the Honda Civic – Honda Civic Hybrid, followed by Toyota's relaunch of the Prius in 2003. Total global cumulative sales for the first generation Insight were 17,020 units. Honda had originally planned to sell 6,500 Insights each year of production. The Insight was the first mass-produced hybrid automobile sold in the United States, achieving  per its then current United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) highway rating. Other hybrids soon followed, with the Toyota Prius arriving in June 2000. The first generation Insight was the most fuel efficient gasoline-powered car available in the U.S. without plug-in capability for the length of its production run and up until December 2015, when it was surpassed by the 2016 Toyota Prius Eco. The 2014–15 BMW i3 BEV is the most efficient EPA-certified vehicles considering all fuels and of all years. , the 2016 Toyota Prius Eco hybrid car is most efficient EPA-certified vehicle with a gasoline engine without plug-in capability. The Insight earned an EPA fuel economy estimate of  in highway driving,  city. With air conditioning it was  and . With a CVT it was /. The EPA changed the way it estimated fuel economy starting with the 2008 model year.  The revised fuel economy ratings for the 2000 Insisht with manual shift 5-speed under the updated testing are  in highway driving,  city, and  combined city/highway. Insight owners who are "hypermilers" compete to achieve maximum travel distance with each refueling. Upon the Insight's release, Honda challenged several automotive magazines to a competition to see who could obtain the best fuel efficiency on the  drive from Columbus, Ohio to Detroit. The contest was won by Car and Driver magazine, which rigged a box behind a Ford Excursion, and had the Insight drive within the confines of the box. With much less wind resistance, the Insight made the trip with a fuel consumption of , while averaging . A two-year test of an Insight with air conditioning, driven , averaged . The New York Times noted that "[if] you drive the car badly, you will get bad mileage." In the EU fuel economy tests, the Insight achieved a combined efficiency figure  with an Extra-Urban figure of  and Urban figure of .)(http://www.car-emissions.com/cars/top100/most-environmental :Car Emissions Information) This remains unbeaten in the UK market for a petrol car. The Insight has an official  emissions figure of 80&nbsp;g/km which is still the lowest of any UK market car. It was also the only car to fall into the VED band A (up to 100g/km ), introduced in 2005, until 2008 when other manufacturers started developing cars to benefit from the tax free status. Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005 in the United States, the Honda Insight was eligible for a US$1,450 tax credit. Cars registered in the UK after 2001 qualified for free road tax because of their low CO2 emissions (2000 registered cars would be taxed on the lower rate of the old system based on engine size). As a hybrid, the Insight did also qualify for an exemption from the London Congestion Charge. However, in December 2010 this changed such that hybrids no longer gained automatic exception, instead cars emitting less than 100g/km CO2 and meeting the January 2005 Euro 4 emissions standard. The Insight being homologated as a 2000 vehicle, and hence not Euro 4 compliant, meant it no longer meets the criteria. A Honda Insight won five races and the Class A championship in the Formula 1000 Rally in the United Kingdom in 2006. In 2011, the Insight was asked to step down from the Formula 1000 Rally Championship after dominating the first three rallies, it went on to compete and win the hybrid electric vehicle class of the RAC Future Car Challenge from Brighton to London by consuming just . As of June 2008 in the U.S., according to Honda, there are fewer than 200 battery failures beyond warranty coverage out of more than 100,000 hybrids sold. As of 1 June 2008, the replacement battery costs US$1,968 and installation is around US$900. In 2010, Multiple aftermarket large capacity replacement NiMH battery packs have become available for the first generation Insight, including GreenTec Auto, YABO Power,[ ] BumbleBee Batteries and Hybrid ReVolt.[ ] A couple of others have come and gone, with a few more potentially in the pipeline. As of October 2013, Dorman Products based in Colmar PA, began producing replacement hybrid car batteries with lower prices and better warranty than have been previously available.   In 2009, Honda introduced its second-generation Insight based on an all-new, 5-passenger, 5-door, dedicated hybrid platform, which was also later used for the Honda CR-Z. The concept version of the Insight hatchback hybrid electric vehicle had made its public debut at the 2008 Paris Motor Show. and its North American debut at the Los Angeles Auto Show. In the US, the new Insight is classified as a compact car based on its interior volume. Despite technological advances, the fuel efficiency of the second-generation Insight was lower than that of the first because of significant increases in size, weight and power. Fuel efficiency rating according to the U.S. EPA testing methodology is: City , Highway , Combined . The 2012 model year U.S. version has minor improvements and its updated EPA fuel economy rating is: City , Highway , Combined . Honda UK state that the official UK fuel efficiency data for the Insight SE is: Urban , Extra urban , Combined  and the CO2 emissions rating is: 101 g/km, putting it in the second lowest UK vehicle excise duty band. Car and Driver magazine performed a comparison between the 2010 Honda Insight and the 2010 Toyota Prius. In this test, the Insight achieved 0–60&nbsp;mph in 10.3 seconds (Prius, 10.0 seconds), the quarter mile in 17.9 seconds at 78&nbsp;mph (Prius, 17.6 at 79&nbsp;mph), and 70–0&nbsp;mph braking in 181 feet (Prius, 182 feet). The Insight's average fuel economy during a 600-mile controlled evaluation was  (Prius, ). Overall, Car and Driver selected the Insight as their preferred vehicle due to its "fun-to-drive" qualities including superior handling, steering, braking, and paddle-shifted transmission. The 2010 Honda Insight was specifically designed to make hybrid technology more affordable to a wide range of buyers. Departing from the first generation Insight’s two-seat configuration, the 2010 Insight is a 5-passenger, 5-door dedicated hybrid vehicle that includes the fifth generation of Honda’s Integrated Motor Assist (IMA) hybrid powertrain. The Insight was facelifted in 2010 in the United Kingdom and in 2011 for the 2012 model year in the United States, with updates to the suspension, styling and interior. There are revisions to the recoil rate of the springs, change of the rear camber angles and alterations to the rear suspension brace and adjusting mounts. As a result, Honda promised better ride, handling and stability. Interior changes include revisions to the dashboard, seat fabric, and some plastics. The air vents received a chrome surround and a silver garnish now adorns the door sills. Honda chose a 5-door hatchback configuration for the latest Insight. The wedge-shaped body assists aerodynamics and reduces drag for improved fuel economy. The 5-passenger accommodations enhance marketability and the overall vehicle shape, as Honda puts it, is “clearly identifiable as a hybrid.” The wedge shape of the second-generation Insight has been criticized by many automotive journalists for its similarities with the more successful and older second-generation Toyota Prius. The Insight's exterior design merges design cues from both the first generation Insight (the tapered tail and triangular taillights) and Honda’s production hydrogen fuel cell vehicle, the FCX Clarity (the low hood, six-point front grille, and wedge-shaped profile). The interior of the new Insight includes a variation of the two-tier instrument panel first introduced on the 2006 Honda Civic. In this arrangement, a digital speedometer is mounted high on the instrument panel within the driver’s normal line-of-sight for ease of visibility. An analog tachometer, fuel gauge, hybrid assist gauge, and Multi-Information Display are housed in the lower tier. The new Insight includes Honda’s fifth and latest generation of its Integrated Motor Assist (IMA) hybrid system. This system mates an internal combustion engine with an electric motor mounted directly to the engine’s crankshaft between the engine and transmission. Honda states that this configuration is less complex, lower cost, and compact enough to accommodate a wide range of vehicle sizes when compared to competing hybrid powertrains. Honda has used previous generations of this IMA system on all of its production hybrid vehicles including the original Insight, Civic Hybrid, and Accord Hybrid. Advanced development has allowed the Insight’s IMA system to be 19 percent smaller and 28 percent lighter than the previous generation IMA used in the existing Civic Hybrid. The Insight’s IMA includes a high-efficiency, lightweight, low-friction 1.3-liter SOHC i-VTEC 4-cylinder engine rated for  at 5800 rpm and  of torque from 1000–1700 rpm. The high torque at low rpm is made possible by the electric motor which contributes up to  at 1500 rpm and  of torque at 1000 rpm to the powertrain, assisting in acceleration and some steady state cruising situations at low-to-mid vehicle speeds. The motor acts as a generator during braking, steady cruising, gentle deceleration and coasting in order to recharge the IMA battery. The motor also serves as the engine starter, quickly spinning the engine to idle speed after Idle Stop and during normal vehicle starting. The system will automatically switch to a back-up, conventional 12-volt starter to start the engine if the IMA system is disabled or if the car is started at extreme cold temperatures. As an additional safety feature, Honda’s hybrid configuration allows the car to operate like a conventional, petrol-engine vehicle even if the IMA hybrid-electric motor system is completely disabled. The Insight’s Continuously Variable Transmission (CVT) provides infinite ratios to keep the engine operating within its most efficient range. Forward gear ratios are infinitely variable between 3.172–0.529 and reverse gear ranges from 4.511~1.693. Final drive is 4.20:1. On Insight EX models, paddle shifters mounted behind the steering wheel allow the driver to engage a manual shift mode and select from seven simulated gear ratios for full control over acceleration and engine braking. Since the CVT’s gear ratios are continuously variable the system electronically directs the transmission to up- or downshift into pre-determined ratios when the driver taps the shift paddles. In normal driving, the CVT allows the engine and IMA motor to stay in their most efficient operating range thereby providing superior fuel efficiency to that of a conventional automatic transmission with fixed gear ratios. The CVT’s variable gear ratios allow for both quick, initial acceleration and efficient, low-rpm cruising. In order to allow the powertrain computer to optimize performance under every driving condition, the Insight’s accelerator pedal is a “drive-by-wire” type that uses an electronic position sensor instead of the conventional metal cable that usually connects the pedal to the engine’s throttle body. In the drive-by-wire system, the engine’s throttle body is controlled by the powertrain computer in response to the accelerator pedal position—allowing the computer to determine the optimal throttle body, fuel, and CVT settings based on the accelerator pedal position and its rate of travel. The Insight’s IMA is powered by a flat, nickel metal hydride battery pack located below the cargo floor between the rear wheels. The 84 module battery is manufactured by Sanyo Electric and provides a nominal system voltage of 100.8 volts with a nominal capacity of 5.75 ampere-hours. The power density of the modules is 30 percent greater than in the second generation Civic Hybrid. The battery is recharged automatically by scavenging engine power, when needed, and by regenerative braking when the car is decelerating. The power management electronics, battery modules, and cooling system are all self-contained within the IMA battery pack. The system monitors and displays the positive or negative effect of a driving style on the vehicle’s fuel economy. As a visual aid, the background of the Insight’s digital speedometer glows green when the car is being driven in an efficient manner. Somewhat less-efficient driving makes the meter glow blue-green. Aggressive starts and stops that consume extra fuel make the meter glow blue. By observing the color shift of the speedometer background, the driver receives assistance in developing driving habits that typically enhance fuel economy. In addition, ECO ASSIST includes a dedicated ECON button that enables the driver to initiate a range of functions that increase the fuel economy of the IMA system via a single button press. In ECON mode, the driver trades off a measure of performance for enhanced fuel economy but gains the following advantages: Overall, ECO ASSIST is designed to assist the driver in adopting a balanced approach between efficient highway commuting and efficient city driving. However, the EPA found during fuel economy testing that using the ECO ASSIST mode "registered no effect" on its fuel economy rating. "It relaxes throttle response, so the test driver simply compensates with additional throttle to achieve the required speeds."  The Insight’s compact chassis is derived from components used in the Honda Fit. The structure of the engine compartment and front section of the chassis is almost identical to the Fit’s, but with additional enhancements to aid crash protection. From the firewall aft the platform is unique to Insight. The most significant difference between the Fit and the Insight platform is the position of the fuel tank. While the Fit locates the fuel tank under the front seats, the Insight positions the fuel tank under the rear seats. This allows the Insight’s hybrid battery pack to be located in the cargo floor below the spare tire, to accommodate folding rear seats, lower roofline, and a more aerodynamic body shape. Front and rear suspension components from the Fit are used including MacPherson struts at the front and an H-shaped torsion beam at the rear to keep the load floor low. Front and rear stabilizer bars are also installed. On EX models, the 175/65-15 low-rolling resistance tires are mounted on lightweight aluminum wheels, each weighing  together with the tire. The rack-and-pinion steering uses electric assist and allows the Insight to steer normally even when the engine is shut off in Idle Stop mode. The braking system includes four-channel ABS, electronic brake distribution, and a creep aid system to prevent the car from rolling on a hill. A brake booster pressure monitoring system monitors vacuum when the engine is shut off during Idle Stop mode. Traction control and vehicle stability assist are also included. The front brakes are single-piston sliding caliper with a one-piece ventilated rotor. Drum brakes are used in the rear. The air conditioning system on the new Insight has an expanded thermodynamic range compared to conventional systems. Unlike the separate low pressure and high pressure refrigerant pipes used in conventional systems, the Insight has its low pressure cold pipe enclosing the high pressure hot refrigerant pipe that allows the cold refrigerant on its way back to the engine bay to cool the warm refrigerant traveling to the cabin. A unique, spiral groove along the outside of the inner pipe increases the surface area and therefore the efficiency of the heat transfer between the outer and inner tubes. This improves the thermal efficiency of the air-conditioning system and, as a result, less effort is required from the compressor, resulting in improved fuel efficiency. In order to control costs, Honda decided not to include the electric-assist air conditioning compressor used in the Civic Hybrid. The Civic Hybrid's electric-assist allows the air conditioning compressor to continue running (using battery pack power) to maintain cabin temperature when the engine is shut off in Idle Stop mode. Instead, the Insight limits the duration of the Idle Stop mode during air conditioning use and restarts the engine, when needed, to maintain cabin temperature. However, when the Insight's ECON function is engaged, a longer Idle Stop time is invoked for improved fuel efficiency at the expense of rapid cabin cooling. In other words, the air conditioning stops whenever the car stops, as in stop-and-go traffic. During Idle Stop the blower continues to run albeit at a low speed. The Multi-information display, located in the center of the tachometer, can be toggled through nine different screens of vehicle information including instantaneous fuel economy, hybrid system schematic, trip computer, and ECO Guide. The ECO Guide display includes a real-time graphic that provides a target zone for acceleration and deceleration in order to achieve maximum fuel economy. When the ignition switch is turned off, a summary screen displays a scoring function that encourages drivers to take an interest in developing fuel-efficient driving habits over the long term. In this manner, drivers can earn additional ‘leaves’ on a plant stem when practicing fuel saving strategies. Long-term fuel efficient driving habits ultimately earn the driver a ‘trophy’ graphic. A facelifted Insight for Europe is shown at the 2011 Frankfurt auto show. Honda facelifted the Insight for 2012 model year. There are several significant changes to improve the car, including exterior, interior, driving and fuel economy. In the exterior, Honda updates the front with larger air intakes on the lower front fascia, installs new head- and taillights, and has new wheel designs. The new grille comes with a blue stripe that Honda says represents the car’s “high-tech hybrid identity.” A thinner rear spoiler and a more compactly mounted rear wiper motor help to improve visibility through the rear window. Even though it now comes with wider 185/60R15 tires, a reduction in engine and CVT friction, improvements to the front and rear bumpers and underbody lead to a 1-mpg increase in EPA's city, highway, and combined mileage numbers.  in the city,  on the highway, and  mpg combined. The aerodynamic efficiency is improved by two percent. In the interior, the rear-seat and headliner are redesigned to add more rear legroom and headroom, improving comfort, additional sound insulation is added and the cupholders are larger. A rear camera and a 16-gigabyte flash card system now comes with the Navi system. Furthermore, the gauge cluster is refreshed. Honda sold 130,445 Insights worldwide in 2009. In an interview in early February 2011, a Honda executive disclosed that Honda produced around 200,000 hybrids a year in Japan. As of November 2013, the Insight has been removed from Honda Canada's website. It was removed from sale in the UK mid 2014. The new Insight began sales in Japan on February 6, 2009. The reception in Japan exceeded Honda's original forecast of 5,000 monthly sales. This resulted as less availability to overseas markets and Honda has to start production on a second line at its Suzuka factory in mid-June to increase production from 700 units a day. In April 2009, the Honda Insight became the first petrol-electric hybrid to be the best-selling vehicle in Japan for the month. After less than eleven months on sale, Honda sold 93,283 Insight in Japan in 2009, ranking it the fifth best-selling car for the year. In March 2010, Honda announced that the new Insight broke through 100,000 sales in Japanese market in just one year after its introduction.  The car went on sale on March 24, 2009 in the U.S. as a 2010 model,"The New Honda Insight" Hybrid Cars. 1 Oct. 2008 . making it the least expensive hybrid vehicle available in the United States. Within less than ten months from its introduction, Insight total sales for 2009 in the U.S. market were 20,572 units, selling more than the Fusion Hybrid (15,554 units) and the Civic Hybrid (15,119), but behind the Camry Hybrid (22,887 units) and the Toyota Prius (139,682 units).  The sales in the U.S. is below expectation, mainly due to the economic recession in 2008–09, stiff competition and a drop in gasoline prices of over one-third over the past year, eroded demand for fuel-efficient cars. In December 2010, Honda introduced a less expensive Insight hybrid for the 2011 model year to help boost sales. For the 2011 LX model, center armrest, cruise control, USB connectivity for the audio system and floor mats are newly added. Electronic stability control and brake assist became standard across all trim levels. All models come with automatic climate control. Honda explained the move "to make (the vehicle) more affordable for those younger customers who couldn't previously get into a hybrid." In 2009, Toyota promised a lower-priced version of the Prius to compete with Insight, but quietly dropped the deal for consumers. In 2010, 20,962 Insights were sold in the country. The Insight ranked number two in all hybrid vehicle sales after the Toyota Prius, beating out the Toyota Camry Hybrid and the Ford Fusion Hybrid.http://www.hybridcars.com/hybrid-clean-diesel-sales-dashboard/december-2010.html December 2010 Hybrid Car Sales Numbers From January 2011 to August 2011, cumulative sales of the Insight in the U.S. reached 13,106 units, ranking number two among hybrid sales for 2011 and outsold only by the Prius. By September 2011, cumulative sales reached 13,618 units, falling to the third place, surpassed by the Hyundai Sonata. For 2012 model year, upgraded upholstery, map light, and steering-wheel-mounted controls are added to LX trim; Bluetooth, automatic headlights, a synthetic leather and premium fabric upholstery, plus a leather-wrapped steering wheel and shift knob are added to EX trim. Rearview camera and a 16-gigabyte flash card system are added to the navigation system. In October 2009, Consumer Reports named the Honda Insight the most reliable vehicle as it scored the highest of any vehicles in predicted reliability, according to its annual vehicles reliability survey. The Honda Insight has been on sale from April 4, 2009 and early reports said it outsold its competitor by 15 percent. The Insight is no longer exempted from the London congestion charge. Starting from autumn 2010, revised suspension should improve ride and handling, parking sensors are added to ES model and higher trim models. The Insight was launched as the lowest priced hybrid car in Australia starting from December 2010. Its price was lower than the Civic Hybrid and the Toyota Prius. Its fuel economy is rated  in official Australian testing. Honda questions the green credentials of an electric vehicle when electricity is generated from coal-fired power stations, "For Australia, unless you're tapped into a green power source, the benefits are negligible". As of March 2010, Honda has sold 2,661 units since the introduction of the Insight in April 2009 of which 847 were sold in the first three months of 2010. As of January 2010, the Honda Insight is exempt of road tax. The sales of the Honda Insight, along with those of the Honda Civic Hybrid, helped Honda achieve their best sales result in the Netherlands since 1989. The Insight was launched in Korea in October 2010 as the lowest priced hybrid car offered by import automakers. In Malaysia, Honda launched the Insight on December 2, 2010 at the Kuala Lumpur International Motor Show (KLIMS) 2010. It was priced slightly more than the top model Honda City. It is reported that a few hundred sales orders were received even before its launch. In 2011, Insight was the best selling hybrid in the country with a total of 4,568 sold.  Early reviews praised the Insight's futuristic styling, handling, and price but noted that it was less powerful, less fuel efficient, and less comfortable than other more expensive hybrids."Honda Insight – What the Auto Press Says" http://usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/cars-trucks/Honda_Insight/ The Insight performed well in comparison tests administered by Motor Trend and Car and Driver. In their comparison test against the 2010 Toyota Prius, Car and Driver stated "...the Insight proved more visceral, connected, and agile than the Prius. The Insight represents a lot of engineering bang for the buck, and the majority of its dynamics are more satisfying than the Prius’s" citing the benefits of the Insight's firm brake feel, accurate steering, and tight suspension (the latter borrowing heavily from the latest Honda Fit). It did not perform as well in Edmunds or Popular Mechanics tests. Despite a high reliability rating in Consumer Reports testing, the Insight was assigned a low score, stating that it fell short in ride quality, handling, interior noise, acceleration, refinement, rear seat access and rear visibility. Autoblog praised it for its fuel economy, tight handling, and good steering feedback, and stated "the Insight is a shockingly fun car to drive in a spirited manner in spite of the comparatively modest thrust available.", but criticized the Insight for its low passenger volume. Automotive critic Jeremy Clarkson, known for his disdain for hybrid vehicles, criticized the Insight for its continuously variable transmission, engine noise, and build quality. He recognized that the price was low, but concluded that a Volkswagen Golf was a better deal. Edmunds.com praised the Insight for improving upon the formula of rival Prius and costing thousands less, but criticized it for excessive road noise, a tight back seat, and buzzy engine under hard acceleration. In addition, they state it "is by far the most enjoyable hybrid hatchback to drive" and praised the ride for being firm, the steering for being relatively responsive, and the seamless integration between the electric and internal combustion engine. In 2009, Edmunds pitted a Honda Insight against other hybrids like Toyota Prius and Ford Fusion hybrid, a Volkswagen Jetta TDI automatic and a MINI Cooper with manual transmission over two days of mixed city and highway driving. In October 2014, Top Gear magazine placed the Insight on its list of "The worst cars you can buy right now", describing the car as "A £20k hyper-efficient numbers merchant now surpassed by loads of diesel rivals in practically any measurement except urban quietness. The game has moved on." Insurance Institute for Highway Safety: Europe NCAP: On February 28, 2014, Honda officially announced it is discontinuing production on the Insight after the 2014 model year (with production ending in the Summer of 2014). The decision was due to slow sales and its decision to withdraw the vehicle from the European markets. Honda later mentioned that they were still committed to producing future hybrid vehicles and is planning to develop a possible replacement through their rollout of Honda's Earth Dreams Technology engines, transmissions and electro-motive technologies, and focusing on further advancing fuel-efficient and alternative-fuel vehicle technologies that are better aligned with customer needs and that strengthen the company's U.S. sales momentum."Honda Insight Officially Dead" from Autoblog (February 28, 2014)    Calendar Year American sales 2009 20,572 2010 20,962 2011 15,549 2012 5,846 2013 4,802 Calendar Year Europe sales 2009 15,416 2010 11,731 2011 5,580 2012 3,282 2013 1,276 2014 536 Driving condition 2010 Toyota Prius 2010 Honda Insight 2009 Volkswagen Jetta TDI A6 2010 Ford Fusion Hybrid 2009 MINI Cooper M6 Back roads 47.2 44.1 41.2 39.6 38.5 City loop 48.7 43.4 31.6 35.1 30.1 Highway 47.4 38.6 40.6 36.0 33.3 Overall 47.6 42.3 38.1 37.3 34.5 EPA City/Hwy 51/48 40/43 29/40 41/36 28/37 Increases the potential for engaging the Idle Stop feature sooner Operates air conditioning more in recirculation mode Reduces automatic climate control blower fan speed Optimizes throttle angle input and CVT operation Limits power and torque by approximately 4 percent (full responsiveness is provided at wide-open-throttle) Frontal Offset test: Good Side Impact test: Good Awarded  stars The Insight's engine won the International Engine of the Year award for 2000, and continued to hold the "Sub-1 liter" size category for the next six years. It received the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's 2000 Climate Protection Award. It was named the Greenest Vehicle of the year for 2000, 2002, 2003 and 2006 by the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE). The Insight was nominated for the North American Car of the Year award for 2001. As of 2011, the 2000 Insight ranks as the most efficient EPA certified gasoline-powered vehicle ever, with a highway rating of  and combined city/highway rating of . The Insight is awarded 2009 Good Design Award from the Japan Industrial Design Promotion Organization The American Automobile Association (AAA) awarded the Honda Insight the Top Commuter Vehicle in 2010.  The 2010 Insight EX was awarded Top Safety Pick 2009 from Insurance Institute for Highway Safety Selected among Kelley Blue Book Top 10 Green Cars for 2010. Selected among Kelley Blue Book Top 10 Green Cars for 2011. Selected among the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy Greenest Vehicles of the Year for 2010, 2011 and 2012. 2012 Total Cost of Ownership Award in the hybrid car category, granted by Kelly Blue Book for the lowest projected costs during initial five-year ownership period in its category. Honda CR-Z Honda Civic Hybrid List of hybrid vehicles
