    Hugh Redwald Trevor-Roper, Baron Dacre of Glanton (15 January 1914 – 26 January 2003), was an historian of early modern Britain and Nazi Germany. He was Regius Professor of Modern History at the University of Oxford. Trevor-Roper was made a life peer in 1979 on the recommendation of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, choosing the title Baron Dacre of Glanton. Trevor-Roper was a polemicist and essayist on a wide range of historical topics, but particularly England in the 16th and 17th centuries and Nazi Germany. His essays established Trevor-Roper's reputation as a scholar who could succinctly define historiographical controversies. In the view of John Kenyon, "some of [Trevor-Roper's] short essays have affected the way we think about the past more than other men's books".Quoted at Adam Sisman, Hugh Trevor-Roper (2010) p 414 On the other hand, his biographer, who is not an historian, claims that "the mark of a great historian is that he writes great books, on the subject which he has made his own. By this exacting standard Hugh failed." Adam Sisman, Hugh Trevor-Roper (2010) p 375 Trevor-Roper's most widely read and financially rewarding book was titled the The Last Days of Hitler (1947). It emerged from his assignment as a British intelligence officer in 1945 to discover what happened in the last days of Hitler's bunker. From his interviews with a range of witnesses and study of surviving documents he demonstrated that Hitler was dead and had not escaped from Berlin. He also showed that Hitler's dictatorship was not an efficient unified machine but a hodge-podge of overlapping rivalries. Trevor-Roper's reputation was damaged in 1983 when he authenticated the Hitler Diaries and they were shown shortly afterwards to be forgeries. Trevor-Roper was born at Glanton, Northumberland, England, the son of a doctor, and the brother of Patrick Trevor-Roper (who became a leading eye surgeon and gay rights activist). Trevor-Roper was educated at Belhaven Hill School, Charterhouse and Christ Church, Oxford, where he read first Classics (Literae Humaniores) and then Modern History, later moving to Merton College, Oxford to become a Research Fellow. Trevor-Roper took a first-class degree in Classical Moderations in 1934 and won the Craven, the Ireland and the Hertford scholarships in Classics. Initially, he intended to make his career in the Classics, but became bored with what he regarded as the pedantic technical aspects of the classics course at Oxford, and switched to History, where he also obtained an honours first in 1936. Trevor-Roper's first book was a 1940 biography of Archbishop William Laud, in which he challenged many of the prevailing perceptions surrounding Laud. During World War II, Trevor-Roper served as an officer in the Radio Security Service of the Secret Intelligence Service, and then on the interception of messages from the German intelligence service, the Abwehr.P. R. J. Winter, "A Higher Form of Intelligence: Hugh Trevor-Roper and Wartime British Secret Service," Intelligence & National Security (Dec 2007), 22#6 pp 847–880, In early 1940, Trevor-Roper and E.W.B.Gill decrypted some of these intercepts, demonstrating the relevance of the material and spurring Bletchley Park efforts to decrypt the traffic. Intelligence from Abwehr traffic later played an important part in many operations including the Double Cross System. (Updated and extended version of Action This Day: From Breaking of the Enigma Code to the Birth of the Modern Computer Bantam Press 2001) He formed a low opinion of most pre-war professional intelligence agents, but a higher one of some of the post-1939 recruits. In The Philby Affair (1968) Trevor-Roper argues that the Soviet spy Kim Philby was never in a position to undermine efforts by the Chief of German Military Intelligence Abwehr, Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, to overthrow the Nazi regime and negotiate with the British government. In November 1945, Trevor-Roper was ordered by Dick White, the then head of counter-intelligence in the British sector of Berlin, to investigate the circumstances of Adolf Hitler's death, and to rebut the Soviet propaganda that Hitler was alive and living in the West.MI5 Security Service (2005) Hitler's last days Using the alias of "Major Oughton", Trevor-Roper interviewed or prepared questions for several officials, high and low, who had been present in the Führerbunker with Hitler, and who had been able to escape to the West, including Bernd Freytag von Loringhoven.In The Bunker with Hitler – Bernd Freytag von Loringhoven with Francois d' Alancon – Weidenfeld & Nicholson/Orion Books – 2006 ISBN 0-297-84555-1 For the most part Trevor-Roper relied on investigations and interviews by hundreds of British, American and Canadian intelligence officers.Parker (2014)Douglas (2014)  He did not have access to Soviet materials. Working very rapidly, Trevor-Roper drafted his most famous book, The Last Days of Hitler in which he described the last ten days of Hitler's life, and the fates of some of the higher-ranking members of the inner circle as well of key lesser figures. Trevor-Roper transformed the evidence into a literary work, with sardonic humour and drama, and was much influenced by the prose styles of two of his favourite historians, Edward Gibbon and Lord Macaulay. The book was cleared by British officials in 1946 for publication as soon as the war crimes trials ended. It was published in English in 1947; six English editions and many foreign language editions followed. In response to The Last Days of Hitler, Trevor-Roper received a death threat from the Stern Gang for his supposed over-emphasis on Hitler's charisma, which the authors of the death threat felt had exonerated the German people.Rosenbaum, Ron Hitler: The Search for the Origins of His Evil, (1999) pp. 63 & 66. Trevor-Roper received a letter from Lisbon written in Hebrew stating that Stern Gang would assassinate him for The Last Days of Hitler, which the Stern Gang stated by portraying Hitler as a "demoniacal" figure had let those ordinary Germans who followed Hitler off the hook, and for this he deserved to die.Rosenbaum, Ron Hitler: The Search for the Origins of His Evil, (1999) page 63 In an interview with the American journalist Ron Rosenbaum, Trevor-Roper stated that this was the most extreme response he had ever received for one of his books. In June 1950, Trevor-Roper attended a conference in Berlin of anti-Communist intellectuals along with Sidney Hook, Melvin J. Lasky, Ignazio Silone, Arthur Koestler, Raymond Aron and Franz Borkenau that resulted in the founding of the Congress for Cultural Freedom and its magazine Encounter. In the 1950s and 1960s, he was a frequent contributor to Encounter, but had reservations about what he regarded as the over-didactic tone of some of its contributors, particularly Koestler and Borkenau. Trevor-Roper was famous for his lucid and acerbic writing style. In reviews and essays he could be pitilessly sarcastic, and devastating in his mockery. In attacking Arnold J. Toynbee's A Study of History, for instance, Trevor-Roper accused Toynbee of regarding himself as a Messiah complete with "the youthful Temptations; the missionary Journeys; the Miracles; the Revelations; the Agony".Sisman, 2010 For Trevor-Roper, the major themes of early modern Europe were its intellectual vitality, and the quarrels between Protestant and Catholic States, the latter being outpaced by the former, both economically and constitutionally. In Trevor-Roper's view, one of the major themes of early modern Europe was expansion. By expansion, he meant both overseas expansion in the form of colonies, and intellectual expansion in the form of the Reformation and the Enlightenment. In Trevor-Roper's view, the witch hunts of the 16th and 17th centuries can ultimately be traced back to the conflict between the religious values of the Reformation, and the rationalistic approach of what became the Enlightenment. Trevor-Roper argued that history should be understood as an art, not a science, and that the key attribute of a successful historian was the power of their imagination. He viewed history as full of contingency, with the past neither a story of continuous advance nor of continuous decline, but the consequence of particular choices made by particular individuals at the time in question. In his studies of early modern Europe, Trevor-Roper did not focus exclusively upon political history, but sought to examine the interaction between the political, intellectual, social and religious trends of the period. His preferred medium of expression was the essay rather than the book. In his essays in social history, written during the 1950s and '60s, Trevor-Roper was influenced by the work of the French Annales School, especially Fernand Braudel, and did much to introduce the work of the Annales school to the English-speaking world. In the 1950s, Trevor-Roper that Braudel and the rest of the French Annales school were doing much innovative historical work, but were "totally excluded from Oxford which remains, in historical matters, a retrograde provincial backwater". In Trevor-Roper's opinion, the dispute between the Puritans and the Arminians was a major, although not the sole, cause of the English Civil War. For him, the dispute was over such issues as free will and predestination, and the role of preaching versus the sacraments, and only later over the structure of the Church of England. The Puritans desired a more decentralised and egalitarian church with an emphasis on the laity, while the Arminians wished for an ordered church with a firm hierarchy, with an emphasis on divine right and salvation through free will. As a historian of early modern Britain, Trevor-Roper was known for his disputes with fellow historians such as Lawrence Stone and Christopher Hill, whose materialist (and in some measure "inevitablist") explanations of the English Civil War he attacked. Trevor-Roper was a leading player in the historiographical "storm over the gentry" (also known as the "Gentry controversy"), a dispute with the historians R. H. Tawney and Stone about whether the English gentry were, economically, on the way down or up in the century before the English Civil War, and whether this helped cause that war. Stone, Tawney and Hill argued that the gentry were rising economically, and that this caused the Civil War. Trevor-Roper argued that while office-holders and lawyers were prospering, the lesser gentry were in decline. A third group, grouped around J. H. Hexter and Geoffrey Elton, argued that the causes of the Civil War had nothing to do with the gentry. In 1948, a paper put forward by Stone in support of Tawney's thesis was vigorously attacked by Trevor-Roper, who showed that Stone had exaggerated the debt problems of the Tudor nobility.Brown, Kenneth "Tawney, R.H." pages 1172–1173 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing page 1173. He also rejected Tawney's theories about the rising gentry and declining nobility, arguing that he was guilty of selective use of evidence and that he misunderstood the statistics.H. R. Trevor-Roper, "The Elizabethan Aristocracy: An Anatomy Anatomized," Economic History Review (1951) 3#3 pp. 279–298 in JSTOR Trevor-Roper attacked the philosophies of history advanced by Arnold J. Toynbee and Edward Hallett Carr, and his colleague A. J. P. Taylor's account of the origins of Second World War. Another dispute was with Taylor and Alan Bullock over the question of whether Adolf Hitler had any fixed aims. In the 1950s, Trevor-Roper was ferocious in his criticism of Bullock for his portrayal of Hitler as a "mountebank" (i.e., opportunistic adventurer) instead of the ideologue Trevor-Roper believed him to be.  When Taylor offered a picture of Hitler similar to Bullock's in his 1961 book The Origins of the Second World War, the debate continued. Another feud was with the novelist and Catholic convert Evelyn Waugh, who was angered by Trevor-Roper's repeated harsh attacks on the Catholic Church.Sisman, (2010) pp 178, 261, 291 In the Globalist-Continentalist debate between those who argued that Hitler had as his aim the conquest of the entire world, and those who argued that he sought only the conquest of the continent of Europe, Trevor-Roper was one of the leading Continentalists. He argued that the Globalist case seeks to turn a scattering of Hitler's remarks made over several decades into a systematic ideology. In his analysis, the only consistent objective Hitler sought was the domination of Europe, as laid out in blueprint form in Mein Kampf. The American historian Lucy Dawidowicz in her 1981 book The Holocaust and Historians delivered what the British historian David Cesarani called an "ad hominem attack", writing that Trevor-Roper in his writings on Nazi Germany was indifferent to Nazi antisemitism because she believed that he was a snobbish anti-Semite who was apathetic about the murder of six million Jews.Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 page 341. Cesarani wrote that Dawidowicz was wrong to accuse Trevor-Roper of antisemitism, but argued that there an element of truth to her critique in that the Shoah was a blind-spot for Trevor-Roper.Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 pages 342-343. Trevor-Roper was a very firm "intentionist" who treated Hitler as a serious, if slightly deranged thinker who from 1924 onwards until his death in 1945 was obsessed with "the conquest of Russia, the extermination of the Slavs, and the colonization of the English".Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 page 345. In his 1962 essay "The Mind of Adolf Hitler", Trevor-Roper again criticized Bullock, writing "Even Mr. Bullock seems content to regard him as a diabolical adventurer animated solely by an unlimited lust for personal power...Hitler was a systematic thinker and his mind is, to the historian, as important as the mind of Bismarck or Lenin".Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 page 346. Trevor-Roper maintained that Hitler on the basis of a wide range of anti-Semitic literature from the writings of Houston Stewart Chamberlain to The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion had constructed a racist ideology that called for making Germany the world's greatest power and the extermination of perceived enemies like the Jews and Slavs. In conclusion, Trevor-Roper wrote that mind of Hitler was: "a terrible phenomenon, imposing indeed in its granite harshness and yet infinitely squalid in in its miscellaneous cumber-like some huge barbarian monolith; the expression of giant strength and savage genius; surrounded by a festering heap of refuse-old tins and and vermin, ashes and eggshells and ordure-the intellectual detritus of centuries". Cesarani wrote that Trevor-Roper regarded Hitler, in marked contrast to Bullock, as a man who was serious about what he said, but at the same time Trevor-Roper's picture of Hitler as a somewhat insane leader fanatically pursuing lunatic policies meant paradoxically that it was hard to take Hitler seriously, at least on the basis of Trevor-Roper's writings.Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 pages 345-346. Cesarani stated that Trevor-Roper was sincere in his hatred and contempt for the Nazis and everything they stood for, but he had considerable difficulty when it came to writing about the complicity and involvement of traditional German elites in National Socialism because the traditional elites in Germany were so similar in many ways to the British Establishment, which Trevor-Roper identified with so strongly. In this respect, Cesarani argued that it was very revealing that Trevor-Roper in The Last Days of Hitler was especially damning in his picture of the German Finance Minister, Count Lutz Schwerin von Krosigk whom Trevor-Roper noted "had been a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford, but he had acquired none of its values".Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 page 352. Cesarani noted: "Thus, to Trevor-Roper the values of Oxford University stood at the opposite pole to those of Hitler's Reich, and one reason for the ghastly character of Nazism was that it did not share them". Cesarani noted that while Trevor-Roper supported the Conservatives and ended his days as a Tory life-peer, he was broadly speaking a liberal and believed that Britain was a great nation because of its liberalism.Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 pages 352-353. Because of this background, Cesarani wrote that Trevor-Roper naturally saw the liberal democracy Britain as totally anathema to Nazi Germany. Cesarani concluded: "In order to maintain the illusion of virtuous British liberalism, Hitler had to be depicted as either a statesmen like any other or a monster without equal, and those who did business with him as, respectively, pragmatists or dupes. Every current of Nazi society that made it distinctive could be charted, while the anti-Jewish racism that it shared with Britain was discreetly avoided".Cesarani, David "From Bullock to Kershaw: Some Peculiarities of British Historical Writing About the Nazi Persecution and Mass Murder of the Jews" page 339-354 from Holocaust Historiography In Context edited by David Bankier and Dan Michman, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 2008 page 354. A notable thesis propagated by Trevor-Roper was the “general crisis of the 17th century.” He argued that the middle years of the 17th century in Western Europe saw a widespread break-down in politics, economics and society caused by demographic, social, religious, economic and political problems. In this "general crisis,” various events, such as the English Civil War, the Fronde in France, the climax of the Thirty Years' War in Germany, troubles in the Netherlands, and revolts against the Spanish Crown in Portugal, Naples and Catalonia, were all manifestations of the same problems.Rabb, Theodore K.The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe, New York: Oxford University Press, 1975 page 18. The most important causes of the “general crisis” in Trevor-Roper’s opinion were conflicts between “Court” and “Country”; that is between the increasingly powerful centralizing, bureaucratic, sovereign princely states, represented by the Court, and the traditional, regional, land-based aristocracy and gentry, representing the country. In addition, he said that the religious and intellectual changes introduced by the Reformation and the Renaissance were important secondary causes of the "general crisis." The "general crisis" thesis generated controversy between supporters of this theory,and those, such as the Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm, who agreed with him that there was a "general crisis,” but saw the problems of 17th century Europe as more economic in origin than Trevor-Roper would allow. A third faction denied that there was any "general crisis,” for example the Dutch historian Ivo Schöffer, the Danish historian Niels Steengsgaard, and the Soviet historian A. D. Lublinskaya.Rabb, Theodore K.The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe, New York: Oxford University Press, 1975 pages 20–21 & 25–26. Trevor-Roper's "general crisis" thesis provoked much discussion, and led experts in 17th century history such as Roland Mousnier, J. H. Elliott, Lawrence Stone, E. H. Kossmann, Eric Hobsbawm and J. H. Hexter to become advocates of the pros and cons of the theory. At times the discussion became quite heated; the Italian Marxist historian Rosario Villari, speaking of the work of Trevor-Roper and Mousnier, claimed that: "The hypothesis of imbalance between bureaucratic expansion and the needs of the state is too vague to be plausible, and rests on inflated rhetoric, typical of a certain type of political conservative, rather than on effective analysis."Rabb, Theodore K.The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe, New York: Oxford University Press, 1975 page 22. Villari accused Trevor-Roper of downgrading the importance of what Villari called the English Revolution (the usual Marxist term for the English Civil War), and insisted that the "general crisis" was part of a Europe-wide revolutionary movement.Rabb, Theodore K.The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe, New York: Oxford University Press, 1975 pages 22–23. Another Marxist critic of Trevor-Roper the Soviet historian A. D. Lublinskaya attacked the concept of a conflict between "Court" and "Country" as fiction, arguing there was no "general crisis;" instead she maintained that the so-called "general crisis" was merely the emergence of capitalism.Rabb, Theodore K.The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe, New York: Oxford University Press, 1975 page 26. In 1973, Trevor-Roper in the foreword to a book by John Röhl endorsed the view that Germany was largely responsible for World War I.Trevor-Roper, Hugh "Foreword" to 1914: Delusion or Design? page 11 Trevor-Roper wrote that in his opinion far too many British historians had allowed themselves to be persuaded of the theory that the outbreak of war in 1914 had been the fault of all the great powers.Trevor-Roper, Hugh "Foreword" to 1914: Delusion or Design? page 10 He claimed that this theory had been promoted by the German government's policy of selective publication of documents, aided and abetted by most German historians in a policy of "self-censorship."Trevor-Roper, Hugh "Foreword" to 1914: Delusion or Design? pages 9–10 He praised Röhl for finding and publishing two previously secret documents that showed German responsibility for the war.Trevor-Roper, Hugh "Foreword" to 1914: Delusion or Design? pages 13–15 In 1973, Trevor-Roper was invited to visit Switzerland to examine a manuscript entitled Decadence Mandchoue written by the Sinologist Sir Edmund Backhouse (1873-1944) in a mixture of English, French, Latin and Chinese that been in the custody of Dr. Reinhard Hoeppli, a Swiss diplomat who been the Swiss consul in Beijing during World War II. Hoeppli, who been given Decadence Mandchoue in 1943 by friend Backhouse had been unable to publish it owning to its sexually explicit content. But by 1973 looser censorship and the rise of the gay rights movement meant a publisher was willing to release Decadence Mandchoue to the market. However, before doing so they wanted Trevor-Roper who as a former MI6 officer was an expert on clandestine affairs to examine some of the more outlandish claims contained in the text. For an example, Backhouse claimed in Decadence Mandchoue that the wives and daughters of British diplomats in Beijing had trained their dogs and tamed foxes to perform cunnilingus on them, which the fascistic Backhouse used as evidence of British "decadence", which in turn explained why he was supporting Germany and Japan in World War II. Trevor-Roper regarded Decadence Mandchoue with considerable distaste calling the manuscript "pornographic" and "obscene" as Backhouse related in graphic detail sexual encounters he claimed to have had with the French poet Paul Verlaine, the Irish playwright Oscar Wilde, Wilde's lover Lord Alfred Douglas, the French poet Arthur Rimbaud, the Russian ballet dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, the British Prime Minister Lord Rosebery and the Empress Dowager Cixi of China whom the openly gay Backhouse had maintained had forced herself on him. Backhouse also claimed to have been the friend of the Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy and the French actress Sarah Bernhardt. For the next two years, Trevor-Roper went on an odyssey that took him all over Britain, France, Switzerland, the United States, Canada and China as he sought to unravel the mystery of just who the elusive Backhouse was. Backhouse had between 1898 and his death in 1944 worked as a Sinologist, the business agent for several British and American companies in China, a British spy, gun-runner and translator before finally ending his days in World War II China as a fascist and a Japanese collaborator who wished fervently for an Axis victory which would destroy Great Britain.Trevor-Roper, Hugh The Hermit of Peking, New York: Alfred Knopf, 1976 pages 295-296. Trevor-Roper noted that despite Backhouse's homosexuality and Nazi Germany's policy of persecuting homosexuals, Backhouse's intense hatred of his own country together with his sadistic-masochistic sexual needs meant that Backhouse longed to be "...ravished and possessed by the brutal, but still perverted masculinity of the fascist Führerprinzip".Trevor-Roper, Hugh The Hermit of Peking, New York: Alfred Knopf, 1976 page 295.  The end result was one of Trevor-Roper's most successful later books, namely his 1976 biography of Backhouse entitled A Hidden Life in Britain and The Hermit of Peking in the United States. Backhouse had long been regarded as a world's leading experts on China. In his biography, Trevor-Roper exposed the vast majority of Sir Edmund's life-story and virtually all of his scholarship as a fraud. In Decadence Mandchoue, Backhouse spoke of his efforts to raise money to pay the defense lawyers for Wilde while he was an undergraduate at Oxford. Trevor-Roper established that Backhouse did indeed raise money for the Wilde defense fund, he spent it all on buying expensive jewelry, especially pearl necklaces, which were a special passion of Backhouse's. It was this embezzlement of the money Backhouse had raised for the Wilde defense fund that led to him fleeing Britain in 1895. The discrediting of Backhouse as a source led to much of China's history being re-written in the West. Backhouse had portrayed Prince Ronglu as a friend of the West and an enemy of the Boxers when the opposite was true.Trevor-Roper, Hugh The Hermit of Peking, New York: Alfred Knopf, 1976 page 268. Trevor-Roper noted that that in the "diary" of Ching Shan that Backhouse claimed to have looted from Ching's house just before it was burned down by Indian troops in the Boxer Rebellion, it has Prince Ronglu saying about the government's support of the Boxers: "C'est pire qu'un crime, c'est une faute".Trevor-Roper, Hugh The Hermit of Peking, New York: Alfred Knopf, 1976 page 203. Trevor-Roper argued that it extremely unlikely that Prince Ronglu-who only knew Manchu and Mandarin-would be quoting a well-known French expression, but noted that Backhouse was fluent in French.Trevor-Roper, Hugh The Hermit of Peking, New York: Alfred Knopf, 1976 page 203. Backhouse was fluent in Mandarin and Cantonese, lived most of his life in Beijing and after moving to China had declined to wear western clothes, preferring instead the gown of a Chinese mandarin, which led most Westerners to assume that Backhouse "knew" China. Trevor-Roper noted that despite his superficial appearance of affection for the Chinese, much of what Backhouse wrote about on China worked subtly to confirm Western "Yellow Peril" stereotypes as Backhouse variously depicted the Chinese as pathologically dishonest, sexually perverted, morally corrupt and generally devious and treacherous-in short Chinese civilization for Backhouse was a deeply sick civilization. In 1960, Trevor-Roper waged a successful campaign against the candidacy of Sir Oliver Franks who was backed by the heads of houses marshalled by Maurice Bowra, for the Chancellorship of the University of Oxford, helping the then Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to be elected instead. In 1964, Trevor-Roper edited a Festschrift in honour of his friend Sir Keith Feiling's 80th birthday. In 1970, he was the author of The Letters of Mercurius, a satirical work on the student revolts and university politics of the late 1960s, originally published as letters in The Spectator. Another aspect of Trevor-Roper’s general outlook on history and on scholarly research that has inspired controversy is his claims about the historical experiences of pre-literate societies. In accordance with HegelHegel, G.W.F. (1821–31), The Philosophy of History, trans. J. Jibree. New York: Dover, 1956, p.99 Africa is "no historical part of the World; it has no movement or development to exhibit". he remarked that Africa had no history prior to European exploration and colonisation, declaring that "there is only the history of Europeans in Africa. The rest is darkness" with its past "the unedifying gyrations of barbarous tribes in picturesque but irrelevant corners of the globe."What's New About African History?, By John Edward Philips, History news network, 6 April 2006 These comments, recapitulated in a later article which called Africa "unhistoric",Hugh Trevor-Roper, "The Past and Present: History and Sociology,” Past and Present 42 (1969): 6. spurred intense debate between historians, anthropologists, sociologists, in the emerging fields of postcolonial and cultural studies about the definition of "history."R. Hunt Davis, "Interpreting the Colonial Period in African History,” African Affairs 72, no. 289 (1973): 383–400.Gus Deveneaux, "The Frontier in Recent African History,” The International Journal of African Studies 11, no. 1 (1978): 63–85.Shepard Krech III, "The State of Ethnohistory,” Annual Review of Anthropology 20 (1991): 345. The conflict centres around what must be present in order for a society to qualify as having a "history,” Trevor-Roper arguing that it required documented evidence.Ali A. Mazrui, "European Exploration and Africa’s Self-Discovery,” The Journal of Modern African Studies 7, no. 4 (1969): 661–676. Many historians agreed with this central claim but think historical evidence should also include oral traditions as well as written history, the previous litmus test for a society having left "prehistory" behind.Kenneth C. Wylie, "The Uses and Misuses of Ethnohistory,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 3, no. 4 (1973): 707–720.Alan Gailey, "The Nature of Tradition,” Folklore 100, no. 2 (1989): 143–161. Critics of Trevor-Roper’s claim have questioned the validity of systematic interpretations of the African past, whether by materialist, Annalist, or, like Trevor-Roper, traditional historical methods.Deveneaux, 67. Some try to argue that all approaches which compare Africa with Europe or directly integrate it into European history cannot be an accurate description of African societies and cultures.Finn Fugelstad, "The Trevor-Roper Trap or the Imperialism of History. An Essay,” History in Africa 19 (1992): 309–326. Virtually all scholars now agree that Africa qualifies as having a "history,"and it is possible that Trevor-Roper's statements played an indirect and unintentional, but important role in the development of post-colonial African studies by motivating discussions about Africa’s role in the present and historical world. In 1980 at the age of sixty-seven, he became Master of Peterhouse, the oldest and smallest college in the University of Cambridge. His election, which surprised his friends, was engineered by a group of Fellows led by Maurice Cowling, then the leading Peterhouse historian. The Fellows chose him because Cowling's reactionary clique thought he would be an arch-conservative who would oppose the admission of women.  In the event, Trevor-Roper feuded constantly with Cowling and his allies, while launching a series of administrative reforms. Women were admitted in 1983 at his urging. The British historian Neal Ascherson summarised the quarrel between Cowling and Trevor-Roper as:"Lord Dacre, far from being a romantic Tory ultra, turned out to be an anti-clerical Whig with a preference for free speech over superstition. He did not find it normal that fellows should wear mourning on the anniversary of General Franco’s death, attend parties in SS uniform or insult black and Jewish guests at high table. For the next seven years, Trevor-Roper battled to suppress the insurgency of the Cowling clique (‘a strong mind trapped in its own glutinous frustrations’), and to bring the college back to a condition in which students might actually want to go there. Neither side won this struggle, which soon became a campaign to drive Trevor-Roper out of the college by grotesque rudeness and insubordination." In a review of Siseman's 2010 biography of Trevor-Roper, the Economist wrote that picture of Peterhouse in the 1980s was "startling", stating the college had become under Cowling's influence a sort of right-wing "lunatic asylum", who were determined to sabotage Trevor-Roper's reforms.  In 1987 he retired complaining of "seven wasted years."Sisman, pp 483, 487, 490, 493, 506, 558, 562 In 1981  Festschrift was published in honour of Trevor-Roper, History and the Imagination. Some of the contributors were Sir Geoffrey Elton, John Clive, Arnaldo Momigliano, Frances Yates, Jeremy Catto, Robert S. Lopez, Michael Howard, David S. Katz, Dimitri Obolensky, J. H. Elliott, Richard Cobb, Walter Pagel, Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Valerie Pearl and Fernand Braudel.Lloyd-Jones, Hugh & Pearl, Valerie History & the Imagination, New York: Holmes & Meier, 1981 page vii The topics contributed by this group of American, British, French, Russian, Italian, Israeli, Canadian and German historians extended from whether the Odyssey was a part of an oral tradition that was later written down, to the question of the responsibility for the Jameson Raid.Lloyd-Jones, Hugh & Pearl, Valerie History & the Imagination, New York: Holmes & Meier, 1981 pages viii–ix The nadir of his career came in 1983, when as a director of The Times he "authenticated" the so-called Hitler Diaries. The opinion among experts in the field was by no means unanimous; David Irving for example, initially decried them as forgeries but subsequently changed his mind and declared that they could be genuine, before finally stating that they were a forgery. Historians Gerhard Weinberg and Eberhard Jäckel had also expressed doubt regarding the authenticity of the diaries.Richard J. Evans, Telling Lies About Hitler: The Holocaust, History and the David Irving Trial (London, 2002), p. 25. Within two weeks forensic scientist Julius Grant demonstrated that the diaries were a forgery. The incident gave Trevor-Roper's enemies the opportunity to criticise him openly. Trevor-Roper's initial endorsement of the diaries raised questions about his integrity, because The Sunday Times, a newspaper to which he regularly contributed book reviews and of which he was an independent director, had already paid a considerable sum for the right to serialise the diaries. Trevor-Roper denied any dishonest motivation, explaining that he had been given assurances that turned out to be false about how the diaries had come into the possession of their "discoverer" and about the age of the paper and ink used in them. Nonetheless, the satirical magazine Private Eye to nickname him Hugh Very-Ropey (Lord Lucre of Claptout). Despite the shadow that this incident cast over his later career, he continued to write and publish, and his work continued to be well received.Rowse and Trevor-Roper defined, Donald Adamson,  Trevor-Roper was portrayed in the 1991 TV miniseries Selling Hitler by Alan Bennett. On 4 October 1954, Trevor-Roper married Lady Alexandra Henrietta Louisa Howard-Johnston (9 March 1907 – 15 August 1997), eldest daughter of Field Marshal the Earl Haig by his wife, the former Hon. Dorothy Maud Vivian. Lady Alexandra was a goddaughter of Queen Alexandra and had previously been married to Rear-Admiral Clarence Dinsmore Howard-Johnston, by whom she had had three children. There were no children by his marriage with her. Hugh Trevor-Roper was raised to the Peerage on 27 September 1979, and was introduced to the House of Lords as Baron Dacre of Glanton, of Glanton in the County of Northumberland; he was granted this title being a great-great-great-grandson of the Hon. and Reverend Richard Henry Roper, second and youngest son of Anne, (16th) Baroness Dacre, by her second marriage to Henry Roper, 8th Baron Teynham, and was in remainder to the ancient barony of Dacre. In his last years he had suffered from sight problems, which were corrected by surgery.  Trevor-Roper died of cancer in a hospice in Oxford, aged 89. Five books by Trevor-Roper were published posthumously. The first was Letters from Oxford, a collection of letters written by Trevor-Roper between 1947–59 to his close friend the American art collector Bernard Berenson. The second book was 2006's Europe’s Physician, an unfinished biography of Sir Theodore de Mayerne, the Franco-Swiss court physician to Henri IV, James I and Charles I. The latter work was largely completed by 1979, but for some unknown reasons was not finished. The third book was The Invention of Scotland: Myth and History, a critique written in the mid-1970s of what Trevor-Roper regarded as the myths of Scottish nationalism. It was published in 2008. The fourth book collecting together some of his influential essays on History and the Enlightenment: Eighteenth Century Essays was published in 2010. The fifth book was The Wartime Journals, edited by Richard Davenport-Hines, published in 2011. The Wartime Journals are from Trevor-Roper's journals that he kept during his years in the Secret Intelligent Service.      Archbishop Laud, 1573–1645, 1940. The Last Days of Hitler, 1947 (revised editions followed, until the last in 1995) "The Elizabethan Aristocracy: An Anatomy Anatomized," Economic History Review (1951) 3 No 3 pp.&nbsp;279–298 in JSTOR Secret Conversations, 1941–1944 (published later as Hitler's Table Talk, 1941–1944), 1953. Historical Essays, 1957 (published in the United States in 1958 as Men and Events). "The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century", Past and Present, Volume 16, 1959 pp.&nbsp;31–64. "Hitlers Kriegsziele", in Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitsgeschichte, Volume 8, 1960 pp.&nbsp;121–133, translated into English as "Hitler's War Aims" pages 235–250 from Aspects of the Third Reich edited by H.W. Koch, London: Macmillan Ltd, 1985. "A. J. P. Taylor, Hitler and the War", Encounter, Volume 17, July 1961 pp.&nbsp;86–96. "E. H. Carr's Success Story", Encounter, Volume 84, Issue No 104, 1962 pp.&nbsp;69–77. Blitzkrieg to Defeat: Hitler's War Directives, 1939–1945, 1964, 1965. Essays in British history presented to Sir Keith Feiling edited by H.R. Trevor-Roper; with a foreword by Lord David Cecil (1964) The Rise of Christian Europe, 1965. Hitler's Place in History, 1965. The Crisis of the Seventeenth Century: Religion, the Reformation, and Social Change, and Other Essays, 1967. The Age of Expansion, Europe and the World, 1559–1600, edited by Hugh Trevor-Roper, 1968. The Philby Affair: Espionage, Treason and Secret Services, 1968. The Romantic Movement and the Study of History: the John Coffin memorial lecture delivered before the University of London on 17 February 1969, 1969. The European Witch-Craze of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, 1969 The Plunder of the Arts in the Seventeenth Century, 1970. Queen Elizabeth's First Historian: William Camden and the Beginning of English "Civil History", 1971. "Fernand Braudel, the Annales, and the Mediterranean," The Journal of Modern History Vol. 44, No. 4, December 1972 "Foreword" pages 9–16 from 1914: Delusion or Design The Testimony of Two German Diplomats edited by John Röhl, 1973. A Hidden Life: The Enigma of Sir Edmund Backhouse (published in the US as The Hermit of Peking: The Hidden Life of Sir Edmund Backhouse), 1976. Princes and Artists: Patronage and Ideology at Four Habsburg Courts, 1517–1633, 1976. History and Imagination: A Valedictory Lecture Delivered before the University of Oxford on 20 May 1980, 1980. Renaissance Essays, 1985. Catholics, Anglicans and Puritans: Seventeenth Century Essays, 1987. From Counter-Reformation to Glorious Revolution, 1992. Edward Gibbon – The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. 1 introduction (London: Everyman's Library, 1993). Letters from Oxford: Hugh Trevor-Roper to Bernard Berenson. Edited by Richard Davenport-Hines. L.: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2006, ISBN 0-297-85084-9. Europe’s Physician: The Various Life of Sir Theodore De Mayerne, 2007, ISBN 0-300-11263-7. The Invention of Scotland: Myth and History, 2008, ISBN 0-300-13686-2 History and the Enlightenment: Eighteenth Century Essays, 2010, ISBN 0-300-13934-9  Letters from Oxford: Hugh Trevor-Roper to Bernard Berenson edited by Richard Davenport-Hines (2007) My Dear Hugh: Letters from Richard Cobb to Hugh Trevor-Roper and Others edited by Tim Heald (2011) [NB does not contain any letters written by Trevor-Roper] One Hundred Letters From Hugh Trevor-Roper, edited by Richard Davenport-Hines, and Adam Sisman (2013) except and text search Corrected paperback edition, 2015. The Wartime Journals: Hugh Trevor-Roper, Edited by Richard Davenport-Hines, 2011 ISBN 1-84885-990-2. Corrected paperback edition, 2015. Dacre made an extended appearance on the television programme After Dark (discussed here), which is available for online download at BFI InViewList of After Dark editions (Series 3, episode 1, 13 May 1989 Out of Bounds) List of books by or about Adolf Hitler Sir Edmund Backhouse, 2nd Baronet Burke's Landed Gentry Burke's Peerage and Baronetage Ascherson, Neal. "Liquidator," London Review of Books Vol. 32 No. 16 · 19 August 2010 pages 10–12 Douglas, Sarah K. "The Search for Hitler: Hugh Trevor-Roper, Humphrey Serle and the Last Days of Hitler: text," Journal of Military History (Jan 2014) 78 No 1 pp 165–210 Parker, Geoffrey. ""The Search for Hitler: Hugh Trevor-Roper, Humphrey Serle, and the Last Days of Hitler: Prologue," Journal of Military History (Jan 2014)  78 No 1 pp 159–64 Robinson, Kristen. "Trevor-Roper, Hugh" pages 1204–1205 from The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing edited by Kelly Boyd, Volume 2 M-Z, London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 1999, ISBN 1-884964-33-8. Sisman, Adam (2010). Hugh Trevor-Roper, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-85214-8; published in North America as  “Discussion of H. R. Trevor-Roper: "The General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century"” pages 8–42 from Past and Present, No. 18, November 1960 with contributions from Roland Mousnier, J. H. Elliott, Lawrence Stone, H. R. Trevor-Roper, E. H. Kossmann, E. J. Hobsbawm and J. H. Hexter. Malloch, S. J. V. "The Classicism of Hugh Trevor-Roper," Cambridge Classical Journal Vol. 61 pages 29–61 Michael Knox Beran: H. R. Trevor-Roper, R.I.P, nationalreview.com, 31 January 2003. Barnard, T. (Faculty of History, University of Oxford) Obituary, History Faculty Alumni Newsletter, No. 1, April 2003.  (there are several discrepancies between these sources) www.thepeerage.com: Hugh Trevor-Roper The Crisis of the Seventeenth Century: Religion, the Reformation and Social Change and Other Essays, 1967. Full text online
