   The United States Navy, United States Coast Guard, and United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) use a hull classification symbol (sometimes called hull code or hull number) to identify their ships by type and by individual ship within a type.  The system is analogous to the pennant number system that the Royal Navy and other European and Commonwealth navies use. The U.S. Navy began to assign unique Naval Registry Identification Numbers to its ships in the 1890s. The system was a simple one in which each ship received a number which was appended to its ship type, fully spelled out, and added parenthetically after the ship's name when deemed necessary to avoid confusion between ships. Under this system, for example, the battleship Indiana was USS Indiana (Battleship No. 1), the cruiser Olympia was USS Olympia (Cruiser No. 6), and so on. Beginning in 1907, some ships also were referred to alternatively by single-letter or three-letter codes—for example, USS Indiana (Battleship No. 1) could be referred to as USS Indiana (B-1) and USS Olympia (Cruiser No. 6) could also be referred to as USS Olympia (C-6), while USS Pennsylvania (Armored Cruiser No. 4) could be referred to as USS Pennsylvania (ACR-4). However, rather than replacing it, these codes coexisted and were used interchangeably with the older system until the modern system was instituted on 17 July 1920. During World War I, the U.S. Navy acquired large numbers of privately owned and commercial ships and craft for use as patrol vessels, mine warfare vessels,  and various types of naval auxiliary ships, some of them with identical names. To keep track of them all, the Navy assigned unique identifying numbers to them. Those deemed appropriate for patrol work received section patrol numbers (SP), while those intended for other purposes received "identification numbers", generally abbreviated "Id. No." or "ID;" some ships and craft changed from an SP to an ID number or vice versa during their careers, without their unique numbers themselves changing, and some ships and craft assigned numbers in anticipation of naval service never were acquired by the Navy. The SP/ID numbering sequence was unified and continuous, with no SP number repeated in the ID series or vice versa so that there could not be, for example, both an "SP-435" and an "Id. No 435". The SP and ID numbers were used parenthetically after each boat's or ship's name to identify it; although this system pre-dated the modern hull classification system and its numbers were not referred to at the time as "hull codes" or "hull numbers," it was used in a similar manner to today's system and can be considered its precursor.Naval History and heritage Command Online Library of Selected Images (at http://www.history.navy.mil/photos/shusn-no/spid-no.htm). The United States Revenue Cutter Service, which merged with the United States Lifesaving Service in January 1915 to form the modern Coast Guard, began following the Navy's lead in the 1890s, with its cutters having parenthetical numbers called Naval Registry Identification Numbers following their names, such as (Cutter No. 1), etc.  This persisted until the Navy's modern hull classification system's introduction in 1920, which included Coast Guard ships and craft. Like the U.S. Navy, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey &ndash; a uniformed seagoing service of the United States Government and a predecessor of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) &ndash; adopted a hull number system for its fleet in the 20th century. Its largest vessels, "Category I" oceanographic survey ships, were classified as "ocean survey ships" and given the designation "OSS". Intermediate-sized "Category II" oceanographic survey ships received the designation "MSS" for "medium survey ship," and smaller "Category III" oceanographic survey ships were given the classification "CSS" for "coastal survey ship." A fourth designation, "ASV" for "auxiliary survey vessel," included even smaller vessels. In each case, a particular ship received a unique designation based on its classification and a unique hull number separated by a space rather than a hyphen; for example, the third Coast and Geodetic Survey ship named Pioneer was an ocean survey ship officially known as USC&GS Pioneer (OSS 31).United States Department of State, United States Treaties and Other International Obligations, Volume 23, Part Four, Washington, D.C.:U.S. Government Printing Office, 1972, p. 3612.United States Department of Commerce, Annual Report of the Director of the Coast and Geodetic Survey for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1964, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.: 1964, pp. 3, 4, 5. The Coast and Geodetic Surveys system persisted after the creation of NOAA in 1970, when NOAA took control of the Surveys fleet, but NOAA later changed to its modern hull classification system. The U.S. Navy instituted its modern hull classification system on 17 July 1920, doing away with section patrol numbers, "identification numbers", and the other numbering systems described above.  In the new system, all hull classification symbols are at least two letters; for basic types the symbol is the first letter of the type name, doubled, except for aircraft carriers. The combination of symbol and hull number identify a modern Navy ship uniquely. A heavily modified or re-purposed ship may receive a new symbol, and either retain the hull number or receive a new one. For example, gun cruiser  was converted to a gun/missile cruiser, changing the hull number to CAG-1. Also, the system of symbols has changed a number of times both since it was introduced in 1907 and since the modern system was instituted in 1920, so ships' symbols sometimes change without anything being done to the physical ship.Derdall and DiGiulian, (section: Nomenclature history) Hull numbers are assigned by classification. Duplication between, but not within, classifications is permitted. Hence, CV-1 was the aircraft carrier  and BB-1 was the battleship . Ship types and classifications have come and gone over the years, and many of the symbols listed below are not presently in use. The Naval Vessel Register maintains an online database of U.S. Navy ships showing which symbols are presently in use. After World War II and until 1975, the U.S. Navy defined a "frigate" as a type of surface warship larger than a destroyer and smaller than a cruiser; in other navies, such a ship generally was referred to as a "flotilla leader", or "destroyer leader" —hence the U.S. Navy's use of "DL" for "frigate" prior to 1975—while "frigates" in other navies were smaller than destroyers and more like what the U.S. Navy termed a "destroyer escort", "ocean escort", or "DE".  The United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification of cruisers, frigates, and ocean escorts brought U.S. Navy classifications into line with other nations' classifications, and at least cosmetically. i.e., in terms of terminology, eliminated the perceived "cruiser gap" with the Soviet Navy by redesignating the former "frigates" as "cruisers". If a U.S. Navy ship's hull classification symbol begins with "T-", it is part of the Military Sealift Command, has a primarily civilian crew, and is a United States Naval Ship (USNS) in non-commissioned service &ndash; as opposed to a commissioned United States Ship (USS) with an all-military crew. If a ship's hull classification symbol begins with "W", it is a ship of the United States Coast Guard.  Until 1965, the Coast Guard used U.S. Navy hull classification codes, prepending a "W" to their beginning.  In 1965, it retired some of the less mission-appropriate Navy-based classifications and developed new ones of its own, most notably WHEC for "high endurance cutter" and WMEC for "medium endurance cutter". The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), a component of the United States Department of Commerce and one of the uniformed seagoing services of the United States, also uses a hull classification symbol system, which it also calls "hull numbers," for its fleet. After NOAA took over the former Coast and Geodetic Survey fleet in 1970 along with research vessels of other government agencies, it adopted a new system of ship classification. In its system, the NOAA fleet is divided into two broad categories, research ships and survey ships.  The research ships, which include oceanographic and fisheries research vessels, are given hull numbers beginning with "R", while the survey ships, generally hydrographic survey vessels, receive hull numbers beginning with "S". The letter is followed by a three-digit number; the first digit indicates the NOAA "class" (i.e., size) of the vessel, which NOAA assigns based on the ship's gross tonnage and horsepower, while the next two digits combine with the first digit to create a unique three-digit identifying number for the ship. Generally, each NOAA hull number is written with a space between the letter and the three-digit number, as in, for example,  or .Wertheim, The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets of the World, 15th Edition: Their Ships, Aircraft, and Systems, p. 1005. Unlike the Navy, once an older NOAA ship leaves service, a newer one can be given the same hull number; for example, "S 222" was assigned to , then assigned to NOAAS Thomas Jefferson (S 222), which entered NOAA service after Mount Mitchell was stricken. The U.S. Navy's system of alpha-numeric ship designators, and its associated hull numbers, have been for several decades a unique method of categorizing ships of all types: combatants, auxiliaries and district craft. Though considerably changed in detail and expanded over the years, this system remains essentially the same as when formally implemented in 1920. It is a very useful tool for organizing and keeping track of naval vessels, and also provides the basis for the identification numbers painted on the bows (and frequently the sterns) of most U.S. Navy ships. The ship designator and hull number system's roots extend back to the late 1880s, when ship type serial numbers were assigned to most of the new-construction warships of the emerging "Steel Navy". During the course of the next thirty years, these same numbers were combined with filing codes used by the Navy's clerks to create an informal version of the system that was put in place in 1920. Limited usage of ship numbers goes back even earlier, most notably to the "Jeffersonian Gunboats" of the early 1800s and the "Tinclad" river gunboats of the Civil War Mississippi Squadron. It is important to understand that hull number letter prefixes are not acronyms, and should not be carelessly treated as abbreviations of ship type classifications. Thus, "DD" does not stand for anything more than "Destroyer". "SS" simply means "Submarine". And "FF" is the post-1975 type code for "Frigate." The hull classification codes for ships in active duty in the United States Navy are governed under Secretary of the Navy Instruction 5030.8B (SECNAVINST 5030.8B). Warships are designed to participate in combat operations. The origin of the 2 letter code derives from the need to distinguish various cruiser subtypes. Aircraft carriers are ships designed primarily for the purpose of conducting combat operations by aircraft which engage in attacks against airborne, surface, sub-surface and shore targets.  Contrary to popular belief, the "CV" hull classification symbol does not stand for "Carrier Vessel". The "CV" designation was originally derived from cruisers, since aircraft carriers were seen as an extension of the sea control and denial mission of cruisers.  The "V" designation for heavier-than-air craft comes from the French verb voler (to fly).United States Naval Aviation 1910–1995, Appendix 16. Since 1935, "CV" has been a two-letter, unitary hull classification symbol meaning "aircraft carrier".  Aircraft carriers are designated in two sequences: the first sequence runs from CV-1 USS Langley to the very latest ships, and the second sequence, "CVE" for escort carriers, ran from CVE-1 Long Island to CVE-127 Okinawa before being discontinued. Surface combatants are ships which are designed primarily to engage enemy forces on the high seas.  The primary surface combatants are battleships, cruisers and destroyers.  Battleships are very heavily armed and armored; cruisers moderately so; destroyers and smaller warships, less so.  Before 1920, ships were called " no. X", with the type fully pronounced.  The types were commonly abbreviated in ship lists to "B-X", "C-X", "D-X" et cetera—for example, before 1920,  would have been called "USS Minnesota, Battleship number&nbsp;22" orally and "USS Minnesota, B-22" in writing.  After 1920, the ship's name would have been both written and pronounced "USS Minnesota (BB-22)". In generally decreasing size, the types are: Submarines are all self-propelled submersible types (usually started with SS) regardless of whether employed as combatant, auxiliary, or research and development vehicles which have at least a residual combat capability. While some classes, including all diesel-electric submarines, are retired from USN service, non-U.S. navies continue to employ SS, SSA, SSAN, SSB, SSC, SSG, SSM, and SST types.Russia still employs several SSA and SSAN class submarines like the Delta Stretch as well as one SST, China has older SSB and SSG types such as the Golf and Mod Romeo classes, and North Korea has built many SSCs and SSMs. See 2007–2008 Janes Fighting Ships. With the advent of new Air Independent Propulsion/Power (AIP) systems, both SSI and SSP are used to distinguish the types within the USN, but SSP has been declared the preferred term. SSK, retired by the USN, continues to be used colloquially and interchangeably with SS for diesel-electric attack/patrol submarines within the USN, and more formally by the Royal Navy and British firms such as Jane's Information Group. Patrol combatants are ships whose mission may extend beyond coastal duties and whose characteristics include adequate endurance and sea keeping, providing a capability for operations exceeding 48&nbsp;hours on the high seas without support. This notably included Brown Water Navy/Riverine Forces during the Vietnam War. Few of these ships are in service today. Amphibious warfare vessels include all ships having organic capability for amphibious warfare and which have characteristics enabling long duration operations on the high seas.  There are two classifications of craft: amphibious warfare ships which are built to cross oceans, and landing craft, which are designed to take troops from ship to shore in an invasion. Ships Landing Craft Operated by Military Sealift Command, have ship prefix "USNS", hull code begins with "T-". Ships which have the capability to provide underway replenishment to fleet units. Mine warfare ships are those ships whose primary function is mine warfare on the high seas. Coastal defense ships are those whose primary function is coastal patrol and interdiction. Mobile logistics ships have the capability to provide direct material support to other deployed units operating far from home ports. An auxiliary ship is designed to operate in any number of roles supporting combatant ships and other naval operations. Support ships are not designed to participate in combat, and are generally not armed.  For ships with civilian crews (owned by and/or operated for Military Sealift Command and the Maritime Administration), the prefix T- is placed at the front of the hull classification. Support ships are designed to operate in the open ocean in a variety of sea states to provide general support to either combatant forces or shore based establishments. They include smaller auxiliaries which, by the nature of their duties, leave inshore waters. Service craft are navy-subordinated craft (including non-self-propelled) designed to provide general support to either combatant forces or shore-based establishments.  The suffix "N" refers to non-self-propelled variants. Prior to 1965, U.S. Coast Guard ships used the same designation as naval ships, but preceded by a "W" to indicate Coast Guard subordination. United States Navy Designations (Temporary) are a form of U.S. Navy ship designation, intended for temporary identification use. Such designations usually occur during periods of sudden mobilization, such as that which occurred prior to, and during, World War II or the Korean War, when it was determined that a sudden temporary need arose for a ship for which there was no official Navy designation. During World War II, for example, a number of commercial vessels were requisitioned, or acquired, by the U.S. Navy to meet the sudden requirements of war. A yacht acquired by the U.S. Navy during the start of World War II might seem desirable to the Navy whose use for the vessel might not be fully developed or explored at the time of acquisition. On the other hand, a U.S. Navy vessel, such as the yacht in the example above, already in commission or service, might be desired, or found useful, for another need or purpose for which there is no official designation. Numerous other U.S. Navy vessels were launched with a temporary, or nominal, designation, such as YMS or PC, since it could not be determined, at time of construction, what they should be used for. Many of these were vessels in the 150 to 200 feet length class with powerful engines, whose function could be that of a minesweeper, patrol craft, submarine chaser, seaplane tender, tugboat, or other. Once their destiny, or capability, was found or determined, such vessels were reclassified with their actual designation. The letter is paired with a three-digit number. The first digit of the number is determined by the ships "power tonnage," defined as the sum of its shaft horsepower and gross international tonnage, as follows: The second and third digits are assigned to create a unique three-digit hull number. Cruiser Armored CA large CB battle CC Light CL aviationhttp://www.history.navy.mil/content/dam/nhhc/research/histories/naval-aviation/USNavalAviationInthePacific/pacific.pdf or Voler CV Destroyer ship DD Escort DE There were two distinct breeds of DE, the World War II Destroyer Escorts (some of which were converted to DERs) and the postwar DE/DEG classes, which were known as Ocean Escorts despite carrying the same type symbol as the World War II Destroyer Escorts.  All DEs, DEGs, and DERs were reclassified as FFs, FFGs, or FFRs, 30 June 1975. The DL category was established in 1951 with the abolition of the CLK category.  CLK 1 became DL 1 and DD 927–930 became DL 2–5.  By the mid-1950s the term Destroyer Leader had been dropped in favor of Frigate.  Most DLGs and DLGNs were reclassified as CGs and CGNs, 30 June 1975.  However, DLG 6–15 became DDG 37–46.  The old DLs were already gone by that time. The FF, FFG, and FFR designations were established 30 June 1975 as new type symbols for ex-DEs, DEGs, and DERs.  The first new-built ships to carry the FF/FFG designation were the s.  In January 2015, it was announced that the LCS ship types would be redesignated as FF. In January 2015, the Navy announced that the up-gunned LCS will be reclassified as a frigate, since the requirements of the SSC Task Force was to upgrade the ships with frigate-like capabilities.  Hull designations will be changed from LCS to FF; existing LCSs back-fitted with modifications may also earn the FF label..SNA: Modified Littoral Combat Ships to be Designated Frigates - News.USNI.org, 15 January 2015 The Navy is hoping to start retrofitting technological upgrades onto existing and under construction LCSs before 2019.Navy Plans to Expand, Speed-Up LCS Modifications - Military.com, 4 March 2015 SSP, ASSP, APSS, and LPSS were all the same type, redesignated over the years. AV: Seaplane Tender (retired) AVG: Auxiliary Aircraft Ferry (Escort carrier) (1941–2) AVD: Seaplane Tender Destroyer (retired) AVP: Seaplane Tender, Small (retired) AVT (i) Auxiliary Aircraft Transport (retired) AVT (ii) Auxiliary Training Carrier (retired) ACV: Auxiliary Aircraft Carrier (Escort carrier) (1942) CV: Fleet aircraft carrier (1921–1975), multi-purpose aircraft carrier (1975–present) CVA: Aircraft Carrier, Attack (category merged into CV, 30 June 1975) CV(N): Aircraft Carrier, Night (Deck equipped with lighting and pilots trained and for nighttime fights) (1944) (retired) CVAN: Aircraft Carrier, Attack, Nuclear-powered (category merged into CVN, 30 June 1975) CVB: Aircraft Carrier, Large (Original USS Midway class, category merged into CVA, 1952) CVE: Escort aircraft carrier (retired) (1943–retirement of type) CVHA: Aircraft Carrier, Helicopter Assault (retired in favor of several LH-series amphibious assault ship hull codes) CVHE: Aircraft Carrier, Helicopter, Escort (retired) CVL: Light aircraft carrier (retired) CVN: Aircraft Carrier, Nuclear-powered CVS: Antisubmarine Aircraft Carrier (retired) CVT: Aircraft Carrier, Training (changed to AVT (Auxiliary)) CVU: Aircraft Carrier, Utility (retired) CVG: Aircraft Carrier, Guided Missile (retired) CVV:http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=getRecord&metadataPrefix=html&identifier=AD0757047 Aircraft Carrier, Vari-Purpose, Medium (retired unused) ACR: Armored Cruiser (pre-1920) AFSB: Afloat Forward Staging Base (also AFSB(I) for "interim", changed to ESB for Expeditionary Mobile Dock) B: Battleship (pre-1920) BB: Battleship BBG: Battleship, Guided Missile or Arsenal Ship (theoretical only, never assigned)See . BM: Monitor (1920–retirement) C: Cruiser (pre-1920 Protected Cruisers and Peace Cruisers) CA: (first series) Cruiser, Armored (retired, comprised all surviving pre-1920 Armored and Protected Cruisers) CA: (second series) Heavy Cruiser, category later renamed Gun Cruiser (retired) CAG: Cruiser, Guided Missile (retired) CB:  Large cruiser (retired) CBC: Large Command Cruiser (retired, never used operationally)See . CC: Battlecruiser (retired, never used operationally)See . CC: (second usage) Command Ship (retired)See . CLC: Command Cruiser CG: Cruiser, Guided Missile CGN: Cruiser, Guided Missile, Nuclear-powered CL: Light Cruiser Cruiser Light (retired) CLAA: Cruiser, Light, Anti-aircraft (retired) CLG: Cruiser, Light, Guided Missile (retired) CLGN: Cruiser, Light, Guided Missile, Nuclear-powered (retired) CLK: Cruiser, Hunter-Killer (abolished 1951)see . CM: Cruiser-minelayer (retired) CS: Scout Cruiser (retired) CSGN: Strike Cruiser Cruiser, Strike, Guided Missile, Nuclear-powered D: Destroyer (pre-1920) DD: Destroyer DDC: Corvette (briefly proposed in the mid-1950s) DDE: Escort Destroyer (not to be confused with Destroyer Escort, DE: an Escort Destroyer; DDE, was a Destroyer, DD, converted for antisubmarine warfare) (category abolished 1962) DDG: Destroyer, Guided Missile DDK: Hunter-Killer Destroyer (category merged into DDE, 4 March 1950) DDR: Destroyer, Radar Picket (retired) DM: Destroyer, Minelayer (retired) DMS: Destroyer, Minesweeper (retired) PG: Patrol Gunboat (retired) PCH: Patrol Craft. Hydrofoil (retired) PHM: Patrol, Hydrofoil, Missile (retired) K: Corvette (retired) M: Monitor (1880s–1920) SC: Cruiser Submarine (retired) SF: Fleet Submarine (retired) SM: Submarine Minelayer (retired) SS: Submarine, Attack SubmarineU.S. Navy Ship And Service Craft Classifications SSA: Submarine Auxiliary, Auxiliary/Cargo Submarine SSAN: Submarine Auxiliary Nuclear, Auxiliary/Cargo Submarine, Nuclear-powered SSB: Submarine Ballistic, Ballistic Missile Submarine SSBN: Submarine Ballistic Nuclear, Ballistic Missile Submarine, Nuclear-powered SSC: Coastal Submarine, over 150 tons SSG: Guided Missile Submarine SSGN: Guided Missile Submarine, Nuclear-powered SSI: Attack Submarine (Diesel Air-Independent Propulsion) SSK: Hunter-Killer/ASW Submarine (retired)Inactive Classification Symbols SSM: Midget Submarine, under 150 tons SSN: Attack Submarine, Nuclear-powered SSNR: Special Attack Submarine (Nuclear-Powered)?This odd entry is not recognised by the U.S. Naval Vessel Register, and appears only in MIL-STD-2525A: Common Warfighting Symbology (15 December 1996) and later editions (MIL-STD-2525B: Common Warfighting Symbology (30 January 1999) and MIL-STD-2525C: Common Warfighting Symbology (17 November 2008)). It seems to refer to some kind of nuclear-powered submarine used by Special Operations Forces. SSO: Submarine Oiler (retired) SSP: Attack Submarine (Diesel Air-Independent Power) (alternate use), formerly Submarine Transport SSQ: Auxiliary Submarine, Communications (retired) SSQN: Auxiliary Submarine, Communications, Nuclear-powered (retired)28034_cov.fh SSR: Radar Picket Submarine (retired) SSRN: Radar Picket Submarine, Nuclear-powered (retired) SST: Training Submarine IXSS: Unclassified Miscellaneous Submarine MTS:  Moored Training Ship (Naval Nuclear Power School Training Platform; Reconditioned SSBN's) PBR: Patrol Boat, River, Brown Water Navy (Pibber or PBR-Vietnam) PC: Coastal Patrol, originally Sub Chaser PCF: Patrol Craft, Fast; Swift Boat, Brown Water Navy (Vietnam) PE: Eagle Boat of World War I PF: World War II Frigate, based on British . PFG: Original designation of  PG: Gunboat, later Patrol combatant PGH: Patrol Combatant, Hydrofoil PHM: Patrol, Hydrofoil Missile PR: Patrol, River, such as the  PT: Motor Torpedo Boat (World War II) PTF: Patrol Torpedo Fast, Brown Water Navy (Vietnam) PTG: Patrol Torpedo Gunboat Monitor: Heavily gunned riverine boat, Brown Water Navy (Vietnam) ASPB: Assault Support Patrol Boat, "Alpha Boat", Brown Water Navy; also used as riverine minesweeper (Vietnam) PACV: Patrol, Air Cushion Craft, Brown Water Navy (Vietnam) SP: Section Patrol, used indiscriminately for patrol vessels, mine warfare vessels, and some other types (World War I; retired 1920) AKA: Attack Cargo Ship (To LKA, 1969) APA: Attack Transport (To LPA, 1969) APD: High speed transport  (Converted Destroyer or Destroyer Escort) (To LPR, 1969) AGC: Amphibious Force Flagship (To LCC, 1969) LCC: Amphibious Command Ship LHA: General-Purpose Amphibious Assault Ship also known as Landing Helicopter Assault LHD: Multi-Purpose Amphibious Assault Ship also known as Landing Helicopter Dock LKA: Amphibious Cargo Ship (out of commission) LPA: Amphibious Transport LPD: Amphibious transport dock LPH: Landing Platform Helicopter LPR: High speed transport LSD: Landing Ship, Dock LSH: Landing Ship, Heavy LSIL: Landing Ship, Infantry (Large) (formerly LCIL) LSL: Landing Ship, Logistics LSM: Landing Ship, Medium LSM(R): Landing Ship, Medium (Rocket) LSSL: Landing Ship, Support (Large) (formerly LCSL) LST: Landing Ship, Tank LSV: Landing Ship, Vehicle LCA: Landing Craft, Assault LCAC: Landing Craft Air Cushion LCFF: (Flotilla Flagship) LCH: Landing Craft, Heavy LCI: Landing Craft, Infantry, World War II era classification further modified by (G) – Gunboat (L)- Large (M)- Mortar (R) – Rocket LCL: Landing Craft, Logistics (UK) LCM: Landing Craft, Mechanized LCP: Landing Craft, Personnel LCP(L): Landing Craft, Personnel, Large LCP(R): Landing Craft, Personnel, Ramped LCPA: Landing Craft, Personnel, Air-Cushioned LCS(L): Landing Craft, Support (Large) changed to LSSL in 1949 LCT: Landing Craft, Tank (World War II era) LCU: Landing Craft, Utility LCVP: Landing Craft, Vehicle and Personnel LSH: Landing Ship Heavy (Royal Australian Navy) ESD: Expeditionary Transfer Dock ESB: Expeditionary Mobile Base (a variant of ESD, formerly AFSB) EPF: Expeditionary Fast Transport MLP: Mobile Landing Platform (changed to ESD) JHSV: Joint High Speed Vessel (changed to EPF) AC: Collier (retired) AE: Ammunition Ship AF: Stores Ship (retired) AFS: Combat Stores Ship AKE: Advanced Dry Cargo Ship AKS: General Stores Ship AO: Fleet Oiler AOE: Fast Combat Support Ship AOR: Replenishment Oiler AW: Distilling Ship (retired) AM: Minesweeper AMb: Harbor Minesweeper AMc: Coastal Minesweeper AMCU: Underwater Mine Locater MSO: Minesweeper, Ocean MSC: Minesweeper, Coastal MCM: Mine Countermeasures Ship MCS: Mine Countermeasures Support Ship MH(C)(I)(O)(S): Minehunter, (Coastal) (Inshore) (Ocean) (Hunter and Sweeper, General) CM: Cruiser (i.e., Large) Minelayer CMc: Coastal Minelayer MLC: Coastal Minelayer DM: High Speed Minelayer (Converted Destroyer) DMS: High Speed Minesweeper (Converted Destroyer) FS: Corvette PB: Patrol boat PBR:  Patrol Boat, River PC: Patrol, Coastal PCE: Patrol Craft, Escort PCF: Patrol Craft, Fast, (Swift Boat) PF: Frigate, in a role similar to World War II Commonwealth corvette PG: Patrol Gunboat PGM: Motor Gunboat (To PG, 1967) PR: Patrol, River SP: Section Patrol AD: Destroyer Tender AGP: Patrol Craft Tender AR: repair ship AS: Submarine tender AV: Seaplane Tender AN: Net Laying Ship ARL: Auxiliary Repair Light—light craft or landing craft repair ship (World War II-era, out of commission) ATF: Fleet Ocean Tug AGHS: Patrol Combatant Support Ship—Ocean or Inshore ZMC: Airship Metal Clad ZNN-G: G-Class Blimp ZNN-J: J-Class Blimp ZNN-L: L-Class Blimp ZNP-K: K-Class Blimp ZNP-M: M-Class Blimp ZNP-N: N-Class Blimp ZPG-3W: surveillance patrol blimp ZR: Rigid Airship ZRS: Rigid Airship Scout ACS: Auxiliary Crane Ship AG: Miscellaneous Auxiliary AGDE: Testing Ocean Escort AGDS: Deep Submergence Support Ship AGER: Environmental Research Ship AGF: Miscellaneous Command Ship AGFF: Testing Frigate AGM: Missile Range Instrumentation Ship AGOR: Oceanographic Research Ship AGOS: Ocean Surveillance Ship AGS: Surveying Ship AGSS: Auxiliary Research Submarine AGTR: Technical research ship AH: Hospital ship AK: Cargo Ship AKR: Vehicle Cargo Ship AKS: Store Issue Ship AOG: Gasoline Tanker AOT: Transport Oiler AP: Transport ARC: Cable Repair Ship (see also Cable layer) APL: Barracks Craft ARL: Small Repair Ship ARS: Salvage Ship AS: Submarine tender ASR: Submarine Rescue Ship AT: Ocean-Going Tug ATA: Auxiliary Ocean Tug ATF: Fleet Ocean Tug ATLS Drone Launch Ship ATS: Salvage and Rescue Ship AVB: Aviation Logistics Support Ship AVS: Aviation Stores Issue Ship AVT: Auxiliary Aircraft Landing Training Ship ID or Id. No.: Civilian ship taken into service for auxiliary duties, used indiscriminately for large ocean-going ships of all kinds and coastal and yard craft (World War I; retired 1920) AB: Crane Ship AFDB: Large Auxiliary Floating Dry Dock AFDL: Small Auxiliary Floating Dry Dock AFDM: Medium Auxiliary Floating Dry Dock APB: Self-Propelled Barracks Ship APL: Barracks Craft ARD: Auxiliary Repair Dry Dock ARDM: Medium Auxiliary Repair Dry Dock   ATA: Auxiliary Ocean Tug DSRV: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle DSV: Deep Submergence Vehicle JUB/JB : Jack Up Barge NR: Submersible Research Vehicle YC: Open Lighter YCF: Car Float YCV: Aircraft Transportation Lighter YD: Floating Crane YDT: Diving Tender YF: Covered Lighter YFB: Ferry Boat or Launch YFD: Yard Floating Dry Dock YFN: Covered Lighter (non-self propelled) YFNB: Large Covered Lighter (non-self propelled) YFND: Dry Dock Companion Craft (non-self propelled) YFNX: Lighter (Special purpose) (non-self propelled) YFP: Floating Power Barge YFR: Refrigerated Cover Lighter YFRN: Refrigerated Covered Lighter (non-self propelled) YFRT: Range Tender YFU: Harbor Utility Craft YG: Garbage Lighter YGN: Garbage Lighter (non-self propelled) YH: Ambulance boat/small medical support vessel YLC: Salvage Lift Craft YM: Dredge YMN: Dredge (non-self propelled) YNG: Gate Craft YNT: Net Tender YO: Fuel Oil Barge YOG: Gasoline Barge YOGN: Gasoline Barge (non-self propelled) YON: Fuel Oil Barge (non-self propelled) YOS: Oil Storage Barge YP:  Patrol Craft, Training YPD: Floating Pile Driver YR: Floating Workshop YRB: Repair and Berthing Barge YRBM: Repair, Berthing and Messing Barge YRDH: Floating Dry Dock Workshop (Hull) YRDM: Floating Dry Dock Workshop (Machine) YRR: Radiological Repair Barge YRST: Salvage Craft Tender YSD: Seaplane Wrecking Derrick YSR: Sludge Removal Barge YT: Harbor Tug (craft later assigned YTB, YTL, or YTM classifications) YTB: Large Harbor Tug YTL: Small Harbor Tug YTM: Medium Harbor Tug YTT: Torpedo Trials Craft YW: Water Barge YWN: Water Barge (non-self propelled) ID or Id. No.: Civilian ship taken into service for auxiliary duties, used indiscriminately for large ocean-going ships of all kinds and coastal and yard craft  (World War I; retired 1920) IX: Unclassified Miscellaneous Unit X: Submersible Craft "none": To honor her unique historical status, USS Constitution, formerly IX 21, was reclassified to "none", effective 1 September 1975. CG: all Coast Guard Ships in the 1920s (retired) WAGB: Coast Guard  WAVP: seagoing Coast Guard seaplane tenders (retired 1960s) WDE: seagoing Coast Guard destroyer escorts (retired 1960s) WHEC: Coast Guard High Endurance Cutters WIX: Coast Guard Barque Eagle WLB: Coast Guard buoy tenders WLBB: Coast Guard seagoing buoy tenders/ice breaker WLM: Coast Guard coastal buoy tenders WLI: Coast Guard inland buoy tenders WLIC: Coast Guard inland construction tenders WLR: Coast Guard river buoy tenders WMEC: Coast Guard Medium Endurance Cutters WMSL: Coast Guard Maritime Security Cutter, Large (referred to as National Security Cutters) WPC: Coast Guard patrol craft—later reclassed under WHEC WPB: Coast Guard Patrol Boats WPG: seagoing Coast Guard gunboats (retired 1960s) WTGB: Coast Guard Tug Boat (140' icebreakers) IX: Unclassified Miscellaneous Auxiliary Ship, for example yacht Chanco acquired by the U.S. Navy on 1 October 1940. It was classified as a minesweeper , but instead, mainly used as a patrol craft along the New England coast. When another assignment came, and it could not be determined how to classify the vessel, it was redesignated IX-175 on 10 July 1944. IXSS: Unclassified Miscellaneous Submarines, such as the , the  and the . YAG: Miscellaneous Auxiliary Service Craft, such as the ,  and  which, curiously, was earlier known as . R: Research ships, including oceanographic and fisheries research ships S: Survey ships, including hydrographic survey ships If the power tonnage is 5,501 through 9,000, the first digit is "1". If the power tonnage 3,501 through 5,500, the first digit is "2." If the power tonnage is 2,001 through 3,500, the first digit is "3." If the power tonnage is 1,001 through 2,000, the first digit is "4." If the power tonnage is 501 through 1,000, the first digit is "5." If the power tonnage is 500 or less and the ship is at least 65 feet (19.8 meters) long, the first digit is "6."noaa.gov NOAA Office of the Administratuve Officer "NAO 217-108: Classification of NOAA Vessels" issued 1 October 2013 United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification List of hull classifications Ship prefix Hull classification symbol (Canada) Pennant number for the British Commonwealth equivalent United States Naval Aviation 1910–1995, Appendix 16: U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Squadron Designations and Abbreviations. U.S. Navy, c.1995. Quoted in Derdall and DiGiulian, op cit. USCG Designations Naval History and Heritage Command Online Library of Selected Images: U.S. Navy Ships – Listed by Hull Number: "SP" #s and "ID" #s — World War I Era Patrol Vessels and other Acquired Ships and Craft Wertheim, Eric. The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets of the World, 15th Edition: Their Ships, Aircraft, and Systems. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59114-955-2. . Friedman, Norman. U.S. Small Combatants, Including PT-Boats, Subchasers, and the Brown-Water Navy: An Illustrated Design History. Annapolis, Md: Naval Institute Press, 1987. ISBN 0-87021-713-5. Current US Navy Ship Classifications US Navy Inactive Classification Symbols US Naval Vessels Registry (Service Craft) US Naval Vessels Registry (Ships)
