   Indiana University Bloomington (abbreviated "IU Bloomington""Editorial Style Guide". Indiana University. Retrieved December 30, 2013. and colloquially referred to as "IU" or simply "Indiana") is a public research university located in Bloomington, Indiana, United States. With over 40,000 students, IU Bloomington is the flagship institution of the Indiana University system and its largest university. It is a member of the Association of American Universities and has numerous schools and programs the comprise part of IU, including the Jacobs School of Music, the IU School of Informatics and Computing, the Kelley School of Business, the School of Public Health, the School of Nursing, the School of Public and Environmental Affairs, the Maurer School of Law, the IU School of Library and Information Science, and the IU School of Education.Schools: Indiana University Bloomington With a Fall 2014 total campus enrollment of 42,634 students, IU Bloomington is the largest university campus in the state. While 55.2% of the student body was from Indiana, students from 49 of the 50 states, Washington D.C., and 165 foreign nations were also enrolled. The university is home to an extensive student life program, with about 17 percent of undergraduates joining the Greek system.Greek Organizations Indiana athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are known as the Indiana Hoosiers. The university is a member of the Big Ten Conference. Among IU Bloomington’s many graduate-level programs are the Kelley School of Business, School of Education and Maurer School of Law. Indiana’s law school has a program with a first-year team-based approach, a diversion from the typical legal education. Notable Indiana alumni include, but are not limited to, composer and songwriter Hoagy Carmichael, who penned “Georgia on My Mind"; John Chambers, executive chairman and former CEO of Cisco Systems; and Mark Cuban, billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks. In terms of academics and other criteria, IU Bloomington ranks in top 100 national universities in the United States and the top 50 public universities in the country. The school's sports teams are notorious competitors in the NCAA Division I Big Ten Conference, and, since Indiana University does not have a mascot, all teams are known simply as Hoosiers. There are more than 650 student organizations on campus, and more than 5,000 students go Greek in the school’s large community of fraternities and sororities.[ ] Indiana's state government in Corydon founded Indiana University in 1820 as the "State Seminary."  Construction began in 1822; It was originally located at what is now called Seminary Square Park near the intersection of Second Street and College Avenue. The first professor was Baynard Rush Hall, a Presbyterian minister who taught all of the classes in 1825–27; he focused on Greek Latin. In the first year, he taught twelve students and was paid $250.  Hall was a classicist who believed that the study of classical philosophy and languages formed the basis of the best education.Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University Midwestern Pioneer: The Early Years.  Vol. 1. pp 9, 33  The first class graduated in 1830. From 1820 to 1889 a legal-political battle was fought by the school in Vincennes that claimed to be the legitimate state university.Howard F. McMains, "The Indiana Seminary Charter of 1820," Indiana Magazine of History (2010) 106#4 pp 356-380.Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University: Vol. I: The Early Years (1970)  In 1829, Andrew Wylie became the first president, serving until his death in 1851. The name became "Indiana College" in 1829 and in 1838 the name finally became "Indiana University."  Wylie and David Maxwell, president of the board of trustees, were devout Presbyterians. They spoke of the nonsectarian status of the school, but generally hired fellow Presbyterians. Presidents and professors were expected to set a moral example for their charges. After six ministers in a row the first non-clergyman to become president was the young biology professor David Starr Jordan in 1885.Gayle Williams, "Andrew Wylie and Religion at Indiana University, 1824–1851: Nonsectarianism and Democracy," Indiana Magazine of History (2003) 99#1 pp 3-24 Jordan followed Baptist theologian Lemuel Moss, who resigned after a scandal broke regarding his involvement with a female professor. Jordan (president 1884–1891) improved the university's finances and public image, doubled its enrollment, and instituted an elective system along the lines of his alma mater, Cornell University.Paul J. Ramsey, "Building A 'Real' University in the Woodlands of Indiana: The Jordan Administration, 1885–1891," American Educational History Journal (2004) 31#1 pp 20-28 Jordan became president of Stanford University in June 1891. Growth of the college was slow. In 1851, IU had nearly a hundred students and seven professors. IU admitted its first woman student, Sarah Parke Morrison in 1867, making IU only the fourth public university to admit women on an equal basis with men. Morrison went on to become the first female professor at IU in 1873. Mathematician Joseph Swain was IU’s first Hoosier-born president, 1893 to 1902.  He established Kirkwood Hall in 1894; a gymnasium for men in 1896, which later was named Assembly Hall; Kirkwood Observatory in 1900; and he began construction for Science Hall in 1901.  During his presidency, student enrollment increased from 524 to 1,285.  In 1883, IU awarded its first Ph.D. and played its first intercollegiate sport (baseball) prefiguring the school's future status as a major research institution and a power in collegiate athletics. But another incident that year was of more immediate concern: the original campus in Seminary Square burned to the ground. The college was rebuilt between 1884 and 1908 at the far eastern edge of Bloomington. (Today, the city has expanded eastward, and the "new" campus is once again at the center of the city.) One challenge was that Bloomington's limited water supply was inadequate for its population of 12,000 and could not handle university expansion.  The University commissioned a study that led to building a reservoir for its own use.Donald H. Maxwel, "Impounded water in Bloomington, Ind.," Municipal and county engineering: design, construction, maintenance, and operation of all public works (Jan 1921) 60#1 pp 159–161 online In 1902, IU enrolled 1203 undergraduates; all but 65 were Hoosiers.  There were 82 graduate students including 10 from out-of-state.  The curriculum emphasized the classics, as befitted a gentleman, and stood in contrast to the service-oriented curriculum at Purdue, which presented itself as of direct benefit to farmers, industrialists and businessmen.Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University 2:5, 9 In 1960, the IU student body elected Thomas Atkins, an African-American from Elkhart, Indiana to the position of president of the student body. A throng of white students protested the result by parading around campus waving Confederate flags and allegedly blamed Atkins' victory on a "bunch of beatniks." When the protesters approached the female dormitory on campus, they were apparently met with "a barrage of cosmetic bottles, old shoes and other objects." The first extension office of IU was opened in Indianapolis in 1916. In 1920/1921 the School of Music and the School of Commerce and Finance (what later became the Kelley School of Business) were opened. In the 1940s Indiana University opened extension campuses in Kokomo and Fort Wayne. The controversial Kinsey Institute for sexual research was established in 1945. The Indiana University Bloomington campus of  includes abundant green space and historic buildings dating to the university's reconstruction in the late nineteenth century. In 2011, Travel+Leisure listed the University as one of the most beautiful college campuses in the United States."America's most beautiful college campuses", Travel+Leisure (September, 2011) The campus rests on a bed of Indiana Limestone, specifically Salem Limestone and Harrodsburg Limestone, with outcroppings of St. Louis Limestone. The "Jordan River" is a stream flowing through the center of campus. A section of Bloomington's Clear Creek,Water Basics: Stream (City of Bloomington) it is named for David Starr Jordan, Darwinist, ichthyologist, and president of IU and later Stanford University.Clark Kimberling, David Starr Jordan Landmarks on the campus of Indiana University, Bloomington, with a further source given as the Indiana Alumni Magazine [vol. 18 (June 1956) page 7]. Many of the campus's buildings, especially the older central buildings, are made from Indiana Limestone quarried locally. The Works Progress Administration built much of the campus's core during the Great Depression. Many of the campus's buildings were built and most of its land acquired during the 1950s and 1960s, when first soldiers attending under the GI Bill and then the baby boom swelled the university's enrollment from 5,403 in 1940 to 30,368 in 1970. Some buildings on campus underwent similar expansion. As additions were constructed by building onto the outside of existing buildings, exterior surfaces were incorporated into their new interiors, making this expansion clearly visible in the affected buildings' architecture. The Chemistry and Biology buildings serve as examples, where two of the interior walls of the latter's library are clearly constructed as limestone exteriors. The Bryan House is the traditional on-campus home of the university president. The 1979 movie Breaking Away was filmed on location in Bloomington and the IU campus. It also featured a reenactment of the annual Little 500 bicycle race. The IU campus also has trails that many use for biking and running. The trails in Bloomington and nearby areas total nearly .  Indiana University's athletic facilities are located on campus and are grouped in between East 17th Street, Dunn Street and the IN-45/IN-46 bypass. In the 17,000-seat Assembly Hall (home to the IU NCAA basketball team), there are five NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship banners on display. Cook Hall, Memorial Stadium, Mellencamp Pavilion, the Gladstein Fieldhouse, the IU Tennis Center, the Billy Hayes Track and Bill Armstrong Stadium are all also located within the complex.  The  Indiana Memorial Union (IMU) is the second largest student union in the United States. In addition to stores and restaurants, it features an eight-story student activities tower (home to the Indiana University Student Association, Indiana Memorial Union Board, and a variety of other student organizations), a 186-room hotel, a 400-seat theatre, a  Alumni Hall,  of meeting space, and a bowling alley. The IMU houses an outstanding collection of Indiana art including artists from Brown County, the Hoosier Group, Richmond Group and others.  The Indiana University Bloomington Library System supports twenty-four libraries, consisting of more than 7.8 million books. The system was named the top American research library system in 2009 by the Association of College and Research Libraries. IU's Herman B Wells Library is the 13th largest university library in North America. Prior to a ceremony in June 2005 when it was renamed for IU's former president and chancellor, this building was simply called the Main Library. Built in 1969, the building contains eleven floors in the East Tower (research collection, used primarily for graduate students) and five floors in the West Tower (the undergraduate collection). The building also contains the Information Commons, a fully integrated technology center for learning and collaboration which attracts 82 percent of all undergraduate students. The library is also home to Indiana University Press. An oft-repeated urban legend holds that the library sinks over an inch every year because when it was built, engineers failed to take into account the weight of all the books that would occupy the building. A webpage hosted on the Indiana.edu domain debunks this myth, stating, among other things, that the building rests on a 94&nbsp;ft (28.6 m) thick limestone bedrock. In addition to IU's main library, the Bloomington Libraries support twenty-four additional libraries:   The Lilly Library is one of the largest rare book and manuscript libraries in the United States. Founded in 1960 with the collection of Josiah K. Lilly, Jr., of Eli Lilly and Company in Indianapolis, the library now contains approximately 400,000 rare books, 6.5 million manuscripts, and 100,000 pieces of sheet music.  The library's holdings are particularly strong in British and American history and literature, religious texts, Latin Americana, medicine and science, food and drink, children's literature, fine printing and binding, popular music, medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, and early printing. Notable items in the library's collections include the New Testament of the Gutenberg Bible, a first edition copy of the Book of Mormon, the first printed collection of Shakespeare's works, Audubon's Birds of America, one of 25 extant copies of the "First Printing of the Declaration of Independence" (also known as the "Dunlap Broadside") that was printed in Philadelphia on July 4, 1776, George Washington's letter accepting the presidency of the United States, Abraham Lincoln's desk from his law office, a leaf from the famous Abraham Lincoln "Sum Book" c. 1824–1826, Lord Chesterfield's letters to his son, the manuscripts of Robert Burns's "Auld Lang Syne", the Boxer Codex, J. M. Synge's The Playboy of the Western World, and J. M. Barrie's Peter Pan, and typescripts of many of Ian Fleming's James Bond novels. The library also owns the papers of Hollywood directors Orson Welles and John Ford, the poets Sylvia Plath and Ezra Pound, and authors Edith Wharton, Max Eastman and Upton Sinclair. In 2006, the library received a collection of 30,000 mechanical puzzles from Jerry Slocum. The collection will be on permanent display. Special permission is not required to use the collections, and the library has several exhibition galleries which are open to the public. Within the Lilly Library is the Ruth E. Adomeit collection of miniature books, one of the world’s largest. Among the collection are rare miniature books such as "From Morn Till Eve", a miniature book that presents biblical quotations in a devotional form, with one phrase for each morning and evening of a month. The Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) had listed that, "the only known copy as being in the collection of famed miniature book collector Ruth E. Adomeit", which is now in the Lilly Library.  The Fine Arts Library houses Indiana University's books and journals in the fields of the visual arts, art history, architecture, design and related disciplines and supports the academic needs of the Henry Radford Hope School of Fine Arts, and the Indiana University Department of Fine Arts. The collection comprises over 140,000 volumes and 322 periodicals, including collections of circulating slides and plates and a non-circulating collection of over 1200 artists' books. IU's first Fine Arts Library was established in the late 1930s as part of the Departmental office on the second floor, east wing of the University Library which was then located in Franklin Hall. In 1941, two important events occurred: Henry Radford Hope became chairman of the Fine Arts Department in the Fall and the Fine Arts Center was created by remodeling Mitchell Hall Annex.  The Fine Arts Library moved into its current quarters inside the IU Art Museum designed by I.M. Pei in August, 1981.   The IU Art Museum was first established in 1941 with a later building being designed by the world-renowned architecture firm I.M. Pei and Partners. Completed in 1982, the museum collection of over 30,000 objects includes works by Claude Monet and Jackson Pollock. The museum has particular strengths in the art of Africa, Oceania, the Americas, Ancient Greece and Rome, and Early Modernism, and its collections of works on paper (prints, drawings and photographs). The IU Art Museum is also ranked as one of the top five university art museums along with Stanford, Harvard, Princeton, and Yale. Notable artists who have their work displayed there include Marcel Duchamp, Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse.  Indiana is one of 62 members of the Association of American Universities, an organization of leading North American research universities. Forty graduate programs and four schools at Indiana University are ranked among the top 25 in the country in the U.S. News & World Report's 2016 rankings  The Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked IU Bloomington 101-150 in the world 52-65 nationally in 2015.  Additionally, it gave the university global rankings of 29th best for economics/business and 35th best for the social sciences. Kiplinger's Personal Finance ranked IU Bloomington 40th out of the "Best Values in Public Colleges 2015". On the 2011 Green Report Card, issued by the Sustainable Endowments Institute, the university received a B. Upon assuming leadership of Indiana University, one of President Adam Herbert's biggest initiatives focused on "mission differentiation" for IU's eight campuses, which includes making the flagship Bloomington campus choosier among freshman applicants. Under the proposal, IUB would educate the professionals, executives and researchers while the regional campuses would educate the state's remaining labor force. Advocates believe it will rejuvenate Indiana's economy while critics argue it betrays the university's mission of educating more of Indiana's populace.   The university's academic system is divided into one large "College" (which itself contains one school) and twelve other schools and divisions. Together, these thirteen units offer more than 900 individual degree programs and majors. The College of Arts and Sciences, is the largest of the University's academic divisions, and is home to more than 40 percent of IU's undergraduates. In addition, the College offers many electives and general education courses for students enrolled in most other schools on campus. There are more than 50 academic departments in the College, encompassing a broad range of disciplines from the traditional (such as biology, chemistry, biochemistry, English, economics, Geography, mathematics, and physics) to more modern and specialized areas, including Jewish Studies, History and Philosophy of Science, and International Studies. Through the College, IU also offers instruction in over 40 foreign languages, one of the largest language study offerings at any American university. IU is the only university in the nation that offers a degree in Hungarian (although it was done through the Individualized Major Program) and is the first university in the United States to offer a doctorate in Gender Studies.  The Department of Geography has highly recognized programs in climate and environmental change, GIS, human-environment interaction, and human geography.  Indiana University is also home to the nation's only degree-granting Department of Central Eurasian Studies.  The university's catalog at one time boasted that a student could study any language from Albanian to Uzbek. The College is the parent division for fifteen individual research institutes, and holds the distinction of being the only academic division within the university to house an autonomous school (The Henry Radford Hope School of Fine Arts) within it. A number of first- and second-year students from the Indiana University School of Medicine (which is based at IUPUI) complete their preclinical education at the Bloomington campus's Medical Science Program, which is housed within the Department of Biology and the Indiana Molecular Biology Institute. The College is also home to the Department of Folklore and Ethnomusicology, the first formally established academic department in folklore at any United States university, and the only such department to integrate these two practices into one field. IU also features a world-class cyclotron, the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility, operated by the Department of Physics. The College also houses IU's Department of Theatre and Drama which offers a Bachelor of Arts in Theatre, a Master of Fine Arts in Acting, Directing, Playwriting or Design/Technology, and as of the 2007–2008 school year, a BFA in Musical Theatre.  In 2009, professor of political science Elinor Ostrom became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences since its inception in 1969.   The Maurer School of Law, founded in 1842, is one of the oldest schools on the Bloomington campus. It features a law library recently ranked first in the nation and is situated on the southwest corner of campus. In 2000, then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist presided over a mock trial of King Henry VIII in the school's moot courtroom. In the 2016 U.S. News & World Report rankings, the school was ranked 34th in the nation among law schools. Notable alumni from the School of Law include songwriter Hoagy Carmichael, and Vice-Chairman of the 9/11 Commission and former congressman Lee H. Hamilton. On December 4, 2008, the school of law was renamed the Michael Maurer School of Law. The IU School of Library and Information Science (SLIS) was ranked by U.S. News & World Report in 2016 as the 8th best program in the nation.  It has also been ranked number 1 in scholarly productivity by a 2006 study published in the journal Library & Information Science Research. SLIS is housed in the ground floor of the Wells Library's Western Tower. In April 2012, SLIS and IU's School of Informatics and Computing began a discussion on a possible merger of the two schools. With the success of negotiations and arrangements, Indiana University Board of Trustees approved the merger on October 22, 2012. Effective from July 1, 2013 IU School of Informatics and School of Library and Information Science will merge into a single school to be called the IU School of Informatics and Computing.   Founded in the beginning of the 20th century by Charles Campbell, the Jacobs School of Music focuses on voice, opera, orchestral conducting, and jazz studies. It has been ranked #1 in the country tied with Juilliard and Eastman School of Music by U.S. News & World Report. With more than 1,600 students, the school is one of the largest of its kind in the US and among the largest in the world. The school's facilities, including five buildings located in the heart of campus, comprise recital halls, more than 170 practice rooms, choral and instrumental rehearsal rooms, and more than 100 offices and studios. Its prestigious faculty has included such notable names as David Effron, Arthur Fagen, János Starker, Costanz Cuccaro, Timothy Noble, André Watts, Menahem Pressler, Linda Strommen, Abbey Simon, Ray Cramer, David Baker, William Bell, Harvey Phillips, Earl Bates, Carol Vaness, Sylvia McNair, Howard Klug, violinist Joshua Bell, conductor Leonard Slatkin, and composer Sven-David Sandström. Notable alumni include Edgar Meyer and soprano Angela Brown.  The Kelley School of Business (known colloquially as "Kelley" or "The B-School") was founded in 1920 as the University's School of Commerce and Finance. Approximately 6,100 students are enrolled in undergraduate, graduate Accountancy and Information Systems degrees, MBA and PhD programs, and online degree program Kelley Direct. In its 2016 rankings, U.S. News & World Report ranked the undergraduate program tied for 10th in the nation and the MBA program tied for 21st in the U.S., with the online MBA program tied for 1st. In 2007, the Wall Street Journal ranked Kelley's MBA program fifth in the nation among regional programs. Kelley's programs in consumer products, and energy and industrial products and services were second, marketing was third and accounting, eighth. Business Week ranked the undergraduate program 8th in 2014 (3rd among public schools) and the graduate program 15th in the nation in 2008 and fourth among public schools. In addition, Business Week gave the undergraduate program an A in teaching and an A+ in career services. Average SAT score is 1357. Kelley partners with the Scotts Miracle-Gro Company to offer Bloomington Brands, a unique work-study program for undergraduates and MBA students.  Participating students obtain real-world brand management experience by managing the Osmocote Plant Food brand under contract to Scotts. The Department of Labor Studies, a unit housed within the School of Social Work, was founded in the 1940s during the tenure of Herman B Wells in response to the growing role of organized labor in American society. Today, the Division is one of only several degree-granting programs in the nation for the area of labor studies or industrial relations.  Notable faculty in recent years have included Leonard Page, General Counsel for the National Labor Relations Board during the Clinton Administration, and labor economist/author Michael Yates. Established in 1946 as the first School of Health, Physical Education, and Recreation in the United States,http://www.publichealth.indiana.edu/about/history.shtml the school and programs have grown to encompass a broad spectrum of academic interests and professional fields. The school was renamed the School of Public Health-Bloomington in September 2012,http://newsinfo.iu.edu/news-archive/23199.htmlhttp://indianapublicmedia.org/news/hper-renamed-iu-school-public-health-36981/ and is working toward the goal of becoming Indiana's first accredited public health school. The school has nearly 3,000 students and 22,000 living alumni, with undergraduate and advanced degree programs offered through five academic departments: Applied Health Science, Environmental Health, Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Kinesiology, and Recreation, Park, & Tourism Studies.http://www.publichealth.indiana.edu/departments/index.shtml The Division of Campus Recreational Sports within the IU School of Public Health-Bloomington provides sport and fitness opportunities for the IU community and the public.http://www.iurecsports.org/mission The school has numerous centers, institutes, and specialized laboratories, including the Center for Sexual Health Promotion, the Indiana Prevention Resource Center, the National Center on Accessibility, the Rural Center for AIDS/STD Prevention, among others.http://www.publichealth.indiana.edu/departments/centers-institutes/index.shtml The school's resources include more than  of research and teaching laboratories, and nearly  of indoor and outdoor sport and fitness facilities, including recreation centers, aquatics centers, and acreage that includes Bradford Woods.   The School of Education, formerly a part of the College of Arts and Science, has been independent since 1923. One of the largest schools of education in the United States, it was ranked 25th in the nation by U.S. News & World Report in its 2016 rankings.  It offers a range of degrees in professional education: a B.S. in teacher education leading to a teaching license, M.S., education specialist (Ed. S.) and doctoral (Ed. D, Ph.D.) degrees. The School of Public and Environmental Affairs (or SPEA) is the largest school of its kind in the United States. Founded in 1972, SPEA is known for its distinctive interdisciplinary approach. It brings together the social, natural, behavioral, and administrative sciences in one faculty.  SPEA has a sister "core" campus at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (or IUPUI) and an affiliate program is operated at Indiana University's Gary campus. In their 2016 rankings, U.S. News & World Report rated SPEA ranked second in the nation, with four of its programs ranked in the top 10: environmental policy and management 1st, nonprofit management 1st, public finance and budgeting 3rd, and public management administration 3rd.  Similar rankings do not yet exist for graduate schools of environmental science or for undergraduate schools in either public affairs or environmental science. SPEA is the headquarters of the Public Administration Review, the premier journal of public administration research, theory and practice.  SPEA is also home to the Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, the Journal of Public Budgeting and Finance and Small Business Economics. SPEA has more than a dozen joint programs in social and natural sciences and professional fields.  Popular majors include nonprofit management, public policy, public finance and arts administration.  SPEA alumni include radio and television host Tavis Smiley and former U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill.  Among SPEA's faculty was Elinor Ostrom, the first woman to receive the Nobel Prize in Economics.  She was named by Time Magazine one of the 100 most influential people in the United States. Housed in a building named for famed war correspondent and alumnus Ernie Pyle, the School of Journalism was established in 1911. The school offers undergraduate and graduate programs for those preparing for careers as reporters, editors, broadcasters, public relations professionals, multimedia specialists, and educators. The School of Journalism draws students from as far away as China and Ukraine and as close as Bloomington or other Indiana towns. Among the alumni are more than 30 Pulitzer Prize winners. Alumni work in every field of journalism, from the oldest form of print publishing to newest form as online journalists. Many remain active in supporting the school by mentoring students, facilitating internship programs, and donating time and financial gifts to the school.  In 1999, the Indiana University School of Informatics was established as an environment for research professors and students to develop new uses for information technology in order to solve specific problems in areas as diverse as biology, fine arts, and economics. Informatics is also interested in "how people transform technology, and how technology transforms us." In 2005 the Department of Computer Science moved from the College of Arts and Sciences to the School of Informatics, prompting the school to expand its name to "School of Informatics and Computing". This move merged several faculty, bringing the total core faculty to over 100. Informatics also has strong ties with the School of Library and Information Sciences, Department of Telecommunications, Jacobs School of Music, and the Cognitive Science program. The School is one of a handful that offer degrees in Human-Computer Interaction. The School offers master's degrees in Human-Computer Interaction Design, Music Informatics, Bioinformatics, Chemical Informatics, Security Informatics, and Computer Science, and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Science and in Informatics.  Specialization areas for the Ph.D. in Computer Science include artificial intelligence, databases, distributed systems, formal methods, high-performance computing, programming languages, and security.  The Informatics Ph.D. program offers tracks in bioinformatics, cheminformatics, complex systems, human-computer interaction design, logic and mathematical foundations of informatics, music informatics, security informatics, and social informatics.  The Indiana University School of Optometry has a long history of optometric education and research, having been founded 1951. The school became a degree-granting institution of its own in 1975. Located at the southwest border of campus the Doctor of Optometry (OD) program admits on average 70-80 students per year. The school operates a  community eye care clinic in Bloomington and a clinic in Indianapolis. In addition to providing optometric education, the facility also houses the Borish Center for Ophthalmic Research, officially dedicated in October 1995. The Borish Center provides opportunities for undergraduate, professional, and graduate students to participate directly in vision research. The Indiana University Training School for Nurses was established in Indianapolis in 1914 in conjunction with the establishment of the Robert W. Long Hospital and in association with the IU School of Medicine to offer training leading to a Registered Nurse diploma. A Division of Nursing Education under the IU School of Education was created on the Bloomington campus, and offered additional training to registered nurses seeking B.S. and M.S. degrees. The two programs were united with the creation of the School of Nursing in 1965 and located in Indianapolis. Today, the School of Nursing is located at several of the IU campuses, with Indianapolis and Bloomington being the main locations. The Indiana University School of Nursing, comprising campuses in Indianapolis, Bloomington, and Columbus, has the distinction of being recognized as a Center of Excellence in two categories simultaneously: Creating Environments that Promote the Pedagogical Expertise of Faculty and Creating Environments that Advance the Science of Nursing Education. Indiana's third continuing designation for Promoting Pedagogical Expertise of Faculty is effective for five years, from 2012 through 2017. The IU School of Nursing ranks 8th among public universities who receive funding from the National Institutes of Health. Almost 40% of the baccalaureate prepared professional nurses in Indiana graduate from the IU School of Nursing each year. The U.S. News & World Report 2014 Graduate School rankings place IU School of Nursing's graduate program 15th overall and higher still in adult health CNS (3rd).    IU's intercollegiate athletics program has a long tradition in several key sports. From its beginnings with baseball in 1867, the Hoosier athletic program has grown to include over 600 male and female student-athletes on 24 varsity teams boasting one of the nation's best overall records. Sports sponsored by the university include football, men's basketball, women's basketball, cross country and track, baseball, golf, tennis, rowing, volleyball, swimming & diving, and  Wrestling The Hoosiers became a member of the Big Ten Conference on December 1, 1899. The school's national affiliation is with the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). National team titles (now totaling 26; 25 NCAA, 1 AIAW) have been won in nine men's sports and one women's sport (tennis), topped by a record-setting six straight men's swimming & diving titles, eight men's soccer crowns and five titles in men's basketball. Indiana University's men's basketball team is one of the most decorated programs in the nation, having won five national championships. Indiana student-athletes have won 133 NCAA individual titles, including 79 in men's swimming and diving and 31 in men's track and field. In addition, IU teams have won or shared 157 Big Ten Conference championships. The IU athletics endowment is $42 million, the largest in the Big Ten Conference. The Varsity Club, which is the fundraising arm of the Athletics Department, drew a record $11.5 million in gifts and pledges in the fiscal year 2004–05. In addition, overall annual giving has increased 8.3% in the last year and 44.8 percent in the last three years. In addition to its rich tradition in intervarsity sports, IU also boasts a strong reputation in many non-varsity sports. Many of these "club" teams, especially those in ice hockey and rugby union, have achieved a great deal of success in intercollegiate competition. Hurling has also become more popular, with the Indiana University Hurling Club becoming the first American national champions in history. The consistent success of these athletic clubs has several times led the university to establish varsity programs in sports in which there had previously not been a team for NCAA intervarsity competition.  A large percentage of the IU student body regularly participates in both formal and/or informal intramural sports, including football, soccer, tennis, basketball, and golf. Among intramural athletics, IU's reputation for student participation and instruction in the martial arts is particularly strong, along with NCAA Division I Wrestling Hoosiers. Media outlets of Indiana University include: With over 1,823 full-time faculty members, Indiana University leads the Big Ten public universities in the number of endowed faculty positions, with 333 chairs, professorships, and curators. IUB also reported in fall 2004 that it employed 334 part-time faculty, totaling 1,877 full-time equivalents. Of the full-time faculty, 76% were tenured. Like the student body, IUB's faculty is predominantly white. Of full-time administrators, faculty, and lecturers, 118 (6%) were Asian, 74 (4%) were African-American, 62 (4%) were Hispanic, 5 (0.3%) were Native American, and 1,535 (85%) were "other." More men (62%) than women held academic appointments at the university. Professors at IUB were better paid than their counterparts in the IU system. A full professor earned an average of $126,500, an associate professor $89,000, and an assistant professor $74,400. Top 5 Indiana counties for enrollment IU Bloomington's Von Lee Theatre building is LEED Certified. The "More Art, Less Trash" recycling initiative included a design contest for recycling bin artwork and promotes both recycling and outdoor art. The university employs a group of student sustainability interns each summer, and students can get involved in campus and community-based sustainability initiatives through the Volunteers in Sustainability coordination group or the Student Sustainability Council. A campus bus system operates several routes on a regular schedule around the IUB campus throughout the semesters. In December 2014, a shuttle service ("Campus Connection") has been introduced between the IUB and the IUPUI campus as well.New shuttle available for people traveling between IU Bloomington, IUPUI   Rank County County 2015 Enrollmenthttps://www.iu.edu/~uirr/reports/standard/factbook/2014-15/Bloomington/Student_Data/Enrollment/Student_Origin/By_Indiana_County 1 Monroe (Bloomington) 4,352 2 Hamilton (Noblesville) 3,853 3 Marion (Indianapolis) 3,686 4 Lake (Gary) 1,389 5 Allen (Fort Wayne) 1,196 Archives of African American Music & Culture Archives of Traditional Music Black Film Center/Archive Business/SPEA Information Commons (Library for the Kelley School of Business and the School of Public and Environmental Affairs) Chemistry Library Education Library Fine Arts Library GLBT Library Indiana Institute on Disability and Community, Center for Disability Information and Referral (CeDIR) Library Indiana Prevention Resource Center Library IU Libraries Moving Image Archive Kinsey Institute Library Law Library (Library for the Maurer School of Law) Life Sciences Library (Library for the Biology Department, Medical Sciences Program, and Nursing Program) The Lilly Library (rare books and manuscripts) Neal-Marshall Black Culture Center Library Optometry Library Ostrom Workshop Library Residential Programs and Services Libraries Sinor Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies Swain Hall Library (Library for the Departments of Physics and Mathematics and the School of Informatics and Computing) University Archives and Records Management William & Gayle Cook Music Library Wylie House Museum WFIU radio - a charter member of the National Public Radio network, WFIU is a public radio station operating out of the Radio and TV Center on the Bloomington, Indiana Campus.  Licensed to the Trustees of Indiana University, it is funded by several sources: Indiana University; the Corporation for Public Broadcasting; program underwriting grants from community businesses and organizations; and voluntary contributions from listeners.  Programming centers on classical music, national and international news. Other formats include folk music, jazz, comedy, and news & public affairs programming. WTIU television - a 24-hour public television licensed to Indiana University, operating out of the Radio and TV Center on the Bloomington, Indiana campus.  WTIU is a PBS affiliate and carries national and locally produced programming, serving over 20 counties in west and south-central Indiana, including the cities of Bloomington, Bedford, Columbus, and Terre Haute, and the communities of Martinsville, Linton, Bloomfield, Nashville, Spencer, and Seymour. Approximately 175,000 TV households are included in the viewing area, cable and off-air combined. IUSTV (Indiana University Student television station) - an entirely student run television station broadcasting to over 12,000 on campus residents and over 40,000 Bloomington residents via Public-access television. Founded in 2002, IUSTV has quickly grown to be a leading media entity and student organization on campus. Indiana Daily Student - free daily newspaper fully supported financially through ad sales. Founded in 1867, it has a circulation of over 15,000 and is produced by IU students. WIUX - an entirely student run radio station that broadcasts currently on FM 99.1 and via live internet streaming on its website. It broadcasts 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the fall and spring semesters. Besides playing independent music, the station provides coverage of nine different Indiana University sports teams. The station was established in 1963 under the call letters WQAD. It was granted a low-power FM license in the spring of 2005 and transitioned to FM in early 2006. IU Home Pages - faculty and staff news. In print, the audience includes approximately 17,000 employees on eight campuses. Capshew, James H. Herman B Wells: The Promise of the American University (Indiana University Press, 2012) 460 pp excerpt and text search Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University, Midwest Pioneer, Volume I: The Early Years (1970) Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer, Vol II: In Mid-Pasage (1973) Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer: Volume III: Years of Fulfillment (1977) covers 1938–68 Gros Louis, Kenneth. "Herman B Wells and the Legacy of Leadership at Indiana University," Indiana Magazine of History (2007) 103#3 pp 290–301. online Wells, Herman B. Being Lucky: Reminiscences and Reflections (1980) excerpt and text search Indiana University Athletics website
