   Indigenous languages of the Americas are spoken by indigenous peoples from Alaska and Greenland to the southern tip of South America, encompassing the land masses that constitute the Americas. These indigenous languages consist of dozens of distinct language families, as well as many language isolates and unclassified languages. Many proposals to group these into higher-level families have been made, such as in three macrofamilies of Eskimo–Aleut, Na-Dene, and Amerind. This scheme is rejected by nearly all specialists.Campbell, Lyle (1997). American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America. p. 253. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509427-1. According to UNESCO, most of the indigenous American languages in North America are critically endangered, and many are already extinct.Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (Ed.). (2005). Ethnologue: Languages of the World (15th ed.). Dallas, Texas: SIL International. ISBN 1-55671-159-X. (Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com) The most widely spoken indigenous language is Southern Quechua, with about 6 to 7 million speakers, primarily in South America.  Thousands of languages were spoken by various peoples in North and South America prior to their first contact with Europeans.  These encounters occurred between the beginning of the 11th century (with the Nordic settlement of Greenland and failed efforts at Labrador and Newfoundland) and the end of the 15th century (the voyages of Christopher Columbus). Several indigenous cultures of the Americas had also developed their own writing systems, the best known being the Mayan.  The indigenous languages of the Americas had widely varying demographics, from the Quechua languages, Aymara, Guarani, and Nahuatl, which had millions of active speakers, to many languages with only several hundred speakers. After pre-Columbian times, several indigenous creole languages developed in the Americas, based on European, indigenous and African languages. The European colonizers and their successor states had widely varying attitudes towards Native American languages. In Brazil, friars learned and promoted the Tupi language. In many Latin American colonies, Spanish missionaries often learned local languages and culture in order to preach to the natives in their own tongue and relate the Christian message to their indigenous religions. In the British American colonies, John Eliot of Massachusetts translated the Bible into the Massachusett language, also called Wampanoag, or Natick (1661–1663; he published the first Bible printed in North America). The Europeans also suppressed use of indigenous American languages, establishing their own languages for official communications, destroying texts in other languages, and insisting that indigenous people learn European languages in schools. As a result, indigenous American languages suffered from cultural suppression and loss of speakers. By the 18th and 19th centuries, Spanish, English, Portuguese, French, and Dutch, brought to the Americas by European settlers and administrators, had become the official or national languages of modern nation-states of the Americas. Many indigenous languages have become critically endangered, but others are vigorous and part of daily life for millions of people. Several indigenous languages have been given official status in the countries where they occur, such as Guaraní in Paraguay. In other cases official status is limited to certain regions where the languages are most spoken. Although sometimes enshrined in constitutions as official, the languages may be used infrequently in de facto official use. Examples are Quechua in Peru and Aymara in Bolivia, where in practice, Spanish is dominant in all formal contexts. In Northern America and the Arctic region, Greenland in 2009 adopted Kalaallisut as its sole official language. In the United States, the Navajo language is the most spoken Native American language, with more than 200,000 speakers in the Southwestern United States. The US Marine Corps recruited Navajo men, who were established as Code Talkers during World War II, to transmit secret US military messages. Neither the Germans nor Japanese ever deciphered the Navajo code, which was a code using the Navajo language. Today, governments, universities, and indigenous peoples are continuing to work for the preservation and revitalization of indigenous American languages.  In American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America (1997), Lyle Campbell lists several hypotheses for the historical origins of Amerindian languages.Campbell, Lyle (1997). American Indian languages: the historical linguistics of Native America. Ch. 3 The Origin of American Indian Languages, pp. 90–106. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509427-1. Roger Blench (2008) has advocated the theory of multiple migrations along the Pacific coast of peoples from northeastern Asia, who already spoke diverse languages. These proliferated in the New World.Blench, Roger. (2008) Accounting for the Diversity of Amerindian Languages: Modelling the Settlement of the New World. Paper presented at the Archaeology Research Seminar, RSPAS, Canberra, Australia. Notes:   There are approximately 296 spoken (or formerly spoken) indigenous languages north of Mexico, 269 of which are grouped into 29 families (the remaining 27 languages are either isolates or unclassified). The Na-Dené, Algic, and Uto-Aztecan families are the largest in terms of number of languages. Uto-Aztecan has the most speakers (1.95 million) if the languages in Mexico are considered (mostly due to 1.5 million speakers of Nahuatl); Na-Dene comes in second with approximately 200,000 speakers (nearly 180,000 of these are speakers of Navajo), and Algic in third with about 180,000 speakers (mainly Cree and Ojibwe). Na-Dené and Algic have the widest geographic distributions: Algic currently spans from northeastern Canada across much of the continent down to northeastern Mexico (due to later migrations of the Kickapoo) with two outliers in California (Yurok and Wiyot); Na-Dené spans from Alaska and western Canada through Washington, Oregon, and California to the U.S. Southwest and northern Mexico (with one outlier in the Plains). Several families consist of only 2 or 3 languages. Demonstrating genetic relationships has proved difficult due to the great linguistic diversity present in North America. Two large (super-) family proposals, Penutian and Hokan, look particularly promising. However, even after decades of research, a large number of families remain. North America is notable for its linguistic diversity, especially in California. This area has 18 language families comprising 74 languages (compared to three families in Europe: Indo-European, Uralic and Turkic and one isolate: Basque). If the Caucasus is considered to be a part of Europe, Northwest Caucasian and Northeast Caucasian would be included resulting in five language families within Europe. Other language families, such as the Turkic, Mongolic, Afroasiatic families have entered Europe in later migrations. Another area of considerable diversity appears to have been the Southeast; however, many of these languages became extinct from European contact and as a result they are, for the most part, absent from the historical record. This diversity has influenced the development of linguistic theories and practice in the U.S. Due to the diversity of languages in North America, it is difficult to make generalizations for the region. Most North American languages have a relatively small number of vowels (i.e. four or five vowels). Languages of the western half of North America often have relatively large consonant inventories. The languages of the Pacific Northwest are notable for their complex phonotactics (for example, some languages have words that lack vowels entirely).Nater 1984, pg. 5 The languages of the Plateau area have relatively rare pharyngeals and epiglottals (they are otherwise restricted to Afro-Asiatic and Caucasian languages). Ejective consonants are also common in North America, although they are rare elsewhere (except, again, for the Caucasus region, parts of Africa, and the Mayan family). Head-marking is found in many languages of North America (as well as in Central and South America), but outside of the Americas it is rare. Many languages throughout North America are polysynthetic (Eskimo–Aleut languages are extreme examples), although this is not characteristic of all North American languages (contrary to what was believed by 19th-century linguists). Several families have unique traits, such as the inverse number marking of Tanoan, the lexical affixes of Wakashan, Salishan and Chimakuan, and the unusual verb structure of Nadene. The classification below is a composite of Goddard (1996), Campbell (1997), and Mithun (1999).    In Central America the Mayan languages are among those used today. Mayan languages are spoken by at least 6 million indigenous Maya, primarily in Guatemala, Mexico, Belize and Honduras. In 1996, Guatemala formally recognized 21 Mayan languages by name, and Mexico recognizes eight more.The Mayan language family is one of the best documented and most studied in the Americas. Modern Mayan languages descend from Proto-Mayan, a language thought to have been spoken at least 5,000 years ago; it has been partially reconstructed using the comparative method.    Although both North and Central America are very diverse areas, South America has a linguistic diversity rivalled by only a few other places in the world with approximately 350 languages still spoken and an estimated 1,500 languages at first European contact. The situation of language documentation and classification into genetic families is not as advanced as in North America (which is relatively well-studied in many areas). Kaufman (1994: 46) gives the following appraisal:  Since the mid 1950s, the amount of published material on SA [South America] has been gradually growing, but even so, the number of researchers is far smaller than the growing number of linguistic communities whose speech should be documented. Given the current employment opportunities, it is not likely that the number of specialists in SA Indian languages will increase fast enough to document most of the surviving SA languages before they go out of use, as most of them unavoidably will. More work languishes in personal files than is published, but this is a standard problem. It is fair to say that SA and New Guinea are linguistically the poorest documented parts of the world. However, in the early 1960s fairly systematic efforts were launched in Papua New Guinea, and that areamuch smaller than SA, to be sureis in general much better documented than any part of indigenous SA of comparable size.  As a result, many relationships between languages and language families have not been determined and some of those relationships that have been proposed are on somewhat shaky ground. The list of language families, isolates, and unclassified languages below is a rather conservative one based on Campbell (1997). Many of the proposed (and often speculative) groupings of families can be seen in Campbell (1997), Gordon (2005), Kaufman (1990, 1994), Key (1979), Loukotka (1968), and in the Language stock proposals section below.   Hypothetical language-family proposals of American languages are often cited as uncontroversial in popular writing. However, many of these proposals have not been fully demonstrated, or even demonstrated at all. Some proposals are viewed by specialists in a favorable light, believing that genetic relationships are very likely to be established in the future (for example, the Penutian stock). Other proposals are more controversial with many linguists believing that some genetic relationships of a proposal may be demonstrated but much of it undemonstrated (for example, Hokan–Siouan, which, incidentally, Edward Sapir called his "wastepaper basket stock").Ruhlen, Merritt. (1991 [1987]). A Guide to the World's Languages Volume 1: Classification, p.216. Edward Arnold. Paperback: ISBN 0-340-56186-6. Still other proposals are almost unanimously rejected by specialists (for example, Amerind). Below is a (partial) list of some such proposals: Good discussions of past proposals can be found in Campbell (1997) and Campbell & Mithun (1979). Amerindian linguist Lyle Campbell also assigned different percentage values of probability and confidence for various proposals of macro-families and language relationships, depending on his views of the proposals' strengths.Campbell, Lyle (1997). American Indian languages: the historical linguistics of Native America. Ch. 8 Distant Genetic Relationships, pp. 260–329. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509427-1. For example, the Germanic language family would receive probability and confidence percentage values of +100% and 100%, respectively. However, if Turkish and Quechua were compared, the probability value might be −95%, while the confidence value might be 95%. 0% probability or confidence would mean complete uncertainty. Several languages are only known by mention in historical documents or from only a few names or words. It cannot be determined that these languages actually existed or that the few recorded words are actually of known or unknown languages. Some may simply be from a historian's errors. Others are of known people with no linguistic record (sometimes due to lost records). A short list is below. Loukotka (1968) reports the names of hundreds of South American languages which do not have any linguistic documentation. Various miscellaneous languages such as pidgins, mixed languages, trade languages, and sign languages are given below in alphabetical order.    Language Family Probability Confidence Macro-SiouanSiouan–Iroquoian–Caddoan–[Yuchi] −20% 75% Aztec–Tanoan 0% 50% Quechumaran +50% 50% Eskimo–Aleut,ChukotanAmerican-Arctic–Paleosiberian Phylum, Luoravetlan – and beyond −25% 20% Na-Dene 0% 25% Tlingit–Eyak–Athabaskan +75% 40% Mosan −60% 65% Wakashan and Chimakuan 0% 25% Almosan (and beyond) −75% 50% Hokan–Subtiaba −90% 75% Coahuiltecan −85% 80% Guaicurian–Hokan 0% 10% Quechua as Hokan −85% 80% Tunican 0% 20% Natchez–Muskogean +40% 20% Atakapa–Chitimacha −50% 60% Gulf −25% 40% Algonkian–Gulf −50% 50% Mexican Penutian −40% 60% Sahaptian–Klamath–(Molala) +75% 50% Sahaptian–Klamath–Tsimshian +10% 10% TakelmanAlternatively Takelma–Kalapuyan +80% 60% Zuni–Penutian −80% 50% Yukian–Siouan −60% 75% Yukian–Gulf −85% 70% Keresan and Zuni −40% 40% Keresan and Uto-Aztecan 0% 60% Macro-MayanMacro-Mayan includes Mayan, Totonacan, Mixe–Zoquean, and sometimes Huave. +30% 25% Maya–Chipaya −80% 95% Maya–Chipaya–Yunga −90% 95% Otomanguean–Huave +25% 25% Tlapanec–Subtiaba as Otomanguean +95% 90% Jicaque–Subtiaba −60% 80% Jicaque–Tequistlatecan +65% 50% Jicaque–Hokan −30% 25% Xinca–Lenca 0% 50% Purépecha–Quechua −90% 80% Misumalpan–Chibchan +20% 50% Nostratic–Amerind −90% 75% A single, one-language migration (not widely accepted) A few linguistically distinct migrations (favored by Edward Sapir) Multiple migrations Multilingual migrations (single migration with multiple languages) The influx of already diversified but related languages from the Old World Extinction of Old World linguistic relatives (while the New World ones survived) Migration along the Pacific coast instead of by the Bering Strait Extinct languages or families are indicated by:  †. The number of family members is indicated in parentheses (for example, Arauan (9) means the Arauan family consists of nine languages). For convenience, the following list of language families is divided into three sections based on political boundaries of countries. These sections correspond roughly with the geographic regions (North, Central, and South America) but are not equivalent. This division cannot fully delineate indigenous culture areas. Adai † Algic (30) Alsean (2) † Atakapa † Beothuk † Caddoan (5) Cayuse † Chimakuan (2) Chimariko † Chinookan (3) Chitimacha † Chumashan (6) † Coahuilteco † Comecrudan (United States & Mexico) (3) † Coosan (2) † Cotoname † Eskimo–Aleut (7) Esselen † Haida Iroquoian (11) Kalapuyan (3) † Karankawa † Karuk Keresan (2) Kutenai Maiduan (4) Muskogean (9) Na-Dené (United States, Canada & Mexico) (39) Natchez † Palaihnihan (2) Plateau Penutian  (4)  Pomoan (7) Salinan † Salishan (23) Shastan (4) † Siouan–Catawban (19) Siuslaw † Solano † Takelma † Tanoan (7) Timucua † Tonkawa † Tsimshianic (2) Tunica † Utian (15)  Uto-Aztecan (33) Wakashan (7) Wappo † Washo Wintuan (4) Yana † Yokutsan (3) Yuchi Yuki † Yuman (11) Zuni Alagüilac (Guatemala) † Algic (United States, Canada & Mexico) (29) Chibchan (Central America & South America) (22) Coahuilteco † Comecrudan (Texas & Mexico) (3) † Cotoname † Cuitlatec (Mexico: Guerrero) † Epi-Olmec (Mexico: language of undeciphered inscriptions) † Guaicurian  (8) Huave Jicaquean Lencan Maratino (northeastern Mexico) † Mayan (31) Misumalpan Mixe–Zoquean (19) Na-Dené (United States, Canada & Mexico) (40) Naolan (Mexico: Tamaulipas) † Oto-Manguean (27) Purépecha Quinigua (northeast Mexico) † Seri Solano † Tequistlatecan (3) Totonacan (2) Uto-Aztecan (United States & Mexico) (33) Xincan Yuman (United States & Mexico) (11) Aguano † Aikaná (Brazil: Rondônia)  Andaquí  † Andoque (Colombia, Peru)  Andoquero † Arawakan (South America & Caribbean) (64)  Arauan  (9) Arutani Aymaran  (3) Baenan (Brazil: Bahia)  † Barbacoan (8) Betoi (Colombia)  † Bororoan Botocudoan  (3)  Cahuapanan  (2)  Camsá (Colombia)  Candoshi  Canichana (Bolivia)  Carabayo Cariban  (29)  Catacaoan  † Cayubaba (Bolivia) Chapacuran  (9)  Charruan  † Chibchan (Central America & South America) (22) Chimuan (3) † Chipaya–Uru  Chiquitano Choco  (10)  Chon  (2)  Chono † Coeruna (Brazil) † Cofán (Colombia, Ecuador) Cueva Culle (Peru)  Cunza (Chile, Bolivia, Argentina)  † Esmeraldeño  † Fulnió Gamela (Brazil: Maranhão) † Gorgotoqui (Bolivia) † Guaicuruan (7)  Guajiboan (4)  † Guamo (Venezuela)  † Guató Harakmbut  (2)  Hibito–Cholon † Himarimã Hodï (Venezuela)  Huamoé (Brazil: Pernambuco) † Huaorani (Ecuador, Peru)  Huarpe  † Irantxe (Brazil: Mato Grosso) Itonama (Bolivia)  Jirajaran (3)  † Jabutian Je (13)  Jeikó † Jivaroan  (2)  Kaimbe Kaliana  Kamakanan † Kapixaná (Brazil: Rondônia)  Karajá Karirí (Brazil: Paraíba, Pernambuco, Ceará) † Katembrí † Katukinan  (3)  Kawésqar (Chile)  Kwaza (Koayá) (Brazil: Rondônia) Leco  Lule (Argentina)  Maku  Malibú  Mapudungu (Chile, Argentina)  Mascoyan  (5)  Matacoan  (4)  Matanawí † Maxakalían (3)  Mocana (Colombia: Tubará) † Mosetenan  Movima (Bolivia) Munichi (Peru)  Muran  (4) Mutú  Nadahup (5) Nambiquaran  (5) Natú (Brazil: Pernambuco) † Nonuya (Peru, Colombia) Ofayé Old Catío–Nutabe (Colombia) † Omurano (Peru)  † Otí (Brazil: São Paulo) † Otomakoan (2) † Paez (also known as Nasa Yuwe) Palta Pankararú (Brazil: Pernambuco) † Pano–Tacanan  (33) Panzaleo (Ecuador)  Patagon † (Peru) Peba–Yaguan  (2)  † Pijao† Pre-Arawakan languages of the Greater Antilles (Guanahatabey, Macorix, Ciguayo)  † (Cuba, Hispaniola) Puelche (Chile)  † Puinave (8)  Puquina (Bolivia) † Purian (2) † Quechuan  (46) Rikbaktsá Saliban  (2)  Sechura  † Tabancale † (Peru) Tairona (Colombia) † Tarairiú (Brazil: Rio Grande do Norte) † Taruma † Taushiro (Peru)  Tequiraca (Peru)  † Teushen † (Patagonia, Argentina) Ticuna (Colombia, Peru, Brazil)  Timotean (2) † Tiniguan (2)  † Tucanoan  (15) Trumai (Brazil: Xingu, Mato Grosso) Tupian  (70, including Guaraní) Tuxá (Brazil: Bahia, Pernambuco) † Urarina  Vilela Wakona † Warao (Guyana, Surinam, Venezuela)  Witotoan  (6)  Xokó (Brazil: Alagoas, Pernambuco)  † Xukurú (Brazil: Pernambuco, Paraíba) † Yaghan (Chile)  Yaruro  Yanomaman  (4) Yuracare (Bolivia) Yuri (Colombia, Brazil)  † Yurumanguí (Colombia)  † Zamucoan  (2) Zaparoan  (5)  Angonkian–Gulf &nbsp;  Algonquian–Wakashan &nbsp;  Almosan–Keresiouan &nbsp;  Amerind &nbsp;  (macro-)Arawakan Arutani–Sape  Aztec–Tanoan &nbsp;  Chibchan–Paezan Chikitano–Boróroan Chimu–Chipaya Coahuiltecan &nbsp;  Cunza–Kapixanan Dené–Yeniseian Dené–Caucasian Esmerelda–Yaruroan Ge–Pano–Carib Guamo–Chapacuran Gulf &nbsp;  Hokan &nbsp;  Hokan–Siouan &nbsp;  Je–Tupi–Carib Jivaroan–Cahuapanan Kalianan Kandoshi–Omurano–Taushiro (Macro-)Katembri–Taruma Kaweskar language area Keresiouan &nbsp;  Lule–Vilelan Macro-Andean Macro-Carib Macro-Chibchan Macro-Gê &nbsp;  Macro-Jibaro Macro-Kulyi–Cholónan Macro-Lekoan Macro-Mayan Macro-Otomákoan Macro-Paesan Macro-Panoan Macro-Puinavean Macro-Siouan &nbsp;  Macro-Tucanoan Macro-Tupí–Karibe Macro-Waikurúan Macro-Warpean &nbsp;  Mataco–Guaicuru Mosan &nbsp;  Mosetén–Chonan Mura–Matanawian Sapir's Na-Dené including Haida &nbsp;  Nostratic–Amerind Paezan  Paezan–Barbacoan Penutian &nbsp;  California Penutian &nbsp;  Oregon Penutian &nbsp;  Mexican Penutian &nbsp;  Puinave–Maku Quechumaran Saparo–Yawan &nbsp;  Sechura–Catacao  Takelman &nbsp;  Tequiraca–Canichana Ticuna–Yuri (Yuri–Ticunan) Totozoque &nbsp;  Tunican &nbsp;  Yok–Utian Yuki–Wappo Ais Akokisa Aranama Ausaima Avoyel Bayogoula Bidai Cacán (Diaguita&ndash;Calchaquí) Calusa - Mayaimi - Tequesta Cusabo Eyeish Grigra Guale Houma Koroa Manek'enk (Haush) [perhaps Chon] Mayaca (possibly related to Ais) Mobila Okelousa Opelousa Pascagoula Pensacola - Chatot (Muscogean languages, possibly related to Choctaw) Quinipissa Taensa Tiou Yamacraw Yamasee Yazoo American Indian Pidgin English Algonquian-Basque pidgin  Broken Oghibbeway  Broken Slavey Bungee  Callahuaya  Carib Pidgin  Carib Pidgin–Arawak Mixed Language Catalangu Chinook Jargon Delaware Jargon  Eskimo Trade Jargon  Greenlandic Pidgin (West Greenlandic Pidgin) Guajiro-Spanish Güegüence-Nicarao Haida Jargon Inuktitut-English Pidgin (Quebec) Jargonized Powhatan Labrador Eskimo Pidgin  Lingua Franca Apalachee Lingua Franca Creek Lingua Geral Amazônica  Lingua Geral do Sul  Loucheux Jargon  Media Lengua Mednyj Aleut  Michif  Mobilian Jargon  Montagnais Pidgin Basque  Nootka Jargon  Ocaneechi  Pidgin Massachusett Plains Indian Sign Language Amerind languages Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas Classification schemes for indigenous languages of the Americas Haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA) Indigenous peoples of the Americas Language families and languages Languages of Peru List of endangered languages in Canada List of endangered languages in Mexico List of endangered languages in the United States of America List of endangered languages with mobile apps List of indigenous languages in Argentina Mesoamerican languages Native American Languages Act of 1990 Bright, William. (1984). The classification of North American and Meso-American Indian languages. In W. Bright (Ed.), American Indian linguistics and literature (pp.&nbsp;3–29). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Bright, William (Ed.). (1984). American Indian linguistics and literature. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-009846-6. Brinton, Daniel G. (1891). The American race. New York: D. C. Hodges. Campbell, Lyle. (1997). American Indian languages: The historical linguistics of Native America. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509427-1. Campbell, Lyle; & Mithun, Marianne (Eds.). (1979). The languages of native America: Historical and comparative assessment. Austin: University of Texas Press. Boas, Franz. (1911). Handbook of American Indian languages (Vol. 1). Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 40. Washington: Government Print Office (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology). Boas, Franz. (1922). Handbook of American Indian languages (Vol. 2). Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 40. Washington: Government Print Office (Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology). Boas, Franz. (1929). Classification of American Indian languages. Language, 5, 1–7. Boas, Franz. (1933). Handbook of American Indian languages (Vol. 3). Native American legal materials collection, title 1227. Glückstadt: J.J. Augustin. Bright, William. (1973). North American Indian language contact. In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Linguistics in North America (part 1, pp.&nbsp;713–726).  Current trends in linguistics (Vol. 10). The Hauge: Mouton. Goddard, Ives (Ed.). (1996). Languages. Handbook of North American Indians (W. C. Sturtevant, General Ed.) (Vol. 17). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution. ISBN 0-16-048774-9. Goddard, Ives. (1999). Native languages and language families of North America (rev. and enlarged ed. with additions and corrections). [Map]. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press (Smithsonian Institution). (Updated version of the map in Goddard 1996). ISBN 0-8032-9271-6. Goddard, Ives. (2005). The indigenous languages of the southeast. Anthropological Linguistics, 47 (1), 1–60. Mithun, Marianne. (1990). Studies of North American Indian Languages. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19(1): 309–330. Mithun, Marianne. (1999). The languages of Native North America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-23228-7 (hbk); ISBN 0-521-29875-X. Nater, Hank F. (1984). The Bella Coola Language. Mercury Series; Canadian Ethnology Service (No. 92). Ottawa: National Museums of Canada. Powell, John W. (1891). Indian linguistic families of America north of Mexico. Seventh annual report, Bureau of American Ethnology (pp.&nbsp;1–142). Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. (Reprinted in P. Holder (Ed.), 1966, Introduction to Handbook of American Indian languages by Franz Boas and Indian linguistic families of America, north of Mexico, by J. W. Powell, Lincoln: University of Nebraska). Powell, John W. (1915). Linguistic families of American Indians north of Mexico by J. W. Powell, revised by members of the staff of the Bureau of American Ethnology. (Map). Bureau of American Ethnology miscellaneous publication (No. 11). Baltimore: Hoen. Sebeok, Thomas A. (Ed.). (1973). Linguistics in North America (parts 1 & 2).  Current trends in linguistics (Vol. 10). The Hauge: Mouton. (Reprinted as Sebeok 1976). Sebeok, Thomas A. (Ed.). (1976). Native languages of the Americas. New York: Plenum. Sherzer, Joel.  (1973).  Areal linguistics in North America.  In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Linguistics in North America (part 2, pp.&nbsp;749–795).  Current trends in linguistics (Vol. 10). The Hauge: Mouton. (Reprinted in Sebeok 1976). Sherzer, Joel. (1976). An areal-typological study of American Indian languages north of Mexico. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Sletcher, Michael, 'North American Indians', in Will Kaufman and Heidi Macpherson, eds., Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History, (2 vols., Oxford, 2005). Sturtevant, William C. (Ed.). (1978–present). Handbook of North American Indians (Vol. 1–20). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution. (Vols. 1–3, 16, 18–20 not yet published). Vaas, Rüdiger: 'Die Sprachen der Ureinwohner'. In: Stoll, Günter, Vaas, Rüdiger: Spurensuche im Indianerland. Hirzel. Stuttgart 2001, chapter 7. Voegelin, Carl F.; & Voegelin, Florence M. (1965). Classification of American Indian languages. Languages of the world, Native American fasc. 2, sec. 1.6). Anthropological Linguistics, 7 (7): 121-150. Zededa, Ofelia; Hill, Jane H. (1991). The condition of Native American Languages in the United States. In R. H. Robins & E. M. Uhlenbeck (Eds.), Endangered languages (pp.&nbsp;135–155). Oxford: Berg. Adelaar, Willem F. H.; & Muysken, Pieter C. (2004). The languages of the Andes. Cambridge language surveys. Cambridge University Press. Fabre, Alain. (1998). "Manual de las lenguas indígenas sudamericanas, I-II". München: Lincom Europa. Kaufman, Terrence. (1990). Language history in South America: What we know and how to know more. In D. L. Payne (Ed.), Amazonian linguistics: Studies in lowland South American languages (pp.&nbsp;13–67). Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-70414-3. Kaufman, Terrence. (1994). The native languages of South America. In C. Mosley & R. E. Asher (Eds.), Atlas of the world's languages (pp.&nbsp;46–76). London: Routledge. Key, Mary R. (1979). The grouping of South American languages. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. Loukotka, Čestmír. (1968). Classification of South American Indian languages. Los Angeles: Latin American Studies Center, University of California. Mason, J. Alden. (1950). The languages of South America. In J. Steward (Ed.), Handbook of South American Indians (Vol. 6, pp.&nbsp;157–317). Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology bulletin (No. 143). Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. Migliazza, Ernest C.; & Campbell, Lyle. (1988). Panorama general de las lenguas indígenas en América. Historia general de América (Vol. 10). Caracas: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia. Rodrigues, Aryon. (1986). Linguas brasileiras: Para o conhecimento das linguas indígenas. São Paulo: Edições Loyola. Rowe, John H. (1954). Linguistics classification problems in South America. In M. B. Emeneau (Ed.), Papers from the symposium on American Indian linguistics (pp.&nbsp;10–26). University of California publications in linguistics (Vol. 10). Berkeley: University of California Press. Sapir, Edward. (1929). Central and North American languages. In The encyclopædia britannica: A new survey of universal knowledge (14 ed.) (Vol. 5, pp.&nbsp;138–141). London: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company, Ltd. Voegelin, Carl F.; & Voegelin, Florence M. (1977). Classification and index of the world's languages. Amsterdam: Elsevier. ISBN 0-444-00155-7. Debian North American Indigenous Languages Project Catálogo de línguas indígenas sul-americanas Diccionario etnolingüístico y guía bibliográfica de los pueblos indígenas sudamericanos Towards a general typology of South American indigenous languages. A bibliographical database South American Languages Society to Advance Indigenous Vernaculars of the United States (SAIVUS) Indigenous Peoples Languages: Articles, News, Videos Documentation Center of the Linguistic Minorities of Panama The Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America Indigenous Language Institute The Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages  of the Americas (SSILA) Southern Oregon Digital Archives First Nations Tribal Collection (collection of ethnographic, linguistic, & historical material) Center for the Study of the Native Languages of the Plains and Southwest Project for the Documentation of the Languages of Mesoamerica Programa de Formación en Educación Intercultural Bilingüe para los Países Andinos Native American Language Center (University of California at Davis) Native Languages of the Americas International Journal of American Linguistics Our Languages (Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre) Swadesh Lists of Brazilian Native Languages 
