 Instructional scaffolding is a learning process designed to promote a deeper level of learning.  Scaffolding is the support given during the learning process which is tailored to the needs of the student with the intention of helping the student achieve his/her learning goals (Sawyer, 2006). Instructional scaffolding is the provision of sufficient support to promote learning when concepts and skills are being first introduced to students. These supports may include the following: Use of instructional scaffolding in various contexts: These supports are gradually removed as students develop autonomous learning strategies, thus promoting their own cognitive, affective and psychomotor learning skills and knowledge. Teachers help the students master a task or a concept by providing support. The support can take many forms such as outlines, recommended documents, storyboards, or key questions. There are three essential features of scaffolding that facilitate learning.Beed, P., Hawkins, M., & Roller, C. (1991). Moving learners towards independence: the power of scaVolded instruction. The Reading Teacher, 44(9), 648–655.Wood, D., & Wood, H. (1996). Vygotsky, tutoring and learning. Oxford Review of Education, 22(1), 5–16. The first feature has to do with the interaction between the learner and the expert. This interaction should be collaborative for it to be effective. The second, learning should take place in the learner’s zone of proximal development. To do that the expert needs to be aware of the learner’s current level of knowledge and then work to a certain extent beyond that level. The third feature of scaffolding is that the scaffold, the support and guidance provided by the expert, is gradually removed as the learner becomes more proficient. The support and guidance provided to the learner is compared to the scaffolds in building construction where the scaffolds provide both “adjustable and temporal” support to the building under construction.Palincsar, A. S. (1986). The role of dialogue in providing scaVolded instruction. Educational Psychologist, 21(1 & 2), 73–98. The support and guidance provided to learners facilitate internalization of the knowledge needed to complete the task. This support is weaned gradually until the learner is independent. For scaffolding to be effective teachers need to pay attention to the following: Scaffolding theory was first introduced in the late 1950s by Jerome Bruner, a cognitive psychologist. He used the term to describe young children's oral language acquisition. Helped by their parents when they first start learning to speak, young children are provided with informal instructional formats within which their learning is facilitated. A scaffolding format investigated by Bruner and his student Anat Ninio whose scaffolding processes are described in detail is joint picture-book reading (Ninio & Bruner, 1978).  Bed-time stories and read alouds are additional examples of book-centered interaction (Daniels, 1994). Scaffolding is inspired by Lev Vygotsky's concept of an expert assisting a novice, or an apprentice.  Wood, Bruner, and Ross's (1976) idea of scaffolding parallels the work of Vygotsky.  They described scaffolding as the support given to a younger learner by an older, more experienced adult.  This concept has been further developed by Jesper Hoffmeyer as 'semiotic scaffolding'. Though the term was never used by Vygotsky, interactional support and the process by which adults mediate a child's attempts to take on new learning has come to be termed "scaffolding." Scaffolding represents the helpful interactions between adult and child that enable the child to do something beyond his or her independent efforts. A scaffold is a temporary framework that is put up for support and access to meaning and taken away as needed when the child secures control of success with a task. A construct that is critical for scaffolding instruction is Vygotsky's concept of the zone of proximal development (ZPD). Zone of proximal development is that field between what a learner can do by himself (expert stage) and what can be achieved with the support of a knowledgeable peer or instructor (pedagogical stage) (Ellis & Worthington, 1994).  Vygotsky was convinced that a child could be taught any subject efficiently using scaffolding practices by implementing the scaffolds at the Zone of proximal development. Students are escorted and monitored through learning activities that function as interactive conduits to get them to the next stage.  Thus the learner obtains or raises new understandings by presenting on their prior knowledge through the support delivered by more capable individuals (Raymond, 2000).  Several peer reviewed studies have shown that when there is a deficiency in guided learning experiences and social interaction, learning and development are obstructed (Bransford, Brown, and Cocking, 2000). In writing instruction, typically support is presented in verbal form (discourse). The writing tutor engages the learner's attention, calibrates the task, motivates the student, identifies relevant task features, controls for frustration, and demonstrates as needed (Rodgers, 2004). Through joint activities, the teacher scaffolds conversation to maximize the development of a child's intrapsychological functioning. In this process, the adult controls the elements of the task that are beyond the child's ability all the while increasing the expectations of what the child is able to do. Speech, a critical tool to scaffold thinking and responding, plays a crucial role in the development of higher psychological processes (Luria, 1979) because it enables thinking to be more abstract, flexible, and independent (Bodrova & Leong, 1996). From a Vygotskian perspective, talk and action work together with the sociocultural fabric of the writing event to shape a child's construction of awareness and performance (Dorn, 1996). Dialogue may range from casual talk to deliberate explanations about features of written language. The talk embedded in the actions of the literacy event shapes the child's learning as the tutor regulates her language to conform to the child's degrees of understanding. Clay (2005) shows that what may seem like casual conversational exchanges between tutor and student actually offer many opportunities for fostering cognitive development, language learning, story composition for writing, and reading comprehension. Conversations facilitate generative, constructive, experimental, and developmental speech and writing in the development of new ideas (Smagorinsky, 2007). In Vygotsky's words, "what the child is able to do in collaboration today he will be able to do independently tomorrow" (Vygotsky, 1987, p.&nbsp;211). Some ingredients of scaffolding are predictability, playfulness, focus on meaning, role reversal, modeling, and nomenclature.Daniels, H. (1994). Literature Circles: Voice and choice in the student-centered classroom. Markham: Pembroke Publishers Ltd. According to Saye and Brush, there are two levels of scaffolding: soft and hard (2002).  An example of soft scaffolding in the classroom would be when a teacher circulates the room and converses with his or her students (Simon and Klein, 2007).  The teacher may question their approach to a difficult problem and provide constructive feedback.  According to Van Lier, this type of scaffolding can also be referred to as contingent scaffolding.  The type and amount of support needed is dependent on the needs of the students during the time of instruction (Van Lier, 1996).  Unfortunately, applying scaffolding correctly and consistently can be difficult when the classroom is large and students have various needs (Gallagher, 1997).  Scaffolding can be applied to a majority of the students, but the teacher is left with the responsibility to identify additional scaffolding. In contrast with contingent or soft scaffolding, embedded or hard scaffolding is planned in advance to help students with a learning task that is known in advance to be difficult (Saye and Brush, 2002).  For example, when students are discovering the formula for the Pythagorean Theorem in math class, the teacher may identify hints or cues to help the student reach an even higher level of thinking.  In both situations, the idea of "expert scaffolding" is being implemented (Holton and Clarke, 2006): the teacher in the classroom is considered the expert and is responsible for providing scaffolding for the students. Reciprocal scaffolding, a method first coined by Holton and Thomas, is a method that involves a group of two or more collaboratively working together.  In this situation, the group can learn from each other's experiences and knowledge.  The scaffolding is shared by each member and changes constantly as the group works on a task (Holton and Clarke, 2006).  According to Vygotsky, students develop higher-level thinking skills when scaffolding occurs with an adult expert or with a peer of higher capabilities (Stone, 1998).  Conversely, Piaget believes that students discard their ideas when paired with an adult or student of more expertise (Piaget, 1928).  Instead, students should be paired with others who have different perspectives.  Conflicts would then take place between students allowing them to think constructively at a higher level. Technical scaffolding is a newer approach in which computers replace the teachers as the experts or guides, and students can be guided with web links, online tutorials, or help pages (Yelland and Masters, 2007).  Educational software can help students follow a clear structure and allows students to plan properly (Lai and Law, 2006). Silliman and Wilkinson (1994) distinguish two types of scaffolding: ‘supportive scaffolding’ that characterises the IRF (Initiation-Response-Follow-up) pattern; and ‘directive scaffolding’ that refers to IRE (Initiation-Response-Evaluation). Saxena (2010)Saxena, M. (2010) Reconceptualising teachers’ directive and supportive scaffolding in bilingual classrooms within the neo-Vygotskyan approach. Journal of Applied Linguistics & Professional Practice, 7 (2), pp. 163-184 develops these two notions theoretically by incorporating Bhaktin’s (1981)Bakhtin, M.M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by M. M. Bakhtin. Edited by M. Holquist and translated by C. Emerson and M. Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press. and vanLier’s (1996)Van Lier, L. (1996) Interaction in the Language Curriculum: Awareness, Autonomy, and Authenticity. London: Longman. works. Within the IRE pattern, teachers provide ‘directive scaffolding’ on the assumption that their job is to transmit knowledge and then assess its appropriation by the learners.  The question-answer-evaluation sequence creates a predetermined standard for acceptable participation and induces passive learning. In this type of interaction, the teacher holds the right to evaluate and asks ‘known-information’ questions which emphasise the reproduction of information. The nature and role of the triadic dialogue have been oversimplified and the potential for the roles of teachers and students in them has been undermined (Nassaji and Wells, 2000).Nassaji, H. and Wells, G. (2000) What’s the use of “triadic dialogue”? An investigation of teacher-student interaction. Applied Linguistics 21 (3): 376--406. If, in managing the talk, teachers apply ‘constructive power’ (Saxena, 2009)Saxena, M. (2009) Negotiating conflicting ideologies and linguistic otherness: codeswitching in English classrooms. English Teaching: Practice and Critique 8 (2): 167-- 187. and exploit students’ responses as occasions for joint exploration, rather than simply evaluating them, then the classroom talk becomes dialogic (Nystrand, 1997).Nystrand, M. (1997) Opening Dialogue: Understanding the Dynamics of Language and Learning in the English Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. The pedagogic orientation of this talk becomes ‘participation orientation’, in contrast to ‘display/assessment orientation’ of IRE (van Lier, 1996). In this kind of pattern of interaction, the third part of the triadic dialogue offers ‘follow-up’ and teachers’ scaffolding becomes ‘supportive’. Rather than producing ‘authoritative discourse’ Bakhtin’s (1981), teachers constructs ‘internally persuasive discourse’ that allows ‘equality’ and ‘symmetry’ (van Lier, 1996:175), wherein the issues of power, control, institutional managerial positioning, etc. are diffused or suspended. The discourse opens up the roles for students as the ‘primary knower’ and the ‘sequence initiator’ (Nassaji and Wells, 2000), which allows them to be the negotiator and co-constructor of meaning. The suspension of asymmetry in the talk represents a shift in the teacher’s ideological stance and, therefore, demonstrates that supportive scaffolding is more than simply a model of instruction (Saxena, 2010: 167). Learner support in scaffolding is known as guidance.  While it takes on various forms and styles, the base of guidance is any type of interaction from the instructor that is intended to aid and/or improve student learning.Wise, A. F., & O’Neill, K. (2009). Beyond more versus less: A reframing of the debate on instructional guidance. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/2009-09809-005  While this a broad definition, the role and amount of guidance is better defined by the instructor’s approach. Instructionists and constructionists approach giving guidance within their own instructional frameworks.  Scaffolding involves presenting learners with proper guidance that moves them towards their learning goals.  Providing guidance is a method of moderating the cognitive load of a learner.  In scaffolding, learners can only be moved toward their learning goals if cognitive load is held in check by properly administered support. Instructionists tend to give a higher level of guidance in light of the inquiry driven style of learning. With each piece of a complex task being broken down, instructors give guidance for each of the separated parts of the learning.  In this way, higher guidance is a function of reducing cognitive load when students are working in a more individual manner. Constructivists approach guidance differently as a result of their focus on transfer.  The concept of transfer focuses on a learner’s ability to apply learned tasks in a context other than the modality in which it was learned.  This results in constructivists giving a lower level of guidance, as learners work through a complete task, only being given guidance in transfer. The role of guidance is to ensure that cognitive load is moderated while the learner works at more complete and complex task; guidance is given during aspects of the task that will help enable transfer. Research has demonstrated that higher level of guidance has a greater effect on scaffolded learning, but is not a guarantee of more learning.Sweller, J., Kirschner, P.A., and Clark, R. E. (2007). Why Minimally Guided Teaching Techniques Do Not Work: A Reply to Commentaries. Educational Psychologist, 42(2), 115–121.  The efficacy of higher amount of guidance is dependent on the level of detail and guidance applicability.  Having multiple types of guidance (i.e. worked examples, feedback) can cause them to interact and reinforce each other.  Multiple conditions do not guarantee greater learning, as certain types of guidance can be extraneous to the learning goals or the modality of learning.  With this, more guidance (if not appropriate to the learning) can negatively impact performance, as it gives the learner overwhelming levels of information.   However, appropriately designed high levels of guidance, which properly interact with the learning, is more beneficial to learning than low levels of guidance. Constructivists pay close attention to the context of guidance, because they believe instruction plays a major role in knowledge retention and transfer. Research studiesWieman, C., & Perkins, K. (2005). Transforming physics education. Physics Today, 59(11), 36-41.Hrepic, Z., Zollman, D. A., & Rebello, N. S. (2007). Comparing students' and experts' understanding of the content of a lecture. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(3), 213-224. demonstrate how the context of isolated explanations can have an affect on student-learning outcomes. For example, Hake’s (1998) large-scale studyHake, R. R. (1998). Interactive engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics course. American Journal of Physics, 66(1), 64-74. demonstrated how post-secondary physics students recalled less than 30% of material covered in a traditional lecture-style class. Similarly, other studiesCapon, N., & Kuhn, D. (2004). What's so good about problem-based learning? Cognition and Instruction, 22, 61-79.Miller, C., Lehman, J., & Koedinger, K. (1999). Goals and learning in microworlds. Cognitive Science, 23, 305-336.Swartz, D.L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for learning: The hidden efficiency of original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129-184. illustrate how students construct different understandings from explanation in isolation versus having a first experience with the material. A first experience with the material provides students with a "need to know." A "need to know" allows learners to reflect on prior experiences with the content, which can help learners construct meaning from instruction. Worked examples Worked-example effect are guiding tools that can act as a "need to know" for students. Worked examples provide students with straightforward goals, step-by-step instructions as well as ready-to-solve problems that can help students develop a stronger understanding from instruction.Carroll, W. (1994). Using worked examples as instructional support in the algebra classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 360-367.Trafton, J. G., & Reiser, B. J., (1993). The contribution of studying examples and solving problems to skill acquisition. Paper presented at the 15th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Guiding has a key role both in constructivism and 'instructivism'. For instructivists the timing of guidance is immediate, either at the beginning or when the learner makes a mistake, whereas in constructivism it can be delayed. It has been found that immediate feedback can lead to working memory load as it does not take in consideration the process of gradual acquisition of a skill,John R. Anderson; Albert T. Corbett; Kenneth R. Koedinger; Ray Pelletier The Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol. 4, No. 2. (1995), pp. 167-207. which also relates to the amount of guidance being given. Research on intelligent-tutoring systems suggests that immediate feedback on errors is a great strategy to promote learning, as the learner is able to integrate the feedback from short-term memory into the overall learning and problem solving task; the longer the wait on feedback, the harder it is for the learner to make this integration. Yet, in another study it was found that providing feedback right after the error can deprive the learner of the opportunity to develop evaluative skills.Mathan, S., & Koedinger, K. R. (2003). Recasting the feedback debate: Benefits of tutoring error detection and correction skills. In U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo, & J. Kay (Eds.), Artificial intelligence in education: Shaping the future of learning through intelligent technologies (pp. 13-20). Amsterdam: IOS Press. Wise and O'Neill bring these two, seemingly contradictory findings, and argue that it does not only prove the importance of the role of feedback, but that points out a timing feature of feedback: immediate feedback in the short term promotes more rapid problem solving but delaying feedback can result in better retention and transfer in the long term. Constructivism views knowledge as a “function of how the individual creates meaning from his or her own experiences”.Jonassen, D. H. (1991). Objectivism versus constructivism: do we need a new philosophical paradigm? Educational Technology Research and Development, 39 (3), 5-14. Constructivists advocate that learning is better facilitated in a minimally guided environment where learners construct important information for themselves.Steffe, L. & Gale, J. (Eds.) (1995). Constructivism in education. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,Inc.  According to constructivism, minimal guidance in the form of process or task related information should be provided to learners upon request and direct instruction of learning strategies should not be used because it impedes the natural processes learners use to recall prior experiences.  In this view, for learners to construct knowledge they should be provided with the goals and minimal information and support. Applications that promote constructivist learning require learners to solve authentic problems or “acquire knowledge in information-rich settings”.Kirschner, P. A. (1992). Epistemology, practical work and academic skills in science education. Science and Education, 1, 273– 299. An example of an application of constructivist learning is science instruction, where students are asked to discover the principles of science by imitating the steps and actions of researchers.van Joolingen, W. R., de Jong, T., Lazonder, A. W., Savelsbergh, E., & Manlove, S. (2005). Co-Lab: Research and development of an on-line learning environment for collaborative scientific discovery learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 671-688. Instructionism are educational practices characterized for being instructor-centered. Some authors see instructionism as a highly prescriptive practice that mostly focuses on the formation of skills, that is very product-oriented and is not interactive;Jonassen, D. H. (Ed.). (1996). Handbook of research for educational communications and technology. New York: Simon & Schuster. or that is a highly structured, systematic and explicit way of teaching that gives emphasis to the role of the teacher as a transmitter of knowledge and the students as passive receptacles.Johnson, G. (2009). Instructionism and Constructivism: Reconciling Two Very Good Ideas. International Journal Of Special Education, 24(3), 90-98. The 'transmission' of knowledge and skills from the teacher to the student in this context is often manifested in the form of drill, practice and rote memorization. An ‘instructionist’, then, focuses on the preparation, organization and management of the lesson making sure the plan is detailed and the communication is effective.Adams, G. L., & Engelmann, S. (1996). Research on Direct Instruction: 25 years beyond DISTAR. Seattle, WA: Educational Achievement Systems.Kameenui, E. J., & Carnine, D. W. (1998). Effective teaching strategies that accommodate diverse learners. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill The emphasis is on the up-front explicit delivery of instruction. Instructionism is often contrasted with constructivism. Both of them use the term guidance as means to support learning, and how it can be used more effectively. The difference in the use of guidance if found in the philosophical assumptions regarding the nature of the learner, but they also differ in their views around the quantity, the context and the timing of guidance. An example of application of instructionism in the classroom is direct instruction. Instructional scaffolding can be thought of as the strategies that a teacher uses to help learners bridge a cognitive gap or progress in their learning to a level they were previously unable to accomplish.van de Pol, Janneke, Volman, Monique, & Beishuizen, Jos. (2010). Scaffolding in Teacher–Student Interaction: A Decade of Research. Educational Psychology Review, 22:271–296 DOI 10.1007/s10648-010-9127-6 These strategies evolve as the teachers evaluate the learners initial level of ability and then through continued feedback throughout the progression of the task. In the early studies, scaffolding was primarily done in oral, face- to-face learning environments. In classrooms, scaffolding may include modelling behaviours, coaching and prompting, thinking out loud, dialogue with questions and answers, planned and spontaneous discussions, as well as other interactive planning or structural assistance to help the learner bridge a cognitive gap. This can also include peer mentoring from more experienced students. There are a wide variety of scaffolding strategies that teachers employ. One approach to looking at the application of scaffolding is to look at a framework for evaluating these strategies.  This model was developed based on the theoretical principles of scaffolding to highlight the use of scaffolding for educational purposes. It highlights two components of an instructors use of scaffolding. The first is the instructors intentions and the second refers to the means by which the scaffolding is carried out. Scaffolding Intentions: These groups highlight the instructors intentions for scaffolding   Scaffolding Means: These groups highlight the ways in which the instructor scaffolds Any combination of scaffolding means with scaffolding intention can be construed as a scaffolding strategy, however, whether a teaching strategy qualifies as good scaffolding generally depends upon its enactment in actual practice and more specifically upon whether the strategy is applied contingently and whether it is also part of a process of fading and transfer of responsibility.Jumaat, Nurul, Farhana & Zaidatun Tasir (2014). Instructional Scaffolding in Online Learning Environment: A Meta-Analysis. Presented at the 2014 International Conference on Teaching and Learning in Computing and Engineering. doi: 10.1109/LaTiCE.2014.22 Examples of scaffolding:Alibali, M (2006). Does visual scaffolding facilitate students’ mathematics learning? Evidence from early algebra. http://ies.ed.gov/funding/grantsearch/details.asp?ID=54 Instructors can use a variety of scaffolds to accommodate different levels of knowledge. The context of learning (i.e. novice experience, complexity of the task) may require more than one scaffold strategy in order for the student to master new content. The following tableNorthern Illinois University, Faculty Development and Instructional Design Center. Found at: http://www.niu.edu/facdev/resources/guide/strategies/instructional_scaffolding_to_improve_learning.pdf outlines a few common scaffolding strategies: When we teach students who are not physically present in the classroom, instructors need to adapt to the environment and their scaffolding needs to be adjusted to fit this new learning medium. It can be challenging to find a way to adjust the verbal and visual elements of scaffolding to construct a successful interactive and collaborative learning environment for distance learning. The recent spread of technology used in education has opened up the learning environment to include hypermedia, hypertext, collaborative learning environments, and web-based learning environments. This challenges traditional learning design conceptions of scaffolding for educators (see;Hogan, K. & Pressley, M. (1997). Scaffolding Student Learning: Instructional Approaches and Issues. Cambridge MA: Brookline Books.Azevedo, R. Computers as metacognitive tools for enhancing learning. Educational Psychologist 40 (4), 199-209Hannafin, M., Hill, J. & Land, S. (1999). Student-centered learning and interactive multimedia: Status, issues, and implication. Contemporary Education 68(2): 94–99.Hannafin, M.J. & Land, S.M. (1997). The foundations and assumptions of technology- enhanced student-centered learning environments. Instructional Science 25: 167–202.Pea, R.D. (2004). The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts for learning, education, and human activity. Journal of the Learning Sciences 13: 423–451.Reiser, B. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student work. Journal of the Learning Sciences 13930: 273–304.Puntambekar, S. & Stylianou, A. (2005). Designing navigation support in hypertext systems based on navigation patterns. Instructional Science 33(5–6): 451–481). A recent review Jumaat, Nurul, Farhana & Zaidatun, Tasir (2014). Instructional Scaffolding in Online Learning Environment: A Meta-Analysis. Presented at the 2014 International Conference on Teaching and Learning in Computing and Engineering. doi: 10.1109/LaTiCE.2014.22 of the types of scaffolding used in online learning identified four main types of scaffolding: These four types are structures that appropriately support students’ learning in online environments (according to Hannafin, Land and Oliver M. J. Hannafin, S. Land and K. Oliver, “Open learning environments: Foundations, methods and models,” in C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999, pp. 115-140.). Other scaffolding approaches that were addressed by the researchers included: technical support, content support, argumentation template, questioning and modelling. These terms were rarely used, and it was agued that these areas had unclear structure to guide students, especially in online learning, and were inadequately justified. As technology changes, so does the form of support provided to online learners. Instructors have the challenge of adapting scaffolding techniques to this new medium, but also the advantage of using new web-based tools such as wikis and blogs as platforms to support and discuss with students. Benefits of Scaffolding in Online Learning Environments As the research in this area progresses, studies are showing that when students learn about complex topics with computer-based learning environments (CBLEs) without scaffolding they demonstrated poor ability to regulate their learning, and failure to gain a conceptual understanding of the topic (;Hill, J. & Hannafin, M. (1997). Cognitive strategies and learning from the World Wide Web. Educational Technology Research & Development 45(4): 37–64.Greene, B. & Land, S. (2000). A qualitative analysis of scaffolding use in a resource- based learning environment involving the world wide web. Journal of Educational Computing Research 23(2): 151–179.Land, S. & Greene, B. (2000). Project-based learning with the World Wide Web: A qualitative study of resource integration. Educational Technology Research Development 48(3): 61–78.Azevedo, R., Cromley, J.G. & Seibert, D. (2004). Does adaptive scaffolding facilitate students’ ability to regulate their learning with hypermedia. Contemporary Educa- tional Psychology 29: 344–370).  As a result, researchers have recently begun to emphasize the importance of embedded conceptual, procedural, strategic, and metacognitive scaffolding in CBLEs (e.g.Vye, N., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J., Barron, B., Zech, L. & CTGV. (1998). SMART environments that support monitoring, reflection, and revision. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. Graesser, eds., Metacognition in Educational Theory and Practice (pp. 305–346). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Lajoie, S.P. & Azevedo, R. Teaching and learning in technology-rich environments. In P. Alexander & P. Winne eds., Handbook of educational psychology (2nd edn.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum (2006).Lajoie, S.P. & Azevedo, R. (2000). Cognitive tools for medical informatics. In S.P. Lajoie, eds, Computers as Cognitive Tools II: No More Walls: Theory Change, Paradigm Shifts and Their Influence on the Use of Computers for Instructional Purposes, pp. 247–271. Erlbaum: Mahwah, NJ.White, B., Shimoda, T. & Frederiksen, J. (2000). Facilitating students’ inquiry learning and metacognitive development through modifiable software advisors. In S. Lajoie, eds, Computers as Cognitive Tools Volume Two: No More Walls, pp. 97–132. Erlbaum: Mahwah, NJ.Brush, T. & Saye, J. (2001). The use of embedded scaffolds with hypermedia-supported student-centered learning. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia 10(4): 333–356.Hadwin, A.F., Wozney, L. & Pantin, O. (2005). Scaffolding the appropriation of self- regulatory activity; A socio-cultural analysis of changes in teacher-student discourse about a graduate research portfolio. Instructional Science 33(5–6): 413–450Azevedo, R. (2002). Beyond intelligent tutoring systems: Computers as MetaCognitive tools to enhance learning? Instructional Science 30(1): 31–45.Baylor, A. L. (2002). Agent-based learning environments for investigating teaching and learning. Journal of Educational Computing Research 26(3): 249–270.Puntambekar, S. & Hubscher, R. (2005). Tools for scaffolding students in a complex learning environment: What have we gained and what have we missed? Educational Psychologist 40(1): 1–12.). In addition to the four scaffolding guidelines outlined, recent research has shown: scaffolding Instructional Scaffolds !! Description of Tool Advanced Organizershttp://edutechwiki.unige.ch/en/Advance_Organizer Tools that present new information or concepts to learners. These tools organize information in a way that helps learners understand new and complex content. Examples of advanced organizers are: Modelling http://www.learnnc.org/lp/pages/4697 Instructors demonstrate desired behaviour, knowledge or task to students.  Instructors use modelling to: context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (i.e. science experiment) Worked Examples  A worked example is a step-by-step demonstration of a complex problem or task..Renkl, A. (2005). The worked-out examples priniciple in multimedia learning. In Mayer, R.E. (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.View in a new window  These types of instructional materials are commonly implemented in mathematics and science classes and include three key features: 1. Problem Formation: A principle or theory is introduced. 2. Step-by-Step Example: A worked example, that demonstrates how the student can solve the problem, is provided. 3. Solution to the Problem: One or more read-to-be solved problems are given for the student to practice the skill. Concept MapsNesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. O. (2013). Concept maps for learning: Theory, research and design. In Schraw. G. (Ed.) Learning Through Visual Displays, pp. 303–328. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.View in a new window Graphical tools for organizing, representing and displaying the relationships between knowledge and concepts.Cañas, A. J., & Novak, J. D., (2009). What is a concept map? Found on http://cmap.ihmc.us/docs/conceptmap.html Types of concept maps are:http://faculty.ksu.edu.sa/aljarf/Research%20Library/Mind-mapping/Kinds%20of%20Concept%20Maps.htm Explanations Ways in which instructors present and explain new content to learners. How new information is presented to the learner is a critical component for effective instruction. The use of materials such as visual images, graphic organizers, animated videos, audio files and other technological features can make explanations more engaging, motivating and meaningful for student learning. Handouts http://www2.wmin.ac.uk/mcshand/TEACHING/handouts.htm#WHY A supplementary resource used to support teaching and learning. These tools can provide students with the necessary information (i.e. concept or theory, task instructions, learning goals, learning objectives) and practice (i.e. ready-to-be-solved problems) they need to master new content and skills. Handouts are helpful tools for explanations and worked examples. Promptshttp://specialed.about.com/od/glossary/g/promptinggossary.htm A physical or verbal cue to aid recall of prior or assumed knowledge. There are different types of prompts, such as:http://www.tcse.us/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/prompting_and_fadingtguide.pdf resources a compelling task templates and guides guidance on the development of cognitive and social skills modeling a task giving advice providing coaching The selection of the learning task: The task should ensure that learners use the developing skills that need to be mastered.Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1978). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89–100. The task should also be engaging and interesting to keep learners involved.Graves, M., Graves, M., & Braaten, S. (1996). Scaffolding reading experiences for inclusive classes. Educational Leadership, 53(5), 14–16. The anticipation of errors: After choosing the task, the teacher needs to anticipate errors the learners are likely to commit when working on the task. Anticipation of errors enables the scaffolder to properly guide the learners away from ineffective directions.Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1992). The use of scaVolds for teaching higher-level cognitive strategies. Educational Leadership, 49(7), 26–33. The application of scaffolds during the learning task: Scaffolds could be organized in “simple skill acquisition or they may be dynamic and generative”. The consideration of emotive or affective factors: Scaffolding is not limited to a cognitive skill but it also relates to emotive and affect factors. During the task the scaffolder (expert) might need to manage and control for frustration and loss of interest that could be experienced by the learner. Encouragement is also an important scaffolding strategy.Schetz, K., & Stremmel, A. (1994). Teacher-assisted computer implementation: a Vygotskian perspective. Early Education and Development, 5(1), 18–26. conceptual scaffolding: helps students decide what to consider in learning and guide them to key concepts procedural scaffolding: helps students use appropriate tools and resources effectively strategic scaffolding: helps students find alternative strategies and methods to solve complex problems metacognitive scaffolding: prompts students to think about what they are learning throughout the process and assists students reflecting on what they have learnt (self-assessment). This is the most common research area and is thought to not only promote higher order thinking but also students ability to plan ahead.  Reingold, Rimor and Kalay R. Reingold, R.Rimor, and A. Kalay, “Instructor’s scaffolding in support of student’s metacognition through a teacher education online course: a case study,” Journal of Intercative Online Learning, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 139-151, 2008 have listed seven mechanisms of metacognitive scaffolding that encourage students’ metacognition in learning. scaffolding can help in group discussions. In a recent study,H. Huang, C. Wu and N. Chen, “The effectiveness of using procedural scaffolding in a paper-plus-smartphone collaborative learning context,” Computers & Education, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 250- 259, 2012. a significant increase in active participation and meaningful negotiations was found within the scaffolded groups as opposed to the non-scaffolded group. metacognitive scaffolding can be used to encourage students in reflecting and help build a sense of a community among learners.R. Reingold, R.Rimor, and A. Kalay, “Instructor’s scaffolding in support of student’s metacognition through a teacher education online course: a case study,” Journal of Intercative Online Learning, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 139-151, 2008. Specifically, Reingold, Rimor and Kalay   recommend using metacognitive scaffolding to support students working on a common task. They believe this can support learners to experience their work as part of a community of learners. Educational psychology Jerome Bruner Jim Cummins Lev Vygotsky Stephen Krashen Collaborative learning Belland, Brian., Glazewski, Krista D., and Richardson, Jennifer C. (2008).  A scaffolding framework to support the construction of evidence-based arguments among middle school students.  Education Tech Research Dev., 56, 401-422. Beed, P., Hawkins, M., & Roller, C. (1991). Moving learners towards independence: the power of scaVolded instruction. The Reading Teacher, 44(9), 648–655 Bodrova, E., & Leong, D. J. (1998). Scaffolding emergent writing in the zone of proximal development. Literacy Teaching and Learning, 3(2), 1-18. Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R.  (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, and Experience & School.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Cazden, C. B. (1983). Adult assistance to language development: Scaffolds, models, and direct instruction. In R. P. Parker & F. A. Davis (Eds.), Developing literacy:Young children's use of language (pp.&nbsp;3–17). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. Clay, M. M. (2005). Literacy lessons designed for individuals: Teaching procedures. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. Cox, B. E. (1994). Young children’s regulatory talk: Evidence of emerging metacognitive control over literary products and processes. In R. B. Ruddell, M. R. Ruddell, & H. Singer (Eds.), Theoretical models and process of reading (pp.&nbsp;733–756). Newark, DE: IRA. Dorn, L. (1996). A Vygotskian perspective on literacy acquisition: Talk and action in the child's construction of literate awareness. Literacy Teaching and Learning: An International Journal of Early Reading and Writing, 2(2), 15-40. Dyson, A. H. (1983). The role of oral language in early writing process. Research in the Teaching of English, 17(1), 1-30. Dyson, A. H. (1991). Viewpoints: The word and the world - reconceptualizing written language development or do rainbows mean a lot to little girls? Research in the Teaching of English, 25, 97-123. Ellis, E., & Worthington, L. (1994). Research Synthesis on Effective Teaching Principles and the Design of Quality Tools for Educators. University of Oregon. Retrieved October 25, 2013, from http://people.uncw.edu/kozloffm/ellisressynth.pdf Hoffman, B., & Ritchie, D. (1997). The problems with problem based learning. Instructional Science 25(2) 97-115. Holton, Derek, and Clark, David (2006).  Scaffolding and metacognition.  International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 37, 127-143. Johnson, G. (2009). Instructionism and Constructivism: Reconciling Two Very Good Ideas. International Journal Of Special Education, 24(3), 90-98. Jonassen, D. H. (1991). Objectivism versus constructivism: do we need a new philosophical paradigm? Educational Technology Research and Development, 39 (3), 5-14. Jonassen, D. H. (Ed.). (1996). Handbook of research for educational communications and technology. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lai, Ming and Law, Nancy (2006).  Peer scaffolding of knowledge building through collaborative groups with differential learning experiences. J. Educational Computing Research, 35, 123-144. Lajoie, Sussane (2005).  Extending the scaffolding metaphor.  Instructional Science, 33, 541-557. Luria, A. R. (1983). The development of writing in the child. In M. Martlew (Ed.), The psychology of written language: Developmental and educational perspectives (pp.&nbsp;237–277). New York: Wiley. Ninio, A. and Bruner, J. (1978).  The achievement and antecedents of labelling.  Journal of Child Language, 5, 1-15. Palincsar, A. S. (1986). The role of dialogue in providing scaVolded instruction. Educational Psychologist, 21(1 & 2), 73–98. Raymond, E. (2000). Cognitive Characteristics.  Learners with Mild Disabilities (pp.&nbsp;169–201). Needham Heights, MA:  Allyn & Bacon, A Pearson Education Company. Rodgers, E. M. (2004). Interactions that scaffold reading performance. Journal of Literacy Research, 36(4), 501-532. Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1992). The use of scaffolds for teaching higher-level cognitive strategies. Educational Leadership, 49(7), 26-33. Sawyer, R. Keith.  (2006).  The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences.  New York: Cambridge University Press. Simons, Krista D., and Klein, James D. (2007).  The impact of scaffolding and student achievement levels in a problem-based learning environment.  Instructional Science, 35, 41-72. Smagorinsky, P. (2007). Vygotsky and the social dynamic of classrooms. English Journal, 97(2), 61-66. Teale, W. H. & Sulzby, E. (Eds.). (1986). Emergent literacy: Writing and reading. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation. Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Thinking and speech. In L. S. Vygotsky, Collected works (vol. 1, pp.&nbsp;39–285) (R. Rieber & A. Carton, Eds; N. Minick, Trans.). New York: Plenum. (Original works published in 1934, 1960). Wertsch, J. V. (1985).  Vygotsky and the social formation of mind.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wertsch, J. V. & Stone, C. (1984). A social interactional analysis of learning disabilities remediation. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17(4), 194-199. Wise, A. F., & O'Neill, D. K. (2009). Beyond More Versus Less: A Reframing of the Debate on Instructional Guidance. In S. Tobias & T. M. Duffy (Eds.), Constructivist Instruction: Success or Failure? (pp.&nbsp;82–105). New York: Routledge. Wood, D., & Wood, H. (1996). Vygotsky, tutoring and learning. Oxford Review of Education, 22(1), 5-16. Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1978). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89-100. Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychiatry and Psychology, 17(2), 89-100. Yelland, Nicola, and Masters, Jennifer (2007).  Rethinking scaffolding in the information age.  Computers and Education, 48, 362-382.
