   John Jonah Jameson, Jr.J. Jonah Jameson (Character) is a supporting character of Spider-Man in the . Jameson is usually the publisher or editor-in-chief of the Daily Bugle, a fictional New York newspaper and once served as the mayor of New York City. Recognizable by his toothbrush moustache, flattop haircut, and ever-present cigar, he carries out a smear campaign against Spider-Man that has, at least temporarily, turned much of the gullible city against the hero. He employs photojournalist Peter Parker, who, unbeknownst to Jameson, is Spider-Man himself. Portrayals of Jameson have varied throughout the years. Sometimes he is shown as a foolishly stubborn and pompous skinflint who micromanages his employees and resents Spider-Man out of jealousy. Other writers have portrayed him more humanly, as a humorously obnoxious yet caring boss who nevertheless has shown great bravery and integrity in the face of the assorted villains with which the Bugle comes into contact, and whose campaign against Spider-Man comes more from fear of youngsters following his example. In either case, he has remained an important part of the Spider-Man mythos. Jameson is also the father of John Jameson, the Marvel Universe supporting character who, in addition to his job as a famous astronaut, has at turns become Man-Wolf and Star-God, and married She-Hulk. As a result of his father's wedding to May Parker, Jameson and Peter Parker are related by marriage. Academy Award-winning actor J. K. Simmons portrayed the character in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy, as well as voicing him in various additional works such as The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, Avengers Assemble, Ultimate Spider-Man, Lego Marvel Super Heroes: Maximum Overload and Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H..  Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Steve Ditko, Jameson first appeared in The Amazing Spider-Man #1 (March 1963). Stan Lee stated in an interview on Talk of the Nation that he modeled J. Jonah Jameson as a much grumpier version of himself.Conan, Neal (October 27, 2010). "Stan Lee, Mastermind Of The Marvel Universe". NPR. According to Behind the Mustache, a story featured in Spider-Man's Tangled Web #20 (January 2003), Jameson was raised as a child by David and Betty Jameson. David was an officer of the United States Army, a war veteran decorated as a hero; at home, however, David regularly abused his wife and son. As a result, J. Jonah Jameson grew convinced that "No one's a hero every day of the week" and "Even the real heroes can't keep it up all the time." Later issues of The Amazing Spider-Man clarified that David Jameson was in fact Jonah's foster father, and the brother of J. Jonah Jameson Sr., Jonah's biological father, who had to leave his son behind for undisclosed reasons. It is unknown if Jameson Jr. remembered him. He was a Boy Scout during his childhood. In high school, his interests were mainly boxing and photography. He met his first wife, Joan, when they both joined their high school's photo club. When the school's three top athletes started bullying him, he fought back and beat all three of them to a pulp. This impressed Joan, and they started dating. They married as soon as they finished school. After school, Jameson sought employment as a journalist. According to Marvels #1, he found employment in the Daily Bugle and bragged to his colleagues that he would one day run the newspaper. In 1939, he witnessed the first appearances of Jim Hammond, the android Human Torch, and Namor, Prince of Atlantis, who are jointly considered Marvel's first superheroes. Jameson was immediately skeptical of both of them; he doubted that someone with superhuman powers who operated outside the law could be trusted. When the U.S.A. joined World War II in 1941, Jameson served as a war correspondent in Europe. Sergeant Fury and His Howling Commandos #110 featured him as covering a mission of Sergeant Nicholas Fury, who was heading a team of commandos during the war. After the war, he and Joan had a son, John Jonah III, who grew up to become an astronaut. When Jameson returned from a journalistic mission in Korea, he was grieved to find that his wife had died in a mugging incident during his absence. Focusing on his professional life to dull the pain, he was eventually promoted to chief editor of the Daily Bugle, and eventually came to own the paper, thereby fulfilling his earlier boasts. Jameson gained a mostly deserved reputation for journalistic integrity, but his greedy opportunism and unyielding belligerent stubbornness made him more than a few enemies. Due to real-world time advancement Jameson's war-time experiences have since either been ignored or retconned. When Spider-Man becomes a media sensation, Jameson strives to blacken Spider-Man's reputation; casting the masked hero as an unhinged vigilante not only boosts the Bugle's circulation, but also punishes Spider-Man for overshadowing Jameson's astronaut son. When Spider-Man tries to counter the bad press by rescuing his son from danger, Jameson accuses the hero of staging the situation for his own benefit.The Amazing Spider-Man #1 (A retcon had Jameson first targeting Spider-Man after John is dropped from a talk show to make room for the hero)Amazing Fantasy #18 by Kurt Busiek This episode sets a pattern with Jameson's and Spider-Man's relationship: Jameson publicly accusing Spider-Man of numerous crimes and misdeeds, only to feel continually obliged to print almost as many retractions after being proven wrong. After his accusations that Spider-Man is the notorious criminal overlord The Big Man are debunked, Jameson admits that he is jealous of Spider-Man's courage and selflessness. Jameson believes that he cannot look at himself as a good man while a hero like Spider-Man exists.The Amazing Spider-Man #10 Despite this, he openly idolizes Captain America, and Mary Jane Watson-Parker has suggested that Jameson hates Spider-Man mainly because he acts outside the law.The Spectacular Spider-Man #175 In Tangled Web #20, a psychiatrist suggests it's the mask that bothers him and that when he sees people who "claimed to be heroes, but covered their faces", he is subconsciously sure that they're hiding a horrible secret like his foster father was. Though Jonah's rancor against Spider-Man at times subsides after he saves the life of one of his loved ones, his determination to find some flaw in the hero always returns before long. For his part, Spider-Man's reaction ranges from frustration and anger at the ungrateful publisher, which leads to occasional pranks to antagonize him, to an amused acceptance of his self-destructive stubbornness. Jameson posts rewards for Spider-Man's capture or secret identity, hunts him with Spencer Smythe's Spider-Slayer robots,The Amazing Spider-Man #25 and 58 and even commissions superpowered agents to defeat the masked man. He hires a private detective named MacDonald Gargan, puts him through a regimen of genetic enhancement, and transforms him into the Scorpion - only to have Gargan go insane and turn on his benefactor.Amazing Spider-Man #20 Although Spider-Man protects Jameson from the Scorpion, Jameson keeps his role in creating the Scorpion secret for years. He creates another superbeing, who turned into a supervillain, the Human Fly, who had his own vendetta against him.Amazing Spider-Man Annual #10 He hires Silver Sable and her Wild Pack to hunt Spider-Man down, and also hires Luke Cage to capture Spider-Man when he is wanted for the deaths of Gwen Stacy and Norman Osborn. For all his hostility towards Spider-Man, Jameson needs photographs of his heroics to sell papers, and Peter Parker takes advantage of that by taking pictures of himself as Spider-Man and selling them to the Bugle with few questions asked.The Amazing Spider-Man #2 Despite his feelings towards Spider-Man, Jameson helps him out during a demonic attack on New York. The publishing offices of the Daily Bugle come under siege and Jameson leads the defense. An injured Spider-Man and Jameson cooperate in defending the others. Though best known for his crusades against vigilante superheroes like Spider-Man, Jameson never hesitates to use the power of his paper against supervillains, crimebosses (including the KingpinDaredevil #230-231), and crooked politicians. He publishes a major expose on presidential candidate Randolf Cherryh's criminal ties, acknowledging in advance that a retaliatory lawsuit from Cherryh could bankrupt the Daily Bugle.Daredevil #177-178 Jameson later takes an aggressive stance against presidential candidate Graydon Creed, attacking him for his anti-mutant agenda and investigating the shadowy Operation: Zero Tolerance, though he never manages to uncover the truth. In Amazing Spider-Man #162 (November 1976), Jameson introduces himself to Dr. Marla Madison, a distinguished scientist and daughter of a deceased friend of his. He asks for her help in creating a new Spider-Slayer, one of a series of robots created to defeat Spider-Man, although Spider-Man has managed to survive their attacks and destroy each of them. Madison is interested in the challenge, and joins Jameson in his efforts. The two grow closer, eventually marrying but not without another attack from the Scorpion, who kidnaps Marla and is defeated by Spider-Man.Amazing Spider-Man Annual #18 Jameson remains a devoted, if a little overprotective, husband to his second wife. Marla Madison adopts Mattie Franklin, the daughter of one of Jonah's friends. Though Jonah is initially opposed to having a roguish teenager in his house, especially one who insists on affectionately calling him "Unca Jonah",Spider-Woman (vol. 3) #3 he soon warms up to Mattie, coming to regard her almost as a surrogate daughter.Spider-Woman (vol. 3) #12 and 18Alias #20 Two weeks after Mattie is abducted for illegal harvesting of mutant growth hormone, private investigators Jessica Drew and Jessica Jones track her down and inform Jonah and Marla that Mattie is also the vigilante Spider-Woman. For saving Mattie, Jonah heavily promotes Jones' agency and later hires her as a reporter for the Bugle's new Pulse magazine. The guilt for creating the Scorpion catches up with Jameson when the Hobgoblin blackmails him about it. When he receives the threats, rather than succumb to the Hobgoblin, Jameson chooses instead to reveal it to the world in a public editorial. He steps down as the Bugle's editor-in-chief, delegating the post to his immediate subordinate, Joseph "Robbie" Robertson, but Jameson remains its publisher. Jonah's control of the Daily Bugle is bought out from under him by multimillionaire Thomas Fireheart. Fireheart had felt that he owed Spider-Man a debt of honor and in an attempt to repay the hero, he purchases the Daily Bugle and begins a pro-Spider-Man campaign.Web of Spider-Man #59 Jameson starts up a rival magazine which continues to produce anti-Spider-Man articles. Spider-Man finds Fireheart's campaign embarrassing at best, and after he repeatedly demands that he stop, Fireheart challenges the web-slinger to a battle to the death in New Mexico. He then sells the Bugle back to Jameson for the sum of one dollar, on the condition that he print an obituary "For either me, or Spider-Man."The Spectacular-Spider-Man #171 Jameson, though shocked by the request, takes the deal. Soon after this he is blackmailed into selling the Bugle to Norman Osborn after threats were made against his family; simultaneously, he is attacked and hounded by the supervillain Mad Jack. The time spent as a subordinate to Osborn took a heavy mental toll, almost driving him to attempted murder, but he is finally able to reclaim the Bugle after Osborn is driven underground by temporary insanity. When a duplicate of Spider-Man created by Mysterio jumps in front of Jameson's car while he's driving home from work one day, he crashes into a tree. He is believed killed in the car crash, dying upon impact, and the media blames Spider-Man for his tragic and untimely demise. Later, he is shown ascending to "the light", only for him to be condemned for all the injustices he committed in life. He is then shown descending into Mysterio's staged version of Hell, where he is tormented by a Spider-Man-esque demon, though this is revealed to just be a part of Mysterio's revenge on Jameson, and he is eventually rescued by none other than Spider-Man himself.Webspinners: Tales of Spider-Man (1999) #1-3 (Jan.-March 1999) Jameson's influence on the paper as its publisher was shown in the 2006-2007 Civil War: Front Line where he pressures his staff into supporting the government's Superhuman Registration Act, still directing the general tone of the paper, despite losing his more hands-on position. When Spider-Man unmasked to reveal himself to be Peter Parker, Jameson fainted in shock at the realization that the man he had been calling a menace had actually been on his payroll for years. On top of the Parker revelation, he had to deal with the notion that She-Hulk had now become his daughter-in-law. This was not helped by the fact that She-Hulk and Spider-Man had previously sued him for libel.  It has been since revealed that Jameson had always believed that between him and Peter Parker was a bond of trust and he had always regarded him as another son, the "last honest man" in the world; he had always bought his photos, even the ones that he considered inferior, to help him in a discreet manner. After Peter's public confession, he felt so betrayed and humiliated that it shattered their bond, and he became determined to make Peter "pay", despite Parker (as enforcer) and Jameson both actively supporting the Superhuman Registration Act. He planned to sue his former protege for fraud, demanding back all the money he paid Peter over the years. However, he found out that the government had granted Parker amnesty for all the acts he had done to protect his secret identity, which included taking photos of himself (see She-Hulk #9). Both this and his son's marriage to She-Hulk drove Jameson into a fit of rage, and he attacked his new daughter-in-law with the original Spider-Slayer. Luckily, she easily destroyed it, and to smooth things over, said she would take the case for fraud against Spider-Man (while privately intending to drag it out as long as possible). Spider-Man later defected from the government's side in enforcing the Registration Act and joined up with Captain America's Secret Avengers, openly rebelling against the new law and fighting those attempting to enforce it. Issues of Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man revealed that Jameson posted a reward to bring Peter in. He also committed libel against Parker by coercing Peter's old girlfriend Debra Whitman into writing an untrue account of him; Betty Brant has secretly supplied information about this to The Daily Globe, which then published a front-page exposé. In the most recent development, his editor-in-chief and closest friend Robbie Robertson stood up to Jameson and his shoddy treatment of Peter/Spider-Man over the years. Unable or unwilling to admit that he had gone too far in his hatred of Spider-Man, Jameson fired Robertson. Later, Spider-Man learned of this from Betty Brant and decided that he and Jameson should have a long overdue "chat". Some time later, Jameson showed up at the Robertson house, with a bottle of wine, two black eyes, and a broken hand. Robbie let him in, and Jameson relates what happened: Jameson discovered his office at the Bugle covered with webbing, with a note attached telling him to meet Spider-Man at an old gangster lair. Spider-Man tried to persuade Jameson to rehire Robbie, and Jameson gave him a choice: to have the lawsuit against him dropped, or for Robbie to be rehired. Spider-Man chose the former, revealing that he did so because he believes Jameson only fired Robbie to get a rise out of him. Spider-Man then told Jameson to hit him, as many times as he'd like, to finally work out his frustrations. Jameson was initially reluctant, until Spider-Man started goading him, threatening to inform his wife and son of his "cowardice". Jameson snapped, and started hitting Spider-Man again and again and again, resulting in his broken hand. When it was over, Spider-Man went into the rafters and brought Jameson back a roll of film, containing pictures of their "fight", telling him the photographs depicting him standing back and letting Jameson beat him up would sell "a gazillion copies", and left. Later, at the Bugle, Jameson crushed the film with his foot, not knowing quite why he was doing it. As he turned to leave, Betty Brant accidentally hit him in the face with a door, resulting in his two black eyes. Back in the present, Jameson told Robbie of his decision to rehire him and to drop the lawsuit against Peter. Jameson has his first heart attack, a mild one, in The Amazing Spider-Man #70, while being threatened by Spider-Man when the latter finally loses his temper after many years of abuse and defamation. After the status quo was revised in the "Brand New Day" storyline, Peter's identity is once again a secret. The Daily Bugle has hit hard times with Peter not selling as many Spider-Man pictures as usual and star reporter Ben Urich gone. These circumstances led to Jonah facing a buyout from the wealthy Dexter Bennett. This forced Jonah to stop everyone's checks to build the capital needed to save the paper, with everyone at the Bugle working temporarily for free as a sign of solidarity. Needing money for an apartment, Peter came to the Bugle claiming he was owed money, to which Jonah yelled at him, causing Peter to snap and yell back, stating that his photographs kept the Bugle selling while Jonah raked in the profits and paid Peter a pittance. This caused Jonah to yell at Peter again, but he stopped short owing to a second heart attack. Peter spent an unknown period of time giving Jonah CPR to try and save him until the paramedics arrived; upon arriving they rushed Jonah to the hospital where he was depicted resting before surgery. His wife began talking to a lawyer about power of attorney and selling the final shares of the Bugle without Jonah having a say. When Peter, as Spider-Man, paid a visit, he accidentally let slip that the Daily Bugle has sold to Dexter Bennett, which caused Jonah to have another heart attack, forcing Spider-Man to once again give him CPR. Surprisingly, Jonah did not blame Spider-Man for once, but instead he just kept on muttering, "Dexter Bennett". Jonah's condition later improved, to the point where he takes physiotherapy sessions and t'ai chi classes. However, he loses his temper if he sees or hears about Dexter Bennett and the D.B. He is also apparently facing problems with his wife, as he has yet to forgive her for selling the Bugle. In a 2009 storyline, Jameson is elected the mayor of New York City.Slott, Dan (w), Delperdang, Jesse; Eaglesham, Dale; Kitson, Barry (a), "'Nuff Said!", Amazing Spider-Man #591. June 2009. Marvel Comics. In his new office, Jonah receives a visit from his estranged father J. Jonah Jameson Sr. demanding that Jonah cease his vendetta with Spider-Man, citing Spider-Man's many heroic deeds and the fact that the Avengers and even Captain America had accepted him. Spider-Man then enters the mayor's office hoping to establish a truce with him only for Jonah to announce that he has assembled an "Anti-Spider Squad" to capture Spider-Man. Spider-Man responds by taking his superhero work into overdrive, committing heroic deeds all over the city simply to enrage Jameson. Jameson responds by putting his squad on double-shifts, severely straining the city council's budget.Amazing Spider-Man #592 In the "Dark Reign" storyline, with Norman's rise to power, Dark Avengers member Spider-Man (really Mac Gargan) seeks to get revenge on Jameson. When Jameson arrived at his home, he was shocked to find a dead stripper on his bed.Dark Reign: Sinister Spider-Man #1 When Gargan starts a gang war, Jameson goes to Osborn to help and is given "Spider-Man". He later discovers Spider-Man has caused the gang war and tries to confront Norman, though Spider-Man's name is cleared when he appears to save the Big Apple Festival from Bullseye, Daken, and the gangs involved. Jameson's popularity jumps from having worked with Spider-Man to solve the problem, though he does not realize during the course of the events that he is dealing with a different Spider-Man.Dark Reign: Sinister Spider-Man #2-4 He also eventually learns that his father is marrying May Parker, something he personally doesn't like, but in the end he begrudgingly accepts, even offering to pay for their ceremony out of his own pocket, and preside over it. The marriage also technically makes him Peter Parker's brother/cousin, something he very clearly dislikes.Amazing Spider-Man #600 Later, Spider-Man tries to stop the Chameleon from setting off a bomb that would kill thousands. Jameson has his squad attack in Mandroid suits. Spider-Man uses his knowledge of the Mandroid suits to disarm the bomb. The squad, instead of following orders and arresting Spider-Man, lets him go. The next day, Jameson is shocked to learn that every member of the squad resigned, and his aide tells him Jonah is getting out of control given Spider-Man's heroics. When Jameson yells about how the public has to see Spider-Man as a menace, the aide snaps that this was not the Daily Bugle. He tenders his own resignation, telling Jameson that he has to choose between Spider-Man or actually helping the city.Amazing Spider-Man #604 Jameson later gives a financial bailout to Dexter Bennett to keep The DB! afloat. This led to a public backlash, which the villain, Electro, takes advantage of. Electro espouses taking down the DB!, a greedy corporation asking for money, and draws energy from his city-wide supporters turning on all their electrical appliances. In a showdown with Spider-Man inside the building, Dexter Bennett is crushed by rubble and the DB! building is completely destroyed. The destruction of the Bugle's longtime headquarters proves heartbreaking for Jameson, who is upset with his life's work and all of his memories being destroyed.Amazing Spider-Man #614 During Spider-Man's encounter with the latest Vulture in Amazing Spider-Man #623-624, it was falsely stated by a mob boss that Jameson was responsible for his creation in order to get that Vulture to attack Jameson. Spider-Man ends up fighting the Vulture to protect him.Amazing Spider-Man #623 Security guard Gabriel Graham, whom Jameson didn't even know the name of before, gives up his life to protect Jameson from the Vulture, something that greatly affects Jameson, and makes Peter decide to make a doctored photo showing Jameson trying to fight back against the Vulture. While the picture in fact gets back support for Jameson from the public, and eventually makes several people admit the truth of the situation, Jameson exposes the picture as a fake, and publicly fires Peter Parker, which leads to Peter, now seen as practically a con artist, being blacklisted by every news source.Amazing Spider-Man #624 During the "Heroic Age" storyline, J. Jonah Jameson witnesses the reformation of the Avengers.Age of Heroes #1 and is later targeted by an assassin called the Extremist.Web of Spider-Man (vol. 2) #8 After Spider-Man saves the whole of New York from a bomb planted by Doctor Octopus, Jameson is talked by his son and Steve Rogers into holding a ceremony to give him the key to the city, much to his chagrin.Amazing Spider-Man #648 At the same time, he cashes the shares he owned of the DB!, giving the money to Robbie Robertson, so that he can rebuild Front Line into the new Daily Bugle.Amazing Spider-Man #649 During the events of the "Big Time" storyline Alistair Smythe tried to kill J. Jonah Jameson. Marla Jameson jumped in front of him saving his life but died in the process. As he held Marla, Jameson did not blame Spider-Man, but instead blamed himself."The Amazing Spider-Man #654 During the attacks of the villain Massacre, J. Jonah Jameson comforts a boy named Liam who lost his mother when Massacre attacked the bank she was visiting. J. Jonah Jameson plans to have Alistair Smythe receive the death penalty for what happened to Marla. After Spider-Man defeated Massacre and kept the NYPD from killing him and instead handed him over to the police, Jameson berates Spider-Man for saving the life of a murderer; however, Spider-Man replies that "no one dies".The Amazing Spider-Man #656 During the "Spider-Island" storyline, J. Jonah Jameson's popularity as the mayor has plummeted and his Anti-Spider-Man Squad is considered to be a huge tax drain. He is shown to have been infected with spider powers Amazing Spider-Man #669 and soon mutates into a spider-like creature where he nearly kills Allistair Smythe, partly due to fact that he was responsible for the death of Jameson's wife.Amazing Spider-Man #670 The mayor is eventually cured of the spider-virus, along with the rest of the citizens of New York.Amazing Spider-Man #672 At present, Mayor Jameson shuts down Horizon Labs, (albeit without a court order), on the accusation that it conducts dangerous experiments and harbors criminals such as Morbius.The Amazing Spider-Man #682 He places the city under martial law with his Anti-Spider-Man Squad patrolling the streets to prevent any looting during the "Ends of the Earth" storyline.The Amazing Spider-Man #685 However, when Horizon Labs returns as heroes, Jameson is forced to re-open their New York facilities to save face, though he still demands the expulsion of Morbius.The Amazing Spider-Man #688 After Superior Spider-Man (Doctor Octopus' mind in Spider-Man's body) stops the Sinister Six, Mayor J. Jonah Jameson comes to thank him personally, while Peter Parker's consciousness is shocked to see Jameson's drastically changed attitude towards the hero.The Superior Spider-Man #2 On the top of the police station building Jameson, Chief Pratchett and Carlie Cooper stand near to the improvised "Spider-Signal". Jameson boasts about his wise ruling policy while Carlie doubts Superior Spider-Man will ever show up. But he finally does and short-circuits the signal. Jameson discharges oaths about wasted taxpayer dollars, and Superior Spider-Man explains they can hinder him using the signal, humiliating Jameson between the lines.The Superior Spider-Man #3 When Massacre rigs the doors of Grand Central Station to explode, this even worries Jameson.The Superior Spider-Man #5 While speaking in a press conference, Jameson is suddenly attacked by criminal pranksters Jester and Screwball who assault their victims and broadcast it through the internet in a web-show called "Jested" (similar to popular TV show Punk'd). Both pranksters humiliate Jameson and transmit it all over the world, where even Superior Spider-Man laughs it off. Then he gets summoned by Jameson himself to the City Hall where he asks him to arrest Jester and Screwball. Superior Spider-Man dismisses it at first, but after Jameson reminded him of all the times Superior Spider-Man has pulled pranks on him (and even Otto remembers Peter's quips against him), he agrees to catch them putting his Patrol App on course. Superior Spider-Man beats up Jester and Screwball where his brutality being watched all over the city including Jameson (who is enjoying the punishment).The Superior Spider-Man #6 Jameson argues with his father about the actions of Superior Spider-Man.The Superior Spider-Man #10 Jameson later enlists Superior Spider-Man to help oversee the execution of Alistair Smythe. Jameson arrives to the Raft for a final inspection before Smythe's execution, where he has told that all of the Raft's inmates will be transferred once Jameson shuts it down, highlighting the infirmary where Boomerang, Vulture and Scorpion are being attended. Jameson, alongside Superior Spider-Man, his assistant Glory Grant and Bugle reporter Norah Jones, watch the procedure of Smythe's execution, while he claims to be a "better person"The Superior Spider-Man #11 Jameson reflecting on the moment whose Smythe killed his wife Marla right in front on him, sadly proclaiming that he will not keep the promise to fulfill her dying wish until Smythe dies, swearing that he will not leave the island. After Smythe's escape, Jameson, Glory Grant, Norah Winters, and the remaining civilians are surrounded by Superior Spider-Man's Spider-Bots and then are informed by Otto (in a pre-recorded holgoram) that he has taken measures to counteract any attempt of escape so his Spider-Bots will safeguard them in a force field while the reinforcements arrive, but Jonah refuses to stand still inside the force field, willing to go and help Superior Spider-Man against Smythe. When Smythe has the upper hand over Superior Spider-Man, Jameson poses as a prison guard to narrowly shoot Smythe. Superior Spider-Man accuses Jameson of leaving the force field, but Jameson confronts Superior Spider-Man to tell him he brought him to ensure that Smythe gets executed by any means necessary, implying that he has giving permission to Superior Spider-Man to directly kill him. Superior Spider-Man accepts and tells Jameson to go back to the force field with the others. Smythe sends Scorpion to target Jameson.The Superior Spider-Man #12 Jameson is assaulted by Scorpion who was more than willing to kill him only to be stopped by the Lizard. Once aboard the rescue boat, Jameson prepares himself for a press conference musing that he will be happy once the Raft is destroyed. Superior Spider-Man sways him apart and tells him that he should give him the Raft for his new base of operations. Jameson refuses only to be blackmailed by Superior Spider-Man with a recording of their meeting at the Raft where Jameson grants permission to Superior Spider-Man to kill Smythe. Fearing the repercussions (and in the process reigniting his hatred towards Superior Spider-Man), Jameson agrees and makes the announcement in his press conference where he publicly gives Superior Spider-Man the Raft as his new Super Hero Headquarters which Superior Spider-Man rechristens it as "Spider-Island II".The Superior Spider-Man #13 During the attacks of the Goblin King's Goblin Underground, Mayor Jameson unveils the Goblin-Slayers (which Mary Jane thinks might be former Spider-Slayers) which he plans to use to combat the Goblin threat.The Superior Spider-Man #28 Jameson orders to send one of the Goblin Slayers to the robbery location and then head to chase Superior Spider-Man. His Spider-Slayers confront Superior Spider-Man as Spider-Slayers with Jameson's face projected on the front faceplate. Jameson replies that he is done with being blackmailed by him and does not care if Jameson loses everything as long as he can finally bring down Superior Spider-Man, but his Spider-Slayers are reactivated by Green Goblin and voice rings out declaring that he has taken control of the Spider-Slayers as Green Goblin comments that Norman Osborn now runs this city.The Superior Spider-Man #29 In New York City Hall, Jameson is coming under heavy fire for the fact that his Spider-Slayers have turned against the people. He tries to blame Alchemax, but his accusations are swiftly rebuked by Liz Allan who appears via video link declares that Alchemax is severing all ties with Jameson.The Superior Spider-Man #30 Jameson shows his frustration for his personal downfall after the Spider Slayers' failure, but Tiberius Stone uses this as a chance to sell them as weapons to other nations. In the aftermath, Spider-Man is restored to his body Octavius sacrificing his own mind to bring Peter back as he recognizes that Peter Parker is the true Spider-Man and Green Goblin's plan is thwarted, Spider-Man visiting Jameson's office to confront him after what happened and returns him the Spider-Bot that Doctor Octopus used to record his blackmail material. Jameson replies that he will not accept it since he would not believe whatever Spider-Man says, regarding him now as a "monster" that does not own up to the consequences of his actions and instead stomps on others. Spider-Man replies that he will not expect him to believe this but says that he should not fear him, and should not take the blame for everything that Green Goblin caused, but to stay and fight. Once Spider-Man leaves, Jameson reveals that he had already resigned his post as Mayor of New York City and leaves the office, promising that from now on he will kick back.The Superior Spider-Man #31 During the Original Sin storyline, the eye of the murdered Uatu the Watcher revealed that J. Jonah Jameson had fired a former Daily Bugle employee for viewing an embarrassing article that he wrote in which he praised Spider-Man in his early days of being a wrestler.Original Sins #3 Jameson later established the Fact Channel. As Silk battles against Electro and Spider-Man deals with Black Cat, Jameson remains on the channel forcing the cameraman to film the action. Black Cat deviate one of Electro's bolts hitting Spider-Man, knocking him down in the process. Black Cat attempts to unmask Spider-Man as Jameson (who hears the truth concerning Doctor Octopus) aims the camera.The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 3 #5 However, Jameson's angle prevents anyone seeing Spider-Man's face long enough for Silk to knock Black Cat back and Spider-Man to put his mask back on.The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 3 #6 He would later be seen taking charge of the Fact Channel's operations acting like he was head of the company and taking interest in Silk.Silk #1 Here are the known family members of J. Jonah Jameson: In 1602: New World, the sequel to Marvel 1602, Jameson is an Irish colonist and friend of Ananias Dare. He prints the Roanoke Colony's newspaper, The Daily Trumpet, with the assistance of Peter Parquagh, whom he orders to learn more about the mysterious "Spider", believing him to be a threat to the colony. In the alternate reality of Earth X, everyone on Earth has been affected by the Terrigen Mists, granting everyone superpowers. Jameson is turned into a humanoid donkey (a human body with an equine head). It is also revealed that after he published information exposing Peter Parker as Spider-Man, his reputation was ruined, as no one trusted a man who had spent years paying the very hero he called a menace, and the Daily Bugle has gone bankrupt. He has captured Jack Russell (Werewolf by Night) in the old Bugle offices and brings him food, presumably having mistaken Russell for his son John, the Man-Wolf. In the original Marvel universe of G.I. Joe, Jameson is seen hassling a news vendor for the seeming lack of any Daily Bugle papers.G.I.Joe A Real American Hero #95 (December 1989). Marvel Comics. In the "House of M" reality created by the insane Scarlet Witch and in which mutants are dominant over baseline humans, Jameson is the maltreated publicist of Peter Parker, here a celebrity without a secret identity. Despising Peter and only keeping his job for the pay, Jameson gets his chance to completely ruin his boss when the Green Goblin gives him Peter's old journal. Learning that Peter is a mutate instead of a mutant, Jameson reveals this to the populace of the world, who come to hate Peter for having only pretended to be a mutant. He is left grieving and guilt-ridden when Spider-Man appears to have killed himself.Spider-Man: House of M #1-3 In the MC2 continuity, an alternate future of the mainstream Marvel Universe, Jonah is still the publisher of The Daily Bugle. His wife, Marla is still alive.The Buzz #1 He hires May Parker, the daughter of Peter, as a photographer. Ironically, he is very supportive of Spider-Girl, in contrast to his stance on her father (in the MC2 continuity, Spider-Man's identity was never made public).Spider-Girl #17 and 22 He also supported "Project Human Fly", another attempt to create a superhero, this time in response to the death of Joseph "Robbie" Robertson at the hands of Doctor Octopus. When "Buzz" Bannon, the intended subject of Project Human Fly, is murdered and the suit stolen, he immediately condemns The Buzz, the identity assumed by the person who stole the suit. However, he is unaware that his own grandson, Jack "J.J." Jameson and The Buzz are one and the same person.The Buzz #1-3 In the Marvel Knights four-issue series Spider-Man: Reign, set 35 years in the future, an elderly Jameson is seen returning to a totalitarian New York, with the mission of convincing a middle age Peter Parker to return as Spider-Man to save the city from being enclosed by Mayor Waters' WEBB security system. After attacking Reign officers, he is saved by the newly returned Spider-Man. Jonah next rounds up groups of children to join his cause to save the city, as they print about Spider-Man's return. Eventually Jonah is captured by the Reign and brought to the mayor's office, where he confirms his suspicions, finding out that Venom is behind the WEBB project as a means of trapping the citizens of New York, so that they can be fed on by itself and other symbiotes. After Spider-Man defeats Venom, and destroys the WEBB, Jonah is seen on television proclaiming that freedom has returned to the city. In the alternate universe of Marvel Zombies, Jameson is eaten by the zombified Spider-Man in his own office, when Zombie Spider-Man confronts him. In Marvel Zombies, it proves that he was right about Spider-Man being a menace. This after Spider-Man remarks he was "going to enjoy this part." Marvel Zombies: Dead Days In Spider-Man Noir, Jameson remains the owner of the Daily Bugle. However, he's seemingly under the thumb of Norman Osborn, the "Goblin" and kills Ben Urich to prevent him from publishing evidence against Goblin. It is soon revealed that this was in fact the Chameleon, who abducted Jameson for the Goblin. Jonah was saved by Spider-Man from being eaten by Kraven's Siberian tiger.Spider-Man: Noir #3 Issue #1 of Spider-Man: Fairy Tales follows the fairy tale of Little Red Riding Hood. Mary Jane takes the part of Little Red Riding Hood, and Peter is one of the woodsmen. Jameson is the leader of the woodsmen, who also include Osborn and Flash Thompson. In Spider-Verse, Jameson giving Peter Parker a call demanding him to go to Armstrong Park to take a picture of a new villain that appears. This reality have humans living on the moon.The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 3 #9 (2014) Another reality, Jameson's wife, Marla was saved from Alistair Smythe by Spider-Man version of Ben Reilly. The article and newspaper has positive story about Spider-Man of Ben was a true hero.Scarlet Spiders #3 On Earth-65, J. Jonah Jameson held a press conference against Spider-Woman after she presumably killed Peter Parker.Edge of Spider-Verse #2 In Ultimate Spider-Man and Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man, Jameson is essentially the same character as the original version, although younger in appearance.  Jameson decries Spider-Man and other vigilantes, accusing them of being fraudulent hero figures in contrast to his astronaut son, who was killed during a mission. While Jameson does not necessarily hate Spider-Man, he has no qualms about painting him in a negative light to sell papers. And despite his adverse attitude towards Spider-Man, this version of Jonah still ends up unwittingly hiring Peter Parker to work at the Daily Bugle as its webmaster. During the "Ultimatum" storyline, Jameson drops his vendetta against Spider-Man after losing his wife in a massive flood that engulfs Manhattan and later witnessing Spider-Man rescuing other flood victims. Feeling ashamed and regretful of his smear campaign, Jameson vows to dedicate his life towards portraying Spider-Man as the hero he really is, and begins by publishing several pro-Spider-Man stories Ben Urich held onto. Subsequently, Jameson deduces Spider-Man's true identity, but following the trauma of being kidnapped, along with Spider-Man, by the Chameleons, and being shot in the head, Jameson comes to believe that it is his God-given duty to protect and aid Spider-Man.Bendis, Brian Michael. Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man #15. Marvel Comics. After the death of Peter Parker, and the assumption of his mantle by the second Spider-Man, Miles Morales, Jameson, when told by investigative reporter Betty Brant that she has discovered his secret identity (though she incorrectly concludes that Morales' father, Jefferson Davis, is Spider-Man), Jameson refuses to publish her theory, explaining that doing so would not illuminate any truth for the benefit of readers, but would only ruin a family's life and deprive the city of another hero.Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Marquez, David (a). Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man #16.1. December 2012. Marvel Comics. J. Jonah Jameson appeared in various issues of What If?, which imagines changes to Marvel continuity during crucial points in history. In issue #82 of the second volume ponders history had Jameson adopted Parker. While this version of Jonah is actually more supportive of Peter, he still harbors his hatred of Spider-Man, until he has a change of heart."What If J. Jonah Jameson Adopted Spider-Man?" What If? (vol 2) #82. Marvel Comics. In another issue that imagines history had Parker's uncle, Ben Parker, not died as a result of Parker's initial lack of responsibility, Spider-Man becomes a successful and entertainer, and uses his wealth and influence to shut down Jameson's paper and ruin his life. Jameson in turn becomes a criminal who organizes the Sinister Six to get revenge on Spider-Man. J. Jonah Jameson has been a regular character in almost all adaptations of Spider-Man:  In the Spider-Man films directed by Sam Raimi, J. Jonah Jameson is portrayed by J.K. Simmons, and serves as a major source of comic relief. Portrayed as a blustering, bombastic man, the film version of Jameson retains his dislike for Spider-Man, and takes delight in anything that might discredit or defame him. This portrayal has been extremely well received by fans of the original comics. Stan Lee has said that, assuming the film was made earlier than 2002, he would have liked to have portrayed Jameson in a live-action Spider-Man film, but he has warmly praised Simmons' rendition. In the films, he has a pencil moustache, unlike in the comics, where he has a toothbrush moustache. In the first film Spider-Man, Jameson describes him as a menace and a vigilante, and points out, "Then why does he wear a mask? Huh? What's he got to hide?" Indeed, the only reason he develops an interest in publishing news on the hero is because it sells papers, and upon hearing that no one has been able to get a clear shot of him, he declares, "He doesn't want to be famous? Then I'll make him infamous!" He also retains much of his cynical, avuncular attitude and brusque manner with his staff, though he willingly protects Peter Parker when the Green Goblin demands to know the identity of Spider-Man's photographer. When Peter accuses him of slandering Spider-Man, Jameson says, "I resent that! Slander is spoken. In print, it's libel." He holds the dubious honor of providing the nicknames (wanting his staff to immediately trademark the name) for the central villains in both of the first two films: the Green Goblin and Doctor Octopus. In each film his office is rearranged and relocated; only the first movie offers an explicit reason for this, as in that film it is partially destroyed by the Green Goblin. A greedy man who demands much of his employees, Jameson is reminiscent of a fast-talking 1940s film character in many ways. Throughout the second film Spider-Man 2, Jameson is shown to know that Spider-Man is a hero, but is too proud to admit it. He even goes so far as to admit it when crime and danger skyrocket and his son's fiancée, Mary Jane Watson, is kidnapped after Spider-Man temporarily disappears; true to form, he recants almost immediately and becomes infuriated with the web-slinger once again when Spider-Man steals back his costume from the Bugle to confront the rampaging Doctor Octopus. The DVD-only Spider-Man 2.1 extended cut of the film contains a short scene in which Jameson dons the Spider-Man suit and romps around on his desk, while Robbie Robertson, Betty Brant, and Hoffman watch in a mix of surprise and confusion. The filmmakers cut the scene from the theatrical release because Simmons didn't fit their original image of a paunchy middle-aged man; instead, he fills out the costume fairly well. Mrs. Jameson is alive and well in the films, being mentioned in the first and third films and seen in the second. References to her are usually relayed as a foil to Jameson's miserly ways; when informed by his secretary his wife had lost his checkbook, he replies "Thanks for the good news." At the wedding of his son John Jameson and Mary Jane Watson in the second film, once it becomes clear that the bride had left the groom at the altar, the first thing Jameson does is tell his wife to call the wedding caterer and "tell her not to open the caviar" after having evidently lost an earlier argument where he did not wish to buy caviar at all. In Spider-Man 3, Jameson sets Eddie Brock and Peter Parker up as rivals to earn a staff job, instructing them to obtain unflattering pictures of Spider-Man. He is shown to supposedly have many medical conditions, being warned by Miss Brant (who was informed by Jameson's wife) whenever he is too tense or when he needs to take his pills. Specifically, it is revealed that he has high blood pressure, and Miss Brant must always remind him to watch his temper. Later, Jameson fires Brock for doctoring and selling fake photos of Spider-Man robbing a bank, in spite of his dislike of the hero, as Brock's photo destroyed his paper's reputation, which has not printed a retraction in 20 years. He is surprised by Parker's new confident and aggressive demeanor, provoked by the black suit, especially when he finds him and Miss Brant flirting on his desk, exclaiming "Miss Brant, that's not the position I hired you for". At the climactic battle between Spider-Man, New Goblin, Sandman and Venom, Jameson, unable to locate Parker, bargains with a little girl in the crowd to obtain her camera to shoot the battle himself. She refuses to sell for less than a hundred dollars. After the stingy Jameson reluctantly pays, he discovers that there is no film in the camera, to which she explains, "The film's extra," much to his fury. J. Jonah Jameson was referenced in The Amazing Spider-Man 2, being mentioned on several occasions. It is established that Peter Parker is working for him by providing him with photographs of Spider-Man, and that Jameson is still slandering him. At one point, Peter emails Jameson to ask him to take it easy on Spider-Man, but Jameson immediately responds with a refusal. J. Jonah Jameson has appeared in many of the Spider-Man video games, usually as a supporting character: In The Simpsons episode "Moe'N'a Lisa", which aired on November 19, 2006, J.K. Simmons guest stars, playing a publisher resembling J. Jonah Jameson in the Spider-Man films. This resemblance is made more apparent when he demands pictures, stories, and even poems about Spider-Man. He even repeats a line from Spider-Man 3: "What are you waiting for? Chinese New Year?" This is due in part to guest star Michael Chabon's script work on Spider-Man 2.TV.com - Moe'N'a Lisa A similar character, also voiced by Simmons, appears later in the same season as the publisher of The Springfield Inquisitor in the episode "Homerazzi". In the Spider-Man 2 parody on VH1's ILL-Ustrated, j. Jonah Jameson is portrayed as a Dr. Dre look-alike. A parody of J. Jonah Jameson mostly based on J.K. Simmons's performance appears in Superhero Movie. This parody is a mental patient from the hospital that the newspaper company shares with, yelling that hamburgers can tell the future. Rob Zicari portrays the character in the 2011 pornographic spoof Spider-Man XXX: A Porn Parody and its sequel Superman vs. Spider-Man XXX: An Axel Braun Parody. Reference is made to Jameson in the novelization of the Fantastic Four movie, although the character is not expressly named as Jameson; after they have saved the people on a bridge, Mister Fantastic is shown on numerous television channels talking about the Fantastic Four, and recognizes a man with a small mustache (accompanied by a headline FANTASTIC FOUR: HEROES OR MENACE) as the owner of a major newspaper. Jameson is also featured in the 1978 novel Mayhem in Manhattan, written by Len Wein and Marv Wolfman. Michael Mulheren plays J. Jonah Jameson in the Broadway musical Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark.Flynn, Kevin (August 10, 2011). "All the Editors That Are Fit to Spoof". The New York Times.    David Burnoll - The stepfather of J. Jonah Jameson.Amazing Spider-Man #2 J. Jonah Jameson, Sr. - The estranged father of J. Jonah Jameson. He later becomes married to Aunt May.Amazing Spider-Man #578 Joan Jameson - The first wife of J. Jonah Jameson.Spider-Man's Tangled Web #20 John Jameson - The son of J. Jonah Jameson who works as an astronaut.Amazing Spider-Man #1 Marla Madison - The second wife of J. Jonah Jameson. She was later killed by Alistair Smythe.Amazing Spider-Man #165 Peter Parker - Step-cousin of J. Jonah Jameson. May Parker - Step-mother of J. Jonah Jameson. The 1960s animated series contained the most negative depiction of the character, voiced by Paul Kligman. He is an egotistical, greedy, cowardly loudmouth who automatically accuses Spider-Man of any crime, even when the evidence clearly contradicts him. He is implied to have some psychic ability in one episode where Green Goblin tries using him as a medium for a demon-summoning. He is constantly against Spider-Man, for example in the episode "Farewell Performance" where he wants an old Castle Theater to be torn down, but when Spider-Man claims he agrees with old buildings being torn down, Jameson says the Daily Bugle will now try to preserve old buildings, which is what Spider-Man wanted. He makes a feature for magic in his paper when he is sent free tickets by Blackwell the Magician, showing his meanness. In the episode "Sting of the Scorpion", he makes out that he saved the employees, despite cowering most of the time. In the second season episode "King Pinned" (which followed up the episode "The Origin of Spider-Man"), Jameson's attitude toward Spider-Man warms a bit even going as far as helping Spider-Man defeat Kingpin and expose a drug counterfeiting racket during their first meeting. Not openly hostile, Jameson seems to be more surprised that Spider-Man actually exists. Earlier in the episode, Jameson gives Peter a job at the Bugle when he remembers that Peter is the nephew of the late Uncle Ben. In the third season, he goes back to blaming Spider-Man for crimes. The character's first live-action appearances were in 1970s The Amazing Spider-Man TV series, performed by David White in the television film and Robert F. Simon in the subsequent television series. In both these incarnations, J. Jonah Jameson's abrasive, flamboyant personality was toned down and the character was portrayed as a more avuncular figure. J. Jonah Jameson appeared in the 1981 Spider-Man series, voiced by William Woodson. William Woodson reprised his role of J. Jonah Jameson in the Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends episodes "The Origin of Iceman", "Spider-Man: Unmasked" and "The Origin of the Spider-Friends". J. Jonah Jameson appears in the 1990s Spider-Man animated series voiced by Edward Asner (the casting may have been inspired by his well-known role as another fictional news editor). In this series, the character's dislike of Spider-Man is based less on his powers and deeds and more to his hiding his identity behind a mask as his wife was killed by a masked gunman in this continuity. The series also portrays his integrity as a journalist, refusing to cover up the truth even when it is in his best interests and portrays his loyalty to those who work for him. Examples of the earlier include firing Eddie Brock when John Jameson confirms Spider-Man's version of who stole a mineral John and a fellow astronaut brought from an asteroid and publishing an article on chemical weapons being developed by Oscorp despite being one of its shareholders and board members on this series. He secretly hired attorney Matt Murdock when Peter Parker was framed by Richard Fisk and personally uncovered evidence exonerating Robbie when he was framed by Tombstone. The character's cigar-smoking trademark characteristic is not depicted in the more recent animated TV incarnations due to the levels of censorship required on the cartoons. In "Farewell Spider-Man," the J. Jonah Jameson of the high-tech Spider-Man's reality doesn't hate Spider-Man and is depicted as Peter Parker's godfather. J. Jonah Jameson appears in MTV's Spider-Man series voiced by Keith Carradine. Here, he is portrayed as extremely cheap and his hatred of Spider-Man only being evident in the show's series finale. J. Jonah Jameson appears in The Spectacular Spider-Man, voiced by Daran Norris.Comics Continuum by Rob Allstetter: Wednesday, January 30, 2008 This version sports a soul patch along with his trademark mustache (that together form an exclamation point) and displays a level of hyperactivity not seen in any of his previous incarnations, as well as an obsession with time, punctuality and deadlines similar to J. K. Simmons's popular film portrayal of the character. Aside from that, he retains his dislike for Spider-Man from the comics, and takes delight in anything that might discredit or defame him and describes spider-man as a menace and a vigilante. He also retains much of his cynical, avuncular attitude and brusque manner with his staff and he shares a resemblance to his mainstream comics counterpart from the 1970s comics. He tends to be boisterous and difficult to get along with, though his secretary Betty Brant seems unfazed by his bloviating. Although he considers Spider-Man a menace (if at least a photo-worthy one), he seems to be fond of Peter Parker as he suggests tomato juice to the boy to kill the stench of garbage on him after a photo shoot in a junkyard and protects him from Rhino by bravely covering for him while he can escape. When he learns that Aunt May had a heart attack during the Sinister Six's attack on Broadway, he says he will tell Peter the news. He blames Spider-Man for the sudden profusion of costumed psychopaths like Doctor Octopus, Green Goblin and Rhino in New York City (though this assumption is actually proven correct in the episode "The Invisible Hand" when Tombstone reveals that at least some of the super-villains were specifically created to occupy Spider-Man so that more ordinary criminals can continue their activities unhindered). At one point, he calls for the headline 'Spider-Man: Threat or Menace?'. In the second season, his hatred of Spider-Man gets worse. After his son John is affected by spores that hitched a ride in the symbiote making him grow and having super strength and leaping tall bounds, Jonah convinces his son to be a superhero and take Spider-Man down. The spores then take over John's mind making him violent and aggressive. After Spider-Man gets rid of the spores with electricity, Jonah then witnesses his son craving the spores powers and he blames Spider-Man for destroying his son. When Venom (Eddie Brock) reveals Parker's identity to Spider-Man, Jonah hardly believes it although he still wants to make sure. At Valentines Day, his wife Joan Jameson makes him go to an opera even though he doesn't want to. After making an excuse to his wife to leave the stage, he witnesses the battle of the crime lords Tombstone, Doctor Octopus and Silvermane just as Jameson ironically made an excuse to leave the opera. After Spider-Man stops them and reveals Tombstone as the Big Man, Jameson accuses Spider-Man of assaulting an outstanding citizen, but Frederick Foswell dismisses this to him by whispering in his ear. Jameson angrily responds by saying "Never mind." After Norman Osborn tests the Vault security by putting Spider-Man in there, Jameson gloats about it. After Spider-Man manages to escape the Vault, Jameson claims Spider-Man and all the villains are working together so they can raise his blood pressure. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Ultimate Spider-Man, voiced by J.K. Simmons reprising his portrayal from the first live-action Spider-Man film series. Much like his Ultimate counterpart, he defaces and mistrusts masked vigilantes much to Spider-Man's dismay.he runs the news network Daily Bugle Communications. In his first two appearances "Great Power" and "Great Responsibility", he stated that there will be a warrant for Spider-Man's arrest. He is seen at the end of "Great Responsibility" reporting the battle that Spider-Man, Power Man, White Tiger, Iron Fist and Nova has against the Frightful Four. In the episode "Exclusive", Mary Jane Watson follows Spider-Man for an exclusive interview in order to sell the footage for a contest held by the Daily Bugle. Although Mary Jane did not win the contest following Hulk's fight with Zzzax, Jameson does mail Mary Jane a new camera. In the episode "Beetle Mania", Jameson is being targeted by the Beetle for a starts making a campaign to expose him to which Spider-Man and his team entering the Daily Bugle to stop Beetle's assassination attempts. After Beetle is defeated by Spider-Man's team and learns Jameson is not in his office but on monitor renderings, Mary Jane unplugs the monitor after she comes for the interviews. In the episode "Out of Damage Control", Jameson sends one of his people out to record Spider-Man's team helping Damage Control clean up the area that was trashed in the fight against the Wrecking Crew which he broadcasts. After Spider-Man's team and Damage Control CEO Mac Porter defeats the Wrecking Crew which was also taped, Jameson appears on the nearby television monitor stated that Spider-Man's victory over the Wrecking Crew still does not prove anything. In the episode "Spidah-Man!", Jameson puts out a $10,000,000.000 bounty on the apprehension and unmasking of Spider-Man. Near the end of the episode, Jameson rescinds the bounty on Spider-Man claiming that the ratings of his broadcast going down "had nothing to do with Spider-Man being in Boston because only Manhattan can tolerate Spider-Man". In the episode "The Man-Wolf", Jameson calls upon S.H.I.E.L.D. director Nick Fury to arrange a rescue party to look for his son John Jameson. After John was rescued, Jameson mentioned in his broadcast that he blames Spider-Man for his son's Man-Wolf transformations. When Jameson asks Nick Fury what he is going to do about it, Fury states to Jameson that his son was rescued because of Spider-Man. Before ending his transmission with Jameson, Nick Fury tells him to "put that info in his moustache and chew on it." In the episode "Sandman Returns", Jameson reports on Spider-Man working with Sandman where Jameson making some negative comments on Sandman causing him to go on a rampage. In the episode "Agent Venom", Jameson comments about people's opinions about Spider-Man changing after he had worked with the Avengers. The "Spider-Verse" episodes featured alternate versions of J. Jonah Jameson that are also voiced by J.K. Simmons. In the episode "Spider-Verse" Part 1, the 2099 version of Jameson does his broadcast through a hologram where he reports on Spider-Man 2099. The gender-swapped reality's version of J. Jonah Jameson is an older lady named J. Joanna Jameson who reports on Spider-Girl. In the episode "Spider-Verse" Part 2, the Noir version of J. Jonah Jameson is shown as a picture with his voice being heard in his radio broadcasts. In Spider-Ham's reality, J. Jonah Jackal appears where his ranting on Spider-Ham caused Spider-Ham to temporary quit the superhero business. In the episode "Spider-Verse" Part 3, a medieval reality's version of J. Jonah Jameson is a town crier (referred to in the closed captioning and credits as "J. Jonas James' Son") who rants about Spyder-Knight while telling the people to pay the Alchemist for protection. The Ultimate Marvel version of J. Jonah Jameson is seen where he still thinks that Spider-Man is a menace with the current Spider-Man being Miles Morales. J. Jonah Jameson appeared in The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, voiced again by J.K. Simmons. In the episode "Along Came a Spider...", Tony Stark visits Jameson trying to tell him that the 'Captain America' that appeared on television was a Skrull in disguise. It made clear that various high-level individuals have told him this including the President, but he "still" disbelieves them and has been calling Captain America a traitor. During the conversation, Stark points out that Jameson has been running campaign against Spider-Man similar to what he has now doing to Captain America for years. Jameson suggests to Tony that he should take Betty Brant and Peter Parker to get proof of Captain America's innocence. Jameson later has the Daily Bugle print out a story about Captain America saving people from Spider-Man and the Serpent Society which lead to Spider-Man to go "web his mouth shut." J. Jonah Jameson appears in Avengers Assemble, again voiced by J.K. Simmons. In the episode "The Avengers Protocol", he reports on the Avengers fight with each other on the grounds of Avengers Mansion when they were taken over by MODOK's microbots. In the episode "Hyperion", Jameson reports on Hyperion's heroic activities. When Hyperion starts fighting the Avengers, Jameson reports on this action stating that Hyperion had the right message, but is the wrong messenger. After the Avengers defeated Hyperion, Jameson later stated that Hyperion was not a superhero. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H., voiced once again by J.K. Simmons. In the episode "Doorway to Destruction" Pt. 1 when Rick Jones talks about Jameson's talks about the Hulk, Rick tries to dub his voice so that Jameson can say nice things about Hulk. In the episode "The Collector", Jameson compares Spider-Man and Hulk as menaces until Hulk breaks the television during the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.'s poker match against Thing. In the episode "All About Ego", Jameson reports on the approach of Ego the Living Planet and that S.H.I.E.L.D. says that there is nothing to worry about. Jameson then reports that the end is near as Ego continues to approach Earth. After Ego the Living Planet was repelled, Jameson states that 'Spider-Man's plot' was stopped. In the episode "Monsters No More", Jameson reports on the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. helping the Fantastic Four to stop the Tribbitites from invading Earth. When Leader's Agents of C.R.A.S.H. attack Vista Verde wearing adamantium-made stealth belts in a plot to discredit the Agents of S.M.A.S.H., Jameson withdraws his praise on them while mentioning how they are "attacking" Vista Verde. In the episode "Fear Itself", Jameson reports on the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.'s disappearance. When he commented about where they are, Jameson states "Who cares?" In the episode "Spidey, I Blew Up the Dinosaur", Jameson reports that Spider-Man and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. have "unleashed" Devil Dinosaur on Manhattan. The "Days of Future Smash" episodes featured alternate timeline versions of J. Jonah Jameson that are also voiced by J.K. Simmons. In the episode "Days of Future Smash: The Dino Era", the dinosaur-dominated timeline featured a dinosaur version of Jameson named J. Jonah Jamesasaurus who reported on Spider-Raptor's activities. In the episode "Days of Future Smash: Dracula", the Vampire-dominated timeline featured a vampire Jameson who reports to all humans to let themselves be converted into vampires. In the episode "Days of Future Smash: The Hydra Years", the Hydra-dominated timeline featured a version of Jameson who reports a messages to Leader (who is the leader of Hydra). J. Jonah Jameson appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes: Maximum Overload, voiced once more by J.K. Simmons. He appears in 2000's Spider-Man video game, voiced by Dee Bradley Baker. Scorpion tries to kill Jameson for his part in creating him. Spider-Man saves Jameson and defeats Scorpion in battle. Jameson later tells two S.W.A.T. cops to shoot down and kill Spider-Man. Spider-Man escapes by jumping out of a window. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Xbox version of the 2002 Spider-Man video game, voiced by Jay Gordon. He tells Peter Parker to get photos at the zoo of a flaming spider, resulting in a confrontation with Kraven the Hunter. Jay Gordon reprises his role of J. Jonah Jameson in Spider-Man 2. He initially supports Quentin Beck's claims that Spider-Man is a fraud, but accuses the two of being in cahoots when it is revealed that Beck is Mysterio. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Spider-Man 3, voiced by J.K. Simmons. He is an employer of Peter Parker as in the films and comics, giving him various photography missions to complete. He is captured by Luke Carlyle and thrown out of a helicopter in midair with an electric necklace on. Spider-Man catches Jameson, and has to keep up with the helicopter to stop Jameson getting electrocuted. After rescuing Jameson and removing the collar, Jameson reluctantly thanks Spider-Man for saving his life, possibly the only time in any media he has done so. Later in the game, Jameson hires both Parker and Eddie Brock to take photographs of Spider-Man in his new black suit, doing criminal activities. While the character never actually appears in the Marvel: Ultimate Alliance games, he is mentioned in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance on a VS simulation disc where the heroes fight Scorpion and in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2 during a special conversation if the player chooses anti-registration for Spider-Man, to which Maria Hill says that "he's just made J. Jonah Jameson a very happy man". J. Jonah Jameson is either mentioned or briefly seen in most of the Capcom 2-D fighting games featuring Spider-Man: In Marvel Super Heroes, Spider-Man's victory pose has him photographing himself standing over his fallen opponent and saying "One for J.J.". In Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter, he appears alongside Robbie Robertson if Spider-Man is one of the fighters in the "Night-Cooking" game show stage. In Marvel vs. Capcom, Spider-Man's victory pose has him posing for a picture with his partner, stating "I know Jameson will use this picture to make me look like a bad guy." There are also various winning quotes where he mentions "J.J.J.". In Marvel vs. Capcom 3: Fate of Two Worlds, Spider-Man has an updated version of the aforementioned victory pose in which he says "That's why J.J. pays me the big bucks!" The Daily Bugle is a playable stage with Jameson appearing in the background in a helicopter where he shouts at the fighters,EventHubs fighting game news, guides, streams, videos - Street Fighter, Marvel vs. Capcom, Tekken, Soul Calibur and also appears in Spider-Man's ending in Arcade mode where he claims to Peter Parker that Spider-Man defeating Galactus is a hoax and that he was actually in cahoots with him the entire time. During the second time in the city in the Sega game The Amazing Spider-Man vs. The Kingpin, J. Jonah Jameson follows the player around bad-mouthing him. J. Jonah Jameson appears in the Spider-Man pinball machine by Stern Pinball. J.K. Simmons also recorded additional lines of custom speech appropriate for a pinball game, such as "Extra ball", "Jackpot" and "Hey, kid, you just won a free game." J. Jonah Jameson appears in the PlayStation 2 and PSP version of Spider-Man: Web of Shadows, voiced by Daran Norris. He has been captured by Spencer Smythe and A.I.M. so that Spencer can clone him and use that clone to discredit J. Jonah Jameson and Spider-Man. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Spider-Man: Edge of Time, voiced by Fred Tatasciore. In the intro cutscene, he criticizes Spider-Man loudly in front of Peter Parker, mockingly stating that the people soon would put out a musical in his honor. When Walker Sloan changes the timeline to start Alchemax in the 1970s, Jameson becomes a controversial late-night TV news anchor. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes, voiced by John DiMaggio.[ ] The Daily Bugle get wrecked during Captain America and Mister Fantastic's fight with Doctor Octopus as J. Jonah Jameson tries calling out for Peter Parker to get his pictures unaware that Peter has changed into Spider-Man to help fight Doctor Octopus. In a bonus mission, J. Jonah Jameson is present in the Daily Bugle at the time when Phil Coulson was overseeing Doctor Octopus' community service of repairing the parts of the Daily Bugle that was damaged in Doctor Octopus' fight with Captain America and Mister Fantastic as J. Jonah Jameson tells them what to do. After the bonus mission is complete, Deadpool narrated that J. Jonah Jameson rewarded Doctor Octopus and Phil Coulson with a free subscription to the Daily Bugle. J. Jonah Jameson appears in The Amazing Spider-Man 2 video game voiced again by Fred Tatasciore. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Disney Infinity 2.0: Marvel Super Heroes, voiced by Kyle Hebert. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Spider-Man Unlimited, voiced again by Kyle Hebert. He appears as a non-playable character.  A mutated version of Jameson from the Spider-Island storyline appears as a playable character. J. Jonah Jameson appears in Marvel Heroes, voiced again by Kyle Hebert. Marvel Directory entry SpiderFan.org: J.Jonah Jameson Samruby.com: Profile on JJJ J Jonah Jameson on the Marvel Universe Character Bio Wiki
