 Japanese has a regular agglutinative subject-object-verb (SOV) morphology, with both productive and fixed elements. In language typology, it has many features divergent from most European languages. Its phrases are exclusively head-final and compound sentences are exclusively left-branching.In contrast, Romance languages such as Spanish are strongly right-branching, and Germanic languages such as English are weakly right-branching There are many such languages, but few in Europe. It is a topic-prominent language. The modern theory of constituent order ("word order"), usually attributed to Joseph Greenberg, identifies several kinds of phrase. Each one has a head and possibly a modifier. The head of a phrase either precedes its modifier (head initial) or follows it (head final). Some of these phrase types, with the head marked in boldface, are: Some languages are inconsistent in constituent order, having a mixture of head initial phrase types and head final phrase types. Looking at the preceding list, English for example is mostly head initial, but nouns follow the adjectives which modify them. Moreover, genitive phrases can be either head initial or head final in English. Japanese, by contrast, is the epitome of a head final language: Head finality in Japanese sentence structure carries over to the building of sentences using other sentences. In sentences that have other sentences as constituents, the subordinated sentences (relative clauses, for example), always precede what they refer to, since they are modifiers and what they modify has the syntactic status of phrasal head.  Translating the phrase the man who was walking down the street into Japanese word order would be street down was walking man. (Note that Japanese has no articles, and the different word order obviates any need for the relative pronoun who.) Head finality prevails also when sentences are coordinated instead of subordinated. In the world's languages, it is common to avoid repetition between coordinated clauses by optionally deleting a constituent common to the two parts, as in Bob bought his mother some flowers and his father a tie, where the second bought is omitted. In Japanese, such "gapping" must precede in the reverse order: Bob mother for some flowers and father for tie bought. The reason for this is that in Japanese, sentences (other than occasional inverted sentences or sentences containing afterthoughts) always end in a verb (or other predicative words like adjectival verbs, adjectival nouns, auxiliary verbs)—the only exceptions being a few particles such as ka, ne, and yo. ka turns a statement into a question, while the other sentence-final particles express the speaker's attitude towards the statement. Japanese has five major lexical word classes: More broadly, there are two classes: uninflectable (nouns, including verbal nouns and adjectival nouns) and inflectable (verbs, with adjectives as defective verbs). To be precise, a verbal noun is simply a noun to which  can be appended, while an adjectival noun is like a noun but uses  instead of  when acting attributively. Adjectives (i-adjectives) inflect identically to the negative form of verbs, which end in . Compare  →  and  → . Some scholars, such as Eleanor Harz Jorden, refer to adjectives instead as adjectivals, since they are grammatically distinct from adjectives: they can predicate a sentence. That is,  is glossed as "hot" when modifying a noun phrase, as in , but as "is hot" when predicating, as in . The two inflected classes, verb and adjective, are closed classes, meaning they do not readily gain new members.Uehara, p. 69 Instead, new and borrowed verbs and adjectives are conjugated periphrastically as verbal noun + suru (e.g. ) and adjectival noun + na. This differs from Indo-European languages, where verbs and adjectives are open classes, though analogous "do" constructions exist, include English "do a favor", "do the twist" or French "faire un footing" (do a "footing", go for a jog), and periphrastic constructions are common for other senses, like "try climbing" (verbal noun) or "try parkour" (noun). Other languages where verbs are closed class include Basque: new Basque verbs are only formed periphrastically. Conversely, pronouns are closed classes in Western languages but open classes in Japanese and some other East Asian languages. In a few cases new verbs are created by appending  to a noun or using it to replace the end of a word. This is most often done with borrowed words, and results in a word written in a mixture of katakana (stem) and hiragana (inflectional ending), which is otherwise very rare. This is typically casual, with the most well-established example being  (circa 1920), from , with other common examples including , from , and  from . In cases where the borrowed word already ends with a , this may be punned to a , as in , from , and , from . New adjectives are extremely rare; one example is , from adjectival noun , and a more casual recent example is , by contraction of .Languages with different open and closed word classes By contrast, in Old Japanese  adjectives (precursors of present i-adjectives ending in , formerly a different word class) were open, as reflected in words like , from the adjective , and , from the noun  (with sound change). Japanese adjectives are unusual in being closed class but quite numerous – about 700 adjectives – while most languages with closed class adjectives have very few.The Typology of Adjectival Predication, Harrie Wetzer, p. 311The Art of Grammar: A Practical Guide, Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, p. 96 Some believe this is due to a grammatical change of inflection from an aspect system to a tense system, with adjectives predating the change. The conjugation of i-adjectives has similarities to the conjugation of verbs, unlike Western languages where inflection of adjectives, where it exists, is more likely to have similarities to the declension of nouns. Verbs and adjectives being closely related is unusual from the perspective of English, but is a common case across languages generally, and one may consider Japanese adjectives as a kind of stative verb. Japanese vocabulary has a large layer of Chinese loanwords, nearly all of which go back more than one thousand years, yet virtually none of them are verbs or "i-adjectives" – they are all nouns, of which some are verbal nouns (suru) and some are adjectival nouns (na). In addition to the basic verbal noun + suru form, verbal nouns with a single-character root often experienced sound changes, such as  →  → , as in , and some cases where the stem underwent sound change, as in , from . Verbal nouns are uncontroversially nouns, having only minor syntactic differences to distinguish them from pure nouns like 'mountain'. There are some minor distinctions within verbal nouns, most notably that some primarily conjugate as  (with a particle), more like nouns, while others primarily conjugate as , and others are common either way. For example,  is much more common than , while  is much more common than .Closed and open classes in Natlangs (Especially Japanese) Nominal adjectives have more syntactic differences versus pure nouns, and traditionally were considered more separate, but they, too, are ultimately a subcategory of nouns. There are a few minor word classes that are related to adjectival nouns, namely the taru adjectives and naru adjectives. Of these, naru adjectives are fossils of earlier forms of na adjectives (the nari adjectives of Old Japanese), and are typically classed separately, while taru adjectives are a parallel class (formerly tari adjectives in Late Old Japanese), but are typically classed with na adjectives. In discourse pragmatics, the term topic refers to what a section of discourse is about. At the beginning of a section of discourse, the topic is usually unknown, in which case it is usually necessary to explicitly mention it. As the discourse carries on, the topic need not be the grammatical subject of each new sentence. Starting with Middle Japanese, the grammar evolved so as to explicitly distinguish topics from nontopics. This is done by two distinct particles (short words which do not change form). Consider the following pair of sentences: 太陽が昇る。 taiyō ga noboru sun NONTOPIC rise 太陽は昇る。 taiyō wa noboru sun TOPIC rise Both sentences translate as "the sun rises". In the first sentence the sun (太陽 taiyō) is not a discourse topic—not yet; in the second sentence it now is a discourse topic. In linguistics (specifically, in discourse pragmatics) a sentence such as the second one (with wa) is termed a presentational sentence because its function in the discourse is to present sun as a topic, to "broach it for discussion". Once a referent has been established as the topic of the current monolog or dialog, then in (formal) modern Japanese its marking will change from ga to wa. To better explain the difference, the translation of the second sentence can be enlarged to "As for the sun, it rises" or "Speaking of the sun, it rises"; these renderings reflect a discourse fragment in which "the sun" is being established as the topic of an extended discussion. The grammatical subject is commonly omitted in Japanese, as in 日本に行きました nihon ni ikimashita Japan LOCATIVE go-POLITE-PERFECT The sentence literally expresses "went to Japan". Subjects are mentioned when a topic is introduced, or in situations where an ambiguity might result from their omission. The preceding example sentence would most likely be uttered in the middle of a discourse, where who it is that "went to Japan" will be clear from what has already been said (or written). Text (文章 bunshō) is composed of sentences (文 bun), which are in turn composed of phrases (文節 bunsetsu), which are its smallest coherent components. Like Chinese and classical Korean, written Japanese does not typically demarcate words with spaces; its agglutinative nature further makes the concept of a word rather different from words in English. The listener identifies word divisions by semantic cues and a knowledge of phrase structure. Phrases have a single meaning-bearing word, followed by a string of suffixes, auxiliary verbs and particles to modify its meaning and designate its grammatical role. In the following example, phrases are indicated by vertical bars: 太陽が｜東の｜空に｜昇る。 taiyō ga | higashi no | sora ni | noboru sun SUBJECT | east POSSESSIVE | sky LOCATIVE | rise The sun rises in the eastern sky. Some scholars romanize Japanese sentences by inserting spaces only at phrase boundaries (i.e., "taiyō-ga higashi-no sora-ni noboru"), treating an entire phrase as a single word. This represents an almost purely phonological conception of where one word ends and the next begins. There is some validity in taking this approach: phonologically, the postpositional particles merge with the structural word that precedes them, and within a phonological phrase, the pitch can have at most one fall. Usually, however, grammarians adopt a more conventional concept of word (単語 tango), one which invokes meaning and sentence structure. In linguistics generally, words and affixes are often classified into two major word categories: lexical words, those that refer to the world outside of a discourse, and function words—also including fragments of words—which help to build the sentence in accordance with the grammar rules of the language. Lexical words include nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and sometimes prepositions and postpositions, while grammatical words or word parts include everything else. The native tradition in Japanese grammar scholarship seems to concur in this view of classification. This native Japanese tradition uses the terminology jiritsugo (自立語), "independent words", for words having lexical meaning, and fuzokugo (付属語), "ancillary words", for words having a grammatical function. Classical Japanese had some auxiliary verbs (i.e., they were independent words) which have become grammaticized in modern Japanese as inflectional suffixes, such as the past tense suffix -ta (which might have developed as a contraction of -te ari). Traditional scholarship proposes a system of word classes differing somewhat from the above-mentioned. The "independent" words have the following categories. katsuyōgo (活用語), word classes which have inflections :dōshi (動詞), verbs, :keiyōshi (形容詞), i-type adjectives. :keiyōdōshi (形容動詞), na-type adjectives hikatsuyōgo (非活用語) or mukatsuyōgo (無活用語), word classes which do not have inflections :meishi (名詞), nouns :daimeishi (代名詞), pronouns :fukushi (副詞), adverbs :setsuzokushi (接続詞), conjunctions :kandōshi (感動詞), interjections :rentaishi (連体詞), prenominals Ancillary words also divide into a nonconjugable class, containing  grammatical particles (助詞 joshi) and counter words (助数詞 josūshi), and a conjugable class consisting of auxiliary verbs (助動詞 jodōshi). There is not wide agreement among linguists as to the English translations of the above terms. Uehara (1998)Uehara, chapter 2, especially §2.2.2.2 observes that Japanese grammarians have disagreed as to the criteria that make some words "inflectional", katsuyō, and others not, in particular, the 形容動詞   keiyōdōshi – "na-adjectives" or "na-nominals". (It is not disputed that nouns like 'book' and 'mountain' are noninflectional and that verbs and i-adjectives are inflectional.) The claim that na-adjectives are inflectional rests on the claim that the syllable da 'is', usually regarded as a "copula verb", is really a suffix—an inflection. Thus hon 'book', generates a one-word sentence, honda 'it is a book', not a two-word sentence, hon da. However, numerous constructions seem to be incompatible with the suffixal copula claim. (1) Reduplication for emphasis :Hora! Hon, hon! 'See, it is a book!' :Hora! Kirei, kirei! 'See, it is pretty!' :Hora! Furui, furui! 'See, it is old!' (the adjectival inflection -i cannot be left off) :Hora! Iku, iku! 'See, it does go!' (the verbal inflection -u cannot be left off) (2) Questions. In Japanese, questions are formed by adding the particle ka (or in colloquial speech, just by changing the intonation of the sentence). :Hon/kirei ka? 'Is it a book? ; Is it pretty?' :Furu-i/Ik-u ka? 'Is it old? ; Does it go?' (the inflections cannot be left off) (3) Several auxiliary verbs, e.g., mitai, 'looks like it's' :Hon mitai da; Kirei mitai da 'It seems to be a book; It seems to be pretty' :Furu-i mitai da; Ik-u mitai da 'It seems to be old; It seems to go' On the basis of such constructions, Uehara (1998) finds that the copula is indeed an independent word, and that regarding the parameters on which i-adjectives share the syntactic pattern of verbs, the nominal adjectives pattern with pure nouns instead. Similarly, Eleanor Jorden considers this class of words a kind of nominal, not adjective, and refers to them as na-nominals in her textbook Japanese: The Spoken Language.  Japanese has no grammatical gender, number, or articles (though the demonstrative その, sono, "that, those", is often translatable as "the"). Thus, specialists have agreed that Japanese nouns are noninflecting: 猫   neko can be translated as "cat", "cats", "a cat", "the cat", "some cats" and so forth, depending on context. However, as part of the extensive pair of grammatical systems that Japanese possesses for honorification (making discourse deferential to the addressee or even to a third party) and politeness, nouns too can be modified. Nouns take politeness prefixes (which have not been regarded as inflections): o- for native nouns, and go- for Sino-Japanese nouns. A few examples are given in the following table. In a few cases, there is suppletion, as with the first of the examples given below, 'rice'. (Note that while these prefixes are almost always in Hiragana&nbsp;— that is, as お   o- or ご  go&nbsp;— the kanji 御 is used for both o and go prefixes in formal writing.)  Lacking number, Japanese does not differentiate between count and mass nouns. (An English speaker learning Japanese would be well advised to treat Japanese nouns as mass nouns.) A small number of nouns have collectives formed by reduplication (possibly accompanied by voicing and related processes (rendaku)); for example: hito 'person' and hitobito 'people'. Reduplication is not productive. Words in Japanese referring to more than one of something are collectives, not plurals. Hitobito, for example, means "a lot of people" or "people in general". It is never used to mean "two people". A phrase like edo no hitobito would be taken to mean "the people of Edo", or "the population of Edo", not "two people from Edo" or even "a few people from Edo". Similarly, yamayama means "many mountains". A limited number of nouns have collective forms that refer to groups of people. Examples include watashi-tachi, 'we'; anata-tachi, 'you (plural)'; bokura, 'we (less formal, more masculine)'. One uncommon personal noun, ware, 'I', or in some cases, 'you', has a much more common reduplicative collective form wareware 'we'. The suffixes -tachi (達) and -ra (等) are by far the most common collectivizing suffixes. These are, again, not pluralizing suffixes: tarō-tachi does not mean "some number of people named Taro", but instead indicates the group including Taro. Depending on context, tarō-tachi might be translated into "Taro and his friends", "Taro and his siblings", "Taro and his family", or any other logical grouping that has Taro as the representative. Some words with collectives have become fixed phrases and (commonly) refer to one person. Specifically, kodomo 'child' and tomodachi 'friend' can be singular, even though -[t]omo and -[t]achi were originally collectivizing in these words; to unambiguously refer to groups of them, an additional collectivizing suffix is added: kodomotachi 'children' and tomodachitachi 'friends', though tomodachitachi is somewhat uncommon. Tachi is sometimes applied to inanimate objects, kuruma 'car' and kuruma-tachi, 'cars', for example, but this usage is colloquial and indicates a high level of anthropomorphisation and childlikeness, and is not more generally accepted as standard.    Although many grammars and textbooks mention pronouns (代名詞 daimeishi), Japanese lacks true pronouns. (Daimeishi can be considered a subset of nouns.) Strictly speaking, pronouns do not take modifiers, but Japanese daimeishi do: 背の高い彼 se no takai kare (lit. tall he) is valid in Japanese. Also, unlike true pronouns, Japanese daimeishi are not closed-class: new daimeishi are introduced and old ones go out of use relatively quickly. A large number of daimeishi referring to people are translated as pronouns in their most common uses. Examples: 彼  kare, (he); 彼女  kanojo, (she); 私  watashi, (I); see also the adjoining table or a longer list."What are the personal pronouns of Japanese?" in sci.lang.japan Frequently Asked Questions Some of these "personal nouns" such as 己 onore, I (exceedingly humble), or 僕 boku, I (young male), also have second-person uses: おのれ  onore in second-person is an extremely rude "you", and boku in second-person is a diminutive "you" used for young boys. This further differentiates daimeishi from pronouns, which cannot change their person. Kare and kanojo also mean "boyfriend" and "girlfriend" respectively, and this usage of the words is possibly more common than the use as pronouns. Like other subjects, Japanese deemphasizes personal daimeishi, which are seldom used. This is partly because Japanese sentences do not always require explicit subjects, and partly because names or titles are often used where pronouns would appear in a translation: 「木下さんは、背が高いですね。」 Kinoshita-san wa, se ga takai desu ne. (addressing Mr. Kinoshita) "You're pretty tall, aren't you?" 「専務、明日福岡市西区の山本商事の社長に会っていただけますか？」 Semmu, asu Fukuoka-shi nishi-ku no Yamamoto-shōji no shachō ni atte itadakemasu ka? (addressing the managing director) "Would it be possible for you to meet the president of Yamamoto Trading Co. in West Ward, Fukuoka tomorrow?" While there is no lexical difference between nouns and daimeishi, the possible referents of daimeishi can be constrained depending on the order of occurrence. The following pair of examples (due to Bart Mathias)Bart Mathias. Discussion of pronoun reference constraints on sci.lang.japan. illustrates one such constraint. Honda-kun ni atte, kare no hon o kaeshita (本田君に会って、彼の本を返した。) (I) met Honda and returned his book. ("His" here can refer to Honda.) Kare ni atte, Honda-kun no hon o kaeshita (彼に会って、本田君の本を返した。) (I) met him and returned Honda's book. (Here, "him" cannot refer to Honda.) English has a reflexive form of each personal pronoun (himself, herself, itself, themselves, etc.); Japanese, in contrast, has one main reflexive daimeishi, namely jibun (自分), which can also mean 'I'. The uses of the reflexive (pro)nouns in the two languages are very different, as demonstrated by the following literal translations (*=impossible, ??=ambiguous): If the sentence has more than one grammatical or semantic subject, then the target of jibun is the subject of the primary or most prominent action; thus in the following sentence jibun refers unambiguously to Shizuko (even though Makoto is the grammatical subject) because the primary action is Shizuko's reading. 誠は静子に自分の家で本を読ませた。 Makoto wa Shizuko ni jibun no uchi de hon o yomaseta. Makoto made Shizuko read book(s) in her house. In practice the main action is not always discernible, in which case such sentences are ambiguous. The use of jibun in complex sentences follows non-trivial rules. There are also equivalents to jibun such as mizukara. Other uses of the reflexive pronoun in English are covered by adverbs like hitorideni which is used in the sense of "by oneself". For example, 機械がひとりでに動き出した kikai ga hitorideni ugokidashita "The machine started operating by itself." Change in a verb's valency is not accomplished by use of reflexive pronouns (in this Japanese is like English but unlike many other European languages). Instead, separate (but usually related) intransitive verbs and transitive verbs are used. There is no longer any productive morphology to derive transitive verbs from intransitive ones, or vice versa. 1. irregular formation 2. -ou is represented by -ō Demonstratives occur in the ko-, so-, and a- series. The ko- (proximal) series refers to things closer to the speaker than the hearer, the so- (medial) series for things closer to the hearer, and the a- (distal) series for things distant to both the speaker and the hearer. With do-, demonstratives turn into the corresponding interrogative form. Demonstratives can also be used to refer to people, for example 「こちらは林さんです。」 Kochira wa Hayashi-san desu. "This is Mr. Hayashi." Demonstratives limit, and therefore precede, nouns; thus この本  kono hon for "this/my book", and その本  sono hon for "that/your book". When demonstratives are used to refer to things not visible to the speaker or the hearer, or to (abstract) concepts, they fulfill a related but different anaphoric role. The anaphoric distals are used for shared information between the speaker and the listener. A：先日、札幌に行って来ました。 A: Senjitsu, Sapporo ni itte kimashita. A: I visited Sapporo recently. B：あそこ(*そこ)はいつ行ってもいい所ですね。 B: Asoko (*Soko) wa itsu itte mo ii tokoro desu ne. B: Yeah, that's a great place to visit whenever you go. Soko instead of asoko would imply that B doesn't share this knowledge about Sapporo, which is inconsistent with the meaning of the sentence. The anaphoric medials are used to refer to experience or knowledge that is not shared between the speaker and listener. 佐藤：田中という人が昨日死んだんだって。 Satō : Tanaka to iu hito ga kinō shinda n da tte...  Sato: I heard that a man called Tanaka died yesterday... 森：えっ、本当? Mori: E', hontō? Mori: Oh, really? 佐藤：だから、その(*あの)人、森さんの昔の隣人じゃなかったっけ？ Satō : Dakara, sono (*ano) hito, Mori-san no mukashi no rinjin ja nakatta 'kke? Sato: It's why I asked... wasn't he an old neighbour of yours? Again, ano is inappropriate here because Sato doesn't (didn't) know Tanaka personally. The proximal demonstratives do not have clear anaphoric uses. They can be used in situations where the distal series sound too disconnected: 一体何ですか、これ(*あれ)は? Ittai nan desu ka, kore (*are) wa? What on earth is this? Prior to discussing the conjugable words, a brief note about stem forms. Conjugative suffixes and auxiliary verbs are attached to the stem forms of the affixee. In modern Japanese there are the following six stem forms. Note that this order follows from the -a, -i, -u, -e, -o endings that these forms have in 五段 (5-row) verbs (according to the あ、い、う、え、お collation order of Japanese), where terminal and attributive forms are the same for verbs (hence only 5 surface forms), but differ for nominals, notably na-nominals. The application of conjugative suffixes to stem forms follow certain euphonic principles (音便 onbin), which are discussed below. Verbs (動詞 dōshi) in Japanese are rigidly constrained to the ends of clauses in what is known as the predicate position. This means that the verb is always located at the end of a sentence. The subject and objects of the verb are indicated by means of particles, and the grammatical functions of the verb&nbsp;— primarily tense and voice&nbsp;— are indicated by means of conjugation. When the subject and the dissertative topic coincide, the subject is often omitted; if the verb is intransitive, the entire sentence may consist of a single verb. Verbs have two tenses indicated by conjugation, past and nonpast. The semantic difference between present and future is not indicated by means of conjugation. Usually there is no ambiguity as context makes it clear whether the speaker is referring to the present or future. Voice and aspect are also indicated by means of conjugation, and possibly agglutinating auxiliary verbs. For example, the continuative aspect is formed by means of the continuative conjugation known as the gerundive or -te form, and the auxiliary verb iru "to be"; to illustrate, 見る  miru ("to see") → 見ている  mite iru ("to be seeing"). Verbs can be semantically classified based on certain conjugations. There are other possible classes, and a large amount of overlap between the classes. Lexically, nearly every verb in Japanese is a member of exactly one of the following three regular conjugation groups (see also Japanese consonant and vowel verbs). The "row" in the above classification means a row in the gojūon table. "Upper 1-row" means the row that is one row above the center row (the u-row) i.e. i-row. "Lower 1-row" means the row that is one row below the center row (the u-row) i.e. e-row. "5-row" means the conjugation runs though all 5 rows of the gojūon table. A conjugation is fully described by identifying both the row and the column in the gojūon table. For example, 見る  (miru, "to see") belongs to マ行上一段活用 (ma-column i-row conjugation), 食べる  (taberu, "to eat") belongs to バ行下一段活用 (ba-column e-row conjugation), and 帰る (kaeru, "to return") belongs to ラ行五段活用(ra-column 5-row conjugation). One should avoid confusing verbs in ラ行五段活用 (ra-column 5-row conjugation) with verbs in 上一段活用 (i-row conjugation) or 下一段活用 (e-row conjugation). For example, 切る  (kiru, "to cut") belongs to ラ行五段活用 (ra-column 5-row conjugation), whereas its homophone 着る  (kiru, "to wear") belongs to カ行上一段活用 (ka-column i-row conjugation). Likewise, 練る  (neru, "to knead") belongs to ラ行五段活用 (ra-column 5-row conjugation), whereas its homophone 寝る  (neru, "to sleep") belongs to ナ行下一段活用 (na-column e-row conjugation). Historical note: classical Japanese had upper and lower 1- and 2-row groups and a 4-row group (上／下一段 kami/shimo ichidan, 上／下二段 kami/shimo nidan, and 四段 yodan, the nidan verbs becoming most of today's ichidan verbs (there were only a handful of kami ichidan verbs and only one single shimo ichidan verb in classical Japanese), and the yodan group, due to the writing reform in 1946 to write Japanese as it is pronounced, naturally became the modern godan verbs. Since verbs have migrated across groups in the history of the language, conjugation of classical verbs is not predictable from a knowledge of modern Japanese alone. Of the irregular classes, there are two: Classical Japanese had two further irregular classes, the na-group, which contained 死ぬ  (shinu, "to die") and 往ぬ  (inu, "to go", "to die"), the ra-group, which included such verbs as あり  ari, the equivalent of modern aru, as well as quite a number of extremely irregular verbs that cannot be classified. The following table illustrates the stem forms of the above conjugation groups, with the root indicated with dots. For example, to find the hypothetical form of the group 1 verb 書く  kaku, look in the second row to find its root, kak, then in the hypothetical row to get the ending -e, giving the stem form kake. When there are multiple possibilities, they are listed in the order of increasing rarity.  The above are only the stem forms of the verbs; to these one must add various verb endings in order to get the fully conjugated verb. The following table lists the most common conjugations. Note that in some cases the form is different depending on the conjugation group of the verb. See Japanese verb conjugations for a full list. The polite ending -masu conjugates as a group 1 verb, except that the negative imperfective and perfective forms are -masen and -masen deshita respectively, and certain conjugations are in practice rarely if ever used. The passive and potential endings -reru and -rareru, and the causative endings -seru and -saseru all conjugate as group 2b verbs. Multiple verbal endings can therefore agglutinate. For example, a common formation is the causative-passive ending, -sase-rareru. 僕は姉に納豆を食べさせられた。 boku wa ane ni nattō o tabesaserareta. I was made to eat nattō by my (elder) sister. As should be expected, the vast majority of theoretically possible combinations of conjugative endings are not semantically meaningful. Japanese has a large variety of related pairs of transitive verbs (that take a direct object) and intransitive verbs (that do not usually take a direct object), such as the transitive hajimeru (始める, someone or something begins an activity), and the intransitive hajimaru (始まる, an activity begins)."What's the difference between hajimeru and hajimaru?" in sci.lang.japan Frequently Asked QuestionsKim Allen (2000) "Japanese verbs, part 2" in Japanese for the Western Brain Note: Some intransitive verbs (usually verbs of motion) take what it looks like a direct object, but it is not. For example, hanareru (離れる, to leave): 私は 東京を 離れる。 Watashi wa Tokyo o hanareru. I leave Tokyo. Semantically speaking, words that denote attributes or properties are primarily distributed between two morphological classes (there are also a few other classes): Unlike adjectives in languages like English, i-adjectives in Japanese inflect for aspect and mood, like verbs. Japanese adjectives do not have comparative or superlative inflections; comparatives and superlatives have to be marked periphrastically using adverbs like motto 'more' and ichiban 'most'. Every adjective in Japanese can be used in an attributive position. Nearly every Japanese adjective can be used in a predicative position; this differs from English where there are many common adjectives such as "major", as in "a major question", that cannot be used to in the predicate position (that is, *"The question is major" is not grammatical English). There are a few Japanese adjectives that cannot predicate, known as 連体詞 (rentaishi, attributives), which are derived from other word classes; examples include 大きな  ōkina "big", 小さな  chiisana "small", and おかしな okashina "strange" which are all stylistic na-type variants of normal i-type adjectives. All i-adjectives except for いい  (ii, good) have regular conjugations, and ii is irregular only in the fact that it is a changed form of the regular adjective 良い  yoi permissible in the terminal and attributive forms. For all other forms it reverts to yoi. Common conjugations of adjectives are enumerated below. ii is not treated separately, because all conjugation forms are identical to those of yoi. Adjectives too are governed by euphonic rules in certain cases, as noted in the section on it below. For the polite negatives of na-type adjectives, see also the section below on the copula だ  da. The copula da behaves very much like a verb or an adjective in terms of conjugation.   Note that there are no potential, causative, or passive forms of the copula, just as with adjectives. The following are some examples. ジョンは学生だ。 JON wa gakusei da John is a student. 明日も晴れなら、ピクニックしよう。 Ashita mo hare nara, PIKUNIKKU shiyō If tomorrow is clear too, let's have a picnic. In continuative conjugations, では  de wa is often contracted in speech to じゃ  ja; for some kinds of informal speech ja is preferable to de wa, or is the only possibility.    1. usually not reflected in spelling Modern pronunciation is a result of a long history of phonemic drift that can be traced back to written records of the thirteenth century, and possibly earlier. However, it was only in 1946 that the Japanese ministry of education modified existing kana usage to conform to the standard dialect (共通語 kyōtsūgo). All earlier texts used the archaic orthography, now referred to as historical kana usage. The adjoining table is a nearly exhaustive list of these spelling changes. Note that palatalized morae  combine with the initial consonant, if present, yielding a palatalized syllable. The most basic example of this is modern , which historically developed as  → , via the  →  rule. A few sound changes are not reflected in the spelling. Firstly, ou merged with oo, both being pronounced as a long ō. Secondly, the particles は and を are still written using historical kana usage, though these are pronounced as wa and o, rather than ha and wo, with the rare exception of 〜んを, which is pronounced as -n wo, as in . Unlike the tradition found in English-speaking countries, where people learn that Middle English (e.g., Chaucer) was pronounced differently from the modern language, it is not generally understood that the historical kana spellings were, at one point, reflective of pronunciation. For example, えふ (lit. efu) for "leaf" (葉, modern ha) was pronounced something like [epu] by the Japanese at the time it was borrowed. However, a modern reader of a classical text would still read this as [yoo], the modern pronunciation. As mentioned above, conjugations of some verbs and adjectives differ from the prescribed formation rules because of euphonic changes. Nearly all of these euphonic changes are themselves regular. For verbs the exceptions are all in the ending of the continuative form of group when the following auxiliary starts with a t-sound, i.e., た  ta, て  te, たり  tari, etc. * denotes impossible/ungrammatical form. There is one other irregular change: 行く iku (to go), for which there is an exceptional continuative form: 行き iki + て te → 行って itte, 行き iki + た ta → 行った itta, etc. There are dialectical differences, which are also regular and generally occur in similar situations. For example, in Kansai dialect the -i + t- conjugations are instead changed to -ut-, as in  instead of , as perfective of . In this example, this can combine with the preceding vowel via historical sound changes, as in  (au → ō) instead of standard . The continuative form of proper adjectives, when followed by polite forms such as  or , undergoes a transformation; this may be followed by historical sound changes, yielding a one-step or two-step sound change. Note that these verbs are almost invariably conjugated to polite  form, as  and  (note the irregular conjugation of gozaru, discussed below), and that these verbs are preceded by the continuative form –  – of adjectives, rather than the terminal form –  – which is used before the more everyday . The rule is  →  (dropping the -k-), possibly also combining with the previous syllable according to the spelling reform chart, which may also undergo palatalization in the case of . Historically there were two classes of proper Old Japanese adjectives,  and  ("-ku adjective" means "not preceded by shi"). This distinction collapsed during the evolution of Late Middle Japanese adjectives, and both are now considered  adjectives. The sound change for -shii adjectives follows the same rule as for other -ii adjectives, notably that the preceding vowel also changes and the preceding mora undergoes palatalization, yielding  → , though historically this was considered a separate but parallel rule. Respectful verbs such as くださる  kudasaru 'to get',  なさる  nasaru 'to do', ござる  gozaru 'to be', いらっしゃる  irassharu 'to be/come/go', おっしゃる  ossharu 'to say', etc. behave like group 1 verbs, except in the continuative and imperative forms. In speech, common combinations of conjugation and auxiliary verbs are contracted in a fairly regular manner. There are occasional others, such as -aranai → -annai as in  →  and  →  – these are considered quite casual and are more common among the younger generation. Contractions differ by dialect, but behave similarly to the standard ones given above. For example, in Kansai dialect  → . Adverbs in Japanese are not as tightly integrated into the morphology as in many other languages. Indeed, adverbs are not an independent class of words, but rather a role played by other words. For example, every adjective in the continuative form can be used as an adverb; thus, 弱い  yowai 'weak' (adj) → 弱く  yowaku 'weakly' (adv). The primary distinguishing characteristic of adverbs is that they cannot occur in a predicate position, just as it is in English. The following classification of adverbs is not intended to be authoritative or exhaustive. Often, especially for sound symbolism, the particle to "as if" is used. See the article on Japanese sound symbolism. Examples of conjunctions: そして  soshite 'and then', また  mata 'and then/again', etc. Although called "conjunctions", these words are, as English translations show, actually a kind of adverbs. Examples of interjections: はい (hai, yes/OK/uh), へえ (hee, wow!), いいえ (iie, no/no way), おい (oi, hey!), etc. This part of speech is not very different from that of English. Particles in Japanese are postpositional, as they immediately follow the modified component. A full listing of particles is beyond the scope of this article, so only a few prominent particles are listed here. Keep in mind that the pronunciation and spelling differ for the particles wa (は), e  (へ) and o (を): This article follows the Hepburn-style of romanizing them according to the pronunciation rather than spelling. The complex distinction between the so-called topic (は wa) and subject (が ga) particles has been the theme of many doctoral dissertations and scholarly disputes. The clause 象は鼻が長い zō-wa hana-ga nagai is well known for appearing to contain two subjects. It does not simply mean "the elephant's nose is long", as that can be translated as 象の鼻は長い zō-no hana-wa nagai. Rather, a more literal translation would be "(speaking of) the elephant, its nose is long". Two major scholarly surveys of Japanese linguistics in English, (Shibatani 1990) and (Kuno 1973), clarify the distinction. To simplify matters, the referents of wa and ga in this section are called the topic and subject respectively, with the understanding that if either is absent, the grammatical topic and subject may coincide. As an abstract and rough approximation, the difference between wa and ga is a matter of focus: wa gives focus to the action of the sentence, i.e., to the verb or adjective, whereas ga gives focus to the subject of the action. However, a more useful description must proceed by enumerating uses of these particles. However, when first being introduced to the subject and topic markers wa and ga most are told that the difference between the two is simpler. The topic marker, wa, is used to declare or to make a statement. The subject marker, ga, is used for new information, or asking for new information. See Topic marker: Japanese: は. The use of wa to introduce a new theme of discourse is directly linked to the notion of grammatical theme. Opinions differ on the structure of discourse theme, though it seems fairly uncontroversial to imagine a first-in-first-out hierarchy of themes that is threaded through the discourse. Of course, human limitations restrict the scope and depth of themes, and later themes may cause earlier themes to expire. In these sorts of sentences, the steadfast translation into English uses constructs like "speaking of X" or "on the topic of X", though such translations tend to be bulky as they fail to use the thematic mechanisms of English. For lack of a comprehensive strategy, many teachers of Japanese emphasize the "speaking of X" pattern without sufficient warning. ジョンは学生です。 JON wa gakusei desu (On the topic of) John, (he) is a student. A common linguistic joke shows the insufficiency of rote translation with the sentence 僕はウナギだ boku wa unagi da, which per the pattern would translate as "I am an eel." (or "(As of) me is eel"). Yet, in a restaurant this sentence can reasonably be used to say "My order is eel" (or "I would like to order an eel"), with no intended humour. This is because the sentence should be literally read, "As for me, it is an eel," with "it" referring to the speaker's order. The topic of the sentence is clearly not its subject. Related to the role of wa in introducing themes is its use in contrasting the current topic and its aspects from other possible topics and their aspects. The suggestive pattern is "X, but..." or "as for X, ...". ame wa futte imasu ga... The rain is falling, but... Because of its contrastive nature, the topic cannot be undefined. *誰かは本を読んでいる。 *dareka wa hon o yonde iru *Someone is reading the book. In this use, ga is required. In practice, the distinction between thematic and contrastive wa is not that useful. Suffice it to say that there can be at most one thematic wa in a sentence, and it has to be the first wa if one exists, and the remaining was are contrastive. For completeness, the following sentence (due to Kuno) illustrates the difference. 僕が知っている人は誰も来なかった。 boku ga shitte iru hito wa daremo konakatta (1) Of all the people I know, none came. (2) (People came but), there weren't any of the people I know. The first interpretation is the thematic wa, treating "the people I know" (boku ga shitte iru hito) as the theme of the predicate "none came" (dare mo konakatta). That is, if I know A, B, ..., Z, then none of the people who came were A, B, ..., Z. The second interpretation is the contrastive wa. If the likely attendees were A, B, ..., Z, and of them I know P, Q and R, then the sentence says that P, Q and R did not come. The sentence says nothing about A', B', ..., Z', all of whom I know, but none of whom were likely to come. (In practice the first interpretation is the likely one.) Unlike wa, the subject particle ga nominates its referent as the sole satisfier of the predicate. This distinction is famously illustrated by the following pair of sentences. ジョンは学生です。 JON wa gakusei desu John is a student. (There may be other students among the people we're talking about.) ジョンが学生です。 JON ga gakusei desu (Of all the people we are talking about) it is John who is the student. It may be useful to think of the distinction in terms of the question each statement could answer, e.g.: ジョンの仕事は何ですか。 JON no shigoto wa nan desu ka What is John's occupation? for the first statement, versus どちらの方が学生ですか。 Dochira no kata ga gakusei desu ka Which one (of them) is the student? for the second. Similarly, in a restaurant, if the waitress asks who has ordered the eel, the customer who ordered it can specify himself with 僕がウナギだ。 boku ga unagi da The eel is for me (not these other people). For certain verbs, typically ga instead of o is used to mark what would be the direct object in English: ジョンはフランス語が出来る。 JON wa FURANSU-go ga dekiru John knows French. These verbs, e.g. 出来る (to be able to), ほしい (to want), 好きだ (to like), 嫌いだ (to dislike), etc., are in fact simply adjectives and intransitive verbs whose subject is what would be a direct object in the English translation.  The equivalent of the English subject is instead the topic in Japanese and thus marked by wa, reflecting the topic-prominent nature of Japanese grammar. The direct object of transitive verbs is indicated by the object particle を o. ジョンは青いセーターを着ている。 JON wa aoi SĒTĀ o kite iru John is wearing a blue sweater. This particle can also mean "through" or "along" or "out of" when used with motion verbs. メアリが細い道を歩いていた。 MEARI ga hosoi michi o aruite ita Mary was walking along a narrow road. 国境の長いトンネルを抜けると雪国であった。 kokkyō no nagai TONNERU o nukeru to yukiguni de atta The train came out of the long tunnel into the snow country. The general instrumental particle is で de, which can be translated as "using" or "by": 肉はナイフで切ること。 niku wa NAIFU de kiru koto Meat must be cut with a knife. 電車で行きましょう。 densha de ikimashō Let's go by train. This particle also has other uses: "at" (temporary location): 町角で先生に会った。 machikado de sensei ni atta (I) met my teacher at the street corner. "In": 海で泳ぐのは難しい。 umi de oyogu no wa muzukashii Swimming in the sea is hard. "With" or "in (the span of)": 劇は主人公の死で終る。 geki wa shujinkō no shi de owaru The play ends with the protagonist's death. 俺は二秒で勝つ。 ore wa nibyō de katsu I'll win in two seconds. The general locative particle is に ni. 東京に行きましょう。 Tōkyō ni ikimashō Let's go to Tokyo In this function it is interchangeable with へ e. However, ni has additional uses: "at (prolonged)": 私はグロスター通り99番に住んでいます。 watashi wa GUROSUTĀ dōri 99 ban ni sunde imasu I live at 99 Gloucester road "On": 氷は水に浮く。 kōri wa mizu ni uku Ice floats on water. "In (some year)", "at (some point in time)": haru no yūgure ni... On a spring eve... To conjoin nouns, と to is used. かばんには、教科書三冊と漫画本五冊を入れています。 Kaban ni wa kyōkasho san-satsu to manga-bon go-satsu o irete imasu I have three textbooks and five comic books in the bag. The additive particle も  mo can be used to conjoin larger nominals and clauses. ヨハンはドイツ人だ。ブリゲッタもドイツ人だ。 YOHAN wa DOITSU-jin da. BURIGETTA mo DOITSU-jin da Johan is a German. Brigette is a German too. 彼は映画スターであり、政治家でもある。 kare wa eiga SUTĀ de ari, seijika de mo aru He is a movie star and also a politician. For an incomplete list of conjuncts, や  ya is used. ボリスやアイバンを呼べ。 BORISU ya AIBAN o yobe Call Boris, Ivan, etc. When only one of the conjuncts is necessary, the disjunctive particle か  ka is used. 寿司か刺身か、何か注文してね。 sushi ka sashimi ka, nanika chūmon shite ne Order sushi or sashimi or something. Quantities are listed between から  kara 'from' and まで  made 'to'. 華氏92度から96度までの熱は心配するものではない。 Kashi 92 do kara 96 do made no netsu wa shinpai suru mono de wa nai A temperature between 92 Fahrenheit and 96 is not worrisome. This pair can also be used to indicate time or space. 朝8時から11時まで授業があるんだ。 asa hachi-ji kara jūichi-ji made jugyō ga aru n da You see, I have classes between 8 a.m. and 11 a.m. Because kara indicates starting point or origin, it has a related use as "because", analogously to English "since" (in the sense of both "from" and "because"): スミスさんは強引な人ですから、いつも頼まれているかもしれない。 SUMISU-san wa gōin na hito desu kara, itsumo tanomarete iru kamoshirenai Mr. Smith, I think it's because you're so assertive that you're always asked to do everything. The particle kara and a related particle yori are used to indicate lowest extents: prices, business hours, etc. 我々は7時より営業して居ります。 wareware wa shichi-ji yori eigyō shite orimasu We are open for business from 7 onwards. Yori is also used in the sense of "than". お前は姉ちゃんよりうるさいんだ! omae wa nē-chan yori urusai n da You are louder/more talkative than my sister! The particle と  to is used to set off quotations. 「殺して・・・殺して」とあの子は言ってたの。 "koroshite... koroshite" to ano ko wa itte'ta no The girl was saying, "Kill... kill." 猫はニャーニャーと鳴く。 neko wa NYĀ NYĀ to naku The cat says: meow, meow. It is also used to indicate a manner of similarity, "as if" or "like". 彼は「愛してるよ」と言って、ぽっくりと死んだ。 kare wa "aishite'ru yo" to itte, pokkuri to shinda He said "I love you," and dropped dead. In a related conditional use, it functions like "after", or "upon". 雨が上がると、子ども達はもう学習を忘れて、太陽に表を向ける水溜りの誘惑に従う。 ame ga agaru to, kodomo-tachi wa mou gakushū o wasurete, taiyō ni omote o mukeru mizu-tamari no yūwaku ni shitagau Rain stops and then: children, forgetting their lessons, give in to the temptation of sun-faced puddles. Finally it is used with verbs like to meet (with) (会う au) or to speak (with) (話す hanasu). ジョンがメアリーと初めて会ったのは、1942年の春の夕暮れだった。 JON ga MEARI to hajimete atta no wa, 1942 nen no haru no yūgure datta John met Mary for the first time on a dusky spring afternoon in 1942. This last use is also a function of the particle に  ni, but to indicates reciprocation which ni does not. ジョンがメアリーと恋愛している。 JON ga MEARI to ren'ai shite iru John and Mary are in love. ジョンがメアリーに恋愛している。 JON ga MEARI ni ren'ai shite iru John loves Mary (but Mary might not love John back). Finally, the particle よ  yo is used in a hortative or vocative sense. 可愛い娘よ、顔をしかめて私を見るな。 kawaii musume yo, kao o shikamete watashi o miruna O my beloved daughter, don't frown at me so! The sentence-final particle か  ka turns a declarative sentence into a question. そちらはアメリカ人でしょうか? sochira wa amerika-jin deshō ka? Are you perchance an American? Other sentence-final particles add emotional or emphatic impact to the sentence. The particle ね  ne softens a declarative sentence, similar to English "you know?", "eh?", "I tell you!", "isn't it?", "aren't you?", etc. 彼に電話しなかったのね。 kare ni denwa shinakatta no ne You didn't call him up, did you? 近々ロンドンに引っ越されるそうですね。 chikajika rondon ni hikkosareru sou desu ne. I hear you're moving to London soon. Is that true? A final よ  yo is used in order to soften insistence, warning or command, which would sound very strong without any final particles. 嘘なんかついてないよ！ uso nanka tsuite nai yo! I'm not lying! There are many such emphatic particles; some examples: ぜ  ze and ぞ  zo usually used by males; な  na a less formal form of ne; わ  wa used by females (and males in the Kansai region) like yo, etc. They are essentially limited to speech or transcribed dialogue. Compound particles are formed with at least one particle together with other words, including other particles. The commonly seen forms are: Other structures are rarer, though possible. A few examples: その件に関して知っている限りのことを教えてもらいたい。 sono ken ni kan-shite shitte-iru kagiri no koto o oshiete moraitai Kindly tell me everything you know concerning that case. (particle + verb in cont.) 外国語を学習する上で大切なことは毎日の努力がものを言うということである。 gaikokugo o gakushū suru ue de taisetsu na koto wa mainichi no doryoku ga mono o iu to iu koto de aru In studying a foreign language, daily effort gives the most rewards. (noun + particle) 兄は両親の心配をよそに、大学をやめてしまった。 ani wa ryōshin no shinpai o yoso ni, daigaku o yamete shimatta Ignoring my parents' worries, my brother dropped out of college. (particle + noun + particle) All auxiliary verbs attach to a verbal or adjectival stem form and conjugate as verbs. In modern Japanese there are two distinct classes of auxiliary verbs: In classical Japanese, which was more heavily agglutinating than modern Japanese, the category of auxiliary verb included every verbal ending after the stem form, and most of these endings were themselves inflected. In modern Japanese, however, some of them have stopped being productive. The prime example is the classical auxiliary たり -tari, whose modern forms た -ta and て -te are no longer viewed as inflections of the same suffix, and can take no further affixes. 1 ます  masu has stem forms: irrealis ませ and ましょ, continuative まし, terminal ます, attributive ます, hypothetical ますれ, imperative ませ. 2 られる  rareru in potential usage is sometimes shortened to れる  reru (grp.&nbsp;2); thus 食べれる  tabereru 'to be able to eat' instead of 食べられる  taberareru. But it is considered non-standard. 3 Technically, such an auxiliary verb る, ru, denoting the potential form, does not exist, as for example 飲める  nomeru is thought to actually come from the contraction of 飲み得る, nomieru (see below). However, textbooks tend to teach it this way. (飲める in old texts would have been the attributive past tense form of 飲む instead of the potential meaning.) 4 させる  saseru is sometimes shortened to さす  sasu (grp.&nbsp;1), but this usage is somewhat literary. Much of the agglutinative flavour of Japanese stems from helper auxiliaries, however. The following table contains a small selection of an abundant store of such auxiliary verbs. meaning !! plain !! respectful meal 飯 meshi ご飯 go-han money 金 kane お金 o-kane body 体 karada お体 o-karada御身 onmi word(s) 言葉 kotoba お言葉 o-kotoba詔 mikotonori person !! plain, informal !! polite !! respectful first 僕  boku (male)あたし  atashi (female)私  watashi (both)俺 ore (male) 私  watashi 私  watakushi second 君  kimiあなた anata 貴方  anataそちら  sochira 貴方様  anata-sama third 彼  kare (male)彼女  kanojo (female)あいつ  aitsu (pejorative) English !! Japanese !! reason History repeats itself. the target of jibun must be animate Hiroshi talked to Kenji about himself (=Hiroshi). Hiroshi wa Kenji ni jibun no koto o hanashita. (ひろしは健司に自分のことを話した。) there is no ambiguity in the translation as explained below ??誠は静子が自分を大事にすることを期待している。??Makoto wa Shizuko ga jibun o daiji ni suru koto o kitai shite iru.either "Makoto expects that Shizuko will take good care of him", or "Makoto expects that Shizuko will take good care of herself." jibun can be in a different sentence or dependent clause, but its target is ambiguous ko- !! so- !! a- !! do- -re korethis one sorethat one arethat one over there dorewhich one? -no kono(of) this sono(of) that ano(of) that over there dono(of) what? -nna konnalike this sonnalike that annalike that over there donnawhat sort of? -ko kokohere sokothere asoko1over there dokowhere? -chira kochirathis way sochirathat way achirathat way over there dochirawhich way? -u2 kōin this manner sōin that manner ā1in that (other) manner dōhow? in what manner? -itsu koitsuthis person soitsuthat person aitsuthat (other) person doitsuwho? 猫 は 魚 を 食べる。 neko wa sakana o taberu Cats TOPIC fish OBJECT eat Cats eat fish. group/example 1 2a 2b sa ka 使・  tsuka(w). 書・  kak. 見・  mi. 食べ・  tabe. Irrealis form1(未然形 mizenkei) 使わ  tsukaw.a2使お  tsuka.o 書か  kak.a書こ  kak.o 見  mi. 食べ  tabe. さ  saし  shiせ  se 来  ko Continuative form(連用形 ren'yōkei) 使い  tsuka.i 書き  kak.i 見  mi. 食べ  tabe. し  shi 来  ki Terminal form(終止形 shūshikei) 使う  tsuka.u 書く  kak.u 見る  mi.ru 食べる  tabe.ru する  suru 来る  kuru Attributive form(連体形 rentaikei) same as terminal form Hypothetical form(仮定形 kateikei) 使え  tsuka.e 書け  kak.e 見れ  mi.re 食べれ  tabe.re すれ  sure 来れ  kure Imperative form(命令形 meireikei) 使え  tsuka.e 書け  kak.e 見ろ  mi.ro見よ  mi.yo 食べろ  tabe.ro食べよ  tabe.yo しろ  shiroせよ  seyoせい  sei 来い  koi &nbsp; formation rule group 1 group 2a group 2b sa-group ka-group 書く  kaku 見る  miru 食べる  taberu する  suru 来る  kuru politeimperfective cont. + ます  masu 書き・ますkaki.masu 見・ますmi.masu 食べ・ますtabe.masu し・ますshi.masu 来・ますki.masu plainperfective cont. + た  ta 書い・たkai.ta2 見・たmi.ta 食べ・たtabe.ta し・たshi.ta 来・たki.ta plainnegativeimperfective irrealis + ない nai 書か・ないkaka.nai 見・ないmi.nai 食べ・ないtabe.nai し・ないshi.nai 来・ないko.nai plainnegativeperfective irrealis+ なかった nakatta 書か・なかったkaka.nakatta 見・なかったmi.nakatta 食べ・なかったtabe.nakatta し・なかったshi.nakatta 来・なかったko.nakatta -te form (gerundive) cont. + て  -te 書いてkai.te2 見てmi.te 食べてtabe.te してshi.te 来てki.te provisionalconditional hyp. + ば  ba 書け・ばkake.ba 見れ・ばmire.ba 食べれ・ばtabere.ba すれ・ばsure.ba 来れ・ばkure.ba pastconditional cont. + たら tara 書いたらkai.tara2 見たらmi.tara 食べたらtabe.tara したらshi.tara 来たらki.tara volitional irrealis + う u 書こ・うkako.u irrealis + よう -yō 見・ようmi.yō 食べ・ようtabe.yō し・ようshi.yō 来・ようko.yō passive irrealis + れる reru 書か・れるkaka.reru さ・れるsa.reru irrealis + られる -rareru 見・られるmi.rareru 食べ・られるtabe.rareru 来・られるko.rareru causative irrealis + せる seru 書か・せるkaka.seru さ・せるsa.seru irrealis + させる -saseru 見・させるmi.saseru 食べ・させるtabe.saseru 来・させるko.saseru potential hyp. + る  ru 書け・るkake.ru 出来るdekiru1 irrealis + られる -rareru 見・られるmi.rareru 食べ・られるtabe.rareru 来・られるko.rareru transitive verb intransitive verb One thing acts out the transitive verb on another. The intransitive verb passively happens without direct intervention. 先生 が 授業 を 始める。 Sensei ga jugyō o hajimeru. The teacher starts the class. 授業 が 始まる。 Jugyō ga hajimaru. The class starts. 車 に 入れる。 Kuruma ni ireru. To put in the car. 車 に 入る。 Kuruma ni hairu. To enter the car. 出す開ける閉める付ける消す抜く 出る開く閉まる付く消える抜ける i-adjectives na-adjectives 安・い  yasu. 静か-  shizuka- Irrealis form(未然形 mizenkei) 安かろ  .karo 静かだろ  -daro Continuative form(連用形 ren'yōkei) 安く  .ku 静かで  -de Terminal form¹(終止形 shūshikei) 安い  .i 静かだ  -da Attributive form¹(連体形 rentaikei) 安い  .i 静かな  -na / 静かなる  -naru Hypothetical form(仮定形 kateikei) 安けれ  .kere 静かなら  -nara Imperative form²(命令形 meireikei) 安かれ  .kare 静かなれ  -nare &nbsp; i-adjectives安い  yasui, "cheap" na-adjectives静か  shizuka, "quiet" informalnonpast root + -i(Used alone, without the copula) 安いyasui"is cheap" root + copula da 静かだ shizuka da"is quiet" informalpast cont. + あった  atta(u + a collapse) 安かったyasuk.atta"was cheap" cont. + あった  atta(e + a collapse) 静かだったshizuka d.atta"was quiet" informalnegativenonpast cont. + (は)ない  (wa) nai¹ 安く(は)ないyasuku(wa)nai"isn't cheap" cont. + (は)ない  (wa) nai 静かで(は)ないshizuka de (wa) nai"isn't quiet" informalnegativepast cont. + (は)なかった  (wa) nakatta¹ 安く(は)なかったyasuku(wa)nakatta"wasn't cheap" cont. + (は)なかった  (wa) nakatta 静かで(は)なかったshizuka de (wa) nakatta"wasn't quiet" politenonpast root + -i + copula です  desu 安いですyasui desu"is cheap" root + copula です  desu 静かですshizuka desu"is quiet" politenegativenon past inf. cont + ありません arimasen¹ 安くありませんyasuku arimasen inf. cont + (は)ありません  (wa) arimasen 静かではありませんshizuka de wa arimasen inf. neg. non-past + copula です  desu¹ 安くないですyasukunai desu inf. cont + (は)ないです  (wa) nai desu 静かではないですshizuka de wa nai desu politenegativepast inf. cont + ありませんでした  arimasen　deshita 安くありませんでしたyasuku arimasen deshita inf. cont + (は)ありませんでした  (wa) arimasen deshita 静かではありませんでしたshizuka de wa arimasen deshita inf. neg. past + copula です  desu¹ 安くなかったですyasukunakatta desu inf. neg. past + なかったです  nakatta desu ¹ 静かではなかったですshizuka de wa nakatta desu -te form cont. + て  te 安くてyasuku.te cont. 静かでshizuka de provisionalconditional hyp. + ば  ba 安ければyasukere.ba hyp. (+ ば  ba) 静かなら(ば)shizuka nara(ba) pastconditional inf. past + ら  ra 安かったらyasukatta.ra inf. past + ら  ra 静かだったらshizuka datta.ra volitional² irrealis + う u 安かろう  yasukarō irrealis + う  u= root + だろう  darō 静かだろう  shizuka darō adverbial cont. 安くyasuku. root + に  ni 静かにshizuka ni degree  root + さ  sa 安さyasu-sa root + sa 静かさshizuka-sa Irrealis form(未然形 mizenkei) では  de wa Continuative form(連用形 ren'youkei) で  de Terminal form(終止形 shūshikei) だ  da (informal)です  desu (polite)でございます  de gozaimasu (respectful) Attributive form(連体形 rentaikei) である  de aru Hypothetical form(仮定形 kateikei) なら  nara Imperative form(命令形 meireikei) impossible nonpast informal だ  da polite です  desu respectful でございます  de gozaimasu past informal cont. + あった  attaだった  datta polite でした  deshita respectful でございました  de gozaimashita negativenonpast informal cont. + はない  wa nai polite cont. + はありません  wa arimasen respectful cont. + はございません  wa gozaimasen negativepast informal cont. + はなかった  wa nakatta polite cont. + はありませんでした  wa arimasen deshita respectful cont. + はございませんでした  wa gozaimasen deshita conditional informal hyp. + ば  ba polite cont. + あれば  areba respectful provisional informal なら  nara polite same as conditional respectful volitional informal だろう  darō polite でしょう  deshō respectful でございましょう  de gozaimashō adverbial and-te forms informal cont. polite cont. + ありまして  arimashite respectful cont. + ございまして  gozaimashite archaic !! modern あ＋う  a + uあ＋ふ  a + fu おう  ō い＋う  i + uい＋ふ  i + fu ゆう  yū1 う＋ふ  u + fu うう  ū え＋う  e + uえ＋ふ  e + fu よう  yō お＋ふ  o + fu おう  ō お＋ほ  o + hoお＋を  o + wo おお  ō auxiliary verb む  mu ん  n medial or final は  ha わ  wa medial or final ひ  hi, へ  he, ほ  ho い  i, え  e, お  o(via wi, we, wo, see below) any ゐ  i, ゑ  e, を  wo い  i, え  e, お  o1 continuative ending !! changes to !! example い i, ち chi or り ri っ (double consonant) び bi, みmi or に ni ん (syllabic n), with the following タ t sound voiced き ki い i ぎ gi い i, with the following タ t sound voiced continuativeending !! changes to !! examples 〜あく -aku 〜おう -ō ＊おはやくございます *ohayaku gozaimasu →おはようございます ohayō gozaimasu 〜いく -iku 〜ゆう -yū ＊大きくございます *ōkiku gozaimasu  →大きゅうございます ōkyū gozaimasu 〜うく -uku 〜うう -ū ＊寒くございます *samuku gozaimasu →寒うございます samū gozaimasu ＊〜えく *-eku ＊〜よう *-yō (not present) 〜おく -oku 〜おう -ō ＊面白くございます *omoshiroku gozaimasu →面白うございます omoshirō gozaimasu 〜しく -shiku 〜しゅう -shū ＊涼しくございます *suzushiku gozaimasu →涼しゅうございます suzushū gozaimasu !! change !! examples continuative ーり changed to ーい imperative ーれ changed to ーい full form colloquial !! example 〜てしまう-te shimau 〜ちゃう/-ちまう-chau/-chimaugroup 1 負けてしまう  makete shimau 'lose' → 負けちゃう/負けちまう  makechau/makechimau 〜でしまう-de shimau 〜じゃう/〜じまう-jau/-jimaugroup 1 死んでしまう  shinde shimau 'die' → 死んじゃう  shinjau or 死んじまう　 shinjimau 〜ては-te wa 〜ちゃ-cha 食べてはいけない  tabete wa ikenai 'must not eat' → 食べちゃいけない  tabecha ikenai 〜では-de wa 〜じゃ-ja 飲んではいけない  nonde wa ikenai 'must not drink' → 飲んじゃいけない  nonja ikenai 〜ている-te iru 〜てる-terugroup 2b 寝ている  nete iru 'is sleeping' → 寝てる  neteru 〜ておく-te oku 〜とく-tokugroup 1 しておく  shite oku 'will do it so' → しとく  shitoku 〜て行く-te iku 〜てく-tekugroup 1 出て行け  dete ike 'get out!' → 出てけ  deteke 〜てあげる-te ageru 〜たげる-tagerugroup 2a 買ってあげる  katte ageru 'buy something (for someone)' → 買ったげる  kattageru 〜るの-ru no 〜んの-nno 何しているの  nani shite iru no 'what are you doing?' → 何してんの  nani shitenno 〜りなさい-rinasai 〜んなさい-nnasai やりなさい  yarinasai 'do it!' → やんなさい  yannasai 〜るな-runa 〜んな-nna やるな  yaruna 'don't do it!' → やんな  yanna auxiliary !! group !! attaches to !! meaning modification !! example ます  masu irregular1 continuative makes the sentence polite 書く  kaku 'to write' → 書きます  kakimasu られる  rareru2 2b irrealis of grp.&nbsp;2 makes V passive/honorific/potential 見る  miru 'to see' → 見られる  mirareru 'to be able to see'食べる taberu 'to eat' → 食べられる  taberareru 'to be able to eat' れる  reru irrealis of grp.&nbsp;1 makes V passive/honorific 飲む  nomu 'to drink/swallow' → 飲まれる  nomareru 'to be drunk' る  ru3 hyp. of grp.&nbsp;1 makes V potential 飲む  nomu 'to drink/swallow' → 飲める  nomeru 'to be able to drink' させる  saseru4 2b irrealis of grp.&nbsp;2 makes V causative 考える  kangaeru 'to think' → 考えさせる  kangaesaseru 'to cause to think' せる  seru irrealis of grp.&nbsp;1 思い知る  omoishiru 'to realize' → 思い知らせる  omoishiraseru 'to cause to realize/to teach a lesson' auxiliary !! group !! attaches to !! meaning modification !! example ある  aru 'to be (inanimate)' 1 -te formonly for trans. indicates state modification 開く  hiraku 'to open' → 開いてある  hiraite-aru 'opened and is still open' いる  iru 'to be (animate)' 2a -te formfor trans. progressive aspect 寝る  neru 'to sleep' → 寝ている  nete-iru 'is sleeping' 2a -te formfor intrans. indicates state modification 閉まる  shimaru 'to close (intransitive)' → 閉まっている  shimatte-iru 'is closed' おく  oku 'to put/place;' 1 -te form "do something in advance" 食べる taberu 'to eat' → 食べておく  tabete-oku 'eat in advance' "keep" 開ける akeru 'to open' → 開けておく  akete-oku 'keep it open' 行く  iku 'to go' 1 -te form "goes on V-ing" 歩く  aruku 'to walk' → 歩いて行く  aruite-iku 'keep walking' くる  kuru 'to come' ka -te form inception, "start to V" 降る  furu 'fall' → 降ってくる  futte-kuru 'start to fall' perfection, "have V-ed" (only past-tense) 生きる  ikiru 'live' → 生きてきた  ikite-kita 'have lived' conclusion, "come to V" 異なる  kotonaru 'differ' → 異なってくる  kotonatte-kuru 'come to differ' 始める  hajimeru 'to begin' 2b continuativenon-punctual "V begins", "begin to V" 書く  kaku 'to write' → 書き始める  kaki-hajimeru 'start to write' continuativepunctual & subj. must be plural 着く  tsuku 'to arrive' → 着き始める  tsuki-hajimeru 'have all started to arrive' 出す  dasu 'to emit' 1 continuative "start to V" 輝く  kagayaku 'to shine' → 輝き出す  kagayaki-dasu 'to start shining' みる  miru 'to see' 1 -te form "try to V" する  suru 'do' → してみる  shite-miru 'try to do' なおす  naosu 'to correct/heal' 1 continuative "do V again, correcting mistakes" 書く  kaku 'to write' → 書きなおす  kaki-naosu 'rewrite' あがる  agaru 'to rise' 1 continuative "do V thoroughly" / "V happens upwards" 立つ  tatsu 'to stand' → 立ち上がる  tachi-agaru 'stand up' 出来る  dekiru 'to come out' → 出来上がる  deki-agaru 'be completed' 得る  eru/uru 'to be able' (see note at bottom) continuative indicates potential ある  aru 'to be' → あり得る  ariuru 'is possible' かかる/かける  kakaru/kakeru 'to hang/catch/obtain' 1 continuativeonly for intrans., non-volit. "about to V", "almost V",  "to start to V" 溺れる  oboreru 'drown' → 溺れかける  obore-kakeru 'about to drown' きる  kiru 'to cut' 1 continuative "do V completely" 食べる  taberu 'to eat' → 食べきる  tabe-kiru 'to eat it all' 消す  kesu 'to erase' 1 continuative "cancel by V""deny with V" 揉む  momu 'to rub' → 揉み消す  momi-kesu 'to rub out, to extinguish' 込む  komu 'to enter deeply/plunge' 1 continuative "V deep in", "V into" 話す  hanasu 'to speak' → 話し込む  hanashi-komu 'to be deep in conversation' 下げる  sageru 'to lower' 2b continuative "V down" 引く  hiku 'to pull' → 引き下げる  hiki-sageru 'to pull down' 過ぎる  sugiru 'to exceed' 2a continuative "overdo V" 言う  iu 'to say' → 言いすぎる  ii-sugiru 'to say too much, to overstate' 付ける  tsukeru 'to attach' 2b continuative "become accustomed to V" 行く  iku 'to go' → 行き付ける  iki-tsukeru 'be used to (going)' 続ける  tsuzukeru 'to continue' 2b continuative "keep on V" 降る  furu 'to fall' (e.g. rain) → 降り続ける  furi-tsuzukeru 'to keep falling' 通す  tōsu 'to show/thread/lead' 1 continuative "finish V-ing" 読む  yomu 'to read' → 読み通す  yomi-tōsu 'to finish reading' 抜ける  nukeru 'to shed/spill/desert' 2b continuativeonly for intrans. "V through" 走る  hashiru 'to run' → 走り抜ける  hashiri-nukeru 'to run through (swh)' 残す  nokosu 'to leave behind' 1 continuative by doing V, leave something behind 思う  omou 'to think' → 思い残す  omoi-nokosu 'to regret' (lit: to have something left to think about) 残る  nokoru 'to be left behind' 1 continuativefor intrans. only be left behind, doing V 生きる  ikiru 'live' → 生き残る  iki-nokoru 'to survive' (lit: to be left alive) 分ける  wakeru 'to divide/split/classify' 2b continuative the proper way to V 使う  tsukau 'use' → 使い分ける  tsukai-wakeru 'to indicate the proper way to use' 忘れる  wasureru 'to forget' 2b continuative to forget to V 聞く  kiku 'to ask' → 聞き忘れる  kiki-wasureru 'to forget to ask' is used for plain negative (of verbs), causative and passive constructions. The most common use of this form is with the -nai auxiliary that turns verbs into their negative (predicate) form. (See Verbs below.) The "-o" version is used for volitional expression and formed by a euphonic change (音便 onbin). is used in a linking role. This is the most productive stem form, taking on a variety of endings and auxiliaries, and can even occur independently in a sense similar to the -te ending. This form is also used to negate adjectives. is used at the ends of clauses in predicate positions. This form is also variously known as plain form (基本形 kihonkei) or dictionary form (辞書形 jishokei) – it is the form that verbs are listed under in a dictionary. is prefixed to nominals and is used to define or classify the noun, similar to a relative clause in English. In modern Japanese it is practically identical to the terminal form, except that verbs are generally not inflected for politeness; in old Japanese these forms differed. Further, na-nominals behave differently in terminal and attributive positions; see adjectives, below. is used for conditional and subjunctive forms, using the -ba ending. is used to turn verbs into commands. Adjectives do not have an imperative stem form. indicate existential properties, such as "to be" (いる iru), "to be able to do" (出来る dekiru), "to need" (要る iru), etc. These verbs generally do not have a continuative conjugation with -iru because they are semantically continuative already. conjugate with the auxiliary -iru to indicate the progressive aspect. Examples: "to eat" (食べる taberu), "to drink" (飲む nomu), "to think" (考える kangaeru). To illustrate the conjugation, 食べる  taberu ("to eat") → 食べている  tabete iru ("to be eating"). conjugate with -iru to indicate a repeated action, or a continuing state after some action. Example: 知る  shiru ("to know") → 知っている  shitte iru ("to be knowing"); 打つ  utsu ("to hit") → 打っている  utte iru ("to be hitting (repeatedly)"). indicate uncontrollable action or emotion. These verbs generally have no volitional, imperative or potential conjugation. Examples: 好む  konomu, "to like / to prefer" (emotive), 見える  mieru, "to be visible" (non-emotive). indicate motion. Examples: 歩く  aruku ("to walk"), 帰る  kaeru ("to return"). In the continuative form (see below) they take the particle ni to indicate a purpose. verbs with a stem ending in i. The terminal stem form always rhymes with -iru. Examples: 見る  miru ("to see"), 着る  kiru ("to wear"). verbs with a stem ending in e. The terminal stem form always rhymes with -eru. Examples: 食べる  taberu ("to eat"), くれる  kureru ("to give" (to someone of lower or more intimate status)). (Note that some Group 1 verbs resemble Group 2b verbs, but their stems end in r, not e.) verbs with a stem ending in a consonant. When this is r and the verb ends in -eru, it is not apparent from the terminal form whether the verb is Group 1 or Group 2b, e.g. 帰る  kaeru ("to return"). If the stem ends in w, that sound only appears in before the final a of the irrealis form. which has only one member, する  (suru, "to do"). In Japanese grammars these words are classified as サ変  sa-hen, an abbreviation of サ行変格活用  sa-gyō henkaku katsuyō, sa-row irregular conjugation). which also has one member, 来る  (kuru, "to come"). The Japanese name for this class is カ行変格活用  ka-gyō henkaku katsuyō or simply カ変  ka-hen. are verbs in the continuative form with the particle ni. E.g. 見る  miru 'to see' → 見に  mi ni 'for the purpose of seeing', used for instance as: 見に行く mi ni iku, go to see (something). are adjectives in the continuative form, as mentioned above. are grammatical nouns that function as adverbs. Example: 一番  ichiban 'most highly'. are words that mimic sounds or concepts. Examples: きらきら  kirakira 'sparklingly', ぽっくり  pokkuri 'suddenly', するする surusuru 'smoothly (sliding)', etc. are usually just called verb endings or conjugated forms. These auxiliaries do not function as independent verbs. are normal verbs that lose their independent meaning when used as auxiliaries. genitive phrase, i.e., noun modified by another noun ("the cover of the book", "the book's cover"); noun governed by an adposition ("on the table", "underneath the table"); comparison ("[X is] bigger than Y", i.e., "compared to Y, X is big"). noun modified by an adjective ("black cat"). genitive phrase: "猫の色" (neko no iro), cat GEN color = "the cat's (neko no) color (iro)"; noun governed by an adposition:日本に (nihon ni), Japan in = "in Japan"; comparison: "Yより大きい" (Y yori ookii), Y than big = "bigger than Y"; noun modified by an adjective: kuroi neko = "black cat". nouns verbal nouns (correspond to English gerunds like 'studying', 'jumping', which denote activities) nominal adjectives (names vary, also called na-adjectives or "adjectival nouns") verbs adjectives (so-called i-adjectives) The -a and -o irrealis forms for Group 1 verbs were historically one, but since the post-WWII spelling reforms they have been written differently. In modern Japanese the -o form is used only for the volitional mood and the -a form is used in all other cases; see also the conjugation table below. The unexpected ending is due to the verb's root being tsukaw- but [w] only being pronounced before [a] in modern Japanese. This is an entirely different verb; する  suru has no potential form. These forms change depending on the final syllable of the verb's dictionary form (whether u, ku, gu, su, etc.). For details, see Euphonic changes, below, and the article Japanese verb conjugations and adjective declensions. adjectival verbs (conventionally called "i-adjectives") (形容詞 keiyōshi)&nbsp;– these have roots and conjugating stem forms, and are semantically and morphologically similar to stative verbs. adjectival nouns (conventionally called "na-adjectives") (形容動詞 keiyōdōshi, lit. "adjectival verb")&nbsp;– these are nouns that combine with the copula. The attributive and terminal forms were formerly 安き  .ki and 安し  .shi, respectively; in modern Japanese these are used productively for stylistic reasons only, although many set phrases such as 名無し nanashi (anonymous) and よし yoshi (sometimes written yosh', general positive interjection) derive from them. The imperative form is extremely rare in modern Japanese, restricted to set patterns like 遅かれ早かれ  osokare hayakare 'sooner or later', where they are treated as adverbial phrases. It is impossible for an imperative form to be in a predicate position. note that these are just forms of the i-type adjective ない  nai since most adjectives describe non-volitional conditions, the volitional form is interpreted as "it is possible", if sensible. In some rare cases it is semi-volitional: 良かろう  yokarō 'OK' (lit: let it be good) in response to a report or request. particle + verb (term. or cont. or -te form) particle + noun + particle noun + particle Note: 得る eru/uru is the only modern verb of shimo nidan type (and it is different from the shimo nidan type of classical Japanese), with conjugations: irrealis え, continuative え, terminal える or うる, attributive うる, hypothetical うれ, imperative えろ or えよ. Bloch, Bernard. (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese I: Inflection. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 66, 97–109. Bloch, Bernard. (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese II: Syntax. Language, 22, 200–248. Chafe, William L. (1976). Giveness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics, and point of view. In C. Li (Ed.), Subject and topic (pp.&nbsp;25–56). New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-447350-4. Jorden, Eleanor Harz, Noda, Mari. (1987). Japanese: The Spoken Language Katsuki-Pestemer, Noriko. (2009): A Grammar of Classical Japanese. München: LINCOM. ISBN 978-3-929075-68-7. Kiyose, Gisaburo N. (1995). Japanese Grammar: A New Approach. Kyoto: Kyoto University Press. ISBN 4-87698-016-0. Kuno, Susumu. (1973). The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-11049-0. Kuno, Susumu. (1976). Subject, theme, and the speaker's empathy: A re-examination of relativization phenomena. In Charles N. Li (Ed.), Subject and topic (pp.&nbsp;417–444). New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-447350-4. Makino, Seiichi & Tsutsui, Michio. (1986). A dictionary of basic Japanese grammar. Japan Times. ISBN 4-7890-0454-6 Makino, Seiichi & Tsutsui, Michio. (1995). A dictionary of intermediate Japanese grammar. Japan Times. ISBN 4-7890-0775-8 Martin, Samuel E. (1975). A reference grammar of Japanese. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-01813-4. McClain, Yoko Matsuoka. (1981). Handbook of modern Japanese grammar: 口語日本文法便覧 [Kōgo Nihon bunpō benran]. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press. ISBN 4-590-00570-0; ISBN 0-89346-149-0. Mizutani, Osamu; & Mizutani, Nobuko. (1987). How to be polite in Japanese: 日本語の敬語 [Nihongo no keigo]. Tokyo: Japan Times. ISBN 4-7890-0338-8. Shibatani, Masayoshi. (1990). Japanese. In B. Comrie (Ed.), The major languages of east and south-east Asia. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-04739-0. Shibatani, Masayoshi. (1990). The languages of Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-36070-6 (hbk); ISBN 0-521-36918-5 (pbk). Shibamoto, Janet S. (1985). Japanese women's language. New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-640030-X. Graduate Level Tsujimura, Natsuko. (1996). An introduction to Japanese linguistics. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-19855-5 (hbk); ISBN 0-631-19856-3 (pbk). Upper Level Textbooks Tsujimura, Natsuko. (Ed.) (1999). The handbook of Japanese linguistics. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-20504-7. Readings/Anthologies FAQ for sci.lang.japan. Nihongoresources grammar book Tae Kim's Guide to Learning Japanese Japanese grammar guide Shoko Hamano, Visualizing Japanese Grammar&nbsp;– Animated Japanese grammar lessons from George Washington University. On particles in Japanese
