  Jerry O'Neil Lawler (born November 29, 1949) is an American semi-retired professional wrestler and color commentator. He is currently signed to WWE, where he serves as the color commentator on Main Event and SmackDown. Lawler is known throughout the professional wrestling world under the ring name Jerry "The King" Lawler. Prior to joining WWE in 1992 (then known as the World Wrestling Federation), Lawler wrestled in numerous territories, winning 168 championships throughout his career. Lawler is a one-time AWA World Heavyweight Champion and a three-time WCWA World Heavyweight Champion.  Lawler unified both titles by defeating Kerry Von Erich at Superclash III, forming the USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship, a championship which he held 28 times.  Lawler has held more championships than any other current WWE wrestler, though he has never won any WWE championships since joining the company.  In 2007, Lawler was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame. While working in Memphis, Tennessee as a disc jockey, Lawler's artistic ability attracted the attention of local wrestling promoter Aubrey Griffith. The two made an agreement in which Lawler would give Griffith free publicity in exchange for free wrestling training. Lawler debuted as a wrestler in 1970 and won his first championship in September 1971 by winning a battle royal. He soon won the NWA Southern Tag Team Championship under the managerial service of Sam Bass with partner Jim White. In 1974, Lawler began feuding with Jackie Fargo, who had been his trainer and mentor. This led to a match for the NWA Southern Heavyweight Championship. On July 24, 1974, Lawler was booked to win the belt and the title of "King of Wrestling." During 1975, Lawler teamed with a variety of partners such as Mr Wrestling II, Don Greene, and Bob Orton, Jr. He won the NWA Macon Tag Team Championship twice during this period. While Lawler began his career as a heel, he became a face after splitting from Bass at the end of 1974. On November 12, 1979, while working in the Continental Wrestling Association (CWA), Lawler defeated Superstar Billy Graham to become the CWA World Champion. In 1980, his career was put on hold due to a broken leg, but he returned to the ring after several months. In 1982, Lawler began a notorious feud with comedian Andy Kaufman. At the time, Kaufman wrestled women as part of his skits and had declared himself the Intergender Heavyweight Champion. On April 5, Lawler, who had taken exception to the skits, wrestled Kaufman in Memphis. During the course of the match, Lawler delivered two piledrivers to his opponent, sending him to the hospital. On July 29, Lawler slapped Kaufman in the face on an episode of Late Night with David Letterman. Kaufman responded by throwing his coffee on Lawler. Years later, Lawler appeared as himself in the Kaufman biopic Man on the Moon; the movie revealed that Lawler's feud with Kaufman had been kayfabe (staged). Lawler later claimed that not only was his entire feud with Kaufman staged, but the two were actually very good friends. On March 7, 1983, Lawler won the AWA International Championship by defeating Austin Idol. He defeated Ken Patera on July 25 to begin his second reign as the International Champion. Lawler became the NWA Mid America Champion on April 12, 1984 when he was booked to defeat Randy Savage for the title. In 1985, Lawler traveled to Japan, where he won the Polynesian Pacific title on January 25, 1986. He later returned to the United States, where he defeated Bill Dundee on July 29, 1986 to begin a new reign as the AWA International Champion. Lawler feuded with Tommy Rich, Austin Idol, and Paul E. Dangerously throughout early 1987. The animosity began after controversy over an AWA World Championship title shot involving Nick Bockwinkel. During the feud, the trio defeated Lawler in a steel cage match and cut his hair, which caused a riot in the Mid-South Coliseum. Lawler won the AWA World Heavyweight Championship from Curt Hennig on May 9, 1988. During his reign, Lawler feuded with World Class Championship Wrestling's Champion Kerry Von Erich. He defeated Von Erich on December 15, 1988 at Superclash III to unify the two titles. Soon after, Lawler's issues with Verne Gagne led to his departure from the AWA. In 1991 and 1992, while working in the United States Wrestling Association (USWA), Lawler teamed with Jeff Jarrett in a match against The Moondogs over the USWA World Tag Team Championship. Throughout his entire career, especially in WWE, Lawler's gimmick has always involved him referring to himself as "The King", he always carries his signature kings crown and occasionally wears other king's attire such as a cape. Lawler has always been a fan of one-liners, and occasionally uses them in order to insult his opponents and mostly used during his commentary career for WWE as a colour commentator where he often uses his high pitched voice when shocking events take place in either a match or in a backstage skit. Lawler has stated that the high voice he often uses is based on Curly from the Three Stooges. From the mid 90's until the mid 2000's, Lawler mostly wore bright, shiny gold shirts at televised WWE events and still wears them on special occasions, most recently he wore one on an episode of RAW in January 2014. Lawler now wears short sleeved t-shirts with a crown logo printed on. Lawler began his WWF career in December 1992 as an announcer on WWF Superstars of Wrestling.WWF Superstars results From 1993 to 1995, he feuded with Bret Hart and the rest of the Hart family. The feud began at King of the Ring when Lawler interrupted Hart's victory ceremony and attacked Bret. Lawler claimed that he was the only true king in the World Wrestling Federation (WWF), and the two were scheduled to wrestle at SummerSlam to settle the dispute. At the event, however, Lawler came to the ring on crutches and claimed that he could not wrestle because of injuries suffered in a car accident. Hart faced Lawler's "court jester", Doink the Clown instead, and beat him by submission. Lawler then attacked Hart, revealing that he was not injured. Hart defeated Lawler by submission but refused to release the Sharpshooter. As a result, the referee reversed the decision and awarded the title of "Undisputed King of the World Wrestling Federation" to Lawler. Simultaneously, in a form of cross-promotion, Lawler engaged in a bitter feud with Vince McMahon (who at the time was never acknowledged as the actual owner of the World Wrestling Federation) back in the USWA. There  Lawler played the babyface to his hometown Memphis audience, whereas McMahon (who had always played face in the WWF) was being portrayed as a smug heel intent on dethroning Lawler as the king of professional wrestling. As part of the cross-promotion, McMahon, Bret and Owen Hart, Giant González, Tatanka, and "Macho Man" Randy Savage would begin appearing on USWA television to further the feud. While the program continued in the USWA, the feud between Lawler and McMahon would not be acknowledged on WWF television. The Hart Family (Bret, Owen, Bruce, and Keith) were scheduled to face a team captained by Lawler in an elimination match at Survivor Series. However, Shawn Michaels had to take Lawler's place because Lawler was facing legal troubles. As a result, the feud between Lawler and Vince McMahon back in the USWA was also abruptly discontinued. Lawler did not face Bret Hart at another pay-per-view until the first In Your House, when he beat Hart after Hakushi and his manager Shinja interfered. This set up a "Kiss My Foot" match at King of the Ring 1995, which Bret won. As a result, Lawler was forced to kiss Bret's feet. The feud took one final turn when Lawler introduced his "dentist" Isaac Yankem, D.D.S.. After Hart defeated Yankem by disqualification, however, the feud quickly disappeared. Following the end of his legal troubles which kept him out of Survivor Series 1993, Lawler eventually returned to the WWF at WrestleMania X, which was also his first appearance as a commentator on a WWF pay-per-view. During the main event of the night, "Rowdy" Roddy Piper served as special guest referee for the second WWF World Heavyweight Championship match. During this Lawler began making disparaging remarks about him. Lawler would continue to berate Piper on later episodes of Monday Night Raw, including bringing a skinny kid into the ring dressed as Piper and forcing him to kiss his feet. This ultimately led to a match between the two at King of the Ring 1994 which Lawler lost. In the fall of 1994, Lawler initiated a feud with Doink the Clown. Lawler popped the balloons carried by Doink's midget sidekick, Dink. After Doink and Dink retaliated, Lawler introduced a midget sidekick of his own, who he named Queasy. In the following weeks, Doink added two more sidekicks, Wink and Pink, while Lawler introduced Sleazy and Cheesy. This led to an elimination match at Survivor Series 1994, which Lawler's team won. After the match, however, Lawler's team turned on him, joining with Doink's team to attack Lawler.  In late 1994 and early 1995, Lawler wrestled briefly in Smoky Mountain Wrestling (SMW) while still continuing to commentate sporadically for the WWF. During his absences, Shawn Michaels filled in for him as color commentator on Monday Night Raw. He defeated Tony Anthony for the promotion's top title in January 1995. By 1996, Lawler wrestled occasionally on WWF Superstars where he would take on jobbers while holding a microphone in the ring to, essentially, "do the commentary on (his) very own matches" while occasionally serving as the official cornerman for Isaac Yankem D.D.S. After a brief feud with The Ultimate Warrior, Lawler began feuding with Jake Roberts after making fun of Roberts' drug and alcohol problems. The two met in a match at SummerSlam 1996, which Lawler won. After the match, Lawler poured Jim Beam whiskey down Roberts' throat. In 1997, Lawler became heavily involved in the working relationship between the WWF and Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW). In interviews and commentary, he referred to the promotion as "Extremely Crappy Wrestling". His frequent insults toward ECW eventually led to the promotion "invading" Monday Night Raw in February 1997 and ultimately to a match with ECW wrestler Tommy Dreamer at ECW's Hardcore Heaven pay-per-view in August, which Dreamer won. In mid-1997, Lawler entered the King of the Ring tournament for the first time and advanced to the semi-final round where he was defeated by Mankind. By the fall, the WWF introduced a new "light-heavyweight division" to compete with World Championship Wrestling's cruiserweight division. Lawler's son, Brian Christopher, was one of the major superstars in the division, although the WWF played up an angle where both Lawler and Christopher would deny their family relationship, even though the two would aide each other in matches and so on. By 1998, Lawler rarely wrestled in the WWF and focused on commentary. Despite their feud in the USWA in 1993, by 1998, Vince McMahon had turned heel in the WWF for the first time and left the announce position, to which Lawler began praising McMahon's name on commentary as part of his own heel persona, much to the chagrin of Jim Ross. It was McMahon's departure from the commentary team which led to the strong on-screen chemistry between Lawler and Ross in subsequent years. This played a key role in a change of Lawler's character; although he still supported the heels, he showed a sense of right and wrong, and would condemn actions of heels when they went too far. He would become a full-time face by 2007. This began when Lawler surprisingly attacked Tazz when he started bullying Ross. At SummerSlam, The King wrestled Tazz in defense of Ross. With the creation of the XFL in 2001, Lawler was given the job as an announcer for the new football league. Lawler claims that he never wanted to announce for the XFL, but that he agreed to it after McMahon and Kevin Dunn asked him. In February 2001, Lawler's then-wife Stacy "The Kat" Carter was released by the WWF, and Lawler quit the company in protest. In his account, there was no clear notice as to why she was fired; when Jim Ross broke the news to him, he stated that the Creative Team simply said that Stacy had "an attitude problem."  Vince McMahon told Lawler that he did not know exactly what the attitude problem was, and failed to straighten the issue to the Lawlers. Considering that McMahon was Head of the Talent Creative Team, Lawler found it highly suspicious that McMahon then allowed him simply to quit, as if McMahon knew it would happen. Lawler has stated several theories as to why he was allowed to leave. His first involves the ascent of Carter's career alongside the downfall of Chyna's. In his contention, Chyna was jealous of his wife's push inside the company, in part due to the Right to Censor storyline, and in part because of his wife's offer to pose for Playboy magazine. Until that time, Chyna had been the second major wrestling star from the World Wrestling Federation to have done a piece in Playboy (after Sable); during Chyna's debut on the adult magazine, she had suddenly broken her friendship with Carter. In interviews, he has also stated that there may have been an alternate reason, namely, that the company wanted to fire him. He also criticizes McMahon for the cavalier attitude he had given him on the day he quit. In his recollection, Jim Ross was fired by McMahon with exactly the same demeanor while struck with a bout of Bell's palsy in 1994, a time when Ross' "usefulness" had run out. Lawler felt that Carter's release was an attempt to remove him as well, stating that the company was well-aware that he would walk-out alongside his wife. Lawler's replacement with Paul Heyman launched a theory in which Heyman was promoted at Lawler's expense. Internet rumors circulated that the company was in better terms with Heyman than Lawler, and used remarks Lawler had made in criticism of ECW to launch a theory whereby Heyman wanted Lawler out. Lawler has stated repeatedly that he has no resentment towards Paul Heyman, accusing the media and internet theorists of spreading false information. During his absence from the WWF, Lawler made appearances on the independent circuit in both Australia and North America, as well as joining the fledgling Xcitement Wrestling Federation promotion alongside WCW veteran Tony Schiavone as a color commentator. He also made appearances with the International Wrestling Cartel and with Maryland Championship Wrestling, where he held the promotion's world title after defeating The Bruiser on November 2.  On November 19, 2001, Lawler returned to the WWF. He was reintroduced by Vince McMahon on Raw as the replacement for color commentator (and Alliance member) Paul Heyman, who had been (kayfabe) fired in the aftermath of the Alliance's loss at the previous night's Survivor Series. As he had been before his departure, Lawler once again became color commentator on Raw and pay-per-view events alongside Jim Ross and SmackDown! with Michael Cole, until the brands were separated and Lawler became exclusive to Raw. Lawler stated that his well-worked chemistry with Jim Ross has been a result of their different styles; according to Lawler, Jim Ross is a fine storyteller and keeps fans well-versed with current storylines, whereas he provides reaction and emotion to liven the commentary.it's good to be the king. Jerry Lawler pg. 372 In 2003, Raw's announce team of Lawler and Jim Ross feuded with Sunday Night Heat's team of Jonathan Coachman and Al Snow. At Unforgiven, Lawler and Ross lost a match against Coachman and Snow, thus losing their right to do commentary on Raw. In a rematch, however, Ross defeated Coachman, winning Lawler and Ross their position back. In June 2006, Extreme Championship Wrestling was re-launched and began a small invasion within WWE again. ECW and WWE went head to head for several weeks on Raw, which spanned to include the SmackDown! superstars. This created tension between the Raw and SmackDown! announce teams, as Tazz, an ECW alumnus, insulted and criticized Jim Ross until Lawler came to Ross' defense, reigniting their feud from 2000. The feud concluded when Tazz and Lawler faced each other in a match at One Night Stand, which Tazz won in only 30 seconds by making Lawler pass out to the Tazzmission after a distraction from Joey Styles, who Lawler had slapped just prior to the match. In July 2006, Randy Orton began a feud with Hulk Hogan. Lawler attacked Orton in defense of Hogan, which set up a match between them on Raw. Orton defeated Lawler after a low blow and an RKO. On March 31, 2007, Lawler was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by William Shatner, whom Lawler had a memorable altercation with on a January 1995 episode of Raw. In August, King Booker claimed to be the only one entitled to be known as "King". After being beaten by Booker in the ring, Lawler was supposed to be forced to crown his opponent at an August 13 show in Madison Square Garden. During the ceremony, however, Lawler announced another king as a new opponent for Booker, "The King of Kings" Triple H. This led to a worked brawl between Lawler and Booker. On the July 7, 2008 edition of Raw, Lawler was attacked by Kane after saving Michael Cole from a similar attack, in which Kane repeatedly asked "Is he alive or is he dead?" Later that summer, he teamed with "Hacksaw" Jim Duggan to face Ted DiBiase and Cody Rhodes for the World Tag Team Championship but lost. At the 2009 Royal Rumble, while announcing the Rumble Match, Lawler said "Randy Orton needs to be the winner of this Royal Rumble, but Orton's almost out at the hands of Triple H", as Randy Orton was the winner of the Royal Rumble many people are led to believe that Jerry Lawler made a mistake by saying this. However in previous weeks, Randy Orton had abused Vince McMahon and his family thus he was in danger of being fired, so he had to win the Royal Rumble to keep his job. It wasn't edited out of the DVD and can also be seen on YouTube. On the March 23, 2009 edition of Raw, Lawler challenged Chris Jericho to a match because of his disrespect and erratic behavior to WWE Hall of Famers, which Jericho accepted. The following week, Lawler lost to Jericho after submitting to the Walls of Jericho. After the match, Jericho outlined how he would remain supreme against WWE Hall of Famers at WrestleMania XXV. On the July 20 episode of Raw, Lawler announced himself as the opponent against The Brian Kendrick. He went on to defeat Kendrick. On the November 16 edition of Raw, after recent acquisition, Sheamus attacked the timekeeper in frustration for not receiving an opponent, Lawler left the announce table to confront Sheamus and check on the victim, only to receive a kick to the head for his troubles. On June 7, 2010, during a Viewer's Choice edition of Raw, Lawler lost his crown to IRS because he had apparently not paid his taxes, but it was regained by Quinton Jackson later on. At the end of the night, Lawler was one of the many employees at ringside that were brutally attacked by the season 1 NXT rookies. Lawler however, was the only person at ringside that fought back, as he used punches and chops to attack the NXT rookies assaulting him until it was a 3-on-1 assault. The following week on Raw, Lawler and the Raw roster fought off the now-called "The Nexus" when they attempted to ambush John Cena a second time. On June 28, Lawler, Ricky Steamboat, Michael Hayes, Arn Anderson, Mike Rotunda, and Dean Malenko were severely attacked by the Nexus, just as they were celebrating Steamboat's career. Josh Mathews replaced Lawler on color commentator for the remainder of the show. On the July 26, 2010 episode of Raw, Lawler teamed with Mark Henry, Goldust, Yoshi Tatsu, Evan Bourne and The Hart Dynasty in a tag team elimination match versus the Nexus. Lawler was eliminated by Heath Slater.  On the November 29, 2010 King of the Ring Raw special, Lawler, (who was celebrating his 61st birthday) challenged The Miz to a WWE Championship match. It was granted by the anonymous Raw General Manager, who made it a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match, and it was Lawler's first shot at the title.  Miz retained the championship after interference by Alex Riley and Michael Cole. Cole's interference would cause tension between the two. On the December 6 episode of Raw, Cole would first apologize to Lawler, only for him to take it back and demand an apology from Lawler to himself. After Lawler threatened to attack Cole, the anonymous Raw General Manager would then issue a "cease and desist" order, which barred any physicality between them and that if either of them violated the order, that individual would have their contract terminated immediately. Lawler continued to challenge with The Miz, where on the December 20 Raw, Lawler teamed with Randy Orton and John Morrison to take on Miz, Riley and Sheamus in a 6-man Tag match which Lawler won by pinning Miz. This led to a rematch between Miz and Lawler the following week, with Lawler once again getting the victory, this time by count-out after Morrison got involved. Miz attacked Lawler from behind as Lawler was sitting at the announce table later that night. Lawler teamed with Orton again on the January 10, 2011 Raw, facing on Miz and Riley, which Lawler won by pinning Riley.   Lawler won a 7-man Raw Rumble match on the January 31 Raw to earn a WWE Championship match against The Miz at WWE Elimination Chamber. At the pay-per-view, Lawler was unsuccessful in winning the title, ending the feud. The following night on Raw, Lawler, after having enough of Cole's attitude, which included the mocking of Lawler's mother's recent death, would challenge him to a match at WrestleMania XXVII. Cole would respond by throwing water into Lawler's face, with Lawler chasing Cole off to the backstage area. On the February 28 edition of Raw, Cole accepted Lawler's challenge to a match at WrestleMania and announced that he would be trained in the coming weeks by Jack Swagger for the upcoming match.  Stone Cold Steve Austin was announced as the guest referee for the match the following week.http://www.wwe.com/shows/raw/archive/03072011/mainarticle  On the March 14 Raw, Lawler was confronted by his son, Brian Lawler, who was invited to Raw by Michael Cole to "expose" his father's character. Brian ranted about various problems he had with his father before slapping him and leaving. Cole continued to harass Lawler after Brian left, but was interrupted by a returning Jim Ross. Before JR could attack Cole, Swagger attacked Lawler from behind, and then proceeded to attack and lock in the ankle lock on JR, while Cole harassed him. Lawler tried to stop the attack, but fell victim to the ankle lock as well.http://www.wwe.com/shows/raw/results/17193200/ Lawler originally won the Wrestlemania match by submission but the anonymous Raw General Manager reversed the decision due to Stone Cold physically getting involved in the match by pushing Cole, making Cole the winner by disqualification. Lawler and Jim Ross then faced Cole and Swagger at Extreme Rules in a Country Whipping match, where they were defeated. Lawler challenged Cole to one last match at Over the Limit, even going as far as to putting his Hall of Fame ring on the line and would personally induct Cole into the Hall of Fame itself. Cole would decline at first, but would be accepted by Swagger later that night. During the contract signing, Cole announced it would be a "Kiss My Foot" match. At the pay-per-view, Lawler defeated Cole. Afterwards, Jim Ross, Eve Torres and Bret Hart helped Lawler by making Cole kiss his foot. Following the pay-per-view, Cole apologized to Lawler, much to Lawler's delight.  Lawler competed in the 2012 Royal Rumble match as the number 12 entrant, but was eliminated by Cody Rhodes after 43 seconds. He, along with Booker T, eliminated Michael Cole afterwards. On the April 30, 2012 episode of Raw, Lawler competed in a Beat the Clock challenge to determine the number one contender for the WWE Championship match at Over the Limit, but was defeated by Daniel Bryan, who went on to challenge for the title. On the July 9 episode of Raw, Lawler went against Michael Cole in a WrestleMania XXVII rematch, which he quickly won, but the anonymous Raw General Manager, who returned that night as the guest general manager, reversed the decision and Lawler lost to Cole by disqualification following interference by Booker T. Santino Marella came out to reveal that Hornswoggle was the Anonymous Raw General Manager, who was hiding underneath the ring. On the July 23 episode of WWE Raw 1000, after CM Punk attacked The Rock, Lawler would mention on commentary that "CM Punk has turned his back on the WWE Universe". The following week on Raw, Punk would confront Lawler about what he said before being interrupted by Big Show. On the August 20 episode of Raw, after John Cena wouldn't tell Punk he was the "Best in the World", Punk would ask for Lawler to get in the ring and say it for the WWE Universe. After Lawler refused to say Punk was the "Best in the World" too, Punk would attack Lawler from behind. The next week on Raw, after Lawler demanded an apology from Punk, Punk would challenge Lawler to a match, which Lawler would accept later that night, where Punk would defeat Lawler in a Steel Cage match. Before the September 3 episode of Raw, Punk and Lawler brawled backstage, with Punk getting the upper hand before officials stopped them, Lawler was kicked in the throat, which caused Lawler to miss commentary that night, with The Miz filling in for him. On September 10, 2012 during Raw at the Bell Centre in Montreal, not long after defeating CM Punk and Dolph Ziggler in a tag-team match with Randy Orton, Lawler legitimately collapsed at the announcers table while Kane and Daniel Bryan competed against The Prime Time Players.Breaking news: Jerry "The King" Lawler collapses ringside at Raw in Montreal Fellow commentator Michael Cole continued to call that match alone, as well as the next match, before WWE (through Cole) announced the medical situation with Lawler. The remaining matches on the show went ahead as scheduled but without commentary, and updates on Jerry's condition were provided by Cole. At the end of the broadcast, it was announced that he had received CPR, but was breathing independently and reacting to stimulation. It was later confirmed on WWE.com that Lawler had suffered a heart attack. On September 11, 2012, he underwent an angioplasty to improve blood flow to his heart.  On September 12, 2012, Lawler was reported to be slowly being eased off sedation, his ventilator removed. He was able to blink, nod, and squeeze with his hands, and that same day, the results of several CT scans showed no signs of brain damage. By September 17, Lawler had returned to his home in Memphis."Jerry Lawler returns home to Memphis". WWE.com. September 17, 2012 During Lawler's hospital stay, it was determined that his heart attack was not caused by a blocked artery, but was instead an unexplained cardiac arrest. Lawler was soon medically cleared to continue wrestling; to this day, he regularly works indy shows on weekends when it does not conflict with his WWE schedule (the company only requires him to work on Smackdown and pay-per-view events).  It was announced on October 29, 2012 that Lawler would return to WWE on the November 12 episode of Raw. He continued his rivalry with CM Punk after his emotional return was interrupted by CM Punk and Paul Heyman, who re-enacted his heart attack. Lawler continued to favor Punk's opponents, hoping that Punk would lose the WWE Championship, which he eventually did to The Rock at the Royal Rumble much to Lawler's delight.Jerry "The King" Lawler returns to Raw: Raw, Nov. 12, 2012 On the March 17, 2014 episode of Raw, Lawler was blamed by Kane for allowing fans to enter the ring the previous week in Memphis as part of Daniel Bryan's Occupy RAW Movement. He was forced in the ring by The Shield but The Shield instead attacked Kane. On January 8, 2015, it was announced on WWE.com that Lawler will be a part of the SmackDown broadcast team as a color commentator along with Michael Cole and Byron Saxton starting January 15, ending his 19-year run as a color commentator of Raw as he was replaced by Booker T. On the March 30 episode of Raw, Lawler made a one night return to commentary for Raw with Saxton to fill in for Michael Cole, Booker T and JBL after they were assaulted by Brock Lesnar after Lesnar was refused his rematch against Seth Rollins. Lawler turned heel for the first time since 2000 on the January 7, 2016 episode of SmackDown when he started favoring heels again for the first time since he went from tweener to full face in 2005. However, as was the case with him as a heel before, he still did not condone certain heel actions.   In 2007 it was announced that Lawler would be participating in a 'dream match' with Hulk Hogan which had been set to take place in the Memphis Wrestling promotion on April 27. The match had been heavily-hyped by promoter Corey Maclin as Hogan had competed in the Memphis territory early in his career. On April 12, however, Lawler pulled out of the event citing his contractual obligations to WWE rendering him unable to appear on a show that was due to be filmed by VH1 for the television show Hogan Knows Best. On January 11, 2008, Maclin revealed that he filed a lawsuit against WWE, claiming that pressure on Lawler (and others) to withdraw from the event violated section two of the Sherman Antitrust Act. In May 2010, Lawler announced a new TV  wrestling show called, Jerry Lawler's Memphis Wrestling. The show was set to debut on Ion Network channel 50 in Memphis on June 5 at the classic 11 am timespot. Three episodes were taped May 20, 2010 at the Vine in Memphis. On September 11, 2010, Lawler announced that there would no longer be any new shows, but that the talent was still available for fundraisers. On October 24, 2015, Lawler defeated Terry Funk by disqualification at USA Championship Wrestling in Jackson, Tennessee at the Oman Arena in what was Funk's retirement match. Lawler has created some musical recordings. Among these are two late-1970s singles: "Cadillac Man/Memphis", and "Bad News". During his feud with manager Jimmy Hart (Lawler is a factor for "The Mouth of the South" Jimmy Hart entering professional wrestling; Lawler wanted to record a wrestling album with him singing and, since they had gone to school together, he called Hart and asked him to be a part of it) in the mid-1980s, Hart became known as "The Wimp", a nickname given to him by Lawler and chanted by fans. Hart was the subject of the song "Wimpbusters", which was sung by Lawler to the tune of the popular hit "Ghostbusters" by Ray Parker, Jr.. A music video was also made, featuring Lawler, legendary announcer Lance Russell, and wrestlers such as Randy Savage, Jimmy Valiant, Dutch Mantel, Tommy Rich, and Rufus R. Jones, along with footage of "The King" beating Hart and his "First Family." A very young Brian Christopher also made an appearance as a young child being bullied, and another child is seen wearing a replica of Tully Blanchard's West Texas State jersey. He also recorded a CD titled "Memphis' Other King". In 1998, Lawler appeared in the movie Man on the Moon, starring Jim Carrey. According to Lawler's autobiography, It's Good To Be The King... Sometimes, an incident involving Jim Carrey forgetting a line led to animosity between the two actors during filming. Between scenes Jim Carrey often remained in character as Andy Kaufman and at one point spit on Jerry, just as Kaufman had done in 1982. A 'stunned' Lawler reacted by grabbing Carrey by the hair and locked him in a sleeper hold and jerking his neck—supposedly sending Carrey to the hospital. In 1999, Lawler ran for mayor of Memphis, Tennessee. His platform focused on making the streets safer for residents, beautifying the city, and improving the quality of education. In addition, he vowed to attract businesses to Memphis, improve the flow of traffic, create more parks, and decrease property taxes. Lawler ended up with 11.7% of ballots, beating twelve of the fifteen candidates. Ultimately, however, Mayor Willie Herenton was easily reelected. In 2000, Lawler made a very brief cameo appearance in the music video of I Can't Lie To Me By Clay Davidson. In 2002, he released an autobiography titled It's Good To Be The King... Sometimes. On July 8, 2009, Lawler again ran for the position of Mayor of Memphis in a special mayoral election on October 15, 2009. He was in 5th with 4% of the vote. Lawler is also an accomplished commercial artist, designing graphics for various companies, including WWE. In 2007, he painted the cover of the wrestling comic book, Headlocked.The Editor Visionary Comics Sticking to its (sic) Guns August 24, 2008 Comic Book Bin In 2012 he played the role of Sheriff Jackson Cole in the comedy, horror film Girls Gone Dead.http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1884318/ Lawler has provided his voice for numerous WWE video games in which he has appeared as a commentator. He is also a playable character in a number of WWE Games, most recently WWE All Stars as a wrestler, WWE '12 as both a wrestler and a commentator and WWE '13 , WWE 2K14, WWE 2K15, and WWE 2K16 simply as a commentator.  Lawler is the cousin of fellow professional wrestler The Honky Tonk Man. Lawler has been married three times.  He has two children, Brian, and Kevin, from his marriage to his first wife, Kay. His son Brian, who has previously wrestled in WWE as "Brian Christopher" and "Grandmaster Sexay," is now wrestling in independent promotions. His other son, Kevin, has been in professional wrestling as both a referee and wrestler under the names "Kevin Christian" and "Freddie Gilbert," the latter of which was used during a stint as the "brother" of Eddie Gilbert.  In his book It's Good To Be The King ... Sometimes, Lawler says he believes Kevin's short physical stature has prevented him from reaching success similar to Brian.  In August 2008, Kevin was arrested on charges of trespassing and aggravated burglary. After divorcing Kay, Lawler was later married to Paula from February 14, 1982 to October 2, 1991. He met his third wife, Stacy "The Kat" Carter, at a charity softball game in Memphis, Tennessee on July 23, 1989.Jerry Lawler. It's Good to Be the King ... Sometimes (p.333) They married in September 2000. In mid-February 2001, Carter (who was a valet and has also made in-ring appearances) was released by the World Wrestling Federation.Jerry Lawler. It's Good to Be the King...Sometimes (p.403) Lawler then left the company in protest. Carter and Lawler later separated shortly before Lawler rejoined the WWF in November 2001. Their divorce was finalized on October 15th 2003.Jerry Lawler. It's Good to Be the King ... Sometimes (p.372-373) In 1993, Lawler was indicted on charges of allegedly raping a 15-year-old girl, which caused him to miss Survivor Series 1993. The charges were later dropped, after the girl admitted she fabricated some of the story. Lawler was arrested on March 16, 1999 after throwing a ticket at a police officer and running over the officer's foot. Though he has spent most of his life in Memphis, Lawler did spend a part of his childhood in Ohio after his father was transferred to a Ford Motor Company assembly plant in Vermilion, Ohio. From the ages of 7 to 15 his family resided in the city of Amherst, Ohio, a suburb near Cleveland.   Though this stay was brief, it would have an influence on Lawler throughout his life thereafter. He often cites Cleveland as his second-favorite city behind only Memphis and is a die-hard fan of both the Cleveland Indians and the Cleveland Browns. When WWE comes to Cleveland, Lawler will usually wear a Browns jersey or an Indians jersey (at SummerSlam 1996 he teased Browns fans by wearing a Baltimore Ravens jersey, because the original Browns moved to Baltimore and became the Ravens), and during baseball season, he will throw out the first pitch at an Indians game. Lawler is a collector of Coca-Cola and Superman merchandise, and owns a replica of the Batmobile from the 1960s Batman series.   1These title changes took place during an AWA hosted card as part of an interpromotional relationship between the American Wrestling Association, World Class Wrestling Association, and Continental Wrestling Association. Lawler also won the championship during a CWA hosted card. 2Lawler won the championship while wrestling on a CWA card in Memphis, Tennessee during the time when the AWA and CWA had a working partnership. It was the same situation during both of Lawler and Dundee's AWA World Tag Team Championship reigns.       Winner (wager) Loser (wager) Location Event Date Notes Bill Dundee (hair) Jerry Lawler (championship) Memphis, Tennessee CWA Live event http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=20258 Austin idol (hair) Jerry Lawler (hair and championship) Memphis, Tennessee CWA Live event http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=21974 Finishing moves Diving fist drop, with theatrics Piledriver Signature moves Belly-to-back suplex Body slam Dropkick Elbow drop Fireball Fist drop Multiple punches Multiple weapon shots Managers Sam Bass Scott Bowden Ronnie P. Gossett Gary Hart Jimmy Hart Jimmy Kent The Bella Twins Jim Ross Nicknames "The King" "The King of Memphis" "King Lawler"Money in the Bank (2015) kickoff: Michael Cole calls him this "Kingfish" (Usually called this when joined on commentary by Shawn Michaels) Entrance music "Going the Distance" by Bill Conti (CWA) "The Great Gate At Kiev" by Modest Mussorgsky (WWF/E; 1993–present) "Kingdom Come" by Jim Johnston (WWE; 2011) American Wrestling Association AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (35 times) AWA Southern Tag Team Championship (10 times) – with Jimmy Valiant (1), Bill Dundee (3), Mongolian Stomper (1), Jos LeDuc (1), Austin Idol (1), Plowboy Frazier (1), and Big Bubba (1) AWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)1 AWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Bill Dundee Continental Wrestling Association / Championship Wrestling Association CWA Heavyweight Championship (1 time) CWA International Heavyweight Championship (3 times) CWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Austin Idol (1) and Tommy Rich (1) NWA Mid-America Heavyweight Championship (3 times) NWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (Memphis version) (7 times) CWA Lord of the Ring (1988) Georgia Championship Wrestling NWA Macon Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Mr. Wrestling II (1) and Don Greene (1) Gulf Coast Championship Wrestling NWA Tennessee Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jim White International Wrestling Association IWA Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Jersey All Pro Wrestling JAPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Maryland Championship Wrestling MCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) MCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with The Bruiser Memphis Championship Wrestling MCW Southern Heavyweight Championship (2 times) Memphis Wrestling Memphis Wrestling Southern Heavyweight Championship (52 times) Memphis Wrestling Television Championship (1 time) NWA Mid-America NWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (Mid-America version) (10 times) NWA Southern Tag Team Championship (Mid-America version) (9 times) – with Jim White (7), Plowboy Frazier (1), and Bill Dundee (1) NWA Southern Junior Heavyweight Championship (5 times) NWA Tri-State Heavyweight Championship (Alabama version) (1 time) NWA Tri-State Tag Team Championship (Alabama version) (2 times)  &ndash; with Steve Lawler NWA United States Tag Team Championship (Mid-America version)  (1 time) &ndash; with Jackie Fargo (1) NWA Polynesian Wrestling NWA Polynesian Pacific Heavyweight Championship (1 time) NWA Virginia NWA All-Star Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Power Pro Wrestling PPW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Bill Dundee Pro Wrestling Illustrated PWI Feud of the Year (1992) with Jeff Jarrett vs. The Moondogs PWI Feud of the Year (1993) vs. Bret Hart PWI Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (1993, 1995) PWI Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year (1988, 2012)  PWI ranked him #56 of the 100 best tag teams of the "PWI Years" with Bill Dundee in 2003 PWI ranked him #12 of the 500 best singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1991 PWI ranked him #23 of the 500 best singles wrestlers in the "PWI Years" in 2003 Pro Wrestling This Week Wrestler of the Week (December 6–12, 1987) Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum (Class of 2011) Smoky Mountain Wrestling SMW Heavyweight Championship (2 times) Traditional Championship Wrestling TCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Matt Riviera United States Wrestling Association USWA Heavyweight Championship (2 times) USWA Texas Heavyweight Championship (1 time) USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship (28 times) USWA World Tag Team Championship (6 times) – with Jeff Jarrett (4) and Bill Dundee (2) Windy City Pro Wrestling WCPW Battle Royal Championship (1 time) World Class Wrestling Association WCWA World Heavyweight Championship (3 time)WCWA World Heavyweight Title history At wrestling-titles.com WCWA Texas Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Wrestling Council Caribbean Cup (2014)http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=114253 World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2007) Slammy Awards (5 times) Mouthiest (1994) I'm Talking and I Can't Shut Up (1996) Most Embarrassing Moment (1996) -  WWE.com Exclusive Video of the Year (2012) -  Comeback of the Year (2012) Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards Feud of the Year (1987) vs. Austin Idol and Tommy Rich Feud of the Year (1992) with Jeff Jarrett vs. The Moondogs Feud of the Year (1993)  vs. Bret Hart Worst Feud of the Year (1994)  vs. Doink the Clown Worst Worked Match of the Year (1994) with Sleazy, Queasy and Cheesy vs. Clowns R' Us at Survivor Series Best Color Commentator (1995, 1996) Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 1996) Worst Television Announcer (2002)
