    The Jersey Shore is the coastal region of the state of New Jersey. Geographically, the term encompasses about  http://www.nj.gov/dep/shoreprotection/ of oceanfront from New Brunswick in the north to Cape May Point in the south. The Jersey Shore area includes Middlesex County, Monmouth County, Atlantic County, Cape May County, and Ocean County. While there is no defined border between North Jersey and South Jersey, the Raritan River, Manasquan River or Interstate 195 are often mentioned as the border, with most of the shore region being located in South Jersey.Galant, Debra. "JERSEY; South Jersey Is Friendlier? Oh, Shut Up And Drive", The New York Times, April 9, 2000, accessed April 11, 2008. "For the purposes of dividing North Jersey from South Jersey, Gannett drew a line between Monmouth County and Ocean County. I decided that it would be amusing to drive down to this dividing line — which turned out to be the Manasquan River — and test the hypothesis." To many New Jersey residents, it is simply referred to as "The Shore." A commonly-said phrase within New Jersey is to go "down the shore", or to have done something "down the shore". Famous for its many boardwalks with arcades, water parks, and amusement parks boasting hundreds of rides and attractions, the Jersey Shore is a popular vacation spot for New Jerseyans, New Yorkers, and Pennsylvanians, and various other states in the Northeastern United States. Certain communities are also popular with visitors from the nearby Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario. The Jersey Shore is lined with over 40 communities, each with a different character and flavor. Some cater to summer tourists and visitors, others are completely full-year residential communities, others still are a mix of both. Below are some of the most notable oceanfront communities. Keyport, New Jersey is home to many diverse businesses, and has a bustling shopping district located on West Front Street, located one block in from the waterfront of the Raritan Bay. The business district is now under control of the Keyport Bayfront Business Cooperative (which was established in 2011 to replace the now-defunct Keyport Business Alliance) which helps to organize events that benefit the businesses in Keyport as well as the city as a whole.Heumiller, Keith. "Keyport proposes changes to business cooperative", Independent, August 15, 2013. Accessed October 16, 2013. "A number of changes could be coming to the Keyport Bayfront Business Cooperative (KBBC), which manages the borough’s business district.... The KBBC was established in late 2011 after the decertification of the borough’s previous district management corporation — the Keyport Business Alliance (KBA), which borough officials said routinely clashed with the governing body." Keyport is known for its oyster industry, which had been one of the world's largest suppliers until overfishing and pollution led to a collapse of the industry in the early to mid 20th century.Bria, Amy. "Oysters returned to bay in Keyport", Asbury Park Press, July 9, 2001. Accessed July 10, 2012. "Eighty years ago, Keyport produced more oysters for market than almost anywhere else in the world. But pollution and overfishing led to the depletion of the oyster in Raritan Bay off the shore of Keyport." In August 2010, NY/NJ Baykeeper suspended an effort to recreate the oyster reefs in Keyport's Raritan Bay after the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection cited concerns that the oysters could be harvested and sold to the public despite the persistent heavy pollution in the water after concerns had been raised by the United States Food and Drug Administration that patrols were insufficient to ensure that the oysters in the reef were not being harvested.Perez-Pena, Richard. "New Jersey Halts Oyster Restoration Project", The New York Times, August 9, 2010. Accessed July 10, 2012. "A decade of efforts to restore marine life to the polluted Raritan Bay suffered a serious setback on Monday when, under orders from the state, an environmental group pulled up the oysters it had cultivated there.But after years of wrangling with the State Department of Environmental Protection, the group, NY/NJ Baykeeper, said it was not surrendering, just beating a tactical retreat."  Keansburg, New Jersey is one of the most tourism-oriented towns along the Raritan Bayshore region, Keansburg is home to the Keansburg Amusement Park and the Runaway Rapids water park. Keansburg is also home to a small boardwalk that runs along the Raritan Bay, sometimes offering views of the New York City skyline. Atlantic Highlands, which overlooks where the Atlantic Ocean and Raritan Bay meet at Sandy Hook, contains Mount Mitchill, the highest point on the eastern seaboard south of Maine, rising  above sea level.Mount Mitchill Scenic Overlook, Monmouth County, New Jersey Park System. Accessed July 17, 2011. "At 266 feet, this overlook in Atlantic Highlands sits on the highest natural elevation on the Atlantic seaboard (excluding islands) from Maine to the Yucatan providing beautiful views of Sandy Hook, Sandy Hook Bay, Raritan Bay and the New York skyline." The Manhattan skyline can be seen from the borough's ridges and its shoreline. Pleasure, fishing and commuter boats sail from its harbor. The municipal harbor was built from 1938 through 1940 with municipal, state, and federal funds. It is the largest on the East Coast, home to 715 craft, including high-speed ferry service to New York City, which was introduced in 1986.Sauchelli, Dana; Fermino, Jennifer; and Sanderson, Bill. "Seastreak captains worried over crash ferry’s new propulsion system", New York Post, January 10, 2013. Accessed August 23, 2013. "Seastreak began ferry service between Atlantic Highlands, NJ, and Manhattan in 1986." In 1966, the Central Railroad of New Jersey pier was destroyed by fire. Its rail route is now used by the Henry Hudson Trail.Henry Hudson Trail, Monmouth County, New Jersey Park System. Accessed August 23, 2013.  Sandy Hook is a long, narrow peninsula managed by the National Park Service as the a unit of the Gateway National Recreation Area. The eastern shoreline consists of various public and fishing beaches, including North Beach and Gunnison Beach. The peninsula's ocean-facing beaches are considered among the finest in New Jersey and are a popular destination for recreation in summer when seasonal ferriesSea Streak bring beachgoers.  Gunnison Beach is one of the largest clothing optional beaches on the East Coast.Flam, Faye. "Clothing optional may not be way of historical human", The Philadelphia Inquirer, July 17, 2006. Accessed June 17, 2007. "Sandy Hook boasts the biggest nude beach along the Atlantic. The clothing-optional part is called Gunnison Beach and there's even a picture showing people of varying shapes and sizes frolicking in their birthday suits." The northern end of the island is home to the Sandy Hook Lighthouse, the Marine Academy of Science and Technology, and restored buildings of the former Fort Hancock Coast Guard Station. Spread across the peninsula are former military installations, including four ammunitions bunkers, two gun stations, and a Nike Missile Base.  Red Bank, overlooking the Shrewsbury River, is a noted social and commercial destination, filled with boutiques, designer clothing and home stores, parks, and restaurants.  Special events are scheduled throughout the summer, such as the KaBoomFest fireworks on July 3, which attracted as many as 150,000 spectators at its 51st annual event in 2010.LaGorce, Tammy (June 24, 2011). "A Town Celebration, Fireworks and All". The New York Times. Accessed May 9, 2012. "KaBoomFest, now in its 52nd year, shows few signs of slowing down. In 2010, 150,000 people attended the fireworks display, which will run 23 minutes this year. The same number of spectators is expected this year, said Mr. Hogan, who is also the president of the town’s Riverview Medical Center." Red Bank consists of an eclectic mix of businesses, including entertainment, retail, professional, medical and hospitality. It offers luxury stores, like Garmany and Tiffany, trendy clothing including Greene Street,http://www.greenestreetconsignment.com/map/red-bank/gsredbank Urban Outfitters, coffee shops like Starbucks and Rookhttps://www.rookcoffee.com/ and eateries including "Pay It Forward" style like the Bonjovi Soul Kitchen, to pubs like the Dublin Househttp://www.thedublinhouse.co/ or vegetarian fare like the Good Karma Cafe.http://www.goodkarmacafenj.com/ Garmany of Red Bank has been expanded from a men's store into a luxury department store with  of high-end retail space.Fischler, Marcelle S. "SHOPPING; A Cappuccino With That $5,000 Suit?". The New York Times. November 19, 2006. Accessed May 17, 2013. "Last year the Garmanys expanded the Red Bank outlet into a 40,000-square-foot, sophisticated department store. The first-floor men's department is divided into boutiques for designer brands like Canali and Zegna." Store openings have included Tiffany & Co. in November 2007.Staff. "Tiffany remains 'cautious' on U.S. market", National Jeweler, March 24, 2008. Accessed July 22, 2015.Staff. "Tiffany to Open Store on Red Bank’s Historic Broad Street", WebWire, March 22, 2007. Accessed July 22, 2015. Boating, sculling, sailing, and fishing are popular outdoor activities in and near Red Bank; in the winter, ice boats sail on the Navesink when it freezes over, as it did in 2009.Berry, Coleen Dee. "Out of Mothballs, Awaiting Ice". The New York Times. January 8, 2009. Accessed July 10, 2012. "Iceboating is so firmly entrenched in Red Bank that the borough’s official seal contains an image of an iceboat." The Monmouth Boat Club, Marine Park, and the slips of the Molly Pitcher Inn provide access to the Navesink and, from there, Sandy Hook and the Gateway National Recreation Area, the Jersey Shore and the Atlantic Ocean.O'Sullivan, Eleanor. "Marine Park anchors northern Red Bank", Asbury Park Press, July 23, 2005. Accessed July 10, 2012.  In years past, Long Branch was a major destination for beachgoers, along with Asbury Park, and enjoyed an upscale connotation with tourists. Long Branch is home to Seven Presidents Oceanfront Park, named for the United States presidents who visited the fashionable resort town, including Ulysses S. Grant, Chester A. Arthur, Rutherford Hayes, Benjamin Harrison, William McKinley, Woodrow Wilson and James Garfield.Seven Presidents Oceanfront Park, Monmouth County Park System. Accessed July 10, 2007. "Long Branch was placed "on the map" in 1869 when President Grant made the city the nation's "Summer Capital," a tradition followed by Presidents Hayes, Garfield, Arthur, Harrison, McKinley, and Wilson." Pier Village is a Victorian-inspired, mixed-use community consisting of 536 rental residences sitting atop more than  of retail space. A public grassy area called Festival Plaza is the site of regular events, including concerts, arts & crafts fairs, outdoor movies and holiday events.  The first story of Pier Village is filled with shops, restaurants, lounges, a salon, and a gym, while the upper floors are filled with ocean-view Apartments. Long Branch is also home to the original WindMill Hot Dogs restaurant, located in a windmill-shaped building since 1963. Asbury Park was developed through the 1920s and 1930s as a resort destination for the New York Metro Area, and it remained that way through World War II. The post-war era of the 1950s and 1960s saw the construction of the Garden State Parkway and the Monmouth Mall, taking visitors away from Asbury Park. Race riots on July 4, 1970 resulted in the destruction of various buildings across the city. Since the early 2000s, a burgeoning crowd of artists along with local political leaders have helped push the town through major redevelopment which is still ongoing. Asbury Park has emerged as a prime LGBT destination and still retains its lively music scene which made it famous, with locales such as the Stone Pony, a music bar which is frequented by artist such as Bruce Springsteen and Southside Johnny. Ocean Grove was originally developed as a religious summer camp meeting site, and is referred to as  "God's Square Mile at the Jersey Shore".2009 Summer Events, Ocean Grove Camp Meeting Association, p. 1. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places, Ocean Grove is noted for its abundant examples of Victorian architecture. It is home to The Great Auditorium, a 5,500-seat indoor arena constructed in 1894 on bridge-like iron trusses laid on stone foundations. The Auditorium contains a pipe organ that is one of the 25 largest in the world.Largest organs in the world Surrounding the Auditorium are 114&nbsp;tents, which are occupied from May to September, just as they have been since 1869. These rustic throwbacks adjoin to rear sheds containing a kitchen and bathroom. The tents are stored in the sheds during the winter. They are in such demand that there is a waiting list of some ten years for summer rentals. Ocean Grove also had the honor of being named one of the top 15 best beaches by Fodor's in 2014.Voted Top 15 Beaches By Fodor's  Belmar is a popular vacation destination due to its natural and recreational resources. Its boardwalk and town offer shops, restaurants, an active arts scene, sporting events, festivals, and a variety of family-oriented activities. Belmar is among the most popular surf spots on the East Coast, frequently hosting surfing events and competitions. Spring Lake is home to many old homes and tree-lined streets, in contrast to many tourist-oriented towns at the Jersey Shore. During the "Gilded Age" of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Spring Lake developed into a coastal resort for members of New York City and Philadelphia high society, in similar fashion to the settlements of Newport, Rhode Island and Bar Harbor, Maine.Corcoran, David. "All That Glitters", The New York Times, July 24, 2005. Accessed July 14, 2011. "Spring Lake... The town was founded in the Gilded Age and in certain ways has never left it."  A surviving example of architecture constructed during this era is the Martin Maloney Cottage on Morris Avenue next to the tycoon's former and no longer existent Ballingarry Estate.Seebohn, Caroline; and Cook, Peter C. Cottages and mansions of the Jersey shore, p. 99. Rutgers University Press, 2007. ISBN 0-8135-4016-X. Accessed July 14, 2011. "One of the most spectacular examples of Spring Lake architecture is the so-called Maloney Cottage, at 101 Morris Avenue. Its wedding-cake opulence, fantastical porches and verandahs up steep flights of stairs, elaborate carpentry, curved balustrades, and dizzying rooflines cause people today to stop and stare. Brilliantly white, intricately decorated, the house represents the Gilded Age of Spring Lake at its most glamorous." Another fine example of period architecture listed on the National Register of Historic Places is the Audenried Cottage on Tuttle Avenue.NEW JERSEY - Monmouth County, National Register of Historic Places. Accessed July 14, 2011. Manasquan has a downtown area with many small businesses. Algonquin Arts Theatre has shows and movies that play throughout the year.  It is a historic 540-seat theatre, built in 1938 as a movie house but converted to a professional live performance space in May 1994.Staff. "Algonquin Arts Theatre announces $100,000 challenge", Asbury Park Press, March 18, 2008. Accessed December 5, 2012. "Arts was originally founded as a movie theatre that opened in Manasquan in 1938."Johnson, Courtney. "Historic theater continues to be hub of activity", Asbury Park Press, April 13, 2006. Accessed December 5, 2012. "Since the curtain first rose on Algonquin Arts programs in May 1994, more than 639,000 patrons have attended shows at the 540-seat theater, Roberts said.... The Algonquin movie theater in Manasquan opened on Friday, June 3, 1938, during the Golden Age of Hollywood." The Manasquan Inlet provides surfers with waves that are corralled, refracted and enlarged by the jetty protruding out into the Atlantic Ocean. The Manasquan Inlet, reopened in 1931, is the northern terminus of the inland portion of the Intracoastal Waterway.Lurie, Maxine N. ; and Marc Mappen, Marc. "Intracoastal Waterway", Encyclopedia of New Jersey, p. 412. Rutgers University Press, 2004. ISBN 0813533252. Accessed December 5, 2012. The Point Pleasant boardwalk is approximately one mile long, spanning the coastline from the Manasquan Inlet at the north to New Jersey Avenue in the south. The central third of the boardwalk contains amusement rides, arcades, pizzerias, ice cream parlors, and miniature golf courses. Point Pleasant Beach is also the northern terminus of the East Coast's Intracoastal Waterway. The town is home to Jenkinson's Aquarium, Jenkinson's Boardwalk amusement park, and Jenkinson's Beach. Jenkinson’s Boardwalk has many different attractions, food vendors, and stores. The attractions include a ride park geared towards children. There are also three arcades on the boardwalk Jenkinson’s South Arcade, Jenkinson’s South Beach Arcade, and Frank’s Fun Center. There are many restaurants ranging from pizza joints, to grills, to ice cream parlors.http://jenkinsons.com  Seaside Heights is famous for its amusement-oriented boardwalk and numerous clubs and bars.Mansnerus, Laura. "So, Just Who Goes Where When Going to the Shore?", The New York Times, June 6, 1999. Accessed July 13, 2011. "Seaside Heights, with a summer population of about 65,000, is packed, one of the few shore towns with larger apartment buildings. The boardwalk has almost a mile of skeeball and video arcades and enough fast food and bars to amuse the young into the early-morning hours. 'I don't think they let you into Seaside Heights if you're over 21,' said Kristin Farfalla, a sales representative at Midway Beach Real Estate in South Seaside Park." Casino Pier and Funtown Piers are amusement parks, each situated on a pier extending approximately 300 feet (100 m) into the Atlantic Ocean. Each of the two piers is part of a boardwalk that stretches for , which offers many family-friendly attractions from arcades to a wide variety of foods and desserts, all within walking distance. Breakwater Beach is a water park situated across the street from Casino Pier. Seaside Heights was boosted into the national spotlight by MTV with shows such as Jersey Shore (TV series). Long Beach Island is a barrier island and collection of several shore communities. Long Beach Island is approximately  in length, which includes three miles (5&nbsp;km) of nature reserve located on the southern tip.Long beach island, Ocean County Historical Society. Accessed July 20, 2007.  "Long Beach Island lies off the New Jersey Coast about  south of Manhattan and  east and slightly south of Philadelphia. The island follows the coast for a distance of  in a roughly northeast-to-southwest direction. Barnegat Bay, which separates it from the mainland, is approximately two to six miles (10 km) wide. The width of the island ranges from more than a mile to less than ." Bisecting the middle of the island is the sole access point for road vehicles, via State Route 72, which consists of the Dorland J. Henderson Memorial Bridge (locally known as "The Causeway"). The bridge is known for its "String of Pearls", a row of lights mounted on the railings lining the length of the bridge. This beach is popular spot for people who want to relax in the sun all day and don't particularly like the boardwalk. Most places are in walking distance and there is a downtown area with stores and restaurants.  The presence of the bisecting roadway, located in Ship Bottom, results in the division of the island into a northern portion and a southern portion. In Beach Haven is The Chicken or The Egg restaurant, that has been serving up delicious meals and debate since 1991. From the bridge northward, the island includes the communities of Surf City, North Beach (a section of Long Beach Township), Harvey Cedars, Loveladies (the northernmost section of Long Beach Township), High Bar Harbor, and Barnegat Light.  From the bridge southward, the island includes the communities of Long Beach Township (including the census-designated place of North Beach Haven) and Beach Haven, with the Holgate section of Long Beach Township at the southernmost tip of the island. The island is home to attractions such as Barnegat Light, the Fantasy Island amusement park, as well as the original Ron Jon Surf Shop location. Brigantine is an island community, the northernmost in Atlantic County. The Brigantine Lighthouse is a central identifying symbol of the city.McKelvey, Wallace. "Construction companies volunteer to restore Brigantine lighthouse after Sandy", The Press of Atlantic City, August 29, 2013. Accessed September 15, 2013. "The lighthouse served many purposes over the last century. In addition to its role as the centerpiece of a real estate development, it became a police station in the 1930s, when the municipality had only a few officers..... Later, in the 1970s, the structure housed the city's original museum, Kramer said.... Despite its lamp, Kramer said, the lighthouse was too low and too far from the beach to ever serve as a navigational aid." Brigantine is home to the Marine Mammal Stranding Center, the state's only marine stranding center. The center rehabilitates and releases stranded marine mammals and sea turtles, rescuing more than 3,900 whales, dolphins, seals and sea turtles since it was formed.About Us, Marine Mammal Stranding Center. Accessed September 15, 2013. Part of the Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge is located on the northern end of Brigantine Island.  Atlantic City is a nationally renowned resort city for gambling, shopping and fine dining. The city also served as the inspiration for the board game Monopoly. Atlantic City is considered the "Gambling Capital of the East Coast" and is second to Las Vegas in number of casinos, yearly gaming revenue, and number of rooms. The Atlantic City Skyline has been transformed by construction of new casino hotels and condominia. Atlantic City is also home to numerous shopping malls and districts. The Atlantic City Boardwalk was one of the first boardwalks of its type in the United States, having opened on June 26, 1870.Today in History: June 26 at the Library of Congress The Boardwalk starts at Absecon Inlet and runs along the beach for four miles (six kilometers) to the city limit.  An additional one and one half miles (two kilometers) of the Boardwalk extend into Ventnor City. Casino/hotels front the boardwalk, as well as retail stores, restaurants, and amusements. Notable attractions include the Boardwalk Hall, the Steel Pier, and the Ripley's Believe It or Not! museum. Home of the Miss America pageant, Atlantic City has been featured in numerous films and television series, most notably the setting of the HBO series Boardwalk Empire.  Ocean City is home to a boardwalk with several shops and amusement areas. Known as a family-oriented seaside resort, Ocean City has prohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages within its limits since its founding in 1879. Ocean City has miles of guarded beaches, a 2.5-mile boardwalk, and a downtown shopping and dining district. The Travel Channel rated Ocean City as the Best Family Beach of 2005.Best Family Beach of 2005, Travel Channel, March 2005. It was ranked the third best beach in New Jersey in the 2008 Top 10 Beaches Contest sponsored by the New Jersey Marine Sciences Consortium.  In the 2009 Top 10 Beaches Contest, Ocean City ranked first.Ocean City wins No. 1 beach in New Jersey for '09, The Star-Ledger, May 19, 2009.  The Wildwoods is used as a collective term for the four communities that have "Wildwood" as part of the municipality name — the Borough of Wildwood Crest, City of Wildwood, Borough of West Wildwood and the City of North Wildwood — together with Diamond Beach, a portion of Lower Township situated on the island. Its most notable features are its beach and  boardwalk, home to the Morey's Piers amusement complex and Raging Waters and Ocean Oasis waterparks owned by Morey's Piers. The boardwalk features a trolley called the "Tramcar", which runs from end to end.  The Wildwoods is home to over 200 motels, built during the Doo-Wop era of the 1950s and 1960s, in an area recognized by the state of New Jersey, known as the Wildwoods Shore Resort Historic District'Doo Wop Preservation League Web site The term doo-wop was coined by Cape May's Mid-Atlantic Center For The Arts in the early 1990s to describe the unique, space-age architectural style, which is also referred to as the Googie or populuxe style.Wildwood Crest Historical Society Web site The motels are unique in appearance, with Vegas-like neon signs and fantastic architecture.Fancher, Emily. "Doo Wop" architecture lures tourists back to seaside town, Columbia News Service, June 10, 2002. Accessed June 17, 2007. "Just about everything in Wildwood, N.J. has been touched by 'Doo Wop'. The term describes the distinctively kitschy flair of the town's 200 motels, which were built in the 1950s and '60s. Reflecting the popular cultural themes of the era, the motels have Hawaiian and Polynesian designs, Space Age accents or rock 'n' roll details."  Cape May is at the southern tip of Cape May Peninsula where the Delaware Bay meets the Atlantic Ocean and is one of the country's oldest vacation resort destinations.Johnson, Charles P. "Many Drive To Resorts On Atlantic: Coast Places Draw Drivers From Pittsburgh District", The Pittsburgh Press, June 22, 1930, p. 3 of the Automobile section. Accessed July 4, 2011. "The southern part of New Jersey largely in Cape May County contains other popular resorts. Cape May City, the southernmost part of New Jersey, is said to be the oldest vacation resort in the United States." With a rich history, award-winning beaches, designation as a top birding location, and many Victorian structures, Cape May is a seaside resort drawing visitors from around the world. The Cape May – Lewes Ferry connects the town to Lewes, Delaware. The following is a list of all the towns within the state of New Jersey that have a beach either along the Raritan Bay or Atlantic Ocean, listed north to south  The entirety of the Jersey Shore region was significantly affected by Hurricane Sandy in October 2012. The devastating effect of the storm surge on property adjacent to the beach resulted in substantial cost to the reinsurance industry which has since advocated avoidance of rebuilding closely packed middle-class residences or flimsy commercial structures adjacent to the beach. It is felt insuring property in the area may be impossible if a configuration of buildings is constructed which have a high probability of suffering massive damage in future storms. The Jersey Shore is home to numerous rock and roll clubs, most famously in Asbury Park, where Bruce Springsteen honed his skills at now defunct clubs like The Upstage and the Student Prince. He still makes periodic live appearances at The Stone Pony bar or at Convention Hall as either a solo act, with the E Street Band, or with other artists. Furthermore, Bill Haley and the Comets performed "Rock Around the Clock" for the first time live at the Hoff Brau in Wildwood. A style of music known as the Jersey Shore sound evolved from this scene. The Springsteen song "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)" is one of several Springsteen songs that contains references to the Jersey shore scene of the early 1970s. MTV also used Seaside Heights as the location of their Summer Beach House in 1998 and again in 2002, and for two episodes of True Life about adults in their 20's and 30's living "down the shore" for the summer.  In 1999, the music video "Summer Girls" by LFO was filmed in Seaside Heights. The Jersey Shore area rose to international fame in 2009 after MTV started airing the reality series Jersey Shore. The popular show, filmed mostly in Seaside Heights, debuted amid large amounts of controversy regarding the use of the words "Guido/Guidette", portrayals of Italian-American stereotypes, and scrutiny from locals because the cast members, with the exception of three, are not New Jersey residents. The 2011 film New Year's Eve was filmed in Seaside Heights. Some episodes of The Real Housewives of New Jersey, season four, took place at the Jersey Shore. As discussed on the show, the families of cast members Teresa Giudice and Melissa Gorga have houses in Toms River, and Kathy Wakile's family also rented a house at the shore. Stronger than the Storm was media campaign, and title of a jingle made for it, to promote tourism in New Jersey, especially the Shore, in 2013.Stronger than the Storm websiteYouTube: New Jersey: Stronger than the Storm TV Commercial  Unlike areas in the interior of the state, which has many big box stores and malls, small businesses make a significant portion of the economy of barrier island Jersey Shore towns. This is because small businesses can more easily adapt to the seasonal nature of business in shore towns. Stores that are located at the shore are all unique ranging from psychics and accessories at Ocean City to home-made chocolates in Long Beach Island. In addition many shore towns deliberately stymie the entry of big box stores because they want to reduce traffic. In addition, many tourists visit shore towns in order to be in an environment without big box stores. In some shore towns Wawa Inc. designs its stores to match the aesthetic and changes its operating procedures to adapt to the shore culture. It is the only retailer on the island of Cape May to have a significant number of stores. Middlesex County Monmouth County Ocean County Atlantic County Cape May County Historic Jersey Shore Lighthouses New Jersey Shore Events, History Hotels, Dining and Articles 17 New Jersey Shore Newspapers serving Atlantic and Cape May Counties Historical Postcards - Jersey Shore Highlights New Jersey Shore Events and activities
