   James Warren "Jim" Jones (May 13, 1931&nbsp;– November 18, 1978) was an American cult leader. Jones was the founder and leader of the Peoples Temple, best known for the mass murder-suicide in November 1978 of 918 of its members in Jonestown, Guyana,Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. the murder of Congressman Leo Ryan, and the ordering of four additional Temple member deaths in Georgetown, the Guyanese capital. Nearly three-hundred children were murdered at Jonestown, almost all of them by cyanide poisoning. Jones died from a gunshot wound to the head; it is suspected his death was a suicide. Jones was born in Indiana and started the Temple there in the 1950s. He later moved the Temple to California in the mid-1960s, and gained notoriety with the move of the Temple's headquarters to San Francisco in the early 1970s. Jones was born in a rural area of Crete, Indiana, to James Thurman Jones (1887–1951), a World War I veteran, and Lynetta Putnam (1902–1977). Lynetta reportedly believed she had given birth to a messiah. He was of Irish and Welsh descent. Jones later claimed partial Cherokee ancestry through his mother, though according to his maternal second cousin Barbara Shaffer, this is likely untrue.Kilduff, Marshall and Javers, Ron. The Suicide Cult. Bantam Books, 1978. p. 10.While Jim Jones claimed to be partially of Cherokee descent through his mother Lynetta, this story was apparently not true.(Lindsay, Robert. "How Rev. Jim Jones and Black Spencer Gained His Power Over Followers". New York Times. November 26, 1978). Lynetta's cousin Barbara Shaffer said "there wasn't an ounce of Indian in our family". (Lindsay, Robert. "How Rev. Jim Jones Gained His Power Over Followers". New York Times. November 26, 1978). Shaffer said that Lynetta was Welsh. ("Jones—The Dark Private Side Emerges". Los Angeles Times. November 24, 1978). The birth records for Lynetta have since been lost. (Kilduff, Marshall and Ron Javers. "Jim Jones Always Led&nbsp;— Or Wouldn't Play". San Francisco Chronicle. December 4, 1978). Economic difficulties during the Great Depression necessitated that Jones' family move to  Lynn, Indiana, in 1934, where he grew up in a shack without plumbing. Jones was a voracious reader as a child and studied Joseph Stalin, Karl Marx, Mao Zedong, Mahatma Gandhi and Adolf Hitler carefully, noting the strengths and weaknesses of each. Jones also developed an intense interest in religion, primarily because he found making friends difficult. Childhood acquaintances later recalled Jones as being a "really weird kid" who was "obsessed with religion ... obsessed with death". They alleged that he frequently held funerals for small animals on his parents' property and had stabbed a cat to death.Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple. American Experience, PBS.org. Jones and a childhood friend both claimed that his father, who was an alcoholic, was associated with the Ku Klux Klan. Jones himself, however, came to sympathize with the country's repressed African-American community due to his own experiences as a social outcast. Jones later recounted how he and his father clashed on the issue of race, and how he did not speak with his father for "many, many years" after he refused to allow one of Jones' black friends into the house. After Jones' parents separated, Jones moved with his mother to Richmond, Indiana. He graduated from Richmond High School early and with honors in December 1948. Jones married nurse Marceline Baldwin in 1949, and moved to Bloomington, Indiana. He attended Indiana University Bloomington, where a speech by Eleanor Roosevelt about the plight of African-Americans impressed him."Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple - Timeline". PBS.org. 20 February 2007. In 1951, Jones moved to Indianapolis, where he attended night school at Butler University, earning a degree in secondary education in 1961.Knoll, James. Mass Suicide & the Jonestown Tragedy: Literature Summary. Jonestown Institute, San Diego State University. October 2007.   In 1951, Jones began attending meetings and rallies of the Communist Party USA in Indianapolis. He became flustered with harassment he received during the McCarthy Hearings, particularly regarding an event he attended with his mother focusing on Paul Robeson, after which she was harassed by the FBI in front of her co-workers for attending.Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 134". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.] He also became frustrated with ostracism of open communists in the United States, especially during the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. This frustration, among other things, provoked a seminal moment for Jones in which he asked himself, "How can I demonstrate my Marxism? The thought was, infiltrate the church." Jones was surprised when a Methodist superintendent helped him get a start in the church even though he knew Jones to be a communist and Jones did not meet him through the Communist Party. In 1952, Jones became a student pastor in Sommerset Southside Methodist Church, but claimed he left that church because its leaders barred him from integrating blacks into his congregation. Around this time, Jones witnessed a faith-healing service at a Seventh Day Baptist Church. He observed that it attracted people and their money and concluded that, with financial resources from such healings, he could help accomplish his social goals. Jones organized a mammoth religious convention to take place June 11 through June 15, 1956, in a cavernous Indianapolis hall called Cadle Tabernacle. To draw the crowds, Jim needed a religious headliner, and so he arranged to share the pulpit with Rev. William M. Branham, a healing evangelist and religious author at the time as highly revered as Oral Roberts. Following the convention, Jones was able to launch his own church, which changed names until it became the Peoples Temple Christian Church Full Gospel. The Peoples Temple was initially made as an inter-racial mission. Jones moved away from the Communist Party USA when their members became critical of some of Stalin's policies.Horrock, Nicholas M., "Communist in 1950s", New York Times, December 17, 1978 In 1960, Indianapolis Democratic Mayor Charles Boswell appointed Jones director of the Human Rights Commission. Jones ignored Boswell's advice to keep a low profile, finding new outlets for his views on local radio and television programs. When the mayor and other commissioners asked Jones to curtail his public actions, he resisted and was wildly cheered at a meeting of the NAACP and Urban League when he yelled for his audience to be more militant, and climaxed with, "Let my people go!" During this time, Jones also helped to integrate churches, restaurants, the telephone company, the police department, a theater, an amusement park, and the Methodist Hospital. After swastikas were painted on the homes of two African-American families, Jones personally walked the neighborhood comforting local blacks and counseling white families not to move, in order to prevent white flight. He also set up stings to catch restaurants refusing to serve black customers and wrote to American Nazi leaders and then leaked their responses to the media. When Jones was accidentally placed in the black ward of a hospital after a collapse in 1961, he refused to be moved; he began to make the beds and empty the bed pans of black patients. Political pressures resulting from Jones' actions caused hospital officials to desegregate the wards. Jones received considerable criticism in Indiana for his integrationist views. White-owned businesses and locals were critical of him. A swastika was placed on the Temple, a stick of dynamite was left in a Temple coal pile, and a dead cat was thrown at Jones' house after a threatening phone call. Other incidents occurred, though some suspect that Jones himself may have been involved in at least some of them. Jim and Marceline Jones adopted several children of at least partial non-Caucasian ancestry; he referred to the clan as his "rainbow family", and stated: "Integration is a more personal thing with me now. It's a question of my son's future." Jones portrayed the Temple overall as a "rainbow family". The couple adopted three children of Korean-American ancestry: Lew, Suzanne and Stephanie. Jones had been encouraging Temple members to adopt orphans from war ravaged Korea. He had also long been critical of the United States' opposition to communist leader Kim Il-Sung's 1950 invasion of South Korea, calling it the "war of liberation" and stating that "the south is a living example of all that socialism in the north has overcome".Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 1023". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. In 1954, he and his wife also adopted Agnes Jones, who was partly of Native American descent.Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple - People & Events  PBS.org. 20 February 2007. Agnes was 11 at the time of her adoption."The Wills of Jim Jones and Marceline Jones". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. Suzanne Jones was adopted at the age of six in 1959. In June 1959, the couple had their only biological child, Stephan Gandhi Jones. Two years later, in 1961, the Joneses became the first white couple in Indiana to adopt a black child, James Warren Jones, Jr."Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple - Race and the Peoples Temple". PBS.org. 20 February 2007. The couple also adopted another son, who was white, named Tim. Tim Jones, whose birth mother was a member of the Peoples Temple, was originally named Timothy Glen Tupper.  After a 1961 Temple speech about nuclear apocalypse, and a January 1962 Esquire magazine article listing Belo Horizonte, Brazil as a safe place in a nuclear war, Jones traveled with his family to the city with the idea of setting up a new Temple location. On his way to Brazil, Jones made his first trip into Guyana, then still a British colony. After arriving in Belo Horizonte, the Joneses rented a modest three bedroom home. Jones studied the local economy and receptiveness of racial minorities to his message, though language remained a barrier. Jones was careful not to portray himself as a communist in a foreign territory, and spoke of an apostolic communal lifestyle rather than of Castro or Marx. Ultimately, the lack of resources in the locale caused the Joneses to move to Rio de Janeiro in mid-1963. There, they worked with the poor in Rio's slums. Jones also explored local Brazilian syncretic religions. Jones was plagued by guilt for leaving behind the Indiana civil rights struggle and possibly losing what he had tried to build there. When Jones' associate preachers in Indiana told him that the Temple was about to collapse without him, Jones returned.  When Jones returned from Brazil in December 1963,Reiterman & Jacobs 1982, p. 86 he told his Indiana congregation that the world would be engulfed in a nuclear war on July 15, 1967 that would then create a new socialist Eden on earth, and that the Temple had to move to Northern California for safety. Accordingly, the Temple began moving to Redwood Valley, California, near the city of Ukiah. According to religious studies professor Catherine Wessinger, while Jones always spoke of the social gospel's virtues, before the late 1960s Jones chose to conceal that his gospel was actually communism. By the late 1960s, Jones began at least partially openly revealing the details of his "Apostolic Socialism" concept in Temple sermons. Jones also taught that, "those who remained drugged with the opiate of religion had to be brought to enlightenment&nbsp;— socialism". Jones often mixed these ideas, such as preaching that, "If you're born in capitalist America, racist America, fascist America, then you're born in sin. But if you're born in socialism, you're not born in sin."Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 1053 By the early 1970s, Jones began deriding traditional Christianity as "fly away religion", rejecting the Bible as being a tool to oppress women and non-whites, and denouncing a "Sky God" who was no God at all. Jones wrote a booklet titled "The Letter Killeth", criticizing the King James Bible.Jones, Jim. "The Letter Killeth". Original material reprint. Department of Religious Studies. San Diego State University. Jones also began preaching that he was the reincarnation of Mahatma Gandhi, Father Divine, Jesus, Gautama Buddha and Vladimir Lenin. Former Temple member Hue Fortson, Jr. quoted Jones as saying, "What you need to believe in is what you can see&nbsp;... If you see me as your friend, I'll be your friend. As you see me as your father, I'll be your father, for those of you that don't have a father&nbsp;... If you see me as your savior, I'll be your savior. If you see me as your God, I'll be your God." In a 1976 phone conversation with John Maher, Jones alternately stated that he was an agnostic and an atheist.See, e.g., Jones, Jim in conversation with John Maher, "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 622". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.] Despite the Temple's fear that the IRS was investigating its religious tax exemption, Marceline Jones admitted in a 1977 New York Times interview that Jones was trying to promote Marxism in the United States by mobilizing people through religion, citing Mao Zedong as his inspiration.New York Times, "How Rev. Jim Jones Gained His Power Over Followers", Robert Lindsay, November 26, 1978 She stated that, "Jim used religion to try to get some people out of the opiate of religion", and had slammed the Bible on the table yelling "I've got to destroy this paper idol!" In one sermon, Jones said that, "You're gonna help yourself, or you'll get no help! There's only one hope of glory; that's within you! Nobody's gonna come out of the sky! There's no heaven up there! We'll have to make heaven down here!" Within five years of the Temple's move to California, it went through a period of exponential growth and opened branches in cities including San Fernando, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. By the early 1970s, Jones began shifting his focus to major cities because of limited expansion opportunities in Ukiah. He eventually moved the headquarters for the Temple to San Francisco, a major center for radical protest movements at the time. The move led to Jones and the Temple becoming politically influential in San Francisco politics, culminating in the Temple's instrumental role in the mayoral election victory of George Moscone in 1975. Moscone subsequently appointed Jones as the chairman of the San Francisco Housing Authority Commission.Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple. PBS.org. Unlike most supposed cult leaders, Jones was able to gain public support and contact with prominent politicians in the local and national level. For example, Jones and Moscone met privately with vice presidential candidate Walter Mondale on his campaign plane days before the 1976 election, leading Mondale to publicly praise the Temple.Los Angeles Times, "First Lady Among Cult's References; Mondale, Califano also listed", November 21, 1978. First Lady Rosalynn Carter also personally met with Jones on multiple occasions; corresponded with him about Cuba; and spoke with him at the grand opening of the San Francisco Democratic Party Headquarters, where Jones garnered louder applause than Mrs. Carter.Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 799". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.Kilduff, Marshall and Phil Tracy. "Inside Peoples Temple". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. August 1, 1977. In September 1977, California assemblyman Willie Brown served as master of ceremonies at a large testimonial dinner for Jones attended by Governor Jerry Brown and Lieutenant Governor Mervyn Dymally. At that dinner, Brown touted Jones as "what you should see every day when you look in the mirror in the early morning hours... a combination of Martin King, Angela Davis, Albert Einstein... Chairman Mao". Harvey Milk, who spoke at political rallies at the Temple,"Another Day of Death". Time Magazine. 11 December 1978. wrote to Jones after a visit to the Temple: "Rev Jim, It may take me many a day to come back down from the high that I reach today. I found something dear today. I found a sense of being that makes up for all the hours and energy placed in a fight. I found what you wanted me to find. I shall be back. For I can never leave."VanDeCarr, Paul "Death of dreams: in November 1978, Harvey Milk's murder and the mass suicides at Jonestown nearly broke San Francisco's spirit.", The Advocate, November 25, 2003Sawyer, Mary My Lord, What a Mourning:’ Twenty Years Since Jonestown, Jonestown Institute at SDSU In his San Francisco apartment, Jones hosted San Francisco radical political figures, including Davis, for discussions. He spoke with friend and San Francisco Sun-Reporter publisher Carlton Goodlett about his remorse over not being able to travel to socialist countries such as the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union, speculating that he could be Chief Dairyman of the Soviet Union.Goodlett, Carlton B., Notes on Peoples Temple, reprinted in Moore, Rebecca and Fielding M. McGehee, III, The Need for a Second Look at Jonestown, Edwin Mellen Press, 1989, ISBN 0-88946-649-1 After his criticisms led to increased tensions with the Nation of Islam, Jones spoke at a huge rally healing the rift between the two groups in the Los Angeles Convention Center that was attended by many of Jones' closest political acquaintances. While Jones forged media alliances with key columnists and others at the San Francisco Chronicle and other media outlets, the move to San Francisco also brought increasing media scrutiny. After Chronicle reporter Marshall Kilduff encountered resistance to publishing an exposé, he brought his story to New West magazine. In the summer of 1977, Jones and several hundred Temple members abruptly decided to move to the Temple's compound in Guyana after they learned of the contents of Kilduff's New West article to be imminently published, which included allegations by former Temple members they were physically, emotionally, and sexually abused. Jones named the settlement "Jonestown" after himself.  Jones had first started building Jonestown, formally known as the "Peoples Temple Agricultural Project", several years before the New West article was published. Jonestown was promoted as a means to create both a "socialist paradise" and a "sanctuary" from the media scrutiny in San Francisco. Jones purported to establish Jonestown as a benevolent model communist community stating, "I believe we’re the purest communists there are."Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 50". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. In that regard, like the restrictive emigration policies of the Soviet Union, Cuba, North Korea and other communist states, Jones did not permit members to leave Jonestown. Religious scholar Mary McCormick Maaga argues that Jones' authority decreased after he moved to the isolated commune, because he was not needed for recruitment and he could not hide his drug addiction from rank and file members.McCormick Maaga, Mary. Hearing the voices of Jonestown. Syracuse University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-8156-0515-3. In spite of the allegations prior to Jones' departure to Jonestown, the leader was still respected by some for setting up a racially mixed church which helped the disadvantaged; 68 percent of Jonestown's residents were black.Moore, Rebecca. "The Demographics of Jonestown. Jonestown Institute, San Diego State University, adapted from Moore, Rebecca, Anthony Pinn and Mary Sawyer. "Demographics and the Black Religious Culture of Peoples Temple". in Peoples Temple and Black Religion in America. Bloomington: Indiana Press University, 2005. 57-80) Jonestown was where Jones began his belief in what he called "Translation", where he and his followers would all die together and move to another planet and live blissfully.Followership in Peoples Temple: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly by Wendy M. Edmonds Jim Jones claimed that he was the biological father of John Victor Stoen, although the birth certificate listed Grace and Timothy Stoen as the parents of the child. The Temple repeatedly claimed that Jones fathered the child when, in 1971, Tim Stoen had requested that Jones have sex with Grace to keep her from defecting. Grace Stoen defected in 1976 and began divorce proceedings against Tim in 1977. In order to avoid potentially giving up the boy in a custody dispute with Grace, Jones ordered Tim to take John to Guyana in February 1977. After Tim Stoen defected from the Temple in June 1977, the Temple kept John Stoen in Jonestown. The custody dispute over John would become a lynchpin of several battles between the Temple and the Concerned Relatives, a group of Temple defectors who began a media campaign accusing Jones and his organization of abuse. Jim Jones also fathered a son, Jim Jon (Kimo), with Carolyn Louise Moore Layton, a Temple member."Jim Jon (Kimo) Prokes". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University.    While most of Jones' political allies broke ties after his departure,Liebert, Larry, "What Politicians Say Now About Jones", San Francisco Chronicle, November 20, 1978 some did not. As a show of support, Willie Brown spoke out against enemies at a rally at the Peoples Temple, which was also attended by Milk and then-Assemblyman Art Agnos. On February 19, 1978, Milk wrote a letter to President Jimmy Carter defending Jones "as a man of the highest character", and claimed that Temple defectors were trying to "damage Rev. Jones' reputation" with "apparent bold-faced lies".Milk, Harvey Letter Addressed to President Jimmy Carter, Dated February 19, 1978 Moscone's office issued a press release saying that Jones had broken no laws.Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-88946-860-5. p. 143. In the autumn of 1977, Tim Stoen and other Temple defectors with relatives in Jonestown formed a "Concerned Relatives" group. Stoen traveled to Washington, D.C. in January 1978 to visit with State Department officials and members of Congress, and wrote a "white paper" to Congress detailing his grievances against Jones and the Temple. Stoen's efforts aroused the curiosity of California congressman Leo Ryan, who wrote a letter on Stoen's behalf to Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes Burnham. On April 11, 1978, the Concerned Relatives distributed a packet of documents, including letters and affidavits, that they titled an "Accusation of Human Rights Violations by Rev. James Warren Jones" to the Peoples Temple, members of the press, and members of Congress."Accusation of Human Rights Violations by Rev. James Warren Jones". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. April 11, 1978. In June 1978, escaped Temple member Deborah Layton provided the group with a further affidavit detailing alleged crimes by the Peoples Temple and substandard living conditions in Jonestown. Facing increasing scrutiny, in the summer of 1978, Jones also hired noted JFK assassination conspiracy theorists Mark Lane and Donald Freed to help make the case of a "grand conspiracy" by intelligence agencies against the Peoples Temple. Jones told Lane he wanted to "pull an Eldridge Cleaver", referring to a fugitive Black Panther who was able to return to the United States after repairing his reputation. In November 1978, Leo Ryan led a fact-finding mission to Jonestown to investigate allegations of human rights abuses. His delegation included relatives of Temple members, an NBC camera crew, and reporters for various newspapers. The group arrived in the Guyanese capital of Georgetown on November 15. Two days later, they traveled by airplane to Port Kaituma, then were transported to the Jonestown encampment on a dump truck. Jones hosted a reception for the Ryan delegation that evening at the central pavilion in Jonestown. The delegation left hurriedly the afternoon of November 18 after Temple member Don Sly attacked Ryan with a knife. The attack was thwarted, bringing the visit to an abrupt end. Congressman Ryan and his people succeeded in taking with them fifteen Peoples Temple members who had expressed a wish to leave. At that time, Jones made no attempt to prevent their departure. As members of Ryan's delegation boarded two planes at the airstrip, Jones' "Red Brigade" armed guards arrived on a tractor and trailer and began shooting at the delegation. The guards killed Congressman Ryan and four others near a Guyana Airways Twin Otter aircraft. At the same time, one of the supposed defectors, Larry Layton, drew a weapon and began firing on members of the party that had already boarded a small Cessna. An NBC cameraman was able to capture footage of the first few seconds of the shooting at the Otter. The five killed at the airstrip were Congressman Ryan; Don Harris, a reporter from NBC; Bob Brown, a cameraman from NBC; San Francisco Examiner photographer Greg Robinson; and Temple member Patricia Parks. Surviving the attack were future Congresswoman Jackie Speier, then a staff member for Ryan; Richard Dwyer, the Deputy Chief of Mission from the U.S. Embassy at Georgetown; Bob Flick, a producer for NBC; Steve Sung, an NBC sound engineer; Tim Reiterman, a San Francisco Examiner reporter; Ron Javers, a San Francisco Chronicle reporter; Charles Krause, a Washington Post reporter; and several defecting Temple members. Later that same day, 909 inhabitants of Jonestown,Who Died?, Alternative Considerations of Jonestown, San Diego State University 304 of them children, died of apparent cyanide poisoning, mostly in and around the settlement's main pavilion.1978: Mass suicide leaves 900 dead. BBC, November 18, 2005 This resulted in the greatest single loss of American civilian life in a deliberate act until the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.Rapaport, Richard, Jonestown and City Hall slayings eerily linked in time and memory, San Francisco Chronicle, November 16, 2003 The FBI later recovered a 45-minute audio recording of the suicide in progress.Jim Jones, "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 42". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. On that tape, Jones tells Temple members that the Soviet Union, with whom the Temple had been negotiating a potential exodus for months, would not take them after the airstrip murders. The reason given by Jones to commit suicide was consistent with his previously stated conspiracy theories of intelligence organizations allegedly conspiring against the Temple, that men would "parachute in here on us", "shoot some of our innocent babies" and "they'll torture our children, they'll torture some of our people here, they'll torture our seniors". Parroting Jones' prior statements that hostile forces would convert captured children to fascism, one temple member states "the ones that they take captured, they're gonna just let them grow up and be dummies". Given that reasoning, Jones and several members argued that the group should commit "revolutionary suicide" by drinking cyanide-laced grape-flavored Flavor Aid. Later-released Temple films show Jones opening a storage container full of Kool-Aid in large quantities. However, empty packets of grape Flavor Aid found on the scene show that this is what was used to mix the solution along with a sedative. One member, Christine Miller, dissents toward the beginning of the tape. When members apparently cried, Jones counseled, "Stop these hysterics. This is not the way for people who are socialists or communists to die. No way for us to die. We must die with some dignity." Jones can be heard saying, "Don't be afraid to die", that death is "just stepping over into another plane" and that it's "a friend". At the end of the tape, Jones concludes: "We didn't commit suicide; we committed an act of revolutionary suicide protesting the conditions of an inhumane world." According to escaping Temple members, children were given the drink first and families were told to lie down together. Mass suicide had been previously discussed in simulated events called "White Nights" on a regular basis."Affidavit of Deborah Layton Blakey". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. During at least one such prior White Night, members drank liquid that Jones falsely told them was poison. Jones was found dead on a deck chair with a gunshot wound to his head that Guyanese coroner Cyrill Mootoo stated was consistent with a self-inflicted gunshot wound. However, Jones' son Stephan believes his father may have directed someone else to shoot him.Jonestown: Paradise Lost, Interview of Stephan Jones, Documentary airing on Discovery Networks, 2007 An autopsy of Jones' body also showed levels of the barbiturate Pentobarbital which may have been lethal to humans who had not developed physiological tolerance.Autopsy of Jim Jones by Kenneth H. Mueller, Jonestown Institute at SDSU Jones' drug usage (including LSD and cannabis) was confirmed by his son, Stephan, and Jones' doctor in San Francisco. On December 13, 1973, Jones was arrested and charged with soliciting a man for sex in a movie theater restroom known for homosexual activity, near MacArthur Park in Los Angeles.Wise, David. "Sex in Peoples Temple". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. The man was an undercover LAPD vice officer. Jones is on record as later telling his followers that he was "the only true heterosexual", but at least one account exists of his sexual abuse of a male member of his congregation in front of the followers, ostensibly to prove the man's own homosexual tendencies. While Jones banned sex among Temple members outside of marriage, he himself voraciously engaged in sexual relations with both male and female Temple members.Paranoia And Delusions, Time Magazine, December 11, 1978 Jones, however, claimed that he detested engaging in homosexual activity and did so only for the male temple adherents' own good, purportedly to connect them symbolically with him (Jones). One of Jones' sources of inspiration was the controversial International Peace Mission movement leader Father Divine."FAQ: Who was the leader of Peoples Temple?" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. Jim Jones' wife, Marceline, was found poisoned at the pavilion. On the final morning of Ryan's visit, Marceline had taken reporters on a tour of Jonestown. Stephan, Jim Jr. and Tim Jones, did not take part in the mass suicide because they were playing with the Peoples Temple basketball team against the Guyanese national team in Georgetown. At the time of events in Jonestown, Stephan and Tim were both nineteen and Jim Jones Jr. was eighteen."Who Survived the Jonestown Tragedy?" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. Tim's biological family, the Tuppers, which consisted of his three biological sisters,"Janet Marie Tupper" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Mary Elizabeth Tupper" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Ruth Ann Tupper" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. biological brother,"Larry Howard Tupper" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. and biological mother,"Rita Jeanette Tupper Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. all died at Jonestown. Three days before the tragedy, Stephan Jones refused, over the radio, to comply with an order by his father to return the team to Jonestown for Ryan's visit. During the events at Jonestown, Stephan, Tim, and Jim Jones Jr. drove to the U.S. Embassy in Georgetown in an attempt to receive help. The Guyanese soldiers guarding the embassy refused to let them in after hearing about the shootings at the Port Kaituma airstrip.Smith, Gary. "Escaping Jonestown". Sports Illustrated. CNN.com. 24 December 2007. Later, the three returned to the Temple's headquarters in Georgetown to find the bodies of Sharon Amos and her three children. Guyanese soldiers kept the Jones brothers under house arrest for five days, interrogating them about the deaths in Georgetown. Stephan Jones was accused of being involved in the Georgetown deaths, and was placed in a Guyanese prison for three months. Tim Jones and Johnny Cobb, another member of the Peoples Temple basketball team, were asked to go to Jonestown and help identify the bodies of people who had died. After returning to the United States, Jim Jones Jr. was placed under police surveillance for several months while he lived with his older sister, Suzanne, who had previously turned against the Temple. When Jonestown was first being established, Stephan had originally avoided two attempts by his father to relocate to the settlement. He eventually moved to Jonestown after a third and final attempt. He has since said that he gave in to his father's wishes to move to Jonestown because of his mother.Jones, Stephan. - "Marceline/Mom" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. Stephan Jones is now a businessman, and married with three daughters. He appeared in the documentary Jonestown: Paradise Lost which aired on the History Channel and Discovery Channel. He stated he will not watch the documentary and has never grieved for his father.Brownstein, Bill. "The son who survived Jonestown". The Gazette. Canada. 9 March 2007. One year later, he appeared in the documentary Witness to Jonestown where he responds to rare footage shot inside the Peoples Temple. Jim Jones Jr., who lost his wife and unborn child at Jonestown, returned to San Francisco. He remarried and has three sons from this marriage, including Rob Jones, a high-school basketball star who went on to play for the University of San Diego before transferring to Saint Mary's College of California."22 - Rob Jones". University of San Diego Official Athletic Site. Accessed: 2009-10-03. Archived by WebCite Lew and Agnes Jones both died at Jonestown. Agnes Jones was thirty-five years old at the time of her death.Agnes Paulette Jones Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple]. San Diego State University. Her husband"Forrest Ray Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. and four children"Billy Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Jimbo Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Michael Ray Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Stephanie Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. all died at Jonestown. Lew Jones, who was twenty-one years old at the time of his death, died alongside his wife Terry and son Chaeoke.Lew Eric Jones Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Terry Carter Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Chaeoke Warren Jones" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. Stephanie Jones had died at age five in a car accident. Suzanne Jones married Mike Cartmell; both turned against the Temple and were not in Jonestown on November 18, 1978. After this decision to abandon the Temple, Jones referred to Suzanne openly as "my goddamned, no good for nothing daughter" and stated that she was not to be trusted.FBI Tape Q 265 - October 17, 1978 address. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. In a signed note found at the time of her death, Marceline Jones directed that the Jones' funds were to be given to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and specified: "I especially request that none of these are allowed to get into the hands of my adopted daughter, Suzanne Jones Cartmell.""November 18 1978 Letter from Marceline Jones". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University."Letter from Marceline Jones". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. Cartmell had two children and died of colon cancer in November 2006.Who Has Died Since 18 November 1978? Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University.Smith, Gary. "Escape From Jonestown" Sports Illustrated CNN.com. 24 December 2007. Specific references to Tim Stoen, the father of John Stoen, including the logistics of possibly murdering him, are made on the Temple's final "death tape", as well as a discussion over whether the Temple should include John Stoen among those committing "revolutionary suicide"."Jonestown Audiotape Primary Project". Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. At Jonestown, John Stoen was found poisoned in Jim Jones' cabin. Both Jim Jon (Kimo) and his mother, Carolyn Louise Moore Layton, died during the events at Jonestown."Carolyn Louise Moore Layton" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University. Jonestown: Mystery of a Massacre (1998) Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple (2006) Jonestown: Paradise Lost (2007) CNN Presents: Escape From Jonestown (2008) Seconds From Disaster, episode "Jonestown Cult Suicide" (2012) Witness to Jonestown (2013) Guyana: Crime of the Century aka Guyana: Cult of the Damned (1979) - Fictionalized exploitation film (Depicted as "Reverend James Johnson") Guyana Tragedy: The Story of Jim Jones (1980) - Fact-based drama The Sacrament (2013) The Veil (2016) Mass suicide List of people who have claimed to be Jesus List of Buddha claimants The Sacrament (2013 film) A fictional film compared by some critics to events that occurred at Jonestown David Dick, CBS News correspondent who covered Jonestown Chidester, David, Salvation and Suicide: Jim Jones, the People's Temple and Jonestown (Religion in North America), 2nd rev.ed., Indiana University Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-253-21632-8 Klineman, George and Sherman Butler. The Cult That Died. G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1980. ISBN 0-399-12540-X. Maaga, Mary McCormick. Hearing the voices of Jonestown. Syracuse University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-8156-0515-3. Naipaul, Shiva. Black & White. Hamish Hamilton, London, 1980. ISBN 0-241-10337-1. The Jonestown Institute FBI No. Q 042 The "Jonestown Death Tape", Recorded 18 November 1978 (Internet Archive) Transcript of Jones' final speech, just before the mass suicide Biography of Jim Jones Encyclopædia Britannica The first part of a series of articles about Jim Jones published in the San Francisco Examiner in 1972. History Channel Video and Stills Isaacson, Barry. From Silver Lake to Suicide: One Family's Secret History of the Jonestown Massacre Mass Suicide at Jonestown: 30 Years Later, Time magazine Jonestown 30 Years Later  photo gallery published Friday, October 17, 2008. Rapaport, Richard. Jonestown and City Hall slayings eerily linked in time and memory Both events continue to haunt city a quarter century later Maurice Brinton. "Suicide for socialism?". Brinton's analysis of the bizarre mass suicide of a socialist cult led by American Jim Jones in Jonestown, Guyana, which discusses the dynamics of political sects in general. Nakao, Annie.The ghastly Peoples Temple deaths shocked the world. Berkeley Rep takes on the challenge of coming to terms with it. American Experience documentary, "Jonestown: The Life And Death Of Peoples Temple", shown on PBS Jonestown: 25 Years Later How spiritual journey ended in destruction: Jim Jones led his flock to death in jungle by Michael Taylor, San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Published Thursday, November 12, 1998. Utopian nightmare Jonestown: What did we learn?  Larry D. Hatfield, of The Examiner staff, Gregory Lewis and Eric Brazil of The Examiner staff and Examiner Librarian Judy Canter contributed to this report. Published Sunday, November 8, 1998. Jones Captivated S.F.'s Liberal Elite: They were late to discover how cunningly he curried favor by Michael Taylor, San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. And [Haunted by Memories of Hell ] by Kevin Fagan, San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Published Thursday, November 12, 1998. Both stories were included in the first of a two-part series. The End To Innocent Acceptance Of Sects Sharper scrutiny is Jonestown legacy  by Don Lattin, San Francisco Chronicle religion writer. And Most Peoples Temple Documents Still Sealed by Michael Taylor and Don Lattin, San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. And Surviving the Heart of Darkness: Twenty years later, Jackie Speier remembers how her companions and rum helped her endure the night of the Jonestown massacre by Maitland Zane, San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Published Friday, November 13, 1998. All stories were included in the second part of a two-part series. Inside Peoples Temple  Marshall Kilduff and Phil Tracy, Used by permission of authors for the San Francisco Chronicle. Published Monday, August 1, 1977. Jonestown: Dismantling the Disinformation  Laurie Efrein Kahalas, an -year member of the Peoples Temple who was living in the Temple building in San Francisco when tragedy struck. Published April 8, 1999.
