   John Cabell Breckinridge (January 16, 1821 – May 17, 1875) was a lawyer and politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky. He represented the Commonwealth in both houses of Congress and in 1857, became the 14th and youngest-ever Vice President of the United States (1857–61). Serving in the U.S. Senate at the outbreak of the Civil War, he was expelled after joining the Confederate Army. He remains the only Senator of the United States convicted of treason against the United States of America by the Senate. He was appointed Confederate Secretary of War late in the war. A member of the Breckinridge family, he was the grandson of U.S. Attorney General John Breckinridge, son of Kentucky Secretary of State Cabell Breckinridge and father of Arkansas Congressman Clifton R. Breckinridge. After non-combat service in the Mexican–American War, Breckinridge was elected as a Democrat to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1849 where he took a states' rights position against legal interference with slavery. Elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1851, he allied with Stephen A. Douglas in support of the Kansas–Nebraska Act. After reapportionment in 1854 made his re-election unlikely, he declined to run for another term. He was nominated for vice-president at the 1856 Democratic National Convention to balance a ticket headed by Pennsylvanian James Buchanan. The Democrats won the election, but Breckinridge had little influence with Buchanan and, as presiding officer of the Senate, could not express his opinions in that body's debates. In 1859, he was elected to succeed U.S. Senator John J. Crittenden at the end of Crittenden's term in 1861. After Southern Democrats walked out of the 1860 Democratic National Convention, the party's northern and southern factions held rival conventions in Baltimore, Maryland that nominated Stephen Douglas and Breckinridge, respectively, for president. Breckinridge carried most of the southern states but no northern states and lost the election. Taking his seat in the Senate, he urged compromise to preserve the Union although seven states had already seceded. Unionists took control of the state legislature when Kentucky's neutrality was breached, but Breckinridge fled behind Confederate battle lines where he was commissioned a brigadier general; he was then expelled from the Senate. After the April 1862 Battle of Shiloh, he was promoted to major general, and in October he was assigned to the command of Braxton Bragg. After Bragg charged that Breckinridge's drunkenness had contributed to Confederate defeats at Stone River and Missionary Ridge, he was transferred to the Trans-Allegheny Department, where he won his most significant victory at the Battle of New Market. After participating in Jubal Early's 1864 campaigns in the Shenandoah Valley, he was charged with defending Confederate supplies in Tennessee and Virginia. In February 1865, Confederate President Jefferson Davis appointed him Secretary of War. Concluding that the war was hopeless, he urged Davis to arrange a national surrender. After the fall of the Confederate capital at Richmond, he ensured the preservation of Confederate military and governmental records. He then fled to Cuba, Great Britain, and finally, to Canada. In exile, he toured Europe from August 1866 to June 1868. When President Andrew Johnson extended amnesty to all former Confederates in late 1868, he returned to Kentucky, but resisted all encouragement to resume his political career. Issues from war injuries sapped his health, and after two operations, he died on May 17, 1875. John C. Breckinridge was born at Thorn Hill, his family's estate near Lexington, Kentucky, on January 16, 1821.Harrison, p. 125 The fourth of six children born to Joseph "Cabell" and Mary Clay (Smith) Breckinridge, he was their only son.Davis, p. 10 His mother was the daughter of Samuel Stanhope Smith, who founded Hampden–Sydney College in 1775, and granddaughter of John Witherspoon, a signer of the Declaration of Independence. Having previously served as Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives, his father had been appointed Kentucky's Secretary of State just prior to his son's birth.Klotter in The Kentucky Encyclopedia, p. 117 In February, the family moved with Governor John Adair to the Governor's Mansion in Frankfort, Kentucky.Heck, p. 3 In August 1823, an illness referred to as "the prevailing fever" struck Frankfort, and Cabell Breckinridge took his children to stay with his mother in Lexington. On his return, both he and his wife fell ill; he died, but she survived.Heck, p. 4 His assets were not enough to pay his debts, and his wife joined the children in Lexington, supported by her mother-in-law.Heck, p. 5 While in Lexington, Breckinridge attended Pisgah Academy in Woodford County."Breckinridge, John Cabell". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress His grandmother also taught him the political philosophies of her late husband, John Breckinridge, who served in the U.S. Senate and as Attorney General under President Thomas Jefferson.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 97 As a state legislator, Breckinridge had introduced the Kentucky Resolutions, which stressed states' rights and endorsed the doctrine of nullification.Heck, p. 1 After an argument between Breckinridge's mother and grandmother in 1832, he, his mother, and his sister Laetitia moved to Danville, Kentucky, to live with his sister, Frances and her husband, who was president of Centre College.Heck, p. 6 Breckinridge's uncle, William Breckinridge, was also on the faculty there, prompting him to enroll in November 1834. Among his schoolmates were Beriah Magoffin, William Birney, Theodore O'Hara, Thomas L. Crittenden and Jeremiah T. Boyle.Davis, p. 14Heck, p. 9 After earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in September 1838, he spent the winter of 1838–1839 as a "resident graduate" at the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University).Davis, p. 15Heck, p. 10 Returning to Kentucky in mid-1839, he read law with Judge William Owsley. In November 1840, he enrolled in the second year of the law course at Transylvania University in Lexington, where his instructors included two members of the Kentucky Court of Appeals – George Robertson and Thomas A. Marshall.Heck, pp. 10–11 On February 25, 1841, he received a bachelor of laws degree and was licensed to practice the next day.Heck, p. 11 Breckinridge remained in Lexington while deciding where to begin practice, borrowing law books from the library of John J. Crittenden, Thomas Crittenden's father.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 99 Deciding that Lexington was overcrowded with lawyers, he moved to Frankfort, but was unable to find an office.Davis, p. 21 After being spurned by a love interest, he and former classmate Thomas W. Bullock resolved to relocate to Iowa Territory in October 1841. Journeying westward, they considered settling on land Breckinridge had inherited in Jacksonville, Illinois, but they found the bar stocked with able men like Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln.Davis, p. 22 They continued on to Burlington, Iowa, and by the winter of 1842–1843, Breckinridge reported to family members that his firm handled more cases than almost any other in Burlington.Heck, p. 12 Influenced by Bullock and the citizens of Iowa, he identified with the Democratic Party, and by February 1843, he had been named to the Democratic committee of Des Moines County.Heck, pp. 13–14 Most of the Kentucky Breckinridges were Whigs, and when he learned of his nephew's party affiliation, William Breckinridge declared, "I felt as I would have done if I had heard that my daughter had been dishonored."Heck, p. 14 Breckinridge visited Kentucky in May 1843.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 102 His efforts to mediate between his mother and the Breckinridges extended his visit and after he contracted influenza, he decided to remain for the summer rather than returning to Iowa's colder climate. While at home, he met Bullock's cousin, Mary Cyrene Burch, and by September, they were engaged."John Cabell Breckinridge". Encyclopedia of World Biography In October, Breckinridge went to Iowa to close out his business, then returned to Kentucky and formed a law partnership with Samuel Bullock, Thomas's cousin.Davis, p. 29Heck, p. 16 He married on December 12, 1843, and settled in Georgetown, Kentucky. The couple had six children – Joseph Cabell (b. 1844), Clifton Rodes (b. 1846; later a Congressman from Arkansas), Frances (b. 1848), John Milton (b. 1849), John Witherspoon (b. 1850) and Mary Desha (b. 1854). Gaining confidence in his ability as a lawyer, Breckinridge moved his family back to Lexington in 1845 and formed a partnership with future U.S. Senator James B. Beck."John Cabell Breckinridge". Dictionary of American Biography A supporter of the Mexican–American War, Breckinridge sought appointment to the staff of William O. Butler, but Butler could only offer him an unpaid aide position and advised him to decline it.Heck, p. 20 In July 1847, he delivered an address at a mass military funeral in Frankfort to honor Kentuckians killed in the Battle of Buena Vista, during which Henry Clay, whose son was among the dead, wept.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 103 The oration inspired Theodore O'Hara to write The Bivouac of the Dead. Breckinridge again applied for a military commission after William Owsley, then governor of Kentucky, called for two additional regiments on August 31, 1847.Heck, p. 21 Owsley's advisors encouraged the Whig governor to commission at least one Democrat; John J. Crittenden supported Breckinridge's application.Davis, p. 34 On September 6, 1847, he appointed Manlius V. Thomson as colonel, Thomas L. Crittenden as lieutenant colonel and Breckinridge as major of the Third Kentucky Infantry Regiment. The regiment left Kentucky on November 1 and reached Vera Cruz by November 21.Heck, p. 22 After several men became ill at Vera Cruz, the regiment hurried to Mexico City. Reports indicate that Breckinridge walked all but two days of the journey, allowing weary soldiers to use his horse. When the Third Kentucky reached Mexico City on December 18, the fighting was almost over; they participated in no military action and remained in the city as an army of occupation until May 30, 1848.Sifakis, p. 71. In demand more for his legal expertise than his military training, he was named as assistant counsel for Gideon Johnson Pillow during a court of inquiry initiated against him by Winfield Scott.Davis, p. 37Heck, p. 23 Seeking to derail Scott's presidential ambitions, Pillow and his supporters composed and published letters that lauded Pillow, not Scott, for the American victories at Contreras and Churubusco.Davis, p. 38 To hide his involvement, Pillow convinced a subordinate to take credit for the letter he wrote. Breckinridge biographer William C. Davis writes, that it was "most unlikely" that Breckinridge knew the details of Pillow's intrigue. His role in the proceedings was limited to questioning a few witnesses; records show that Pillow represented himself during the court's proceedings. Returning to Louisville on July 16, 1848, the Third Kentucky mustered out on July 21. During their time in Mexico, over 100 members of the 1,000-man regiment had died of illness. Breckinridge's nominal military service proved an asset to his political prospects in Kentucky.  Breckinridge campaigned for Democratic presidential nominee James K. Polk during the 1844 campaign.Davis, p. 30 He decided against running for county clerk of Scott County after his law partner complained that he spent too much time in politics.Davis, p. 31 Some local Democrats encouraged him to run seek the Eighth District's congressional seat in 1845, but he declined, supporting instead Alexander Keith Marshall, the party's unsuccessful nominee. As a private citizen, he opposed the Wilmot Proviso that would have banned slavery in the territory acquired in the war with Mexico.Davis, p. 33 In the 1848 presidential election, he backed the Democratic ticket of Lewis Cass and William Butler.  In August 1849, Kentuckians elected delegates to a state constitutional convention in addition to representatives and senators.Heck, p. 26 Breckinridge's abolitionist uncles, William and Robert, joined with Cassius Marcellus Clay to nominate slates of like-minded candidates for the constitutional convention and the legislature. In response, a bipartisan group of pro-slavery citizens organized its own slate of candidates, including Breckinridge for one of Fayette County's two seats in the House of Representatives.Heck, p. 24 Breckinridge, who by this time owned five slaves, had publicly declared his opposition to "impairing in any form" the legal protection of slavery. Despite his endorsement of slavery protections, he was a member of the Freemasons and the First Presbyterian Church in Lexington, both of which officially opposed slavery.Davis, p. 43 He had also previously represented free blacks in court, expressed support for voluntary emancipation, and supported the Kentucky Colonization Society, which was dedicated to the relocation of free blacks to Liberia. Breckinridge received 1,481 votes in the election, over 400 more than his nearest competitor, marking the first time that Fayette County had elected a Democrat to the state House of Representatives.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 104Davis, p. 45 Between the election and the legislative session, Breckinridge formed a new law partnership with Owsley's former Secretary of State, George B. Kinkead; his previous partner having died in a cholera epidemic earlier in the year.Heck, p. 28 He also co-founded the Kentucky Statesman, a semi-weekly Democratic newspaper, and visited his cousin, Mary Todd, where he met her husband, Abraham Lincoln, for the first time; despite their political differences, they became friends."John Cabell Breckinridge, 14th Vice President (1857-1861)". United States Senate When the House convened, Breckinridge received a plurality of votes for Speaker, but fell at least eight votes short of a majority on each of the first three ballots. Unable to break the deadlock, he withdrew from the race, and the position went to Whig Thomas Reilly.Davis, p. 46 Breckinridge biographer Frank H. Heck wrote that Breckinridge was the leader of the House Democratic caucus during the session, but most of the measures considered were "local or personal...and in any case, petty".Heck, p. 29 Breckinridge was assigned to the House's standing committees on Federal Relations and the Judiciary. He supported bills allocating funding for internal improvements, a traditionally Whig stance. As Congress debated Henry Clay's proposed Compromise of 1850, the four Whigs on the Committee on Federal Relations drew up resolutions urging the Kentucky congressional delegation to support the compromise as a "fair, equitable, and just basis" for settlement of the slavery issue in the newly acquired U.S. territories.Heck, p. 30 Breckinridge felt that the resolution was too vague and authored a minority report that explicitly denied federal authority to interfere with slavery in states and territories. Both sets of resolutions, and a set adopted by the Senate, were all laid on the table. Three days before the end of the session, Breckinridge took a leave of absence to care for his son, John Milton, who had become ill; he died on March 18, 1850.Davis, p. 48 Keeping a busy schedule to cope with his grief, he urged adoption of the proposed constitution at a series of meetings around the state.Heck, p. 31 His only concern with the document was its lack of an amendment process. The constitution was overwhelmingly ratified in May.Davis, p. 49 Democrats wanted to nominate him for re-election, but he declined, citing problems "of a private and imperative character". Davis wrote "his problem – besides continuing sadness over his son's death – was money." Breckinridge was a delegate to the January 8, 1851, state Democratic convention which nominated Lazarus W. Powell for governor.Heck, p. 33 A week later, he announced that he would seek election to Congress from Kentucky's Eighth District. Nicknamed the "Ashland district" because it contained Ashland, the estate of Whig Party founder Henry Clay, and much of the area Clay once represented, the district was a Whig stronghold. In the previous congressional election, Democrats had not even nominated a candidate in the district. Breckinridge's opponent, Leslie Combs, was a former state legislator whose popularity was bolstered by his association with Clay and his participation in the War of 1812; he was expected to win the election easily. In April, the candidates held a debate in Frankfort, and in May, they jointly canvassed the district, making daily speeches.Heck, pp. 33–34 Breckinridge reiterated his strict constructionist view of the U.S. Constitution and denounced the protective tariffs advocated by the Whigs, stating that "free thought needs free trade".Davis, p. 53 His strong voice and charismatic personality contrasted with the campaign style of the much older Combs.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 105 On election day, he carried only three of the district's seven counties, but accumulated a two-to-one victory margin in Owen County, winning the county by 677 votes and the election by 537.Davis, pp. 55–56 Democrats carried five of Kentucky's ten congressional districts, and Powell was elected as the first Democratic governor since 1832.Heck, p. 34 Supporters promoted Breckinridge for Speaker of the House, but he refused to allow his own nomination and voted with the majority elect fellow Kentuckian Linn Boyd.Davis, p. 58Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 107 Despite this, the two were factional enemies, and Boyd assigned Breckinridge to the lightly regarded Committee on Foreign Affairs.Davis, p. 59 Breckinridge's first speech, and several subsequent ones, were made to defend William Butler, again a presidential aspirant in 1852, from charges leveled by proponents of the Young America movement that he was too old and had not made his stance on slavery clear.Davis, pp. 65–68 The attacks came from the pages of George Nicholas Sanders's Democratic Review, and on the House floor from Florida's Edward Carrington Cabell, fellow Kentuckian Humphrey Marshall, Illinois' William A. Richardson, and California's Edward C. Marshall, who was Breckinridge's cousin, nearly all of whom supported Stephen Douglas for the nomination. Their attacks, however, ultimately hurt Douglas's chances for the nomination and Breckinridge's defense of Butler enhanced his own reputation.Davis, p. 68 After this controversy, he was more active in the chamber's debates but introduced few significant pieces of legislation. He defended the constitutionality of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 against attacks by Ohio Representative Joshua Giddings and opposed Andrew Johnson's proposed Homestead Act out of concern that it would create more territories that excluded slavery. Despite his campaign rhetoric that federal funds should only be used for internal improvements "of a national character", he sought to increase Kentucky's federal allocation for construction and maintenance of rivers and harbors, and supported bills that benefited his district's hemp farmers. Returning home from the legislative session, Breckinridge made daily visits with Henry Clay, who lay dying in Lexington, and was chosen to deliver his eulogy in Congress when the next session commenced.Davis, pp. 69–70 The eulogy enhanced his popularity and solidified his position as Clay's political heir apparent. He also campaigned for the election of Democrat Franklin Pierce as president.Heck, p. 37 Although Pierce lost Kentucky by 3,200 votes, Breckinridge wielded more influence with him than he had with outgoing Whig President Millard Fillmore.Heck, p. 38 A week after his inauguration, Pierce offered Breckinridge an appointment as governor of Washington Territory.Davis, p. 76 He had initially sought the appointment, securing letters of recommendation from Powell and Butler, but by the time it was offered, he had decided to stay in Kentucky and seek re-election to the House.  Whigs, seeking to recapture Breckinridge's seat, nominated Attorney General James Harlan, but some Whig factions opposed him, and he withdrew in March.Davis, pp. 76–77 Robert P. Letcher, a former congressman and governor who had won 14 elections in Kentucky without a loss, was the party's second choice.Davis, p. 77 Both candidates campaigned vigorously throughout the Eighth District, making multiple speeches a day between May and August.Harrison, p. 126 Letcher was an experienced campaigner, but his popular, anecdote-filled oratory, was unpolished, and he was prone to outbursts of anger when frustrated.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, pp. 105–106 By contrast, Breckinridge delivered calm, well-reasoned speeches.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 106 Cassius Clay, a political enemy of Letcher's for years, endorsed Breckinridge, despite their differences on slavery. Citing this endorsement and the abolitionism of Breckinridge's uncles, Letcher tried to paint Breckinridge as an enemy of slavery. Breckinridge pointed to his consistent support for slavery and claimed Letcher was actually hostile to the interests of slaveholders. Although the district had gone for Whig candidate Winfield Scott by over 600 votes in the previous year's presidential election, Breckinridge defeated Letcher by 526 votes.Heck, p. 35 Once again, he received a large margin in Owen County, which reported 123 more votes than eligible voters living in the county. Grateful for the support of the reliably Democratic county, he gave his son John Witherspoon Breckinridge the nickname "Owen". Of the 234 members of the House, Breckinridge was among the 80 that were returned to their seats for the Thirty-third Congress. Due to his increased seniority, he was assigned to the more prestigious Ways and Means Committee, but he was not given a committee chairmanship as many had expected. Although he supported Pierce's pro-slavery agenda on the principle of states' rights and believed that secession was legal, he opposed secession as a remedy to the country's immediate problems. This, coupled with his earlier support of manumission and African colonization, balanced his support for slavery; most still considered him a moderate legislator. An ally of Illinois' Stephen A. Douglas, Breckinridge supported the doctrine of popular sovereignty as expressed in Douglas's Kansas–Nebraska Act. He believed passage of the act would remove the issue of slavery from national politics – although it ultimately had the opposite effect – and acted as liaison between Douglas and Pierce to secure its passage. During its debate on the House floor, New York's Francis B. Cutting, incensed by a statement that Breckinridge made, demanded that he explain or retract it. Breckinridge interpreted Cutting's demand as a challenge to duel. Under code duello, the individual being challenged retained the right to name the weapons used and the distance between the combatants; Breckinridge chose rifles at 60 paces. He also specified that the duel should be held at Silver Spring, Maryland, the home of his friend Francis Preston Blair. Cutting, who had not intended his initial remark as a challenge, believed that Breckinridge's naming of terms constituted a challenge; he chose to used pistols at a distance of 10 paces. While the two men attempted to clarify who had issued the challenge and who reserved the right to choose the terms, mutual friends resolved the issue, preventing the duel. The recently adopted Kentucky Constitution prevented anyone who participated in a duel from holding elected office, and the peaceful resolution of the issue may have saved Breckinridge's political career.Heck, p. 45  In February 1854, the Whig majority in the Kentucky General Assembly passed – over Powell's veto – a reapportionment bill that redrew Breckinridge's district, removing Owen County and replacing it with Harrison and Nicholas counties.Heck, pp. 46–47 This, combined with the rise of the Know Nothing Party in Kentucky, left Breckinridge with little hope of re-election, and he decided to retire from the House at the expiration of his term.Heck, p. 47 Following the December 1854 resignation of Pierre Soulé, the U.S. Minister to Spain who failed to negotiate a U.S. annexation of Cuba, Pierce nominated Breckinridge to the position. Although the Senate confirmed the nomination, Breckinridge declined it on February 8, 1855, telling Pierce only that his decision was "of a private and domestic nature".Heck, p. 48 Desiring to care for his sick wife and rebuild his personal wealth, Breckinridge returned to his law practice in Lexington. In addition to his legal practice, he engaged in land speculation in Minnesota and Wisconsin territories.Heck, pp. 50–52 When territorial governor Willis A. Gorman thwarted an attempt by Breckinridge's fellow investors to secure approval of a railroad connecting Dubuque, Iowa, with their investments near Superior, Wisconsin, the petitioned Pierce to remove Gorman and appoint Breckinridge in his place.Heck, p. 51 In 1855, Pierce authorized two successive investigations of Gorman, but failed uncover any misdemeanors that would justify his removal. During his time away from politics, he also promoted the advancement of horse racing in his native state and was chosen president of the Kentucky Association for the Improvement of the Breed of Horses.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 110  As a delegate to the 1856 Democratic National Convention in Cincinnati, Ohio, Breckinridge supported Pierce's re-nomination for president. When Pierce's hopes of securing the nomination faltered, Breckinridge threw his support to his friend, Stephen Douglas. Even with support from erstwhile Pierce backers, Douglas was also unable to garner a majority of the delegates' votes, and he withdrew, leaving James Buchanan as the Democratic nominee. William Alexander Richardson, a Kentucky-born Congressman from Illinois, then suggested that nominating Breckinridge for vice-president would balance Buchanan's ticket and placate disgruntled supporters of Douglas.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 111 A delegate from Louisiana placed his name before the convention, and although Breckinridge desired the nomination, he declined, citing his deference to fellow Kentuckian Linn Boyd, who was supported by the Kentucky delegation. Ten men received votes on the first vice-presidential ballot.Heck, p. 59 Mississippi's John A. Quitman had the most support with 59 votes. Eight state delegations – with a total of 55 votes – voted for Breckinridge in spite of his refusal of the nomination, making him the second-highest vote getter. Kentucky cast its 12 votes for Boyd, bringing his third-place total to 33 votes. Seeing Breckinridge's strength on the first ballot, large numbers of delegates voted for him on the second ballot, and those who did not soon saw that his nomination was inevitable and changed their votes to make it unanimous. Unlike many vice-presidential nominees of his time, Breckinridge actively campaigned for his and Buchanan's election. During the first ten days of September 1856, he spoke in Hamilton and Cincinnati in Ohio; Lafayette and Indianapolis in Indiana; Kalamazoo, Michigan; Covington, Kentucky; and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.Heck, p. 61 His speeches stressed the idea that Republicans were fanatically devoted to emancipation, and their election would prompt the dissolution of the Union. Breckinridge's presence on the ticket helped the Democrats carry his home state of Kentucky – which the party had not won since 1828 – by 6,000 votes.Harrison, p. 127 Buchanan and Breckinridge received 174 electoral votes to 114 for Republicans John C. Frémont and William L. Dayton and 8 for Know Nothing candidates Millard Fillmore and Andrew Jackson Donelson.Heck, p. 63  Thirty-six years old at the time of his inauguration on March 4, 1857, Breckinridge was the youngest vice-president in U.S. history, exceeding the minimum age required under the Constitution by only a year. Buchanan resented the fact that Breckinridge had supported both Pierce and Douglas before endorsing his nomination.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 112 Relations between the two were further strained when, upon asking for a private interview with Buchanan, Breckinridge was told to come to the White House and ask for Harriet Lane, who acted as the mansion's host for the unmarried president.Heck, p. 67 Feeling slighted by the response, Breckinridge refused to carry out these instructions; later, three of Buchanan's intimates informed Breckinridge that requesting to speak to Miss Lane was actually a secret instruction to White House staff to usher the requestor into a private audience with the president. They also conveyed Buchanan's apologies for the misunderstanding.Heck, p. 68  Buchanan rarely consulted Breckinridge when making patronage appointments, and meetings between the two were infrequent. Differences over the legitimacy of admitting Kansas as a state under the Lecompton Constitution further alienated Buchanan and Douglas. When Breckinridge joined Buchanan in endorsing the Lecompton Constitution, the friendship between Breckinridge and Douglas was breached as well.Heck, p. 72 This disagreement ended plans for Breckinridge, Douglas, and Minnesota's Henry Mower Rice to build a series of three elaborate, conjoined row houses in which to live during their time in Washington, D.C. After Breckinridge found alternate lodging in Washington, he sold a slave woman and her young infant which, according to historian James C. Klotter, probably ended his days as a slaveholder. When Breckinridge did not travel to Illinois to campaign for Douglas's re-election to the Senate and gave him only a lukewarm endorsement, relations between them worsened.Heck, p. 75 Functioning as the Senate's presiding officer, Breckinridge's participation in the chamber's debates was also restricted. On January 4, 1859, he was asked to deliver the final address in the Old Senate Chamber; in the speech, he expressed his desire that the solons find a solution that would preserve the Union. He opposed the idea that the federal government could coerce action by a state, but maintained that secession, while legal, was not the solution to the country's problems. Although Crittenden's Senate term did not expire until 1861, the Kentucky General Assembly met to choose his successor in 1859. Until just days before the election, the contest was expected to be between Breckinridge and Boyd, who had been elected lieutenant governor in August; Boyd's worsening health, however, prompted his withdrawal on November 28, 1859.Heck, p. 79 On December 12, the Assembly chose Breckinridge over Joshua Fry Bell, the defeated candidate in the August gubernatorial election, by a vote of 81–53. In his acceptance speech, Breckinridge endorsed the Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford – which upheld the legality of slavery – and insisted and cautioned that John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry was evidence of Republicans' insistence on either negro equality or violence. Resistance in some form, he predicted, would eventually be necessary.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 113  Early in 1859, South Carolina's James Henry Hammond reported to a friend that Breckinridge was seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, but as late as January 1860, Breckinridge told family members that he had no desire for the nomination.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 114 A New York Times editorial noted that while Buchanan was falling "in prestige and political consequence, the star of the Vice President rises higher above the clouds." Douglas, considered the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination, was convinced that Breckinridge would be a candidate; this, combined with Buchanan's reluctant support of Breckinridge and Breckinridge's public support for a federal slave code deepened the rift between the two. Among Breckinridge's supporters at the 1860 Democratic National Convention in Charleston, South Carolina, were former Kentucky Governor Lazarus Powell, former Kentucky Congressmen William Preston (a distant relative) and James Brown Clay (son of Henry Clay), and James B. Beck. Breckinridge did not attend the convention, but instructed his supporters not to nominate him as long as James Guthrie remained a candidate.Heck, p. 82 Accordingly, when a delegate from Arkansas nominated Breckinridge for president on the thirty-sixth ballot, Beck asked that it be withdrawn, and the request was honored.Heck, p. 83 Over the course of 57 ballots, Douglas maintained a wide plurality, but failed to gain a majority; Guthrie consistently ran second. Unable to nominate a candidate, delegates voted to reconvene in Baltimore, Maryland on June 18, 1860. Pro-Southern delegates, who had walked out of the Charleston convention in protest of its failure to adopt a federal slave code plank in its platform, did not participate in the Baltimore convention.Heck, p. 82Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 115 The delegates from Alabama and Louisiana – both of which had walked out at Charleston – had been replaced with Douglas supporters from those states, leading to the nomination of Douglas and Herschel Vespasian Johnson for president and vice-president, respectively.Heck, pp. 83–84 The protesting delegates convened five days later in Baltimore. On the first ballot, Breckinridge received 81 votes, with 24 going to New York's Daniel S. Dickinson.Heck, p. 84 Dickinson supporters gradually changed their support to Breckinridge in order to make his nomination unanimous, and Oregon's Joseph Lane was chosen by acclamation as his running mate. Despite concerns about the breakup of the party, Breckinridge accepted the nomination. In August, Mississippi's Jefferson Davis attempted to broker a compromise under which Douglas, Breckinridge, and Tennessee's John Bell, the nominee of the Constitutional Union Party, would all withdraw in favor of a compromise candidate. Both Breckinridge and Bell readily agreed to the plan, but Douglas was opposed to compromising with the "Bolters", and his supporters retained an intense dislike for Breckinridge that made them adverse to Davis's proposal. Opponents knew Breckinridge believed in the right of secession and accused him of favoring the breakup of the Union; he denied this during a speech in Frankfort: "I am an American citizen, a Kentuckian who never did an act nor cherished a thought that was not full of devotion to the Constitution and the Union."Harrison, p. 128 While he had little to no support in the northern states, most, if not all, of the southern states were expected to go for Breckinridge.Heck, p. 90 This would give him only 120 of 303 electoral votes, but to gain support from any northern states, he had to minimize his connections with the southern states and risked losing their support to Bell.Klotter in The Kentucky Encyclopedia, p. 118 Some Breckinridge supporters believed his best hope was for the election to be thrown to the House of Representatives; if he could add the support of some Douglas or Bell states to the thirteen believed to support him, he could best Lincoln, who was believed to carry the support of fifteen states. To Davis's wife, Varina, Breckinridge wrote, "I trust I have the courage to lead a forlorn hope."Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 117  In the four-way contest, Breckinridge came in third in the popular vote, with 18.1%, but second in the Electoral College. The final electoral vote was 180 for Lincoln, 72 for Breckinridge, 39 for Bell, and 12 for Douglas. Although Breckinridge won the states of the Deep South, his support in those states came mostly from rural areas with low slave populations; the urban areas with higher slave populations generally went for Bell or Douglas. Breckinridge also carried the border states of Maryland and Delaware. Historian James C. Klotter points out in light of these results that, while Douglas maintained that there was "not a disunionist in America who is not a Breckinridge man", it is more likely that party loyalty and economic status played a more prominent role in Breckinridge's support than did issues of slavery and secession.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 118 He lost to Douglas in Missouri and Bell in Virginia and Tennessee.Heck, p. 91 Bell also captured Breckinridge's home state, Kentucky. Lincoln swept most of the northern states, although New Jersey split its electoral votes, giving four to Lincoln and three to Douglas. As the candidate of the Buchanan faction, Breckinridge outpolled Douglas in Pennsylvania and received support comparable to Douglas in Connecticut. It was Breckinridge's duty as vice-president to announce Lincoln as the winner of the electoral college vote on February 13, 1861. On February 24, Breckinridge visited Lincoln at Willard's Hotel in Washington, D.C., and frequently thereafter, he visited his cousin, now the First Lady, at the White House.Heck, p. 97 In the lame duck session following the election, Congress adopted a resolution authored by Lazarus Powell, now in the Senate, calling for a committee of thirteen "to consider that portion of the President's message relating to the disturbances of the country".Heck, p. 94 Frank Heck wrote that Breckinridge appointed "an able committee, representing every major faction". He endorsed Crittenden's proposed compromise and used his influence as the Senate's presiding officer in an unsuccessful attempt to get it approved by either the committee or the Senate. Ultimately, the committee reported that they were unable to agree on a recommendation.Heck, p. 95 On March 4, 1861, the last day of the session, Breckinridge swore in Hannibal Hamlin as his successor as vice-president. Hamlin, in turn, swore in the newly elected senators, including Breckinridge.  Seven states had already seceded when Breckinridge took his seat as a senator, leaving him almost alone in his defense of slavery. Seeking to find a compromise that would reunite the states under constitutional principles, he urged Lincoln to withdraw federal forces from the Confederate states in order to avert war.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 119Heck, p. 98 The congressional session ended March 28, and in an April 2 address to the Kentucky General Assembly, he continued to advocate peaceful reconciliation of the states and proposed a conference of border states to seek a solution.Heck, pp. 98–99 On April 12, Confederate troops fired on Fort Sumter, ending plans for the conference.Heck, p. 100 He recommended that Governor Beriah Magoffin call a sovereignty convention to determine whether Kentucky would side with the Union or the Confederacy.Harrison, p. 129 On May 10, he was chosen by the legislature as one of six delegates to a conference to decide the state's next action. The states' rights delegates were Breckinridge, Magoffin, and Richard Hawes; the Unionist delegates were Crittenden, Archibald Dixon, and S.S. Nicholas. Unable to agree on substantial issues, the delegates recommended that Kentucky adopt a neutral stance in the Civil War and arm itself to prevent invasion by either federal or Confederate forces.Heck, p. 101 Breckinridge did not support this recommendation, but he agreed to abide by it once it was approved by the legislature. In special elections in June, pro-Union candidates captured 9 of 10 seats in Kentucky's House delegation. Returning to the Senate for a special session in July, he was regarded as a traitor by most of his fellow legislators because of his Confederate sympathies.Harrison, p. 130 He condemned as unconstitutional Lincoln's enlistment and arming of men for a war Congress had not officially declared, his expending funds for the war that had not been allocated by Congress, and his suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. He was the only senator to vote against a resolution authorizing Lincoln to use "the entire resources of the government" for the war.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 120 Asked what he would do if he were president, he replied, "I would prefer to see these States all reunited upon true constitutional principles to any other object that could be offered me in life...But I infinitely prefer to see a peaceful separation of these States than to see endless, aimless, devastating war, at the end of which I see the grave of public liberty and of personal freedom." On August 1, he declared that, if Kentucky sided with the federal government against the Confederacy, "she will be represented by some other man on the floor of this Senate." Kentucky's neutrality was breached by both federal and Confederate forces in early September 1861. Soon after, Unionists in the state arrested former governor Charles S. Morehead for his suspected Confederate sympathies and shut down the Louisville Courier because of its pro-Confederate editorials. Word reached Breckinridge that Union General Thomas E. Bramlette intended to arrest him next. To avoid detainment, on September 19, 1861, he left Lexington.Heck, p. 104 Joined in Prestonsburg by Confederate sympathizers George W. Johnson, George Baird Hodge, William Preston, and William E. Simms, he continued to Abingdon, Virginia, and from there by rail to Confederate-held Bowling Green, Kentucky. The state legislature immediately requested his resignation. In an open letter to his constituents dated October 8, 1861, Breckinridge maintained that the Union no longer existed and that Kentucky should be free to choose her own course; he defended his sympathy to the Southern cause and denounced the Unionist state legislature, declaring, "I exchange with proud satisfaction a term of six years in the Senate of the United States for the musket of a soldier."Heck, p. 105 He was indicted for treason in U.S. federal district court in Frankfort on November 6, 1861, having officially enlisted in the Confederate army days earlier. On December 2, 1861, he was declared a traitor by the United States Senate.Eicher, 2001, p. 143. A resolution stating "Whereas John C. Breckinridge, a member of this body from the State of Kentucky, has joined the enemies of his country, and is now in arms against the government he had sworn to support: Therefore--Resolved, That said John C. Breckinridge, the traitor, be, and he hereby is, expelled from the Senate," was adopted by a vote of 36–0 on December 4. Ten Southern Senators had been expelled earlier the same year. On the recommendation of Simon B. Buckner, Breckinridge was commissioned as a brigadier general in the Confederate Army on November 2, 1861.Harrison, p. 131 On November 16, he was given command of the 1st Kentucky Brigade.Heck, p. 108 Nicknamed the Orphan Brigade because its men felt orphaned by Kentucky's Unionist state government, the brigade was in Buckner's 2nd Division under the command of Albert Sidney Johnston.Sifakis,1988, p. 72. For several weeks, he trained his troops in the city, and he also participated in the organization of a provisional Confederate government for the state. Although not sanctioned by the legislature in Frankfort, its existence prompted the Confederacy to admit Kentucky on December 10, 1861."John C. Breckinridge". Encyclopedia of the Confederacy Johnston's forces were forced to withdraw from Bowling Green in February 1862. During the retreat, Breckinridge was put in charge of Johnston's Reserve Corps. Johnston decided to attack Ulysses S. Grant's forces at Shiloh, Tennessee on April 6, 1862. Breckinridge's reserves soon joined the fight as Johnston tried to force Grant's troops into the river. Despite Johnston being killed in the fighting, the Confederates made steady progress against Grant's troops until P. G. T. Beauregard – who assumed command after Johnston's death – ordered his generals to break off the fighting at about 6 o'clock in the afternoon.Heck, p. 109 The next day, the Union forces regrouped and repelled the Confederates. Of the 7,000 troops under Breckinridge's command at the battle, 386 were killed and 1,628 were wounded, Breckinridge among them.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 121  Breckinridge's performance earned him a promotion to major general on April 14, 1862. After his promotion, he joined Earl Van Dorn near Vicksburg, Mississippi. The Confederate forces awaited a Union attack throughout most of July.Harrison, p. 132 Finally, Van Dorn ordered Breckinridge to attempt to recapture Baton Rouge, Louisiana, from federal forces. Despite having his forces reduced to around 3,000 by illness and desertions, on August 5, he attacked the city, capturing several Union prisoners, destroying their supplies, and driving them from the city. The ironclad Arkansas was supposed to support Breckinridge's attack, but it was immobilized by a mechanical failure and its crew sank it to prevent its capture. Without naval support, the Confederates were unable to hold the city. Later that month, Breckinridge served as an independent commander in the lower Mississippi Valley, securing Confederate control of the area by taking Port Hudson, which helped halt the federal advance down the Mississippi River. Meanwhile, Braxton Bragg was preparing an invasion of Kentucky, and Breckinridge was ordered to join him. Confederate leaders believed that Breckinridge's presence in the state could spur enlistments. Van Dorn was reluctant to lose command of Breckinridge and his men, and by the time he relented on October 15, Bragg was already retreating from the state. He and his division of 7,000 men met Bragg at Murfreesboro, Tennessee. With Kentucky solidly under Union control, Breckinridge's wife and children moved south and followed his troops as closely as was safely possible.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 123 Bragg resented Breckinridge's close ties to Confederate commanders, particularly Joseph E. Johnston, Wade Hampton, John B. Floyd, and William Preston, all of whom were related to Breckinridge.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 124 Further, he thought Breckinridge's late arrival for the Kentucky campaign had contributed to the lack of Confederate volunteers he found in the state.Heck, p. 113 In December, Bragg ordered the execution of Kentucky Corporal Asa Lewis after a court martial had convicted him of desertion.Heck, pp. 113–114 Lewis's enlistment had expired, but he continued to serve with the 6th Kentucky Infantry until his impoverished mother and siblings begged him to return home.Heck, p. 114 Although Lewis claimed he was returning to the army at the time of his arrest, Bragg was insistent on reducing desertions by making him an example.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 125 After witnessing the execution, Breckinridge reportedly became nauseated and fell forward on his horse, requiring assistance from members of his staff. He protested Bragg's "military murder" and was barely able to prevent open mutiny by his Kentucky soldiers against him.Harrison, p. 133 Relations between Breckinridge and Bragg continued to deteriorate; Breckinridge's opinion that Bragg was incompetent was shared by many other Confederate officers.Harrison, p. 134  At Murfreesboro, Breckinridge's 2nd Division was assigned to William J. Hardee's corps and stationed on the east side of the Stones River. When William Rosecrans attacked on December 31, 1862, beginning the Battle of Stones River, Bragg's main force initially repelled the attack. Bragg ordered Breckinridge to reinforce him on the west side of the river, but John Pegram erroneously reported that a large Union force was advancing along the east bank, and Breckinridge was slow to comply with Bragg's order. When he finally crossed the river, his attacks were ineffective, and Bragg ordered him back across the river. By January 2, Union forces had taken a ridge that ran along the river; against Breckinridge's advice, Bragg ordered the 2nd Division to launch a near-suicidal attack on the federal position.Heck, p. 115 Prior to the attack, Breckinridge wrote to Preston, "if [the attack] should result in disaster and I be among the killed, I want you to justice to my memory and tell the people that I believed this attack to be very unwise and tried to prevent it." Breckinridge's men initially broke the Union line and forced them across the river. Artillery on the opposite side of the river then opened fire on Breckinridge's men, and reinforcements for the fleeing Union troops arrived. In just over an hour,  nearly one-third of Breckinridge's troops were killed. One anecdote holds that, as he rode among the survivors, he cried out repeatedly, "My poor Orphans! My poor Orphans," bringing recognition to the Orphan Brigade. Bragg's official report criticized the conduct of Breckinridge's division and assigned to Breckinridge most of the blame for the Confederate defeat. Breckinridge asserted to his superiors that Bragg's report "fails...to do justice to the behavior of my Division"; he requested a court of inquiry, but the request was denied. Several Kentuckians under Breckinridge's command, who already blamed Bragg for the failed invasion of their native state, encouraged him to resign his commission and challenge Bragg to a duel. In May 1863, Breckinridge was reassigned to Joseph E. Johnston, participating in the Battle of Jackson in an attempt to break the Siege of Vicksburg. Vicksburg fell to Grant's forces on July 4, and Breckinridge was returned to Bragg's command on August 28, 1863. After seeing no action on the first day of the Battle of Chickamauga (September 19, 1863), he led a division of D.H. Hill's corps in an attack on the Union forces the next morning. They  succeeded in breaking the Union line but were not able to destroy the main army. Of Breckinridge's 3,769 men, 166 were killed in the battle; 909 were wounded and 165 were missing.Heck, p. 116 In late November, Breckinridge commanded one of Bragg's two corps in the unsuccessful defense of Chattanooga. Bragg ordered a significant number of Breckinridge's men to reinforce Hardee's corps, leaving him with insufficient forces to repel the combined attack of Joseph Hooker and George Henry Thomas on Missionary Ridge.Heck, p. 117 His son, Cabell, was captured in the battle. In his official report, Bragg charged Breckinridge with drunkenness at both battles and (retroactively) at Stones River. Historian Lowell H. Harrison noted that, while Breckinridge frequently drank whiskey, he was well known for being able to consume large amounts without getting drunk. Before submitting his own resignation, Bragg removed Breckinridge from command. On December 15, 1863, Breckinridge took leave in Richmond.Heck, p. 119 Premature rumors of his death prompted the New York Times to print a quite vituperative obituary arguing that Kentucky's decision to stay in the Union denied Breckinridge the notion of states' rights to justify his siding with the Confederacy. Confederate leaders were skeptical of Bragg's claims against Breckinridge, and in February 1864, Confederate President Jefferson Davis assigned him to the Eastern Theater and put him in charge of the Trans-Allegheny Department (later known as the Department of East Tennessee and West Virginia). On May 5, Robert E. Lee ordered Breckinridge to take command of a reconnaissance mission to scout the federal forces under Franz Sigel near Winchester, Virginia.Heck, p. 121 With a force of about 4,800 men, including 261 cadets from the Virginia Military Institute, he defeated Sigel's 6,300 men at the Battle of New Market.Heck, p. 123 The victory was considered one of his best performances as a general.Harrison, p. 135 Shortly thereafter, he reinforced Lee's Army of Northern Virginia and played an important role in halting Grant's advance at the Battle of Cold Harbor. During the battle, his troops repulsed a powerful Union attack.Eicher, 2001, p. 144. Breckinridge was wounded when a cannonball struck his horse and he was pinned underneath.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 127 He was still unable to walk or ride when Lee ordered him to take command of the survivors of the Confederate defeat at the Battle of Piedmont.Heck, p. 125 Traveling by rail to Rockfish Gap on June 10, he marched his forces into the city of Lynchburg, Virginia. He was joined there by Lt. Gen. Jubal Early, who arrived just in time to save the Confederate forces from an assault by Union forces under David Hunter.Heck, p. 126 After Early and Breckinridge (who was now able to ride a horse) chased Hunter more than sixty miles away from the city, Lee ordered them to clear the Union forces from the Shenandoah Valley, then cross into Maryland and probed the defenses of Washington, D.C. Union forces' only serious attempt to turn back the expedition was the Battle of Monocacy, but the Confederates prevailed and continued toward Washington. After the Battle of Fort Stevens, Early decided to withdraw rather than assault the well-fortified federal capital.Heck, p. 127 Since Lincoln was watching the fight from the ramparts of Fort Stevens, this was only time in American history when two former opponents in a presidential election faced one another across battle lines. Early and Breckinridge were able to hold the Shenandoah Valley through July and August, but on September 19, 1864, Philip Sheridan forced their retreat at the Third Battle of Winchester.Heck, p. 127–128 Responding to General John Brown Gordon's admonition to be careful in the fight, Breckinridge responded, "Well, general, there is little left for me if our cause is to fail." After the death of John Hunt Morgan, Breckinridge again took command of the Department of East Tennessee and West Virginia. He reorganized the department, which was in great disarray. At the October 2, 1864, First Battle of Saltville, he was also able to protect critical Confederate salt works from forces under Stephen G. Burbridge, despite a lack of resources. The next morning, he discovered that soldiers under his command had killed about 100 wounded black Union soldiers of the 5th United States Colored Cavalry.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, pp. 127–128 Hearing the gunfire, he rushed to stop the massacre.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 128 He attempted to have the commander responsible, Felix Huston Robertson, arrested and put on trial, but was unable to achieve this before the Confederacy disintegrated. In mid-November, Breckinridge led a raid into northeastern Tennessee, driving Alvan Cullem Gillem's forces back to Knoxville.Heck, p. 129 In December, he faced a two-pronged attack from George Stoneman at the Battle of Marion in Virginia. Badly outnumbered by either flank, Breckinridge resisted Stoneman's forces until he ran low on ammunition. Stoneman's forces were able to damage Confederate salt works, lead mines, and railroads in the area, as well as destroying supply depots at Bristol and Abingdon. Finally restocked with ammunition after three days, Breckinridge was able to drive Stoneman – whose men were now short of ammunition themselves – out of the area. James A. Seddon resigned as the Confederate Secretary of War on January 19, 1865, and Davis appointed Breckinridge to the vacant position – partially to quiet growing opposition to his administration – on February 6.Harrison, p. 137Heck, p. 132 Initially opposed by several members of the Confederate Congress because he had waited to join the Confederacy, he eventually gained their support by administrating his office more efficiently than his predecessors. With their support, he was able to expand the post's influence to include making officer assignments and promotion recommendations and advising field generals regarding strategy. His first act as secretary was to promote Robert E. Lee to general-in-chief of all Confederate forces. After Lee reported a critical shortage of food, clothing, and supplies among his troops, Breckinridge recommended the removal of Lucius B. Northrop, the Confederate commissary general.Heck, p. 133 Northrop's successor, Isaac M. St. John, improved the flow of supplies to troops in the field.  By late February, Breckinridge concluded that the Confederate cause was hopeless. Delegating the day-to-day operations of his office to his assistant, John Archibald Campbell, he began laying the groundwork for surrender. Davis desired to continue the fight, but Breckinridge urged, "This has been a magnificent epic. In God's name let it not terminate in farce." On April 2, Lee sent a telegram to Breckinridge informing him that he would have to withdraw from his position that night, and that this would necessitate the evacuation of Richmond.Heck, p. 134 Ordering Campbell to organize the flight of the Confederate cabinet to Danville, Virginia, Breckinridge remained in the city to oversee the destruction of facilities and supplies to prevent their use by the invading federal forces. In the process, he ensured that the Confederate archives, both government and military, were captured intact by the Union forces. By so doing, he ensured that a full account of the Confederate war effort would be preserved for history. Upon his exit from the city, he ordered that the bridges over the James River be burned. His son Clifton, then serving in the Confederate Navy at Richmond, resigned his post and joined his father as he moved southward to meet Davis. After overseeing the transfer of Richmond, Breckinridge joined Robert E. Lee's forces at Farmville, Virginia, on the night of April 5 and remained there until April 7. He continued on to Danville, arriving on April 11 to discover that Lee had surrendered on April 9 and the Confederate cabinet had already fled to Greensboro, North Carolina.Heck, p. 135 Arriving in Greensboro on April 13, he advised the cabinet that the remaining Confederate armies should be surrendered; only Davis and Secretary of State Judah P. Benjamin disagreed. At Bennett Place, he assisted Joseph E. Johnston in his surrender negotiations with William T. Sherman. Sherman later praised Breckinridge's negotiating skills, and the surrender terms agreed to were later criticized by Sherman's colleagues as too generous.Harrison, p. 138 At Abbeville, South Carolina, Breckinridge and Basil W. Duke finally convinced Davis that further prosecution of the war was hopeless.Heck, p. 137 Breckinridge was put in charge of the $150,000 in gold specie remaining in the Confederate treasury; traveling southward by rail toward Washington, Georgia, a group of soldiers in his military escort – unpaid for months – threatened to divide the gold among themselves before it could be captured by federal troops.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 129 Breckinridge convinced them to abandon their scheme after paying them their wages from the treasury, but some of them refused to escort Breckinridge and the bullion any further. Breckinridge's party arrived in Washington on May 4 and, after paying out several requisitions from the treasury, deposited the rest in banks there.Heck, p. 138 He also composed a letter to his remaining deputies in which he disbanded the War Department. On May 5, Breckinridge discharged most of the men escorting him, retaining only a small contingent of Kentuckians under the command of his cousin, William Campbell Preston Breckinridge. Feeling honor bound to protect Davis, he attempted to create a diversion that would allow him to escape. The next day, his party encountered a large federal force; while his cousin negotiated with the force's commander, Breckinridge and a small detachment escaped. Riding southward across Georgia, he reached Milltown (now Lakeland) by May 11 and remained there for a few days.Heck, p. 139 Learning of Davis's capture, which left him as the highest-ranking former Confederate official still at large, he left Milltown with only a military aide, a personal servant, and his son Cabell.Harrison, p. 139 On May 15, 1865, in Madison, Florida, he was joined by fellow fugitive John Taylor Wood. Breckinridge and Wood decided to flee to The Bahamas, but because Cabell was allergic to mosquito bites, Breckinridge told him to surrender to the nearest federal officer.Heck, p. 140  At Gainesville, Florida, the group found Confederate Colonel J. J. Dickison, who gave them a lifeboat he had taken from a captured federal gunboat. Traveling down the St. Johns River, they reached Fort Butler on May 29.Heck, p. 141 From there, they had to transport the boat  over land to the Indian River. They reached the river by May 31, but as they followed its course southward, they had to drag the boat across the river's mudflats and sandbars. Transferring the boat to the Atlantic Ocean near Jupiter Inlet, they continued along the Florida coast and landed near present-day Palm Beach on June 4.Heck, p. 142 Strong winds prevented them from navigating the small craft out to sea, so they continued southward down the coast. On June 5, the party was spotted by a federal steamer, but convinced the crew they were hunters scavenging the coast. Two days later, they encountered a larger boat with a mast and rigging; chasing it down, they disarmed the occupants and hi-jacked the craft. As compensation, they gave their old boat and twenty dollars in gold to the owners of the larger craft, as well as returning some of their weapons after the exchange was complete. With this more seaworthy craft, they decided to flee to Cuba. Departing from Fort Dallas, they survived an encounter with pirates, two significant storms, and a dangerous lack of provisions before arriving at Cardevas on June 11, 1865. A Kentuckian then living in the city recognized Breckinridge, introduced him to the locals, and served as his interpreter.Heck, p. 144 The refugees were given food and stayed the night in a local hotel. The next morning, they traveled by rail to Havana, where Breckinridge was offered a house.Heck, p. 145 He declined the offer, choosing to travel with Charles J. Helm, a fellow Kentuckian who had been operating as a Confederate agent in the Caribbean, to Great Britain.  Arriving in Britain in late July, he consulted with former Confederate agents there and arranged communication with his wife, then in Canada.Heck, p. 146 Re-crossing the Atlantic, he was reunited with his wife and all of his children except Clifton in Toronto on September 13, 1865. After spending the winter in Toronto, the family moved to Niagara in May.Heck, p. 146 In August, doctors advised Breckinridge's wife that the climate of France might benefit her ailing health. Cabell Breckinridge returned to the U.S. to engage in business ventures with his brother Clifton, and Mary, just 12 years old, was sent to live with relatives in New York. The remainder of the family journeyed to Europe, where the children attended school in Paris, Versailles, and Vevey, Switzerland.Heck, p. 147 From mid-1866 to early 1868, Breckinridge toured Europe – including visits to Germany, Austria, Turkey, Greece, Syria, Egypt, and the Holy Land; because of her poor health, his wife remained in France until February 1868, when she joined him in Naples, Italy. During their tour of Italy, Breckinridge met with Pope Pius IX in Rome, and also visited Pompeii. Desiring to return to the U.S. but still fearing capture, Breckinridge moved his family back to Niagara in June 1868.Harrison, p. 140Heck, p. 148 Within sight of the U.S. border, he steadfastly refused to seek a pardon, although 70 members of the Kentucky General Assembly had requested one on his behalf from President Andrew Johnson on February 10, 1866. On January 8, 1868, the Louisville City Council instructed the state's congressional delegation to seek assurance that Breckinridge would not be prosecuted on his return. James Beck, Breckinridge's old law partner, was then in Congress and wrote to him on December 11, 1868, that it appeared likely that Johnson would issue a general pardon for all former Confederates; he advised Breckinridge to return to the U.S. prior to the pardon being issued because he feared it might only apply to those in the country.Harrison, p. 141 Johnson proclaimed amnesty for all former Confederates on December 25, 1868. Still in Canada, Breckinridge lingered for a few weeks to receive assurance that it still applied to him even though he had not been in the U.S. when it was issued. Departing Canada on February 10, he made several stops to visit family and friends along the route to Lexington, where he arrived on March 9. Although he resided in Kentucky for the rest of his life, he never bought a home there after the war, living first in hotels and then renting a home on West Second Street.Heck, p. 151  Many insurance companies in the south asked Breckinridge to join them in various capacities.  In August 1868, he became manager of the Kentucky branch of Virginia's Piedmont Life Insurance Company (which soon became the Piedmont and Arlington Insurance Company).Heck, p. 150 Washington College (now Washington and Lee University) offered him a professorship, but he declined. He resumed his law practice, taking as a partner Robert A. Thornton, a 27-year-old former Confederate soldier. He served as general counsel for the proposed Cincinnati Southern Railway, which would connect Cincinnati to Chattanooga via Lexington.Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 134 Officials in Louisville tried to block the move, which would break the near-monopoly that the Louisville and Nashville Railroad had on southern trade. On January 25, 1870, he presented his case to the House and Senate railroad committees, and although they rejected it at that time, they approved it two years later. Construction began in 1873.Harrison, p. 142 Breckinridge's other railroad ventures were less successful. During his lifetime, he was unable to secure the construction of railroads to his real estate investments in and around Superior, Wisconsin.Heck, p. 153 As president of the newly formed Elizabethtown, Lexington, and Big Sandy Railroad company, he secured financial backing from Collis Potter Huntington for a railroad connecting Elizabethtown and Lexington to the Big Sandy River as part of a route linking those cities with the Atlantic Ocean.Heck, p. 154 When Huntington invested in June 1871, he became president of the company, and Breckinridge became vice-president. A line from Lexington to Mount Sterling was all that could be completed before the Panic of 1873 dried up the needed investment capital.Heck, p. 156 The proposed line was finally completed in 1881. Breckinridge refused all requests – including one made by President Ulysses S. Grant – to return to politics, insisting, "I no more feel the political excitements that marked the scenes of my former years than if I were an extinct volcano." Harrison notes that, under the terms of section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment, a two-thirds vote in each house of Congress would have been needed to allow him to hold office because he sided with the Confederacy. He never expressed interest in seeking such approval. Speaking as a private citizen in March 1870, he publicly denounced the actions of the Ku Klux Klan.Heck, p. 157 In 1872, he supported passage of a state statute legalizing black testimony against whites in court.  By 1873, Breckinridge began to experience health problems which he referred to as "pleuro-pneumonia".Klotter in The Breckinridges of Kentucky, p. 135 Repeated surgeries and visits to the New York coast and the Virginia mountains did not improve his condition.Harrison, p. 144 In May 1875, he consulted surgeons Lewis Sayre and Samuel D. Gross, who concluded that his ill health was caused by cirrhosis brought on by injuries to his liver suffered during the war.Heck, p. 159 Of more immediate concern, they opined, was the fluid that filled two-thirds of one of his lungs. On May 11, Sayre attempted to create an artificial opening through which the fluid could drain; although he had to stop before completing the operation, some of the fluid was drained, bringing some measure of relief. Assisted by Beck and Frank K. Hunt, he completed his will. Sayre further alleviated Breckinridge's pain via another surgery on the morning of May 17, but by the afternoon, his condition rapidly worsened, and he died at approximately 5:45&nbsp;p.m.Heck, p. 160 Basil Duke led the funeral procession to Lexington Cemetery where Breckinridge's body was buried.Heck, p. 161 Despite differences in spelling, the towns of Breckenridge, Colorado; Breckenridge, Minnesota; Breckenridge, Missouri; and Breckenridge, Texas, were named in Breckinridge's honor. The Colorado town deliberately changed the spelling of its name when its namesake joined the Confederacy.Hiking Colorado: An Atlas of Colorado's Greatest Hiking Adventures, by Maryann Gaug, 2003, page 111Exploring Colorado Highways: Trip Trivia, by Michael Heim, 2007, page 86Seven Perfect Days in Colorado: A Guided Driving Tour, by Bill Ginnodo and Celia Ginnodo, 2007, page 45Newspaper article, Breckenridge or Breckinridge: Local Historian Breaks it Down, by Robert Allen, Vail (Colorado) Daily, June 13, 2009 Fort Breckinridge, Arizona Territory (1860 to 1865), located at the confluence of the Aravaipa Creek and the San Pedro River, was named in honor of the Vice President, though the name was changed after the Civil War to Camp Grant, Arizona. A memorial to Breckinridge was placed on the Fayette County Courthouse lawn (now known as Cheapside Park) in Lexington in 1887. In 2009, the monument was relocated closer to Main Street as part of a reworking of Cheapside Park. Breckinridge was played by Jason Isaacs in the 2014 film Field of Lost Shoes, which depicted the Battle of New Market.        |-     |-  |-    |-     |-    |-            List of American Civil War generals Fort Breckinridge, Arizona Camp Grant, Arizona Eicher, John H., and David J. Eicher. Civil War High Commands. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-8047-3641-3. Sifakis, Stewart. Who Was Who in the Civil War. New York: Facts On File, 1988. ISBN 0-8160-1055-2. New York Times premature obituary Biographical sketches of Hon. John C. Breckinridge, Democratic nominee for president : and General Joseph Lane, Democratic nominee for Vice President
