  In the manga and anime series Naruto by Masashi Kishimoto, a  refers to the abilities that a ninja can use. The series occurs in a fictional universe in which different countries fight for power using ninja soldiers. The Naruto storyline follows a group of young ninja from the village of Konohagakure (Hidden Leaf Village). In this series, ninja use jutsu by manipulating a form of energy known as chakra, a combination of the physical and mental energies into either of the other two main jutsus. Series creator Masashi Kishimoto developed the concept of jutsu to explain the supernatural feats ninja perform in the series, and also to provide an original image of ninja in manga. The incorporation of jutsu into the series has received both praise and criticism from several anime and manga publications. T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews asserted that jutsu were the primary focus of Naruto and the source of its "highest accolades," but criticized the overly repetitive use of certain jutsu in fight scenes. Anime News Network agreed with this sentiment, calling the fights "repetitive to a fault," but praised the visual presentation of jutsu in both the anime and manga. Masashi Kishimoto developed the concept of jutsu in order to explain the superhuman feats that ninja performed in the Naruto series. He intended the design for the ninja in Naruto to dispel preconceived notions about ninja popularized by other manga and to bring an original take to the presentation of ninja in manga. The use of hand seals substitutes for the incantations for magic found in other sources, and was based on the motions of ninja in various role-playing games. The hand seals are based upon the characters of the Chinese zodiac, which is a longstanding tradition in Japan, and Kishimoto used them specifically to draw upon that tradition.  Although the concept of chakra appears in Indian mythology, in Buddhism and in other belief systems, in an interview, Kishimoto claimed that none of these influences were the basis for his use of chakra in Naruto. He further asserted that it was a term to apply a concrete definition to ninjas' ability to use jutsu in Naruto, and was comparable to the Force in Star Wars or to magic points in role-playing games.   is the basic energy source necessary for ninja in Naruto to perform most jutsu. Millennia ago, humans were originally born without Chakra until a young woman named Kaguya Ōtsutsuki stole the fruit of the Shinju and ate it to obtain the power of Chakra to end a war in her time. Her son, the Sage of Six Paths, was born with ability to produce Chakra by combining the , drawn from the trillions of cells that make up the human body, and the , gained through experience and meditation. Once created, chakra moves throughout the body in a manner similar to the circulatory system and is delivered to one of 361 chakra release points. By performing a sequence composed of any of twelve different hand seals, chakra can then be manipulated to create supernatural effects, such as walking on water. The method of Chakra production is passed on to the Sage's various descendants, both direct and indirect, along with other ninja. During Part II of the series the concept of , altering the quality of chakra, is introduced. Nature manipulation allows ninja, following certain training, to convert their chakra into one of five elements: earth, water, fire, wind, and lightning. Each element is stronger and weaker than another element; for example, fire is weak against water, but can easily counter and even gets stronger when used against a wind-based jutsu. Most ninja have a natural affinity for one of the five elements, allowing them to use jutsu of that type with greater ease. Ninja with an affinity for fire, for instance, will be able to breathe fire much sooner than they will be able to manipulate water. Skilled ninja can learn how to use other elements; ninja of the Jonin rank typically are able to manipulate at least two elements. Kakashi Hatake has been shown using all 5 different elements in the Naruto series . Although these ninja can use their different elements separately with little effort, combining the two elements is impossible for ninja who do not have a genetic predisposition for it. Ninja with one of these genetic abilities can mix two specific elements to create an entirely new one. Haku, an antagonist introduced at the start of the series, can mix water and wind to create ice. Wood Style, a combination of earth and water unique to the First Hokage, Danzo and Yamato, which allows the user to produce wood. There is also the Yin-Yang Style and its splintered forms, Yin Style and Yang Style, that only few master and can counter the other chakra natures.  The  are eight specific points along the chakra circulatory system that limit the overall flow of chakra within a person's body, which enables the body from expiring too soon. Ninja devised the  to surpass their own physical limits at the cost of various levels of damage to their own bodies. Each additional gate grants the user new levels of strength with additional injuries; by opening all eight gates the user will become invincible in battle, but their body will be so damaged in the process that they will die afterwards. Having learned the release technique from his father, Might Guy taught Rock Lee to open his first five gates during Part I of the series, which, according to Kakashi Hatake is a very remarkable feat as he himself can only open the first gate. Guy himself can go further by activating all the way to the eighth gate during Part II, although he states that activating it would kill him. In the Naruto Shippūden 2: Bonds movie, the villain Shinnō mentions opening the eight gates when gaining the "perfect body" from his dark chakra transformation. Jutsu are divided into three categories: ninjutsu, genjutsu, and taijutsu. Ninjutsu also has two sub-categories: sealing jutsu and cursed seal jutsu, both of which are used to create seals for various purposes. Senjutsu, a concept introduced in Part II of the series, uses three types of energy: the mental and physical energies of the shinobi and the energy of nature. By channeling the energy of nature, the senjutsu user can greatly increase the power of his or her other jutsu. Kekkei genkai abilities are genetically inherited traits that allow the user to perform unique techniques. Jutsu are ranked in terms of how difficult they are to perform, an E-rank denoting basic techniques and an S-rank indicating jutsu that require years of practice to master. An S-rank jutsu is not necessarily more effective than an E-rank ability, as a jutsu's effectiveness is largely based on individual skill. In addition to the six letter ranks, jutsu can also receive one of two informal ranks.  jutsu are passed down from generation to generation within a clan. These jutsu are not ranked because no one outside the clan knows how to perform them. , on the other hand, fall into one of the six main ranks, but are an exception because they are forbidden to learn or perform. A technique can be categorized as forbidden if it either causes great harm to the user, such as opening the Eight Gates or the execution of Naruto's technique Wind Style: Rasenshuriken, or if the techniques are dark or sinister in nature, such as those used by Orochimaru.  is a vague term referring to almost any technique that uses chakra and allows the user to do something that they otherwise would be incapable of doing. The ninjutsu that most contemporary ninja use is successor to what was called , teachings created by the Sage of the Six Paths that allowed people to use chakra so they might connect with each other; however, as time went by, people began to channel their chakra to their physical and spiritual energies instead, which weaponized the chakra into something they can inflict to others. Unlike genjutsu, which makes the opponent see illusions, the effects of ninjutsu are real. They vary greatly in purpose, with the simpler ninjutsu serving such tasks as transforming the user or allowing them to evade attacks. These techniques are often second-nature for experienced ninja, who can use them at will. More complex ninjutsu manipulate one's surroundings or utilize the elements, respectively serving such tasks as healing others or manipulating basic elements. Techniques that involve the manipulation of elements are called Nature Transformation. However, advanced elements can not be accessed by all ninja as advanced elements can only be used through the use of a kekkai genkai.  are techniques that use the chakra in the victim's mind system to create illusions. The most commonly seen genjutsu in the series is the simple creation of phantasms &ndash; causing the targeted person(s) to hear, see, smell, taste or feel sensations that are not actually there in order to manipulate them. Most genjutsu affects the five senses, though other applications of genjutsu exist. Those under the influence of genjutsu usually freeze in place or lose consciousness, depending on how capable they are in recognizing and defending against it. Depending on the purpose of the genjutsu, one could be running or jumping while under the genjutsu (as seen when Itachi uses genjutsu on Naruto in part II, when he used the Rasengan on Itachi, only to find out it had been genjutsu and he had used it on air). A genjutsu can be broken in one of three ways. The first is , a disruption of the victim's chakra flow either by themselves or their allies. Pain that is not a result of the genjutsu, such as stabbing oneself, is a second method of countering genjutsu. Finally, if the caster of the genjutsu loses focus for whatever reason, the jutsu will end and the victim is freed.  refers to any techniques involving the martial arts or the optimization of natural human abilities. Taijutsu is executed by directly accessing the user's physical and mental energies, relying on the stamina and strength gained through training. Because chakra does not need to be produced, taijutsu can typically be performed much faster than ninjutsu or genjutsu techniques. Rock Lee and his teacher Might Guy are examples of ninja who specialize in taijutsu.  are abilities passed down genetically in ordinary clans. Most of these clans have developed special techniques that rely on their genetic abilities, as it gives them an advantage in battle that cannot be taught to or copied by opponents. Kekkei genkai such as the Sharingan that work via the user's eyes are called . This particular type of jutsu was derived from Kaguya Ōtsutsuki, the mother of the Sage of Six Paths and originator of the Three Great Dōjutsu, with both the Uchiha and Hyūga Clans her descendants. Other kekkei genkai such as Wood Style revolve around a simultaneous combination of two separate chakra elements to create an entirely new one. Kekkei Genkai have an advanced variation called . There is only one example of this variation: Particle Style, which involves the combination of fire, wind, and earth elements. An even more powerful variation is , which combines all elements of nature, including Yin-Yang Style. An example of kekkei mōra is Rinne Sharingan, an ancient dojutsu possessed by Kaguya Otsutsuki and the jinchuriki of Kaguya's monstrous form, the Ten Tails.  is a form of kekkei genkai that utilizes the eyes. It grants the user with ocular abilities that may be ninjutsu, genjutsu, or something else. Because of the physical nature of eyes, dojutsu can be transplanted to another individual and still be functional, though if the user is not of the same family as the donor, they may have little control over when the dojutsu is activated or have their chakra taxed more than usual. In the Ninja World, there exists the "Three Great Dōjutsu": the Byakugan that allows the user 360 degrees view within a certain distance and an individual's chakra pathway system; the Sharingan that allows the user to copy others' jutsu and movements as well as a multitude of genjutsu and other abilities; and the Rinnegan, the most "exalted" of the three that gives the user control over the six paths. There is also the Rinne Sharingan, the primeval form of the Sharingan and the Rinnegan, and the Tenseigan, a heightened form of Byakugan and very similar to the Rinnegan in power. There is only one individual who possesses all three of the Great Dojutsu: Kaguya Ōtsutsuki, who possesses both the Byakugan and the Rinne Sharingan.  are techniques developed by the Sage Of Six Paths to seal something inside objects or living beings. The developing of new Sealing jutsus was continued by the Uzumaki Clan, a branch of Senju Clan who are descendants of the Sage, one of their works being one that seals Tailed Beasts into their Jinchuriki to be. The most common application of this is sealing weapons or other objects within scrolls to efficiently carry a large number of items. Sealing jutsu are also utilized to restrict access to things, such as chakra or entry to a building. The "Reaper Death Seal" is a unique sealing jutsu as the target's soul is sealed with the Reaper, who is neither living nor an object.  is a form of jutsu introduced during Part II of the series that is taught from summons who have obtained the title of Sage, two of which are the Great Toad Sage and the White Snake Sage. A user can achieve mastering Senjutsu by combining the user's chakra with "natures energy", a task that can only be completed by ninja with particularly large chakra reserves who learn to harmonize with nature by remaining perfectly still — anyone else who tries is quickly overwhelmed by this natural energy, as seen in the case of Jugo's Clan rendered mentally unstable with fits of rage. For those who learn under the Great Toad Sage, the overdose of natural energy turns them into giant stone toad statues though the effects can be neutralized with the sage's beating stick. Even if the user is able to use Senjutsu, they only have a certain amount of time before the natural energies are used up, as the user will still need to move around the battlefield and Senjutsu requires to user to remain still, although it can be bypassed by certain methods, such as summoning frog assistants or using shadow clones to help gather the energy. Those who master Senjutsu are able to enter a state called  where user adopts the physical features of his animal mentor. Because of the difficulty in maintaining the natural energy, only a few people have been able to properly master Senjutsu; Naruto Uzumaki is stated to be the first Senjutsu user under the tutelage of the Great Toad Sage, Gamamaru, who has achieved such feat. Ninja who are able to use Senjutsu include Jiraiya,  and Hashirama Senju are also able to use Senjutsu, seemingly without the aid of an animal mentor. Because the chakra utilized from the natural world, Senjutsu is an effective weapon against the Ten-Tails and Yin-Yang Style users.  The  was created by Kakashi Hatake during his childhood, gaining its name when the channeling of strong lightning-based chakra in one's hand produces a sound reminiscent of chirping birds. Once enough lightning-chakra has been collected, the user rushes at their target and thrusts the Chidori into it; the speed of the attack and the amount of chakra used enable the user to penetrate most defenses easily. During Kakashi Gaiden, a short flashback to Kakashi's childhood that divides Part I and II of the series, the Chidori is revealed to cause a tunnel vision effect because of the speeds at which the user moves, leaving them vulnerable to a counterattack. Because of this disability, only ninja with a Sharingan eye can use the Chidori effectively, as the Sharingan's ability to notice even the slightest details counteracts the tunnel vision. As a result, Kakashi is able to teach the Chidori to Sasuke Uchiha during Part I.  Due to the large amounts of concentration and chakra needed to collect and control the lightning-chakra, both Kakashi and Sasuke are initially limited to using Chidori only a few times a day. They are shown to have increased their limits in Part II, but to what extent is unclear. As the creator of the Chidori, Kakashi has reached a level of control great enough that he can split a bolt of lightning, resulting in his version being called the . Sasuke also reaches greater levels of control during Part II, which allows him to reshape the Chidori in his hand into solid form like a sword with more variations like Chidori Stream, Chidori Needles, or Chidori Spear.  is a forbidden summoning jutsu that is used to revive the dead in a state of near-life. The process of this jutsu is obtaining a genetic sample from the deceased, either through grave robbery or blood stains and salvaged organs. From there, a living person is then sacrificed for the deceased spirit to inhabit and serve as a slave to the user's will. However, the Jutsu can only function if the deceased soul is within the realm of Pure Land and not elsewhere in the afterlife like in the stomach of the Reaper. Though it was the Tobirama Senju who invented the Reanimation Jutsu for the purpose of creating an indestructible army used in suicide attacks, the jutsu was later completed by Orochimaru when he used it against the Third Hokage, Hiruzen Sarutobi by reviving Tobirama Senju and Hashirama Senju. However, Kabuto perfected the jutsu to the point where he is able to revive dozens of ninja in one execution, needing to focus all his mental energy to fully control them. People revived through this process are almost invulnerable to even the most fatal attacks, as they will simply regenerate any damage taken (although it takes some time for especially damaging ones like Rasengan and they can also be paralyzed by specific attacks, such as poison). Having already died, the resurrected expel any basic needs living people required; they have unlimited chakra and power due to not needing to replenish them. In addition, they cannot be subjected to genjutsu jutsu that affect living things like the Infinite Tsukuyomi. The only effective means to destroy a ninja brought back is with Yin-Yang Style techniques that damages the body beyond regeneration to the point of death. Despite Kabuto claiming that the technique is flawless, it does have several flaws, including that the reanimated can choose to leave their vessels to drift back to the afterlife willingly. Those who are paralyzed, sealed, or subjected to certain genjutsu, such as Kotoamatsukami, cannot take further action to free themselves until the technique is canceled. Also, the reanimated can sever their link to the jutsu so they will remain among the living even after the jutsu is canceled, as shown by Madara Uchiha. Furthermore, if such a ninja who lost a body part while alive is brought back to true life with the Rinnegan's Samsara of Heavenly Life Jutsu, the living equivalent of that ninja's body part is absent. The advanced Chakra Nature Transformation is a type of kekkei genkai which allows the users to manipulate elements other than the five basic chakra nature; fire, water, wind, lightning, and earth. The combination is usually achieved through mixing two (or three in the case of kekkei tōta) separate elements to create an entirely new one; thus the users are able to use the elements that composed the advanced element in addition to the kekkei genkai (such as Yamato being able to use water and earth in addition to the wood) . Due to the nature of kekkei genkai, ninja with no blood limit required to use the elements are unable to use them even when they had mastered the basic components of the element. Some advanced elements may be unique to one person in the clan, the most notable being the Wood Style, which is only present in Hashirama Senju. The known advanced chakra nature transformations are as follows: The anime adaptation and the film series have also introduced several new advanced chakra nature transformations. These types have never been revisited in the manga. Those are as follows:  is the kekkei genkai of Hashirama Senju. By combining earth and water-based chakra, the user can produce trees or wooden objects from any surface. This allowed the First Hokage, Hashirama Senju, to create the foundation of Konohagakure. The objects created with the Wood Style vary in detail, ranging from a simple wall to a functioning copy of the user. During Part II, it was revealed that Yamato received the ability to use Wood Style techniques after being injected with Hashirama's DNA by Orochimaru, though at a much lesser scale. A possibly unrelated technique, but unique to the First Hokage and Yamato, is the ability to suppress a tailed beast. This is accomplished by producing wooden poles from the ground that attach to the beast and force its chakra to recede. Similar to Yamato, Danzō Shimura also had Hashirama's DNA injected into him by Orochimaru, granting him the ability to use Wood Style techniques, but only to a limited amount as Danzō can not have too much implanted as he would have been killed. Madara Uchiha is revealed to have successfully injected Hashirama's DNA into him as well, becoming a genetic match to the Sage of Six Paths and had used it to save his apprentice Obito Uchiha from dying. White Zetsu and those mutated from being assimilated by the Shinju also possess Wood Style, with Madara deceived into thinking that they are essentially artificial humans he created through Hashirama's DNA. After Naruto and Sasuke's final battle end with them losing their right and left arms respectively, Tsunade offers to use her grandfather's cells containing the Wood Style to fit them with prosthetic arms; while Naruto accepts, Sasuke declines the offer.  is the ability it allows the user's soul to materialize and leave their body, makes them reminiscent of an "ikiryō" (生霊, Literally meaning: living ghost), which is then able to take possession of a target, enabling them to freely manipulate the victim's body at will or kill them. It can as well crossed a vast distance and also transfer chakra to them. The only known user of this technique is Dan Katō. Orochimaru's  is a special seal Orochimaru uses to increase the power level of his subordinates and control them. Having met Jugo, Orochimaru's research of the youth's ability to freely transform parts of his body led him to Ryūchi Cave where he gained the ability to assume Sage Mode yet could not properly use it due to the frailty of his hosts. However, to compensate for the flaw, Orochimaru devised the Cursed Seals by infusing his Senjutsu Chakra into the enzymes he extracted from Jugo's body. From there, Orochimaru proceeded to bestow his Cursed Seals to those he intended to use as his strong and loyal followers due to a part of his consciousness influencing them through the Cursed Seals. Among those given the Cursed Seal are Anko, the Sound Five, Kimimaro and Sasuke. The process upon being branded is a painful experience for the person as the body would either accept the seal or reject it. Once one's body accepts the seal, they can assume its First Level where the seal spreads from its point of application across the user's body, increasing their chakra supply and their physical abilities in the process. When the seal is deactivated, the user is left exhausted, having expended all their energy during its use. The Second Level of the Cursed Seal is achieved by allowing the seal to engulf the users entire body, ultimately causing the person to transform into a personalized parody of Sage Mode with various strengths and weakness. The means to achieve the Second Level is by being given a drug and entering a state of lifelessness. Having gained his Cursed Seal by Orochimaru's bite to his neck during the Chunin Exams, all to prepare him as the ninja's next vessel, Sasuke survives the ordeal and briefly used its power before Kakashi set up an additional seal to keep the Cursed Seal at bay. But after gaining the Second Level with the Sound Four's aid, Sasuke began training under Orochimaru and manages to isolate the level two transformation to specific parts of his body within a few years' time before Itachi removed the Cursed Seal from him. Anko also had hers removed during the Fourth Great Ninja War when Sasuke transferred the consciousness within it into a new body. The  is a style of combat originating from the Ōtsutsuki clan. The village of Sunagakure that utilizes strings of chakra to control objects, typically puppets. The puppeteer connects one of their fingers to part of a puppet's body with a chakra string, allowing them to remotely operate it in battle with the proper finger movements. Advanced puppeteers can control multiple puppets at once; for instance, the Sunagakure ninja Chiyo can control ten puppets at once by having each finger control a different puppet. However, Sasori can control up to 100 different puppets, with the strings connected directly to his heart. He can do this because he turned himself into a puppet. Because they rely almost exclusively on the secret weapons and features of their puppets during battle, puppeteers are the most vulnerable component of this style, and go to lengths to remove themselves from combat. Puppets normally cannot use chakra; the Akatsuki member Sasori creates puppets from human bodies, preserving the chakra and unique abilities the body originally had. Kankuro is the most commonly seen puppeteer in Naruto, and he adds additional puppets to his arsenal as the series progresses. The  is a jutsu that Minato Namikaze created after three years of hard development by observing the Tailed Beast Bomb. It is a spinning ball of compressed chakra formed in the user's hand that tears and grinds with great force into whatever it comes into contact with. The Rasengan is introduced in the series when Jiraiya, Minato Namikaze's teacher, teaches it to Naruto Uzumaki, Minato's son, to take the boy further in his training. Because it is a difficult jutsu, Jiraiya teaches it to Naruto in three stages: spinning the chakra, giving it sufficient force, and forming the chakra into a compressed spherical shape. Naruto struggles with the final step, and creates an alternative method using a shadow clone to mold the shape of the attack while he provides the chakra and controls it. During Part II of the series, new variants of the Rasengan are seen. Both Naruto and Jiraiya are shown capable of forming a larger,  that is stronger than the standard version. Kakashi Hatake, Minato's student, and Konohamaru Sarutobi, Naruto's "apprentice", are also revealed to have been taught how to use the Rasengan. Later in Part II, having developed the Rasenshuriken and perfecting it with sage chakra to use the technique without any self-damage, Naruto uses the sage chakra to create an enhanced version of Rasengan, the . After Naruto gains control over Kurama's chakra, in the form of the Nine-Tails Chakra Mode, many new variations are introduced, such as the , which places three regular Rasengan in synchronous orbit around a single Giant Rasengan similar to moons cycling a planet, the  which creates multiple Rasengan using chakra arms to attack multiple targets, and the  which uses the chakra arms to grab and smash his foes into a Giant Rasengan, creating the illusion of being "absorbed by Rasengan". All of these variations can be multiplied through the use of shadow clones. After Naruto gains the chakra of the other Tailed Beast, Naruto invents other variations of the technique such as Shukaku's Magnet Style for the . The Naruto movies also introduce one-time variations of the Rasengan: The , the , the , the , the , and the . These variations have never been revisited in either the manga or anime. Kakashi reveals to Naruto that Minato intended to combine the Rasengan with his elemental chakra but was unable to complete the technique. Naruto is able to complete his father's work through the use of shadow clones. In order to perform it, Naruto requires the aid of two shadow clones; he provides the chakra, one clone is responsible for the shape transformation, and the other provides the nature transformation. By manipulating the wind-natured chakra of the Wind Release: Rasengan, Naruto was able to create four large points, causing the Rasengan to take on the appearance of a giant fūma shuriken, with the Rasengan in the center remaining a perfect sphere. The technique gives off a loud screech-like noise during, and after formation. The Rasenshuriken creates countless microscopic wind-blades that severely damage the body on a cellular level. It produces so many individual strikes that even Kakashi Hatake is unable to count them all with his Sharingan. The wind-blades sever all nerve channels in the body, leaving the target unable to move after being struck. They also attack the entire chakra circulatory system, which cannot be repaired by any form of medical ninjutsu whatsoever. When Naruto first uses the Rasenshuriken against Kakuzu as a slashing weapon, it did cellular damage to Naruto's arm with Tsunade labeling it a forbidden jutsu and comparing it to poison. But Naruto learns that sage mode heals things much quicker therefore he can use the Rasenshuriken as it will quickley heal his arm. The Rasenshuriken's flaw is removed and the damage is greatly increased to the point of cutting through rocky mountains and momentarily stun beings like Kurama. After receiving Hagoromo's yang chakra, Naruto is able to infuse his Rasenshuriken with the elemental chakra provided by the Tailed Beasts inside him: using Son Gōku's Lava Style with the Rasenshuriken to create . Naruto can also create eight Shadow Clones to utilize all nine tailed beasts' chakra in the  attack. In Naruto Shippuden: Ultimate Ninja Storm Revolution, there is a very powerful variation called Tailed Beast Planetary Rasenshuriken.  is a suicidal forbidden Sealing Jutsu where the user summons an entity called the  behind him, thrusting its arm through the user's stomach to grab the soul of the target and drag it into the user's body. Once the sealing is completed, the Reaper would consume the souls of both the user and the sealed, sentencing them to be locked in combat within its stomach for all eternity. However, in cases where only part of the target's soul is sealed, the corresponding body part is paralyzed and suffers from extremely painful necrosis. Only the Fourth and Third Hokage executed the Reaper Death Seal during their respective battles with Kurama and Orochimaru. In both cases, both Hokage were forced to only take a part of their opponents down with them: Minato taking the Yin aspect of Kurama while Hiruzen is forced take the part of Orochimaru's soul within his arms in an attempt to ensure his former pupil would never perform a jutsu again. Later, in the Part II during the events of the Fourth Great Ninja War, Orochimaru uses an Uzumaki clan mask to summon the Reaper in a risky move, and breaks the Reaper Death Seal by cutting the demon's stomach wide open. With the Reaper Death Seal undone, the souls of the previous four Hokage are reanimated while Orochimaru regains the part of his soul he lost years ago.  is the absolute pinnacle of medical ninjutsu, created by Tsunade, who is regarded as the greatest medical ninja in the ninja world. The user must first store a substantial amount of chakra to form the  at the forehead. To activate the technique, the user releases the seal to forcibly release the stored chakra to the body. Through the input of the user, proteins hasten the creation of new cells through cell division, which regenerates any injuries sustained by the user. Thus, as long as the user have enough chakra, they are able to regenerate even the most fatal injuries, essentially making them "invincible" in combat. However, because body cells can only divide a number of times in life, the user is basically shortening their own lifespan by speeding up the process. Tsunade manages to counteract this to a certain extent through her long lifespan, thus she is able to live even after using the jutsu several times. The jutsu also has a variation, . Though it has the same effect as the original, the user does not need to input chakra to activate, thus injuries are automatically regenerated as the damages are done. Tsunade, for the longest time the only ninja who had mastered this technique, had made the rule that prohibits any medical ninja to directly participate in battles if they had not mastered this technique. Tsunade's student, Sakura Haruno, is also able to use One Hundred Healings after having stored her chakra for three years to form the Byakugo Seal. The  is a transformation jutsu that Naruto Uzumaki invented, transforming the user into a nude woman, covered in a mist or dressed, in a seductive posture. While not an offensive attack, the Sexy Jutsu is mainly used for distractive purposes with a stronger effect on more perverted targets. Naruto also invented the more potent , through his Shadow Clones, and the  where he adds an alluring outfit to his guise in order to add further enticement. Naruto also taught his jutsu to Konohamaru, who also invented his own more potent variations. During Part II, Konohamaru, who has been taught the technique by Naruto, creates a variation that transforms him into two nude men in suggestive positions instead. Meanwhile, Naruto combines that variation with more shadow clones to create the  for dealing with female opponents. The  is one of Naruto Uzumaki's signature techniques, invented by Tobirama Senju with the instructions placed in a forbidden scroll that Naruto was tricked into stealing by a ninja named Mizuki. Unlike regular clone jutsus, the Shadow Clones are physical clones of the user capable of cohabiting with their surroundings, performing jutsu, and engaging in battle before dispersing in a puff of smoke when sufficiently damaged or at the user's discretion. When clones are created, the user's chakra is evenly distributed among them, making it easy for the user to quickly expend all their chakra. While most ninja limit themselves to only making a few clones because of this, Naruto can create thousands of clones due to his large amount of chakra. He can also combine it with his "Sexy Jutsu" to produce the "Harem Jutsu". During Part II, having been unaware of this fact until Kakashi explains it, Naruto learns that any knowledge his clone possesses will be transferred to him at the moment that the jutsu is canceled. This fact enables Naruto to make use of the Jutsu in gaining more experience within days of training that would last years and to cover more ground with by using his Shadow Clones as scouts.  is a kekkei genkai of the Kaguya clan, who are one of the many descendants of Kaguya Otsutsuki, the first human possessing chakra. Due to the clan's barbaric and bloodthristy nature, the technique met its end with the clan's last surviving member, Kimimaro, who is one of the few members to possess the technique as well as being terminally ill; the technique is then lost after Kimimaro's death until Kabuto Yakushi's usage of Kimimaro's DNA to gain the Shikotsumyaku through a construct of Kimimaro's body. The Shikotsumyaku is the ability to manipulate the user's own skeletal structure by using chakra infusions to manipulate the growth and properties of their bones for combat use. The user thus recovers heavy injuries fast and not hindered at all if their bones are broken; in fact, the technique's usage encourages the user to break up their bones, which are hardened almost like steel, for offensive use. Most of the technique's names are named after plants, combined with a theme around "dances", including the , , and . Meanwhile, the technique's progenitor, Kaguya, uses an advanced variation called the : she manifests bones from her back and then fires bones from her palms at the intended target. When these bones hit a living organism, the target starts to deteriorate at a molecular level, reducing their bodies to nothing more than a pile of ash. She also used this attack in a variety of ways: as a projectile attack, incorporating the use of her dimension-manifesting abilities to land a two-sided attack as well as a close-range melee attack. The  is a genetic eye technique and one of the Three Great Dōjutsu that naturally occurs in members of the Otsutsuki clan as well as its descendants, the Hyuga clan. The Byakugan originated with Kaguya with her Hamura inheriting the dojutsu before he and most of his clan took residence on the moon where they nearly die out from infighting resulted in the clan having only one surviving descendant. Only one branch of Hamura's clan remained behind and eventually become the Hyuga clan over many generations. Unlike the Sharingan and Rinnegan which are gained through experience and time, the Byakugan manifest at the moment of the user's birth. While normally lavender-white, pupil-less eyes, Byakugan's activation causes the pupils to become more distinct while the veins near their temples bulge. The Byakugan gives the user a nearly 360 degree field of vision. The user can concentrate his or her chakra in the blind spot to achieve a 360 degree angle. They can see and focus in on anything within a certain distance from themselves, the range of which can be extended through training. During Part I of the series, Neji Hyuga is limited to fifty meters, and by Part II, he can see objects at least eight-hundred meters away.  The Byakugan can detect and see through anything within its range of sight. In battle, users of the Byakugan can see the flow of chakra within an opponent's body. This enables the user to forcibly release their own chakra through one of the opponent's 361 chakra release points, cutting off the flow of chakra or directly attacking the internal organs. Because this is accomplished through only the slightest amount of physical contact, this style of fighting is named . Due to the manifold techniques using the Byakugan and the Gentle Fist style, the Hyūga impose an elaborate family hierarchy for security reasons. The Gentle Fist's secret techniques are only allowed to be learned by the clan's "main house", who are protected at all times by members of the "branch houses". Branch house members are also branded with a cursed seal that destroys their Byakugan when they die, preventing enemy ninja from studying their bodies to learn the Byakugan's secrets. In Part II, it is revealed that a Kirigakure ninja, Ao, had the Byakugan of a ninja he defeated transplanted into his right eye. Himawari Uzumaki has her variant of the Byakugan, which appears to function like a Sharingan rather than manifest at her birth.  is a term that refers to two different concepts: an eye technique and an object. The eye technique first manifested in Hamura Ōtsutsuki, the son of the first known Byakugan user, Kaguya. His descendants, the Hyūga and the Ōtsutsuki clans both inherit only Byakugan, but by combining the two bloodlines their Byakugan will evolve into Tenseigan (similar to the Senju and Uchiha clans combination required to obtain Rinnegan). It is characterized by a blue pupil surrounded by a blue and white flower-like iris. The Tenseigan allows the user to control both attractive and repulsive forces, similar to the Rinnegan. Additionally, it also grants the wielder Tenseigan Chakra Mode, which in turn gives the user an increase in speed, power, strength, durability, and reflexes. It also grants its user Truth-Seeking Balls, thus granting the user all five nature transformations and Yin–Yang Style. The second concept is a huge energy vessel hidden in the world inside the Moon and protected by the Ōtsutsuki clan. It is a yellow sun-like object with a double-layered hexagonal pupil surrounded by orange flower-like iris. The center of the core also contains Hamura's Tenseigan. The object is stored within a spherical case attached to Hamura's shrine. It can only be touched by someone who possesses "the undiluted chakra of Hamura". The vessel is a highly powerful object as it supports the life of the hollow world by providing the artificial sun. It was also used in warfare by the feuding main and branch families of the Ǒtsutsuki clan. However, to support the vessel, all Ōtsutsuki clan members have to give up and combine their Byakugan within the vessel. This includes Toneri, the last surviving member of the clan. The  is a genetic attribute within the Uchiha Clan that is descended from Rinne Sharingan, an ancient dojutsu possessed by Kaguya Otsutsuki; the Sharingan retains its red iris and sclera as well as three of its tomoe. The Sharingan first manifests in Kaguya's grandson, Indra, who became the founding ancestor of the Uchiha Clan. It is not immediately present from birth, and first activates when the user experiences a strong sensation of despair that causes a special chakra to be released from the brain and alter the user's eyes. Because of the psychological effects it can have in obtaining it and evolving it, many have referred to the Sharingan as the "Curse of Hatred", including the Second Hokage. After awakening the Sharingan, the user may use it freely. When first acquired, the Sharingan may have one or two tomoe, acquiring more tomoe until it fully matures, having three tomoe in each eye. It is possible for the user to have a different number of tomoe in each eye. Kakashi Hatake possessed a single, transplanted Sharingan in his left eye that he received from his teammate, Obito Uchiha. Because he is not a member of the Uchiha clan, Kakashi's Sharingan is always active and he expends chakra rapidly when using it, forcing him to withdraw in combat or sacrifice his life energy and needing extended rest after long battles. Members of the Uchiha clan expend a mild amount of chakra when using the Sharingan; Akatsuki member Itachi Uchiha keeps his Sharingan activated constantly. Danzo Shimura has also been shown to have a transplanted Sharingan in his right eye, taken from Shisui Uchiha, and ten more in his right arm, obtained from Orochimaru's experimentation on Shin Uchiha. Sasuke Uchiha is also frequently shown using his Sharingan, only retracting it when exhausted. Over the course of its development, the Sharingan will grant the user three unique abilities: The first being its famous ability for the user to instantly memorize and replicate any opponent's movement and attacks with perfect accuracy. The Sharingan's second ability grants the user increased ocular perception, allowing them to read and predict the movements and actions of fast-moving objects. This also allows the user to easily recognize genjutsu and different forms of chakra (see chakra in different colors). Its final ability is a brand of scenarios that suggests actions and thoughts to the opponent, acting as an effective way to produce beyond genjutsu abilities or implant memories in another person. Those who possess the Sharingan also have access to two of the most powerful genjutsu,  and . Both techniques work in reverse: Izanagi allows the user to "alter destiny"; they may turn moments inflicted on them (such as injury or death blow) into mere illusions, though only for several seconds, while Izanami is used to "determine destiny"; it traps the target in reliving a moment in an infinite loop until accepting the truth or remain still and eventually die. However, both techniques are labeled as forbidden jutsu, as they will permanently close the user's Sharingan eye. Danzō Shimura implanted numerous Sharingan eyes onto his right arm, allowing him to use Izanagi more than once, with one of the eyes being sealed per use, through Shisui Uchiha's Mangekyō Sharingan. However, Obito Uchiha claimed that the Izanagi jutsu is "perfected" and more effective when a person has both the Sharingan and the Senju's power, meanwhile labeling Danzō's Izanagi as "imperfect", as he lacks complete control over Hashirama's cells. Due to the massacre of the Uchiha clan, at the start of the series, there are only four living people who possess the Sharingan: Sasuke Uchiha; his brother, Itachi; Obito Uchiha; and Kakashi Hatake. Itachi had died prior to the Fourth Great Ninja War, in which Obito meets his demise while Kakashi has his Sharingan taken out in exchange for his normal eye. Years after the Great Ninja War, it is revealed that from one of Orochimaru's test subjects who has a unique ability of accepting tissue and organ transplantation, Shin Uchiha, came multiple clones of children having cloned Sharingan, the surviving ones of whom are taken care of in Konoha's orphanage. Additionally, Sasuke's daughter, Sarada, also eventually awakens her own Sharingan. The  is a heightened form of Sharingan introduced towards the end of Part I. At that time, the Mangekyō Sharingan is explained to be rare, even among the members of the Uchiha clan, and present only in those who have killed the person closest to them, be it their best friends, relatives, or significant others, either accidentally or intentionally. While Madara Uchiha is stated to be the first person to awaken the Mangekyō Sharingan, which resulted in a common tradition for members of the Uchiha clan to follow his example by killing their friends, an ability of the Mangekyō (Susanoo) had been used since the time of the first Sharingan user, Indra. Also when one of the eyes from the same eyeset awakens the Mangekyō, the other eye awakens the Mangekyō too, causing Obito to awaken it, even if the one who killed his best friend was Kakashi, who has his other eye. As explained late to the Part II, the event is the end result of the "Curse of Hatred", in which the brain releases special chakra to the eyes so much that the Sharingan eventually transforms into Mangekyō Sharingan. At the cost of increased power, the Uchiha clan members who possess the Mangekyō Sharingan will start to lose their sanity, eventually descending to complete madness as they gain more power. Unlike the regular Sharingan, which appears identical from user to user, the Mangekyō Sharingan's tomoe seal differs between individuals. Its abilities were usually derived from the Japanese mythology, hence giving the interpretation that they are one of the divine and most powerful ninja techniques ever used. Also, the Mangekyō seems to grant different kind of abilities to each of its users, though some might share the same jutsu, as Sasuke and Itachi share the ability to perform Amaterasu, while all members have the potential to construct a Susanoo. Features of the Mangekyō Sharingan include Tsukuyomi and Amaterasu. When the user has mastered the full power of both of their eyes, regardless of what kind of Mangekyō abilities they have, the user gains the ability to create a construct of chakra called a Susanoo. Other Mangekyō abilities include Kamui and , awakened in Shisui's Mangekyō Sharingan, which granted him the ability to control other people's minds without them knowing. Once it has been gained, the Uchiha user suffers from ever-deteriorating eyesight, a process that is aggravated by repeated use and culminates in blindness. One's eyesight can be permanently restored by taking and transplanting the eyes of another Uchiha clan member, a process that results in the creation of an "Eternal" Mangekyō Sharingan (永遠の万華鏡写輪眼, Eien no Mangekyō Sharingan). The tighter the blood ties are between the "donor" and the receiver, the better it is for compatibility, siblings for example. Not only does this process permanently restore one's eyesight, with the exception of using Izanagi or Izanami, but it also gives the person even greater power. The Eternal Mangekyō Sharingan also seems to change form from the original, with what appears to be a fusion of the current owner's Mangekyo with the previous owner's. Madara was the first Uchiha to awaken the Eternal Mangekyō by taking his younger brother's, Izuna, eyes to regain his sight, which gave him great power. After suffering from onset near-total blindness from overuse of his ocular powers, Sasuke underwent the process himself with Itachi's eyes, granting him all of Itachi's ocular powers in addition to his own. However, the side effects of using the Mangekyō might not be applicable to all users, as Obito has been shown to use his Kamui ability nearly all the time and does not become exhausted or suffer from deteriorating eyesight from doing so. Mangekyō Sharingan can also evolve further to become Rinnegan, as in the case of Madara. However, he only managed to achieve that because he was the current reincarnation of one of the Sage of the Six Paths' son, Indra, and had injected himself with the DNA of Hashirama (the reincarnation of the Sage's other son, Asura), which would grant the person with the Sage's own power. The process also happens only near the end of the user's natural lifespan. However, Sasuke awakened a Rinnegan unique to him in his left eye after receiving Hagoromo's (Sage of the Six Paths) Six Paths Yin Chakra. His Rinnegan is a Six-Tomoe variant. He has six tomoe on the first to rings of the Rinnegan. Although he awakened the Rinnegan, Sasuke can still access the powers of his Mangekyō Sharingan e.g. Amaterasu and Susano'o. He also awakened a Perfect Susano'o (Complete Body 一 Susanoo) that rivals Madara's. His Susano'o has wings that enable him to fly.  is a genjutsu used by those of the Uchiha Clan who gained Mangekyō Sharingan, said to be the  in opposition to Amaterasu. As one of the most powerful genjutsu, Tsukuyomi allows the user to trap his target in an illusionary realm where time is controlled by the user of this jutsu. In the case of those like Itachi, Tsukuyomi is used for the purpose of torturing an opponent at a psychological level. Besides added stress on the left eye unless it is an Eternal Mangekyō Sharingan, the Tsukuyomi can be negated by an opponent who is a blood relative of the user. A more powerful variant of the Tsukuyomi is the , cast on the moon to subjugate every living things caught in its light, which momentarily shines bright enough that night appears to be day. This results with those inflicted to be robbed of their free will while experiencing their deepest desires. However, the Infinite Tsukuyomi can only be cast by someone with the Rinne Sharingan, either someone like Kaguya Ōtsutsuki or a jincuriki to her Ten Tails form. People managing to avoid its light are not bound to the jutsu, as are people who are reincarnated with Summoning: Reanimation, as the jutsu only affects living things. During the events of Road to Ninja: Naruto the Movie, using the seven of the nine Tailed Beasts already in his possession, Obito developed a  that he used on Naruto and Sakura. Unlike the Infinite Tsukuyomi, the Limited Tsukuyomi creates an alternate reality based on the targets' inner thoughts.  is the highest level of Fire Style jutsu exclusive to Itachi and Sasuke's Mangekyō Sharingan, said to be the . It is the antipode of Tsukuyomi. Amaterasu produces black flames at the focal point of the user's vision. Once created, it can continue burning for seven days and seven nights. The flames cannot be extinguished with water or any other normal methods; only the user can put the flames out. Said to be "the fires from hell" and to burn as hot as the sun itself, Amaterasu burns virtually any material, including other flames until nothing but ash remains. However, the flames cannot burn through chakra or materials infused with chakra, as they fail to burn into Naruto's Kurama chakra cloak or through Gaara's chakra-infused sand.This technique can also be sealed within the Sharingan of another person. Beyond mere offence, Amaterasu's flames can be used as a deterrent, with users surrounding themselves in its flames to discourage physical attacks. For more advanced users, they can shape Amaterasu into more specialized configurations. Use of Amaterasu puts a great deal of strain on the user, usually causing their eyes to bleed. For all its lethal potential, Amaterasu burns fairly slowly, allowing targets to remove burning clothes before their body is caught ablaze or, if it is too late for that, remove the burning body parts before it spreads. Other defensive options are pushing the flames away, absorbing them, certain space–time ninjutsu, or being the host of the Ten Tails.  is the final ability of the Mangekyō Sharingan, also known as the . The ability is gained by awakening the full power of both of the user's eyes, thus, unlike the other abilities, all Mangekyō Sharingan users have the potential to summon their own Susanoo. By performing this technique, the user constructs a being of chakra, called Susanoo, which provides defense and offense. Susanoo originally appears in a skeletal form before assuming a complete form, and a "final" version. Each one is unique to the summoner with the most striking difference being the color: Itachi's Susanoo is orange (red in the anime), Sasuke's and Indra's are both purple, and Madara's and Kakashi's are both blue. Each Susanoo is also different in power; Sasuke's incomplete version is easily melted by Mei's Vapor Style, while Madara's final version, which is titanic in size, is said to be comparable to a tailed beast in power. The user additionally can infuse their Susanoo with another chakra, including Sage chakra owned by Sasuke, or equip it with "garments", such as the reflective  and the powerful sealing object , both used by Itachi.  is an ability that is exclusive to Obito's Mangekyo Sharingan, a space-time ninjutsu that allows the user to transfer himself or anything into a pocket dimension. At the time, Obito could only use his right eye for close range while partially transporting himself between spaces to appear "intangible" for minutes. Through Obito's left eye, Kakashi can create a long-ranged portal that is primarily based on line of sight and can increase in size. As a result, Obito and Kakashi are unable to use Kamui against each other as their attack cancel each other out. Once Obito regained his left eye, his abilities are hasten to the point where he can use his eyes to create two distortions and then connect them to produce a wormhole from one location to another. However, as this ability has nothing to do with his pocket dimension, it places a significant strain on Obito. The  is a unique eye technique and the third and most "exalted" of the Three Great Dōjutsu. The dōjutsu, along with Sharingan, is descended from Rinne Sharingan, retaining its ripple-like pattern but with light purple iris and sclera. The first person to possess the dojutsu was Hagoromo Ōtsutsuki, whose mother, Kaguya, possessed its ancestor, the Rinne Sharingan. In addition to enabling the user to quickly master various jutsu, the user may also use all forms of chakra nature, including the Yin and Yang forms. Similar to Sharingan, the Rinnegan has its own exclusive abilities - the , based on the Desire realm in Buddhist cosmology: the  that uses a variety of animal summons such as giant multi-headed dogs; the  with access to an arsenal of weapons; the  which enables reading mind and ripping souls; the chakra absorbing  (this path can take chakra from ninjutsu, making Rinnegan users technically immune to them); and the  that can summon the . The sixth aspect of the Six Paths, the , provides five known abilities based on gravitation. The first is , which uses the user's body as the epicenter of gravity and pushes away any technique of any force through gravity manipulation, though it has a five-second limit after each use. It can be used for a large-scale effect by placing a titanic gravity over a large area and blowing them; in this case it can be used to destroy an entire village - at the cost of shortening the user's lifespan and being unable to use it for several minutes. The second is , a companion of Almighty Push and also manipulates gravity, but instead of pushing force, it pulls all things towards a center point. It also has the same five second limit, though it is unknown whether it can be used for a large-scale effect. The third ability is , which musters a large amount of user's chakra to release a small black orb of energy with intense gravitational pull, enough to uproot trees and destroy mountains, that compacts any thing caught in its pull into an extraterrestrial body that serves to encase whoever is trapped within it. Hagoromo used this technique to seal the Gedo Statue with the moon created as a result. The fourth ability is , which pulls down double meteors to the Earth. The fifth ability is , which sends as many as five shadowed duplicates of the user to an invisible world known as the . The shadow can attack in accordance with the user, capable of blowing all nine Tailed Beasts at once. It is normally undetectable by people without Rinnegan, however, Naruto is able to sense its presence after receiving some of Hagoromo's power. Despite being invisible, the shadows can be bound, and if they expire, all damage they sustained are transferred to their user. In conjunction to Six Paths, a Rinnegan gives its user access to a special path called the , which allows the user to control the aspect of life and death. Nagato used this Path to devise a means to animate six corpses, each with a sixth of his full power, that he can control them through first-person view. The user can also use special chakra chains which can bind even Tailed Beasts. Lastly, the user may perform a technique called  to fully resurrect the dead by offering their own lives. The Sage of the Six Paths possesses a unique technique not used by anyone else called the  which manipulates the Yin chakra to create physical forms out of nothingness, then bestows it with life force through the Yang chakra. Due to the fact that it is not a genetic ability and thus is very rare, the Rinnegan has been regarded as some sort of legend with only the Sage of Six Paths known to acquire it. However, the reincarnations of Hagoromo's sons, Indra and Asura, can potentially access Rinnegan by having the genes of both reincarnations, as in the case of Madara (Indra's reincarnation), who obtained the DNA of Hashirama (Asura's reincarnation), although he only awoke the Rinnegan near the end of his natural lifespan. This is considered a wrongful act by Hagoromo as he attempted to leave a message in the form of a stone tablet for Indra's descendants to reconsider the act. The Rinnegan is shown to be transplantable, as Madara was able to implant his Rinnegan into the young Nagato, and Obito takes up Madara's left Rinnegan to use it in conjunction with his Sharingan. After meeting with Hagoromo, Sasuke, who is the current reincarnation of Indra, awakens a Rinnegan in his left eye, which has an additional six tomoe on top of the ripple pattern, making it closer to the Rinne Sharingan in appearance. His Rinnegan allows him to perform , which can shift himself, others, and objects a set distance away from his original location. He can increase the range of this technique by instantaneously changing place with a remote space. Due to its speed, this technique has proven to be especially useful for launching surprise attacks against enemies within its range. While there is no prerequisite for using the technique, it does have a recharging period after each use. Once fully mastered it can even cross dimensions but requires a large amount of chakra and drains his dōjutsu of its power for an extended period of time. The  is a kekkei mōra dojutsu exclusive to Kaguya and the Ten Tails. As the Rinnegan and Sharingan originated from it, possessing the abilities that both eyes possess, the Rinne Sharingan resembles a red Rinnegan with nine tomoe in the irides. The Rinne Sharigan first manifested through Kaguya Ōtsutsuki after eating the Shinju's fruit, which in turn is present in her Ten Tails incarnation and those who become Jinchuriki of the Ten Tails. Besides the Infinite Tsukuyomi, the user of a Rinne Sharingan can use  to instantly teleport the user and anyone within a certain range to different dimensions. Those affected by it are caught completely off guard, as there seems to be no warning prior to its usage and have found themselves plunging into a river of lava and abruptly being encased within a block of ice. Having been sent to a different dimension, the presence of their chakra is completely erased in the normal world and cannot be sensed through traditional means. It has been compared to the creation of genjutsu due to the ability to instantly rewrite all aspects of the dimension; however, it is noted to be very chakra taxing. There is also the , a technique that allows the user to teleport themselves instantly through a dark portal, either partially or completely. The  allows a ninja to summon anything to their side. One common use for Summoning Jutsus are calling in creatures to fight by the summoner's side. Before such a summon can be performed, a ninja must first sign a contract with the creature in their own blood. Even after that they need only perform the proper hand-seals and press their hand to the ground, offering an additional donation of blood while providing an appropriate amount of chakra to bring the creature to their location. The Summoning Jutsu has been used by a number of different characters during the series, each of whom summons a different type of creature: The most common summons being the toads of Mount Myoboku and snakes. Other summons include tortoises, hawks, dogs, slugs, puppets, and various other creatures. But as seen in Part II, the Summoning Jutsu can work both ways with a creature bringing its summoner to its location. Shonen Jump has featured several popularity polls for jutsu in the series. In every official poll, Rasengan has ranked first, and Chidori has ranked second. These results were reversed in a similar poll in the first Naruto databook, in which Chidori was ranked first, and Rasengan second. In a top ten list of jutsu compiled by IGN's Ramsey Isler, Rasengan was ranked first, and Chidori second. Several pieces of merchandise have been released featuring Naruto characters performing jutsu, including action figures and clothing. Several publications for anime and manga have commented on the use of jutsu in the series. IGN called jutsu "one of the most entertaining parts of the Naruto franchise", and noted that "the complicated but impressive-looking hand gestures, the unique physical attributes, and the pure unadulterated destructive power of the ninjutsu are some of the things that make the series wildly popular". T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews claimed that it was in "fight/action scenes that Naruto receives is highest accolades", and praised the "invigorating and unique fighting styles/techniques [that] manage to continuously infuse action sets with life". However, it criticized the "overemployment of certain special techniques" such as Naruto Uzumaki's Shadow Clone Technique, noting that the fights became "bland and repetitive" over time. Anime News Network (ANN) considered the structure of battles "repetitive to a fault — a series of competing power-ups followed by an elegiac coda", but mollified by the series' "winning formula: the villains are vile, the heroes sympathetic, and the stakes high". In a review of the eighth through tenth volumes of the manga, ANN lambasted the fact the fights were frequently "interrupted by long-winded (and sometimes redundant) explanations of strategies and special techniques", but praised the visual presentation of the fights, noting that "the fights are staged with a clear eye for geography, movement and the human form, and are bursting with so much visual energy that not even the flashbacks and tedious explanations can dampen them". For the visuals in the anime, ANN made note of the fight between Naruto Uzumaki and Sasuke Uchiha in episodes 132–134, noting the "impressiveness of the Sasuke fight's visuals", in which "Naruto clones explode from a lake like ninja-shaped surface-to-air missiles and glowing energy limbs ambush enemies from underground and cling to rock faces like neon prehensile tails". Although ANN praised the animators who "put all the love they could into the fight", it criticized the slow plot pacing that led up to the fight, and the fight's tedious structure.   : Located in the brain, the gate removes the brain's restraints on the muscles to use 100% of their strength and makes them stronger. : Located in the brain, it forcibly increases one's physical strength and temporarily empowers the body. : Located on the spinal cord, its release causes the skin to turn red from increased blood flow. : Located on the spinal cord, its release increases the user's speed and power at the cost of potential tearing in muscle tissue. : Located in the abdomen, its release further increases the user's speed and power. : Located in the stomach, its release further increases the user's speed and power to the point that bodies of water would converge around the user who to the enormous amounts of chakra being emitted. The technique associated with this gate is , kicking an opponent in the air to deliver a barrage of punches so fast that the air around the fist is set ablaze and a peacock-like fan of flames is formed around the opponent. : Located below the stomach, its releases causes every pour of the user's body to emit a turquoise-colored sweat that instantly evaporates and gives the illusion of a chakra coating. Unfortunately, the side effects of opening the seventh gate are that the user's muscle fibers become fragile to the point that anything can rip them to shreds. The technique associated with this gate is , a single punch that creates air pressure around the fist in the form of a tiger to land a death blow. : Located at the heart, its release uses up all of the body's energy while the sweat becomes a crimson color. With the heart pumping at maximum power and exceeds the power of every other gate, this gate makes the user the most powerful figure in a battle yet kills them shortly after. One technique associated with this gate is , a series of punches in which the shockwaves produced resemble the bottoms of giant elephant feet. The other technique is a last resort attack called , which produces a kick in the shape of a dragon moving at such speed that it can literally distort the space surrounding the attack, negating any attack dealt to the user. While normally an instant kill attack, this move kills the user as well.  mixes water and wind elements to create ice. It is possessed by members of the Yuki clan, one of the once numerous clans with kekkei genkai in Kirigakure that has been exterminated to almost extinction during the Fourth Mizukage's reign. The only known members of the clan are Haku and his mother, both of whom have died, leaving the technique's existence uncertain.  allows the users to imbue objects with explosive chakra to make them explode. It is possessed by members of the Iwagakure Explosion Corps, which include Gari and Akatsuki member Deidara, thus being one of kekkei genkai possessed by ninja without familial connection with each other. It is named long after its introduction, previously being thought to be a variation of Earth Style.  allows the manipulation of chakra to attract objects or magnetize an object through simple touch. Though present in the Hidden Sand Village, its tailed beast Shukaku able to manipulate sand, neither of the two users appear to be related. These two are the Third Kazekage, whose development of his Iron Sand fighting style from studying the One Tail led to his death by Sasori, and the Fourth Kazekage who mixed gold dust in his sand. The Fourth Kazekage's son, Gaara, who was once the host of Shukaku, is able to manipulate sand as well even after the tailed beast has been extracted from him. Naruto gained use of this chakra nature after a fragment of Shukaku is transferred into his body. Toroi of Kumogakure possessed a variation of the technique which is used to magnetize objects through skin contact.  mixes fire and earth elements for diverse purposes. This nature is possessed by Son Gōku, which manifests through both the Four Tails Jinchuriki Roshi and Naruto in the form of molten rock and lava. The Lava Style is also of the kekkei genkai possessed by ninja without familial connection with each other: seen in the Fifth Mizukage Mei Terumī, Kurotsuchi of Iwagakure whose lava takes form of quicklime, Dodai of Kumogakure whose variation is said to take the form of vulcanized rubber. , an advanced variation of Fire Style, allows manipulation of the virtually long-lasting black flames of Amaterasu, regarded as the highest form of Fire Style techniques. Thus, it is only commanded by people who could cast Amaterasu, namely, Sasuke Uchiha and his brother, Itachi.  mixes water and lightning elements to create energy beams which can be guided like water. It is possessed by Kumogakure ninja, most notably Darui. The third Shippūden film, Naruto Shippuden the Movie: The Will of Fire has a variation which allows manipulation of lightning clouds which are able to absorb chakra. The variation is possessed by Hiruko after stealing it from an unknown ninja.  mixes fire and water elements to create powerful corrosive gas. It is one of the two advanced chakra nature possessed by Mei Terumī.  mixes fire, wind, and earth elements to create an expanding three-dimensional object capable of disintegrating anything it touches at molecular level. It is the only example of kekkei tōta, an advanced variation of kekkei genkai which mixes three elements instead of two. Two ninja are known to possess it: Ōnoki and Mū, both of which had no familial connection with each other.  allows manipulation of chakra taking form of fire orbs capable of heating up water inside a person's body until they evaporate, effectively mummifying them. The only ninja known to possess the technique is Pakura from Sunagakure, who had already died. However, the technique created from the combination of Naruto and Sasuke's wind and fire elements, respectively, is also named a Scorch Style technique by Minato Namikaze, though it might be attributed to it being a combination of two elemental natures and not due to being a genetic attribute.  allows the user to create crystals from moisture in the air as weapons, crystallize objects, or manipulate already available crystals. The only known user of this kekkei genkai is Guren, who appears in the anime-only Three Tails Arc.  allows the user to move at instantaneous speed, making them unable to be hit by most Taijutsu attacks. It appears in the third Naruto Shippūden film Naruto Shippuden the Movie: The Will of Fire, possessed by Hiruko after stealing it from an unknown ninja.  allows the user to absorb, manipulate, and release enemy's chakra through a pair of diamond marks in the user's hand. It appears in the third Naruto Shippūden film Naruto Shippuden the Movie: The Will of Fire, possessed by Hiruko after stealing it from an unknown ninja.  allows the user to transform the body into black steel, rendering it impenetrable. It appears in the third Naruto Shippūden film Naruto Shippuden the Movie: The Will of Fire, possessed by Hiruko after stealing it from an unknown ninja.
