    Kangchenjunga (, Sikkimese and , ) is the third highest mountain in the world, and lies partly in Nepal and partly in Sikkim, India. It rises with an elevation of  in a section of the Himalayas called Kangchenjunga Himal that is limited in the west by the Tamur River, in the north by the Lhonak Chu and Jongsang La, and in the east by the Teesta River. The main peak of Kangchenjunga is the highest mountain in India and the second highest in Nepal after Mount Everest. Three of the five peaks&nbsp;– Main, Central and South&nbsp;– are on the border between North Sikkim in India and Nepal. Two peaks are in the Taplejung District, Nepal.Bhuju, U. R., Shakya, P. R., Basnet, T. B., Shrestha, S. (2007). Nepal Biodiversity Resource Book. Protected Areas, Ramsar Sites, and World Heritage Sites. International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology, in cooperation with United Nations Environment Programme, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific. Kathmandu, Nepal. ISBN 978-92-9115-033-5 Kangchenjunga Main is also the easternmost of the mountains higher than . It is called Five Treasures of Snow after its five high peaks, and has always been worshipped by the people of Darjeeling and Sikkim. Until 1852, Kangchenjunga was assumed to be the highest mountain in the world, but calculations based on various readings and measurements made by the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India in 1849 came to the conclusion that Mount Everest, known as Peak XV at the time, was the highest. Allowing for further verification of all calculations, it was officially announced in 1856 that Kangchenjunga is the third highest mountain. Kangchenjunga was first climbed on 25 May 1955 by Joe Brown and George Band, who were part of a British expedition. They stopped short of the summit as per the promise given to the Chogyal that the top of the mountain would remain inviolate. Every climber or climbing group that has reached the summit has followed this tradition. Other members of this expedition included John Angelo Jackson and Tom Mackinon. Kangchenjunga is the official spelling adopted by Douglas Freshfield, A. M. Kellas, and the Royal Geographical Society that gives the best indication of the Tibetan pronunciation. Freshfield referred to the spelling used by the Indian Government since the late 19th century. There are a number of alternative spellings including Kangchendzönga, Khangchendzonga, and Kanchenjunga.Denjongpa, A. B. (2002). Kangchendzönga: Secular and Buddhist perceptions of the mountain deity of Sikkim among the Lhopos. Bulletin of Tibetology 38 (2002): 11.Nirash, N. (1982). The Lepchas of Sikkim. Bulletin of Tibetology 18 (2): 18–23.Herrligkoffer, K. M. (1983). Sieg am Kanchenjunga: die deutsche Erstbesteigung. Droemer Knaur, München. The brothers Hermann, Adolf and Robert Schlagintweit explained the local name Kanchinjínga (, Sikkimese IPA: ) meaning "The five treasures of the high snow" as originating from the Tibetan word (following IPA given in Sikkimese) gangs ) meaning "snow, ice"; chen  meaning "great"; mdzod  meaning "treasure"; lnga  meaning "five". It means "The Five repositories or ledges of great snow" and is physically descriptive of its five peaks. Local Lhopo people believe that the treasures are hidden but reveal to the devout when the world is in peril; the treasures comprise salt, gold, turquoise and precious stones, sacred scriptures, invincible armor or ammunition, grain and medicine.Scheid, C. S. (2014). Hidden land and changing landscape: Narratives about Mount Khangchendzonga among the Lepcha and the Lhopo. Journal of the Irish Society for the Academic Study of Religions 1(1): 66–89. Kangchenjunga's name in the Limbu language is Senjelungma or Seseylungma, and is believed to be an abode of the omnipotent goddess Yuma Sammang.Subba, J. R. (2009). Mythology of the People of Sikkim. Gyan Publishing House, New Delhi. The Kangchenjunga landscape is a complex of three distinct ecoregions: the eastern Himalayan broad-leaved and coniferous forests, the Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows and the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands. The Kangchenjunga transboundary landscape is shared by Bhutan, China, India and Nepal, and comprises 14 protected areas with a total of :Chettri, N., Bajracharya, B., Thapa, R. (2008). Feasibility Assessment for Developing Conservation Corridors in the Kangchenjunga Landscape. Pages 21–30 in: Chettri, N., Shakya, B., Sharma, E. (eds.) Biodiversity Conservation in the Kangchenjunga Landscape. International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu. These protected areas are habitats for many globally significant plant species such as rhododendrons and orchids and many endangered flagship species such as snow leopard, Asian black bear, red panda, white-bellied musk deer, blood pheasant and chestnut-breasted partridge.  The Kangchenjunga Himal section of the Himalayas lies both in Nepal and India, and encompasses 16 peaks over . In the north, it is limited by the Lhonak Chu, Goma Chu and Jongsang La, and in the east by the Teesta River. The western limit runs from the Jongsang La down the Gingsang and Kangchenjunga glaciers and the rivers of Ghunsa and Tamur. Kanchenjunga rises about  south of the general alignment of the Great Himalayan range about  east-south-east of Mount Everest as the crow flies. South of the southern face of Kanchenjunga runs the  high Singalila Ridge that separates Sikkim from Nepal and northern West Bengal.Dhar, O. N. and S. Nandargi (2000). An appraisal of precipitation distribution around the Everest and Kanchenjunga peaks in the Himalayas Weather 55 (7): 223–234. Kangchenjunga and its satellite peaks form a huge mountain massif.Smythe, F. S. (1930). The Kangchenjunga adventure. Victor Gollancz Ltd., London The massif's five highest peaks are listed in the following table.   The main ridge of the massif runs from north-north-east to south-south-west and forms a watershed to several rivers. Together with ridges running roughly from east to west they form a giant cross. These ridges contain a host of peaks between . The northern section includes Yalung Kang, Kangchenjunga Central and South, Kangbachen, Kirat Chuli and Gimmigela Chuli, and runs up to the Jongsang La. The eastern ridge in Sikkim includes Siniolchu. The southern section runs along the Nepal-Sikkim border and includes Kabru I to III. This ridge extends southwards to the Singalila Ridge.Mason, K. (1932). The Recent Assaults on Kangchenjunga: Review. The Geographical Journal 80 (5): 439–445. The western ridge culminates in the Kumbhakarna, also known as Jannu. Four main glaciers radiate from the peak, pointing roughly to the north-east, south-east, north-west and south-west. The Zemu glacier in the north-east and the Talung glacier in the south-east drain to the Teesta River; the Yalung glacier in the south-west and the Kangchen glacier in the north-west drain to the Arun and Kosi rivers.Freshfield, D. W. (1902). The Glaciers of Kangchenjunga. The Geographical Journal 19: 453–475. The glaciers spread over the area above approximately , and the glacialized area covers about  in total.Asahi, K. (1999). Data on inventoried glaciers and its distribution in eastern part of Nepal Himalaya. Data Report 2, Basic studies for assessing the impacts of the global warming on the Himalayan cryosphere, 1994–1998. Institute for Hydrospheric-Atomospheric Sciences, Nagoya University and Department of Hydrology and Meteorology, HMG/Nepal. There are 120 glaciers in the Kanchenjunga Himal, of which 17 are debris-covered. Between 1958 and 1992, more than half of 57 examined glaciers had retreated, possibly due to rising of air temperature.Ashahi, K., Watanabe, T. (2000). Past and recent glacier ﬂuctuations in Kanchenjunga Himal, Nepal. Journal of Nepal Geological Society (22): 481–490. Kangchenjunga Main is the highest elevation of the Brahmaputra River basin, which forms part of the southeast Asian monsoon regime and is among the globally largest river basins.Bajracharya, S. R., Palash, W., Shrestha, M. S., Khadgi, V. R., Duo, C., Das, P. J., & Dorji, C. (2015). Systematic Evaluation of Satellite-Based Rainfall Products over the Brahmaputra Basin for Hydrological Applications. Advances in Meteorology: 398687. Kangchenjunga is one of six peaks above  located in the basin of the Koshi river, which is among the largest tributaries of the Ganges.Shijin, W., & Tao, Z. (2014). Spatial change detection of glacial lakes in the Koshi River Basin, the Central Himalayas. Environmental Earth Sciences 72(11): 4381–4391. The Kangchenjunga massif forms also part of the Ganges Basin.      In 1955, Joe Brown and George Band made the first ascent on 25 May, followed by Norman Hardie and Tony Streather on 26 May. The full team also included John Clegg (team doctor), Charles Evans (team leader), John Angelo Jackson, Neil Mather, and Tom Mackinnon. The ascent proved that Aleister Crowley's 1905 route (also investigated by the 1954 reconnaissance) was viable. The route starts on the Yalung Glacier to the southwest of the peak, and climbs the Yalung Face, which is  high. The main feature of this face is the "Great Shelf", a large sloping plateau at around , covered by a hanging glacier. The route is almost entirely on snow, glacier, and one icefall; the summit ridge itself can involve a small amount of travel on rock. The first ascent expedition made six camps above their base camp, two below the Shelf, two on it, and two above it. They started on 18 April, and everyone was back to base camp by 28 May. Despite improved climbing gear the fatality rate of climbers attempting to summit Kanchenjunga is high. Since the 1990s, more than 20% of people died while climbing Kanchenjunga's main peak.   Some of the most famous views of Kangchenjunga are from the hill station of Darjeeling and Antu Dada of Illam, Nepal. The Darjeeling War Memorial is among the most visited places from which Kangchenjunga is observed. On a clear day it presents an image not so much of a mountain but of a white wall hanging from the sky. The people of Sikkim revere Kangchenjunga as a sacred mountain. Permission to climb the mountain from the Indian side is rarely given. Due to its remote location in Nepal and the difficulty involved in accessing it from India, the Kangchenjunga region is not much explored by trekkers. It has, therefore, retained much of its pristine beauty. In Sikkim too, trekking into the Kangchenjunga region has just recently been permitted. The Goecha La trek is gaining popularity amongst tourists. It goes to the Goecha La Pass, located right in front of the huge southeast face of Kangchenjunga. Another trek to Green Lake Basin has recently been opened for trekking. This trek goes to the Northeast side of Kangchenjunga along the famous Zemu Glacier.  The area around Kangchenjunga is said to be home to a mountain deity, called Dzö-ngaAnna Belikci Denjongpa, Kangchendzönga: Secular and Buddhist perceptions of the mountain deity of Sikkim among the Lhopos or "Kangchenjunga Demon", a type of yeti or rakshasa. A British geological expedition in 1925 spotted a bipedal creature which they asked the locals about, who referred to it as the "Kangchenjunga Demon". For generations, there have been legends recounted by the inhabitants of the areas surrounding Mount Kanchenjunga, both in Sikkim and in Nepal, that there is a valley of immortality hidden on its slopes. These stories are well known to both the original inhabitants of the area, the Lepcha people, and those of the Tibetan Buddhist cultural tradition. In Tibetan, this valley is known as Beyul Demoshong. In 1962 a Tibetan Lama by the name of Tulshuk Lingpa led over 300 followers into the high snow slopes of Kanchenjunga to ‘open the way’ to Beyul Demoshong. The story of this expedition is recounted in the 2011 book A Step Away from Paradise. The above Himalayan Journal References were all also reproduced in the "50th Anniversary of the First Ascent of Kangchenjunga" The Himalayan Club, Kolkata Section 2005.       Name of peak Height (m) Height (ft) Location Prominence (m) Prominence (ft) Nearest Higher Neighbor Kangchenjunga Main 8,586 28,169 3,922 12,867 Mount Everest&nbsp;– South Summit Kangchenjunga West (Yalung Kang)Peakbagger.com (1987–2012). Yalung Kang 8,505 27,904 135 443 Kangchenjunga Kangchenjunga CentralPeakbagger.com (1987–2012). Kanchenjunga Central 8,482 27,828 32 105 Kangchenjunga South Kangchenjunga SouthPeakbagger.com (1987–2012). Kanchenjunga South 8,494 27,867 119 390 Kangchenjunga KangbachenPeakbagger.com (1987–2012). Kangbachen 7,903 25,928 103 337 Kangchenjunga West Nepal: Kanchenjunga Conservation Area. Sikkim, India: Khangchendzonga National Park, Barsey Rhododendron Sanctuary, Fambong Lho Wildlife Sanctuary, Kyongnosla Alpine Sanctuary, Maenam Wildlife Sanctuary, Shingba Rhododendron Sanctuary, Pangolakha Wildlife Sanctuary Darjeeling, India: Jore Pokhri Wildlife Sanctuary, Singalila National Park, Senchal Wildlife Sanctuary, Mahananda Wildlife Sanctuary, Neora Valley National Park. Bhutan: Torsa Strict Nature Reserve Between April 1848 and February 1849, Joseph Dalton Hooker explored parts of northern Sikkim and eastern Nepal, mainly to collect plants and study the distribution of Himalayan flora. He was based in Darjeeling, and made repeated excursions in the river valleys and into the foothills of Kangchenjunga up to an altitude of . In spring 1855, the German explorer Hermann Schlagintweit travelled to Darjeeling but was not allowed to proceed further north due to the Nepalese-Tibetan War. In May, he explored the Singalila Ridge up to the peak of Tonglo for a meteorological survey. In 1879, Sarat Chandra Das and Lama Ugyen-gyatso crossed into Tibet west of "Kanchanjinga" via eastern Nepal and the Tashilhunpo Monastery en route to Lhasa. They returned along the same route in 1881.Das, S. C. (1902). A Journey to Lhasa and central Tibet. E. P. Dutton & Company, New York, John Murray, London. In 1883, a party of William Woodman Graham together with two Swiss mountaineers climbed in the area of Kangchenjunga. They were the first who ascended Kabru within  below the summit. They crossed the Kang La pass, and climbed a peak of nearly  from which they examined Jannu. They concluded it was too late in the year for an attempt and returned once again to Darjeeling.Blaser, W. and G. Hughes (2009). Kabru 1883. A Reassessment. The Alpine Journal 114: 219–228. Between October 1885 and January 1885, Rinzin Namgyal surveyed the unexplored north and west sides of Kangchenjunga. He was the first native surveyor to map the circuit of Kangchenjunga and provided sketches of each side of the peak and the adjoining valleys. He also defined the frontiers of Nepal, Tibet and Sikkim in this area.Ward, M. (2001). Early Exploration of Kangchenjunga and South Tibet by the pundits Rinzin Namgyal, Sarat Chandra Das and Lama Ugyen Gyatso. The Alpine Journal 106: 191–196. In 1899, British mountaineer Douglas Freshfield set out with his party comprising the Italian photographer Vittorio Sella. They were the first mountaineers to examine the lower and upper ramparts, and the great western face of Kangchenjunga, rising from the Kangchenjunga Glacier. In 1905, a party headed by Aleister Crowley was the first attempt at climbing the mountain. Aleister Crowley had been part of the team attempting the 1902 ascent of K2. The team reached an estimated altitude of  on the southwest side of the mountain before turning back. The exact height reached is somewhat unclear; Crowley stated that on 31 August, "We were certainly over  and possibly over ", when the team was forced to retreat to Camp 5 by the risk of avalanche. On 1 September, they evidently went further; some members of the team, Reymond, Pache and Salama, "got over the bad patch" that had forced them to return to Camp 5 the day before, and progressed "out of sight and hearing" before returning to Crowley and the men with packs, who could not cross the dangerous section unassisted with their burdens. It is not clear how far Reymond, Pache and Salama had ascended&nbsp;– but in summarizing, Crowley ventured "We had reached a height of approximately ." Attempting a "mutinous" late-in-the-day descent from Camp 5 to Camp 4, climber Alexis Pache (who earlier that day had been one of three to ascend possibly higher than any before), and three local porters, were killed in an avalanche. Despite the insistence of one of the men that "The demon of Kangchenjunga was propitiated with the sacrifice", Crowley decided enough was enough and that it was inappropriate to continue.Crowley, A.; Symonds, J.; Grant, K. (1989). The confessions of Aleister Crowley: an autobiography Chapter 52 Arkana, London In 1907, two Norwegians set about climbing Jongri via the Kabru glacier to the south, an approach apparently rejected by Graham’s party. Progress was very slow, partly because of problems with supplies and porters, and presumably also lack of fitness and acclimatisation. However, from a high camp at about  they were eventually able to reach a point  below the summit before they were turned back by strong winds. In 1929, the German Paul Bauer led an expedition team that reached  on the northeast spur before being turned back by a five-day storm.Bauer, P. (1955). Kangchenjunga Challenge. William Kimber, London. In May 1929, the American E. F. Farmer left Darjeeling with native porters, crossed the Kang La into Nepal and climbed up towards the Talung Saddle. When his porters refused to go any further, he climbed alone further upwards through drifting mists but did not return. In 1930, Günter Dyhrenfurth led an international expedition comprising the German Uli Wieland, Austrian Erwin Schneider and Englishman Frank Smythe who attempted to climb Kangchenjunga. They failed due to poor weather and snow conditions. In 1931, Paul Bauer led a second German expedition team who attempted the northeast spur before being turned back by bad weather, illnesses, and deaths. The team retreated after climbing only a little higher than the 1929 attempt. In 1954, John Kempe led a party comprising J. W. Tucker, S. R. Jackson, G. C. Lewis, T. H. Braham and medical officer Dr. D. S. Mathews. They explored the upper Yalung glacier with the intention to discover a practicable route to the great ice-shelf that runs across the south-west face of Kangchenjunga.Braham, T. H. (1955–56). Kangchenjunga Reconnaissance, 1954. The Himalayan Journal Volume 19. This reconnaissance led to the route used by the successful 1955 expedition.Braham, T. H. (1996). Kangchenjunga: The 1954 Reconnaissance. The Alpine Journal 101: 33–35. 1973 Climbers Yutaka Ageta and Takeo Matsuda of the Japanese expedition summitted Kangchenjunga West (Yalung Kang) by climbing the SW Ridge. 1977 The second ascent of Kangchenjunga, by an Indian Army team led by Colonel Narendra Kumar. They completed the northeast spur, the difficult ridge that defeated German expeditions in 1929 and 1931. 1978 Polish teams made the first successful ascents of the summits Kangchenjunga South (Wojciech Wróż and Eugeniusz Chrobak, 19 May) and Kangchenjunga Central (Wojciech Brański, Zygmunt Andrzej Heinrich, Kazimierz Olech, 22 May).Wojciech Wróż: Święta góra Sikkimu. Warszawa: "Sport i Turystyka", 1982. ISBN 83-217-2377-2.  1979 The third ascent, on 16 May, and the first without oxygen, by Doug Scott, Peter Boardman and Joe Tasker establishing a new route on the North Ridge 1982 The 6th of May sees Ang Dorje, Friedel Mutschlechner, and Reinhold Messner (with an amoebic abscess in the liver) reach the top by a variation on the North Face route without supplemental oxygen. 1983 Pierre Beghin made the first solo ascent. It was accomplished without the use of supplemental oxygen. 1986 On 11 January, Krzysztof Wielicki and Jerzy Kukuczka, Polish climbers, made the first winter ascent. 1988 First successful American Expedition; led by Carlos Buhler, from the North Face. Summiting were Buhler, Peter Habeler (Austrian) and Martin Zabaleta (Spanish Bask) 1989 A Soviet expedition successfully traversed all four summits of Kangchenjunga that are higher than 8,000m. Two separate teams traversed the summits in opposite directions. 1989 American Expedition led by Lou Whittaker, with six people summiting on the Northwall: George Dunn, Craig van Hoy, Ed Viesturs, Phil Ershler, Larry Nielson, Greg Wilson. 1991 Slovenian Marija Frantar and Joze Rozman attempted the first ascent by a woman. Their bodies were later found below the summit headwall. 1991 Slovenian Andrej Stremfelj and Marko Prezelj completed an alpine-style climb up the south ridge of Kangchenjunga to the south summit (8,494&nbsp;m). 1992 Carlos Carsolio made the only summit that year. It was in a solo climb without supplementary oxygen. 1992 Wanda Rutkiewicz, the first woman in the world to ascend and descend K2 and a world-renowned Polish climber, died after she insisted on waiting for an incoming storm to pass, which she did not survive. 1995 Benoît Chamoux, Pierre Royer and their Sherpa guide disappeared on 6 October near the summit. 1998 Ginette Harrison was the first woman who climbed Kangchenjunga North face. 2005 Alan Hinkes, a British climber, was the only person to summit in the 50th anniversary of the first ascent year. 2006 Gerlinde Kaltenbrunner, an Austrian mountaineer, was the second woman to reach the summit. 2009 Jon Gangdal and Mattias Karlsson reached the summit, becoming, respectively, the first Norwegian and the first Swedish mountaineer to summit this mountain. 2009 Edurne Pasaban, a Spanish mountaineer, reached the summit becoming the first woman to summit twelve eight-thousanders. In May 2009, Kinga Baranowska was the first Polish woman to reach the summit of Kangchenjunga.Mysza (2009). Kinga Baranowska zdobyła Kangchenjungę. wspinanie.pl, 18 May 2009. 2011 Tunc Findik became the first Turkish man to reach the peak of Kangchenjunga, his seventh eight thousander, with Swiss partner Guntis Brandts via the British 1955 SW Face route. 2011 Indian mountaineers Basanta Singha Roy and Debasish Biswas of Mountaineers' Association of Krishnanagar (MAK), West Bengal, India, successfully scaled Kangchenjunga Main on 20 May 2011. In May 2013, five climbers including Hungarian Zsolt Erőss and Péter Kiss reached the summit, but disappeared during the descent. In May 2014, Bulgarian Boyan Petrov reached the peak without using oxygen. Petrov is a diabetic. In the Swallows and Amazons series of books by Arthur Ransome, a high mountain (unnamed in the book, but clearly based on the Old Man of Coniston in the English Lake District) is given the name "Kanchenjunga" by the children when they climb it in 1931. In The Epic of Mount Everest, first published in 1926, Sir Francis Younghusband: " For natural beauty Darjiling (Darjeeling) is surely unsurpassed in the world. From all countries travellers come there to see the famous view of Kangchenjunga,  in height, and only  distant. Darjiling (Darjeeling) itself is  above sea-level and is set in a forest of oaks, magnolia, rhododendrons, laurels and sycamores. And through these forests the observer looks down the steep mountain-sides to the Rangeet River only  above sea-level, and then up and up through tier after tier of forest-clad ranges, each bathed in a haze of deeper and deeper purple, till the line of snow is reached; and then still up to the summit of Kangchenjunga, now so pure and ethereal we can scarcely believe it is part of the solid earth on which we stand; and so high it seems part of the very sky itself." In 1999, official James Bond author Raymond Benson published High Time to Kill. In this story, a microdot containing a secret formula for aviation technology is stolen by a society called the Union. During their escape, their plane crashes on the slopes of Kangchenjunga and James Bond becomes part of a climbing expedition in order to retrieve the formula. The Inheritance of Loss by Kiran Desai, which won the 2006 Man Booker Prize, is set partly in Kalimpong, a hill station situated near Kangchenjunga. Joseph Dalton Hooker 1855. Himalayan Journals. Assistant-director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Maj Laurence Waddell 1899. Among The Himalayas. Travels in Sikkim. Book includes the exploration of the south of Kangchenjunga. Aleister Crowley 1905. The Confessions of Aleister Crowley, Chapters 51, 52 & 53, Tells of the Kangchenjunga Expedition by he and Dr. Jacot-Guillarmod. Douglas Freshfield 1903. Round Kangchenjunga&nbsp;– A Narrative of Mountain Travel and Exploration. Edward Arnold, London Paul Bauer 1937. Himalayan Campaign. Blackwell is the story of Bauer’s two attempts in 1929 and 1931, republished as Kangchenjunga Challenge (William Kimber, 1955). Paul Bauer The German Attack on Kangchenjunga, The Himalayan Journal, 1930 Vol. II. Lieut. Col. H.W. Tobin Exploration and Climbing in The Sikkim Himalaya The Himalayan Journal, April 1930 Vol. II. Provides the early exploration and climbing attempts on Kangchenjunga. F.S. Smythe The Kangchenjunga Adventure, 1930 to 1931. Victor Gollancz, Ltd. Smythe was the team member responsible for writing and sending the dispatches to The Statesman in Calcutta, (Mr. Alfred Watson Editor), who transmitted the dispatches to The Times (editors Deakin & Bogaerde), during the expedition of 1930 * example. Prof. G. O. Dyhrenfurth The International Himalayan Expedition, 1930, The Himalayan Journal, April 1931, Vol. III. Details their attempt on Kangchenjunga. H.W. Tilman The ascent of Nanda Devi, 7 June 1937,Cambridge University Press. Relates the story of their intention to climb Kangchenjunga. Irving, R. L. G. 1940. Ten Great Mountains. London, J. M. Dent & Sons John Angelo Jackson 1955. More than Mountains Book containing data on the 1954 Kangchenjunga reconnaissance. Jackson was also a team member of the first ascent of Kangchenjunga in 1955, also relates the Daily Mail "Abominable Snowman" or Yeti Expedition, when the first trek from Everest to Kangchenjunga was accomplished * [ ]. Relevant pages 97 onwards with two detailed maps. Charles Evans Kangchenjunga The Untrodden Peak, Hodder & Stoughton, Leader of the 1955 expedition. Principal of the University College of North Wales, Bangor. Foreword by His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G. Joe Brown, The Hard Years, tells his version of the first ascent of Kangchenjunga in 1955. Colonel Narinder Kumar 1978. Kangchenjunga: First ascent from the north-east spur. Vision books. Includes the second ever ascent of Kangchenjunga and the first from the North-East Spur on the Indian side of the mountain. See also Himalayan Journal Vol. 36 and 50th Anniversary Edition Peter Boardman 1982. Sacred Summits: A Climber's Year. Includes the 1979 ascent of Kangchenjunga with Joe Tasker and Doug Scott. Also in The Himalayan Journal Vol 36. John Angelo Jackson 2005. Adventure Travels in the Himalaya. Indus Publishing. Recounts in more detail the first ascent of Kangchenjunga. Simon Pierse 2005. Kangchenjunga: Imaging a Himalayan Mountain. University of Wales, School of Art Press, ISBN 978-1-899095-22-3. An anthology of word and image published to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the first ascents of Kangchenjunga. Well illustrated with reproductions of paintings, prints and photographs describing the climbing history and cultural significance of the mountain. Preface by George Band. Pema Wangchuk and Mita Zulca Khangchendzonga: Sacred Summit. The book details the stories and legends celebrated by the communities living in the Kangchenjunga's shadow, goes over the exploits of the early explorers and mountaineers. Chapters cover what Khangchendzonga means to Buddhism, mapping, early explorers, Alexander Kellas, early expeditions, the first ascent in 1955, the Indian Army ascent (1977), the second British ascent (1979), women climbers, the Tiger climbers, the yeti, and more. Profusely illustrated with many period photos. The Geographer at High Altitudes, "Climbing on the Himalaya and other Mountain Ranges", By J. Norman Collie, F.R.S. Edinburgh: David Douglas. 1902. The Glaciers of Kangchenjunga Douglas Freshfield The Geographical Journal, Vol. 19, No. 4 Apr., 1902, pp.&nbsp;453–472 Round Kangchenjunga. A Narrative of Mountain Travel and Exploration, Douglas W. Freshfield Bulletin of the American Geographical Society, Vol. 36, No. 2 1904 C. K. Howard-Bury. 1922. The Mount Everest Expedition. The Geographical Journal 59 (2): 81–99. "General Bruce's Illness a Serious handicap" "The Times", (British) World Copyright, Lt. R.F.Norton, 19 April 1924. Expedition in the Kangchenjunga area. Account of a Photographic Expedition to the Southern Glaciers of Kangchenjunga in the Sikkim Himalaya, N. A. Tombazi, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 67, No. 1 Jan., 1926, pp.&nbsp;74–76 An Adventure to Kangchenjunga, Hugh Boustead, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 69, No. 4 (Apr., 1927), pp.&nbsp;344–350 The Times Literary Supplement, Thursday, 11 December 1930. "The Kangchenjunga Adventure", F.S. Smythe. Im Kampf um den Himalaja, Paul Bauer. The Kangchenjunga Adventure, F. S. Smythe, Himalaya: Unsere Expedition, G. O. Dyhrenfurth. 1930 The Times Literary Supplement, Thursday, 9 April 1931. "Kangchenjunga", Paul Bauer. The Imperial Gazetteer of India. Vol. XXVI, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 79, No. 1 Jan., 1932, pp.&nbsp;53–56 Recent Heroes of Modern Adventure, T. C. Bridges; H. Hessell Tiltman, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 81, No. 6 Jun., 1933, p.&nbsp;568 Paul Bauer 1931. Um Den Kantsch: der zweite deutsche Angriff auf den Kangchendzönga, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 81, No. 4 Apr., 1933, pp.&nbsp;362–363 Paul Bauer; Sumner Austin 1938. Himalayan Campaign: The German Attack on Kangchenjunga, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 91, No. 5: 478 Charles Evans; George Band 1956. Kangchenjunga Climbed. The Geographical Journal 122 (1): 1–12. Charles Evans 1956. "Kangchenjunga: The Untrodden Peak". The Times Literary Supplement. Lou Whittaker, Memoirs of a Mountain guide, 1994 Kangchenjunga page on Himalaya-Info.org (German) Kangchenjunga page on Summitpost.org Aleister Crowley's detailed account of the 1905 attempt on Kangchenjunga Kangchenjunga History for a more detailed up to date account of the mountain's history and ascents. "Kāngchenjunga, India/Nepal" on Peakbagger Kangchenjunga on Peakware&nbsp;– photos Glacier Research Image Project presents photos tracking 24 years of changes in glaciers at Kangchenjunga.
