    Kathleen Mary "Kathy" Griffin (born November 4, 1960) is an American actress, comedian, writer, producer, and television host. Born in Oak Park, Illinois, she moved to Los Angeles in 1978, where she studied drama at the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute and became a member of the improvisational comedy troupe The Groundlings. In the 1990s, Griffin began performing as a standup comedian and also appeared as a guest star on several television shows. She achieved recognition in a supporting role on the NBC sitcom Suddenly Susan (1996–2000). Her Bravo reality show Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List (2005–2010) became a ratings hit for the network and earned her two Emmy Awards for Outstanding Reality Program. Griffin has released six comedy albums, all of which received Grammy Award nominations. Her first album, For Your Consideration (2008), made her the first female comedian to debut at the top of the Billboard Top Comedy Albums chart. In 2009, she released her autobiography Official Book Club Selection: A Memoir According to Kathy Griffin, which topped The New York Times Best Seller list. Griffin has taped numerous standup specials with HBO and Bravo. For the latter network, she has recorded 16 television specials, breaking the Guinness World record for the number of aired TV specials on any network, by any comedian in the history of comedy. In 2011, she also became the first comedian to have four televised specials in a year. Besides her comedy career, she is an LGBT activist involved in causes such as same-sex marriage and the repeal of "Don't ask, don't tell". She has also participated in two USO tours. Influenced by acts such as Joan Rivers and Don Rickles, Griffin is known for her conversational style and controversial statements on celebrities, religion and sexuality. After being nominated for six years in a row for the Grammy for Best Comedy Album, she won the award in 2014, becoming only the third woman to win the category (the others being Lily Tomlin and Whoopi Goldberg). Kathleen Mary Griffin was born on November 4, 1960 in Chicago, Illinois. Her mother, Mary Margaret "Maggie" Griffin (née Corbally) (born June 10, 1920), and her father, John Patrick Griffin (October 29, 1915 – February 17, 2007), were first-generation Irish Americans. Maggie worked as a cashier in the Oak Park Hospital. The last of five children, Kathy's siblings are Kenny, Joyce, Gary, and John. Griffin described herself during her early years as "a kid who needed to talk, all the time". She would often visit her neighbors, the Bowens, to tell them stories about her family; she has referred to those visits as her first live shows and the place where she learned "the power of juicy material". When most of her siblings moved, Griffin often spent hours alone in the house, and she developed a binge eating disorder. She explained that even though eating disorders were not very well known at that time, she knew that her eating behavior was aberrant and always threw the garbage away in the neighbor's can. In her 2009 autobiography Official Book Club Selection, Griffin confessed that she "still suffers [from food issues]" but has learned to "deal with them". In the same book, Griffin discussed her eldest brother, Kenny, who was a drug addict and homeless at various times, and revealed that she was 'afraid of him until the moment he died' due to his violent, abusive nature. Griffin states that Kenny would climb into bed with her when he was 30 and she was 7 and 'whisper' into her ears; Kathy refused to speak to him or be in the same room as him for years but didn't tell her parents until she was in her twenties, at which point he openly admitted pedophilia to their parents. As a young girl Griffin attended St. Bernadine's Elementary School and began to develop a dislike for organized religion because of the punishments she and other "vulnerable" students received from the nuns. After graduation, she attended Oak Park and River Forest High School and sought refuge in musical theatre, playing roles such as Rosemary in How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying and Hodel in Fiddler on the Roof. During her senior year she began arguing with her parents, who wanted her to attend college, because she wanted to become a professional actress. Her first appearance on television was as an extra on a Chicago White Sox commercial, and she was then signed with several Chicago talent agencies. At age eighteen, Griffin persuaded her parents to move to Los Angeles to help her become famous. At age nineteen, Griffin attended a show of the California-based improvisational group The Groundlings. She said, "I thought this is where I want to be. This is the greatest thing in the world."  Griffin began performing in the early 1980s in the Los Angeles improv comedy troupe The Groundlings. In an E! True Hollywood Story segment, she stated that she often went to see the Groundlings perform before she joined. She said that, at one show, she went backstage and talked with Groundling member Phil Hartman and asked him what the group was all about. Struggling to make it in the Los Angeles acting scene, she joined the troupe after a failed audition for the lead role in the film version of Harriet the Spy. This led to her taking classes there and eventually being asked into the Groundling's main company. While Kathy was a Groundling, she became best friends with the late Judy Toll. She went on to perform standup comedy and became part of the burgeoning alternative comedy scene in Los Angeles, appearing at Un-Cabaret and ran her own standup night, "Hot Cup of Talk". "Hot Cup Of Talk" was performed in a small, 100-seat theater and featured Griffin and two other comics, originally her friends Margaret Cho and Janeane Garofalo, talking for 15 minutes each, measured by an egg timer at the front of the stage. The next performer would take over when the timer went off regardless of whether or not the current performer had finished. The time limit, intimate setting, and Griffin's rule that nobody could repeat material on her stage made it popular with both standups and live comedy fans, and it attracted a wide range of performers from the LA 'Alternative Comedy' scenes. Griffin would later title her 1998 solo HBO special after the night. Griffin made an appearance in Quentin Tarantino's 1994 film Pulp Fiction as a pedestrian coming to the aid of Marcellus Wallace (Ving Rhames) after he is hit by a car driven by Butch Coolidge (Bruce Willis). In the credits she was listed as herself. She broke into film in the supporting role of Connie in the horror film The Unborn, starring Brooke Adams. Griffin gradually amassed a number of TV and film credits throughout the 1990s. She appeared in fellow comedian Julie Brown's Medusa: Dare to Be Truthful, a Showtime parody of the 1991 Madonna film Truth or Dare. Griffin then had two appearances as the character Susan Klein, a reporter, on NBC's The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, her TV sitcom debut. She appeared in fellow comic Bob Goldthwait's film Shakes the Clown and as the enthusiastic leader of a fanatical car club in the Ellen episode "Oh, Sweet Rapture", airing in January 1996.  Another memorable role for Griffin was as Jerry's nemesis Sally Weaver in two episodes of Seinfeld. Griffin also starred in a dual role in a seventh-season episode of The X-Files and in an episode of ABC's divorce-attorney series Civil Wars, Griffin's dramatic-series debut. After starring in an HBO Half Hour Comedy Special, Griffin had her first consistent public exposure in 1996, when she was cast as the acerbic colleague of Brooke Shields' title character on the NBC sitcom Suddenly Susan. In 1998, Griffin starred in her first one-hour special, HBO's Kathy Griffin: A Hot Cup of Talk. She honed a comedy and television career that poked fun at her relatively modest place in the Hollywood hierarchy in a self-deprecating manner. She frequently appears in such self-consciously tacky projects as the reality show competition Celebrity Mole Hawaii, in which she won the 2003 edition after undergoing such experiences as walking over hot lava with her bare feet. She identifies her victory as the moment she became a "D-list" celebrity.  Griffin also has a secondary career in voiceover work and has been featured on a variety of projects such as the animated series Dilbert and Spider-Man: The New Animated Series. Griffin's TV production company is called Inappropriate Laughter, a reference to her sometimes shocking form of humor. On June 12, 2008, Griffin hosted the first ever Bravo! A-List Awards. Included in the show was a scene wherein Griffin mimicked a "wardrobe malfunction" (referring to the infamous Janet Jackson Super Bowl halftime show controversy in 2004). She also hosted the 2009 Bravo A-List Awards, which aired on April&nbsp;15, 2009, and her Bravo special Kathy Griffin: She'll Cut a Bitch, taped on March&nbsp;4, 2009, in Portland, Oregon, aired beforehand. Shout! Factory released an extended version of the show on DVD in early 2010. On September 8, 2009, Ballantine Books published Griffin's memoir, titled Official Book Club Selection: A Memoir According to Kathy Griffin. The book debuted at No. 1 on the New York Times Bestseller List. A week prior, she released her second comedy album, Suckin' It for the Holidays. It was the comedian's second bid to win a Grammy Award. It was announced on November 3, 2009, that Griffin was to host ABC's new show Let's Dance, which was supposed to premiere immediately after the finale of Dancing with the Stars on November 23. On the show, celebrity contestants would have reenacted famous routines from past music videos, movies, and musicals while competing for a $250,000 grand prize for their favorite charity. However, the show never aired. Griffin hosted CNN's New Year's Eve Broadcast on December 31, 2009, along with Anderson Cooper. As Cooper talked about the Balloon boy hoax, Griffin said the word "fucking" while making fun of the pronunciation of Falcon Heene, the six-year-old boy who was said to have been trapped in the balloon. Although Griffin was rumored to be banned from future CNN broadcasts, she has co-hosted the show with Cooper every year since. Griffin has also guest-starred in an episode of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, playing a lesbian activist. Since the 2008 presidential election Griffin has made frequent jokes about the Palin family. Shots at Sarah Palin, her husband, Todd Palin, and their eldest daughter Bristol Palin have garnered cheers but also boos. Griffin parodied Palin in Glee, wearing a red power-suit and wide-rimmed glasses, posing as a judge at the regionals singing competition. Griffin also poked fun at Christine O'Donnell in the show by stating, "Before we start, I would like to say I am not a witch." On March 15, 2011, Griffin had a guest-starring role on Glee in the episode "Original Song" as a Regionals competition judge, "Twitterer and former Tea Party candidate" Tammy Jean Albertson. Her character complained about a duet of Hey Monday's "Candles" between two young men, Kurt Hummel and Blaine Anderson, and automatically accused their school, Dalton Academy, of being a "gay school". She also remarks that the performance of "Loser Like Me" by the show's primary Glee club, New Directions, was disgraceful because "when I lost the election, I didn't sing about being a loser, I twittered that Obama is a terrorist"; this remark almost started an argument between her and fellow judge Sister Mary Constance (Loretta Devine). On January 7, 2012, it was announced that&mdash;along with having two more standup specials on Bravo&mdash;Griffin will start a weekly one-hour talk show on the channel, Kathy, which will consist of standup routines, "rant about pop culture", and celebrity interviews. The first show aired on April 19, 2012, on Bravo. Griffin announced via Twitter on July 26, 2012, that the show had been picked up for a second season. On April 8, 2013, during a live standup performance in Cincinnati, Ohio, Griffin reportedly announced that her show would not be renewed for a third season. She later confirmed it on her Twitter account. A source close to the series told FOX 411 that Bravo is planning to film several comedy specials starring Griffin after the show wraps. On June 13, 2014, it was announced that Griffin was set to host the 41st Daytime Emmy Awards. For the first time in the event's four-decade history, the show bypassed a network television airing for a live online streaming event."Daytime Emmys to Be Streamed Online", from Broadcasting & Cable, 6/5/2014 The ceremony took place on June 22, 2014. Griffin's performance was well received by critics. Kathy Griffin served as the unofficial guest co-host of The View from May 2007 to September 2007 and was considered as a replacement for the recently departed Rosie O'Donnell. However, Whoopi Goldberg was ultimately selected as the permanent replacement. On September 10, 2007, Sherri Shepherd took over the remaining co-host spot that had been vacant since Star Jones's departure. Barbara Walters stated that she was worried about hiring another loose cannon after the troubles with O'Donnell. Griffin divulged in her standup that she is now banned from The View after talking about the gig on her televised comedy special, Kathy Griffin: Straight to Hell. While declining to discuss the ban on Access Hollywood, during the filming of an episode for My Life on the D-List with former View co-host/moderator Rosie O'Donnell, Griffin did talk about the ban, specifically targeting View executive producer Bill Geddie. Griffin has also been mentioned as a possible replacement for Walters in the event she departs the show. As of August 2009, Griffin had been un-banned from The View and was a guest on September 18, 2009, and June 15, 2010. However, in an interview on The Talk, Griffin has stated she has been re-banned from The View, due to an argument with View co-host Elisabeth Hasselbeck. Griffin has since been unbanned once again and has appeared several times on the show, including as a guest co-host.  The second season, which premiered on June 6, 2006, earned Griffin the 2007 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program, non-competition, on September 8, 2007. She received it during the Creative Arts Emmy, which was hosted by Carlos Mencia and aired on E! on September 15. Griffin stirred up controversy with her acceptance speech, saying,  Griffin later explained that she meant this remark not as a slight on Jesus, but rather as a satire of celebrities who thank Jesus profusely and nonsensically for their awards, especially artists who themselves are controversial in their speech and actions. Her remarks were quickly condemned by the Catholic League which urged the academy to "denounce Griffin's obscene and blasphemous comment." The Academy said that her "offensive remarks will not be part of the E! telecast on Saturday night". Griffin later responded, "Am I the only Catholic left with a sense of humor?" Fox News commentator Bill O'Reilly called Griffin a "pinhead" for her remark, which Griffin considered a "badge of honor." Griffin developed her love for popular culture through her immediate and extended family, who were always commenting about the latest news. She explained that "I may have been into The Brady Bunch like every other kid, but I also wanted to watch John Lennon and Yoko Ono on The Dick Cavett Show, and every minute of the Watergate hearings. It was fear of the dinner table that got me hooked." She has also named her mother Maggie as influential in her consumption of pop culture, calling her "the ideal audience for the Hollywood dish." Griffin has also named the character of Rhoda Morgenstern of 1970s sitcom The Mary Tyler Moore Show as an influence, saying,  While Griffin established her career with candid observations about everyday life and her dating experiences, later focusing on mainly mocking celebrities, her act currently consists of recounting embellished stories involving celebrities. Though her humor may be wicked, Griffin hopes people understand that no malice is intended by it. "I'm genuinely a fan of most of the people I trash in the act," said Griffin in an interview. "I really, really try and focus on making fun of people for their behavior. I'm not so into making fun of someone for the way they look, or something that's out of their control." Her favorite celebrity topics are plastic surgery, Scientology, alcohol intoxication, substance abuse, snooty attitudes, eating disorders, and stars whose sexual orientation is disputed. Among Griffin's staples are Paris Hilton, Clay Aiken, Barbara Walters, Whitney Houston, Larry David, Celine Dion, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jerry Seinfeld, Star Jones, Paula Abdul, Sharon Stone, Oprah Winfrey, Britney Spears, Ryan Seacrest, Lindsay Lohan, Miley and Billy Ray Cyrus, Bravo's Real Housewives, Kirstie Alley, Sarah Palin, Michele Bachmann, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, Uma Thurman and Renée Zellweger. Griffin is sometimes the object of her own humor, particularly with regard to her D-list status. While Griffin paints herself as a Hollywood outsider, she has a group of close celebrity friends such as Rosie O'Donnell, Joan Rivers, Jerry Seinfeld, Gloria Estefan, Whoopi Goldberg, Jennifer Coolidge, Rachel True, Larry David, Ricky Gervais, Anderson Cooper, Cher and Lance Bass. Griffin's longtime friendship with Bass was the catalyst for a feud between her and gossip blogger Perez Hilton, in which Griffin expressed anger over Hilton's "outing" of Bass on his website, calling Hilton's attacks on Bass "mean" and "unfunny". Hilton responded by saying that Griffin's anger was hypocritical, considering all of the gay jokes she makes about Clay Aiken in her stand-up routines. In 2007, Griffin commented on her aversion to making fun of celebrity friends by saying, "There's nothing I won't do, but on the other hand I'm full of shit because that changes. For example, you know Lance Bass from 'N Sync and how he's gay now? All those years that I knew he was gay, he and I were friends, I would never say, 'Hey, by the way, did you know that Lance Bass is gay?'" Griffin and Hilton ended their feud after the death of Griffin's father, and Hilton appeared on an episode of her show in 2007. Yet in July 2008, he asserted that Griffin's assistant Jessica Zajicek had quit because she could not take Griffin's now hectic career. Griffin dismissed these statements as false as Zajicek is still working for Griffin. However, the season premiere of The D-List depicted that Zajicek was no longer working for Griffin; Griffin explained early in the episode that Zajicek "has decided to move on".  Her style has led to a number of controversies. Although some talk show hosts welcome her humor on their programs such as Craig Kilborn, Bill Maher and Howard Stern (who she credits with giving her a "straight fanbase"), Griffin has claimed to be banned from appearing on several more tasteful TV shows including The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and The View. She got rebanned from The View because of a joke she made about Barbara Walters. She says Ellens producers told her they cannot have her on "trashing celebrities", but she appeared as a guest on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on September 11, 2007. One of the most notable controversies occurred when she made a joke during a 2005 E! televised event that the child actress Dakota Fanning, then age 11, had entered rehab. This incident got Griffin fired from hosting duties on E!'s red-carpet award show coverage. Nevertheless, E! purchased rights to air My Life on the D-List for its British channel, a fact she noted in an episode of season 3. In a July 2009 episode of My Life on the D-List, after using profanity in an Octomom joke during her routine at New York's legendary Apollo Theater, Griffin claimed that she received a letter banning her from the venue. Griffin has claimed to have been fired from an appearance on the show Hannah Montana, on account of her Emmy acceptance speech. According to Griffin "the instructions literally came down, 'We don't want her anywhere near the building.'" Griffin hit back in her comedy act joking that Miley Cyrus "...has been flashing her green bra and posing topless."  Griffin is an outspoken supporter for LGBT rights, including same-sex marriage. She has protested with fellow proponents in West Hollywood, California, and showcased the footage of such protests on her reality show Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List. Her mother Maggie Griffin is also a supporter of LGBT rights and is seen in Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List protesting alongside her daughter. Prior to the Proposition 8 ballot results, Griffin volunteered for the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center’s "Vote for Equality" campaign, going door-to-door asking Los Angeles residents for their opinion of LGBT marriage rights. In March 2010, Griffin helped organize a rally in Washington DC to repeal "Don't Ask, Don't Tell." She stated that she organized the rally after meeting with several closeted gay people serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. Griffin held meetings with several Members of Congress to encourage its repeal; she also organized a rally in Freedom Plaza. Griffin caused controversy when she confronted Republican Congresswoman Michele Bachmann over her views on homosexuality at the 2010 Radio and Television Correspondents' Association Dinner, while in town for her rally against DADT. According to Griffin, she asked Bachmann "if she was naturally a bigot or if that's just the way she legislates." Griffin claimed that Bachmann replied by saying, "That's a good question, I'll have to think about it." Bachmann's office confirmed the exchange but claimed that Griffin confronted Bachmann after Bachmann approached Griffin to compliment her appearance. Griffin has been a long-time supporter of the Aid For AIDS annual fundraiser, Best In Drag Show in Los Angeles, and hosted the opening of the show for more than five years." In November 2009, Aid For AIDS presented Kathy Griffin with an AFA Angel Award at their silver anniversary celebration. Griffin has been a long-time critic of Sarah Palin, and has made fun of Palin's daughter, Bristol Palin, using the Palin family as material in her comedy routines. In March 2011, Sarah Palin responded to Griffin by calling her a "bully." Palin went on to dare Griffin to "come up to Alaska and pick on me." In connection with her reality TV show, Griffin visited the Palin family home in Wasilla and invited Palin to attend her stand-up show in Anchorage. Griffin has also poked fun at Willow Palin as a result of her Facebook statements on homosexuality. On New Year's Eve 2012, Griffin made repeated remarks on the CNN television coverage to her co-host, recently out gay man, Anderson Cooper, including seemingly groping him repeatedly. Commentary on the Good Men Project website asked whether these actions and remarks would be acceptable if the roles were reversed, and questioned CNN's policies for workplace harassment.Did Kathy Griffin Sexually Harass Anderson Cooper on New Year's Eve?, Alyssa Royse, www.goodmenproject.com, 9 January 2013, accessed 10 January 2013  Griffin describes herself as a "non-believer". In her book Official Book Club Selection: A Memoir According to Kathy Griffin, Griffin said that while in high school, she fell away from the Roman Catholic Church. She considered becoming a Unitarian but wasn't sure what that would involve. On March 9, 2008, Kathy Griffin became an ordained minister with the Universal One Church of Carrabelle, FL. In a 2006 interview, Griffin said she does not drink alcohol. She is an outspoken opponent of LASIK eye surgery, having endured a series of operations for her own eyesight that left her partially blind in one eye with a visible eyeball deformity. She is open about her multiple plastic surgeries, and jokes that the fat "was donated to a soup kitchen" after her liposuction procedure. Her father, John Patrick Griffin, died of heart failure on February 17, 2007, during the shooting of the third season of her reality show; he was 91 years old. The episode related to his death aired on June 19, 2007. She placed 17th on Oxygen's 2007 list of "The 50 Funniest Women Alive". In 2009, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to her.Palm Springs Walk of Stars by date dedicated  Griffin married Washington, D.C. native Matt Moline on February 18, 2001, atop the 360 Degree Restaurant in Hollywood. ABC News reported that she walked down the aisle to the strains of 1980s power ballad "Sister Christian" by Night Ranger. Her maid of honor was Brooke Shields, and the wedding was attended by, among others, Camryn Manheim, Bill Maher, James Williams, and Jane Krakowski. Griffin and Moline appeared to have a loving and supportive relationship on her reality show. After briefly separating and reconciling in 2005, they divorced in May 2006. Griffin had her tattooed wedding ring laser-removed after her divorce. On Larry King Live, Griffin accused her husband of stealing $72,000 from her. In a written statement, he declined to respond to the allegations publicly but stated that he was saddened by the accusations. In July 2007, rumors circulated that Griffin was dating Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak. They attended the 2007 Emmy Awards together, and speculation arose when the two were interviewed together on the red carpet. On Tom Green's House Tonight on February 6, 2008, Griffin confirmed her relationship with Wozniak. When asked if she actually targeted Wozniak to make her ex-husband jealous, Griffin stated: "What better way to get back at my ex, who was a tech, than to marry the biggest techno-nerd in the Universe?" Wozniak and Griffin served as King and Queen of the Humane Society of Silicon Valley Fur Ball on April 5, 2008, in Santa Clara, California, and scenes for the fourth season of My Life on the D-List were taped. However, in June 2008, it was confirmed that Griffin and Wozniak were no longer dating. On August 9, 2009, she attended the Teen Choice Awards with Levi Johnston and subsequently interviewed him in her role as guest host on Larry King Live. In the interview, Griffin and Johnston joked that they were in a serious relationship. On March 7, 2011, while appearing on Howard Stern's radio show, Griffin announced that she was romantically involved with actor and former NFL practice-squad player Isaiah Mustafa. Mustafa later announced that he was single, though he admitted to finding Griffin "amazing". In the same interview, Griffin also stated that the previous July, she had ended a private romantic relationship that had lasted four years with a man whom she did not publicly identify, only saying that he was "a regular guy with a regular job", and that it was a "messy breakup". It was later revealed that the man was Tom Vize. Vize was Griffin's tour manager and had appeared on several seasons of My Life on the D List. Since 2012, Griffin has been in a relationship with marketing executive Randy Bick, who is twenty years her junior. On June 10, 2008, Griffin released a comedy CD titled For Your Consideration. It is Griffin's first audio-only release of her stand-up material. The disc was recorded at the ETK Theatre at the Grand Theatre Center For The Arts in Tracy, California on February 17, 2008. Included on the disc are her takes on various celebrities and her personal life. Griffin stated that she decided to release this CD to try to win a Grammy award. On December 3, 2008, Griffin was nominated for a Grammy for Best Comedy Album. However, she lost to George Carlin's It's Bad for Ya. On August 25, 2009, Griffin released a second comedy album, Suckin' It for the Holidays, in another bid for a Grammy. The album was initially released as a digital download and retail released on November 3, 2009. Despite the album's holiday title, it contains little holiday-related content, and it just barely made the nominations cut-off. On December 2, 2009 it was nominated for Best Comedy Album, making it Griffin's second Grammy nomination. Griffin received her third Grammy nomination for "Kathy Griffin does the Bible Belt" in 2010 and her fourth in 2011 for "Kathy Griffin: 50 And Not Pregnant". On May 4, 2012, the full length version of "I'll Say It", the theme song of her show Kathy, was released to iTunes as a single. On August 20, 2012, Griffin released a seven track EP containing dance remixes of "I'll Say It". On August 14, 2014, Griffin released a third comedy CD titled Look at My Butt Crack. Primetime Emmy Awards  |- | 2006 | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program |  |- | 2007 |  |- | rowspan="2" style="text-align:left;"|2008 |  |- | Kathy Griffin: Straight to Hell | Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety, Music, or Comedy Special |  |- | 2009 | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program |  |- | 2010 |  |- | 2011 |  |- | 2012 | Kathy Griffin: Tired Hooker | Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety, Music, or Comedy Special |  |} Grammy Awards  |- | 2008 | For Your Consideration | rowspan="6" style="text-align:left;"|Best Comedy Album |  |- | 2009 | Suckin' It for the Holidays |  |- | 2010 | Kathy Griffin Does the Bible Belt |  |- | 2011 | Kathy Griffin: 50 and Not Pregnant |  |- | 2012 | Kathy Griffin: Seaman 1st Class |  |- | 2013 | Calm Down Gurrl |  |- |} GLAAD Media Awards  |- | 2009 | Kathy Griffin | Vanguard Award |  |} PGA Awards  |- | 2008 | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List | rowspan="3" style="text-align:left;"|Television Producer of the Year Award in Non-Fiction Television |  |- | 2009 |  |- | 2010 |  |} Gracie Awards  |- | 2009 | Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List | Outstanding Female Lead – Comedy Series |  |}     Film Year Film Role Notes 1980 Battle Beyond the Stars Alien Extra Uncredited Fade to Black Grauman's Chinese Theater Extra 1984 Streets of Fire Concertgoer 1991 The Unborn Connie 1992 Shakes the Clown Lucy Medusa: Dare to Be Truthful Taffy 1994 Pulp Fiction Hit-and-run Witness It's Pat Herself Cameo 1995 Big News TV film Four Rooms Betty The Barefoot Executive Mary TV film 1996 The Cable Guy Mother 1997 Who's the Caboose? Katty Trojan War Cashier Courting Courtney Ona Miller 1999 Can't Stop Dancing Modeling Agent Dill Scallion Tina Muppets from Space Female armed guard Jackie's Back Herself TV film 2000 Lion of Oz Caroline Voice role The Intern Cornelia Crisp Enemies of Laughter Cindy A Diva's Christmas Carol Ghost of Christmas Past TV film E Nurse "The Real Slim Shady", music video collection 2001 On Edge Karen Katz 2002 Run Ronnie Run Herself 2003 Beethoven's 5th Evie Kling 2005 Dirty Love Madame Pelly 2005 Dinotopia: Quest for the Ruby Sunstone Rhoga Voice role Her Minor Thing Maggie Love Wrecked Belinda 2006 Bachelor Party Vegas Spaghetti Wrestling She-Elvis Uncredited cameo 2007 Judy Toll: The Funniest Woman You've Never Heard of Herself Documentary In Search of Puppy Love Mr. Warmth: The Don Rickles Project Heckler 2009 Sammy's Adventures: The Secret Passage Voice role 2010 Shrek Forever After Taran Joan Rivers: A Piece of Work Herself Documentary 2011 The Muppets Scene removed from theatrical release Hall Pass Television Year Title Role Notes 1989–1991 On the Television Various Episode: "Beauty and the Beast" The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air 1990 Susan Klein Episode: "Not With My Pig, You Don't" 1993 Civil Wars Yvonne Episode: "Watt, Me Worry?" Dream On Dawn Episode: "The French Conception" 1995 ER Dolores Minky Episode: "Motherhood" Dweebs Sheila Episode: "The Birthday Party Show" 1995 Mad About You Brenda Episode: "New Year's Eve" 1996 Ellen Peggy Episode: "Oh, Sweet Rapture" Partners Michelle Episode: "Can We Keep Her, Dad?" Caroline in the City DMV clerk Episode: "Caroline and the Movie" Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist Herself Episode: Koppleman and Katz Saturday Night Special 2 episodes 1995–1996 Ned & Stacey Jeanne Episode: "Loganberry's Run" and "Accountus Interruptus" 1997 Oddville, MTV Episode: August 13, 1997 The Wonderful World of Disney Mary Episode: "The New Barefoot Executive" 1996–1998 Seinfeld Sally Weaver Episode: "The Cartoon" and "The Doll" 1997–1998 Premium Blend Herself Hostess 1999 Rock & Roll Jeopardy! Celebrity edition 2000 The X-Files Betty Templeton/Lulu Pfeiffer Episode: "Fight Club" 2000 Curb Your Enthusiasm Herself Episode: "The Pants Tent" 1999–2000 Dilbert Alice Voice role (uncredited) 1996–2000 Suddenly Susan Vicki Groener 2001 The Simpsons Francine Episode: "Bye Bye Nerdie" Strong Medicine Matchmaker Episode: "Silent Epidemic" Weakest Link Herself Episode: "Comedians Special" Kathy's So-Called Reality Hostess 2002 The Drew Carey Show Kathy Episode: "The Eagle Has Landed" The Anna Nicole Show Herself Christmas special 2003 What's New, Scooby-Doo? Luis Agent Autumn Summerfield Episode: "The Unnatural" (Voice role) Spider-Man: The New Animated Series Roxanne Gaines Episode: "Mind Game: Part 1" and "Part 2" (Voice role) Crank Yankers Marion Simons Episode: "Jim Florentine & Kathy Griffin" (Voice role)sSegment: Marion gets an Estimate The Mole Herself Season 3 winner 2002–2003 Whose Line Is It Anyway? 4 episodes (5-02, 5–15, 5–19, 5–29) 2002 National Lampoon's Funny Money Episode 1 (Guest comedian) 2004 Striperella The Bridesmaid Episode: "The Bridesmaid" and "Evil Things Come in Small Packages" (Voice role) Half & Half Dr. Morgan Episode: "The Big Labor of Love Episode" Celebrity Poker Showdown Herself Two episodes, third tournament 2001–2004 Hollywood Squares 86 episodes 2005 Cheap Seats Rae Episode: "1995 SuperDogs! Superjocks!" Days of Our Lives Limo driver All-Star Reality Reunion Herself Hostess 2006 Gameshow Marathon Herself "Match Game" 2007 Ugly Betty Fashion TV anchor Episode: "In or Out" Loose Women Herself 2008 Rosie Live Impersonated Nancy Grace Dog Whisperer Episode: Season 4, Episode 24 2009 Privileged Olivia Episode: "All About a Brand New You" Paris Hilton's My New BFF Herself Episode: "Must Have Thick Skin" (Special guest) 2008–2010 Larry King Live Six episodes 2009 The Comedy Central Roast Of Joan Rivers Roast Master The Celebrity Apprentice 2 Special guest 2005–2010 Kathy Griffin: My Life on the D-List 47 episodesGracie Allen Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series 2010 Law & Order Special Victims Unit Babs Duffy Episode: "P.C." RuPaul's Drag Race Guest judge Season 2, Episode 1: "Gone With The Windows" The Marriage Ref Episode: "Tracy Morgan, Kathy Griffin, and Nathan Lane" Last Comic Standing Performer Season 7 finale Shep & Tiffany Watch TV: The Best of 2010  Executive Producer 2011 Glee Tammy Jean Albertson Season 2, Episode 16: "Original Song" Same Name Herself Season 1, episode 2 Drop Dead Diva Jenna Kaswell-Bailey Episode: "He Said, She Said" America's Next Top Model Guest Judge Season 17, episode 7 2012 American Dad! Kelly Wilk Season 7, Episode 16: "The Kidney Stays in the Picture"Voice role Whitney Lindsay Episode: Codependence Day The Rosie Show Herself Rachael vs. Guy: Celebrity Cook-Off Herself Season 2, Episode 6: Star Studded Supper 2012–2013 Kathy Host Talk show 2013 Cyndi Lauper: Still So Unusual Herself Episode: No Voice, No Choice 2014 Kirstie Herself Episode: The Girl Next Door 2014 Big Brother 16 Herself Episode 25 2015 Fashion Police Host Talk ShowTalk Show http://uk.eonline.com/shows/fashion_police/news/602249/kathy-griffin-named-new-host-of-e-s-fashion-police RuPaul's Drag Race Guest judge Season 7, Episode 1: "Born Naked" Big Brother 17 Herself Episode 5 HBO Comedy Half-Hour (1996)"HBO Comedy Half-Hour" (1995) – Episode list. IMDB. Kathy Griffin: Hot Cup of Talk (1998)Kathy Griffin: Hot Cup of Talk (1998) (TV). IMDB. Kathy Griffin: The D-List (2004) Kathy Griffin: Allegedly (2004) Kathy Griffin Is...Not Nicole Kidman (2005) Kathy Griffin: Strong Black Woman (2006) Kathy Griffin: Everybody Can Suck It (2007) Kathy Griffin: Straight to Hell (2007) Kathy Griffin: She'll Cut a Bitch (2009) Kathy Griffin: Balls of Steel (2009) Kathy Griffin Does the Bible Belt (2010) Kathy Griffin: Whores on Crutches (2010) Kathy Griffin: 50 and Not Pregnant (2011) Kathy Griffin: Gurrl Down! (2011) Kathy Griffin: Pants Off (2011) Kathy Griffin: Tired Hooker (2011) Kathy Griffin: Seaman 1st Class (2012) Kathy Griffin: Kennedie Center On-Hers (2013) Kathy Griffin: Calm Down Gurrl (2013) Kathy Griffin: Record Breaker (2013) My Life on the D-List - TV Locations - Virtual Globetrotting Kathy Griffin  Video produced by Makers: Women Who Make America
