     The Kellogg School of Management (The Kellogg School or Kellogg) is the business school of Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, with additional campuses in downtown Chicago, Illinois and Miami, Florida. Kellogg offers full-time, part-time, and executive programs, and partners with schools in China, France/Singapore, India, Spain, Hong Kong, Israel, Germany, Canada, and Thailand. Degrees granted include the Master of Business Administration (MBA), Ph.D., an MBA-JD, and MMM Program, a MBA + MDI dual degree.MBA and Executive Programs at the Kellogg School of Management | Northwestern University | Think Bravely | ThinkBravely. Kellogg.northwestern.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. The MDI degree replaces the MEM degree within the MMM program. Founded in 1908 in downtown Chicago as a part-time evening program, the school was chartered to educate business leaders with "good moral character". Kellogg pioneered the use of group projects and evaluations and popularized the importance of "teamwork" and "team leadership" within the business world.The Evolution of Management Education, Sedlak, Michael W. and Harold F. Williamson, University of Illinois Press, 1983, pp. 7–24; p. 124. "A New Way to Start the MBA," Eugene M. Lerner, Northwestern Management Reporter 3 (Spring 1970), pp. 15–18. Wide Awake in the Windy City, Matt Golosinski, NU Press, 2008, pp. 151–153. Kellogg has historically been ranked as one of the top business schools in the world by BusinessWeek, U.S. News & World Report, The Economist Intelligence Unit, and other business news outlets. The PTMBA program has recently been ranked #1 in the nation by Business Week.  Alumni from the Kellogg school hold leadership positions in for-profit, nonprofit, governmental, and academic institutions around the world. Kellogg is also the part of the Super Elite M7 business schools which comprise seven private business schools generally considered to have the world's best MBA programs. These seven business schools include - Harvard, Stanford, Wharton, Kellogg, Booth, Columbia, and MIT. The school, originally founded in 1908 as Northwestern University's School of Commerce, a part-time evening program, was one of 16 founding members of the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business, the organization that sets accreditation standards for business schools.American Association of Collegiate Schools of Business, 1916–1966 (Homewood, Ill.: Richard D. Irwin, 1966), pp. 181–92. As one of the organization's original members, the school later played a major role in helping to establish the Graduate Management Admission Test.The Evolution of Management Education, Sedlak, Michael W. and Harold F. Williamson, University of Illinois Press, 1983, pp. 93–94. In addition, faculty associated with the school have made contributions to fields such as marketing and decisions sciences. For instance, Walter Dill Scott, a pioneer in applied psychology, helped establish some of the earliest advertising and marketing courses in the first decade of the twentieth century.Psychology of Advertising in Theory and Practice (1902–1903) Walter Dill Scott (Small, Maynard & Co.) He went on to serve as president of Northwestern University from 1920–1939.Northwestern University: A History 1850–1975, Williamson, Harold F. and Payson S. Wild (Northwestern University Press, 1976), pp. 143ff.History of Marketing Thought, Robert Bartels, Grid Publications, 1976, pp. 35–36."WALTER D. SCOTT, EDUCATOR, 86, DIES; Northwestern Ex-President Blazed Trail in Applying Psychology to Business" The New York Times. Sep 25, 1955, p. 93. More recently, Philip Kotler and Sidney J. Levy's groundbreaking 1969 Journal of Marketing article, "Broadening the Conception of Marketing," laid the foundations for a greatly expanded understanding of marketing."Leaders in Marketing: Philip Kotler," Journal of Marketing, Vol. 36 (Oct. 1972), pp. 60–61, Gerald Zaltman History of Marketing Thought, Robert Bartels, Grid Publications, 1976, p. 181. Handbook of Marketing and Society, Paul N. Bloom, Gregory Thomas Gundlach, p. 89. "First among marketers: GURU GUIDE PHILIP KOTLER," Morgen Witzel on the force behind marketing's move from the periphery to the mainstream," Morgen Witzel, Financial Times, Aug 5, 2003, p. 11. "How Philip Kotler has helped to shape the field of marketing," Maureen A. Bourassa, Peggy H. Cunningham, Jay M. Handelman, European Business Review, 2007 Volume: 19 Issue: 2 pp. 174–192. Similarly, Kotler's Marketing Management text has played a key role in deepening the field's scholarship.http://www.jstor.org/stable/2351758Review, Neil H. Borden, Jr., The Journal of Marketing, Vol. 37, No. 1 (Jan. 1973), pp. 110–111. In 1919, Ralph E. Heilman, a Northwestern graduate with a doctorate from Harvard, was appointed dean of the school. And in the next year, the school launched a graduate program leading toward the Master of Business Administration degree, drawing nearly 400 students in its first two years. In 1939, Homer Vanderblue became the fifth dean of the school. During immense resource shortages caused by World War II, Dean Vanderblue kept the school functioning and led it through its transition from technical specialization toward a broader managerial education. In 1951, Kellogg began offering executive education courses. The Institute for Management, a four-week summer program based in Evanston, expanded the following year to two sections. The program's success eventually led to it being expanded in Europe in 1965 with a similar program offered in Bürgenstock, Switzerland. In 1976, the school expanded its executive education offerings in Evanston, introducing a degree-granting program known as the Executive Management Program (EMP, today known as the Executive MBA Program). A watershed event in the school's history was the opening of the James L. Allen Center, home of the Kellogg executive education programs. The vision of dean Donald P. Jacobs (deanship 1975–2001; on faculty in Finance Department since 1957), the Allen Center enlisted the help of significant business figures in the Chicago-area, most notably James L. Allen, a Kellogg alumnus and cofounder of consultancy Booz Allen Hamilton. The Allen Center's cornerstone was laid in 1978 while the facility officially opened Oct 31, 1979. In 1956, the school was renamed the School of Business; little more than a decade later, in 1969, the school once again changed its name, this time to the Graduate School of Management, a designation that reflected the demand among the business community for sophisticated managers trained in both analytical and behavioral skills. In addition, this training was oriented toward general management, rather than narrowly functional skills, as had largely been the case in many business schools for much of the 20th century. The training was designed to provide management skills suitable for leadership roles whether in the corporate, public, or nonprofit sectors – rather than careers focused solely on traditional business. To reflect this change, the school in 1969 stopped issuing the MBA credential in favor of the MM, or master of management degree. A point of differentiation for nearly three decades, the school more recently returned to the traditional MBA.Northwestern University: A History 1850–1975, Williamson, Harold F. and Payson S. Wild (Northwestern University Press, 1976), p. 122. These dramatic changes were predicated upon a key change under Dean John Barr (1965–1975): In 1966, Northwestern elected to discontinue its highly respected undergraduate program (the School of Business) so as to focus its energies solely on graduate education. In so doing, the school decided to pursue a research-based faculty, quickly attracting a number of world-class quantitative experts, many in the field of game theory, to build the school's Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences Department, founded in 1967 and initially led by Professor Stanley Reiter.The Evolution of Management Education, Sedlak, Michael W. and Harold F. Williamson, University of Illinois Press, 1983, p. 134.Wide Awake in the Windy City, Matt Golosinski, NU Press, 2008, pp. 142–145. In 1979, in honor of a $10 million gift made to the school on behalf of John L. Kellogg, the school was renamed as the J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management. The funds allowed the school to significantly expand its research and teaching mission by establishing three endowed professorships; two major centers of interdisciplinary research; four research professorships; and a large student rooming facility designed as a living-learning center. Even prior to the Kellogg gift, the school had been bolstering its research-based faculty: In 1978 alone the school added six additional "named" professorships and two new research professorships. In 2001, in an effort to solidify the school's brand, the name was shortened to the Kellogg School of Management." The story on the Kellogg Centennial site highlights the Kellogg School's journey over the last 100 years. In June 2009, Kellogg announced that Dipak C. Jain would step down as dean after eight years of leadership and return to teaching. On September 1, 2009, Sunil Chopra, former Senior Associate Dean:Curriculum and Teaching and IBM Distinguished Professor of Operations Management, assumed as interim dean while the Dean Search Committee worked to find the best candidate to lead the school. Later in 2009, Northwestern University announced plans to construct a new building at the northeast corner of its Evanston campus to serve as Kellogg's new home.  The new facility will be located adjacent to Lake Michigan and will include classrooms, faculty offices, collaborative learning spaces and administrative offices.  As of the announcement date, the timing for completion of the new facility had not yet been determined. In March 2010, Kellogg announced that Sally Blount would replace Sunil Chopra as the dean, starting in July.  Blount was the dean of the undergraduate college and vice dean of the Stern School of Business at New York University. In addition, Dean Blount has launched ambitious marketing and capital campaigns starting in 2011 with the Think Bravely campaign, and subsequently announced a new Inspiring Growth campaign in 2014. This campaign is focused on the dual meaning of creating economic value while increasing self-knowledge and insight. On February 6, 2012 Blount unveiled a seven-year plan, Envision Kellogg, aimed at reformatting the business school and launching Kellogg to the top of global rankings. On September 15, 2014  the new key milestones in its Envision Kellogg plan for transformation, including a new brand strategy focused on "inspiring growth" was announced.  This theme encapsulates what Kellogg has accomplished over the past four years and provides a beacon for where the school is headed.  The bold strategic transformation plan is rapidly moving from concept to action to results. Alumni and friends had already contributed 226 million dollars of the campaign target of 350 million dollars to transform the school. On October 2, 2014, President Barack Obama came to Northwestern's campus to make a speech on the US economy in front of students from both the university and Kellogg. The Kellogg School's Full-Time and Executive MBA facilities are situated along the picturesque shores of Lake Michigan in Evanston, Illinois on Chicago's North Shore, while the school's Part-Time MBA program is housed on Northwestern's Downtown Chicago campus in Wieboldt Hall (340 E. Superior Street Chicago, IL 60611), between the Law and Medical Schools. The downtown campus is in the heart of Chicago, only a few blocks away from Lake Michigan to the east and Michigan Avenue to the west. In January 2006, Kellogg opened a new campus for its EMBA program for Latin American executives in Miami. EMBA Programhttp://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/emba/programs/miami.htm Kellogg-Miami Currently, students in the Kellogg Full-Time program take the majority of their classes at the Donald P. Jacobs Center, also known as "The Jake." On November 11, 2009, Northwestern University announced plans to construct a new building to house the Kellogg Full-Time program.  The new facility will be located adjacent to Kellogg's Allen Center near Lake Michigan and will centralize management research and education activities creating a unified, state-of-the-art presence on Northwestern's Evanston campus. Construction officially started in April 2014 and is expected to be complete by the Fall of 2016. The new building (and the school global hub) will be designed by Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg (KPMB) Architects. Kellogg offers Full-Time MBA, Executive MBA, MMM Program (MBA + MSDI), JD-MBA, Part-Time MBA (PTMBA) and MSMS programs, as well as non-degree Executive Education programs. Kellogg is one of the American business schools to offer a one-year MBA program for students who have already completed a specified list of prerequisite courses, including undergraduate-level Financial Accounting, Statistics, Finance, Economics, Marketing, and Operations. The 1Y program began in 1965 and has more than 3,500 graduates around the world. Program graduates include Robert Eckert '77, Former Chairman & CEO, Mattel; Richard Lenny '77, Former Chairman & CEO, The Hershey Company; and Thomas Wilson '80, Chairman & CEO, The Allstate Company.  Although the top ranked MBA program in Europe is the two-year MBA at London Business School, typically European MBA's are one year, as at IMD in Switzerland, IE Business School in Madrid, INSEAD in Paris, and Oxford's Saïd Business School. Graduates earn both an MBA from the Kellogg School of Management and an MS in Design Innovation from the Segal Design Institute at the McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science. This seven quarter program begins in the summer before the traditional fall start of the 2Y program.http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/programs/full-time-mba/two-year-mba-program.aspx Kellogg also offers a part-time MBA program aimed towards students who continue to develop their careers as they pursue their MBA degree.  Within the PT-MBA program, Kellogg offers both an evening program and a weekend program. The PT-MBA requires 20.5 credits to complete.  Kellogg also offers an accelerated option for students who have previous academic or industry experience in MBA-relevant subjects (e.g. accounting, marketing, corporate finance, etc.).  The accelerated option only requires 15.5 credits to complete. Students in the evening part-time program typically take 2 classes per quarter, which allows them to finish the program in 2.5 years. Recent changes allow part-time students to take up to 4 classes per quarter. The program must be completed within 5 years of starting, which can be accomplished by taking one class every quarter or by a combination of taking multiple classes per quarter and taking some quarters off. Class for the part-time program are offered at the downtown Chicago campus located at Wieboldt Hall, but students can take classes in Evanston at the Jacobs Center as well. Kellogg also offers Executive MBA program designed for senior and mid career executives. Executives can choose between two campuses - Evanston and Miami and also two schedules - one weekend a month or two weekends a month. Students declaring a finance major may chose to follow the asset management track, a special set of courses offered by the Kellogg finance department. At the core of the asset management track is a yearlong experiential learning course sequence, the Asset Management Practicum (FINC 933, 934, 935, and 936). In the practicum — a for-credit course with limited enrollment — students manage a portfolio under the guidance of faculty from the finance and accounting departments. Currently, the portfolio's value is more than $6.5 million. For the 2014-2015 school year, tuition was $21,250 for full-time students (3-5 courses) and $5,313 per credit hour for part-time students (one credit hour = 1 class) in the full-time program. The 2014–2015 tuition rate for the part-time program is $5,969 per 1 unit course and $2,984.50 per 1/2 credit course. In the 2014 Winter quarter, tuition for a full-time student increased to $19,695, and will be $20,532 in 2015. Tuition for the full 2014-2015 academic year is $61,596 for the Two-Year MBA program and $85,000 for the One-Year MBA program.  In the 2015 Winter quarter the cost per class for part-time students increased to $5,969.00. Tuition and fees covering the 2-year Executive MBA program for cohorts beginning in September 2014 and January 2015 totals $90,042.00. The two-year MMM program, providing an MBA plus an MS in Design Innovation enrolls 60 students annually and it costs $143,630 in total tuition, a slight discount versus the one-year program.   In the most recent rankings of US business schools, Kellogg is ranked #6 by U.S. News & World Report, and #3 by Bloomberg Businessweek. In addition, Kellogg MBA has consistently been ranked #1 in Marketing by U.S News & World Report. Three of the Kellogg School's other executive MBA programs are also highly ranked by the Financial Times. The Kellogg-HKUST Executive MBA Program at the Hong Kong UST Business School is ranked No. 2 in the world, the school's Kellogg-Schulich Executive MBA program at York University in Canada is ranked No. 33 in the world, while the school's Kellogg-WHU Executive MBA program at WHU Business School in Germany is ranked No. 22 in the world.[ ]. Rankings.ft.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. The Kellogg-HKUST Executive MBA Program consistently ranks in the No. 1 position; EMBA was ranked No. 1 in Canada by the Financial Times. Kellogg's Part-Time MBA program was ranked No. 1 by US News & World Report in 2010 and 2012.  More recently, Kellogg's Part Time MBA program was ranked No. 1 by Bloomberg Businessweek. In the 2010 QS Global 200 Business Schools Report Kellogg School was #3 in North America. According to the Global MBA rankings 2015 from the Financial Times, Kellogg is ranked No. 14 in the world.http://rankings.ft.com/businessschoolrankings/global-mba-ranking-2015 In Sep 2015, Forbes ranks Kellogg as #3 in the America's List of Best Business Schools. In 2014, US News ranked Kellogg as #6 in its 2015 list of Best Business Schools. The school belongs to the M7 group of elite MBA programs which recognize each other as peers, consisting of Chicago Booth, Columbia, Harvard, Kellogg, MIT Sloan, Stanford, and Wharton. Kellogg was the first business school in the world to insist that all applicants be interviewed to assess their leadership potential and suitability for the Kellogg School's cooperative environment."Mr. Business-School Boom; What Jacobs Wrought, in a Quarter-Century, at Kellogg," David Leonhardt, The New York Times, May 3, 2000, Section C; p. 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk As a result, in addition to grades, GMAT scores, professional achievement, and demonstrated leadership, 'fit' is an important part of the admissions equation at Kellogg.  Students tend to be very active in impacting the local Evanston and Chicago communities, and frequently collaborate on philanthropic causes.  One example combining the campus culture and passion for giving is the annual Charity Auction Ball, held each Winter quarter. A particularly popular donation in 2013 included the rights to emblazon a student's posterior with a tattoo of the bidder's choosing, which raised over $1,100.letstattoojohn.com Another example of the students' impact on the community takes place at the annual Polar Plunge, when Kellogg students plunge into a frigid Lake Michigan. In 2013, Kellogg participants raised over $25,000 for Special Olympics and were the #1 team in Illinois by both fundraising dollars and number of plungers. Finally, Kellogg Cares, Kellogg's largest philanthropic club, holds events each quarter for the entire community to enjoy. Some of their most popular events include the Holiday Gift Drive and Ugly Sweater Party to benefit underprivileged children in Chicago, the winter Food Fight to support the Chicago Food Depository, and the annual Spring 5K that raises funds for children with terminal illnesses to attend summer camp. When students graduate from the Kellogg School, they join a vibrant and inclusive alumni network that spans the globe and every conceivable industry and endeavor. Alumni are renowned for their commitment to Kellogg ideals and their willingness to help each another, both personally and professionally. Kellogg alumni frequently access the wealth of free, professional career counseling and development resources available to them. The Kellogg Career Management Center also maintains an online database of job opportunities exclusively for Kellogg graduates. More than 80 regional and special interest alumni clubs offer lifelong learning and social opportunities.Map and Directions. Kellogg.northwestern.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Of those that have majored in Entrepreneurship, 85% of alumni have started their own businesses within five years.  Of all of the Kellogg alumni, 25% have started their own businesses. In 2012, Kellogg Innovation and Entrepreneurship Initiative (KIEI) was created to combine and deepen the strength of Kellogg's centers of excellence related to innovation, growth and new business formation. Kellogg students are part of a culture that emphasizes teamwork and leadership skills. Many aspects of the school, from admissions decisions and admitted students weekend to orientation week (attended by all incoming first-year students to introduce them to the Kellogg culture and prepare them for life at Kellogg), are organized and led by students.  In addition, students organize all of Kellogg's 12 annual student conferences, which span topics as diverse as Healthcare, Marketing, High Tech, Private Equity and Venture Capital, and Real Estate. Kellogg's student body comes from a diverse set of backgrounds and provides a unique experience for networking and collaboration. Many applicants attend Day At Kellogg (DAK) after being informed that they have been admitted. The event, which is led by current students, welcomes admits to Kellogg and helps them gain a deeper understanding of Kellogg's academic offerings, professors, clubs, facilities, and culture. Throughout DAK, admits are organized into sections, which mirror those of students after they matriculate. Sections then take mini-courses with Kellogg professors, compete in various challenges, such as obstacle courses, and are provided with dinners, housing tours, and similar events. Ultimately, DAK is designed not only to be an exciting introduction to the school, but also to provide admits with the information they need to make a decision about whether to attend Kellogg. Prior to on-campus orientation many new incoming students go on a Kellogg Worldwide Experiences and Service Trips (KWEST) to destinations all over the world for a week with 25 of their future classmates. These trips are organized and led by second year students. Full-time Kellogg students are grouped into 8 sections (commonly referred to as cohorts at other top business schools): the Poets, winners of the 2014 CIM competition and 2014 flag football intra-collegiate championship, Cash Cows, Highlanders, Bucketheads, Bullfrogs, Big Dogs, Jive Turkeys and Moose. Sections socialize and engage in competition during the first few weeks of Kellogg's orientation, called its Complete Immersion in Management (CIM). Most students also take first year core courses with their respective sections. Students completing their graduate studies in an extended 1-year program are designated to one of two sections, the Roadrunners or Hedgehogs. All students enrolled in a course offered by the Kellogg School of Management agree to abide by the Kellogg Honor Code. The purpose of the Kellogg Honor Code is to promote these qualities so that each student can fully develop his or her individual potential. Students who violate the Kellogg Honor Code violate this agreement and must accept the sanction(s) imposed by the Kellogg community.[36] Kellogg is also known for its amazing entirely student-led performing arts groups. "Special K!" is a student-created musical comedy sketch show performed annually, consisting of live skits and digital shorts, to poke fun as well as celebrate life at business school. The theme of the 2012-2013 show was "The Book of Kellogg" and the theme of the 2013-2014 was "#BusinessKollege." Special K's audio-visual hijinks extend beyond the performing stage. The production's most recent LipDub video showcasing Kellogg's modern facilities and diverse student wardrobes can be found online. Every year, the alumni of the previous year's "Special K!" come back to perform in front of the incoming students. Kellogg is also home to two cover bands, "The Rocket Pockets" and "Captains of Industry", who perform at Kellogg events. These bands are formed by Kellogg students and new performers are added every year at an audition at Kellogg in the fall. The bands often play on Tuesday nights at local bars around Evanston and also have an annual Battle of the Bands competition with the bands from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The "Captains of Industry" placed first at the 2014 Battle of the Bands. As part of its student-led culture, Kellogg offers a wide array of clubs for students to take significant involvement in. These include professional clubs where the student body strengthens and builds relationships with world-leading external companies (examples include the consulting, investment banking, media and entertainment, and marketing clubs), athletic clubs where students have the opportunity to compete against both other Kellogg teams and students from other leading business schools (examples include basketball, flag football, hockey, rugby and soccer), cultural clubs where students can connect with other students with similar backgrounds (examples include the India Business Club, Asian Business Association, Hispanic Management Association, Black Management Association, Women's Business Association and the Gay & Lesbian Management Association), personal improvement and training clubs (such as the public speaking club and Improv club) and social/community service clubs where students have the opportunity to enjoy similar passions in a setting conducive to forming strong bonds with their peers (examples include Brew n' Q, Kellogg Cares, Cork & Screw and Kellogg Volunteers). Kellogg students also have the opportunity to lead and plan an international academic course called Global Immersion in Management or "GIM", which takes place in winter quarter. Students participate in 10 weeks of coursework paired with 12 days of travel and meetings in country. While target countries and regions are pre-selected by Kellogg Global Programs each year, student leaders work with faculty to coordinate detailed plenary sessions with global companies, government officials, and international alumni. Each year, approximately 150 students attend GIM trips with 4 -5 student leaders per trip planning the in country experience. Each fall quarter, first year students form groups to participate in the Kellogg Marketing Competition. Each group is assigned a product and given three weeks to market their products. The process culminates in a TG marketplace where each team sets up a booth to display and sell their product. Fellow students, professors and administration are given tickets with which they can purchase products. A winner is determined by number of products sold. On Friday, during the academic quarter, students meet at 5pm in the Jacobs center for an event called TG. People from the Kellogg community come together to unwind and catch up. Refreshments are served and the event is typically sponsored by student clubs, companies or other on campus organizations (rotated weekly between organizations). There is also a weekly TG for the families of students, where children eat pizza, watch movies, and have costume parties while students and significant others chat. Each December, Kellogg students embark on a week-long ski trip to celebrate the end of the fall term. The trip destination is a secret until a special Reveal Party typically held in May.  In recent years, the trip has been to Telluride, CO (2011) and Steamboat Springs, CO (2012), Breckenridge, CO (2013), and Aspen, CO (2014). The trip is planned and led by the Kellogg Ski and Snowboard Club and is the largest MBA ski trip of its kind by revenue and participation with 800 participants. In addition to skiing, the trip features daily Apres Ski social gatherings and nightly themed costume parties. On Tuesday nights, Kellogg students network at nearby bars, as there are no classes on Wednesdays. The most popular bar used to be The Keg; however, in April 2013 it closed. Now, students go to other bars such as World of Beer, 27 Live, JTs, Nevins and more recently, Banger and Lace. On occasion, Kellogg students can be found at the Mark II Lounge, a popular undergraduate bar also known as "The Deuce." Kellogg students in the part-time program are known to frequent bars located in downtown Chicago's Streeterville neighborhood close to Wieboldt Hall.  Timothy O'Toole's is the most popular of these bars primarily because it is across the street from the primary parking garage Kellogg students utilize. Students who enjoy a more upscale experience frequent D4, yet another nearby Irish Bar. Kellogg offers plenty of opportunities to its students to get involved. A wide array of student run clubs and organizations are available for all Kellogg students to participate in. These groups sponsor industry-specific networking events (Healthcare Club and Hi-Tech Club) to help students learn about the latest industry trends or to find like-minded peers. They also provide a terrific opportunity for students to develop their leadership skills. Since 1982, spouses and significant others of Kellogg students have been able to participate in the Joint Venture (JV) program, which enables spouses, girlfriends, boyfriends, partners, and families to fully participate in Kellogg life, including clubs and organizations, and Kellogg events.  Approximately 35 to 40 percent of Kellogg students have significant others, and the current JV membership includes approximately 250 couples, representing over 20 countries.  In addition to the JV Program, "Kellogg Kids" connects spouses and partners of Kellogg students with children through field trips, music classes, birthday parties, and many more family-friendly events. Kellogg is known for its collaborative culture as opposed to a more competitive environment in most of the other top business schools. Most of the classes require several group works during classes or outside which require acute interpersonal skills from the students.  Students take great pride in Kellogg's diverse community and strongly believe in respecting one another's viewpoints. Kellogg's distinct culture is characterized by a collaborative and courageous spirit.http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/about/transforming/priorities/brand-culture.aspx Unlike many peer schools, Kellogg does disclose grades to on campus recruiters. The issue of grade disclosure was last voted on by students in 2005, and a process exists whereby Kellogg students can vote to change the policy.http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/student/ksa/site/KSA2010/docs_secure/Grade%20Disclosure%20Policy%20Evaluation.pdf There are many cultural clubs at Kellogg, which represent diversity in Kellogg community. Some notable clubs are Middle East and North Africa Club, India Business Club, Asia Management Association, Black Management Association, Catholics at Kellogg, Muslim Cultural Business Association etc. In addition to the Kellogg School campuses in Evanston, Chicago, and Miami, the Kellogg School partners with institutions abroad that share its commitment to academic excellence and a global understanding of management. Kellogg's partner institutions are leaders in business education in Asia, Europe, South America, Australia, the Middle East and Canada. Kellogg students have the opportunity to study abroad in fall or winter of their second year on six continents. The exchange partner schools offer the opportunity to learn about business from a different perspective, experience another culture, and network with students, faculty, and professionals from around the world. The International Exchange Program at the Kellogg School was started in 1980 with a vision to promote a cultural interchange of ideas and provide a greater understanding of cross-cultural trade and business practices. Since that time, more than 1,000 Kellogg School students have participated in the Exchange Program with schools from over 20 countries, including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Italy, Mexico, Scotland, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, The Netherlands, Thailand, and U.K. Beginning in 1996, Kellogg established joint Executive MBA programs with the Recanati Graduate School of Management at Tel Aviv University in Israel; WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management in Vallendar, Germany; Guanghua School of Management at Peking University and the School of Business and Management at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in China; INSEAD Campuses in France and Singapore; and the Schulich School of Management at York University in Toronto. To further increase their understanding of global business issues, the Kellogg EMBA program offers students a one-of-a-kind opportunity to complete an elective course during Live-In Week at one of the Kellogg School's Global Partner Institutions in Tel Aviv, Israel; Vallendar, Germany; Toronto, Canada; or Hong Kong. Kellogg offers joint executive MBA degree programs with—and grant Kellogg degrees to—these schools:  Kellogg has a global alumni network of over 55,000 entrepreneurs, innovators and experts across every conceivable industry and endeavor.  Alumni have the opportunity to network, socialize, and participate in activities with over 60 active regional alumni clubs and more than 20 special interest clubs.  To build the alumni community, Kellogg has set up the Kellogg Alumni Council (KAC) to serve as champions and ambassadors of Kellogg that strengthen and enrich the alumni network.  In 2012 there were active KAC members in North America, Latin America, Europe and Asia. Current Kellogg students are encouraged to interact with alumni on a number of levels, most recently, the Part-Time MBA program introduced the Kellogg Alumni Mentorship Program (KAMP).  KAMP asks current students and alumni to fill out a short survey and then matches mentors and mentees by areas of interest.Kellogg Alumni Network | Kellogg School of Management | Northwestern University. Kelloggalumni.northwestern.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14.  Alumni Clubs like The Kellogg Alumni Club of Chicago (KACC) provide an opportunity to enrich your connections, careers and lives through an ongoing array of social, professional development and networking events that are offered exclusively to Kellogg alumni living in the Chicago area.Kellogg Alumni Network | Kellogg School of Management | Northwestern University. Kelloggalumni.northwestern.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Kellogg offers a wide range of career management services to both current students and alumni. The breadth of services provided include career coaching with academic advisers and career counselors, self assessments for students, networking resources, resume preparation, interview preparation, on-campus recruiting, career development series, videos, handouts and special alumni services. Kellogg's Career Management Center(CMC) also offers a highly personalized series of leadership assessment and career development sessions for part-time students. The Leadership Career Series(LCS) is a focused, highly personalized, co-curricular series of four, full-day sessions complemented with self-directed virtual modules scheduled at key milestones throughout one's Part-Time MBA Program experience. In 2011, more than 120 companies came to recruit on-campus and 475 companies hired Kellogg students for full-time and internship positions. From the school's 2014 employment statistics, 35.4% of Kellogg MBA graduates were placed in careers in consulting, followed by 13.9% in financial services and 18.4% in the high-tech industry.http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/career_employer/employment_statistics.aspx From 2013 to 2014, the percentage of Kellogg students pursuing careers in technology increased from 12% to 18%.   Arthur Andersen, founder of the auditing firm bearing his name, member of faculty between 1909 and 1922; member of the Northwestern University Board of Trustees from 1933–34. Ali Babacan, Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey Bala V. Balachandran, J. L. Kellogg Distinguished Professor of Accounting and Information Management Efraim Benmelech, Harold L. Stuart Professor of Finance Ronald Dye, faculty member since 1986, Chairman of Department of Accounting & Information Management since 2001 and Leonard Spacek Professor of Accounting Information & Management. Christopher Galvin, served as the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Motorola from 1997 to 2003 Shane Greenstein, an expert on the business economics of computing, communications and the internet and the chair of the Management and Strategy Department from 2002 to 2005. Ravi Jagannathan, Chicago Mercantile Exchange/John F. Sandner Professor of Finance. Philip Kotler, #4 management guru of all time as ranked by the Financial Times and marketing scholar Marvin Manheim, William A. Patterson Distinguished Professor of Transportation Dale T. Mortensen, Awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2010 for his work on the search and matching theory of frictional unemployment. J. Keith Murnighan, Harold H. Hines Jr. Distinguished Professor of Risk Management Roger Myerson, faculty between 1976 and 2001; winner of the 2007 Nobel Prize in Economics Mark Satterthwaite, A.C. Buehler Professor in Hospital and Heath Services Management. Mohanbir Sawhney, pioneer in the field of technology management, and selected as one of the 25 most influential people in e-Business as ranked by Businessweek in May 2000. Dr. Prabha Sinha, Co-Founder of ZS Associates, was an Associate Professor of Marketing at the Kellogg School of Management until 1987 Robert J. Weber, the Frederic E. Nemmers Professor of Decision Sciences. Oprah Winfrey, the American media proprietor, talk show host, actress, producer, and philanthropist, taught a Dynamics of Leadership course until 2001. Robert C. Wolcott, Co-Founder and Executive Director of the Kellogg Innovation Network (KIN). Andris A. Zoltners, Co-Founder of ZS Associates, is a Frederic Esser Nemmers Distinguished Professor Emeritus of Marketing at Kellogg, where he had been a faculty member for more than 30 years. Dean Sally Blount, the current dean of the school, teaches a course on Leadership: Power, Politics & Talk Tim Calkins, clinical professor of marketing, teaches marketing strategy. Expert on Super Bowl advertising, created the Kellogg Super Bowl Advertising Review in 2005 School of Business and Management at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in Hong Kong Recanati Graduate School of Management at Tel Aviv University in Israel WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management in Germany Schulich School of Business at York University in Toronto, Canada Guanghua School of Management at Peking University in Beijing, China Booz Allen Hamilton, Founded by Edwin G. Booz and James L. Allen Arthur Andersen, Founded by Arthur E. Andersen OpenTable, Founded by Chuck Templeton FishingEnthusiast, Founded by David Hasebroock Fieldglass, Founded by Jai Shekhawat, '96 Kayak.com, Founded by Steve Hafner, '97I Have A Kellogg MBA | Kellogg School of Management | Northwestern University. Alumni.kellogg.northwestern.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Wind Point Partner, Founded by S. Curtis Johnson IIIS. Johnson: Executive Profile & Biography - Businessweek. Investing.businessweek.com (1999-12-08). Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Ethos Water, Founded by Peter Thum and Jonathan GreenblattEthos' co-founder turns water into more than just a drink - Chicago Tribune. Articles.chicagotribune.com (2006-11-19). Retrieved on 2013-07-14. Honey-Can-Do International, Founded by Steve Greenspon Element Bars, Founded by Jonathon Miller, as seen on Shark Tank ZS Associates, Founded by Andris A. Zoltners and Prabhakant Sinha BrideSide.com, Founded by Sonali Lamba and Nicole Staple One Acre Fund, Founded by Andrew Youn Booz Allen Hamilton List of business schools in the United States List of United States business school rankings Business school Northwestern University
