    Kennywood is an amusement park located in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania. The park first opened as a "trolley park" attraction at the end of the Mellon family's Monongahela Street Railway on May 30, 1899. It was purchased in 1906 by F. W. Henninger and Andrew McSwigan who later formed the Kennywood Entertainment Company, which owned and operated the park as a closely held family business for over 100 years. Kennywood was purchased by California-based Palace Entertainment in 2007. The amusement park features various structures and rides dating back to the early 1900s. Along with Rye Playland Park, it is one of only two amusement parks listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Kennywood is approximately  from Downtown Pittsburgh, in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania. The park is along Pennsylvania Route 837, known as Kennywood Boulevard as it passes through the borough. The closest Interstate connection is Exit 77 (Edgewood/Swissvale) on Interstate 376. The Mon–Fayette Expressway will eventually go past Kennywood, which will prompt an expansion of the park when it is built.http://triblive.com/opinion/ericheyl/9806391-74/expressway-kennywood-park Historically, the park is on the location of the July 9, 1755 Battle of the Monongahela, where British general Edward Braddock was mortally wounded, ending his expedition to capture the French Fort Duquesne during the French and Indian War. George Washington was a colonel to Braddock, and fought at the battle before they retreated.Hahner, pg. 9 Later the land on the bluff above the Monongahela River was part of a farm owned by Anthony Kenny. Starting around the time of the American Civil War, the site was a popular picnic grove for locals, known as "Kenny's Grove".  A tree-filled portion of a farm owned by Anthony Kenny, known as "Kenny's Grove" overlooking the Monongahela River near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania was a popular picnic spot for local residents since the American Civil War. In 1898, the Monongahela Street Railways Company, partially owned by prominent banker Andrew Mellon, seeking to increase fare profits on the weekends, leased the land from the Kenny family in order to create a trolley park at the end of their line.  The company's chief engineer, George S. Davidson, designed the original layout of the park and served as its first manager. A carousel, casino hall, and dance pavilion were added in 1899. A bandstand was constructed in 1900, while the Old Mill was constructed in 1901, and the park's first roller coaster, the Figure Eight Toboggan, was added in 1902.Hahner, pg. 14 After less than a decade, the trolley company no longer wanted to manage the park. The standing manager, Andrew S. McSwigan, along with partners Frederick W. Henninger and A. F. Meghan, leased and operated the park as Kennywood Park Limited beginning in 1906.  From its origin as a working-class picnic entertainment destination, the park grew in the first half of the twentieth century into a popular attraction that combined thrill rides with recreation venues such as swimming pools and dance halls. Kennywood ceased to be served by streetcar when Mon Street Railways successor Pittsburgh Railways Company converted the route serving it, the lengthy #68 Duquesne-McKeesport line, to bus on September 15, 1958. The park was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 1987. and  Today, the park features a nostalgic atmosphere and is supported by a loyal fan base. As of December 2007, Kennywood Entertainment also ran Sandcastle Waterpark [ ], which opened in 1989; Idlewild Park [ ] near Ligonier; Story Land [ ], a children's theme park in Glen, New Hampshire; and Lake Compounce [ ], New England's family theme park in Bristol, Connecticut, which is the oldest continuously operating amusement park in North America. On December 12, 2007, Kennywood Entertainment announced that it would be selling Kennywood Park, along with four other amusement parks in the Northeastern United States, to Parques Reunidos, a company based in Madrid, Spain. Kennywood now uses the slogan "America's Finest Traditional Amusement Park" as well as "Make a New Memory," although from the 1960s through the early 1990s the slogan was "The Roller Coaster Capital of the World." (a title which is now being used by Cedar Point) The property features three old wooden roller coasters still in working order, along with two newer steel coasters, the Phantom's Revenge (2001) and the Sky Rocket (2010), and one indoor coaster, the Exterminator (1999). Through the years, the phrase "Kennywood's open!" has gained an alternate meaning and is often used in the Pittsburgh region to alert another person that the zipper on his/her pants is open. For the past several years, Kennywood has been rated the "Favorite 'Dark Attraction Park'" by the Darkride And Funhouse Enthusiasts, or DAFE.[ ]  It ranked second to Cedar Point in the category of "Favorite Park" in Theme Park Magazine's 2004 Reader's Choice Awards. Kennywood has made use of the hilly Pittsburgh terrain to create coasters that wouldn't be feasible in some amusement parks. The Thunderbolt and the Jack Rabbit, both wooden coasters, place the lift chain in the middle of the ride, not at the beginning. In both cases, the car leaves the station and drops into a valley for its first hill. Phantom's Revenge uses the same valley as the Thunderbolt, where the Phantom's second drop passes through the supports of the Thunderbolt's first drop, making the second drop the longest and steepest drop in the ride. Kennyville Theater  (2015) Blue Sky Studio/FOX Animation This is Kennywood park's first theater style attraction and will Show its first year ICE Age: No Time For Nuts 4D Phantom Fright Nights is a Halloween event held at Kennywood on Friday and Saturday nights during the month of October. The park typically opens at seven in the evening and closes at one in the morning. The event began in 2002, though the concept of theming an amusement park for Halloween is not new. "Phantom Fright Nights" received third place in the Golden Ticket Awards for best Halloween event in 2007. Labor Day traditionally marked the end of the season and the park would shut down until the spring. In 2002, Kennywood decided to break the long-standing tradition and turn almost half of the park into a giant Halloween extravaganza. The park's initial trial of Phantom Fright Nights in 2002 consisted of four traditional haunted houses, with only a few rides and roller coasters in operation. Despite the relatively limited scope of the opening year, the experiment proved to be a success, and new areas of the park and rides are opened for the festivities every year. In 2004 Kennywood debuted Gory Park, a haunted zone in Lost Kennywood. The following year, 2005, the park managed to have 3/4 of the rides and attractions operable due to high demand and record-breaking crowds. The park has reported attendance greater for one Fright Night than they have on a good normal operating day. In the spirit of Halloween season, the park itself is given a complete make-over, with costumed actors roaming the paths, spooky music filling the air, and fog blanketing the park and every light bulb in the park is changed to a different color—even the restroom windows are covered in colored films. The merry-go-round horse normally found in the fountain by the entrance is replaced by a giant Phantom-like figure with glowing red eyes hovering over bubbling red blood (dyed water). In some places sheets are hung up and classic horror movies are played, such as the original "House on Haunted Hill". Several areas of the park, including Kiddieland and Lost Kennywood, are turned into open-air haunted attractions. Other buildings, such as the Penny Arcade and the Parkside Terrace Cafe, are converted into more traditional haunted houses. Some rides are given entirely new lighting and fog effects including strobes and blacklights, or in the Exterminator's case, an absolute absence of light. In the case of the Carousel and Müsik-Express, Halloween-themed music is all that is played. Even the entrance tunnel is affected; a great amount of fog is pumped into the passageway and chainsaw-wielding characters stalk unsuspecting guests as they enter. These ghouls are also found throughout the park when least expected. Kennywood discourages children under the age of thirteen from attending the park during Phantom Fright Nights as the atmosphere may be too intense for some younger children, but letting children attend is solely at the discretion of parents or guardians. Many children go to Fright Nights anyway, even with the suggestion since Kennywood will admit attendees of any age. Indoor Haunts Outdoor Haunts Haunted Midways Past/Changed Haunts Kennywood's world-renowned reputation and nationwide popularity has led to its mention and appearance in many forms of media, including TV shows, movies, books, records, and has even warranted a reason to film a documentary about the park's history. Television Movies Literature Song Documentary Asterisks (*) indicate number of times a ride was replaced or re-introduced. Kennywood employs weapon-certified security officers that have the ability to make arrests that are supported by the district's local police force.  A famous case resulting from a 1986 arrest of a park visitor for drug possession went all the way to the Pennsylvania Superior Court in 1988, which ruled in favor of the park's security force. The defendant had unsuccessfully attempted to have the evidence suppressed.http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=SHQcAAAAIBAJ&sjid=xGMEAAAAIBAJ&pg=3339%2C6164133       Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Type Description Jack Rabbit (1920)  John A. Miller Wooden A wooden out and back roller coaster, one of the oldest running in the world. The Jack Rabbit is famous for its double dip, lifting riders out of their seat. It is also one of the few remaining coasters operating with only a seatbelt to restrain passengers. Racer (1927)  John A. Miller Wooden Moebius A wooden racing roller coaster with a track that is looped over on itself to create the appearance of two separate, parallel tracks; the ride in fact consists of one track referred to as a moebius track. The winning side is the one that passes the black and white checkered finish line above the brake run just before the station, and is signaled by one of two red lights on either side of the operators' booth. This is one of four rides that use a bell to signal its start and stop. Thunderbolt (1924)  Andy Vettel Sr./John A. Miller Wooden A wooden roller coaster that resulted from a renovation of the Pippin. It was ranked the Ultimate Roller Coaster and King of Coasters by the New York Times in 1974.  The coaster is unusual in that the lift hill isn't immediately out of the station. Instead, the lift hill is in the middle of the ride. Exterminator (1999)  Reverchon Spinning Wild Mouse It is a roller coaster and a dark ride. The coaster has heavily themed scenery, even in the queue. Phantom's Revenge (2001)  D. H. Morgan/Arrow Dynamics Steel Hypercoaster A steel coaster that resulted from renovating the 1991 Steel Phantom. After the 2000 season, the coaster was heavily modified by D. H. Morgan, including the removal of all inversions due to complaints of uncomfortable shoulder restraints. The ride is unusual because the second drop is longer than the first. Although the first hill is only  tall, it is still considered a hyper-coaster because its maximum drop exceeds a  change in elevation. Sky Rocket (2010)  Premier Rides Steel Launched coaster. A steel coaster and Kennywood's newest coaster. It is the first coaster at the park to feature inversions since Steel Phantom. The trains feature waist and shin restraints rather than traditional over the shoulder restraints. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Model Description Aero 360 (2000)  Zamperla Hawk 48 This ride is a modern, open-air version of the park's old Ranger ride and features the Kennywood arrows on the rotating arms.  Seated on inverted seats with legs freely dangling, riders swing back and forth – higher and higher with each pendulum motion. As momentum builds, the ride culminates by spinning riders the full 360 degrees. Auto Race (1930)  Traver Engineering Auto Train Also known by several veterans as the Auto Ride, this ride is the last of its kind and was designed by Harry Traver of the Traver Engineering Company. Electric cars run through a trough-like wooden track that twists and turns. When the ride opened in 1930, it had several small hills placed in the track, but these were soon removed to avoid rear-end collisions that were caused when cars could not get up and over them on rainy days. Again to avoid rear-end collisions, the ride was fully computer automated and the cars slowed down for the 2014 season. Bayern Kurve (2009)  Anton Schwarzkopf Bayern Kurve Riders sit in one of the sixteen cars that travel at a high-speed around a circular, single-hilled track. Riders start in an upright position and as the cars pick up speed, they tilt inward toward the center of the ride. This ride is also known for its loud air horn which, along with the sound of the moving vehicles, is reminiscent of a diesel train.  A popular ride since 1968, this is the third Bayern Kurve that the park has installed. Black Widow (2012)  Zamperla Giant Discovery The ride seats 40 people and swings riders back and forth like a pendulum, reaching speeds up to 68&nbsp;mph. The ride structure stands at 90&nbsp;ft and at the peak of the pendulum's swing height riders will hang 146&nbsp;ft off the ground. The ride replaced the Pittfall drop tower ride. Cosmic Chaos (2007)  Zamperla Mega Disk'O The ride seats 24 people on a giant disk. Riders sit upon motorcycle-like pedestal seats with back restraints. Arms and legs are free from restraint and the passenger faces outward. To a top height of 50&nbsp;ft, the disk begins its untamed flight along the 120&nbsp;ft concave track while its passengers spin around in circle. Gran Prix (1973)  Reverchon Bumper Cars The ride was added as a replacement for the Scooters bumper car ride and eliminated the need for a center divider and one way traffic. It runs 40 two-passenger cars, one of which, #31, is painted black and gold in honor of Mike Logan of the Pittsburgh Steelers football team, who mentioned the park after the Steelers won Super Bowl XL. It is one of four rides at Kennywood with a ride start/stop bell and its bell was actually salvaged from the Scooters building. Riders steer their cars in any direction across the metal rectangular floor bumping other cars out of their way. Kangaroo (1962)  John Norman Bartlett Flying Coaster The last ride of its kind; purchased in 1962. During the ride, eight cars travel a circular track with a single steep hill. After "bouncing" off the top of the hill, the cars then make a slow descent in midair back down to the track, giving each guest the sensation of flying. Its resemblance of a Kangaroo's leap is what inspired its name. Merry-Go-Round (1927)  William H. Dentzel Carousel Referred to as the Grand Carousel by many, the Merry-Go-Round is a Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation Historic Landmark and is Kennywood's third and largest carousel. Originally intended for the 1926 Philadelphia Sesqui-Centennial Exposition, it was not completed in time and was purchased by Kennywood. It is also the last carousel that was ever built by William Dentzel. There are 50 jumping and 14 stationary horses. The only two non-horse animals featured on the ride are the tiger and the lion. It is one of four rides at Kennywood with a ride start/stop bell that dates back to the origin of the ride and features over 1500 lights. Music is provided by a 1916 Wurlitzer Style #153 Military Band Organ, which is the oldest of its kind in existence, and possibly the first of more than 140 style #153 organs built between 1916 and 1936. During Phantom Fright Nights, the carousel is filled with fog, decorated in colored lights (in a different color pattern each year) and various figures are placed on the outer row of animals and Halloween music is played on the band organ. During Holiday Lights, the carousel is decorated in wreaths and garland, with red and green lights, and Christmas music (arranged by a New Kensington, Pennsylvania native) playing on the band organ. Musik Express (1987)  Mack Rides Music Express Musik Express is a quick circular ride that travels clockwise around an undulating track. It has a white/red loading/running lighting theme, respectively. The ride has a 1960s/1970s rock theme to it with yellow and green being the theme colors of the ride. During Phantom Fright Nights, mostly Halloween related music is played. During Holiday lights, Christmas music is played. Paratrooper (1959)  Frank Hrubetz Paratrooper Originally called the SkyDiver, this ride has ten umbrella-covered cars which rotate counter-clockwise on a long arm. During the ride, the hydraulic-powered arm the cars are mounted to raises to a 45 degree angle. Pirate (1982)  Huss Pirate Boat This is a large pirate-themed boat suspended from a giant "A" frame structure mounted to a trailer. The trailer is hidden behind a retaining wall surrounded by landscaping. The boat swings back and forth until it achieves a height of  and is at a 75-degree angle with its initial resting position, giving riders the sensation of weightlessness. Originally the "helm" of the ship was facing the road, but after Kennywood renovated the ride under Huss's supervision, the direction of the boat was flipped so that the "helm' now faces Noah's Ark. Swing Shot (2006)  S&S Worldwide Air-Launched Screamin' Swing One of the first 32 passenger models of the S&S Screamin' Swing to debut. It is a giant swing that swings riders back and forth, reaching a height of  at a 120 degree angle and reaching speeds of . This ride stands where the WipeOut once stood. Initially the ride was plagued with downtime due to the plastic air chambers leaking. Since installing the redesigned steel air tanks, the ride has been more reliable. Turtle (1927)  Traver Engineering Company Tumble Bug This is a bumpy-track or undulating ride with six cars that travel counter-clockwise on a circular track over a series of three hills and dips. Originally called the Tumble Bug, the ride featured bug-themed cars until it received new turtle-like exteriors. The Turtle is one of only two operating rides of its kind and the only known Turtle variant of the Tumble Bug left in existence. Volcano (1978)  Huss Enterprise This ride was originally called the Enterprise until the addition of the Volcano Valley themed area. As the Enterprise, the loading platform was surrounded by a blue railing and was raised by a retaining wall that was surrounded by shrubbery. As the Volcano, the shrubbery has been replaced with a mountain landscape that covers the original retaining wall and railing. It has 20 swinging gondolas, which travel in a circular clockwise motion on a large wheel. Once it achieves a fast enough speed, the wheel raises riders to a 90-degree angle and spins the riders upside down.  In the past, this ride featured eruption-themed special effects including sound, fog, and lighting. Only the fog effect is still operational and is almost exclusively used during Phantom Fright Nights. Wave Swinger (1984)  Zierer Wave Swinger 48 This ride is a trailer-mounted wicker swing ride with the trailer placed in a pit to make the ride flush to the ground and ADA accessible, unlike the usual trailer setup.  It has a white/red loading/running lighting theme, respectively, and features a painting in the center of a decorative molding on each exterior panel. Whip (1918)  W.F. Mangels 16 Car Whip It is the oldest flat ride in the park and the last operating 16 car whip. The ride's 16 cars travel along an oblong track and "whip" as they go around the bend at either end. The Whip was relocated from the Log Jammer Pavilion to Lost Kennywood in 1995 and is one of four rides in Kennywood with a ride start/stop bell that dates back to the origin of the ride. In 2002, a park guest was killed when the ride's pavilion collapsed during a microburst. The pavilion has not been rebuilt, but replaced with a white wooden fence and surrounded by flagpoles. The openness of the ride makes it unique as most Whips are sheltered under pavilions. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Model Description Skycoaster (1994) Sky Fun 1 Skycoaster A  tall giant swing, allowing one to three riders at a time to free-fall approximately   above the park's lagoon. This is the first Skycoaster model to be permanently installed in an amusement park. When the Skycoaster opened, it was the world's tallest version of this ride. This ride requires an extra fee. Paddle Boats (1981) Pedal Boats The park's only remaining human-powered attraction. Riders paddle through the park's lagoon in any path they choose. This ride requires an extra fee. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Model Description Garfield's Nightmare (2004)  Halloween Productions Old Mill A dark ride in bright 3D fluorescent colors under black light. The ride scenes feature characters from the Garfield comic strip and cartoons. This is the oldest ride at Kennywood, though it has gone through numerous major theme and structural changes throughout its existence. The scenes inside this vintage dark attraction have featured "gorgeous grottos" from around the world including Hawaii and Australia. Prior to 2004, this attraction featured scenery of a mine haunted by ghosts, ghouls, and skeletons, as well as three outdoor scenes. In 2004 all scenes became enclosed to ensure a continuous 3D blacklight effect. Ghostwood Estate (2008)  Halloween Productions/ETF Ride Systems Trackless Interactive Dark ride Riders begin by standing in a "library/study" room when Lord Kenneth (the owner of the estate) literally forces himself out of a picture frame. He informs riders of the spirits and how you will be able to drive them from his home so that he may regain his solitude. Each rider then walks up a flight of stairs and approaches the trackless "Ghost Buggies". Each guest is provided with a "Ghost Blaster" to help them eliminate the ghosts. The ride features animatronics, props, elaborate sets, and computer-generated animation. Noah's Ark (1936)  Herbert Paul Schmeck of the Philadelphia Toboggan Company Noah's Ark A walk-through "dark" attraction. Patrons walk through an ark recreating Noah's attempt at bringing animals aboard. This ride, the last operating of its kind in the world, was remodeled in 1996. During the remodeling, the Ark was entirely rebuilt due to structural problems with the original "boat." Instead of entering through a whale's mouth, patrons now board an industrial service elevator that provides the effect of rising, then crashing to the ground. Part of the re-theming of the ride includes props meant to appear like ancient artifacts that were found below the Ark. Older gags no longer part of the ark included air jets that would shoot up from the ground to catch a girl wearing a skirt off guard. One popular classic gag, the shaker boards, still remains. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Model Description Log Jammer (1975)  Arrow Dynamics Log Flume A fiberglass log flume water ride and a water roller coaster, which runs through the wooded area in the back of the park. It was the park's first multimillion-dollar project, built in 1975 and consisting of two lifts, a spillway that is  high, and a  high chute. Pittsburg  Plunge (1995)  Hopkins Rides Shoot the Chute The centerpiece attraction in Lost Kennywood, this is a Shoot-the-Chute ride named for the brief period in the 1890s when Pittsburgh dropped the "h" from its name. It runs with two 20-passenger boats at a time that are designed to look like the shoot-the-chutes boats of old amusement parks. This ride can soak both the passengers and nearby onlookers with water. Raging Rapids (1985)  Intamin River Rapids Ride This ride was opened in 1985 and simulates a white-water rafting trip through canyons and beneath waterfalls. Three pumps are constantly filling the cement trough with 93,000 gallons of water each minute. During the first season, the first holding pool had an operating wave machine. Since 1986, wooden guide rails have sent rafts continuously through the former wave pool without stoppage. The gates at the exit of the pool are constantly held open and the wave machine is still visible, but deactivated. Also, shortly before the lift at the end of the ride there used to be a figure of a man aiming a water gun at passengers. This effect is no longer part of the ride. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Type Description Kenny's Parkway (1996)  CTEC Inc. Chairlift This is the only ride on the list of attractions located outside the park gates. It is a chairlift meant to carry guests between the park entrance and the uppermost parking lot, while providing an aerial view of the park below. It operates seasonally based on crowd levels. Olde Kennywood Railroad (1945)  Miniature Train A  narrow gaugeSeptember 2007 diary train ride along the top of the cliff at the rear of the park with various displays and a recording that tells about park history (prior to the 2009 season, it also told Western Pennsylvania history).  The locomotives are from the 1939 New York World's Fair, have a gasoline-powered engine, and were installed in the park in 1945.  The crossing sign, tunnel, and Raging Rapids Overlook were removed in 2012.  The rocking train, originally featured on the roof of the station, was rebuilt in 2013. Ride/Year Opened Manufacturer/Designer Description Crazy Trolley (2001) Zamperla Added in 2001, this ride kicked off a rehabilitation and expansion project for Kiddieland. Placed on a new midway that replaced the Safety City jeep ride, this is a miniature version of the park’s former Flying Carpet ride. It is themed to the Kennywood trolley bus that used to lead the Fall Fantasy parades and roam the streets of Pittsburgh (a new bus in different colors was purchased in 2008). Adults may ride. Dizzy Dynamo (1970) San Antonio Roller Works A unique ride, in which riders sit in one of eight cars mounted to a circular platform. As the platform begins to spin, so does each individual car, in alternating directions. Finally, the whole ride tilts over. This ride has an umbrella over top of it as well, and adults are allowed to ride. Elephant Parade (1987) Zamperla A ride reminiscent of Disney's iconic Dumbo the Flying Elephant, which allows children to fly an elephant using a lever to control the height. Elephant Parade spins in the clockwise direction. Kenny's Karousel (1924) W.F. Mangels It is one of Kiddieland's original rides. This miniature merry-go-round actually pre-dates the park's full sized version. It was refurbished for the 2009 season. Lil' Phantom (1996) Molina & Son's The park’s kiddie coaster. Added in 1996, this is a modern coaster in the style of classic coasters manufactured by Allan Herschell. The ride was rehabbed, overhauled, and rebuilt for the 2007 season. Adults can ride. Orbiter (1982) Zamperla On this ride, children ride around in a circle in either a helicopter or a Transformers-esque robot. The ride lifts and tilts as it operates. Pounce Bounce (2002) Zamperla Kiddieland’s expansion was continued with the addition of this ride, a miniature of the Pitt Fall located in the center of the area where ornamental structures once stood. As its name suggests, the car gently bounces up and down the tower. The tower is themed to look like cheese, and mice from the Garfield comic series appear on the sides. A Garfield statue is mounted at the top. Adults can ride. Red Baron (1979) Chance A common kiddie ride, loosely based on the iconic real-life story of World War I pilot Manfred von Richthofen. On this ride, children pilot a plane in a circle, using a lever to control the height. Red Baron spins in the counter-clockwise direction. S. S. Kenny (2007) Zamperla The most recent addition to Kiddieland, added in 2007. This ride is a miniature version of the Cosmic Chaos, which was added to the park the same year. As the colorful boat vehicle goes back and forth on a U-shaped ramp, the boat spins. This ride replaced the Kiddieland Magic Show after one season of operation, which itself replaced the Kiddie Cadillac ride. A statue of Kenny Kangaroo, the park’s mascot, wearing a sailor suit stands in front of the ride. Adults can ride. Steel City Choppers (1974) San Antonio Roller Works This ride lets children ride around in a circle on motorcycles. A large umbrella covers the ride. Turtle Chase (1950) R. E. Chambers A kiddie version of the Turtle ride. While Kennywood's Turtle is one of only two in operation, there are many examples of the kiddie version to be found throughout the United States. Until Kiddieland’s expansion, this ride was located next to the Dizzy Dynamo. Adults are allowed to ride. Wacky Wheel (1924) W.F. Magnels One of the first four kiddie rides installed, this miniature ferris wheel ride has had its cars replaced, but the ride is much like it has been since its opening. Whippersnapper (1985) W.F. Magnels A kiddie version of the park's Whip ride. A kiddie whip has been in place in Kiddieland for many years, although this one was purchased in 1985 from a park in Oregon to replace the original ride lost in a 1975 fire. Whirlwind (1984) Zamperla A kiddie version of the Wave Swinger, although this ride does not lift or undulate. Ride/Years in Operation Manufacturer/Designer Type/Model Description Flying Carpet (1988–2006) Zierer Flying Carpet Formerly located where the Cosmic Chaos is now, this was a high-speed ride that begins by rocking back and forth until the momentum rotates it right over the top. After a stop at the top, riders would be sent in the opposite direction. It was removed at the end of the 2006 season after a failed overhaul to increase reliability and decrease maintenance. It was donated to a non-profit amusement park in Costa Rica. Ghost Ship (1967–1975) Bill Tracy Dark Ride The Ghost Ship was the final theme of the dark ride located in 1899 Dance Pavilion building. In the early part of the 1975 season, The Ghost Ship burned to the ground due to faulty wiring. Fire departments from Munhall and West Mifflin pumped the water from the Kennywood lagoon to extinguish the fire.  The Ghost Ship stood next to the Kiddieland entrance. Gold Rusher (1981–2007) Maurice Ayers Dark Ride Originally designed with a spiral lift taking the cars from the station on the ground level to the show scenes on the second floor, the station was rebuilt above the midway where is could be reached by stairs next to the Raging Rapids. This was done to eliminate the problems experienced with the lift. It was removed during the 2007 season to make way for Ghostwood Estate. Props from the Gold Rusher are used as part of Death Valley during Phantom Fright Nights as well as during Idlewild Park's Hallowboo!. The ride system was originally intended to be donated to the same park as the Flying Carpet, but the offer was turned down and it was eventually sold on eBay. King Kahuna (2003–2009) Huss Top Spin The ride consists of a gondola attached to two arms. The arms rotate in a circle while the platform flips riders upside down. The ride was built with jets of water that originally sprayed the riders as it spun, but after guest complaints and mold problems resulting in the replacement of the seat padding, the use of the spraying effect was discontinued leaving the fountain strictly ornamental. The ride was sold to the same non-profit park in Costa Rica to which the Flying Carpet was donated. Pitt Fall (1997–2011) Intamin 2nd Generation Freefall A 251&nbsp;ft (76 m) drop tower that was the world's tallest drop tower upon opening. This ride was sold to an undisclosed new owner outside of the United States and replaced by the Black Widow. Turnpike (1966–2009)  Arrow Dynamics/ Morgan Electric Cars An antique car ride formerly located right at the front of the park. This attraction originally debuted with gasoline powered cars and was sponsored by Gulf Oil. However, in 1987 these cars were removed and replaced with electric cars manufactured by Morgan. When it was created, it was a major investment for the park because the tracks could not be removed and the park owners did not yet own the land the park was built on. The price of gas at the Turnpike's gas station was read as "FUN", no matter what grade of fuel. It was removed in 2009, though the park stated in an official announcement that plans are underway to bring back the Turnpike within the next few seasons. The Sky Rocket is in its place. WipeOut (1993–2008) Chance WipeOut In 1993, it temporarily replaced the Enterprise (now Volcano) while it was being rehabbed. In 1994, it was a similar placeholder for the Wave Swinger which was being rehabbed for its move to Lost Kennywood and ultimately replaced by the Kennyville Stage. Then in 1996, the ride found its first permanent home by the entrance to Lost Kennywood, between the Musik Express and Wave Swinger. In 2006, the Wipeout was transplanted one final time to the current location of the Bayern Kurve to make way for the installation of the Swingshot. Originally the Kurve was to be rehabbed over the winter, but due to issues with obtaining parts, the WipeOut was installed at its location and the Kurve was removed. 2008 would be the last season for the WipeOut since the Bayern Kurve was finally done with its lengthy overhaul and reinstalled at its former location for the 2009 season. The WipeOut was moved to Lake Compounce where it is currently operating in the location of the park's former Music Express. Vendor Description Potato Patch Located in front of the Thunderbolt, gourmet French fries are served in a basket with an option of up to eight toppings. The Potato Patch Fries have become so well known that Pittsburgh-based Giant Eagle grocery stores began selling frozen Potato Patch Fries in 2001.  Lines for these popular French fries are long enough that to alleviate the wait, another vendor of the fries, Small Fry's, was added to Lost Kennywood. The Lucky Stand One of the oldest food stands in Kennywood and known for its age and fun-looking appearance. It is located in the center of the Kennyville midway between the Potato Patch and Noah's Ark and serves a variety of carnival food.  It has a pastel color scheme of pink, yellow, and green. The Pagoda A food stand located between the Parkside Cafe and the Olde Kennywood Railroad. It is noted for its Chinese pagoda-style of architecture. It also features a collection of wooden, hand-carved dragon heads that were once located on the front of the fleet of boats that travel through the Old Mill. Kandy Kaleidoscope A candy store located near the entrance of the park that sells homemade fudge and other candies Note: This building is not the same building that the Rotor was located from 1965 to 1968. That Rotor was a portable model. Parkside Cafe A cafeteria located in one of the park's oldest structures, a historic landmark formerly used as a casino. Dating back to 1898, it was one of the first buildings at the park. The building was renovated over the winter of 2010–11. Renovations included installation of central air conditioning, expanded restrooms, new wallpaper, carpet, and windows. In addition, all of the woodwork and the classic tin ceiling were re-painted along with the 17 of the 18 ceiling fans (one was removed in order to expand the restrooms) which date back to the 1960s Johnny Rockets Located in the former carousel pavilion, which was one of the first buildings at the park. In 1927, Kennywood purchased its current carousel (which is adjacent to the stand), which was too big for the existing pavilion and required the construction of a new one. At one point this was called the Soda Fountain. In 2014 it was made into a Johnny Rockets, serving the restaurant classics of hamburgers, hot dogs, chicken tenders, American fries, cheese fries and Soda Pop. Pizza Pavilion Located in Lost Kennywood, it pays homage to former competitor West View Park, bearing a resemblance to its carousel pavilion. Specializes in pizza, hoagies, burgers, and hotdogs. Golden Nugget Located next to the entrance to Kiddieland, this stand is very popular for its hand-dipped ice cream cones. Originally attached to the Dance Pavilion, one of the park's first buildings, the stand is all that remains after a 1975 fire destroyed the rest of the building. Pizza Warehouse This stand can be found behind the Golden Nugget. Pizzas and hoagies can be purchased here along with drinks. Star Refreshment Stand  Near the entrance of the Log Jammer, this stand gets its namesake from a ferris wheel that used to sit on the site (not to be confused with the Wonder Wheel, which was next to the stand and removed in 2000). A very large variety of food can be purchased here, including funnel cakes, batter-dipped deep-fried Oreos, and, new in 2011, original Potato Patch fries. Dippin Dots These stands exist all over the park with a special stand next to the Racer that sells Dot sundaes, milkshakes, floats and more. Midway Refreshment Stand  Located across from the Jack Rabbit and sells a variety of foods, including Philly Steak hoagies. Pedro's Located in Volcano Valley, this stand has Mexican-style offerings. Doc Popcorn Near the exit of Garfield's Revenge, this stand offers various flavors of popcorn. Big Dipper Across from Noah's Ark, this is an art-decor style ice cream stand attached to the rear of the Parkside Cafe. U-Do-It Slush Factory This stand allows guests to combine any of 8 different slushie flavors in one cup. Object Description The Lagoon This is a stunning water feature in the heart of the park featuring the paddle boats (formerly rowboats) and the Skycoaster. Several carnival games and food stands are adjacent to the Lagoon, as well as the Log Jammer, Aero 360, Jack Rabbit, and Racer. For decades there were twice daily circus acts performed in the middle of the Lagoon on the Lagoon Stage, however the shows came to an end when the stage was converted to a loading platform for the Skycoaster for the 1994 season. In 2010 for the first time in 16 years, the Lagoon became host of a new show to close every night with when the Kennywood Laser Spectacular was added. For this nighttime finale a new screen was installed on the Pastime Building and lasers, fog machines, and fire effects were placed in and around the Lagoon. The Victorian Windmill  There is a large decorative scaled-down windmill structure that stands in the front of the park. At night, the four spinning blades are illuminated by hundreds of lights.  The windmill is a wooden structure built on a stone foundation and is one of the oldest structures in the park. Formerly located in the middle of the lagoon, it was moved to the front of the park to make room for the Traver circle swing, better known as the Rocketships. Dancing Waters  This is the water fountain located between the Grand Prix and the Windmill, in what is probably the most beautiful and serene part of the park. Formerly located in front of the Wonder Wheel at the location of the Aero 360, It was created as a scaled-down replica of the fountain at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas and was choreographed to lights and music. The show features have since been abandoned leaving it as just a static fountain with spinning spray nozzles in the middle. The Lost Kennywood Fountain  There is a spectacular fountain located in front of the Pittsburg  Plunge that features a light show in the evenings. One part of the fountain is designed to replicate the one that existed in almost exactly the same place in the former swimming pool. The Mushroom Fountain  It is a vintage drinking fountain shaped like a giant mushroom featuring four spigots, each at different heights for guests of all sizes. It is located between the Merry-Go-Round and Parkside Cafe. The Lion Fountain  It is a drinking fountain shaped like a Lion. It is located near the Kiddieland Bathrooms. When children take a drink from it, it looks as if the lion is going to bite their head off making it a humorous photo opportunity. The Clown-Headed Garbage Cans  They are a collection garbage cans usually located within Kiddieland that are topped with a colorfully costumed fiberglass clown head cap. Each clown has a hole in its wide open mouth through which guests deposit their garbage. Leo, The Paper Eating Lion  He is a most unusual garbage can. The device is shaped like a circus trailer and has a lion's head sculpted on the front. The lion's face has a large hole in the mouth where a vacuum aids in the disposal of paper products such as napkins, tissues, cigarette boxes, and cups. There is also a continuously looping audio track that is played in which Leo talks and roars. Leo is located in the heart of Kiddieland right across from the Turtle Chase. The Kiddieland Fountain  This fountain marks the side entrance to Kiddieland. Built on part of the site of the park's former Ghost Ship darkride, it is the centerpiece of a relaxing, shaded plaza where many guests sit to enjoy their food from the nearby refreshment stands. The Garden Clock Plaza  This is a small area in front of Raging rapids and the Olde Kennywood Railroad where the old Garden Clock is located. The Garden Clock has graced the midway for decades and the floral designs on the face of the clock change annually and range from images of sunbursts to Kenny Kangaroo's head. In front of the clock is a very unusual spherical-shaped fountain reminiscent of seeding dandelion flower that has seating located around it. For a long time Cowboy Joe found a home on his bench in front of the fountain in this area of the park. Laffin' Sal  She is a mechanical laughing woman sculpted from paper mache who greets guests with her cheerful gap-toothed smile and haunting laugh through a window in the Olde Kennywood Railroad train station. She has been a Kennywood tradition since the opening of Laff in the Dark in 1931, during the Great Depression to boost visitors' spirits. Before she moved to the train station, she was located at the entrance of the park's old Le Cachot dark ride. While her location and outfits change occasionally, she herself has retained the same looks as well as her original cackling laughter soundtrack. During Phantom Fright Nights, she is dressed as a witch and an even creepier and evil-sounding laugh soundtrack is played.  Many people believe her to be the scariest attraction at Kennywood. Cowboy Joe  He is a famous Kennywood "visitor" who has been occupying his special bench in the park for decades. There is a sign behind him that reads "Swappin' yarns with Cowboy Joe at Kennywood." and park goers have been getting a picture taken with him since he first stepped foot in the park. In reality, this classic icon is but a fiberglass statue of a cowboy with glass eyes (replaced with paint-on-fiberglass eyes in 2009), mounted to a wooden bench. He used to hold a cigarette in his right hand, but quit smoking cold turkey after being stripped of his paint, patched, and repainted during 2008. His costume consists of a brown hat, boots, and vest; red button down shirt; and blue jeans.  Also, he has gray hair and brown eyes.  While his location within the park has changed, he himself remains very much the same. Kiddieland was one of the first children's ride areas in the world, featuring all the rides in the park's diverse array of young child-specific rides in a compact area between the Auto Race and the Aero360. Rides include miniature versions of the Turtle, Wave Swinger, Phantom's Revenge, Cosmic Chaos, Whip, and Merry-Go-Round. It is located next to the edge of the cliff on the river-view side of the park. It was originally located next to the Jack Rabbit before moving to its current location in 1927. Lost Kennywood, which was added to the park in 1995, was built on the old sunlite pool/pay parking lot area. The area references Kennywood's long history, including its short-lived rival Luna Park (1905–1909), and also the illusion of yesteryear's dangerous rides. The area includes the Pittsburg  Plunge, the Whip, the Bavarian Wave Swinger, the Exterminator, the Black Widow, and the Swing Shot. Older rides which have been removed from Lost Kennywood since its opening include the Phantom Phlyers, Roll-O-Plane, the Pitt Fall -drop tower ride and WipeOut. The gateway to Lost Kennywood is a one-third scale replica of Luna Park's main entrance which spells Pittsburgh with no 'H', because in 1905–1909, Pittsburgh's name was spelled that way. Volcano Valley was created in the park in 2003 for the addition of a new ride that year, King Kahuna. The Enterprise was re-themed as the Volcano during the transformation of this section of the park, which features the Volcano, Pirate, and cement volcanoes that are capable of spewing smoke. Entertainment is a focal point of Kennywood. Strolling musicians, live shows, and costume characters are part of Kennywood's history. For the park's 100th anniversary in 1998, the park had side shows, magicians, and other events in their "anniversary midway." During the 2008 season, the Kennyville Stage offered an act by Jason Pipatone – Master Entertainer as well as all day viewing of "Kenny TV", a closed circuit TV network displaying various videos and trivia. "Kenny TV" can also be viewed at various other locations throughout the park. The Scheer's Lumberjack Show had a one-year run in 2008 replacing the "Pirates of Kenny Cove" high-dive show. In 2009, this location featured a show called Maximum Velocity, a BMX stunt show based on audience participation. The park also has strolling musicians and roaming mascots including the park's mascot, Kenny Kangaroo, who debuted in the early 1970s. From 2001 up through the end of 2008, the comic characters Garfield and Odie also could be found at the park. Nationality Days are several annual events, each spotlighting a different local culture. These include, but are not limited to, Irish Day, Greek Day, Serbian Day, Croatian Day, Polish Day, Slovak Day, Hungarian Day, and Italian Day. On these days some of the park's many picnic pavilions will be in use for entertainers of the particular day's nationality, including ethnic dancers. Villa of the Vampires in the Penny Arcade Mortem Manor in the Parkside Cafe The Haunted Ark in Noah's Ark BIOFEAR in the former Whip Pavilion (Pavilion 23) Kennyville Cemetery in the grassy Dancing Waters/Gazebo area Dark Shadows in the back of Kiddieland Voodoo Bayou in the Raging Rapids trough Gory Park in Lost Kennywood Death Valley Haunted Ghost Town in front of and leading up to Ghostwood Estate Fear Festival surrounding the area usually occupied by the George Washington statue Creeper's Crypt in the Penny Arcade Fort Despair behind the Star Refreshment stand Terror Vision in 3-D in the former Whip Pavilion (Pavilion 23) Fear Festival was part of Gory Park for its first year. Dark Shadows once was located near Pavilion 5. Captain Skully's Curse In 3D in the former Whip Pavilion (Pavilion 23) Kennywood was mentioned in an episode of CSI: Crime Scene Investigation entitled "Turn of the Screws", which dealt with a Las Vegas roller coaster derailment. CSI Supervisor Gil Grissom, who is a roller coaster enthusiast, tells the park engineer that he holds the marathon riding record on the Steel Phantom in Kennywood Park, Pennsylvania. Kennywood was also mentioned on an episode of Without a Trace. They showed the park, but the name of it was not the same. It had the famous Steel Phantom in the park also. After the Pittsburgh Steelers won Super Bowl XL in 2006, Steelers safety Mike Logan, a native of McKeesport, Pennsylvania, near Kennywood, made a humorous riff on the "I'm going to Disney World!" advertising campaign usually associated with the Super Bowl, saying, "Forget Disney World, I want them to open up Kennywood!" Singer/Actor Micky Dolenz, former drummer for The Monkees, often fondly tells audiences at his live shows that Kennywood was the location of his first ever public appearance. He appeared at Kennywood with his elephant in the 1950s when he was known as Circus Boy. The television series featured Micky as Corky, a boy who grows up on the road in a circus. A scene of Kennywood can be seen in the Nickelodeon TV program Zoey 101 (ep. 62: "Roller Coaster") with a sign reading "Spine Twister" on the lift hill of the Phantom's Revenge. In the 1993 film Striking Distance, a poster for Kennywood's Fraternal Order of Police picnic day is visible inside a Pittsburgh Police station. Footage of Kennywood's Musik Express was shown in the beginning of the 1994 film Only You.  The Wonder Wheel was also featured in this movie. The 2009 film Adventureland was filmed at Kennywood. Kennywood also served as the inspiration for "Joyland Park" in LJ Smith's teen horror novel The Forbidden Game: The Kill. In 1899 Kennywood commissioned the "Kennywood Park Waltz" and it was popular around the turn on the century.  Kennywood would sell the sheet music in the park.  It was composed by Margaretha Scandroll.  It has only been professionally recorded once for the 2007 documentary "Welcome Back Riders".  It was performed by the Bulgarian Tosheff Piano Duo. In 1987 Rock 'n roll singer Freddy Cannon recorded a slightly remade version of his 1962 hit "Palisades Park" called "Kennywood Park", featuring attractions at Kennywood [ ]. The song was released on a limited-edition 45 vinyl pressing and sold as a $1.99 fundraising item for Pittsburgh's Children's Hospital through the now-defunct National Record Mart. The record is considered by some to be a collector's item today. On September 28, 1988, the local PBS station, WQED, first aired Kennywood Memories, a one-hour documentary about Kennywood. Rick Sebak narrated. Though twenty years later, many of the rides talked about are gone, the historic information about the park is still quite relevant. Kennywood was featured in the 2007 documentary "Welcome Back Riders". 2016: Noah's Ark remodeled 2015: 4-D Theater replaces Playdium Arcade 2012: Black Widow ride replaces Pitt Fall 2011: Kandy Kaleidoscope is remodeled, Parkside Cafe is remodeled and becomes the park's first air-conditioned food service location, Kiddieland restrooms are rebuilt to include a refreshment stand, Star Refreshment stand is renovated, Merry-Go-Round horses are refurbished, Pitt Fall removed, Holiday Lights debut, Wurlitzer Band Organ on Merry-Go-Round is completely rebuilt. 2010: Sky Rocket, a new Steel Roller Coaster,http://www.kennywood.com/docs/KennywoodCoasterRelease081209.pdf Turnpike Removed and placed in storage with intent to be reinstalled. King Kahuna removed. 2009: Bayern Kurve****,[ ]  WipeOut removed, original Phantom drop and second hill retracked. 2008: Ghostwood Estate,http://www.kennywood.com/docs/2008NewRideMediaRelease.pdf  new Kiddieland games building. 2007: Cosmic Chaos, SS Kenny, roofing over the escalators to lot 2, Gold Rusher removed. 2006: Swing Shot 2005: New front gate structures built, Bayern Kurve*** and Swing Around removed, Merry-Go-Round undergoes a complete overhaul and is rebuilt, Wurlitzer Band Organ is repainted 2004: Garfield's Nightmare (theme change from Old Mill) 2003: King Kahuna (formerly Top Spin from Lake Compounce, removed 2010), Ham-on-Rye (removed in 2005), Volcano Valley themed area, Volcano (theme change from Enterprise), Roll-O-Plane removed, Miniature Golf removed 2002: Garfield's Pounce Bounce, Phantom Fright Nights debut 2001: Phantom's Revenge (rebuilt from Steel Phantom), Crazy Trolley 2000: Aero 360, Dancing Waters relocated across from Grand Prix, Garfield and Odie added as park mascots 1999: Exterminator, Wonder Wheel removed. 1998: Kennywood celebrates its 100th anniversary, Centennial Midway (one season), Le Cachot demolished 1997: Pitt Fall (Removed in 2011) 1996: Lil Phantom (Kiddieland), Kenny's Parkway, Noah's Ark remodeled, Phantom Phlyer removed 1995: LOST KENNYWOOD expansion in former location of Sunlite Swimming Pool – Pittsburg Plunge, Phantom Phlyer (Removed in 1996, moved to Lake Compounce), Roll-O-Plane*** (removed in 2003), Whip and Wave Swinger moved to Lost Kennywood, Great Balloon Race removed 1994: SkyCoaster, Bayern Kurve*** (Removed in 2005) 1993: WipeOut (removed 2009, relocated to Lake Compounce) 1992: Tri-Star (lasts only one season, moved to Idlewild in 1998), Old Mill (Haunted Hideaway renamed) 1991: Steel Phantom (quickly tops top 10 list, rebuilt as Phantom's Revenge in 2001), Wurlitzer Band Organ undergoes extensive repairs 1990: Great Balloon Race (removed in 1995, moved to Idlewild), Laser Loop removed, original facade on Racer loading platform restored 1989: Swing Around** (removed in 2005), Monster removed 1988: Flying Carpet (removed in 2006), Rotor*** (removed in 1994, eventually moved to Lake Compounce), Tilt-A-Whirl removed, Kennywood Memories is filmed and premieres 28 Sep. 1988 1987: Musik Express, electric cars added to Turnpike and directions cars face on track reversed, Kennywood designated National Historic Landmark 1986: Wonder Wheel (removed in 1999), Bayern Kurve** removed, geysers and waterfall added to Raging Rapids 1985: Raging Rapids, Super Round-Up removed 1984: Wave Swinger, Swing Around* (removed at end of season, but returns five years later), Bayern Kurve** (original replaced), Dipper removed 1983: Ranger (lasts only one season) 1982: Pirate, Wonder Bread trains on Racer replaced by new PTC models 1981: Gold Rusher (removed in 2007), Paddle Boats 1980: Laser Loop.(Removed in 1990) 1979: Monster***, renamed Monongahela Monster (removed 1989), Garden Stage (removed in 2006) 1978: Enterprise (renamed Volcano in 2003), Rockets removed 1977: Monster**; Nearby West View Park closes 1976: Tilt-A-Whirl*** (removed in 1988, moved to Idlewild), (Super) Round Up*** (moved to Idlewild 1985), SkyDiver replaced with new model and renamed Paratrooper 1975: Log Jammer (first multimillion-dollar ride in the park's history) Carousel is completely stripped, and repainted, Wurlitzer Band Organ is completely rebuilt 1974: Hardheaded Harold's Horrendously Humorous Haunted Hideaway (theme change of park's Old Mill), Kenny Kangaroo makes his debut as park mascot 1973: Gran Prix, Sunlite Swimming Pool removed 1972: Bayern Kurve*, Le Cachot Name means "The Dungeon" in French, replaced Safari dark ride. (removed 1998), Monster* (removed 1974) 1971: Roll-O-Plane** (removed 1985) 1969: Noah's Ark remodeled, Loop-O-Plane** (removed 1983) 1968: Thunderbolt, rebuilt from Pippin. The four drops in the ravine and the lift hill remain intact from the original coaster. The new Thunderbolt track had a small hill in the inner helix that was removed in 1969. 1967: Road Runner (Cuddle Up), Ghost Ship (Replaced Tornado, Both rides destroyed in fire on June 19, 1975) 1966: Turnpike (Electric cars added in 1987) 1965: Rotor** (removal date unknown), Popover (removed in 1976), Laff in the Dark removed 1964: Tornado dark ride (from defunct Freedomland, removed 1966), Round-Up** (replacing original Round-Up; damaged by the June 19, 1975 fire and replaced with Super Round-Up) 1962: Kangaroo (only Flying Coaster flat ride in existence) 1961: Bandshell destroyed in fire, Calypso (removed 1987), Old Mill gets new boats 1960: Wild Mouse removed, facade on Racer loading platform redesigned 1959: SkyDiver 1958: Wild Mouse (removed 1960), Little Dipper remodeled and renamed Dipper 1957: Round-Up* (replaced with new model in 1964) 1955: Rotor* (removed 1958), Sunlite Pool reopens after rehab, Kiddie Cadillacs, Daffy Klub removed 1953: Sunlite Pool closes to swimming due to maintenance problems and turned into U-Driven boat concession 1952: Octopus (removed 1965), Tickler removed 1950: Roll-O-Plane* (removed 1969) 1949: Tilt-A-Whirl** (removed 1963), Tumble Bug renamed Turtle 1948: Little Dipper (remodeled in 1958, removed in 1984), hills removed from Auto Race and car bodies replaced with current style bodies, Tumble Bug cars replaced with turtle-looking versions 1947: Teddy Bear removed 1946: Original facade on Racer loading platform replaced 1945: Olde Kennywood Railroad 1941: Daffy Klub (replaces 13 Spook Street) 1940: Rockets (Traver circle swing added to island in lagoon, removed 1978) 1938: Ridee-O (removed 1959) 1937: 13 Spook Street, Kiddie Old Mill (Swan Boats, removed mid-1970s) 1936: Noah's Ark (re-built in 1996), Loop-O-Plane* (removed 1950) 1935: Teddy Bear (roller coaster, removed in 1947), Skooter (removed 1979) 1931: Tickler (roller coaster, removed 1952) 1930: Auto Race, Laff in the Dark (removed 1965) 1929: Dodgem removed 1928: Brownie Coaster (removed 1953 or later), Tilt-A-Whirl* (removed 1934) 1927: Merry-Go-Round(T.M. Harton carousel replaced by current William H. Dentzel model, Wurlitzer Band Organ is moved to new carousel), current Racer, Tumble Bug, larger 16 car Whip**, Kiddieland** (moved from near Jack Rabbit coaster to former location of original Racer coaster) 1926: 1910 Racer removed 1925: Sunlite Swimming Pool (removed 1973) 1924: Pippin (converted to Thunderbolt in 1968), Kiddieland* (located near Jack Rabbit coaster) 1923: Speed-O-Plane removed 1922: Dodgem (removed in 1929) 1921: Gee Whizz Dip the Dips removed 1920: Jack Rabbit 1918: Whip* (replaced in 1927) 1916: Wurlitzer Band Organ provides music for Merry-Go-Round 1914: Old Mill (re-themed Panama Canal) 1913: Merry-Go-Round** (original G.A. Dentzel carousel replaced by T.M. Harton model) 1911: Speed-O-Plane (removed 1923), Panama Canal (re-themed Old Mill) 1910: 1910 Racer (original version, removed 1926), Dip-the-Dips Scenic Railway removed 1906: Fairyland Floats (re-themed Old Mill), Figure Eight Toboggan renamed to Gee Whizz Dip the Dips 1905: Dip-the-Dips Scenic Railway (removed 1910) 1904: Steeplechase removed 1903: Steeplechase (removed 1904) 1902: Figure Eight Toboggan (park's first coaster, removed 1921) 1901: Old Mill (converted to Garfield's Nightmare in 2004, also formerly named/themed as Hard Headed Harrold's Horrendously Humorous Haunted Hideaway and Panama Canal) May 30, 1899: Kennywood Park is formally opened; Merry-Go-Round* (G.A. Dentzel carousel), Casino restaurant (now Parkside Cafe), Dancehall December 18, 1898: Kenny's Grove purchased by Monongahela Street Railway Co. National Register of Historic Places listings in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania Incidents at independent amusement parks List of Defunct Kennywood Rides Official website Phantom Fright Nights Official Website
