     The Kriegsmarine (, War Navy) was the navy of Nazi Germany from 1935 to 1945. It superseded the Imperial German Navy of World War I and the inter-war Reichsmarine. The Kriegsmarine was one of three official branches of the Wehrmacht, the armed forces of Nazi Germany. The Kriegsmarine grew rapidly during German naval rearmament in the 1930s (the Treaty of Versailles had limited the size of the German navy previously). Kriegsmarine ships were deployed to the waters around Spain during the Spanish Civil War, under the guise of enforcing non-intervention, but in reality supporting the Franco side of the war. In January 1939 Plan Z was ordered, calling for naval parity with the Royal Navy by 1944. However, when World War II broke out in September 1939, Plan Z was shelved in favour of building submarines (U-boats) and prioritizing land and air forces. The Commander-in-Chief of the Kriegsmarine (as for all branches of armed forces during the period of absolute Nazi power) was Adolf Hitler, who exercised his authority through the Oberkommando der Marine. The Kriegsmarines most famous ships were the U-boats, most of which were constructed after Plan Z was abandoned at the beginning of World War II. Wolfpacks were rapidly assembled groups of submarines which attacked British convoys during the first half of the Battle of the Atlantic but this tactic was largely abandoned in the second half of the war. Along with the U-boats, surface commerce raiders (including auxiliary cruisers) were used to disrupt Allied shipping in the early years of the war, the most famous of these being the heavy cruisers Admiral Graf Spee and Admiral Scheer and the battleship Bismarck. However, the adoption of convoy escorts, especially in the Atlantic, greatly reduced the effectiveness of commerce raiders against convoys. After the Second World War, the Kriegsmarine's remaining ships were divided up amongst the Allied powers and were used for various purposes including minesweeping. Adolf Hitler was the Commander-in-Chief of all German armed forces, including the Kriegsmarine. His authority was exercised through the Oberkommando der Marine, or OKM, with a Commander-in-Chief (Oberbefehlshaber der Kriegsmarine), a Chief of Naval General Staff (Chef des Stabes der Seekriegsleitung) and a Chief of Naval Operations (Chef der Operationsabteilung). The first Commander-in-Chief of the OKM was Erich Raeder who was the Commander-in-Chief of the Reichsmarine when it was renamed and reorganized in 1935. Raeder held the post until falling out with Hitler after the German failure in the Battle of the Barents Sea. He was replaced by Karl Dönitz on 30 January 1943 who held the command until he was appointed President of Germany upon Hitler's suicide in April 1945. Hans-Georg von Friedeburg was then Commander-in-Chief of the OKM for the short period of time until Germany surrendered in May 1945. Subordinate to these were regional, squadron and temporary flotilla commands. Regional commands covered significant naval regions and were themselves sub-divided, as necessary. They were commanded by a Generaladmiral or an Admiral. There was a Marineoberkommando for the Baltic Fleet, Nord, Nordsee, Norwegen, Ost/Ostsee (formerly Baltic), Süd and West. The Kriegsmarine used a form of encoding called Gradnetzmeldeverfahren to denote regions on a map. Each squadron (organized by type of ship) also had a command structure with its own Flag Officer. The commands were Battleships, Cruisers, Destroyers, Submarines (Führer der Unterseeboote), Torpedo Boats, Minesweepers, Reconnaissance Forces, Naval Security Forces, Big Guns and Hand Guns, and Midget Weapons. Major naval operations were commanded by a Flottenchef. The Flottenchef controlled a flotilla and organized its actions during the operation. The commands were, by their nature, temporary. The Kriegsmarine's ship design bureau, known as the Marineamt, was administered by officers with experience in sea duty but not in ship design, while the naval architects who did the actual design work had only a theoretical understanding of design requirements. As a result the German surface fleet was plagued by design flaws throughout the war. Under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, Germany was only allowed a minimal navy of 15,000 personnel, six capital ships of no more than 10,000&nbsp;tons, six cruisers, twelve destroyers, twelve torpedo boats and no submarines or aircraft carriers. Military aircraft were also banned, so Germany could have no naval aviation. Under the treaty Germany could only build new ships to replace old ones. All the ships allowed and personnel were taken over from the Kaiserliche Marine, renamed Reichsmarine. The launching of the first pocket battleship,  in 1931 (as a replacement for the old pre-dreadnought battleship Preussen) was a sign for the rebuilding of a modern German fleet. Modern destroyers and light cruisers were also built. All of these new ships were built in accordance with the terms of the Treaty of Versailles that allowed replacements of the old ships taken over from the German World War I fleet. The building of the Deutschland caused consternation among the French and the British as they had expected that the restrictions of the Treaty of Versailles would limit the replacement of the pre-dreadnought battleships to coastal defence ships, suitable only for defensive warfare. By using innovative construction techniques, the Germans had built a heavy ship suitable for offensive warfare on the high seas while still abiding by the letter of the treaty. From the start, through German-owned front companies, the Germans continued the banned work on U-boats through a submarine design office in the Netherlands and a torpedo research program in Sweden. Even before the Nazi takeover on 30 January 1933 the German government decided on 15 November 1932 to launch a naval re-armament program that included U-boats, airplanes and an aircraft carrier which were not allowed under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. When the Nazis came to power in 1933, Adolf Hitler soon began to ignore many of the Treaty restrictions and accelerated German naval rearmament. The Anglo-German Naval Agreement of 18 June 1935 allowed Germany to build a navy equivalent to 35% of the British surface ship tonnage and 45% of British submarine tonnage; battleships were to be limited to no more than 35,000&nbsp;tons. That same year the Reichsmarine was renamed as the Kriegsmarine. In April 1939, as tensions escalated between the United Kingdom and Germany over Poland, Hitler unilaterally rescinded the restrictions of the Anglo-German Naval Agreement. The building-up of the German fleet in the time period of 1935–1939 was slowed by problems with marshaling enough manpower and material for ship building. This was because of the simultaneous and rapid build-up of the German army and air force which demanded substantial effort and resources. Some projects, like the D-class cruisers and the P-class cruisers, had to be cancelled. The first military action of the Kriegsmarine came during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939). Following the outbreak of hostilities in July 1936 several large warships of the German fleet were sent to the region. The heavy cruisers  and , and the light cruiser  were the first to be sent in July 1936. These large ships were accompanied by the 2nd Torpedo-boat Flotilla. The German presence was used to covertly support Franco's Nationalists although the immediate involvement of the Deutschland was humanitarian relief operations and the rescuing of 9,300 refugees from the fighting, including 4,550 Germans. Following the brokering of the International Non-Intervention Patrol to enforce an international arms embargo the Kriegsmarine was allotted the patrol area between Cabo de Gata (Almeria) and Cabo de Oropesa. Numerous vessels served as part of these duties including . U-Boats also participated in covert action against Republican shipping as part of Operation Ursula. At least eight U-Boats engaged a small number of targets in the area throughout the conflict. By way of comparison the Italian Navy, Regia Marina, operated 58 submarines in the area as part of Sottomarini Legionari. On 29 May 1937 the Deutschland was attacked in the Deutschland incident off Ibiza by two bombers from the Republican Airforce. Total casualties from the Republican attack were 31 dead and 110 wounded, 71 seriously, mostly burn victims. In retaliation the Admiral Scheer shelled the harbour of Almeria on 31 May. Following further attacks by Republican submarine forces against the  off the port of Oran between 15–18 June 1937 Germany withdrew from the Non-Intervention Patrol although the Kriegsmarine maintained a continuous presence in the area until the end of the conflict.  The Kriegsmarine saw as her main tasks the controlling of the Baltic Sea and winning a war against France in connection with the German army, because France was seen as the most likely enemy in the event of war. But in 1938 Hitler wanted to have the possibility of winning a war against Great Britain at sea in the coming years. Therefore he ordered plans for such a fleet from the Kriegsmarine. From the three proposed plans (X, Y and Z) he approved Plan Z in January 1939. This blueprint for the new German naval construction program envisaged building a navy of approximately 800 ships during the period 1939–1947. Hitler demanded that the program was to be completed by 1945. The main force of Plan Z were six H-class battleships. In the version of Plan Z drawn up in August 1939 the German fleet was planned to consist of the following ships by 1945: Personnel strength was planned to rise to over 200,000. The planned naval program was not very far advanced by the time World War II began. In 1939 two s and two H-class battleships were laid down and parts for two further H-class battleships and three s were in production. The strength of the German fleet at the beginning of the war was not even 20% of Plan Z. On 1 September 1939, the navy still had a total personnel strength of only 78,000, and it was not at all ready for a major role in the war. Because of the long time it would take to get the Plan Z fleet ready for action and shortage in workers and material in wartime, Plan Z was essentially shelved in September 1939 and the resources allocated for its realization were largely redirected to the construction of U-boats, which would be ready for war against the United Kingdom quicker. Siegfried Breyer: Der Z-PLAN. Podzun-Pallas-Verlag. Wölfersheim-Berstadt 1996. ISBN 3-7909-0535-6 The Kriegsmarine was involved in World War II from its outset and participated in the Battle of Westerplatte and the Battle of the Danzig Bay during the Invasion of Poland. In 1939, major events for the Kriegsmarine were the sinking of the British aircraft carrier  and the British battleship  and the loss of the  at the Battle of the River Plate. Submarine attacks on Britain's vital maritime supply routes (Battle of the Atlantic) started immediately at the outbreak of war, although they were hampered by the lack of well placed ports from which to operate. Throughout the war the Kriegsmarine was responsible for coastal artillery protecting major ports and important coastal areas. It also operated anti-aircraft batteries protecting major ports.Feldgrau :: Organization of the Kriegsmarine in the West 1940–1945 In April 1940, the German Navy was heavily involved in the invasion of Norway, where it suffered significant losses, which included the heavy cruiser  sunk by artillery and torpedoes from Norwegian shore batteries at the Oscarsborg Fortress in Oslofjord. Ten destroyers were lost in the Battles of Narvik (half of German destroyer strength at the time), and two light cruisers, the Königsberg which was bombed and sunk by Royal Navy aircraft in Bergen, and the Karlsruhe which was sunk off the coast of Kristiansand by a British submarine. The Kriegsmarine did in return sink some British warships during this campaign, including the aircraft carrier . The losses in the Norwegian Campaign left only a handful of undamaged heavy ships available for the planned, but never executed, invasion of Britain (Operation Sea Lion) in the summer of 1940. There were serious doubts that the invasion sea routes could have been protected against British naval interference. The fall of France and the conquest of Norway gave German submarines greatly improved access to British shipping routes in the Atlantic. At first, British convoys lacked escorts that were adequate either in numbers or equipment and, as a result, the submarines had much success for few losses (this period was dubbed the First Happy Time by the Germans). Italy entered the war in June 1940, and the Battle of the Mediterranean began: from September 1941 to May 1944 some 62 German submarines were transferred there, sneaking past the British naval base at Gibraltar. The Mediterranean submarines sank 24 major Allied warships (including 12 destroyers, 4 cruisers, 2 aircraft carriers and 1 battleship) and 94 merchant ships (449,206&nbsp;tons of shipping). None of the Mediterranean submarines made it back to their home bases, as they were all either sunk in battle or scuttled by their crews at the end of the warUboat.net, U-boats in the Mediterranean – Overview  In 1941 one of the four modern German battleships, the  sank  while breaking out into the Atlantic for commerce raiding. The Bismarck was in turn hunted down by much superior British forces after being crippled by an airborne torpedo. She was subsequently scuttled after being rendered defenceless by two British battleships. During 1941, the Kriegsmarine and the United States Navy became de facto belligerents, although war was not formally declared, leading to the sinking of the . This hostility was the result of the American decision to support Britain with its Lend-Lease program and the subsequent decision to escort Lend-Lease convoys with American war ships through the western part of the Atlantic. The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent German declaration of war against the United States in December 1941 led to another phase of the Battle of the Atlantic. In Operation Drumbeat and subsequent operations until August 1942, a large number of Allied merchant ships were sunk by submarines off the American coast as the Americans had not prepared for submarine warfare, despite clear warnings (this was the so-called Second happy time for the German navy). The situation became so serious that military leaders feared for the whole Allied strategy. The vast American ship building capabilities and naval forces were however now brought into the war and soon more than offset any losses inflicted by the German submariners. In 1942, the submarine warfare continued on all fronts, and when German forces in the Soviet Union reached the Black Sea, a few submarines were eventually transferred there. Hitler, fearing a British invasion of Norway, forced the leadership of the Kriegsmarine to transfer her big ships based in the French Atlantic port of Brest to Norway. Thus, in February 1942, the two battleships  and  and the heavy cruiser  passed through the English Channel (Channel Dash) on their way to Norway despite British efforts to stop them. Not since the Spanish Armada in 1588 had any warships in wartime done this. It was a tactical victory for the Kriegsmarine and a blow to British morale, but the German fleet lost the possibility to attack allied convoys with heavy surface ships in the Atlantic (which was its wish) because of Hitler's decision. With the German attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941 Britain started to send Arctic convoys with military goods around Norway to support their new ally. In 1942 German forces began heavily attacking these convoys, mostly with bombers and U-boats. The big ships of the Kriegsmarine in Norway were seldom involved in these attacks, because of the inferiority of German radar technology, and because Hitler and the leadership of the Kriegsmarine feared losses of these precious ships. The most effective of these attacks was the near destruction of Convoy PQ 17 in July 1942. Later in the war German attacks on these convoys were mostly reduced to U-boat activities and the mass of the allied freighters reached their destination in Soviet ports. The Battle of the Barents Sea in December 1942 was an attempt by a German naval force to attack an Allied Arctic convoy. However, the advantage was not pressed home and they returned to base. There were serious implications: this failure infuriated Hitler, who nearly enforced a decision to scrap the surface fleet. Instead, resources were diverted to new U-boats, and the surface fleet became a lesser threat to the Allies. After December 1943 when the  had been sunk in an attack on an Arctic convoy in the Battle of North Cape by , most German surface ships in bases at the Atlantic were blockaded in, or close to, their ports as a fleet in being, for fear of losing them in action and to tie up British naval forces. The largest of these ships, the battleship , was stationed in Norway as a threat to Allied shipping and also as a defence against a potential Allied invasion. When she was sunk, after several attempts, by British bombers in November 1944 (Operation Catechism), several British capital ships could be moved to the Far East. From late 1944 until the end of the war, the surviving surface fleet of the Kriegsmarine (heavy cruisers: , , , , light cruisers: , , ) was heavily engaged in providing artillery support to the retreating German land forces along the Baltic coast and in ferrying civilian refugees to the western Baltic Sea parts of Germany (Mecklenburg, Schleswig-Holstein) in large rescue operations. Large parts of the population of eastern Germany fled the approaching Red Army out of fear for Soviet retaliation (mass rapes, killings and looting by Soviet troops did occur). The Kriegsmarine evacuated two million civilians and troops in the evacuation of East Prussia and Danzig from January to May 1945. It was during this activity that the catastrophic sinking of several large passenger ships occurred: the  and the  were sunk by Soviet submarines, while the  was sunk by British bombers, each sinking claiming thousands of civilian lives. The Kriegsmarine also provided important assistance in the evacuation of the fleeing German civilians of Pomerania and Stettin in March and April 1945. A desperate measure of the Kriegsmarine to fight the superior strength of the Western Allies from 1944 was the formation of the Kleinkampfverbände (Small Battle Units). These were special naval units with frogmen, manned torpedoes, motorboats laden with explosives and so on. The more effective of these weapons and units were the development and deployment of midget submarines like the Molch and Seehund. In the last stage of the war, the Kriegsmarine also organized a number of divisions of infantry from its personnel. Between 1943 and 1945, a group of U-boats known as the Monsun Boats (Monsun Gruppe) operated in the Indian Ocean from Japanese bases in the occupied Dutch East Indies and Malaya. Allied convoys had not yet been organized in those waters, so initially many ships were sunk. However, this situation was soon remedied.Uboat.net, U-boat Operations – The Monsun U-boats During the later war years, the "Monsun Boats" were also used as a means of exchanging vital war supplies with Japan. During 1943 and 1944, due to Allied anti-submarine tactics and better equipment the U-boat fleet started to suffer heavy losses. The turning point of the Battle of the Atlantic was during Black May in 1943, when the U-boat fleet started suffering heavy losses and the number of Allied ships sunk started to decrease. Radar, longer range air cover, Sonar, improved tactics and new weapons all contributed. German technical developments, such as the Schnorchel, attempted to counter these. Near the end of the war a small number of the new Elektroboot U-boats (XXI and XXIII) became operational, the first submarines designed to operate submerged at all times. The Elektroboote had the potential to negate the Allied technological and tactical advantage, although they were deployed too late to see combat in the war.Submarines: an illustrated history of their impact Paul E. Fontenoy p.39  After the German conquest on 29 June 1941, the naval base at Liepāja, Latvia came under the command of the Kriegsmarine. On 1 July 1941, town commandant Korvettenkapitän Stein ordered that ten hostages be shot for every act of sabotage, and further put civilians in the zone of targeting by declaring that Red Army soldiers were hiding among them in civilian attire. On 5 July 1941 Korvettenkapitän Brückner, who had taken over for Stein, issued a set of anti-Jewish regulationsEzergailis, The Holocaust in Latvia, at page 209 in the local newspaper, Kurzemes Vārds. Kurzemes Vārds, 5 July 1941, page 1, at website of National Library of Latvia. Summarized these were as follows:Ezergailis, The Holocaust in Latvia, at page 233, n.26 and page 287 On 16 July 1941, Fregattenkapitän Dr. Hans Kawelmacher was appointed the German naval commandant in Liepāja.Dribins, Leo, Gūtmanis, Armands, and Vestermanis, Marģers, Latvia's Jewish Community: History, Tragedy, Revival (2001) at page 224 On 22 July, Kawelmacher sent a telegram to the German Navy's Baltic Command in Kiel, which stated that he wanted 100 SS and fifty Schutzpolizei ("protective police") men sent to Liepāja for "quick implementation Jewish problem".Anders and Dubrovskis, Who Died in the Holocaust, at pages 126 and 127 Kawelmacher hoped to accelerate killings complaining: "Here about 8,000 Jews... with present SS-personnel, this would take one year, which is untenable for [the] pacification of Liepāja."[ ] Kawelmacher on 27 July 1941: "Jewish problem Libau largely solved by execution of about 1,100 male Jews by Riga SS commando on 24 and 25.7." In 1945 U-boat Commander Heinz-Wilhelm Eck of U-852 was executed with two of his crewman for shooting at survivors; likewise German submarine U-247 was also involved in shooting at sunken ship survivors-althugh they were not tried as they were lost at sea. After the war, the German surface ships that remained afloat (only the cruisers  and , and a dozen destroyers were operational) were divided among the victors. The officer in charge of the Kriegsmarine division and appropriation, was Lt. Gerald Ivers of the US Navy, who used mathematical analysis to assign the remaining ships to their respective nations. The US used the heavy cruiser  in nuclear testing at Bikini Atoll in 1946 as target ship. Some (like the unfinished aircraft carrier ) were used for target practice with conventional weapons, while others (mostly destroyers and torpedo boats) were put into the service of Allied navies that lacked surface ships after the war. The training barque SSS Horst Wessel was recommissioned USCGC Eagle and remains in active service, assigned to the United States Coast Guard Academy. The British, French and Soviet navies received the destroyers, and some torpedo boats went to the Danish and Norwegian navies. For the purpose of mine clearing, the Royal Navy employed German crews and minesweepers from June 1945 to January 1948,German Mine Sweeping Administration (GMSA) (in German), accessed: 9 June 2008 organized in the German Mine Sweeping Administration, the GMSA, which consisted of 27,000 members of the former Kriegsmarine and 300 vessels.Google book review: German Seaman 1939–45 Page: 41, author: Gordon Williamson, John White, publisher: Osprey Publishing, accessed: 9 July 2008 The destroyers and the Soviet share light cruiser  were all retired by the end of the 1950s, but five escort destroyers were returned from the French to the new West German navy in the 1950s and three 1945 scuttled type XXI and XXIII U-boats were raised by West Germany and integrated into their new navy. In 1956, with West Germany's accession to NATO, a new navy was established and was referred to as the Bundesmarine (Federal Navy). Some Kriegsmarine commanders like Erich Topp and Otto Kretschmer went on to serve in the Bundesmarine. In East Germany the Volksmarine (People's Navy) was established in 1956. With the reunification of Germany in 1990, it was decided to simply use the name Deutsche Marine (German Navy).   By the start of World War II, much of the Kriegsmarine were modern ships: fast, well-armed and well-armoured. This had been achieved by concealment but also by deliberately flouting World War I peace terms and those of various naval treaties. However, the war started with the German Navy still at a distinct disadvantage in terms of sheer size with what were expected to be its primary adversaries – the navies of France and Great Britain. Although a major re-armament of the navy (Plan Z) was planned, and initially begun, the start of the war in 1939 meant that the vast amounts of material required for the project were diverted to other areas. The sheer disparity in size when compared to the other European powers navies prompted German naval commander in chief Grand Admiral Erich Raeder to write of his own navy once the war began "The surface forces can do no more than show that they know how to die gallantly." A number of captured ships from occupied countries were added to the German fleet as the war progressed.[ ] Though six major units of the Kriegsmarine were sunk during the war (both Bismarck-class battleships and both Scharnhorst-class battleships, as well as two heavy cruisers), there were still many ships afloat (including four heavy cruisers and four light cruisers) as late as March 1945. Some ship types do not fit clearly into the commonly used ship classifications. Where there is argument, this has been noted. The main combat ships of the Kriegsmarine (excluding U-boats): Construction of the  was started in 1936 and construction of an unnamed sister ship was started two years later in 1938, but neither ship was completed. In 1942 conversion of three German passenger ships (Europa, Potsdam, Gneisenau) and two unfinished cruisers—the captured French light cruiser  and the German heavy cruiser — to auxiliary carriers was begun. In November 1942 the conversion of the passenger ships was stopped because these ships were now seen as too slow for operations with the fleet. But conversion of one of these ships, the Potsdam, to a training carrier was begun instead. In February 1943 all the work on carriers was halted because of the German failure during the Battle of the Barents Sea which convinced Hitler that big warships were useless. All engineering of the aircraft carriers like catapults, arresting gears and so on were tested and developed at the Erprobungsstelle See Travemünde (Experimental Place Sea in Travemünde) including the airplanes for the aircraft carriers, the Fieseler Fi 167 ship-borne biplane torpedo and reconnaissance bomber and the navalized versions of two key early war Luftwaffe aircraft:  the Messerschmitt Bf 109T fighter and Junkers Ju 87C Stuka dive bomber. The Kriegsmarine completed four battleships during its existence. The first pair were the 11-inch gun , consisting of the  and , which participated in the invasion of Norway (Operation Weserübung) in 1940, and then in commerce raiding until the Gneisenau was heavily damaged by a British air raid in 1942 and the Scharnhorst was sunk in the Battle of the North Cape in late 1943. The second pair were the 15-inch gun , consisting of the  and . The Bismarck was sunk on her first sortie into the Atlantic in 1941 (Operation Rheinübung) although she did sink the battlecruiser Hood and severely damage the battleship Prince of Wales, while the Tirpitz was based in Norwegian ports during most of the war as a fleet in being, tying up Allied naval forces, and subject to a number of attacks by British aircraft and submarines. More battleships were planned (the H-class), but construction was abandoned in September 1939. The "Pocket battleships" were the  (later renamed Lützow), , and . Modern commentators favour classifying these as "heavy cruisers" and the Kriegsmarine itself reclassified these ships as such (Schwere Kreuzer) in 1940.Deutschland History In German language usage these three ships were designed and built as "armoured ships" (Panzerschiffe) – "pocket battleship" is an English label. The Graf Spee was scuttled by her own crew in the Battle of the River Plate, in the Rio de la Plata estuary in December 1939. Admiral Scheer was bombed on 9 April 1945 in port at Kiel and badly damaged, essentially beyond repair, and rolled over at her moorings. After the war that part of the harbor was filled in with rubble and the hulk buried. Lützow (ex-Deutschland) was bombed 16 April 1945 in the Baltic off Schwinemünde just west of Stettin, and settled on the shallow bottom. With the Soviet Army advancing across the Oder, the ship was destroyed in place to prevent the Soviets capturing anything useful. The wreck was dismantled and scrapped in 1948–1949.E. Gröner, Die Schiffe der deutschen Kriegsmarine. 2nd Edition, Lehmanns, München, 1976. C. Bekker, Verdammte See, Ein Kriegstagebuch der deutschen Marine. Köln, Neumann / Göbel, no date.1976, The World War I era Pre-dreadnought battleships  and  were used mainly as training ships, although they also participated in several military operations, with the latter bearing the distinction of firing the opening shots of WWII.  and  were converted into radio-guided target ships in 1928 and 1930 respectively.  was decommissioned in 1931 and struck from the naval register in 1936. Plans to convert her into a radio-controlled target ship for aircraft was canceled because of the outbreak of war in 1939. Three s were ordered in 1939, but with the start of the war the same year there were not enough resources to build the ships. , , and  Never completed: ,  The term "light cruiser" is a shortening of the phrase "light armoured cruiser." Light cruisers were defined under the Washington Naval Treaty by gun caliber. Light cruiser describes a small ship that was armoured in the same way as an armoured cruiser. In other words, like standard cruisers, light cruisers possessed a protective belt and a protective deck. Prior to this, smaller cruisers tended to be of the protected cruiser model and possessed only an armoured deck. The Kriegsmarine light cruisers were as follows: Never completed: three s Never Completed: KH-1 and KH-2 (Kreuzer (cruiser) Holland 1 and 2). Captured in the Netherlands 1940. Both being on the stocks and building continued for the Kriegsmarine. In addition, the former Kaiserliche Marine light cruiser  was captured by Germans on 11 September 1943 after the capitulation of Italy. She was pressed into Kriegsmarine service for a brief time before being destroyed by British MTBs. During the war, some merchant ships were converted into "auxiliary cruisers" and nine were used as commerce raiders sailing under false flags to avoid detection, and operated in all oceans with considerable effect. The German designation for the ships was 'Handelstörkreuzer' thus the HSK serial assigned. Each had as well an administrative label more commonly used, e.g. Schiff 16 = Atlantis, Schiff 41 = Kormoran, etc. The auxiliary cruisers were:   Although the German World War II destroyer (Zerstörer) fleet was modern and the ships were larger than conventional destroyers of other navies, they had problems. Early classes were unstable, wet in heavy weather, suffered from engine problems and had short range. Some problems were solved with the evolution of later designs, but further developments were curtailed by the war and, ultimately, by Germany's defeat. In the first year of World War II, they were used mainly to sow offensive minefields in shipping lanes close to the British coast. These vessels evolved through the 1930s from small vessels, relying almost entirely on torpedoes, to what were effectively small destroyers with mines, torpedoes and guns. Two classes of fleet torpedo boats were planned, but not built, in the 1940s.  The E-boats were fast attack craft with torpedo tubes. Over 200 boats of this type were built for the Kriegsmarine. , , , , . Thousands of smaller warships and auxiliaries served in the Kriegsmarine, including minelayers, minesweepers, mine transports, netlayers, floating AA and torpedo batteries, command ships, decoy ships (small merchantmen with hidden weaponry), gunboats, monitors, escorts, patrol boats, sub-chasers, landing craft, landing support ships, training ships, test ships, torpedo recovery boats, dispatch boats, aviso, fishery protection ships, survey ships, habor defense boats, target ships and their radio control vessels, motor explosive boats, weather ships, tankers, colliers, tenders, supply ships, tugs, barges, icebreakers, hospital and accommodation ships, floating cranes and docks, and many others. The Kriegsmarine employed hundreds of auxiliary Vorpostenboote during the war, mostly civilian ships that were drafted and fitted with military equipment, for use in coastal operations.   At the outbreak of war, the Kriegsmarine had a relatively small fleet of 57 submarines (U-boats). This was increased steadily until mid-1943, when losses from Allied counter-measures matched the new vessels launched. The principal types were the Type IX, a long range type used in the western and southern Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans; and the Type VII, the most numerous type, used principally in the north Atlantic. Type X was a small class of minelayers and Type XIV was a specialized type used to support distant U-boat operations – the "Milchkuh" (Milkcow). Types XXI and XXIII, the "Elektroboot", would have negated much of the Allied anti-submarine tactics and technology, but only a few of this new type of U-boat became ready for combat at the end of the war. Post-war, they became the prototypes for modern submarines, in particular, the Soviet . During World War II, about 60% of all U-boats commissioned were lost in action; 28,000 of the 40,000 U-boat crewmen were killed during the war and 8,000 were captured. The remaining U-boats were either surrendered to the Allies or scuttled by their own crews at the end of the war. The military campaigns in Europe yielded a large number of captured vessels, many of which were under construction. Nations represented included Austria (riverine craft), Czechoslovakia (riverine craft), Poland, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Yugoslavia, Greece, Soviet Union, United Kingdom, United States (several landing craft) and Italy (after the armistice). Few of the incomplete ships of destroyer size or above were completed, but many smaller warships and auxiliaries were completed and commissioned into Kriegsmarine during the war. Additionally many captured or confisticated foreign civilian ships (merchantmen, fishing boats, tugboats etc.) were converted into auxiliary warships or support ships. The first warship sunk in World War II was the destroyer  of the Polish Navy by Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers of the carrier air group of aircraft carrier  on 3 September 1939. This carrier air group (Trägergeschwader 186) was part of the Luftwaffe but at that time under command of the Kriegsmarine. The Luftwaffe had a near-complete monopoly on all German military aviation, including naval aviation, a major source of ongoing interservice rivalry with the Kriegsmarine. Catapult-launched spotter planes like Arado Ar 196 twin-float seaplanes were manned by the so-called Bordfliegergruppen ("shipboard flying group").Bordfliegergruppe 196  In addition, Trägergeschwader 186 (Carrier Air Wing 186) operated two Gruppen (Trägergruppe I/186 and Trägergruppe II/186)Trägergruppe 186 equipped with navalized Messerschmitt Bf 109T and Junkers Ju 87C Stuka; these units were intended to serve aboard the aircraft carrier  which was never completed, yet provided the Kriegsmarine with some air-power from bases on land. Furthermore, five coastal groups (Küstenfliegergruppen) with reconnaissance aircraft, torpedo bombers, Minensuch aerial minesweepers and air-sea rescue seaplanes supported the Kriegsmarine, although with lesser resources as the war progressed.Luftwaffe naval-air units The coastal batteries of the Kriegsmarine were stationed on the German coasts. With the conquering and occupation of other countries coastal artillery was stationed along the coasts of these countries, especially in France and Norway as part of the Atlantic Wall.J. P. Mallmann-Showell: Das Buch der deutschen Kriegsmarine 1935–1945. Publisher Motorbuch. Stuttgart 1995 ISBN 3-87943-880-3 p. 75-91 Naval bases were protected by Flak-batteries of the Kriegsmarine against enemy air raids. The Kriegsmarine also manned the Seetakt sea radars on the coasts. At the beginning of World War II, on 1 September 1939, the Marine Stoßtrupp Kompanie (Marine Attack Troop Company) landed in Danzig from the old battleship  for conquering a Polish bastion. A reinforced platoon of the Marine Stoßtrupp Kompanie landed with soldiers of the German Army from destroyers on 9 April 1940 in Narvik. In June 1940 the Marine Stoßtrupp Abteilung (Marine Attack Troop Battailon) was flown in from France to the Channel Islands to occupy this British territory. In September 1944 amphibious units unsuccessfully tried to capture the strategic island Suursaari in the Gulf of Finland from Germany's former ally Finland (Operation Tanne Ost). With the Invasion of Normandy in June 1944 and the Soviet advance from the summer of 1944 the Kriegsmarine started to form regiments and divisions for the battles on land with superfluous personnel. With the loss of naval bases because of the Allied advance more and more navy personnel were available for the ground troops of the Kriegsmarine. About 40 regiments were raised and from January 1945 on six divisions. Half of the regiments were absorbed by the divisions.Jörg Benz: Deutsche Marineinfanterie 1938–1945. Publisher Husum Druck. Husum 1996. ISBN 3880427992 Officer candidates (with PO-ranks) where as follows:   Many different types of uniforms were worn by the Kriegsmarine; here is a list of the main ones:    Top 10 U-Boat Aces in World War II 274,333 tons (47 ships sunk) &nbsp; &nbsp; Otto Kretschmer 225,712 tons (43 ships) Wolfgang Lüth 193,684 tons (34 ships) Erich Topp 186,064 tons (29 ships) Karl-Friedrich Merten 171,164 tons (34 ships) Victor Schütze 171,122 tons (26 ships) Herbert Schultze 167,601 tons (28 ships) Georg Lassen 166,596 tons (22 ships) Heinrich Lehmann-Willenbrock 162,333 tons (30 ships) Heinrich Liebe 160,939 tons (28 ships), plus the British battleship  inside Scapa Flow Günther Prien Ship Type Date Action  (Royal Navy) Fleet Aircraft Carrier 17 September 1939 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Battleship 14 October 1939 Torpedoed at anchor by submarine   (Royal Norwegian Navy) Coastal Battleship 9 April 1940 Torpedoed by destroyer   (Royal Norwegian Navy) Coastal Battleship 9 April 1940 Torpedoed by destroyer   (French Navy) Large Destroyer 23 May 1940 Torpedoed by torpedo boats (E-boats) S21 and S23  (Royal Navy) Fleet Aircraft Carrier 8 June 1940 Sunk by battleships  and   (Royal Navy) Battlecruiser 24 May 1941 Sunk by the battleship   (Royal Navy) Fleet Aircraft Carrier 14 November 1941 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Australian Navy) Light Cruiser 19 November 1941 Sunk by   (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 24 November 1941 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Battleship 25 November 1941 Torpedoed by submarine . While the attack on the ship was recorded, the Kriegsmarine were unaware that it had in fact been sunk until 27 January 1942 when the British admiralty admitted Barham's loss.  (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 14 December 1941 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Escort Carrier 21 December 1941 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 11 March 1942 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 2 May 1942 Torpedoed by  and destroyers ,  and , abandoned and scuttled  (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 16 June 1942 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Aircraft Carrier 11 August 1942 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Escort Carrier 15 November 1942 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Minelaying Cruiser 1 February 1943 Torpedoed by   (Royal Navy) Minelaying Cruiser 10 September 1943 Mine hits, mines laid by torpedo boats (E-boats) S54 and S61  (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 23 October 1943 Torpedoed by torpedo boats  and   (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 18 February 1944 Torpedoed by submarine   (U.S. Navy) Escort Carrier 29 May 1944 Torpedoed by submarine   (Royal Navy) Light Cruiser 23 June 1944 Mine hit, declared a constructive total loss  (Polish Navy) Light Cruiser 7 July 1944 Torpedoed by a Neger manned torpedo abandoned and scuttled  (Royal Navy) Escort Carrier 22 August 1944 Torpedoed by , judged not worth repairing, beached and abandoned  (Royal Navy) Escort Carrier 15 January 1945 Torpedoed by , declared a constructive total loss Personnel strength of the Kriegsmarine 1943 Category Strength Commissioned officers 22,000 OfficialsWehrmachtbeamte 14,000 Petty Officers and Seamen 613,000 Source:Gesamtstärke der Kriegsmarine am 1. Mai 1943 2012-09-27. Kriegsmarine !! US Navy/Royal Navy Großadmiral Fleet Admiral/Admiral of the Fleet Generaladmiral Admiral Admiral Vice Admiral Vizeadmiral Rear Admiral (Upper Half)/Rear Admiral Konteradmiral Rear Admiral (Lower Half)/Commodore Admiral Kommodore Commodore Junior Grade/ Commodore Kapitän zur See Captain Fregattenkapitän Commander Korvettenkapitän Lieutenant Commander Kapitänleutnant Lieutenant Oberleutnant zur See Lieutenant (Jg.)/Sub-Lieutenant Leutnant zur See Ensign/Acting Sub-Lieutenant Kriegsmarine !! US Navy/Royal Navy Oberfähnrich zur See Midshipman (Senior Grade) Fähnrich zur See Cadet/Midshipman (Junior Grade) Seekadett N.N. German !! English Dienstanzug Service Suit kleiner Dienstanzug Small Service Suit Ausgehanzug Suit for Walking Out Sportanzug Sports Suit Tropen-und Sommeranzug Tropical and Summer Suit große Uniform Parade Uniform kleiner Gesellschaftsanzug Small Party Suit großer Gesellschaftsanzug Parade Party Suit 4 aircraft carriers 10 battleships 12 battlecruisers 3 armored ships (Panzerschiffe) 5 heavy cruisers 44 light cruisers 158 destroyers and torpedo boats 249 submarines Numerous smaller craft All Jews must wear the yellow star on the front and back of their clothing; Shopping hours for Jews were restricted to 10:00&nbsp;a.m. to 12:00 noon. Jews were only allowed out of their residences for these hours and from 3:00&nbsp;p.m. to 5:00&nbsp;p.m.; Jews were barred from public events and transportation and were not to walk on the beach; Jews were required to leave the sidewalk if they encountered a German in uniform; Jewish shops were required to display the sign "A Jewish-owned business" in the window; Jews were to surrender all radios, typewriters, uniforms, arms and means of transportation Wikinger ("Viking") (1940) – foray by destroyers into the North Sea Weserübung ("Exercise Weser") (1940) – invasion of Denmark and Norway Juno (1940) – operation to disrupt Allied supplies to Norway Nordseetour (1940) – first Atlantic operation of Admiral Hipper Berlin (1941) – Atlantic cruise of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau Rheinübung ("Exercise Rhine") (1941) – breakout by Bismarck and Prinz Eugen Doppelschlag ("Double blow") (1942) – anti-shipping operation off Novaya Zemlya by Admiral Scheer and Admiral Hipper Sportpalast (1942) – aborted operation (including Tirpitz) to attack Arctic convoys Rösselsprung ("Knights Move") (1942) – operation (including Tirpitz) to attack Arctic convoy PQ 17 Wunderland (1942) – anti-shipping operation in Kara Sea by Admiral Scheer Paukenschlag ("Drumbeat" ("Beat of the Kettle Drum"); "Second Happy Time") (1942) – U-boat campaign off the United States east coast Neuland ("New Land") (1942) – U-boat campaign in the Caribbean Sea; launched in conjunction with Operation Drumbeat Regenbogen ("Rainbow") (1942) – failed attack on Arctic convoy JW-51B, by Admiral Hipper and Lützow Cerberus (1942) – movement of capital ships from Brest to home ports in Germany (Channel Dash) Ostfront ("East front") (1943) – final operation of Scharnhorst, to intercept convoy JW 55B Domino (1943) – second aborted Arctic sortie by Scharnhorst, Prinz Eugen and destroyers Zitronella ("Lemon extract") (1943) – raid upon Allied-occupied Spitzbergen (Svalbard) Hannibal (1945) – evacuation proceedings from Courland, Danzig-West Prussia  and East Prussia Deadlight (1945) – the British Royal Navy's postwar scuttling of Kriegsmarine U-boats  (HSK-1, Schiff 36)  (HSK-2, Schiff 16)  (HSK-3, Schiff 21)  (HSK-4, Schiff 10)  (HSK-5, Schiff 33)  (HSK-6, Schiff 23)  (HSK-7, Schiff 45)  (HSK-8, Schiff 41)  (HSK-9, Schiff 28)  (HSK number not assigned, Schiff 14, never active in raider operations.)  (HSK not assigned, Schiff 5, never active in raider operations, used as a training ship)E. Gröner, Die Schiffe der deutschen Kriegsmarine. 2nd Edition. 1976, München, Lehmanns Verlag. Matrose (Apprentice Seaman) Matrosengefreiter (Seaman) 2nd Class Matrosenobergefreiter (Seaman) 1st Class Matrosenhauptgefreiter (Seaman 1st Class with 4 ½ years time-in-service) Matrosenstabsgefreiter (Seaman 1st Class with 6 years time-in-service) Matrosenoberstabsgefreiter (Seaman 1st Class with 8 years time-in-service) Bootsmannsmaat (Petty Officer 3rd Class) Oberbootsmannsmaat (Petty Officer 2nd Class) Bootsmann/Feldwebel (Petty Officer 1st Class) Stabsbootsmann/Stabsfeldwebel (Petty Officer 1st Class with 12 years time-in-service) Oberbootsmann/Oberfeldwebel (Chief Petty Officer) Stabsoberbootsmann/Stabsoberfeldwebel (Chief Petty Officer with 10 years time-in-service including 3 years time-in-grade) Glossary of German military terms Alwin-Broder Albrecht Karl Dönitz Erich Raeder Horst Wessel List of Kriegsmarine ships List of Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross recipients of the Kriegsmarine List of ships of the German navies List of World War II torpedoes of Germany The photo album of Kriegsmarine minelayer ‘Roland’ crew member. Photos of minelayers on combat missions and various Kriegsmarine vessels.
