  Kurt Thomas Busch (born August 4, 1978) is an American professional stock car racing  driver. He currently competes full-time in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, driving the No. 41 Chevrolet SS for Stewart-Haas Racing. He is a second-generation racing driver; his father, Tom, won several NASCAR-sanctioned events. He is the older brother of 2015 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Champion Kyle Busch.http://www.jockbio.com/Bios/Busch/Busch_bio.html Busch has also driven for Furniture Row Racing, Phoenix Racing, Penske Racing, and Roush Racing in his Sprint Cup career, which began in 2000. Busch, the winner of twenty-seven Cup career races and the 2004 series championship, also races on an "opportunity permitting" basis in the Pro Stock division of NHRA. Busch won the Cup Series Championship in 2004, the first ever season using the "Chase for the Cup" points format, finishing just eight points ahead of Jimmie Johnson. With a 2006 win in the Nationwide Series, Busch became one of only twenty-three drivers to win races in all three of NASCAR's top divisions: the Sprint Cup Series, the Nationwide Series, and the Camping World Truck Series. His Sprint Cup career has included a history of arguments, fights with other drivers, profanity-laced tirades, and legal problems that have resulted in suspensions on three different occasions, the most recent on February 20, 2015.  Busch was born  to Thomas and Gaye Busch in Las Vegas, Nevada. At the age of six, Busch was accompanying his father to the track and driving go-carts himself.  As an underage teenager, he competed in Dwarf competition winning in just his second race, at the Las Vegas Speedway Park.  This father and son team competed western tracks from Southern California to Utah. In 1994, his first full year as a driver, Busch won ten consecutive races at ten different tracks. His father eventually sold their dwarf equipment and purchased a powerful car for the Legends Series, which Busch began driving in 1996 at age 18. After graduating at Durango High School, Busch enrolled at the University of Arizona, hoping to earn a degree in Pharmacy. Busch became engaged to girlfriend Eva Bryan while attending the 2005 Hungarian Grand Prix. On July 27, 2006, three years to the day of them meeting on a blind date, they were married in Virginia. The footage was taped and later aired on national television. Busch announced on June 30, 2011, "Those in the NASCAR community have been aware for some time now that we are no longer together and we are legally separated". The announcement came days after Busch kissed another woman in Victory Lane celebration following a win at Sonoma Raceway. Busch and Eva Bryan filed for divorce in early June and were legally separated later that month. Busch has a documented history of verbally abusing members of his team and the media. Busch revealed that he has been working with a sports psychologist for two months, to work on "personal issues" according to interviews during the 2011 NASCAR Championship week. Busch is also an avid baseball fan and stated the goal of visiting every ballpark nationwide. His favorite baseball team is the Chicago Cubs. His younger brother Kyle Busch also competes full-time in the Sprint Cup Series champion and runs part-time in both the Xfinity Series and Camping World Truck Series. Busch is a close friend of famous entrepreneur Felix Sabates who co-owns Chip Ganassi Racing, and had a successful racing team SABCO Racing. In 2012 when Busch went to drive for Phoenix Racing (a CGR ally), he co-credited Sabates as having helped him convince James Finch to hire him. On Friday, November 7, 2014, it was reported that Busch was under investigation for domestic assault for an incident on September 26, 2014 in Dover, Delaware. The incident in question involved Busch's ex-girlfriend, Patricia Driscoll inside a motorhome at Dover International Speedway. On February 16, 2015, Busch was given a no-contact order by a Dover judge. Busch was indefinitely suspended by NASCAR February 20, 2015.http://www.nascar.com/en_us/news-media/articles/2015/2/20/kurt-busch-suspended-daytona-500-2015.html On March 5, 2015 the Delaware attorney general's office decided that there was not enough evidence to bring criminal charges for domestic violence. NASCAR however did not lift the suspension choosing to continue a reinstatement program agreed upon by Busch. The official statement from NASCAR read "He has accepted the terms and conditions of a reinstatement program and is actively participating in the program. Busch's eligibility for reinstatement will continue to be governed by that program and the NASCAR rule book, though the elimination of the possibility of criminal charges certainly removes a significant impediment to his reinstatement."http://espn.go.com/racing/nascar/cup/story/_/id/12425871/kurt-busch-not-face-criminal-charges In October 2014 at Martinsville, Busch was introduced to polo player Ashley Van Metre by her sister, who was also a friend of Busch. The two eventually began dating, and Busch announced their engagement on August 26, 2015. Busch's first racing experience was in a Dwarf car at age 14 at Pahrump Valley Speedway.2000 NASCAR Preview and Press Guide. 2000. UMI Publications. Page 321&nbsp;– profile of 2000 season Craftsman Truck Series drivers. He was put in the Dwarf car by his father.2000 NASCAR Preview and Press Guide. 2000. UMI Publications. Page 437&nbsp;– profile of 1999 Featherlite Southwest Series champion (Kurt Busch). Busch earned his big break after Chris Trickle was wounded in an unsolved shooting. (Trickle would die of the injuries over a year later.) The Star Nursery team looked for a new driver to replace Trickle for the No. 70 team. Busch gained national exposure while competing against Ron Hornaday, Jr., Matt Crafton, Greg Biffle, Kevin Harvick and others for the first time in the 1997 Winter Heat Series at Tucson Raceway Park. Busch's team went on to win the 1998 Auto Zone Elite Division Southwest Series Rookie of the Year.Chevrolet 1998 Season Review, December 8, 1998; motor sport.com; Retrieved February 15, 2008 He followed up by winning the series championship in 1999.Chevy Adds to Win Tally in '99, December 22, 1999; motor sport.com; Retrieved February 15, 2008 That led to a tryout in a Roush Racing "Gong Show", which he won and earned a Craftsman Truck Series ride. He raced the No. 99 Ford F-150. He won four races and finished runner-up to teammate Greg Biffle in the championship standings, as well as winning Rookie of the Year honors.  Roush announced during the 2000 season that Busch was being promoted to the Winston Cup Series to replace Chad Little in Roush's No. 97 Ford for the 2001 season. However, Little was released from the ride toward the end of the season and Busch ran several races, beginning at Dover in September, with Jeff Hammond as his crew chief. Busch finished 48th in the points with no wins, Top 5's, or Top 10's. Busch ran for Rookie of the Year honors in 2001, starting all but one of the 36 races with no wins, although he scored three Top 5's and six Top 10 finishes that year. He and Dale Earnhardt made contact in the 2001 Daytona 500 on lap 85. Earnhardt promptly flipped Busch the bird at 185&nbsp;mphLap114 or as described by lap-by-lap commentator Mike Joy in the Fox Sports booth, he simply was telling him "Kurt, you're number one." To this day, Busch recalls this as the only time he encountered Earnhardt on the track (it was also the last time he and Earnhardt competed in the same race as a result of Earnhardt's fatal crash on the last lap). Busch finished with 27th in the point standings and runner-up for the Rookie of the Year honor's, and earned more than $2 million in winnings. Busch's best finish was third at the spring Talladega race, which was three weeks after scoring his first career Top 5 finish at Texas (fourth), and he added a fifth-place in the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis. He also won the pole for the Southern 500 at Darlington, where he led 74 laps before a late-race brush with the wall took him to the garage. A month later, he led 38 laps at Martinsville before contact with Ricky Rudd cut his left-rear tire; heavy traffic behind him made matters worse, as Busch had to complete a lap and a half before he could get to the pits. During the delay, the tire carcass wrapped itself around the axle, costing him several laps. Overheating problems halted a strong performance at Rockingham in October, where he led 45 laps. 2002 was Busch's breakout year in the Winston Cup Series. He won his first victory in the Food City 500 at Bristol, after battling hard with rival Jimmy Spencer on worn tires. Busch added a second win at Martinsville in October and then won at Atlanta the next week and in the season finale at Homestead. This gave Busch four wins, twelve Top 5's, and 22 Top 10 finishes, and one pole, all of which would allow him to finish third in the final standings for the year. He finished the season particularly strong, winning three of the final five races and finishing third and sixth and leading many laps in the next two. As well as his finish in the point standings, he also collected $5,105,394. Busch had an "up and down" year in 2003, finishing eleventh in the season's points standings, earning four wins (including a season sweep at Bristol, making him the first driver to do that since Rusty Wallace accomplished the feat in 2000), nine Top 5's, and 14 Top 10 finishes but a late season slump put him in this finishing spot in the point standings, although he collected over  again that year. Busch was the runner-up finisher in what was the most closest finish in all of NASCAR history - this was the Carolina Dodge Dealers 400, held at Darlington on March 16 of that year. The race in this old race track was decided with a two-lap side-by-side battle between him and Ricky Craven. For two laps, the two drivers fought for the victory and touched the cars together. When the cars attached, the final lap was ferociously fought ending up with Craven shifting ahead of Busch by 0.002 of a second, making it the closest finish in NASCAR history, tied with the 2011 Aaron's 499. Busch also won the IROC championship before winning a NASCAR championship. In 2004, Busch won three races, two poles, and the inaugural NASCAR Nextel Cup Championship. He won his fourth consecutive race at Bristol after winning the Food City 500 in March (winning that race for the third consecutive year), and became the second driver to win both races at New Hampshire Motor Speedway in a single season. He scored ten Top 5's and 21 Top 10 finishes. Midway through the 2005 season, Busch announced that he would be leaving Roush Racing at the end of the season and would replace Rusty Wallace in the No. 2 Dodge for Penske Racing South. Initially, Roush was unhappy with Busch's decision to leave his team but when Chip Ganassi Racing announced that Jamie McMurray wanted to join Roush Racing in 2006, Roush agreed to let Busch go. Busch won three races during the 2005 season, along with nine Top 5's and 18 Top 10 finishes in 34 races. He finished tenth in the final points standings.  Busch was released from Roush Racing at the end of 2005 and joined Penske Racing South in 2006. Busch had asked team owner Jack Roush to let him out of his contract at the end of the 2005, but Roush initially refused. However, after Chip Ganassi released Jamie McMurray from his 2006 contract, Roush decided to release Busch when Roush learned that Busch already signed a contract with Roger Penske before the season ended. Busch's last race with Roush-Fenway Racing and 2005 was at Texas before the final two races; because he was parked by NASCAR for an incident with the police (see below). Busch appealed and a misunderstanding on the police's part was cleared before the races but nonetheless the parking penalty was held in place. McMurray, who was originally slated to join Roush in 2007 to drive the No. 6 (which ultimately went to David Ragan), instead replaced Busch in the No. 97, which was then renumbered to No. 26. In the 2006 season, driving for Penske, Busch scored one win at Bristol Motor Speedway in the Food City 500, his fifth win at the track. Busch celebrated the victory by getting out of his car and making a snow angel on the track, due to snow that had fallen at the track that weekend. He also won six poles and had seven top fives and twelve top ten finishes but finished 16th in the final standings. He also made his Busch Series debut for Penske in the No. 39  Dodge at Texas Motor Speedway, winning in his first race. He ran six more races that season and picked up a second win at Watkins Glen International by holding off Robby Gordon on the final lap. Gordon and Busch on the final lap struggled for the win but it resulted in Busch holding onto the lead in the outer-loop to seal up the win. In victory circle Busch thanked Gordon for a fight for victory and said that the struggle reminded him of his 2003 Carolina Dodge Dealers 400 at Darlington when Ricky Craven beat Busch by one inch to win the race after a 2 lap-long struggle to the checkers. In the 2007 season, Busch had two wins, one pole, scored five top-fives, and ten-top tens through 26 races and qualified for the Chase for the Sprint Cup. Busch's on-track performance increased noticeably after the addition of Pat Tryson as his crew chief mid-way through the season.Tryson takes over No. 2 Kurt Busch Crew Chief Duties He also ran four more Busch races, earning 2 top five and 3 top ten finishes.  In 2008, in order to make sure rookie teammate Sam Hornish Jr. would be guaranteed a starting spot in the season's first five races, the owner's points from Busch's No. 2 car were transferred over to the No. 77 car driven by Hornish. Busch would still be guaranteed a starting spot, due to NASCAR's Champion's Provisional Rule, which states that the most recent series champion not in the top 35 in the previous season's final owner points automatically qualifies for a race. (With his 2004 championship, Busch was by several years the most recent). At the 2008 Daytona 500, Busch was contending to win and had a fast car on the final lap capable to win. He and his teammate Ryan Newman got by Joe Gibbs Racing rivals, Tony Stewart and Kurt's brother Kyle on the final lap and Kurt decided to instead of trying for the win himself, push Newman to victory. In turn 4 Newman cleared further challenges and won the race, thanking his win on Busch in victory circle. It was Roger Penske's first Daytona 500 win and it made Penske one of the few owners to win both the Indianapolis 500 and Daytona 500 in an owner career. On June 29, Busch broke a 29-race winless streak at New Hampshire Motor Speedway when the Lenox Industrial Tools 301 was called due to rain on lap 284. It was his first win since Michigan's late summer race in 2007, and his fourth win since joining Penske Racing and 18th overall. He began his 2009 season at the 2009 Daytona 500, he was involved in a wreck on lap 124 when Dale Earnhardt Jr. swerved into Brian Vickers. Vickers shot up the track and hit the wall, ricocheting into Denny Hamlin, who came down into Busch. He then spun into the grass along with eight other drivers including his brother Kyle. Busch made numerous pit stops to repair the car, and was able to finish tenth. Kurt was one of the many ones that believed that Dale Jr.'s contact was intentional and Kurt joined Earnhardt's fans, the drivers and owners in calling NASCAR to penalize Earnhardt, for the rest of the race but this was not granted. Busch then qualified fourth for the season's second race at the Auto Club Speedway in Fontana, California. He ran in the top five most of the race and finished fifth. This moved him up seven spots in the standings to third. Busch led most of the race the 2009 Kobalt Tools 500, leading 235 of 325 laps and getting his nineteenth Sprint Cup Series victory. He led more laps in the race than he did in the entire 2008 season. At Las Vegas he and his younger brother Kyle had a touching moment when Kyle Busch won at Las Vegas, their hometown. In victory circle, Kurt came in and shared a big hug with Kyle. Legendary driver and NASCAR announcer Darrell Waltrip called it "The most touching thing I have ever seen."http://www.skirtsandscuffs.com/2012/03/why-i-love-nascar-las-vegas-by-chief.html He remained in the top five in points for the rest of the season. He qualified for the Chase, and ended up fourth in the standings, the highest-ranked car that was not under the Hendrick Motorsports banner. Busch picked up another win at the 2009 Dickies 500 after his brother Kyle ran out of fuel with two laps to go. For the 2010 season, Penske Racing brought rookie, Brad Keselowski on board to drive the No. 12 Penske Racing Dodge Charger. Busch and Sam Hornish would be his teammates.http://www.nascar.com/2009/news/headlines/cup/09/01/bkeselowski.penske/index.html  Keselowski also ran a full-time Nationwide Series, driving the No. 22 Dodge Challenger. 2009 Rookie Justin Allgaier accompanied him in the Nationwide Series.http://www.nascar.com/2009/news/business/09/16/discount.tire.penske.bkeselowski/index.html Steve Addington, who was Kyle Busch's crew chief for the past two seasons and led the younger Busch to 14 victories, became the crew chief for Kurt at the start of the 2010 season, as Pat Tryson left to join Michael Waltrip Racing as Martin Truex, Jr.'s crew chief. On May 22, 2010, Busch won the 26th Annual NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race. He then followed it up by winning the Coca-Cola 600 the following weekend, becoming only the seventh driver to win both in the same year. Busch eventually made the Chase being seeded fifth in points. Busch also, amazingly, finished seventh at Daytona at the Coke Zero 400 after wrecking three times in the last twelve laps. Busch would finish out the season eleventh among the Chase contenders. In 2011, Busch and Keselowski swapped teams and crews. Busch took over a renumbered No.22 Dodge. Busch earned his first Budweiser Shootout win after Denny Hamlin went below the yellow line at the end of the race at Daytona. He would go on to win the 2011 Gatorade Duel 1, and because of polesitter Dale Earnhardt, Jr.'s crash in practice, which forced him into a backup car, Busch started in first for the 2011 Daytona 500, and started the 2011 season three for three. Busch won the pole for and led most of the race at Kansas, for 152 laps. However, a fuel pickup issue late hurt his chances of winning. Teammate Brad Keselowski took the victory. However, a few weeks later on June 26, Kurt finally got an elusive road course victory at Infineon Raceway. Not only did he win, but he also led the most laps with 76. Because of Brad Keselowski's injury during a practice crash at Road Atlanta, Busch filled in for Keselowski in his NASCAR Nationwide Series car for the Zippo 200 at Watkins Glen International, and Busch managed to get the pole and the win. By August 13, 2011, Busch had won 1/4 of all of his Nationwide races. On October 2, Busch won on two late restarts beating Jimmie Johnson in turn 1 leading the final 43 laps to grab his first ever victory at the Monster Mile at Dover. After a frustrating final five races, things came to a head when Busch launched a verbal tirade against an ESPN cameraman, and giving an obscene gesture to workers when a car blocked his path towards his pit garage following a transmission failure at the same race. Crew chief Steve Addington moved to Stewart-Haas Racing after the 2011 season. Busch's employment with Penske Racing terminated on December 5, 2011.  Although most observers of the sport believe he was fired, Busch claimed in a public statement that the parting was "mutual": "I am grateful to Penske Racing for six very productive years. Together we won a lot of races&nbsp;— 16 in all. ... Coming to a mutual agreement to go our separate ways is a positive step for me."  In contrast, the Charlotte Observer reported several sources confirming team owner Roger Penske decided that Busch's altercation at Homestead-Miami Speedway was the last straw in his stormy tenure with the team but chose to defer the announcement until after Champion's Week.http://www.cbssports.com/nascar/story/16343021/penske-kurt-busch-to-reportedly-part-ways He was replaced in the No.22 by A. J. Allmendinger.  Following his release from Penske Racing, Busch reached an agreement to drive for Phoenix Racing, driving the No. 51 Chevrolet, for the 2012 Sprint Cup Series season, He also ran a limited Nationwide Series schedule for the team, while running additional Nationwide Series races for Kyle Busch Motorsports, sharing the No. 54 car with his younger brother. At the 2012 Aaron's 499 at Talladega, Busch paid homage to the 2006 racing comedy Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby by running his No.51 car with the paint scheme of Ricky Bobby's No.62 "ME" Cougar car from the movie, causing NASCAR on Fox commentators Mike Joy, Larry McReynolds and Darrell Waltrip to jokingly refer to Busch as "Ricky Bobby" throughout the race, and Busch also dropped movie lines into radio chatter with his spotter and crew chief. Busch's girlfriend Patricia Driscoll spent months getting permission from Sony and Will Ferrell as well as other trademark and license holders. Busch's real-life fall from grace during the 2011-12 Sprint Cup off-season has been compared to Ricky Bobby's. Busch's car was one of the stronger performers, running near the front and even leading for a few laps. Towards the end of the race, with six laps to go, he dropped back when he spun out in the trioval off ex-teammate Brad Keselowski's bumper. After stopping, Busch drove backwards down pit road to get replacement tires, though he was not penalized and finished in 20th place as the last car on the lead lap. At Darlington, Busch was turned with Ryan Newman, and both drivers' days were ended. On pit road Busch gestured and did a burnout in front of Newman, leaving one of Newman's pit crew members to have to jump to avoid being hit by Busch's car. Busch was fined $50,000 and put on a five race probation and Newman was not penalized.  On June 4, 2012, Busch feuded with Justin Allgaier at the Nationwide event at Dover and after talking to his boss and brother Kyle. When asked by Bob Pockrass about being on probation, Busch said, "It refrains me from not beating the shit out of you right now because you ask me stupid questions. But since I'm on probation, I suppose that's improper to say as well. If you can talk about racing things, we'll talk about many things, Bob. It is not racing, you're here just to start stuff, you know that's you're all out here for!" NASCAR immediately suspended Busch from the Pocono race as a result for violating their policy forbidding swearing publicly. The following week NASCAR suspended Busch until June 13 and extended his probation until December 31. Busch was already was on probation for the confrontation with Newman and his crew following the May 12 Sprint Cup race at Darlington and for driving recklessly through Newman’s pit stall. According to a NASCAR news release, Busch was suspended for violating Section 12-1 of the NASCAR rulebook, which covers “actions detrimental to stock car racing; violation of probation; verbal abuse to a media member.” On July 6, Busch won the Nationwide Series Jalapeño 250 at Daytona by passing Austin Dillion on the final lap. During his 7-8 month stint with James Finch, he finished third at Sonoma after leading a few laps and running in the top three all race long. However his nearest miss took place at Talladega that autumn. There Kurt controlled the race early and mid-way and spun out from contact with Jamie McMurray. He was parked by NASCAR after driving away from the safety officials who were trying to assist him and he wouldn't stop his car even though NASCAR was telling him to do so. The following week he began driving for Furniture Row Racing. On September 24, 2012, it was announced that Busch would drive the No. 78 Chevrolet SS for Furniture Row Racing for the 2013 season, replacing Regan Smith. In his first start for FRR at the 2012 Bank of America 500, Busch finished in twenty-first. He had a twenty-fifth-place finish the following week at Kansas. Busch later rebounded with three consecutive top-ten finishes at Texas, Phoenix, and Homestead to end the season. 2013 started off for Busch the very same way that 2012 had - driving with a new team, in this case, Furniture Row Racing. In spite of this, Busch showed off significant improvement over the off-year that had been 2012, both for himself and for FRR as a whole: in the three years the car was driven by Regan Smith, Furniture Row Racing had only one win, three top-five, and six top-ten finishes, and only led 42 laps in Sprint Cup competition. In comparison, in the first 23 races of 2013, Busch had five top-five finishes, nine top-ten finishes, one pole, and had led 270 laps, more than six times as many laps as the car had ever led with Smith in the previous three seasons. Busch started off the 2013 season crashing in the Sprint Unlimited on lap 14, finishing in 13th place. He finished fifth in the Budweiser Duel, but poor handling made him finish the Daytona 500 in 28th place, five laps down. He did not improve much the next week at Phoenix, where he finished one lap down in twnety-seventh place. He then had a twentieth-place finish at Las Vegas. After three less successful runs, his hit a resurgence, getting a fourth-place finish at Bristol. At Fontana, Busch went a lap down briefly after being penalized for speeding during green flag pit stops, but he surged back in the last laps to finish in third place behind brother his Kyle Busch and Dale Earnhardt, Jr.. At Martinsville, Busch had bad luck. He crashed early in the race and after repairing his damages, successfully took the lucky dog free pass. But later, on lap 487, while running many laps down, Busch lost his brakes in turn 1 and slammed the wall hard enough to cause his engine to burst into flames. This brought out a 6-minute red flag. Busch was uninjured. At Texas, Busch almost acquired the pole position with a qualifying speed of 195.688&nbsp;mph, but the final one to qualify; his younger brother managed to win the pole with a speed of 196.299&nbsp;mph to conclude qualifying. Busch ended up starting second, but still on the front row. However he was disappointed to lose the pole, saying "I would rather lose to Kyle than anybody else...it is frustrating that I do lose it to him though." At Richmond, Busch led for 36 laps and contended for victory. However on a final restart he again tangled with Tony Stewart. He had bumped Stewart on the restart causing Stewart to finish out of the top-ten. After the race ended the two cars exchanged shoves and the two argued on pit road, drawing attention away from race winner Kevin Harvick. Both were summoned to the NASCAR hauler. Busch finished in ninth place, and said to reporters that he did not intentionally hit Stewart and said he was surprised and disappointed when Stewart retaliated after the checkers. At Talladega, Busch led two laps and was in the top-ten on lap 182 when he was collected in a large pileup on the back straightaway. He took the worst damage in the crash, as J.J. Yeley got loose from contact with Ricky Stenhouse, Jr., went across the track and hit him with enough force that Busch turned sideways, flipped over once, and landed on top of Ryan Newman, then slid off Newman and struck the outside wall, and was hit again by Clint Bowyer and Bobby Labonte. Busch was uninjured. At Darlington, Busch won his first pole position of the year. From the drop of the green flag, Busch led 69 of the first 80 laps, but his handling went away after the first green flag pit stops and he was forced to settle for a fourteenth-place finish. At the All-Star race, Busch started up front and led 29 laps, winning two of the four 20 lap segments, with brother Kyle winning the other two. However, a poor pit stop by both Busch brothers was responsible for causing them to lose the lead and race to Jimmie Johnson for the final ten lap shootout. Kurt finished fifth. At the Coca-Cola 600 a week later, Busch started second on the outside of the front row. Despite having to change a battery late in the race, he led eight laps and he still finished in third place, the first time he'd finished in the top three since June 2012 at Sonoma. When interviewed, he responded, “Yeah, a top-five is great. To be up front, to lead laps, that's what it's all about. So we'll get these little hiccups polished up and continue plugging forward. That's the only thing we can do, is learn from what exactly happened -- was it a cable issue, a battery that was dead, was the alternator not charging? To show our strength tonight, to finish third, we'll take it. I think that's what needs to be said. The Furniture Row team was fast, and we didn't quite have a perfect night, and we brought it home third.”"Kurt Busch comes oh-so close at Charlotte" Busch then had a 12th-place finish at Dover and a seventh place showing at Pocono. At Michigan, Busch qualified on the front row and led the first 21 laps, but went seven laps down when he got into an early accident on lap 30. At Sonoma, Busch got his next top-five finish with a fourth-place finish at Sonoma, after leading fifteen laps, then battling back from a lap down after a pair of speeding penalties on pit road. At Kentucky, brief controversy hit Busch as on lap 48, he was responsible for causing a seven car wreck that was instigated when he went down on the apron, then came back up the track and turned Brad Keselowski approaching turn 1, causing Keselowski to shoot up the track and collect several more cars including Greg Biffle, Travis Kvapil and Dave Blaney. Busch finished sixth, and followed this up with another sixth-place finish at the Coke Zero 400. This finish gave Furniture Row Racing their first ever streak of three straight top-ten finishes, and also moved Busch up to ninth in the points. However the next week at Loudon, Busch started second and led 102 laps before he was turned and wrecked by Matt Kenseth and finished 31st. At Indianapolis, Busch had a fourteenth place showing. The following week at Pocono, he led nine laps and recorded a third-place finish. This was followed by a ninth-place finish at Watkins Glen. Returning to Michigan, Busch started on the outside of the front row, led 43 laps, and finished third, bringing himself up to ninth in driver points. At Bristol in August, Busch started on the outside row and led 54 laps early, before a loose wheel caused him to go behind the wall, resulting in a 31st-place finish, 26 laps down. However, he bounced back over the following two weeks, with a fourth-place finish at Atlanta. The following week at Richmond, Busch started second and had one of the strongest cars of the night, ultimately finishing second to Carl Edwards, the team's best race finish to date. This also marked Furniture Row Racing's first ever appearance in the Chase. At Chicagoland, Busch opened the Chase with a fourth-place finish. He then had a 13th-place finish at New Hampshire. At Dover, Busch finished 21st, three laps down, after he had to pit for a loose wheel. At Kansas, Busch was forced to start at the rear of the field when he crashed in practice and had to bring out a backup car. He managed to work his way through the field to finish second. This brought Busch up to ten top-five and fifteen top-ten finishes over 30 races. Busch would go on to finish tenth in the final standings. Also in 2013, Busch planned to drive the No. 1 Chevrolet in the Nationwide Series for Phoenix Racing, competing in sixteen events; in the event he would run only three races during the season, wrecking at Daytona but having top-ten finishes at Talladega and the second race at Daytona. On August 26, 2013, Busch announced that he would be leaving Furniture Row Racing to join Stewart-Haas Racing, stating he had signed a multi-year deal with the team. Team co-owner Gene Haas stated he would fund Busch's ride exclusively. In late September it was revealed that Busch's car number would be the No. 41.  Busch had his outbreaking race for his new team at Fontana. He led a bit of the race after Jimmie Johnson blew a tire with 7 laps to go. He led on the restart against teammate Tony Stewart but lost the lead on the final lap after allowing Kyle Busch to slip past and win. The next week at the STP 500, on lap 43, Busch collided with former Penske teammate Brad Keselowski on pit road during a caution, causing massive damage to Keselowski's car. There would be several instances of beating and banging between the two ex-teammates after Keselowski's car was repaired and came out of the garage. By the end of the race, Busch was battling Jimmie Johnson for the lead in the final 27 laps. Busch took the lead with 11 laps remaining, and kept it to win his first race since 2011, and first at Martinsville since 2002. At Darlington, while running in the top five with 3 laps to go, Busch got tapped from behind by Clint Bowyer and spun out, hitting a barrier head-on. Because of energy absorbing walls, Busch was uninjured, but waved angrily towards Bowyer under caution and showed discontent with Bowyer in post-race ceremonies. In regards to the incident with Bowyer, Busch said "That was a terrible way to end what could have been a decent night. We struggled at times to get the balance of the Haas Automation Chevrolet right, but we kind of found our spot just past the halfway point and made slight adjustments the rest of the way. We called for a two-tire stop at the end hoping to gain some track position, but it seemed like everyone had the same idea. We gained a little, but the guys behind us all had four tires. I tried to hold them off the best I could, but someone (Bowyer) moved me out of their way and it ruined our night. I hate it for the team, but we keep learning each week and we will get better." At the Coca-Cola 600, Busch in his attempt to complete all 1,100 miles of the 2014 Indianapolis 500 and the Coca-Cola 600 in the same day, came up 114 miles short, blowing an engine with less than 30 laps left. At Pocono Busch qualified third. He led 5 laps throughout the race and ran in the top five all day long. He ultimately finished third; his best finish since his win at Martinsville. At Daytona Busch qualified 42nd; despite this Busch led the most laps. However he got passed by Aric Almirola on lap 111. 5 laps later a rain-shower soaked the speedway on lap 116 ending the race. In an interview a disappointed Busch said "I didn't do my job. Third is good but I wanted to win." After the race Busch was penalized 10 points and Daniel Knost was fined $10,000 for an illegal window automotive part accidentally installed before the race. Busch elected not to appeal the penalty. Since Daytona Busch did much better. He had a top five finish at Pocono and Watkins Glen. Daniel Knost parted ways with Kurt Busch mid-way into the Chase and Knost was replaced with Tony Gibson. Knost was given to Busch's teammate Danica Patrick. With Gibson as his new crew chief, Kurt did significantly better, qualifying his remaining races in the top ten. His best finish in a race during the Chase was seventh twice-at Talladega and Phoenix. Busch started out his season on a rough note in the 2015 Sprint Unlimited, when he got collected in 2 multi-car accidents. At the second Budweiser Duel, he was running second behind Jimmie Johnson with nine laps to go. He went below the yellow line by accident and improved his spot. He was given a stop-and-go-penalty by officials which sent him to the back of the field for the final results. On February 20, Busch was indefinitely suspended by NASCAR after a Delaware family court cited "more likely than not" that Busch had abused his ex-girlfriend. Regan Smith replaced him for the Daytona 500 along with the races held at Atlanta and Las Vegas. On March 11, NASCAR lifted Busch's indefinite suspension, making him eligible to compete again, starting with the CampingWorld.com 500 at Phoenix. Additionally, Busch was granted a waiver by NASCAR, making him still eligible for the Chase if he won a race between then and the autumn Richmond event. In his first race back from suspension, Busch finished fifth. At Auto Club, Busch won the pole and led the most laps (65), before being bumped back to third due to a last lap pass by Brad Keselowski and Kevin Harvick. The race ended in controversy as, according to an online poll, 69% of the fans suspected a fix in the waning laps on NASCAR's part. NASCAR denied the allegations but not before controversy broke out for the next few days following the race.  The next week at Martinsville, Busch led early in the race. He faded to the tail end of the field mid-way. He briefly got penalized for moving lanes before the restart, but 20 laps later officials rescinded the penalty. Busch later took the checkers after a dominating performance at Richmond. Battling Justin Allgaier and Jamie McMurray for the win during the final 100 laps, Busch pulled away to win the race, his first win of the season. Busch's second win came in a rain-shortened Michigan race. At Sonoma, Busch dominated early, before finishing second to younger brother Kyle. Busch would finish 8th in 2015 championship points despite missing the first three races of the season, scoring 21 top 10s and 3 poles. Busch began training in January 2011 under veteran NHRA Pro Stock driver Allen Johnson and obtained his NHRA Pro Stock competition license. He made his drag racing competition debut on March 10 at the 42nd annual Tire Kingdom Gatornationals in Gainesville. On March 12, Busch qualified in the Pro Stock field, and made his first professional drag racing Elimination-round start on March 13, losing to Erica Enders by 0.004 seconds. Busch is only the third driver to cross over between NASCAR and NHRA, the other two being Richard Petty and John Andretti. In 2003, during CART's pre-season test at Sebring International Raceway, Busch tested a Champ Car for three-time CART champion Bobby Rahal. Ford, Busch's manufacturer in Winston Cup at the time, were CART's exclusive engine supplier, and the test was merely for fun rather than evaluation. Driving a car fielded for Michel Jourdain, Jr. (who later tried NASCAR), Busch was pleased with the experience, though he was several seconds off pacesetter Oriol Servia's time.Oreovicz, John. IndyCar -- Kurt Busch back - yes, back - in and IndyCar, ESPN, May 3, 2013, Retrieved 2013-05-03 In 2013 it was announced that Busch would test an IndyCar for Andretti Autosport, owned by 1991 CART champion Michael Andretti, at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Andretti, the defending championship team, use Chevrolet engines, as Busch's Furniture Row Racing team does in Sprint Cup. Busch did not comment on whether or not he was preparing for Indianapolis 500. In January 2014 he insisted that he is interested in competing at the Indianapolis 500.Kurt Busch mulls Indy 500 run - Brant James, ESPN, 17 January 2014 It was announced on March 4, 2014 that Busch will attempt to qualify for the 2014 Indianapolis 500, driving a fifth car for the Andretti Autosport team, and attempt to perform double duty: racing in both the Indianapolis 500 and the Coca Cola 600 on the same day. Busch started 12th in the Indy 500. After riding along throughout the race, Busch became more competitive. He finished sixth and received praise from his fellow NASCAR racers for his finish. However, his attempt to do the full 1,100 miles of both races ended 191 miles short when the engine on his Charlotte car blew on lap 273. On October 21, 2014, Busch announced he would race in the 2014 Race of Champions for Team USA alongside IndyCar's Ryan Hunter-Reay. Busch is notable for having been a rival of fellow driver Jimmy Spencer. In 2002 at Bristol, Spencer was leading with 150 laps left in the race. With 56 laps to go, Busch came up to Spencer's No.41 Dodge. After a small bump Spencer slowed and Busch got by. Busch led the rest of the race and took his first Sprint Cup win. As Spencer finished the race he radioed "We will never forget what happened today guys" in regard to the contact.http://www.nascar.com/en_us/news-media/articles/2012/03/15/maumann-kbusch-jspencer-bristol.html In a post-race interview Busch claimed it was payback for a past move at Phoenix in late 2001 in which Spencer wrecked him trying to make a pass. Spencer threateningly warned "Jimmy never forgets." At Indianapolis later in summer 2002, Busch was racing in the top ten. He aggressively passed Spencer on lap 37. In reply Spencer deliberately tapped Busch who then crashed into the turn 3 wall. Busch climbed out of his demolished car and until paramedics came, whenever he saw Spencer driving by him under caution, he pointed at Spencer and repeatedly shouted at him. When interviewed Kurt called Jimmy Spencer a "decrepit old has-been or maybe I should say a never-was." Spencer replied "Kurt has a lot to learn, and some of that is to control his mouth". At Charlotte in the All-Star Challenge in May 2002, Kurt Busch was involved in an altercation with Robby Gordon. In the final segment of the race, Kurt Busch tapped Robby Gordon's No.31 Chevy, throwing him into the wall. After the race Kurt admitted that he intentionally spun Gordon to "put on a good show." and added that he "Hated to use Robby as a caution." Kurt was fined $10,000 by NASCAR for the incident and put on probation until the end of the calendar year. In summer 2003 at Michigan, Busch and Spencer had another run in. After Spencer was accidentally wrecked by Busch, he was livid. When the race ended, Spencer saw Busch driving by him in the garage. Spencer reportedly went into Busch's window and punched Busch in the face. Spencer was led away, and Busch was taken to a hospital with a broken nose and a dental injury. The next morning NASCAR and Ultra Motorsports declared that Spencer would be parked for the Cup race at Bristol the next weekend as a consequence.http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1350&dat=20030818&id=x35RAAAAIBAJ&sjid=OAQEAAAAIBAJ&pg=4875,954669 The week before the race Spencer also was fined $35,000 and put on probation for the rest of the year. Spencer was nearly arrested by the police for the charges of assault until NASCAR promised to handle it. After this incident Spencer and Busch did not get involved with each other anymore on the track. In 2013, Busch and Spencer announced that they are now close friends and no longer have grudges against each other.http://chronicle.augusta.com/sports/2012-05-09/nascar-feuds-are-short-lived-or-long-lasting Busch's 2005 season ended two races short after a confrontation during the fall Phoenix race weekend with Maricopa County Sheriff deputies on November 11, 2005, when he was pulled over for suspicion of drunken driving and cited for reckless driving.Associated Press. Kurt Busch cited for reckless driving. NASCAR.com. URL Retrieved July 12, 2006. At first, the Sheriff's department claimed that their equipment for sobriety testing had failed and they could not release results of his drunk driving tests. This claim later proved to be false, but by this time, Roush Racing responded two days later by suspending Busch for the remainder of the season and replacing him with Kenny Wallace for the final two races. Team president Geoff Smith famously declared they were "officially retiring as Kurt Busch's apologists."Associated Press. 'Last straw': Kurt Busch suspended for rest of season. ESPN.com. URL Retrieved July 12, 2006. Busch was eighth in the Cup Series Chase for the Championship at the time of the incident. He was sentenced to serve 50 hours of community service which was to be completed within one year. In November 2006, one year after the incident, Busch was declared an honorary deputy in Maricopa County.Associated Press. One year after citation, Kurt Busch an honorary deputy. ESPN.com. URL Retrieved March 12, 2015. At the 2007 NEXTEL All-Star Challenge, Kurt Busch had a public breakdown of relations with his younger brother Kyle. With ten laps to go in the event, the Busches were racing against each other, their cars making contact; eventually their contact resulted in the two crashing out of contention to win. Kevin Harvick went by to win the event; but the center of the attention and media was on Kurt and Kyle's feud. Kyle and Kurt were livid with each other in the post-race ceremonies, and were arguing on pit road. When Kurt was interviewed he stated he "wasn't going to be eating any Kellogg's [Kyle's sponsor] soon", and said that Kyle was fighting dirty. When Kyle was interviewed he said that he wanted to cleanly get by Kurt and that Kurt shoved up his car for no reason. The next week when they refused to reconcile, NASCAR had officials separate them for the rest of the season to avoid any on-track or off-track incidents. The two brothers did not speak to each other for six months; it was not until a family Thanksgiving reunion, by the persuasion of their grandmother, Kurt and Kyle Busch apologized to each other. During the Crown Royal 400 at Richmond International Raceway, Busch went on a profanity-laced rant on his in-car radio that appeared to be directed at then Penske racing technical director Tom German. Busch was reportedly dissatisfied with Tom and at one point during the race said "I'm sorry, our day was done when Tom German decided he was in charge".http://www.sbnation.com/nascar/2011/5/6/2157887/kurt-busch-penske-racing-changes-darlington-richmond-radio-rant-nascar-2011 During the September 11, 2011 Wonderful Pistachios 400 at Richmond International Raceway, Busch locked up his brakes and accidentally wrecked Jimmie Johnson on lap 186. Despite it being clear that Kurt did not intend to crash him, Jimmie Johnson did not see it that way; and later retaliated spinning Busch going into Turn 1 sixty laps later and was parked for the balance of the race. Busch ended up in fifth place and called Johnson "A five time chump-ion."  In the post race interview, Busch was quoted as saying on ABC that he was "in [Johnson's] head,". He had to be restrained after the race when NASCAR.com reporter Joe Menzer asked “Kurt, can either you or Jimmie win the Chase...”. Busch cut Menzer off replying “How did I see you were going to come with that? We’re good.” and started to walk away. Busch ultimately shouted expletives and physically went after Menzer before Penske team members had to physically restrain him. Jenna Fryer later in a press conference asked Johnson about the comment during the ABC post race interview, Busch interrupted saying "I didn't say that tonight. Did not." Fryer offered to show him the ABC transcript, which he looked at after the interview. Busch proceeded to tear up the transcript showing he had made these statements and walked out of the media center. At the start of the Sylvania 300 at New Hampshire Motor Speedway, Busch's team was delayed in rolling their car to pit road until after the National anthem. During pre-race car inspections NASCAR had an issue with the rear-end housing being outside of its allowable tolerances. Jamie Little, walking with Busch, asked if he was okay with her asking a question. Busch responded, "Why the f*** do you think I would be okay, I gotta go get in my car. NASCAR told me I gotta get in my car". In the final race of the 2011 season, Busch finished 47 laps behind the leaders, after spending time in the garage for mechanical issues that developed in the first five laps.  While turning into the garage, Busch made an obscene hand gesture.  While his car was undergoing repairs, Busch verbally abused Dr. Jerry Punch while waiting to be interviewed by Punch for ESPN, in an incident captured by a fan and posted on YouTube.http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NsaBQq5D4Zg  NASCAR fined Busch $50,000 for his actions during the race, and Penske Racing issued an apology for Busch's "inappropriate actions". In December 2011, he announced that he was seeing a sports psychologist, acknowledging "I need to be a better person on the radio, to the team, as a leader. It's personal issues, of course, and working with a sports psychologist, I've gotten obviously a small grasp, but there's obviously bigger things that I need to accomplish and things can't happen overnight." Penske Racing and Busch later mutually agreed to part ways,http://www.penskeracing.com/news/index.cfm?cat_id=542&cid=50920 although many in the sport believe he was fired.http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/C/CAR_NASCAR_KURT_BUSCH_PENSKE?SITE=GENERIC&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT&CTIME=2011-12-05-13-57-18 With six laps remaining in the Bojangles' Southern 500, Busch cut a tire and subsequently caused a wreck that involved not only his car but also Ryan Newman. When leaving his pit (directly in front of Newman), Busch did a burnout and sped next to where crew members and NASCAR officials where standing. Following the conclusion of the race, while entering pit road, Busch bumped Newman's car. Busch explained the incident as an accident and unrelated, caused by taking his helmet off and not seeing where he was going. Andrew Rueger, Newman's gas man, went after Busch following the race. This turned into a heated argument, accidentally knocking over a NASCAR official. Newman, giving an interview to Sports Illustrated, was quoted as saying, "It's easy to say that Kurt blew a fuse again, I'm not sure why he did it and tried to run over our guys and NASCAR officials. And nobody is. I think the chemical imbalance speaks for itself. Kurt drilled me in pit lane and said that he was taking his helmet off, and he didn't see where he was going. I'm pretty sure there were 42 other guys that are taking their helmets off and doing whatever for the last 10 years, and that's the first time that's happened to me." On May 15, 2012, NASCAR announced that Busch had been fined $50,000 and placed on probation until July 25, 2012 for "reckless driving on pit road during the race" and for being "involved in an altercation with another competitor after the completion of the race." After the 2012 5-hour Energy 200, Busch, who was already on probation following the above altercation with Newman at Darlington, was upset with Justin Allgaier after a close call during the race. After the race, Bob Pockrass, a reporter with the Sporting News, asked Busch if being on probation made an impact during the Nationwide Series race. Busch replied "It refrains me from not beating the shit out of you right now because you ask me stupid questions. But since I'm on probation, I suppose that's improper to say as well."[ ] On June 4, NASCAR suspended Busch for both the upcoming tire test and the Pocono 400 at Pocono Raceway, and extended his probation though December 31, 2012. For this race, Busch's car was driven by David Reutimann, who finished in 21st place on the lead lap. Busch's No.51 was parked on lap 99 by NASCAR after Busch drove away from track workers that were tending to his car, which had run out of gas and crashed on the back straightaway after being accidentally spun out by Jamie McMurray. He had been leading the race before the accident and soon the medical assistance arrived. Busch realized that his fuel tank was not completely empty and tried to drive it to the garage for repairs. As a medical bag was dragged with the car and slipped off NASCAR ordered Kurt to stop his car for the medical assistance but Busch ignored the order. His car ran out of gas just in turn 4 and NASCAR officials picked him up and parked the No.51 team for the remainder of the race. Kurt Busch said goodbye to his team members since he was to drive the No.78 car for a multi-year deal after the race and when asked about the incident, Busch said that he ignored the order because he did not have his helmet on and could not hear his crew chief's order to stop. NASCAR investigation that week proved that this appeal was true and therefore they did not penalize Busch any further after the parking. On the final restart of the Toyota Owners 400, Busch and Tony Stewart had another altercation. Busch had previously led 36 laps of the race and was in contention to win. Stewart because of slight contact lost 17 spots and Busch finished in ninth-place behind race winner Kevin Harvick. When the race was over, seconds after the checkers flew, Stewart bumped Busch, who also bumped Matt Kenseth. Their shoving match using their cars caused Busch's to be damaged. Both were summoned to the NASCAR hauler. During the post-race ceremonies, the fans noticed Busch and Stewart arguing near the NASCAR hauler. When interviewed Busch said he did not intentionally hit Stewart but was trying to cleanly race him to the finish. Stewart disagreed with this because the two drivers had had several prior incidents in 2007 and 2008 in similar fashion. At Loudon in the July race, Busch started in the front row alongside former teammate Brad Keselowski. After brother Kyle led 53 laps of the event, Kurt dominated the race leading for 102 laps and driving in the top ten. With about 75 laps left in the race Busch again crashed with Ryan Newman. Busch's crew fixed the car amazingly before the restart and got back on the track but finished about 20 laps down. Kyle Busch, who finished in second spot in the race, stood up for Kurt as well as drivers such as David Gilliland, Danica Patrick and Kenseth. With his brother, Kyle spent the post-race ceremonies insulting Ryan Newman for his part in the accident. Kyle said to reporters "I really hate that Kurt got tore up. He was the class of the race but man just stupidity. Ryan Newman is the biggest stupid idiot out there and is a big ogre. But we are all glad that he is out of a job." It had been previously announced at nearly the same time as the post-race ceremonies, that Ryan Newman would not be a part of Stewart-Haas Racing in 2014. Newman just smiled when he heard these words and said "They are both a heck of talent and both are good kids off the track but when they are on the track they are both not so bright. We'll leave it at that." At the spring race, Busch got into an incident with former Penske teammate Brad Keselowski. On pit road, Keselowski slowed in front of Busch, trying to avoid Kasey Kahne. Busch did not slow down in time and rear-ended Keselowski's car, severely causing damage to the racecar. Keselowski was upset by the collision and criticized Busch in an interview in the garages. On lap 87, Keselowski and Busch  encountered each other on the track with Keselowski over forty laps down and Kurt running in fourth place. Keselowski tried to retaliate by bumping Busch repetitively until NASCAR officials and Keselowski's boss Roger Penske told Keselowski to go to the garage and take a long time-out for his antics. Despite this altercation, Busch went on to win the race while Keselowski finished 39th. Post-race, Keselowski was quoted as stating, "Kurt does good things for charity and is such a talent but he is the dumbest racer." Busch replied hours later in a media conference by calling Keselowski's retaliatory moves "Punk-ass moves." On February 20, 2015, Busch became the first driver suspended for allegations of domestic violence under NASCAR rules due to his being investigated on allegations that he had assaulted his ex-girlfriend Patricia Driscoll during the Dover race weekend in September. As a result, he was suspended and replaced by Regan Smith in the Daytona 500 and the next two races after that. Even though the charges were dropped, NASCAR head Brian France announced he would remain suspended until he completed NASCAR's reinstatement program. On March 11, 2015 the indefinite suspension was lifted by NASCAR. In the February 2006 edition of GQ Magazine, he was selected number three on their list of the top ten most hated athletes, behind Barry Bonds and Terrell Owens.Gargill, David & Penn, Nate (2006). The Ten Most Hated Athletes. men.style.com. URL Retrieved July 12, 2006. Aside from Jimmy Spencer, Busch has had notable run-ins with Greg Biffle, Robby Gordon, Brad Keselowski, Jimmie Johnson, teammates Kevin Harvick and Tony Stewart, and even with younger brother Kyle, for whom he raced in the Nationwide Series in 2012. On June 4, 2007 in the Autism Speaks 400 at Dover International Speedway, after a tangle with Stewart on lap 264, Busch drove up beside Stewart's car on pit road, and gestured through his window netting causing a pit crew member to jump over Stewart's hood to avoid being hit. Busch was parked for the rest of the race, penalized 100 championship points, fined $100,000, and placed on probation until the end of the year.http://sports.espn.go.com/rpm/news/story?seriesId=2&id=2897492 Busch would tangle with Stewart again the following season. During practice for the 2008 Budweiser Shootout at Daytona, Stewart clipped the back end of Busch's car and sent Busch into the wall. After sustaining major damage Busch drove towards Stewart's car and rammed Stewart's car three times before attempting to return to the garage after the practice was called. Stewart had stopped his car in an effort to block Busch from going back into the garage area but Busch went around Stewart.http://sports.espn.go.com/rpm/daytona2008/news/story?id=3238563 In 2013 Busch and Stewart had another altercation at Richmond. On a final restart Busch drove by Stewart, who afterwards got loose and lost 15 positions. After the race ended with Busch in ninth, Stewart made contact with Busch to express displeasure and another bump ruined Kurt's car. While Harvick was celebrating in victory lane, Stewart and Busch began arguing which turned the fans' attention to the argument rather than Harvick's win. Busch said he was just racing Stewart cleanly on the final lap and was satisfied with his good run for his new Furniture Row team.  The following season, Busch was hired to drive for the team Stewart owns. Busch also has a bitter history with Kevin Harvick. They raced each other at carnivals and go-kart tracks as teenagers and tangled many times starting in 2001. Their feud came to a boiling point in spring 2006. At Bristol in 2006, Harvick spent the drivers meeting and his pre-race interview taunting Busch following a feud at Atlanta. Busch ignored his insults and got the last laugh by winning the race, while Harvick ended up in second place. When Harvick was interviewed after the race ended he said that he was happy with his finish but said he was very upset to seeing Busch win, before calling Busch a "whiner." Richard Childress later apologized for his driver's comments and NASCAR gave Harvick a warning not to target Busch.http://msn.foxsports.com/nascar/story/Jensen-Kyle-Busch-Kevin-Harvick-10-reasons-they-dislike-each-other-0512111 In 2007 when Harvick won two races Busch dominated such as the 2007 Daytona 500, and the 2007 All-Star Race, Busch said the same thing about Harvick: "I just hate losing to Kevin." Ironically, in 2014, with both drivers moving from their previous teams to Stewart-Haas Racing, Busch and Harvick became teammates with Stewart. On June 21, 2009 in the Toyota Save-Mart 350, Busch was involved in a wreck with Jimmie Johnson. Three weeks later at Chicagoland Speedway, both Johnson and Busch were involved in another incident where they collided into each other. Busch then retaliated by colliding with Johnson's car in the door area shortly after the contact. Over a year later, Busch was involved in a crash on lap 165 at Pocono's August race after bumpdrafting with Johnson. His part was overshadowed by Elliott Sadler's violent hit into the inside wall in the same crash. Busch and Johnson were also involved on the final lap of the August 2011 Pocono race in which both made contact when battling for third place. The two would exchange words on pit road after the race. Later in September 2011 when Busch was racing at the fall Richmond race after he and Johnson were told to settle down after Pocono; Busch accidentally made contact that resulted with Johnson spinning out in smoke. Almost 60 laps later, Johnson waited for Busch to come back around the track and intentionally retaliated by making contact resembling the previous spin. Although it looked like Busch would avoid the result of crashing, Busch was spun around when avoiding another car during the contact. Johnson was black-flagged for several laps because radio communications proved that Busch's first contact with Johnson was not intentional. After the race Busch, satisfied with his top-five finish, called Johnson "A five time chumpion" and said he was in Johnson's head always. He then shook hands with Johnson during the post-race ceremonies to put the incident behind both of them.http://bleacherreport.com/articles/844516-nascar-revenge-fail-watch-jimmie-johnsons-lame-takeout-attempt-of-kurt-busch (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics&nbsp;– Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.)  Season still in progress  Ineligible for series points (key) (key) 1 Run on same day. 2 Non-points race. ** Podium (Non-win) indicates second or third place finishes. *** Top-tens (Non-podium) indicates fourth through tenth place finishes. (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.)               NASCAR Sprint Cup Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 Pts 2000 Roush Racing 97 Ford DAY CAR LVS ATL DAR BRI TEX MAR TAL CAL RCH CLT DOV MCH POC SON DAY NHA POC IND GLN MCH BRI DAR RCH NHA DOV18 MAR37 CLT13 TAL CAR24 PHO29 HOM19 ATL36 48th 613 2001 DAY41 CAR36 LVS11 ATL10 DAR30 BRI42 TEX4 MAR33 TAL3 CAL13 RCH18 CLT12 DOV39 MCH43 POC13 SON23 DAY30 CHI8 NHA42 POC37 IND5 GLN29 MCH43 BRI25 DAR39 RCH24 DOV41 KAN9 CLT22 MAR35 TAL29 PHO22 CAR39 HOM23 ATLDNQ NHA21 27th 3081 2002 DAY4 CAR12 LVS20 ATL11 DAR28 BRI1 TEX23 MAR10 TAL3 CAL2 RCH27 CLT31 DOV12 POC40 MCH10 SON4 DAY31 CHI6 NHA8 POC2 IND41 GLN41 MCH39 BRI6 DAR7 RCH19 NHA2 DOV7 KAN31 TAL4 CLT12 MAR1 ATL1 CAR3 PHO6 HOM1 3rd 4641 2003 DAY2 CAR2 LVS38 ATL40 DAR2 BRI1 TEX9 TAL19 MAR28 CAL1 RCH8 CLT15 DOV15 POC36 MCH1 SON28 DAY36 CHI39 NHA11 POC2 IND7 GLN12 MCH18 BRI1 DAR13 RCH24 NHA15 DOV38 TAL6 KAN40 CLT41 MAR39 ATL8 PHO4 CAR17 HOM36 11th 4150 2004 DAY16 CAR8 LVS9 ATL12 DAR6 BRI1 TEX6 MAR11 TAL36 CAL23 RCH31 CLT11 DOV12 POC5 MCH11 SON36 DAY4 CHI35 NHA1 POC26 IND10 GLN10 MCH6 BRI8 CAL11 RCH15 NHA1 DOV5 TAL5 KAN6 CLT4 MAR5 ATL42 PHO10 DAR6 HOM5 1st 6506 2005 DAY2 CAL3 LVS3 ATL32 BRI35 MAR19 TEX7 PHO1 TAL7 DAR37 RCH17 CLT43 DOV9 POC22 MCH12 SON3 DAY37 CHI8 NHA2 POC1 IND18 GLN39 MCH7 BRI10 CAL12 RCH1 NHA35 DOV23 TAL8 KAN14 CLT2 MAR6 ATL36 TEX10 PHOQL HOM 10th 5974 2006 Penske Racing South 2 Dodge DAY38 CAL16 LVS16 ATL37 BRI1 MAR11 TEX34 PHO24 TAL7 RCH29 DAR19 CLT39 DOV16 POC2 MCH9 SON5 DAY3 CHI8 NHA38 POC2 IND12 GLN19 MCH40 BRI37 CAL27 RCH27 NHA19 DOV4 KAN25 TAL3 CLT32 MAR27 ATL14 TEX8 PHO8 HOM43 16th 3900 2007 DAY41 CAL7 LVS26 ATL11 BRI29 MAR12 TEX11 PHO18 TAL3 RCH5 DAR12 CLT32 DOV42 POC16 MCH25 SON22 NHA21 DAY3 CHI6 IND11 POC1 GLN11 MCH1 BRI6 CAL9 RCH9 NHA25 DOV29 KAN11 TAL7 CLT26 MAR21 ATL8 TEX8 PHO12 HOM2 7th 6231 2008 DAY2 CAL13 LVS38 ATL11 BRI12 MAR33 TEX23 PHO23 TAL39 RCH42 DAR12 CLT16 DOV20 POC8 MCH21 SON32 NHA1 DAY4 CHI28 IND40 POC38 GLN10 MCH36 BRI15 CAL39 RCH10 NHA6 DOV34 KAN30 TAL21 CLT3 MAR36 ATL6 TEX41 PHO2 HOM43 18th 3635 2009 Penske Championship Racing DAY10 CAL5 LVS23 ATL1 BRI11 MAR18 TEX8 PHO3 TAL6 RCH12 DAR16 CLT34 DOV5 POC37 MCH8 SON15 NHA3 DAY5 CHI17 IND27 POC9 GLN7 MCH36 BRI7 ATL38 RCH2 NHA6 DOV5 KAN11 CAL8 CLT10 MAR17 TAL30 TEX1 PHO6 HOM4 4th 6446 2010 DAY23 CAL6 LVS35 ATL1 BRI3 MAR23 PHO35 TEX4 TAL8 RCH18 DAR3 DOV19 CLT1 POC6 MCH3 SON32 NHA3 DAY7 CHI26 IND10 POC33 GLN2 MCH40 BRI9 ATL6 RCH18 NHA13 DOV4 KAN13 CAL21 CLT30 MAR16 TAL30 TEX24 PHO9 HOM18 11th 6142 2011 Penske Racing 22 DAY5 PHO8 LVS9 BRI7 CAL17 MAR16 TEX10 TAL18 RCH22 DAR27 DOV14 CLT4 KAN9 POC2 MCH11 SON1 DAY14 KEN9 NHA10 IND21 POC3 GLN38 MCH34 BRI17 ATL4 RCH5 CHI6 NHA22 DOV1 KAN13 CLT13 TAL36 MAR14 TEX30 PHO22 HOM34 11th 2262 2012 Phoenix Racing 51 Chevy DAY39 PHO15 LVS35 BRI18 CAL9 MAR33 TEX13 KAN17 RCH28 TAL20 DAR21 CLT27 DOV24 POC MCH30 SON3 KEN19 DAY35 NHA24 IND36 POC30 GLN31 MCH30 BRI28 ATL13 RCH28 CHI32 NHA35 DOV23 TAL39 25th 735 Furniture Row Racing 78 Chevy CLT21 KAN25 MAR15 TEX8 PHO8 HOM9 2013 DAY28 PHO27 LVS20 BRI4 CAL5 MAR37 TEX37 KAN15 RCH9 TAL30 DAR14 CLT3 DOV12 POC7 MCH35 SON4 KEN6 DAY6 NHA31 IND14 POC3 GLN9 MCH3 BRI31 ATL4 RCH2 CHI4 NHA13 DOV21 KAN2 CLT14 TAL18 MAR18 TEX17 PHO5 HOM21 10th 2309 2014 Stewart-Haas Racing 41 Chevy DAY21 PHO39 LVS26 BRI35 CAL3 MAR1 TEX39 DAR31 RCH23 TAL33 KAN29 CLT40 DOV18 POC3 MCH13 SON12 KEN12 DAY3* NHA17 IND28 POC13 GLN3 MCH31 BRI5 ATL13 RCH7 CHI8 NHA36 DOV18 KAN42 CLT11 TAL7 MAR36 TEX8 PHO7 HOM11 12th 2263 2015 DAY QL ATL LVS PHO5 CAL3* MAR14 TEX14 BRI15 RCH1* TAL12 KAN8 CLT10 DOV31 POC5 MCH1 SON2 DAY5 KEN10 NHA10 IND9 POC37 GLN5 MCH20 BRI14 DAR6 RCH15 CHI3 NHA19 DOV17 CLT5 KAN6 TAL10 MAR34 TEX7 PHO7 HOM8 8th 2333 2016 DAY ATL LVS PHO CAL MAR TEX BRI RCH TAL KAN DOV CLT POC MCH SON DAY KEN NHA IND POC GLN BRI MCH DAR RCH CHI NHA DOV CLT KAN TAL MAR TEX PHO HOM † - Replaced by Kenny Wallace. · ‡ - Replaced by Regan Smith.  NASCAR Nationwide Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 Pts 2006 Penske Racing South 39 Dodge DAY CAL MXC LVS ATL BRI TEX1* NSH PHO4 TAL RCH DAR CLT2 DOV3 NSH KEN MLW DAY CHI6* NHA MAR GTY IRP GLN1* MCH21 BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM 39th 1160 2007 12 DAY CAL MXC LVS4 ATL BRI NSH TEX8 PHO TAL RCH DAR CLT41 DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA DAY CHI GTY IRP CGV 69th 527 39 GLN3 MCH BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM 2011 Penske Racing 22 Dodge DAY PHO LVS BRI CAL TEX TAL NSH RCH DAR DOV IOW CLT CHI MCH ROA DAY KEN NHA NSH IRP IOW GLN1 CGV BRI ATL RCH CHI DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 97th 01 2012 Phoenix Racing 1 Chevy DAY10 PHO LVS BRI CAL TAL6 DAY1 NHA CHI IND34 102nd 01 Kyle Busch Motorsports 54 Toyota TEX30 RCH1 DAR8 IOW5 CLT DOV4 MCH3 ROA8 KEN2 IOW17 GLN CGV BRI ATL RCH3 CHI28 KEN DOV CLT KAN TEX PHO HOM 2013 Phoenix Racing 1 Chevy DAY35 PHO LVS BRI CAL TEX RCH TAL4 DAR CLT DOV IOW MCH ROA KEN DAY4 NHA CHI IND IOW GLN MOH BRI ATL RCH CHI KEN DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 104th 01 NASCAR Camping World Truck Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Pts 2000 Roush Racing 99 Ford DAY2 HOM9 PHO4 MMR2 MAR23 PIR11 GTY21 MEM13 PPR2 EVG5 TEX6 KEN29 GLN2 MLW1* NHA1 NZH14 MCH2 IRP6 NSV12 CIC19 RCH3* DOV1 TEX3 CAL1 2nd 3596 2001 DAY HOM MMR MAR GTY DAR PPR DOV TEX MEM MLW5 KAN KEN NHA IRP NSH CIC NZH RCH SBO TEX LVS PHO CAL 79th 155 2012 Kyle Busch Motorsports 18 Toyota DAY MAR CAR KAN CLT DOV TEX KEN IOW CHI POC MCH9 BRI TAL7 MAR TEX PHO HOM 87th 01 Billy Ballew Motorsports 51 Chevy ATL10 IOW KEN LVS 24 Hours of Daytona results Year Class No Team Car Co-drivers Laps Position Class Pos. 2005 DP 49  Multimatic Motorsports Ford Multimatic DP  Scott Maxwell Matt Kenseth Greg Biffle 588 27  15  2008 DP 9  Penske-Taylor Racing Pontiac Riley DP  Ryan Briscoe Hélio Castroneves 689 3 3 IndyCar Series results Year Team Chassis Engine 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Rank Points 2014 Andretti Autosport Dallara DW12 Honda STP LBH ALA IMS INDY6 DET DET TXS HOU HOU POC IOW TOR TOR MDO MIL SNM FON 25th 80 Years Teams Races Poles Wins Podiums(Non-win)** Top-Tens(Non-podium)*** Indianapolis 500Wins Championships 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 Year Team Chassis Engine Start Finish 2014 Andretti Autosport Dallara Honda 12 6 International Race of Champions results Year Make 1 2 3 4 Pos. Points 2003 Pontiac DAY2 TAL1* CHI3 IND4 1st 69 2004 DAY2 TEX11 RCH3 ATL4 5th 46 2005 DAY9 TEX11 RCH2* ATL12 6th 43 10 Questions with Kurt Busch&nbsp;– July 2005 interview of the defending Nextel Cup champ, nascar.com [ ], espn.go.com
