    Lafayette Ronald Hubbard (March 13, 1911&nbsp;– January 24, 1986), better known as L. Ron Hubbard (, ) and often referred to by his initials, LRH, was an American author and the founder of the Church of Scientology. In 2014, Hubbard was cited by the Smithsonian magazine as one of the ten most influential religious figures and one of the 100 Most Significant Americans of all time. After establishing a career as a writer, becoming best known for his science fiction and fantasy stories, he developed a system called Dianetics which was first expounded in book form in May 1950. He subsequently developed his ideas into a wide-ranging set of doctrines and practices as part of a new religious movement that he called Scientology.http://www.britannica.com/topic/new-religious-movement His writings became the guiding texts for the Church of Scientology and a number of affiliated organizations that address such diverse topics as business administration, literacy and drug rehabilitation. The Church's dissemination of these materials led to Hubbard being listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the most translated and published author in the world. Although many aspects of Hubbard's life story are disputed, there is general agreement about its basic outline.Bromley, p. 89 Born in Tilden, Nebraska, he spent much of his childhood in Helena, Montana. He traveled in Asia and the South Pacific in the late 1920s after his father, an officer in the United States Navy, was posted to the U.S. naval base on Guam. He attended George Washington University in Washington, D.C. at the start of the 1930s, before dropping out and beginning his career as a prolific writer of pulp fiction stories. He served briefly in the United States Marine Corps Reserve and was an officer in the United States Navy during World War II, briefly commanding two ships, the USS YP-422 and USS PC-815. According to Colonel L. Fletcher, retired US Air Force, he found that Hubbard “worked in intelligence at a deep level” upon close examination of his naval records. He also wrote that he was awarded significant accolades such as the “Unit Citation” (awarded by the United States president) and the “Marine Medal” (a rare award given to Navy line officers).https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P3-1078354851.html According to a different account in the LA times, he was removed both times when his superiors found him incapable of command. The last few months of his active service were spent in a hospital, being treated for a duodenal ulcer.http://web.archive.org/web/20080612145705/http://www.latimes.com/business/la-scientology062490,0,2050131,full.story After the war, Hubbard developed Dianetics, which he called "the modern science of mental health". He founded Scientology in 1952 and oversaw the growth of the Church of Scientology into a worldwide organization. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, he spent much of his time at sea on his personal fleet of ships as "Commodore" of the Sea Organization, an elite inner group of Scientologists. His expedition came to an end when Britain, Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Venezuela all closed their ports to his fleet.  At one point, a court in Australia revoked the Church's status as a religion, though it was later reinstated. Hubbard returned to the United States in 1975 and went into seclusion in the California desert.  In 1978, a trial court in France convicted Hubbard of fraud in absentia.  Others convictions from the same trial were reversed on appeal, but Hubbard died before the court considered his case. In 1983 L. Ron Hubbard was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in an international information infiltration and theft project called "Operation Snow White". He spent the remaining years of his life on his ranch near Creston, California, where he died in 1986. The Church of Scientology describes Hubbard in hagiographic terms,Christensen, p. 228 and he portrayed himself as a pioneering explorer, world traveler, and nuclear physicist with expertise in a wide range of disciplines, including photography, art, poetry, and philosophy. His critics, including his own son Ronald DeWolf, have characterized him as a liar, a charlatan, and mentally unstable, though DeWolf later repudiated those statements. Though many of Hubbard's autobiographical statements have been found to be fictitious,Urban, Hugh B. "Fair Game: Secrecy, Security, and the Church of Scientology in Cold War America." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 74:2 (2006) the Church rejects any suggestion that its account of Hubbard's life is not historical fact.Rothstein, p. 21.  Lafayette Ronald Hubbard was born in 1911, in Tilden, Nebraska.Hall, Timothy L. American religious leaders, p. 175. New York: Infobase Publishing, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8160-4534-1 He was the only child of Ledora May ( Waterbury), who had trained as a teacher, and Harry Ross Hubbard, a former United States Navy officer.Miller, Russell. Bare-faced Messiah: the true story of L. Ron Hubbard, p. 11. London: Joseph, 1987. ISBN 0-7181-2764-1, OCLC 17481843Christensen, pp. 236–237 After moving to Kalispell, Montana, they settled in Helena in 1913. Hubbard's father rejoined in the Navy in April 1917, during World War I, while his mother May worked as a clerk for the state government.Miller, p. 19 Biographical accounts published by the Church of Scientology describe Hubbard as "a child prodigy of sorts" who rode a horse before he could walk and was able to read and write by the age of four.Tucker, p. 300 A Scientology profile says that he was brought up on his grandfather's "large cattle ranch in Montana""About The Author," in Hubbard, L. Ron: Have You Lived Before This Life?: A Scientific Survey: A Study of Death and Evidence of Past Lives, p. 297. Los Angeles: Church of Scientology Publications Organization, 1977. ISBN 978-0-88484-055-8 where he spent his days "riding, breaking broncos, hunting coyote and taking his first steps as an explorer". His grandfather is described as a "wealthy Western cattleman" from whom Hubbard "inherited his fortune and family interests in America, Southern Africa, etc."Quoted in Rolph, p. 17 Scientology claims that Hubbard became a "blood brother" of the Native American Blackfeet tribe at the age of six through his friendship with a Blackfeet medicine man."L. Ron Hubbard and American Pulp Fiction," in Hubbard, L. Ron: "The Great Secret," p. 107–108. Hollywood, CA: Galaxy Press, 2008. ISBN 978-1-59212-371-1 However, contemporary records show that his grandfather, Lafayette Waterbury, was a veterinarian, not a rancher, and was not wealthy. Hubbard was actually raised in a townhouse in the center of Helena.Atack, p. 48 According to his aunt, his family did not own a ranch but did own one cow and four or five horses on a few acres of land outside the city.Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Making of L. Ron Hubbard: Creating the Mystique." Los Angeles Times, p. A38:1 Hubbard lived over a hundred miles from the Blackfeet reservation. While some sources support Scientology's claim of Hubbard's blood brotherhood, other sources say that the tribe did not practice blood brotherhood and no evidence has been found that he had ever been a Blackfeet blood brother.Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Making of L. Ron Hubbard: Staking a Claim to Blood Brotherhood." Los Angeles Times, p. A38:5 During the 1920s the Hubbards repeatedly relocated around the United States and overseas. After Hubbard's father Harry rejoined the Navy, his posting aboard the USS Oklahoma in 1921 required the family to relocate to the ship's home ports, first San Diego, then Seattle.Miller, p. 23 During a journey to Washington, D.C. in 1923 Hubbard learned of Freudian psychology from Commander Joseph "Snake" Thompson, a U.S. Navy psychoanalyst and medic.Whitehead, p. 46 Scientology biographies describe this encounter as giving Hubbard training in a particular scientific approach to the mind, which he found unsatisfying.Christensen, p. 238 Hubbard was active in the Boy Scouts in Washington, D.C. and earned the rank of Eagle Scout in 1924, two weeks after his 13th birthday. In his diary, Hubbard claimed he was the youngest Eagle Scout in the U.S.Miller, p. 25 The following year, Harry Ross Hubbard was posted to Puget Sound Naval Shipyard at Bremerton, Washington.Miller, p. 27 His son was enrolled at Union High School, Bremerton, and later studied at Queen Anne High School in Seattle.Miller, p. 28 In 1927 Hubbard's father was sent to the U.S. Naval Station on Guam in the Mariana Islands of the South Pacific. Although Hubbard's mother also went to Guam, Hubbard himself did not accompany them but was placed in his grandparents' care in Helena, Montana to complete his schooling. Between 1927 and 1929 Hubbard traveled to Japan, China, the Philippines and Guam. Scientology texts present this period in his life as a time when he was intensely curious for answers to human suffering and explored ancient Eastern philosophies for answers, but found them lacking.Christensen, pp. 239–240 He is described as traveling to China "at a time when few Westerners could enter""About the Author," in Hubbard, L. Ron: Battlefield Earth. (No page number given.) Los Angeles: Galaxy Press, 2005. ISBN 978-1-59212-007-9 and according to Scientology, spent his time questioning Buddhist lamas and meeting old Chinese magicians. According to church materials, his travels were funded by his "wealthy grandfather"."Appendix" in Hubbard, L. Ron: Hymn of Asia. (No page number given.) Los Angeles : Church of Scientology of California, Publications Organization, 1974. ISBN 0-88404-035-6 In the summer of 1927, Hubbard took up teaching to the native Chamorros in Guam for several weeks. He returned to Asia in 1928 to stay longer. For fourteen months, he traveled around China and served as a helmsman and supercargo aboard a twin-masted coastal schooner, returning to finish high school at Swavely Prep School in Virginia and Woodward school for Boys in Washington, D.C. Hubbard's unofficial biographers present a very different account of his travels in Asia. Hubbard's diaries recorded two trips to the east coast of China. The first was made in the company of his mother while traveling from the United States to Guam in 1927. It consisted of a brief stop-over in a couple of Chinese ports before traveling on to Guam, where he stayed for six weeks before returning home. He recorded his impressions of the places he visited and disdained the poverty of the inhabitants of Japan and China, whom he described as "gooks" and "lazy [and] ignorant". His second visit was a family holiday which took Hubbard and his parents to China via the Philippines in 1928.Atack, p. 54Miller, p. 31  After his return to the United States in September 1927, Hubbard enrolled at Helena High School but earned only poor grades.Miller, p. 34 He abandoned school the following May and went back west to stay with his aunt and uncle in Seattle. He joined his parents in Guam in June 1928. His mother took over his education in the hope of putting him forward for the entrance examination to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland. Between October and December 1928 a number of naval families, including Hubbard's, traveled from Guam to China aboard the cargo ship . The ship stopped at Manila in the Philippines before traveling on to Qingdao (Tsingtao) in China. Hubbard and his parents made a side trip to Beijing before sailing on to Shanghai and Hong Kong, from where they returned to Guam.Miller, p. 41 Scientology accounts say that Hubbard "made his way deep into Manchuria's Western Hills and beyond&nbsp;— to break bread with Mongolian bandits, share campfires with Siberian shamans and befriend the last in the line of magicians from the court of Kublai Khan"."L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile: Asia and the South Pacific." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. However, Hubbard did not record these events in his diary.Atack, p. 57 He remained unimpressed with China and the Chinese, writing: "A Chinaman can not live up to a thing, he always drags it down." He characterized the sights of Beijing as "rubberneck stations" for tourists and described the palaces of the Forbidden City as "very trashy-looking" and "not worth mentioning". He was impressed by the Great Wall of China near Beijing,Miller, p. 42 but concluded of the Chinese: "They smell of all the baths they didn't take. The trouble with China is, there are too many chinks here."Miller, p. 43 Back on Guam, Hubbard spent much of his time writing dozens of short stories and essaysMiller, p. 44 and failed the Naval Academy entrance examination. In September 1929 Hubbard was enrolled at the Swavely Preparatory School in Manassas, Virginia, to prepare him for a second attempt at the examination.Miller, p. 45 However, he was ruled out of consideration due to his near-sightedness.Miller, p. 46 He was instead sent to Woodward School for Boys in Washington, D.C. to qualify for admission to George Washington University. He successfully graduated from the school in June 1930 and entered the university the following September.Miller, p. 47  Hubbard studied civil engineering during his two years at George Washington University at the behest of his father, who "decreed that I should study engineering and mathematics".Atack, p. 59 While he did not graduate from George Washington, his time there subsequently became important because, as George Malko puts it, "many of his researches and published conclusions have been supported by his claims to be not only a graduate engineer, but 'a member of the first United States course in formal education in what is called today nuclear physics.'" However, a Church of Scientology biography describes him as "never noted for being in class" and says that he "thoroughly detest[ed] his subjects"."A Brief Biography of L. Ron Hubbard," Ability, Church of Scientology Washington, D.C. Issue 111, January 1959. He earned poor grades, was placed on probation in September 1931 and dropped out altogether in the fall of 1932.Malko, p. 31Wallis, p. 18 Scientology accounts say that he "studied nuclear physics at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., before he started his studies about the mind, spirit and life""Foreword," in Hubbard, L. Ron: Scientology: The Fundamentals of Thought, p. vii. Los Angeles: Bridge Publications, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4031-4420-1 and Hubbard himself stated that he "set out to find out from nuclear physics a knowledge of the physical universe, something entirely lacking in Asian philosophy". His university records indicate that his exposure to "nuclear physics" consisted of one class in "atomic and molecular phenomena" for which he earned an "F" grade.Streeter, p. 206 Scientologists claim he was more interested in extracurricular activities, particularly writing and flying. According to church materials, "he earned his wings as a pioneering barnstormer at the dawn of American aviation" and was "recognized as one of the country's most outstanding pilots. With virtually no training time, he takes up powered flight and barnstorms throughout the Midwest."L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 1930–1940." Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 17, 2011. His airman certificate, however, records that he qualified to fly only gliders rather than powered aircraft and gave up his certificate when he could not afford the renewal fee.Atack, p. 64 During Hubbard's final semester he organized an expedition to the Caribbean for "fifty young gentleman rovers" aboard the schooner Doris Hamlin commencing in June 1932. The aims of the "Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition" were stated as being to explore and film the pirate "strongholds and bivouacs of the Spanish Main" and to "collect whatever one collects for exhibits in museums".Miller, p. 52 It ran into trouble even before it left the port of Baltimore: Ten participants quit and storms blew the ship far off course to Bermuda. Eleven more members of the expedition quit there and more left when the ship arrived at Martinique.Miller, p. 54 With the expedition running critically short of money, the ship's owners ordered it to return to Baltimore.Miller, p. 55 Hubbard blamed the expedition's problems on the captain: "the ship's dour Captain Garfield proved himself far less than a Captain Courageous, requiring Ron Hubbard's hand at both the helm and the charts."L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile&nbsp;— Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. Specimens and photographs collected by the expedition are said by Scientology accounts to have been acquired by the University of Michigan, the U.S. Hydrographic Office, an unspecified national museum and the New York Times,Hubbard, L. Ron. Mission into Time, p. 7. Copenhagen: AOSH DK Publications Department A/S, 1973. ISBN 87-87347-56-3 though none of those institutions have any record of this.Miller, p. 56 Hubbard later wrote that the expedition "was a crazy idea at best, and I knew it, but I went ahead anyway, chartered a four-masted schooner and embarked with some fifty luckless souls who haven't stopped their cursings yet."Hubbard, L. Ron, "The Camp-Fire," Adventure magazine, vol. 93 no. 5, October 1, 1935. Quoted in Atack, p. 62 He called it "a two-bit expedition and financial bust",Maisel, Albert (December 5, 1950). "Dianetics&nbsp;— Science or Hoax?" Look magazine, p. 79 which resulted in some of its participants making legal claims against him for refunds.Atack, p. 63  After leaving university Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico on what the Church of Scientology calls the "Puerto Rican Mineralogical Expedition"."L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile&nbsp;— Puerto Rican Mineralogical Expedition." Church of Scientology, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. Scientologists claim he "made the first complete mineralogical survey of Puerto Rico" as a means of "augmenting his [father's] pay with a mining venture", during which he "sluiced inland rivers and crisscrossed the island in search of elusive gold" as well as carrying out "much ethnological work amongst the interior villages and native hillsmen". Hubbard's unofficial biographer Russell Miller writes that neither the United States Geological Survey nor the Puerto Rican Department of Natural Resources have any record of any such expedition. According to Miller, Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico in November 1932 after his father volunteered him for the Red Cross relief effort following the devastating 1932 San Ciprian hurricane. In a 1957 lecture Hubbard said that he had been "a field executive with the American Red Cross in the Puerto Rico hurricane disaster".Hubbard, L. Ron. "Creating a Third Dynamic / United Survival Action Clubs," lecture of December 30, 1957. Ability Congress, 5th lecture. According to his own account, Hubbard spent much of his time prospecting unsuccessfully for gold. Towards the end of his stay on Puerto Rico he appears to have done some work for a Washington, D.C. firm called West Indies Minerals Incorporated, accompanying a surveyor in an investigation of a small property near the town of Luquillo, Puerto Rico. The survey was unsuccessful. A few years later, Hubbard wrote:     Hubbard became a well-known and prolific writer for pulp fiction magazines during the 1930s. Scientology texts describe him as becoming "well established as an essayist" even before he had concluded college. Scientology claims he "solved his finances, and his desire to travel by writing anything that came to hand" and to have earned an "astronomical" rate of pay for the times.L. Ron Hubbard, the writer. Los Angeles, CA : Bridge Publications, 1989. (No page number in original.) His literary career began with contributions to the George Washington University student newspaper, The University Hatchet, as a reporter for a few months in 1931. Six of his pieces were published commercially during 1932 to 1933. The going rate for freelance writers at the time was only a cent a word, so Hubbard's total earnings from these articles would have been less than $100.Miller, p. 63 The pulp magazine Thrilling Adventure became the first to publish one of his short stories, in February 1934."About L. Ron Hubbard&nbsp;— Master Storyteller." Galaxy Press, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. Over the next six years, pulp magazines published around 140 of his short stories"L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile&nbsp;— L. Ron Hubbard's Fiction Books." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. under a variety of pen names, including Winchester Remington Colt, Kurt von Rachen, René Lafayette, Joe Blitz and Legionnaire 148.Miller, p. 72 Although he was best known for his fantasy and science fiction stories, Hubbard wrote in a wide variety of genres, including adventure fiction, aviation, travel, mysteries, westerns and even romance. Hubbard knew and associated with writers such as Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, L. Sprague de Camp and A. E. van Vogt.Asimov, Isaac. In Memory Yet Green: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1920-1954, p. 413. New York: Doubleday, 1979. ISBN 978-0-385-13679-2 His first full-length novel, Buckskin Brigades, was published in 1937. He became a "highly idiosyncratic" writer of science fiction after being taken under the wing of editor John W. Campbell,Stableford, Brian. Historical dictionary of science fiction literature, p. 164. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-8108-4938-9 who published many of Hubbard's short stories and also serialized a number of well-received novelettes that Hubbard wrote for Campbell's magazines Unknown and Astounding. These included Fear, Final Blackout and Typewriter in the Sky.Miller, p. 86 Science fiction newsletter Xignals reported that Hubbard wrote “over 100,000 words a month” during his peak. Martin Gardner asserted that his writing “[wa]s done at lightning speed.”http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/L._Ron_Hubbard.aspx According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard was "called to Hollywood" to work on film scripts in the mid-1930s, although Scientology accounts differ as to exactly when this was (whether 1935,"About the Author" in Hubbard, L. Ron: Dianetics Today, p. 989. Los Angeles: Church of Scientology of California, 1975. ISBN 0-88404-036-4 1936 or 1937). He wrote the script for The Secret of Treasure Island, a 1938 Columbia Pictures movie serial.Harmon, Jim; Donald F. Glut. The Great Movie Serials: Their Sound and Fury, p. 329. London: Routledge, 1973. ISBN 978-0-7130-0097-9 The Church of Scientology claims he also worked on the Columbia serials The Mysterious Pilot (1937), The Great Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok (1938) and The Spider Returns (1941), though his name does not appear on the credits. Hubbard also claimed to have written Dive Bomber (1941),Hubbard, L. Ron. "The Story of Dianetics and Scientology," lecture of October 18, 1958Atack, p. 65 Cecil B. DeMille's The Plainsman (1936) and John Ford's Stagecoach (1939).Miller, p. 69 Hubbard's literary earnings helped him to support his new wife, Margaret "Polly" Grubb. She was already pregnant when they married on April 13, 1933, but had a miscarriage shortly afterwards; a few months later, she became pregnant again.Miller, p. 61 On May 7, 1934, she gave birth prematurely to a son who was named Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, Jr. and the nickname "His Nibs", invariably shortened to "Nibs".Miller, p. 64 Their second child, Katherine May, was born on January 15, 1936.Miller, p. 70 The Hubbards lived for a while in Laytonsville, Maryland, but were chronically short of money.Miller, p. 62 In the spring of 1936 they moved to Bremerton, Washington. They lived there for a time with Hubbard's aunts and grandmother before finding a place of their own at nearby South Colby. According to one of his friends at the time, Robert MacDonald Ford, the Hubbards were "in fairly dire straits for money" but sustained themselves on the income from Hubbard's writing.Miller, p. 74 Hubbard spent an increasing amount of time in New York City,Miller, p. 71 working out of a hotel room where his wife suspected him of carrying on affairs with other women.Miller, p. 75Miller, p. 84 Hubbard's authorship in mid-1938 of a still-unpublished manuscript called Excalibur is highlighted by the Church of Scientology as a key step in developing the principles of Scientology and Dianetics. The manuscript is said by Scientologists to have outlined "the basic principles of human existence" and to have been the culmination of twenty years of research into "twenty-one races and cultures including Pacific Northwest Indian tribes, Philippine Tagalogs and, as he was wont to joke, the people of the Bronx"."L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile&nbsp;— Founder." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. According to Arthur J. Cox, a contributor to John W. Campbell's Astounding magazine, Hubbard told a 1948 convention of science fiction fans that Excalibur inspiration came during an operation in which he "died" for eight minutes.Gardner, p. 272 (Gerry Armstrong, Hubbard's archivist, explains this as a dental extraction performed under nitrous oxide, a chemical known for its hallucinogenic effectsAtack, p. 66): Arthur J. Burks, the President of the American Fiction Guild, wrote that an excited Hubbard called him and said: "I want to see you right away. I have written THE book." Hubbard believed that Excalibur would "revolutionize everything" and that "it was somewhat more important, and would have a greater impact upon people, than the Bible."Burks, Arthur J (December 1961). "Excalibur." The Aberree. It proposed that all human behavior could be explained in terms of survival and that to understand survival was to understand life.Miller, p. 80 As Hubbard biographer Jon Atack notes, "the notion that everything that exists is trying to survive became the basis of Dianetics and Scientology." According to Burks, Hubbard "was so sure he had something 'away out and beyond' anything else that he had sent telegrams to several book publishers, telling them that he had written 'THE book' and that they were to meet him at Penn Station, and he would discuss it with them and go with whomever gave him the best offer." However, nobody bought the manuscript. Forrest J Ackerman, later Hubbard's literary agent, recalled that Hubbard told him "whoever read it either went insane or committed suicide. And he said that the last time he had shown it to a publisher in New York, he walked into the office to find out what the reaction was, the publisher called for the reader, the reader came in with the manuscript, threw it on the table and threw himself out of the skyscraper window."Ackerman, Forrest J (November 19, 1997) Secret Lives: L. Ron Hubbard. Channel 4 Television. Hubbard's failure to sell Excalibur depressed him; he told his wife in an October 1938 letter: "Writing action pulp doesn't have much agreement with what I want to do because it retards my progress by demanding incessant attention and, further, actually weakens my name. So you see I've got to do something about it and at the same time strengthen the old financial position."Letter from L. Ron Hubbard, October 1938, quoted in Miller, p. 81 He went on: The manuscript later became part of Scientology mythology. An early 1950s Scientology publication offered signed "gold-bound and locked" copies for the sum of $1,500 apiece (equivalent to about $29,000 now). It warned that "four of the first fifteen people who read it went insane" and that it would be "[r]eleased only on sworn statement not to permit other readers to read it. Contains data not to be released during Mr. Hubbard's stay on earth."Quoted in Malko, p. 39  Hubbard joined The Explorers Club in February 1940 on the strength of his claimed explorations in the Caribbean and survey flights in the United States.Miller, p. 85 He persuaded the club to let him carry its flag on an "Alaskan Radio-Experimental Expedition" to update the U.S. Coast Pilot guide to the coastlines of Alaska and British Columbia and investigate new methods of radio position-finding.Miller, p. 88 The expedition consisted of Hubbard and his wife—the children were left at South Colby—aboard his ketch Magician.Miller, p. 89 Scientology accounts of the expedition describe "Hubbard's recharting of an especially treacherous Inside Passage, and his ethnological study of indigenous Aleuts and Haidas" and tell of how "along the way, he not only roped a Kodiak Bear, but braved seventy-mile-an-hour winds and commensurate seas off the Aleutian Islands.""L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile&nbsp;— Alaskan Radio-Experimental Expedition" Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. They are divided about how far Hubbard's expedition actually traveled, whether  or . Hubbard told The Seattle Star in a November 1940 letter that the expedition was plagued by problems and did not get any further than Ketchikan near the southern end of the Alaska Panhandle, far from the Aleutian Islands.Atack, p. 68 Magician's engine broke down only two days after setting off in July 1940. The Hubbards reached Ketchikan on August 30, 1940, after many delays following repeated engine breakdowns. The Ketchikan Chronicle reported—making no mention of the expedition—that Hubbard's purpose in coming to Alaska "was two-fold, one to win a bet and another to gather material for a novel of Alaskan salmon fishing". Having underestimated the cost of the trip, he did not have enough money to repair the broken engine. He raised money by writing stories and contributing to the local radio stationMiller, p. 91 and eventually earned enough to fix the engine, making it back to Puget Sound on December 27, 1940.   After returning from Alaska, Hubbard applied to join the United States Navy. His Congressman, Warren G. Magnuson, wrote to President Roosevelt to recommend Hubbard as "a gentleman of reputation" who was "a respected explorer" and had "marine masters papers for more types of vessels than any other man in the United States". Hubbard was described as "a key figure" in writing organizations, "making him politically potent nationally". The Congressman concluded: "Anything you can do for Mr Hubbard will be appreciated." His friend Robert MacDonald Ford, by now a State Representative for Washington, sent a letter of recommendation describing Hubbard as "one of the most brilliant men I have ever known". It called Hubbard "a powerful influence" in the Northwest and said that he was "well known in many parts of the world and has considerable influence in the Caribbean and Alaska". The letter declared that "for courage and ability I cannot too strongly recommend him." Ford later said that Hubbard had written the letter himself: "I don't know why Ron wanted a letter. I just gave him a letter-head and said, 'Hell, you're the writer, you write it!'"Miller, p. 93 Hubbard was commissioned as a Lieutenant (junior grade) in the U.S. Naval Reserve on July 19, 1941. His military service forms a major element of his public persona as portrayed by Scientologists.Atack, p. 70 The Church of Scientology presents him as a "much-decorated war hero who commanded a corvette and during hostilities was crippled and wounded".Lamont, pp. 19–20 Scientology publications say he served as a "Commodore of Corvette squadrons" in "all five theaters of World War II" and was awarded "twenty-one medals and palms" for his service.Rolph, p. 16 He was "severely wounded and was taken crippled and blinded" to a military hospital, where he "worked his way back to fitness, strength and full perception in less than two years, using only what he knew and could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe". He said that he had seen combat repeatedly, telling A. E. van Vogt that he had once sailed his ship "right into the harbor of a Japanese occupied island in the Dutch East Indies. His attitude was that if you took your flag down the Japanese would not know one boat from another, so he tied up at the dock, went ashore and wandered around by himself for three days."Miller, p. 141 According to The Los Angeles Times, Hubbard's official Navy service records indicate that "his military performance was, at times, substandard" and he received only four campaign medals rather than twenty-one. He was never recorded as being injured or wounded in combat and so never received a Purple Heart. Most of his military service was spent ashore in the continental United States on administrative or training duties. He served for a short time in Australia but was sent home after quarreling with his superiors. He briefly commanded two anti-submarine vessels, the USS YP-422 and USS PC-815, in coastal waters off Massachusetts, Oregon and California in 1942 and 1943 respectively. After Hubbard reported that the PC-815 had attacked and crippled or sunk two Japanese submarines off Oregon in May 1943, his claim was rejected by the commander of the Northwest Sea Frontier. Hubbard and Thomas Moulton, his second in command on the PC-815, later said the Navy wanted to avoid panic on the mainland.Streeter, p. 208 A month later Hubbard unwittingly sailed the PC-815 into Mexican territorial waters and conducted gunnery practice off the Coronado Islands, in the belief that they were uninhabited and belonged to the United States. The Mexican government complained and Hubbard was relieved of command. A fitness report written after the incident rated Hubbard as unsuitable for independent duties and "lacking in the essential qualities of judgment, leadership and cooperation".Miller, p. 107 He served for a while as the Navigation and Training Officer for the USS Algol while it was based at Portland. A fitness report from this period recommended promotion, describing him as "a capable and energetic officer, [but] very temperamental", and an "above average navigator".Atack, p. 81; Streeter, p. 208 However, he never held another such position and did not serve aboard another ship after the Algol.  Hubbard's war service has great significance in the history and mythology of the Church of Scientology, as he is said to have cured himself through techniques that would later underpin Scientology and Dianetics. According to Moulton, Hubbard told him that he had been machine-gunned in the back near the Dutch East Indies. Hubbard asserted that his eyes had been damaged as well, either "by the flash of a large-caliber gun" or when he had "a bomb go off in my face". Scientology texts say that he returned from the war "[b]linded with injured optic nerves, and lame with physical injuries to hip and back" and was twice pronounced dead. His medical records state that he was hospitalized with an acute duodenal ulcer rather than a war injury. He told his doctors that he was suffering from lameness caused by a hip infection and he told Look magazine in December 1950 that he had suffered from "ulcers, conjunctivitis, deteriorating eyesight, bursitis and something wrong with my feet". He was still complaining in 1951 of eye problems and stomach pains, which had given him "continuous trouble" for eight years, especially when "under nervous stress". This came well after Hubbard had promised that Dianetics would provide "a cure for the very ailments that plagued the author himself then and throughout his life, including allergies, arthritis, ulcers and heart problems". The Church of Scientology says that Hubbard's key breakthrough in the development of Dianetics was made at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland, California. According to the Church, An October 1945 Naval Board found that Hubbard was "considered physically qualified to perform duty ashore, preferably within the continental United States".Atack, p. 84 He was discharged from hospital on December 4, 1945, and transferred to inactive duty on February 17, 1946. He resigned his commission with effect from October 30, 1950. The Church of Scientology says he quit because the U.S. Navy "attempted to monopolize all his researches and force him to work on a project 'to make man more suggestible' and when he was unwilling, tried to blackmail him by ordering him back to active duty to perform this function. Having many friends he was able to instantly resign from the Navy and escape this trap." The Navy said in a statement in 1980: "There is no evidence on record of an attempt to recall him to active duty." The Church disputes the official record of Hubbard's naval career. It asserts that the records are incomplete and perhaps falsified "to conceal Hubbard's secret activities as an intelligence officer". In 1990 the Church provided the Los Angeles Times with a document that was said to be a copy of Hubbard's official record of service. The U.S. Navy told the Times that "its contents are not supported by Hubbard's personnel record." The New Yorker reported in February 2011 that the Scientology document was considered by federal archivists to be a forgery. Nevertheless, the German Protestant theologian and history of religion scholar Marco Frenschkowski wrote in the Marburg Journal of Religion that the publicly available copies of Hubbard's military records (of which Frenschkowski has a complete collection) are "much nearer" in his assessment to Hubbard's statements about his military career than Miller's Bare-Faced Messiah.   Hubbard's life underwent a turbulent period immediately after the war. According to his own account, he "was abandoned by family and friends as a supposedly hopeless cripple and a probable burden upon them for the rest of my days".Hubbard, L. Ron. "My Philosophy," Church of Scientology International, 1965, retrieved February 17, 2011. His daughter Katherine presented a rather different version: his wife had refused to uproot their children from their home in Bremerton, Washington, to join him in California. Their marriage was by now in terminal difficulties and he chose to stay in California.Miller, p. 125 In August 1945 Hubbard moved into the Pasadena mansion of John "Jack" Whiteside Parsons. A leading rocket propulsion researcher at the California Institute of Technology and a founder of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Parsons led a double life as an avid occultist and Thelemite, follower of the English ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley and leader of a lodge of Crowley's magical order, Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO).Miller, p. 113 He let rooms in the house only to tenants who he specified should be "atheists and those of a Bohemian disposition".Miller, p. 114 Hubbard befriended Parsons and soon became sexually involved with Parsons's 21-year-old girlfriend, Sara "Betty" Northrup.Miller, p. 117 Despite this Parsons was very impressed with Hubbard and reported to Crowley: Hubbard, whom Parsons referred to in writing as "Frater H", became an enthusiastic collaborator in the Pasadena OTO. The two men collaborated on the "Babalon Working", a sex magic ritual intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon, the supreme Thelemite Goddess. It was undertaken over several nights in February and March 1946 in order to summon an "elemental" who would participate in further sex magic.Urban, Hugh B. Magia sexualis: sex, magic, and liberation in modern Western esotericism, p. 137. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0-520-24776-5 As Richard Metzger describes it, The "elemental" arrived a few days later in the form of Marjorie Cameron, who agreed to participate in Parsons' rites. Soon afterwards, Parsons, Hubbard and Sara agreed to set up a business partnership, "Allied Enterprises", in which they invested nearly their entire savings—the vast majority contributed by Parsons. The plan was for Hubbard and Sara to buy yachts in Miami and sail them to the West Coast to sell for a profit. Hubbard had a different idea; he wrote to the U.S. Navy requesting permission to leave the country "to visit Central & South America & China" for the purposes of "collecting writing material"—in other words, undertaking a world cruise.Pendle, p. 268 Aleister Crowley strongly criticized Parsons's actions, writing: "Suspect Ron playing confidence trick—Jack Parsons weak fool—obvious victim prowling swindlers." Parsons attempted to recover his money by obtaining an injunction to prevent Hubbard and Sara leaving the country or disposing of the remnants of his assets.Pendle, p. 269 They attempted to sail anyway but were forced back to port by a storm. A week later, Allied Enterprises was dissolved. Parsons received only a $2,900 promissory note from Hubbard and returned home "shattered". He had to sell his mansion to developers soon afterwards to recoup his losses.Pendle, p. 270 Hubbard's fellow writers were well aware of what had happened between him and Parsons. L. Sprague de Camp wrote to Isaac Asimov on August 27, 1946, to tell him: Scientology accounts do not mention Hubbard's involvement in occultism. He is instead described as "continu[ing] to write to help support his research" during this period into "the development of a means to better the condition of man"."L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 1941–1949." Church of Scientology International, retrieved February 8, 2011. The Church of Scientology has nonetheless acknowledged Hubbard's involvement with the OTO; a 1969 statement, written by Hubbard himself,Atack, p. 90 said: The Church of Scientology says Hubbard was "sent in" by his fellow science fiction author Robert Heinlein, "who was running off-book intelligence operations for naval intelligence at the time". However, Heinlein's authorized biographer has said that he looked into the matter at the suggestion of Scientologists but found nothing to corroborate claims that Heinlein had been involved, and his biography of Heinlein makes no mention of the matter.Wright, Lawrence (February 14, 2011)."The Apostate: Paul Haggis vs. the Church of Scientology." The New Yorker, retrieved February 8, 2011. On August 10, 1946, Hubbard bigamously married Sara, while still married to Polly. It was not until 1947 that his first wife learned that he had remarried. Hubbard agreed to divorce Polly in June that year and the marriage was dissolved shortly afterwards, with Polly given custody of the children.Miller, p. 134  After Hubbard's wedding to Sara, the couple settled at Laguna Beach, California, where Hubbard took a short-term job looking after a friend's yachtMiller, p. 132 before resuming his fiction writing to supplement the small disability allowance that he was receiving as a war veteran.Streeter, p. 210 Working from a trailer in a run-down area of North Hollywood, Hubbard sold a number of science fiction stories that included his Ole Doc Methuselah series and the serialized novels The End Is Not Yet and To the Stars. However, he remained short of money and his son, L. Ron Hubbard Jr, testified later that Hubbard was dependent on his own father and Margaret's parents for money and his writings, which he was paid at a penny per word, never garnered him any more than $10,000 prior to the founding of Scientology. He repeatedly wrote to the Veterans Administration (VA) asking for an increase in his war pension. In October 1947 he wrote: The VA eventually did increase his pension,Miller, p. 139 but his money problems continued. On August 31, 1948, he was arrested in San Luis Obispo, California, and subsequently pled guilty to a charge of petty theft, for which he was ordered to pay a $25 fine.Miller, p. 142 According to the Church of Scientology, around this time he "accept[ed] an appointment as a Special Police Officer with the Los Angeles Police Department and us[ed] the position to study society's criminal elements" and also "worked with neurotics from the Hollywood film community"."Letters from the Birth of Dianetics." Church of Scientology International, 2004, retrieved February 8, 2011 In late 1948 Hubbard and Sara moved to Savannah, Georgia.Miller, p. 143 Here, Scientology sources say, he "volunteer[ed] his time in hospitals and mental wards, saving the lives of patients with his counseling techniques"."L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 1941–1949" Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 14, 2011. Hubbard began to make the first public mentions of what was to become Dianetics. He wrote in January 1949 that he was working on a "book of psychology" about "the cause and cure of nervous tension", which he was going to call The Dark Sword, Excalibur or Science of the Mind.Miller, p. 144 In April 1949, Hubbard wrote to several professional organizations to offer his research.One such letter can be found on the Church of Scientology's official L. Ron Hubbard website. See "Letters from the Birth of Dianetics," Church of Scientology International, 2004, retrieved February 8, 2011. None were interested, so he turned to his editor John W. Campbell, who was more receptive due to a long-standing fascination with fringe psychologies and psychic powers ("psionics") that "permeated both his fiction and non-fiction".Luckhurst, Roger. Science Fiction, p. 74. Malden, MA: Polity, 2005. ISBN 978-0-7456-2893-6 Campbell invited Hubbard and Sara to move into a cottage at Bay Head, New Jersey, not far from his own home at Plainfield. In July 1949, Campbell recruited an acquaintance, Dr. Joseph Winter, to help develop Hubbard's new therapy of "Dianetics". Campbell told Winter: Hubbard collaborated with Campbell and Winter to refine his techniques,Atack, p. 106 testing them on science fiction fans recruited by Campbell.Miller, p. 150 The basic principle of Dianetics was that the brain recorded every experience and event in a person's life, even when unconscious. Bad or painful experiences were stored as what he called "engrams" in a "reactive mind". These could be triggered later in life, causing emotional and physical problems. By carrying out a process he called "auditing", a person could be regressed through his engrams to re-experiencing past experiences. This enabled engrams to be "cleared". The subject, who would now be in a state of "Clear", would have a perfectly functioning mind with an improved IQ and photographic memory.Streeter, pp. 210–211 The "Clear" would be cured of physical ailments ranging from poor eyesight to the common cold,Atack, p. 108 which Hubbard asserted were purely psychosomatic. Winter submitted a paper on Dianetics to the Journal of the American Medical Association and the American Journal of Psychiatry but both journals rejected it.Winter, p. 18 Hubbard and his collaborators decided to announce Dianetics in Campbell's Astounding Science Fiction instead. In an editorial, Campbell said: "Its power is almost unbelievable; it proves the mind not only can but does rule the body completely; following the sharply defined basic laws set forth, physical ills such as ulcers, asthma and arthritis can be cured, as can all other psychosomatic ills."Quoted in Miller, p. 145 The birth of Hubbard's second daughter Alexis Valerie, delivered by Winter on March 8, 1950, came in the middle of the preparations to launch Dianetics.Miller, p. 152 A "Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation" was established in April 1950 in Elizabeth, New Jersey, with Hubbard, Sara, Winter and Campbell on the board of directors. Dianetics was duly launched in Astounding's May 1950 issue and on May 9, Hubbard's companion book Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health was publishedAtack, p. 107 by Hermitage House. Hubbard abandoned freelance writing in order to promote Dianetics, writing several books about it in the next decade, delivering an estimated 4,000 lectures while founding Dianetics research organizations. The etymological origin of the word Dianetics are the words dia, meaning "through" and nous, meaning "soul." Hubbard defined it as “a spiritual healing technology” and “an organized science of thought.”   Hubbard called Dianetics "a milestone for man comparable to his discovery of fire and superior to his invention of the wheel and the arch". It was an immediate commercial success and sparked what Martin Gardner calls "a nationwide cult of incredible proportions".Gardner, p. 265 By August 1950, Hubbard's book had sold 55,000 copies, was selling at the rate of 4,000 a week and was being translated into French, German and Japanese. Five hundred Dianetic auditing groups had been set up across the United States.Staff (August 21, 1950). "Dianetics book review; Best Seller." Newsweek Dianetics was poorly received by the press and the scientific and medical professions. The American Psychological Association criticized Hubbard's claims as "not supported by empirical evidence". Scientific American said that Hubbard's book contained "more promises and less evidence per page than any publication since the invention of printing",Rabi, Isaac Isador. "Book Review." Scientific American, January 1951 while The New Republic called it a "bold and immodest mixture of complete nonsense and perfectly reasonable common sense, taken from long acknowledged findings and disguised and distorted by a crazy, newly invented terminology".Gumpert, Martin. (August 14, 1950) "Dianetics: book review by Martin Gumpert." The New Republic Some of Hubbard's fellow science fiction writers also criticized it; Isaac Asimov considered it "gibberish" while Jack Williamson called it "a lunatic revision of Freudian psychology".Miller, p. 153 Several famous individuals became involved with Dianetics. Aldous Huxley received auditing from Hubbard himself;Atack, p. 113 the poet Jean ToomerKerman, Cynthia Earl; Eldridge, Richard. The lives of Jean Toomer: a hunger for wholeness, pp. 317–318. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-8071-1548-0 and the science fiction writers Theodore SturgeonSturgeon, Theodore; Williams, Paul. Baby is three, p. 414. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 1999. ISBN 978-1-55643-319-1 and A. E. van Vogt became trained Dianetics auditors. Van Vogt temporarily abandoned writing and became the head of the newly established Los Angeles branch of the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation. Other branches were established in New York, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and Honolulu.Melton, p. 190 Although Dianetics was not cheap, a great many people were nonetheless willing to pay; van Vogt later recalled "doing little but tear open envelopes and pull out $500 checks from people who wanted to take an auditor's course".Miller, p. 166 Financial controls were lax. Hubbard himself withdrew large sums with no explanation of what he was doing with it. On one occasion, van Vogt saw Hubbard taking a lump sum of $56,000 (equivalent to $0.5 million at 2010 prices) out of the Los Angeles Foundation's proceeds. One of Hubbard's employees, Helen O'Brien, commented that at the Elizabeth, N.J. branch of the Foundation, the books showed that "a month's income of $90,000 is listed, with only $20,000 accounted for".O'Brien, p. 27 Hubbard played a very active role in the Dianetics boom, writing, lecturing and training auditors. Many of those who knew him spoke of being impressed by his personal charisma. Jack Horner, who became a Dianetics auditor in 1950, later said, "He was very impressive, dedicated and amusing. The man had tremendous charisma; you just wanted to hear every word he had to say and listen for any pearl of wisdom."Miller, pp. 159–160 Isaac Asimov recalled in his autobiography how, at a dinner party, he, Robert Heinlein, L. Sprague de Camp and their wives "all sat as quietly as pussycats and listened to Hubbard. He told tales with perfect aplomb and in complete paragraphs." As Atack comments, he was "a charismatic figure who compelled the devotion of those around him".Atack, p. 377 Christopher Evans described the personal qualities that Hubbard brought to Dianetics and Scientology: Hubbard's supporters soon began to have doubts about Dianetics. Winter became disillusioned and wrote that he had never seen a single convincing Clear: "I have seen some individuals who are supposed to have been 'clear,' but their behavior does not conform to the definition of the state. Moreover, an individual supposed to have been 'clear' has undergone a relapse into conduct which suggests an incipient psychosis."Winter, p. 34 He also deplored the Foundation's omission of any serious scientific research.Miller, p. 169 Dianetics lost public credibility in August 1950 when a presentation by Hubbard before an audience of 6,000 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles failed disastrously.Whitehead, p. 67 He introduced a Clear named Sonya Bianca and told the audience that as a result of undergoing Dianetic therapy she now possessed perfect recall. However, Gardner writes, "in the demonstration that followed, she failed to remember a single formula in physics (the subject in which she was majoring) or the color of Hubbard's tie when his back was turned. At this point, a large part of the audience got up and left."Gardner, p. 270 Hubbard also faced other practitioners moving into leadership positions within the Dianetics community. It was structured as an open, public practice in which others were free to pursue their own lines of research and claim that their approaches to auditing produced better results than Hubbard's.Stark, Rodney; Bainbridge, William Sims. The future of religion: secularization, revival, and cult formation, pp. 268–269. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. ISBN 978-0-520-05731-9 The community rapidly splintered and its members mingled Hubbard's ideas with a wide variety of esoteric and even occult practices.Marshall, Gordon. In praise of sociology, p. 186. London: Routledge, 1990. ISBN 978-0-04-445688-9 By late 1950, the Elizabeth, N.J. Foundation was in financial crisis and the Los Angeles Foundation was more than $200,000 in debt.Miller, p. 173 Winter and Art Ceppos, the publisher of Hubbard's book, resigned under acrimonious circumstances. Campbell also resigned, criticizing Hubbard for being impossible to work with, and blamed him for the disorganization and financial ruin of the Foundations. By the summer of 1951, the Elizabeth, N.J. Foundation and all of its branches had closed. The collapse of Hubbard's marriage to Sara created yet more problems. He had begun an affair with his 20-year-old public relations assistant in late 1950, while Sara started a relationship with Dianetics auditor Miles Hollister.Miller, p. 170 Hubbard secretly denounced the couple to the FBI in March 1951, portraying them in a letter as communist infiltrators. According to Hubbard, Sara was "currently intimate with [communists] but evidently under coercion. Drug addiction set in fall 1950. Nothing of this known to me until a few weeks ago." Hollister was described as having a "sharp chin, broad forehead, rather Slavic". He was said to be the "center of most turbulence in our organization" and "active and dangerous".Miller, p. 180 The FBI did not take Hubbard seriously: an agent annotated his correspondence with the comment, "Appears mental." Three weeks later, Hubbard and two Foundation staff seized Sara and his year-old daughter Alexis and forcibly took them to San Bernardino, California, where he attempted unsuccessfully to find a doctor to examine Sara and declare her insane.Atack, p. 117 He let Sara go but took Alexis to Havana, Cuba. Sara filed a divorce suit on April 23, 1951, that accused him of marrying her bigamously and subjecting her to sleep deprivation, beatings, strangulation, kidnapping and exhortations to commit suicide.Martin, Walter Ralston; Zacharias, Ravi K. (ed.). The Kingdom of the Cults, p. 338. Minneapolis: Bethany House, 2003. ISBN 978-0-7642-2821-6 The case led to newspaper headlines such as "Ron Hubbard Insane, Says His Wife."Staff (April 24, 1951). "Ron Hubbard Insane, Says His Wife." San Francisco Chronicle Sara finally secured the return of her daughter in June 1951 by agreeing to a settlement with her husband in which she signed a statement, written by him, declaring: Dianetics appeared to be on the edge of total collapse. However, it was saved by Don Purcell, a millionaire businessman and Dianeticist who agreed to support a new Foundation in Wichita, Kansas. Their collaboration ended after less than a year when they fell out over the future direction of Dianetics.Streissguth, p. 71 The Wichita Foundation became financially nonviable after a court ruled that it was liable for the unpaid debts of its defunct predecessor in Elizabeth, N.J. The ruling prompted Purcell and the other directors of the Wichita Foundation to file for voluntary bankruptcy in February 1952. Hubbard resigned immediately and accused Purcell of having been bribed by the American Medical Association to destroy Dianetics. Hubbard established a "Hubbard College" on the other side of town where he continued to promote Dianetics while fighting Purcell in the courts over the Foundation's intellectual property.Miller, p. 200 Only six weeks after setting up the Hubbard College and marrying a staff member, 18-year-old Mary Sue Whipp, Hubbard closed it down and moved with his new bride to Phoenix, Arizona. He established a Hubbard Association of Scientologists International to promote his new "Science of Certainty"—Scientology.Atack, p. 129W. Vaughn Mccall, distinguished Professor and Chairman, Georgia Regents University, differentiates Scientology and Dianetics: Dianetics is all about releasing the mind from the “distorting influence of engrams,” and Scientology “is the study and handling of the spirit in relation to itself, universes and other life.”    The Church of Scientology attributes its genesis to Hubbard's discovery of "a new line of research", first set out in his book Science of Survival—"that man is most fundamentally a spiritual being"."L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 1950–1959. Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 8, 2011. Non-Scientologist writers have suggested alternative motives: that he aimed "to reassert control over his creation", that he believed "he was about to lose control of Dianetics", or that he wanted to ensure "he would be able to stay in business even if the courts eventually awarded control of Dianetics and its valuable copyrights to&nbsp;... the hated Don Purcell."Miller, p. 203 Hubbard expanded upon the basics of Dianetics to construct a spiritually oriented (though at this stage not religious) doctrine based on the concept that the true self of a person was a thetan—an immortal, omniscient and potentially omnipotent entity.DeChant, Dell; Danny L. Jorgensen. "The Church of Scientology: A Very New American Religion" in Neusner, Jacob. World Religions in America: An Introduction, p. 226. Westminster John Knox Press, 2003. ISBN 0-664-22475-X Hubbard taught that the thetans, having created the material universe, had forgotten their god-like powers and become trapped in physical bodies.Bromley, p. 91 Scientology aimed to "rehabilitate" each person's thetan to restore its original capacities and become once again an "Operating Thetan". Hubbard insisted humanity was imperiled by the forces of "aberration", which were the result of engrams carried by the immortal thetans for billions of years. Hubbard introduced a device called an E-meter that he presented as having, as Miller puts it, "an almost mystical power to reveal an individual's innermost thoughts".Miller, p. 204 He promulgated Scientology through a series of lectures, bulletins and books such as A History of Man ("a cold-blooded and factual account of your last sixty trillion years") and Scientology: 8-8008 ("With this book, the ability to make one's body old or young at will, the ability to heal the ill without physical contact, the ability to cure the insane and the incapacitated, is set forth for the physician, the layman, the mathematician and the physicist.")Miller, p. 206 Scientology was organized in a very different way from the decentralized Dianetics movement. The Hubbard Association of Scientologists (HAS) was the only official Scientology organization. Training procedures and doctrines were standardized and promoted through HAS publications, and administrators and auditors were not permitted to deviate from Hubbard's approach. Branches or "orgs" were organized as franchises, rather like a fast food restaurant chain. Each franchise holder was required to pay ten percent of income to Hubbard's central organization. They were expected to find new recruits, known as "raw meat", but were restricted to providing only basic services. Costlier higher-level auditing was only provided by Hubbard's central organization.Tucker, p. 304 Although this model would eventually be extremely successful, Scientology was a very small-scale movement at first. Hubbard started off with only a few dozen followers, generally dedicated Dianeticists; a seventy-hour series of lectures in Philadelphia in December 1952 was attended by just 38 people.Miller, p. 210 Hubbard was joined in Phoenix by his 18-year-old son Nibs, who had been unable to settle down in high school.Miller, p. 207 Nibs had decided to become a Scientologist, moved into his father's home and went on to become a Scientology staff member and "professor".Miller, p. 232 Hubbard also traveled to the United Kingdom to establish his control over a Dianetics group in London. It was very much a shoestring operation; as Helen O'Brien later recalled, "there was an atmosphere of extreme poverty and undertones of a grim conspiracy over all. At 163 Holland Park Avenue was an ill-lit lecture room and a bare-boarded and poky office some eight by ten feet—mainly infested by long haired men and short haired and tatty women."O'Brien, p. 49 On September 24, 1952, only a few weeks after arriving in London, Hubbard's wife Mary Sue gave birth to her first child, a daughter whom they named Diana Meredith de Wolfe Hubbard.Miller, p. 208 In February 1953, Hubbard acquired a doctorate from the unaccredited Sequoia University. According to a Scientology biography, this was "given in recognition of his outstanding work on Dianetics" and "as an inspiration to the many people&nbsp;... who had been inspired by him to take up advanced studies in this field&nbsp;..." The British government concluded in the 1970s that Sequoia University was a "degree mill" operated by Joseph Hough, a Los Angeles chiropractor. Miller cites a telegram sent by Hubbard on February 27, 1953, in which he instructed Scientologist Richard de Mille to procure him a Ph.D. from Hough urgently—"FOR GOSH SAKES EXPEDITE. WORK HERE UTTERLY DEPENDANT ON IT."Miller, p. 212 Hough's "university" was closed down by the Californian authorities in 1971. British government officials noted in a report written in 1977: "It has not and never had any authority whatsoever to issue diplomas or degrees and the dean is sought by the authorities 'for questioning'."Smith, Graham (August 7, 2009). "Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard exposed as a 'fraud' by British diplomats 30 years ago." Daily Mail, retrieved February 8, 2011. A few weeks after becoming "Dr." Hubbard, he wrote to Helen O'Brien—who had taken over the day-to-day management of Scientology in the United States—proposing that Scientology should be transformed into a religion.Streeter, p. 215; Miller, p. 213 As membership declined and finances grew tighter, Hubbard had reversed the hostility to religion he voiced in Dianetics.Kent, Stephen A. "The Creation of 'Religious' Scientology." Religious Studies and Theology 18:2, pp. 97–126. 1999. ISSN 1747-5414 His letter to O'Brien discussed the legal and financial benefits of religious status. The idea may not have been new; Hubbard has been quoted as telling a science fiction convention in 1948: "Writing for a penny a word is ridiculous. If a man really wants to make a million dollars, the best way would be to start his own religion."Methvin, Eugene H. (May 1990). "Scientology: Anatomy of a Frightening Cult." Reader's Digest. pp. 16.Lawrence, Sara. (April 18, 2006) "The Secrets of Scientology" The Independent. Retrieved February 17, 2011.Staff. (April 5, 1976). "Religion: A Sci-Fi Faith." Time. Retrieved February 17, 2011. Scholar J. Gordon Melton notes, "There is no record of Hubbard having ever made this statement, though several of his science fiction colleagues have noted the broaching of the subject on one of their informal conversations." The Church of Scientology has denied that Hubbard said this and insists that it is a misattributed quote that was said instead by George Orwell.Did L. Ron Hubbard state that the way to make money was to start a religion? Church of Scientology International, 2003, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard outlined plans for setting up a chain of "Spiritual Guidance Centers" charging customers $500 for twenty-four hours of auditing ("That is real money&nbsp;... Charge enough and we'd be swamped."). He wrote: O'Brien was not enthusiastic and resigned the following September, worn out by work.Miller, p. 214 She criticized Hubbard for creating "a temperate zone voodoo, in its inelasticity, unexplainable procedures, and mindless group euphoria".O'Brien, p. vii He nonetheless pressed ahead and on December 18, 1953, he incorporated the Church of Scientology, Church of American Science and Church of Spiritual Engineering in Camden, New Jersey.Williams, Ian. The Alms Trade: Charities, Past, Present and Future, p. 127. New York: Cosimo, 2007. ISBN 978-1-60206-753-0 Hubbard, his wife Mary Sue and his secretary John Galusha became the trustees of all three corporations.Voltz, Tom. Scientology und (k)ein Ende, p. 75. Solothurn: Walter, 1995. ISBN 978-3-530-89980-1 Hubbard later denied founding the Church of Scientology, and to this day, Scientologists maintain that the "founding church" was actually the Church of Scientology of California, established on February 18, 1954, by Scientologist Burton Farber.Atack, p. 137 The reason for Scientology's religious transformation was explained by officials of the HAS: Scientology franchises became Churches of Scientology and some auditors began dressing as clergymen, complete with clerical collars. If they were arrested in the course of their activities, Hubbard advised, they should sue for massive damages for molesting "a Man of God going about his business". A few years later he told Scientologists: "If attacked on some vulnerable point by anyone or anything or any organization, always find or manufacture enough threat against them to cause them to sue for peace&nbsp;... Don't ever defend, always attack."Miller, p. 239 Any individual breaking away from Scientology and setting up his own group was to be shut down: The 1950s saw Scientology growing steadily. Hubbard finally achieved victory over Don Purcell in 1954 when the latter, worn out by constant litigation, handed the copyrights of Dianetics back to Hubbard.Atack, p. 138 Most of the formerly independent Scientology and Dianetics groups were either driven out of business or were absorbed into Hubbard's organizations.Atack, p. 139 Hubbard marketed Scientology through medical claims, such as attracting polio sufferers by presenting the Church of Scientology as a scientific research foundation investigating polio cases.Streissguth, p. 74 One advertisement during this period stated: Scientology became a highly profitable enterprise for Hubbard.Atack, p. 142 He implemented a scheme under which he was paid a percentage of the Church of Scientology's gross income and by 1957 he was being paid about $250,000 annually—equivalent to $1.9&nbsp;million at 2010 prices.Miller, p. 227 His family grew, too, with Mary Sue giving birth to three more children—Geoffrey Quentin McCaully on January 6, 1954; Mary Suzette Rochelle on February 13, 1955;Miller, p. 221 and Arthur Ronald Conway on June 6, 1958.Miller, p. 230 In the spring of 1959, he used his new-found wealth to purchase Saint Hill Manor, an 18th-century country house in Sussex, formerly owned by Sawai Man Singh II, the Maharaja of Jaipur. The house became Hubbard's permanent residence and an international training center for Scientologists.  By the start of the 1960s, Hubbard was the leader of a worldwide movement with thousands of followers. A decade later, however, he had left Saint Hill Manor and moved aboard his own private fleet of ships as the Church of Scientology faced worldwide controversy. The Church of Scientology says that the problems of this period were due to "vicious, covert international attacks" by the United States government, "all of which were proven false and baseless, which were to last 27 years and finally culminated in the Government being sued for 750&nbsp;million dollars for conspiracy." Behind the attacks, stated Hubbard, lay a vast conspiracy of "psychiatric front groups" secretly controlling governments: "Every single lie, false charge and attack on Scientology has been traced directly to this group's members. They have sought at great expense for nineteen years to crush and eradicate any new development in the field of the mind. They are actively preventing any effectiveness in this field."Hubbard, L. Ron. "Constitutional Destruction." June 9, 1969, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard believed that Scientology was being infiltrated by saboteurs and spies and introduced "security checking" to identify those he termed "potential trouble sources" and "suppressive persons". Members of the Church of Scientology were interrogated with the aid of E-meters and were asked questions such as "Have you ever practiced homosexuality?" and "Have you ever had unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard?"Atack, p. 150 For a time, Scientologists were even interrogated about crimes committed in past lives: "Have you ever destroyed a culture?" "Did you come to Earth for evil purposes?" "Have you ever zapped anyone?"Hubbard, L. Ron. "Sec Check Whole Track," HCO Bulletin of June 19, 1961; quoted in Atack, p. 152 He also sought to exert political influence, advising Scientologists to vote against Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election and establishing a Department of Government Affairs "to bring government and hostile philosophies or societies into a state of complete compliance with the goals of Scientology". This, he said, "is done by high-level ability to control and in its absence by a low-level ability to overwhelm. Introvert such agencies. Control such agencies."Hubbard, L. Ron. "Department of Government Affairs," HCO Policy Letter of August 15, 1960; quoted in Miller, p. 241 The U.S. Government was already well aware of Hubbard's activities. The FBI had a lengthy file on him, including a 1951 interview with an agent who considered him a "mental case".Miller, p. 181 Police forces in a number of jurisdictions began exchanging information about Scientology through the auspices of Interpol, which eventually led to prosecutions.Fooner, Michael. Interpol: issues in world crime and international criminal justice, p. 13. New York: Plenum Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-306-43135-7 In 1958, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service withdrew the Washington, D.C. Church of Scientology's tax exemption after it found that Hubbard and his family were profiting unreasonably from Scientology's ostensibly non-profit income. The Food and Drug Administration took action against Scientology's medical claims, seizing thousands of pills being marketed as "radiation cures"Miller, p. 228 as well as publications and E-meters. The Church of Scientology was required to label them as being "ineffective in the diagnosis or treatment of disease".Atack, p. 154 Following the FDA's actions, Scientology attracted increasingly unfavorable publicity across the English-speaking world.Wallis, p. 192 It faced particularly hostile scrutiny in Victoria, Australia, where it was accused of brainwashing, blackmail, extortion and damaging the mental health of its members.Wallis, p. 215 The Victorian state government established a Board of Inquiry into Scientology in November 1963.Miller, p. 250 Its report, published in October 1965, condemned every aspect of Scientology and Hubbard himself. He was described as being of doubtful sanity, having a persecution complex and displaying strong indications of paranoid schizophrenia with delusions of grandeur. His writings were characterized as nonsensical, abounding in "self-glorification and grandiosity, replete with histrionics and hysterical, incontinent outbursts".Miller, pp. 252–253 Sociologist Roy Wallis comments that the report drastically changed public perceptions of Scientology: The report led to Scientology being banned in Victoria,Wallis, p. 193 Western Australia and South Australia,Wallis, p. 196 and led to more negative publicity around the world. Newspapers and politicians in the UK pressed the British government for action against Scientology. In April 1966, hoping to form a remote "safe haven" for Scientology, Hubbard traveled to the southern African country Rhodesia (today Zimbabwe) and looked into setting up a base there at a hotel on Lake Kariba. Despite his attempts to curry favour with the local government—he personally delivered champagne to Prime Minister Ian Smith's house, but Smith refused to see him—Rhodesia promptly refused to renew Hubbard's visa, compelling him to leave the country.Reitman (2011), pp. 80–81 In July 1968, the British Minister of Health, Kenneth Robinson, announced that foreign Scientologists would no longer be permitted to enter the UK and Hubbard himself was excluded from the country as an "undesirable alien".Atack, p. 183 Further inquiries were launched in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. Hubbard took three major new initiatives in the face of these challenges. "Ethics Technology" was introduced to tighten internal discipline within Scientology. It required Scientologists to "disconnect" from any organization or individual—including family members—deemed to be disruptive or "suppressive".Atack, p. 155 According to church-operated websites, “A person who disconnects is simply exercising his right to communicate or not to communicate with a particular person." Hubbard stated: “Communication, however, is a two-way flow. If one has the right to communicate, then one must also have the right to not receive communication from another. It is this latter corollary of the right to communicate that gives us our right to privacy.” Scientologists were also required to write "Knowledge Reports" on each other, reporting transgressions or misapplications of Scientology methods. Hubbard promulgated a long list of punishable "Misdemeanors", "Crimes", and "High Crimes".Atack, p. 156 The "Fair Game" policy was introduced, which was applicable to anyone deemed an "enemy" of Scientology: "May be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologist. May be tricked, sued or lied to or destroyed."Hubbard, L. Ron. "Penalties for Lower Conditions." HCO Policy Letter of October 18, 1967, Issue IV. Quoted in Atack, pp. 175–176Wallis, pp. 144–145 At the start of March 1966, Hubbard created the Guardian's Office (GO), a new agency within the Church of Scientology that was headed by his wife Mary Sue.Atack, p. 161 It dealt with Scientology's external affairs, including public relations, legal actions and the gathering of intelligence on perceived threats.Atack, p. 165 As Scientology faced increasingly negative media attention, the GO retaliated with hundreds of writs for libel and slander; it issued more than forty on a single day.Atack, p. 189 Hubbard ordered his staff to find "lurid, blood sex crime actual evidence  on [Scientology's] attackers".Atack, p. 160 Finally, at the end of 1966, Hubbard acquired his own fleet of ships. He established the "Hubbard Explorational Company Ltd" which purchased three ships—the Enchanter, a forty-ton schooner,Miller, p. 264 the Avon River, an old trawler,Miller, p. 265 and the Royal Scotman , a former Irish Sea cattle ferry that he made his home and flagship.Miller, p. 269 The ships were crewed by the Sea Organization or Sea Org, a group of Scientologist volunteers, with the support of a couple of professional seamen.Miller, p. 272   After Hubbard created the Sea Org "fleet" in early 1967 it began an eight-year voyage, sailing from port to port in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern North Atlantic. The fleet traveled as far as Corfu in the eastern Mediterranean and Dakar and the Azores in the Atlantic, but rarely stayed anywhere for longer than six weeks. Ken Urquhart, Hubbard's personal assistant at the time, later recalled: When Hubbard established the Sea Org he publicly declared that he had relinquished his management responsibilities. According to Miller, this was not true. He received daily telex messages from Scientology organizations around the world reporting their statistics and income. The Church of Scientology sent him $15,000 a week and millions of dollars were transferred to his bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein.Miller, p. 299 Couriers arrived regularly, conveying luxury food for Hubbard and his familyMiller, p. 300 or cash that had been smuggled from England to avoid currency export restrictions.Miller, p. 290 Along the way, Hubbard sought to establish a safe haven in "a friendly little country where Scientology would be allowed to prosper", as Miller puts it.Miller, p. 310 The fleet stayed at Corfu for several months in 1968–1969. Hubbard renamed the ships after Greek gods—the Royal Scotman was rechristened Apollo—and he praised the recently established military dictatorship. The Sea Org was represented as "Professor Hubbard's Philosophy School" in a telegram to the Greek government.Miller, p. 295 In March 1969, however, Hubbard and his ships were ordered to leave.Miller, p. 296 In mid-1972, Hubbard tried again in Morocco, establishing contacts with the country's secret police and training senior policemen and intelligence agents in techniques for detecting subversives.Miller, p. 311 The program ended in failure when it became caught up in internal Moroccan politics, and Hubbard left the country hastily in December 1972.Miller, p. 312 At the same time, Hubbard was still developing Scientology's doctrines. A Scientology biography states that "free of organizational duties and aided by the first Sea Org members, L. Ron Hubbard now had the time and facilities to confirm in the physical universe some of the events and places he had encountered in his journeys down the track of time." In 1965, he designated several existing Scientology courses as confidential, repackaging them as the first of the esoteric "OT levels".Atack, p. 159 Two years later he announced the release of OT3, the "Wall of Fire", revealing the secrets of an immense disaster that had occurred "on this planet, and on the other seventy-five planets which form this Confederacy, seventy-five million years ago".Hubbard, L. Ron. "Ron's Journal '67," quoted in Atack, p. 173. Scientologists were required to undertake the first two OT levels before learning how Xenu, the leader of the Galactic Confederacy, had shipped billions of people to Earth and blown them up with hydrogen bombs, following which their traumatized spirits were stuck together at "implant stations", brainwashed with false memories and eventually became contained within human beings.Atack, p. 32 The discovery of OT3 was said to have taken a major physical toll on Hubbard, who announced that he had broken a knee, an arm, and his back during the course of his research.Atack, p. 173 A year later, in 1968, he unveiled OT levels 4 to 6 and began delivering OT training courses to Scientologists aboard the Royal Scotman.Atack, p. 177 Scientologists around the world were presented with a glamorous picture of life in the Sea Org and many applied to join Hubbard aboard the fleet. What they found was rather different from the image. Most of those joining had no nautical experience at all. Mechanical difficulties and blunders by the crews led to a series of embarrassing incidents and near-disasters. Following one incident in which the rudder of the Royal Scotman was damaged during a storm, Hubbard ordered the ship's entire crew to be reduced to a "condition of liability" and wear gray rags tied to their arms.Miller, p. 285 The ship itself was treated the same way, with dirty tarpaulins tied around its funnel to symbolize its lower status. According to those aboard, conditions were appalling; the crew was worked to the point of exhaustion, given meagre rations and forbidden to wash or change their clothes for several weeks.Miller, p. 286 Hubbard maintained a harsh disciplinary regime aboard the fleet, punishing mistakes by confining people in the Royal Scotman bilge tanks without toilet facilities and with food provided in buckets.Atack, p. 180 At other times erring crew members were thrown overboard with Hubbard looking on and, occasionally, filming.Atack, p. 186 David Mayo, a Sea Org member at the time, later recalled: From about 1970, Hubbard was attended aboard ship by the children of Sea Org members, organized as the Commodore's Messenger Organization (CMO). They were mainly young girls dressed in hot pants and halter tops, who were responsible for running errands for Hubbard such as lighting his cigarettes, dressing him or relaying his verbal commands to other members of the crew.Miller, p. 301Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Mind Behind the Religion : Life With L. Ron Hubbard." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 20, 2011. In addition to his wife Mary Sue, he was accompanied by all four of his children by her, though not his first son Nibs, who had defected from Scientology in late 1959.Miller, p. 236 The younger Hubbards were all members of the Sea Org and shared its rigors, though Quentin Hubbard reportedly found it difficult to adjust and attempted suicide in mid-1974.Miller, p. 325  During the 1970s, Hubbard faced an increasing number of legal threats. French prosecutors charged him and the French Church of Scientology with fraud and customs violations in 1972. He was advised that he was at risk of being extradited to France.Corydon, Bent. L. Ron Hubbard: Messiah or Madman?, p. 94. Fort Lee, N.J.: Barricade Books, 1992. ISBN 978-0-942637-57-1 Hubbard left the Sea Org fleet temporarily at the end of 1972, living incognito in Queens, New York,Miller, p. 314 until he returned to his flagship in September 1973 when the threat of extradition had abated.Miller, p. 318 Scientology sources say that he carried out "a sociological study in and around New York City"."L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 1970–1979." Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard's health deteriorated significantly during this period. A chain-smoker, he also suffered from bursitis and excessive weight, and had a prominent growth on his forehead.Miller, p. 316 He suffered serious injuries in a motorcycle accident in 1973 and had a heart attack in 1975 that required him to take anticoagulant drugs for the next year.Atack, p. 255 In September 1978, Hubbard had a pulmonary embolism, falling into a coma, but recovered.Atack, p. 256 He remained active in managing and developing Scientology, establishing the controversial Rehabilitation Project Force in 1974Atack, p. 206 and issuing policy and doctrinal bulletins.Atack, p. 204 However, the Sea Org's voyages were coming to an end. The Apollo was banned from several Spanish ports and was expelled from Curaçao in October 1975.Atack, p. 209 The Sea Org came to be suspected of being a CIA operation, leading to a riot in Funchal, Madeira, when the Apollo docked there. At the time, The Apollo Stars, a musical group founded by Hubbard and made up entirely of shipbound members of the Sea Org, was offering free on-pier concerts in an attempt to promote Scientology, and the riot occurred at one of these events. Hubbard decided to relocate back to the United States to establish a "land base" for the Sea Org in Florida.Miller, p. 334 The Church of Scientology attributes this decision to the activities on the Apollo having "outgrow[n] the ship's capacity". In October 1975, Hubbard moved into a hotel suite in Daytona Beach. The Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, was secretly acquired as the location for the "land base". On December 5, 1975, Hubbard and his wife Mary Sue moved into a condominium complex in nearby Dunedin.Miller, p. 336 Their presence was meant to be a closely guarded secret but was accidentally compromised the following month.Miller, p. 338 Hubbard immediately left Dunedin and moved to Georgetown, Washington, D.C., accompanied by a handful of aides and messengers, but not his wife.Miller, p. 340 Six months later, following another security alert in July 1976, Hubbard moved to another safe house in Culver City, California. He lived there for only about three months, relocating in October to the more private confines of the Olive Tree Ranch near La Quinta.Miller, p. 343 His second son Quentin committed suicide a few weeks later in Las Vegas.Miller, p. 344 Throughout this period, Hubbard was heavily involved in directing the activities of the Guardian's Office (GO), the legal bureau/intelligence agency that he had established in 1966. He believed that Scientology was being attacked by an international Nazi conspiracy, which he termed the "Tenyaka Memorial", through a network of drug companies, banks and psychiatrists in a bid to take over the world.Beresford, David (February 7, 1980). "Snow White's dirty tricks." London: The Guardian In 1973, he instigated the "Snow White Program" and directed the GO to remove negative reports about Scientology from government files and track down their sources.Miller, pp. 317–318 The GO was ordered to "get all false and secret files on Scientology, LRH &nbsp;... that cannot be obtained legally, by all possible lines of approach&nbsp;... i.e., job penetration, janitor penetration, suitable guises utilizing covers." His involvement in the GO's operations was concealed through the use of codenames. The GO carried out covert campaigns on his behalf such as Operation Bulldozer Leak, intended "to effectively spread the rumor that will lead Government, media, and individual [Suppressive Persons] to conclude that LRH has no control of the C of S and no legal liability for Church activity". He was kept informed of GO operations, such as the theft of medical records from a hospital, harassment of psychiatrists and infiltrations of organizations that had been critical of Scientology at various times, such as the Better Business Bureau, the American Medical Association, and American Psychiatric Association.Marshall, John (January 24, 1980). "The Scientology Papers: Hubbard still gave orders, records show." Toronto: Globe and Mail Members of the GO infiltrated and burglarized numerous government organizations, including the U.S. Department of Justice and the Internal Revenue Service.Streissguth, p. 75 After two GO agents were caught in the Washington, D.C. headquarters of the IRS, the FBI carried out simultaneous raids on GO offices in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. on July 7, 1977. They retrieved wiretap equipment, burglary tools and some 90,000 pages of incriminating documents. Hubbard was not prosecuted, though he was labeled an "unindicted co-conspirator" by government prosecutors. His wife Mary Sue was indicted and subsequently convicted of conspiracy. She was sent to a federal prison along with ten other Scientologists.Reitman (2007), p. 323 Hubbard's troubles increased in February 1978 when a French court convicted him in absentia for obtaining money under false pretenses. He was sentenced to four years in prison and a 35,000FF ($7,000) fine.Marshall, John (January 26, 1980). "The Scientology Papers: The hidden Hubbard." Toronto: Globe and Mail He went into hiding in April 1979, moving to an apartment in Hemet, California, where his only contact with the outside world was via ten trusted Messengers. He cut contact with everyone else, even his wife, whom he saw for the last time in August 1979.Atack, p. 258 Hubbard faced a possible indictment for his role in Operation Freakout, the GO's campaign against New York journalist Paulette Cooper, and in February 1980 he disappeared into deep cover in the company of two trusted Messengers, Pat and Anne Broeker.Atack, p. 259Miller, p. 364 For the first few years of the 1980s, Hubbard and the Broekers lived on the move, touring the Pacific Northwest in a recreational vehicle and living for a while in apartments in Newport Beach and Los Angeles.Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert W. (June 24, 1990). The Mind Behind the Religion : Chapter Four : The Final Days : Deep in hiding, Hubbard kept tight grip on the church." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard used his time in hiding to write his first new works of science fiction for nearly thirty years—Battlefield Earth (1982) and Mission Earth, a ten-volume series published between 1985 and 1987.Queen, Edward L.; Prothero, Stephen R.; Shattuck, Gardiner H. Encyclopedia of American religious history, Volume 1, p. 493. New York: Infobase Publishing, 2009. ISBN 978-0-8160-6660-5 They received mixed responses; as writer Jeff Walker puts it, they were "treated derisively by most critics but greatly admired by followers".Walker, Jeff. The Ayn Rand Cult, p. 275. Chicago: Open Court, 1999. ISBN 978-0-8126-9390-4 Hubbard also wrote and composed music for three of his albums, which were produced by the Church of Scientology. The book soundtrack Space Jazz was released in 1982. Mission Earth and The Road to Freedom were released posthumously in 1986. In Hubbard's absence, members of the Sea Org staged a takeover of the Church of Scientology and purged many veteran Scientologists. A young Messenger, David Miscavige, became Scientology's de facto leader. Mary Sue Hubbard was forced to resign her position and her daughter Suzette became Miscavige's personal maid.Miller, p. 366  For the last two years of his life, Hubbard lived in a luxury Blue Bird motorhome on Whispering Winds, a 160-acre ranch near Creston, California. He remained in deep hiding while controversy raged in the outside world about whether he was still alive and if so, where. He spent his time "writing and researching", according to a spokesperson, and pursued photography and music, overseeing construction work and checking on his animals.Brown, Mark (January 30, 1986). "Creston provided quiet retreat for controversial church leader." The County Telegram-Tribune, San Luis Obispo, pp. 1A/5A. He repeatedly redesigned the property, spending millions of dollars remodeling the ranch house—which went virtually uninhabited—and building a quarter-mile horse-racing track with an observation tower, which reportedly was never used. He was still closely involved in managing the Church of Scientology via secretly delivered orders and continued to receive large amounts of money, of which Forbes magazine estimated "at least $200 million [was] gathered in Hubbard's name through 1982." In September 1985, the IRS notified the Church that it was considering indicting Hubbard for tax fraud.Behar, Richard (October 27, 1986). "The prophet and profits of Scientology." Forbes 400 (Forbes) Hubbard suffered further ill-health, including chronic pancreatitis, during his residence at Whispering Winds. He suffered a  stroke on January 17, 1986, and died a week later.Church of Scientology. L. Ron Hubbard's death. Image of Death Certificate. Retrieved on: 2012-06-15. His body was cremated following an autopsy and the ashes were scattered at sea.Miller, p. 375 Scientology leaders announced that his body had become an impediment to his work and that he had decided to "drop his body" to continue his research on another planet,Petrowsky, Marc. Sects, cults, and spiritual communities: a sociological analysis, p. 144. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1998. ISBN 978-0-275-95860-2 having "learned how to do it without a body".Atack, p. 354 Hubbard was survived by his wife Mary Sue and all of his children except his second son Quentin. His will provided a trust fund to support Mary Sue; her children Arthur, Diana and Suzette; and Katherine, the daughter of his first wife Polly.[Staff] (February 7, 1986). "Hubbard Left Most of Estate to Scientology Church; Executor Appointed." The Associated Press He disinherited two of his other children.Atack, p. 356 L. Ron Hubbard, Jr. had become estranged, changed his name to "Ronald DeWolf" and, in 1982, sued unsuccessfully for control of his father's estate.Lamont, p. 154 Alexis Valerie, Hubbard's daughter by his second wife Sara, had attempted to contact her father in 1971. She was rebuffed with the implied claim that her real father was Jack Parsons rather than Hubbard, and that her mother had been a Nazi spy during the war.Miller, p. 306 Both later accepted settlements when litigation was threatened. In 2001, Diana and Suzette were reported to still be Church members, while Arthur had left and become an artist. Hubbard's great-grandson, Jamie DeWolf, is a noted slam poet.Lattin, Don (February 12, 2001). "Scientology Founder's Family Life Far From What He Preached." San Francisco Chronicle, retrieved February 12, 2011. The copyrights of his works and much of his estate and wealth were willed to the Church of Scientology. In a bulletin dated May 5, 1980, Hubbard told his followers to preserve his teachings until an eventual reincarnation when he would return "not as a religious leader but as a political one". The Church of Spiritual Technology (CST), a sister organization of the Church of Scientology, has engraved Hubbard's entire corpus of Scientology and Dianetics texts on steel tablets stored in titanium containers. They are buried at the Trementina Base in a vault under a mountain near Trementina, New Mexico, on top of which the CST's logo has been bulldozed on such a gigantic scale that it is visible from space.Gallagher, Eugene V.; Ashcraft, Michael. African Diaspora Traditions and Other American Innovations, p. 172; vol 5 of Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006. ISBN 978-0-275-98717-6 Hubbard is the Guinness World Record holder for the most published author, with 1,084 works, most translated book (70 languages for The Way to Happiness) and most audiobooks (185 as of April 2009). According to Galaxy Press, Hubbard's Battlefield Earth has sold over 6 million copies and Mission Earth a further 7 million, with each of its ten volumes becoming New York Times bestsellers on their release; however, the Los Angeles Times reported in 1990 that Hubbard's followers had been buying large numbers of the books and re-issuing them to stores, so as to boost sales figures.Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert W. (June 28, 1990). "Costly Strategy Continues to Turn Out Bestsellers." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 15, 2011. Opinions are divided about his literary legacy. Scientologists have written of their desire to "make Ron the most acclaimed and widely known author of all time". The sociologist William Sims Bainbridge writes that even at his peak in the late 1930s Hubbard was regarded by readers of Astounding Science Fiction as merely "a passable, familiar author but not one of the best", while by the late 1970s "the [science fiction] subculture wishes it could forget him" and fans gave him a worse rating than any other of the "Golden Age" writers.Bainbridge, William Sims. "Science and Religion: The Case of Scientology," in Bromley, David G.; Hammond, Phillip E. (eds). The Future of new religious movements, p. 63. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1987. ISBN 978-0-86554-238-9 In 2004, eighteen years after Hubbard's death, the Church claimed eight million followers worldwide. According to religious scholar J. Gordon Melton, this is an overestimate, counting as Scientologists people who had merely bought a book. The City University of New York's American Religious Identification Survey found that by 2009 only 25,000 Americans identified as Scientologists.Associated Press. "Defections, court fights test Scientology." MSNBC.com, November 1, 2009, retrieved February 14, 2011 Hubbard's presence still pervades Scientology. Every Church of Scientology maintains an office reserved for Hubbard, with a desk, chair and writing equipment, ready to be used.Reitman (2007), p. 324 Lonnie D. Kliever notes that Hubbard was "the only source of the religion, and he has no successor". Hubbard is referred to simply as "Source" within Scientology and the theological acceptability of any Scientology-related activity is determined by how closely it adheres to Hubbard's doctrines.Rothstein, p. 24 Hubbard's name and signature are official trademarks of the Religious Technology Center, established in 1982 to control and oversee the use of Hubbard's works and Scientology's trademarks and copyrights. The RTC is the central organization within Scientology's complex corporate hierarchy and has put much effort into re-checking the accuracy of all Scientology publications to "ensur[e] the availability of the pure unadulterated writings of Mr. Hubbard to the coming generations". The Danish historian of religions Mikael Rothstein describes Scientology as "a movement focused on the figure of Hubbard". He comments: "The fact that [Hubbard's] life is mythologized is as obvious as in the cases of Jesus, Muhammad or Siddartha Gotama. This is how religion works. Scientology, however, rejects this analysis altogether, and goes to great lengths to defend every detail of Hubbard's amazing and fantastic life as plain historical fact." Hubbard is presented as "the master of a multitude of disciplines" who performed extraordinary feats as a photographer, composer, scientist, therapist, explorer, navigator, philosopher, poet, artist, humanitarian, adventurer, soldier, scout, musician and many other fields of endeavor. The Church of Scientology portrays Hubbard's life and work as having proceeded seamlessly, "as if they were a continuous set of predetermined events and discoveries that unfolded through his lifelong research" even up to and beyond his death. According to Rothstein's assessment of Hubbard's legacy, Scientology consciously aims to transfer the charismatic authority of Hubbard to institutionalize his authority over the organization, even after his death. Hubbard is presented as a virtually superhuman religious ideal just as Scientology itself is presented as the most important development in human history.Rothstein, p. 20 As Rothstein puts it, "reverence for Scientology's scripture is reverence for Hubbard, the man who in the Scientological perspective single-handedly brought salvation to all human beings." David G. Bromley of the University of Virginia comments that the real Hubbard has been transformed into a "prophetic persona", "LRH", which acts as the basis for his prophetic authority within Scientology and transcends his biographical history. According to Dorthe Refslund Christensen, Hubbard's hagiography directly compares him with Buddha. Hubbard is viewed as having made eastern traditions more accessible by approaching them with a scientific attitude. "Hubbard is seen as the ultimate-cross-cultural savior; he is thought to be able to release man from his miserable condition because he had the necessary background, and especially the right attitude." Following Hubbard's death, Bridge Publications has published several stand-alone biographical accounts of his life. Marco Frenschkowski notes that "non-Scientologist readers immediately recognize some parts of Hubbard's life are here systematically left out: no information whatsoever is given about his private life (his marriages, divorces, children), his legal affairs and so on."Frenschkowski, Marco. "L. Ron Hubbard and Scientology: An annotated bibliographical survey of primary and selected secondary literature," Marburg Journal of Religion, 4:1, July 1999, retrieved February 8, 2011. The Church maintains an extensive website presenting the official version of Hubbard's life.Available at www.lronhubbard.org It also owns a number of properties dedicated to Hubbard including the Los Angeles-based L. Ron Hubbard Life Exhibition (a presentation of Hubbard's life), the Author Services Center (a presentation of Hubbard's writings),Cowan, Douglas E.; Bromley, David G. Cults and new religions: a brief history, p. 30. Oxford: Blackwell, 2008. ISBN 978-1-4051-6128-2 and the L. Ron Hubbard House in Washington, D.C. In late 2012, Bridge published a comprehensive official biography of Hubbard, titled The L. Ron Hubbard Series: A Biographical Encyclopedia, written primarily by Dan Sherman, the official Hubbard biographer at the time. This most recent official Church of Scientology biography of Hubbard is a 17 volume series, with each volume focusing on a different aspect of Hubbard's life, including his music, photography, geographic exploration, humanitarian work, and nautical career. It is advertised as a "Biographic Encyclopedia" and is primarily authored by the official biographer, Dan Sherman.http://www.lronhubbard.org/books/ron-series/biographical-encyclopedia.html To date, there has not been a single volume comprehensive official biography published Gallagher, Eugene V. The new religious movements experience in America, p. 216. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004. ISBN 978-0-313-32807-7 During his lifetime, a number of brief biographical sketches were also published in his Scientology books. The Church of Scientology issued "the only authorized LRH Biography" in October 1977 (it has since been followed by the Sherman "Biographic Encyclopedia").Flag Information Letter 67, "L.R.H. Biography." Sea Organization, October 31, 1977. His life was illustrated in print in What Is Scientology?, a glossy publication published in 1978 with paintings of Hubbard's life contributed by his son Arthur.Miller, p. 350 In the late 1970s two men began to assemble a very different picture of Hubbard's life. Michael Linn Shannon, a resident of Portland, Oregon, became interested in Hubbard's life story after an encounter with a Scientology recruiter. Over the next four years he collected previously undisclosed records and documents. He intended to write an exposé of Hubbard and sent a copy of his findings and key records to a number of contacts but was unable to find a publisher.Atack, p. 46 Shannon's findings were acquired by Gerry Armstrong, a Scientologist who had been appointed Hubbard's official archivist. He had been given the job of assembling documents relating to Hubbard's life for the purpose of helping Omar V. Garrison, a non-Scientologist who had written two books sympathetic to Scientology, to write an official biography. However, the documents that he uncovered convinced both Armstrong and Garrison that Hubbard had systematically misrepresented his life. Garrison refused to write a "puff piece" and declared that he would not "repeat all the falsehoods they [the Church of Scientology] had perpetuated over the years". He wrote a "warts and all" biography while Armstrong quit Scientology, taking five boxes of papers with him. The Church of Scientology and Mary Sue Hubbard sued for the return of the documents while settling out of court with Garrison, requiring him to turn over the nearly completed manuscript of the biography.Shelor, George-Wayne. "Writer tells of Hubbard's 'faked past'." Clearwater Sun, May 10, 1984 In October 1984 Judge Paul G. Breckenridge ruled in Armstrong's favor, saying: In November 1987, the British journalist and writer Russell Miller published Bare-faced Messiah, the first full-length biography of L. Ron Hubbard. He drew on Armstrong's papers, official records and interviews with those who had known Hubbard including ex-Scientologists and family members. The book was well-received by reviewers but the Church of Scientology sought unsuccessfully to prohibit its publication on the grounds of copyright infringement.Murtagh, Peter (October 10, 1987). "Scientologists fail to suppress book about church's founder." The Guardian. Other critical biographical accounts are found in Bent Corydon's L. Ron Hubbard, Messiah or Madman? (1987) and Jon Atack's A Piece of Blue Sky (1990). Hubbard appears as a major character in Paul Malmont's historical novel The Astounding, the Amazing, and the Unknown (2011). The title character in the 2012 film The Master drew comparisons with Hubbard.   According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard produced some 65 million words on Dianetics and Scientology, contained in about 500,000 pages of written material, 3,000 recorded lectures and 100 films. His works of fiction included some 500 novels and short stories. Hubbard “published nearly 600 books, stories, and articles during his lifetime.” He sold over 23 million copies of fiction and 27 million copies of nonfiction.      Atack, Jon. A Piece of Blue Sky: Scientology, Dianetics, and L. Ron Hubbard exposed. Carol Publishing Group, 1990. ISBN 978-0-8184-0499-3,  Behar, Richard Pushing Beyond the U.S.: Scientology makes its presence felt in Europe and Canada Bromley, David G. "Making Sense of Scientology: Prophetic, Contractual Religion," in Lewis, James R. (ed.), Scientology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. ISBN 978-0-19-533149-3  Christensen, Dorthe Refslund. "Inventing L. Ron Hubbard: On the Construction and Maintenance of the Hagiographic Mythology of Scientology's Founder," pp.&nbsp;227–258 in Lewis, James R.; Petersen, Jesper Aagaard: Controversial new religions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0-19-515683-6, , available through Oxford Scholarship Online,  Evans, Christopher. Cults of Unreason. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974. ISBN 0-374-13324-7,  Gardner, Martin. Fads and fallacies in the name of science. New York: Courier Dover Publications, 1957. ISBN 978-0-486-20394-2,  Jacobsen, Jeff Day, Robert RJ. What the Church of Scientology Doesn't Want You To Know Lamont, Stewart. Religion Inc.: The Church of Scientology. London: Harrap, 1986. ISBN 978-0-245-54334-0,  Malko, George. Scientology: The Now Religion. New York: Delacorte Press, 1970.  Melton, J. Gordon. Encyclopedic handbook of cults in America. Taylor & Francis; 1992. ISBN 978-0-8153-1140-9 Miller, Russell. Bare-faced Messiah: the true story of L. Ron Hubbard. London: Joseph, 1987. ISBN 0-7181-2764-1,  O'Brien, Helen. Dianetics in Limbo: A Documentary About Immortality. Philadelphia: Whitmore Publishing, 1966.  Pendle, George. Strange Angel: The Otherworldly Life of Rocket Scientist John Whiteside Parsons. Orlando, FL: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2006. ISBN 978-0-15-603179-0,  Reitman, Janet. "Inside Scientology," pp.&nbsp;305–348 of American Society of Magazine Editors (Ed.) The Best American Magazine Writing 2007. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-231-14391-2,  Reitman, Janet. Inside Scientology: The Story of America's Most Secretive Religion. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011. ISBN 978-0-618-88302-8,  Rolph, Cecil Hewitt Believe What You Like: what happened between the Scientologists and the National Association for Mental Health. London: Deutsch, 1973. ISBN 978-0-233-96375-4,  Rothstein, Mikael. "Scientology, scripture and sacred traditions," in Lewis, James R.; Hammer, Olav (eds.): The invention of sacred tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-521-86479-4,  Streeter, Michael. Behind closed doors: the power and influence of secret societies. London: New Holland Publishers, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84537-937-7,  Streissguth, Thomas. Charismatic cult leaders. Minneapolis: The Oliver Press, 1995. ISBN 978-1-881508-18-2,  Tucker, Ruth A. Another Gospel: Cults, Alternative Religions, and the New Age Movement. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004. ISBN 978-0-310-25937-4,  Wallis, Roy. The road to total freedom: a sociological analysis of Scientology. New York: Columbia University Press, 1977. ISBN 978-0-231-04200-0,  Whitehead, Harriet. Renunciation and reformulation: a study of conversion in an American sect. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987. ISBN 978-0-8014-1849-5,  Winter, Joseph A. A Doctor's Report on Dianetics: Theory and Therapy. New York: Julian Press, 1951.  Official L. Ron Hubbard site Biographical Profile of L. Ron Hubbard L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle Author Services Inc.[ ] Publisher of L. Ron Hubbard's fiction Bridge Publications Inc.[ ] Publisher of L. Ron Hubbard's Scientology and Dianetics works Writers of the Future[ ] A contest founded in the early 1980s by L. Ron Hubbard to encourage upcoming fiction and fantasy writers Bare Faced Messiah by Russell Miller Biographical documentation from The New Yorker Operation Clambake. Critical material on Hubbard and Scientology U.S. Government FBI Files for Hubbard via The Smoking Gun  - World in Action, Granada TV, directed & produced by Charlie Nairn, 1967. Frenschkowski, Marco, L. Ron Hubbard and Scientology: An annotated bibliographical survey of primary and selected secondary literature, Marburg Journal of Religion, Vol. 1. No. 1. July 1999, ISSN 1612-2941 L. Ron Hubbard at the Internet Book List Hubbard, L Ron  at the Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Hubbard, , L Ron  at the Encyclopedia of Fantasy
