    Las Palmas ( or , , ), officially Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, is a city and capital of Gran Canaria, in the Canary Islands. It is the co-capital (jointly with Santa Cruz de Tenerife) and the most populous city in the autonomous community of the Canary Islands, and the ninth largest city in Spain, with a population of 383,308 in 2010. Nearly half (45.9%) of the people of the island and 18.35% of all inhabitants of the Canary Islands live in this city. It is also the fifth most populous urban area in Spain with a population exceeding 700,000 and (depending on sources) ninth or tenth most populous metropolitan area in Spain with a population of between 625,000 and 750,000.Urban Audit - EurostatStudy on Urban Functions: Final Report - European Spatial Planning Observation Network, ISBN 2-9600467-2-2Europe: metropolitan areas - World Gazetteer, 2012 Las Palmas is the largest city of the European Union lying outside the European Continent. It is located in the northeast part of the Spanish island of Gran Canaria, about  off the northwestern coast of Africa within the Atlantic Ocean. Las Palmas enjoys a subtropical climate, with mild to warm temperatures throughout the year. According to a study carried out by Thomas Whitmore, director of research on climatology at Syracuse University in the United States, Las Palmas enjoys "the best climate in the world". It was founded as a city in 1478, considered the de facto only capital of the Canary Islands until the seventeenth century.La Junta Suprema de Canarias. Volumen I. Buenaventura Bonnet y Riveron. Real Sociedad Económica de Amigos del País de Tenerife, Editorial: Editorial Interinsular Canaria SA, publicado en Santa Cruz de Tenerife en 1980 (reedición de 1948) Páginas 104-106 Today, the city is capital of Canary Islands with Santa Cruz and home to the Canarian Ministry of Presidency (shared in a 4-year term with Santa Cruz de Tenerife), home to half of the Ministries and Boards of the Canarian Government, and home to the High Court of Justice of the Canary Islands. It is the judicial and commercial capital of the Canary Islands, and is also home to a great share of the executive power.   The city was founded by Juan Rejón on 24 June 1478, with the name "Real de Las Palmas". Rejón was head of the invading Castilian army, before engaging in war with the locals. In 1492, Christopher Columbus (Spanish:Cristóbal Colón) anchored in the Port of Las Palmas, and spent some time on the island on his first trip to the Americas. He also stopped on the way back to Spain. The  museum in the  area of the city is named after him. In 1595 Francis Drake failed to plunder the island. The raid and partial destruction of Las Palmas by the Dutch under Vice Admiral Pieter van der Does in 1599 is considered a major event in the city's history. In 1927, Las Palmas was designated the premier capital of the Canary Island by decree of 30 November 1833,Real Decreto de 30 de noviembre de 1833 Wikisource The Las Palmas seaport, Puerto de la Luz, known internationally as La Luz Port, benefited greatly from the closure of the Suez Canal during the Arab-Israeli conflict. Due to its situation as nexus of two continents and its importance as a tourist destination, many foreign workers have migrated to the city. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria is a sister city of San Antonio, Texas in the United States, which was founded in 1718 by about 25 Canary Islanders. Las Palmas is divided into five administrative districts, which in turn are subdivided into districts, not necessarily consistent with the traditional neighborhoods. Las Palmas has a Subtropical—desert climate (BWh)  with Mediterranean precipitation patterns, with warm dry summers and moderately warm winters. Its average annual temperature is &ndash; during the day and  at night. In the coldest month—January—the temperature typically ranges from  during the day (and sometimes more), around  at night, the average sea temperature is . In the warmest months—August and September—the temperature typically ranges from  during the day, above  at night, the average sea temperature is . Large fluctuations in temperature are rare. August 1990 was the warmest month on record, with the average maximum temperature of the month during the day being . The coldest temperature ever recorded was . The highest wind speed ever recorded was on the 28th of November 2005, measuring . Las Palmas city has never recorded any snow,  although in the February 15, 2015, fell up to 20 meters sleet round with + 5.8&nbsp;°C, while January 22, 1793 fell mixed with rain."Valores Extremos for Las Palmas" (pdf) (www version) - Agencia Estatal de Meteorología Annual average relative humidity is 68%, ranging from 65% in March to 71% in October. Sunshine duration hours is above 2,800 per year, from around 190 in winter (average above 6 hours of sunshine duration at day) to around 300 in summer (average 10 hours of sunshine duration at day). It rains on average only 22 days a year, with total precipitation per year of only .  As of 2008 almost one in five (18.35%) of all inhabitants of the Canary Islands live in Las Palmas.  Throughout history, Las Palmas received waves of immigrants from mainland Spain and countries from every continent. The majority of the population is Spanish, although there are large North and Sub-Saharan African and Latin American communities, as well as important historical minorities such as Indians (Sindhi) and Koreans and a growing Chinese population.  Ethnically, most autochthonous Canarians are descendants of a mixture of aboriginal people (guanches) of the Canary Islands (now extinct), the Spanish  and later European (mainly Spanish, Portuguese, Flemish, Irish, French, Italian, German and British) colonizers.  Las Palmas is home to University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria with appr. 25,000 students. The city also has a wide variety of state and public primary and secondary schools: International schools include: The Escuela Complementaria Japonesa de Las Palmas previously provided a weekend supplementary Japanese programme."欧州の補習授業校一覧 (Archive). MEXT, January 2, 2003. Retrieved on April 6, 2015. "ラス・パルマス La escueda complementaria japonesa de Las Palmas Carretera del Centro 47,TafiraAlta,LasPalmas de Gran Canaria SPAIN" Las Palmas offers a variety of theater, cinema, opera, concerts, visual arts and dance performances. The city hosts the Canary Islands Music Festival, the Theatre and Dance and the International Film Festival. The main City Festival, celebrating the foundation of the "City Fiestas de San Juan"http://www.promocionlaspalmas.com/sanjuan/ is held in June. The Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria is known not only in Spain but also worldwide, and is one of the main attractions for tourists. The city center of Las Palmas, specifically the Vegueta and Triana neighbourhoods, are included in the tentative List of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The city has a wide network of libraries. Along with the 11 municipal libraries, there are three specialized centres: A library is situated in the first floor of Woermann Tower.  The historic district of Vegueta has regained great popularity in recent years, the meeting place of choice at weekends for many young people, who fill its bars and discos. In the port area are also numerous bars and nightclubs, particularly in the vicinity of Santa Catalina. The Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria usually takes place between January and February each year; popular activities include Mogollon dances and queen and the drag queen galas. The WOMAD (World Of Music, Art & Dance) Festival usually occurs in November each year in the capital of Gran Canaria – 2010 marks the sixteenth edition.   The city has four main beaches: Las Canteras, Las Alcaravaneras, La Laja, and El Confital.      Urban road infrastructure is overburdened on workdays and in certain areas; the city street plan is not at all rectilinear, and may be confusing even to experienced drivers. However, there are no toll roads; entrances, exits, main streets and important zones are all well-signposted. Las Palmas, being the centre of the Las Palmas metropolitan area, is the hub for the island's motorway network. The city is linked with three highways: the GC-1 to the south, the GC-2 to the west and GC-3 to the center of the island. The GC-1 links the capital with Puerto Rico in the south. It is the fastest route from the top of the island to the bottom and vice versa with a speed limit of . It is approximately  in length and runs along the eastern and the southern coasts, and is also the second longest superhighway in the Canary Islands. The road provides easy access from the airport to the major cities and resorts, which include Maspalomas and Playa del Inglés. The increase in tourism over the years has necessitated the route's upgrading and widening to cope with traffic growth. The GC-1 begins south of the downtown area of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, the highway runs within the beach of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and  south intersects with the GC-2 and later runs with a few clover leaf interchanges and later forms a junction with GC-5 and south, the GC-31.  The GC-2 North Highway connects Las Palmas with the small northern port and village of Agaete. The eastern portion &ndash; about  in length &ndash; is a superhighway with interchange numbers, the rest of the highway is a two-laned; the western part is also only two-laned and has exit numbers. The highway begins by the beach area of the island, and runs through the downtown area, linking with the GC31 at a roundabout interchange. The freeway runs within the beaches and the coastline of the Atlantic Ocean for the half part but at around the 20th km, it becomes a highway after the unidirectional parclo interchanges and runs within the coastline, it later has several interchanges and several towns as it passes to the northwest and finally, it ends in Agaete.  Las Palmas is served by Gran Canaria Airport, often called Las Palmas Airport . In 2008, it handled 10,212,106 passengers,.AENA passenger and aircraft movements for 2008 This airport handled  of cargo, and is the fourth busiest in Spain. It is also the only airport on the islands with two runways, thus can accommodate up to 53 landings and take-offs per hour. The lengthy runways made the airport an alternative landing site for the NASA Space Shuttle. Also this airport is a base for Binter Canarias and Navegacion y Servicios Aéreos Canarios, airlines which operate regional inter-island flights within the Canary Islands. The Airport is located in the eastern part of the island, about  from the Las Palmas city center. An airbase of the Spanish Air Force is located to the east of the runways. Beyond several hangars opposite the passenger terminal, the Gando Air Base (Base Aérea de Gando) contains ten shelters situated on the southern end of the eastern runway.  Puerto de Las Palmas (Las Palmas Port), also known as 'Puerto de la Luz', is a main port for fishing, commercial, passenger and sports in the northwest of the city. It has been the traditional base for scale and supplying ships on their way through the Middle Atlantic for five centuries. The Port of Las Palmas is not only the first port of the Canary Islands, it is one of the main ports of Spain and the first of the geographical area of West Africa. As the leading port in the mid-Atlantic, it serves as the crossroads between Europe, Africa and America. In 2007, the port received some 11,262 ships; it welcomed a total of 907,782 cruise passengers, a 16.26% increase on 2006. In terms of annual TEU, the port of Las Palmas ranks as the 5th in Spain, and is among the first 15 ports of Europe. The Port of Las Palmas is the first Mid-Atlantic fishing base, with an annual traffic of more than 4,500 stopovers and with some 400,000 tons of frozen fish processed. Despite experiencing some decline in recent years, it retains its dominance in the fishing industry over other ports in the Canary Islands. The port provides  of cold storage facilities. At the foot of pier, special refrigerated containers and preparation rooms for frozen products owned by Trastainer can carry out the entire chain of post-processing and storage of fish, from refrigeration and distribution, to manufacture and supply of industrial ice. The port's EU-approved border inspection post is responsible for inspecting all types of imports and exports between the European Economic Union and its trading partners.  Las Palmas boasts a high quality bus system, provided by Guaguas Municipales. Municipal Bus Lines offers 40 urban transport routes, covering both the bottom and the top of the city. The main lines are the 1 (Teatro - Puerto), 2 (Alameda de Colón - Puerto), 17 (Teatro - El Rincón), 25 (Campus Universitario - El Rincón), 12 (Puerto - Hoya de la Plata) and 30 (Alameda de Colón - Santa Catalina, via Rehoyas). In addition, two circular lines (A: Santa Catalina - Santa Catalina, via Alcaraveneras) and B (Santa Catalina - Santa Catalina, via Ciudad Alta). The most important bus lines have frequencies of between 3 and 15 minutes during the day and between 10 and 40 minutes at night; most lines have service throughout the night. The bright yellow buses are known simply as 'guaguas'. The unique tariff, paid directly to the driver, is 1.30 euro. A 10-ride ticket is available for €7.50 at official shops in the city. The Tarjeta Insular (Island Card) which offered a 20% discount on both municipal buses and Global buses was discontinued on 1 January 2011. Global, inter-hire company, has 119 lines, many to or from the capital. This company was formed in 2000, resulting from the merger of the previous Salcai and interurban lines Utinsa. There is also the Guagua Turística, which covers the most interesting sites of the city with a guide in several languages. El Tren de Gran Canaria (TG) is a rail project initially proposed as an alternative way to get from Las Palmas to Maspalomas but was later raised to Agaete extension. Another project is the Tramway Palmas (Gran Canaria), which would cover the same journey as the bus line 1, with an average frequency of 5 minutes and a journey time of 35 minutes.  Las Palmas is home to three major professional sports teams. These are: Las Palmas was one of the arenas of 2014 FIBA World Championship for Group D, consisting , , , ,  and . Matches were played in the new arena - Palacio de Deportes de Las Palmas with a capacity of about 10,000. Many [mainly] outdoor sports are practised in city and neighbourhood, for example: surfing, windsurfing, kitesurfing, swimming, diving, skydiving, paragliding, running, cycling, rowing, tennis and golf (mainly in Las Palmeras Golf, Real Club De Golf De Las Palmas, El Cortijo Club de Campo and Oasis Golf). Real Club De Golf De Las Palmas, inaugurated on 17 December 1891, is the oldest golf club in Spain. fountain in the Historical center of Vegueta Canarian Village ("Pueblo canario"). Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Calle Perojo, Central Las Palmas The Community of Canary Islands's government headquarters in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria View on the) The Basilica of Our Lady of the Pine contains the image of Our Lady of the Pine, who is the patron saint of Gran Canaria.  Las Palmas is twinned  with:     No District Population 1 Vegueta, Cono Sur y Tafira 73,243 2 Centro 88,546 3 La Isleta-Puerto-Canteras 71,412 4 Ciudad Alta 101,684 5 Tamaraceite-San Lorenzo 39,191 Average sea temperature:Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Sea Temperature  – seatemperature.org Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Year !! Population !! Density 1991 354,887 3,529.46/km2 1996 355,563 3,536.18/km2 2002 370,649 3,686.22/km2 2004 376,953 3,748.92/km2 2007 377,203 3,751.40/km2 2008 381,123 3,790.38/km2 2010 383,308 3,812.11/km2 IES La Minilla IES Mesa y López Deutsche Schule Las Palmas (German) The British School of Gran Canaria (Tafira School is in the city limits)"Contact." The British School of Gran Canaria. Retrieved on April 8, 2015. "Tafira School Address Crta. Tafira a Marzagán s/n. El Sabinal 35017 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Las Palmas" and "South School Address C\ Mar de Azor, 3 El Hornillo 35100 San Bartolomé de Tirajana Las Palmas" The American School of Las Palmas Lycée Français René-Verneau, the French international school, is in the city limits of Telde"Nous contacter"/"Contacto." Lycée Français René-Verneau. Retrieved on 8 April 2015. "LYCÉE FRANÇAIS RENÉ-VERNEAU de GRAN CANARIA Crta. de Taliarte s/n 35214, Telde (Espagne)" The Las Palmas Japanese School (ラス・パルマス日本人学校 Rasu Parumasu Nihonjin Gakkō), a Japanese international school, was formerly located within the city;"欧州の日本人学校一覧" (Archive). MEXT. Retrieved on 6 April 2015. "ラス・パルマス Japanese School of Las Palmas Carretera Del Centro 47, Tafira Alta, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,Espana " located in Tafira Baja, it opened in October 1973, making it the first Japanese school in Spain and the third-oldest in Europe.Ávila Tàpies, Rosalía (University of Kyoto) and Josefina Domínguez Mujica (Universidad de Las Palmas). "The Canary Islands in the Japanese Imaginary: The Analysis of Three Contemporary Narratives" (; Page archive, PDF archive). Anuario de Estudios Atlánticos ISSN 0570-4065, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (2011), no. 57, pp. 525-56. Received 26 May 2010. Accepted 30 June 2010. English abstract available. CITED: p. 528 (PDF 4/38). "El colegio japonés «rasuparumasu nihonjin gakko-» en Tafira Baja, abierto en el año 1973 (octubre) como el tercer colegio japonés más antiguo de Europa y el primero de España, se cerró definitivamente en el 2000 (marzo)." It closed in March 2001."関係機関へのリンク" (Archive). The Japan School of Doha. Retrieved on March 31, 2015. "アテネ日本人学校（2007年3月休校）" and "ラス・パルマス日本人学校（2001年3月閉校）" The Museo Canario is located in the historic district of Vegueta. Founded in 1879, it is an international partner of the Council for Scientific Research (CSIC). It has a valuable collection of Canary archaeological objects, which are exhibited in 16 halls. It is also equipped with a library of over 60,000 volumes, many of them dealing with the Canary Islands topics. Its archive covers period from 1785 until today. The Casa Museo de Colón is in the Plaza de San Antonio Abad, behind the Cathedral of Santa Ana. It focuses on the history of the Canary Islands and its relations with America. It has 13 permanent exhibition halls, a library and dedicated study center, and diverse spaces for temporary activities. The complex consists of several houses, one of which was accessed by Christopher Columbus during his first trip to America in 1492; it was the residence of former Governor (now better known as home of Columbus). It is organized into five subject areas: America before the Discovery, Columbus and his journeys, Canary enclave strategic base for experimenting with the New World, The history and genesis of the city of Palmas, and painting of the 16th century to start of the 20th century. The Casa Museo Pérez Galdós is located in the Triana neighborhood of the city. It is the birthplace of Benito Pérez Galdós. It has an extensive collection of documents, books, furniture and personal belongings of the writer. The Museo Néstor is in the neighborhood of Garden City. Dedicated to the modernist painter Néstor Martín-Fernández de la Torre, the museum was opened in 1956 in the architectural ensemble of the Pueblo Canario, which was conceived and built by his brother Miguel. It has 10 exhibition halls, as well as a documentation center and pedagogy. The Elder Museum of Science and Technology is an innovative, interactive, engaged in scientific and technological culture. Elder located in the building, which dates from the end of the 19th century has  of exhibition halls, workshops, interactive modules, large-format film and greenhouse ecosystem. The Maritime Museum, located in the former Jet Foil station has around  of floor space. When the expansion is finished, will have a giant pool to simulate interactive bay, where a large ship can be handled by visitors. The Atlantic Center of Modern Art (CAAM), opened in 1989, is one of the most important references for the cultural and artistic life of the Canary Islands, and is responsible for disseminating the art made in the islands to the rest of the world, especially Africa, America and Europe. It has permanent and temporary exhibitions that range from the historical avant-garde to the latest trends. It is located on Calle Los Balcones de Vegueta, and preserves the original façade of the 18th century. The Teatro Pérez Galdós was designed by the architect Francisco Jareño y Alarcón in 1867. Its current appearance, with some modifications, is due to the intervention of Fernando Navarro and Miguel Martín Fernández de la Torre after the fire that destroyed it almost entirely in 1928. Miguel Martín's brother, the painter Néstor Martín-Fernández de la Torre, was commissioned to decorate the stalls, lounges and the stage. It was originally called Teatro Tirso de Molina until 1901, when, with occasion of the premiere of Electra, the theatre was renamed after the canarian writer Benito Pérez Galdós. Following works of renovation, the theatre reopened in April 2007. The Cuyás Theater, on the stage of the former Cine Cuyás is a work of rationalist Canarian architect Miguel Martín Fernández de la Torre. Its main hall has a capacity for 940 people, divided between the stalls and two amphitheatres. It also has a large patio that allows the organization of outdoor events. It is currently constructing an alternative test room with capacity for one hundred seats. The Sala Insular de Teatro is a scenic area which lies in the main hall of an old church. In 2007, after some refurbishment, the Board reopened its doors to the public, welcoming small local assemblies. The Guiniguada Theater after a decade long refurbishment, will reopen in 2011. The Auditorio Alfredo Kraus is located on the Atlantic, near the Playa de Las Canteras, one of the most privileged areas of the city. Its  floor area has 11 rooms which accommodate from large conventions and concerts to conferences. The Palais des congrès de Gran Canaria is in the premises of the Institución Ferial de Canarias with a capacity for 800 people on . The Center for Initiatives of the Caja de Ahorros de Canarias (CICC) is housed in a mid-19th-century building by the architect Manuel Ponce de Leon in the neighborhood of Triana. It is a small conference center with the latest technology and up to 500 guests. The Library Island, which has the capacity for 500 users in its three floors, besides a hall and more than 100 computer connections with 20 Internet access points. La Biblioteca Simón Benitez Padilla, center specializing in geology, biology and ecology that contains valuable bibliographical former president of the Museum Canario Simón Benitez Padilla, notable advocate of the study of the Canarian culture. The Archives Joaquín Blanco, which contains 160 years of history of the city, as the burning of the Houses Consistoriales in 1845 destroyed the previous document repository. Dance Center Festival of Theater and Dance Festival Internacional de Cine de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Canary Islands Music Festival Jazz Festival Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Founding Celebrations WOMAD Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (World of Music Arts and Dance) Opera Festival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Fantastic and Terror Film Festival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria Triana Vegueta Alcaravaneras La Isleta Tafira Guanarteme Puerto Playa de Las Canteras (Las Canteras Beach) is the largest of the existing city, and is frequented throughout the year by most city dwellers and foreign visitors. It lies on the west side of the isthmus of Guanarteme, which links the peninsula of La Isleta, located to the northeast, with the rest of the island of Gran Canaria. The 3,100&nbsp;m beach is oriented to the northwest in what is known as Confital bow or bay, and stretches from the foothills of La Isleta until shortly before the mouth of the ravine Tamaraceite. Along much of this length, the beach is sheltered from the currents of the Atlantic by a natural barrier of coral sandstone popularly known as "the bar", which is in easy swimming distance from shore. A system for environmental management has been introduced, and the beach has received ISO 14001 certification &ndash; one of only three beaches in Spain to do so, namely La Concha in San Sebastián and La Victoria in Cádiz. On the inner side of the coast runs the Paseo de Las Canteras, a pedestrian street that runs parallel to the beach from near the Auditorio Alfredo Kraus to the area known as "Puntilla" until reaching Playa del Confital.  La Playa de Las Canteras covers three areas that correspond to the arches and inflections that it conducts on the coast. Each presents certain morphological characteristics.Agustín Portillo Hahnefeld en Las Canteras y Bahía del Confital, Libro Blanco (op. cit.) Playa de Las Alcaravaneras (Las Alcaravaneras beach) extends from the rising side of the Isthmus of Guanarteme, an old spit of sand dunes and mountains linking the peninsula of La Isleta, located to the northeast, with the rest of the island of Gran Canaria. It extends from the Real Club Náutico de Gran Canaria to the new marina breakwater of the city, for just over  of fine golden sand.Guía de Playas, Ministerio de Medio Ambiente de España The whole beach is serviced by the promenade, which starts in Las Alcaravaneras, connects with the Playa de San Cristobal, and ends in Playa de La Laja,  to the south. The promenade is one of the recreational areas of the city and is popular with people who take the opportunity to walk, run, play sports, or cycle. The tranquility of the bay, and yacht clubs close to the existing beach, make Playa de Las Alcaravaneras a great place to practice sports such as sailing and canoeing. The beach also offers facilities for sports such as beach volleyball, beach soccer or futvóley (which has organized tournaments in the summer) and court sports such as basketball, indoor soccer, and volleyball. Playa de la Laja (La Laja Beach), with fine gray sand, is approximately 1200&nbsp;m long and has an average width of 40&nbsp;m. Its moderate waves and currents are no longer dangerous since the construction of a dam in the south in the 1990s. At the time, the Ministry of Environment also trawled the seabed to bring sand onto the beach, and the construction of a boardwalk has significantly improved pedestrian access. Due to the intensity of its streams and incoming waves, La Laja has been hailed as a favorite surfers' beach. It is the starting point for boat races that occur every weekend between April and October. Playa del Confital (Confital Beach), southwest of the peninsula of La Isleta, is a natural extension of Las Canteras Beach. The area normally suitable for swimming covers about two kilometers (), but the coastal strip is much greater. It consists of panels of rock with a layer of gravel at the end of them. Until some years ago, the beach was home to a small shanty town, which was eradicated; the land of the Confital went back to being public. Ensuing works proved controversial, as some environmental organizations and the residents of the city questioned the legality of the proceedings. The waves arriving at the beach are highly thought of by amateur and professional surfers, some of whom consider the Confital as having one of the best right waves in Europe.«Cuando ya se dominaba el arte, se podía optar por otros lugares como La Barra, el Murro del Lloret o incluso El Confital, que se destaca en las revistas especializadas por la perfección de la ola que, no obstante, no está al alcance de cualquiera. (...) Los surferos de Las Canteras tienen el orgullo de decir que en 'El Confi', nombre por el que lo conocen, se origina la mejor ola 'de derecha' de Europa.» Barrera Artiles (op. cit., pp. 75 y 176.). Here, the ocean currents form a tube that is used by more experienced surfers for its speed and strong contrasts. Each year, qualifying events for the professional world surfing championship take place on this beach.Entre el 8 y el 14 de octubre tendrá lugar en El Confital el certámen La Caja de Canarias-Ocean & Earth Pro 2007, prueba de categoría cuatro estrellas valedera para las clasificatorias mundiales masculinas de la ASP. Sitio web del evento Avenida Marítima Avenida Mésa y López El Confital Fuente Luminosa Parque de la Mayordomía Parque de Santa Catalina Parque Doramas Parque Juan Pablo II Parque San Telmo Plaza de Canarias Plaza de España Plaza de La Feria Plaza de Las Ranas Plaza Santa Ana Triana Bandama Caldera (Bandama Natural Monument) in Santa Brígida, Las Palmas is part of the Tafira Protected Landscape. It's considered a point of geological interest, because of the Caldera de Bandama. This volcanic caldera reaches  above sea level at the highest point on its rim, Pico de Bandama, and is about  wide and  deep. The steep walk to the bottom of the caldera takes about half an hour. Volcanic ash of different hues is in great abundance, and there are some interesting botanic species of Canary Islands origin. There are facilities for food and refreshments as well. Archaeological sites in Santa Brígida. In the valley of La Angostura and Las Meleguinas can find numerous traces of Aboriginal canaries that have prompted the declaration of the area as a Cultural, as groups of caves carved into rock, silos or sidewalks. In the archaeological site of El Tope, discovered on 16 July 1988, where you can see remnants that suggest the existence of an aboriginal burial mound, as well as ceramics, pottery and curious pintaderas."Historia de Santa Brígida", Ayuntamiento de Santa Brígida"Lugares de interés histórico cultural de Santa Brígida", Cabildo de Gran Canaria En la pared norte de la Caldera de Bandama se encuentra la Cueva de los Canarios, utilizada por los aborígenes como granero. It has been discovered Libyan-Berber inscriptions and some vessels (which are now in the Museo Canario). Also in the same area in the wall of the volcano in the stew is the Cueva de Los Frailes was discovered in 1933 a set of 37 caves. Church of San Juan Bautista (also vulgarly known as Catedral de Arucas due to its big size) built entirely in Arucas stone by local master masons, and it dates from 1909 (Initial Configuration from the 17th century). Apart from the wealth of the carved stone columns and column heads, there are also some beautiful stained glass windows, the works of Canary Island painter Cristobal Hernandez de Quintana, and an extraordinary carving of the Reclining Christ, by Manuel Ramos. Jardín de la Marquesa de Arucas - Botanical Garden in Arucas. Iglesia de San Juan Bautista de Telde is the true spiritual centre of Telde. Located in the square of the same name and founded in 1483, the old church was erected by the Garcia del Castillo family at the time of the town's foundation. It still has the original gateway, an example of Sevillian&ndash;Portuguese Gothic architecture. The towers, however, are an example of early 20th neo-Gothic construction. The real marvels are inside the building: the statue of Christ on the main altar, made from corn dough by the Purépecha Mexican Indians, brought here before 1550, the Flemish Gothic main altar, which dates back to before 1516, and the triptych of the Virgin Mary, brought from Flanders, also in the 16th century, depicting five religious scenes. Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Pino in Teror from 1760. Archaeological sites in Telde. Telde has 101 archaeological sites and 709 listed assets of ethnographic interest. In regard to the aboriginal time deposits, each year it expands its number or discover new aspects of old fields, but most are in disrepair and many are disappearing. Some of the most prominent are the coastal town of Tufia in good condition and extensively excavated by archaeologists, four doors located on top of a mountain overlooking the plain teldense and consists of a large cave with four doors and its name suggests, plus an Almogarén (religious vessel) at the top and a village of caves with collective barn in the back, the caves of Tara and Cendro remains of the ancient center of population, the town of Draguillo on the border with Ingenio, Las Cuevas Chalasia which consist of a labyrinthine series of artificial caves linked by tunnels and the impressive Necropolis of Jinámar which includes more than 500 tombs of various types belonging to the old canary. Basílica de San Juan Bautista in Telde Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Pino in Teror from 1760. UD Las Palmas - association football club who will be playing in La Liga as of the 15/16 season. The team play their home games at Estadio de Gran Canaria, with a capacity of 32,665. The team used to play at Estadio Insular (which is now closed), with a capacity of 22,000. Honours: Spanish SuperLeague: Runner-up 1968-69, Spanish Cup: Runner-up 1977-78, Semifinal: 1974, 1984, 1997. CB Gran Canaria - basketball club playing in Liga ACB at the Centro Insular de Deportes, with a capacity of 5,200. Honours: 1/8 finals of ULEB Eurocup: 2007. La Caja de Canarias (Club Voleibol J.A.V. Olímpico) - women's volleyball club playing in Superliga Femenina de Voleibol. Juan José Armas Marcelo, a Spanish writer; Javier Bardem, a famous Spanish actor (Academy Award–winning) Antonio Betancort, former football player, goalkeeper of Real Madrid, Deportivo de La Coruña and U.D. Las Palmas; Juan Bordes, sculptor; José Comas Quesada, painter; José Doreste, a Spanish sailor and olympic champion Luis Doreste, a Spanish sailor and 2x olympic champion Nicolás Estévanez, military officer, politician and poet; Manuel Pablo García Díaz, football (soccer) player; Nicolás García Hemme, 2012 London Olympic Silver Medalist; Sven Giegold, a German politician; Mateo Gil (writer and film director); Patricia Guerra, a Spanish sailor and olympic champion Jesé, Spanish professional footballer, who plays for Real Madrid C.F.; Alfredo Kraus, a 20th-century tenor; Francisco Kraus, Spanish baritone, and a voice teacher; Juan Fernando López Aguilar (Former Spanish Minister of Justice); Marta Marrero, tennis player; Kira Miró, actress; Roberto Molina, a Spanish sailor and olympic champion Juan Negrín, politician; President of Government of Republican Spain 1937-39 Benito Pérez Galdós, a 19th-century writer; Lolita Pluma, (1904–1987) Eccentric character of parque de Santa Catalina, remembered as a statue of her, surrounded by cats; Leticia Romero, Spanish international basketball player Jerónimo Saavedra Antonia San Juan, a Spanish actress, director and screenwriter; Magüi Serna, tennis player; Julien Stoeffler, a French eclectic street artist Carla Suárez Navarro, tennis player; Juan Carlos Valerón, football (soccer) player; José de Viera y Clavijo City Council
