   The Legion of Doom is a group of supervillains led by Lex Luthor that originated in Challenge of the Super Friends, an animated series from Hanna-Barbera based on DC Comics' Justice League. The Legion of Doom has since appeared in other animated programs and has been adapted in published comic books. In each episode of Challenge of the Super Friends that they appeared, the Legion of Doom would enact a plot against the Super Friends, only to be met with defeat by the end of the story. In some episodes, they would escape capture through a last-minute escape plan often contrived by Luthor. Other times, the Legion of Doom would end up captured. When the Challenge of the Super Friends season was originally conceived, it was named Battle of the Superheroes and featured the introduction of Captain Marvel to the Super Friends. The group that challenged the heroes was to be called the "League of Evil", led by Captain Marvel's nemesis Doctor Sivana. However, Filmation was producing Shazam! and The New Adventures of Batman which prevented the use of characters such as Mister Atom, King Kull, Beautia Sivana, Joker, Penguin, Mr. Freeze, and Catwoman. Early conceptual art drawn by Alex Toth also included Heat Wave, Poison Ivy, and Abra Kadabra. The Legion of Doom's headquarters was the Hall of Doom, a facility most often located in Slaughter Swamp (just outside Gotham City). The Hall of Doom was mobile, lowered below or raised above the swamp water's surface, and often flown through the air via rockets if needed, and was even able to fly through space. It could be remotely controlled and sometimes used to help the Legion escape. It also had laser defense weapons and at times was altered to time travel to the past or future. Darth Vader's helmet resembled it. In Doomsday after Sinestro, Black Manta and Cheetah are abandoned by the rest of the Legion they take control of a mental device and use it to create another Hall of Doom, which attacks the original one and enables the Legion to be captured. In History of Doom it is shown to have been constructed in a Barn just after the Legion formed, then flown to the Swamp. There were thirteen members of the Legion of Doom: While Challenge of the Super Friends was the series spotlighting the Legion of Doom, they appear in a few Super Friends shorts. Members of the team have solo appearances in later episodes. Lex Luthor appears in: Brainiac appears in: Bizarro appears in: Riddler appears in: Scarecrow makes an appearance in "The Fear", also introducing his real name Jonathan Crane (as seen in The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians). The two NBC televised specials of Legends of the Superheroes was based largely on Challenge of the Super Friends while featuring Adam West, Burt Ward, and Frank Gorshin of the 1966 Batman television series fame. The Legion of Doom featured Mordru leading Doctor Sivana, Riddler, Giganta, Sinestro, Weather Wizard, and Solomon Grundy (Superman, Wonder Woman, and their associate characters were absent due to the Superman film and Wonder Woman television series licensing the rights, respectively). In 2003, Cartoon Network Latin America aired the spoof series The Aquaman & Friends Action Hour that starred Aquaman as a children's television show host and the Legion of Doom as his bankrupt villains. An updated version of the Legion of Doom is the primary focus of Season 3 of the 2000s animated series Justice League Unlimited. Although clearly based on the original Legion (down to their skull-like swamp-base) the group is never referred to by this name in the series (according to a post from Bruce Timm on ToonZone.net, this was a direct order from DC; however, every script his team worked on addressed the group as the Legion, as does the cover of the DVD season release), and is treated simply as an expanded version of the Secret Society, previously formed by Gorilla Grodd in an earlier season and on camera referred to as such. Grodd is the leader of this "Legion," who refers to the group as a co-operative, a loose organization of super-villains that primarily work on their own, but back each other up when a member is challenged by the Justice League for a 25% portion of the requesting member's take of the crime commissioned at that time. After the revelation that Grodd's ultimate plan in the creation of the new Secret Society was the ludicrous transformation of humanity into apes, Lex Luthor ousted him and assumed the position as leader with no objections from the membership (Luthor states he had planned this for a later time anyway). Solicitations for future episodes indicated that the team had a secret backer, but have turned out to be incorrect.  Timm had also said he wanted to include Riddler and Scarecrow as villains in the group as a nod to the original Legion, but was prevented from doing this by the "Bat-Embargo." Confirmed members of this "Secret Society" (the DCAU take on the Legion) are as follows:    During the two-part series finale, Lex Luthor tried to resurrect Brainiac by ordering the crew to transform the base into a spaceship, so that they could travel to the site of Brainiac's ruined asteroid base. With Tala's help, Grodd attempted a coup to retake control of the Secret Society, leading to a battle between members loyal to either Grodd or Luthor. After a pitched battle, Luthor defeated Grodd by turning his mental powers back on him and shunting the ape out an airlock. The rest of Grodd's forces were frozen solid by a turncoat Killer Frost to spare herself from any retribution from Luthor (Blockbuster, Copperhead, Fastball, Goldface, Hellgrammite, Key, Parasite, Rampage, Shade, and Weather Wizard were shown being frozen). When the Secret Society reaches the site of Brainiac's defeat, Luthor used Tala's magic to restore Brainiac, apparently killing her, despite a sudden warning from the New God, Metron. Luthor accidentally resurrected Darkseid merged with Brainiac instead, who rewards Luthor for his help by destroying the Secret Society's base in a fiery explosion. Darkseid's resurrection was possibly a last act of revenge from Tala. However, force fields produced by Star Sapphire and Sinestro saved Luthor's crew. Lightray, another of the Gods of New Genesis, spotted the explosion, and was subsequently robbed of his Mother Box after Evil Star knocked him out from behind, which allowed the remnants of the Secret Society to make it back to Earth to warn the Justice League of Darkseid's return. At the conclusion of "Alive!", the first part of the finale, the only remaining members of the team are: Atomic Skull, Bizarro, Cheetah, Evil Star, Giganta, Heat Wave, Killer Frost, Lex Luthor, Sinestro, Star Sapphire, Toyman and Volcana. They team up with the League to face Darkseid's invasion of Earth by Parademons. Matt Wayne stated that he consciously tried to round up the original 13 Legion of Doom members in Luthor's team, and for that he cited this Wikipedia page as one source. In "Destroyer", (the series finale) Luthor acquires the Anti-Life Equation after Metron takes him to the Source Wall, which Darkseid was searching for, and shares it with him – or possibly uses it on him. Both villains disappear in a flash of light, and Darkseid's forces leave Earth. The remaining members of the Legion survive the battle, and as a reward are given a five-minute head start by the Justice League. It is assumed that all other villains that weren't with Luthor were killed. The Legion of Doom appear in the Batman: The Brave and the Bold series. In the teaser of "Triumvirate of Terror", they play a game of baseball against the Justice League International. Members of the Legion of Doom are Lex Luthor, Joker, Cheetah, Weather Wizard, Felix Faust, Chronos, Clock King, and Amazo. Later, Luthor, Joker, and Cheetah are shown at the Legion's headquarters, which is visually based on the Hall of Doom and in a Swamp. In the Young Justice episode "Revelation", the team battles the Light's Injustice League in the Louisiana bayou. The group's headquarters and location is a homage to the Hall of Doom.http://brandonvietti.blogspot.com/2011/11/season-one.html The Legion of Doom fitted prominently in the ongoing story arc of the Robot Chicken DC Comics Special. In the meeting room of the Hall of Doom, the Joker and Penguin were provided seats alongside the thirteen traditional members of the group. The Legion of Doom also have a mailroom worker named Glen who has a glandular problem and later dies during the commercial. Aquaman joins the group giving them access to the Justice League Watchtower in the final act after he was pushed too far by the other members of the Justice League. For the finale, this Legion of Doom was joined by Bane, Catwoman, Two-Face, Icicle, Mirror Master, Harley Quinn, Deathstroke, Mr. Freeze, Mister Banjo, Chillblaine, Darkseid, and original Robot Chicken character Humping Robot. It is soon discovered during Aquaman's "Trojan Cake" plan that the Justice League prepared a surprise party for Aquaman who ends up cutting into the cake enough for the villains to come out and fight the Justice League. The fight ensues until only Superman, Aquaman, and Lex Luthor remain standing. When Superman and Lex Luthor try to get Aquaman to hand each on the Kryptonite, Aquaman throws the Kryptonite and punches Lex Luthor as it is shown that the Kryptonite hit Superman by accident (yet Superman survived). Both sides attend the funeral of Glen. In the second Robot Chicken DC Comics Special, titled "Villains in Paradise", the Legion of Doom is featured prominently. Lex Luthor is still the leader, but its core membership now features Bizarro, Poison Ivy, Black Manta, Joker, Penguin, Brainiac, Captain Cold, Scarecrow, Grodd, Sinestro, Catwoman, Riddler, Toyman, and Two-Face while Weather Wizard, Black Adam, Darkseid, Harley Quinn, Mr. Freeze, Killer Croc, and Clayface make cameo appearances among the core members. After escaping from Arkham Asylum (and an incident resulting in the death of Mr. Banjo), the Legion's members are shown as being overworked by the stress of their jobs along with Lex's daughter Lena Luthor having to work at the Hall of Doom's coffee shop called "Hall of Doom Coffee" on spring break when she wants to go to a beach resort with her boyfriend. During the meeting, the members of the Legion of Doom demand a vacation where Luthor states they have plenty of time off when they are in prison. After Lena leaves to go to the beach anyway without her father's permission where she enlisted Scarecrow's nephew Calvin to cover for her, Lex Luthor gets a hold of her location when Gorilla Grodd sees her Instagram profile being active. In retaliation, Luthor allows the rest of the Legion of Doom to go to Lena's location with him provided that they help him find Lena and bring her back. When at the beach, the Legion of Doom members end up taking part in some spring break activities. After an incident where Penguin, Scarecrow, Brainiac, Riddler, and Black Manta mistook the Justice League's private beach for a nude beach (since Penguin thought that they were the same thing), Lex Luthor discovers that Lena's boyfriend is actually Superboy (who is at the beach with the Justice League). The Legion of Doom and the Justice League briefly do battle over this before teaming up to fight a giant-sized Starro (who Captain Cold previously flushed down the Hall of Doom's toilet). After Starro was slain by Batman riding in Green Lantern's boat construct, both sides are present at Gorilla Grodd and Bizarro's wedding. In 2007 at Six Flags New England, a live show written by Brandon T. Snider featured the Legion of Doom. This incarnation of the group involved Lex Luthor, Sinestro, Cheetah, Captain Cold, Riddler, and Joker.http://www.supermanhomepage.com/news/2007-news/2007-news-merchandise.php?topic=2007-news-merchandise/0701ii The Legion of Doom appear as the central antagonists in the animated film Justice League: Doom led by Vandal Savage.http://www.comicvine.com/news/nathan-fillion-joins-justice-league-doom-the-new-dc-animated-movie/143635/ The members here are Cheetah, Star Sapphire, Bane, Metallo, Mirror Master, and Ma'alefa'ak.http://www.worldsfinestonline.com/news.php/news.php?action=fullnews&id=1135 Cheetah is the only original member in this film. In the animated film JLA Adventures: Trapped in Time, the Legion of Doom travel back in time to eliminate Superman with the help of Time Trapper. The members here are Lex Luthor, Bizarro, Toyman, Solomon Grundy, Cheetah, Gorilla Grodd, Captain Cold, and Black Manta.http://www.worldsfinestonline.com/2014/01/logline-character-details-for-jla-adventures-trapped-in-time-animated-feature/ Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Justice League: Attack of the Legion of Doom features the Legion of Doom as the main antagonists. This version includes Lex Luthor, Sinestro, Black Manta, Captain Cold, Cheetah, and Gorilla Grodd. While Luthor is the one that formed them, it is in fact Darkseid that ordered him to do so. The Legion of Doom first appears where they attack Area 52 in order to free a capsule containing a specific alien and get away after a fight with the Legion of Doom. Upon releasing the alien, he introduces himself as J'onn J'onzz where he shows off his abilities. Lex Luthor persuades J'onn J'onzz to assist the Legion of Doom against the "dastardly" Justice League. With J'onn J'onzz's help, the Legion of Doom fools the Justice League into thinking that the prototype nuketron reactor core is going to explode as part of a plan to discredit them. Cyborg's readings of the core not exploding was repeatedly unheeded. After the Justice League are banished from Earth, the Legion of Doom rejoices as Sinestro is sent to use the Father Box to sent the Justice League to the other side of the universe. Upon getting the info needed upon posing as Black Manta, J'onn Jonzz saves Cyborg (who had his dummy take his place in the Justice League's exile) by mind-controlling Sinestro (who was sent to destroy the Hall of Justice) into rescuing the Justice League from the black hole. Lex Luthor pilots the Hall of Doom as Darkseid sends some gifts to the Legion of Doom to help take over Earth. While Cyborg keeps an eye on J'onn J'onzz and Sinestro, the Justice League heads out to fight the Legion of Doom. Using the Hall of Justice's flight mode, Cyborg uses it to fight the Hall of Doom and shoot it down. J'onn J'onzz then helps to defeat the Legion of Doom. Afterwards, the Justice League are cleared of all charges and the Legion of Doom are arrested by the police.    Member Alter ego Description Powers Traditional enemy Voice actor Bizarro Bizarro Twisted doppelganger of Superman from Bizarro World Same as Superman, but often behaves in an erratic and irrational manner Superman William Callaway Black Manta David (Last Name Unknown) Deep-sea diver and would-be ocean conqueror Enhanced strength, water breathing ability (through artificial gills), high tech equipment, laser beams Aquaman Ted Cassidy Brainiac Vril Dox Evil android Super-intelligence, advanced technology Superman Ted Cassidy Captain Cold Leonard Snart Blue-suited master of low temperatures Freeze ray guns The Flash Dick RyalMichael Bell (additional dialogue) Cheetah Priscilla Rich Cat-suit-wearing woman Cat-like reflexes, claw-tipped gloves Wonder Woman Marlene Aragon Giganta Doris Zeul Stole Apache Chief's magic powder to duplicate his powers Ability to grow, super strength Wonder WomanAlthough she is depicted as an enemy of Apache Chief in Challenge of the Super Friends, Giganta first appeared as a Wonder Woman villain in 1944. and Apache Chief Ruth Forman Gorilla Grodd Grodd Megalomaniacal exile from Gorilla City Super-intelligence, super strength The Flash Stanley Ralph Ross Lex Luthor Lex Luthor Founder and leader of the Legion of Doom Evil genius, highly advanced weaponry Superman Stanley Jones Riddler Edward Nigma Uses riddles to taunt and confuse adversaries while committing crimes Puzzle creation, problem solving, super intelligent evil genius, puzzle themed traps and gadgets. Batman and Robin Michael Bell Scarecrow Professor Jonathan Crane Uses his fear gas to bring peoples' worst fears to life Fear gas Batman and Robin Don Messick Sinestro Thaal Sinestro Renegade ex-Green Lantern Yellow power ring Green Lantern Vic PerrinDon Messick (additional dialogue) Solomon Grundy Cyrus Gold A super-powered zombie born from the swamp Great strength, invulnerability Green Lantern, Batman, and Superman Jimmy Weldon Toyman Jack Nimball Dresses as a jester; uses toy-based tactics to commit crimes Creates destructive toys Superman Frank Welker Despite the opening sequence for Challenge of the Super Friends claiming that the Legion's members had "banded together from remote galaxies", ten out of the thirteen are native to Earth; only Bizarro (from Bizarro World), Brainiac (from Colu), and Sinestro (from Korugar) are extraterrestrials. (In certain versions in the character's history, Bizarro is native to Earth; he later emigrated to Bizarro World, which Superman created for him.) The episode "Super Friends: Rest In Peace" makes a reference to a former unseen member of the Legion, the only time such a reference has been made. This was Doctor Natas (Satan spelled backwards), the inventor of the Noxium crystal that had the power to destroy all of the Super Friends. The Super Friends knew of this crystal and tricked the Legion into thinking that it had killed all of them (using android doubles of the Super Friends while the real ones hid in their space station). They anticipated that the Legion would throw away the crystal when they no longer needed it. The crystal was retrieved by Apache Chief in a hazmat suit and launched into deep space. It was not explained what happened to Doctor Natas. Prior to the first televised appearance of the Legion of Doom, a group called the Super Foes appeared in the first issue of the Super Friends comic book (Nov 1976). Its membership featured Toyman, the Penguin, Poison Ivy, the Cheetah, the Human Flying Fish and their protégés Toyboy, Chick, Honeysuckle, Kitten, and Sardine respectively in keeping with the theme of trainees ala Wendy and Marvin. The Krypton Syndrome: After Superman saves Krypton in the past, he returns to an alternate present. Robin mentions that the Super Friends were defeated by the Legion of Doom. Two Gleeks are Deadlier Than One: Though only Giganta and Grodd appear, the Legion of Doom is mentioned. Like in "Superfriends: Rest in Peace", the Super Friends used androids to trick the villains into thinking they were destroyed. The Revenge of Doom (Super Friend short): All 13 LOD members appear after getting back together, but only Lex Luthor, Sinestro and Solomon Grundy have dialogue. In this appearance, they salvage the Hall of Doom disguised as construction workers and have developed a crystallizing ray to immobilize the Super Friends. Lex Luthor Strikes Back (The World's Greatest Super Friends) – Using a special camera that would enable him to assume the disguise of everyone, Lex Luthor escapes from prison. No Honor Among Thieves Super Friends (Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show) – Lex Luthor collaborates with Darkseid in order to steal the powers of the Super Friends. The Case of the Shrinking Super Friends' (Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show) – Lex Luthor uses a shrink ray to shrink the Wonder Twins, Gleek, Robin, Ronnie Raymond, and Professor Martin Stein. The Mask of Mystery (Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show) – Lex Luthor steals data that Captain Mystery had tapped from the Hall of Justice's computers in order to trap the Super Friends. The Seeds of Doom (The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians) – Lex Luthor attacks the city in a giant mechanical spider before he is defeated by the Super Powers Team and Cyborg. Superclones (Super Friends short) The Wrath of Brainiac (Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show) – Brainiac collaborates with Darkseid to create android versions of Superman and Wonder Woman. Starting here, Brainiac takes up a more robotic form from this appearance to Brainchild matching his current comic counterpart at the time. The Village of Lost Souls (Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show) – Brainiac brainwashes a village of people to serve him and help him rebuild his ship. Brainchild (The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians) – Bizarroworld (Super Friends short) – Revenge of Bizarro (Super Friends short) – Video Victims (Super Friends short) – The Bizarro Super Powers Team (The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians) "Around the World in 80 Riddles" (Super Friends short) – Riddler infiltrates the Batcave and sprays Superman, Wonder Woman, Batman, and Robin with Stupid Spray that would decrease their intelligence and had to solve each riddle that would lead to the location of the antidote. Members of the Legion of Doom made some appearances in the Super Friends spin-off comic title based on the TV series. A version of the Legion of Doom appeared in Extreme Justice #s 17–18 (June–July 1996), led by Brainwave Jr, during a time when he had become a villain. The other members were Killer Frost, Houngan, Major Force, the Madmen and a robot duplicate of Gorilla Grodd.Extreme Justice #17Extreme Justice #18 The 2006, DC comic miniseries Justice features a version of the Legion of Doom. Series plotter/artist Alex Ross is a passionate Super Friends fan. In addition to Lex Luthor, Bizarro, Black Manta, Brainiac, Captain Cold, Cheetah, Giganta, Gorilla Grodd, Riddler, Scarecrow, Sinestro, Solomon Grundy, and Toyman, this version of the Legion of Doom also counts Black Adam, Metallo, Clayface, Parasite, and Poison Ivy as members. The Joker and Doctor Sivana also make appearances. Sivana employs microscopic robots that resemble Mister Mind.Justice #9 (February 2007) The Hall of Doom serves as the headquarters for the Injustice League in Justice League of America: Injustice League Unlimited (though, this Hall is located in the Florida swamplands).Justice League of America #14 (December 2007) The headquarters of the Justice League in the future of the Sorcerer Kings arc in Superman/Batman is the Hall of Doom.Superman/Batman #83 (April 2011) An alternate version of the team appeared in the mini-series Flashpoint: Legion of Doom, part of the company-wide Flashpoint event. This iteration of the team consisted of supervillains interred in Doom Prison, which is based on the Legion headquarters from Super Friends. The membership consisted of Heat Wave, Plastic Man, Sportsmaster, Killer Wasp and Cluemaster.Flashpoint: Legion of Doom #1Flashpoint: Legion of Doom #2Flashpoint: Legion of Doom #3 A new Legion of Doom led by Superboy-Prime appeared in a Teen Titans storyline that ran from issues #98–100.http://comics.ign.com/articles/116/1168864p1.html The roster consisted of Sun Girl, Headcase, Persuader (Elise Kimble), Indigo, Zookeeper, three Superboy clones, and an imposter Inertia.Teen Titans (vol. 3) #98 In the 2013 crossover event Forever Evil, the world is conquered by a new Secret Society of Super Villains and Crime Syndicate of Earth-3. Lex Luthor has since surrounded himself with several classic Legion villains including Captain Cold, Bizarro, Black Manta, and Sinestro. He appears to be forming an Injustice League team to combat the Society/Syndicate.Forever Evil #2 Lex LuthorJustice League Unlimited episode "I Am Legion" – Successor leader Gorilla Grodd – Founder & original leader Angle ManJustice League Unlimited episode "Dead Reckoning" Atomic Skull (Joseph Martin) Bizarro Black Mass Blockbuster BloodsportJustice League Unlimited episode "The Great Brain Robbery" Blue Llama Cheetah Copperhead Crowbar Devil Ray (based on Black Manta) Doctor Cyber Doctor Destiny Doctor Polaris Doctor Spectro Dummy Electrocutioner Evil Star Fastball Gentleman Ghost Giganta Goldface Heat Wave HellgrammiteJustice League Unlimited episode "Alive!" Javelin Key KGBeast Killer Frost Livewire Major Disaster Merlyn Metallo Mirror Master Monocle Neutron Parasite Psycho-Pirate Puzzler Puppeteer Queen Bee Rampage Shade Shark ShatterfistJustice League Unlimited episode "Grudge Match" Silver Banshee Sinestro Sonar Sportsmaster Star Sapphire Tala Tattooed Man Thinker Top Toyman Tsukuri Volcana Weather Wizard The Secret Society members loyal to Luthor were: Atomic Skull, Bizarro, Cheetah, Doctor Destiny, Evil Star, Giganta, Heat Wave, Sinestro, Star Sapphire, Toyman and Volcana. The group loyal to Grodd included: Blockbuster, Copperhead, Electrocutioner, Goldface, KGBeast, Killer Frost, Neutron, Parasite, Rampage, Silver Banshee, The Key, The Monocle, Merlyn, Weather Wizard, Fastball, Shade, Major Disaster, and Tala. The Hall of Doom appears in DC Universe Online. It is one of the hubs for the players that are on the villain campaign. Black Manta, Giganta, Toyman, the Riddler, Bizarro, the Scarecrow, Lex Luthor, Captain Cold, Cheetah, Solomon Grundy, Gorilla Grodd, Brainiac, and Sinestro are all playable characters in Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham. The Hall of Doom also appears as an explorable hub location. The key members of this Legion (referred to on screen) are Luthor, The Joker, Cheetah, Firefly, Killer Croc, and Grundy. Notably, the only members of this Legion that play key roles in the story (with the exception of Joker) are Luthor, Cheetah and Grundy (actual members of the original Legion of Doom). Both Sinestro and Brainiac appear in the main story, although both play more villainous roles and are not explicitly said to be part of the Legion. The Headquarters also appears, with statues of the key members inside. The Legion of Doom is named and pictured in the opening sequence for the direct-to-video original animation DC Super Friends: The Joker's Playhouse (2010).http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EDSj5ZvlbuU In the Family Guy episode, "It Takes a Village Idiot, and I Married One" Lois, when trying to get money from the town, convinced the people in a press conference that the Legion of Doom is conspiring with Adolf Hitler to assassinate Jesus. The scene then jumps to the Hall of Doom where Lex Luthor shouts "How did she discover our plan?!". Solomon Grundy admits he "kind of dropped the ball on that one." Almost all of the original Legion is portrayed except for the Riddler. In "Something, Something, Something Dark Side" (which is a parody version of Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back), there is a reference to "The Legion of Doom" when the Hall of Doom begins to rise out of the swamp on Dagobah shortly after Luke Skywalker (portrayed by Family Guy character Chris Griffin) has landed. An announcer bearing resemblance to the narrative voice on Super Friends begins by saying "Meanwhile, at the Legion of Doom..." only to be cut off by Chris (playing Luke Skywalker) who says "Not now!" The narration then quickly says "OK" as the apparent Hall of Doom sinks back beneath the water in the swamp. In Krypto the Superdog, the Intergalactic Villains Club that Mechanicat is a part of is a spoof of the Legion of Doom. In the Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law episode "Peanut Puberty," the headquarters for the Legion of Doom was used for a club called the "Legion of Dance." The Legion of Doom was referenced in the animated series South Park episode "Krazy Kripples" featured Christopher Reeve (who portrayed Superman in the movies) forming his own version of the Legion of Doom, complete with the Hall of Doom as their headquarters; its main goal, according to Reeve, was to kill Gene Hackman (aka Lex Luthor in the movies: as a news reporter said "if irony were made out of strawberries, we'd all be drinking a lot of smoothies right now"). It included both parodies of actual LoD villains (Solomon Grundy, Cheetah, and Black Manta), at least two Marvel villain parodies (Doctor Octopus and Doctor Doom) and villains from the South Park universe (such as Professor Chaos, General Disarray, David Blaine and Saddam Hussein, as well as Osama Bin Laden and Kim Jong Il). The first episode of Season 3 of Duck Dodgers titled "Till Doom Do Us Part" featured the Legion of Duck Doom, led by Agent Roboto and was composed of various villains from the earlier seasons made up of Crusher, Fudd, a Catapoid, Count Muerte, New Cadet, Black Eel, Nasty Canasta, Commandante Hilgalgo, Baby-Faced Moonbeam, Long John Silver the 23rd, K'chutha Sa'am, and Taz. Black Eel (a parody of Black Manta) makes his first appearance in this episode. A Cartoon Network bumper featured The Powerpuff Girls saving Aquaman and Wonder Woman from the Legion of Doom's clutches. In the mid to late 1990s, the Philadelphia Flyers forward line of John LeClair, Eric Lindros, and Mikael Renberg was nicknamed the Legion of Doom. Professional wrestling manager Paul Ellering named his wrestling stable The Legion of Doom after the supervillain group, eventually using the name to refer to his chief – and later sole – protégés, the tag team of The Road Warriors. When the Road Warriors arrived in the World Wrestling Federation in 1990, they changed their team name to The Legion of Doom. In Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season 6, Episode 17 "Normal Again", Jonathan asks Andrew, "Did you even read Legion of Doom?" An episode of The Drew Carey Show featured Drew and his friends getting in trouble being a "gang". Drew gets sent to a counseling session for gangbangers and enters the room to see a group of imposing bikers and gang members sitting around a large table. He quips "the reason I've called you all here is to destroy Superman" as Lex Luthor would do when leading a Legion meeting. In the Aqua Teen Hunger Force episode "The Last One," the Mooninites tried to organize a league of every single villain that was from Season 1 to 3. Among its members are the Mooninites, Rabbot, Mothmonsterman, Happy Time Harry, Cybernetic Ghost of Christmas Past from the Future, Travis of the Cosmos, Randy the Astonishing, the Brownie Monsters, Romulox, MC Pee Pants's worm, the Trees, Frat Aliens, Oog, Dumbassahedratron, Ol'Drippy, and Major Shake. However, almost all of them got foolishly killed or asked to leave leaving only a small force led by the Mooninites. Afterwards, the Rabbot called the team "Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday." In Johnny Test, The Evil Johnny Stopping Force Five have a secret base in a swamp that closely resembles the Legion of Doom's secret headquarters. The song "Trap or Die" by rap artists Young Jeezy and Bun B contains the lyric "I've got my own Super Friends in a Legion of Doom", referencing the DC characters. The music video for the song P.I.M.P. by rappers 50 Cent, Snoop Dogg, Lloyd Banks, and Young Buck features 50 Cent seeking the join the "P.I.M.P. Legion of Doom", who are led by Snoop Dogg and gather around a round table and discuss criminal affairs amongst themselves. 50 Cent becomes a members by pleasing its members upon showing his "magic stick."
