     Life imprisonment (also known as a life sentence, lifelong incarceration or life incarceration) is any sentence of imprisonment for a serious crime under which the convicted person is to remain in prison for the rest of his or her life or until paroled. Crimes for which a person could receive this sentence include murder, attempted murder, severe child abuse, rape, espionage, high treason, drug dealing, human trafficking, severe cases of fraud, aggravated criminal damage in English law and aggravated cases of arson, burglary or robbery resulting in death or grievous bodily harm. Life imprisonment can, in certain cases, also be imposed for transportation offences causing death, as a maximum term. Some American states and Canada allow judges to impose life imprisonment for such offences. This sentence does not exist in all countries. Portugal was the first country in the world to abolish life imprisonment by the prison reforms of Sampaio e Melo in 1884. However, where life imprisonment is a possible sentence, there may also be formal mechanisms to request parole after a certain period of imprisonment. This means that a convict could be entitled to spend the rest of the sentence (until he or she dies) outside prison. Early release is usually conditional depending on past and future conduct, possibly with certain restrictions or obligations. In contrast, when a fixed term of imprisonment has ended, the convict is free. The length of time and the modalities surrounding parole vary greatly for each jurisdiction. In some places, convicts are entitled to apply for parole relatively early, in others, only after several decades. However, the time until being entitled to apply for parole does not necessarily tell anything about the actual date of parole being granted. Article 110 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) stipulates that for the gravest forms of crimes (such as war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide), a prisoner ought to serve two-thirds of a fixed sentence, or 35-50 years in the case of a life sentence. The highest determined prison sentence that can be imposed in the ICC, aside from life imprisonment, is 30 years (article 77 1) a)). After this period, the court will review the sentence to determine whether or not it should be reduced. The US has the world's largest population behind bars and leads in life sentences, at a rate of 50 people per 100,000 residents imprisoned for life. Some technically finite sentences are handed out, especially in the United States that exceed a century and thus are seen as being 'de facto' life sentences, since without indefinite life extension nobody would ever be able to live long enough to serve those sentences.  Additionally, for particularly heinous crimes, courts will sometimes tack additional years onto the sentence, in addition to life imprisonment, in order to ensure that no amount of good behavior could ever result in the person being set free.  For example, Ariel Castro, the perpetrator of the Michelle Knight, Amanda Berry, and Georgina "Gina" Dejesus kidnappings, was sentenced to "life plus 1,000 years," on August 1, 2013, for the 937 criminal counts of rape, kidnapping, and aggravated murder stemming from those kidnappings, which he pled guilty to.  Courts in South Africa have handed out at least two sentences that have exceeded a century (to Moses Sithole and Eugene de Kock) and were thus symbolic life sentences. Unlike other areas of criminal law, sentences handed to minors do not differ from those given to legal adults. A few countries worldwide allow for minors to be given lifetime sentences that have no provision for eventual release. Countries that allow life imprisonment without the possibility of parole for juveniles include Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina (only juveniles between the ages of 16 and 18, as those under the age of 16 cannot be held accountable for their actions and cannot be tried), Australia, Belize, Brunei, Cuba, Dominica, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, and the United States. Of these, only the United States currently has minors serving such sentences, though even in the U.S., life sentences without parole for juveniles who are under 18 cannot be given automatically, and are only for certain cases of first-degree murder, once the judge and jury have considered mitigating and aggravating factors (the death penalty is no longer constitutional for U.S. minors). As of 2009, Human Rights Watch had calculated that there were 2,589 youth offenders serving life without parole in the United States."The Rest of Their Lives: Life without Parole for Child Offenders in the United States", 2008. In 2011 the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that sentencing minors to life without parole, automatically (as the result of a statute) or as the result of a judicial decision, for crimes other than intentional homicide, violated the 8th Amendment's ban on "cruel and unusual punishments", in the case of Graham v. Florida. Graham v. Florida was a significant case in juvenile justice. In Jacksonville, Florida, Terrence J. Graham tried to rob a restaurant along with three adolescent accomplices. During the robbery one of Graham's accomplices had a metal bar that he used to hit the restaurant manager twice in the head. Once arrested, Graham was charged with attempted armed robbery and armed burglary with assault/battery. The maximum sentence he faced from these charges was life without the possibility of parole, and the prosecutor wanted to charge him as an adult. During the trial, Graham pled guilty to the charges, resulting in three years of probation, one year of which had to be served in jail. Since he had been awaiting trial in jail, he already served six months and therefore was released after six additional months.Drinan, C. H. (2012, March). "Graham on the Ground". Washington Law Review, 87(1), 51–91. Criminal Justice Abstracts. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Within six months of his release, Graham was involved in another robbery. Since he violated the conditions of his probation, his probation officer reported to the trial court about his probation violations a few weeks before Graham turned 18 years old. It was a different judge presiding over his trial for the probation violations a year later. While Graham denied any involvement of the robbery, he did admit to fleeing from the police. The trial court found that Graham violated his probation by "committing a home invasion robbery, possessing a firearm, and associating with persons engaged in criminal activity", and sentenced him to 15 years for the attempted armed robbery plus life imprisonment for the armed burglary. The life sentence Graham received meant he had a life sentence without the possibility of parole, "because Florida abolished their parole system in 2003". Graham's case was presented to the United States Supreme Court, with the question of whether juveniles should receive life without the possibility of parole in non-homicide cases. The Justices eventually ruled that such a sentence violated the juvenile's 8th Amendment rights, protecting them from punishments that are disproportionate to the crime committed, resulting in the abolition of life sentences without the possibility of parole in non-homicide cases for juveniles. The Supreme Court considered, in the spring of 2012, the question of whether or not minors should be sentenced, at least automatically, to life without parole for any crime at all, including the only cases in which such a punishment was at that time an option: first-degree murder with aggravating factors (felony murder, where life without parole was then given as an option to juveniles, and where an adult in the same context could be charged with capital murder and given life or the death penalty). On 25 June 2012, according to the Catholic News Service (CNS) news brief posted that day, the Court ruled on the case of Miller v. Alabama in a 5–4 decision and with the majority opinion written by Associate Justice Elena Kagan that life in prison without parole as an automatic sentence would be considered unconstitutional in all cases in the United States. The majority opinion stated that the judge should take into account mitigating factors and other information that are usually of relevance during the sentencing phase. Such factors would include, but are not limited to: information on the nature of the crime and the victim(s), age, record, potential for rehabilitation and contribution to society, wishes of the prosecution, defense, and the victim's family, maturity level, degree of malice and forethought and degree of participation, aggravating circumstances or accompanying crimes, family environment and related circumstances such as a history of mistreatment, literacy and educational level, psychosocial and neurological development, and many others. Their reasoning was that such a sentence violated the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution's ban on cruel and unusual punishment. The decision was announced on the penultimate day of the 2011–12 Supreme Court term. For now, a sentence of life in prison without parole could still be handed down for aggravated first-degree murder if it was determined, after those relevant considerations, to be warranted. In a number of countries, life imprisonment has been effectively abolished. Many of the countries whose governments have abolished both life imprisonment and indefinite imprisonment have been culturally influenced or colonized by Spain or Portugal, and have written such prohibitions into their current constitutional laws. A number of European countries have abolished all forms of indefinite imprisonment, including Serbia, Croatia, and Spain, which set the maximum sentence at 40 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina, which sets the maximum sentence at 45 years, and also Portugal, which sets the maximum sentence at 25 years, while Norway has abolished life imprisonment but retains other forms of indefinite imprisonment. In South and Central America, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Costa Rica, Venezuela, Colombia, Uruguay, Bolivia, Ecuador, and the Dominican Republic have all abolished life imprisonment. The maximum sentence is 75 years in El Salvador, 60 years in Colombia, 50 years in Costa Rica and Panama, 40 years in Honduras, 35 years in Ecuador, 30 years in Nicaragua, Bolivia, Uruguay, and Venezuela, and 25 years in Paraguay. Brazil has a maximum sentence of 30 years under statutory law, but capital punishment and life imprisonment during wartime (for military crimes such as treason, desertion, and mutiny) are allowed in the Constitution. In the United States, a 2009 report by the Sentencing Project suggested that life imprisonment without parole should be abolished, a suggestion that was met with opposition from law enforcement officials. Life imprisonment is generally considered to be a more humane and ethical alternative to capital punishment.   Jurisdiction (link to details) Life imprisonment Minimum to serve before eligibility for requesting parole Maximum length of sentence (under life) Indefinite sentence (excl. preventive or psychiatric detainment) Mandatory sentence Possible other sentence Under age of 18 (or 21) Pardon, amnesty, other release Death penalty Yes Never None Yes Murder, terrorism, violation of Islamic law Treason, drug trafficking Yes By President  Albania Yes, only for men above age 18 25 years Maximum 30 years for all women ?? Murder with aggravating factor Terrorism, war crimes under 18: max. 20 years' imprisonment Only in extraordinary circumstances may the convicted serving life imprisonment be released on parole  Andorra No Varies, depending on sentence 25 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years or never None Yes Murder with aggravating circumstances; murder of a relative; murder of and/or by a police officer; treason Serial rape; Gender homicide ?? By president or governor of a state (depending on jurisdiction) Yes, but only for men 20 years Maximum 30 years for all women No Murder, terrorism Collaborating with Azerbaijani armed forces, treason ?? By President  Austria Yes 15 years (Imprisonment for a definite period)  or never (Imprisonment for lifetime, when clemency is rejected by President) None Yes Genocide Murder, high level drug dealing, Nazi activism, production or distribution of chemical warfare agents to be used in armed conflict; abduction, robbery, rape and statutory rape if the crime causes the victim's death, sea and air piracy and arson if the crime causes the death of a large number of people under 16: max. 10 years' imprisonment16–17: max. 15 years' imprisonment18–20: max. 20 years' imprisonment Pardon by president  Australia Yes 10 years, 20 years, 25 years, or never; individually set by judge None Yes Murder of police officer or other public official, murder in South Australia, Queensland, Northern Territory, aircraft hijacking Treason, terrorism, drug trafficking, rape, serious child sex offences under 18: must have minimum term set Compassionate release by Governor of state/Administrator of territory, or Governor-General Yes, but only for men aged 18–65 20 years None No Murder, terrorism Drug trafficking No By President Yes but only for men aged between the age of 18 and 65 (same as Russia) 25 years 15 years and 25 years (separate sentences; 15 years for men under 18 and 25 years for men at the age of 65 and over as well as women) ?? ?? ?? Maximum 15 years By Courts Yes (with the exception of women as well as men under the age of 18 and over the age of 65).  Belgium Yes 15 years (no previous conviction or below 3 years), 19 years (previous conviction below 5 years), or 23 years (previous conviction 5 years or more)  extract from the Belgian Official Journal advocaat.be 17 March 2013. None No None Murder under 12: never prosecution12–15: max. detained till the age of 2016–17: max. 30 years' imprisonment Jeugdsanctierecht in Europa: is uithandengeving een evidentie? Jura falconis, jg 44, 2007–2008, nr 1, pp. 3–38 Parole by Conditional Release Commission or pardon by King Yes Never ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No Varies, depending on sentence 45 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No (except in wartime)Brazil's Constitution prohibits the death penalty with a saving allowing the death penalty in wartime, if the state of war is duly declared by Congress (art. 5, item XLVII, subitem "a)"); the Constitution's next line (art. 5, item XLVII, subitem "b)"), prohibits life sentences. The clause prohibiting life imprisonment does not contain a saving similar to the death penalty clause, and thus life sentences are not allowed even in wartime. It is unclear, however, if the Presidential power of mercy, that allows the President to pardon or commute a penal sentence, could be used to reduce a death penalty imposed in wartime, transforming it into a sentence of life imprisonment. Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years or never None Yes None Aggravated murder, aggravated kidnapping, aggravated robbery, treason, espionage, war crimes, genocide, desertion in wartime under 14: never prosecution14-16: Maximum 10 years16-18: Maximum 12 years By President Yes Never None No Murder, genocide, crimes against humanity, terrorism Drug trafficking Yes By King  Canada Yes 25 years minimum for 1st degree murder; 10 years minimum for 2nd degree murder (all sentences run concurrent, not consecutively) None Yes High treason, 1st degree murder, kidnapping, war crimes, and crimes against humanity Various crimes including armed robbery, extortion, and most offenses resulting in death under 12: Never prosecuted 12-13: 14+: Yes Abolished in 1976. No Varies, depending on sentence 25 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No Varies, depending on sentence 60 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No Varies, depending on sentence 50 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years, 40 years for military crimes None Yes None Treason, kidnapping with homicide or rape, rape with homicide, parricide, robbery with homicide or rape 14–15: max. 5 years' imprisonment16–17: max. 10 years' imprisonment By President  People's Republic of China Yes 10 years for non-violent crimes; never for murder, rape, kidnap, arson, explosives offences, putting hazardous materials or other organized violent crimes None No No Various Yes By courts Yes  Croatia No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence Yes Never; only under pardon by president None No Murder, Drug trafficking ?? Yes By President Yes Yes 20 years None Yes Murder Terrorism, treason, drug trafficking ?? By President Yes 20 years general30 or more years if part of sentence(The court may decide that only the time in less-than-maximum security prison counts for the purposes of parole and that the convict must serve at least ten years in maximum security; good behavior record needed for transfer to lower security in which 20 years must be served then) None No None Some cases of murder, public endangerment, treason, terrorism, genocide, crimes against humanity, use of forbidden combat device or forbidden combat tactics, war crimes, persecution of population, misuse of international symbols 15–18: max. 10 years' imprisonment By President  Denmark Yes 12 years, or never  None Yes ?? ?? Maximum 16 years After 12 years entitled to request to Minister of Justice; granted by King or Queen of Denmark No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence 13–15: max. 5 years' imprisonment16–17: max. 8 years' imprisonment No life imprisonment sentence No Varies, depending on sentence 35 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No (Except in wartime) Varies, depending on sentence 75 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes Never None No Murder, rape, kidnapping, terrorism Drug offenses Yes Pardon by president Yes 30 years None Yes (de facto) None Some cases of murder, some cases of handling drugs, crimes against humanity, genocide, acts of war against civilians, terrorism, violence against the independence of Estonia, causing an explosion using nuclear energy. Maximum length 10 years Pardon by president  Finland Yes 12 years for court release, any time for presidential pardon None Yes Murder High treason, espionage, genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, homicidal terrorist act under 18: max. 15 years' imprisonmentunder 21: minimum 10 years for parole request By president, Helsinki Court of Appeal  France Yes 18–22 years (30 years or never for very rare cases) None Yes, but only if decided by court at sentencing None Aggravated murder, aggravated torture, aggravated treason, drug kingpin, crimes against humanity, war crimes under 16: max. 20 years' imprisonment16+: Yes By president, with countersignature from Prime minister and ministry of justice  Germany Yes, only for someone over the age of 21 (in very rare cases extremely dangerous criminals can get Life Sentences above the age of 18). Since 1977: Decision of the judge leading the case, a minimum of 15 years without parole is required by law before parole can be granted to someone serving life in prison. In most, nearly all cases the judge sentences someone who gets life in prison to serve a minimum of 15 years.sec. 57a(1) German Criminal Code Strafgesetzbuch Before 1977 a life sentence meant life in prison without the possibility of parole except for a full pardon from the Federal President. This law was ruled unconstitutional by the German Federal Constitution Court. None No Aggravated murder,sec. 211(1) German Criminal Code genocide resulting in death,sec. 6(1) German Criminal Code on crimes against international law and war crimes Völkerstrafgesetzbuch crimes against humanity resulting in death,sec. 7(1) German Criminal Code on crimes against international law and war crimes war crimes against persons resulting in deathsec. 8(1) German Criminal Code on crimes against international law and war crimes See details Under the Age of 14: Never prosecuted. 14–18: max. 10 years imprisonment and 18–21: either a maximum of 15 years imprisonment or life in prison. A person between the ages of 18 and 21 can be tried before a Juvenile Court "Jugendgericht" (which happens in almost all cases concerning minors) or an Adult Court, which is determined by the intellectual development of the accused and the severity of the crime itself. By Federal President or Minister-President No (Forbidden in West Germany by the Constitution since 23 May 1949). Abolished by law in West Germany in 1953 and in East Germany in 1987. Yes 25 years None No Murder Terrorism, treason ?? Pardon by president  Greece Yes 16 years, or 20 years in cases of multiple life sentences None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? Maximum 20 years By President  Guatemala No Varies, depending on sentence 50 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20–40 years or never None Yes Murder, after 3 violent crimes Genocide, high treason under 18: max. 15 years' imprisonment By president No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes Yes Individually set by judge None Yes Murder, Genocide involving killing Manslaughter, drug trafficking, treason, incitement to mutiny, piratical acts, Must have minimum term set By Chief Executive of Hong Kong, under the recommendation of Long Term Prison Sentences Review Board No Varies, depending on sentence 20 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No Yes 25 years or never None Yes None Kidnapping, murder, dacoity, rape, sedition Yes May be pardoned or reprieved by exercise of prerogative clemency powers of the President or the Governor Yes Yes Never None Yes Murder, terrorism, kidnapping, rape, treason ?? ?? By President Yes  Ireland Yes 12–30 years or never; individually set by judge None Yes Murder, treason, some serious injuries, etc. see details See details ?? By President  Israel Yes Never; only under pardon by president None Yes Murder, terrorism Kidnapping child with intent to murder Yes By president usually after 30 years  Italy Yes 21 years, 26 years, or never None Yes Murder, terrorism, mafia association, drug trafficking, human trafficking, treason Aggravated sexual assault, aggravated robbery, firearm trafficking under 16: max. 20 years' imprisonment By president Yes 10–30 years or never; individually set by judge None Yes ?? ?? ?? ??  Japan Yes 10 years or never None Yes Varies by prefecture (Murder) Death sentence due to foreign aggression Yes By Emperor Yes Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism, espionage Drug trafficking Yes By King Yes 25 years or never None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? Maximum 20 years By President Yes 25 years or never None ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? Yes Never None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? ?? By President No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  Lao People's Democratic Republic Yes Never None Yes ?? ?? ?? ?? Yes 25 years None Yes Murder, treason, terrorism, war crimes Drug offenses, rape, robbery, sabotage, crimes against humanity ?? By President Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism, treason Drug trafficking and manufacturing Yes By President Yes Yes Never; only pardon by president None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? ?? By President Yes 15 years None No None Murder, terrorism ?? Pardon by prince Yes 15 years None Yes Murder, treason Terrorism ?? By Grand Duke No Varies, depending on sentence 25 years (30 in exceptional circumstances) No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  Republic of Macedonia Yes 15 years None Yes Murder, terrorism Rape, robbery, drug offenses crimes against humanity Yes By President Yes 20 years or never None Yes Murder, drug offenses, serious firearms/ammunition/explosive offenses, terrorism, rape, attack on monarch, violence to parliament, treason ?? ?? By Yang di-Pertuan Agong / Federal Pardon Committee Yes Yes Never; only pardon by President None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? ?? By President  Mexico No (exception of Chihuahua) Varies, depending on sentence 60 years (70 years if convicted of murder involving kidnapping) NoFor details of new rulings from Mexican Supreme Court, see: "Wanted Fugitive Raul Gomez Garcia Extradited to the U.S." (US Embassy in Mexico) and Mexico alters extradition rules (BBC News))  No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  Republic of Moldova Yes 35 years None Yes Murder, terrorism ?? ?? By President Yes 15 years None Yes Murder, terrorism, genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity ?? ?? By Prince  Montenegro No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism, treason Drug trafficking and manufacturing Yes By King / Queen  The Netherlands Yes Never None Yes (de facto) None Attack on monarch, violence to parliament, several facts constituting an offence resulting in death of (a) person(s) (not manslaughter), manslaughter in combination with other facts, facts with intent to terrorism, treason under 12: never prosecution12–15: max. 12 months imprisonment16–17: max. 24 months imprisonment By monarch (almost never granted)  Mozambique No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years None No Murder, terrorism ?? ?? By president  New Zealand Yes Individually set by judge, but not less than 10 years None Yes Treason Murder (mandatory unless manifestly unjust)manslaughter, certain drug related under 18: must have minimum term set Sentence may be reduced or pardon granted by the Governor General (Rarely done) No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes Never None Yes ?? ?? No life imprisonment sentence ?? Yes Never None Yes (de facto and de jure) Murder, espionage, treason ?? Yes By president  Norway No Varies, depending on sentence 21 years (can be extended indefinitely if the criminal poses a danger to society at the end of served time); 30 years for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity Yes No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence, people over age of 15 can be sentenced by normal laws or to child protection No life imprisonment sentence Yes 25 years None ?? ?? ?? ?? By President Yes No Varies, depending on sentence 50 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence No Varies, depending on sentence 25 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 35 years or never None Yes Murder with aggravated circumstances, terrorism, treason, sex with under 10 year olds Serious kidnapping, violent rape attempted murder ?? By President  Poland Yes 25 years or more—individually set by judge None No None Genocide, war crimes, high treason, murder, assassination attempt of Polish president under 18: max. 25 years' imprisonment Pardon by president, Amnesty by act of parliament (last amnesty in 1989) No Varies, depending on sentence 25 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years None No; replaced by 25 years' imprisonment at age 60 Genocide during wartime, inhumane treatment during wartime Treason and other grave crimes against the state, extremely grave murder, capitulation, desertion on the battlefield, crimes against peace or humanity under 18: max. 20 years' imprisonment Pardon by President, amnesty by act of Parliament No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  Russian Federation Yes, but only for men between 18 and 65 years. 25 years or 30 years (25 years for murder and 30 years for murder with exceptional circumstances (for men aged 65 and over as well as women) unless multiple murders are committed for life imprisonment to be applied) 25 years or 30 years; 25 years for a single murder and also for woman, 30 years for a single murder with exceptional circumstances for men aged 65 years and over as well as women. No No See details under 18: max. 10 years' imprisonment By President Yes Never None No Apostasy, Drug trafficking, Willful killing, Homosexuality, witchcraft Yes By King Yes No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes 20 years None Yes Kidnapping for ransom Drug trafficking, gun crime Prisoner detained at the President's discretion ?? Yes  Slovakia Yes 25 years None Yes Murder, terrorism, treason Crimes against humanity, war crimes under 14: no imprisonment14–17: max. 15 years' imprisonment§ 117 Slovak Criminal Code By President Yes 25 years None Yes Murder, treason Terrorism, drug offenses, crimes against humanity ?? By President  South Africa Yes 10, 15, or 25 years None No Certain murder, rape and robbery ?? ?? ?? Yes 10 years or never None No High treason, robbery (rape) with deadly outcomes, arson, murder of relative, etc. Counterfeiting or falsification of currency Maximum 10 years (for certain violent crimes 20 years) By President and requires agreement of National Assembly  Spain No Varies, depending on sentence 40 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  Sweden Yes 18 years or never, but parole hearing may be held after 10 years served, thus fixing a much later date for release on parole None Yes None Murder, kidnapping, arson, sabotage, devastation, hijacking, espionage, terror crimes, rebellion, endangering the public health by spread of contagion or poison, disloyalty when negotiating with foreign powers, dealing with anti-personnel mines, cluster bombs or chemical or nuclear weapons, unlawful nuclear explosion, treason, genocide and (the following in wartime only) mutiny, insubordination, undermining the will to fight, desertion, unauthorised capitulation, negligence of war preparations and negligence of battle duty; attempts, accessories, accomplices and incitements of all the above crimes might also be punished with life. under 21: no life imprisonment By the District Court of Örebro (parole hearing). Or by the Government (pardon).  Switzerland Yes 10 years or 15 years; individually set by judge None Yes None Aggravated murder,art. 112 Swiss Criminal Code aggravated hostage-taking,art. 185 Swiss Criminal Code genocide,art. 264 Swiss Criminal Code endangering the independence of the countryart. 266 Swiss Criminal Code under 15: no imprisonment15–17: max. 4 years' imprisonmentart. 25 Juvenile Criminal Code By Federal Assembly (Parliament)art. 173 al. 1 let. k Constitution of the Swiss Confederation  Suriname No Varies, depending on sentence 50 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence  (Taiwan) Yes 25 years None Third violent crime Aggravated murder, hard drug trafficking Many violent crimes causing death, etc. Banned by Criminal Code By President Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism Treason Yes By President Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism, drug trafficking and manufacturing Kidnapping, sex offenses Yes By King Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism, treason, hijacking, espionage, attempting to overthrow the government Drug trafficking Yes By President  Turkey Yes Life imprisonment: 24 years (30 if organized crime), Multiple life imprisonments: 30 years (34 if organized crime), Aggravated life imprisonment: 30 years (36 if organized crime), Multiple aggravated life imprisonments: 36 years (40 if organized crime), or never (aggravated life imprisonment for terrorism) None Yes Murder with special cirucumstances, treason, terrorism Sexual offences, military and political crimes Maximum 24 years By President in case of permanent illness, rehabilitation, disability or decrepitude Yes Never None No Murder, terrorism Treason Yes By President  United Kingdom ( and ) Yes Individually set by judge (maximum Whole life tariff) None Yes Murder, second serious violent or sexual crime All common law offences, rape, inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent, treason, aggravated burglary, criminal damage with intent to endanger life, hijacking, destroying or endangering safety of an aircraft, possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life, possession of a firearm with criminal intent, use of a firearm to resist arrest, terrorism, Importing or supplying Class A controlled drug 10-11: Rarely imprisoned, aggravated cases: 6–12 years, maximum: Life (usually no more than 15 years). 12-17: Starting point: 12 years, aggravated cases: 15 years, maximum: Life (usually no more than 25 years).18-20: Starting point 15 years, aggravated cases: 20-25, maximum: Life (usually no more than 30 years).21+: Starting point 15 years, aggravated cases: 20–45 years, maximum: Whole Life Order (no chance of parole). NOTE: All offenders at least aged under 21 have to be set a release or parole date and must have some chance of parole, unless still classed as a danger risk to the public. A Whole Life Order sentence is usually only used in very aggravating cases, such as murder of a police or prison officer, murder of a child, murder of multiple people or murder for sexual or sadistic gain. Sentencing years based on many cases during sentencing. Compassionate release and pardon by Secretary of State for Justice; amnesty by Royal decree alone (by means of the Royal prerogative of mercy) or with Act of Parliament in accordance with the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty (last amnesty in 1747). United Kingdom:  Yes Individually set by judge None Yes Murder ?? No whole life tariff Compassionate release by Cabinet Secretary for Justice (Scottish Government); amnesty by royal decree (by means of the Royal prerogative of mercy) alone or with act of parliament (in accordance with the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty). United Kingdom:  Yes Individually set by judge None No Murder, Rape Robbery ?? General release through a referendum based agreement in 1998 (became applicable in 3 cases i, ii, iii). The Royal prerogative of mercy or an Act of Parliament (in accordance with the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty) can be used to grant amnesty like the rest of the UK. Yes Never; only pardon by President None No Murder with aggravating circumstances ?? Maximum 15 years By President  United States of America Yes 15 years minimum to infinite, or never (depending on crime and state) None Yes Varies by state Varies by state Yes (de jure) By president or governor of a state (depending on jurisdiction) Yes (depending on state) No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes, only for men aged between 18 and 60 years 25 years or never 30 years for women and men over the age of 60 No None Aggravated murder, terrorism Maximum 10 years By President No Varies, depending on sentence 35 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence (for serious offenses, the Vatican often works with Italian authorities; certain offenses are pardonable or reducible by the Pope and/or ecclesiastical or civil Vatican courts) No Varies, depending on sentence 30 years No No life imprisonment sentence No life imprisonment sentence ?? No life imprisonment sentence Yes Never None Yes (de jure) ?? ?? under 16: max. 14 years' imprisonment16–17: max. 18 years' imprisonment By president Yes 10-20-Life Incapacitation (penology) Indefinite imprisonment List of prison deaths Use of capital punishment by country International perspectives on life imprisonment
