   Loran-C is a hyperbolic radio navigation system which allows a receiver to determine its position by listening to low frequency radio signals transmitted by fixed land-based radio beacons. Loran-C combined two different techniques to provide a signal that was both long-range and highly accurate, traits that had formerly been at odds. The downside was the expense of the equipment needed to interpret the signals, which meant that Loran-C was used primarily by militaries after it was first introduced in 1957. By the 1970s the electronics needed to implement Loran-C had been dramatically reduced due to the introduction of solid state radio electronics, and especially the use of early microcontrollers to interpret the signal. Low-cost and easy-to-use Loran-C units became common from the late 1970s, especially in the early 1980s, leading to the earlier LORANThe original system was known as LORAN, a short-form for LOng RAnge Navigation. Operation of the system, and the newly introduced Loran-C system, were handed to the Coast Guard in 1958. They took the time to retroactively change the name of the original system to Loran-A, and used lower-case naming from then on. See Gatterer, p. xi. system being turned off in favour of installing more Loran-C stations around the world. Loran-C became one of the most common and widely used navigation systems for large areas of North America, Europe, Japan and the entire Atlantic and Pacific areas. The Soviet Union operated a nearly identical system, CHAYKA. The introduction of civilian satellite navigation in the 1990s led to a very rapid drop-off in Loran-C use. Discussions about the future of Loran-C began in the 1990s, and several turn-off dates were announced and then cancelled. In 2010 the US and Canadian systems were shut down, along with shared Loran-C/CHAYKA stations with Russia. Several other chains remain active, and some have been upgraded for continued use.  The original LORAN was proposed by Alfred Lee Loomis at a meeting of the Microwave Committee. The US Army Air Corps was interested in the concept for aircraft navigation, and after some discussion they returned a requirement for a system offering accuracy of about  at a range of , and a maximum range as great as  for high-flying aircraft. The Microwave Committee, by this time organized into what would become the Radiation Laboratory, took up development as Project 3. During the initial meetings a member of the UK liaison team, Taffy Bowen, mentioned that he was aware the British were also working on a similar concept, but had no information on its performance. The development team, led by Loomis, made rapid progress on the transmitter design and tested several systems during 1940 before settling on a 3&nbsp;MHz design. Extensive signal-strength measurements were made by mounting a conventional radio receiver in a station wagon and driving around the eastern states.Halford, Davidson and Waldschmitt, "History of LORAN", MIT Radiation Laboratory, pp. 19-23. However, the custom receiver design and its associated cathode ray tube displays proved to be a bigger problem. In spite of several efforts to design around the problem, instability in the display prevented accurate timing measurements. By this time the team had become much more familiar with the British  Gee system, and were aware of their work on "strobes", a time base generator that produced well-positioned "pips" on the display that could be used for accurate measurement. They met with the Gee team in 1941, and immediately adopted this solution. They also found that Project 3 and Gee called for almost identical systems, with similar performance, range and accuracy. But Gee had already completed basic development and was entering into initial production, making Project 3 superfluous. In response, the Project 3 team told the Army Air Force to adopt Gee, and realigned their own efforts to provide long-range navigation on the oceans. This led to US Navy interest, and a series of experiments quickly demonstrated that systems using the basic Gee concept but operating at a much lower frequency around 2&nbsp;MHz would offer reasonable accuracy on the order of a few miles over distances on the order of , at least at night when signals of this frequency range were able to skip off the ionosphere. Rapid development followed, and a system covering the western Atlantic was operational in 1943. Additional stations followed, covering the European side, and then a massive expansion in the Pacific. By the end of the war there were 72 operational LORAN stations, and as many as 75,000 receivers. In 1958 the operation of the LORAN system was handed over to the US Coast Guard, which renamed the system "Loran-A", the lower-case name being introduced at that time. There are two ways to implement the timing measurements needed for a hyperbolic navigation system, pulse timing systems like Gee and LORAN, and phase-timing systems like the Decca Navigator System. The former requires sharp pulses of signal, and their accuracy is generally limited to how rapidly the pulses can be turned on and off, which is, in turn, a function of the carrier frequency. The second requires constant signals ("continuous wave") and is easy to use even at low frequencies, but is subject to an ambiguity in location that has to be determined using some other navigation method. Numerous efforts were made to provide some sort of secondary low-accuracy system that could be used with a phase-comparison system like Decca in order to resolve the ambiguity. Among the many methods were a directional broadcast systems known as the POPI, and a variety of systems combining pulse-timing for low-accuracy navigation and then using phase-comparison for fine adjustment. Decca themselves had set aside one frequency, "9f", for testing this concept, but did not have the chance to do so until much later. Similar concepts were also used in the experimental Navarho system in the US. It was known from the start of the LORAN project that the same CRT displays that showed the LORAN pulses would also, when suitably magnified, show the individual waves of the intermediate frequency. This meant that pulse-matching could be used to get a rough fix, and then the operator could gain additional timing accuracy by lining up the individual waves within the pulse, like Decca. This could either be used to greatly increase the accuracy of LORAN, or alternately, offer similar accuracy using much lower carrier frequencies, and thus greatly extend range. This would require the transmitter stations to be synchronized both in time and phase, but much of this problem had been solved by Decca engineers. The long-range option was of considerable interest to the Coast Guard, who set up an experimental system known as LF LORAN in 1945. This operated at much lower frequencies than the original LORAN, 180&nbsp;kHz, and required very long balloon-borne antennas. Testing was carried out throughout the year, including several long-distance flights as far as Brazil. The experimental system was then sent to Canada where it was used during Operation Muskox in the Arctic. Accuracy was found to be  at , a significant advance over LORAN. With the ending of Muskox it was decided to keep the system running under what became known as "Operation Musk Calf", run by a group consisting of the US Air Force, Royal Canadian Air Force, Royal Canadian Navy and Royal Corps of Signals. The system ran until September 1947. This led to another major test series, this time by the newly formed USAF, known as Operation Beetle. Beetle was located in the far north, on the Canada-Alaska border, and used new guy-stayed  steel towers, replacing the earlier system's balloon-lofted cable antennas. The system became operational in 1948 and ran for two years until February 1950. Unfortunately the stations proved poorly sited, as the radio transmission over the permafrost was much shorter than expected and synchronization of the signals between the stations using groundwaves proved impossible. The tests also showed that the system was extremely difficult to use in practice; it was easy for the operator to select the wrong sections of the waveforms on their display, leading to significant real-world inaccuracy. In 1946 the Rome Air Development Center sent out contracts for longer-ranged and more-accurate navigation systems that would be used for long-range bombing navigation. As the US Army Air Force was moving towards smaller crews, only three in the Boeing B-47 Stratojet for instance, a high degree of automation was desired. Two contracts were accepted; Sperry Gyroscope proposed the CYCLAN system (CYCLe matching LorAN) which was broadly similar to LF LORAN but with additional automation, and Sylvania proposed Whyn using continuous wave navigation like Decca, but with additional coding using frequency modulation. In spite of great efforts, Whyn could never be made to work, and was abandoned. CYCLAN operated by sending the same LF LORAN-like signals on two frequencies, LF LORAN's 180&nbsp;kHz and again on 200&nbsp;kHz. The associated equipment would look for a rising amplitude that indicated the start of the signal pulse, and then use sampling gates to extract the carrier phase. Using two receivers solved the problem of mis-aligning the pulses, because the phases would only align properly between the two copies of the signal when the same pulses were being compared. None of this was trivial; using the era's tube-based electronics, the experimental CYCLAN system filled much of a semi-trailer. CYCLAN proved highly successful, so much so that it became increasingly clear that the problems that led the engineers to use two frequencies were simply not as bad as expected. It appeared that a system using a single frequency would work just as well, given the right electronics. This was especially good news, as the 200&nbsp;kHz frequency was interfering with existing broadcasts, and had to be moved to 160&nbsp;kHz during testing. Through this period the issue of radio spectrum use was becoming a major concern, and had led to international efforts to decide on a frequency band suitable for long-range navigation. This process eventually settled on the band from 90 to 100&nbsp;kHz. CYCLAN appeared to suggest that accuracy at even lower frequencies was not a problem, and the only real concern was the expense of the equipment involved. The success of the CYCLAN system led to a further contract with Sperry in 1952 for a new system with the twin goals of working in the 100&nbsp;kHz range while being equally accurate, less complex and less expensive. These goals would normally be contradictory, but the CYCLAN system gave all involved the confidence that these could be met The resulting system was known as Cytac. To solve the complexity problem, a new circuit was developed to properly time the sampling of the signal. This consisted of a circuit to extract the envelope of the pulse, another to extract the derivative of the envelope, and finally another that subtracted the derivative from the envelope. The result of this final operation would go negative during a very specific and stable part of the rising edge of the pulse, and this zero-crossing was used to trigger a very short-time sampling gate. This system replaced the complex system of clocks used in CYCLAN. By simply measuring the time between the zero-crossings of the master and slave, pulse-timing was extracted. The output of the envelope sampler was also sent to a phase-shifter that adjusted the output of a local clock that locked to the master carrier using a phase-locked loop. Gating on the slave signal was then compared to this master signal, and a varying voltage was produced depending on the difference in phase. This voltage represented the fine-positioning measurement. The system was generally successful in testing through 1953, but there were concerns raised about the signal power at long ranges, and the possibility of jamming. This led to further modifications of the basic signal. The first was to broadcast a series of pulses instead of just one, broadcasting more energy during a given time and improving the ability of the receivers to tune in a useful signal. By adding a fixed 45° phase shift to every pulse, simple continuous-wave jamming signals could be identified and rejected. The Cytac system underwent an enormous series of tests across the United States and offshore. Given the potential accuracy of the system, even minor changes to the groundwave synchronization were found to cause errors that could be eliminated - issues such as the number of rivers the signal crossed caused predictable delays that could be measured and then factored into navigation solutions. This led to a series of "correction contours" that could be added to the received signal to adjust for these concerns, and these were printed on the Cytac charts. Using prominent features on dams as target points, a series of tests demonstrated that the uncorrected signals provided accuracy on the order of 100 yards, while adding the correction contour adjustments reduced this to the order of ten yards. It was at this moment that the US Air Force (having taken over these efforts while moving from the USAAF) dropped their interest in the project. Although the reasons are not well recorded, it appears the idea of a fully automated bombing system using radio aids was no longer considered possible. The AAF had been involved in missions covering about 1000&nbsp;km (the distance from London to Berlin) and the Cytac system would work well at these ranges. But as the mission changed to trans-polar missions of 5,000&nbsp;km or more, even Cytac did not offer the range and accuracy needed. They turned their attention to the use of inertial platforms and Doppler radar systems, cancelling work on Cytac as well as a competing system known as Navarho.Gil McElroy, "Loran-C History' Around this period the Navy began work on a similar system using combined pulse and phase comparison, but based on the existing LORAN frequency of 200&nbsp;kHz. By this time the Navy had handed operational control of the LORAN system to the Coast Guard, and it was assumed the same arrangement would be true for any new system as well. Thus the Coast Guard was given the choice of naming the systems, and decided to rename the existing system "Loran-A", and the new system Loran-B. With Cytac fully developed and its test system on the US east coast mothballed, the Navy also decided to re-commission the Cytac system for tests in the long-range role. An extensive series of tests across the Atlantic were carried out by the USCGC Androscoggin (WHEC-68) starting in April 1956. Meanwhile Loran-B proved to have serious problems keeping their transmitters in phase, and that work was abandoned.Very little information on Loran-B is available in the public record, and any reasons for its failure even less so. Minor changes were made to the Cytac systems to further simplify it, including a reduction in the pulse-chain spacing from 1200 to 1000&nbsp;µs, the pulse rate changed to 20&nbsp;pps to match the existing Loran-A system, and the phase-shifting between pulses to an alternating 0, 180 degree shift instead of 45 degrees at every pulse within the chain. The result was Loran-C. Testing with the new system was equally intensive, and overwater flights around Bermuda demonstrated that 50% of fixes lay within a  circle. This was a dramatic improvement over the original Loran-A, meeting the accuracy of the Gee system but at much greater range. The first chain were set up using the original experimental Cytac system, along with a second in the Mediterranean in 1957. Further chains covering the North Atlantic and large areas of the Pacific followed. At the time global charts were printed with shaded sections representing the area where a  accurate fix could be obtained under most operational conditions. Loran-C had originally been designed to be highly automated, allowing the system to be operated more rapidly than the original LORAN's multi-minute measurement. It was also operated in "chains" of linked stations, allowing a fix to be made by simultaneously comparing two slaves to a single master. The downside of this approach was that the required electronic equipment, built using 1950s-era tube technology, was very large. Looking for companies with knowledge of seaborne, multi-channel phase-comparison electronics led, ironically, to Decca, who built the AN/SPN-31, the first widely used Loran-C receiver. The AN/SPN-31 weighed over  and had 52 controls. Airborne units followed, and an adapted AN/SPN-31 was tested in an Avro Vulcan in 1963. By the mid-1960s, units with some transistorization were becoming more common, and a chain was set up in Viet Nam to support the US war efforts there. A number of commercial airline operators experimented with the system as well, using it for navigation on the great circle route between North America and Europe. However, inertial platforms ultimately became more common in this role. In 1969, Decca sued the Navy for patent infringement, producing ample documentation of their work on the basic concept as early as 1944, along with the "missing" 9f frequencyBlanchard uses 7f and 9f on different pages. at 98&nbsp;kHz that had been set aside for experiments using this system. Decca won the initial suit, but the judgement was overturned on appeal when the Navy claimed "wartime expediency". When Loran-C became widespread, the USAF once again became interested in using it as a guidance system. They proposed a new system layered on top of Loran-C, using it as the coarse guidance signal in much the same way that pulses were the coarse guidance and phase-comparison used for fine. To provide an extra-fine guidance signal, Loran-D interleaved another train of eight pulses immediately after the signals from one of the existing Loran-C stations, folding the two signals together. This technique became known as "Supernumary Interpulse Modulation" (SIM). These were broadcast from low-power portable transmitters, offering relatively short-range service of high accuracy.George Galdorisi and Thomas Phillips, "Leave No Man Behind", MBI Publishing, 2009, pg. 391. Loran-D was used only experimentally during war-games in the 1960s from a transmitter set in the UK. The system was also used in a limited fashion during the Vietnam War, combined with the Pave Spot laser designator system, a combination known as Pave Nail. Using the AN/ARN-92 mobile transmitters, accuracy on the order of , which the Spot system improved to about . The SIM concept became a system for sending additional data.James Caffery, "Wireless Location in CDMA Cellular Radio Systems", Springer, 2000, pg. 5.Darrel Whitcomb, "PAVE NAIL: there at the beginning of the precision weapons revolutions" At about the same time, Motorola proposed a new system using pseudo-random pulse-chains. This mechanism ensures that no two chains within a given period (on the order of many seconds) will have the same pattern, making it easy to determine if the signal is a groundwave from a recent transmission or a multi-hop signal from a previous one. The system, Multi-User Tactical Navigation Systems (MUTNS) was used briefly but it was found that Loran-D met the same requirements but had the added advantage of being a standard Loran-C signal as well. Although MUTNS was unrelated to the Loran systems, it was sometimes referred to as Loran-F."Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Technical Symposium", pg. 7. In spite of its many advantages, the high cost of implementing a Loran-C receiver made it uneconomical for many users. Additionally, as military users upgraded from Loran-A to Loran-C, large numbers of surplus Loran-A receivers were dumped on the market. This made Loran-A popular in spite of being less accurate and fairly difficult to operate. By the early 1970s the introduction of integrated circuits combining a complete radio receiver began to greatly reduce the complexity of Loran-A measurements, and fully automated units the size of a stereo receiver became common. For those users requiring higher accuracy, Decca had considerable success with their Decca Navigator system, and produced units that combined both features. The same rapid development of microelectronics that made Loran-A so easy to operate worked equally well on the Loran-C signals, and the obvious desire to have a long-range system that could also provide enough accuracy for lake and harbour navigation led to the "opening" of the Loran-C system to public use in 1974. Civilian receivers quickly followed, and dual-system A/C receivers were also common for a time. The switch from A to C was extremely rapid, due largely to rapidly falling prices which led to many user's first receiver being Loran-C. By the late 1970s the Coast Guard decided to turn off Loran-A, in favour of adding additional Loran-C stations to cover gaps is its coverage. The original Loran-A network was shut down in 1979 and 1980, with a few units used in the Pacific for some time. One of the reasons for Loran-C's opening to the public was the move from Loran to new forms of navigation, including INS, Transit and OMEGA, meant that the security of Loran was no longer as stringent as it was as a primary form of navigation. As these newer systems gave way to GPS through the 1980s and 90s, this process repeated itself, but this time the military was able to separate GPS's signals in such a way that it could provide both secure military and insecure civilian signals at the same time. GPS was more difficult to receive and decode, but by the 1990s the required electronics were already as small and inexpensive as Loran-C, leading to rapid adoption that has become largely universal. Although Loran-C was largely redundant by 2000, it has not universally disappeared  due to a number of concerns. One is that the GPS system can be jammed through a variety of means; although the same is true of Loran-C, the transmitters are close-at-hand and can be adjusted if need be. More importantly, there are effects that might cause the GPS system to become unusable over wide areas, notably space weather events and potential EMP events. Loran, located entirely under the atmosphere, offers more resilience to these sorts of issues. There has been considerable debate about the relative merits of keeping the Loran-C system operational as a result of considerations like these. In November 2009, the USCG announced that LORAN-C is not needed by the U.S. for maritime navigation. This decision left the fate of LORAN and eLORAN in the U.S. to the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.Senate committee letter  Per a subsequent announcement, the U.S. Coast Guard, in accordance with the DHS Appropriations Act, terminated the transmission of all U.S. LORAN-C signals on 8 February 2010. On 1 August 2010 the U.S. transmission of the Russian American signal was terminated, and on 3 August 2010 all Canadian signals were shut down by the USCG and the CCG. (for access click on "I have read..." and "Accept") The European Union had decided that the potential security advantages of Loran are worthy not only of keeping the system operational, but upgrading it and adding new stations. This is part of the wider Eurofix system which combines GPS, Galileo and nine Loran stations into a single integrated system. However, in 2014, Norway and France both announced that all of their remaining transmitters, which make up a significant part of the Eurofix system, will be shut down on 31 December 2015.http://kartverket.no/efs-documents/editions/2015/efs01-2015.pdf, page 26 The two remaining transmitters in Europe (Anthorn, UK and Sylt, Germany) will no longer be able to sustain a positioning and navigation Loran service, with the result that the UK announced its trial eLoran service would be discontinued from the same date.  The navigational method provided by LORAN is based on measuring the time difference between the receipt of signals from a pair of radio transmitters.  A given constant time difference between the signals from the two stations can be represented by a hyperbolic line of position (LOP). If the positions of the two synchronized stations are known, then the position of the receiver can be determined as being somewhere on a particular hyperbolic curve where the time difference between the received signals is constant. In ideal conditions, this is proportionally equivalent to the difference of the distances from the receiver to each of the two stations. So a LORAN receiver which only receives two LORAN stations cannot fully fix its position—it only narrows it down to being somewhere on a curved line.  Therefore the receiver must receive and calculate the time difference between a second pair of stations.  This allows to be calculated a second hyperbolic line on which the receiver is located.  Where these two lines cross is the location of the receiver. In practice, one of the stations in the second pair also may be—and frequently is—in the first pair.  This means signals must be received from at least three LORAN transmitters to pinpoint the receiver's location.  By determining the intersection of the two hyperbolic curves identified by this method, a geographic fix  can be determined.  In the case of LORAN, one station remains constant in each application of the principle, the primary, being paired up separately with two other secondary stations. Given two secondary stations, the time difference (TD) between the primary and first secondary identifies one curve, and the time difference between the primary and second secondary identifies another curve, the intersections of which will determine a geographic point in relation to the position of the three stations. These curves are referred to as TD lines.The American Practical Navigator, An Epitome of Navigation, page 173 In practice, LORAN is implemented in integrated regional arrays, or chains, consisting of one primary station and at least two (but often more) secondary  stations, with a uniform group repetition interval (GRI) defined in microseconds. The amount of time before transmitting the next set of pulses is defined by the distance between the start of transmission of primary to the next start of transmission of primary signal. The secondary stations receive this pulse signal from the primary, then wait a preset number of milliseconds, known as the secondary coding delay, to transmit a response signal. In a given chain, each secondary's coding delay is different, allowing for separate identification of each secondary's signal. (In practice, however, modern LORAN receivers do not rely on this for secondary identification.)  Every LORAN chain in the world uses a unique Group Repetition Interval, the number of which, when multiplied by ten, gives how many microseconds pass between pulses from a given station in the chain. (In practice, the delays in many, but not all, chains are multiples of 100 microseconds.) LORAN chains are often referred to by this designation (e.g., GRI 9960, the designation for the LORAN chain serving the Northeast United States). Due to the nature of hyperbolic curves, a particular combination of a primary and two secondary stations can possibly result in a "grid" where the grid lines intersect at shallow angles. For ideal positional accuracy, it is desirable to operate on a navigational grid where the grid lines are closer to right angles (orthogonal) to each other. As the receiver travels through a chain, a certain selection of secondaries whose TD lines initially formed a near-orthogonal grid can become a grid that is significantly skewed. As a result, the selection of one or both secondaries should be changed so that the TD lines of the new combination are closer to right angles. To allow this, nearly all chains provide at least three, and as many as five, secondaries.  Where available, common marine nautical charts include visible representations of TD lines at regular intervals over water areas. The TD lines representing a given primary-secondary pairing are printed with distinct colors, and note the specific time difference indicated by each line.  On a nautical chart, the denotation for each Line of Position from a receiver, relative to axis and color, can be found at the bottom of the chart.  The color on official charts for stations and the timed-lines of position follow no specific conformance for the purpose of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO).  However, local chart producers may color these in a specific conformance to their standard.  Always consult the chart notes, administrations Chart1 reference, and information given on the chart for the most accurate information regarding surveys, datum, and reliability. There are three major factors when considering signal delay and propagation in relation to LORAN-C: The chart notes should indicate whether ASF corrections have been made (Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS) charts, for example, include them). Otherwise, the appropriate correction factors must be obtained before use. Due to interference and propagation issues suffered from land features and artificial structures such as tall buildings, the accuracy of the LORAN signal can be degraded considerably in inland areas (see Limitations). As a result, nautical charts will not show TD lines in those areas, to prevent reliance on LORAN-C for navigation. Traditional LORAN receivers display the time difference between each pairing of the primary and one of the two selected secondary stations, which is then used to find the appropriate TD line on the chart.  Modern LORAN receivers display latitude and longitude coordinates instead of time differences, and, with the advent of time difference comparison and electronics, provide improved accuracy and better position fixing, allowing the observer to plot their position on a nautical chart more easily. When using such coordinates, the datum used by the receiver (usually WGS84) must match that of the chart, or manual conversion calculations must be performed before the coordinates can be used. Each LORAN station is equipped with a suite of specialized equipment to generate the precisely timed signals used to modulate / drive the transmitting equipment.  Up to three commercial cesium atomic clocks are used to generate 5&nbsp;MHz and pulse per second (or 1&nbsp;Hz) signals that are used by timing equipment to generate the various GRI-dependent drive signals for the transmitting equipment. While each U.S.-operated LORAN station is supposed to be synchronized to within 100&nbsp;ns of UTC, the actual accuracy achieved as of 1994 was within 500&nbsp;ns. LORAN-C transmitters operate at peak powers of 100–4,000&nbsp;kilowatts, comparable to longwave broadcasting stations.  Most use 190–220&nbsp;metre tall mast radiators, insulated from ground. The masts are inductively lengthened and fed by a loading coil (see: electrical lengthening). A well known-example of a station using such an antenna is Rantum. Free-standing tower radiators in this height range are also used. Carolina Beach uses a free-standing antenna tower. Some LORAN-C transmitters with output powers of 1,000&nbsp;kW and higher used supertall 412&nbsp;metre mast radiators (see below). Other high power LORAN-C stations, like George, used four T-antennas mounted on four guyed masts arranged in a square. All LORAN-C antennas are designed to radiate an omnidirectional pattern. Unlike longwave broadcasting stations, LORAN-C stations cannot use backup antennas because the exact position of the antenna is a part of the navigation calculation. The slightly different physical location of a backup antenna would produce Lines of Position different from those of the primary antenna. Atlantic Ocean LORAN coverage (2006) Pacific Ocean LORAN coverage (2006) LORAN suffers from electronic effects of weather and the ionospheric effects of sunrise and sunset. The most accurate signal is the groundwave that follows the Earth's surface, ideally over seawater. At night the indirect skywave, bent back to the surface by the ionosphere, is a problem as multiple signals may arrive via different paths (multipath interference). The ionosphere's reaction to sunrise and sunset accounts for the particular disturbance during those periods. Magnetic storms have serious effects as with any radio based system. LORAN uses ground based transmitters that only cover certain regions.  Coverage is quite good in North America, Europe, and the Pacific Rim. The absolute accuracy of LORAN-C varies from . Repeatable accuracy is much greater, typically from .COMDTPUB P16562.6, "LORAN-C Users Handbook", 1992 LORAN-A was a less accurate system operating in the upper mediumwave frequency band prior to deployment of the more accurate LORAN-C system.  For LORAN-A the transmission frequencies 1750&nbsp;kHz, 1850&nbsp;kHz, 1900&nbsp;kHz and 1950&nbsp;kHz were used, shared with the 1800–2000&nbsp;kHz amateur 160-meter band. LORAN-A continued in operation partly due to the economy of the receivers and widespread use in civilian recreational and commercial navigation.  LORAN-B was a phase comparison variation of LORAN-A while LORAN-D was a short-range tactical system designed for USAF bombers.  The unofficial "LORAN-F" was a drone control system.  None of these went much beyond the experimental stage.  An external link to them is listed below. LORAN-A was used in the Vietnam War for navigation by large United States aircraft (C-124, C-130, C-97, C-123, HU-16, etc.). A common airborne receiver of that era was the R-65/APN-9 which combined the receiver and cathode ray tube (CRT) indicator into a single relatively lightweight unit replacing the two larger, separate receiver and indicator units which composed the predecessor APN-4 system. The APN-9 and APN-4 systems found wide post–World War II use on fishing vessels in the U.S. They were cheap, accurate and plentiful. The main drawback for use on boats was their need for aircraft power, 115 VAC at 400 Hz. This was solved initially by the use of rotary converters, typically 28 VDC input and 115 VAC output at 400&nbsp;Hz. The inverters were large, noisy and required significant power. In the 1960s, several firms such as Topaz and Linear Systems marketed solid state inverters specifically designed for these surplus LORAN-A sets. The availability of solid state inverters that used 12 VDC input opened up the surplus LORAN-A sets for use on much smaller vessels which typically did not have the 24-28 VDC systems found on larger vessels. The solid state inverters were very power efficient and widely replaced the more trouble prone rotary inverters. LORAN-A saved many lives by allowing offshore boats in distress to give accurate position reports. It also guided many boats whose owners could not afford radar safely into fog bound harbors or around treacherous offshore reefs. The low price of surplus LORAN-A receivers (often under $150) meant that owners of many small fishing vessels could afford this equipment, thus greatly enhancing safety. Surplus LORAN-A equipment, which was common on commercial fishing boats, was rarely seen on yachts. The unrefined cosmetic appearance of the surplus equipment was probably a deciding factor. Pan American World Airways used APN 9s in early Boeing 707 operations. World War II surplus APN-9 looked out of place in the modern 707 cockpit, but was needed. There is an R65A APN-9 set displayed in the museum at San Francisco International Airport, painted gold. It was a retirement gift to an ex Pan Am captain. An elusive final variant of the APN 9 set was the APN 9A. A USAF technical manual (with photographs and schematics) shows that it had the same case as the APN-9 but a radically different front panel and internal circuitry on the non-RF portions. The APN-9A had vacuum tube flipflop digital divider circuits so that TDs (time delays) between the primary and secondary signal could be selected on front panel rotary decade switches. The older APN-9 set required the user to perform a visual count of crystal oscillator timing marker pips on the CRT and add them up to get a TD. The APN 9A did not make it into widespread military use, if it was used at all, but it did exist and represented a big advance in military LORAN-A receiver technology. In the 1970s one US company, SRD Labs in Campbell, California, made modern LORAN-A sets including one that was completely automatic with a digital TD readout on the CRT, and autotracking so that TDs were continuously updated. Other SRD models required the user to manually align the primary and secondary signals on the CRT and then a phase locked loop would keep them lined up and provide updated TD readouts thereafter. These SRD LORAN-A sets would track only one pair of stations, providing just one LOP (line of position). For a continuously updated position (two TDs giving intersecting LOPs) rather than just a single LOP, two sets were necessary. LORAN-A was terminated in the United States on 31 December 1980 and the restrictions on amateur radio use of the 160-meter band were lifted. Long after LORAN-A broadcasts were terminated, commercial fishermen still referred to old LORAN-A TDs, e.g., "I am on the 4100 [microsecond] line  in 35 fathoms", referring to a position outside Bodega Bay. Many LORAN-C sets incorporated LORAN A TD converters so that a LORAN-C set could be used to navigate to a LORAN-A TD defined line or position. LORAN Data Channel (LDC) is a project underway between the FAA and USCG to send low bit rate data using the LORAN system. Messages to be sent include station identification, absolute time, and position correction messages. In 2001, data similar to Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) GPS correction messages were sent as part of a test of the Alaskan LORAN chain. As of November 2005, test messages using LDC were being broadcast from several U.S. LORAN stations. In recent years, LORAN-C has been used in Europe to send differential GPS and other messages, employing a similar method of transmission known as EUROFIX. A system called SPS (Saudi Positioning System), similar to EUROFIX, is in use in Saudi Arabia.   GPS differential corrections and GPS integrity information are added to the LORAN signal. A combined GPS/LORAN receiver is used, and if a GPS fix is not available it automatically switches over to LORAN. As LORAN systems are government maintained and operated, their continued existence is subject to public policy. With the evolution of other electronic navigation systems, such as satellite navigation systems, funding for existing systems is not always assured. Critics, who have called for the elimination of the system, state that the LORAN system has too few users, lacks cost-effectiveness, and that GNSS signals are superior to LORAN. Supporters of continued and improved LORAN operation note that LORAN uses a strong signal, which is difficult to jam, and that LORAN is an independent, dissimilar, and complementary system to other forms of electronic navigation, which helps ensure availability of navigation signals."GPS back-up 'needs more research' ". bbc.co.uk, 20 June 2008, Retrieved 5 October 2010 On 26 February 2009, the U.S. Office of Management and Budget released the first blueprint for the Financial Year 2010 budget.Office of Management and Budget. ( www.budget.gov), "A New Era of Responsibility Renewing America's Promise"  The FY 2010 Budget, Department of Homeland Security Section, page 72 This document identified the LORAN-C system as “outdated” and supported its termination at an estimated savings of $36 million in 2010 and $190 million over five years. On 21 April 2009 the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs released inputs to the FY 2010 Concurrent Budget Resolution with backing for the continued support for the LORAN system, acknowledging the investment already made in infrastructure upgrades and recognizing the studies performed and multi-departmental conclusion that eLORAN is the best backup to GPS. Senator Jay Rockefeller, Chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, wrote that the committee recognized the priority in "Maintaining LORAN-C while transitioning to eLORAN" as means of enhancing the homeland security, marine safety and environmental protection missions of the Coast Guard. Senator Collins, the ranking member on the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs wrote that the President's budget overview proposal to terminate the LORAN-C system is inconsistent with the recent investments, recognized studies and the mission of the U.S. Coast Guard. The committee also recognizes the $160 million investment already made toward upgrading the LORAN-C system to support the full deployment of eLORAN. Further, the Committees also recognize the many studies which evaluated GPS backup systems and concluded both the need to back up GPS and identified eLORAN as the best and most viable backup. "This proposal is inconsistent with the recently released (January 2009) Federal Radionavigation Plan (FRP), which was jointly prepared by DHS and the Departments of Defense (DOD) and Transportation (DOT). The FRP proposed the eLORAN program to serve as a Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) backup to GPS (Global Positioning System)." On 7 May 2009, President Barack Obama proposed cutting funding (approx. $35 million/year) for LORAN, citing its redundancy alongside GPS.Obama: Budget cuts add up to 'real money'  In regard to the pending Congressional bill, H.R. 2892, it was subsequently announced that "[t]he Administration supports the Committee's aim to achieve an orderly termination through a phased decommissioning beginning in January 2010, and the requirement that certifications be provided to document that the LORAN-C termination will not impair maritime safety or the development of possible GPS backup capabilities or needs." Also on 7 May 2009, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), the investigative arm of Congress, released a report citing the very real potential for the GPS system to degrade or fail in light of program delays which have resulted in scheduled GPS satellite launches slipping by up to three years.http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-670T On 12 May 2009 the March 2007 Independent Assessment Team (IAT) report on LORAN was released to the public.  In its report the ITA stated that it "unanimously recommends that the U.S. government complete the eLORAN upgrade and commit to eLORAN as the national backup to GPS for 20 years."  The release of the report followed an extensive Freedom Of Information Act (FOIA) battle waged by industry representatives against the federal government.  Originally completed 20 March 2007 and presented to the co-sponsoring Department of Transportation and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Executive Committees, the report carefully considered existing navigation systems, including GPS.  The unanimous recommendation for keeping the LORAN system and upgrading to eLORAN was based on the team's conclusion that LORAN is operational, deployed and sufficiently accurate to supplement GPS.  The team also concluded that the cost to decommission the LORAN system would exceed the cost of deploying eLORAN, thus negating any stated savings as offered by the Obama administration and revealing the vulnerability of the U.S. to GPS disruption.http://sidt.gpsworld.com/gpssidt/article/articleDetail.jsp?id=597861 In November 2009, the U.S. Coast Guard announced that the LORAN-C stations under its control would be closed down for budgetary reasons after 4 January 2010 provided the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security certified that LORAN is not needed as a backup for GPS.  On 7 January 2010, Homeland Security published a notice of the permanent discontinuation of LORAN-C operation.  Effective 2000 UTC 8 February 2010, the United States Coast Guard terminated all operation and broadcast of LORAN-C signals in the USA.  The U.S. Coast Guard transmission of the Russian American CHAYKA signal was terminated on 1 August 2010. The transmission of Canadian LORAN-C signals was terminated on 3 August 2010.http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/?pageName=loranMain With the perceived vulnerability of GNSS systems,http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/8533157.stm and their own propagation and reception limitations, renewed interest in LORAN applications and development has appeared.  Enhanced LORAN, also known as eLORAN or E-LORAN, comprises an advancement in receiver design and transmission characteristics which increase the accuracy and usefulness of traditional LORAN. With reported accuracy as good as ±&nbsp;8 meters,http://www.aviationtoday.com/av/commercial/GPS-Backup-Is-eLoran-the-Answer_76148.html  the system becomes competitive with unenhanced GPS. eLORAN also includes additional pulses which can transmit auxiliary data such as DGPS corrections. eLORAN receivers now use "all in view" reception, incorporating signals from all stations in range, not solely those from a single GRI, incorporating time signals and other data from up to 40 stations. These enhancements in LORAN make it adequate as a substitute for scenarios where GPS is unavailable or degraded. On 31 May 2007, the UK Department for Transport (DfT), via the General Lighthouse Authorities (GLA), awarded a 15-year contract to provide a state-of-the-art enhanced LORAN (eLORAN) service to improve the safety of mariners in the UK and Western Europe. The service contract will operate in two phases, with development work and further focus for European agreement on eLORAN service provision from 2007 through 2010, and full operation of the eLORAN service from 2010 through 2022. The first eLORAN transmitter is situated at Anthorn radio station Cumbria, UK, and operated by Babcock Comms, which is part of the Babcock Group PLC.  eLORAN: The UK government has granted approval for seven differential eLoran ship-positioning technology stations to be built along the south and east coasts of the UK to help counter the threat of jamming of global positioning systems. They are set to reach initial operational capability by summer 2014.Nautilus International Newspaper August 2013 The General Lighthouse Authorities (GLAs) of the UK and Ireland announced October 31 the initial operational capability of UK maritime eLoran. Seven differential reference stations now provide additional position, navigation, and timing (PNT) information via low-frequency pulses to ships fitted with eLoran receivers. The service will help ensure they can navigate safely in the event of GPS failure in one of the busiest shipping regions in the world, with expected annual traffic of 200,000 vessels by 2020.GPS World. December 2014. Despite these plans, in light of the decision by France and Norway to cease Loran transmissions on 31 December 2015, the UK announced at the start of that month that its eLoran service would be discontinued on the same day.    A list of LORAN-C transmitters. Stations with an antenna tower taller than 300 metres (984 feet) are shown in bold. Station !! Country !! Chain !! Coordinates !! Remarks Afif Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830) 400&nbsp;kW Al Khamasin Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830) Al Muwassam Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830) Angissq Greenland Shut down on 31 December 1994 used until 27 July 1964 a 411.48 metre tower Anthorn United Kingdom Lessay (GRI 6731) Master and Slave on 9 Jan. 2016. Replacement for transmitter Rugby  Ash Shaykh Humayd Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830) Attu Island United States North Pacific (GRI 9990)Russian-American (GRI 5980) demolished in August 2010 Balasore India Calcutta (GRI 5543) Barrigada Guam shut down Baudette United States North Central U.S. (GRI 8290)Great Lakes (GRI 8970) Berlevåg Norway Bø (GRI 7001) Bilimora India Bombay (GRI 6042) Boise City United States Great Lakes (GRI 8970)South Central U.S. (GRI 9610) Bø, Vesterålen Norway Bø (GRI 7001)Eiði (GRI 9007) Cambridge Bay Canada shut down free-standing lattice tower, used as NDB Cape Race Canada Canadian East Coast (GRI 5930)Newfoundland East Coast (GRI 7270) used a 411.48 metre tall tower until 2 February 1993, uses now a 260.3 metre tall tower Caribou, Maine United States Canadian East Coast (GRI 5930)Northeast U.S. (GRI 9960) Carolina Beach United States Southeast U.S. (GRI 7980)Northeast US (GRI 9960) Chongzuo China China South Sea (GRI 6780) Comfort Cove Canada Newfoundland East Coast (GRI 7270) Dana United States Great Lakes (GRI 8970)Northeast US (GRI 9960) Dhrangadhra India Bombay (GRI 6042) Diamond Harbor India Calcutta (GRI 5543) Eiði Faroe Islands Eiði (GRI 9007) Estartit Spain Mediterranean Sea (GRI 7990)(shut down) Fallon United States U.S. West Coast (GRI 9940) Fox Harbour Canada Canadian East Coast (GRI 5930)Newfoundland East Coast (GRI 7270) George United States Canadian West Coast (GRI 5990) Gesashi Japan North West Pacific (GRI 8930)East Asia (GRI 9930) Gillette United States North Central U.S. (GRI 8290)South Central U.S. (GRI 9610) Grangeville United States Southeast U.S. (GRI 7980)South Central U.S. (GRI 9610) Havre United States North Central U.S. (GRI 8290) Hellissandur Iceland shut down on 31 December 1994 411.48 metre tall tower, now used for longwave broadcasting of RÚV on 189&nbsp;kHz Helong China China North Sea (GRI 7430) Hexian China China South Sea (GRI 6780) Iwo Jima Japan shut down in September 1993. Dismantled used a 411.48 metre tall tower Jan Mayen Norway Bø (GRI 7001)Ejde (GRI 9007) Johnston Island United States shut down Jupiter United States Southeast U.S. (GRI 7980) Kargaburun Turkey Mediterranean Sea (GRI 7990)(shut down) Kwang Ju South Korea East Asia (GRI 9930) Lampedusa Italy Mediterranean Sea (GRI 7990)(shut down) Las Cruces United States South Central U.S. (GRI 9610) Lessay France Shut down on 31 December 2015Lessay (GRI 6731)Sylt (GRI 7499) Loop Head Ireland Lessay (GRI 6731)Eiði (GRI 9007) (Never built) 250&nbsp;kW Malone United States Southeast U.S. (GRI 7980)Great Lakes (GRI 8970) Middletown United States U.S. West Coast (GRI 9940) Minamitorishima Japan North West Pacific (GRI 8930) used until 1985 a 411.48 metre tall tower Nantucket United States Canadian East Coast (GRI 5930)Northeast U.S. (GRI 9960) Narrow Cape United States Gulf of Alaska (GRI 7960)North Pacific (GRI 9990) Niijima Japan North West Pacific (GRI 8930)East Asia (GRI 9930) Patapur India Calcutta (GRI 5543) Pohang South Korea North West Pacific (GRI 8930)East Asia (GRI 9930) Port Clarence United States Gulf of Alaska (GRI 7960)North Pacific (GRI 9990) uses a 411.48 metre tall tower  Demolished 28 April 2010 http://coastguardnews.com/video-loran-station-port-clarence-tower-demolition/2010/05/01/ Port Hardy Canada Canadian West Coast (GRI 5990) Rantum (Sylt) Germany Shut down on 31 December 2015Lessay (GRI 6731)Sylt (GRI 7499) Raymondville United States Southeast U.S. (GRI 7980)South Central U.S. (GRI 9610) Raoping China China South Sea (GRI 6780)China East Sea (GRI 8390) Rongcheng China China North Sea (GRI 7430)China East Sea (GRI 8390) Rugby United Kingdom Experimental (GRI 6731)(shut down at the end of July 2007) Saint Paul United States North Pacific (GRI 9990) Salwa Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia South (GRI 7030)Saudi Arabia North (GRI 8830) Searchlight United States South Central U.S. (GRI 9610)U.S. West Coast (GRI 9940) Sellia Marina Italy Mediterranean Sea (GRI 7990)(shut down) Seneca United States Great Lakes (GRI 8970)Northeast U.S. (GRI 9960) Shoal Cove United States Canadian West Coast (GRI 5990)Gulf of Alaska (GRI 7960) Soustons France Shut down on 31 December 2015Lessay (GRI 6731) Tok United States Gulf of Alaska (GRI 7960) Tokachibuto Japan Eastern Russia Chayka (GRI 7950)North West Pacific (GRI 8930) Upolo Point United States shut down Værlandet Norway Sylt (GRI 7499)Ejde (GRI 9007) Veraval India Bombay (GRI 6042) Williams Lake Canada Canadian West Coast (GRI 5990)North Central U.S. (GRI 8290) Xuancheng China China North Sea (GRI 7430)China East Sea (GRI 8390) Yap Federated States of Micronesia shut down in 1987. Dismantled used a 304.8 metre tall tower Primary Phase Factor (PF)&nbsp;– This allows for the fact that the speed of the propagated signal in the atmosphere is slightly lower than in a  vacuum. Secondary Phase Factor (SF)&nbsp;– This allows for the fact that the speed of propagation of the signal is slowed when traveling over the seawater because of the greater conductivity of seawater compared to land. Additional Secondary Factors (ASF)&nbsp;– Because LORAN-C transmitters are mainly land based, the signal will travel partly over land and partly over seawater.  ASF may be treated as land and water segments, each with a uniform conductivity depending on whether the path is over land or water. CHAYKA, the Russian counterpart of LORAN Alpha, the Russian counterpart of the Omega Navigation System, still in use as of 2006. OMEGA, the Western counterpart of the Alpha Navigation System, no longer in use. Decca Navigator System, a British system that used phase difference instead of time difference. SHORAN Oboe (navigation) G-H (navigation) GEE (navigation) GPS Local positioning system L. E. Gatterer "The Development of Loran-C Navigation and Timing", National Bureau of Standards, October 1972 W. F. Blanchard, "Hyperbolic Airborne Radio Navigation Aids", Journal of Navigation, September 1991, pp.&nbsp;285–315 Jennet Conant, Tuxedo Park: A Wall Street Tycoon and the Secret Palace of Science That Changed the Course of World War II (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2002, ISBN 0-684-87287-0) pp.&nbsp;231–232. International Loran Association United States National Institute of Standards and Technology Site- Using LORAN C for time-keeping. European Loran-C network website  :former LORAN-C transmitter mast, now used for longwave broadcasting Jerry Proc, VE3FAB: Hyperbolic Radionavigation Systems: In-depth discussion of the Loran-A system. Histories of Loran-B, -D, and -F Loran-C Introduction: eLoran Integrated GPS/Loran Prototypes for Aviation Applications The Migration to Enhanced or eLoran GNSS/eLoran for Timing and Frequency by Locus, Inc. Loran's Capability to Mitigate the Impact of a GPS Outage on GPS Position, Navigation, and Time Applications by Locus, Inc. New Potential of Low-Frequency Radionavigation in the 21st Century Ph.D. dissertation LORAN-C chains in service List of active LORAN-C transmitters SDR in action: The last LORAN-C receiver is a technical description of using a software-defined radio to decode LORAN-C signals New UK eLORAN service provision news article News article re: UK leading the way in eLORAN service provision. eLORAN vs Loran-C at Inside GNSS—Short article describing the innovations in eLORAN History of LORAN
