    The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda (; MSU) is a university in the city of Vadodara,  in Gujarat state, India. Originally known as the Baroda College of Science (established 1881), it became a university in 1949 after the independence of the country. It was later renamed after its benefactor Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III, the former ruler of Baroda State belonging the royal Gaekwad dynasty of the Marathas. It is a teaching and residential university and the only university in Gujarat whose medium of instruction is English for all courses. India Today has ranked it at tenth place in their list of India's best universities.India Today 15 August 2011 while Hindustan Times has ranked it at sixth place.  The university has its origins in the Baroda College established in 1881 by Baroda State. The main building which houses the faculty of Arts was designed by Robert Fellowes Chisholm (1840–1915) in Indo-Saracenic architecture style, in a fusion of Indian and Byzantine arches and domes in brick and polychromed stone. The main dome on the convocation hall was modeled after the great dome of the Gol Gumbaz in Bijapur. Pratap Singh Gaekwad of Baroda (1908–1968) (the last Maharaja of the erstwhile Baroda State) founded the university in 1949 on the wishes of his grandfather, Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III (1863–1939), and settled the "Sir Sayajirao Diamond Jubilee and Memorial Trust" which exists to date, catering to the education and other needs of the people of the former Baroda State. It has its origins in the Baroda College of Science established in 1881. The full-blown lotus growing out of the lake symbolizes the emergence of mind and its triumph over matter. The flame rising from the centre of the lotus is the flame of human knowledge, spreading light and learning for the coming generations. The motto inscribed below defines the purpose and existence of life, which is love of beauty, goodness and intellectual curiosity. After hearing the university songs of the western universities, renowned theater personality Prof. C. C. Mehta (from then College of Indian music, Dance & Dramatics of the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda) proposed Smt. Hansa Mehta (the then vice chancellor) to write the Maharaja Sayajirao University’s own song, which she approved later on. The song was composed by Prof. C. C. Mehta and the lyrics are in Gujarati, but it is traditionally written in the Devanagari script, as per the customs of the Baroda State. अमे वडोदराना विद्यापीठनां सपना सारवनारा अमे ज्योत जलावी सृष्टि नवली सहसा सर्जनहारा अमे गगनकुसुम कर धरनारा अमे मगन मगन थई फरनारा अगनबाथ अमे भरनारा अमे दैन्यतिमिर ने हरनारा श्री सयाजी विद्यापीठना ज्ञानदीपने धरनारा सत्यं शिवं सुन्दरम् नो मंत्र अनंतर भणनारा The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda is the only State University of Gujarat whose chancellor is not the governor of Gujarat. The chancellor is a member of the Royal family of Baroda. The Vice-Chancellor of the university is appointed for three years. Maharaja Sayajirao Rao Gaekwad was a patron of Indian classical music. Ustad Moula Bux founded the Academy of Indian Music under the patronage of Sayajirao, on 26 February 1886. This academy later became the Music College and is now the Faculty of Performing Arts of MSU. Apart from Moula Bux, Sayajirao's Court boasted of artists like Ustad Hazrat Inayat Khan and legendary Agra Gharana Aftaab e Mousiqui (Sun of Music) Ustad Faiyyaz Khansaheb. After educationist Pt. Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande's music curriculum was introduced at the college, Gayanacharya Pt. Madhusudan Joshi became the first recipient of a diploma in Music (1932) in the history of music education in India. He later on served the faculty as a guru for almost 42 years. Pt. Madhusudan Joshi (popularly known as Joshi master) was trained by Ustads like Ut. Faiyyaz Khan, Ut. Atta Hussain Khan of Agra gharana. Music director Late Padmabhushan Shrinivas Khale was his disciple and alumni of the Faculty of Performing Arts. The MSU started the first dance programme in India in 1950. In 1880 the Maharani Kanta Ben of Tanjore was married to Baroda's Maharaja Sayajirao III Gopalrao Gaekwad, a prince who established the Baroda College as one of his first public acts. It was later absorbed into the university that bears his name. Chimnabai I was knowledgeable in Bharatanatyam and carnatic music and brought a troupe with her: two dancers, two nattuvanars (leaders of Bharatanatyam concerts), and two teachers.Khandwani 2002 Others followed: Nattuvanar Appaswamy and his dancer wife Kantimati, who had studied with Kannusamy and Vadively, two members of the Tanjore Quartet. After Appaswamy's death in 1939, Kantimati and their son, Kubernath, left to teach in Lucknow and worked in film in South India until Maharaja Pratap Singhrao Gaekwad called the Tanjorkars family back to Baroda in 1949, to teach in the music department in the Palace Kalavan which was later absorbed into MSU.Gaston 1996: 158–160.  Faculty of Fine Arts at the university was founded in June 1950, today one of most known art schools in India and gave rise to the "Baroda school" of Indian art.  The Faculty of Arts building is known for its Gumbaz (The Dome), often rated as the second largest dome in India, after Gol Gumbaz. The Department of English library has reading and conference facilities. It has a collection of around 1,200 titles of poetry, fiction and drama, literary criticism and theory, and works on individual authors and texts. The richest sections are on literary criticism and theory, and fiction.  The library receives gifts from the British Council, the USIS, and individuals including members of the department teaching staff. The library has borrowed books from the collection of Smt. Hansa Mehta library. It is the same Department where Prof.VY.Kantak, Prof.Birji Patil, Dr.G N Devy , Prof. P.C.Kar and Dr.Rani Dharkar taught. The Department of Philosophy is the oldest in the Faculty of Arts which runs B.A., M.A., and Ph.D programmes and has given finest philosophers to the country. The Department of Economics in the Faculty of Arts has given birth to some of the finest economists of the country. Dr. I.G. Patel, former director of the London School of Economics and later the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, was the first head of the Department of Economics. Professors I.S. Gulati, V.N. Kothari, K.N. Reddy, S.R. Hashim and M.M. Dadi belonged to this department. The department has strength in finance, sustainable development, gender studies, environmental economics. The department has been supported by schemes and grants from the Department of Special Assistance, Center for Planning and Development, and Assistance for Strengthening Infrastructure in Social Sciences and Humanities. The department runs a professional postgraduate Diploma in Applied Corporate Finance. The department has a library which is accessed by the post-graduate students. It has a computer lab for training and instruction. The only media faculty to be recognised all over Gujarat. Once accredited as third at all-India level in March 2001 for its courses offered. The Department of Psychology offers four areas of study: Clinical Psychology, Counseling Psychology, Educational Psychology, and Industrial Psychology at undergraduate and postgraduate level. For on-the-job experience postgraduate students are provided placement in corporate and service sector organizations, community guidance centers, mental hospitals, general hospitals, schools, clinics and counseling centers. The department has community outreach programs, such as in the university counseling centre: MARG for counseling of students. The department organizes workshops and seminars. The department has undertaken teaching as well as research and guidance. A guidance and counseling centre catering to the needs of student and well community is attached to the department. The department offers three part-time postgraduate diplomas: Human Resource Development, Clinical and Community Psychology, and Applied Hypnosis. The Faculty of Law has been a law institute in Gujarat since 1962. It offers courses like B.A.LL.B. (5 years) (Baroda School of Legal Studies), LLB (3 years), LLM (Business Law), LLM (Criminal Law), postgraduate Diploma in Taxation Practice, postgraduate Diploma in Labour Practice and a PhD programme. The Faculty of Law has produced lawyers and judges of the Gujarat High Court. The faculty has produced Judicial Officers and other members of the Bar, serving at the Supreme Court of India, Gujarat High Court, other High Courts and Lower Courts. The faculty has run a postgraduate cyberlaw course of one-year duration and has produced cyberlaw consultants from MSU from fields like Insurance, Personnel, Computer Science, Company Secretaries, and Doctors. The faculty is a girls college but boys can get admission. There are five majors in the Home Science faculty. Students can do a BSc (home) degree as well as a postgraduate MSc In any of above majors they can do their graduation with General Home Science which cover all five majors. Popularly known as FMS Baroda, is inaugurated on July 16, 1984 as Sant Jagdish Institute of Management, The Faculty of Management by Shri B K Nehru (Governor of Gujarat) with a two-year full-time MBA course. Then it began a three-year MBA evening programs for working executives. The intake of students for MBA regular program is 40. It offers specialisation in Marketing, Finance, Human Resources and Information Systems. The MBA program has been rated in India's top 30 MBA program by Business India 2000 ranking. It has its own library and computer lab. It offers PhDs in management for research scholars. Dean of the faculty is Prof. (Dr.) G C Maheshwari. Before him, it was headed by Prof. Mayank Dholakiya] The faculty began on 15 March 1949. Courses offered are Master of Social Work (MSW), Master of Human Resource Management (MHRM), postgraduate Diploma in IRPM; postgraduate Diploma in Human Resource Management, postgraduate Diploma in Health Management and Interventions; postgraduate Diploma in Social Development and Organisation Management; postgraduate Diploma in Criminology and Correctional Management and PhD in Social Work. The student-to-faculty ratio is 1:8/10, a level mostly seen in the U.S., UK and other developed countries. The average class size is 40 students. The faculty owes its origin to the first Vice-Chancellor of M.S. University, Smt. Hansa Mehta. The faculty made a modest beginning as the Baroda School of Social Work (in 1951, elevated to faculty status) in the White Pavilion building in Sayajibaug; they shortly moved to the seminar building of Baroda College and later to its present premises in 1960. The faculty had Dr. Perin Vakharia as the founder dean. Prof. Aruna Khasgiwala is the former Dean. The present Dean is Dr. MN Parmar. The faculty is one of the pioneering post-graduate institutions in social work education with a master's degree in Social Work (MSW) as its focal programme. From the early 1970s, a PhD programme in Social Work was instituted. In the mid-70s an evening post-graduate diploma in Industrial Relations and Personnel Management (IRPM) was added. The faculty has undertaken in-service training programmes for field practitioners, government employees, etc. In 1999, a two-year self-financed master's degree programme in Human Resource Management was launched.   The faculty is one of the engineering schools in the state of Gujarat. It is housed in Kala Bhavan, the building was supposed to be a temporary palace of the Maharaja of Baroda while his palace was being constructed. Hence is it located exactly opposite to the Laxmi Vilas Palace. The Maharaja donated the palace to open the school of engineering. Founded by Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III of Baroda as the Kalabhavan Technical Institute in 1890 the Faculty of Technology and Engineering is popularly known as Techo. The Polytechnic status continued until 1949 when the Kalabhavan was converted into the Faculty of Technology and Engineering (with the establishment of The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda), following donations by the Gaekwads for the university and the new building of the institute. These developments resulting in the creation of 15 departments, a workshop, a library and several buildings, due to financial support mainly from UGC and aided by UNDP, USAID and government agencies and due to the efforts by the institute, deans and teachers. Faculty laboratories and departments received aid of $1,050,000 for development from the United Nations Development Program. The aid was given to develop infrastructure facilities in the area of Fracture mechanics, Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, Turbojet propulsion and Microprocessor Applications. In 1986 postgraduate courses on Fracture Mechanics, Irrigation Water Management, Turbojet Propulsion and Microprocessor Applications were introduced. Under the USAID program, faculty received a grant of Rs.40&nbsp;million from the Water Resources Department and Narmada Department of the government of Gujarat for development of undergraduate and postgraduate program of Irrigation Water Management in March 1991. Includes: Faculty of Commerce is the largest in the university, with over 18,000 students. The faculty has been an institute of education in business studies since 1949. When it was established in 1942, it was known as the Maharaja Pratapsinh College of Commerce and Economics. It offers undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral programmes leading to B.Com., M.Com. and PhD degrees. The faculty offers BBA and three postgraduate diplomas in Business Management, Banking and Co-operation. It has five departments: The faculty receives the services of colleagues from the following departments of other faculties: Faculty of Science has two-year Masters and three-year honours programmes in environmental science. The number of seats are 40 at P.G. level and admission is based on written test held in June. Students having Bachelor of Science degree in Environment or any other branch with Chemistry as a subject are eligible for test. In the last semester, students are given industrial training. Presentation of seminars and discussions are regular features. For graduation B.Sc. Environmental Science Honors course students have to clear 6 semesters. There are theory and Practical components, programme is credit based. The visit to an industry or a Sanctuary, National Park is conducted in each semester. Students of Gujarat and other boards are eligible. Entrance test is conducted for 60 seats. The students undertake regular visits to industries, wildlife sanctuaries and other places for practical exposure. Six month industrial training helps them to learn the industrial working conditions, environment and safety related issues. Campus interviews are organized for better job positions. Personality development and imparting Quality Education is our motto. Experts from industry reguraly visits the Department for Seminar. Students can get admission forms from university website. This department is formally established in 2013. The department offers two programmes. Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA) and M.Sc. in Software Technologies. BCA is a three-year under graduate programme that is focused on developing software professionals. In BCA students are trained for desktop applications, web applications as well as Mobile applications using Microsoft, Java and Open Source platforms. The programming languages taught include C, C++, JAVA, C#, VB.net, etc. The students are trained to use web technologies including HTML, JavaScript, XML, JSP, ASP.net, PHP, AJAX, etc. The BCA curriculum gives detailed coverage to Software Engineering, Computer networking, Database technologies, mathematical skills, distributed computing, computer graphics, artificial intelligence, Communication skills and so on. Students undertake a part-time project of three months in the fifth semester and a full-time four-month project in their final semester. Students are involved in international projects with universities like the Penn State University (USA) and East Carolina University. Centennial college. Link for the official website of Computer Applications Department: http://ca.msubaroda.ac.in/ The Dr. K.G. Naik Department of Biochemistry was established in 1955, under the Chemistry Department, and was headed by Dr. C.V. Ramakrishnan (father of 2009 Chemistry Nobel Laureate Dr. Venkatraman (Venky) Ramakrishnan). The department has a Center for Nutritional Studies. The department was awarded an Excellent status in 2006 by FIST a Government of India accreditation agency. It imparts master's degree courses in Biochemistry & Medical Biotechnology with a force of around 50 research students. The Biochemistry Department offers courses in enzymology, genetics, molecular biology, neuroscience, plant biochemistry, endocrinology, clinical biochemistry among others. The department conducts research in areas including acterial cooperation, polyketide synthase clusture, antibiotic resistance, Apoptosis, phosphate solubilisation, nitrogen fixation, probiotics, heavy metal toxicity, diabetes, prostate cancer, female infertility, endophytes, magnetoliposomes, protein folding, and vitiligo. The department was funded under the DST-FIST I program under which new equipment has been purchased and infrastructure facilities strengthened. The department has received support from UGC-DRS, UGC-DSA and COSIST programs. The department has a strong base in Microbial technology and the main focus of the program is on Genetics, Molecular Biology, Industrial Microbiology, Immunology and other areas allied to Microbiology and Biotechnology. Basic training is given in Microbiology, Biochemistry, Genetics, Developmental Biology, Genetic Engineering, Biochemical Engineering and some aspects of Biophysics, Biostatistics, Environmental Biology. The areas of research in which the department is engaged are: The department started in 1964. It offers an M.Sc. Microbiology course of duration two years and Ph. D in Microbiology. It started M.Sc. Biotechnology course (duration two years) in 1986. It also offers Post M.Sc Diploma in Genetic Engineering, Bioprocess Development and Intellectual Property Rights (duration one year). The department is active in research work. The broad areas of research in which the department is engaged are The department has research laboratories. The Genome research Center (GRC) established in 1999 is one of the research laboratories of the department. GRC has international research collaboration with: The bioinformatics centre at the department was started in 1989 as a Distributed Information Sub Centre (Sub-DIC) under the Biotechnology Information System network (BTISnet) of the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology, government of India. The centre was upgraded to a Distributed Information Centre (DIC) in 2004. The department is funded by DBT, DST-FIST, GSFC Science Foundation for development of laboratories and purchase of new equipments. The department has high-end equipment like Bioinformatics dedicated server, PCR, Nano-photometer, HPLC, GC, Electron microscope etc. The institute was established in Baroda on 1 September 1927. It operated from the Central Library before it was shifted in a separate building near the palace. It is known for the seven volumes of critical edition of Ramayana that it published between 1951 and 1975, a part of the a 25-year project sponsored by the University Grants Commission (UGC). The text was later the reference source for Ramayan, the popular TV series by Ramanand Sagar that originally ran in 1987–88. One of the oldest manuscript preserved at the institute is Ayodhya Mahatmya, written by Harishankar in 1656 AD, part of the collection of over 10,000 manuscripts of Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III, who first conceptualised the institute in 1893, inspired by the opening of the Oriental Research Institute Mysore in 1891, established by then Maharaja of Mysore Chamaraja Wodeyar, and a close friend. The Oriental Institute organises seminar and conferences for research in Oriental studies. The recent seminar on "Research in Indian Languages and Literature" was organised on 22 January 2014. The tweet-feed and Facebook posting can be identified with #oimsurill - regarding this seminar. The library was established on 1 May 1950. At the time of MSU's establishment, a collection of 5,12,159 books belonging to two state libraries (Huzur Political Office and Secretariat Library) was handed over to the University Library. There were several colleges in Baroda – Baroda College (for Arts), Science Institute, Commerce College, and Secondary Teacher's Training College, etc. These colleges had libraries of their own that continued to remain as Faculty Libraries and were administered independently. Thus the University Library System was established on 5 January 1950 and housed in the central block of Old Residency Office Building. Status of library holdings are as following The Library is having SOUL Software made by INFLIBNET. Recently transformed the whole data from SOUL to SOUL 2.0 This among one of the biggest Library- Learning Resource Centre from Collection point of view. The collection at present is 8lakh documents(2015) The Library is ranked among top 20 Libraries across the India ranked by INFLIBNET in terms of the usage of e-resources(YTD)(2014) The University Library is the heart of any Academic Research Institute, it has to play very vital role in Teaching and Learning. The Library is designated among 22 Document Delivery Centre, designated by INFLIBNET. At present University Librarian is Dr Mayank Trivedi  Dr Trivedi has published 40+ articles in National and International Journals.  During last five years(2010-2015), the role of University Library is tremendous in enhancing the Research output of The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda    Maharaja Shrimant Pratap Singh Gaekwad: Served as the chancellor from 1949 to 1951. He was the first chancellor and was the grandson of Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III. He was instrumental in the establishment of the university in 1949. Maharaja Shrimant Fatehsinghrao Gaekwad: He was second chancellor and he remained in office from 1951 to 1988. An astute administrator, ardent sports lover and cricketer, he served as the member of Parliament and as a minister in the government of Gujarat. He was twice elected president of the Board of Control for Cricket in India. Dr. Mrunalini Devi Puar: Dr. Puar; the sister of Maharaja Fatehsinghrao Gaekwad remained the Chancellor from 1988; up to her demise in January 2015. Rajmata Shrimant Shubhangini Raje Gaekwad: 2015 - (incumbent) Smt. Hansa Mehta: 1949-1958 Dr. Jyotindra Mehta: 1958-1964 Dr. C. S. Patel: 1964-1970 Dr. N. K. Vakil: 1970-1974 Prof. P. J. Madan: 1981-1984 Lord Bhikhu Parekh: 1981-1984 Prof. M. N. Desai: 1985-1987 Prof. R. C. Patel: 1988-1990 Prof. V. C. Shah: 1990-1993 Prof. Suresh Dalal: 1993-1994 Ms. Padma Ramachandran: 1995-1998 Dr. Anil Kane: 1998-2001 Prof. K. C. Upadhyaya: 2002-2005 Dr. Manoj Soni: 2005-2008 Prof. Ramesh Goyal: 2008-2011 Prof. Yogesh Singh: 2011-2014 Prof. Parimal Vyas: (2014) (Currently In-charge Vice-Chancellor) Department of Archaeology and Ancient History Department of Anthropology Department of Arabic Department of Canadian Studies Department of Economics Department of English (The oldest in Gujarat) Department of French Department of Geography Department of German Department of Gujarati Department of Hindi Department of History Department of International Relation Department of Library & Information Science Department of Linguistics Department of Marathi Department of Persian Department of Philosophy Department of Political Science Department of Pali Department of Prakrit Department of Russian Department of Sanskrit Department of Sindhi Department of Sociology Department of Traditional Sanskrit Studies Department of Urdu Foods and Nutrition Catering Clothing and Textile Fashion Technology Interior Designing Fashion and Communication Baroda Medical College Physiotherapy College Nursing College Department of Accounting and Financial Management Department of Banking and Business Finance Department of Business Economics Department of Marketing Department of Commerce including Business Administration Department of Co-operation and Rural Studies Department of International Business Department of English, Faculty of Arts Department of Statistics, Faculty of Science Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science Department of Law, Faculty of Law Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering Microbiology Bioprocess Engineering Immunology, Biophysics Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering Microbiology Bioprocess Engineering Immunology Biophysics Forensic Science Developmental Biology The Weizmann Institute of Science, partners under the International Centre for Cooperation in Bioinformatics, sponsored by UNESCO and supported by DBT, government of India and Indian industrial partners for activities at Baroda. Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Honggerberg, Zurich (Bioprocess Development, Reactor design and bioprocess control and automation: Indo-Swiss Bilateral Collaboration in Biotechnology). International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos and Du Pont R & D, Delaware (Molecular markers for mapping blast resistance, Rockefeller Foundation, USA.). Tel Aviv University, Israel: Indo-Israel S & T Cooperation (Plant SUMO conjugates — its role in biotic stress). Smt. Hansa Mehta Library:  Faculty of Law Library: 11,029 Sir Sayajirao Memorial Trust (SSMT) Library:  combined with H M Library Prof. T. K. Gajjar Library, Faculty of Technology & Engineering:  Polytechnic Library, Polytechnic College: 43,346 Faculty of Fine Arts Library: 12,001 Faculty of Management Studies Library: 9,989 M K Amin Arts & Science College and College of Commerce, Padra Library: 15,792 Faculty of Performing Arts Library: 14,478 Faculty of Social Work Library: 15,349 Center for Advance Studies in Education (C. A. S. E.) Library: 20,492 Oriental Institute Library: 51,784 Water Resources Engineering & Management Institute’s (WREMI) Library: 2,258 Baroda Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya Library: 5,791 Department of Biochemistry Library (Faculty of Science): 789 Vinoba Bhave, Indian advocate of nonviolence and human rights; "National Teacher of India", spiritual successor of Mahatma Gandhi Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, biologist and winner of 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry Dadasaheb Phalke, the Father of Indian cinema Ajay Bhatt, co-inventor of Universal Serial Bus for Intel I. G. Patel, the fourteenth Governor of the Reserve Bank of India Sam Pitroda, inventor, entrepreneur and policy-maker Vishal Sikka, CTO and Executive Board member of SAP AG Vijay P. Bhatkar, Indian scientist Meghnad Desai, Baron Desai, British businessman Bakul Harshadrai Dholakia, former Director of IIM Ahmedabad Bhargav Gajjar, Aerospace robotics scientist, educator and entrepreneur from Massachusetts Institute of Technology K. M. Munshi, Indian independence movement activist, politician, writer, former Union Minister and educationist Bharati Mukherjee, American writer; professor in the department of English at the University of California K. Chidananda Gowda, former Vice-Chancellor of Kuvempu University Haku Shah, an eminent Indian painter Sujan R. Chinoy (Indian Foreign Service): Indian diplomat & China expert; Ambassador of India to Mexico & High Commissioner of India to Belizehttp://indembassy.org/eoi.php?id=Ambassador Pramod Kale, a scientist and former Director, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre Pankaj Advani (director), film-director, film-editor, screenplay-writer, photographer, theater director, and painter Rajendra Shah, lyrical Gujarati poet and philosopher. S. L. Bhyrappa, Kannada novelist and philosopher. Atul Bedade, former Indian cricketer Amarsinh Chaudhary, former Chief Minister of Gujarat Gunvant Shah, a noted thinker, writer and columnis Chimanbhai Patel, former Chief Minister of Gujarat, Member of Parliament. Mohan G. Valrani, co-founder and current Senior Vice Chairman of the Al Shirawi Group, a UAE-based industrial conglomerate Sunil Kothari, Indian dance historian, scholar and critic Tushar Amarsinh Chaudhary, Union Cabinet Minister for Road Transport and Highways Anshuman Gaekwad, former Indian cricketer and two-time Indian national cricket coac Ranjitsinh Pratapsinh Gaekwad, former Maharaja of Baroda, former Member of Parliament Mrunalini Devi Puar, an Indian educator and the titular Maharani of Dhar State Sanjay Hazare, international cricket umpire Mohit Shantilal Shah, Chief Justice, Bombay High Court Ghulam Mohammed Sheikh, an internationally renowned painter, writer and art critic Akshay H. Mehta, former Judge, Gujarat High Court Swapna Waghmare Joshi, director and producer of TV Serials Shrinivas Khale, Indian composer and music director Narayan Gopal, Nepalese singer, editor, musician and writer Vihang A. Naik, (b.1969) poet who writes in English Shanti Dave, painter Kaka Kalelkar, Gandhian Indian patriot, social reformer, scholar of Indian culture, historian, educationist, and journalist Manubhai Mehta, Dewan of Baroda state, Prime Minister of Bikanir (Bikaner state) Nayan Mongia, former Indian cricketer Kiran More, former Indian cricketer and former Chairman of the Selection Committee of the BCCI Pan Nalin, director, screenwriter and documentary-maker Ahmed Patel, Indian National Congress Leader, Political Adviser to Congress President Nethra Raghuraman, actress and model Pushpendra Singh, Minister in Rajasthan Government Jaynarayan Vyas, former Cabinet Minister, Government of Gujarat, BJP Leader Elisha Kriis, Actress, Film Producer, International Model and T.V show Hostess for Travelxp. Tanvi Vyas, an Indian actress Kavitha Balakrishnan, an art critic, poet Srilamanthula Chandramohan, an artist Mitali Mukherjee, an Indian classical singer Sosa Joseph, an Indian contemporary artist Deepak Shimkhada, a Nepali American educator, artist, art historian, author and community leader Vivan Sundaram,  an Indian contemporary artist Chintan Upadhyay, an Indian contemporary artist Thota Vaikuntam, an Indian painter Piyush Ranade, a Marathi film & television actor N. N. Rimzon, an Indian artist known primarily for his symbolic and enigmatic sculptures Paritosh Pandya, an Indian computer scientist Salma Arastu, an Indian artist Beena Kak, an Indian politician and Bollywood actress Ghulam Rasool Santosh, a prominent Kashmiri Indian painter Ankur Vikal, a renowned Indian film and theatre actor Laxma Goud, painter, printmaker and draughtsman Latika Katt, an Indian sculptor Pushpamala N., a photo and visual artist Anita Dube, an Indian contemporary artist Official website
