 Malaybalay, officially City of Malaybalay (; ), is a first class component city and the capital and administrative center of the province of Bukidnon, Philippines. The city, dubbed as the "South Summer Capital of the Philippines", is bordered north by Impasugong; west by Lantapan; south by Valencia City and San Fernando; and east by Cabanglasan and Agusan del Sur. According to the 2010 census, the city is inhabited by 153,085 residents. It was formerly part of the province of Misamis Oriental as a municipal district in the late 19th century. When the special province of Agusan (now Agusan del Norte and Agusan del Sur) and its sub-province (Bukidnon) were created in 1907, Malaybalay was designated as the capital of Bukidnon. It was then formally established as a municipality on October 19, 1907 and was created into a city on February 11, 1998 by virtue of Republic Act 8490.Malaybalay City Profile Malaybalay City is the venue of the Kaamulan Festival, held annually from mid-February to March 10.Cultural and Historical Sites & Events Folk etymology has it that when Spanish explorers came to the central portion of the province in the late 18th century, they met children playing at the lower part of the Sawaga. The soldiers asked in Spanish what is the name of the place. The children, who did not understand Spanish, thought that they were asked what they were doing. So they replied "Tagbalaybalay kay" (we are playing house). The soldiers misheard and thought that the name of the place was Malaybalay. So in the Spanish record the name Malaybalay stuck approximately 1820–1840. The original inhabitants of Malaybalay come from the seashores of Northern Mindanao (Misamis Oriental area) but were driven toward the mountains because of pirates and the arrival of Spanish colonizers. Before the final conquest of the central part of Mindanao (Bukidnon area), Sumilao, Linabo, Mailag and Silae has been established by Spanish missionaries (Dominicans and Jesuits). In 1850, Kalasungay (an old settlement site in Malaybalay), was burned down by the Spaniards during their final battle with the lumads, in which all male adults were killed and the women and children were taken as hostages. This battle is the last recorded resistance by the original inhabitants against the Spanish conquerors.Historical Background of MalaybalayMalaybalay City History A few years after their defeat, the survivors of the battle who fled to Silae slowly returned to the area and established a new settlement near the Sacub River (present-day Rizal Park) under the protection of Datu Mampaalong. Together with 30 other datus, Datu Mampaalong accepted Spanish dominion and embraced Christianity on June 15, 1877, ending the long-standing war between them. On that day, the Spaniards made Malaybalay into a pueblo named Oroquita del Interior with a territory covering the area of what is now the province of Bukidnon; the name of the settlement was retained as Malaybalay. From 1877 until the coming of the Americans, covering a span of 20 years, capitanes, who were acknowledge tribal chieftains and were appointed by the Spaniard missionaries, governed Malaybalay. Some of this leaders were Mariano Melendez (Datu Mampaalong), Doroteo Melendez, Juan Carbajal, Alejandro Bontao, Esteban Tilanduca and Faustino Abello In 1850, Malaybalay became a part of the province of Misamis Oriental as a municipal district. The Philippine Commission then headed by Commissioner Dean C. Worcester, Secretary of Interior and a member of the Philippine Commission proposed the separation of Bukidnon from Misamis Oriental Province. On August 20, 1907, the Philippine Commission Act No. 1693 was enacted creating the Province of Agusan and the sub-province of Bukidnon. Malaybalay was then formally created as a municipality on October 19, 1907. When Bukidnon was declared as a regular province and become an independent political unit on March 10, 1917 by virtue of the creation of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu under Act 2711, Malaybalay was designated as its provincial capital.  During the Second World War, in 1942, the Japanese occupation troops entered Bukidnon. They occupied Malaybalay, establishing a camp in Casisang. Guerrilla groups operating around Malaybalay made frequent raids on the Japanese camps from the time of the occupation until the arrival of the Americans. In 1945, American liberation forces, together with the Philippine Commonwealth Forces and Filipino guerrillas liberated Malaybalay. On March 26, 1996, the Sangguniang Bayan of the municipality of Malaybalay passed Resolution No. 3699-96 petitioning to the House of Representatives for the conversion of Malaybalay into a city. Reginaldo Tilanduca, 2nd District Representative of Bukidnon at that time, filed House Bill No. 6275, proposing the creation of Malaybalay into a component city. On February 11, 1998, President Fidel Ramos signed the act (R.A. 8490) that converted Malaybalay to a city, making it the first component city of Bukidnon. Malaybalay City, the capital city of Bukidnon, is in the central part of the province. It is bounded in the east by the municipality of Cabanglasan and the Pantaron Range, which separates Bukidnon from the provinces of Agusan del Sur and Davao del Norte; on the west by the municipality of Lantapan and Mount Kitanglad; on the north by the municipality of Impasugong; and on the south by Valencia City and the municipality of San Fernando.Commission on Population - Malaybalay City Profile The whole eastern and southeastern border adjoining Agusan del Sur and Davao del Norte is elevated and densely forested mountains, which is one of the few remaining forest blocks of Mindanao. The nearest seaports and airports are in Cagayan de Oro City, which is 91 kilometers away. The climate classification of Malaybalay City falls under the Fourth Type or intermediate B type, which is characterized by the absence of a pronounced maximum period and dry season. The period from May to October is where heavy rains occur. Rain falls at a yearly average of  and occurs throughout the year, though it is more intense during the country's rainy season from June to October. On the other hand, November to April are the dry months. Compared with the rest of the country, the climate in Malaybalay is relatively cooler the whole year round and the area is not on the typhoon belt. The total land area of the city is , that is about 13% of the total area of Bukidnon. An estimated of 65% of this is classified as forestland/timberland and the remaining 35% is alienable and disposable areas: lands which could be used for purposes such as for agriculture or for industry. The city plays a strategic role in the protection of the headwater source of the Pulangi and the Tagoloan rivers because of its location the upper portion of both watershed areas. The Pulangi River then extends through the Cotabato provinces as the Rio Grande de Mindanao and to Cotabato City, where it empties into Illana Bay. The Tagoloan River, on the other hand, traverses northwestward toward Tagoloan, Misamis Oriental, where it joins the Macajalar Bay. These watershed areas provided potable water, irrigation, hydro-electric power, and recreation and tourism activities.  The average elevation of the city is 622 meters above sea level (2,040.68 feet). About 60% of the city's area has above 30% slope, characterized by steep hills, mountains, and cliff-like stream side. About 25% are level, gently sloping, and undulating. The rest are rolling and hilly. One of prominent geographical structure in the city is the Kitanglad Mountain Range, located in the western frontier, on its border with Lantapan and Impasugong. Some barangays (Dalwangan, Capitan Bayong, Imbayao and Mampayag) are in the foothills of this mountain range. Steep hills are found in the central portion of the city (Kibalabag, Manalog and Can-ayan), where the Tagoloan River headwater can be found. The Central Mindanao Cordillera (Pantaron Mountain Range), is on the eastern side of the city, in its boundaries with Agusan del Sur province. The Pulangi River cuts across the area between the hills in the central part and the Central Cordillera in the eastern part, creating a portion of the Upper Pulangi river valley. The southern portion of the city is made up of level to undulating area, a river valley created by the Sawaga River and the Manupali River, which are both tributaries of the Pulangi River. About 66% of the city's soil is identified as undifferentiated mountain soil and the rest are clay. The predominant types of clay are Kidapawan, Alimodian and Adtuyon, which are generally good for agriculture.   Malaybalay is originally the home of the Bukidnon "lumads" or natives, but there has been an influx of settlers and immigrants from the Visayas and Luzon for the last four decades contributing to the growth of the population. The original inhabitants, the Bukidnons, have retreated to the hinterlands as the migrants continued to occupy and dominate the population centers in the city. Malaybalay City is the second most populous political subdivision in the province, after Valencia City. The Census of Population conducted by the National Statistics Office in 2007 showed that the city now has 144,065 inhabitants. The historical growth of population of the city showed a variable pattern of growth (See Figure). The first census of population in was made 1918 with Malaybalay having only 16,428 inhabitants. The 21 years from 1918 to 1939 was a low-growth period with the city's population growing at a 0.6% annually. This was then followed by a period of population decline until the post-World War II era, declining by 1.5% per year. The 12-year period from 1948 to 1960 is a period of high growth, when the city's population almost doubled from its 1948 level. This pace of growth continued until 1970, growing 6.7%. In 1970, Malaybalay has 65,918 inhabitants. A 5-year period of declining growth followed, the population dropped to 60,779. After the decline, Malaybalay's population has been increasing since then, growing by 3.4% from 1990to 1995, 1.9% from 1995 to 2000. Government demographers estimated that the city's population would reach more than 150,000 by 2010. The city is predominantly rural, with only 16% of the population in urban areas, 40% in urbanizing barangays and 46% in rural areas. Population is evenly distributed in the urban and rural areas. The urban areas are generally found on the confines of the Sayre Highway that traverses the city. The main urban population is found in the Poblacion-Casisang area. Secondary population centers includes barangays Aglayan, Bangcud and Kalasungay. Malaybalay has one of the lowest average population density in the province, second only to Impasug-ong with only 146 persons per square kilometer although there are barangays, especially in the Poblacion area, with high population density. Cebuano and Binukid are prevailing mediums of communication in the city. More than half of the city's population are native-speakers of this language. Other languages such as Maranao are spoken by the Maranao people. Boholano (a dialect of Cebuano from Bohol) and Ilonggo are also spoken by its native speakers living in this city. The City is mainly an agricultural area, and its products include rice, corn, sugarcane, vegetables, legumes, root crops and commercial crops such as rubber, coffee, banana and pineapple. During the past years, corn used to be the pre-dominant crop in the city. But as the corn areas gave way to sugarcane, agri-farms (poultry, hog), and residential areas, sugarcane (306,600 metric tons) and rice (30,318 MT) came out now as the predominant crops in terms of production volume. These products are usually sold in the local market, or in nearby municipalities of the province. There are also farmers producing larger volume of corn and rice who sell their products in Cagayan de Oro. Agri-based industries primarily poultry and piggery, now flourish in the City. These farms are assisted by big corporations such as San Miguel, Purefoods, Monterey and Swift. Other agri-based industries in the City include Asian Hybrid Philippines (feeds processing), Rubber Tex (rubber shoes manufacturing), and Monastery Farms (peanuts and other preserved foods). Also notable are the 12 cattle ranches that produce an average of 470 heads yearly. Data from the License Department of the City showed that majority or 95.87% of the establishments in the City belong to the service sector. Looking at the breakdown, sari-sari stores (37%) make up majority of the establishments in this sector, followed by trade/wholesale/retails (21%) and other, social and personal services (14%). Industry Sector and Agriculture Sector only make up only 2.27% and 1.9% respectively of all establishments. There is no data available on the employment per sector from the NSO that is specific for Malaybalay City, thus the CPDO collected data from DTI, License Department, and City Agriculture Office to get the distribution of employment per industrial sector. The result showed that 70% of employment is in the farming/ crop production sector followed by government agencies and commercial/private establishments. Agri-industries and service sectors registered only about 1.63% and 5.99% respectively. The lowest is the manufacturing/processing sector at only 0.36% Given the City’s scenic natural endowments, so far only 3 spring resorts, 5 plazas/nature parks have been developed. Other beautiful sites such as natural growth forest, industrial tree plantation sites, mountains, falls, rivers and caves are still to be developed for eco-tourism.http://malaybalaycity.gov.ph/malaybalay/?page_id=39 The net income for 2014 pegged at P178,073,912.11 million pesos.http://coa.gov.ph/index.php/local-government-units/category/5465-bukidnon?download=23389:region-x Malaybalay has several notable tourist destinations.Malaybalay City, The City is administered by the City Mayor together with the Vice Mayor and the Sangguniang Panlungsod.Malaybalay City Government The mayor is the local chief executive officer of the city and exercises control and supervision over all local administrative offices as mandated by the Local Government Code of the Philippines (1991). The City also has a City Administrator that assists the mayor. Here are the offices of the Local Government Unit of Malaybalay City and its corresponding Head of Office:  The Sangguniang Panlungsod (or SP) serves as the local legislative arm of the City. It enacts ordinances and issues regulations that are necessary to promote the propriety and general welfare of the City’s residents; ensure the health, safety, comfort and convenience of its constituents, maintain peace and order, improve and promote high public morals, and ensure the protection of the properties within the City’s jurisdiction. There are 12 elected Sangguniang members and a permanent Sangguniang Panlungsod secretary. The Sangguniang Panlungsod is headed by the Vice Mayor, acting as its presiding officer. There are twelve (12) elected Sanggunian members and one permanent Sangguniang Panlungsod secretary. Malaybalay City 46 barangays each headed by a barangay chairman together with seven Sangguniang Barangay members. Malaybalay City is politically subdivided into 46 barangays.  There are about 820.89 kilometers of road linking the different parts of the city. 102.70&nbsp;km or 12.51% are classified as National Road, 60.40&nbsp;km or 7.36% Provincial Road, 61.35&nbsp;km or 7.47% City Road, and 596.44&nbsp;km or 72.66% barangay roads. About 14.14% of all roads in the city are paved, that is, either concrete or asphalt. These are in the poblacion areas. At least 85.86% are unpaved (gravel or earth filled). These are primarily the barangay roads. These unpaved roads leading to the rural barangays usually require regular maitenance since they are easily destroyed by heavy rains. There are also logging roads leading to the forestal communities, but these are usually passable by farm animals and single motor cycles only, making it hard for communities to transport products into the market. Connecting the various road networks and cutting across rivers and creeks are at least 22 bridges of various types. Almost all of these bridges are said to be in good condition. There are 15 bridges or 69.35% totaling to about 470.67 m in length that are administered nationally, while 3 bridges of about 115.00 m are under the province’s administration. Only about 93.00 m or about 13.70% are under the administration of city and barangays. The Sayre Highway bisects the Poblacion, the main urban center of the City, serving as the main thoroughfare of the city.When the Sayre Highway reaches the Poblacion of Malaybalay City, it is known as Fortich Street, named after the first governor of the province of Bukidnon Buses that ply the Cagayan de Oro City, Bukidnon, General Santos City and Davao City route, as well as jeepneys, multi-cabs, vans and private vehicles pass through this highway. Suburbs are served by multicabs, motorelas and improvised bicycles (trisikads).Malaybalay City Transportation The current main highway in the city center is now congested. Heavy traffic and congestion has been observed in the main highway, especially during peak hours. The absence of proper and adequate parking areas further contributes to the congestion. The situation underlies the need for a bypass road as well as more traffic aides. The city has two proposed roads to answer the above concerns. The first proposal is the Circumferential Road from Sumpong to DPWH Depot in Casisang, which is 2.5&nbsp;km. in length. The other is the by-pass road from Dalwangan to San Jose with a total stretch of 15&nbsp;km.http://malaybalaycity.gov.ph/malaybalay/?page_id=47 There are various types of public transportation. Buses that ply the Bukidnon, Cagayan de Oro, Cotabato and Davao City route are used for travel from the city to other provinces. There are also mini-vans that transport passengers from Cagayan de Oro to Malaybalay. The multi-cabs ply the main highway from the poblacion proper to other points of destination within the city and nearby barangays. The four-wheeled motorelas are limited to the inner streets. Recently, tri-sikads have also begun to operate in the inner streets of Barangay Sumpong. Jeepneys are usually used for travel from the poblacion to other barangays and municipalities. In far-flung areas, motorcycles (habal-habal) are the fastest means of transportation. The main terminal for public transportation vehicles is in the public market, especially for buses, mini-vans, and jeepneys. For motorelas and tri-sikads, street-corners of convergence serve as terminals or waiting areas. With the increase in traffic of both vehicles and pedestrians, especially in the poblacion, there is a growing concern for better and safer organized streets. There is a need to designate walking pavements or pedestrian lanes, including pedestrian overpass especially for the use of children and students crossing the major highway. Malaybalay City once had an airport located at Barangay Casisang but closed in the 1990s by the provincial government to give land for housing; the nearest one is the Laguindingan Airport in Cagayan de Oro. The city also relies on the Cagayan de Oro seaport for the delivery of its products to other destinations in the Philippines as it is the closest port to the city. All the 46 barangays are already energized. Majority or 57.07% of the city’s households have electricity for lighting. 39.88% of households still use kerosene. Malaybalay is served by the Bukidnon Second Electric Cooperative Incorporated or BUSECO, which started its operations in 1979 (Table 77: Number of Connections by Type of Users and Average Consumption). Recent data from BUSECO indicate a total of 16,157 power connections. Of these 14,107 or 87.31% are residential connections, while 1,454 or 9.00% are commercial establishments. While the number of household connections is 9 times more than the combined industrial and commercial connections, the average monthly consumption of households is 3.06% less than the latter. In actual number, businesses use at least 73,560.39 kWh per month more than households. This trend is not surprising because businesses tend to use more electricity than households. However, the data underlines the need to plan ahead to ensure that there is enough power supply for the city’s growing power demands. Already, at least 43% of the population remains without electricity and those who do have experience regular power outage. This sector needs attention especially with the expected increase in population as well as business establishments. The water system and services of Malaybalay is provided by Malaybalay City Water District (MCWD) in which its office is located in Barangay Sumpong. There are 2 major telephone companies in the city, the Southern Telecommunications Company (SOTELCO) and Philcom. Both Philcom and Sotelco offer Internet connections. Mobile phone services available in the city include Globe, Smart, TM and Sun. With the growing demand for better communication systems companies are facing the challenge of providing better and higher quality services to the population. Broadcast media include 5 radio and 2 television repeater stations, including a cable station. Most national dailies such as the Philippine Daily Inquirer and Philippine Star are available. Local newspapers include the Bukidnon Newswatch, Gold Star Daily and Bukidnon Plateau. There are 4 major courier services available in the city for national and international forwarding. The post office, the Bureau of Telecommunication and 2 telegraphic companies serve other communication needs. The telecommunication technologies have continued to improve over the years. But the mode of communication in the upland barangays are still the old and tested letter sending through vehicle drivers and broadcasting over the public radio stations. The city's mobile and internet services are provided by Globe Telecom, PLDT, Parasat Cable TV and Smart Communications. The Malaybalay Police Station is responsible for the protection of the city’s population against crime. Data for year 2005 indicate that the police force is 76 and serving a population of 136,210. This translates to a ratio of 1 policeman for every 1,792 persons in the city. Ideal ratio for police to population is 1:500 and the minimum standard police-population ratio is 1:1,000. In terms of area coverage, this translates to 1 policeman for every 1,424 hectares. There are 9 police community precincts located in Sumpong, Dalwangan, Casisang, Aglayan, Managok, Bangcud, Zamboangita, Can-ayan and Barangay 9 (Public Market). The police force to population ratio is highest in Casisang with 1 policeman for every 13,874 individuals. Lowest ratio is in Sumpong with 1:151. A low ratio indicates that there are more policemen available to serve the population of a given area. Further analysis indicates that based on the total population, the number of existing police force and the minimum police-population ratio of 1:1,000, the city still needs 606 policemen.http://malaybalaycity.gov.ph/malaybalay/?page_id=166 Malaybalay City host 2 military and police camps. One is the Camp Ramon M. Onahon, located at Barangay 7. It is the provincial headquarters of the Philippine National Police. The other one is Camp Osito Bahian, located at Impalambong, Barangay 10. It is the home of the 403rd Infantry Brigade Barangay Public Safety Officer (BPSO) also assists in the peace-keeping efforts at the barangay level. Malaybalay City has four tertiary schools, found in the Poblacion area: The city has 64 primary/elementary schools and 13 secondary schools. Almost every barangay has at least one primary/elementary school, while secondary schools are strategically located in areas with higher population. Majority of the primary and secondary schools are run by the government through the Department of Education.City of Malaybalay - Basic Services These are the major primary/elementary and secondary schools found in the city:  Available sports venues in the city include basketball courts, 1 bowling alley, 1 pelota court, and 10 tennis courts. All barangays in the city have at least one basketball court. With a total of 60 basketball courts, there are some barangays with 2 or more basketball courts. The recent resurgence of Badminton as a favorite sport has created 4 new facilities in this field of recreation. There are 4 gymnasium/auditorium, which are used for sports events as well as other public programs or gatherings. Most people go to Valencia or Cagayan de Oro to watch movies. There are 4 spring resorts located in Bangcud & Managok and 4 plazas or parks. Aside from these, well-maintained public open spaces for leisure and recreation have yet to be developed in the city. Parasat Cable TV provides cable television in the city. ABS-CBN and GMA have good and clear reception. ABS-CBN and GMA broadcast towers are located at the peak of Mount Kitanglad, the fourth highest mountain in the Philippines. Radio stations have good and clear receptions in the City. Love Radio 106.3 FM is the major radio station in the City. Bukidnon State University created its own radio station (DxBU 104.5). Countryside Radio Group also operates DXXM-FM 92.7 & DXXB-FM 89.7 in the city. National newspapers are available in the city like the Philippine Daily Inquirer, Philippine Star and Manila Bulletin. The Central Mindanao Newswatch is the major local newspaper distributor. FM AM     Juan Melendez 1906-1908 Fernando Damasco 1909-1913 Jose Ruiz 1914-1918 Juan Melendez 1924-1936 Faustino Caterial 1936-1937 Catalino Damasco 1937-1939 Gerardo Pimentel 1940-1941 Salvador Alberto 1943-1947 Teofilo Salcedo 1948-1951 Fortunato Carbajal, Sr. 1951-1954 Lorenzo S. Dinlayan 1955-1971 Timoteo C. Ocaya 1972-1979 Edilberto B. Mamawag 1979-1980* Reginaldo N. Tilanduca 1980-1986 Violeta T. Labaria 1986* Almaco A. Villanueva 1987* Rogelio M. Bides 1988* Reginaldo N. Tilanduca 1988-1992 Bob Tabios-Casanova April 1992-June 1992 Nicolas C. Jurolan 1992-2001 Florencio T. Flores, Jr. 2001-2010 Ignacio W. Zubiri 2010 to present * - Appointed Barangay !! Population(2010) Aglayan 6,205 Bangcud 4,954 Busdi 1,921 Cabangahan 2,775 Caburacanan 1,057 Can-ayan 4,176 Capitan Angel 1,108 Casisang 22,230 Dalwangan 6,112 Imbayao 1,562 Indalasa 1,453 Kalasungay 7,456 Kibalabag 1,026 Kulaman 1,064 Laguitas 2,658 Patpat (Lapu-Lapu) 3,200 Linabo 6,193 Apo Macote 4,186 Miglamin 2,709 Magsaysay 2,241 Maligaya 1,963 Managok 6,719 Manalog 727 Mapayag 970 Mapulo 1,106 Barangay 1 (Pob.) 4,992 Barangay 2 (Pob.) 856 Barangay 3 (Pob.) 461 Barangay 4 (Pob.) 515 Barangay 5 (Pob.) 234 Barangay 6 (Pob.) 873 Barangay 7 (Pob.) 2,221 Barangay 8 (Pob.) 642 Barangay 9 (Pob.) 7,817 Barangay 10 (Pob.) 2,806 Barangay 11 (Pob.) 2,783 Saint Peter 2,288 San Jose 5,640 San Martin 2,863 Santo Niño 1,614 Silae 2,099 Simaya 3,774 Sinanglanan 2,885 Sumpong 8,335 Violeta 2,066 Zamboanguita 1,532 Total 153,085 Taking place every March 22, the date is declared as a special working holiday through Republic Act 8813http://philippinelaw.info/statutes/ra8813.html as a commemoration of Malaybalay's anniversary as a chartered city. Events are lined up by the city to enable residents and visitors to come and experience the charter day activities. Malaybalay City Fiesta takes place every May 15 in honor of the City's patron saint, Saint Isidro Labrador, the patron of agricultural workers, labourers and livestock.http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=11141837 The fiesta is a two-day event starting May 14, a day before the fiesta, wherein residents actively prepare for the festivities, up to fiesta day proper (May 15). Kaamulan Festival is an ethnic cultural festival held annually in Malaybalay City, Bukidnon in the Philippines from the second half of February to March 10, the anniversary date of the foundation of Bukidnon as a province in 1917. It is held to celebrate the culture and tradition of the seven ethnic tribal groups—Bukidnon, Higaonon, Talaandig, Manobo, Matigsalug, Tigwahanon and Umayamnon—that originally inhabit the province. It is the only ethnic festival in the Philippines. The City's 25-year Monastery of Transfiguration on San Jose hill, is made of heavy lime blocks, designed by National Artist for architecture Leandro Locsin. The first Filipino Abbot, Fr. Eduardo Africa and former Malaybalay bishop Gaudencio Rosales inaugurated it on August 6, 1983. Today, 10 monks had its 7 hectares planted to rice, 25 hectares to corn, and the rest for planting the world-famous Monk’s Blend Premium coffee. Its two-story Museum of Transfiguration Monastery (MTM) houses Dom Martin’s 50-piece vestment collection included in Philippines' 1998 centennial celebration. The Worship and Weave book on the vestments won the 2001 National Book Award (art category).showbizandstyle.inquirer.net A Healing Silence Located in Brgy. Bangcud, this spring has blue waters deep enough for diving and swimming. It also serves as picnic grounds for families bonding together or a place of refuge and recollection. This 39,000-hectare reforestation project (21,000 hectares of which are plantable) demonstrates the compatibility of nature with economic objectives. Funded with the assistance of the New Zealand government under the auspices of DENR, the project has been operational since 1990. The City of Malaybalay and the municipalities of Impasugong, Manolo Fortich and Malitbog are the areas covered by the plantation. Its 5-hectare nursery is capable of producing 5.2 million fast-growing seedlings every year. Located at Brgy. 1, Kaamulan Grounds serves as an activity area, refuge and recollection, picnic and other outdoor activities one can think of. An intimate environment where pine trees abound, the Kaamulan Park bids one a breather from the busy hub of the city. The Folk Arts Theater, where some provincial activities and events are held, is also found here. A sanctuary for those who seek serenity and peace, the Carmelite Sister’s Monastery is a place for retreat and prayer. The refreshing air, well-kept flower gardens and a beautiful view of some mountains in makes the place ideal for quiet moments to ponder and take a breather from a busy life. It is at Pal-ing, Barangay Kalasungay; some 5&nbsp;km from the city proper bound to the south. Famous as the evacuation area in World War II, this mountain is characterized by its unique rock formations and challenging caves. Nature trekkers and mountain climbers find a good spot at the top, albeit rough and sharp, to see a vista of Bukidnon’s grandeur as it offers a free, panoramic view of the nearby mountains and the acres of rice and cornfields. Located at Barangay Managok, it is 18&nbsp;km from the City of Malaybalay proper bound south. Roxas Monument is a historical park whose principal feature is the monument of the Philippine’s first president of the independent Republic, Manuel Roxas. History has it that President Roxas hid secretly in the old school, now known as Casisang Elementary School, after escaping from Japanese Imperial Army at the height of World War II on his way to Australia. The monument was erected in honor of Roxas’ brief stay as well as to remember the WWII prisoners of war. The Roxas Monument is located at Casisang, Malaybalay&nbsp;&ndash; a few minutes ride going South from the city proper. This is the spot identified to be where the Northern and Southern Army of the US Air Force linked in World War II. The centennial marker is erected at Barangay Dalwangan, City of Malaybalay. Is a popular edifice along the highway of Cabangahan, Malaybalay City. This old three-storey house was built in 1962 by David Valmorida. Only a few information about this place can be found in the internet An old article which was featured in inquirer.net in 2007 reported that there are some strange and unexplained occurrences in this house. The monument of creation of the town is proudly standing at Plaza Rizal. It depicts the 1877 agreement between the Spanish Colonizers and local leaders such as Datu Mampaalonghttp://www.thepinaysolobackpacker.com/malaybalay-bukidnon-top-tourist-attractions/ D' Stable Eco Resort is more popularly known as Quadra. It is located in Sta. Cruz, Sumpong, Malaybalay City, just a few meters away from Shepherds Meadow Memorial Park. Quadra has a ranch-like setting, with a horses, stables, huts and cottages built on grassy grounds and a mountain view backdrop. The place is ideal for open air dining and drinking as they serve food and drinks with reasonable prices. One may also opt to stay for a night or two as they have closed cottages for accommodation. Horseback riding may also be available.http://bukidnonphotojournal.blogspot.com/2010/09/d-stable-eco-resort-quadra.html The Two Trees is a part of the Provincial Tree Park of Bukidnon, which the Northern Entrance is at the Kaamulan Grounds and its Southern Entrance is at Gawad Kalinga (also known as Capitol Village), Barangay 9. The Park is traversed by the Kalawaig River, a tributary of Sawaga River, the major river of Malaybalay City (except in the Upper Pulangi District where the Pulangi River reigns), which starts at Barangay 1.http://exploremalaybalaycity.blogspot.com/2012/05/view-from-famous-two-trees.html The monastery nuns provide an environment of natural attractions with its well kept grounds as well as spiritual blessings of peace renewal.http://malaybalaycity.gov.ph/malaybalay/?page_id=143 Primarily a retreat center, its well kept grounds being on the banks of a creek offer the intrepid a climbing experience amidst a mini rainforest ambiance. Owned by the Jesuits, silence and nature harmony is an unforgettable experience. Is a Gawad Saka 2006 First Place Winner for showcasing an ecological and agricultural all organic, all natural lifestyle. This is a site for bird watching, trekking, camping, fishing and eco-walk. Being situated at the foothill of Mr. Kitanglad, a rare flight of the Bukidnon eagle could be in your sights as you walk along misty eco- trails with a cool temperature to equal that of Trinidad valley in Mt. Province. The site of frequent conferences and seminars, the rustic ambiance is one to snare the ecology oriented tourist at heart. The sweetest pineapples exported fresh are from this Filipino agri-corporation. Its plantations are located in different sites and the headquarters are found not more than a 10-minute drive from the City’s commercial section. This is owned by the Lorenzo family, a name long associated with the pineapples and agriculture. This area is the site of farm showcases where animals of good stocks (bred) and high value vegetables are seeded and tested for research by government technicians. This natural attraction features scenic environs the site of a varied flora and fauna, providing varied environmental activities of which bird watching is one. A swimming pool and another for children welcome the daring to try clean, coolest water. Located at Barangay Can-ayan Owned privately by the Hernandez family, the site was developed with horseback riding trails, swimming pools and fishing grounds. Here’s a new place ideal for prayer and reflection in Bukidnon, Mindanao, Philippines. Q Park II, located at Barangay Kalasungay, Malaybalay City, boasts of a lovely manicured lawn, a gorgeous view of the Bukidnon mountain ranges and Malaybalay’s signature cool breeze. It’s a nice place to commune with the Lord. An alternative to the Monastery of Transfiguration, which is also located in Malaybalay. Admission to Q Park II is FREE and this park is open from 9 AM to 5 PM, Tuesday to Sunday. Closed on Mondays. Matin-ao resort is located about 21 kilometers from Malaybalay City proper and 8 kilometers away from Valencia City. Compared to Nasuli, Matin-ao has more shallow areas making it a safe place to swim for children. Bukidnon Provincial Medical Center Bethel Baptist Hospital, Inc. Malaybalay Polymedic General Hospital Malaybalay Medical Hospital St. Jude Thaddeus General Hospital Bukidnon State University (BSU) &ndash; BSU is the first tertiary school in the city to attain university status last 2007 San Isidro College (SIC) STI College-Malaybalay Mindanao Arts and Technological Institute (MATI) Prime Broadcasting Network DXXB-FM (89.7 Prime FM) Radio Mindanao Network DXXM-FM (92.7 iFM) Century Broadcasting Network DXGH-FM (99.3 Magik FM) Bukidnon State University DXBU-FM (104.5 BSU FM) Radio Corporation of the Philippines (105.3 One FM) Manila Broadcasting Company DXIQ-FM (Q106.3 Love Radio) Catholic Media Network DXDB-FM (Radyo Bandilyo 594&nbsp;kHz) Radio Mindanao Network DXMB-FM (RMN 648)  Butuan City, Philippines  Marawi City, Philippines  Tagum City, Philippines  Ürümqi, China  Lhasa, China Lorenzo S. Dinlayan – USEC, Office of Cultural Communities Teofisto Guingona III – senator Clare Cabiguin – Pinoy Big Brother: Teen Edition 1, 4th Placer Rowell Ucat – internet celebrity, song-writer, popularly known as "Medyo Maldito" Phillip "Papot" Paredes – PBA player Lora E. Añar – one of the Ten Outstanding Teachers organized by the Metrobank Foundation Inc.(MBFI) in 2011 Elenito Galido – bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Iligan Maite Zubiri – contestant of The Voice Kids (Philippines season 1) Kaamulan Festival Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information
