    Amanda Leigh "Mandy" Moore (born April 10, 1984) is an American singer-songwriter and actress. Moore first came to prominence with her 1999 debut single, "Candy", which peaked at number 41 on the Billboard Hot 100. After singing with Epic Records, she released her first album, So Real, in 1999. It went on to receive a Platinum certification from the RIAA. Her 2000 single, "I Wanna Be with You", became her first Top 30 song in the US, peaking at number 24 on the Hot 100 chart. The parent album of the same name was released that same year to generally mixed reviews. The album went on to achieve Gold certification. After revealing her displeasure with her early works, Moore's self-titled third album, Mandy Moore (2001), featured a change of sound that drifted away from her "bubblegum pop" roots. The album spawned the single "In My Pocket", which became her third Top 20 song in Australia. The album itself was her final album to be certified by the RIAA, receiving a Gold certification. In 2003, Moore released her fourth studio album, Coverage, featuring covers of classic 1970s songs. Following the album's release, Moore parted ways with Epic due to creative differences. The split prompted the label to release the compilation albums The Best of Mandy Moore (2004) and Candy (2005), both of which have sold an estimated 100,000 copies to date. Moore did not return to music until the release of her 2007 album Wild Hope, which failed to have much success. To date, the album has sold an estimated 200,000 copies, and failed to receive an RIAA certification. Similarly, both of the album's singles failed to chart worldwide. In 2009, Moore released her sixth studio album, Amanda Leigh, which peaked at number 25 on the Billboard 200 and sold an estimated 100,000 copies. In 2012, Moore confirmed that she was working on her seventh studio album. As of 2009, Moore has sold more than 12.5 million albums worldwide, according to Billboard. In 2012, Moore was ranked #96 on VH1's list of "100 Greatest Women in Music", as well as #63 on their Sexiest Artists of All Time List. Outside of her musical career, Moore has also branched out into acting. She made her film debut in the 2001 film Dr. Dolittle 2, though it was only a minor voice role. Later that year, she appeared as Lana Thomas in the comedy film The Princess Diaries, alongside Anne Hathaway. She had her first starring role as Jamie Sullivan in the 2002 romantic drama film A Walk to Remember, which was based on the novel by Nicholas Sparks. Between 2003 and 2006, Moore starred in various films, including How to Deal (2003), Chasing Liberty (2004) and Saved! (2004). She later co-starred in the 2006 satirical comedy American Dreamz, which was both a critical and financial failure. The film failed to make back its $17 million budget, and debuted at number 9 at the box office. The following year, Moore co-starred in the romantic comedies Because I Said So and License to Wed. In 2010, Moore voiced Rapunzel in the animated film Tangled, in which she performed the duet "I See the Light" with Zachary Levi; the song won a Grammy for Best Song Written for Visual Media. She later reprised the role in the short film Tangled Ever After, and will do so again in a Disney Channel television series based on the film in 2017. She has also voiced the role in several video games. Amanda Leigh Moore was born on April 10, 1984 in Nashua, New Hampshire. Her mother, Stacy (née Friedman), is a former news reporter who once worked for the Orlando Sentinel, and her father, Donald Moore, is a pilot for American Airlines.  Moore was raised Catholic, but has since developed a "hodgepodge of things" that she believes.http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/10/30/1099028258032.html?from=storyrhs Moore's ancestry is Russian Jewish (from her maternal grandfather), English, Irish, Scottish. She is the middle of three children with an older brother, Scott, and a younger brother, Kyle. When she was two months old, Moore and her family moved to Longwood, Seminole County, Florida, outside of Orlando, due to her father's job. Moore became interested in acting and singing at a young age, and cited her British grandmother, Eileen Friedman, a professional ballerina in London, as one of her inspirations. Moore stated "My parents thought It was just a phase I'd grow out of. But I stuck to it and begged them for acting lessons, for voice lessons." Moore began starring in numerous local productions, as well as performing the National Anthem at numerous Orlando based events. She was only twelve years old when she attended the Stagedoor Manor theater camp, where other celebrities including actress Natalie Portman had once attended. Production director Konnie Kittrell said of Moore "She was a quiet, sweet girl", and stated that even though she earned numerous solos "She wasn't a spotlight seeker." When Moore was thirteen, she began working on music by herself. One day, while working in an Orlando studio, she was overheard by a FedEx delivery man, who had a friend in A&R at Epic Records. The delivery man, named Victor, later sent this friend a copy of Moore's unfinished demo, and Moore went on to sign with the label.  After signing with Epic Records, Moore began working on her debut album. While recording the album, Moore had to leave Bishop Moore Catholic High School when she was only a freshman, but continued receiving an education from tutors. In the summer of 1999, Moore began touring with pop band NSYNC. Later that year, Moore also toured with the Backstreet Boys. Moore released her debut single, "Candy", on August 17, 1999 in the United States. The single, which immediately drew comparison to fellow teen pop singers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera, was a commercial success in numerous countries. It debuted at number 88 on the Billboard Hot 100, before reaching a peak of number 41 on the chart. The single would later receive a Gold certification from the RIAA, for sales exceeding 500,000 copies in the US. The single was most successful in Australia, where it peaked at number 2 on the ARIA Charts and received a Platinum certification. Moore's debut album, So Real, was released on December 7, 1999 by 550 Music through Epic Records. The album received a limited release in only a few countries. It received mixed critical reviews upon its release, and continued to fuel similarities between Moore and other teen pop singers. Allmusic said of the album "Fifteen-year-old Mandy Moore's debut album sounded like it was inspired almost entirely by listening to recent hit albums by 'N Sync, the Backstreet Boys, and Britney Spears." Entertainment Weekly had a similar opinion about the album, and went on to give it a C- in their review. So Real debuted at number 77 on the Billboard 200 chart. The album eventually continued to climb the chart until peaking at number 31. So Real went on to receive a Platinum certification from the RIAA, for sales exceeding one million copies in the US alone. Moore released her second single, "Walk Me Home", the same day as the album. The single failed to match the success of its predecessor, failing to appear on any major charts. It did, however, peak at number 38 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart in the US. The third and final single, title track "So Real", was released exclusively in certain territories on June 13, 2000. The single was not released in the US, but was released in territories such as Japan. In Australia, the single became her second Top 40 hit, peaking at number 21 on the ARIA Charts. The single also peaked at number 18 on the Official New Zealand Music Chart. Before promotion for So Real had even ended, Moore had already begun working on new material. Moore released the lead single from her upcoming project, titled "I Wanna Be with You", on July 11, 2000. The song became her first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 since her debut single, "Candy". "I Wanna Be with You" spent 16 weeks on the chart and reached its peak of 24 during its ninth week on the chart. The song became her first Top 20 hit on the Billboard Pop Songs chart, where it peaked at number 11. The single also became Moore's second Top 20 hit in Australia, where it peaked at number 13. It was also a minor success on the German Media Control Charts, where it peaked at number 70. Billboard praised the song and said, "Top 40 programmers and listeners alike will love Moore more with this track", while Allmusic chose the song as a highlight track from the album. Moore released her second official studio album, I Wanna Be with You, on May 9, 2000. The album featured the lead single as well as songs from Moore's previous album, So Real. I Wanna Be with You served as Moore's debut album in numerous countries. The album was criticized on the basis that it was a remix album and not a true follow-up, with Allmusic accusing its style of being "trashier, flashier, gaudier, and altogether more disposable" than that of So Real. The album was a commercial success, debuting and peaking at number 21 on the US Billboard 200 chart. It went on to receive a Gold certification from the RIAA, for sales exceeding 500,000 copies in the US alone. The album led Moore to winning the Kids' Choice Awards for Favorite Rising Star in 2000. By 2001, Moore had already begun working on her third studio album, which was said to stray from her usual "bubblegum pop" sound she had come to be known for. Moore stated during an interview with Billboard magazine that "All of the music has started to look and sound the same" and that she had opted to move in a different musical direction. Moore added that she wanted "no more dancers, no more singing to tracks. I got tired of that in a big way". The album's lead single, "In My Pocket", was released on May 29, 2001. Entertainment Weekly said the single contained "pumping, Indian influenced Eurodisco." It failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 in the US, but did peak at number 2 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart, and it reached number 21 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart. The song became her third Top 20 hit in Australia, where it peaked at number 11 on the ARIA Charts. Her third studio album, Mandy Moore, was released on June 19, 2001. The album contained uptempo tracks and influences from Middle Eastern music. Allmusic described the album as a "lush, layered production." It received mixed reviews from other critics. The album debuted and peaked at number 35 on the Billboard 200 chart, and went on to receive a Gold certification from the RIAA. The album has sold an estimated 1.5 million copies worldwide. The album also reached number 37 on the ARIA charts in Australia, her highest peak in the country to date. The second single from Mandy Moore, titled "Crush", was released on August 28, 2001; it peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart, and it climbed to number 25 on the ARIA Charts. During the Summer of 2001, Moore made her film debut as the voice of a Girl Bear Cub in the comedy film Dr. Dolittle 2, starring Eddie Murphy.Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001)Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001) – Full cast and crew Later that year, Moore earned a supporting role opposite Anne Hathaway in the comedy The Princess Diaries, based on Meg Cabot's novel of the same name, released in August.The Princess Diaries (2001) – IMDb She played Lana Thomas. On her role, Moore told In Style "I'm the crude popular girl who gets ice cream in her face." The film opened in 2,537 theaters in North America and grossed $22,862,269 in its opening weekend. It grossed $165,335,153 worldwide—$108,248,956 in North America and $57,086,197 in other territories. Reviews for the film were mixed. Rotten Tomatoes reported that 47% of 113 sampled critics gave the film positive reviews and that it got a rating average of 5.2 out of 10. For the film, Moore performed the original song "Stupid Cupid" while at a party on the beach. In 2002, Moore made her starring debut in the romantic drama A Walk to Remember opposite Shane West, based on Nicholas Sparks' novel of the same name. The film opened at No. 3 at the U.S. box office raking in $12,177,488 in its opening weekend, behind Snow Dogs and Black Hawk Down. Even though not a critical success, it was a modest box office hit, earning $41,281,092 in the United States alone, and a sleeper hit in Asia. The total revenue generated worldwide was $47,494,916. The film earned Moore numerous nominations and awards for her performance. The song "Cry", from Moore's third studio album, was released as the album's third single to help promote the film. Commenting on the film, she said: "It was my first movie and I know people say it may be cliche and it's a tearjerker or it's cheesy, but for me, it's the thing I'm most proud of." By 2003, work on Moore's fourth studio album had begun, later revealed to be a cover album titled Coverage. The album consisted of covers of songs released throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The album's lead single, a cover of John Hiatt's song "Have a Little Faith in Me", was released shortly before the album, but failed to have an impact on any charts. Coverage was released on October 21, 2003. Allmusic characterized the album as a "leap to musical maturity" while Entertainment Weekly referred to it as perhaps an "effort to shed her bubblegum-blond image". The album debuted at number 14 on the Billboard 200 chart, with first week sales of 53,000. This made it Moore's highest debut on the chart, and highest peaking album to date. Despite being her highest charting album, it is her lowest selling, being her first album to fail to be certified by the RIAA. The second single, "Senses Working Overtime", failed to have any chart success. Moore's cover of "I Feel the Earth Move" appeared on Love Rocks, a compilation CD of songs from gay rights supporters. Due to creative differences between Moore and Epic, she parted ways with the label. Moore and the company released the greatest hits album, The Best of Mandy Moore, in November 2004 as a final obligation to Moore's contract. The album, which featured no new material, reached number 148 on the Billboard 200. Another compilation, Candy, followed in 2005. In 2003, Moore co-starred in the romantic comedy How to Deal opposite Allison Janney and Trent Ford which she played a cynical seventeen-year-old who deals with falling in love and issues with her family and friends. The film failed to draw in teenage crowds in the U.S. and grossed a total of $14&nbsp;million domestically. In 2004, Moore co-starred in the romantic comedy Chasing Liberty opposite Matthew Goode, where she played the rebellious eighteen-year-old first daughter who desires more freedom. The film grossed approximately $12&nbsp;million. Both films received negative reviews; however, Ebert once again singled Moore's performances out, noting in his review of How to Deal that Moore has "an unaffected natural charm" and "almost makes the movie worth seeing", and adding in his Chasing Liberty review that she has "undeniable screen presence and inspires instant affection." Other critics described her as an "actress of limited range", though one review of Chasing Liberty noted that she was the "most painless of former pop princesses." Later in 2004, Moore co-starred in the religion satire Saved! opposite Jena Malone, Macaulay Culkin and Patrick Fugit in which she played Hilary Faye Stockard, a proper and popular girl at a Christian school. The film was positively reviewed, though it did not receive a wide release. Moore received praise for her performance, with one critic calling her a "demented delight" and another naming it her best performance to date. She sang a cover version of The Beach Boys 1966 hit "God Only Knows", with Michael Stipe, that bookended the movie. In 2005, Moore co-starred in a voice role in the sports family comedy-drama Racing Stripes as Sandy the white horse and appeared on the HBO comedy-drama Entourage; she was also originally scheduled to star in the films Cursed, Havoc, and The Upside of Anger, all of which were eventually released in 2005 without Moore's involvement. In 2006, Moore guest-starred as Julie Quinn in two episodes of the fifth season of the NBC medical sitcom Scrubs that were the ninth episode "My Half-Acre" and the tenth episode "Her Story II". The same year, she lent her voice to The Simpsons as Tabitha Vixx in the episode "Marge and Homer Turn a Couple Play". Moore also co-starred opposite Hugh Grant, Dennis Quaid and William Dafoe in Paul Weitz's satirical comedy American Dreamz, which was released in April 2006. In the film, she played a deranged contestant on a television series modelled after American Idol. Weitz stated that he had Moore in mind for the role before she was cast, explaining that "there's something inherently sweet about Mandy; it makes it all the more interesting to see her in a villainess role". Moore has said that she enjoys playing mean-spirited characters but fears being typecast as a villain. American Dreamz opened at number nine at the U.S. box office, eventually totaling barely $7&nbsp;million, and received mixed reviews; critic Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly, however, wrote that Moore and Grant have a "wicked barbed chemistry" in their roles, while Varietys Robert Koehler said Moore's role was a "pitch-perfect study of a woman for whom a reality show is reality". Later that year, in what ComingSoon.net's review described as a "surprisingly good performance", Moore voiced Nita, the heroine of the Disney animated sequel Brother Bear 2, which was released directly-to-DVD on August 29, 2006. She was also originally cast to appear in that year's ensemble film Bobby, but was replaced by Mary Elizabeth Winstead.  In 2006, Moore commented on her early albums, noting that although she believed that her first album was appropriate for her age at the time when she released it, she felt it "sucked" and that her first albums were "just awful." Moore also said that she "would give a refund to everyone who bought my first two albums" if she could; during a radio interview in April 2006, the show's co-host—who had seen her comments—asked her for a refund on the first album, a request that Moore fulfilled. In early 2006, Moore stated that she missed her music career and that singing is what she was the "most passionate about." Moore had signed to Sire Records after her contract with Epic ended, but she left the company in May 2006. She signed with a new EMI Music-owned record company, The Firm, in July that year, describing her new contract as "especially exciting", and adding that she left Sire because she did not want to "follow the mainstream", but rather have "complete control and freedom" over her work. Wild Hope was released on June 19, 2007, and includes collaborations with artists Chantal Kreviazuk, Rachael Yamagata, Lori McKenna and The Weepies. Moore stayed alone in a house in Woodstock in Upstate New York while recording the album in late 2006.  Moore performed the song at the Brick Awards on April 12, 2007 and launched a tour in the summer of 2007. Wild Hope received generally mixed critical reviews. Billboard stated that "Wild Hope is the gratifying sound of a singer finally finding her comfort zone. Gone is the sugary pop of Moore's early career, replaced instead by thoughtful musings on love and life...an album full of subtle, but undeniable hooks." Wild Hope debuted on the U.S. Billboard 200 at No. 30, selling a mere 25,000 copies the first week of release, according to Billboard.Katie Hasty, "Bon Jovi Scores First No. 1 Album Since 1988", Billboard, June 27, 2007. It is Moore's third-highest debuting album, falling short of her 2003 album Coverage, which debuted at No. 14 on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 59,000 copies. Her album also reached No. 9 on The Top Internet albums. After five weeks, Wild Hope charted off the Billboard 200; however, it returned to the chart at No. 118 after selling 5,500 copies. To date, Wild Hope has sold over 120,000 copies in the United States and more than 350,000 copies worldwide.Billboard.com – Ask Billboard. Retrieved June 5, 2009 On February 23, 2008, Moore released Wild Hope in Australia, and subsequently toured with Ben Lee and the West Australian Symphony Orchestra in Western Australia, supporting Kelly Clarkson on her tour. In October 2008, Moore posted on her website blog live videos of three new songs she had been working on, along with singer-songwriter, pianist and guitarist Mike Viola. It was at first expected to a be a duo album between the two, but then in January 2009, it was revealed it would be a solo album with a collaboration with him, slated for release in April 2009. Moore, citing her conservative upbringing, has expressed dissatisfaction with her appearance on a May 2006 cover of Cosmopolitan; the magazine's headline is "orgasms unlimited", which refers to an article unrelated to her. Afterwards, Moore co-starred in the romantic comedy Because I Said So opposite Diane Keaton. In the film, Moore's character describes in detail the feeling of an orgasm to her mother (Keaton). The film was released on February 2, 2007, receiving mixed reviews, but was a financial success, earning over $69 million worldwide at the box office. That same year, Moore co-starred in the romantic comedy License to Wed opposite Robin Williams and John Krasinski which was released on July 3, 2007. Critical reaction to the film was overwhelmingly negative. Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a 7% rating and a critical consensus of "broad and formulaic". Metacritic.com rated it 25 out of 100, citing 21 generally negative reviews out of 30 for its rating. It was reviewed in Variety as "an astonishingly flat romantic comedy, filled with perplexing choices." The film grossed $10,422,258 in its opening weekend opening at #4 at the U.S. Box Office behind Live Free or Die Hard, Ratatouille, and Transformers, which opened at the top spot. License to Wed had grossed $43.8 million domestically and $69.3 million worldwide. Nevertheless, Variety described Moore's performance as "appealing." In 2007, Moore guest-starred in an episode of the CBS sitcom How I Met Your Mother titled "Wait for It". Later that year, she appeared in the independent film Dedication, which premiered at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival. The film received mixed reviews from critics. The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film received 41% positive reviews, based on 46 reviews. Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 50 out of 100, based on 19 reviews. Moore began working on her sixth studio album in 2008, slated for release the following year. Recording sessions for the album took place around December 2008 in Boston, Massachusetts. The lead single from the project, "I Could Break Your Heart Any Day of the Week", was released on March 17, 2009 for digital download. The music video premiered on Monday April 20, 2009, on Yahoo! Music. The single, like Moore's previous efforts, failed to have much success on any charts. Moore's sixth studio album, Amanda Leigh, was released on May 26, 2009. On the album, Moore stated "The music is all a reflection of me now, not somebody else's choices." Moore visited many talk shows including The Ellen DeGeneres Show and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. On both shows she performed "I Could Break Your Heart Any Day of the Week", to promote the album. On May 26, 2009, she performed her new songs at Amoeba Music in Hollywood, together with Mike Viola, the day the album set to be released under the label Storefront Records. The album was not released in some territories until 2010, and was not released in Brazil until 2011, two years after its initial release. Time magazine said that the album was "impeccably recorded." An article on the album by Paper said, "Mandy (in the album)... shows real thoughtful and emotional depth." Paper concluded that "Moore is a far better musician than she's often given credit for." It debuted at number 25 on the Billboard 200, selling 16,000 copies in the US during the week of its release, and at number 4 on the Top Independent albums chart. To date, the album has sold an estimated 100,000 copies. After a break of almost two years from film roles, Moore filmed the romantic comedy Swinging with the Finkels in the United Kingdom in 2009 for a 2011 release. In 2010, Moore co-starred with Kellan Lutz in the romantic comedy Love, Wedding, Marriage.Love, Wedding, Marriage at IMDb She guest-starred on the sixth season finale of the ABC medical drama Grey's Anatomy on May 20, 2010, her first television role since 2007. She returned to the show in an episode of the seventh season. Also that year, Moore voiced Rapunzel in the CGI Disney animated film Tangled. Tangled received positive reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 89% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 185 reviews, with an average score of 7.5/10. The site's consensus is: "While far from Disney's greatest film, Tangled is a visually stunning, thoroughly entertaining addition to the studio's classic animated canon." Another review aggregator Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score from 0–100 out of reviews from mainstream film critics, calculated a score of 71 based on 34 reviews. CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave Tangled was an "A+" on an A+ to F scale. Tangled earned $200,821,936 in North America, and $389,900,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $590,721,936. Worldwide, it is the 17th highest-grossing animated film, the eighth highest-grossing film of 2010, and the third highest-grossing 2010 animated film (behind Toy Story 3 and Shrek Forever After). It is also the third Disney film appearing in the Top 10 films of 2010. It is the third highest-grossing film worldwide produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, trailing Frozen and The Lion King. Moore, with her co-star Zachary Levi, performed the film's theme song, "I See the Light", at the 83rd Academy Awards, where it was nominated for Best Original Song. The song also won a Grammy Award for Best Song Written For Visual Media as well as Best Song at the Las Vegas Film Critics Society. In October 2011, it was announced that she was set to star in an ABC sitcom titled Us and Them. The pilot was eventually passed by the network. In 2012, she co-starred in the crime film Hotel Noir with Carla Gugino and Rufus Sewell, which was released on October 9, 2012 in the U.S. Along with her voice role in the Tron: Uprising animated series, which was cancelled after one season, she currently voices the title character in the Disney Junior series Sheriff Callie's Wild West. In July 2012, Moore announced that she would be collaborating with her then-husband Ryan Adams on her upcoming seventh studio album.  She said, "There's tremendous influence right now around the house... from the music I've been introduced to and being very happy and in a healthy, happy relationship... I think that still garners a lot of material to write about."  She later stated "There's a lot to say and a lot that's happened to me in the last three or so years since the last record's come out, so I have been writing a lot and it's definitely going to be an intense, emotional record. I'm excited about it. I'm excited to get into the studio and start recording." She added that she thinks the album will be "intense, emotional". On February 20, 2013, it was announced Moore would be starring as Louise in the ABC sitcom Pulling, which is based on the British series of the same name. The pilot was written by Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky. However, in March, as the pilot came closer to production, Moore's character was moved in a different direction and she believed herself to be no longer right for the role and asked to be released, which ABC accepted. Soon after, she signed on to star in the CBS drama The Advocates as Shannon Carter, but the pilot was passed by the network. In a July 2014 interview with CBS News, Moore said that 2014 was "the year of actual progress forward" on her album, describing it as more "dangerous" and "raw" when comparing it to her previous albums, and said that she hoped to start recording the album in Adams' studio later in the summer; she also revealed that she would appear on Adams' self-titled album, Ryan Adams, which was released on September 5, 2014. On September 12, 2014, Moore signed on for a recurring role on the Fox drama Red Band Society as Dr. Erin Grace. The series was cancelled after one season. In May 2015, Moore was cast as Kate in the underwater thriller film 47 Meters Down opposite Claire Holt. Filming began at Pinewood Studios in the United Kingdom on June 18, 2015, and concluded on August 7, 2015. In June 2015, it was confirmed that Moore and Levi would reprise their roles as Rapunzel and Eugene in a television series based on Tangled. The animated series, set between Tangled and Tangled Ever After, will air on Disney Channel in 2017. In September 2015, Moore said that she is currently working on her new record. "I've been working on music steadily for the last couple of years. I guess 2016 will be the re-emergence of my music. That side of my life has been dormant for too long in my opinion".  At the start of her career, Moore was known for her bubblegum pop sound, which she revealed was not the type of music she prefers, saying, "[The record company] was like, 'Here are your songs.' I was like, 'Hi, I'm fourteen. I'll do anything.' Those albums are why I'm here today, but god damn, I should give a refund to anyone who bought my first record". Moore has often been praised by music critics for branching off and making her own music. Billboard stated, "She has successfully dropped all the tacky accoutrements of her past and turned into a sweet, classy singer-songwriter whose charms are readily apparent". AllMusic claimed, "Moore smoothly evolved from adolescent starlet to mature songwriter, continuing to distance herself from the scene that had launched her career one decade prior". Moore has noted that she was inspired by film and television as a child. She has also stated, "I'm stuck in the '70s. I think I'll always have that kind of influence. Joni Mitchell, Todd Rundgren, Harry Nilsson, McCartney – that's the sort of stuff I'm really inspired and influenced by". Moore also revealed how Ryan Adams, her then-husband has had a huge influence on her music, and that he introduced her to heavy metal. "Not that I can necessarily differentiate between speed metal and black metal…" she said. "I'll tolerate it, but I turn it down". Moore has said that she has been influenced by female singers such as Alanis Morissette, Blondie, Carole King, Debbie Gibson, Janet Jackson, Madonna, Mariah Carey, Shania Twain, Joni Mitchell and Tiffany. Moore branched into the fashion world in 2005 with her own fashion line named Mblem., a brand of contemporary knitwear and cashmere. One of her aims was to provide clothing for taller women (Moore is ). In February 2009, Moore announced that the line would be shutting down, but that she hoped to re-enter the fashion world again under different circumstances in the future. Moore advocates "giving with your head", endorsing the philosophy of effective altruism. Moore has worked with and highlighted nonprofit organization Population Services International (PSI), and its subsidiary, Five & Alive, which addresses health crises facing children under the age of five and their families. Moore has served as the Honorary Chairperson of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society's division on awareness for youth. She served as a spokesperson by helping young people be aware of the seriousness of leukemia and lymphoma. She also serves as the spokesperson for Cervical Cancer Awareness Month, held every January. In addition, to increase cervical cancer awareness, Moore collaborated with Dr. Yvonne Collins, The Gynecologic Cancer Foundation (GCF), and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK)."Mandy Moore promotes Cervical Cancer Prevention" January 26, 2010, EmpowHER Moore made a surprise visit at Children's Hospital Los Angeles as a part of Get Well Soon Tour.http://elliottbisnow.com/get-well-soon-tour-more-stops/  Moore is the ambassador for the UN Foundations’s Nothing But Nets malaria prevention campaign. As a part of the Nothing But Nets campaign Moore interviewed Laurence D. Wohlers, United States Ambassador to the Central African Republic, in 2010 and helped the campaign raise $1.2 million.  Moore is also the spokesperson for Dove's self-esteem movement and the "Women who should be famous" campaign. Moore also teamed up with Indrani Goradia, a domestic violence survivor and founder of Indrani's Light Foundation, along with Mom Bloggers Club, to help raise awareness and campaign against domestic violence. In 2008, Moore began dating singer-songwriter Ryan Adams. They became engaged in February 2009 and married on March 10, 2009, in Savannah, Georgia. Moore filed for divorce in January 2015 while Adams was in New York, citing "irreconcilable differences". Moore and Adams later released a joint statement explaining their decision, describing it as a "respectful, amicable parting of ways". Court documents obtained a few days later indicated that they had been legally separated for nearly six months prior to the filing. In July 2015, Moore began dating Dawes guitarist Taylor Goldsmith.   Year Title Role Notes 2001 Dr. Dolittle 2 Girl Bear Cub Voice 2001 The Princess Diaries Lana Thomas 2002 A Walk to Remember Jamie Sullivan 2002 All I Want Lisa 2003 How to Deal Halley Martin 2004 Chasing Liberty Anna Foster 2004 Saved! Hilary Faye Stockard 2005 Racing Stripes Sandy Voice 2005 Romance & Cigarettes Baby Murder 2006 American Dreamz Sally Kendoo 2006 Brother Bear 2 Nita Voice 2007 Because I Said So Milly Wilder 2007 License to Wed Sadie Jones 2007 Dedication Lucy Riley 2007 Southland Tales Madeline Frost Santaros 2009 Swinging with the Finkels Ellie Finkel 2010 Tangled Rapunzel Voice 2011 Love, Wedding, Marriage Ava 2012 Tangled Ever After Rapunzel Voice; short film 2012 Hotel Noir Evangeline Lundy 2013 Christmas in Conway Natalie Springer Hallmark Hall of Fame TV film TBC 47 Meters Down Kate Filming Year Title Role Notes 2000 2GE+HER: The Series Herself "Bunny" (season 1, episode 3) 2000 All That Herself "Mandy Moore" (season 6, episode 3) 2003 Clone High Herself "Snowflake Day: A Very Special Holiday Episode" (season 1, episode 11) 2003 Punk'd Herself 1 episode 2005 Criss Angel Mindfreak Herself "Blind" (season 1, episode 10) 2005 Entourage Herself / Aquagirl 5 episodes 2006 Scrubs Julie Quinn 2 episodes 2006 The Simpsons Tabitha Vixx Voice; "Marge and Homer Turn a Couple Play" (season 17, episode 22) 2007 How I Met Your Mother Amy "Wait for It" (season 3, episode 1) 2010 Grey's Anatomy Mary Portman 4 episodes 2012–2013 Tron: Uprising Mara Voice; series regular 2012 Winx Club Additional voices Voice; English dub 2013 The Advocates Shannon Carter 1 episode 2013 High School USA! Cassandra Barren Voice; series regular 2014 Sofia the First Rapunzel Voice; "The Curse of Princess Ivy" (season 2, episode 18) 2014–2015 Red Band Society Dr. Erin Grace Recurring role 2014–present Sheriff Callie's Wild West Sheriff Callie Voice; series regular 2017 Tangled Rapunzel Voice; series regular Year Title Role Notes 2002 Kingdom Hearts Aerith Gainsborough Voice (English version) 2013 Disney Infinity Rapunzel Voice 2013 Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix Aerith Gainsborough Voice (English version); Archival footage 2014 Disney Infinity: Marvel Super Heroes Rapunzel Voice 2015 Disney Infinity 3.0 Rapunzel Voice TBA Kingdom Hearts III Rapunzel Voice (English version) Year !! Award !! Category !! Work !! Result !! Ref. 2000 Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards Favorite Rising Star "I Wanna Be with You" Teen Choice Awards Music - Choice Female Artist Herself 2002 MTV Movie Awards Breakthrough Female Performance A Walk to Remember Best Musical Sequence Teen Choice Awards Film - Choice Breakout Performance, Actress Film - Choice Chemistry Young Hollywood Awards Superstar of Tomorrow - Female Herself 2003 Unstoppable Vision Teen Choice Awards Choice Crossover Artist (Music/Acting) 2004 Choice Movie Sleazebag Saved! Choice Movie Hissy Fit Choice Movie Actress - Drama/Action Adventure Chasing Liberty So Real (1999) I Wanna Be with You (2000) Mandy Moore (2001) Coverage (2003) Wild Hope (2007) Amanda Leigh (2009)
