   Marikina (), officially the City of Marikina (), located on the island of Luzon in the Philippines, is one of the cities that make up Metro Manila, the National Capital Region. Marikina became the capital of the Province of Manila from 1898 to 1899. According to the , it has a population of . Marikina was given the title Shoe Capital of the Philippines because of its notable shoe industry, being the biggest manufacturer of shoes in the Philippines, producing almost 70% of shoes manufactured in the country. The Philippine International Footwear Center is located here where top quality shoes can be found. The Shoe Museum houses part of the famous shoe collection of the former First Lady Imelda Marcos, shoes of some of the world leaders and celebrities and shoes of different countries, making it the world's largest collection of pairs of shoes in a museum. Marikina is the main gateway of Metro Manila to Rizal Province as well as Quezon Province. It is one of the most awarded metropolitan cities in the Philippines, including the prestigious "Most Competitive Cities in the Philippines" awarded by the National Competitiveness Council in 2003 and 2005. Marikina remains in top 10 Philippine rankings, and ranking number one in Metro Manila for many years. A formerly rural settlement, Marikina is primarily residential and industrial, the city rapidly transformed into a highly urbanized and one of the wealthiest local government units in the Philippines. It is also home of some of high-end communities in Metro Manila, such as Loyola Grand Villas, Provident Villages and gated communities located in Barangays Industrial Valley and Marikina Heights. In view of the non-existence of records or documents on how the name Marikina came into being, the following legends were gathered from elder residents of the different barrios in Marikina. One of the builders of the Jesus dela Pena Chapel was a young priest named "Mariquina" who was given the task of baptizing children to Christianity.  Because of this very noble job, Mariquina was named in his honor. It is said that before the Spaniards came to Mariquina, a beautiful, virtuous, polite and intelligent lady named Maria Cuina was residing in the town. Because of her expertise in business, she became rich and her fortunes were expended in charity and eventually became famous in the whole town up to Manila. When a traveler from other towns visited the barrio, he asked for the name of the town, a resident replied "Maria Cuina" thinking that what was being asked was their admirable lady. Since then, the story spread throughout and the town was known as "Mariquina".  During the construction of the chapel of Jesus dela Peña, it was being supervised by the Jesuit priest and the laborers were Filipinos. As expected, the language barrier resulted in the usual misunderstandings. When the chapel was completed and the priest asked what the structure would be called, one worker answered "Marikit-na-Po", thinking that what was being asked was the condition of the chapel. Because the Spaniards knew that the word "Po" is a sign of respect and they were finding it difficult to express the letter "T", the Marikit-na was believed to be said as "Marikina". In the province of Nueva Viscaya in Spain, there was a beautiful town called Mariquina. This was where Eduardo de Mariquina, a famous musician got his name. The town is located beside the Charmaga River, now known as Artibai River, which is the origin of the Jesuit priests who came to the Philippines and established Jesus dela Peña. Because of this, "Mariquina" was used to honor the place where they came from. In 1901, Commissioner de Tavera changed the letter "Q" to a more vernacular "K". Based on history and documents in the custody of the municipal government of Marikina, the town was called Marikit-na in 1787 and was later changed to Mariquina. According to Dr. Trinidad Pardo de Tavera, the word Mariquina was in recognition of Capt. Berenguer de Mariquina who led the town in 1788.  The first settlers were descendants of Lakan Dula in the 1560s and the area is part of Kingdom of Tondo, followed by Augustinians were the first to arrive at the valley in the 1570s, at the spot known as Chorillo in Barangka. In 1572, Our Lady of the Abandoned Parish was established. Next came the Jesuits in 1630, in a place now called Jesus dela Peña (Jesus of the Rocks). Here, the Jesuits established a mission and built a chapel still known today as Jesus dela Pena Chapel. Fray Pedro de Arce, apostolic ruler of the Archbishop of Manila at that time, approved transfer of ecclesiastical control and supervision to the Jesuits, and settled the place as a town.[ ]   In 1665, an intensity 8 earthquake struck the valley and nearby Manila, and it is related to the activity now known as Marikina Valley Fault System. Only a Jesuit church experienced great damage and resulting 19 dead on the said earthquake.  In 1687, the town was called "Mariquina" after Felix Berenguer de Marquina, who was the governor-general at that time, and the town was declared a pueblo under the Spanish colonial government.  By the 19th century, Hacienda Mariquina was owned and administered by the Tuazon family and had become the largest in the Philippines. The hacienda was declared a mayorazgo by the Spanish colonial government. Don Juan Gregorio became the first Alcalde Capitan of Mariquina in 1822. In 1887, Mariquina emerged as a town of shoemakers.  During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Andrés Bonifacio arrived in Mariquina before he and his Katipuneros proceeded to the caves of Montalban. Mariquina became the capital of the Province of Manila in 1898, when the Philippine Revolution broke out, a period when Philippine Independence was declared by Emilio Aguinaldo, the first Philippine president. Don Vicente Gomez became the first Alcalde Presidente of Mariquina in 1900. On June 11, 1901, shortly after the United States took possession of the Philippines, its name officially became "Marikina". The province of Rizal was created by virtue of Act No. 137 by the First Philippine Commission which was acting as the unicameral legislative body in the island of Luzon. Marikina, along with many other towns around Manila, was incorporated into the new province. In 1906, the Manila Railroad Company completed the 31-kilometer steam train line called "Marikina Line", also known as Rosario-Montalban branch,List of Philippine National Railways stations#Rosario-Montalban branch (converted into the road which is now known as Daang Bakal, including Shoe Avenue), Marikina Railway Depot (Marikina Elementary School in the present-day) and Marikina Railway Station (which stands today as Marikina Sports Center), connecting Montalban and Rosario (now known as Tramo, in Pasig). Marikina Bridge, a vital economic link to Manila, was formally opened in 1934. During the construction of the train line, not far from Marikina Railway Depot, Marikina Airfield was completed and used for civilian airfield. The runways were subsequently converted into the road known today as E. Rodriguez Avenue and E. Santos Streets, and the airfield stands today as Paliparan Subdivision. In 1936, the train line was completely abandoned, while the airfield became primarily used by the Japanese during World War II.  After the war, neither was rebuilt. In 1942, Japanese Imperial forces occupied Marikina. The town was liberated in 1945 by combined U.S. and Philippine Commonwealth ground troops, who attacked the Japanese Imperial Army by artillery from Quezon City. Almost all of the large buildings, including the church bell tower, were destroyed. In reality, the Japanese had already left the town and retreated to the north. The town saw over 400 civilians casualties by the end of World War II. Local Filipino troops under the pre-war 4th and 42nd Infantry Division of the Philippine Commonwealth Army entered Marikina and assisted U.S. forces in attacking Japanese troops during the liberation.  In 1956, Marikina had re-emerged as a town of shoemakers after World War II. Honed by years of shoe manufacturing experience, the natives had developed a work ethic that prepared them for the arrival of heavy industries, and the town was finally named as the "Shoe Capital of the Philippines". With the industrial plants came waves of workers who chose to stay, rapidly increasing the population. In 1968, Kapitan Moy's house (now known as Sentrong Pangkultura ng Marikina) was declared a national shrine by the town council and the National Historical Commission. In 1969, Rodriguez Sports Complex, known today as Marikina Sports Center was completed. On November 7, 1975, by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 824, four cities and thirteen towns of Rizal, including Marikina, were made part of Metropolitan Manila Area. On October 23, 1988, Typhoon Unsang brought heavy rains, causing widespread flooding in Marikina for the first time. Large parts of Marikina was submerged by floods and many residents were stranded on their house rooftops and trees, and their properties and businesses were extensively damaged.   By 1992, Marikina had become an industrialized urban municipality under the leadership of Bayani Fernando. Marikina River was transformed into a  waterway, with the Marikina River Park along the riverbanks. On December 8, 1996, the municipality of Marikina became a city and transformed rapidly into a highly urbanized. Marikina became a First Class City by virtue of Republic Act No. 8223, the day of the Feast of Immaculate Concepcion, signed by President Fidel V. Ramos. In 2006, under Republic Act No. 9364 signed by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, Marikina was divided into two congressional districts being served by two representatives in 2007.  Barangays Fortune and Tumana were created and became independent in 2007. On September 26–27, 2009, Marikina was widely devastated by a flash flood from the overflowing Marikina River, due to torrential rains caused by Tropical Storm Ondoy. The river reached the 23-meter mark, the worst flooding in two decades.  The city was declared under state of calamity, as flood water flowed throughout the towns and barangays. National and international aides arrived immediately for relief, retrieval and recovery operations. In mid-2010s, Marikina emerge as one of Metro Manila's culinary destination because of numerous cafés, restaurants and bars have established, most notably some of these establishments are ancestral houses converted to this kind of business. Located along the eastern border of Metro Manila, it is bordered on the west by Quezon City, to the south by Pasig City and Cainta, Rizal, to the north by San Mateo, Rizal and to the east by Antipolo City, the capital of Rizal province. It is approximately 21 kilometers away from Manila and lies within . Marikina lies on the so-called Marikina Valley, which extends to the south toward Pasig City and Cainta, Rizal. Sierra Madre mountains lie to the east and Quezon City hills to the west. Marikina River runs through the mid-west portion of the city, with its tributary including Nangka River. Nangka River runs through the north slicing between Marikina and San Mateo, while the small waterway called Sapang Baho Creek slicing the southeast between Marikina and Cainta and Antipolo City. The total land area of Marikina is approximately 21.5 square kilometers (km²) or 2,150 hectares (ha). This represents about 3.42% of the total land area of Metro Manila. At present, the city is composed of 16 barangays. Barangays Fortune, Concepcion Dos and Marikina Heights are among the largest in terms of land area.[ ]   The south portion of the city comprises the numerous commercial, industrial and residential areas, heritage sites and mixed use zones, while the north and northeast portion are primarily for residential and industrial zones, and various establishments such as small and medium enterprises. Loyola Grand Villas, located at the northwest portion of the city, is a gated community comprising upper-middle class and wealthy residential areas. Barangay Sta. Elena represents a poblacion, or the center of Marikina. At present, it comprises 38% residential, 19% commercial and industrial, 17% Roads, 8% Mixed-use, 18% for parks and open spaces, development areas, institutional, cemeteries and others. From the north, Marikina occupies most of the south bank of Nangka River. The east slices at the foot of the Sierra Madre mountains of Antipolo and sliced by the streets of Montserrat Hill, Bonanza and Starlite in Barangay Concepcion Dos. The southeast slices by Sapang Baho River occupies the north-west bank. The south portion is sliced by Marcos Highway and occupies most of the north side of the highway and extends to the west until it occupies the LRT-2 Santolan Station depot until it reaches the Marikina River. The east occupies the southernmost of Quezon City hills which lies in Barangay Industrial Valley and sliced by C5 Road occupies the west side until it reaches Ateneo de Manila University campus. The east part of the campus covers the city, extending to the north and sliced by several roads of Loyola Grand Villas, which covers the east part of the village until it reaches Marikina River and its tributary Nangka River to the north. Marikina River runs to the western part of the city and surrounded by many lush trees in the Marikina River Park on the riverbanks. The south portion of the river is surrounded by structures and concrete walkways. The river covers an area of around 220 hectares and measures about 11 kilometers in length, and is the principal drainage system for Marikina. Its depth measures from 12 meters up to 18 meters during heavy downpour. Rehabilitation of the River started in 1992. The river traverses 11 city barangays which have streets and alleys going to the river, making river parks easily accessible. River parks today are popular sports and recreational centers not only in Metro Manila but throughout the Philippines. Marikina is divided into four (4) physiography zones, each physiography zones consisting of barangays which are belong: Marikina is prone to various natural disasters, including 2009 Typhoon Ketsana, and southwest monsoon flooding such as 2012 Habagat. Flash floods and landslides are frequent in Marikina, especially when struck by heavy rains.  Primarily, flooding within Marikina is caused by the increase of water level in major rivers and its tributaries, followed by overflowing from its riverbanks to low-lying areas throughout the city. Landslides are another threat, particularly at the foot of the higher grounds. Another major threat is earthquakes in Marikina. West Valley Fault System, previously known as Marikina Valley Fault Line, lies at the west of Marikina. The east of the fault line, in which a large portion of Marikina is included, is constantly sinking. It generates as the epicenter of the earthquake is in Marikina itself if the earthquake struck.  Marikina features a tropical monsoon climate. Its proximity to the equator means that the temperature range is very small, rarely going lower than  or higher than . However, humidity levels are usually very high, which makes it feel much warmer. It has a distinct, relatively short dry season from January through May, and a relatively lengthy wet season, from June through December.    The native people in Marikina refer to themselves as "Marikeño" (or Marikenyo, in Filipino). The population of Marikina is near half a million, making it one of the most densely populated areas in the Philippines. Like other places in Metro Manila, the original settlers are Tagalog. There has been constant migration of other ethnic groups in the Philippines. Tagalog is widely spoken and the main language in Marikina, while English is used in education and business. Marikina was one of the seats of the Spanish colonial government in past centuries, and has been used as the base of Roman Catholic missions to the Philippines. Religious orders include the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the Jesuits and the Augustinians, which were the first to arrive in Marikina. The Our Lady of the Abandoned Church, completed in 1572, is the seat of Nuestra Señora de los Desamparados, the Patron Saint of Marikina. The majority of the population is Roman Catholic. Other Christian faiths in Marikina including Iglesia ni Cristo, Seventh-day Adventist Church, Members Church of God International, Philippine Independent Church, Jesus Miracle Crusade, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, more than a dozen Baptist churches and other small Christian groups. Pentecostal Missionary Church of Christ (4th Watch) headquarters are located in the city. Other small religions in Marikina are Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam.   Like in other city governments in the Philippines, Marikina is governed by a mayor and a vice mayor elected to three-year terms. The mayor is the executive head and leads the city's departments in executing city ordinances and improving public services, along with city councilors, while the vice mayor heads a legislative council, and these councilors represent the two (2) legislative districts of the city. The council is in charge of formulating and enacting city ordinances. Marikina, being a part of the Metro Manila region, has its mayor in the Metro Manila Council headed by the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA). This council formulates development plans that seeks to solve the problems and improve the conditions in the metropolis. Marikina is made up of 16 barangays which handle governance in a much smaller area. These barangays are grouped into the aforementioned legislative districts. Each district is represented by a congressman, in turn is represented in the House of Representatives of the Philippines  The official seal of the City of Marikina bears the inscriptions "Lungsod ng Marikina", "Pilipinas", "1630" (the founding year of the municipality), and "1996", the year of approval of the city charter. The two mountains represent the majestic twin ranges of the Cordillera and Sierra Madre, between which the Marikina Valley is nestled, traversed by the Marikina River. The rising sun points to the eastern location of the city, with each ray representing the city's barangays. The machinery gear symbolizes its industries and the shoe last represents the traditional manufacturing in the city. The torch focuses on the lofty and noble ideals for human development and a better quality of life, and is symbolic of its Hispanic culture and tradition. The bamboo underscores a mixture of the people's natural humility and strength of character and also emphasizes the city's transition from an agricultural past to the urbanized, industrial present; the leaves and branches symbolize order and serenity. The bamboo and the wheel represent Marikina and its people's respect for and protection of the environment so as to remain in harmony with progress.    Marikina is politically subdivided into 16 barangays.NSCB Philippine Standard Geographic Codes – City of Marikina Its barangays are grouped into two districts for city council representation purposes. The first district encompasses the southern section of the city, while the second district encompasses the northern section.    Local cuisines such as Everlasting,  a popular dish in Marikina similar to embutido but it is cooked in "llanera", Waknatoy, a unique dish is simply a variant of Menudo with addition of pickles which gives waknatoy a sweet-tangy flavor and Laoya, a dish similar to Nilaga with addition of pounded garlic, sweet potato and banana (Saba). Marikina's festivities is rich in culture, tradition and the people itself. The traditional dance in Marikina is Lerion, the official folk dance of Marikina.http://marikina.gov.ph/v3/#!/musicandarts Some of the local festivities in Marikina includes: Ilognayan Festival, a cultural event is about letting the people know about the Marikina River’s significance which held in February along the Marikina River; Ka-Angkan Festival is a feast coincides with the founding anniversary of Marikina on April 16. It is an event that honors the large native clans of the city that have unique monikers; Marikina Christmas Festival/Shopalooza, is a long holiday festival which filled with stalls selling a wide variety of goods at affordable prices. The festival starts as early as October, and runs until February of the following year, mostly concentrated in Marikina River Park and Riverbanks Center; Rehiyon-Rehiyon Festival, a festival that showcases the various ethnic groups that make up the people of Marikina. It serves as a tribute to the active community who came from other regions of the country and chose to settle in Marikina. It proves that unity can be achieved despite diverse backgrounds and different dialects. The festival celebrates every year on December 8, where Marikina was established as a city; and lastly, the Sapatos Festival, since Marikina was tagged as the Shoe Capital, the city celebrates the Sapatos Festival every year, from mid-September until the year ends. This is a celebration of the ingenuity and craftsmanship of shoemakers in Marikina. It gives due recognition to their hardship and the local shoe industry itself.   Marikina Sports Center, also known as Marikina Sports Park (formerly known as Rodriguez Sports Center), is a prominent structure located in the heart of Marikina. It features an Olympic-size swimming pool, a 15,000-seater grandstand, 400-meter oval, a sports building, an indoor gymnasium and several courts. The area has been host to several sports competitions both national and regional as well as entertainment such as grand concerts, finals night and live television shows.   The financial resources of Marikina is scattered all over the city, but the southern part is primarily concentrated which includes business establishments and commercial facilities, while the northern part is factories and warehouses. Riverbanks Center is the city's commercial center situated southwest of the city where shopping malls and recreation areas are located. Real estate, commercial developments and numerous commercial establishment along Marcos and Sumulong Highways are developing. Gil Fernando Avenue and J. P. Rizal Street are the heart of a restaurant, cafés and entertainment row with a wide array of prices, cultures, and flavors. Fortune Avenue is home to major companies such as Fortune Tobacco, Philip Morris, Armscor and Noritake. Sumulong Highway is the center of business and trade, it has mixed establishments such as banking, small shops, retail shops, electronics and appliances. Almost all of major international and local commercial and government banks in the Philippines operate a branch in the city. Business processing outsourcing and other international services are also growing  in Marikina primary located in Blue Wave Marquinton and Riverbanks Center which are the only 2 areas in the city accredited by PEZA. Marikina Market Mall is a centralized public market and an attraction for shoppers with a mall-like ambiance. The market is divided into two sections: the dry goods and the wet goods. Commerce in this market is active, especially in the early morning. Under the urban renewal program of the city, the market have been refurbished and it was named as the cleanest and organized market in Metro Manila for many years.  Some of Marikina's products are handicrafts, sweet delicacies, leathers, clothing, food processing, bags, accessories, cigarettes  and most of all, the shoe manufacturing. Marikina is the biggest manufacturer of quality shoes in the Philippines. It is also the Philippines' largest worldwide exporter of leather shoes that tagged Marikina as the Shoe Capital of the Philippines. Hundreds of footwear establishments are located throughout the city, generating thousands of jobs and city financial resources that continue to make the shoe and leather industry the top livelihood in the city. By the 2000s, the Marikina shoe industry was affected by competition from Chinese manufacturers. SM City Marikina, Blue Wave Mall at Marquinton, and C&Ps Circle Mall are some of city's shopping malls. A popular shopping mall in the city is Riverbanks Mall located inside Riverbanks Center. Other major shopping centers located along Marcos Highway are Sta. Lucia East Grandmall, Robinsons Place Metro East and SM City Masinag which are more closely to Marikina.    Like in most of the urban areas in the Philippines, is facilitated mostly using inexpensive jeepneys. Buses mostly in highways, tricycles give access to more secluded areas like villages and subdivision, while taxi cabs are available throughout the city. Tamaraw FX has begun to compete directly with jeepneys in major roads while UV Express Shuttle services are also available in selected terminals. On January 2016, the city government of Marikina invented the "AMV" or "Adaptive Mobile Vehicle" for the PWD or Person with Disabilities and Senior Citizens. The "AMV" is wheelchair vehicle or can put wheelchair inside. The local governmemt of Marikina wants to be a "friendly city" for the Senior Citizens. Marcos Highway (R-6) (also known as Marikina-Infanta Road), is the main highway east of Metro Manila connecting Metro Manila, Rizal Province and Quezon Province. Other major networks in the city are A. Bonifacio Avenue, Sumulong Highway, J. P. Rizal Street, Gil Fernando Avenue, Shoe Avenue, Fortune Avenue, Bayan-bayanan Avenue, General Ordoñez Street and C-5 Access Road connecting Riverbanks Avenue. Major bridges including Marikina Bridge, Marcos Bridge, Diosdado Macapagal Bridge, Nangka Bridge, Gil Fernando Bridge and Modesta Bridge. These bridges are accessed and spans by Marikina River and its tributary Nangka River. Overpass or flyovers are concentrated southwest of the city such as SM Marikina overpass, Marcos overpass, C5 Access overpass and Barangka Aqueduct. An elevated LRT-2 runs through the city and the current elevated railway station is Santolan, the east-end station of the line, located along Marcos Highway, just the border of Barangay Calumpang in Marikina and Barangay Santolan in Pasig. The station connects to the west-end, Recto Station, along Claro M. Recto Avenue in Manila. The city has developed a network of bike lanes along major roads and city streets, as well as the riverbanks of Marikina River. The bikeways program commenced in 2002 under former mayor Marides Fernando.  A bike lane was introduced in 2012, this time beside major highway like Marcos Highway, running from Santolan station of LRT-2 up to Imelda Avenue.http://www.philstar.com/nation/2012/11/27/874895/mmda-opens-2nd-bike-lane-marikina Marikina River is the main waterway in Marikina and the main transportation is river ferries. Sto. Niño Ferry Station are under construction, and once completed, it will provide more efficient transportation for commuters, while Riverbanks Ferry Station still abandoned. However, as of December 2015, these ferry services has been suspended.    Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Marikina (PLMar) is the first city government-funded university offers different courses while Marikina Polytechnic College (MPC) is a city state college offers mostly technical courses, both are government-owned institutions. Other prominent college includes Roosevelt College Marikina, a private non-sectarian college named in honor of the American president Franklin D. Roosevelt. Numerous campuses of information technology and computer colleges such as AMA Computer College East Rizal, STI College Marikina, Informatics International School, International Electronics and Technical Institute, Asian Institute of Computer Studies, Deeco Technological Institute, Expert Information Technology Education Center and others are growing in the city. The city also offers vocational courses such as National Cottage Industries Technology Center. Marikina Science High School (MSHS), is the first city public science high school in Marikina. Marikina Catholic School is a private sectarian institution and it is considered as the city's center of Catholic educational institution located in Our Lady of the Abandoned Parish complex. Other sectarian schools such as Marikina Christian Integrated School, National Christian Life College and Our Lady of Perpetual Succor College (OLOPSC). Private school such as Mother of Divine Providence School, St. Nicholas School, Holy Trinity School, Charis School, Infant Jesus Academy, San Lorenzo Ruiz de Manila School, Kostka School, Ingenium School Foundation, and some exclusive schools such as Marist School and St. Scholastica's Academy are also found in the city. Manila Boystown Complex, is a government-owned institution and facility is exclusively for abandoned, forgotten, and voluntarily surrendered children, teenagers, and senior citizens. Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) located near the city hall, is responsible for managing and supervising technical education and skills development in the city. Aside from these institutions, each barangays in Marikina has public schools. A total of 17 primary public schools and 14 secondary public schools scattered all over the city under the supervision of Department of Education.   Marikina Health Office is a center of health services in the city and responsible for providing healthcare services as well as planning and implementation of the health care programs provided by the city government. It operates health centers and lying-in clinics of each barangays to provide basic medical services in the community. Local government provides free medical and dental missions, health seminars and check-ups, proper disposal and hygiene training, special services for senior citizens, pregnant women and children, and other free medical operations. It also has a privilege card that offers discount fees and free services such as emergency, medical, safety and security services. Amang Rodriguez Medical Center is a public major and prominent hospital in Marikina as well as its neighboring cities and towns, while medical centers such as  Marikina Valley Medical Center and St. Anthony Medical Center, are private major hospitals offers state-of-the-art equipment. Other several city hospitals are found across the city including Sta. Monica Hospital, St. Vincent General Hospital, Victoria Hospital, Garcia General Hospital, Immaculate Concepcion Hospital, and among others. Marikina Sports Complex provides a gym, sections for senior citizens, dance and aerobic exercises, oval track for runners, and other sporting activities. Riverbanks Center is a place for jogging, walking and running.   Marikina Rescue 161 is a 24-hour emergency service responds to all calls within the city for assistance during emergency situations in 5 minutes. The office also conducts seminars and trainings on first-aid among its staff to upgrade skills especially Marikina is vulnerable in calamities like floods, fire and earthquakes. Marikina Police Station is responsible law enforcement, under the Eastern Police District (EPD) of National Capital Region Police Office (NCRPO) of the Philippine National Police (PNP), . Marikina Police Station has won several awards for being the Best Police Station in Metro Manila. Marikina Fire Department provides fire and emergency services, under Fire District IV (FD4) known as the Eastern District Fire of Bureau of Fire Protection National Capital Region (BFPNCR) of Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG). Marikina's main phone carrier (like other cities and towns throughout the Philippines) was the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company. Aside from PLDT, two independent companies to install new phone lines in Marikina granted by National Telecommunications Commission , these are Bayan Telecommunications (BayanTel)/Benpress and GlobeLines. These 3 companies offers mobile phone and internet services. Marikina has its own radio station, the DEL Radio - Radyo Marikina, through its Public Information Office, and it considered as the first local government radio station in the Philippines. Its frequency is 1674&nbsp;kHz in Metro Manila and formerly known as DZBI. Marikina has sister cities and friendship agreements with foreign and local cities.     Barangays District Population Area (ha) Density (/km²) Zip Code Barangka 1st 19,222 117 16,429 1803 Calumpang 1st 14,879 72 20,665 1801 Concepcion Uno 2nd 39,204 213 18,405 1807 Concepcion Dos 2nd 26,114 184 14,192 1811 Fortune 2nd 33,390 219 15,246 1810 Industrial Valley 1st 14,263 65 21,943 1802 Jesus Dela Peña 1st 9,465 82 11,542 1804 Malanday 1st 51,956 87 59,719 1805 Marikina Heights 2nd 35,416 206 17,192 1810 Nangka 2nd 40,731 182 22,379 1808 Parang 2nd 37,896 164 23,107 1809 San Roque 1st 18,252 109 16,744 1801 Santa Elena 1st 6,954 44 15,804 1800 Santo Niño 1st 26,120 146 17,809 1800 Tañong 1st 8,479 73 11,615 1803 Tumana 2nd 41,809 182 22,971 1805 Friendship city Sister city (International) Sister cities (Local) Juan Chanyungco (1938–1945) Enrique Dela Paz (1945–1948) Gil Fernando (1948–1951) Juan Chanyungco (1951–1955) Gil Fernando (1956–1959) Osmundo De Guzman (1960–1986) Teofisto Santos (1986) Rodolfo B. Valentino (1987–1992) Bayani Fernando (1992–2001) Ma. Lourdes Fernando (2001–2010) Del De Guzman (2010–present) Marikina Valley Legislative districts of Marikina City List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines Official Website of the City Government of Marikina
