 Ramón Antonio Gerardo Estévez (born August 3, 1940), better known by his stage name Martin Sheen, is an American actor who first became known for his roles in the films The Subject Was Roses (1968) and Badlands (1973), and later achieved wide recognition for his leading role in Apocalypse Now (1979). Other notable films in Sheen's career include Gandhi (1982), Gettysburg (1993), The Departed (2006), and The Amazing Spider-Man (2012). He also starred in the television series The West Wing (1999–2006) as President Josiah Bartlet. In film, he has won the Best Actor award at the San Sebastián International Film Festival for his performance as Kit Carruthers in Badlands. His portrayal of Capt. Willard in Apocalypse Now earned a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor. Sheen has worked with a wide variety of film directors, such as Richard Attenborough, Francis Ford Coppola, Terrence Malick, David Cronenberg, Mike Nichols, Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, and Oliver Stone. He has had a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame since 1989. In television, he has won both a Golden Globe and two Screen Actors Guild awards for playing the role of President Josiah Bartlet in The West Wing, and an Emmy for guest starring in the sitcom Murphy Brown. Born and raised in the United States by immigrant parents, he adopted the stage name Martin Sheen to help him gain acting parts. He is the father of four children (Emilio, Ramón, Carlos (aka Charlie Sheen), and Renée), all of whom are actors, as is his younger brother Joe Estevez. Although known as an actor, Sheen also has directed one film, Cadence (1990), appearing alongside sons Charlie and Ramón. He has narrated, produced, and directed documentary television, earning two Daytime Emmy awards in the 1980s. In addition to film and television, Sheen has been active in liberal politics. Sheen was born in Dayton, Ohio, the son of Mary-Ann (née Phelan; 1903–1951) and Francisco Estévez Martinez (1898–1974). During birth, Sheen's left arm was crushed by forceps, giving him limited lateral movement of that arm, which is  shorter than his right. Both of Sheen's parents were immigrants; his mother from Borrisokane, County Tipperary, Ireland; and his father was born in Parderrubias, Galicia, Spain. After moving to Dayton in the 1930s, his father was a factory worker/machinery inspector at the National Cash Register Company. Sheen grew up on Brown Street in the South Park neighborhood, one of ten children (nine boys and a girl). Due to his father's work, the family lived in Bermuda on St. John's Road, Pembroke where five of his brothers were born. Martin was the first child to be born in Dayton, Ohio, after the family returned from Bermuda.  Sheen contracted polio as a child and had to remain bedridden for a year. His doctor's treatment using Sister Kenny's method helped cure him and he regained use of his legs. When he was 11, Martin's mother died and the children faced the possibility of living in an orphanage or foster homes. The family was able to remain together with the assistance of Holy Trinity Catholic Church in Dayton. Raised as a Catholic, he graduated from Chaminade High School (now Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School). :("the actor born Ramón Antonio Gerard Estévez is a devout Roman Catholic") Sheen was the first of the children born in the United States. At age 14 he organized a strike of golf caddies while working at a private golf club in Dayton, Ohio. He complained about the golfers: "They often used obscene language in front of us.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. we were little boys and they were abusive .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. anti-Semitic .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And they, for the most part, were upstanding members of the community." Sheen was drawn to acting at a young age, but his father disapproved of his interest in the field. Despite his father's opposition, Sheen borrowed money from a Catholic priest and moved to New York City in his early twenties, hoping to make it as an actor.  He spent two years in the Living Theatre company. It was in New York that he met the legendary Catholic activist Dorothy Day. Working with her Catholic Worker Movement, he began his commitment to social justice, and would one day go on to play Peter Maurin, cofounder of the Catholic Worker Movement, in Entertaining Angels: The Dorothy Day Story. Sheen deliberately failed the entrance exam for the University of Dayton so that he could pursue his acting career. He adopted his stage name, Martin Sheen, from a combination of the CBS casting director, Robert Dale Martin, who gave him his first big break, and the televangelist archbishop, Fulton J. Sheen. In a 2003 Inside the Actors Studio interview, Sheen explained, Whenever I would call for an appointment, whether it was a job or an apartment, and I would give my name, there was always that hesitation and when I'd get there, it was always gone. So I thought, I got enough problems trying to get an acting job, so I invented Martin Sheen. It's still Estevez officially. I never changed it officially. I never will. It's on my driver's license and passport and everything. I started using Sheen, I thought I'd give it a try, and before I knew it, I started making a living with it and then it was too late. In fact, one of my great regrets is that I didn't keep my name as it was given to me. I knew it bothered my dad.Stated in interview on Inside the Actors Studio, May 18, 2003  Sheen has said he was greatly influenced by the actor James Dean. He developed a theatre company with other actors in hopes that a production would earn him recognition. In 1963, he made an appearance in Nightmare, an episode of the television science fiction series The Outer Limits. In 1964, he co-starred in the Broadway play The Subject Was Roses; he later reprised his role in the 1968 film of the same name, and was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor.  Sheen also starred in the television production Ten Blocks on the Camino Real (1966), an adaptation of Tennessee Williams' play Camino Real directed by Jack Landau and presented by NET, a PBS predecessor. During the 1960s and early 1970s, Sheen honed his skills as a guest star on a number of popular television series, including My Three Sons (1964), Flipper (1967), The F.B.I. (1968), Mission: Impossible (1969), Hawaii Five-O (1970), Dan August (1971), The Rookies (1973), Columbo (1973), and The Streets of San Francisco (1973). He also had a recurring role as "Danny Morgan" on Mod Squad (1970–1971). By the early 1970s, Sheen was increasingly focusing on television films and motion pictures. Sheen portrayed Dobbs in the 1970 film adaptation of Catch-22. He then co-starred in the controversial Emmy Award-winning 1972 television film That Certain Summer, said to be the first television movie in America to portray homosexuality in a sympathetic light. His next important feature film role was in 1973, when he starred with Sissy Spacek in the crime drama Badlands, playing an antisocial multiple murderer. Sheen has stated that his role in Badlands was one of his two favorites, the other being his role as a U.S. Army special operations officer in Apocalypse Now. Also in 1973, Sheen appeared opposite David Janssen in "Such Dust As Dreams Are Made On", the first pilot for the television series Harry O. In 1974, Sheen portrayed a hot rod driver in the television movie The California Kid, and that same year received an Emmy Award nomination for Best Actor in a television drama for his portrayal of Pvt. Eddie Slovik in the television film The Execution of Private Slovik. Based on an incident that occurred during World War II, the film told the story of the only U.S. soldier to be executed for desertion since the American Civil War.  Sheen's performance ultimately led to Francis Ford Coppola choosing him for a starring role as U.S. Army Captain Benjamin L. Willard in 1979's Apocalypse Now, a film that gained him wide recognition. Filming in the Philippine jungle in the typhoon season of 1976, Sheen admitted he was not in the greatest shape and was drinking heavily. For the film’s legendary opening sequence in a Saigon hotel room, Sheen did not have to act so much since it was his 36th birthday and he was heavily intoxicated. After 12 months, Sheen reached breaking point, suffering a minor heart attack and he had to crawl out to a road for help. After his heart attack, his younger brother Joe Estevez stood in for him in a number of long shots and in some of the voice-overs. Sheen was able to resume filming a few weeks later. Sheen has played U.S. President John F. Kennedy (in the miniseries Kennedy ); Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the television special The Missiles of October; White House Chief of Staff A.J. McInnerney in The American President;  White House Counsel John Dean in the Television mini-series Blind Ambition; sinister future president Greg Stillson in The Dead Zone; the President in the Lori Loughlin-Chris Noth television mini-series, Medusa's Child; and fictional Democratic president Josiah "Jed" Bartlet in the acclaimed television drama, The West Wing. On November 4, 2010, it was confirmed that he had been cast as Uncle Ben in Sony's 2012 reboot of the Spider-Man film series, The Amazing Spider-Man, directed by Marc Webb. Sheen has performed voice-over work as the narrator for the Eyewitness series and as the "real" Seymour Skinner in the controversial Simpsons episode "The Principal and the Pauper." In addition, he played the role of the Illusive Man in the highly acclaimed video game Mass Effect 2, and the sequel, Mass Effect 3. Martin Sheen is also the host of In Focus, a television program whose Facebook page claims airs on PBS affiliate stations on Public Television, but in fact does not, according to the company's spokesperson, as reported in the Washington Post on December 27, 2012. Sheen recently travelled to Mexico City to star in Chamaco with Kirk Harris, Alex Perea, Gustavo Sanchez Parra and Michael Madsen. In November 2010 he filmed Stella Days in County Tipperary, Ireland, near the birthplace of his mother. Thaddeus O'Sullivan directed and Irish actor Stephen Rea also starred. Sheen appeared in Martin Scorsese's The Departed as Captain Oliver Queenan, a commanding officer who is watching an undercover cop (Leonardo DiCaprio) who is a mole in an Irish American mob run by a vicious mob boss (Jack Nicholson). Martin Sheen and son Ramon Estevez combined both their real and stage names to create the Warner Bros.-affiliated company, Estevez Sheen Productions. The company’s latest film is The Way, written and directed by Sheen's son Emilio Estevez who also stars in the film as Martin’s on-screen son, who dies while hiking the Camino de Santiago. His daughter, Renée, also has a part in the film. Driven by sadness, Martin’s character, an American doctor, leaves his Californian life and embarks on the 800-km pilgrimage from the French Pyrenees to Spain’s Santiago de Compostela himself, with his son’s ashes. The Way premiered at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival. Sheen appeared in the Irish Film entitled Stella Days directed by Irish Director Thaddeus O'Sullivan and stars IFTA award winning actress Amy Huberman.  Sheen plays parish priest Daniel Barry, whose love for the cinema leads him on a path to help set up a local cinema in the town of Borrisokane. Daniel comes up against opposition from doubtful local parishioners who question his faith and the Bishop Hegarty (Tom Hickey), who is more interested in raising funds for a new church. In 2010, Sheen first spoke to 18,000 young student activists at Free The Children's We Day, explaining "While acting is what I do for a living, activism is what I do to stay alive." Although he did not attend college, Sheen credited the Marianists at University of Dayton as a major influence on his public activism, as well as Archbishop Desmond Tutu. Sheen is known for his outspoken support of liberal political causes, such as opposition to United States military actions and a hazardous-waste incinerator in East Liverpool, Ohio. Sheen has resisted calls to run for office, saying: "There's no way that I could be the president. You can't have a pacifist in the White House .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I'm an actor. This is what I do for a living." Sheen is an honorary trustee of the Dayton International Peace Museum. He supported the 1965 farm worker movement with Cesar Chavez in Delano, California. He is a proponent of the Consistent life ethic, which advocates against abortion, capital punishment and war. He articulated this view further in an interview with The Progressive: "I'm inclined to be against abortion of any life. But I am equally against the death penalty or war."  He also supports the Democrats for Life of America's Pregnant Women Support Act. In 2004 along with Rob Reiner, Sheen campaigned for Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean, and later campaigned for nominee John Kerry. On May 16, 1995, Martin Sheen and Paul Watson from the non-profit environmental organization Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, were confronted by a number of Canadian sealers in a hotel on Magdalen Islands over Sea Shepherd's history of attacks on sealing and whaling ships. Sheen negotiated with the sealers while Watson was escorted to the airport by police. In 2000, Sheen got involved in support of gun control after the National Shooting Sports Foundation hired his politically conservative brother, actor Joe Estevez who sounds like Sheen, to do a voice over for a pro-gunmaker commercial earlier in the year.Leah Garchik, I'm Not a President But I Play One, San Francisco Chronicle, October 10, 2000, accessed January 17, 2013.2000 POLITICAL ADS Year In Review , National Journal, December 21, 2000, accessed January 17, 2013. In early 2003 Sheen signed the "Not in My Name" declaration opposing the invasion of Iraq (along with prominent figures such as Noam Chomsky and Susan Sarandon); the declaration appeared in the magazine The Nation. On August 28, 2005, he visited anti-Iraq War activist Cindy Sheehan at Camp Casey. He prayed with her and spoke to her supporters. He began his remarks by stating, "At least you've got the acting president of the United States," referring to his role as fictional president Josiah Bartlet on The West Wing. Cindy Sheehan had been demanding a second meeting with the President, George W. Bush. Sheen endorsed marches and walkouts called by the civil rights group By Any Means Necessary (BAMN) to force the state of California to honor the Cesar Chavez holiday. On the day of the protests (March 30), thousands of students, primarily Latino from California and elsewhere, walked out of school in support of the demand. Sheen also stated that he participated in the large-scale immigration marches in Los Angeles in 2006 and 2007. On April 10, 2006, the New York Times reported that members of the Democratic Party in Ohio had contacted Sheen, attempting to persuade him to run for the United States Senate in Ohio. Sheen declined the offer, stating, "I'm just not qualified. You're mistaking celebrity for credibility." On November 26, 2006, the Sunday Times in the Republic of Ireland, where Sheen was then living as a result of his enrolment in NUI Galway, reported on his speaking out against mushroom farmers exploiting foreign workers by paying them as little as €2.50 an hour in a country where the minimum wage was €7.65. Sheen's latest activism includes attendances at meetings of the environmentalist group Earth First! and speaking appearances at youth empowerment events called We Day on behalf of Free The Children, an international charity and educational partner. Sheen has been named an ambassador of Free The Children and has supported such initiatives as the We are Silent campaign, a 24-hour pledge of silence. Speaking about his work with Free The Children, Sheen has said, "I'm hooked! I told them whenever I could offer some insight or energy or whatever I had, I'd be delighted if they would call on me, and they have." Sheen has also endorsed and supported Help Darfur Now, a student-run organization to help aid victims of the genocide in Darfur, the western region in Sudan. He also appears in the recent anti-fur documentary "Skin Trade." Sheen has appeared in television and radio ads urging Washington State residents to vote 'no' on Initiative 1000, a proposed assisted suicide law before voters in the 2008 election. Sheen initially endorsed New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election, and helped raise funds for his campaign. After Richardson dropped out of the campaign, Sheen stated in a BBC Two interview with Graham Norton that he was supporting Barack Obama. In March 2012, Sheen was featured with George Clooney in a performance of Dustin Lance Black's play, 8—a staged reenactment of the federal trial that overturned California's Prop 8 ban on same-sex marriage—as attorney Theodore Olson. The production was held at the Wilshire Ebell Theatre and broadcast on YouTube to raise money for the American Foundation for Equal Rights. In September 2012, Sheen reunited with the cast of The West Wing to produce a video tasked with explaining Michigan's ballot and its partisan and nonpartisan sections. The video doubled as a campaign ad for Bridget McCormack, who was running as a nonpartisan candidate for Michigan's Supreme Court.McCormack Nonpartican Election Video http://mediadecoder.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/09/21/a-brief-west-wing-reunion/ In 2015, it was announced that Sheen narrated the trailer for a proposed documentary film about the controversial prosecution of former Alabama governor Don Siegelman.https://www.gofundme.com/DonSiegelmanFilm Sheen married Janet Templeton on December 23, 1961, and they have four children, three sons and a daughter, all of whom are actors: Emilio, Ramón, Carlos, and Renée. All but one decided to keep their own names when they began acting&nbsp;&ndash; Carlos, calling himself Charlie Sheen, made the decision to Anglicize his first name and take his surname from his father's stage name. Charlie and his father jointly parodied their respective previous roles in the 1993 movie Hot Shots! Part Deux their river patrol boats passed each other, at which point they both shouted, "I loved you in Wall Street!" a film they both starred in as father and son in 1987. He has played the father of sons Emilio Estevez and Charlie Sheen in various projects: he played Emilio's father in The War at Home, In the Custody of Strangers and The Way, and Charlie's father in Wall Street, No Code of Conduct, two episodes of Spin City, and Anger Management. He also appeared as a guest star in one episode of Two and a Half Men playing the father of Charlie's neighbor Rose (Melanie Lynskey), and another as guest star Denise Richards's father; at the time that episode aired, Richards was still married to Charlie. Martin also played a "future" version of Charlie in a VISA TV commercial. Martin has played other characters with his children. He starred in the film Bobby, which was directed by Emilio, who also starred in the movie alongside his father. Renée had a supporting role in The West Wing, as one of President Josiah Bartlet's (Sheen) secretaries. Emilio also appeared, uncredited, in an episode of The West Wing portraying his father's character, President Bartlet, in home movie footage. Sheen became a grandfather at age 43 when his son Emilio had a son named Taylor Levi with his girlfriend, Carey Salley. Sheen has a total of ten grandchildren, the other nine being: Paloma Rae (from Emilio), Cassandra, Sam J, Lola Rose, Bob and Max (from Charlie) and Katherine, Luis Jr. and Christopher (from Ramon) and one great-granddaughter Luna (from Cassandra). He celebrated his 50th wedding anniversary in 2011. In 2012, Sheen was a guest on the U.S. version of Who Do You Think You Are?, tracing his Irish and Spanish ancestry. After the end of filming of The West Wing, Sheen announced plans to further his education: "My plan is to read English literature, philosophy and theology in Galway, Ireland, where my late mother came from and where I'm also a citizen." Speaking after an honorary arts doctorate was conferred on him by the National University of Ireland, Sheen joked that he would be the "oldest undergraduate" at the National University of Ireland (NUI), Galway, when he started his full-time studies there in the autumn of 2006. Although expressing concern that he might be a "distraction" to other students at NUIG, he attended lectures like everyone else. Speaking the week after filming his last episode of The West Wing, he said, "I'm very serious about it." He once said, "I never went to college when I was young and am looking forward to giving it a try .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at age 65!" On September 1, 2006, Sheen was among the first to register as a student at NUI Galway. He left the University after completing a semester. Sheen maintains links with Galway and "heartily" supported Michael D. Higgins in the Irish presidential election, 2011, having become a "dear friend" of Higgins while studying there."'President’ Sheen adds lustre to Michael D bid for Áras". Galway City Tribune. 2 September 2011. In a speech at Oxford University in 2009, Sheen admitted to having been arrested 66 times for protesting and acts of civil disobedience. He was described by human rights activist Craig Kielburger as having "a rap sheet almost as long as his list of film credits." On April 1, 2007, Sheen was arrested, with 38 other activists, for trespassing at the Nevada Test Site at a Nevada Desert Experience event protesting against the site. Sheen is a Roman Catholic, having had his faith restored by a series of meaningful conversations in Paris in 1981 with Terrence Malick, the director of Sheen’s breakthrough film, Badlands (1973). He is a supporter of the Catholic Worker movement. He stated in 2012 that he supports same-sex marriage, unlike the Catholic Church's position on the matter. He discussed his views on abortion in a 2011 interview with RTÉ in which he said his wife was conceived through a rape and he says had her mother aborted her, or dumped her in the Ohio River as she had considered, his wife would not exist. He also talked about three of his grandchildren who were conceived out of wedlock, saying his sons "were not happy at the time but they came to love these children. We have three grown grandchildren, two of them are married, they're some of the greatest source [sic] of joy in our lives." He has also stated his empathy for women facing unexpected pregnancy and that he didn't oppose their right to abortion: "I cannot make a choice for a women, particularly a black or brown or poor pregnant woman. I would not make a judgment in the case. As a father and a grandfather, I have had experience with children who don't always come when they are planned, and I have experienced the great joy of God's presence in my children, so I'm inclined to be against abortion of any life. But I am equally against the death penalty or war - anywhere people are sacrificed for some end justifying a means. I don't think abortion is a good idea. I personally am opposed to abortion, but I will not judge anybody else's right in that regard because I am not a woman and I could never face the actual reality of it." In the spring of 1989, Sheen was named honorary mayor of Malibu, California. He promptly marked his appointment with a decree proclaiming the area "a nuclear-free zone, a sanctuary for aliens and the homeless, and a protected environment for all life, wild and tame". Some local citizens were angered by the decree, and the Malibu Chamber of Commerce met in June of that year to consider revoking his title, but voted unanimously to retain him.  While Sheen claims he deliberately failed the entrance exam for the University of Dayton so that he could pursue his acting career, he still has an affinity for UD, and is seen drinking from a "Dayton Flyers" coffee mug during several episodes of The West Wing. Sheen also developed an ongoing relationship with Wright State University, where he performed Love Letters as a benefit for scholarships in the Department of Theatre, Dance and Motion Pictures, and hosted a trip of donors to the set of The West Wing with the department's chair, W. Stuart McDowell, in September 2001. The Sheen/Estevez & Augsburger Scholarship Fund has since attracted over $100,000 in scholarships in the arts for students in need at WSU since its inception in 2000.Community: The Magazine of Wright State University, Fall, 2000. Sheen also has a great affinity for the University of Notre Dame and in 2008 was awarded the Laetare Medal, the highest honor bestowed on American Catholics, in May 2008 at the school's commencement. Sheen received six Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for his performance on The West Wing, for which he won a Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in TV-Drama, as well as two SAG Awards for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series, and was part of the cast that received two SAG Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. In his acting career, Sheen has been nominated for ten Emmy Awards, winning one. He has also earned eight nominations for Golden Globe Awards. Sheen has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, at 1500 Vine Street. In 2001 Sheen won a TV Guide Award for 'Actor of the Year in a Drama Series' for The West Wing. In the animated Nickelodeon movie, TV show and TV spin-off of The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, there is a character named Sheen Estevez, which is Sheen's original last name – Estévez – and working last name, Sheen. Sheen was the 2003 recipient of the Marquette University Degree of Doctor of Letters, honoris causa for his work on social and Catholic issues.Famous Faces Answers In 2011, he was awarded an honorary life membership in the Law Society of University College Dublin.  On May 3, 2015 Sheen received an honorary degree Doctor of Human Letters from the University of Dayton for his lifelong commitment to peace, social justice and human rights exemplifying the Catholic, Marianist university's missions. First appearing on A Prairie Home Companion on November 11, 2004, Sheen has since become a frequent guest performer, with over a dozen episodes since 2007.       Year Title Role Director Notes 1967 Artie Connors Larry Peerce 1968 Timmy Cleary Ulu Grosbard Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture 1970 Catch-22 1st Lt. Dobbs Mike Nichols 1972 No Drums, No Bugles Ashby Gatrell Clyde Ware Pickup on 101 Les John Florea Rage Maj. Holliford George C. Scott That Certain Summer Gary McClain Lamont Johnson 1973 When the Line Goes Through Bluff Jackson Clyde Ware Badlands Kit Carruthers Terrence Malick The Conflict (Catholics) Father Kinsella Jack Gold 1974 Luther Sykes John Patterson Michael McCord Richard T. Heffron Robert F. Kennedy Anthony Page Eddie Slovik Lamont Johnson 1975 Alexander William Holmes Lee H. Katzin Sweet Hostage Leonard Hatch Lee Phillips 1976 Robby Navarro George P. Cosmatos Frank Hallet Nicolas Gessner 1979 Apocalypse Now Captain Benjamin L. Willard Francis Ford Coppola Nominated — American Movie Award for Best ActorNominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role Eagle's Wing Pike Anthony Harvey 1980 Warren Lasky Don Taylor 1981 Loophole Stephen Booker John Quested 1982 Gandhi Vince Walker Richard Attenborough That Championship Season Tom Daley Jason Miller In the Custody of Strangers Frank Robert Greenwald Enigma Alex Holbeck Jeannot Szwarc 1983 In the King of Prussia Judge Samuel Salus II Emile de Antonio Man, Woman and Child Robert Beckwith Dick Richards Greg Stillson David Cronenberg 1984 Firestarter Captain Hollister Mark L. Lester 1985 Artaban Michael Ray Rhodes 1986 Dr. Alex Carmody Richard C. Bennett Shattered Spirits Lyle Mollencamp Robert Greenwald 1987 Cal Jamison John Schlesinger Siesta Del Mary Lambert Wall Street Carl Fox Oliver Stone 1988 Da Charlie Matt Clark Judgment in Berlin Herbert Jay Stern Leo Penn 1989 Marked for Murder Man in park Rick Sloane Cold Front John Hyde Allan A. Goldstein Beverly Hills Brats Dr. Jeffrey Miller Jim Sotos Nightbreaker Dr. Alexander Brown Peter Markle Beyond the Stars Paul Andrews David Saperstein 1990 Cadence MSgt. Otis V. McKinney Martin Sheen 1991 Touch and Die Frank Piernico Solinas Anthony Wayne Ian Toynton JFK Narrator Oliver Stone 1992 Running Wild Dan Walker Duncan McLachlan Original Intent Joe Robert Marcarelli 1993 When the Bough Breaks Captain Swaggert Michael Cohn My Home, My Prison Narrator Susana Blaustein Muñoz Ghost Brigade (aka The Killing Box) Gen. Haworth George Hickenlooper Fortunes of War Francis Labeck Thierry Notz Hear No Evil Lt. Brock Robert Greenwald Hot Shots! Part Deux Capt. Benjamin L. Willard Jim Abrahams Gettysburg Robert E. Lee Ronald F. Maxwell Jack Brown Michael Switzer 1994 Guns of Honor Jackson Baines Hardin David Lister Hits! Kelly William R. Greenblatt Grey Knight General George Hickenlooper Boca Jesse James Montgomery Walter Avancini, Zalman King 1995 Chief of Staff A.J. McInnerney Rob Reiner Sacred Cargo Father Andrew Kanvesky Aleksandr Buravsky Dillinger and Capone John Dillinger Jon Purdy Captain Nuke and the Bomber Boys Jeff Snyder Charles Gale Himself Agnès Varda Gil Robbins Lee H. Katzin Dead Presidents The Judge Albert Hughes, Allen Hughes Gospa father Jozo Zovko Jakov Sedlar 1996 Bob Collier Emilio Estevez Nominated — ALMA Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Crossover Role in a Feature Film Entertaining Angels: The Dorothy Day Story Peter Maurin Michael Ray Rhodes Project ALF Colonel Gilbert Milfoil Dick Lowry 1997 Truth or Consequences, N.M Sir Kiefer Sutherland Narrator Robbie Leppzer Hostile Waters Aurora Skipper David Drury Television movie; BBC/HBO Spawn Jason Wynn Mark A.Z. Dippé 1998 Family Attraction President Brian Hecker Stranger in the Kingdom Sigurd Moulton Jay Craven Gunfighter Christopher Coppola Monument Ave. Hanlon Ted Demme Shadrach Narrator Susanna Styron Michael's Father Marvin Baker, Bret Michaels Free Money New Warden Yves Simoneau No Code of Conduct Bill Peterson Bret Michaels Thanks Terrence Malick 1999 Ninth Street Father Frank Tim Rebman, Kevin Willmott Lost & Found Millstone Jeff Pollack Storm General James Roberts Harris Done A Texas Funeral Grandpa Sparta W. Blake Herron 2001 O Coach Duke Goulding Tim Blake Nelson 2002 Catch Me if You Can Roger Strong Steven Spielberg 2003 Mercy of the Sea Frederik Dominik Sedlar, Jakov Sedlar The Commission Dep. Atty. Gen. Nicholas Katzenbach Mark Sobel 2004 Jerusalemski sindrom Dominik Sedlar, Jakov Sedlar 2006 Oliver Queenan Martin Scorsese Bobby Jack Stevens Emilio Estevez 2007 Talk to Me E.G. Sonderling Kasi Lemmons Bordertown George Morgan Gregory Nava Flatland: The Movie Arthur Square Dano Johnson, Jeffrey Travis 2008 Voice Kamala Lopez 2009 Echelon Conspiracy Raymond Burke Greg Marcks Love Happens Burke's Father-in-Law Brandon Camp Imagine That Dante D'Enzo Karey Kirkpatrick The Kid: Camacho Dr. Frank Irwin mMiguel Necoechea 2010 Thomas Avery Emilio Estevez 2011 Stella Days Daniel Barry Thaddeus O'Sullivan Nominated — Irish Film and Television Award for Actor in a Lead Role – Film Tom Highland Michael Brandt 2012 Seeking a Friend for the End of the World Frank Petersen Lorene Scafaria Ben Parker Marc Webb 2014 Bhopal: Prayer for Rain Warren Anderson Ravikumar Selma Frank Minis Johnson Ava DuVernay Ask Me Anything Glenn Warburg Allison Burnett 2015 Trash Father Juilliard Stephen Daldry Unity Narrator Shaun Monson Documentary Badge of Honor Captain Richards Agustin The Vessel Father Douglas Julio Quintana 2016 Untitled Warren Beatty project Warren Beatty Year Film Role Director 1968 Pat Neal Is Back Himself Edward Beyer 1985 Broken Rainbow Narrator Maria Florio, Victoria Mudd In the Name of the People Narrator Frank Christopher Spaceflight Narrator Blaine Baggett 1986 Secrets of the Titanic Narrator Robert Ballard 1988 Walking After Midnight Himself Jonathon Kay 1991 Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse Himself Fax Bahr / George Hickenlooper 1994–6 Eyewitness Narrator (U.S. version) 1997 187: Documented Narrator Timothy Fong Tudjman Narrator Jakov Sedlar, Joe Tripician 1998 Taylor's Campaign Narrator Richard Cohen Holes in Heaven Narrator Wendy Robbins 2001 Himself Tracie Holder, Karen Thorsen SOA: Guns and Greed Himself Robert Richter Stockpile Narrator Stephen Trombley Inside the Vatican Narrator John B. Bredar 2002 Cuba: The 40 Years War Narrator Peter Melaragno Himself Tibet: Cry of the Snow Lion Narrator Tom Piozet Straight Up: Helicopters in Action Narrator David Douglas 2003 Hidden in Plain Sight Narrator John Smihula All the Presidents' Movies Narrator Brett Hudson 2004 Learning to Sea Narrator Ziggy Livnat Winning New Hampshire Himself Aram Fischer, Mark Lynch, William Rabbe Tell Them Who You Are Narrator Mark Wexler 2005 On the Line: Dissent in an Age of Terrorism Himself Peter Glenn, Jason A. Schmidt James Dean: Forever Young Narrator Michael J. Sheridan 2006 Who Killed the Electric Car? Narrator Chris Paine Between Iraq and a Hard Place Narrator Rex J. Pratt 2007 Searching for George Washington George Washington (voice) 2008 Flower in the Gun Barrel Narrator Gabriel Cowan They Killed Sister Dorothy Narrator Daniel Junge Vietnam-American Holocaust Narrator Clay Claiborne 2009 One Water Narrator Sanjeev Chatterjee and Ali Habashi Narrator Philippe Diaz 2010 Pax Americana and the Weaponization of Space Himself Denis Delestrac Return to El Salvador Narrator Jamie Moffett "The Octopuss" Pondy Doorcan Narrator 2011 Curiosity Host 2012 Who Do You Think You Are? Himself Death by China Narrator Peter Navarro 2013 The Second Cooler Narrator Ellin Jimmerson Salinger Himself Shane Salerno Messenger of the Truth Narrator Tony Haines 2015 American Hercules: Babe Ruth Narrator Josh Oshinsky Year Title Role Director Notes 1961 Route 66 Gang leader Packy Elliot Silverstein 1962 Phil Kasnick Elliot Silverstein 1963 Private Arthur Dix John Erman Arrest and Trial Dale David Lowell Rich 1966 NET Playhouse Kilroy Jac Venza Flipper Philip Adams 1969 Mission: Impossible Albert Stuart Hagmann Then Came Bronson Nick Oresko 1970 Hawaii Five-O Eddie Calhao Paul Stanley Arthur Dixon John Llewellyn Moxey 1972 Cannon Jerry 1973 Columbo Karl Lessing, a chemist who became the murder victim Jeannot Szwarc 1973 Circle of Fear Frank Herschel Daugherty 1974 The Story of Pretty Boy Floyd Charles Arthur 'Pretty Boy' Floyd Clyde Ware television film 1979 Blind Ambition John Dean George Schaefer Miniseries 1983 Kennedy John F. Kennedy Jim Goddard Miniseries 1984 The Guardian Charles Hyatt David Greene Television film 1985 Consenting Adult Ken Lynd Gilbert Cates Television film 1986 News at Eleven Frank Kenley Mike Robe Television film 1992 The Last P.O.W.? The Bobby Garwood Story William F.(Ike) Eisenbraun Georg Stanford Brown Television film 1993 Alex Haley's Queen James Jackson Sr. John Erman Miniseries 1993 Murphy Brown Nick Brody, former 1960s radical Peter Bonerz 1994 Roswell Townsend Jeremy Kagan Television film 1994 One of Her Own Asst. D.A. Pete Maresca Armand Mastroianni Television film 1996 The Crystal Cave: Lessons from the Teachings of Merlin King Arthur (Created by Deepak Chopra) Television film 1997 Seymour Skinner Guest star (Episode: "The Principal and the Pauper") 1998 Babylon 5 A Soul Hunter Janet Greek 1999 Total Recall 2070 Praxis Mark Sobel 1999–2006 President Josiah Bartlet Various(Created by Aaron Sorkin) Series regular, 140 episodes, (Season 1-7) 2002 Spin City Charlie's Father Ted Wass 2005 Two and a Half Men Harvey, Rose's father Gary Halvorson 2007 Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip Radio Host (voice, uncredited) Timothy Busfield 2009 Guest host Steve Smith 2012 Flash Pop Guest appearance 2012–2014 Anger Management Martin Goodson 2014 The Whale Thomas Nickerson Alrick Riley Television film 2015 Grace and Frankie Robert Hanson Main cast, 13 episodes 2015 Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Himself 2016 Anne of Green Gables Matthew Cuthbert John Kent Harrison Television film Year Game Role Notes 2010 World of Warcraft: Cataclysm Nozdormu Voice 2010 Mass Effect 2 Voice and Likeness 2012 Mass Effect 3 Voice and Likeness Year Association Category Nominated work Result 1969 Golden Globe Award Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture The Subject Was Roses 1974 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie The Execution of Private Slovik 1978 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie Taxi!!! 1980 British Academy Film Awards Best Actor in a Leading Role Apocalypse Now 1980 Golden Globe Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama Blind Ambition 1981 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Individual Achievement in Religious Programming Insight 1984 British Academy Television Awards Best Actor Kennedy 1984 Golden Globe Award Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film Kennedy 1985 CableACE Awards Best Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie The Guardian 1986 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Children's Special CBS Schoolbreak Special 1986 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Individual Achievement in Children's Programming CBS Schoolbreak Special 1989 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Individual Achievement in Children's Programming CBS Schoolbreak Special 1990 CableACE Awards Best Movie or Miniseries Nightbreaker 1994 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series Murphy Brown 1999 ALMA Award Outstanding Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie Babylon 5: The River of Souls 1999 ALMA Award Outstanding Actor in a Feature Film Monument Ave. 2000 ALMA Award Outstanding Actor in a Television Series The West Wing 2000 Golden Globe Awards Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2000 Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2000 Satellite Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2000 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2000 TCA Awards Individual Achievement in Drama The West Wing 2000 Viewers for Quality Television Best Actor in a Quality Drama Series The West Wing 2001 ALMA Awards Outstanding Actor in a Television Series The West Wing 2001 Golden Globe Awards Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2001 Primetime Emmy Awards Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2001 Satellite Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2001 TCA Awards Individual Achievement in Drama The West Wing 2001 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2001 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2002 ALMA Awards Outstanding Actor in a Television Series The West Wing 2002 Golden Globe Awards Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2002 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2002 Satellite Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2002 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2002 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2002 TCA Awards Individual Achievement in Drama The West Wing 2003 Golden Globe Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2003 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2003 Satellite Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2003 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2003 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2004 Golden Globe Awards Best Actor – Television Series Drama The West Wing 2004 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2004 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2004 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2005 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2006 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series The West Wing 2006 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series Two and a Half Men 2006 Satellite Award Best Cast – Motion Picture The Departed 2006 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series The West Wing 2007 Critics' Choice Movie Award Best Cast Bobby 2007 Critics' Choice Movie Award Best Cast The Departed 2007 Gotham Awards Best Ensemble Cast Talk to Me 2007 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Bobby 2007 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture The Departed 2012 ALMA Awards Favorite Movie Actor The Way 2012 Irish Film & Television Academy Best Actor – Film Stella Days 2004: November 11 2007: June 9, September 29 2008: June 7 2009: June 6, December 12 2010: January 2 2011: March 12 2012: March 17, May 19, July 14 2013: June 8 List of peace activists
