   Masters of the Universe (commonly abbreviated MOTU and sometimes referred to as He-Man, after the lead hero) is a media franchise created by Mattel.  The main premise revolves around the conflict between the heroic He-Man and the evil Skeletor on the planet Eternia, with a vast line-up of supporting characters in a hybrid setting of medieval sword and sorcery and sci-fi technology. Later spin-offs also featured He-Man's sister She-Ra and her struggle against the Evil Horde, along with other planets/settings; however the main premise usually remained the same. Since its initial launch, the franchise has spawned a variety of products, including six lines of action figures, four animated television series, several comic series, and a feature film. In 1976, Mattel's CEO Ray Wagner declined a request to produce a toyline of action figures based on the characters from the George Lucas film Star Wars.The rights to manufacture the Star Wars toyline were later acquired by Hasbro. Upon the commercial success of the film trilogy during the next few years and all related merchandise, Mattel attempted to launch several unsuccessful toylines, none of which captured the public's imagination or made a significant dent in the toy market.These included: Kid Gallant, a medieval knight; Robin and the Space Hoods, a sci-fi figure; and the daredevil Kenny Dewitt, pronounced "Can He Do It?" In the race to design the next hit action figure, Roger Sweet, a lead designer working for Mattel's Preliminary Design Department throughout much of the 1970s and 1980s, realized simplicity was the key to success. According to his book Mastering the Universe: He-Man and the Rise and Fall of a Billion-Dollar Idea published in 2005, Sweet knew that if he gave marketing something they could sell, he would have won 90% of the battle (although this is not officially acknowledged by Mattel and is disputed by some other contributors).Sweet, Roger; David, Wecker Mastering the Universe : He-Man and the Rise and Fall of a Billion-Dollar Idea, Emmis Books July 11, 2005, ISBN 1-57860-223-8Authorship of the He-Man character has been subject to debate, as designer Roger Sweet claims to be the chief creator of He-Man and MOTUThe general consensus among the fandom is that it was the collaborative efforts of many designers and artists (Mark Taylor, Roger Sweet, Anthony G. Guerrero and Ted Mayer), that produced the original MOTU toys. The earliest storybooks and much of the original backstory were written by Donald F. Glut. Two other designers, Mark Taylor and Jill Barad, have also taken credit for creation of the superhero.  "The only way I was going to have a chance to sell this [to Wagner] was to make three 3D models—big ones. I glued a Big Jim figure [from another Mattel toy line] into a battle action pose and I added a lot of clay to his body. I then had plaster casts made. These three prototypes, which I presented in late 1980, brought He-Man into existence." "I simply explained that this was a powerful figure that could be taken anywhere and dropped into any context because he had a generic name: He-Man!"Other names considered by the design team were Mighty Man, Megaton Man, Strong Man and Big Man.  —Roger Sweet  Roger Sweet presented the He-Man concept to Ray Wagner at the Mattel Product Conference, in the form of the aforementioned three large three-dimensional plaster prototype models, which Sweet dubbed the "He-Man Trio". These prototypes were molded from an extensively modified Big Jim action figure, and had some painted formed sheet wax outfit parts. The He-Man Trio models were a barbarian, a soldier, and a spaceman. Out of the three concepts, the barbarian version He-Man was chosen to be the basis of the toyline (this original trio-prototype idea was released around thirty years later as the figure Vykron, and the barbarian concept on its own as Vikor, in the 'Masters of the Universe Classics' line). In 1980, the rights-holders of Conan the Barbarian began negotiating the character's toy rights with Mattel. They entered in an agreement the following year regarding characters from the Conan movie. Upon Mattel introducing a toy line starring He-Man, the rights-holders sued the toy company claiming the character was a copy of Conan. Mattel eventually won the lawsuit. Taking in consideration that the Conan character was created almost 50 years prior to the development of the He-Man franchise, it is likely that the Masters of the Universe borrowed many aspects from Conan, but it appears that it was not intended to be a toyline for the film after legal agreements were dissolved. Additionally, Roger Sweet has claimed also to have been "real impressed" by the paintings of fantasy artist Frank Frazetta when creating He-Man. and the barbarian sculpt was based on an illustration by Mark Taylor.  The decision to change He-Man's hair to blonde was made by Mattel's Tom Kalinske. To further expand on this initial barbarian theme, Mattel hired comic book writers such as Donald F. Glut and artists like Earl Norem (who painted covers for the Marvel Comics Savage Sword of Conan since issue #16 in 1976) to create additional characters and their backstory, posters, package inlays, box art and mini-comics to be distributed with the action figures.   From these early concepts, Mattel would finally produce the original 'Masters of the Universe' action figure toyline in 1981. Released as 5 1/2 inch action figures, the lore of Masters of the Universe would first be explored through minicomics that accompanied the toys through the duration line. The two primary characters, 'the most powerful man in the universe', He-man and his nemesis, the evil skull-faced sorcerer Skeletor, were the first released in action figure form, along with other core characters of the entire series; He-Man's allies, Man-At-Arms, Teela, Battle Cat, and Stratos, and Skeletor's henchmen Beast Man and Mer-Man. He-Man was given his power by the Goddess/Sorceress of Castle Grayskull and would defend his planet Eternia from the evil forces of Skeletor (originally described as an evil warlord/demon from another dimension). Set in a hybrid world of sword and sorcery and technological sci-fi, they would battle over the possession of the 'Power Sword', as He-Man tried to stop Skeletor from his ambition to rule Eternia and discover the Secrets of Castle Grayskull. After the original toy releases, DC Comics would adapt the franchise into special insert appearances in their regular comic series and a three issue mini-series in 1982. These issues introduced elements to the series, such as He-Man being the secret alter ego of Prince Adam, son of the royal family of Eternia; as in Adam's father King Randor and mother Queen Marlena. However, the Masters of the Universe franchise would become much better known through Filmation's He-Man and the Masters of the Universe cartoon series; debuting in the fall of 1983, running 130 episodes through two seasons until the end of 1984 (primarily featuring various moral-themed encounters between He-Man, Skeletor and a wide and expanding cast of heroic and villainous characters; with the notable additions of the childlike Orko and the sinister witch-like Evil-Lyn characters). With the release of the "He-Man and She-Ra: The Secret of the Sword" movie in spring 1985 (introducing He-man's twin sister She-Ra, and her arch-villain Hordak on the planet Etheria), Filmation produced 93 episodes of the She-Ra: Princess of Power series, which ran until the end of 1986, along with the He-Man & She-Ra: Christmas Special. Various children's books, magazines, comics, read-along records/cassette tapes and other merchandise were also released worldwide around this time, with much of the content based primarily on the Filmation He-Man and She-Ra series. Masters of the Universe, a live action movie was released in 1987 by Cannon Films, starring Dolph Lundgren and Frank Langella. The later action figure minicomics continued the adventures of He-Man and She-Ra past the end of the two Filmation series; but popularity had waned by the end of 1987 and a planned continuation of the original toyline under the heading of 'The Powers of Grayskull' (set in ancient Eternia, featuring the villain King Hiss, and He-Man's ancestor He-Ro) was started, but eventually scrapped. He-Man would be brought back in 1989, in an entirely new, and space-based cartoon series and toy line known as the 'New Adventures of He-Man'. Under the name 'He-Man', Mattel released an entirely new line of action figures, featuring only He-Man and Skeletor as the main returning characters to join the battle between Galactic Guardians and Space Mutants on the planet Primus. Jetlag Productions would go to produce 65 episodes of the New Adventures cartoon, while minicomics and a few adventure magazines were also created for this new series. Ultimately though, the series would not be as successful and the entire franchise would go on a hiatus for more than a decade (although a series about the son of He-Man was pitched in 1996 by Lou Scheimer, but rejected). After some success with a 'Commemorative Series' re-release of the classic action figures in 2000; Mattel relaunched the toyline with all new action figures, playsets and vehicles, sculpted by Four Horsemen Studios in 2002. As part of the relaunch, a modern updated animated series was also created by Mike Young Productions, lasting for 39 episodes; featuring He-Man and his ensemble of heroic warriors, now called the 'Masters of the Universe', battling Skeletor's minions and later King Hiss and his Snake Men. Several volumes of comic books were also produced to go along with the series by Image Comics and MVCreations. Although popular with longtime fans and collectors (with mini-statue figures being released by NECA until 2007), the new series failed to catch on with a larger audience and was cancelled in 2004. From 2007 to the present, a new assortment of Masters of the Universe action figures has been released under the banner of 'Masters of the Universe Classics'. Primarily geared towards the collector's market, the series took into consideration all aspects of previous Masters of the Universe lore, with characters from all previous incarnations (and also featured a continuation of the original minicomics line, produced by Dark Horse Comics). DC Comics would soon follow suit, and relaunch a new grittier, contemporary version of the Masters of the Universe franchise, releasing various new comic book series from 2012 until present; featuring crossovers with the DC Comics Universe, and a new origin for She-Ra, culminating in Hordak's conquest of Eternia. The current ongoing series is entitled 'He-Man: The Eternity War'. As with many toy franchises which have been transferred to several different media there are a number of story differences between the various versions of Masters of the Universe. Complicating matters further, several media have made implicit attempts to change details to realign with other versions, with the result that internal discontinuities arise. Created by Mattel in 1981, the 'Masters of the Universe' toyline was first released as 5 1/2 inch action figures in 1982 (as opposed to the 3 3/4 inch size used by Kenner Star Wars and Hasbro's G.I. Joe). Brief descriptions of the characters would appear on the toyline's unique packaging and box art (with illustrations by Errol McCarthy, William George and others); however, the lore of Masters of the Universe would really first be explored through minicomics that accompanied the toys through the duration line. The two main characters, He-man (the muscular blonde hero and most powerful man in the universe) and his arch-enemy Skeletor (the blue-skinned, skull-faced master of evil and sorcery) were the first released in action figure form, along with other core characters of the entire series; Man-At-Arms (He-man's friend and scientific master of weapons), Beast Man (Skeletor's master of beasts and main henchman) and Battle Cat (He-Man's large green, Tiger-like companion). Later on that year, first wave of action figures in 1982 would also include Teela (a heroic female warrior, and an essential character through most of the Masters of the Universe franchise, serving as a potential love interest for He-man), Mer-Man (an aquatic henchman of Skeletor, master of the seas, featured in most He-Man incarnations), Stratos (a bird-like winged warrior and one of He-Man's main allies) and Zodac (an ambiguous neutral 'cosmic enforcer' character, who appeared far less in the series than the other characters released at this time). Also alongside the first wave of figures were the Battle Ram and Wind Raider vehicles and the Castle Grayskull playset. Additional waves of action figures, creatures, vehicles and playsets were released every year until 1987; totaling 70 distinct figures in all (including 24 creatures, 12 vehicles, 6 playsets and 10 accessories) with the final two overseas releases from the original line coming from Italy in 1988. Other major characters introduced in these early waves of action figures and minicomics included He-Man's heroic allies Ram Man, Man-E-Faces and Zoar (an alternate falcon form of the magical Sorceress of Castle Grayskull); along with Skeletor's evil warriors Tri-Klops, Trap Jaw and Faker (evil robot clone of He-Man). Many of the original characters, vehicles and playsets, including Castle Grayskull, were designed by Mark Taylor & Ted Mayer. The final production sculpt of the 1982 He-Man action figure was done by Tony Guerrero. All of the original Mattel action figures came with minicomics that told stories involving the characters, with 49 distinct comics being issued from 1981 until 1987. In the earliest series, featuring the original four minicomics made by Mattel (written by Donald F. Glut with artwork by Alfredo Alcala), He-Man is introduced in 'He-man and the Power Sword' as a wandering barbarian, leaving behind his jungle tribe on Eternia; a world dealing with the aftermath of a Great War that has devastated the civilizations that once reigned, but has left behind fantastical machinery and weapons. The events of the Great War opened a rift between dimensions, which allows the evil warlord Skeletor to travel to Eternia, and he has now set his sights on obtaining both halves of the power sword (split in two in these early stories) and gain entry into the ancient Castle Grayskull, the 'fortress of mystery and power' (depicted, in these early comics, as being inhabited by the ghostly 'Spirit of Castle Grayskull'). Whoever attains control of Grayskull will gain the power to become Master of the Universe. To prevent Skeletor from achieving his goal, He-Man has been given special powers, armor and weapons by the Sorceress (referred to as 'The Goddess' in early stories, appearing to have green skin in her debut appearance and Caucasian skin thereafter, she is shown wearing 'snake armor' similar in appearance to Mattel's first Teela action figure; instead of adorning her later more familiar bird-like attire). He-Man (not yet with the dual-identity of Prince Adam), is supported by several heroic allies, such as his loyal pet Battle Cat (without the dual form of Cringer), Man-At-Arms, the Eternian master of weapons (clean-shaven, without moustache), Teela, (often shown with long blonde hair and accompanied by a horse in these early depictions), and Stratos, the winged warrior. Skeletor, in-turn, enlists the help of the brutish Beast Man and aquatic Mer-Man to battle He-Man and his heroic warriors. Vehicles introduced in this early series include the Wind-Raider and Battle Ram. The second series, consisting of seven minicomics, released in 1982, were produced by DC Comics, written by Gary Cohn and featured artwork by Mark Texeira. This second wave of comics would introduce the Eternian Palace and Royal Court with King Randor and Queen Marlena (yet unnamed, looking decidedly older than in the later series), along with the heroic warriors Ram Man, Man-E-Faces, the mystical bird-creature Zoar (not yet an alternate form of the Sorceress) and the vehicles known as the Attak-Trak and the Talon Fighter of Point Dread. Skeletor was joined by the evil warriors Tri-Klops and Trap Jaw, portrayed as inter-dimensional bounty-hunter types. The primary characters of Prince Adam, Cringer, Orko, and Evil-Lyn did not yet feature in the series, although the storyline of Teela being the daughter of the Sorceress and adopted daughter of Man-At-Arms was first introduced. He-Man and company would then make appearances in the actual pages of DC Comics, starting with DC Comics Presents issue #47, followed by a special insert comic in many DC's titles from November 1982, finishing up with a three issue mini-series at the start of 1983 (all written by Paul Kupperberg, with artwork by Curt Swan and George Tuska). In the first two tales of these notable DC publications, Superman ends up joining with He-Man on to combat Skeletor and his minions. This series would introduce Prince Adam and his transformation into He-Man into the series (although Adam was originally portrayed as a blue vest-wearing womanizer, rather than his more wholesome later character and would transform inside 'Cave of Power' instead of his famous 'By the Power of Grayskull!' line). Other entries into the series mythos, such as Zodac the neutral cosmic enforcer, Stratos' home world of Avion, and Adam's mother, Queen Marlena, as an astronaut hailing from Earth, were also partly introduced in these early DC issues.DC Comics Presents #47: "From Eternia With Death" (1982)The Daring New Adventures of Supergirl #1: "Fate Is The Killer" (November 1982) The animated series He-Man and the Masters of the Universe was created by Filmation and made its television debut on September 5, 1983 with the episode 'The Diamond Ray of Disappearance', through 2 seasons, totaling 130 episodes until 'The Cold Zone', airing on November 21, 1985. The series was produced by Lou Scheimer (who also provided the voice for Orko, King Randor, Stratos, Trap Jaw, Tri-Klops and many others), Gwen Wetzler and Hal Sutherland; and featured the voice talents of John Erwin (He-Man/Adam, Beast Man, Ram Man, Whiplash and others), Alan Oppenheimer (Skeletor, Man-At-Arms, Battle Cat/Cringer, Mer-Man and others) and Linda Gary (Teela, The Sorceress, Evil-Lyn, Queen Marlena and others). The series is set in Eternia, which is ruled by King Randor and Queen Marlena (the latter was born Marlena Glenn, an astronaut from Earth who married Randor after she was marooned on Eternia by the crash of her spaceship). Their son is Prince Adam, who pretends he is lazy, clumsy, careless, irresponsible and almost as cowardly as his pet tiger Cringer (who transforms into Battle Cat). However, Prince Adam possesses a magic sword, and when he holds it aloft and says the magic words, "By the power of Grayskull...I have the Power!!!" Prince Adam is transformed into He-Man, "The Most Powerful Man In The Universe". Prince Adam's secret identity of He-Man is known only by the Sorceress of Castle Grayskull (magical bird-like guardian of Castle Grayskull who often takes the form of Zoar the falcon), Man-At-Arms (veteran soldier, scientist, inventor and most trusted ally; also known as Duncan) and Orko (a floating childlike Trollan magician, often used for comic relief). Rounding out the main cast of heroes is Teela, the Captain of the Royal Guard (who is the adopted daughter of Man-At-Arms and secret child of the Sorceress), who serves as a teasing and semi-antagonistic love interest of Adam and He-Man throughout the series. Stratos (the flying leader of the birdpeople of Avion) and Ram-Man (a dim-witted bouncing warrior) also feature in the series with semi-regularity. Appearing with less frequency in the series are He-Man's recurring allies Mossman, Fisto, Man-E-Faces, Mekaneck, Sy-Klone, Zodac, Lizard-Man, Melaktha, Dree-Elle, Montork, Squinch and the Widgets and Granamyr the Dragon. He-Man's nemesis, the powerful skull-faced evil wizard Skeletor wished to rule Eternia and conquer Castle Grayskull; often seeking ancient and mysterious artifacts to try and stop He-man and his allies. Skeletor usually hosts his rogues gallery in his bone-filled throne room inside Snake Mountain. Skeletor's most dangerous counterpart is the cunning sorcerer Evil-Lyn, and most his frequent sidekicks are the often bumbling, master of beasts, Beast Man and the equally bumbling weapon-armed Trap Jaw. His original henchmen in the cartoon also included Tri-Klops, Mer-Man and his purple pet feline Panthor. Other rogues would make a few appearances later in the series such as Webstor, Kobra Khan, Clawful, Spikor, Two-Bad, Modulok and Whiplash (appearing the most out of the later henchmen). Several memorable heroes and villains would appear only once or twice in the Filmation cartoon, such as Faker, Jitsu (called 'Chopper'), Count Marzo, Evilseed, Batros, General Tataran, Shokoti, Negator, Icer, Fang-Man, Strong-Arm, Plundor, Delora, Hawk, Roboto and Adam's grandfather King Miro to name a few. Despite the limited animation techniques that were used to produce the series, He-Man and the Masters of the Universe was notable for breaking the boundaries of censorship that had severely restricted the narrative scope of children's TV programming in the 1970s. For the first time in years, a cartoon series could feature a muscular superhero who was actually allowed to hit people (although most of the time wrestling-style moves were utilized instead of direct violence), though he still couldn't use his sword often. The cartoon was controversial in that it was produced in connection with marketing a line of toys; advertising to children was itself controversial during this period. In Britain, advertising regulations forbade commercials for He-Man toys to accompany the program itself (either before or after the episode, as there were no in-show commercials). Similar to other shows at the time (notably G.I. Joe), an attempt to mitigate the negative publicity generated by this controversy was made by including a "life lesson" or "moral of the story" at the end of each episode. This moral was usually tied to the action or central theme of the episode. In the United Kingdom, where the episodes were usually edited for timing reasons, these closing "morals" were nearly always edited out of their original broadcasts. The cartoon series was also remarkable because it was one of the first animated series produced directly for syndication, as opposed to most other syndicated cartoons of the time which were re-runs of old Saturday morning cartoons. The most notable production fact of the series was that it was the very first animated series where a bulk quantity of 65 episodes were produced so that the series could be stripped across 13 weeks. Writers on the show included Larry DiTillio, David Wise, Ron Schultz, Sam Schultz, Marc Scott Zicree, Robby London, Michael Reaves, J. Brynne Stephens, Robert White, Don Heckman, Douglas Booth, Rowby Goren, Tom Tataranowicz, Robert Lamb, Antoni Zalewski, Jeffry O'Hare, and many others. The series is also noted for featuring early script-writing work from Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski, and Paul Dini of Batman: The Animated Series fame One episode, "Battle Cat," was written by Star Trek's D.C. Fontana. The series, although still popular, would not be renewed for a third season. Instead Filmation opted to create the She-Ra: Princess of Power Series, and deliberately crossover the existing He-Man and the Masters of the Universe characters and continuity into the new series. The original He-Man series would end and She-Ra begin with animated movie The Secret of the Sword, released theatrically in the spring of 1985, featuring most of the main characters from both cartoons. The two animated series, would however, join up one last time for He-Man & She-Ra: A Christmas Special in December 1985; in which two children from Earth end up accidentally on Eternia and are protected by Skeletor, who in a rare act of kindness, is overtaken by the Christmas Spirit. The very last appearance of Filmation's He-Man and Skeletor was in one of the final She-Ra episodes, entitled 'Assault on the Hive', airing December 13, 1986. In 1985, Mattel and Filmation decided to diversify the Masters of the Universe line beyond its traditional realm of "male action" in the hopes of bringing in a young female audience as well. Mattel's toyline Princess of Power featured almost exclusively female characters, all of whom featured an emphasis on hair and clothing, with "real" hair and partially softgoods costumes. Essentially, the line attempted to fuse the appeal of Masters of the Universe with Mattel's successful line of fashion dolls, Barbie. The 'Princess of Power' toyline ran from 1985 to 1987, for which Mattel would release 22 action figure/dolls (with 12 creatures, 2 playsets and 16 clothing accessories). Apart from the main Princess of Power line, the preeminent villains of the She-Ra series, Hordak and the Evil Horde (originally created by Filmation in collaboration with Mattel), were released by Mattel under the Masters of the Universe branding. So, Hordak and the other male Evil Horde characters (Mantenna, Leech, Grizzlor and Modulok), although featuring heavily in the She-Ra cartoon series, were also sold as a new group of villains battling He-Man on Eternia, with the mini-comics debuting them as such. The character Catra was the only Evil Horde villain to be released in the first wave of the Princess of Power toyline, with Mattel downplaying her connection to the Horde (she is later joined in the toy-line by fellow Horde-Villainess Entrapta). In conjunction with the new action figure line, Filmation created a new animated series titled She-Ra: Princess of Power, with She-Ra as its feminine warrior-woman heroine. Filmation had the task of revealing that Prince Adam had a twin sister, Princess Adora, who was first introduced in the animated feature The Secret of the Sword in the spring of 1985. This film was a compilation of what would become the first five episodes of the cartoon series, first airing 'The Sword of She-Ra Part 1: Into Etheria' on September 9, 1985. The series would run for 2 seasons, and 93 episodes from 1985 to 1986. She-Ra: Princess of Power was produced in lieu of continuing He-Man and the Masters of the Universe for a third year; however, He-Man often appeared in special crossover episodes of She-Ra to aid his sister, and many other characters from He-Man and the Masters of the Universe, both heroic and evil, also appeared in multiple crossover episodes. She-Ra would also feature in 13 of her own minicomics (packaged with the figures), along with several children's books, comic magazines, and read-along record/cassette-tape books. She-Ra she was born as Princes Adora on Eternia, Prince Adam/He-Man's twin sister and daughter of King Randor and Queen Marlena. Adora is kidnapped by Hordak and Skeletor as a baby and taken to the world of Etheria (the main setting of the She-Ra series), which is dominated by the Evil Horde. She is raised and brainwashed by Hordak and his powerful confidant Shadow Weaver, to eventually becomes Force Captain of the Horde. After encountering her brother He-Man (who is on a mission from the Sorceress on Etheria to find her), she eventually dons the Sword of Protection, becomes She-Ra and joins the Great Rebellion fighting to free her planet from its tyrannical ruler Hordak. Just as Prince Adam transforms into He-Man with the use of his Sword of Power, Adora transforms into She-Ra via her Sword of Protection, a replica of He-Man's sword featuring a smooth white gem in its hilt. Adora's transformation into She-Ra is similarly triggered by holding her sword over her head, and by uttering her own unique invocation; "For the honor of Grayskull... I AM SHE-RA!". Unlike He-Man's sword, however, She-Ra's possesses the ability to transform into different weapons and accessories, such as a lasso, a shield or a flaming blade, when commanded by She-Ra. Similar to He-Man and Cringer/Battle Cat, She-Ra also transforms her horse Spirit into the flying unicorn Swift Wind. Hordak rules Etheria from his dreaded base known as the Fright Zone, enslaving the people through his legions of Horde Troopers and his Force Squad. The Force Squad lead originally by Adora, and now by Catra; consists of the goofy Mantenna (whom Hordak loves to torment), beastly Grizzlor, energy-draining Leech and scorpion-woman Scorpia. The Horde was later joined by others including Skeletor's former henchman Modulok, the robotic Multi-Bot, the future Snake Men Tung-Lashor and Rattlor and others. Several major villains from the She-Ra cartoon did not receive an original action figure release, such as the aforementioned evil sorceress Shadow Weaver, or brutish Scorpia; nor did other recurring evil characters such as the mischievous Imp, the octopus woman Octavia, the Horde zoo keeper Vultak, Hunga the Harpy and the robot Dylamug. The overarching inter-planetary supreme leader of the Horde, Horde Prime, who held leadership over both Hordak and Skeletor was also introduced during the She-Ra Filmation series. The premise of the She-Ra TV series was the reverse of the He-Man cartoon, where the heroes are actually rebels countering an evil establishment (rather than Skeletor trying to conquer Eternia). The Great Rebellion, hidden within the Whispering Woods, is led by Queen Angela and her daughter Glimmer, with the main cast of the Princess of Power cartoon also featuring Adora/She-Ra's steed Spirit/Swift Wind, the main male heroic character of the series, Bow, the timid owl-like Kowl, the inept magician Madame Razz and her wise-cracking sidekick, Broom. Also appearing in many episodes are the small imp-like forest-dwelling Twiggits (mainly Sprockett, Spritina, and Spragg) and the mystical character Light Hope, who served as a 'Sorceress of Grayskull-type' guide to She-Ra, residing high atop Mount Skydancer in the Crystal Castle. Throughout the series recurring characters and members/allies of the Rebellion included Adora's swashbuckling love interest Sea-Hawk, the flirtatious Frosta, magical Castaspella, butterfly-like Flutterina, the mermaid Mermista, peacock-like Peakablue, Perfuma, Netossa, Sweet Bee, Sorrowful the dragon, the elephant warrior Snout Spout, and the comet warriors Granita, Rokkon and Stonedar. Some of the other popular one-off heroes and villains were Spinnerella, Huntara, General Sunder, False-Face, Colonel Blast, the Red Knight, King Micah, the Meteorbs and the Star Sisters. She-Ra: Princess of Power would air its final episode 'Swifty's Baby' on December 5, 1986; with no real conclusion or finale for neither the She-Ra nor He-Man Filmation series. Series three of Mattel's minicomics would follow a more similar canon to that of the Filmation animated series, sometimes taking stories straight from episodes of the show in 1983. Series four in 1984, would also follow Filmation's continuity, but showcase new stories featuring the introduction of Princess of Power villain Hordak and the Evil Horde (focusing more on Hordak's attempts to attack He-Man and invade Eternia, rather than anything She-Ra/Princess of Power related). Series five and the final series, six, in 1986 and 1987, would continue on the adventures past the animated series and its sequel in the She-Ra line, introducing new characters not seen in the cartoon series such as Stinkor, Rio Blast, Clamp Champ, Dragstor, Extendar, Blast-Attak, Ninjor, Scare-Glow, Snake-Face, Sssqueeze, Mosquitor and the Energy Zoids (along with live action movie characters Blade, Saurod and Gwildor). More importantly, the main storyline included the new major villains known as the Snake Men. Kobra Khan, Tung-Lashor and Rattlor (previously appearing in the He-Man and She-Ra cartoon series with Skeletor, and/or as members of the Horde), were now under the leadership of the ancient Eternian King Hiss, whose snake men army rose from Eternia's past, joining forces with Skeletor to once again rule Eternia. Other notable storylines included the introduction three-towered fortress of Eternia, and the suggested origin of Skeletor as Keldor; all leading towards what would have been a continuation of the series in the 'Powers of Grayskull' line, before being discontinued. Issues from series 3 through 6 were often edited by Lee Nordling, included writing by Steven Grant, Michael Halperin, Tim Kilpin, Phil White, and Christy Marx; and often featured the artwork of Bruce Timm, Jim Mitchell, Chris Carlson, Alfredo Alcala or Larry Houston. The proposed exploration of the distant past of Eternia, dubbed "Preternia", forms the basis of what was originally to be the next incarnation of the toyline, entitled The Powers of Grayskull. However the toyline was canelled very early on, with only a few toys released (like the dinosaur-themed creatures Turbodactyl, Bionatops, Tyrantisaurus Rex and the rare Italian-only released giant figures, Tytus and Megator). The main story information originates from the final mini-comic The Powers of Grayskull—The Legend Begins!, which was intended as the first of a three-part series, however only this issue appeared. The proposed storyline was to focus on Ancient Eternia, which was populated by many creatures, including the aforementioned cybernetic dinosaurs and giants. When the Sorceress and He-Man arrive, followed by Skeletor, they find King Hiss leading an attack on a village in the hope of drawing out "The Elders", using some of the cybernetic dinosaurs to their advantage. Hiss serves an "unnamed one" and agrees to unite with Skeletor on the basis that he might be an emissary. Seeing Skeletor's interference, the Sorceress allows He-Man to enter the battle but, "for reasons that will be made clear to you in the future," he had to be disguised. He finds himself overwhelmed, but then a shadowy figure appears who turns the odds with a powerful wand. The stranger then sends the Snake Men back to their base and all the time travellers home. The Sorceress describes the intervener as "the Greatest Sorcerer of all" and He-Man is left asking, "But who is he?". No further story information is given, and it remains unclear how the giants mentioned and released as toys would fit into the story. However, some marketing press releases and prototypes have shed further information. The wizard was to be He-Ro, an ancestor of He-Man. Raised by his mentor Eldor and discovering special powers in a cave, He-Ro would have led the fight against the Snake Men. According to the mini-comics' writers it was intended that the central antagonist would be Keldor, a character revealed similarly late in the line to have been He-Man's uncle and also strongly hinted to have been the former identity of Skeletor. Whether or not Keldor was also supposed to be the "Unnamed One" Hiss served is not clear, although in an interview writer Steven Grant vaguely recalls that the intention was that the Unnamed One would be a greater evil who, as the Emperor was to Darth Vader, was intended to be the one who caused Keldor to become Skeletor. Generally going along with the established Filmation continuity, Marvel Comics would also release a younger-skewing Star Comics Masters of the Universe series that ran from 1986 to 1988 bi-monthly and produced 13 issues. Comics strips could also be found at this time in newspaper syndication, and various He-Man adventure magazine issues containing Masters of the Universe related comics were released in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Argentina, Brazil, Spain, Italy and others. Some of the magazines included the 'He-Man and the Masters of the Universe Magazine', which was a fan club magazine featuring puzzles, fan letters, feature stories/comic strips and very well rendered covers and posters by artist Earl Norem (running 16 issues, 1985-1988; She-Ra also with a similar magazine, running 6 issues). Egmont's London Editions in the United Kingdom, published 72 issues biweekly of their 'By The Power of Grayskull... Masters of the Universe' comic magazine from 1986 to 1988 (also publishing 14 issues of 'For the Honor of Grayskull She-Ra' and 3 specials). The series is often noted for expanding the origins of many characters, and introducing the character 'Scrollos'. Egmont also ran a monthly comic magazine entitled 'Masters of the Universe Adventure', which ran for 18 issues before turning into a 'New Adventures' themed magazine 'He-Man Adventure' for 10 more issues. Masters of the Universe and Princess of Power featured in many children's books in the 1980s as well. One of the main producers of these titles was Golden Books, which published several series of hard and softcover children's books from 1983 to 1986 (with the earliest four books being more in line with early minicomics rather than the cartoon series). World I.P. also produced annual Masters of the Universe and Princess of Power storybooks from 1984 until the New Adventures line in 1990 (with the 1984 edition written pre-Filmation, notably naming Orko as 'Gorpo' and King Randor as 'King Miro'). Also notable in the 1980s were the various combination book/record/cassette-tape read-along/tell-a-tale adventures produced by Ladybird Books out of the U.K., by Kid Stuff Records out of the U.S., and by Mattel themselves. Various video game adaptations of the franchise have been released. Masters of the Universe: The Power of He-Man was released by Intellivision for Atari 2600 and Intellivision in 1983. Two games, Masters of the Universe: The Arcade Game and Masters of the Universe: The Super Adventure, were developed by Adventure Soft and released by U.S. Gold for Amstrad CPC, BBC Micro, Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum in 1987. A video game based on the movie, Masters of the Universe: The Movie, was released by Gremlin Graphics for Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, MSX and ZX Spectrum in 1987. Various board games were released in the 1980s and FASA produced The Masters of the Universe Role Playing Game in 1985. Throughout the 1980s a wide array of He-Man merchandise was released, including colouring books, activity books, a Panini Sticker book and much more. Also notable was a complete Masters of the Universe audio-only adventure LP record, which was released by Kid Stuff Records in 1983; written and produced by John Braden, complete with a new He-Man theme song and original voice acting. In 1987, a live action He-Man film was made by Cannon Films entitled Masters of the Universe. The release date in the USA was August 7, 1987. The film starred Dolph Lundgren in the title role of He-Man, Frank Langella as Skeletor, with Courteney Cox, Robert Duncan McNeill and James Tolkan in supporting roles (as Julie Winston, Kevin Corrigan, and Detective Lubic, respectively). The other characters from the original cartoon to appear in the film are Evil-Lyn (Meg Foster), Man-At-Arms (Jon Cypher), Teela (Chelsea Field), Beast Man (Tony Carroll), and the Sorceress (Christina Pickles). The character Gwildor (Billy Barty) is included, apparently in place of Orko, because the special effects of the time would have been insufficient and too costly to create him. Skeletor's henchmen Blade (Anthony De Longis), Saurod (Pons Maar) and Karg (Robert Towers) were also introduced, in place of other more familiar villains from the series. Many viewers reviewed the motion picture by comparing it to the cartoon, when reality it was an adaptation of the toys only, which initially depicted He-Man as a barbarian with no secret identity (the early mini-comics story did not include Prince Adam or Orko). Ed Pressman was interested in the property before the cartoon was even aired and Filmation had no involvement whatsoever in the film. In the movie, Skeletor has finally conquered Eternia after stealing the Cosmic Key from the locksmith Gwildor, which allows him to gain entry to Castle Grayskull. The villain imprisons the Sorceress of Grayskull within an energy-draining field which gradually transfers her powers to him. After a failed attempt to rescue the Sorceress, the heroes He-Man, Man-At-Arms, Teela and Gwildor escape to the planet Earth using Gwildor's prototype Cosmic Key. Stranded on Earth, they are faced with the task of retrieving their Cosmic Key (which has fallen into the hands of several unwitting humans) and getting back to Eternia before Skeletor can gain the full power of Grayskull. Skeletor sends his minions to Earth with the mission of recovering the Cosmic Key prototype, and chaos ensues as the war between good and evil is transferred to Earth. Numerous parts of the previously accepted history of the series are omitted in the film, including all references to Prince Adam, as well as Randor and Marlena, in fact it is implied that Castle Grayskull itself is the ruling point of Eternia rather than any royal city. The story concentrates more on the science fiction elements of the franchise rather than the fantasy. Aside from The Sorceress and Skeletor there is little reference to magic powers, with most of the characters relying instead on futuristic technology. He-Man himself uses a gun in some scenes in addition to his Power Sword, and he only displays superhuman strength in one scene, when toppling a huge statue. Although He-Man twice utters his catchphrase "I Have the Power" while holding the sword aloft in the iconic manner, he does omit the prefacing clause "By the Power of Grayskull". Although Mattel had hoped that the movie would boost sales of the toyline, it instead had no effect on the line's falling sales, and the MOTU toy line was finally discontinued in early 1988 under immense financial difficulties. A sequel to the film was written, but by 1989, Cannon Films was in such severe financial troubles that it could no longer afford to pay the license fees to Mattel. Thus the script was transformed into the action film Cyborg, starring Jean-Claude Van Damme.   In 1990, several years after the financially disastrous ending of the original Masters of the Universe product line, a second He-Man animated series titled The New Adventures of He-Man, was created by Jetlag Productions to promote Mattel's short-lived attempt to revive the MOTU brand with a new toyline, simply titled He-Man. The new series is radically different from the original fantasy-oriented milieu, shifting to an almost purely science fiction setting which sees He-Man transported to the futuristic planet of Primus. As He-Man leads the heroic Galactic Guardians, Skeletor bases himself on the mutant world of Denebria, forming an alliance with Flogg and his band of Evil Mutants, who are hellbent on conquering Primus for themselves. The series contains clear continuity links to the original Masters of the Universe, and was intended as a continuation of the existing mythology, although some fans see it as a separate canon from the original series due to the differences in style and character portrayal. Other than He-Man and Skeletor, the Sorceress of Castle Grayskull is the only character from the original series to make regular appearances, acting as a guide to He-Man. Several other characters are featured in the pilot episode, including King Randor and Queen Marlena, who learn of the dual identity of Prince Adam and He-Man. Teela also makes a later appearance in the series Other main characters introduced in this series are He-Man's new allies, the wise sage Master Sebrian, his assistant Mara, and the lead Galactic Guardians Captain Hydron and Flipshot. Other frequently appearing heroic characters included the young shepherd girl Drissi, her little brother Caz, Grot the gardener, councilman Werban, the cyclops Meliac, the Scientists (Alcon, Gepple, Krex and Meldoc) and the remaining Galactic Guardians Sagitar, Tuskador, Spinwit and Artilla, with the final members Kayo, Vizor and Nocturna rarely featuring in the show (although they did appear in the comics and series intro). Skeletor's other allies in Flogg's band of Evil Mutants consisted mainly of Flogg's incompetent second in command Slush-Head, Skeletor's new love interest Crita, and other mutants such as Quakke, Staghorn, B.H., Hoove, Karatti, Optik and Lizorr (with the last few mutants rarely appearing or featuring in the cartoon series). The majority of the cartoon episodes were written by Jack Olesker, resulting in a tight continuity, which was almost entirely lacking in the earlier Filmation series. Neither the New Adventures animated series or toyline were nearly as popular as the originals, lasting sixty-five episodes, with a few waves of less popular action figures; totaling 28 distinct figures in all (including 7 vehicles, 2 playsets and 2 accessories). The New Adventures of He-Man series was also featured in its own series of 4 minicomics, and in a monthly comic magazine entitled 'He-Man Adventure' (which ran for about 6 issues before returning to adventures on Eternia), and was published by Egmont's London Editions Magazines in the U.K. World I.P. also produced a New Adventures themed annual in 1990. These publications differed somewhat from the animated series; one change being the character Darius, who did not appear in the cartoon series at all, in a major role as leader of the Galactic Council. In 2002, Mattel launched a new Masters of the Universe toyline with sculpts designed by the Four Horsemen (a prior "commemorative" re-release of some of the action figures from the 1980s toyline has been released in 2000). The new toyline was made surprisingly faithful to the original line, with the characters gently "re-imagined" and updated in terms of sculpting detail rather than radically reinterpreted. One point of contention for many fans of the original Masters toyline was the redesign of He-Man's Power Sword. According to the Four Horsemen, this was due to their original re-sculpts being intended for a continuation of the original storyline in which Skeletor had obtained both halves of the Power Sword (hence the new Skeletor figure's dual blades with clear "good" and "evil" hilt designs), necessitating a new sword to be built by Man-At-Arms and endowed with the properties of the original by the Sorceress. However, Mattel decided to reboot the continuity for a new generation of children, and thus the "new" Power Sword design became the "original" version for the new continuity. The line's faithfulness to the original series made it very popular with collectors, however, suggesting it would have been better served as a collector-based line, akin to DC Direct. This theory was borne out in the wake of the discontinuation of the mass-market toyline, with NECA taking the rather unprecedented step of continuing the toyline through action figure sized mini-statues scaled and sculpted to be aesthetically compatible for display alongside the Mattel toys, thus allowing fans to fill out their collections with other Four Horsemen redesigned characters that had yet to be produced as figures when the toyline was canceled. According to a December 8, 2005 interview with a Mattel representative on he-man.org, NECA offered to produce fully articulated action figures for Mattel without taking any credit, but permission was denied. Instead, NECA was only permitted to produce nonarticulated statues. A new animated series was produced to accompany the toyline, made by Mike Young Productions and lasting for 39 episodes. This series involved much tighter continuity and a somewhat greater depth of characterization than its Filmation predecessor. Later episodes of this series were re-titled Masters of the Universe vs. the Snake-Men, and sidelined Skeletor as chief villain in favor of King Hiss, leader of the reptilian Snake Men. Hordak and The Evil Horde were to be the main antagonists for the third season if the show had continued. An ongoing publication that mirrored tales of the 2002 Mike Young Productions show, the comic series elaborated and added to the mythos by introducing characters that never made it in after the 39 episodes of the television series. The first issue of the comic was seen in September 2002 in the form of a white preview, the series would continue on through 2004/5 where it would see a switch to Image and several successful trade paperback volumes. A game based on the 2002 series, He-Man: Power of Grayskull, was developed by Taniko and published by TDK Mediactive in October 2002. A follow up developed by Savage Entertainment and published by Midas Interactive Entertainment, He-Man: Defender of Grayskull, was released for PlayStation 2 in February 2005. An iOS game, He-Man: The Most Powerful Game in the Universe, was developed by GlitchSoft and published by Chillingo and Mattel in late 2012. In 2007 a new incarnation of Masters of the Universe was announced. Based on the look of the original 1980s MOTU toys, this new toyline was aimed primarily at the adult toy collector market. The first action figure released at San Diego Comic Con 2008 was King Grayskull, a character that appeared in one episode of the 200X TV series 'He-Man and the Masters of the Universe'. It came housed in unique Castle Grayskull packaging and was only sold in the USA. Sculpted by the Four Horsemen, these toys were updated versions of previous figures as well as characters that never before had a toy. Not only did the toyline feature action figures from the originals line from the 80s, but it also included Princess of Power, and the He-Man line from 1989-1992.  Eventually characters that had exclusively appeared in She-Ra: Princess of Power and 'The New Adventures of He-Man' were added.  Characters from other media, such as comic books, are also included.  In February 2010, the figures of He-Man and Skeletor are available as Toys R Us exclusives packed in two-packs with Superman and Lex Luthor respectively, from Mattel's DC Universe Classics action figure line. Both lines are designed by the Four Horsemen. This dual line expanded to include two-packs featuring Aquaman and Mer-Man, Hawkman and Stratos, Bizarro and Faker, Supergirl and She-Ra, and finally Green Lantern and Zodac. Masters of the Universe Classics has surpassed the original 1980s toyline in terms of length, running continuously for 7 years.  Over 150 different figures have been made available since its launch in August 2008. Dark Horse Comics produced mini-comics to be included in Mattel's Masters of the Universe Classics line of toys, continuing the series of mini-comics first introduced in the original He-Man toys of the 1980s. The mini-comics will be written by Tim Seeley and drawn by Wellinton Alves, with covers by Eric Powell. According to Seeley, the current mini-comics will finish off the story that was supposed to be the new direction of the original action figure line, before it was cancelled. The story will deal with the The Powers of Grayskull line, which included King Hsss, Tyrantisaurus Rex and He-Ro, tying the toy continuity to the He-Man line, also known as "Preternia He-Man". Seeley also states that the current Mattel line intends to blend the different He-Man continuities and select the best stories and ideas from MOTU history.  A comic book series by DC Comics was relaunched 2012. The series is made up of two ongoing series, two standard mini-series, a digital mini-series and several origin one-shots. Grayskull: Masters of the Universe was an announced science fiction/fantasy film based on the toy line. According to Variety, it is produced by Joel Silver, and written by Justin Marks, and employing visual special effects to a large degree, as was done with the 2007 war film 300. Warners announced that John Stevenson, director of Kung Fu Panda will direct the upcoming feature. On 12 May 2009, it was announced that the scripting duties had been handed to newcomer Evan Daugherty, with John Stevenson still attached to direct. In September 2009, Sony took over the rights from Warner Bros. to produce the Masters of the Universe live action film after Mattel and Silver couldn't agree on creative direction for the film. Sony and Escape Artists' Todd Black, Jason Blumenthal and Steve Tisch will now start developing the project from scratch for Columbia. In April 2010, Sony hired screenwriters Mike Finch and Alex Litvak to draft a new script. Deadline reports that Jon M. Chu is in talks to direct the film. Original He-Man actor Dolph Lundgren did an interview with IGN about possibly appearing in the film as King Randor. On October 12, 2012, Richard Wenk was hired to rewrite the script for the film. On March 28, 2013, Chu said that the film is still early is in the experimentation and also it would not be campy but an origin story. On October 7, 2013, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Terry Rossio will write the film & Todd Black, Jason Blumenthal and Steve Tisch are producing the film and it will be set on Eternia, the site also report that Chu will not direct the film. On February 26, 2014, it was reported that directors Jeff Wadlow, Mike Cahill, Harald Zwart, and Chris McKay are on the short list to direct the film. On April 9, 2014, Schmoes Know reported that Wadlow will direct the film, but The Hollywood Reporter announced that he was rewriting the script. Columbia Pictures Senior Vice President, DeVon Franklin has tweeted that the film's script has been completed by Jeff Wadlow. Franklin later tweeted a photo on his Twitter page of Battle Cat. On August 19, 2015, Variety reports that Christopher Yost will rewrite the script. Mike O'Hearn announced on his instagram account that he's training to star as He-Man.[ ] On January 22, 2016, Deadline reports that McG will direct the film and will also oversee a rewrite of the latest script by Alex Litvak and Mike Finch, while Escape Artists’ Todd Black, Jason Blumenthal and Steve Tisch are on board as producers. The action figures themselves were often repaints and head-swaps of existing characters, outfitted with different equipment; for example, Stinkor was originally a color-swap of Mer-Man wearing a re-colored version of Mekaneck's breastplate. For much of the original line, there were limited molds. Two chests, hairy and smooth, one belt/pair of shorts, and three sets of arms and legs (smooth muscular, evil 'claw' fingers/toes, and hairy). Teela had her own mold, which was later duplicated for Evil-Lyn. When the second wave appeared, several new molds were used (Ram Man, Man-E-Faces, and Trap Jaw all had new mold pieces). Wave three incorporated the same torso for Whiplash and Buzz-Off. New legs were shared with Whiplash, Buzz-Off and an early release of Clawful. Wave Four saw the introduction of more unique body parts (i.e. Leech, Mantenna, Sy-Klone and Two Bad) with Moss Man and Stinkor being the only new characters to be entirely created using old body parts. Wave 5 featured completely unique parts for almost every new character, while the final waves largely returned to the "classic" look of shared sculpts. Each 1982 action figure featured 5 points of articulation (poseable head, arms and legs), removable armor, a weapon accessory and a spring-loaded "Power punch" at the waist. All 8 characters featured the twist waist action, but it was Wave 2 that saw the introduction of additional action features unique to the character, such as Tri-Klops' rotating visor and Ram Man's spring-loaded legs. Each figure would also come packaged with a mini-comic. The line debuted in 1982 with just four figures to begin with: He-Man, Man-At-Arms, Skeletor and Beast Man. Later that year the remaining four characters from Wave 1 were released. They were Stratos, Teela, Mer-Man and Zodac. Each figure came with removable armor, a weapon and mini-comic. The Comet Warriors, Stonedar and Rokkon, arrived in the UK a full year before the rest of their wave 5 counterparts. This may have been due to their appearance in the UK Masters of the Universe fortnightly magazine in 1986. Originally Beast Man was going to be He-Man's arch rival, Stratos was an Evil Warrior and Mer-Man and Tri-Klops were both intended to be Heroic Warriors. This changed by the time of their release.  In 1985 Mattel attempted to broaden the success of Masters of the Universe, by releasing a line of toys aimed at girls. Many of the Princess of Power characters would eventually be incorporated into Masters of the Universe Classics. Mattel revamped the Masters of the Universe concept for this 1989 toyline, which had more slender-looking action figures, and a storyline which featured He-Man and Skeletor taking their adventures beyond Eternia, into outer space. Four Horsemen Studios continued the 200X toyline in the form of non-articulated 6" scale resin statues, which were designed to fit in with the 2002-2004 action figures. They were released by NECA, under licence from Mattel. This is the legend (abbreviations) for the CODES used in the subsequent tables: Masters of the Universe Classics (August 2008-December 2009) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2010) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2011) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2012)    Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2013) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2014) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2015) Mattel Masters of the Universe Classics (2016) In 2016 Masters of the Universe Classics will be accompanied by an additional toyline, featuring designs and characters from the Filmation cartoon series. They will also be sold on MattyCollector. He-Man and the Masters of the Universe Collectors Choice (2016) Masters of the Universe Classics/He-Man and the Masters of the Universe Collectors Choice (possible future releases) Mattel has stated their intention to release as many action figures as possible as part of the Masters of the Universe Classics/Collectors Choice toylines. The following is a selection of characters that Mattel own the rights to make toys of: In 2014, Masters of the Universe Minis were released via the Mattel toy collector website, Matty Collector.  The figures were packed in sets of two with a hero versus a villain.  Also included was a build and connect Castle Grayskull playset. Masters of the Universe Giants In the fall of 2014, a brand new 12" Masters of the Universe toyline was released. This time the figures were 12" versions of the original 1980s toys. In 2003, Tops Toys, an Argentinian toy company, used the molds from the vintage Masters of the Universe figures and released eight characters in Argentina.     Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Man-At-Arms Master of Weapons! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Stratos Winged Warrior! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Teela Warrior Goddess! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Skeletor Lord of Destruction! Evil Warriors Action Figure Beast Man Savage Henchman! Evil Warriors Action Figure Mer-Man Ocean Warlord! Evil Warriors Action Figure Zodac Cosmic Enforcer! Neutral Action Figure Battle Cat Fighting Tiger Heroic Warriors Creature Battle Ram Mobile Launcher Heroic Warriors Vehicle Wind Raider Assault Lander Heroic Warriors Vehicle Castle Grayskull Fortress of Mystery and Power for He-Man and his Foes Heroic Warriors Playset Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Man-E-Faces Human...Robot...Monster! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Ram Man Human Battering Ram! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Faker Evil Robot of SKELETOR Evil Warriors Action Figure Trap Jaw Evil & Armed for Combat Evil Warriors Action Figure Tri-Klops Evil & Sees Everything Evil Warriors Action Figure Zoar Fighting Falcon Heroic Warriors Creature Screeech Barbarian Bird Evil Warriors Creature Attak Trak Battle Machine Heroic Warriors Vehicle Point Dread & Talon Fighter Frontier Outpost Heroic Warriors Playset/Vehicle Weapons Pak Arms & Armor N/A Accessories Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Mekaneck Heroic Human Periscope Heroic Warriors Action Figure Evil-Lyn Evil Warrior Goddess Evil Warriors Action Figure Battle Armor He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Buzz-Off Heroic Spy in the Sky Heroic Warriors Action Figure Fisto Heroic Hand-To-Hand Fighter Heroic Warriors Action Figure Orko Heroic Court Magician Heroic Warriors Action Figure Prince Adam Heroic "Secret" Identity to He-Man Heroic Warriors Action Figure Battle Armor Skeletor Lord of Destruction Evil Warriors Action Figure Clawful Warrior with the Grip of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Jitsu Evil Master of Martial Arts Evil Warriors Action Figure Kobra Khan Evil Master of Snakes Evil Warriors Action Figure Webstor Evil Master of Escape Evil Warriors Action Figure Whiplash Evil Tail Thrashing Warrior Evil Warriors Action Figure Stridor Heroic Armored War Horse Heroic Warriors Creature Panthor Savage Cat Evil Warriors Creature Dragon Walker Sidewinding Beast/Vehicle Heroic Warriors Vehicle Road Ripper Warrior Carrier Heroic Warriors Vehicle Roton Evil Assault Vehicle Evil Warriors Vehicle Snake Mountain Evil Stronghold of Skeletor Evil Warriors Playset Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Thunder Punch He-Man Leader of Heroic Warriors Now Packs a Loud Power Punch! Heroic Warriors Action Figure Moss Man Heroic Spy & Master of Camouflage Heroic Warriors Action Figure Roboto Heroic Mechanical Warrior Heroic Warriors Action Figure Sy-Klone Heroic Fist-Flinging Tornado Heroic Warriors Action Figure Dragon Blaster Skeletor Evil Leader and his Dreadful Dragon with the "Paralyzing" Spray! Evil Warriors Action Figure Spikor Untouchable Master of Evil Combat Evil Warriors Action Figure Stinkor Evil Master of Odors Evil Warriors Action Figure Two Bad Double-Headed Evil Strategist Evil Warriors Action Figure Hordak Ruthless Leader of The Evil Horde The Evil Horde Action Figure Grizzlor Hairy Henchman of The Evil Horde The Evil Horde Action Figure Leech Evil Master of Power Suction The Evil Horde Action Figure Mantenna Evil Spy with the Pop-Out Eyes The Evil Horde Action Figure Modulok Evil Beast of a Thousand Bodies The Evil Horde Action Figure Battle Bones Collectors Carrying Case Neutral Creature Night Stalker Evil Armored Battle Steed! Evil Warriors Creature Bashasaurus Heroic Combat Vehicle Heroic Warriors Vehicle Land Shark Evil Monster/Vehicle Evil Warriors Vehicle Spydor Evil Stalker Evil Warriors Vehicle Fright Zone Trap-Filled Stronghold of Terror The Evil Horde Playset Thunder Punch Ammo Rings of Caps for Thunder Punch He-Man Heroic Warriors Accessories Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Flying Fists He-Man Heroic Leader with the Arm Swinging Action Heroic Warriors Action Figure Extendar Heroic Master of Extension Heroic Warriors Action Figure Rio Blast Heroic Transforming Gun-Slinger Heroic Warriors Action Figure Snout Spout Heroic Water-Blasting Firefighter Heroic Warriors Action Figure Rokkon Young Heroic Comet Warrior Comet Warriors Action Figure Stonedar Heroic Rock People Leader Comet Warriors Action Figure Terror Claws Skeletor Evil Leader with the Claw Swinging Action Evil Warriors Action Figure Hurricane Hordak Ruthless Leader and his Wicked Whirling Weapons The Evil Horde Action Figure Dragstor Evil Transforming Warrior/Vehicle The Evil Horde Action Figure Horde Trooper Evil Collapsing Robot The Evil Horde Action Figure Multi-Bot Evil Robot of a Thousand Bodies The Evil Horde Action Figure King Hiss Dreadful Disguised Leader of the SNAKE MEN Snake Men Action Figure Rattlor Evil SNAKE MEN Creature with the Quick-Strike Head Snake Men Action Figure Tung Lashor Evil Tongue-Shooting SNAKE MEN Creature Snake Men Action Figure Mantisaur Evil Insectoid Steed The Evil Horde Creature Monstroid The Ultimate Battling Monster The Evil Horde Creature Blaster Hawk Heroic Land & Sky Disc Launcher! Heroic Warriors Vehicle Laser Bolt Heroic Road Rocket Heroic Warriors Vehicle Fright Fighter Evil Dragonfly Attack Vehicle Evil Warriors Vehicle Slime Pit Evil Pit of Gruesome Ooze The Evil Horde Playset Jet Sled Heroic Rocket Sled & Jetpack Heroic Warriors Accessories Megalaser Heroic Wind-Up Beam Blaster Heroic Warriors Accessories Stilt Stalkers Heroic Battle Stilts Heroic Warriors Accessories Slime Pit Vat Tub of Slime The Evil Horde Accessories Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Clamp Champ Heroic Master of Capture Heroic Warriors Action Figure Gwildor Heroic Creator of the Cosmic Key Heroic Warriors Action Figure King Randor Heroic Ruler of Eternia Heroic Warriors Action Figure Rotar Heroic Master of Hyper-Spin Heroic Warriors Action Figure Sorceress Heroic Guardian of Castle Grayskull Heroic Warriors Action Figure Blade Evil Master of Swords Evil Warriors Action Figure Blast-Attak Evil Blast-Apart Robotic Warrior Evil Warriors Action Figure Faker (aka Faker II, reissue) Evil Robotic HE-MAN Imposter! Evil Warriors Action Figure Ninjor Evil Ninja Warrior Evil Warriors Action Figure Saurod Evil Spark-Shooting Reptile Evil Warriors Action Figure Scare Glow Evil Ghost of Skeletor Evil Warriors Action Figure Twistoid Evil Speed Twisting Robot Evil Warriors Action Figure Buzz-Saw Hordak Ruthless Leader with Blaster Blade The Evil Horde Action Figure Mosquitor Evil Energy-Draining Insectoid The Evil Horde Action Figure Snake Face Most Gruesome of the Snake Men Snake Men Action Figure Sssqueeze Evil Long Armed Viper Snake Men Action Figure Bionatops Heroic Bionic Dinosaur Heroic Warriors Creature Turbodactyl Heroic Reptile with "Jet" Wings Heroic Warriors Creature Tyrantisaurus Rex Most Terrifying Dinosaur in the Land of Preternia Snake Men Creature Tytus (Only released in Italy) Heroic Giant Warlord Heroic Warriors Creature Megator (Only released in Italy) Evil Giant Destroyer Snake Men Creature Eternia The Ultimate Battleground Comes to Life! Neutral Playset Beam Blaster & Artilleray Heroic Warriors/The Evil Horde Accessories Cliff Climber Motorized Mountain Battle Equipment Heroic Warriors Accessories Tower Tools Motorized for Castle Battle Heroic Warriors Accessories Scubattack Motorized Underwater Battle Pack Evil Warriors Accessories Astro Lion Heroic Lion with Amazing Brute Strength Heroic Meteorbs Creature Comet Cat Heroic Panther is the Fastest of the Meteorbs Heroic Meteorbs Creature Cometroid Heroic Meteorb with Heroic Might Heroic Meteorbs Creature Tuskor Heroic Mammoth Busts Force-Fields with Tusks Heroic Meteorbs Creature Ty-Grrr Heroic Tiger Meteorb Heroic Meteorbs Creature Crocobite Evil Crocodile with Crushing Jaws Evil Meteorbs Creature Dinosorb Evil Dinosaur Stomps to Start Quakes Evil Meteorbs Creature Gore-Illa Evil Ape with Monstrous Muscle Power Evil Meteorbs Creature Orbear Evil Grizzly Bashes Enemies with Claws Evil Meteorbs Creature Rhinorb Evil Rhino with Horrible Ramming Horn Evil Meteorbs Creature Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Laser Power He-Man Heroic Master of Light Energy Heroic Warriors Action Figure Laser-Light Skeletor Evil Master of Light Energy Evil Warriors Action Figure Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Evil Robot Evil Robot with the Long-Range "Laser" Jet Evil Warriors Action Figure He-Ro Most Powerful Wizard in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Eldor Heroic Guardian of the Book of Living Spells Heroic Warriors Action Figure Gygor Unknown Evil Warriors Creature Gigantisaur Unknown Heroic Warriors Creature Gyrattacker Unknown Heroic Warriors Vehicle Name !! Alternative Name !! Allegiance !! Type He-Man Galactic Guardians Action Figure Flipshot Icarius Galactic Guardians Action Figure Hydron Galactic Guardians Action Figure Skeletor Evil Mutants Action Figure Flogg Brakk Evil Mutants Action Figure Slush Head Kalamarr Evil Mutants Action Figure Astrosub Galactic Guardians Vehicle Bolajet Galactic Guardians Vehicle Shuttle Pod Dreadwing Evil Mutants Vehicle Terrorclaw Terror Pod Evil Mutants Vehicle Rocket Disk Power Pack Galactic Guardians Accessory Turbo Tormentor Evil Mutants Accessory Starship Eternia Galactic Guardians Playset Name !! Alternative Name !! Allegiance !! Type Battle Punch He-Man Galactic Guardians Action Figure Kayo Tatarus Galactic Guardians Action Figure Nocturna Galactic Guardians Action Figure Vizar Galactic Guardians Action Figure Disks of Doom Skeletor Evil Mutants Action Figure Hoove Evil Mutants Action Figure Karatti Evil Mutants Action Figure Lizorr Evil Mutants Action Figure Nordor Evil Mutants Playset Name !! Alternative Name !! Allegiance !! Type Artilla Weaponstronic Galactic Guardians Action Figure Spinwit Tornado Galactic Guardians Action Figure Tuskador Insyzor Galactic Guardians Action Figure Butthead Evil Mutants Action Figure Optikk Evil Mutants Action Figure Quakke Earthquake Evil Mutants Action Figure Staghorn Evil Mutants Action Figure Sagitar Tharkus Galactic Guardians Creature Battle Bird Galactic Guardians Vehicle Doomcopter Skull Copter Evil Mutants Vehicle Terrotread Dread Tread Evil Mutants Vehicle Name !! Alternative Name !! Allegiance Type Thunder Punch He-Man Galactic Guardians Action Figure Missile Armor Flipshot Missile Armor Icarius Galactic Guardians Action Figure Spin Fist Hydron Galactic Guardians Action Figure Battle Blade Skeletor Evil Mutants Action Figure Hook `Em Flogg Hook `Em Brakk Evil Mutants Action Figure Too Tall Hoove Evil Mutants Action Figure Name !! Alternative Name !! Allegiance !! Type Darius Galactic Guardians Action Figure Mara Galactic Guardians Action Figure Kayo (variant) Tatarus Galactic Guardians Action Figure Galactimytes Heroic Galactimytes Action Figures Gleanons Evil Gleanons Action Figures Clawber Galactic Guardians Creature Grr Evil Mutants Creature Mattel attempted to revive the long-dormant franchise with a new toyline, which was sculpted by Four Horsemen Studios. Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Battle Sound He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Man-At-Arms Heroic Master of Weapons Heroic Warriors Action Figure Stratos Heroic Winged Warrior Heroic Warriors Action Figure Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Battle Sound Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Beast Man Savage Henchman Evil Warriors Action Figure Mer-Man Evil Ocean Warlord Evil Warriors Action Figure Wolf Armor He-Man/Snake Armor Skeletor Most Powerful Man in the Universe/Overlord of Evil Heroic Warriors/Evil Warriors Gift Set He-Man Eagle Fight-Pak None Heroic Warriors Accessories Skeletor Bat Fight-Pak None Evil Warriors Accessories Battle Cat Heroic Fighting Tiger Heroic Warriors Creature Panthor Evil Savage Cat Evil Warriors Creature Bashin' Beetle Heroic Smash ‘n’ Grab Vehicle Heroic Warriors Vehicle Battle Hawk Heroic Combat Aircraft Heroic Warriors Vehicle Battle Tank (with He-Man) Heroic Attack Vehicle Heroic Warriors Vehicle Battle Ram Chariot (with Skeletor) Skeletor’s Demolition Vehicle Evil Warriors Vehicle Terrodactyl Skeletor’s Attack Aircraft Evil Warriors Vehicle Castle Grayskull Heroic Fortress of Mystery & Power Heroic Warriors Playset Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Jungle Attack He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Mekaneck Heroic Human Periscope Heroic Warriors Action Figure Ram Man Heroic Human Battering Ram Heroic Warriors Action Figure War Whale Heroic Attack Watercraft Heroic Warriors Vehicle Attack Squid Evil Attack Watercraft Evil Warriors Vehicle Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Smash Blade He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Battle Armor He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Samurai He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Samurai Man-At-Arms Heroic Master of Weapons Heroic Warriors Action Figure Orko Heroic Court Magician Heroic Warriors Action Figure Teela Warrior Goddess Heroic Warriors Action Figure Spin Blade Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Battle Armor Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Trap Jaw Evil Mechanical Menace Evil Warriors Action Figure Tri-Klops Evil Three-Eyed Villain Evil Warriors Action Figure Samurai Battle Cat Heroic Fighting Tiger Heroic Warriors Creature Samurai Battle Raptor None Evil Warriors Action Figure Spit Bull None Heroic Warriors Vehicle Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Martial-Arts He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Battle Glove Man-At-Arms Heroic Master of Weapons Heroic Warriors Action Figure Prince Adam Heroic Secret Identity of He-Man Heroic Warriors Action Figure Sy-Klone Heroic Fist-Flinging Tornado Heroic Warriors Action Figure Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Ice Armor He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Mega Punch He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Buzz-Off Heroic Spy in the Sky Heroic Warriors Action Figure Man-E-Faces Heroic Human... Robot... Monster Heroic Warriors Action Figure Fire Armor Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Evil-Lyn Evil Warrior Goddess Evil Warriors Action Figure Two Bad Double Headed Evil Strategist Evil Warriors Action Figure Whiplash Evil Tail Thrashing Warrior Evil Warriors Action Figure He-Man Battle Station None Heroic Warriors Playset Mutant Slime Pit (with Mutant Warrior) None Evil Warriors Playset Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Shield Strike He-Man (aka Stealth Armor He-Man) Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Sky Strike Stratos Heroic Winged Warrior Heroic Warriors Action Figure Roboto Heroic Mechanical Warrior Heroic Warriors Action Figure Zodak Heroic Cosmic Enforcer Heroic Warriors Action Figure Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Snake Hunter He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Mecha-Blade He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Serpent Claw Man-At-Arms Heroic Master of Weapons Heroic Warriors Action Figure Serpent Track Mekaneck Heroic Human Periscope Heroic Warriors Action Figure Battle Fist (aka Fisto) Heroic Hand-To-Hand Fighter Heroic Warriors Action Figure Snake Crush Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure Mecha-Blade Skeletor Overlord of Evil Evil Warriors Action Figure King Hssss (aka King Hiss) Dreadful Disguised Leader of the Snake Men Snake Men Action Figure Venom Spitting Khan (aka Kobra Khan) Henchman of the Snake Men Snake Men Action Figure The General (aka Rattlor) Evil Snake Creature with the Quick Strike Head Snake Men Action Figure Battle Bones Transport (aka Battle Bones) Figure Carrier Neutral Creature Mecha-Bite Battle Cat Fighting Tiger Heroic Warriors Creature Mecha-Bite Panthor Savage Cat Evil Warriors Creature Name !! Log Line !! Alliegiance !! Type Snake Armor He-Man (Only released in Europe) Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Action Figure Claw Attack Stratos Winged Warrior Heroic Warriors Action Figure Trap 'N' Smash Orko Heroic Court Magician Heroic Warriors Action Figure Ice Armor Skeletor Lord of Destruction Evil Warriors Action Figure Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance !! Type Faker Evil Robot of Skeletor Evil Warriors Action Figure Keldor Apprentice of Hordak Evil Warriors Action Figure Moss Man Heroic Master of Camouflage Heroic Warriors Action Figure She-Ra Most Powerful Woman in the Universe The Great Rebellion Action Figure Snake Teela Warrior Goddess Snake Men Action Figure Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Snout Spout Heroic Water Blasting Fire Fighter Heroic Warriors Clawful Warrior with the Grip of Evil Evil Warriors Hordak Ruthless Leader of the Evil Horde The Evil Horde Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Clamp Champ Heroic Master of Capture Heroic Warriors Stinkor Evil Master of Odors Evil Warriors Grizzlor Hairy Henchman of the Evil Horde The Evil Horde Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Sorceress (& Zoar) Heroic Guardian of Castle Grayskull Heroic Warriors Mantenna Evil Spy with the Pop Out Eyes The Evil Horde Tung Lashor Evil Tongue-Shooting Snake Men Creature Snake Men Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Webstor Evil Master of Escape Evil Warriors Leech Evil Master of Power Suction The Evil Horde Snake Face Most Gruesome of the Snake Men Warriors Snake Men Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Rio Blast Heroic Transforming Gunslinger Heroic Warriors Evil-Lyn (& Screeech) Evil Warrior Goddess Evil Warriors Sssqueeze Evil Long Armed Viper Snake Men Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance Battle Armor He-Man Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroic Warriors Jitsu (& Odiphus) Evil Master of Martial Arts Evil Warriors Mosquitor Evil Energy-Draining Insectoid The Evil Horde Name !! Log Line !! Allegiance King Randor Ruler of Eternia Heroic Warriors King Randor (Classic Colors) Ruler of Eternia Heroic Warriors Sorceress (Classic Colors) Guardian of Castle Grayskull Heroic Warriors Evil-Lyn (Classic Colors) Evil Warrior Goddess Evil Warriors Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line!! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 24 Aug, 2008 C King Grayskull (Not given) Ancestor of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions/MOTU 200X 200X New 24 Aug, 2008 C King Grayskull (Bronze, random chase figure) (Not given) Ancestor of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions/MOTU Classics 200X New 24 Aug, 2008 R King Grayskull (Spirit, translucent blue) (Not given) Ancestor of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions/MOTU Classics 200X New 1 Dec, 2008 M He-Man Adam of the House of Randor Most Powerful Man in the Universe Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 1 Dec, 2008 M Beast Man Raqquill Rqazz Savage Henchman Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 15 Jan, 2009 M Skeletor Keldor Evil Lord of Destruction Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 16 Feb, 2009 M Stratos Stratos of the House of Avion Winged Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 16 Mar, 2009 M Faker Faker Evil Robot of Skeletor Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 2 15 Apr, 2009 M Mer-Man Squidish Rex Ocean Warlord Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 15 May 2009 M Zodac Zodac Zur Cosmic Enforcer Neutral Cosmic Enforcers MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 15 Jun, 2009 M Hordak Hec-Tor Kur Ruthless Leader of the Evil Horde Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Jul, 2009 M Man-At-Arms Duncan Master of Weapons Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 23 Jul, 2009 C He-Ro - SDCC chest logo (with random green. red or purple spell stone) Ro Heroic Cosmic Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors Prototype POG New 2 Aug, 2009 B He-Ro (with random green, red or purple spell stone) Ro Heroic Cosmic Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors Prototype POG New 17 Aug, 2009 M Tri-Klops Trydor Esooniux Scope Evil & Sees Everything Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 2 15 Sep, 2009 M Webstor Araneus son of Raknus Master of Escape Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 Oct, 2009 M Teela (with Zoar) Teela Warrior Goddess Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 15 Oct, 2009 B Zodak Kar-Tor Mystic Enforcer Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 2002–2004 200X 7 16 Nov, 2009 M Scareglow (aka Scare Glow) Karak Nul Evil Ghost Serving Skeletor Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Dec, 2009 M King Randor Randor of the House of Miro Ruler of Eternia Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Dec, 2009 B The Goddess Sharella Trainer of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors Mini-Comic MOTU New Date !! Code!! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 15 Jan, 2010 M Adora Adora of the House of Randor Leader in the Great Rebellion Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation POP New 15 Jan, 2010 A Battle Armor He-Man Adam of the House of Randor Most Powerful Man in the Universe Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 16 Feb, 2010 M Trap Jaw Kronis Evil & Armed For Combat Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988/Mike Young Productions MOTU/200X 2 16 Feb, 2010 O Battle Cat Cringer Fighting Tiger Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 16 Feb, 2010 P Castle Grayskull Stands N/A None None Heroic Warriors MOTU Classics MOTU New 25 Feb, 2010 T Superman vs. He-Man (Comic colours) Kal-El/Adam of the House of Randor The Man of Steel/ The Most Powerful Man in the Universe Heroes Justice League/Heroic Warriors Comic Book DC/MOTU New 25 Feb, 2010 T Lex Luthor vs. Skeletor (Comic colours) Alexander Joseph Luthor/Keldor Criminal Mastermind/Evil Lord of Destruction Villains Injustice League/Evil Warriors Comic Book DC/MOTU New 15 Mar, 2010 M Moss Man Kreann’ot N’horosh Heroic Spy & Master of Camouflage Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 19 Apr, 2010 M Evil-Lyn (with Screeech) Evelyn Morgan Powers Evil Warrior Goddess Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 19 Apr, 2010 P Weapons Pak N/A Arms & Armor Neutral None MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 19 Apr, 2010 S Wun-Dar Wun-Dar The Savage He-Man Hero None Myth MOTU New 19 May 2010 S Map of Eternia (Came with Wun-Dar) Eternia Magical Planet None None Filmation/MOTU 1982-1988 MOTU New 15 May 2010 M Optikk Pronounced through a series of blinks Space Mutant Spy for Skeletor Villain Space Mutants He-Man 1989–1992 NA 3 15 May 2010 O Tytus Tytus Heroic Giant Warlord Hero Heroic Warriors Powers of Grayskull/MOTU 1982–88 POG 7 15 Jun, 2010 M She-Ra Adora of the House of Randor Most Powerful Woman in the Universe Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–1987/Filmation POP 1 15 Jun, 2010 A Keldor Keldor of the House of Miro Apprentice of Hordak Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88/Mike Young Productions 200X C 15 Jul, 2010 M Count Marzo Marzo Kalif Evil Master of Magic Villain None Mike Young Productions/Filmation 200X New 22 Jul, 2010 C Orko - colour change (with Prince Adam) Orko/Adam of the House of Randor Court Magician/Secret Identity of He-Man Heroes Heroic Warriors Filmation/MOTU 1982–88 MOTU 3 22 Jul, 2010 B Mo-Larr & Skeletor Dr. Moe Larrstein & Keldor Eternian Dentist & Lord of Destruction Hero/Villain None/Evil Warriors Robot Chicken/MOTU 1982-88 MOTU New 22 Jul, 2010 R She-Ra (silver, cake decoration) Adora of the House of Randor Most Powerful Woman in the Universe Hero The Great Rebellion N/A POP New 02 Aug, 2010 B Orko (with Prince Adam) Orko/Adam of the House of Randor Court Magician/Secret Identity of He-Man Heroes Heroic Warriors Filmation/MOTU 1982–88 MOTU 3 16 Aug, 2010 M Whiplash Torrant Krazut Tail Thrashing Warrior Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 16 Sep, 2010 M Chief Carnivus Carnivus Fervelius III Feline Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 16 Sep, 2010 O Gygor Gygor Evil Fighting Gorilla Villain Evil Warriors Prototype MOTU New 15 Oct, 2010 M Roboto Robot Model 9041 Mechanical Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Nov, 2010 M Grizzlor Gur’rull Gu’rrooowarrrk The Ferocious Figure with Fur Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Nov, 2010 B King Grayskull (red cape, with orb) D’vann Grayskull Heroic Ancestor of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU Classics/Mike Young Productions 200X New 18 Nov, 2010 T Hawkman vs. Stratos (Blue wings) Katar Hol; Carter Hall/Stratos Winged Avenger/Winged Warrior Heroes Justice League/Heroic Warriors Comic Book/MOTU 1982-88 DC/MOTU 1 18 Nov, 2010 T Aquaman vs. Mer-Man (Blue skin) Arthur Curry; Orin/Squidish Rex King of the Seven Seas/Ocean Warlord Hero/Villain Justice League/Evil Warriors Comic Book/Mini-Comic DC/MOTU New 15 Dec, 2010 M Buzz-Off Tzzzzt zzz zzTTTzz Heroic Spy in the Sky Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 18 Jan, 2011 M Vikor Vikor He-Man of the North Hero None Concept Art POG New 18 Jan, 2011 O Eternian Palace Guards Various Heroic Guards Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation/Ladybird Books MOTU New 15 Feb, 2011 M Bow Kyle Reccula Special Friend Who Helps She-Ra Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–1987/Filmation POP 1 15 Feb, 2011 O Shadow Beast Various Evil Creatures of Darkness Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU New 15 Feb, 2011 S Preternia Disguise He-Man Adam of the House of Randor Most Powerful Man in the Universe Hero Heroic Warriors Mini-Comic POG New 15 Feb, 2011 S Map of Etheria (Came with Preternia Disguise He-Man) Etheria Beautiful Planet of Despondos N/A N/A POP 1985-87/Filmation POP New 15 Mar, 2011 M King Hssss (aka King Hiss) Hssss of the Viper House Dreadful Disguised Leader of the Snake Men Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 15 Mar, 2011 A Battle Armor Skeletor Keldor of the House Of Miro Lord of Destruction Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 Apr, 2011 M Sy-Klone Sy-Klone Son of Dy-Lex Heroic Fist-Flinging Tornado Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Apr, 2011 O Panthor Panthor Savage Cat of Skeletor Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 May 2011 M Catra C’yra of D’riluth III Jealous Beauty Villain The Evil Horde POP 1985–87/Filmation POP 1 15 Jun, 2011 M The Faceless One Nikolas Powers Ancient Lord of Zalesia Hero None Mike Young Productions 200X New 15 Jun, 2011 A Battleground Teela Teela Heir to the Sorceress Hero Heroic Warriors DC Comics MOTU New Jul, 2011 T Bizarro vs. Faker (Battle Armour) None Imperfect Duplicate/Evil Robot of Skeletor Villains Injustice League/Evil Warriors Comic Book/MOTU Classics DC/MOTU New Jul, 2011 T Green Lantern vs. Zodac (Comic colours) Hal Jordan/Zodac Zur Cosmic Crusader/Cosmic Enforcer Hero/Neutral Justice League/None Comic Book DC/MOTU New Jul, 2011 T Supergirl vs. She-Ra (Silver sword) Linda Danvers/Adora of the House of Randor The Maid of Might/Most Powerful Woman in the Universe Heroes Teen Titans/The Great Rebellion Comic Book/Filmation DC/POP New 15 Jul, 2011 M Clawful Pronounced through a series of claw clicks Warrior with the Grip of Evil Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 21 Jul, 2011 C Queen Marlena (& young Cringer) Marlena Glenn Queen of Eternia Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation/MOTU 1982-88/MOTU Classics MOTU New 1 Aug, 2011 B Captain Glenn (& young Cringer) Marlena Glenn Heroic Space Adventurer Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation/MOTU 1982-88/MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 Aug, 2011 M Man-E-Faces Perkaedo Human...Robot...Monster Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 2 15 Aug, 2011 O Megator Moleb The Demolisher Evil Giant Destroyer Villain Snake Men & The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 POG 7 15 Sep, 2011 M Leech K’ull’leusshhhh Master of Power Suction Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Sep, 2011 A Hurricane Hordak Hec-Tor Kur Ruthless Leader with Wicked Whirling Weapons Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 17 Oct, 2011 M Icarius (aka Flipshot) TC Icarius Kaz Daring Space Ace Hero Galactic Protectors He-Man 1989–1992 NA 1 15 Nov, 2011 M Snout Spout Jaxton Water Blasting Firefighter Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 15 Nov, 2011 S Princess of Power stickers (came with Snout Spout, subscribers only) POP/MOTU/POG/NA New 15 Nov, 2011 A Bubble Power She-Ra (aka She-Ra 2.0) Adora of the House of Randor Most Powerful Woman in the Universe Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–87/Filmation POP 3 15 Nov, 2011 O Swiftwind (aka Swift Wind) Spirit Beautiful Horse, Spirit, Becomes Magical Flying Unicorn! Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–87/Filmation POP 1 15 Dec, 2011 M Demo-Man Uqquz'zekul-Mshqx Evil Spirit of Despondos Villain None Concept Art MOTU New 15 Dec, 2011 A Battleground Evil-Lyn Evelyn Morgan Powers Evil Witch of Eternia Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 200X/Mike Young Productions 200X 5 15 Dec, 2012 V Wind Raider N/A Heroic Assault Lander Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 1 Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 17 Jan, 2012 O The Star Sisters (Jewelstar, Starla, Tallstar) (with Glory Bird) Devena/Gemma/Cassandra Hidden Beauty/Bright and Beautiful Leader/ Lovely Lookout Hero The Great Rebellion Prototype POP New 15 Feb, 2012 M Sorceress Teela Na Guardian of Castle Grayskull Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Feb, 2012 30 Fearless Photog Jey Heroic Master of Cameras Hero Heroic Warriors 1980s Contest/MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 Feb, 2012 M Fisto Malcom Hand-To-Hand Fighter Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 Feb, 2012 S Shadow Weaver Beatrix Lightspinner Mistress of Dark Magic Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP New 15 Feb, 2012 S Map of Preternia (Came with Shadow Weaver) Preternia Ancient Continent of Hidden Magic None None The Powers of Grayskull POG New 15 Mar, 2012 M Kobra Khan Khan of the Clan Kobra Evil Master of Snakes Villain Evil Warriors/Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 16 Apr, 2012 A Thunder Punch He-Man Adam of the House of Randor Heroic Leader With A Power Punch Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 16 Apr, 2012 30 Draego-Man (renounced his given Dragonian name) Evil Fire-Breathing Menace Villain Evil Warriors MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 May 2012 M Stinkor Odiphus Evil Master of Odors Evil Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 May 2012 M Slush Head Kalamarr Scaly Goon Squad Thug Villain Space Mutants He-Man 1989–1992 NA 1 15 May 2012 P Snake Mountain Stands N/A None Villain Evil Warriors MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 May 2012 30 The Mighty Spector John Spector Master of Time Travel Hero Time Agents MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 Jun, 2012 M Horde Prime Anillis Kur Supreme Ruler of the Horde Empire Villain The Evil Horde MOTU Classics/Filmation/Comic Book POP/MOTU New 15 Jun, 2012 A Snake Man-At-Arms Duncan of the Viper Clan Transformed Master Of Weapons Villain Snake Men Mike Young Productions 200X New 15 Jun 2012 O Griffin Varies Evil Flying Beasts Villain Evil Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 12 Jul, 2012 C/O Vykron (Packaged in barbarian outfit) Vykron Ultimate Eternian Champion Heroic None Prototype MOTU New 16 Jul, 2012 M Spikor Kleffton Untouchable Master of Evil Combat Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 1 Aug, 2012 B/O Vykron (Packaged in military or space outfits) Vykron Ultimate Eternian Champion Heroic None Prototype MOTU New 15 Aug, 2012 30 Sir Laser-Lot Unknown Heroic Knight of Grayskull Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU Classics POG New 15 Sep 2012 M Mekaneck Orius Heroic Human Periscope Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 Sep, 2012 A Dragon Blaster Skeletor Keldor of the House of Miro Evil Leader & his Dreadful Dragon with the "Paralyzing Spray" Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 15 Sep 2012 O Snake Men Varies Slithering Minions of King Hssss Villain Snake Men Mike Young Productions 200X New 15 Oct, 2012 M Frosta Queen Mackenzie Ice Empress of Etheria Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–1987/Filmation POP 1 15 Oct, 2012 M Rattlor Slltyo of the Rattlor House Evil Creature with the Quick Strike Head Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 15 Oct, 2012 S Time Agents/The Great Rebellion stickers (came with Rattlor, subscribers only) POP/MOTUC New 15 Oct, 2012 30 Cy-Chop Scychor Evil Horde Bounty Hunter Villain Horde MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 Oct, 2012 P Great Unrest Weapons Pack N/A None Neutral None MOTU Classics MOTU New 15 Nov 2012 M Dekker Dekker Heroic Trainer-At-Arms Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 15 Nov 2012 A King Randor (Eternos Palace) Randor of the House of Miro Eternos Palace Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation MOTU New 15 Nov, 2012 30 Castle Grayskullman Not Applicable Heroic Embodiment of Castle Grayskull Hero Heroic Warriors 30th Anniversary Contest/MOTU Classics MOTU New 23 Nov, 2012 B/C Temple of Darkness Sorceress Teela Na Heroic Guardian of Castle Grayskull Hero Heroic Warriors Mini-Comic MOTU New 17 Dec, 2012 M Mosquitor Bliddeon Black Evil Energy-Draining Insectoid Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 17 Dec, 2012 O Procrustus Procrustus Giant Guardian of Magic Hero None Mini-Comic MOTU New 17 Dec, 2012 O/B Granamyr Granamyr the Wise Great Magic Wielding Dragon Hero Neutral Filmation MOTU New Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 15 Jan, 2013 M Netossa Vivian Redretta Captivating Beauty Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–1987 POP 3 15 Feb, 2013 M Jitsu Chopper Evil Master of Martial Arts Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 3 15 Feb, 2013 O Ram Man Krass Heroic Human Battering Ram! Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 2 14 Mar, 2013 B/C Strobo Gelpher Light Powered Cosmic Enforcer Neutral None Comic Book MOTU New 15 Mar, 2013 M/S Fang Man Scutes Ignis Evil Fanged Minion of Skeletor Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU New 15 Mar, 2013 S King He-Man Adam of the House of Randor Heroic Ruler of Future Eternia Hero Heroic Warriors MOTUC/Mini-Comic MOTU New 15 Mar, 2013 S Map of Subternia (Comes with King He-Man) Subternia Hidden Land Beneath the Horizon None None MYP/Mini-Comic MOTU New 15 Apr, 2013 M Snake Face Cyltho Ssstavvve Most Gruesome of the Snake Men Warriors Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982-1988 MOTU 6 15 Apr, 2013 O The Fighting Foe Men Dawg-O-Tor/Ditztroyer/Shield Maiden Sherrilyn Evil Eternian Pirate Clan Villains None/The Evil Horde Concept MOTU New 8 May 2013 B Hordak (Spirit) Hec-Tor Kur Spirit Villain The Evil Horde Comic 200X New 15 May 2013 M Karatti Stickel-Vat Bone Bashing Mutant Villain Space Mutants NA 1989-1992 NA 2 17 Jun, 2012 M Octavia Polypus Rorqu Wicked Tentacle-Swinging Warrior Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP New 15 Jul, 2013 M Clamp Champ Raenius Heroic Master of Capture Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Jul, 2013 A He-Man (Galactic Protector) Adam of the House of Randor Galactic Protector Heroic Galactic Protectors He-Man 1989–1992 NA 1 15 Jul, 2013 F Icer Icleeel of the Outer Stilia Clan Evil Master of Cold Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU New 18 Jul, 2013 O/B Rokkon and Stonedar Rokkon/Stonedar Young Heroic Comet Warrior/Heroic Rock People Leader Heroic Warriors Rock People MOTU 82-88 MOTU 5 15 Aug, 2013 M Castaspella Esmerelda Enchantress Who Hypnotizes Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985–1987/Filmation POP 1 15 Aug, 2013 F Shokoti Shokoti Evil Witch of Eternia Villain None Filmation MOTU New 16 Sep, 2013 V Sky High with Jet Sled (aka Sky Sled) Daril Heroic Airship Adventurer Hero Heroic Warriors Concept MOTU New 16 Sep, 2013 F Batros Wiley Evil Master of Theft Villain None Filmation MOTU New 15 Oct, 2013 M Mantenna Glieeb-Tolio Jak-Us Evil Spy with the Pop Out Eyes Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982-88/Filmation MOTU 4 15 Oct, 2013 M Lord Dactus (aka Lord Dactys) Dactus of Spelia Heroic Bat Warrior Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions MOTU New 15 Oct, 2013 O Horde Troopers Horde Drones Serial Numbers 2549 and 3849 Evil Mechanical Enforcers of Hordak Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982-88/Filmation MOTU/POP 5 15 Oct, 2013 P Weapons Pak: End of Wars (includes Kowl) Kowl The Know-It Owl Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985-87 POP 1 15 Oct, 2013 F Nepthu Nepthu Sencri Wicked Sun Sorcerer Villain None Filmation MOTU New 15 Nov, 2013 M Geldor Geldor III Evil Barbarian Obsessed with Immortality Villain None Mini-Comic MOTU New 15 Nov, 2013 S Son of He-Man stickers (came with Geldor, subscribers only) MOTU/NA/MOTUC New 15 Nov, 2013 F Sea Hawk Captain Jeoff Blithe Heroic Etherian Pirate Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation POP New 16 Dec, 2013 B Standor Standor Cosmic Creator of Power Neutral None MOTU Classics MOTU New 16 Dec, 2013 M Plundor Plundor the Spoiler Evil Rabbit Seeking Riches Villain None Filmation MOTU New 16 Dec, 2013 F Strong-Or (aka Strongarm) Dalmus Fu Evil Power-Punching Warrior Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU New 16 Dec, 2013 P Castle Grayskull Castle Grayskull Fortress of Mystery & Power Neutral Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 1 16 Dec, 2013 S Masters of the Universe Checklist (came with Castle Grayskull - preorders only) Masters of the Universe Heroic and Evil Warriors Wielding Great Power None None MOTU Classics MOTU New Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave 15 Jan 2014 M Two Bad Tuvar & Baddhra Double-Headed Evil Strategist Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 4 17 Feb 2013 M Glimmer Glimmer of the House of Brightmoon The Guide who Lights the Way! Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP 1 15 Feb 2014 O Modulok Galen Nycoff Evil Beast of a Thousand Bodies Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 4 17 Mar 2013 M Hydron Daniel Ripper, Jr. Heroic Leader of the Galactic Protectors Hero Galactic Protectors New Adventures 1989-92 NA 1 17 Mar 2013 S Unnamed One Gorpo Evil Lord of Chaos Villain None MOTU Classics/Mini-Comic MOTU New 17 Mar 2013 S Map of The Horde Empire (came with Unnamed One) The Horde Empire Tyrannical Galactic Rulers None None Filmation POP/MOTU POP/MOTU New 15 Apr 2014 M Blade Ritter Evil Master of Swords Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 6 15 Apr 2014 B Kowl (Filmation) & Loo-Kee Kowl/Pedraut Edeltran The Know-It Owl/Hides and Sees All in Etheria Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP New, 3 15 Apr 2014 B/C Goat Man Klacky Horn-Headed Servant of Beast Man Villain Evil Warriors Golden Books MOTU New 15 May 2014 M Scorpia Lynda D'ream Stinging Horde Enforcer Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP New 15 May 2014 O Battle Lion Granger Heroic Steed of King Grayskull Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 16 June 2014 M Extendar Doodon Heroic Master of Extension Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 5 15 July 2014 M Flogg Brakk Evil Leader of the Space Mutants Villain Space Mutants New Adventures 1989-92 NA 1 15 July 2014 E Double Mischief (aka Double Trouble) Rebekkah Kettle Glamorous Double Agent Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-1987 POP 1 24 July 2014 B Hordak (with Imp) Hec-Tor Kur Evil Leader of the Horde Invasion Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP New 24 July 2014 C Imp as Treasure Chest Imp Evil Shapeshifting Spy Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP New 15 Aug 2014 M Flutterina Abby De'note Beautiful "Flying" Lookout Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-1987/Filmation POP 2 15 Aug 2014 E Madame Razz (includes Broom!) Regina Razz Magical Witch of Whispering Woods Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation POP NEW 15 Aug 2014 A Skeletor (Intergalactic Overlord of Evil) Keldor of the House of Miro Intergalactic Overlord of Evil Villain Space Mutants New Adventures 1989-92 NA 1 15 Sep, 2014 M Rio Blast Riolus Blast Heroic Transforming Gunslinger Hero Heroic Warriors Masters of the Universe 1982-88 MOTU 5 15 Sep, 2014 E Entrapta Es'tra Vesslelak Tricky Golden Beauty Villain The Evil Horde Princess of Power 1985-1987/Filmation POP 2 15 Sep, 2014 S/E The Great Rebellion stickers (came with Entrapta, subscribers only) MOTUC POP New 15 Oct, 2014 M Eldor R'endril the Wise Heroic Guardian of the Book of Living Spells Hero Heroic Warriors Prototype POG New 15 Oct, 2014 S Heroic Warriors & Evil Warriors stickers (came with Eldor, subscribers only) MOTUC MOTU New 15 Oct, 2014 E Sweet Bee Beatrice Castle Honey of a Guide Hero Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP 2 15 Oct 2014 S/E Light Hope Lord Ry'gus Hope Magical Protector of the Crystal Castle Hero The Great Rebellion MOTU Classics/Filmation POP New 15 Nov 2014 M Tung Lashor Kasssher Evil Tongue-Shooting SNAKE MEN Creature! Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 15 Nov 2014 E She-Ra (Galactic Protector) Adora of the House of Randor Galactic Protector Hero Galactic Guardians MOTU Classics NA New 15 Nov 2014 O Arrow Arrow True Blue Horse Flies Bow to Victory Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP 1 15 Dec 2014 M Mermista Elaysia Mermaid Friend of She-Ra Hero The Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP 2 15 Dec 2014 E Spinnerella Cynthia Dizzying Defender Hero Great Rebellion Princess of Power 1985-87/Filmation POP 3 15 Dec 2014 B Gwildor G'ww'ld'rrr Wicket Will'ow Heroic Creator of the Cosmic Key Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Dec 2014 V Battle Ram (with Man-At-Arms) Duncan Mobile Launcher Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 1 Date !! Code!! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin!! Era !! Wave 15 Jan, 2015 M Lizard Man Gayn Heroic Cold-Blooded Ally Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation MOTU New 15 Feb, 2015 M Ninja Warrior (aka Ninjor) Unknown Evil Ninja Master Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 Feb, 2015 O Snake Armor He-Man Vs. Battle Armor King Hssss (aka Battle Armor King Hiss) Adam of the House of Randor/Hssss of the Viper Clan The Most Powerful Snake Hunter in the Universe/Slithering Leader of the Snake Men Hero/Villain Heroic Warriors/Snake Men Mike Young Productions/MOTU 200X 200X 8/7 15 Feb, 2015 B Spirit of Grayskull (glows in the dark) D'vann Grayskull Heroic Guardian of Power Hero Heroic Warrior Mini-Comic/Mike Young Productions MOTU New 15 Mar, 2015 M Huntara Tara Courageous Silaxian Warrior Hero None Filmation POP New 15 Mar, 2015 S Oo-Larr (aka Mini-Comic He-Man) Oo-Larr, Lord of the Jungle Tribe The Jungle He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors Mini-Comic MOTU New 15 Mar, 2015 S Map of Castle Grayskull (with Oo-Larr) Castle Grayskull Fortress of Mystery & Power None Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU New 15 Apr, 2015 M Angella Angella III, Queen Regent of Bright Moon Angelic Winged Guide Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation/POP 1985-87 POP 1 15 Apr, 2015 B Hover Robots None Evil Mindless Robot Goons Villains Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU New 15 May 2015 M Blast Attak (aka Blast-Attak) Program Robot Serial Number 1710 Evil Blast Apart Robot Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 June 2015 M Sssqueeze Schisszz Shazzz Evil Long Armed Viper Villain Snake Men MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 6 15 June 2015 O Multi-Bot Serial Number 2312 Evil Robot of a Thousand Bodies Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982–1988 MOTU 5 9 July 2015 B Rotar Vs. Twistoid Ronur/Gyro Robot Heroic Master of Hyper-Spin/Evil Energy Cyborg Hero/Villain Heroic Warriors/Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-1988 MOTU 6 15 July 2015 M Peekablue Penelope Watchful Feathered Friend Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation/POP 1985-87 POP 2 15 July 2015 X Callix (aka Calix) Callix Evil Horde Rock Man Villain The Evil Horde Mike Young Productions 200X New 17 Aug, 2015 M Mara of Primus Mara Heroic Ambassador of Peace Hero Galactic Protectors He-Man 1989–1992/Jetlag NA New 17 Aug, 2015 A Buzz-Saw Hordak Hec-Tor Kur Ruthless Leader with Blaster Blade Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982-1988 MOTU 6 17 Aug, 2015 X Evil Seed (aka Evilseed) Sero Malusto Evil Master of Plants Villain None Mike Young Productions 200X New 17 Aug, 2015 S/X Heads of Eternia (200X Buzz-Off, Roboto, Snout Spout, Sy-Klone, Clawful & Grizzlor heads) Heroes/Villains Heroic Warriors/Evil Warriors/The Evil Horde MOTU 200X 200X New 15 Sep, 2015 M Saurod C'Ngrel Chouluth Evil Spark-Shooting Reptile Villain Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 6 Oct, 2015 O Flying Fists He-Man Vs. Terror Claws Skeletor Adam of the House of Randor/Keldor of the House of Miro Heroic Leader with the Arm-Swinging Action!/Evil Leader with the Claw Swinging Action Hero/Villain Heroic Warriors/Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 5 15 Sep, 2015 X King Chooblah K'Rudulak Chooblah Heroic King of the Kulataks Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 15 Oct, 2015 M Perfuma Tara Scent-Sational Flower Maiden Hero The Great Rebellion POP 1985-87/Filmation POP 2 15 Oct, 2015 X Ceratus Ceratus Krazut Heroic Leader of Subternia Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New 16 Nov, 2015 M Dragstor Theydon Transforming Evil Warrior/Vehicle Villain The Evil Horde MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 5 16 Nov, 2015 X Queen Grayskull Veena Grayskull Heroic Guardian of Power Hero Heroic Warriors Mike Young Productions 200X New Nov, 2015 P Point Dread & Talon Fighter (with Teela) Teela Frontier Outpost Hero Heroic Warriors MOTU 1982-88/Filmation MOTU MOTU 2/New 15 Dec, 2015 M He-Ro II Dare Heroic Son of He-Man Hero Heroic Warriors MOTUC Son of He-Man New 15 Dec, 2015 X Prahvus Prahvus the Untamed Evil Master of Doom Villain None Mike Young Productions 200X New Dec, 2015 O Laser Power He-Man Vs. Laser-Light Skeletor Adam of the House of Randor/Keldor Heroic Master of Light Energy/Evil Master of Light Energy Hero/Villain Heroic Warriors/Evil Warriors MOTU 1982-88 MOTU 7 Date !! Code !! Name !! Real Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Toyline/Origin !! Era !! Wave Jan 2016 B Serpentine King Hssss Hssss of the Viper Clan Evil Disguised Leader of the Snake Men Villain Snake Men MOTUC MOTU New Jan 2016 M Masque Masque Evil Servant of Shokoti Villain None Filmation MOTU MOTU New Mar 2016 M Vultak Vultak TBA Villain The Evil Horde Filmation POP POP New May 2016 M Darius Darius TBA Hero Galactic Guardians Prototype NA New May 2016 O Night Stalker Night Stalker Evil Armored Battle Steed Villain Evil Warriors MOTU MOTU 4 TBA 2016 B Anti-He-Man TBA Villain None German Audio Plays MOTU New 4 June 2016 C Beast Man (red) Savage Henchman Villain Evil Warriors MOTU Minicomics MOTU New 4 June 2016 C Camo Khan TBA Villain Snake Men Top Toys MOTU MOTU 5 4 June 2016 C Granamyr (green) Granamyr the Wise Great Magic Wielding Dragon Hero Neutral MOTU Minicomics MOTU New June 2016 S Despara Adora TBA Villain The Evil Horde DC MOTU Comics/MOTUC Minicomics MOTU New Jul 2016 M Crita Crita TBA Villain Space Mutants Jetlag New Adventures NA New Sep 2016 M General Sunder Sunder TBA Hero The Great Rebellion Filmation POP POP New Nov 2016 O Tuskador Insyzor TBA Hero Galactic Guardians New Adventures 1989-1992 NA 3 Nov 2016 M Horde Wraith TBA Villain The Evil Horde MYP MOTU 200X New Nov 2016 P Snake Mountain Evil Stronghold of Skeletor Villain Evil Warriors MOTU MOTU 3 Date !! Code !! Name !! Log Line !! Hero/Villain !! Allegiance !! Origin !! Era !! Wave Feb 2016 M He-Man The Most Powerful Man in the Universe Hero Heroic Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New Apr 2016 M Trap Jaw Evil & Armed for Combat Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New Jun 2016 M Skeletor Lord of Destruction Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New Aug 2016 M Beast Man Savage Henchman Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New TBA 2016 S Evilseed Evil Master of Plants Villain None Filmation MOTU MOTU New Oct 2016 M Evil-Lyn Evil Warrior Goddess Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New Dec 2016 M Clawful Warrior with the Grip of Evil Villain Evil Warriors Filmation MOTU MOTU New Origin !! Original characters !! Variants Masters of the Universe (1982–1988) / Princess of Power (1985–1987) vintage toys Evil Robot, Gore-Tusk, Gray (seen on prototype Eldor cardback), Horde Mummy, Meteorbs, Red Beast, Sharella (seen on the box art of Megator) Bird Man (Stratos), Catra, D-Man (Skeletor), He-Man (viking helmet), Man-At-Arms, Mer-Man, Multi Face (Man-E-Faces), Scratchin' Sound Catra, Sensor (Zodac), She-Ra, Shower Power Catra, Sorceress (cobra armor), Starburst She-Ra, Teela (blonde), Tree Man (Beast Man) Masters of the Universe vintage mini-comics (1981–1986) Bould-Or, Garn, Glorm, Haramesh, Kobolds, Lodar, Manticore, Masks of Power Demons, Peblass (female rock warrior), Prince Dakon King Randor (elderly), Queen Marlena (elderly), Ram Man (orange & red), Slime Pit He-Man, Stratos (caucasian skin), Trap Jaw (green skin), Tri-Klops (light green & magenta) Filmation MOTU/POP cartoons (1983–1986) Admiral Scurvy, Chakra, Chimera, Colonel Blast, Darkdream, Delora, Dragoon, Dree Elle, Dylamug, Enchantress, Facet, Gaeda, Game Master, General Tataran, Granita, Hawke, Hunga the Harpy, Illena, Inspector Darkney, King Ahgo, King Micah, King Miro, King Tamusk, Kittrina, Kol Darr, Kothos, Kowla, Kuduk Ungol, Lady Valtira, Lohni, Lord Tyrin, Melaktha, Melog, Molkrom, Montork, Negator, Red Eye, Red Knight, Slavemaster, Space Pirates (Batty, Frogman, Hisser, Lavaman, Leo, Sticky Fingers), Starchild, the Twiggets (Spragg, Spritina, Sprocker), Zilora Catra (cat form), Count Marzo, Hordak, Horde Aqua Trooper, Man-At-Arms, Marlena Glenn (white spacesuit), Mer-Man, Multi-Bot, Teela, Tri-Klops, Tung Lashor He-Man toys (1989–1992) / Jetlag's New Adventures of He-Man cartoons (1990–1991) Artilla, Butthead, Caz, Clawber, Crystoll (Karatti), Detector (Vizar), Drissi, Galactimytes, Gleanons, Gleep, Grr, Hoove, Kayo, Lizorr, Master Sebrian, Nocturna, Quakke, Sagitar, the Scientists of Primus (Alcon, Gepple, Krex, Meldoc), Spinwit, Staghorn, UR, Vizar Adam of Grayskull, Battle Blade Skeletor, Battle Punch He-Man, Crita (2nd outfit), Disks of Doom Skeletor, Hook’Em Flogg, Missile Armor Icarius, Optikk (black armor), Spin Fist Hydron, Thunder Punch He-Man, Too Tall Hoove Masters of the Universe The Modern Series toys (2002–2004) / NECA mini-statues (2005-2007) / Mike Young Productions MOTU cartoons (2002-2003) Evil Giants (Azdar, Belzar, Chazdar), Hawke, King/Captain Miro, Mutant Warrior (came with Mutant Slime Pit playset), Oracle, Queen Andreeno Battle Armor He-Man, Battle Armor Skeletor, Battle Glove Man-At-Arms, Battle Sound He-Man, Battle Sound Skeletor, Captain Randor, Claw Attack Stratos, Fire Armor Skeletor, He-Man, Ice Armor He-Man, Ice Armor Skeletor, Jungle Attack He-Man, Keldor (acid face), King Randor, King Randor (snake armor), Martial Arts He-Man, Marzo (old man), Mecha Blade He-Man, Mecha Blade Skeletor, Mega Punch He-Man, Odiphus (not mutated Stinkor), Prince Adam, Queen Marlena (snake armor), Queen Marlena (white dress), Samurai He-Man, Samurai Man-At-Arms, Samurai Skeletor, Serpent Claw Man-At-Arms, Serpent Track Mekaneck, Shield Strike (aka Stealth Armor) He-Man, Skeletor, Sky Strike Stratos, Smash Blade He-Man, Snake Armor Skeletor, Snake Crush Skeletor, Snake Hunter He-Man, Snake Teela, Sorceress, Spin Blade Skeletor, Teela, Trap and Smash Orko, Tuvar & Baddrah, Wolf Armor He-Man He-Ro - Son of He-Man unreleased 1988 Mattel toy line and 1996 Lou Scheimer Productions cartoon series Air-Bag, Bug-Eye, Craven/Battle-Bird, Ever-Mean, Fork-Lift, Kay-La, Missile-Toe, Odar, Saw-Tooth, Skeleteen, Slob-Boar, Tongue-Lasher Evil-Lyn, He-Ro II (blonde), Man-E-Faces II, Old Man-At-Arms, Prince Dare (brunette/blonde), Queen Teela, Ram Man II, Skeletor MOTUC modern mini-comics (2011-2015) Bandwidth, Beast Lord, Brainwave, Bubblor, Compactor, Eyebeam, Fang-Or, Gladiator, Goldenrod, Hans Hammer Holder, Jet Pak (Castle Grayskull spacesuit), Lady Slither, Major Header, Man Crystal, Muckman, Netta, Ra-Jar, Red Shadow, Robo Woman, Snarll the Snow Thief, Spin-Whiz, Stretch Neck, The Great Black Wizard, Three-Beast, Tufos, Vypor Sorceress-Teela, Zombie-Skeletor Other media/miscellaneous MOTU Power Tour: Songster; Ladybird MOTU books: Delora (Stratos' human wife), Skelcons; UK MOTU magazines: Dream Mistress, Scrollos; 200X TDK Videogame/Comic Book: Illumina, Skeleton Warriors MOTU DC Comics: Force Captain Adora (blue Horde tunic), Goddess Teela, Horokoth Sorceress Evil-Lyn, Light Spinner (pre-Shadow Weaver), Prince Adam (blue tunic); MVCreations Comics: Blindfolded Tri-Klops; German MOTU audio plays: Anti-Man-At-Arms, Anti-Orko Masters of the Universe live action movie (1987) Comtech, Eternian Soldiers, Julie, Karg, Kevin, Lubic, Pigboy, Skeletor's Soldiers (Air Centurions, Troopers, Warlords) Beast Man, Evil-Lyn, God Skeletor, He-Man, Man-At-Arms, Skeletor, Sorceress, Teela  Unreleased prototype  Concept art  Mattel currently does not own the rights to make these Masters of the Universe characters into toys Name Battle Armor He-Man vs. Mer-Man (February 2014) Battle Armor Skeletor vs. Moss Man (April 2014) Stratos vs. Scareglow (June 2014) Man-At-Arms vs. Faker (August 2014) Zodac vs. Beast Man (October 2014) King He-Man vs. Clawful (December 2014) Mekaneck vs. Jitsu (March/April 2015) She-Ra vs. Horde Trooper (May/June 2015) Name He-Man (September 2014) Skeletor (October 2014) Stratos (November 2014) Beast Man (December 2014) Man-At-Arms (2015) Zodac (2015) Name !! Allegiance Platino Heroic Shidoshi Heroic Titano Heroic Tekno Heroic Destructo Evil Pantano Evil Carnivor Evil Felinor Evil M = Club Eternia Monthly released figure A = A list variant B = Bonus items (not included in Club subscriptions) C = Convention exclusive R = Charity/Raffle figures, only a few were ever made 30 = 30th Anniversary figure F = Club Filmation Monthly figure E = Club Etheria Monthly figure X = Club 200X Monthly figure S = Subscription exclusive T = Toys 'R' Us exclusive O = Oversized figure (creatures, large scale figures, multi-packs) P = Playset, small diorama, weapons rack, weapons pack, figure stands V = Vehicle MOTU = Masters of the Universe. POP = Princess of Power. MOVIE = The 1987 live action movie. NA = The New Adventures of He-Man. POG = The Powers of Grayskull. 200X = The 2000s era Masters of the Universe. Galactic Protectors = Galactic Guardians of The New Adventures of He-Man. Space Mutants = Evil Mutants of The New Adventures of He-Man. Filmation = Filmation Productions. Appeared in the 1980s "He-Man and the Masters of the Universe" and/or "She-Ra: Princess of Power" TV series. MYP = Mike Young Productions. Appeared in the 2002-2004 "He-Man and the Masters of the Universe" TV series. Jetlag = Jetlag Productions.  Any character that appeared in the New Adventures of He-Man TV series. Prototype = Used to be a prototype only. Concept = Based on concept art. Myth = Unknown figures with unknown origins. Date = Date of release of action figure. Code = Represented by a letter (M, C, B etc.) signifying whether the toy is a monthly release, convention exclusive, bonus figure release, etc. Name = The name of the toy released. Real Name = The birth name of the character. Log Line = In the original line each toy had a subtitle (e.g. He-Man was the 'Most Powerful Man in the Universe!'). Hero/Villain/Neutral = Indicates whether the character is good or evil. Toyline/Origin = This indicates where the toy first appeared.  For example, MOTU 1982-1988 indicates the character debuted in the original 1982-1988 toyline. Wave = This indicates the wave in which the toy was released in its debut appearance.  For example, He-Man first appeared in Wave 1 of the original toyline, hence the number '1' appearing. New = This indicates a toy that has never been previously released.
