     Middlesex University is a university in Hendon, north west London, England. It is located within the historic county boundaries of Middlesex from which it takes its name. It is one of the new universities and is a member of the Million+ working group. As is the case with many former polytechnics, Middlesex can trace its history back to the 19th century, yet was not formally organised as a teaching institution until 1973. Since 2000, the university has been reducing the number of campuses dotted around London's North Circular Road in an effort to cut costs and provide a better student experience by consolidating most of the university at the flagship campus in Hendon. As of the 2013 academic year, its estate strategy which has cost £150&nbsp;million has now concentrated the university on one site in north London. In 2012, the university re-structured its academic schools to align them more closely with the needs of industry. Courses at Middlesex are now delivered by the schools of Business, Law, Art and Design, Health and Education, Media and Performing Arts and Science and Technology, alongside the university's Institute for Work Based Learning.   The university grew out of merger between different schools and colleges in North London. The oldest and perhaps the most prominent was the Hornsey College of Art, founded in 1882. Other institutions included Ponders End Technical Institute (founded in 1901) and Hendon Technical Institute (founded in 1939). All three were amalgamated to form Middlesex Polytechnic in January 1973. Before becoming a university in 1992, Middlesex expanded further by adding three more colleges in north London. While continuing to grow through mergers in the 1990s, the university had also begun developing its international presence, by opening regional offices in continental Europe. As of July 2011, it has been operating 21 such offices worldwide. Since 2000, the university launched a major restructuring programme, which, specifically, translated into a total image rebrand in 2003, the closure of a number of campuses over 2005–2012, the expansion of other campuses and generally the consolidation of the university's activities on fewer, bigger campuses in north London. Timeline  In May 2001 the University appointed C Eye, a branding consultancy, to design a new logo. In 2003, the previous "M" logo was replaced with a new red-coloured wavy line intended to express a flexible and responsive approach to the needs of students.  Following the review of the sustainability of its academic programmes, the university implemented a series of cost-containment adjustments over 2005–2006. In late 2005 it decided to stop offering history courses in an attempt to reduce a £10&nbsp;million deficit that had built up. The decision, however, was met with considerable hostility from Middlesex's student union as well as from the National Union of Students. In other moves to save costs, the university made 175 voluntary redundancies, including 33 academic staff, a measure that was intended to save £5&nbsp;million. Since 2000, Middlesex has embarked on a new strategy to achieve 'fewer, better campuses' to reduce costs and improve its long-term sustainability. The strategy translated into the disposal of several small arts campuses in Bedford, Hampstead and Wood Green and the larger, but still uneconomic and unattractive campuses at Bounds Green, Enfield and Tottenham. The university also closed the Corporate Services building at the North London Business Park and consolidated most of the functions carried out on these sites at Hendon, where it aims to accommodate nearly all its London-based teaching. In 2010, Middlesex announced the closure of its Philosophy department, because it was judged to be not financially sustainable. This was despite the fact that it had been the highest ranking department in the university's latest Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) in 2008, building on its grade of 5 in the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise. An international campaign of support was quickly organised, with figures such as Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Jean-Luc Nancy, Slavoj Žižek, Étienne Balibar, David Harvey, Isabelle Stengers expressing their strong disapproval. Articles condemning the decision appeared in the national press and students protested on campus and elsewhere for its restitution. In early June 2010 it was announced that the postgraduate component, the CRMEP, was to be transferred to Kingston University, but the undergraduate programme was still to be phased out. Over the past five years the university has consolidated most of its activities onto the Hendon campus in London with all teaching is located at Hendon from Autumn 2013. All older campuses were closed – Bounds Green (2003), Tottenham (2005), Enfield (2008), Cat Hill (2011), Trent Park (2012), and Archway and Hospitals (2013) – while Hendon received substantial investment in facilities and infrastructure to accommodate new students and programmes. Since 2004, the university has also been operating an overseas campus in Dubai and opened another one in Mauritius in October 2009. In September 2013, Middlesex opened its third international campus in Malta.  Hendon is set in a prime location of North West London, a short walk from Hendon Central tube station. Today's main (or college) building was built in the neo-Georgian style by H.W. Burchett and opened in 1939 as part of Hendon Technical Institute (aka Hendon College of Technology). The college was extended in 1955 and in 1969 when a new refectory and engineering block (the Williams Building) were added. The main building has been refurbished in a £40&nbsp;million project, which included the addition of a glass-covered central courtyard forming Ricketts Quadrangle. In 2004 The new Learning Resource Centre, The Sheppard Library opened on the site. Hendon also has a sports club, known as The Fitness Pod for students and staff which has one of the few real tennis courts in the UK. Middlesex University Business School, Engineering & Information Sciences School and the bulk of the School of Health and Social Science are located in Hendon.  The campus in Hendon is expanding dramatically using a number of London Borough of Barnet office buildings including the current Town Hall in The Burroughs as well as the construction of new buildings including a new state of the art Science Building which opened in September 2008. The research centres for biomedical science, crime and conflict, and risk and environmental sciences are based here. The university aims to achieve the consolidation of nearly all its London based teaching at Hendon. In 2011 the university opened 'The Grove' a new building for creative courses, featuring dedicated workshops and classrooms as well as exhibition areas. Subject focus: Business – accounting and finance, economics, human resource management, law and marketing; Art and design – photography, fashion, fine art, interiors, product design, Media and performing arts – dance, drama, media, TV production, Computing – business information systems, computer networking and computer communications; Health and social sciences – criminology, politics, psychology, social work, sociology, world development studies, and complementary health. Also biomedical and biological sciences, nursing, sport sciences, public health, risk management and media. In October 2013, the university opened a new sports science facility at Allianz Park (the new stadium of Saracens Rugby Club) in Hendon. In 2004, The university opened a campus in Dubai, UAE, in Dubai Knowledge Village, a free economic zone. It is a joint venture with Middlesex Associates, a business consortium in Dubai. The campus is spread over nearly  and is the first Middlesex campus outside North London. The first programmes, mostly in Business Studies, were offered to students from January 2005. The campus is licensed by Dubai Knowledge and Human Authority (KHDA), and all of its programmes are individually approved by the KHDA. In August 2009 KHDA's University Quality Assurance International Board (UQAIB) commended quality of university's programmes. Middlesex University Dubai offers 24 undergraduate and 7 postgraduate programmes, as well as pre-undergraduate studies. All four of university's schools (Arts and Education, Business School, Engineering and Information Sciences and Health and Social Sciences) offer courses in Dubai campus. All degrees are issued by Middlesex University, UK. In 2008 Middlesex University Dubai awarded its first honorary doctorate to His Excellency Sultan Bin Sulayem. The number of graduates has grown from just 8 in 2006 to over 200 in 2009, while the alumni network has exceeded 1,000 in 2010. As of February 2011, Dubai campus had over 1,700 students from nearly 90 nationalities. In 2010, the campus expanded its facilities to include Block 17, which will house a state-of-the-art lecture theatre, several new classrooms and faculty offices as well as the first dedicated postgraduate study suite. In an interview with Khaleej Times, Raed Awamleh, Dubai campus director, said that the university is aiming to start a whole set of programmes in 2012. Awamleh also mentioned a distant possibility of relocating to Dubai International Academic City.  Located in Bonne Terre, a suburb of Vacoas-Phoenix, the 7,800 sq metre campus officially opened in October 2009. It features a Learning Resource Centre, open access and specialist computer suites, and dining and social spaces as well as on-site accommodation for up to 190 students. Lecturing academics based at the Mauritius campus work in partnership with the academic programme team based at Middlesex's London campuses to ensure the quality standards of the UK programmes are maintained in curriculum delivery, teaching styles and assessment. Middlesex University shares its Mauritian campus with JSS Mahavidyapeetha (JSSMVP), an Indian educational institution. In May 2013 Middlesex announced that it would open a campus in Malta, with students welcomed from September 2013. The campus, located in Pembroke on Malta's north-east coast, will initially offer business and computing courses at undergraduate and postgraduate levels.  This campus was closed in 2013, to help provide students with better facilities than those allowed by the old building at the Archway Campus. Archway and Hospitals campus was primarily the domain of the School of Health and Social Sciences. It operated from four sites (hospitals): Royal Free Hospital, Whittington Hospital (jointly owned with UCL), Chase Farm and North Middlesex. On 24 January 2007 the university inaugurated a new Centre for Excellence in Teaching and Learning (CETL) Mental Health and Social Work based at Archway campus. CETL status was bestowed on the Mental Health and Social Work Academic Group at the university in partnership with the Sainsbury Centre for Mental Health in 2005. Consequently, the Centre was awarded a capital grant of £1.4&nbsp;million along with an annual revenue of £350,000 for five years, representing one of the largest ever funding initiatives by the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). This funding enabled the university to establish new teaching facilities at its Archway campus with the aim of creating an academic community of mental health and social work practitioners, students and faculty in one location. Subject focus: Nursing, midwifery, complementary health, sport science and social work.  Trent Park campus was closed in 2012 and all departments were moved to the main campus in Hendon. This campus was set within a  country park, which was originally a fourteenth-century hunting ground of Henry IV. The focus of the campus was a palatial mansion, designed by Sir William Chambers in the 18th century. After the Second World War, the Ministry of Education used the house as an emergency teacher training centre, which became a residential teacher training college, called Trent Park College of Education in 1951. In 1974 the college was incorporated into Middlesex Polytechnic. In 2012 around 16% of Middlesex students were based at Trent Park campus. The university's Summer School, which accounts for 0.2% of Middlesex students, also took place here. The university had ambitious plans to redevelop the site, but they were twice rejected by Enfield Council on environmental concerns. Subject focus: Dance, drama and performing arts, English language and literature, media, culture and communication, music, theatre arts, languages and translation studies, product design, Teaching and education. It was also home to the Flood Hazard Research Centre, which moved there when Enfield campus closed in July 2008.  The Flood Hazard Research Centre is still part of Middlesex University but is now based at North London Business Park in New Southgate. The campus was closed in summer 2005, its programmes of study having moved to the university's other campuses. What was the Tottenham campus started life as St Katharine's College, one of the first British teacher training colleges in 1878, later to become the College of All Saints, a Church of England college of higher education and a constituent college of the Institute of Education, University of London, for whose degrees it taught. The name change was a result of the 1964 union of St Katharine's with Berridge House, Hampstead, on the Tottenham site. The college expanded in the 1960s, although much of the campus retained its Victorian architecture. After the closure of the college and the union with Middlesex Polytechnic, the 'All Saints' campus was home to humanities and cultural studies, business studies, law, sociology and women's studies, all of which have been moved to other campuses. The buildings, previously occupied by the university, were eventually demolished and the site is now the home of the newly built Haringey Sixth Form Centre. The College of All Saints Foundation continues as the All Saints Educational Trust. Bounds Green campus, home to the Engineering and Information Technology schools was sold to a residential developer in December 2003. It was used extensively for location shooting for the 1989 film, Wilt.  The history of Enfield Campus began with the history of electric light. In 1901, Joseph Wilson Swan bought a house in Ponders End High Street that became the Ediswan Institute.Pam, D. (1977),The New Enfield: Stories of Enfield Edmonton and Southgate, a Jubilee History, London Borough of Enfield Libraries, Arts & Entertainment Dept Four years later Ediswan Institute was bought by Middlesex County Council and became the Ponders End Technical Institute. By 1937 The Ponders End Technical Institute was growing so rapidly that it was decided to build a new college across the road, in Queensway. Due to the Second World War, it was not completed until 1953, but the unfinished buildings were in use throughout the war. By now it was called Enfield Technical College, but in 1962 it was renamed Enfield College of Technology by the Ministry of Education. In 1973 the college formed part of Middlesex Polytechnic. There are four major buildings on campus: Broadbent, Roberts building (or Tower Block), McCrae and Pascal. They are named after people who helped to create it. The campus was closed in July 2008, and the majority of departments located here moved to the extended Hendon campus and some to the Archway Campus shared with UCL. In March 2011 Cat Hill campus was sold to the L&Q housing association as part of the university's plans to centralise its courses in Hendon. The campus closed in September 2011 and students moved to a new £80&nbsp;million 'Grove' building on the university's Hendon campus. Cat Hill Campus was located in Cockfosters. It was originally the illustrious Hornsey College of Art, founded in 1880. In the late 1970s the campus was extended to become the Faculty of Art & Design of the then Middlesex Polytechnic. Today, art and design, cinematics and electronic arts are located at Cat Hill. The campus also houses the university's Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture (MoDA) and formerly housed the national Lesbian and Gay Newsmedia Archive until it relocated to the Bishopsgate Institute in central London. Cat Hill campus is also home to the Lansdown Centre for Electronic Arts (named after John Lansdown), which runs a variety of graduate and undergraduate degrees in interactive media and electronic arts. Subject focus: Art & Design, fashion, textiles, fine art, graphics and media arts. The university is divided into six schools and an Institute for Work Based Learning. The school contains The Department of Visual Arts and The Department of Fashion and Interiors. Areas of study include animation, fine art, fashion, graphic design, illustration, photography, interior architecture and furniture. Teaching is now carried out in the 'Grove' at Hendon, an £80m centre for creative courses, though Middlesex art and design began life as Hornsey College of Art, founded in 1880 – an iconic British art institution, renowned for its experimental and progressive approach to art and design education. Courses and research areas include theatre arts, music, dance, choreography, creative writing, film, 3D animation and games, television production, journalism, media studies, digital cultures, English and advertising and PR. Courses are delivered in the state of the art 'Grove' facility in Hendon, opened in 2011, which houses a range of TV and radio studios alongside editing suites. Based at Hendon campus, Middlesex University Business School (MUBS) is over 50 years old. It has run business studies qualifications since the 1950s at what was then Hendon College of Technology and offered the UK's first degree in business studies in 1965. It also launched its first MBA in the early 1980s. MUBS was one of only a handful of new universities in the UK accredited by Association of MBAs., before abandoning accreditation in 2010. The university also runs a small business school in Quarry Bay, Hong Kong, offering two courses from the university in London. Since August 2011 they have been working with the Austrian "KMU Akademie" to offer German MBA-Programmes.http://www.mba-studium.co.uk Masters distance programmes Middlesex MBA ranked amongst the global top 200 programmes by Quacquarelli Symonds and took 53rd place in Europe. The School of Science and Technology is one of the largest in the UK, having trebled in size since 1994, with more than 1000 students from a rich diversity of backgrounds, ages and countries. Study areas include Computer and Communications Engineering, Computer Science, Design Engineering and Mathematics and Natural Sciences. Teaching is located at Hendon campus in North London. The School offers undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in Law, Criminology, Sociology, Politics, Development, Environmental Governance and International Relations. The European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC) joined the university in 2013 and is part of the School of Law. The School of Health and Education offers undergraduate and postgraduate courses in education and teaching, health, social work, psychology, and sports and exercise science. The Institute for Work Based Learning (or IWBL) pioneered the development of Work Based Learning at higher education level during the early 1990s. It grew out of Work Based Learning Research and Development Project, which was initially funded by the Department for Education and Employment over 1992–1994. This established Work Based Learning as a transdisciplinary field of study in which higher education qualifications could be awarded. Later, in 1993, The National Centre for Work Based Learning Partnerships (or NCWBLP) was founded and two years later – in 1995 – the first Work Based Learning Studies programmes were validated. In 1998 the university launched its highly successful transdisciplinary Doctorate in Professional Studies (DProf), which now represents over a third of all the university's doctoral level programmes with around 300 candidates. 2005 Middlesex University was recognised as a Centre for Excellence in Teaching and Learning for Work Based Learning by the Higher Education Academy and HEFCE awarded the university a grant of £3.5&nbsp;million to share this excellent practice with the wider higher education sector.  In 2008 HEFCE awarded Middlesex University with a major grant of almost £8&nbsp;million to support employer engagement. The funding allowed the university to establish Middlesex University Organisational Development Network (or MODNet), a centre of a national network of expertise in work-based learning. Essentially, MODNet offers learning and development programmes co-designed with employers and acts as a 'one-stop shop', able to respond to all employer training needs, drawing on partner expertise where appropriate. In December 2011 the Government's Higher Apprenticeships Fund awarded the Institute with nearly £1.5m to develop Higher Level Apprenticeships in the construction industry. As one of only two Universities to lead Higher Apprenticeship projects, Middlesex has to date developed work-based higher education programmes for four Higher Apprenticeship frameworks and has worked in construction, care management, retail management and aviation sectors. Today the university runs Work Based Learning Centres in Athens, Ireland, Hong Kong and Malaysia and has received Queen's Anniversary Prize for Higher and Further Education for its role in integrating formal education and employment. Research covers 29 areas. The UK Funding Councils' 2014 Research Excellence Framework (REF) rated 58% of research submitted to be  world-leading and internationally excellent.REF 2014 Results and submissions, accessed 28 January 2014 In 2011 the university's research project on age diversity was selected for inclusion in the Research Councils' "Big Ideas for the Future" report. The report brings together the leading research projects currently taking place across UK universities. The university has a student body of around 21,000 strong, many of whom are mature students. Around 4,800 students (23%) are from overseas, with ca. 3,400 (16%) from outside of the European Union. The university also has student exchange links with over 100 different universities in more than 22 different countries across Europe, the United States, and the world. Until recently the number of students at the university has been declining fast, hitting a four-year low of 21,350 in the academic year of 2008–2009. The number of PG students fell 20% in four years (from over 6,000 graduates in 2005 to less than 5,000 in 2009), while the number of non-EU students were down by a third over the same period. In the academic year of 2009–2010, however, the number of students across all categories increased sharply. The trend continued the following year with particularly high increase in the number of students from the EU. In 2010 Middlesex had one of the biggest increases in applications at any university – more than 30% – but the demand for places had still grown by another 11% at the start of 2011. Middlesex Students' Union (MDXSU) is a non-profit organisation, separate to the university, which acts as the voice of students at Middlesex and supports them throughout their studies. The Students' Union provides social and skill-building opportunities through societies, events, volunteering and the student run media. The latter, POW! Media, includes a termly magazine, radio station, TV channel and online blog showcasing student content. As a democratic organisation, MDXSU is led by four Student Officers who are elected each spring by students at Middlesex. The officer positions are the President, the Vice-President Health & Education and Science & Technology, the Vice-President Art & Design and Media & Performing Arts, and the Vice-President Business and Law. These Student Officers each have a specific portfolio of responsibilities covering all aspects of student life – from sports and volunteering to accommodation and welfare – while the Vice-Presidents are also responsible for representing the students within their schools. To help ensure that the Students' Union is properly representing and supporting students, MDXSU established the Student Voice Leader scheme in 2013. These students are elected for each year of each course, and are responsible for taking feedback from their coursemates to lecturers and university staff, helping to create changes that students want to see. In 1981 Union president Nick Harvey joined protests outside Rochester Row police station after six Irish students were detained without charge under the Prevention of Terrorism Act. That year student John Kennedy stood in the Crosby by-election to highlight the case of seven students suspended from the Polytechnic after a sit-in protest demanding nursery facilities.  The university has been awarded the Queen's Anniversary Prize three times and has twice received Queen's Award for Enterprise (for its international work). A team of auditors from the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA) visited Middlesex from 30 March to 3 April 2009 to carry out an Institutional audit. Its resulting report said auditors had confidence in the university's current and likely future management of its academic standards and of the learning opportunities available to students. There was also praise for the 'meticulous attention' given to the establishment, development and integration of the university's Dubai campus. Middlesex also received QAA praise for its initiatives to improve student progression and achievement and the 'distinctive contribution' of the university's Work Based Learning programmes. In 2006, the university was ranked second in a re-assessment of teaching quality in all English universities. The Times Higher Education Supplement of 17 November 2006 reported on how the scores for each university, as marked by the Quality Assurance Agency, had been "adjusted to remove the link with research" and form a league table which had post-1992 universities performing strongly. The Social Science Research Network (SSRN) ranks the university Business School the 209th international business schools in the world.  Middlesex University Business School is also rated as a "centre of excellence" by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD), the first university in the UK to offer courses accredited by the Chartered Institute of Marketing. The university is home to two HEFCE 'Centres for Excellence in Learning and Teaching' – one in Work Based Learning – one in Mental Health and Social Work. The overall satisfaction rating from the National Student Survey (or NSS) increased from 77% in 2011/12 to 82% in 2012/13. Middlesex runs an alumni association allowing former students to maintain contact with the university after graduation. It also offers various discounts and benefits to members and organises reunions and social events. Although not a graduate, Tommy Flowers, a British engineer and who help create the Colossus computer used to break code during World War II received a basic computing certificate from Hendon College.    1878 – St Katherine's College opens in Tottenham 1882 – Hornsey College of Art founded 1901 – Ponders End Technical Institute begins 1939 – Hendon Technical Institute opens 1947 – Trent Park College of Education opens 1962 – New College of Speech and Drama opens 1962 – Ponders End Technical Institute is renamed Enfield College of Technology by the Ministry of Education. 1964 – St Katherine's College unites with Berridge House to form The College of All Saints 1973 – Middlesex Polytechnic formed 1974 – Trent Park College of Education and New College of Speech and Drama join Middlesex Polytechnic 1978 – The College of All Saints at Tottenham joins Middlesex Polytechnic 1992 – Middlesex University formed; Baroness Platt of Writtle becomes the first Chancellor of the university; First overseas regional office opens in Kuala Lumpur 1994 – The London College of Dance becomes part of the university 1995 – North London College of Health becomes part of the university; Regional offices open in Europe 1996 – Michael Driscoll becomes the Vice-Chancellor; Middlesex receives its first Queen's Anniversary Prize for Higher and Further Education 1998 – Whittington Hospital is jointly purchased with University College London (UCL) from National Health Service (NHS); Queen's Anniversary Prize awarded for the second time; 1999 – Middlesex achieves Investors in People status 2000 – Lord Sheppard of Didgemere becomes Chancellor; Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture on the Cat Hill campus opens to the public; Middlesex awarded third Queen's Anniversary Prize; Hendon campus redevelopment begins 2003 – Rebranding initiated in 2001 is completed with the approval of new university logo; Bounds Green campus closes; Queen's Award for Enterprise received 2004 – London Sport Institute established within the School of Health and Social Sciences 2005 – First overseas campus opens in Dubai (U.A.E.); Tottenham campus closes with most programmes transferred to Trent Park campus 2007 – Middlesex Media programmes awarded Skillset Media Academy status by the Government Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills 2008 – Enfield campus closes in summer – programmes, students and staff relocate to Hendon 2009 – Second overseas campus opens in Mauritius 2010 – Philosophy research centre and postgraduate programmes relocate to Kingston University after a decision to close taught programmes and subsequent campaign to save them 2011 – 2nd Queen's Award for Enterprise; to charge £9,000 a year in tuition fees – maximum under government legislation; Cat Hill closed, relocated to Trent Park and Hendon. 200 redundancies to make £10m of savings 2012 – Trent Park campus closed and programmes relocated to flagship campus in Hendon. 2013 – Closure of Archway campus and transfer of programmes to Hendon. All UK teaching at Hendon. Third international campus opens in Malta 2015 – Professor Tim Blackman becomes the Vice-Chancellor BROADBENT: The main building of Enfield Campus is named after Henry Winterbottom Broadbent, a Mechanical Engineer who was appointed first Principal of Enfield Technical College in January 1941. ROBERTS BUILDING: The Tower Block was named after a local industrialist George A. Roberts, who was chair of Enfield College's Governing Body from 1949 to 1968. MCCRAE: The McCrae Building was the first extension to Enfield Technical College. Built in 1955, it was later named after Roderick McCrae, who was the Principal from 1955 to 1962. PASCAL: The Pascal Building is named after Eric Pascal who was Education Officer of the Borough of Enfield from before 1942 until 1945 or later, and clerk to the Governors of Enfield College from 1949 to 1965. 1992–2000 – Beryl Platt, Baroness Platt of Writtle 2000–2013 – Allen Sheppard, Baron Sheppard of Didgemere 2013–present – Janet Ritterman School of Art and Design School of Media and Performing Arts Business School School of Science and Technology School of Health and Education School of Law Institute for Work Based Learning Johnny Vegas (Art and Ceramics) Sonia Boyce (Fine Art) Richard Billingham (Photography), Eva Vermandel (Photography) Keith Piper (Fine Art) Katy Deepwell (Art theory and criticism) David Wightman (Fine Art) Dermot O'Leary (Media Studies with Politcs) Peter Fribbins (Music) Jake Hook (Performing Arts) Alan Carr (Theatre Arts) Chris Batchelor (jazz) Nikki Iles (jazz) Stuart Hall (Jazz) David Rain (Creative Writing) Sarah Wardle (Creative Writing) James Martin Charlton (Creative Writing) Ivor Grattan-Guinness, Professor Emeritus of the History of Mathematics and Logic John Grahl (European integration) Stephan Dahl (marketing) Bernard Ingham (marketing) John Redwood (management) David Turner (computing science) Roman Belavkin (computing science) Meir Manny Lehman (computing science) Colin Green(Flood Hazard – economics) David Conway, Professor Emeritus of Philosophy Edmund Penning-Rowsell (Flood Hazard – geography) Irena Papadopoulos (Transcultural nursing research) Ivan Roitt (Director, Centre for Investigative & Diagnostic Oncology) Lola Young, Professor Emeritus of cultural studies Vincenzo Ruggiero (Sociology  – organised and corporate crime) John Lea (Criminology – left realism; law and order) Ed Gallagher (environmental studies) Hall-Carpenter Archives Hornsey College of Art Lansdown Centre for Electronic Arts Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture Middlesex University home page Middlesex University Students' Union home page
