 Miss Saigon is a musical by Claude-Michel Schönberg and Alain Boublil, with lyrics by Boublil and Richard Maltby, Jr. It is based on Giacomo Puccini's opera Madame Butterfly, and similarly tells the tragic tale of a doomed romance involving an Asian woman abandoned by her American lover.  The setting of the plot is relocated to the 1970s Saigon during the Vietnam War, and Madame Butterfly's story of marriage between an American lieutenant and geisha is replaced by a romance between an American GI and a Vietnamese bargirl. The musical was premièred at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, on 20 September 1989, closing after over four thousand performances, on 30 October 1999. It opened on Broadway at the Broadway Theatre in 1991 and subsequently played in many other cities and embarked on tours. Prior to the opening of the 2014 London revival, it was claimed that Miss Saigon had set a new world record for opening day ticket sales, with sales in excess of £4m reported.Miss Saigon breaks record for biggest single day of sales whatsonstage.com, Retrieved 24 January 2014Miss Saigon posts £4m first day sales – but is it a record? whatsonstage.com, Retrieved 24 January 2014 The musical represented Schönberg and Boublil's second major success, following Les Misérables in 1985. As of September 2015, Miss Saigon remains Broadway's thirteenth longest-running show. The musical's inspiration was reportedly a photograph, which Schönberg found inadvertently in a magazine. The photograph showed a Vietnamese mother leaving her child at a departure gate at Tan Son Nhut Air Base to board an airplane headed for the United States where her father, an ex-GI, would be in a position to provide a much better life for the child. Schönberg considered this mother's actions for her child to be "The Ultimate Sacrifice," an idea central to the plot of Miss Saigon.Schönberg, Claude-Michel. "This Photograph was for Alain and I the start of everything...", October 1995. Retrieved on 2007-December 15. Highlights of the show include the evacuation of the last Americans in Saigon from the Embassy roof by helicopter while a crowd of abandoned Vietnamese screams in despair, the victory parade of the new communist régime and the frenzied night club scene at the time of defeat. Miss Saigon premiered in the West End at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane on 20 September 1989 and closed after 4,264 performances on 30 October 1999."Long Runs-West End" world-theatres.com, retrieved February 23, 2010 The director was Nicholas Hytner with musical staging by Bob Avian and scenic design by John Napier. In December 1994 the London production became the Theatre Royal's (Drury Lane) longest running musical, eclipsing the record set by My Fair Lady."Theatre Royal, Drury Lane history-partial reference" arthurlloyd.co.uk, retrieved February 23, 2010 The original Kim was played by Lea Salonga, who became famous because of this role and won the Laurence Olivier Award and Tony Award. The original Engineer was portrayed by Jonathan Pryce who also won the Laurence Olivier Award and Tony Award for the role. The original Chris was played by Simon Bowman. The musical débuted on Broadway at the Broadway Theatre on 11 April 1991 and closed on 28 January 2001 after 4,092 performances. Directed again by Nicholas Hytner with musical staging by Bob Avian, scenic design was by John Napier, costume design was by Andreane Neofitou and Suzy Benzinger and lighting design was by David Hersey.Retrieved on 2007-December 15. As of September 2015, Miss Saigon is still the 13th longest-running Broadway musical in musical theatre history. Preview performances for the anticipated West End revival in the show's 25th year began in early May 2014 at the Prince Edward Theatre.Breaking News: Confirmed! Cameron Mackintosh to Restage MISS SAIGON in 2014 broadwayworld.com, accessed December 9, 2012BREAKING NEWS: It's Finally Official! MISS SAIGON to Return to West End in May 2014 at Prince Edward Theatre! broadwayworld.com Retrieved June 19, 2013 It is produced by Cameron Mackintosh and directed by Laurence Connor. Auditions for the role of Kim were held from November 19–22, 2012 in Manila, Philippines. On November 21, 2013, it was announced 18-year-old Eva Noblezada was cast as Kim.17-Year-Old Eva Noblezada to Star in MISS SAIGON in the West End Retrieved November 22, 2013 Other cast members include Kwang-Ho Hong as Thuy,Korean Star to play Thuy in Miss Saigon Retrieved February 11, 2014 Jon Jon Briones as the Engineer, Alistair Brammer as Chris, Hugh Maynard as John, Tamsin Carroll as Ellen and Rachelle Ann Go as Gigi.Alistair Brammer, Tamsin Carroll, Hugh Maynard & More Join West End's MISS SAIGON; Full Cast Announced! Retrieved November 22, 2013 The official opening night was 21 May. On the 22nd September 2014, a special 25th anniversary gala performance was held. After a full performance of the current show, Lea Salonga, Simon Bowman, Jonathan Pryce and many of the original 1989 cast joined with the current cast for a special finale. The finale started with Lea Salonga leading the ensemble with "This is the Hour", Lea and Rachelle Anne Go performed "The Movie in My Mind". Lea, Simon Bowman, Alistair Brammer and Eva Noblezada performed "Last Night of the World" before Jonathan Pryce took to the stage with "American Dream". The West End production is set close on 27 February 2016 with plans to transfer to Australia, Germany and Broadway in the next two years. According to Baz Bamigboye, this was so as to make way for the West End production of Aladdin. It was announced on November 19, 2015 that the West End production of the show is planned to transfer to Broadway in the spring of 2017 for a limited engagement through January 15, 2018. A US national tour is planned thereafter. Since its opening in London Miss Saigon was produced in many cities around the world including Stuttgart from 2 December 1994 till 19 December 1999 and Toronto, where new theatres were designed specifically to house the show. In the small island community of Bømlo, Norway with only around eleven thousand inhabitants, the show was set up in the outdoor amphitheatre by the local musical fellowship and ran from 5 August to 16 August 2009. The local musical fellowship brought in a Bell Helicopter for the show.http://www.bomlo-nytt.no/index.cfm?event=doLink&famId=92973 According to the Miss Saigon Official Site, Miss Saigon has been performed by twenty-seven companies in twenty-five countries and 246 cities, and it has been translated into twelve different languages."Facts and Figures" miss-saigon.com, accessed September 7, 2009  Arlington Virginia's Signature Theatre 2013's production was the US debut with the inclusion of the new song 'Maybe' (which replaced the prior song 'Now That I've Seen Her) which would be integrated into the West End's 2014 revival. After the London production closed in 1999 and also following the closure of the Broadway production in 2001, the show in its original London staging embarked on a long tour of the six largest venues in Britain and Ireland stopping off in each city for several months. The tour opened at the Palace Theatre, Manchester and also played in the Birmingham Hippodrome, the Mayflower Theatre in Southampton, the Edinburgh Playhouse, the Bristol Hippodrome and The Point Theatre in Dublin. This successful tour drew to a close in 2003 and a brand new production was developed by original producer Cameron Mackintosh on a smaller scale so that the show could be accommodated in smaller theatres.  This tour started in July 2004 and ended in June 2006."Miss Saigon" Official Site, article on the UK 2003 tour and the "new" 2004 revised tour production The first US tour started in Chicago, Illinois in October 1992 and was then expected to travel to those cities that could accommodate the large production. The tour also played venues such as the Wang Center in Boston from 14 July to 12 September 1993,Taylor, Markland. "Wang Boasts Bang-Up B.O.", Variety, October 4, 1993 - October 10, 1993, p.74 the Broward Center for the Performing Arts, Florida in the Spring 1994,Erstein, Hap. "Miss Saigon' Is Critics' Choice For Best Actor, Actress And Tour", Palm Beach Post (Florida), June 15, 1994, p.5D and the Kennedy Center, Washington, DC in June 1994.(no author)."ROAD GROSSES:B.0. even at $ 12.3 mil", Variety, June 27, 1994 - July 3, 1994. p. 92 Cameron Mackintosh said: "Corners haven't been cut. They've been added. There are only a dozen theaters in America where we can do this."Stearns, David Patrick. "'Saigon' retools for the road", USA Today, November 11, 1992 p.4D A second National US tour launched in Seattle in early 1995 and would close very successfully in August 2000 in Buffalo NY after playing engagements in most major US and Canadian markets, including Honolulu HI, San Francisco, Toronto, and return engagements in Boston (twice), Chicago and West Palm Beach. The tour originally starred DeeDee Magno as Kim (later Kristine Remigio, Kym Hoy, and Mika Nishida), Thom Sesma as The Engineer (later Joseph Anthony Foronda), and Matt Bogart as Chris (replaced by Will Chase, Steven Pasquale, Greg Stone and Will Swenson). This production boasted all the original design and creative elements of Broadway, but on a scale that most major market road houses could accommodate. A non-Equity North American tour began in summer 2002 to spring 2005, playing such venues as the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey in November 2003, Raleigh, North Carolina in February 2005, and Gainesville, Florida in November 2003.McDowell, Robert W."REVIEW: Broadway Series South: Miss Saigon Superbly Dramatizes the Fall of Saigon and Its Horrific Aftermath" Classical Voice of North Carolina, February 17, 2005Rendell, Bob."Miss Saigon Lands at NJPAC" talkinbroadway.com, Nov 6, 2003"Miss Saigon tour, 2002-2005 listing", bigleague.org, retrieved February 2, 2010 In April 1975 at "Dreamland," a Saigon bar and brothel, shortly before the end of the Vietnam War, it is Kim's first day as a bargirl. The seventeen-year-old peasant girl is hauled in by the Engineer, a French-Vietnamese hustler who owns the joint. Backstage, the girls ready themselves for the night's show, jeering at Kim's inexperience ("Overture"). The U.S. Marines, aware that they will be leaving Vietnam soon, party with the Vietnamese prostitutes ("The Heat Is on in Saigon"). Chris Scott, a sergeant disenchanted by the club scene, is encouraged by his friend John Thomas to go with a girl. The girls compete for the title of "Miss Saigon," and the winner is raffled to a Marine. Kim's guilelessness strikes Chris. Gigi Van Tranh wins the crown for the evening and begs the marine who won the raffle to take her back to America, annoying him. The showgirls reflect on their dreams of a better life ("Movie in My Mind"). John buys a room for Chris and the virgin Kim ("The Transaction"). Kim is reluctant and shy, but dances with Chris.  Chris tries to pay her to leave the nightclub. When the Engineer interferes, thinking that Chris does not like Kim, Chris allows himself to be led to her room ("The Dance"). Chris, watching Kim sleep, asks God why he met her just as he was about to leave Vietnam ("Why, God, Why?"). When Kim wakes up, Chris tries to give her money, but she refuses, saying that it is her first time sleeping with a man ("This Money's Yours"). Touched to learn that Kim is an orphan, Chris offers her to come and live with him. The two fall in love ("Sun and Moon"). Chris tells John that he is taking leave to spend time with Kim. John warns him that the Viet Cong will soon take Saigon, but then reluctantly agrees to cover for Chris ("The Telephone Song"). Chris meets with the Engineer to trade for Kim, but the Engineer tries to include an America visa in the deal. Chris forces the Engineer at gunpoint to honour the original arrangement for Kim ("The Deal"). The bargirls hold a "wedding ceremony" for Chris and Kim ("Dju Vui Vai"), with Gigi toasting Kim as the "real" Miss Saigon. Thuy, Kim's cousin, to whom she was betrothed at thirteen, arrives to take her home. He has since become an officer in the North Vietnamese Army and is disgusted to find her with a white man ("Thuy's Arrival"). The two men confront each other, drawing their guns. Kim tells Thuy that their arranged marriage is now nullified because her parents are dead, and she no longer harbours any feelings for him because of his betrayal. Thuy curses them all and storms out ("What's This I Find"). Chris promises to take Kim with him when he leaves Vietnam. Chris and Kim dance to the same song as on their first night ("Last Night of The World"). Three years later in 1978, a street parade is taking place in Saigon (since renamed Ho Chi Minh City) to celebrate the third anniversary of the reunification of Vietnam and the defeat of the Americans ("Morning of The Dragon"). Thuy, a commissar in the new Communist government, has ordered his soldiers to look for the still-corrupt Engineer. Thuy orders the Engineer to find Kim and bring her to him. Kim is still in love with Chris and has been hiding in an impoverished area, steadfastly believing Chris will return to Vietnam and rescue her. Meanwhile, Chris is in bed with his new American wife, Ellen, when he wakes from a dream shouting Kim's name. Ellen and Kim both swear their devotion to Chris from opposite ends of the world ("I Still Believe"). A week later, Thuy's soldiers find the Engineer somewhere up north. For the Communist Party, he goes under the name of "Tranh Van Dinh" and has spent the past three years working in the rice fields. The Engineer takes Thuy to where Kim has been hiding. Kim refuses Thuy's renewed offer of marriage, unaware that his men are waiting outside the door. Furious, Thuy calls them in and they begin tying up Kim and the Engineer, threatening to put them into a reeducation camp. Kim introduces him to Tam, her three-year-old son from Chris. Thuy calls Kim a traitor and Tam an enemy, and tries to kill Tam with a knife, but Kim pulls out a gun and kills Thuy ("You Will Not Touch Him"). She flees with Tam ("This Is the Hour") and tells the Engineer what she has done ("If You Want to Die in Bed"). The Engineer refuses to help her until he learns that Tam's father is American ("Let Me See His Western Nose") – thinking the boy is his chance to emigrate to the United States. He tells Kim that now he is the boy's uncle, and he will lead them to Bangkok. The three set out on a ship with other refugees ("I'd Give My Life for You"). In Atlanta, Georgia, John now works for an aid organisation whose mission is to connect Bui-Doi (from Vietnamese trẻ bụi đời "street children," meaning children conceived during the war) with their American fathers ("Bui Doi"). John tells Chris that Kim is still alive, which Chris is relieved to hear after years of having nightmares of her dying.  He also tells Chris about Tam and urges Chris to go to Bangkok with Ellen. Chris finally tells Ellen about Kim and Tam ("The Revelation"). In Bangkok, the Engineer is hawking a sleazy club where Kim works as a dancer ("What A Waste"). Chris, Ellen, and John arrive in search of Kim. John finds Kim dancing at the club, and tells her that Chris is also in Bangkok. He then tries to tell her that Chris is remarried, but Kim interrupts. She is thrilled about the news and tells Tam that his father has arrived, believing that they are to go to America with Chris. Seeing Kim happy, John cannot bring himself to break the news to her, but promises to bring Chris to her ("Please", replaced with "Too Much for One Heart" [same melody] in 2014 London revival). The Engineer tells Kim to find Chris herself, because he doubts that Chris will come ("Chris Is Here"). Kim is haunted by the ghost of Thuy, who taunts Kim, claiming that Chris will betray her as he did the night Saigon fell. Kim suffers a horrible flashback to that night ("Kim's Nightmare"). In the nightmare/flashback, Kim remembers the Viet Cong approaching Saigon. As the city becomes increasingly chaotic, Chris is called to the embassy and leaves his gun with Kim, telling her to pack. When Chris enters the embassy, the gates close, as orders arrive from Washington for an immediate evacuation of the remaining Americans. The Ambassador orders that no more Vietnamese be allowed into the Embassy. Kim reaches the gates of the Embassy, one of a mob of terrified Vietnamese trying to enter. Chris calls to Kim and is about to go into the crowd to look for her, but John is eventually forced to punch Chris in the face to stop him from leaving. Chris is put into the last helicopter leaving Saigon as Kim watches from outside, still pledging her love to him ("The Fall of Saigon"). Back in 1978 Bangkok, Kim joyfully dresses in her wedding clothes ("Sun and Moon [Reprise]") and leaves the Engineer to watch Tam while she is gone. She goes to Chris's hotel room, where she finds Ellen. Kim mistakenly thinks that Ellen is John's wife, but Ellen reveals that she is Chris's wife.  Kim is heartbroken and refuses to believe Ellen. Ellen asks Kim if Chris is the father of Tam, and Kim confirms. Kim says that she does not want her son to continue living on the streets and pleads that they take Tam with them back to America, but Ellen refuses, saying that Tam needs his real mother, and Ellen wants her own children with Chris. Kim angrily demands that Chris tell her these things in person, and runs out of the room ("Room 317"). Ellen feels bad for Kim, but is determined to keep Chris ("Now That I've Seen Her", originally "Her or Me", replaced with "Maybe" [completely new lyrics and melody] for the 2014 London revival). Chris and John return, having failed to find Kim. Ellen tells them both that Kim arrived and that she had to tell Kim everything. Chris and John blame themselves, realising that they were gone too long. Ellen also tells them that Kim wants to see Chris at her place, and that she tried to give away her son to them. John realises that Kim wants Tam to be "an American boy." Ellen then issues an ultimatum to Chris: Kim or her. Chris reassures Ellen, and they pledge their love for each other. Chris will leave Tam and Kim in Bangkok but offer them monetary support from America. John warns that Kim will not find it acceptable to have Tam stay in Thailand ("The Confrontation"). Back at the club, Kim lies to the Engineer that they are still going to America ("Paper Dragons"). The Engineer imagines the extravagant new life that he will lead in America ("The American Dream"). Chris, John, and Ellen find the Engineer and he takes them to see Kim and Tam. In her room, Kim tells Tam that he should be happy because he now has a father. She tells him that she cannot go with him but will be watching over him ("This Is the Hour [Reprise]", referred to as "Little God of My Heart" on the 2014 London revival recording, though those words are not contained in the lyrics). Chris, Ellen, John, and the Engineer arrive just outside her room. The Engineer comes in to take Tam outside to introduce Tam to his father. While this is happening, Kim steps behind a curtain and shoots herself. As she falls to the floor, everyone rushes into the room at the sound of the gunshot and find Kim mortally wounded. Chris picks up Kim and asks what she has done. She asks him to hold her once more and repeats something that he said to her on the first night they met: "How in one night have we come so far?" and dies in his arms ("Finale").       Miss Saigon has received criticism for what some have perceived as a racist or sexist overtone, including protests regarding its portrayal of Asians and women in general.Steinberg, Avi. "Group targets Asian stereotypes in hit musical," Boston Globe, January 2005. Retrieved on 2007-December 15. Originally, Pryce and Burns, white actors playing Eurasian/Asian characters, wore eye prostheses and bronzing cream to make themselves look more Asian,Behr, Edward, and Mark Steyn. The Story of Miss Saigon. New York: Arcade Publishing, 1991. which outraged some who drew comparisons to a "minstrel show". Hubert van Es, a Dutch photojournalist who recorded the most famous image of the fall of Saigon in 1975 (a group of people scaling a ladder to a CIA helicopter on a rooftop), considered legal action when his photograph was used in Miss Saigon. In the London production of Miss Saigon, Lea Salonga originally starred as Kim, with Jonathan Pryce as the Engineer. When the production transferred from London to New York City, the Actors' Equity Association (AEA) refused to allow Pryce, a white actor, to recreate the role of the Eurasian pimp in America. As Alan Eisenberg, executive secretary of Actors' Equity explained, "The casting of a Caucasian actor made up to appear Asian is an affront to the Asian community. The casting choice is especially disturbing when the casting of an Asian actor, in the role, would be an important and significant opportunity to break the usual pattern of casting Asians in minor roles." This ruling led to criticism from many including British Equity, citing violations of the principles of artistic integrity and freedom. Producer Cameron Mackintosh threatened to cancel the show, despite massive advance ticket sales. Though there had been a large, well-publicised international search among Asian actresses to play Kim, there had been no equivalent search for Asian actors to play the major Asian male roles—specifically, Engineer (Pryce) and Thuy (Keith Burns). However, others pointed out that since the Engineer's character was Eurasian (French-Vietnamese), they argued that Pryce was being discriminated against on the basis that he was Caucasian. Also, Pryce was considered by many in Britain to have "star status," a clause that allows a well-known foreign actor to recreate a role on Broadway without an American casting call. After pressure from Mackintosh, the general public, and many of its own members, Actors' Equity was forced to reverse its decision. Pryce starred alongside Salonga and Willy Falk (as Chris) when the show opened on Broadway.Bright Lights Film Journal - Hollywood Yellowface Retrieved on 2007-December 15. During the production transfer from West End to Broadway, a lesser controversy erupted over Lea Salonga's citizenship, as she was neither British nor American. Salonga is Filipina, and the AEA wanted to give priority to its own members and so initially prevented her from reprising her role. However, Mackintosh was unable to find a satisfactory replacement for Salonga despite the extensive auditions that he conducted in several American and Canadian cities. An arbitrator reversed the AEA ruling a month later to allow Salonga to star. Community members have organized against the play in many different cities over the years, citing that the production is racist and misogynistic.  2010 Fulbright Hayes Scholar D Hideo Maruyama states, "it's time to see the real Vietnam, not the Miss Saigon version.  Whether or not America is ready to see the real one is up to question."  Hmong American artist and activist Mai Neng Moua states, "I protested Miss Saigon back in 1994 when the Ordway first brought it to town.  I was a college student at St. Olaf and had never protested anything before.  I didn’t know what to say or do.  I was scared people would yell or throw things at me.  Then I met Esther Suzuki, a Japanese American woman whose family survived the racist U.S. policy of internment camps.  Esther was about my size – which is small – but she was fearless.  Esther protested Miss Saigon because, she better than anyone, understood Dr. King’s “No one is free until we all are free.”  I stood with Esther, protesting Miss Saigon, and drew strength from her.  We protested Miss Saigon because it was racist, sexist, and offensive to us as Asian Americans.  Nineteen years later, this hasn’t changed."   Vietnamese American activist Denise Huynh recounts her experience attending the production and the stereotypes making her feel physically ill. Sarah Bellamy, co-artistic director of the Penumbra Theatre, dedicated to African American theater, states "It gets a lot easier to wrap your head around all of this for folks of color when we remember a key point: this work is not for us. It is by, for, and about white people, using people of color, tropical climes, pseudo-cultural costumes and props, violence, tragedy, and the commodification of people and cultures, to reinforce and re-inscribe a narrative about white supremacy and authority." Though the show has received awards and acclaim, it lost the Best Musical Award at the 1989/1990 Laurence Olivier Awards to Return to the Forbidden Planet in London.Laurence Olivier Awards: Past winners - Musical Retrieved on 2007-December 15. Upon its Broadway opening in 1991 the musical was massively hyped as the best musical of the year, both critically and commercially. It broke several Broadway records, including a record advance-ticket sales at $24 million, highest priced ticket at $100, and repaying investors in fewer than 39 weeks.AmerAsians and the Theater Retrieved on 2007-December 15. Miss Saigon and The Will Rogers Follies led the 1991 Tony Award nominations with eleven nominations. According to The New York Times, "'Will Rogers' and Miss Saigon had both earned 11 nominations and were considered the front-runners for the Tony as best musical. But many theatre people predicted that Miss Saigon, an import from London, would be the victim of a backlash. There is lingering bitterness against both the huge amount of publicity Miss Saigon has received and the battle by its producer, Cameron Mackintosh, to permit its two foreign stars, Mr. Pryce... and the Filipina actress Lea Salonga, to re-create on Broadway their number one award-winning roles."Rothstein, Mervyn. "'Yonker' and 'Will Rogers' Top Tony Awards",  The New York Times, June 3, 1991, p. A1 The show lost to The Will Rogers Follies for nearly every major award, though Lea Salonga, Jonathan Pryce and Hinton Battle all won awards. On 21 October 2009, a film version of the musical was reported to be in "early stages of development". Producer Paula Wagner was reported to be teaming with the original musical producer Cameron Mackintosh to create a film version of the musical.Hetrick, Adam.""The Movie in My Mind": Miss Saigon on Track for Film Treatment", playbill.com, October 21, 2009 Filming locations are said to be Cambodia and quite possibly Ho Chi Minh City (the former Saigon). Cameron Mackintosh reported that the film version of Miss Saigon depended on whether the Les Misérables film was a success. In August 2013, director Lee Daniels announced hopes to get a film adaptation off the ground.   Character Original West End Cast (1989) Original Broadway Cast (1991) West End Revival Cast (2014) Current West End Cast Kim Lea Salonga Eva Noblezada The Engineer Jonathan Pryce Jon Jon Briones Chris Simon Bowman Willy Falk Alistair Brammer Chris Peluso John Peter Polycarpou Hinton Battle Hugh Maynard Ellen Claire Moore Liz Callaway Tamsin Carroll Siobhan Dillon Thuy Keith Burns Barry K. Bernal Kwang-Ho Hong Sangwoong Jo Gigi Isay Alvarez Marina Chapa Rachelle Ann Go Marsha Songcome Tam Allen Evangelista  Wasseem Hamdan  David Platt  Yuichi Dean Miyama Brian R. Baldomero  Philip Lyle Kong  William Dao   Munck Batailkhan  Connor Mason  Maria (CK) Tangonan  James Quek  Zen Fordyce   Chloe Caccam  Silveria Geronimo  Isabella Geronimo  Olivia Geronimo  Lanna Poon  James Preou  Jordan Ting  Paul Benedict Sarte  Heather Louise Alcalde Alternate Kim Monique Wilson Kam Cheng Tanya Manalang Character Original Cast Recording Complete Symphonic Recording 2014 Cast Recording Kim Lea Salonga Joanna Ampil Eva Noblezada The Engineer Jonathan Pryce Kevin Gray Jon-Jon Briones Chris Simon Bowman Peter Cousens Alistair Brammer John Peter Polycarpou Hinton Battle Hugh Maynard Ellen Claire Moore Ruthie Henshall Tamsin Carroll Thuy Keith Burns Charles Azulay Kwang-Ho Hong Gigi Isay Alvarez Sonia Swaby Rachelle Ann Go Year Award Ceremony Category Nominee Result 1989 Laurence Olivier Award Best New Musical Best Actor in a Musical Jonathan Pryce Best Actress in a Musical Lea Salonga Best Director Nicholas Hytner Year Award Ceremony Category Nominee Result 1991 Tony Award Best Musical Best Book of a Musical Claude-Michel Schönberg and Alain Boublil Best Original Score Claude-Michel Schönberg, Alain Boublil and Richard Maltby, Jr. Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical Jonathan Pryce Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Musical Lea Salonga Best Performance by a Featured Actor in a Musical Hinton Battle Willy Falk Best Choreography Bob Avian Best Direction of a Musical Nicholas Hytner Best Scenic Design John Napier Best Lighting Design David Hersey Drama Desk Award Outstanding Actor in a Musical Jonathan Pryce Outstanding Actress in a Musical Lea Salonga Outstanding Orchestrations William David Brohn Outstanding Lighting Design David Hersey Theatre World Award Lea Salonga Year Award Category Nominee Result Ref 2015 Laurence Olivier Award Best Musical Revival Best Actor in a Musical Jon Jon Briones //www.bangkokpost.com/arts-and-culture/music/314088/behind-and-beyond-miss-saigon Behind and beyond Miss Saigon], Bangkok Post, September 26, 2012., retrieved October 8, 2012 Kim – A seventeen-year-old girl, recently orphaned and forced to work at "Dreamland." She corresponds to Butterfly in the original opera. Christopher "Chris" Scott – An American G.I. sergeant about to leave Saigon to return to America. He corresponds to Pinkerton. The Engineer, a.k.a. Tran Van Dinh – The sleazy hustler and owner of "Dreamland." He is half-Vietnamese and half-French. He corresponds to Goro. Ellen – Chris's American wife. She corresponds to Kate. John Thomas – Chris's friend, also a G.I. He corresponds to Sharpless. Thuy – Kim's cousin and betrothed, to whom Kim's parents promised her when the two were thirteen. Has since become an officer in the Communist Vietnamese government. He is a composite character, corresponding in part to both The Bonze and Prince Yamadori. Gigi Van Tranh – A hardened Saigon stripper; initially voted as "Miss Saigon". Tam – Kim and Chris's three-year-old son. He corresponds to Dolore, or "Sorrow". "Overture" / "Backstage Dreamland" – Gigi, Kim, The Engineer and Bar Girls "The Heat is On in Saigon" – Soldiers, Bar Girls, The Engineer, Kim, John, Chris and Gigi "The Movie in My Mind" – Gigi, Kim and Bar Girls "The Transaction" – The Engineer, John, Soldiers, Chris, and Kim "The Dance" – Kim, Chris and The Engineer "Why, God, Why?" – Chris "This Money's Yours" – Chris and Kim "Sun and Moon" – Chris and Kim "The Telephone Song" / "Asking For Leave" – Chris and John "The Deal" – The Engineer and Chris "The Wedding Ceremony" – Gigi, Kim, Bar Girls and Chris "Thuy's Arrival" / "Thuy's Intervention" – Thuy, Chris, and Kim "Last Night of the World" – Chris and Kim "The Morning of the Dragon" – Soldiers, The Engineer, Two Guards and Thuy "I Still Believe" – Kim and Ellen "Back in Town" / "Coo-Coo Princess" – The Engineer, Kim, Thuy and Soldiers "Thuy's Death" / "You Will Not Touch Him" – Thuy and Kim "This is the Hour" – Chorus "If You Want to Die in Bed" – The Engineer "Let Me See His Western Nose" / "Kim & Engineer"– Kim and The Engineer "I'd Give My Life for You" – Kim "Exodus" - Chorus "Entr'acte" "Bui Doi" – John and Chorus "The Revelation" – Chris and John "What a Waste" – The Engineer, Hustlers, Tourists, John and Kim "Please" – John and Kim (Original Production) / "Too Much For One Heart" - John and Kim (2014 London production) "Chris is Here" – The Engineer, Kim, Club Owner and John "Kim's Nightmare" – Thuy "Fall of Saigon" – Soldiers, Chris, Kim, John and Citizens "Sun and Moon" (Reprise) – Kim "Room 317" – Kim and Ellen "Now That I’ve Seen Her" – Ellen (Original production "Her or Me") "Maybe" - Ellen (2011 Holland / 2014 London production) "The Confrontation" – Chris, Ellen and John "Paper Dragons" – The Engineer and Kim "The American Dream" – The Engineer "This is the Hour" / "Little God of My Heart" (Reprise) – Kim "Finale" – Chris and Kim Kim – Minako Honda, Kanako Irie, Eri Ito The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura, Takashi Sasano, Atsushi Haruta Chris – Satoshi Kishida, Motomu Azaki, Hiroshi Miyakawa John – Shintarō Sonooka, Kiyotaka Imai Ellen – Honoka Suzuki, Shizuka Okada, Yumiko Ishitomi Thuy –　Yukio Yamagata, Atsushi Yamamoto, Mamoru Rusu Gigi – Shizuka Okada, Takako Kitamura, Haruko Sonoyama Tam – Haisuke, Ruike Daichi, Wataru Kitao, Takanori Kubo, Shinozuka Ryo and Sasaki Sofutoshi Kim – Ma-Anne Dionisio The Engineer – Kevin Gray Chris – H.E.Greer John – Rufus Bonds Jr. Ellen – Melissa Thomson Thuy – Charles Azulay Tam – Katelyn Fong Kim – Aura Deva The Engineer – Jerzy Jeszke Chris – Uwe Kröger John – Eric Lee Johnson Ellen – Grania Renihan Thuy – Robert Seña Gigi – Milanie Sumalinog Kim – Eszter Bíró The Engineer – Attila Kaszás Chris – Attila Csengeri John – Sándor Sasvári Ellen – Mónika Sáfár Thuy – Gábor Lengyel Gigi – Ottília Csengery Kim – Linda Wagenmakers and Casey Francisco The Engineer – Willem Nijholt,  Bill van Dijk, Frans van Deursen and Wim Van Den Driessche Chris – Tony Neef and Paul Vaes John – Stanley Burleson, Matthew Dickens and Marc Dollevoet Ellen – Ellen Evers Lottie Hellingman and Claudia de Graaf Thuy – Charles Azulay and Arvin Quirante Gigi – Imelda de los Reyes, Nurlaila Karim and Cystine Carreon Tam - Burkay Cetinkaya, Brendon Gazi, Cherry-May Chu and Dejavu Rodrigues Kim – Joanna Ampil The Engineer – Cocoy Laurel Chris – Peter Cousens John – Milton Craig Nealy Ellen – Silvie Paladino Thuy – Darren Yap Kim – Kun Jing The Engineer – Daniel Eriksson Chris – Carsten Lepper John – David Whitley Ellen – Wietske Van Tongeren Thuy – Romeo Salazar Gigi – Marides Lazo Tam – Angelo Nguyen / Levin Hu Kim – Lea Salonga, Cezarah Campos The Engineer – Leo Valdez, Jon-Jon Briones Chris – Will Chase John – Ronn Smith Ellen – Lisa Capps Thuy – Robert Seña, Arvin Quirante Gigi – Isay Alvarez Tam – Bianca Coronel, Regine Salcedo, Mary Caitlene Sambeli Kim – Jihyen Park The Engineer – Matthew Pike Chris – Nic Kyle John – Michael Bayly Ellen – Laura O' Loughlin Thuy – Charlie Panapa Gigi – Jamie Ling Tam – Helaina Lim / Sena Eady / Jennifer Im / Arian Rassoul Kim – Divina Sarkany The Engineer – Stefan Sauk Chris – Niklas Andersson John – Johan Boding Ellen – Sofia Källgren Thuy – Thomas Flores Gigi – Malena Laszlo Kim – Nele-Liis Vaiksoo, Meribel Müürsepp The Engineer – Marko Matvere, Sepo Seeman Chris – Koit Toome, Mikk Saar John – Lauri Liiv, Erik Meremaa Ellen – Maarja-Liis Ilus, Janika Sillamaa Thuy – Jaagup Kreem, Kristo Leier Gigi – Kaire Vilgats, Ele Raik Kim - Michelle Nigalan The Engineer - Patrik Martinsson Chris - Christopher Wollter John - David E. Moore Ellen - Åsa Fång Thuy - Devanand Janki, Rommel Singson Gigi - Nina Pressing Kim – Sanna Majuri / Jennie Storbacka The Engineer – Sören Lillkung / Puntti Valtonen / Sami Hokkanen Chris – Mika Turunen / Koit Toome / Ville Salonen John – Sami Hintsanen / Lauri Liiv Ellen – Maria Ylipää / Nina Tapio Thuy – Sami Uotila / Gary Revel jr, Gigi – Raili Ruutu / Laura Taimisto / Tiina Peltonen Kim – Kim Bo-Kyung The Engineer – Kim Sung-Ki Chris – Michael K. Lee John – Lee Kun-Myung Ellen – Kim Sun-young Kim – Kanda Witthayanuparpyuenyong, Kulkornpat Phothongnak The Engineer – Chalatit Tantiwut Chris – Napat Gun Injaiuea John – Suveera Boonrod Ellen – Napassorn New Putornjai Thuy – Lerwit Sungsit Gigi – Primapha Kornrojanachawin Kim – Li-Tong Hsu The Engineer – Dan Ekborg Chris – Philip Jalmelid John – Oscar Pierrou Lindén Ellen – Cecilie Nerfont Thorgersen Thuy – Rommel Singson Gigi – Kitty Chan Tam – Rasmus Matthiesen Kim – Rena Sasamoto, Rina Chinen, Seiko Niizuma and Takako Matsu The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura, Toshio Kakei, Satoshi Hashimoto, and Tetsuya Bessho Chris – Kazutaka Ishii, Kenji Sakamoto, Yoshio Inoue and Hiroyuki Takami John – Kazutaka Ishii, Kenji Sakamoto, Kiyotaka Imai and Kojiro Oka Ellen – ANZA, Chihiro Ishikawa and Yumiko Takahashi Thuy – Yohei Izumi, Tekkan and Katsumi Toi Gigi – Mai Kinemuchi, Miho Takashima and Hirasawa Yumi Tam - Kazuyu Adachi and Shion Hatakeyama Kim – Rena Sasamoto, Rina Chinen, Seiko Niizuma and Sonim The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura, Toshio Kakei, Satoshi Hashimoto, and Tetsuya Bessho Chris – Yuichi Harada, Masaaki Fujioka and Terui Hirotaka John – Kojiro Oka, Yuji Kishi and Kenji Sakamoto Ellen – Sylvia Grab, Honoka Suzuki, Minako Asano and RiRiKA Thuy – Yohei Izumi, Kyohei Kanda and Ishii Kazuaki Gigi – Yuko Ikeya, Maki Kuwahara and Marie Sugaya Tam – Terai Masaharu, Mito Takamasa and Wataru Yoshi Kim – Ma-Anne Dionisio The Engineer – Kevin Gray Chris – Aaron Ramey John – Josh Tower Ellen – Becca Ayers Thuy – Devin Ilaw Gigi – Joanne Javien Tam – Alessandra Crisante-Crespo / Chloe Stanford Kim – Na-Young Jeon The Engineer – Stanley Burleson Chris – Ton Sieben and Jamai Loman John – Edwin Jonker Ellen – Brigitte Heitzer and Maike Boerdam Thuy – Kok-Hwa Lie Gigi – Li-Tong Hsu Tam - Shao de Bondt, Julin Djamaludin, Aalisah Bui, Lilian Eslami, Jiao Oude Sogtoen, Jamiro van Dam, Milène de Haas, Delila Goudriaan, Kiara Chin See Hoo, Gaby de Mees, Mei-Ying Ong, Luna Booij and Jay Agerbeek Kim – Rena Sasamoto, Rina Chinen and Seiko Niizuma The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura Chris – Yuichi Harada and Ikusaburo Yamazaki John – Kojiro Oka and Rio Uehara Ellen – Hanayo Kimura Thuy – Yohei Izumi Gigi – Yuko Ikeya Tam – Maki Arakawa, Kenshiro Kato and Anzu Terasaki Kim Kim Bo Kyung and Lim Hye Young and Lee Ha Na The Engineer - Kim Sung Ki and Lim Choon Gil Chris - Michael Lee and Lee Geun Myong John - Kim Woo Hyung Ellen - Ku Min Jin Thuy - Park Hyong Kyu Gigi - Kim Myong Hee Kim – Rena Sasamoto, Rina Chinen and Natsumi Kon The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura, Toshio Kakei and Hajime Komada Chris – Yuichi Harada and Tetsuya Ueno John – Kojiro Oka and Rio Uehara Ellen – Hanayo Kimura and Chiaki Mitsumori Thuy – Yohei Izumi and Kyohei Kanda Gigi – Yuko Ikeya and Rena Yoshida Tam – Miu Asanuma, Yoshiharu Jin and Tomoyo Niitsu Kim – ? The Engineer – Masachika Ichimura, Hajime Komada and Diamond Yukai Chris – ? John – ? Ellen – ? Thuy – ? Gigi – ? Puccini's Madame Butterfly Tears of Heaven - Another Vietnam-set musical, from 2011 by composer Frank Wildhorn, set in the lead up to and during the Tet Offensive. Official UK website Musical Cyberspace: Miss Saigon On the Scene: Miss Saigon Celebrates 4,000 Performances Time review, noting changes from West End to Broadway Plot summary and character descriptions Miss Saigon at the Music Theatre International website Miss Saigon - School Edition at the Music Theatre International website New Zealand Premiere Photos New Zealand Premiere Cast
