   Moline ( ) is a city located in Rock Island County, Illinois, United States.  With a population of 43,977 in 2010, it is the largest city in Rock Island County. Moline is one of the Quad Cities, along with neighboring East Moline and Rock Island in Illinois and the cities of Davenport and Bettendorf in Iowa. The Quad Cities has a population estimate of 381,342. The city is the ninth-most populated city in Illinois outside of the Chicago Metropolitan Area. The corporate headquarters of Deere & Company is located in Moline, as was Montgomery Elevator, which was founded and headquartered in Moline until 1997, when it was acquired by Kone Elevator, which has its U.S. Division headquartered in Moline. Quad City International Airport, Niabi Zoo, Black Hawk College, and the Quad Cities campus of Western Illinois University-Quad Cities. Moline is a retail hub for the Illinois Quad Cities, as South Park Mall and numerous big-box shopping plazas are located in the city. In the mid-1990s, the city undertook major efforts to revitalize its central business district, which had declined after suburban growth and retail changes after the 1950s and 1960s. Today, Moline's downtown again serves as one of the civic and recreational hubs of the Quad Cities; many events take place at the 12,000-seat iWireless Center (formerly known as The MARK of the Quad Cities) and at John Deere Commons. Downtown Moline features hotels such as Radisson and Stoney Creek Inn, and commercial areas such as Bass Street Landing and the historic 5th Avenue. The city of Moline is nestled beside and on a broad bluff situated between the banks of the Mississippi River and Rock River in Rock Island County, Illinois. The city's highland areas are cut across by many deep ravines that break up the city into natural neighborhoods. The city is bounded to the east by East Moline and to the west by Rock Island. Moline is located approximately  west of Chicago and approximately  north-west of Springfield, Illinois. Moline and its neighboring communities within the Quad Cities form the largest urban area along the Mississippi River between Minneapolis to the north and St. Louis to the south, and are located approximately halfway between them.  The area is served by four interstate highways: Interstate 74 (which runs directly through Moline, bisecting it in roughly equal halves), Interstate 280 (which serves as a ring road around the Quad Cities), Interstate 80 (which crosses the Mississippi River a few miles to the northeast of Moline), and Interstate 88 (which begins on the eastern border of the Quad Cities and terminates in Hillside, Illinois, near Chicago). The Quad City International Airport, located on the southern fringe of the city to the south of the Rock River, is home to four commercial airlines providing non-stop flights to eight different cities.  This airport is the third busiest one in the state of Illinois, following Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and Midway Airport. According to the 2010 census, the city has a total area of , of which  (or 98.62%) is land and  (or 1.38%) is water. Typical of the northern half of Illinois, Moline experiences a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfa) with hot, humid summers and cold, moderately snowy winters; precipitation is distributed throughout the year but is greater in the warmer months. The normal monthly mean temperature ranges from  in January to  in July; on average, there are 23 days of + highs, 43 days with a high at or below freezing, and 11 days of sub- lows annually. Extremes in temperature have ranged from , set on July 14, 1936, down to , set on February 3, 1996; the record coldest maximum temperature is  on January 18, 1994 and January 29, 1966, while the record warmest minimum is , set the same day of the record high. Temperatures reach  only several years per decade, and  readings are even rarer; the last occurrence of each was July 25, 2012 and February 11, 2014. The average window for freezing temperatures is October 10 thru April 24, allowing a growing season of 168 days. Snowfall averages  per season, but has ranged as low as  in 1901–02 to  in 1974–75; on average, measurable (≥) snow occurs from November 21 to March 26, and rarely in October. Unlike much of the Midwest, measurable snow has never officially occurred in May. Indigenous peoples of varying cultures inhabited areas along the river over thousands of years, using it for transportation, water and fishing.  According to the Rock Island County Historical Society, the first more permanently settled inhabitants of the Moline area are thought to be the Sauk and Meskwaki Indians, who founded the village of Saukenuk in 1720 along the Rock River not far from its confluence with the Mississippi. This tribe saw the land between the Rock and Mississippi rivers as ideal for farming and fishing. By the early 19th century, this once peaceful area became a site of violent confrontations between European-American settlers, arriving in greater numbers and encroaching on Native American land, and the Sauk and Fox tribes. In 1832 Chief Black Hawk declared war on the United States, initiating the Black Hawk War. When the war ended later that year, Black Hawk and his people were forced to leave the area and go north, paving the way for more European-American settlers to enter the Mississippi Valley. In 1837, David B. Sears and a group of associates built a  stone-and-brush dam across Sylvan Slough, thereby connecting the southern bank of the Mississippi River to what is today called Arsenal Island. The dam not only served as an access road between the island's settlements and the mainland, but it provided water power for a mill which Sears built to saw wood, grind corn, and card wool.  The water power generated by the dam attracted many industrialists.  Over the next seven years, a number of factories sprouted up along the shoreline.  A factory town was platted in 1843 on the Illinois shore under the working name of "Rock Island Mills".  The name did not stick. When Charles Atkinson, one of the major landowners in the area, was offered the choice of naming the town Moline ("City of Mills", from the French moulin, as suggested by a local surveyor P.H. Olgilvie) or Hesperia (meaning "Star of the West"), he chose Moline.  The town of Moline was incorporated on April 21, 1848 under Illinois state law and granted a charter for a trustee form of government. The same year, John Deere, the inventor of the self-scouring steel plow, relocated his steel plow company from Grand Detour, Illinois, to Moline. At the time, Moline had a population of only a few hundred, mostly involved in work at the mill.  Despite Moline's small size, Deere saw several promising elements there: Moline's dam and coal deposits would provide a good source of power; Moline was near the other well-established towns of Stephenson (later renamed Rock Island) in Illinois and Davenport in Iowa; and Moline's access to the river would make shipping goods cost-efficient.  As Deere expanded his factories, Moline grew in area and population. Charles Atkinson and others successfully lobbied the federal government to get the first transcontinental railroad to pass through Moline and to cross the Mississippi over Arsenal Island.  The railroad, which arrived in 1854, carried thousands of immigrants – at that time mostly Swedish, Belgian, and German, reflecting areas of economic problems in Europe – to Moline's borders.  The immigrants, most of whom knew little or no English, responded to the call of "John Deere Town" by the conductor.  The railroad connected the region to the national economy, ending its previous isolation, and ensured the future success of the area.  Manufactured goods were increasingly transported over rail instead of by water.Bess Pierce, Moline: A Pictorial History,’’ Virginia Beach: The Donning Co. Publishers, 1993, p. 17. Moline's founding fathers were primarily ambitious industrialists from New England. David B. Sears came to Moline from the Northeast by way of Cairo, Illinois, and Atkinson, John W. Spencer, and Spencer H. White, other prominent founding men, were also New Englanders.  They brought a stern work ethic and controlled civic life; Moline, in contrast to its neighbors, was not a "shoot ‘em up river-town."Jae Bryson, "Moline follows industrious path", Quad City Times, Apr 30, 1998, p. 4C An article in the Moline Workman in 1854 noted that a "much duller town could not be scared up this side of Sleepy Hollow."Roald Tweet, The Quad Cities: An American Mosaic, Rock Island, Illinois: East Hall Press, 1996, p. 20.  Moline attracted large waves of immigrants from Sweden, who were believed to be family-minded, God-fearing, community-oriented workers who rarely went on strike."Moline: Its Interests and Industries," Promotional pamphlet and map, Moline: Porter Printing Company, 1888. Following incorporation, Moline was laid out in an orderly initial grid of sixteen square blocks with streets named after the primary landowners of the time.  The New Englanders chose not to install a town common or park along the river, as they thought the space would be better used for industrial purposes.  Many of these founders clearly envisioned a "Lowell on the Mississippi", after a major industrial city of Massachusetts; Moline was marketed as a "Lowell of the West" to potential investors and immigrants. As Moline grew around its mills and factories, and as its neighbor to the west, Rock Island, continued to grow at a similar pace, the neighboring towns ran up against one another's borders relatively quickly.  In the mid-19th century, articles about "consolidation" were a daily feature in the Moline Workman and the Rock Island Advertiser; city leaders dreamed of the joint city becoming the largest in the state."Things at Moline," The Rock Island Advertiser, Rock Island, Illinois, May 4, 1854.  As local leaders sat down to discuss consolidation, however, disputes arose, with the most important being which city would subsume the other.  As the county seat and earliest settlement on the Illinois side, Rock Island argued that it should annex Moline; Moline, being more prosperous and better known nationally, wanted to keep its name.  Other points of conflict included that Moline did not want to have to assume any of Rock Island's public debt;  Rock Island feared that a union with Moline would drive down its property values; and the citizens of the two towns, representing different regions, classes, occupations and ethnicities, widely disagreed on major political issues of the day. Many leaders of Rock Island, a community founded largely by Southerners, remained sympathetic to the Confederate cause throughout the Civil War.  Meanwhile, Moline was ardently Republican.Tweet, p. 21  The talks of consolidation ceased, although they would later return but were never resolved in favor of the merger. After the Civil War, the population of Moline continued to grow.  The street grid was expanded to the east and west along the shoreline and to the south up the bluffs.  There was a severe housing shortage; few men were rich enough to invest in real estate other than what they could afford to build for themselves, and few incoming workers had sufficient funds to build a home.Newspaper clipping from The Rock Island Union, Rock Island, Illinois, Aug. 15, 1868.  Nevertheless, Moline's expansion was generally an orderly affair.  The street grid remained a set of rectangular blocks, and though no zoning commission or local authority directly oversaw construction, the unwritten code of carpenters, masons, and citizens kept the city a well-planned place.  Temperance societies and lyceums joined other reform movements and social organizations in prominence within the community.William Roba, The River and the Prairie: A History of the Quad-Cities, 1812–1960, Quad-Cities, Illinois: The Hesperian Press, 1986, p. 20. The quality of life was generally regarded as quite good:  "The laboring men of Moline are among the most prosperous to be found in the country.  Instead of spending their spare earnings in saloons and dram shops, they carefully hoard them and in a few years a little home of their own is the result.""New homes in Moline – what our laboring men do with their money", Rock Island Union, Rock Island, Illinois, July 15, 1868. Over time, John Deere expanded operations into other agricultural equipment, and Deere-affiliated factories employed the bulk of Moline's workforce.  Soon other Moline-based companies became known around the country for their products. These include Dimock, Gould, and Co., Moline Pipe Organ Co., and Moline Furniture Works, to name a few. In addition, several pioneering automobile companies operated in the city, among them Moline Automobile Company,Floyd Clymer, Treasury of Early American Automobiles, 1877–1925 (New York: Bonanza Books, 1950), p. 51. Moline Wagon Company, Stephens (a marque of the Moline Plow Company) and Velie Motors Corporation. During the last few decades of the 19th century, Moline had continued prosperity, expansion of the city to the southwest, west, and east along the Mississippi river, and a stronger relationship with neighboring communities.  Consolidation talks began again with Rock Island, but failed as the two cities quarreled over which would acquire the other.  By 1880, Moline had 7,800 residents, and by 1890 there were 12,000.  Rock Island kept pace with 8,500 and 13,000 people respectively.  New jobs were created primarily in Moline in this era.Jim Renkes, The Quad-Cities and the People, Helena, Montana: American & World Geographic Publishing and the Quad-City Times, 1994, p. 70. Several improvements in construction and urban planning led to a shift in urban growth strategies in Moline.  The first buildings were equipped with heat in September 1897, and electricity first arrived in Moline in 1881 when John Deere & Co. installed sixteen electric streetlights on the roadway outside its factories.  Work on an electric streetcar system soon followed, and within the same decade, an intercity streetcar system linked Moline with Rock Island and Davenport.  The diminishing reliance on well water or the river allowed home construction to proceed further up the bluff, and the electric streetcars allowed Tri-Citians to live in one community and shop or work in another.  Moline's streetcar system, the state's first and only the nation's third, was also Illinois's best for a number of years, with a minimal five-cent fare and an extensive coverage area.Tweet, p. 34.  The state's first garbage collection system was also developed in Moline in 1894.  In this time, the municipal administration bureaucracy first began to grow, with departments created for sanitation, public works, utilities, and recreation.  New public buildings also were constructed; the first public library came in 1873, the YMCA was built in 1885, and Moline Public Hospital opened in 1896.Jonathan Turner, "Moline authors chronicle ‘City of Mills,’" The Moline Dispatch. Moline, Illinois, Apr. 19, 1998, p. A10. In the midst of steady growth and changing times, the town's founders struggled to maintain their positions of authority.  Moline was re-chartered as a city under a mayor/aldermanic form of government on April 21, 1872, and John Deere, the longtime resident and entrepreneur, was defeated by Daniel Wheelock, a newcomer, for the first mayorship.Roba, p. 86.  Belgian and Swedish immigrants began arriving in a huge influx, settling into a neighborhood on the bluffs in the southwestern part of the city.  Belgian immigrants came predominantly to work in the fledgling auto industry in Moline, Velie Motors, founded by a Deere relative.  For a time, Moline had the second largest Belgian population in the country after Detroit.  Swedish immigrants continued to be drawn to Deere & Company, with John Deere as leader continuing to hire new employees in droves until his death in 1886.Renkes, p. 78. In 1883 a major overhaul of Moline's urban grid was undertaken.  Several roads were removed or re-routed in the interest of creating an aesthetically pleasing downtown and a more orderly method of horse and streetcar transit.  The model of Lowell was abandoned in favor of that of Pittsburgh, a great river town with a strong urban center.  Retail and commerce was encouraged in downtown Moline, and higher density housing began to appear there.  The historic street names were replaced by a numerical system in which north-south roads were dubbed "streets" and east-west ones were re-christened "avenues".  Though some complained "the corner of Ann Street and Bass Street… is now merely 17th Street at 6th Avenue," the new system, inspired by an alderman's visit to Philadelphia in 1876 for the Centennial, was generally regarded as a great urban innovation.Tweet, p. 24. Moline was a successful, if somewhat boring, turn-of-the-20th-century city.  It was clean, well maintained, and prosperous, and unlike Rock Island and Davenport, contained no slums, congestion, or red-light districts.   Despite the occasional conflicts between native-born and immigrant leaders, the Puritanical, serious temperament of the city had not changed in the half-century since Moline's founding.  The city became known as "Proud Moline" to its neighbors, a somewhat derisive nickname that touched on Moliners' sometimes haughty, holier-than-thou attitude.   The electric streetcar system expanded as the city did, and by 1915 there were over  of paved city streets and  of sidewalks.Jane Sturgis, Moline: The Golden Years, In fulfillment of Art 400A, Tennessee State University, Nashville, 1987.  Recognizing a need for more recreational space, Riverside Park was established in 1902 near present-day 34th Street on the waterfront, and the Tri-City Railway Company opened Prospect Park in the southern part of the city in 1911 as an amusement park.Julie Jensen, "Moline: Of Mills and Mansions…" Quad-City Times, Davenport, Iowa, Feb. 22, 1976, p. 2D.  The widespread prosperity attracted wave upon wave of immigrants, and Moline's immigrant workers often sent for their extended families in the Old Country to join them in America.  The 1910 census showed the Tri-Cities metro area to have the second highest per-capita income in the United States.Roba, p. 97. By the 1920s and 1930s, the appearance of East Moline in Illinois and Bettendorf in Iowa reflected the further growth and diversification of the region.  Moline emerged as a retail, transportation, and cultural hub on the Illinois side of the river.  The first metropolitan airfield, the Moline Airport, opened in 1926 and later provided commercial air service to Chicago and St. Louis.Roba, p. 123. With federal funds from the Works Progress Administration, the Iowa-Illinois Memorial Bridge, a single-span, two-lane highway bridge built for automotive traffic, was concluded between Moline and Davenport in 1935 and quickly became the preferred method for interstate transit.Roba, p. 124. A bustling retail sector emerged in downtown Moline, anchored by merchants like the New York Store, Sears & Roebuck, and JC Penney.Roba, p. 106. The economic reliance on the farm implement industry continued as Deere & Company emerged to become the largest agricultural machinery company in the world. Colonel Charles Deere Wiman, the President of Deere & Company, re-affirmed Deere's commitment to the Quad-Cities region by building several new factories in Moline, East Moline, Silvis, and Milan in Illinois and Davenport in Iowa.  Moline witnessed a continued population increase after World War II with the completion of "Molette," a subdivision of mass-produced starter homes selling for $5,000 each.  Molette was the first Moline neighborhood produced on a mass scale and one of the largest single-unit housing projects in the Midwest at the time.Tweet, p. 62.  Near Molette on 41st Street, the Defense Department funded an $800,000 housing project known as Springbrook Courts, which served as housing for Rock Island Arsenal employees before being converted into a non-military-affiliated public housing project managed by the Moline Housing Authority."Moline's $886,000 Defense Housing Project from the Air", The Daily Dispatch, Moline, Illinois, Nov. 20, 1941. It was in this time that one of the major factors shaping the modern layout of Moline first came into play—the rough topography of the inland bluffs.  As Moline grew, the traditional rectilinear grid of the downtown area gave way to smaller subdivisions containing cul-de-sacs, curvilinear roadways, and courts.  As a comprehensive plan of Moline later stated, "the topography has had a decided influence upon the growth and development of the city . . . the city is literally interlaced with fingers of wooded ravines draining surface water to the north into the Mississippi and to the south into the creeks and drainage ditches tributary to the Rock River.  This condition has greatly influenced the building of underground utilities, the location of thoroughfares, the selection of sites for schools and parks, the design and development of residential areas, and the location of business and industrial areas.  The customary ‘grid’ type subdivision planning so common to most Midwestern cities is impractical of adaptation when looking at a map of the present city.  Some streets . . . have been dedicated but never improved because of the topography and the excessive cost of construction."A Comprehensive Plan for the City of Moline, Illinois, and its Environs, Moline Planning Commission, City of Moline: Moline, Illinois, March 1958. The layout of the city was significantly improved by the approval of the city's first zoning ordinance and the creation of a Zoning Board in 1929.  Moline became the first Illinois city outside of the Chicago area to adopt this tool of urban planning.  The zoning board, in its preliminary report, released the following statement: "Generally speaking, [the new zoning ordinance] will tend to promote public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare.  Specifically, it is designed to lessen congestion in streets and to avoid future congestion; to secure safety from fire and other hazards; to provide light and air about buildings in which people live; to prevent overcrowding of land and avoid excessive concentration of population; to assist in adequately providing transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, parks, and other public requirements.Moline Zoning Commission Final Report, Moline, Illinois, June 17, 1929. Although the city did not suffer during the 1950s and 1960s, those decades marked a departure from the city's earlier trajectory of unceasing upward growth.  The zoning ordinance drawn up in 1929 predicted a population of 70,000–80,000 for Moline in 1980, but Moline actually only attained 45,000 by that year.Moline Zoning Commission Final Report, p. 8.  The primary problem for Moline, and the Quad-Cities at large, in this period was the area's lack of a strong national identity.  The Moline Association of Commerce marketed the Quad-Cities under the motto of "Joined together, as the boroughs of New York City" throughout the 1940s and 1950s, with Moline as the "nucleus," but few corporations bought into the analogy.  Despite the Quad-Cities’ status as "the largest metropolitan area between Chicago, Omaha, Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Kansas City," the area remained relatively unheard of."Moline, Illinois, presents the metropolitan Quad-Cities," Moline Chamber of Commerce, Jan. 1969, Promotional booklet. Existing companies, including John Deere, Alcoa, Caterpillar, Case, and International Harvester all continued to grow and expand operations in the area, but no real diversification of local industry occurred; Moline remained steadfastly dependent on the farm implement industry for its economic solvency, a dependency that later proved disastrous. In 1989, a region-wide comprehensive plan called "Quad-City Visions for the Future" summed up the area's problems well.  "Growth has been so that the Quad-Cities population is split almost equally between the two states.  This is an unusual growth pattern on major rivers that form state boundaries ... .  Further complicating the economic and political arenas is the fact that there are five contiguous cities in the Iowa Quad-Cities and eight in the Illinois Quad-Cities.  Quad-Cities fragmentation historically has been raised as a major community liability by many different groups and individuals . . . .  It is difficult for outsiders to appreciate the opportunities available here; growth and development are more difficult because of the differences in regulations; the distribution of grant money from state and federal governments has not always been efficient or effective; governmental services are more costly when administered by many entities separately.""Quad-Cities USA – Visions for the Future: Strategic Plan and Implementation", Jan. 31, 1989. As a result of the gradual dissolution of the trends of industrial expansion and the end of the age of immigration, Moline's population stagnated throughout the mid-to-late-20th century, settling in the 40,000–45,000 range, where it remains today.  The central retail district gradually closed down as the area's first shopping malls opened in the early 1970s, pulling business away from downtown.  This southward trend in retail occurred despite the extension of Interstate 74 through the city and across the river on the Iowa-Illinois Memorial Bridge in 1974, an infrastructure improvement that made Moline's downtown more accessible and brought thousands of commuters and travelers through Moline each day.  Though most civic leaders and journalists had been optimistic-–one reporter claimed "almost every indicator of economic, population, and civic growth points to the fact that Moline's potential for growth is greater than ever . . . especially in its now readily accessible downtown . . ." – there was no stopping the dawn of the age of strip retailing.Doug Anderson, "Downtown key to development of Moline growth,"  The Daily Dispatch, Moline, Illinois, July 21, 1969. Perhaps the greatest problem befalling Moline in the second half of the 20th century was the farm crisis of the 1980s.  Moline's economic vitality was sapped as the agricultural crisis crippled the farm implement industry, the force which had shaped the development of Moline since the city's earliest days.  Plant after plant laid off workers by the thousands, and unemployment in the area soared to twice the national average.  Even Deere & Company moved most of its factory operations out of Moline, though it maintained its world headquarters in Moline in a specially commissioned building that was designed by Eero Saarinen.  The LeClaire Hotel, the tallest building in Moline and a longtime symbol of the city's wealth and prestige, closed its doors.  The 1990 census showed a population loss for the city for the second straight decade.  In the 1990s, Moline began staging a comeback through the redevelopment of its riverfront.  Deere & Company demolished its vacant riverfront factories and donated the land to the city so that it could build a civic center on the space.  The Mark of the Quad-Cities, now known as the i wireless Center, was completed in 1993 and is now the home to  large conventions, concerts, high school sports tournaments, and a host of other events.  The Quad City Steamwheelers, an arena football team, played their af2 home games at the arena from 2000–2009.  The Steamwheelers are presently without a league due to the af2 ceasing operations, but are a candidate to join the new Arena Football 1 or the rival Indoor Football League in the future. From 2007–2009, the arena was home to a minor league hockey team, the Flames, prior to the franchise's relocation to Abbotsford, British Columbia.[ ]   In the late 1990s, John Deere Commons was built, a multimillion-dollar entertainment and tourism complex containing a hotel, restaurants, offices, a John Deere Collector's Center (located in a re-created 1950s John Deere dealership), the John Deere Store, and the John Deere Pavilion, a tourist center showcasing the history of agriculture in the Midwest.  The Commons attracts 400,000 visitors a year, injecting a tremendous boost to the downtown economy.  Renovations have been completed on many old brownstone buildings, and plans for shoreline mixed-use condominium and retail developments are in the works on the site of vacant industrial land. Moline still reflects the rich culture of the successive waves of immigrants from France, Germany, Sweden, Belgium, Eastern Europe, and most recently, Mexico. Events such as the annual Greek Cultural Festival at John Deere Commons, rolle bolle tournaments at Stephen's Park, and "Viva! Quad~Cities" all reflect Moline's diverse heritage.  Downtown Moline also plays host to events of regional importance such as Taste of the Quad Cities, Race for the Cure, the Quad City Marathon, and the Lighting of the Commons.  Since the late 2000s - Early 2010s, Moline has seen progressive growth in its downtown area. The current projects include a new 9 story building for Moline-based Kone and its nearly 250 Quad Cities' area employees. The building opened in August 2012, and also has  a combination of active and passive energy strategies includes an array of 1365 distributed solar panels, which is now the third largest in the state of Illinois. Other projects include new lofts that opened up in 2011, and the I-74 Corridor Project is planned to build 3 auxiliary lanes from Avenue of the Cities passed 53rd Street in Davenport, with a new I-74 Bridge spanning 4 lanes in each direction, also an observation deck overlooking the Mississippi River, construction date is still unknown.[ ]  In 2012, Western Illinois University-Quad Cities opened the new river front campus, an $18.2 million first phase of the project has 60,000 square feet, making it the only college campus along the Mississippi River. It includes 14 classrooms and four meeting/conference rooms. The second phase, including five connected buildings, is expected to cost $42 million and have 90,000 square feet. Those buildings will include the colleges of arts and sciences, education and human services, fine arts and communications, as well as the campus library. The second phase of construction is set to be completed by 2014. Amtrak is set to bring service back to the city with a Moline to Chicago line sometime in 2015. More projects are being planned, all a part of the city's "Moline Centre" downtown plan. According to the City's 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the largest employers in the city are: As of the census of 2010, there were 43,977 people, 19,032 households, and 11,594 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,805.7 people per square mile (1,083.3/km²). There were 19,487 housing units at an average density of 1,249.2 per square mile (482.3/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 86.2% White, 4.6% African American, 0.2% Native American, 3.5% Asian, 3% from other races, and 2.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 9.4% of the population. There were 19,032 households out of which 28.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.8% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.3% were non-families. 31.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.97. In the city the population was spread out with 24.0% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 23.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 91.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.9 males. The median income for a household in the city was $47,970, and the median income for a family was $59,292. Males had a median income of $36,586 versus $24,711 for females. The per capita income for the city was $26,710. About 3.1% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.1% of those under age 18 and 2.1% of those age 65 or over. Through the Neighborhood Partnership Program, the City of Moline has established nine city-sponsored neighborhood associations and is working diligently to form more. These associations assist their residents by organizing neighborhood clean-up days, participating in the crime watch program, planning social activities, and other activities. Downtown / Moline Centre: Moline's downtown, now known as Moline Centre, is the historic area bounded approximately by 12th and 34th Streets and the Mississippi River and 6th Avenue.  The area has long been home to Moline's City Hall, its original, and now vacant, Carnegie-sponsored public library, and other civic institutions.  A major retail center in the 1950s and 1960s, today the area is home to the John Deere Commons development, including the John Deere Pavilion and the i wireless Center (where thousands come each year to watch shows, concerts, and sporting events) and to various other restaurants and entertainment venues.  A new mixed-use retail and residential development known as Bass Street Landing is currently under construction.  Notable businesses in the area include Temple's Sporting Goods and Lagomarcino's, an ice cream parlor and confectionery which has been open since 1908.   Moline Centre is also home to the offices of Isabel Bloom and the headquarters of Heart of America Restaurants. Floreciente: This neighborhood, stretching below the bluff along the Mississippi River from downtown to the east and Rock Island to the west, is the traditional home to the city's increasing Latino population, many of whom hail from the central state of Guanajuato in Mexico.  The area was traditionally one of the oldest neighborhoods in the city, with many of the houses now serving well into their 2nd century of life.  Olde Towne: Olde Towne is bounded to the west by Rock Island, to the east by 12th Street, to the north by 12th Avenue, and to the south by 19th Avenue.  Olde Towne was the traditional home of Moline's large Belgian population. According to the Belgian Culture Center, Moline once had the largest Belgian population in the United States and now has the second largest. The area is filled with a variety of rental and owner-occupied homes and is also home to a vibrant retail center called City Line Plaza.  Belgium maintains an honorary consulate in Moline located in this neighborhood. Uptown: East of Olde Towne is a very similar neighborhood, though not traditionally as Belgian but rather German and Irish, called Uptown.  This thoroughfare contains many successful businesses such as Holst-Kakert Upholstery, K'nees Florist, and Wallace Music Company. The homes in the neighborhood are quite eclectic. Overlook: This neighborhood is bounded on the north by 7th Avenue and on the south by 12th Avenue from 10th Street to 16th Street. Named after the home of Charles Deere, Overlook sits on the bluff above Moline Centre. This neighborhood boasts a wide range of historically significant homes that have been maintained or restored to their original detail by their owners. Two famous homes are the Butterworth Mansion and Deere-Wiman House. These two homes and their gorgeous grounds are open to the public year-round. The neighborhood is also home to One Moline Place, a new development featuring luxury single-family homes, townhomes, and condominiums which is the former site of the Moline Public and Moline Lutheran Hospitals. The area also includes Velie Park and Butterworth Park. The Overlook Historic Neighborhood Association has conducted numerous activities to promote its neighborhood, including "Art in the Park," an annual June art festival held in Velie Park featuring works from local artists, as well as a walking tour of some of Overlook's beautiful historic homes.  Rock Island County Historical Society is also located here. Karsten's Park: This neighborhood is centered on the city park with the same name between 5th and 6th Streets and 22nd and 23rd Avenues. 7th Street is the main thoroughfare through this neighborhood of many ethnicities. Residents of Karsten's Park are predominantly middle class; however, residential architecture of the period shows a growing affluence.  Newer homes of the 1960s and 1970s era are located closer to 2nd Street, but the houses generally date from the 1920s–1940s. Wharton: Wharton, also sometimes known as Willard, is centered at the busy intersection of 16th Street and Avenue of the Cities (formerly 23rd Avenue). The Wharton Field House gives the neighborhood its name, and the field house (built in 1928 and named for P.T. Wharton, former president of the Moline School Board) and the adjacent Browning Field (named after John T. Browning) host many events, such as Moline Maroons basketball, football, and soccer games as well as track and field events.  Wharton Field House used to host the Quad City Thunder CBA Basketball before the Mark of the Quad Cities (now the i wireless Center) opened. The neighborhood contains many large two and three story brick Georgian homes. Wharton is home to many prominent local businesses, such as Hungry Hobo, Whitey's Ice Cream, Rudy's Tacos, Teske's, and Happy Joes, a successful pizza parlor with locations throughout the Upper Midwest. Hamilton Heights: The neighborhood south of Karsten's Park is known as Hamilton Heights after the local elementary school in the area. Houses here mostly were built in the 1940s and 1950s and many are of brick construction, especially along 7th Street. The neighborhood is completely residential aside from Katy's Market, a small token of the city's German heritage that sells German sausages and other German groceries. Wildwood: Just before the city's western arterial, 7th Street, passes downhill into the Rock River Valley lies the neighborhood of Wildwood. Tucked away in a forest, the neighborhood contains a number of well-to-do homes built in the decades since the 1970s. The old Velie Mansion, now Quad City Bank and Trust, is on the fringe of the neighborhood.  A small part of the Wildwood neighborhood actually lies in Rock Island. Wildwood is also one of the richest neighborhoods, with upper-class families living in this excellent neighborhood. Prospect Park: This is a name for the broad area south of Avenue of the Cities between I-74 to the east and 7th Street to the west. Much like the other 16th Street neighborhoods, the neighborhood to the west of 16th Street (also known as Stewartville) is generally more upscale than that east of 16th (an area known as Greater Tartan Oaks); however, the far west and east fringes both contain newer large houses built in the 1970s–1990s. 16th Street is an important thoroughfare, housing Trevor's Hardware, WQAD-TV, and the actual Prospect Park itself, one of the largest in the city. Behind the park are many older large homes. The neighborhood is also home to Quad City Music Guild, which offers wonderful musicals year-round. The Prospect Park neighborhood is adjacent to SouthPark Mall and other stores like Best Buy, Toys R Us, Many Small Plazas and Petco. Also many restaurants are adjacent to this neighborhood, most in the outparcel of SouthPark Mall including Taco Bell, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Arby's, A&W and Long John Silver's combination restaurant, IHOP, Buffalo Wild Wings, and Qdoba Mexican Grill. Outside of the outparcel of SouthPark Mall restaurant include Miss Mamies, Los Agaves Mexican Restaurant, Osaka Japanese Steakhouse, New Mandarin Chinese Restaurant, and McDonald's. Park Hill: Park Hill is bounded by 4th Avenue to the north, 12th Avenue to the south, 19th Street to the west, and 27th Street to the east. This neighborhood boasts a terrific view of the mighty Mississippi River from its bluffs. Park Hill is one of Moline's oldest neighborhoods, with many of its homes built for the workers of John Deere. Several neighborhood homes were built between the 20th century and 1930s and were owned by prominent business leaders. Riverside Park, which gives the neighborhood its name, contains several baseball fields, a pond, two cemeteries, and the Riverside Aquatic Center, a pool with water slides and fountains. Forest Hill: This neighborhood, centered along 27th Street between 12th and 23rd Avenues, is one of the many solely residential neighborhoods which predominate in the east side of town. Forest Hill, much like Wharton, contains very nice older homes, unusual for the east side of town, which contains mostly newer construction. In Forest Hill, these homes tend to be much larger, though, making it one of the most desirable areas in the city to live. Highland: Highland is a neighborhood along Avenue of the Cities and was mostly built during the Great Depression. The business corridor of Avenue of the Cities keeps people in the area. Highland is the home of Hafner's Bar, El Pavito, and a number of small, independent retailers that gives Highland a "main street" look. Villa Park / Green Acres: Together, these two miniature neighborhoods, built between the 1940s and 1960s, make up another solely residential neighborhood on the east side. The neighborhood was dramatically altered during the 1960s when several residential blocks and the old Oakwood Country Club were demolished in order to construct I-74. Villa Park today is the area lying to the east of I-74 and to the south of Avenue of the Cities. Molette: After World War II, the influx of veterans coming home from the war created a huge demand for starter housing.  The developers of Molette, as in Levittown, responded to this need by creating large tracts of identical prefabricated homes.  The area consists of winding streets that run between 34th and 41st Streets and 12th and 23rd Avenues, each with small two bedroom ranch homes, many of which have had porches and extra rooms added on to them over the years. Rockview Estates: This neighborhood is west of 41st Street and between John Deere Road and Moline High School. Most of the houses in this neighborhood are actually duplexes, and more people rent here than in most neighborhoods.  The neighborhood sets on the ridges above the Rock River Valley and some apartment buildings take advantage of this location, although recent development along the John Deere Road Corridor, including Wal-Mart and Lowe's, has left the natural beauty of the Rock River wetlands largely destroyed.  There are no commercial establishments in the area, although the Moline Public Library is nearby on 41st Street. Homewood: Much like Wildwood, this neighborhood meanders along the bluff overlooking the Rock River Valley. It is bisected by 53rd Street but extends from 41st to 60th Streets south of 34th Avenue. The houses were mostly built in the 1970s and 1980s and are of various styles.  One of the most beautiful homes in the neighborhood can be seen from the parking lot of Jane Addams Elementary School.  It is a two story white home with 4 large columns. Homewood is also home to the Playcrafter's Barn Theater, a long-running home for community theater.  Homewood, Wildwood, and Heritage are among the more heavily wooded neighborhoods in the city, and consequently, both suffered heavy damage in the derecho which swept through Moline on July 21, 2008 around 6:00A.M. Heritage:  This neighborhood lies to the south of the big box retail of John Deere Road between 41st Street and 53rd Street.  It is bounded to the south by the Rock River.  A mile to the east of Heritage lies the Green Valley Sports Complex, home to the city's largest complex of baseball, softball, and soccer fields. Just south of the neighborhood on the north bank of the Rock River is Old Green Valley Park with a scenic view of the river and two boat ramps. Heritage homes were built between 1960 and 1980 and consist of ranch, split, and trilevel homes. With its position on the southern fringe of the city it is among the quieter neighborhoods in the city. In this neighborhood there is a grade school, several churches, and a dental office. Deerview / Walton Hills:  Deerview is one of the newest neighborhoods in the city, with a majority of homes built in the 1980s or later.  Many of the homes in the Walton Hills addition have been built in the first decade of the 21st century and have typically adopted traditional suburban styles.  Next to Walton Hills lies Millennium Park, the city's newest park, which is jointly maintained with East Moline. The John Deere Pavilion at John Deere Commons contains exhibits celebrating the history of the agricultural implements industry in the Midwest and showcases a variety of past and present John Deere plows, tractors, combines, and other machinery. The LeClaire Hotel is the tallest building in Moline. Moline is served by Moline School District No. 40, which serves the student-age populations of Moline and Coal Valley.  The district educates approximately 7,500 students in twelve elementary schools, one middle school (John Deere Middle School) and one high school (Moline High School). Seton Catholic School serves the large Catholic population of Moline. It has the highest enrollment of any elementary and middle school in the Quad Cities as well as in the Catholic Diocese of Peoria. The school is supported by the Moline parishes of Sacred Heart, Christ the King, and St. Mary's. The Moline Park & Recreation Department maintains 18 parks (taking up 728 acres) in addition to various other recreational facilities and cemeteries. Moline's noteworthy parks include Riverside Park, home to the Riverside Family Aquatic Center and to a busy baseball and tennis complex; Prospect Park, home to the Quad City Music Guild; and the Green Valley Sports Complex.  The Department also maintains the Ben Butterworth Parkway, a four-mile (6&nbsp;km)-long scenic trail along the Mississippi River running between downtown Moline to the west and East Moline to the east.  The Channel Cat Water Taxi and the Celebration Belle, a non-gaming excursion riverboat built in the 19th century style, both dock along the Parkway. In addition, the Moline Activity Center offers programs and activities for retired and semi-retired adults.  Moline was home to the Tri-Cities Blackhawks, a professional basketball team that evolved into what is today the Atlanta Hawks.  Moline's i Wireless Center is currently home to the Quad City Mallards, a minor league professional hockey team in the ECHL. The Quad Cities are also home to the Quad City River Bandits, the Single A Midwest League affiliates of the Houston Astros. The River Bandits play their home games at Modern Woodmen Park (formerly John O'Donnell Stadium) in Davenport, Iowa. On the younger side of sports is Little League. The Moline Baseball Little League Association has done some big things, winning state and doing very well in all district championships but was upset in 2015 by Silvis Little League who won there first district ever.  The Quad Cities has numerous media outlets, including dozens of radio stations, local affiliates of Fox, NBC, ABC, and CBS, and three newspapers. The Dispatch, formerly the Daily Dispatch, is the traditional paper of the city and also serves Coal Valley, East Moline, and other communities to the east. The Rock Island Argus, owned by the same company as the Dispatch, carries substantially the same print coverage. The Quad City Times, formerly the Davenport Times-Democrat, is based in Davenport but prints an Illinois edition that is widely read. Of the local television stations, the ABC affiliate, WQAD-TV and the Fox affiliate KLJB make their home in the Prospect Park neighborhood in studios adjacent to the park itself.      Employer 1 Deere & Company 6,300 2 Moline School District No. 40 990 3 Black Hawk College 520 4 United Healthcare 520 5 McLaughlin Body Company 500 6 Kone 450 7 City of Moline, Illinois 402 8 Walmart 400 9 i wireless 400 10 Moline Daily Dispatch 280 Bonnie Bartlett, television and film actress Louie Bellson, jazz drummer Vincent Hugo Bendix, inventor and industrialist Ken Berry, actor, F Troop, Mayberry R.F.D. Don Carothers, football player Charles F. Carpentier, businessman and politician, was born in Moline.'Illinois Blue Book 1963-1964, Biography Sketch of Charles F. Carpentier, pg. 76 Albert M. Crampton, Chief Justice of the Illinois Supreme CourtIllinois Supreme Court-Albert M. Crampton Doris Davenport, actress John Deere, tractor maker Acie Earl, power forward and center with several NBA teams Carl Ed, cartoonist (Harold Teen) John Getz, actor (The Fly and The Social Network) Oscar Graham, baseball player Ron Hallstrom, offensive tackle with Green Bay Packers Robert R. Heider, Wisconsin State Assemblyman'Wisconsin Blue Book 1958,' Biographical Sketch of Robert R. Heider, pg. 55 Brad Hopkins, offensive tackle with the Tennessee Titans Corey Jahns, drummer with the Funk Brothers Jim Jamieson, golfer with the PGA Tour Steve Kuberski, power forward and center with the Boston Celtics, Milwaukee Bucks, and Buffalo Braves Katherine Lanpher, journalist and podcaster Gene Oliver, catcher, first baseman, outfielder for five Major League Baseball teams; born in Moline Tom Railsback, US congressman (1967–1983) Heather Rattray, actress Ed Reimers, television announcer Sharm Scheuerman, Iowa basketball player and coach Dean Stone, All-Star pitcher for six Major League Baseball teams; born in Moline Donald K. Sundquist, 47th governor of Tennessee Al Van Camp, first baseman and outfielder for the Cleveland Indians and Boston Red Sox; born in Moline List of tallest buildings in the Quad Cities QCOnline – local news and information qctimes.com – The Quad-City Times visitquadcities.com – visitor and tourist information Flashback Moline Retro Moline, Illinois
