   Moshe Zalman Feiglin (, born 31 July 1962) is an Israeli politician and columnist. A former member of Likud, he headed the Manhigut Yehudit (Jewish Leadership) faction within the party, and represented Likud in the Knesset between 2013 and 2015. Prior to become a Knesset member, Feiglin co-founded the Zo Artzeinu (This is our Land) movement with Shmuel Sackett in 1993 to protest the Oslo Accords. On 8 August 1995 eighty intersections throughout the country were blocked in a massive act of civil disobedience against the Oslo process. As a result of his activities, Feiglin was sentenced to six months in prison in 1997 for sedition against the state by Israel's Supreme Court. The sentence was later commuted to community service.Anti-Arab hopeful irks Israel's Netanyahu, AFP December 11, 2008 In November 1996 Feiglin established the Manhigut Yehudit movement; it joined Likud in 2000, with Feiglin declaring that he would be a candidate for chairmanship of the party as a springboard for premiership of the State of Israel. In early January 2015 Feiglin announced that he was leaving the Likud and forming his own party after his poor showing in the Likud primaries the previous month. However, he was unable to form a new party in time for the Knesset elections in March. Feiglin was born in Haifa in 1962, the son of Ya'akov Zvi and Esther Feiglin. His ancestors moved to Palestine from Imperial Russia during the First Aliyah.Moshe Feiglin: Biography Manhigut Yehudit His grandfather was the first child born in Metula, and some of his ancestors were among the founders of several settlements, including Mishmar HaYarden, Hadera and Kinneret. His father served in the Jewish Settlement Police during the British Mandate era. His family later moved to Rehovot, where he attended the local Tachkemoni school of the Mizrachi movement, and subsequently graduated from Rabbi Haim Drukman's Yeshivat Or Etzion. Feiglin enlisted in the Israeli army for the full mandatory three-year term, despite the fact that the commonly accepted enlistment path among religiously observant Israelis is through the Hesder program, which allows those Israelis who wish to do so to pursue religious studies for a year and a half at an approved Yeshiva and have that time deducted from their mandatory service. During his IDF national service he served in the Engineering Corps. He later signed on to one additional year as a career soldier and attained the rank of Captain.  He fought in the 1982 Lebanon War. Feiglin once ran a company that used rope rappelling in the construction industry. Feiglin co-founded the Manhigut Yehudit movement in 1996. It began as a brainchild of Feiglin and a friend of his, Moti Karpel, who established the organisation as the continuation of the Zo Artzeinu protest movement. The main tactical difference between the two in Feiglin's thought is that Zo Artzeinu protested government policy without suggesting an alternative, whereas Manhigut Yehudit seeks to become the government and be the alternative. Lacking the tools to do this and without a political party with which to stake his run, he was approached by a founding member of the Likud party and participant in the Zo Artzeinu protests who proposed that Feiglin register for the Likud party and register, in turn, the thousands who participated in the protests, thereby building a support base for himself in the party, from which he could run for the party presidency and in turn, Prime Minister.Feiglin, Moshe.מלחמת החלומות, Manhigut Yehudit: 2005, pp. 378–382 According to Feiglin's own words, Manhigut Yehudit was started to "return the country to the people and lead the State of Israel through authentic Jewish values".Moshe Feiglin: The Religious Jew Who Might Be A Future Israeli Prime Minister International Business Times, 26 February 2013 Feiglin has demanded that Israeli schools stop teaching the Arab view of the history of Israel, such as describing the creation of the State of Israel as a disaster (nakba in Arabic). Feiglin says that the movement’s leadership will arise from "those who have a deep commitment to Torah values." Still, 30 percent of its present members are secular (2005). He opposes the surrender of what he regards as Jewish land, and has demanded the government take action against the estimated 50,000 illegal Arab structures built throughout the country. Feiglin has stated that Likud had "given up true Likud values and acquiesced in the Gaza evacuation."Likud Leans Farther To Right IsraCast, 9 December 2008 Feiglin has been on public record supporting the transfer of Arab citizens of Israel who do not accept Jewish sovereignty over the state. This emigration would be encouraged with financial incentives.  In December 2005, Feiglin ran for Likud chairman and won 12.5% of the votes, coming third out of seven candidates, after Benjamin Netanyahu and Silvan Shalom. He attempted to run for a slot on the party's Knesset list, but encountered severe opposition from Netanyahu, who delayed party elections and advocated making changes to its charter to bar "anyone who has served three or more months in prison" from running as a Likud MK. This would have prevented Feiglin, who served a six-month sentence in the mid-1990s for civil disobedience, from running for either an MK or leadership position in the future. Feiglin withdrew from the race on 3 January 2006, following the release of a statement from the Likud party election chairman declaring, in agreement with a prior decision by the Israeli High Court, that Feiglin's conviction was not for "dishonorable" violations of the law, allowing him to participate in future Likud affairs. In the 14 August 2007 primaries, Feiglin nearly doubled his previous showing and received 23.4% of the votes to Netanyahu's 72.8%. Netanyahu, fearing a strong showing by Feiglin, tried to have him ousted from the party prior to the vote, and said he would continue such efforts. On 10 December 2008 Feiglin was won twentieth place in the Likud primaries. On 11 December following a petition submitted against him by Ophir Ekonis, he was demoted to the 36th spot. In an article written in 2009, Feiglin stated: "Sad to say, Prime Minister Netanyahu is a pitiful puppet of Peres and his cohorts." Feiglin ran against Netanyahu again in the 2012 Likud leadership election held on 31 January 2012 and again received 23% of the vote. In the Likud primaries held in late 2012 to select candidates for the 2013 elections, Feiglin finished thirteenth, and was elected to the Knesset in the 2013 elections. Feiglin served as Deputy Speaker in the 19th Knesset. He and his Manhigut Yehudit faction suffered a serious setback in the December 2014 Likud primaries, held in the run-up to the 2015 Knesset elections, when he fell to the 36th position on the Likud list, making it unlikely he would be returned to the Knesset. In January 2015 he announced that he was leaving Likud to form his own party,Moshe Feiglin Leaves Likud, Forms New Party Israel National News, 5 January 2015 although he did not do so in time for the elections. Shortly after the elections, he announced that the new party was to be called Zehut (Identity).Feiglin to register new political party The Jerusalem Post, 30 March 2015 Feiglin has openly stated that, though he is not opposed to peace, peace is not his goal,http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6fUdpbejmM, time index 2:10 and would not be on the top of his agenda as Prime Minister. Rather, Feiglin's focus is on reforming Israel as an essentially Jewish State by acting on several campaigns on the religious, social, legal, and security fronts.http://www.jewishisrael.org/liberty-identity-meaning/ In a September 2014 article, Israel National News website wrote that "MK Feiglin is widely recognized as a brilliant intellectual with highly original thoughts on numerous issues, including a libertarian philosophy that appeals to many non-religious people. In a May 2012 article on libertyhttp://www.jewishisrael.org/identity-liberty-meaning/ that originally appeared on the NRG Maariv Hebrew website,http://www.nrg.co.il/online/1/ART2/364/934.html Feiglin wrote: "Liberty means fighting against coercion of all kinds; religious, anti-religious, economic, cultural, educational and more. Liberty means allocating state land to the citizen. It means privatization of government firms to the public and not to core shareholders. Liberty means liberalized communication – broadcasting license and not broadcast franchise. You want to open up a television or radio station? Buy a wavelength and broadcast as you please within the framework of the law. Liberty means restoring the responsibility for education to the parents, using the education coupon method. It means a gradual transfer to a professional volunteer army. Liberty means prohibiting biometric data bases or any other type of human designation. There is no difference in principle between sophisticated biological marking and tattooing an ID number; both turn our identities into the property of a third party. In both, we lose our freedom. Simply put: We have one G-d above us and we should not be enslaved to another person or mechanism. The state is ours and under no circumstance is the opposite true." Feiglin is against religious coercion, and is even against the establishment of religious political parties. He has come out against religious legislation such as the Chametz Law, which forbids selling leavened products on the Passover Holiday, when eating or owning leavened food products is prohibited by Jewish law.http://www.nrg.co.il/online/1/ART2/081/292.html He is also a proponent of the civil marriage initiative in Israel which would allow any Israeli citizen to marry without the auspices of a religious cleric.http://www.mflikud.co.il/contents/maamarim/maamarim69.1/maamarim69031.html At present, marriage in Israel is impossible outside the confines of a religious system; hence for tens of thousands of people with problematic religious status it is impossible ever to get married in the country. The present system also places the power of divorce in the hand of the Religious courts, who are answerable only to the Supreme Courts. The civil marriage initiative would make the religious nature of marriage entirely voluntary, effectively separating religion and state in this matter. Feiglin has advocated removing the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf's control over the entire al-Aqsa complex, and suggested a synagogue should be established on the Temple Mount.Feiglin to question legal authority, legitimacy of Temple Mount Waqf. Jerusalem Post. September 15, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2015 In February 2014, at Feiglin's insistence, the Knesset debated the status of the Temple Mount.Stormy debate: Knesset hosts first-ever parley on Temple Mount sovereignty in plenum. Jerusalem Post. February 26, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2015 Feiglin's platform states: “We have to internalize that this is our Land – exclusively.... Most important: We must expel the Moslem wakf from the Temple Mount and restore exclusive Israeli sovereignty over this most holy site.” In July 2014, during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, Feiglin outlined steps toward "achieving quiet in Gaza." His plan included attacking all of Gaza, its infrastructure and military sites, without regard to civilian 'human shields'. After conquering and annexing Gaza into Israel, that portion of Gaza's "enemy population that is innocent of wrong-doing and separated itself from the armed terrorists will be treated in accordance with international law and will be allowed to leave." After becoming part of Israel, Gaza would be repopulated by Jews.My Outline for a Solution in Gaza Israel National News, July 15, 2014 He said the civilians of Gaza could go to Sinai and his plan would also "ease the housing crisis in Israel".'Our Soldiers Are The Only Innocents In Gaza': Here's What Israel's Far-Right Is Saying On August 4, 2014, the Daily Mail newspaper alleged that Feiglin had called for concentration camps in Gaza, "the conquest of the entire Gaza Strip, and annihilation of all fighting forces and their supporters' and also for shipping the people living in Gaza across the world".[ ] Daily Mail, August 4, 2014 In a TV show with CNN's Wolf Blitzer, Feiglin denied that claim, saying he was talking about creating "sheltered areas" for the civilians of Gaza so that Israel could stop rockets by Hamas in a more effective way. He also said that he "definitely" supported "tent encampments" before the people in Gaza can be relocated to another place.WATCH: CNN's Blitzer grills MK Feiglin over whether he called for 'Gaza concentration camp' Feiglin has proposed a plan to end the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians."Pay Gazans to leave, right-wing leader says", in the Canadian Jewish News, 3 April 2008. By Sheri Shefa. Note that the article mistranslates "Yesha", an acronym for Judea, Samaria and Gaza, as merely Gaza.  Feiglin's proposal was for all three of these regions. His plan would include annexing the all post 1967 land currently in Israel's hands and offering financial incentive for Palestinian families in these areas to emigrate to other countries.Likud hardliner suggests paying Palestinian families to emigrate from West Bank Times of Israel, January 2, 2013 Feiglin pointed to a poll by An-Najah University in Nablus, which showed that one in three Palestinian Arabs would emigrate to other countries even without a financial incentive,The secret Exodus -- Palestinian Emigration as supporting his plan. Feiglin also proposed that Israel actively encourage Israeli-Arabs to emigrate to the Arab world, and provide assistance to any Arab who chooses to do so. About 20% of Israel's citizens are Israeli Arabs.  Feiglin was asked about Israel's status as a "Jewish and democratic state" in a 2004 interview and stated: "Why should non-Jews have a say in the policy of a Jewish state?... For two thousand years, Jews dreamed of a Jewish state, not a democratic state. Democracy should serve the values of the state, not destroy them...." In a 2003 posting on the Manhigut Yehudit website (Hebrew version) setting forth a 20-point political program of his most important policy changes, Feiglin proposed replacing the Knesset with a bicameral legislature, whose upper house, which would control all "national affairs", would be "composed exclusively of Jews."  The article was entitled "Feiglin's First Hundred Days as Prime Minister."  Point three in the program states that he will enact a new Basic Law which will set forth a detailed proposal for a constitution.  The Law will replace the at-large election of the Knesset with regional representatives, and would also create a lower house to handle municipal issues, in which Israeli Arabs could be represented.  The posting was taken down on Dec. 9, 2008, the day after Feiglin won twentieth place in the Likud primaries. However, the posting had been archived by Israeli scholar Tomer Frisco prior to being removed and Frisco wrote a 2012 article analyzing Feiglin's program, referencing the 2003 posting. In his 2005 book "War of Dreams", Feiglin wrote that his program was: "Israeli citizenship to Jews only [and] the immediate expulsion of any person of another people who claims any sort of sovereignty in the Land of Israel." "We are busy fighting for Yesha, and refuse to recognize the more dangerous front against the fifth column inside Israel." "We established a state so that we could stop being different and start being normal. If only Jews can be Israelis, then we will never be normal. . . .The fundamental solution is leadership that is not looking for normalcy. The solution is leadership that emphasizes our Jewish identity. Paradoxically, it is only when the Arabs understand that the Israelis do not need them to help them to forget that they are Jews - will we be able to live here in peace with non-Jews who unequivocally accept the fact that Israel is a Jewish state." It appears that the Israeli Arabs identify with our enemies. There are laws in this country that deal with treason and they should be applied when required. If Israeli Arabs are found helping our enemies, they should be stripped of their citizenship. In addition, if they are citizens, they should not be exempt from paying taxes; they should serve in the IDF, or at least in Sherut Le'umi, the National Service. . . . .If they are against us, we must make every effort to ensure that they leave. If they collaborate with our enemy, they must be removed.Moshe Feiglin, A Different Type of Politician Jewish Magazine, October 2006 Feiglin's 2013 campaign set forth his legislative agenda regarding Israeli Arabs: "Zero tolerance for Arab citizens' defiance. Enforcement of laws of treason. Enforcement of laws against robbery, rape and vandalism." Feiglin has repeatedly made clear his view that only Jews deserve to be full citizens of Israel. The momentum toward citizenship for all residents of Israel, regardless of their religion, is part of the Zionist ideology based on Western culture. If not checked, it will effectively transform Israel from a Jewish state to a state with some Jewish citizens. The Arab sector is not loyal to the state and does not serve in the army.  Feiglin, responding to a report that Israel's first permanent Arab Supreme Court judge Salim Joubran had refused to sing Israel's national anthem, asserted Joubran: “must return his Israeli ID card and make do with the status of ‘permanent resident.’” Both Feiglin's critics and supporters have described him as a latter-day version of Rabbi Meir Kahane.  In an interview with the U.S.-based Jewish Press, Feiglin said: You can find places where we say the same things. You can also find places where we are different. I was in the army when Meir, Hashem yikom damo [may God avenge his blood], was [most] active, so I didn’t get to know him so well. But I can definitely say that the slogan “Kahane tzadak – Kahane was right” has proven itself many times.  Some supporters of Feiglin have called for him to distance himself from Kahane's legacy. In a reply to one such plea from a supporter, Feiglin's deputy and Manhigut's co-founder, Shmuel Sackett, wrote on the Manhigut website shortly after Feiglin's election to the Knesset, that Manhigut Yehudit would never renounce Kahane, and extolled Kahane as "pure and saintly." The article declares that Manhigut will never "bow to political correctness," and that "MK Moshe Feiglin understands this concept very well." Sackett had close ties with Rabbis Meir and Binyamin Ze'ev Kahane, and there are several ideological similarities. Feiglin advocates encouraging emigration of all Arabs under Israel's jurisdiction with financial incentives.http://www.jewishisrael.org/strangers-land/ He supports annexing all parts of the Land of Israel under Israeli control, developing a legal system more consistent with Jewish values, and restricting Israeli citizenship to Jews and those non-Jews loyal to the State of Israel.New Yorker article Among the Settlers Will they destroy Israel? by Jeffrey Goldberg In 2005, Feiglin took this idea a step further and suggested that all Jews who wished to be citizens of Israel, regardless of where they lived, should be given full citizenship and voting rights."Jews Worldwide Should Be Granted Israeli Citizenship" Feiglin and Sackett are distinguished most from traditional Kahanism through their commitment to nonviolent protest. Kahanism is often associated with militancy and a tacit acceptance of, if not outright support for, violence. Conversely, Feiglin and Sackett are also attacked in some right-wing Religious Zionist circles (including Kahane supporters) for selling out to the Likud. Several left-wing or Arab commentators have depicted Feiglin as fascist,Ha'aretz 10 December 2008 Yossi Sarid / Feiglin, his cronies are fascists by any definition by Yossi SaridME Times Fears of Fascism as Israeli Extremists Prepare to Take Elections by Mel Frykbergal-Ahram Heil, Feiglin! by Khaled Amayreh but for his part, Feiglin rejects this label, claiming that he is fighting fascism himself."They call me a fascist, but simultaneously attack me for supporting conscientious objection. Fascism is the belief that the state is above all else. But I claim that G-d or one's conscience is above the state. How can the Left attack me for both fascism and for supporting conscientious objection at one and the same time?" [ ]"The law is nothing more than a tool in the service of justice. When the tool becomes the goal, it turns into fascism, a dangerous version of idolatry. In no time, it is adopted by base forces and destruction will necessarily follow." [ ]"Nationalism without faith in God does not last here. Either it deteriorates into something reminiscent of fascism or it swings to the other extreme and sheds all its achievements, Sharon-style." [ ]"Whoever thinks that the state is the supreme value edges uncomfortably close to fascism." [ ] Of Israeli Arabs, Feiglin said, "They will have to seek the right to self-determination in Arab states. Israel will encourage the Arabs to emigrate to their countries and assist any Arab who wishes to do so," Feiglin was quoted as saying. He insisted there is no such thing as a Palestinian people and that they and Israeli Arabs should relocate, citing a text he had posted on the website of his Manhigut Yehudit ("Jewish Leadership") movement. In a 2004 interview with Yedioth Ahronoth he spoke of "a voluntary transfer to the 22 neighbouring Arab states" of the some 1.4 million Israeli Arabs, who make up 20 percent of Israel's population. "Arabs are not the sons of the desert, but its father," he quoted Sir Claude Jarvis, British governor of Sinai from 1923. Arabs are “a gang of bandits that never produced anything and never wanted to produce anything – a gang of bandits that for over one thousand years (since Islam was born) has lived on robbery and terror. . . . Since their establishment, the Arab states have produced nothing but poverty, suffering, wars – and fantastic wealth for their leaders.” The Arabs engage in typical Amalek  behaviour. I can't prove this genetically but this is the behaviour of Amalek.Elliott S. Horowitz (2006) Reckless Rites: Purim and the Legacy of Jewish Violence Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-12491-4 p 1 Jeffrey Goldberg reported in the New Yorker about a series of disturbing interviews he had recently conducted with Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza. We shall offer them human rights without civil rights, so long as they prove their loyalty to their Jewish state host and accept Jewish sovereignty over their land. In such a situation they will be given legal-resident status and they can carry on their private affairs without anyone infringing on their human rights.Ha'aretz Feiglin's missing manifesto: Israel should quit UN, cut off water to Palestinians By Yair Ettinger In a 2004 report by Jeffrey Goldberg in the New Yorker magazine, Feiglin was quoted as saying: Why should non-Jews have a say in the policy of a Jewish state?... For two thousand years, Jews dreamed of a Jewish state, not a democratic state. Democracy should serve the values of the state, not destroy them... You can’t teach a monkey to speak and you can’t teach an Arab to be democratic. You’re dealing with a culture of thieves and robbers.The Arab destroys everything he touches.http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2004/05/31/040531fa_fact2_a?currentPage=4 On his website, Feiglin wrote: We all know that most of the fires in Israel are caused by arson. Arson perpetrated by Arabs. Not by nut-jobs, not by criminals. Arson motivated by nationalism. Arson by Arab citizens of Israel. ... Wherever the Arab goes, he brings the desert with him. ... There is not and there never will be democracy in the Arab states - and their economies will never flourish. Israel produces more than all its neighbors combined. That is not because we are extremely industrious. It is because true economic vitality cannot exist in a culture of robbery. ... Arab culture is anti-productive. It has no good and bad, only strong and weak. According to a 2012 article in Haaretz daily, Feiglin condemned Baruch Goldstein over his killing of 29 Palestinian Muslims in a mosque in the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre, though he did not condemn Goldstein's motivations. In an article in Ha'aretz, Yossi Sarid quoted Feiglin, in the context of demonstrations against the democratically chosen Oslo accords, as saying, "Hitler was an unparalleled military genius. Nazism promoted Germany from a low to a fantastic physical and ideological status. The ragged, trashy youth body turned into a neat and orderly part of society and Germany received an exemplary regime, a proper justice system and public order. Hitler savored good music. He would paint. This was no bunch of thugs. They merely used thugs and homosexuals." Feiglin clarified his position to the Maariv newspaper that just because he considers Hitler a military genius this does not mean he admires him. In an interview on Israeli television Feiglin accused Sarid and other left-wing journalists of a smear campaign against him by quoting him out of context. He explained his point as saying that just because Germany was a democracy does not give legitimacy to what Hitler had done. Feiglin is banned from entering the United Kingdom due to a decision by Home Secretary Jacqui Smith, made public in March 2008, excluding Feiglin on the grounds that his presence in the country "would not be conducive to the public good."Jerusalem Post, March 9, 2008 A letter to Feiglin from the Home Office said that Smith based her decision on an assessment that his activities "foment or justify terrorist violence in furtherance of particular beliefs; seek to provoke others to terrorist acts; foment other serious criminal activity or seek to provoke others to serious criminal acts and foster hatred which might lead to inter-community violence in the UK."Home Secretary's LetterHa'aretz Britain bans Likud's Moshe Feiglin from entering country By Nadav Shragai Feiglin responded, "Seeing that renowned terrorists like Hizbullah member Ibrahim Mousawi are welcomed in your country in open arms, I understand that your policy is aimed at encouraging and supporting terror."Feiglin banned from entering UK - ynetnews March 10, 2008 Feiglin was arrested for organizing mass acts of resistance and blocked highways across Israel during the period in which the Oslo accords were debated and implemented.Assassin Hints a Bodyguard Helped Him Kill Rabin Feiglin was charged with "break[ing] the barrier of obedience to the rule of law" and incitement to commit crimes.  Regarding his organization of peaceful demonstrations and the blocking of intersections without a permit, Feiglin was quoted as stating, "We will do all that it's possible to do, including breaking the law."Israeli Police Put Down Rightist Protest Against Pact with PLO He was sentenced to six months in prison in 1997 for sedition, and the sentence was later performed via community service. Relations between Feiglin and his fellow Likud members have been mixed. Likud Knesset member Limor Livnat stated that Feiglin and his friends are "not real Likudniks" and that his faction "cannot be allowed to prevail."Livnat: Criminals are trying to take over Likud In an interview with the Jerusalem Post, Livnat explained that Feiglin and his faction must be prevented "from taking over, or the party and the state will be in danger," adding, that "this is not democracy, this is anarchy." Despite criticism from fellow Likud members, Feiglin has displayed favorable relations with a significant number of former Likud Knesset members. This was manifest during a Feiglin rally at Jerusalem's Ramada Hotel that took place before the 2008 Likud primary after Feiglin promised to throw all his votes to them if they showed up. Former Likud Knesset members Gila Gamliel, David Mena, Daniel Benlulu and Ayoub Kara attended the event despite warnings from Netanyahu's advisers not to do so. Gila Gamliel, who did not vote against the Disengagement from Gaza, eventually took Feiglin's votes and placed 19th, one spot ahead of Feiglin. This ultimately resulted in Feiglin getting pushed down to the 36th spot and out of the Eighteenth Knesset.158 Likud candidates to run for Knesset Feiglin is a highly vocal supporter of Jonathan Pollard, a former American naval intelligence analyst who is currently serving a life sentence in the American Federal prison system for spying for Israel.  Feiglin, who has called Pollard a hero,Gedolim in Israel and the US Ask President Bush to Free Pollard before Pesach: And, after 22 Years, They Think He’ll Do It has written a number of articles in support of Pollard.  In a recent article, Feiglin stated that "Pollard is a Jew who saved the Israelis from American treachery."Hug for a Betrayed Brother Feiglin referred to U.S. Vice President Joseph Biden as a "diseased leper" in a 2010 op-ed column published by Israel's third largest news outlet, Maariv. As part of his libertarian political philosophy, Feiglin supports the full legalization of cannabis in Israel, stating of legalization in Amsterdam: "I don’t see Amsterdam as a bad thing. .. There’s no chaos, there’s more freedom for citizens. [Legalization] didn’t upend the way of life."Likud’s Moshe Feiglin: Cool on Palestinians, hot for pot Jewish Telegraphic Agency, By Ben Sales, November 19, 2013 And stating that, "This may be one of the reasons why marijuana is illegal. God owns the patent on cannabis, and the large pharmaceutical companies do not appreciate such an intervention in their market and exert their influence accordingly."God owns cannabis patent Moshe Feiglin, ynetnews, Published:  09.20.12 The opposition of the Knesset Health committee to Feiglin's proposals have led to multiple controversial confrontations in the Knesset.Feiglin: Medical Marijuana Law Harms Patients By Tova Dvorin, 12/6/2013, Israel National News Feiglin says that "When I expressed my opinion on this issue over a year ago, I had no idea that I had climbed atop such a potent barrel of social dynamite... The debate is not about cannabis. Cannabis is just the tip of the iceberg. The debate is about liberty."Cannabis and Liberty Moshe Feiglin, Published: October 24th, 2013, The Jewish Press Feiglin wrote an article in 2009 entitled "I Am A Proud Homophobe." In 2012, he wrote several posts on his Facebook page detailing his views on gays. “The gay pride parade isn't about rights. It's about forcing the values of the minority onto the majority, effectively locking the majority into the proverbial closet. Homosexual "rights" undermine the normative family, the foundation of our nation.” ""Throughout history," Feiglin explained, "from Rome to Europe in our day, the approval and spread of homosexuality presaged the decline of nations and cultures. If one reads the Torah portion 'Noah' – this comes as no surprise. . . .The organizers of a pride parade do not wish to gain rights. They strive to force homosexuality as a culture upon the public sphere. . . . A minority has no right to take over public assets. Let the marchers kindly go back to their individual closets. And let them do it without whining, because no one interferes with their affairs in there. Let them give up their attempts at takeovers, and leave the public sphere to normal people. . . .Feiglin added in an additional post: "I have no problem with homosexuals, most of whom are, most likely, good and talented people and no one wants to interfere in their private lives. I have a problem with homosexuality as a culture. This culture subverts the status of the family. And without the family there is no nation, and without a nation there is no civilization." Feiglin refused to meet with a gay faction within the Likud and was quoting as stating: "[A]s individuals I can’t tell them how to lead their lives and I can cooperate with them on different subjects, but as a group that tries to promote an ideology of their sexual orientation, I don’t think they have legitimacy, especially not in the Likud.”   On Feb. 7, 2013, Feiglin met with an Israeli gay advocacy group in Tel Aviv and said he was no longer a homophobe. News accounts of the meeting reported Feiglin's views: " 'I am in favor of you having all your human rights, but I am not prepared by the way to invalidate the special value of the classic family,' he said and made it clear that he still opposed gay marriage and same-sex parenting.  'Every child in the world has a right to a mother and father. It has nothing to do with religion but with my basic perception of the good of the child,' he said." After his election to the Knesset, Moshe Feiglin met with homosexual groups. Although he does not identify with their lifestyle choices, he told them, he supports their rights as individuals and will fight to ensure that those rights are upheld. During his 2013 campaign, Feiglin reiterated his view that women's role in Israeli society should be based on Jewish Biblical principles.  In response to a question about feminism, Feiglin was quoted as saying: “ 'Tel Aviv has become a city that has erased masculinity and where being a man is considered a sickness' and added that feminism has destroyed family values, something essential to Judaism. . . . Pressed further, he stated that 'the man is the family while the woman is the home [literally "house"]' and that in our current culture we are forgetting 'what it means to be a man.' ” When the Jerusalem city government voted to permit sex-segregated public buses, Feiglin supported the action: "I see discrimination against women as despicable. But it is unreasonable to force an ultra-Orthodox bus company to institute mixed seating on its buses against the wishes of its customers." Feiglin also opposes the Israeli army's decision to allow women into combat units. Instead of saying that we no longer need families, our lexicon now includes single parent families or same gender marriage. These newly introduced concepts are not contrived for the good of those parents raising their children without the support of a spouse (who should be benefiting from aid when needed). Instead, they revise the way we think of the traditional family -- compromising its preeminence and relegating it to "just another option" status. During the 2014 military operation in Gaza, Feiglin criticized lawmaker Aliza Lavie for discussing legislation on sexual violence, protesting that in wartime no one should be "talking about things like flowers and sexual assault."Gaza: It's a Man's War The Atlantic, 7 Aug 2014 Feiglin has criticized Christian supporters of Israel, such as Glenn Beck, and challenged the sincerity of Christians who have defended Israel, as well as Israeli Jews who supported Beck.  "Jews like it when goyim finally smile at them, but sometimes a smile is more dangerous than a scowl, and this is one of those occasions," Feiglin said. The Christian conquest is much more dangerous than the Muslim conquest because it is not direct. It is not violent. Embracing and supportive, it connects with Israel against the Muslim enemy. It supports a Jewish Land of Israel in its entirety - even speaking up for the sanctity of the connection between the Nation of Israel, the Land of Israel and the Torah of Israel. It just forgets to specify which Nation of Israel and which Torah. The Christians are careful to hide their true intentions. They will not usually display the crucifix and will not mention the name of their deity in conversation with Jews. They simply "love" us - "no strings attached." But their goal is clear: to immigrate to Israel by the millions, to become citizens, and to convert us all, God forbid.   Feiglin has criticized Christianity generally. “Two deviant daughters came forth from Judaism but left the fold to conquer the world: Christianity and Islam. Both hate their mother, and both fight each other.”  "[C]ynical Christian morality [has] replaced the evil of colonialism with a new – and much worse – evil." In December 2014, a group of academics who are part of the anti-BDS movement and members of The Third Narrative, a Labor Zionist organization, have called on the U.S. and E.U. to impose sanctions on Feiglin and three other Israelis "who lead efforts to insure permanent Israeli occupation of the West Bank and to annex all or parts of it unilaterally in violation of international law.""i24news 'Academic initiative seeks to sanction Israeli far-right individuals' (Dec 12, 2014)" http://www.i24news.tv/en/news/international/54202-141212-academic-initiative-seeks-to-sanction-israeli-far-right-individuals  These academics, calling themselves Scholars for Israel and Palestine (SIP) and claiming to be "pro-Israel, pro-Palestine, pro-peace", are asking the U.S. and EU to freeze Feiglin's foreign assets and impose visa restrictions."Cohen, Debra Nussmaum 'Anti-BDS Professors Launch Push To Ban 4 Far Right Israeli Leaders:Zionist 'Third Narrative' Academics Target Naftali Bennett' (Dec. 12, 2014) The Jewish Daily Forward" http://forward.com/articles/210833/anti-bds-professors-launch-push-to-ban--far-right/ One of the signatories was quoted in Haaretz as saying the four leaders were chosen because they "were particularly dismissive of Secretary of State Kerry’s peace-making efforts, and explicitly call for and work towards the formal annexation of the West Bank or part of it, and thereby push Israel in the direction of violating international law. They are the ones who cross particularly sharp red lines.""Haaretz 'Anti-BDS academics urge 'personal' sanctions against 'annexationist' Israelis' (Dec 11, 2014)"http://www.haaretz.com/jewish-world/jewish-world-news/.premium-1.631336 The group of mainly Jewish academics blasted Feiglin for his "straightforward and undisguised extremism" and "annexationist" agenda."'US academics urge sanctions against Israeli 'annexationists' Anti-BDS professors want US, Europe to impose punitive measures on Bennett, Feiglin and others pursuing ‘destructive’ policies (Dec 13, 2014) The Times of Israel" http://www.timesofisrael.com/us-academics-urge-sanctions-on-annexationist-israeli-figures/ Feiglin is the author of the Hebrew language books Where There Are No Men, and War of Dreams, has a column in both the Ma'ariv and Makor Rishon daily newspapers, and appears frequently on international TV and radio. He writes columns regularly for the Brooklyn-based Jewish Press as well. Moshe and his wife Tzippy have five children and three grandchildren. They live in the Israeli settlement of Karnei Shomron, in the Samaria region of the West Bank. Feiglin is an avid mountain biker, riding most mornings in the Samarian hills just outside his town. In addition to his native Hebrew, he is proficient in English.   Manhigut Yehudit Website Manhigut Yehudit Website in Hebrew Moshe Feiglin Website A monthly journal published by Manhigut Yehudit Moshe Feiglin & Manhigut Yehudit on Facebook FrontPage Magazine article about Feiglin's ban from the UK by Dan Rabkin Moshe Feiglin interview with FrontPage Magazine by Dan Rabkin
