     Mountain Dew (currently stylized as Mtn Dew in the United States) is a carbonated soft drink brand produced and owned by PepsiCo.  The original formula was invented in 1940 by Tennessee beverage bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman. A revised formula was created by Bill Bridgforthhttp://www.knoxnews.com/knoxville/life/drinking-in-history in 1958. The rights to this formula were obtained by the Tip Corporation of Marion, Virginia.  William H. "Bill" Jones of the Tip corporation further refined the formula, launching that version of Mountain Dew in 1961.  On August 27, 1964, the Mountain Dew brand and production rights were acquired from Tip by the Pepsi-Cola company, at which point distribution expanded more widely across the United States and Canada. Between the 1940s and 1980s, there was just one variety of Mountain Dew, which was citrus-flavored and caffeinated in most markets (see Caffeine-Free Mountain Dew below). Diet Mountain Dew was introduced in 1988, followed by Mountain Dew Red, which was introduced and subsequently discontinued in 1988. In 2001, a cherry flavor called Code Red debuted. This product line extension trend has continued, with expansion into specialty, limited time production, region-specific, and retailer-specific (Taco Bell, 7-Eleven) variations of Mountain Dew. Production was first extended to the UK in 1996, but was phased out in 1998. A similarly named but very different-tasting product has been sold in the UK under the name "Mountain Dew Energy" since 2010 and in Ireland since Spring 2011. The product was renamed in 2014 to simply just 'Mountain Dew'. As of 2009, Mountain Dew represented a 6.7 percent share of the overall carbonated soft drinks market in the U.S. Its competition includes The Coca-Cola Company's Mello Yello and Surge, and Dr Pepper Snapple Group's Sun Drop; Mountain Dew accounts for 80 percent of citrus soft drinks sold within the US. Tennessee bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman developed Mountain Dew as a mixer.  Soft drinks were regional in the 1930s, and the Hartmans had difficulty in Knoxville obtaining their preferred soda to mix with liquor, preferably whiskey, so the two men developed their own. Charles Gordon, who had partnered with William Swartz to bottle and promote Dr. Enuf, was introduced to Mountain Dew when he met the Hartman brothers on a train and they offered him a sample. Gordon and the Hartman brothers subsequently made a deal to bottle Mountain Dew by the Tri-Cities Beverage Corporation in Johnson City, Tennessee. The Hartman brothers also asked Coca-Cola for input on their soda; the Coca-Cola Company refused their offer. The Tip Corporation of Marion, Virginia bought the rights to Mountain Dew, revising the flavor and launching it in 1961.  In 1964, Pepsico purchased the Tip Corporation and thus acquired the rights to Mountain Dew. In 1999, the Virginia legislature recognized Bill Jones and the Town of Marion for their role in the history of Mountain Dew.  "Mountain Dew" was originally Southern and/or Scots/Irish slang for moonshine (i.e., homemade whiskey), or poitín as it is called in Ireland. Using it as the name for the soda was originally suggested by Carl E. Retzke at an Owens-Illinois Inc. meeting in Toledo, Ohio, and was first trademarked by Ally and Barney Hartman in the 1940s. Early bottles and signage carried the reference forward by showing a cartoon-stylized hillbilly. The first sketches of the original Mountain Dew bottle labels were devised in 1948 by John Brichetto, and the representation on product packaging has changed at multiple points in the history of the beverage.    PepsiCo (then The Pepsi-Cola Company) acquired the Mountain Dew brand in 1964, and shortly thereafter in 1969 the logo was modified as the company sought to shift its focus to a "younger, outdoorsy" generation. This direction continued as the logo remained the same through the 1970s, 1980s, and then was retired in 1996 when another logo took its place for the next three years. Later updates to the logo were made in 1998 and then again in 2005. In October 2008, the Mountain Dew logo was redesigned to "Mtn Dew" within the U.S. market, as a result of PepsiCo announcing that it would rebrand its core carbonated soft-drink products by early 2009. However, the variant flavors continued to use the previous design until May 2011, when it was announced that the "Code Red", "LiveWire", "Voltage", and "Baja Blast" flavor variants would be given redesigned packaging, including new logos to correspond with the "Mtn Dew" style. The returning flavors "Pitch Black", "Supernova", "Typhoon", and "Game Fuel" were given redesigned packaging and logos for their re-release. Beginning in summer 2010, a secondary type of Mountain Dew bottles began appearing on some U.S. shelves. Designed by 4sight, a design and innovation firm, these bottles featured a sleeker design, smaller packaging labels, and a built-in grip. The bottles were dubbed "Sidekick bottles" and were tested in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Indiana markets. PepsiCo said they are transitioning the contents to a new 20 fl oz sidekick bottle. In its primary market of the United States, the ingredient composition of Mountain Dew is listed as: "carbonated water, high-fructose corn syrup (in much of the U.S.), concentrated orange juice, citric acid, natural flavors, sodium benzoate, caffeine, sodium citrate, erythorbic acid, gum arabic, calcium disodium EDTA, brominated vegetable oil (banned ingredient in Europe, India & Japan), and yellow 5." The ingredient makeup of Mountain Dew varies based on the country of production. For example, in Canada, the sweetener listed is "glucose-fructose" (another name for high-fructose corn syrup), and (until 2012), it was caffeine-free by default. In response to negative publicity around high-fructose corn syrup, PepsiCo in 2009 released a limited-run production of Mountain Dew Throwback, a variation consisting of sugar in place of high-fructose corn syrup. Mountain Dew Throwback subsequently was re-released for brief periods (generally 8–12 weeks at a time), including a second wave from December 2009 to February 2010 and a third wave in the summer and fall of 2010. A fourth 8-week production run began in March 2011, before it became a permanent addition to the Mountain Dew flavor line-up. A 12 oz can of Mountain Dew contains 54&nbsp;mg of caffeine."Caffeine Content Of Popular Drinks". Department of Mathematics, College of Science, The University of Utah. Retrieved March 5, 2013.  An urban legend about Mountain Dew ingredients is that dye Yellow #5 (tartrazine) lowers sperm count. Tartrazine has never been scientifically linked to any of the alleged effects in the legends; nor has any other component of the drink. While some studies have shown that among children (with and without ADHD) tartrazine can increase ADHD-like symptoms (see Stevens, Kuczek, Burgess, Hurt & Arnold, 2010)., the general consensus is that it does not.FDA. Background Document for the Food Advisory Committee: Certified Color Additives in Food and Possible Association with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children: March 30-31, 2011 However, it can cause allergic-type sensitivity reactions (e.g. hives and asthma) in a small number of individuals, especially those who also have a sensitivity to aspirin.CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 AMP Energy is an energy drink distributed by PepsiCo under the Mountain Dew brand. Launched in 2001, AMP was originally known as "Mountain Dew AMP". From 2007 to 2008, several additional flavors of AMP were introduced. In 2012, AMP labeling and ingredients changed, as did the flavor and appeal, according to fans. The Mountain Dew branding was also removed from the cans during this change. Between 2004 and early 2014, Mountain Dew has given Taco Bell stores the exclusive right to carry Mountain Dew Baja Blast, a green-colored, tropical-lime-flavored variety of the popular soft drink. Baja Blast was developed to appeal to Taco Bell customers, with the manufacturer conducting extensive research to ensure that the name, color and taste of the drink complemented Taco Bell food products. In spring 2014, Mountain Dew began distributing its Baja Blast flavor in standard 12 ounce cans, 20 ounce bottles and 24 ounce cans for sale at supermarkets and retail businesses in the US. The new retail product bears the Taco Bell logo. Taco Bell's chief marketing officer, Chris Brandt, said the exclusive drinks have helped increase the company's beverage sales, even as soda sales have declined in the broader market. He noted that people are more likely to buy drinks when they're available exclusively at the chain. Due to the drink's success, many other new beverages were introduced at Taco Bell including a new Taco Bell exclusive, Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast, a non-alcoholic sangria flavored Mountain Dew. Beginning in 2007, Mountain Dew began a promotion entitled "DEWmocracy",officially stylized as DEWmocracy which involved the public electing new flavors, colors, names, packaging graphics and advertisements for upcoming Mountain Dew products. The campaign has been the subject of recognition within the advertising industry, cited as one of the earliest and longest-running examples of a consumer product brand employing crowdsourcing to make decisions which are traditionally made internally by employees. In its initial phase, Dewmocracy participation and voting was conducted via an online game. Television advertisements at the time featured actor Forest Whitaker asking people to decide the next new flavor of Mountain Dew. Online voters selected from three choices: Supernova (a strawberry-melon flavor), Revolution (a berry flavor), and Voltage (a raspberry-citrus flavor). Each included ginseng. The event ended on August 17, 2008, with Voltage announced as the winning flavor. It was officially released on December 29, 2008. According to Beverage Digest, sales of Dewmocracy flavors totaled 25 million cases in 2008. Mountain Dew announced a continuation of the Dewmocracy campaign&nbsp;–referred to as "Dewmocracy 2"&nbsp;– which launched in July 2009. A marked difference between Dewmocracy 2 and its predecessor was the wider range of online voting methods, expanding beyond the Dewmocracy website to include Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and the "Dew Labs Community"&nbsp;– a private, online forum for the "most passionate Dew fans." In July 2009, Dew Labs sampling trucks distributed product samples of seven potential flavor variations. At the same time, 50 "Dew fanatics" were chosen based on their video submissions to the video website 12seconds.tv, and were shipped boxes of the seven prototype flavors. From the initial seven flavors, taste testers were asked to elect three final flavors for later release at retail stores. The three new candidate flavors were Distortion (a key lime flavor), Typhoon (a tropical punch flavor), and White Out (a smooth-citrus flavor). The three new candidate flavors were released on 19 April 2010 and voting lasted until 14 June. The following day, White Out was announced as the winner. Mountain Dew White Out was released for sale on 4 October 2010. A limited production White Out Slurpee (Mtn Dew White Out Freeze) was made available at 7-Eleven beginning in January 2011. In July 2011, Mountain Dew Typhoon was re-released briefly in 2-liter form. In 2007, after using the term "Game Fuel" to market their sodas to the video-gaming subculture, Mountain Dew introduced a new flavor variant with that name. Coinciding with the release of the Xbox 360 game Halo 3, Mountain Dew Game Fuel sported a label that was almost entirely image-based, showing promotional artwork for the game and featuring the game series' main character Master Chief prominently. This variant remained on shelves for 12 weeks, and was discontinued afterwards. Two years later, the website for the popular MMORPG World of Warcraft stated that two Mountain Dew Game Fuel flavors would be sold in June 2009 and would promote the game.  Shortly afterwards, the bottle art was released, and showed that the two flavors would promote different player races in the game. One of the two was exactly the same drink from the original Halo 3 promotion, with updated packaging.  The second flavor was a new wild fruit drink similar to the previously released Pepsi Blue. Both drinks were given World of Warcraft-based packaging, and sported the newly updated "MTN Dew" logo. Like their precursor, these two flavors lasted for 12 weeks and were discontinued. On 24 August 2011, Mountain Dew announced another return of the Game Fuel promotion on their Facebook page. The original citrus-cherry would once again be returning, along with a new tropical companion flavor.  The announcement gave a planned release date of October 2011 and stated that the packaging would feature codes granting players double experience points in Call of Duty's Modern Warfare 3. Both flavors were mailed out to Dew Labs members in early September 2011, a month before the planned release date. Later that same month, it was announced through the Facebook page that Game Fuel would be arriving to the public in mid-October, though it would vary by market. These flavors began appearing from the first week of October, and were also discontinued after 12 weeks of being on shelves. Game Fuel returned in October 2012 to promote Halo 4, in the original citrus-cherry flavor. In August 2013, Mountain Dew announced that Game Fuel would be returning to stores in the fall of 2013, with a new blueberry version titled "Electrifying Berry". In October 2013, boxes of original citrus-cherry Game Fuel appeared on store shelves with packaging promoting Xbox One and the games Dead Rising 3 and Forza Motorsport 5 and with cans featuring Dead Rising 3 graphics. The new Electrifying Berry flavor of Game Fuel simultaneously appeared with packaging promoting Kinect Sports Rivals and the game Ryse: Son of Rome, graphics from which appear on the cans as well. In May 2014, the original, citrus-cherry Game Fuel began appearing on shelves once again, but this time, the soda does not seem to be promoting any video game. In October 2014, Game Fuel returned with citrus cherry along with a new lemonade flavor for the promotion of Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare. Unlike past two-variant Game Fuel releases, both drinks sport the same artwork (unlike 2009's Horde Red and Alliance Blue or 2011's citrus cherry and tropical), albeit differing colors to match their respective flavors. In October 2015, Game Fuel returned once again with Citrus Cherry and Berry Lime for the promotion of Call of Duty: Black Ops III. Green Label is an online magazine, a partnership between Mountain Dew and Complex Media producing sponsored content covering action sports, music, art and style, housed at Green-Label.com. The site replaces several websites and a YouTube channel that have been overseen by PepsiCo since 2007. The initiative originated in 2013 and will continue through the year. Mountain Dew's Green Label promotion originated in 2007, when a line of limited edition aluminum bottles was put into production, featuring artwork from a range of tattoo artists and other artists. This initial series marked the first use of the term Green Label Art to describe the use of artistic works on Mountain Dew packaging. In June 2010, a contest entitled "Green Label Art: Shop Series" was announced, involving 35 independent skateboard store owners who partnered with local artists to design and submit future can artwork designs. Approximately one million votes were submitted by the conclusion of the contest in October of the same year, with Street Science Skate Shop&nbsp;– a store in Tracy, California&nbsp;– named the winner of a cash prize. This winning can design was scheduled to appear on Mountain Dew cans at some point in 2011. In 2008, a Mountain Dew-sponsored music label was launched under the name Green Label Sound. In December 2010, a Mountain Dew Code Red television advertisement was produced, incorporating the hip-hop artist Jay Electronica performing his song The Announcement. The advertisement concludes with the tagline "Hip Hop is different on the mountain". Sponsorship of action sports athletes has been a part of Mountain Dew marketing since the late 1990s, with present sponsorship including Eli Reed (skateboarder), Paul Rodriguez (skateboarder), and Danny Davis (snowboarder). Mountain Dew also sponsors its own namesake festival, "The Dew Tour", which is an action sports tour made up of events held in five U.S. cities over several months. The first Dew Tour was held in the summer of 2005 with events in skateboarding, BMX and Freestyle Motocross. In 2008 it expanded to add a "Winter Dew Tour", comprising snowboarding and snow skiing competitions. It is "the most watched and attended action sports event in the world," according to Transworld Snowboarding magazine. In coordination with its Dew Tour sponsorship, a sponsored television show entitled Mountain Dew's Green Label Experience premiered on Fuel TV in July 2010, for the primary purpose of broadcasting interviews with action sports athletes from each of the stops on the Dew Tour. Under the term Green Label Gaming&nbsp;– coined in 2007&nbsp;– Mountain Dew has broadened its sponsorship of independent video game designers and players. The brand is often the subject of media attention for its popularity among video game enthusiasts, as several flavors of Mountain Dew have been produced in partnership with video games. In December 2008, Mountain Dew produced a 30-minute television special which documented independent gamers in Japan and the U.S., which aired on the Spike TV network. In 2009, Mountain Dew sponsored two prominent gaming events: the Independent Games Festival and the Game Developers Conference. Green Label Gaming has since come under controversy over a sponsored Game Jam-themed reality show by Matti Leshem. In 2008, Doritos debuted a mystery flavor known as "Quest", featuring a campaign of online puzzles and prizes to identify the Quest flavor. The flavor was later identified as Mountain Dew. In October 2010, Mountain Dew started the "FanDEWmonium" promotion, a competition in which new flavors would compete to become permanent similar to the two DEWmocracy campaigns, but with eight diet flavors instead of three regular ones. Five of the participating flavors were diet versions of previous DEWmocracy flavors: Diet Super Nova, Diet Voltage, Diet Distortion, Diet Typhoon, and Diet White Out. Another flavor, Diet Ultra Violet, was returning from its own limited release in 2009. The two remaining competitors were brand-new Diet flavors created specifically for the promotion&nbsp;– Crave (green apple-flavored), and Flare (berry-citrus-flavored). Each of the eight flavors was available for tasting at specific tour locations, and special cans were also mailed to some Dew Labs members. Also similar to the DEWmocracy campaign, those who taste-tested the Diet flavors were asked to go online and vote for which flavors they thought should be permanently sold in stores. After the first round of voting was completed, two flavor finalists were chosen to receive a limited release to store shelves for a final round of voting. Diet Voltage and Diet Super Nova were sold in stores for an eight-week period beginning in March 2011. After votes were cast, it was announced that Diet Super Nova had won, with 55% of all votes, and it returned in January 2012 for another 12-week limited release. Afterwards, it was removed from shelves permanently due to poor sales. On 7 January 2011, Mountain Dew posted on their Facebook that Pitch Black would return to the shelves on May 2011, also stating that this may be the start of many re-releases of old favorites.  The company promoted Pitch Black's return heavily with giveaways and contests. About a month before the planned release date, a photo was posted on a Mountain Dew worker's Pongr, which showed Pitch Black and 2008's Supernova. Two weeks before the release, Dew Labs announced the return of 2010's Typhoon in 2-Liter bottles exclusively at Walmart Supercenters. The three flavors were re-released to stores on May 2. At the same time of the DEWmand Promotion, Mountain Dew launched the Throwback Shack, a website where participators could enter to win exclusive Dew merchandise, including a "secret stash" of Mountain Dew Revolution, a losing competitor from 2008's DEWmocracy. The promotional advertisements were then taken down from the Mountain Dew website. Mountain Dew later stated via tweet that there would not be any more flavors returning 'by Popular DEWmand' for now, as it was only intended to be a summer program. After much speculation over a leaked Instagram photo of a potential new flavor, it was officially announced that Mountain Dew was teaming up with Warner Bros. Pictures' and Legendary Pictures' film The Dark Knight Rises and released a limited-edition flavor on 18 June 2012. A website&nbsp;— DEWGothamCity.com&nbsp;— was launched, on which fans were able to enter codes to access exclusive content and details on the movie before its 20 July release date. Some Mountain Dew products temporarily featured packaging to promote the movie, including thermochromic 16 oz. cans that change color when cooled. The limited-edition flavor, Dark Berry, was mixed berry-flavored, and was available for 8 weeks. The Dark Knight Rises promotion inspired a permanent 24 oz. version of Mountain Dew. In August 2012, Villa Enterprises held a promotion known as Dub the Dew, where users were asked to submit and vote on name ideas for a green apple flavor of Mountain Dew. The promotion was infamously hijacked by users, particularly those originating from the image board 4chan, who submitted and upvoted entries such as "Diabeetus", "Fapple", numerous variations of "Gushing Granny", and "Hitler did nothing wrong". Although the promotion was not directly connected to Mountain Dew, a representative from the company did offer to "help clean up" the site. Adweek compared the incident to another recent campaign, where musician Pitbull was sent to perform in Kodiak, Alaska in a Walmart promotion. Following the success of Code Red in 2001, over 40 subsequent Mountain Dew flavors have been introduced. Original Mountain Dew, Caffeine-Free Mountain Dew, Diet Mountain Dew, Caffeine-Free Diet Mountain Dew, Code Red, Diet Code Red, Live Wire, Voltage, Throwback, White Out, Game Fuel Citrus Cherry, Game Fuel Berry Lime, Baja Blast, and Solar Flare are the currently available drinks on the Mountain Dew line (some are region-specific and may not appear in certain areas). This table covers all Mountain Dew flavor variants to date.  The tune "Good Old Mountain Dew" has been recorded and covered by artists like Grandpa Jones and Willie Nelson.  After PepsiCo bought the soft drink Mountain Dew in 1964, they commissioned a set of advertisements featuring a "Good Old Mountain Dew"-based jingle and the drink's hillbilly mascot. A Mountain Dew can, along with a Pepsi can, was featured in the 1998 DreamWorks film Antz. The last song of the 2003 album It's Pronounced Five Two by Christian rapper KJ-52 titled "Gimme Dat" is a narrative about the singer attending MDA (Mountain Dew Anonymous) and telling about how he is addicted to the soft drink. Singer and songwriter Lana Del Rey sings about Diet Mountain Dew in her aptly titled 2012 song "Diet Mountain Dew", from her sophomore album Born to Die. The South Park episode "I Should Have Never Gone Ziplining" refers to Mountain Dew and its level of sugar and caffeine using two fictional versions of the drink: Double Dew and Diet Double Dew. The president of the United States in the film Idiocracy (2006) is Dwayne Elizondo Mountain Dew Herbert Camacho. Mountain Dew was named the #1 caffeine delivery system by Dr. Dobb's Journal, a popular programmer's technical journal.  Mountain Dew beat out the 2nd-place finisher, Jolt soda.  Dr. Dobbs noted that, while Jolt had more caffeine, Mountain Dew won on the basis of its superior user friendliness.   Dates of production Notes Mountain Dew 1958–present The original flavor. A yellow-green-colored, citrus-flavored soda that was developed in the 1940s by Barney and Ally Hartman, who were beverage bottlers in Tennessee. A revised formula was created by Bill Bridgforth in the year 1958. Flavor changed to use high fructose corn syrup in the 1990s. Old recipe using cane sugar is now Throwback. Caffeine-Free Mountain Dew 1976–present Non-caffeinated Mountain Dew. Available in various parts of the United States. In Australia, it was once sold as regular Mountain Dew, but as of June 2012 Australian Mountain Dew is now sold with caffeine in it. Until 2012, the Canadian version of Mountain Dew was caffeine-free, but has been reformulated as Mountain Dew "Citrus Charge" and now contains caffeine. Diet Mountain Dew 1988–present A no-calorie Mountain Dew that was first introduced in 1988. It was formerly known as "Sugar-Free Mountain Dew" until 1986, when it was given its current name. In 2006 Diet Mountain Dew was reformulated with a new "Tuned Up Taste", using a blend of sucralose, aspartame, and acesulfame potassium as sweeteners. The previous formulation was sweetened exclusively with aspartame. Mountain Dew Red (Discontinued) 1988 Simply known to be Fruit-flavored Mountain Dew, Red was the first Mountain Dew flavor variation, and was discontinued the same year it was released. Its legacy lives on as Mountain Dew Code Red, but the two are entirely different flavors. It was only available in Alabama. Diet Mountain Dew Red (Discontinued) 1988 A zero-calorie version of Mountain Dew Red. Like the original version, it was also discontinued in the same year and was also only available in Alabama. Caffeine-Free Diet Mountain Dew 1989–present A no-calorie, non-caffeinated Mountain Dew. Available in limited locations in the United States. In Australia it is sold as "Diet Mountain Dew." Mountain Dew Sport (Discontinued) 1989–91 Following initial test marketing in 1989, this Mountain Dew-flavored sports drink was released in a limited number of U.S. regions in 1990. A 2-calorie variant was released, as well as a Diet version. They were all short-lived, being discontinued in 1991. Diet Mountain Dew Sport (Discontinued) 1989–91 The zero-calorie version of Mountain Dew Sport. Like the original version, it was also discontinued in 1991. Mountain Dew Code Red 2001–present (U.S.)2009–present (New Zealand)2010–present (Germany)2013, 2014–present (Canada) A cherry-flavored Mountain Dew. Introduced in 2001, it was the first widely successful flavor extension; In its first year of production, Code Red increased overall sales of Mountain Dew by 6%. Versions of Code Red were later released in New Zealand in 2009 (with the cherry flavor changed to berry), in Germany in 2010 and in Canada for DEWmocracy Canada in 2013, where it finished in 2nd place. Code Red was released along with the two other losing flavors from DewMocracy 2013,and won the vote, making it a permanent flavor in Canada. Diet Mountain Dew Code Red 2002–present A no-calorie, no-sugar cherry-flavored Mountain Dew. Available in limited areas only, it was first introduced in late 2002. Mountain Dew Live Wire 2004–present (America)2011–present (New Zealand)2013–present (Malaysia)2014–present (Philippines)2014–present (Singapore) An orange-colored, orange-flavored Mountain Dew. Live Wire was initially introduced in 2003 as a limited-edition flavor for the summer. In 2005, after two years of limited summer releases, Live Wire became a permanent addition to the product line. It appears that Live Wire became region-specific in 2011, as many areas across the U.S. began noticing its disappearance from shelves. It was also released in New Zealand in 2011. It was released in Malaysia in 2013 and in both the Philippines and Singapore in 2014. Mountain Dew Pitch Black 2004, 2011, 2016 (America)2011–12 (New Zealand)2013–present (Malaysia)2014–present (Philippines)2014–present (Singapore) A dark purple-colored, grape-flavored Mountain Dew released for the 2004 Halloween season. Pitch Black was re-released in 2011 as a part of the "Back by popular DEWmand" promotion in the United States and was also released in New Zealand. The US version stayed on shelves through May and July. It was released in Malaysia in 2013 and in both the Philippines and Singapore in 2014. Mountain Dew Pitch Black 2 (Discontinued) 2005 The "sequel" flavor to Pitch Black, released a year later from the original for the 2005 Halloween season.This too was a grape flavor but was different from the original Pitch Black flavor as it was a sour grape flavor.  The tagline was "Back with a sour bite." Mountain Dew Baja Blast 2004–present (2014, 2015–16 in Cans/Bottles U.S.) A sea green, tropical lime-flavored Mountain Dew introduced in 2004, available exclusively as a fountain drink at Taco Bell restaurants. On May 5, 2014, Baja Blast was made available in stores for a limited time by popular demand. In January 2015, information began leaking on the internet about a second store release of Baja Blast, accompanied by the debut in-store release of Sangrita Blast. On April 19, Baja Blast and Sangrita Blast appeared on store shelves and will remain on shelves for a limited time only. Mountain Dew Game Fuel (Citrus Cherry) 2007, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 A red-orange-colored, citrus-cherry-flavored Mountain Dew first released in August 2007 for a total of 12 weeks to promote the release of Halo 3, an Xbox 360 game. This flavor has had a limited return to shelves in 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015 to promote World of Warcraft, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3, Halo 4, Dead Rising 3, Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare, and Call of Duty: Black Ops III respectively, each time with redesigned packaging to promote its associated video game. Additionally, it is sold in 16 oz. bottles on Amazon.com. Its taste has been compared to "LiveWire", "Code Red" and the energy drink AMP Overdrive (another drink sold under the Mountain Dew brand name). Mountain Dew Revolution (Discontinued) 2008 A sky blue-colored, wild berry fruit-flavored Mountain Dew with ginseng. One of the three "candidate flavor" finalists for DEWmocracy's "People's Dew" national vote. Revolution held the highest number of votes until the end of the promotion, when it dropped to 3rd place and lost to Mountain Dew Voltage. In 2011, the "Mountain Dew Throwback Shack" offered a prize of "A Hidden Stash of Dew" which was revealed to be glass bottles of Revolution with lab labels on them. Demand for Revolution has increased since Pitch Black, Typhoon, and Supernova were returning to shelves, but Mountain Dew said that there were currently no plans to rerelease Revolution. Mountain Dew Supernova 2008, 2011 (America) 2012–present (Finland), 2013 and 2014 (Canada) A magenta-colored, strawberry-melon-flavored Mountain Dew with ginseng. One of the three "candidate flavor" finalists for DEWmocracy's "People's Dew" national vote, it lost to Mountain Dew Voltage. It had held the fewest votes until the end, when it finished in 2nd place. This flavor was re-released as a part of the "Back by popular DEWmand" promotion in early May 2011 and stayed on shelves through July. In 2012 it was released in Finland and is produced under license by Hartwall. In 2013 it was released in Canada for DEWmocracy Canada, where it finished in 4th place. In 2014, it was released again in Canada for Back By Popular DEWmand Canada, along with the two other losing flavors of DEWmocracy 2013 in Canada. Mountain Dew Voltage 2008–present (America) 2011–present (New Zealand) 2013–present (Canada) A deep blue-colored, raspberry-citrus-flavored Mountain Dew with ginseng. A part of the first DEWmocracy promotion, it was released in stores on 19 May 2008 as a limited edition flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they like best before voting. Voltage was announced the winner with 42% of all votes on 17 August 2008. It was released as a permanent flavor on 29 December 2008 and was later released in New Zealand in 2011 under the name "Electro Shock" and described as a "charge of wild berry flavour." A Diet Voltage was released in 2011 as a part of the "FanDEWmonium" promotion and made it to the finals with Diet Mountain Dew Supernova, meaning it had a limited release in U.S. stores while voting took place, until Diet Supernova was revealed to be the winner. It came in second in voting, against Diet Mountain Dew Supernova with 45% out of all votes. Mountain Dew Voltage was released in 2013 for DEWmocracy Canada where it got the most votes and Won. becoming a permanent Canadian flavor. Mountain Dew Game Fuel "Alliance Blue" (World of Warcraft Edition) (Discontinued) 2009 A blue violet-colored, wild fruit punch-flavored Mountain Dew flavor released alongside "Mountain Dew Game Fuel Horde Red" for a 10-week period in 2009. Like Horde Red, Alliance Blue was a promotional flavor for World of Warcraft. Diet Mountain Dew Ultra Violet (Discontinued) 2009, 2011 A lavender-colored, mixed berry-flavored Mountain Dew. It was originally available for three months in 2009; and was the first Mountain Dew flavor available exclusively in Diet. It was released on 3 August 2009 at a first taste party in Brooklyn, New York. This flavor returned for the "FanDEWmonium" promotion, but ultimately lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova, coming in sixth place and not making it into the final round. Its flavor is sometimes compared to that of "Revolution" due to their berry-themed flavoring. Mountain Dew Throwback 2009–present A variation of Mountain Dew in the U.S. containing natural sugar in place of high fructose corn syrup, first released in a limited production run during the summer of 2009. Mountain Dew Throwback has since been re-released for brief periods (generally 8–12 weeks at a time), including a 2nd wave from December 2009 - February 2010 and a 3rd wave in Summer/Fall 2010. A fourth limited production run began in March 2011, lasting for eight weeks, before it became a permanent addition. Mountain Dew Cherry Fusion (Discontinued) 2009–10 A red-colored, cherry-flavored fountain drink only available at Wienerschnitzel restaurants in the Western United States. It has a stronger cherry flavor in comparison to Code Red. Because this flavor was removed from the official Wienerschnitzel online menu, it is presumed to be discontinued. Mountain Dew Flavor #736 (Discontinued) 2009 A golden colored, Tropical flavored Mountain Dew. One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion but it lost. Mountain Dew Flavor #286 (Discontinued) 2009 A yellow colored, Pineapple flavored Mountain Dew. One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion but it lost. Mountain Dew Flavor #722 (Discontinued) 2009 A deep green-colored, Apple flavor Mountain Dew. One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion but it lost. Mountain Dew Flavor #648 (Discontinued) 2009 A red-orange colored, Watermelon flavor Mountain Dew. One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion but it lost. Mountain Dew Distortion (Discontinued) 2010 A deep green-colored, lime-flavored Mountain Dew. Part of the second "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion. It lost to Mountain Dew White Out and came in 3rd place with only 16% of all votes. Due to its similarity in color to the original Mountain Dew, Distortion was packaged in a clear bottle with a black label (as opposed to the green-plastic bottle with a green label used in the original Mountain Dew) in an attempt to avoid confusion. A Diet Distortion was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion, which came in eighth place, not making it to the final round. Mountain Dew Typhoon (Discontinued) 2010, 2011 A red-orange-colored, strawberry-pineapple flavored Mountain Dew. Part of the second Mountain Dew "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion. It lost to Mountain Dew White Out and came in 2nd place with 40% of all votes. A Diet Typhoon was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion, which came in fifth place, not making it to the final round. It was announced on 15 April 2011 that Typhoon would return in May 2011 as part of the "Back by Popular DEWmand" promotion and it stayed on shelves in 2-Liter bottles exclusively at Walmart Supercenters through July. Mountain Dew White Out 2010–present (U.S.) 2012–present (Japan) 2013 and 2014 (Canada) A white-colored, smooth citrus-flavored Mountain Dew. Part of the second Mountain Dew "DEWmocracy: Collective Intelligence" promotion. It was released in stores on 19 April as a limited edition flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they like best before voting. Voting ended on 14 June, and White Out won the campaign with 44% of the votes. It became a permanent flavor and was officially for sale on 4 October 2010 . It later released in Japan in 2012. A Diet White Out was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion, which came in third place, not making it to the final round. It has been available in slurpee form since January 2011. White Out was also released in Canada for Dewmocracy Canada in 2013, but finished in 3rd place. Along with Supernova and Code Red, White Out was released for Back By Popular DEWmand 2014 in Canada. Diet Mountain Dew Flare (Discontinued) 2011 A deep yellow-colored, berry-citrus-flavored Diet Mountain Dew. Part of "FanDEWmonium" promotion series of flavors but it lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova and came in fourth place, not making it into the final round. Diet Mountain Dew Crave (Discontinued) 2011 A light green-colored, sweet and sour apple-flavored Diet Mountain Dew. Part of "FanDEWmonium" promotion series of flavors but it lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova, coming in seventh place and not making it to the final round. Diet Mountain Dew Supernova (Discontinued) 2011, 2012 A magenta-colored, strawberry-melon-flavored Diet Mountain Dew with a "shot of ginseng" for flavor enhancement. This flavor began as one of the "FanDEWmonium" promotion series of flavors. Diet Supernova was released in U.S. stores alongside Diet Mountain Dew Voltage on 6 March 2011 for eight weeks as a limited edition diet flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they preferred before voting. It won FanDEWmonium with 55% out of all votes, and became a permanent addition to the Diet Mountain Dew flavor line-up. It returned for a 12-week limited release in February but was removed from shelves permanently after its 12-week limited release due to poor sales. Mountain Dew Game Fuel Tropical (Call of Duty: MW3 Edition) (Discontinued) 2011 A dark green-colored, Tropical-flavored Mountain Dew flavor to coincide with the release of Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3. Like its counterpart, its concept was leaked in early August 2011 by means of an eBay auction, was announced on Mountain Dew's Facebook page on 24 August 2011 and was released to U.S. stores on 10 October that year. It stayed on shelves until the end of 2011. It was originally tested by 500 Dew Labs members as a "Mystery" flavor, and was described by many to resemble the taste of "Baja Blast" and "Distortion". Mountain Dew A.M. (Discontinued) 2012 This flavor was introduced exclusively at select Taco Bell locations as a part of their new breakfast menu. It is simply a mixture of the original Mountain Dew flavor and Tropicana Orange Juice (both Pepsi products), and is greenish-orange in color. Mountain Dew Dark Berry (Discontinued) 2012 (U.S., Finland and Denmark) 2012–present (Romania) A limited-edition mixed-berry-flavored Mountain Dew that coincided with the film The Dark Knight Rises. It first gained popularity in late May when a 3-in-one photo of its 12-pack box design leaked on Instagram. On 14 March, Dark Berry was announced by the Mountain Dew Facebook page. It's 8-week release period began on 18 June. Mountain Dew Johnson City Gold (Discontinued) 2012–13 A malt flavored version of Mountain Dew, named after Johnson City, Tennessee, that was test-marketed starting in late August 2012 in the Chicago area, Denver, Colorado, and Charlotte, North Carolina. The beverage featured a malt flavor with a kick of lemon-lime. Mountain Dew promised a return after 2013 after "Dew Fans" voted for names with 6 different kinds of cans for certain regions of the United States named, Liberty Malt, Southern Gold, Rusted Malt, Gold Mountain Malt, Great Plains Gold & Miner's Malt. As of late 2015, there is no word when it will be released to the public. Mountain Dew Game Fuel Electrifying Berry (Ryse: Son of Rome Edition) (Discontinued) 2013–14 A purple-colored, berry-flavored Mountain Dew to coincide with the release of the video game, Ryse: Son of Rome for the Xbox One. Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast 2014–present (2015 in Cans/Bottles U.S.) A dark red, cherry and pomegranate-flavored Mountain Dew introduced in 2014, available exclusively as a fountain drink at Taco Bell restaurants. In January 2015, information began leaking on the internet about a second store release of Baja Blast, accompanied by the debut in-store release of Sangrita Blast. On April 19, Baja Blast and Sangrita Blast appeared on shelves. However, they will remain on shelves for a limited time only. Diet Mountain Dew Baja Blast (Discontinued) 2014–15 A sea green, tropical lime-flavored Diet Mountain Dew introduced in 2014. Once only exclusively available as a fountain drink at Taco Bell restaurants, is now sold in stores due to popular demand. As of March 26, 2015, It is discontinued from Taco Bell locations to make room for Kickstart in the fountain. Mountain Dew Game Fuel Lemonade  (Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare Edition) (Discontinued) 2014–15 A yellow-colored, Lemonade-flavored Mountain Dew introduced on October 6, 2014 to promote Call Of Duty: Advanced Warfare. Mountain Dew Solar Flare 2014–present A tropical punch-flavored soda. Its color is red-orange. Solar Flare is a new flavor variant that is only available at fountain machines at 7-Eleven locations. Mountain Dew Dewshine 2015–present Dewshine is a citrus flavored soda, and is clear in color. It is made of real sugar, similar to that of Throwback. Similar to another flavor, Johnson City Gold, Dewshine is non-alcoholic, despite the name being a portmanteau of the highly-alcoholic beverage "moonshine" and Mountain Dew. At this time, Dewshine is only available in glass bottles. There is no word on any future can, 2-liter, or on-tap fountain releases. Originally Dewshine was only in the 12 oz. bottles made out of glass but has now been but in limited edition Dewshine 25 oz. jugs only on Amazon.com Mountain Dew Black Label Pre-released at Colleges and Universities starting September 2015 - It will officially be released in 16 oz. cans in early 2016. Mountain Dew Black Label is an upcoming Mountain Dew flavor variant that will be released in 16 oz. cans in 2015 to coincide with the "Deeper, Darker Dew" promotion. It will be a Crafted Dark Berry-flavored soda, and its color is a reddish magenta. Mountain Dew Game Fuel Berry Lime  (Call of Duty: Black Ops III Edition) (Discontinued) October 2015–16 Game Fuel (Berry Lime) is dark blue/green in color and, as its name indicates, will be a Berry-Lime-flavored drink. It debuted in October 2015 to promote Call Of Duty: Black Ops III. Mountain Dew Lemonade & Ginger (Vault Flavor 1) Unreleased Lemonade and Ginger was a Mountain Dew flavor that was taste tested on college campuses alongside Dewitos. Mountain Dew Dewitos (Vault Flavor 2) Unreleased In late 2014, Mountain Dew were reported to be testing a Doritos flavored Mountain Dew on US college campuses. Dates of production Notes Picture Mountain Dew Kickstart Fruit Punch 2013–present A fruit-flavored soda that was released on February 25, 2013. The drink is advertised to have caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the morning. Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Citrus 2013–present An orange-flavored soda that was released on February 25, 2013. The drink is advertised to have caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the morning. As of March 26, 2015, this flavor of Kickstart also is available as a fountain drink at Taco Bell locations. Mountain Dew Kickstart Black Cherry 2014–present A Black-Cherry flavored soda that was released in January 2014, advertised to contain caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the evening. Mountain Dew Kickstart Limeade 2014–present A Lime flavored soda that was released in January 2014, advertised to contain caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the evening. Mountain Dew Kickstart Pineapple Orange Mango 2015–present This is a combination of Pineapple, Orange, and Mango flavors, and will be Golden in color. Contains Coconut Water. Mountain Dew Kickstart Strawberry Kiwi 2015–present This is a strawberry kiwi flavored soda, and will have a bright red-orange color. Contains Coconut Water. Mountain Dew Kickstart Blood Orange 2016–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Blood Orange is a flavor of Mountain Dew Kickstart that will come out in early 2016. It will contain Antioxidants - Vitamins C and E. Mountain Dew Kickstart Watermelon 2016–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Watermelon is a flavor of Mountain Dew Kickstart that will come out in early 2016. It will contain Coconut Water. Mountain Dew Kickstart Blueberry Pomegranate 2016–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Blueberry Pomegranate is a flavor of Mountain Dew Kickstart that will come out in early 2016. It will contain Antioxidants - Vitamins C and E. Mountain Dew Kickstart Midnight Grape 2016–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Midnight Grape is a flavor of Kickstart that will come out sometime in 2016, it has 5% juice. Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Cranberry 2016 Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Cranberry is a flavor of Kickstart that will come out sometime in 2016, it has 5% juice. For some reason, the other 4 flavors came out mid-January 2016, but Orange Cranberry made the cut, maybe we'll see it come out later in the year. Dates of production Notes Picture Mountain Dew Golden Lime 1980s A Lime Flavored Mountain Dew Released In Japan during the 1980s. It is very hardly known of, and the color of this is unknown. Mountain Dew Aurora 1980s A red colored Mountain Dew Released In Japan during the 1980s. It is very hardly known of, and the flavor is unknown. Mountain Dew Dry Ginger 1990s A Ginger Flavored Mountain Dew Released In Japan during the 1990s. Due to the fact it is rarely known, It is unknown what the flavor or the color really were. Mountain Dew Blue Shock 2001–present2014–present (Malaysia) Berry-citrus flavored Mountain Dew. Blue Shock was initially test-marketed in Chicago in can and bottle formats, but sales did not meet expectations so it was released in 2002 in the U.S. exclusively in Slurpee form at 7-Eleven stores. As of 2014, it remains listed as a current flavor according to 7-Eleven. It was once available at select Marcus Theatres in Icee form. It is also available as "Mtn Dew Blue Shock Freeze" at RaceTrac stores in the Southeast US. In 2014, as part of the DEWmocracy Malaysia promotion, Blue Shock was released in bottles and cans in Malaysia, joining the regular flavor, Pitch Black, and Live Wire. It was described as "DEW with a Raspberry Citrus flavor." Dew Fuel 2002–07 A caffeinated version of Mountain Dew produced in Canada. Marketed as a natural health product and not as a soft drink, due to Health Canada regulations that only allow caffeine in 'dark-colored' varieties of soft drinks such as cola and root beer. Originally called "Mountain Dew Energy" until given its present name in 2006. A sugar-free version was also made, which was essentially a caffeinated version of Diet Mountain Dew sold in Canada. In early 2007, Pepsi-QTG Canada cited that Dew Fuel is out of production. Darth Dew 2005 A limited production tangy grape Slurpee flavor. It was available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of Star Wars Episode III. [ ] Mountain Dew MDX 2005–07 A Mountain Dew-flavored energy soda introduced in 2005 in  bottles. In 2006, its packaging was changed to  bottles. Its production was discontinued in 2007. Mountain Dew Pitch Black Freeze 2006 A re-release of Pitch Black in Slurpee form as a limited edition flavor during the 2006 Halloween season. Mountain Dew Arctic Burst 2006 A Mountain Dew Slurpee flavor available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of Superman Returns. The Slurpee was blue in color and said to taste like blueberry. Mountain Dew Kryptonite Ice 2006 A Mountain Dew Slurpee flavor available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of Superman Returns. The Slurpee was green in color and had a tropical, mango taste. Dew Iced 2007–08 A Mountain Dew-flavored smoothie that was available exclusively at Cold Stone Creamery stores in 2007 and 2008. Mountain Dew Game Fuel (slurpee) August 2007 and 2013 A red-orange colored, cherry citrus flavored slurpee that is available only at participating 7-Eleven stores. Like the original version, it was introduced in August 2007 and promoted the Xbox 360 game "Halo 3". It returned in 2013 and just like the original, This also promoted the Xbox One. [ ] Mountain Dew Max Air 2007, 2014 A Mountain Dew Variant that was Released In Japan in 2007 that had used a different formula and had more carbonation. in 2014, the flavor was quietly released in 600ml bottles. Mountain Dew Max Air 2 2008 A Mountain dew variant that was Released In Japan in 2008 that had more carbonation than the 1st Max Air, but less Flavoring. Mountain Dew Thin Ice 2009–present A blueberry-flavored Slurpee that was sold at 7-Eleven stores. Today you can buy it in Most Convenience Stores. Mountain Dew Max Air 3 2009 The Last Max Air variant. Like the Other Max Air Variants, were Released In Japan in 2009 with another revived formula. This time it retained the carbonation than the 2nd Max Air and the flavoring from the 1st Max Air. Mountain Dew X-Treme 2010–present A Grape-flavored Mountain Dew similar to "Pitch Black". It was released in Kuwait during December 2010 and has so far made its way into Saudi Arabia. Mountain Dew White Out Freeze 2011–present A smooth citrus, limited edition Slurpee flavor only available at 7-Eleven stores. Mountain Dew Coolatta 2011 In 2011, Dunkin' Donuts announced a new Mountain Dew-flavored Coolatta, but it was discontinued later that year. [ ] Mountain Dew Energy/Citrus Blast 2010–present (UK) 2011–present (Ireland) 2013–present (Italy) A new line of Mountain Dew released in the UK in June 2010, originally in 500ml bottles, but as of February 2011 it has expanded to 440ml cans (Normal and sugar free) and 1 Litre bottles. Mountain Dew Energy was released in Ireland in April 2011. Produced in a lemon and lime flavor, it has a higher caffeine content than Mountain Dew sold in the U.S., at 18&nbsp;mg per 100ml, versus 91&nbsp;mg per 20 fl oz in the U.S. version (which is ~15.385&nbsp;mg per 100ml). The UK version is produced with real sugar instead of high-fructose corn syrup, as with most other soft drinks in the UK. Mountain Dew did initially launch in the UK and Ireland in 1996; however it was discontinued in 1998 due to its low sales. It is produced by Britvic in the UK. In 2014, the "Energy" Wording was removed, so the drink was simply called "Mountain Dew" in the UK. In early 2015, it was once again renamed, this time to "Mountain Dew Citrus Blast." It is still called Mountain Dew Energy in Italy. AMP Energy&nbsp;— Powered by Mountain Dew (UK) 2013–present In August 2013, PepsiCo. released a citrus-flavored energy drink under the 'AMP' brand in the UK. Rather than being an entirely separate brand as is the case with its North American counterpart&nbsp;— the UK version of AMP Energy was released under the 'Mountain Dew' brand. It contains a higher caffeine content than Mountain Dew Energy at 31&nbsp;mg/100ml and contains real sugar as is common with other British soft drinks. Mountain Dew Energy Game Fuel (Halo 4 Edition) (Discontinued) September 2012–January 2013  and September 2013–January 2014 A limited-edition raspberry-citrus flavor released in the United Kingdom to promote the release of Halo 4 in 2012 and the Xbox One in 2013. Though it has a similar-colored bottle as the American cherry-citrus Game Fuel (see table above), it is an entirely different flavour. Adrenaline Mountain Dew 2010–present (Poland)2013–present (Norway) In August 2010, this new flavor was released to Poland. Much like previous attempts, Adrenaline is marketed as a Mountain Dew energy drink, and contains ingredients such as caffeine, taurine, guarana extract, ginseng, and vitamins B2 and B12. The drink is available in 250ml cans and in 500ml black-tinted bottles (similar to Mountain Dew Energy's green-tinted bottles). The Uk Variant of Adrenaline Mountain dew is called AMP. Mountain Dew Grape 2011–present A deep purple-colored, Grape-flavored Mountain Dew. Since its introduction in mid-2011, it has only been available in Japan exclusively in Pepsi and Boss vending machines. It is only offered in  cans and not available in stores in Japan. Its taste has often been compared to that of Grape flavored Jolly Rancher candies. Mountain Dew Citrus Charge 2012–present In March 2012 "Mountain Dew Citrus Charge" was released in Canada. (In March 2010, the ban was lifted on synthetic caffeine in non-cola beverages in Canada.) It is essentially a caffeinated version of Canadian Mountain Dew, like the US version of Mountain Dew, with a slightly lower caffeine content of 51&nbsp;mg per serving. Diet Mountain Dew Citrus Charge 2012–present In March 2012 "Diet Mountain Dew Citrus Charge" was released in Canada. This is the first time Diet Dew was released in Canada ( If you exclude Dew Fuel Sugar Free). It is essentially a caffeinated version of Canadian Diet Mountain Dew, like the US version of Diet Mountain Dew, with a slightly lower caffeine content of 51&nbsp;mg per serving. Mountain Dew Energised 2012–present In June 2012 Mountain Dew was relaunched in Australia, with caffeine added, like Canada's relaunch a few months earlier. It was first introduced to Australian KFC restaurants, and then spread to markets and convenience stores. Mountain Dew Passionfruit Frenzy 2012–present Passionfruit Frenzy is a Mountain Dew flavor variant released in New Zealand on 15 October 2012. Mountain Dew Passionfruit Frenzy is a passion fruit-flavored drink, golden-green in color. Mountain Dew Typhoon Freeze 2013–14 Beginning on September 26, 2013, select Taco Bell locations began offering "Mountain Dew Typhoon Freeze", which is a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Typhoon flavor available during 2010 and 2011. It was discontinued at the beginning of June 2014 and was replaced with the Dr. Pepper Vanilla Float Freeze. Mountain Dew Distortion Freeze 2013–14 Beginning on September 26, 2013, select Taco Bell locations began offering "Mountain Dew Distortion Freeze", which was a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Distortion flavor available during 2010. It was discontinued at the beginning of March 2014 and was replaced with the Kickstart Freeze. Mountain Dew Cold Fusion 2013–present A Cherry-lime flavored Slurpee that was released in most US Convenience Stores. Mountain Dew Kickstart Freeze 2014 At the beginning of March 2014, select Taco Bell locations began offering "Mountain Dew Kickstart Freeze", which was a slushee version of the Black Cherry Mountain Dew Kickstart flavor. It replaced the Distortion Freeze but was discontinued at the beginning of October 2014 and was replaced with the Starburst Strawberry Freeze. Mountain Dew Energised Code Red 2014 A Berry-flavored variant of Mountain Dew Energised that was released in Australia, it was available from April to September of that year. Mountain Dew Electric Charge 2014–present A Sour lemon flavored Slurpee that was released in most US Convenience Stores. Mountain Dew Solar Flare Slurpee 2015–present Mountain Dew Solar Flare is only available in 7-Eleven fountains, though May 4, 2015, the Slurpee variation was spotted with the tag "NEW! DEW with a Blast of Tropical Punch only at 7-Eleven". It came to Canada in August 2015. Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast Freeze 2015 At the beginning of May 2015, select Taco Bell locations began offering "Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast Freeze", which was a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast flavor. It was discontinued at the beginning of September 2015 and was replaced with the Starburst Cherry Freeze. Mountain Dew Electric Citrus 2015 In 2015, Mountain Dew was released in Spain under the name "Mountain Dew Electric Citrus." Mountain Dew Game Fuel Berry Lime Slurpee   (Discontinued) 2015 In 2015, Mountain Dew Game Fuel Berry Lime was only available at 7 elevens in Slurpee form. Mountain Dew Pitch Black Freeze 2016 In Early 2016, Mountain Dew Pitch Black Freeze is only available at Speedway Gas stations in Freeze and Fountain form only until DEWcision in May. Generic citrus sodas Surge (soft drink) Mountain Dew nutritional facts and other information via Pepsico
