  Muntinlupa, officially the City of MuntinlupaBased on 1987 constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, it is spelled as Muntinglupa (instead of Muntinlupa). (), is the southernmost city in Philippine National Capital Region. According to the , it has a population of . It is classified as a highly urbanized city It is bordered on the north by Taguig; to the northwest by Parañaque; by Las Piñas to the west; to the southwest by Bacoor; by San Pedro, Laguna and Laguna de Bay to the east, the largest lake in the country. It is given the nickname "Emerald City of the Philippines" by the tourism establishment and also known as the "Gateway to Calabarzon" as it is the southernmost city of the National Capital Region. Muntinlupa is known as the location of the national insular penitentiary, the New Bilibid Prison, where the country's most dangerous criminals were incarcerated, as well as the location of Ayala Alabang Village, one of the country's biggest and most expensive residential communities, where many of the wealthy and famous live. "Muntinlupa" came from at least three versions. First, its association with the thin topsoil in the area. Second, residents, purportedly replying to a question by Spaniards in the 16th century what the name of their place was, said “Monte sa Lupa”—apparently mistaking the question for what card game they were playing. Third, the topographical nature of the area, where the term Monte or mountain was expanded to Muntinlupa or mountain land. It is bordered on the north by Taguig; to the northwest by Parañaque; by Las Piñas to the west; to the southwest by the city of Bacoor; by the city of San Pedro, Laguna; and by Laguna de Bay to the east, the largest lake in the country. Muntinlupa’s terrain is relatively flat to slopping towards the east along the lake. Gentle rolling hills occupy the western part of the city, with elevation increasing up to 60 meters and above towards its southwest portion. Marikina Valley Fault System' the west segment, known as the West Valley Fault (WVF) is one of the two major fault segments of the Valley Fault System which runs through the cities of Marikina, Pasig and Muntinlupa and moves in a dominantly dextral strike-slip motion. The West Fault is capable of producing large scale earthquakes on its active phases with a magnitude of 7 or higher. The dry season rungs through the months of November to April, while the wet season starts in May and lasts to November. The wet season reaches its peak in the month of August. Maximum rainfall in Muntinlupa usually occurs from the month of June to September. The average annual of rainfall is 2,014.8 millimeters with a peak of 420.0 millimeters in July and a low 26.9 millimeters in April. The highest temperature occurs during the month of April and May (34 degrees Celsius) while the lowest occurs during the months of January & Friday (24 degrees Celsius) The Philippines, due to its geographical location, is one of the Asian countries often affected by typhoons. It is located within the so-called “typhoon belt”. Generally, typhoon season starts from June and ends in November. However, the rest of the months are not entirely free of the typhoons since they are unpredictable in nature and might enter the country anytime of the year. Alabang is the business district of the city where the tallest structures of the city be located. It used to be the location of Alabang Stock Farm. Land reclamation is also done along the Laguna Lake for further developments in the city. During the dry season, the waterlevel in lake subsides exposing the soil that is then used for farming.   Muntinlupa City is governed primarily by the city mayor, the vice-mayor and the city councilors. The mayor acts as the chief executive of the city while the city councilors act as its legislative body.  The vice-mayor, besides taking on mayoral responsibilities in case of a temporary vacancy, acts as the presiding officer of the city legislature.  The legislative body is composed of 16 regular members (8 per district) and representatives from the barangay and the youth council. The Bureau of Corrections has its headquarters in the New Bilibid Prison Reservation in Muntinlupa City."About the Bureau of Corrections." Bureau of Corrections. Retrieved on October 2, 2010. "Bureau of Corrections NBP Reservation Muntinlupa City, Philippines." "Most Business Friendly City" on 2001, 2002 & 2006 as awarded by the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry Muntinlupa is the first city in the Philippines to ban the use of plastic bags and Styrofoam for packaging. The City Government encourages to "Bring your own Bag" or "BYOB" when shopping to reduce the use of plastic bags that would otherwise clog the waterways. ISO Certification on Quality Management System or ISO 9001:2000 has initially been acquired on 2004 and is valid for 3 years. Muntinlupa City has re-acquired its ISO Certification on QMS in April 2015, ISO 9001:2008, together with Ospital ng Muntinlupa and Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa as certified by BRS Rim of the World Operations, California.  Designed by Manuel Amorsolo, son of a national artist Fernando Amorsolo, the City Seal features the Philippine Eagle, the biggest, the strongest and the highest flying bird of the Philippine Republic, a bird that symbolizes our dream, one day, to make Muntinlupa the Premiere Emerald City of the 21st Century."[url=http://www.muntinlupacity.gov.ph/index.php?target=about&params=request_._resord] Municipal Mayors:  City Mayors: Muntinlupa City is composed of a lone congressional district, and two legislative districts which are further subdivided into nine barangays. Legislative District One includes barangays Bayanan, Putatan, Poblacion and Tunasan in the southern half of the city, while legislative District Two are barangays Alabang, Buli, Ayala Alabang, Cupang and Sucat in the northern portion of the city. Other Zip Codes include Muntinlupa Central Post Office 1770, Ayala Alabang Village 1780, Pleasant Village 1777, and Susana Heights 1774. Putatan got its name from a tree called putat. When the Spaniards colonized the Philippines, those who came to this particular place which has yet no name during the 18th century found out that many trees abound which looked like the Santol tree but whose leaves are much bigger with flowers blooming like rounded bunches of threads in rosy color to become chain of fruits in a seemingly small vine branches. The fruits, which are known to be poisonous, resembled the American guava. Now, the Spaniards wanted to know the name of this place and had to ask the residents who likewise answered them, putat, and thinking the Spaniards were asking for the name of the trees around the area. Tunasan may have originated from the plant tunas a prickly pear which grow in Tunasan. It may also had originated from the story of Chinese Merchands being robbed by rebels. When asked for the place where they were robbed, they answered that they were robbed by "tulisan" which means rebels. Sucat got its name from the vernacular word "sukat" which means “measurement”. It has been known that this community prior to the establishment of the name during the Spanish era was always measured. During the regime, the Posadas family was in power because of the then Mayor of Manila – Juan Posadas, who have a close relation with the Spanish Government Officials. Juan Posadas was able to acquire all the land he wished to measure in the entire community due to his connections with the government. Buli is said to also be named after the buri palm that is abundant in the area. Cupang is likewise named after a plant  Alabang is named after the river that passes through the barangay.  Ayala Alabang was created by Batas Pambansa Bilang 219 on March 25, 1982. It was originally a part of Barangay Alabang. It was separated from Barangay Alabang and "constituted into a distinct and independent barangay" named Barangay New Alabang by Batas Pambansa Bilang 219 which was passed and approved on March 25, 1982. The name was changed to Barangay Ayala Alabang in November 2003, after the public hearing conducted by the City Government of Muntinlupa for this purpose. While Barangays are the administrative divisions of the city, and are legally part of the addresses of establishments and homes, many residents indicate their Subdivision (village) instead of their Barangay. Listed below are the Barangays in each district and known subdivisions."[url=http://www.muntinlupacity.gov.ph/sep/139%20list%20of%20subdivision.htm]   District 1 Barangay Bayanan (0.784&nbsp;km2) Barangay Poblacion (6.131&nbsp;km2) Barangay Putatan (6.746&nbsp;km2) Barangay Tunasan (9.596&nbsp;km2) District 2 Barangay Alabang (8.064&nbsp;km2) Barangay Buli (0.437&nbsp;km2) Barangay Cupang (5.370&nbsp;km2) Barangay Ayala Alabang Barangay Sucat  Barangay Alabang, part of the second district of Muntinlupa, has undergone tremendous growth mainly due to a development boom in the late 1990s. The development of two large-scale commercial real estate projects namely; the Filinvest Corporate City and Ayala Land's Madrigal Business Park, changed the landscape of Muntinlupa City from what was once vast fields of cow pasture in the late 1980s, into a supercity that houses new residential, business, industrial and commercial establishments. The Muntinlupa "Business One-Stop-Shop" is recognized in the 2014 World Cities Summit in Singapore in its effectiveness in reducing the number of steps in acquiring a Business Permit. Northgate Cyberzone is the information technology park within Filinvest Corporate City in Alabang. The 18.7 hectare, PEZA registered IT zone is designed, mastered-planned and built around the needs of technology-based companies engaged in Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO), education, learning and firm, software design and multimedia, call centers, e-commerce, banking and financial services, as well as other IT support businesses and the like. It is home to Capital One Philippines Support Services Corp., Convergys Philippines Corp, HSBC Electronic Data Processing (Philippines), Inc., Genpact, Verizon Business and many more.[ ] Kawasaki Motors Philippines Corporation is in charge of production and distribution of Kawasaki Motors in the Philippines. KMPC, having been in the country for over 40 years, is hailed today as one of the top manufacturers in the Philippine motorcycle industry. Amkor Technology is a semiconductor product packaging and test services provider. Pepsi-Cola Products Philippines has a plant located at Tunasan, Muntinlupa City. Zuellig Pharma is located in Muntinlupa City  Shopping Centers in Muntinlupa include Alabang Town Center owned by Ayala Malls popular for the people for the citizens of Southern Manila, Festival Supermall owned and operated by Filinvest Development Corporationit has an area of 20 hectares, Starmall Alabang (formerly known as Metropolis Star Alabang), and SM Center Muntinlupa owned by SM Prime Holdings. There are multiple car dealerships located in Muntinlupa and most of them are along the Alabang-Zapote Road in Alabang. Ford Motors Alabang has a five-floor facility covering a floor area of nearly 13,000 square meters including a 2-floor, 23-vehicle showroom and a 4-floor, and an 80-bay service center. Toyota Alabang also constructed a facility with a showroom, parts warehouse, office & service facilities in a 5,000 square meter lot. Audi Alabang, Chevrolet Alabang, Chrysler Alabang, Mitsubishi Motors Alabang, Nissan and Suzuki Alabang are also located within the area, most of which are along the Alabang - Zapote Road. Still in Alabang-Zapote Road but located in barangay Ayala Alabang are Hyundai Alabang, Isuzu Alabang and Honda Alabang.  The sole distributor of electricity in Metro Manila is the Manila Electric Company, also known as Meralco. The de-commissioned Sucat Thermal Power Plant is located at Sucat, Muntinlupa City. Water is provided Maynilad Water Services also known as Maynilad is a water and waste water services provider of cities and municipalities of the National Capital Region that forms the West Zone and some parts of Cavite. It is one of the two concessionaires that provide water to Metro Manila in the Philippines, the other one is Manila Water which serves the East Zone. Majority of the land-line connection is provided by phone carrier Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company. Mobile telecommunication services are mostly provided by Globe Telecom, Smart Communications & Sun Cellular.  Muntinlupa can be accessed through private vehicles, buses, jeepneys, taxis and tricycles. Electric vehicles by both private and public sectors operate within the borders of the city. Buses have a stations in Starmall Alabang which have routes passing through EDSA to Quezon City. Provincial Buses can be found in South Station Alabang which have routes to Lucena, Quezon. Buses also pass through the Alabang viaduct from EDSA to Pacita Station. Jeepneys have stations in Starmall Alabang which have routes to General Mariano Alvarez, Cavite and Pasay going through Metro Manila Skyway or Alabang-Zapote Road. Tricycles and Pedicabs serves as feeders from the secondary and tertiary roads to the main road. "360 Eco-loop" is Filinvest City’s fully integrated electric-powered public transport system operated by Filinvest as the main mode of transportation around the 244-hectare Filinvest City, Muntinlupa. "electric-Jeepney Ride for Free" is launched by the City Government of Muntinlupa on March 30, 2015 it is composed of an initial fleet of 10 e-jeepneys produced in the Philippines. People on from Muntinlupa are referred to as Muntinlupeño as an adaptations from the standard Spanish suffix -(eñ/n)o. The native language of Muntinlupa is Tagalog. The official language of the Philippines is Filipino and English.  Muntinlupa City has 89 Child Development Centers, 20 Public Elementary Schools, 8 Public High Schools, 1 Public Tertiary School, 1 Public Vocational/Technical School, 88 Private Schools, 10 Private Tertiary Schools and 9 Private Vocational/Technical School. The "Iskolar ng Bayan" program has been able to give financial assistance to 3,567 students with an allocated budget of thirteen million pesos. The city search for the Ten Muntinlupa Outstanding Students (MOST) is conducted annually to give recognition and honor to talented and academically excellent students in all public and private high schools of Muntinlupa.  Muntinlupa City has 18 Health Centers, 1 Public Hospital, 8 Private Hospitals. The City uses Online Rapid Enrollment or ORE that is equivalent to automatic registration on PhilHealth. The Ospital ng Muntinlupa serves more than 600 patients daily. Discounts ranging from 25 to 75 percent may be availed depending on the financial capability the patient. The Food and Drug Administration, tasked to ensure the health and safety of food and drugs, has its headquarters located at Alabang, Muntinlupa City.  Landmarks Hotels There are multiple hotels located in Alabang. Acacia Hotel Manila, Crimson Hotel, Parque España Residence Hotel, The Bellevue Manila and Vivere Suites are some of those hotels. Muntinlupa City Public Library is located at 2/F Contessa Bldg., Poblacion Muntinlupa City. Muntinlupa City has 10 swimming pools, 14 Billiard Halls, 11 Tennis Courts, 8 Resorts, 7 Country Clubs, 9 Dance/Fitness/Slimming Centers, 41 Open Basketball Courts, 59 Covered Basketball Cours and 11 Parks & Playgrounds. The Muntinlupa Sports Complex is used for a variety of activities such as concerts, conferences, reunions and graduations, the sports complex has 3,500 seating capacity and has two separate multipurpose rooms. Located on a reclaimed area in Barangay Tunasan, it has an open area which local residents enjoy their morning exercise and leisure time. Artists Athletes  Politics   Barangays District Population[ ] Area (km²) Density (/km²) Zip Code Alabang 2nd 56,752 8.064 7,038 1781 Ayala Alabang 2nd 20,349 6.949 2,928 1799 Bayanan 1st 35,392 0.784 45,143 1772 Buli 2nd 7,319 0.437 16,748 1771 Cupang 2nd 57,013 5.370 10,617 1771 Poblacion 1st 103,104 6.131 16,817 1776 Putatan 1st 82,015 6.746 12,158 1772 Sucat 2nd 46,964 2.623 Tunasan 1st 51,033 9.596 5318 1773  Takasaki, Japan  Carson, California, USA  Piteşti, Romania  Liuzhou, China  Staffanstorp, Sweden  Paris, France  Madeira, Portugal  Craiova, Romania  Siruma, Camarines Sur  Calabanga, Camarines Sur  Sta. Cruz, Marinduque  Calauag, Quezon  Bangued, Abra  Ozamiz City  Pagadian City  Cotabato City 1601: Some 80 years after the discovery of the islands for King Philip II of Spain by Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, the original lands constituting Muntinlupa could be deduced to have been friar lands administered by the Augustinians, then sold and assigned to the Sanctuary of Guadalupe. 1869: The lands were transferred to the state and large individual landholders. In an effort by the Spanish Government to bring under closer administrative control the people living in the contiguous sitios, as well as those in Alabang, Tunasan, Sucat and Cupang, the municipality was created upon the recommendation of a government official, Professor de Medicina and a prominent Castillan, Don Eduardo de Canizares. August 6, 1898: The town supported the Philippine Revolution against the Spaniards and formally joined the revolutionary government headed by Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. June 1, 1901: The Philippine Commission promulgated Rizal Province on June 11, 1901 through Act 137. Muntinlupa becomes a district of Morong, Rizal. November 25, 1903: Under the American regime, Muntinlupa was incorporated under Act 1008 and included within the boundary of Laguna province under the municipality of Biñan. Muntinlupa residents protested this Executive Act, and through their town head, Marcelo Fresnedi, filed a formal petition to the Governor for the return of the municipality to the province of Rizal. March 22, 1905: Act 1308 paved the way for Muntinlupa's return to Rizal province to become a part of Taguig along with Pateros. January 1, 1918: Governor General Harrison's Executive Order 108, which grants the petition of residents for an independent status of their municipality, takes effect. Vidal Joaquin, a native of Alabang, served as the first appointed mayor in 1918-1919 followed by Primo Ticman, native of Poblacion 1919-1922 while the first elected mayor was Melencio Espeleta (1922-1924). January 22, 1941: The historic New Bilibid Prison, the national penitentiary, was established in the hills of Muntinlupa. November 7, 1975: Muntinlupa became a part of Metropolitan Manila by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 824 issued by then President Ferdinand E. Marcos. June 13, 1986: Following the EDSA Revolution in February that year, President Corazón C. Aquino appoints Atty. Ignacio R. Bunye, Officer-In-Charge of Muntinlupa as part of a nationwide revamp of local government units.  In the ratification of the 1987 Constitution, Muntinlupa together with Las Piñas formed one political district. December 6, 1988: President Corazon C. Aquino by Proclamation 351 declares the 19th of December as "Municipality of Muntinlupa Day". February 16, 1995: House Bill No. 14401 converting the Municipality of Muntinlupa into a highly urbanized city was approved by the House of Representatives. Then on March 1, Muntinlupa becomes the 65th city in the Philippines as signed into law by President Fidel V. Ramos, its conversion into a highly urbanized city by virtue of Republic Act No. 7926. March 1, 2001: Republic Act 9191 declaring the First Day of March of every year as a Special Non-working Holiday in the City of Muntinlupa to be known as "The Muntinlupa City Charter Day" by virtue of Senate Bill No. 2165. August 3, 2007: The city hall of Muntinlupa was completely damaged and later abandoned due to a fire. The fire started from the informal settlers area, behind the city hall. Almost all files, important documents and other references of Muntinlupa were burned. The Philippine Eagle - Symbolizes the City of Muntinlupa soaring into new heights in terms of progress and prosperity; the characteristics properly enlikened to a mother, that is caring, loving and nurturing her children to become good and responsible citizens of the country; and Muntinlupa’s hope, vision and dream of becoming a premiere city of the nation. Bamboo Surrounding the Seal - Symbolizes the ability of the citizens of Muntinlupa to cope up with the fast changing times; that we can withstand the trials that come our way and stand still and ready to triumph again. Lakas, Talino at Buhay - These are words taken from the lyrics of the Muntinlupa March, the city's official anthem. These are values that will guide the city in achieving its goals and visions. 1917 and 1995 - The year 1917 marks the time when Muntinlupa became an independent town while the year 1995 was the time when Muntinlupa became a city. The Philippine Flag - The flag behind the eagle symbolizes the City of Muntinlupa being a part of the Republic of the Philippines and its government. The Nine Stars - The nine (9) stars symbolize the nine barangays that comprises the City of Muntinlupa namely, Tunasan, Poblacion, Putatan and Bayanan for District I and Alabang, Cupang, Buli, Sucat and Ayala Alabang for District II. Ignacio Bunye - June 13, 1986 – July 1, 1998 Jaime R. Fresnedi - July 1, 1998 – July 1, 2007 Aldrin L. San Pedro - July 1, 2007 – July 1, 2013 Jaime R. Fresnedi - July 1, 2013 – Present Almanville Subdivision Pleasant Homes Subdivision Filrizan Subdivision Summit Circle Summit Homes Sunrise Subdivision Camella Homes Alabang IV-A Katarungan Village 1 Katarungan Village 2 South Ville III New Tensuan Site Old Tensuan Site Agro Homes Subdivision Bayfair Subdivision Bruger Subdivision Camella Townhomes 1 Camella Townhomes 2 Camella Homes 1 Camella Homes 2 Camella Homes 2-D Camella Homes 2-E Country Homes Express View Subdivision Freedom Hills Freewill Subdivision Gruenville Subdivision Jayson Ville Joasmerray Subdivision La Charina Homes Lakeview Homes 1 Lakeview Homes 2 Multiland/Midland Subdivision Mutual Homes Ph1 & 2 Mutual Homes Ph3 Neuwrain Subdivision RCE Homes Segundina Townhomes Soldiers Hills Subdivision South Greenheights Subdivision South Superville Subdivision Summitville Subdivision Treelane Subdivision V.M. Townhomes Abbey Place Aguila Village Camella Homes 3 City Estate JPA Subdivision Lake Shore Subdivision Lodora Subdivision Midland II Subdivision Parkhomes Subdivision Ridgeview Subdivision Sto. Nino Village Susana Heights Teosejo Industrial Complex Teosejo Subdivision Victoria Homes Subdivision Villa Carolina I Carolina II Highway Homes Subdivision UP Side Subdivision Alabang 400 Alabang Hills B.F. Homes Ph4 Capri Homes Embassy Village Hillsborough Homes Liberty Homes Mintcor South Row Townhomes Rizal Village San Jose Subdivision Tierra Nueva Subdivision Pacific Village Pacific Malayan Kalipayan Homes Ayala Alabang Village Augusto Posadas Village Brittany Bay Corinthian Villas Don Juan Bayview Subdivsion Dona Rosario Heights Subdivision Dona Rosario Bayview Patio Homes Philippine National Railways has 3 stations in the city. The following stations are Sucat, Alabang, and Muntinlupa (Brgy. Poblacion) Stations. There used to be a 4th and 5th stations in Brgy. Tunasan and Brgy. Buli, however both were discontinued to be used and demolished in 2009. Alabang station is the terminus of the Metro Commuter services so only the Provincial Commuter services that goes to Calamba City that stops in the Muntinlupa station which is currently 2 Northbound trips in the morning and 2 Southbound trips in the evening. Pan-Philippine Highway  also known as the Maharlika ("Nobility/freeman") Highway () is a  network of roads, bridges, and ferry services that connect the islands of Luzon, Samar, Leyte, and Mindanao in the Philippines, serving as the country's principal transport backbone. Alabang-Zapote Road begins in Alabang near the Alabang railway station and Festival Supermall in Filinvest City. It then crosses into the Madrigal Business Park and Alabang Town Center intersecting with Madrigal Avenue and Acacia Avenue. West of Daang Hari Road (Investment Drive), it enters Las Piñas and ends at an interchange with Coastal Road (CAVITEX). Daang Hari Road begins as a north-south road from Commerce Avenue just south of Alabang–Zapote Road running through the borders of Las Piñas and Muntinlupa. It then runs east-west for 9.2 kilometers (5.7 miles) from the intersection with Daang Reyna Road, winding through the cities of Bacoor and Imus in Cavite where it ends at Aguinaldo Highway near Dasmariñas. South Luzon Expressway has several exits in Muntinlupa which makes going around the city easier. These exits are Sucat Exit, Skyway Entrance/Exit, Alabang Exit, Filinvest Exit, Susana Heights Exit and MCX Exit. Muntinlupa–Cavite Expressway is a 4&nbsp;km (2.5&nbsp;mi) long access-controlled toll expressway linking the southern province of Cavite to Muntinlupa in the Philippines. It feeds into and from the South Luzon Expressway and the junction of Daang Hari Road and Daang Reyna Road. Metro Manila Skyway is a fully grade separated elevated highway and motorway serving as the main expressway in the southern parts of Metro Manila. It is currently undergoing expansions to a total length of 31.2 kilometers. Laguna Lakeshore Expressway Dike is a proposed expressway that will start from the coastal area of Laguna de Bay from Taguig in Metro Manila to Calamba and Los Baños in Laguna Ina ng Awa Parish (New Bilibid Prison) L'Annunziata Parish (Victoria Homes) Mary Cause of Joy Parish Church (Putatan) Mary Mother of God Parish Church (Bayanan) Our Lady of the Abandoned Diocesan Shrine (Poblacion) Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal National Shrine Parish (Sucat) Sacred Heart of Jesus Chaplaincy (Cupang) San Nicholas de Tolentino Parish Church San Roque Church (Alabang) St. James, The Great Parish (Ayala Alabang) St. Jerome Emiliani & Sta. Susana Parish (Ayala Alabang) Diocesan Shrine of St. Peregrine Laziosi (Tunasan) Sto. Niño Chapel (Poblacion) Sto. Domingo Parish Church (Sucat) Radha Soami Satsang Beas Center Philippines Alabang Church of Christ (Star Mall, Alabang) Alabang Full Gospel Church Alabang Foursquare Gospel Church (Alabang) Alabang New Life Christian Center (Alabang Hills Village) Alabang United Evangelical Church Bayanan IEMELIF Church Bible Christian Fellowship of Planas Cathedral of Praise - South Campus (Bellevue Hotel, Alabang) Christ Baptist Church (Soldiers Hills Village) Christ Commission Fellowship Alabang Christ Living Epistle Ministries Inc. (Poblacion) City Bible Church (Alabang) City Light Church (Tunasan) Day By Day Christian Ministries South Metro.(Starmall, Alabang) Divine Mercy Chapel (Poblacion) Door of Faith Christian Church Elohim Foursquare Gospel Church (Soldiers Hills Village) Evangelical Church of Muntinlupa (Poblacion) Fair Haven Baptist Church Faithful Jesus Church Greenhills Christian Fellowship South Metro Iglesia Ni Cristo Chapel (Putatan, Tunasan, Cupang, Sucat, Karunungan, Victoria and Alabang) Ina ng Awa Parish Church (NBP Reservation) Jesus by the Lake Worship Center (Bayanan,) Jesus the Living Water Christian Church (Sto. Nino Village, Tunasan) Jesus the Lord of the Harvest and Victory Church (Alabang) Jesus, the Good Shepherd Church of Muntinlupa (National Road, Tunasan) Jesus Is Lord Church Muntinlupa (Putatan) Kordero ng Diyos Christian Church (Putatan) Lakeview Baptist Church (Putatan) Lighthouse Apostolic Ministry of Pentecost Church (Manggahan, Putatan, and New Bilibid Prison, Poblacion) Lighthouse Christian Community (Buencamino St., Alabang) Manifestation of God's Glory (Sucat) Muntinlupa Baptist Church (Putatan) Muntinlupa Christian Church (Poblacion) Muntinlupa Church of Christ (Poblacion) Muntinlupa City Foursquare Gospel Church (NBP Reservation) Old Line Primitive Baptist Church (Festival Supermall, Alabang) River of Life Christian Church (Poblacion) Sa Diyos Walang Imposible Ministry (Alabang) The True Vine Church Global Outreach Ministry (3rd Floor DLA1 Bldg. National Road Putatan - Beside Municipal Hall ) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (National Road, Putatan) The Truth Christian Ministries (Tunasan) Tunasan Evangelical Church Parkhomes United Methodist Church Word International Ministries Alabang (Alabang City Terminal) World Mission Society Church of God - Villa Carolina 1 Villa Carolina Bible Christian Church- Villa Carolina 1 (Tunasan) Victory Christian Fellowship - Alabang and Muntinlupa (Tunasan) South City Church - Alabang Town Center World Mission Society Church of God World International Ministries (Alabang) South Metro Church (Primitive Baptist Church of God)(Putatan) Muntinlupa National High School is a public high school located at Poblacion, Muntinlupa City. MNHS also has a special curriculum, the Science Technology and Engineering or STE (formerly ESEP), that prepares students for careers in Science and Technology, Math, and Communication Arts. Muntinlupa Science High School or MunSci, is a special public high school in the City of Muntinlupa, Philippines that provides a technical and science curriculum that aims to prepare students for careers in Science and Technology, Math, and Communication Arts. Nihongo and French classes are offered in students Muntinlupa Science High School. Classes are taught by teachers from the Japanese and French embassies. Pedro E. Diaz High School, formerly Annex of Fort Bonifacio College (FBC), is a public high school located at UP Side Subd., Alabang, Muntinlupa City. Muntinlupa Business High School, formerly known as Pedro E. Diaz High School Annex, is located at Espeleta St., Buli, Muntinlupa City. The school makes education more accessible to students residing at Barangay Buli, Cupang and Sucat. MBHS offers a curriculum focused on preparing its graduates into vocational and collegiate degree. Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa The establishment of a local university in the Municipality started as a dream of former Mayor Ignacio Bunye who viewed education as potent tool for transforming society for the better. Upon his assumption of office in 1986, he included the objective of organizing and establishing an institution of higher learning in the Ten Point Agenda of his administration. Former Dean Enrico Vivar led the movement to convert the Muntinlupa Polytechnic College into a local university. Atty. Raul R. Corro, then Councilor and Chairman of the Committee on Education, sponsored City Ordinance No. 03-089 converting the Muntinlupa Polytechnic College to a Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa (PLMun) in March, 2003 during the 67th session. The Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa is now ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED by the BRS Rim of the World Operations in California, USA. PLMun was awarded its Certification on April 27, 2015 at the City Hall Quadrangle of the City Government of Muntinlupa. Muntinlupa City Technical Institute MCTI offers technical vocational-training of TESDA Accredited Courses. Courses offered in MCTI are Automotive Servicing NC II, Building Wiring Installation NC II, Dressmaking NC II, Food & Beverage Services NC II and Massage Therapy NC II. ALS Center Bayanan, formerly Bayanan Elementary School Unit I, conducts Alternative Learning System classes during Saturdays and uses modules that students can answer at home. This program will help them finish secondary education to make them eligible to take courses offered by TESDA or be a college graduate. They will be given certificates by the Department of Education (DepEd) once they finish the program in five months. The project is being implemented by the local DepEd office in coordination with the city government. NBP Alternative Learning System is 10-month course offered by the Department of Education (DepEd). Convicts are given a chance to overcome illiteracy or acquire livelihood skills behind bars. This program is made possible by the coordination of Bureau of Corrections with the Department of Education. Ospital ng Muntinlupa or OsMun provides general in-patient health service. Among the medical services offered by the Ospital ng Muntinlupa included Medicine (Cardiology, Cardiology-Heart Station, Emergency Medicine, Endocrinology, Family Medicine, Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, Nephrology and Pulmonology), Obstetric and Gynecology, Anesthesia, Clinical Nutrition, ENT, Pulmonary, Ophthalmology, Orthopedic Surgery, Pathology, Pediatrics, Pharmacy, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Surgery. Ospital ng Muntinlupa also operates its own dialysis center. Bed capacity of has been increase to 215. Asian Hospital and Medical Center, or Asian Hospital established on March 15, 2002 with Jorge Garcia, MD, an alumnus of the Faculty of Medicine & Surgery of the University of Santo Tomas, as its founding chairman, is the first private tertiary hospital built in the southern part of Metro Manila. It currently stands on a land area within the vicinity of Filinvest Corporate City, Alabang, Muntinlupa City, Philippines, measuring  that both includes the main hospital building and the hospital's medical offices. Muntinlupa Center Muntinlupa, or MCM is located across the Muntinlupa City Hall at Putata, Muntinlupa City. Research Institute for Tropical Medicine or RITM was conceptualized through the Philippine Executive Order (EO) 674, authorizing the Philippine Department of Health to establish a research facility within the country for health advancement and medical research. Through the efforts of the Government of Japan, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) provided partial financial grant to the agency in the construction of the RITM. In 1989, the RITM Center for Training in Tropical Infectious Diseases was established. RITM is to supervise, plan, and successfully implement research programs to prevent and to control prevailing infectious and tropical diseases in the Philippines. The Bureau of Corrections Administration Building - This is a prison facade that houses the offices of the prison administration. The maximum security compound, consisting of 12 buildings called brigades are located at the western side of the facade. The structures were built in 1941, but it is the area of the medium security compound that is being shown in movies and in television. The maximum security compound was never shown in TV or in movies, except for the Office of the Director and the front view of the Maximum Security Compound. Jamboree Lake - This is the smallest natural lake in the country, a favorite hang-out spot for nature lovers, as well as ordinary passers-by looking for a cool respite from the tropical heat. The lake has been in existence since time immemorial. Memorial Hill - This is a small hill in the NBP reservation compound that cradles a World War II Vintage Japanese canon. The hill is likewise the burial place of Eriberto Misa the famous Prison's Director from 1937 to 1949. Director's Quarters - The structure manifest an influence of a pre-war architecture that characterizes the outstanding edifice. This was built simultaneously with the Administration Building in 1941. This is also the official residence of the Director of Bureau of Corrections. The Japanese Garden Cemetery - The cemetery is a burial place of Gen. Tomoyuki Yamashita, the Japanese general who became famous during the Japanese occupation of the country. Insular Life Corporate Centre - Headquarters of the Insular Life Assurance Company, the first Filipino life insurance company where a marker was installed by the National Historical Commission on November 25, 2010, centenary of the corporation's establishment. Notable feature of the building is a bas relief sculpture of Filipino life and business by National Artist Napoleon Abueva mounted on its facade. Dale Baldillo - Child Actor & Socialite-Phlantrophist Ya Chang - Japanese/Filipino Accent Charlene Gonzalez - Actress, TV Host, Binibining Pilipinas 1994 and Miss Universe 1994 Top 6 Karel Marquez - Actress & Model Nino Muhlach - Former Child Actor & Director Aga Muhlach - Actor of TV5 Alonzo Muhlach - Child Actor Allan Paule - Actor Sandara Park - K-Pop Actress & Singer Of 2NE1 Jodi Sta. Maria - Actress of ABS-CBN Lougee Basabas - Lead Singer Of Mojofly & Delara Champ Lui Pio - Vocalist of HALE Band Lea Salonga - Singer Janos Delacruz - Painter Gwendoline Ruais - Miss World Philippines 2011 and Miss World 2011 1st runner-up Michael Christian Martinez - 2014 Winter Olympics athlete Prince Carlos - Basketball Varsity Player of De LaSalle Zobel College William Prado - Bantamweight Boxer Muntinlupa Mariners - a baseball team in the Baseball Philippines formed in 2007 as one of its charter members. The team was originally known as the Makati Mariners. The team moved to Muntinlupa in 2008. Ruffy Biazon - Filipino politician (Former Congressman of the City) Rodolfo Biazon - politician (Current Congressman of the City) Ignacio Bunye - Filipino Politician (Former Mayor of the City) Fidel Ramos - Former President Ming Martinez-Ramos - Former First Lady Muntinlupa City official government website
