    Mythology is a collection of myths, especially one belonging to a particular sacred, religious or cultural tradition of a group of people. Myths are a collection of stories told to explain nature, history, and customsOxford English Dictionary,  "myth, n. Oxford University Press (Oxford), 2003.–or the study of such myths.Kirk, p. 8; "myth", Encyclopedia Britannica As a collection of such stories, mythology is a vital feature of every culture. Various origins for myths have been proposed, ranging from personification of nature, personification of natural phenomena to truthful or hyperbolic accounts of historical events, to explanations of existing ritual. Although the term is complicated by its implicit condescension, mythologizing is not just an ancient or primitive practice, as shown by contemporary mythopoeia such as urban legends and the expansive fictional mythoi created by fantasy novels and comics. A culture's collective mythology helps convey belonging, shared and religious experience, behavioural models, and moral and practical lessons. The study of myth dates back to antiquity. Rival classifications of the Greek myths by Euhemerus, Plato's Phaedrus, and Sallustius were developed by the Neoplatonists and revived by Renaissance mythographers. Nineteenth-century comparative mythology reinterpreted myth as a primitive and failed counterpart of science (E. B. Tylor), a "disease of language" (Max Müller), or a misinterpretation of magical ritual (James Frazer). Some recent approaches have rejected a conflict between the value of myth and rational thought, often viewing myths, rather than being  merely inaccurate historical accounts, as expressions for understanding general psychological, cultural or societal truths. The English term mythology predates the word myth by centuries. It appeared in the 15th century,], borrowed from Middle French mythologie. The word mythology, "exposition of myths", comes from Middle French mythologie, from Late Latin mythologia, from Greek μυθολογία mythologia "legendary lore, a telling of mythic legends; a legend, story, tale," from μῦθος mythos "myth" and -λογία -logia "study.""mythology". Online Etymology DictionaryOxford English Dictionary, 3rd ed. "mythology, n." 2003. Accessed 20 Aug 2014. Both terms translated the subject of Fulgentius's 5th-century Mythologiæ, which was concerned with the explication of Greek and Roman stories about their gods. Although the African author Fulgentius's conflation with the contemporary African saint Fulgentius is now questioned,Hays, Gregory. "The date and identity of the mythographer Fulgentius" in Journal of Medieval Latin, ,  2003. the Mythologiæ explicitly treated its subject matter as allegories requiring interpretation and not as true events.Whitbread, Leslie George, tr. Fulgentius the Mythographer. Ohio State University Press (Columbus), 1971. (The word mythología [] appears in Plato but was a general term for "fiction" or "story-telling" of any kind, combining mỹthos [, "narrative, fiction"] and -logía [, "discourse, able to speak about"].Oxford English Dictionary,  "-logy, comb. form". Oxford University Press (Oxford), 1903.) From Lydgate until the 17th or 18th century, "mythology" was similarly used to mean a moral, a fable, an allegory, or a parable. From its earliest use in reference to a collection of traditional stories or beliefs, it has implied the falsehood of the stories being described; remaining associated with sacred tales of the Greeks and Romans, though, it came to be applied by analogy with similar bodies of traditional stories among other polytheistic cultures around the world. The Greek loanword mythos[ (pl. mythoi) and Latinate mythus (pl. mythi) both appeared in English before the first attestation of myth in 1830.][][   In present use, "mythology" usually refers to the collected myths of a group of people but may also mean the study of such myths. For example, Greek mythology, Roman mythology and Hittite mythology all describe the body of myths retold among those cultures, but landscape mythology describes the study of landscape used across various totemistic peoples. Alan Dundes defined myth as a sacred narrative which explains how the world and humanity evolved into their present form, "a story that serves to define the fundamental worldview of a culture by explaining aspects of the natural world and delineating the psychological and social practices and ideals of a society"; Bruce Lincoln defined it as "ideology in narrative form". Many scholars in other fields use the term "myth" in somewhat different ways;Dundes, "Madness", p. 147Doty, pp. 11–12Segal, p. 5 in a very broad sense, the word can refer to any traditional storyKirk, "Defining", p. 57; Kirk, Myth, p. 74; Simpson, p. 3 or any popular misconception or imaginary entity. Because of this pejorative sense, some opt to return to the earlier mythos, although its use was similarly pejorative and it now more commonly refers to its Aristotelian sense as a "plot point" or to a collective mythology,Oxford English Dictionary,  "mythos, n." Oxford University Press (Oxford), 2003. as in the worldbuilding of H.P. Lovecraft. Mythology is now often sharply distinguished from didactic literature such as fables, but its relationship with other traditional stories such as legends and folktales is much more nebulous.Bascom, p. 7 The main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or supernatural humans,Bascom, p. 9"myths", A Dictionary of English FolkloreO'Flaherty, p.78: "I think it can be well argued as a matter of principle that, just as 'biography is about chaps', so mythology is about gods." while legends generally feature humans as their main characters, but many exceptions or combinations exist, as in the Iliad, Odyssey, and Aeneid.Kirk, Myth, pp. 22, 32; Kirk, "Defining", p. 55 Myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests and closely linked to religion or spirituality. In fact, many societies group their myths, legends, and history together, considering myths to be true accounts of their remote past.Eliade, Myths, Dreams and Mysteries  p. 23Pettazzoni, p. 102 Creation myths, particularly, take place in a primordial age when the world had not yet achieved its current form,Dundes, Introduction, p. 1Eliade, Myth and Reality, p. 6 but other myths explain how the society's customs, institutions and taboos were established and sanctified. A separate space is created for folktales,Bascom, p. 17Eliade, Myth and Reality, pp. 10–11; Pettazzoni, pp. 99–101 which are not considered true by the people who tell them. As stories spread to other cultures or as faiths change, however, myths can come to be considered folktales,Doty, p. 114Bascom, p. 13 sometimes even to the point of being reinterpreted as one, its divine characters recast as humans or as demihumans such as giants, elves, and faeries.   One theory claims myths are distorted accounts of real historical events.Bulfinch, p. 194Honko, p. 45 According to this theory, storytellers repeatedly elaborated upon historical accounts until the figures in those accounts gained the status of gods. For example, one might argue that the myth of the wind-god Aeolus evolved from a historical account of a king who taught his people to use sails and interpret the winds. Herodotus (5th century BC) and Prodicus made claims of this kind. This theory is named "euhemerism" after the mythologist Euhemerus (c.320 BC), who suggested the Greek gods developed from legends about human beings."Euhemerism", The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions Some theories propose that myths began as allegories. According to one theory, myths began as allegories for natural phenomena: Apollo represents the sun, Poseidon represents water, and so on. According to another theory, myths began as allegories for philosophical or spiritual concepts: Athena represents wise judgment, Aphrodite represents desire, etc. The 19th century Sanskritist Max Müller supported an allegorical theory of myth. He believed myths began as allegorical descriptions of nature, but gradually came to be interpreted literally: for example, a poetic description of the sea as "raging" was eventually taken literally, and the sea was then thought of as a raging god.Segal, p. 20  Some thinkers believe myths resulted from the personification of inanimate objects and forces. According to these thinkers, the ancients worshipped natural phenomena such as fire and air, gradually coming to describe them as gods.Bulfinch, p. 195 For example, according to the theory of mythopoeic thought, the ancients tended to view things as persons, not as mere objects;Frankfort, p. 4 thus, they described natural events as acts of personal gods, thus giving rise to myths.Frankfort, p. 15  According to the myth-ritual theory, the existence of myth is tied to ritual.Segal, p. 61 In its most extreme form, this theory claims myths arise to explain rituals.Graf, p. 40 This claim was first put forward by the biblical scholar William Robertson Smith.Meletinsky pp.&nbsp;19–20 According to Smith, people begin performing rituals for a reason that is not related to myth.  Later, after they have forgotten the original reason for a ritual, they try to account for it by inventing a myth and claiming the ritual commemorates the events described in that myth.Segal, p. 63 The anthropologist James Frazer had a similar theory. He thought primitive humans start out with a belief in magical laws.  Later, when they begin to lose faith in magic, they invent myths about gods and claim their formerly magical rituals are actually religious rituals intended to appease the gods.Frazer, p. 711 Mircea Eliade argued that one of the foremost functions of myth is to establish models for behaviorEliade, Myth and Reality, p. 8Honko, p. 51 and that myths may also provide a religious experience. By telling or reenacting myths, members of traditional societies detach themselves from the present and return to the mythical age, thereby bringing themselves closer to the divine.Eliade, Myth and Reality, p. 19 Lauri Honko asserts that, in some cases, a society will reenact a myth in an attempt to reproduce the conditions of the mythical age. For example, it will reenact the healing performed by a god at the beginning of time in order to heal someone in the present.Honko, p. 49 Similarly, Roland Barthes argues that modern culture explores religious experience. Because it is not the job of science to define human morality, a religious experience is an attempt to connect with a perceived moral past, which is in contrast with the technological present.Roland Barthes, Mythologies Joseph Campbell writes: "In the long view of the history of mankind, four essential functions of mythology can be discerned. The first and most distinctive – vitalizing all – is that of eliciting and supporting a sense of awe before the mystery of being."  "The second function of mythology is to render a cosmology, an image of the universe that will support and be supported by this sense of awe before the mystery of the presence and the presence of a mystery." Campbell,   Occidental Mythology p519 "A third function of mythology is to support the current social order, to integrate the individual organically with his group;"Campbell,   Occidental Mythology p520 "The fourth function of mythology is to initiate the individual into the order of realities of his own psyche, guiding him toward his own spiritual enrichment and realization."Campbell, Occidental Mythology p521 In a later work Campbell explains the relationship of myth to civilization: The rise and fall of civilisations in the long, broad course of history can be seen largely to be a function of the integrity and cogency of their supporting canons of myth; for not authority but aspiration is the motivator, builder, and transformer of civilisation. A mythological canon is an organisation of symbols, ineffable in import, by which the energies of aspiration are evoked and gathered toward a focus.Joseph Campbell,  Creative Mythology p5 And yet the history of civilisation is not one of harmony. There are two pathologies. One is interpreting myth as pseudo-science, as though it had to do with directing nature instead of putting you in accord with nature, and the other is the political interpretation of myths to the advantage of one group within a society, or one society within a group of nations. Campbell gives his answer to the question: what is the function of myth today? in episode 2 of Bill Moyers's The Power of Myth series. Historically, the important approaches  to the study of mythology have been those of Vico, Schelling, Schiller, Jung, Freud, Lévy-Bruhl, Lévi-Strauss, Frye, the Soviet school, and the Myth and Ritual School.Guy Lanoue, Foreword to Meletinsky, p.viii The critical interpretation of myth goes back as far as the Presocratics.Segal, p. 1 Euhemerus was one of the most important pre-modern mythologists. He interpreted myths as accounts of actual historical events, distorted over many retellings. Sallustius,On the Gods and the World, ch. 5, See Collected Writings on the Gods and the World, The Prometheus Trust, Frome, 1995 for example, divides myths into five categories – theological, physical (or concerning natural laws), animastic (or concerning soul), material and mixed. This last being those myths which show the interaction between two or more of the previous categories and which, he says, are particularly used in initiations. To ones who are even trying to change content of the myth according to probability would be found criticism in Plato Phaedrus (229d), in which Socrates says that it is the province of one who is "vehemently curious and laborious, and not entirely happy . . .". Although Plato famously condemned poetic myth when discussing the education of the young in the Republic, primarily on the grounds there was a danger the young and uneducated might take the stories of gods and heroes literally; nevertheless, he constantly refers to myths of all kinds throughout his writings. As Platonism developed in the phases commonly called 'middle Platonism' and neoplatonism, such writers as Plutarch, Porphyry, Proclus, Olympiodorus and Damascius wrote explicitly about the symbolic interpretation of traditional and Orphic myths.Perhaps the most extended passage of philosophic interpretation of myth is to be found in the fifth and sixth essays of Proclus’ Commentary on the Republic (to be found in The Works of Plato I, trans. Thomas Taylor, The Prometheus Trust, Frome, 1996); Porphyry’s analysis of the Homeric Cave of the Nymphs is another important work in this area (Select Works of Porphyry, Thomas Taylor The Prometheus Trust, Frome, 1994). See the external links below for a full English translation. Interest in polytheistic mythology revived in the Renaissance, with early works on mythography appearing in the 16th century, such as the Theologia mythologica (1532). Myths are not the same as fables, legends, folktales, fairy tales, anecdotes, or fiction, but the concepts may overlap. Notably, during the nineteenth century period of Romanticism, folktales and fairy tales were perceived as eroded fragments of earlier mythology (famously by the Brothers Grimm and Elias Lönnrot). Mythological themes are also very often consciously employed in literature, beginning with Homer. The resulting work may expressly refer to a mythological background without itself being part of a body of myths (Cupid and Psyche). The medieval romance in particular plays with this process of turning myth into literature. Euhemerism refers to the process of rationalization of myths, putting themes formerly imbued with mythological qualities into pragmatic contexts, for example following a cultural or religious paradigm shift (notably the re-interpretation of pagan mythology following Christianization). Conversely, historical and literary material may acquire mythological qualities over time, for example the Matter of Britain referring to the legendary history of Great Britain, especially those focused on King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table, and the Matter of France, based on historical events of the fifth and eighth centuries, respectively, were first made into epic poetry and became partly mythological over the following centuries. "Conscious generation" of mythology has been termed mythopoeia by J. R. R. Tolkien[16], and was notoriously also suggested, very separately, by Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg. The first scholarly theories of myth appeared during the second half of the 19th century. In general, these 19th-century theories framed myth as a failed or obsolete mode of thought, often by interpreting myth as the primitive counterpart of modern science.Segal, pp. 3–4 For example, E. B. Tylor interpreted myth as an attempt at a literal explanation for natural phenomena: unable to conceive of impersonal natural laws, early humans tried to explain natural phenomena by attributing souls to inanimate objects, giving rise to animism.Segal, p. 4 According to Tylor, human thought evolves through various stages, starting with mythological ideas and gradually progressing to scientific ideas. Not all scholars, not even all 19th century scholars, have agreed with this view. For example, Lucien Lévy-Bruhl claimed  "the primitive mentality is a condition of the human mind, and not a stage in its historical development." Max Müller called myth a "disease of language". He speculated that myths arose due to the lack of abstract nouns and neuter gender in ancient languages: anthropomorphic figures of speech, necessary in such languages, were eventually taken literally, leading to the idea that natural phenomena were conscious beings, gods.Segal, p.20 The anthropologist James Frazer saw myths as a misinterpretation of magical rituals, which were themselves based on a mistaken idea of natural law.Segal, pp. 67–68 According to Frazer, humans begin with an unfounded belief in impersonal magical laws. When they realize their applications of these laws don't work, they give up their belief in natural law, in favor of a belief in personal gods controlling nature thus giving rise to religious myths. Meanwhile, humans continue practicing formerly magical rituals through force of habit, reinterpreting them as reenactments of mythical events. Finally humans realize nature does follow natural laws, but now they discover their true nature through science. Here again science makes myth obsolete as humans progress "from magic through religion to science". Robert Segal asserts that by pitting mythical thought against modern scientific thought, such theories implied modern humans must abandon myth.Segal, p. 3  Many 20th-century theories of myth rejected the 19th-century theories' opposition of myth and science. In general, "twentieth-century theories have tended to see myth as almost anything but an outdated counterpart to science […] Consequently, moderns are not obliged to abandon myth for science." Swiss psychologist Carl Jung (1873–1961) tried to understand the psychology behind world myths. Jung asserted that all humans share certain innate unconscious psychological forces, which he called archetypes. He believed the similarities between the myths from different cultures reveal the existence of these universal archetypes.Boeree Joseph Campbell believed there were two different orders of mythology: myths that "are metaphorical of spiritual potentiality in the human being," and myths "that have to do with specific societies".Campbell, p. 22  His major work is The Masks of God I-IV. In the first volume, Primitive Mythology, he outlines clearly his intention:  In his fourth volume Campbell coins the phrase, creative mythology, which he explains as:  Claude Lévi-Strauss believed myths reflect patterns in the mind and interpreted those patterns more as fixed mental structures, specifically, pairs of opposites (good/evil, compassionate/callous), than as unconscious feelings or urges.Segal, p. 113 In his appendix to Myths, Dreams and Mysteries, and in The Myth of the Eternal Return, Mircea Eliade attributed modern humans’ anxieties to their rejection of myths and the sense of the sacred. In the 1950s, Roland Barthes published a series of essays examining modern myths and the process of their creation in his book Mythologies. Following the structuralist era (roughly 1960s to 1980s), the predominant anthropological and sociological approaches to myth treat myth increasingly as a form of narrative that could be studied, interpreted and analyzed like ideology, history and culture. In other words, myth is a form of understanding and telling stories that is connected to power, political structures, and political and economic interests. These approaches are very much in opposition and contrast to approaches such as that of Campbell and Eliade that hold that myth has some type of essential connection to ultimate sacred meanings that transcend cultural specifics. In particular, there is a long-standing exploration of myth in relation to history from diverse social sciences. Most of these studies share the assumption that there is no necessary difference between history and myth in the sense that history is factual, real, accurate and truth while myth is the opposite. Myth, like ideology, is a word used to disparage the histories (or ways of understanding) of other sociopolitical groups.  Comparative mythology is the systematic comparison of myths from different cultures.Littleton, p. 32 It seeks to discover underlying themes that are common to the myths of multiple cultures. In some cases, comparative mythologists use the similarities between different mythologies to argue that those mythologies have a common source. This common source may be a common source of inspiration (e.g. a certain natural phenomenon that inspired similar myths in different cultures) or a common "protomythology" that diverged into the various mythologies we see today. Nineteenth-century interpretations of myth were often highly comparative, seeking a common origin for all myths.Leonard However, modern-day scholars tend to be more suspicious of comparative approaches, avoiding overly general or universal statements about mythology.Northup, p. 8 One exception to this modern trend is Joseph Campbell's book The Hero With a Thousand Faces (1949), which claims all hero myths follow the same underlying pattern. This theory of a "monomyth" is out of favor with the mainstream study of mythology.  In modern society, myth is often regarded as historical or obsolete. Many scholars in the field of cultural studies are now beginning to research the idea that myth has worked itself into modern discourses. Modern formats of communication allow for widespread communication across the globe, thus enabling mythological discourse and exchange among greater audiences than ever before. Various elements of myth can now be found in television, cinema and video games. Although myth was traditionally transmitted through the oral tradition on a small scale, the technology of the film industry has enabled filmmakers to transmit myths to large audiences via film dissemination (Singer, "Mythmaking: Philosophy in Film", 3–6). In the psychology of Carl Jung, myths are the expression of a culture or society’s goals, fears, ambitions and dreams (Indick, "Classical Heroes in Modern Movies: Mythological Patterns of the Superhero", 93–95). Film is ultimately an expression of the society in which it was credited, and reflects the norms and ideals of the time and location in which it is created. In this sense, film is simply the evolution of myth. The technological aspect of film changes the way the myth is distributed, but the core idea of the myth is the same. The basis of modern storytelling in both cinema and television lies deeply rooted in the mythological tradition. Many contemporary and technologically advanced movies often rely on ancient myths to construct narratives.  The Disney Corporation is well-known among cultural study scholars for "reinventing" traditional childhood myths (Koven, "Folklore Studies and Popular Film and Television: A Necessary Critical Survey", 176–195). While many films are not as obvious as Disney fairy tales in respect to the employment of myth, the plots of many films are largely based on the rough structure of the myth.  Mythological archetypes such as the cautionary tale regarding the abuse of technology, battles between gods, and creation stories are often the subject of major film productions. These films are often created under the guise of cyberpunk action movies, fantasy dramas, and apocalyptic tales. Although the range of narratives, as well as the medium in which it is being told is constantly increasing, it is clear myth continues to be a pervasive and essential component of the collective imagination (Cormer, "Narrative." Critical Ideas in Television Studies, 47–59.) Recent films such as Clash of the Titans, Immortals, or Thor continue the trend of mining traditional mythology in order to directly create a plot for modern consumption. With the invention of modern myths such as urban legends, the mythological traditional will carry on to the increasing variety of mediums available in the 21st century and beyond. The crucial idea is that myth is not simply a collection of stories permanently fixed to a particular time and place in history, but an ongoing social practice within every society. Many authors use mythology nowadays as a basis for their books, such as Rick Riordan, whose Percy Jackson and the Olympians series is situated in a modern-day world where the Greek deities are manifest; likewise his Kane Chronicles with the Egyptian pantheon.    Archetypal literary criticism Artificial mythology Creation myth Flood myth Fairy Fable Geomythology Legendary creature LGBT themes in mythology Mytheme Mythical place National myth Origin-of-death myth Poles in mythology Culture hero Death deity Earth Mother First man or woman (disambiguation) Hero Life-death-rebirth deity Lunar deity Psychopomp Sky father Solar deity Trickster Underworld Bengali mythology Chinese mythology Christian mythology Greek mythology Hindu mythology Hittite mythology Islamic mythology Japanese mythology Jesus Christ in comparative mythology Jewish mythology Magic and mythology Maya mythology Religion and mythology Roman mythology List of deities List of legendary creatures by type List of legendary creatures List of mythical objects List of mythologies List of women warriors in folklore New Comparative Mythology / Nouvelle Mythologie Comparée, http://nouvellemythologiecomparee.hautetfort.com/ Ollodagos, http://www.sbec.be/index.php/publications/ollodagos Studia Mythologica Slavica, http://sms.zrc-sazu.si/ Mythological Studies Journal,http://journals.sfu.ca/pgi/index.php/pacificamyth/index The Journal of Germanic Mythology and Folklore, http://www.jgmf.org/ Armstrong, Karen. "A Short History of Myth". Knopf Canada, 2006. Bascom, William. "The Forms of Folklore: Prose Narratives". 'Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth. Ed. Alan Dundes. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 5–29. Bulfinch, Thomas. Bulfinch's Mythology. Whitefish: Kessinger, 2004. Campbell, Joeseph. "The Power of Myth". New York: Doubleday, 1988. Doty, William. Myth: A Handbook. Westport: Greenwood, 2004. Downing, Christine. The Goddess: Mythological Images of the Feminine. New York: Authors Choice Press. 2007. Dundes, Alan. "Binary Opposition in Myth: The Propp/Levi-Strauss Debate in Retrospect". Western Folklore 56 (Winter, 1997): 39–50. Dundes, Alan. Introduction. Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth. Ed. Alan Dundes. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 1–3. Dunes, Alan. "Madness in Method Plus a Plea for Projective Inversion in Myth". Myth and Method. Ed. Laurie Patton and Wendy Doniger. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1996. Eliade, Mircea. Myth and Reality. Trans. Willard R. Trask. New York: Harper & Row, 1963. Eliade, Mircea. Myths, Dreams and Mysteries. Trans. Philip Mairet. New York: Harper & Row, 1967. "Euhemerism". The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions. Ed. John Bowker. Oxford University Press, 2000. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press.  UC – Berkeley Library.  20 March 2009 . Fabiani, Paolo "The Philosophy of the Imagination in Vico and Malebranche". F.U.P. (Florence UP), English edition 2009. PDF Frankfort, Henri, et al. The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man: An Essay on Speculative Thought in the Ancient Near East. Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 1977. Frazer, James. The Golden Bough. New York: Macmillan, 1922. Graf, Fritz. Greek Mythology. Trans. Thomas Marier. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993. Honko, Lauri. "The Problem of Defining Myth". Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth. Ed. Alan Dundes. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 41–52. Humphrey, Sheryl. The Haunted Garden: Death and Transfiguration in the Folklore of Plants. New York: DCA Art Fund Grant from the Council on the Arts and Humanities for Staten Island and public funding from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs, 978-1-300-55364-9, 2012. Kirk, G.S. Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures. Berkeley: Cambridge University Press, 1973. Kirk, G.S. "On Defining Myths". Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth. Ed. Alan Dundes. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 53–61. Leonard, Scott. "The History of Mythology: Part I". Scott A. Leonard's Home Page. August 2007.Youngstown State University, 17 November 2009 Littleton, Covington. The New Comparative Mythology: An Anthropological Assessment of the Theories of Georges Dumezil. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973. Meletinsky, Elea. The Poetics of Myth. Trans. Guy Lanoue and Alexandre Sadetsky. New York: Routledge, 2000. "myth." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online, 21 March 2009 "myths". A Dictionary of English Folklore. Jacqueline Simpson and Steve Roud. Oxford University Press, 2000. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press.  UC – Berkeley Library.  20 March 2009  Oxfordreference.com Northup, Lesley. "Myth-Placed Priorities: Religion and the Study of Myth". Religious Studies Review 32.1(2006): 5–10. O'Flaherty, Wendy. Hindu Myths: A Sourcebook. London: Penguin, 1975. Pettazzoni, Raffaele. "The Truth of Myth". Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth. Ed. Alan Dundes. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 98–109. Segal, Robert. Myth: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2004. Simpson, Michael. Introduction. Apollodorus. Gods and Heroes of the Greeks. Trans. Michael Simpson. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1976. 1–9. Singer, Irving. "Introduction: Philosophical Dimensions of Myth and Cinema." Cinematic Mythmaking: Philosophy in Film. Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States: MIT Press Books, 2008. 3–6. Web. 23 Oct. 2011. Slattery, Dennis Patrick. Bridge Work: Essays on Mythology, Literature and Psychology. Carpinteria: Mandorla Books. 2015. Indick, William. "Classical Heroes in Modern Movies: Mythological Patterns of the Superhero." Journal of Media Psychology 9.3 (2004): 93–95. York University Libraries. Web. Koven, Mikel J. "Folklore Studies and Popular Film and Television: a Necessary Critical Survey." Journal of American Folklore 116.460 (2003): 176–195. Print. Matira, Lopamundra. "Children's Oral Literature and Modern Mass Media." Indian Folklore Research Journal 5.8 (2008): 55–57. Print. Cormer, John. "Narrative." Critical Ideas in Television Studies. New York, United States: Charendon Press, 2007. 47–59. Print. Stefan Arvidsson, Aryan Idols. Indo-European Mythology as Ideology and Science, University of Chicago Press, 2006. ISBN 0-226-02860-7 Roland Barthes, Mythologies (1957) Kees W. Bolle, The Freedom of Man in Myth. Vanderbilt University Press, 1968. Richard Buxton. The Complete World of Greek Mythology. London: Thames & Hudson, 2004. E. Csapo, Theories of Mythology (2005) Edith Hamilton, Mythology (1998) Graves, Robert. "Introduction." New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology. Trans. Richard Aldington and Delano Ames. London: Hamlyn, 1968. v–viii. Joseph Campbell The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton University Press, 1949. Flight of the Wild Gander: Explorations in the Mythological Dimension: Select Essays 1944–1968  New World Library, 3rd ed. (2002), ISBN 978-1-57731-210-9. The Power of Myth. Doubleday, 1988, ISBN 0-385-24773-7. Thou Art That (book). New World Library, 2001, ISBN 1-57731-202-3 Mircea Eliade Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return. Princeton University Press, 1954. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. Trans. Willard R. Trask. NY: Harper & Row, 1961. Louis Herbert Gray [ed.], The Mythology of All Races, in 13 vols., 1916-1932. Lucien Lévy-Bruhl Mental Functions in Primitive Societies (1910) Primitive Mentality (1922) The Soul of the Primitive (1928) The Supernatural and the Nature of the Primitive Mind (1931) Primitive Mythology (1935) The Mystic Experience and Primitive Symbolism (1938) Charles H. Long, Alpha: The Myths of Creation. George Braziller, 1963. O'Flaherty, Wendy. Hindu Myths: A Sourcebook. London: Penguin, 1975. Barry B. Powell, Classical Myth, 5th edition, Prentice-Hall. Santillana and Von Dechend (1969, 1992 re-issue). Hamlet's Mill: An Essay Investigating the Origins of Human Knowledge And Its Transmission Through Myth, Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-87923-215-3. Isabelle Loring Wallace and Jennie Hirsh, Contemporary Art and Classical Myth. Farnham: Ashgate (2011), ISBN 978-0-7546-6974-6 Walker, Steven F. and Segal, Robert A., Jung and the Jungians on Myth: An Introduction, Theorists of Myth, Routledge (1996), ISBN 978-0-8153-2259-7. Vanda Zajko and Miriam Leonard, Lauphing with Medusa. Oxford: Oxford `University Press (2006), ISBN 978-0-19-923794-4. Zong, In-Sob. Folk Tales from Korea. 3rd ed. Elizabeth: Hollym, 1989. The New Student's Reference Work/Mythology, ed. Beach (1914), at wikisource. Leonard, Scott. "The History of Mythology: Part I". Youngstown State University. Greek mythology Sacred texts Myths and Myth-Makers Old Tales and Superstitions Interpreted by comparative mythology by John Fiske. LIMC Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae, a database of ancient objects linked with mythology Joseph Campbell on Bill Moyers's The Power of Myth Dreams, Visions, and Myths: Making Sense of Our World
