     Nanyang Technological University (Abbreviation: NTU; Malay: Universiti Teknologi Nanyang; Chinese: 南洋理工大学; pinyin:  Nányáng Lǐgōng Dàxué; Tamil:  நன்யாங் தொழில்நுட்ப பல்கலைக்கழகம், Naṉyāṅ Toḻilnuṭpa Palkalaikkaḻakam) is one of the two largest public and autonomous universities in Singapore. NTU was inaugurated in 1991, when its predecessor institution, the Nanyang Technological Institute (NTI) merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE). NTU has since grown to become a full-fledged comprehensive and research-intensive university, with over 33,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students in the various colleges of engineering, science, humanities, arts and social sciences, the Nanyang Business School, as well as the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine. NTU is also home to the National Institute of Education, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Earth Observatory of Singapore, and the Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering. The latest addition to the university, the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, is set-up jointly with Imperial College London, and opened its doors in 2013. Despite being only 24 years old, NTU is consistently ranked among the world's best in various college and university rankings. In the 2015 QS World University Rankings, NTU was ranked 13th in the world and 2nd in Asia. For the second year running, NTU has been ranked 1st in the world among young universities in the 2015 QS Top 50 Under 50. Alternatively, the Academic Ranking of World Universities, which places a high weightage on the number of Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals won by a university’s alumni and faculty recently placed NTU among the top 151-200 worldwide and 2nd in Singapore. The College of Engineering at NTU is also ranked 6th in the world in the 2015 QS World University Rankings by Faculty. The NTU Nanyang MBA is Singapore's No.1 MBA programme having placed 29th worldwide in the 2016 Financial Times Global MBA Rankings and 59th globally (2nd in Asia) by The Economist Intelligence Unit for full-time MBA Rankings in 2015. For 12 consecutive years, Nanyang Business School has been ranked the best in Singapore by The Economist.http://www.economist.com/whichmba/full-time-mba-ranking?fsrc=scn/fb/te/bl/ed/MBARankings The university's main campus covers 200 hectares of land, making it the the largest university campus in Singapore. The main campus grounds are located in the south-western part of the Western Water Catchment just adjacent to the catchment's western boundary with the town of Jurong West. NTU also has two other campuses, one in Novena and another at one-north. Nanyang Technological Institute (NTI) was set up on 1 August 1981 with a charter to train three-quarters of Singapore’s engineers.  When NTI started in 1982, it had a total student population of 582 in three engineering disciplines – civil and structural, electrical and electronic, and mechanical and production engineering. By 1990, the institute’s undergraduate student population had grown to 6,832. The first two graduate students were admitted in 1986. Three engineering schools were added, and the School of Accountancy from the National University of Singapore was transferred to NTI in 1987. A school of applied science was also started.  In 1990, the government announced that the Institute of Education would be merged with the College of Physical Education to form the National Institute of Education and that it would be part of the new NTU upon its establishment in 1991. Despite the similar name, it is not related to Nanyang University ("南大"), the local Chinese-medium tertiary institution which merged with the University of Singapore in 1980 to form the National University of Singapore. NTI was established the following year and took over the former Nanyang University's buildings. In 1991, NTI merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE) to form Nanyang Technological University (NTU). The alumni rolls of the former Nanyang University were transferred to NTU in 1996. NTU became autonomous in 2006 and is today one of the three largest public universities in Singapore.  NTU's primary campus is the 200-hectare (2.0&nbsp;km2; 0.772 sq mi) Yunnan Garden Campus which is situated adjacent to the town of Jurong West. It is the largest university campus on the island of Singapore and also houses Singapore's largest on-campus residence infrastructure including 18 halls of residence for undergraduates and two graduate halls. The campus grounds were originally donated by the Singapore Hokkien Association to Nanyang University, a Chinese-medium university inaugurated in 1953.  In 1980, the Government of Singapore merged Nanyang University with the University of Singapore to form the present-day National University of Singapore.  The following year, the Nanyang University grounds were granted to the Nanyang Technological Institute, a newly formed English-medium engineering college. In 1991, NTI merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE), Singapore's main teaching college, to form the present-day Nanyang Technological University.   The former Nanyang University administration building was beautifully restored into the Chinese Heritage Centre and was gazetted as a national monument in 1998 - now overlooking the historical Yunnan Garden. The Nanyang University Memorial and original Nanyang University Arch were also declared national monuments of Singapore in 1998. The NTU Art & Heritage Museum is an approved public museum under the National Heritage Board’s Approved Museum Scheme; benefactors who donate artworks and artefacts to NTU enjoy double tax deductions. There is a small lake between the Chinese Heritage Centre and Hall of Residence 4 called Nanyang Lake. Only members of NTU Anglers' Club permit holder, the fishing club at NTU, are allowed to fish in this lake. In 2008, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, one of the world’s largest foundations for entrepreneurship, selected NTU as the first Kauffman campus outside of the US. The campus also served as the Youth Olympic Village for the inaugural Youth Olympic Games in 2010. Singapore's first eco-business park, CleanTech Park, is situated next to NTU's main campus. It is proposed to be developed in three phases with an estimated completion year of 2030. The park's first multi-tenanted building, CleanTech One, was opened in October 2010. CleanTech One's tenants include those from the public sector (the Nanyang Environment & Water Research Institute (NEWRI), the Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), and the Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore), as well as from the private sector (DHI Water & Environment, Toray Industries, Silecs International, CIMA Nanotech, Diamond Energy, the Sustainable Energy Association of Singapore (SEAS), Yingli Solar, and Pfizer). NTU@one-north is located at the one-north business park, and is home to the NTU Alumni Clubhouse. It comprises two wings with educational and recreational facilities primarily allowing the university to enhance its delivery of continuing education programmes through the Centre for Continuing Education and Confucius Institute of NTU. The educational facilities include a 215-seat auditorium, an 80-seat lecture theatre,  six 45-seat lecture theatres, twenty-one 18 to 50-seat seminar rooms, three 18 to 27-seat computer rooms and eight 6-seat discussion rooms. Alumni clubhouse facilities include a fun pool, a Chinese restaurant, games arcade, wine bar, lounge, karaoke rooms, games rooms, gymnasium, childcare centre and SPA. The Campus is also home to NTU's Centre for Continuing Education and the Confucius Institute of NTU. Its close proximity to the city means that it is more convenient for alumni to gather and connect with the university. A third campus, Novena Campus, is situated close to LKCMedicine’s partner teaching hospital, Tan Tock Seng Hospital in downtown Novena. The new 20-storey Clinical Sciences Building is expected to be completed in 2016. The CSB will also be home to LKCMedicine researchers, with the laboratories interconnected through collaborative spaces. On-campus housing is located within NTU's Yunnan Garden Campus. NTU has 18 Halls of Residence for undergraduates, each with a capacity of between 500 & 659 residents. They accommodate more than 10,000 local and international students, with every freshman guaranteed a hostel room. Under the Campus Master Plan, an additional 3,750 students will be able to experience hostel life by mid 2016. All halls are co-ed by floor or wing and offer single and double occupancy rooms which are fully furnished. Double rooms are shared by residents of the same gender. With the exception of Halls 1 & 2 which offer shared suite-style attached shower and toilets, all halls have gender specific communal showers and toilets. All rooms at Halls 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 & 16 are fitted with air-conditioners on a pay-for-use basis. Selected rooms at Crescent Hall & Pioneer Hall are fitted with air-conditioners, also on a pay-for-use basis. Every hall also has communal facilities like lounges, air-conditioned reading rooms, pantries, and laundry rooms with washing machines and dryers. On-campus graduate housing is available at two on-campus graduate halls - Graduate Hall 1 and Graduate Hall 2, with a capacity of 476 and 852 respectively. All rooms are fully furnished with a bed, wardrobe, desk, fan, air-conditioning and internet connection. Communal facilities like pantries and laundry rooms with washing machines and dryers are also available to residents. Faculty Housing consists of five clusters made up of apartment blocks, maisonettes, semi-detached houses and bungalows. There is also a wide variety of housing types consisting of 1 bedroom, 2 bedroom, 3 bedroom and duplex units. The floor areas range from 55 sqm to 200 sqm. All the faculty housing are surrounded by greenery, and each cluster has its own exclusive setting and view. The University is connected to the high speed Internet. All the facilities and resources available over the Internet are accessible by anyone on the campus network. The campus network, which links together all computing systems on the campus, is managed by the University's Centre for IT Services. To supplement the fixed-line campus network, NTU implemented a campus-wide wireless network in 2000. This high-speed wireless network, capable of a transfer rate of up to 11 megabits per second, enables NTU staff and students equipped with mobile devices such as notebooks, PCs and PDAs to access all networked services from practically anywhere on the campus without the need of a hardwired network connection. However services like torrents are still blocked. NTU provides e-learning services, which is based on BlackBoard technology, provides the framework and eco-system for learning and teaching. Besides providing a repository of lecture recordings, lecture notes, it also facilitates learning activities for collaboration, discussion, assessment and project work. During term time, the usage typically by faculty and students exceeds nine-million page views weekly (Jan 2010). NTU is organised into several colleges and schools, each corresponding to different fields of study. The various engineering schools, which were consolidated to form the College of Engineering in 2001, together with Nanyang Business School, the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information and the National Institute of Education, have been part of NTU from its inception. More recently, NTU has established additional schools for the Biological Sciences (2001), Humanities and Social Sciences (2004), Physical & Mathematical Sciences (2005), and Art, Design and Media (2009). In 2013, NTU and Imperial College London jointly established a new medical school, the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, which is based in the Novena campus. NTU also hosts a number of autonomous institutes: the National Institute of Education, the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, and two recently established research institutes. Nanyang Business School (NBS) is the largest business school in Singapore with over 4,400 undergraduates and postgraduates pursuing degrees in Accountancy and Business, as well as one of the world's top MBA programmes. The faculty consists of over 160 professors from more than 20 countries. NBS is the only business school in Singapore to offer the 3-year direct-honours single degree programme in Business or Accountancy. NBS' widely popular double degree programme in Accountancy and Business can be completed within 3.5 - 4 years, and the newly introduced integrated Bachelor & Master's programme takes 4 years to complete. Students enrolled into the Business programme are allowed to specialise in their penultimate year of study in one of six areas, namely: Actuarial Science, Banking & Finance, Business Analytics, Human Resource Consulting, Marketing, Risk Management and Insurance. Those who choose to major in Banking & Finance have the option to choose one of three specialised tracks which include the 'International Trading' option. The business school also provides undergraduates with the opportunity to go on a semester-long exchange, on top of overseas study missions and compulsory internships. Graduate programmes offered by NBS include the top-ranked Nanyang MBA, Nanyang Executive MBA, MSc Accountancy, and MSc Financial Engineering.  It consists of three schools. The College of Engineering is NTU's largest subdivision.  It is claimed to be the world's largest engineering college, with a student population of more than 10,500 undergraduates and 3,500 graduates. It consists of six schools (Chemical and Biomedical, Civil and Environmental, Computer, Electrical and Electronic, Materials Science, Mechanical and Aerospace) focused on technology and innovation. The college offers a rich array of multidisciplinary programmes and specialisations in traditional engineering disciplines and beyond. In addition to the 12 single degree programmes, the college also offers double degrees, double majors and integrated programmes as well as the only aerospace engineering programme in Singapore. Today, the college consists of three schools and is home to about 150 faculty members (more than 15 of which are Singapore National Research Foundation Fellows), 340 research staff, 110 administrative and technical staff, 4,000 undergraduate and 750 graduate students. The Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine was established in 2013 in collaboration with Imperial College London. Prior to its opening in 2013, the school received record donations of S$400 million, including S$150 million from the Lee Foundation. The School’s primary clinical partner is the National Healthcare Group. NTU's Interdisciplinary Graduate School focuses on the key research areas within NTU's Peaks of Excellence in Sustainable Earth, New Media and Future Healthcare. Research in these areas span across different disciplines beyond the conventional school-based programmes. IGS leverages on professors from all the schools and colleges in NTU to undertake interdisciplinary research and to act as advisors for IGS PhD students. NTU hosts a number of autonomous research and educational institutes. NTU has a total undergraduate population of around 24,300. Approximately 80% of undergraduates are Singaporean citizens and permanent residents. The remaining 20% of international students are mostly from the ASEAN nations, China, and India. When applying for admission to NTU, applicants are required to specify one (or more) of NTU's schools in which to study. Applicants are offered admission by the individual schools, which have varying admission criteria (after admission, it is possible to appeal for a transfer between schools). Applicants from Singapore must have graduated from a junior college or polytechnic. International students are required to have completed K-12 education; furthermore, as English is the medium of instruction at NTU, students from non-English speaking countries may be required to have an English language proficiency certificate such as IELTS or TOEFL. Undergraduate tuition is heavily subsidised by the Government of Singapore. Singaporean citizens pay around 27 percent of the base tuition cost. A reduced subsidy is optionally available to Singaporean permanent residents and international students, but with a stipulation: the recipients are contractually required to work for a Singapore-based company for three years after graduation. NTU also offers a variety of undergraduate scholarships to new as well as current students pursuing their full-time undergraduate studies in the university. Scholarships are generally awarded to students based on academic merit and good co-curricular records. NTU's Premier Scholars Programmes (PSP), comprising the University Scholars Programme (USP), Renaissance Engineering Programme (REP), CN Yang Scholars Programme (CNYSP) and NTU-NIE Teaching Scholars Programme (TSP), aim to attract the high-achieving post-secondary students with outstanding co-curricular records, leadership qualities and a strong passion to contribute to society. On top of a multidisciplinary and broad-based curriculum, these students will also have personal guidance by top faculty, interdisciplinary and intensive research opportunities, overseas exposure, as well as meeting renowned Nobel Laureates and other world class leading scientists, politicians and industry leaders. Students who are under the CNYSP, USP and TSP will, upon their graduation, be awarded a special certificate in addition to their degree certificate. The University Scholars Programme (USP) leads a University-wide commitment to provide an intellectually stimulating and enriching academic environment for the best students of NTU. The programme includes an exciting multidisciplinary curriculum that compliments their core curriculum and supplements their general education programme. From ethics to quantitative reasoning, from religions of the world to astronomy, USP offers a wide range of courses, special events, and learning opportunities each year that promise to broaden students’ perspectives and challenge their creative thinking and analytical ability. The Renaissance Engineering Programme (REP) is an integrated, rigorous and fully residential programme with a curriculum that covers a broad spectrum of multidisciplinary subjects bridging Engineering, Business and the Liberal Arts which includes Sciences, Mathematics, Engineering Technology Management, and interdisciplinary studies. This programme includes a one-year fully-fledged overseas experience at a partnering university such as University of California, Berkeley or Imperial College London with an Industrial Orientation in Year 3, and it awards a dual-degree comprising Bachelor of Engineering Science degree (with specialisation in a chosen engineering discipline) and Master of Science in Technology Management in 4.5 years. The CN Yang Scholars Programme (CNYSP), named in honour of Professor CN Yang (1957 Nobel Laureate in Physics), is a programme that is specially designed for exceptional students with a deep passion in science and engineering for the high-technology world of the 21st century. The programme provides a strong and broad foundation in the basics of science, mathematics and engineering so as to empower the students to delve deeper into any discipline in science and engineering. Students are given unique opportunities to broaden their experience by being engaged in cutting edge research within NTU. At the end of their undergraduate studies, CNYSP graduates are also given an option to pursue postgraduate studies (PhD) with a scholarship and overseas lab attachment. The NTU-NIE Teaching Scholars Programme (TSP) is the latest addition to the existing suite of scholar programmes in NTU. It is a premier scholars programme aimed at preparing tomorrow’s leaders of education who possess the passion and aspiration to inspire, nurture and lead our next generation. The programme offers a unique opportunity for both personal development and international exposure in interdisciplinary training through seminars, conference presentations, research assignments and mentorship, internships, and overseas programmes. Graduates of TSP will be well-equipped with intellectual rigour, strong leadership and global perspectives – ready to fulfil their aspirations in education and make their contribution in shaping the future of the nation. NTU has approximately 10,000 graduate students pursuing Master's degrees, doctorates, and other post-graduate degrees.  The graduate student population is largely international. The admission requirements for post-graduate studies vary with the school and the course of study. Several programmes require GRE or GMAT scores; typical minimum scores are 320 (GRE verbal/quantitative), 3.5 (GRE analytical), and 600 (GMAT), but these can vary widely between different schools. Applicants from non-English speaking countries are typically required to submit TOEFL or IELTS scores; typical minimum scores are 6.0 (IETL) and 90 (Internet-based TOEFL). NTU provides rich opportunities for groups and communities to form and grow, as well as supports the forming and organisation of student activities to provide a platform to share knowledge and experiences. Currently, there are more than 100 student organisations in NTU. NTU has performed exceptionally well in the various university rankings published worldwide, and was recently named the world's fastest-rising young university by the Times Higher Education in April 2015. NTU has been ranked 13th in the world and 2nd in Asia according to the latest 2015 QS World University Rankings. NTU is also ranked 1st in the world among young elite universities for the second consecutive year according to the 2015 QS Top 50 Under 50. In 2011, NTU became the first university in Asia to receive the maximum five stars under the QS Stars evaluation system. QS World University Rankings In 2015, NTU's Faculty of Engineering and Technology was ranked 6th in the world and 2nd in Asia by the QS World University Rankings by Faculty 2015. NTU also has a research citation that is among the top four in the world, with its research output being ranked among the top three universities globally in Engineering by Essential Science Indicators of Thomson Reuters. In the 2015 QS World University Rankings by Faculty, NTU is ranked 22nd in the world for Social Sciences and Management, up 11 places from the previous year. This includes the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Business School and School of Humanities and Social Sciences. In the field of Natural Sciences, NTU's College of Science jumped 44 spots to rank 15th in the world while Art & Humanities leapt 41 places to emerge 45th globally. In the recent QS World University Rankings by Subject published in April 2015, NTU had 18 subjects in the world's top 50, with three subjects in the global top 10. Times Higher Education World University Rankings In 2015, NTU rose to 55th position worldwide and 6th in Asia in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings with strong scores in all the categories measured, particularly for research, citations, international outlook as well as industry income and innovation. As a result, NTU rocketed a total of 114 places in the past four years in the THE rankings. NTU is also ranked 5th among the global top 100 universities under the age of 50 in 2015. Other rankings Separately, the Academic Ranking of World Universities published by the Shanghai Ranking Consultancy that ranks universities' research performance and places a high weightage on the number of Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals won by a university’s alumni and faculty recently placed NTU in the range of 151-200 worldwide and 2nd in Singapore. However, this ranking methodology has proven to be inherently biased against young universities like NTU.http://www.hey.ntu.edu.sg/issue24/features_02.html As of May 2015, Microsoft Academic Search website ranks NTU's overall engineering as the 8th in the world for the last 5 years, according to the number publications and H-Index criteria. NTU's Nanyang MBA is Singapore's No.1 MBA programme, having ranked 29th worldwide in the 2016 Financial Times Global MBA Rankings and 59th globally (2nd in Asia) by The Economist Intelligence Unit for full-time MBA Rankings in 2015. For the 12th straight year, Nanyang Business School has been ranked the best in Singapore by The Economist.http://www.economist.com/whichmba/full-time-mba-ranking?fsrc=scn/fb/te/bl/ed/MBARankings Also, NBS is placed 10th worldwide in the Financial Times’ (FT) rankings of the world’s top 100 Executive MBA (EMBA) programmes. Accounting research at NBS is rated 7th in the world and remained No. 1 in Asia by the Brigham Young University (BYU) Accounting Research Rankings released in April 2014. NTU Professor Tan Hun Tong is currently the world's top accounting researcher for the third year running while Professor Clive Lennox is ranked 7th in the world and 2nd in Asia. Notably, Professor Vijay Sethi was voted the world's best business professor as the sole recipient of the prestigious Business Professor of the Year award from The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) in March 2013, beating top business professors from Harvard Business School, Wharton Business School and London Business School. The S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies has been ranked second among university-affiliated think-tanks in Asia and 22nd internationally. NTU has many multi-national programmes and initiatives with institutions worldwide. Some examples of key partners include MIT, Stanford University, Cornell University, Caltech, University of Washington, Carnegie Mellon University; world-class universities in Asia such as Beijing University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Waseda, IIT of India; European universities like Cambridge University, Imperial College London, Warwick University, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Karolinska Institutet, University of Mannheim, Heidelberg University and Technische Universität München; and Israeli Universities like Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Technion – Israel Institute of Technology NTU is also the first Kauffman Campus outside the United States, spearheading entrepreneurship in Asia. Bachelor's degrees: Higher degrees: Although NTU occupies the grounds of the former Nanyang University (NU), and has a similar name, it is not a direct continuation of that institution. In 1980, the Government of Singapore forcibly merged Nanyang University with the University of Singapore to form the present-day National University of Singapore (NUS).  This was a source of significant discontent amongst NU students and alumni, because NU had been a Chinese-medium university, whereas the newly merged NUS was (and is) an English-medium university. As NTU subsequently grew into a full university, various efforts were made to have it claim the Nanyang University mantle. In 1996, the alumni rolls of Nanyang University were transferred from NUS to NTU. In 1998, the prominent local calligrapher and poet Pan Shou, who had been the first vice-chancellor of Nanyang University, called for NTU to be renamed Nanyang University, as a way to "quieten the hearts of many" NU alumni. In 2003, this idea received further support from NTU president Su Guaning, during an interview with the Chinese-language paper Lianhe Zaobao. One reason oferred for the renaming was that, by the mid-2000s, NTU no longer had a narrow focus on technical subjects, but had become a full university including studies in the humanities. However, the NTU administration's renaming plans soon encountered significant push-back. One NU alumni, Zhu Yong-an, circulated the results of a straw poll in which NU alumni came out strongly against the idea; respondents complained that NTU could not provide "continuity" for the "murdered" Nanyang University. Finally, after Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong weighed in on the affair, the administration dropped the idea quietly in 2006 and has not raised it since. In 2013, there was a debate over academic freedom in Singapore when Associate Professor Cherian George, an outspoken academic at the Wee Kim Wee School of Communications who had publicly criticised Singapore's system of media control and its ruling People’s Action Party. did not get tenured. Although George had been recommended for tenure by the Wee Kim Wee School, his application was turned down by a university-level committee which included representatives from the Government of Singapore. One of the reviewers for the tenure case, Cardiff University's professor Karin Wahl-Jorgensen, expressed outrage at NTU's decision, and George's thesis advisor, Stanford University's Theodore Glasser, raised doubts about "NTU's reputation as a university of international standing" and "NTU's commitment to academic freedom". Despite a petition against the tenure decision by students at the Wee Kim Wee School, George's appeal against the tenure decision was subsequently rejected by the university.    Subject !! World rank !! Asian rank Electrical & Electronic Engineering 7th 2nd Materials Science 8th 2nd Education 10th 2nd Communication & Media Studies 15th 2nd Mechanical & Aeronautical Engineering 17th 4th Chemistry 18th 6th Civil & Structural Engineering 18th 7th Chemical Engineering 21st 7th Computer Science & Information Systems 21st 5th Accounting & Finance 22nd 3rd Linguistics 24th 7th Business & Management Studies 31st 5th Environmental Sciences 31st 4th Statistics & Operational Research 31st 6th Mathematics 32nd 5th Physics & Astronomy 43rd 9th Psychology 44th 4th Art & Design 45th 6th The Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information is a school of communication studies and offers courses in Journalism, Broadcast, Advertising, Communication Policy and Information Studies. It originally established in 1992 and it was named after Singapore's former president Wee Kim Wee in 1995. The School of Art, Design and Media is Singapore's first professional art school and offers an undergraduate programmes in Art, Design, and Media, as well as graduate degrees in arts research. Its building, which features a sloping grassy roof surrounding a central courtyard, is frequently featured in NTU's promotional materials. The School of Humanities and Social Sciences offers programmes in a wide variety of fields including Chinese, Economics, English Literature, History, Linguistics, Philosophy, Psychology, Public Policy and Sociology. The School of Biological Sciences was established in 2002 and offers a variety of programmes in the Biological Sciences and also a unique and innovative "East meets West" double degree programme in Biomedical Sciences and Traditional Chinese Medicine with the Beijing University of Chinese Medicine in China. Students may also pursue a second major in Food Science and Technology to gain understanding about food processes with an engineering and industrial point of view. The School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences was established in 2005 and offers various disciplines in Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, as well as Earth Sciences in collaboration with the Earth Observatory of Singapore. Students also have the choice of several multidisciplinary programmes such as Chemistry and Biological Chemistry with a second major in Food Science and Technology and/or with optional concentrations in current topics such as Green Chemistry and Nanotechnology, Physics with a second major in Mathematical Sciences and the combined major in Mathematics and Economics. The Asian School of the Environment is a new interdisciplinary School established in 2015 to focus on Asian environmental challenges, integrating Earth systems, environmental life sciences, ecology, and the social sciences to address key issues of the environment and sustainability. Strong interdisciplinary links between ASE and the Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), the Earth Observatory of Singapore (EOS) and the Complexity Institute provide an excellent community for tackling large, cutting edge research questions. The National Institute of Education (NIE), occupying 16 hectares in the western part of NTU's Yunnan Garden campus, is Singapore's main teaching college and is run in close collaboration with Singapore's Ministry of Education. Full-time teachers in Singapore's public schools are typically required to complete a post-graduate diploma course at NIE, sponsored by Singapore's Ministry of Education. NIE is also internationally acclaimed and provides educational consultancy to countries from Indonesia to UAE. The S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS), named after Singapore's former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, offers graduate programmes in international relations and is an autonomous graduate institution of NTU. The school has the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies—long recognised as a world authority on strategic studies and terrorism. RSIS was ranked second among university-affiliated think tanks in Asia in the 2011 Global Go-To Think Tank Rankings. The Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE) is a unique interdisciplinary Research Centre of Excellence (RCE), funded by National Research Foundation, Singapore Ministry of Education, Nanyang Technological University and National University of Singapore. Hosted by the NTU in partnership with NUS, SCELSE is linking new insights from the Life Sciences with expertise from the emerging technologies in Engineering and Natural Sciences to understand, harness and control microbial biofilm communities. The union of these fields has established a new discipline of Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (ELSE). The Earth Observatory of Singapore (EOS) is an autonomous research institute specialising in Earth Sciences and conducts fundamental research on earthquakes, volcanoes, tsunamis & climate change in and around Southeast Asia, towards safer and more sustainable societies. University Scholars Programme Renaissance Engineering Programme CN Yang Scholars Programme NTU-NIE Teaching Scholars Programme Bachelor of Accountancy Bachelor of Arts Bachelor of Business Bachelor of Communication Studies Bachelor of Education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Fine Arts Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) Bachelor of Medicine (Chinese Medicine) Bachelor of Science Master of Accountancy Master of Applied Science Master of Arts Master of Business Master of Business Administration Master of Communication Studies Master of Education Master of Educational Administration Master of Engineering Master of Mass Communication Master of Public Administration Master of Science Master of Teaching Doctor of Philosophy Doctor in Education Inderjit Singh – MP Intan Azura binte Mokhtar – MP, Assistant Professor at National Institute of Education Lee Bee Wah – MP Low Yen Ling – MP, Parliamentary Secretary Masagos Zulkifli - MP, Minister for Home Affairs and Foreign Affairs Sim Ann – MP, Minister of State Teo Ser Luck – MP, Mayor and Minister of State Zaqy bin Mohamad – MP Ang Mong Seng – former MP Yu-Foo Yee Shoon – former MP and Minister of State Gerald Giam Yean Song - NCMP Low Thia Khiang – MP, Secretary-General of the Workers Party of Singapore Yee Jenn Jong – NCMP Cheo Chai Chen – former MP, now member of the National Solidarity Party Sebastian Teo Kway Huang – President of the National Solidarity Party Edhie Baskoro Yudhoyono – former Indonesian MP, Secretary General of Democratic Party (Indonesia), son of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono Wee Ka Siong - Deputy President of the Malaysian Chinese Association and MP in the Dewan Rakyat Azmoon Ahmad – Chairman, Association of Muslim Professionals Major Agus Harimurti Yudhoyono - Tentara Nasional Indonesia, Chief of Operations in Kostrad, son of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono Ng Gek Boo – Assistant Director-General of International Labour Organisation Ng Joo Hee – Commissioner of Police (Singapore) Shafie Shamsuddin – Managing Director, Carrefour Indonesia Chade-Meng Tan – Jolly Good Fellow, Google Inc Darren Tan Siew Peng – Chief Financial Officer Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation Leo Chen Ou – Founder, Jumei International Holdings Lim Chow Kiat - Chief Investment Officer, GIC Private Limited Chee Kheng Hoy – World expert on rubber tree research Cheryl Marie Cordeiro – International Business and Relations Researcher in the University of Gothenburg and Miss Singapore Universe 1999 Ng Yew Kwang – Albert Winsemius Professor of Economics in NTU Lee Hui Mien – Creater of the world's first spectacle frame made entirely of recycables Zihan Loo – film director, actor, dancer Yang Quee Yee – Malay and Chinese Linguist Yap Koon Chan – author and literary activist Vincy Chan – Cantopop singer Lee Teng – television host Ng Hui – actress Rui En – actress Joanne Peh – actress Michelle Saram – actress Vanessa Vanderstraaten – actress Diana Ser – journalist, former Channel News Asia news presenter, actress, host Stefanie Sun – singer Alan Tern – actor Jerry Yeo – actor Zhu Zhiqiang – graphic designer, animator Jeanette Aw – actress Youyi - actress, television host Dipna Lim Prasad – National Hurdler C Kunalan - Former National Sportsman, and Educator at the National Institute of Education Calvin Kang Li Loong - National Sprinter Bertil Andersson – Biochemistry Freddy Boey – Materials Engineering Balazs Gulyas – Neuroscience Philip Ingham – Zebrafish models for Human diseases Christopher G. Newhall – Volcanologist, co-creator of the Volcanic explosivity index Daniela Rhodes – Structural and Molecular Biology Kerry Sieh – Geology and Seismology Paul Tapponnier – Neotectonics Rudolph A. Marcus – Nobel Laureate in Chemistry 1992 Staffan Kjelleberg – Microbiology, Biofilms Peter M.A. Sloot – Complex systems modelling Anthony Gordon Fane – Membrane Technology Joseph Wilfred Lakai - Earthquake Engineer Lock Yue Chew - Physics Grace Chia – Literature Lim Chong Yah – Economics, first Chairman of National Wages Council Nadia Magnenat Thalmann - Computer graphics Tan Hun Tong – World's top experimental accounting researcher Vijay Sethi – First Economist Intelligence Unit Business Professor of the Year Iriana Halim – MediaCorp Artiste Farish A. Noor – Political Scientist and Historian Nanyang University National University of Singapore Singapore Institute of Technology Singapore Management University Singapore University of Technology and Design SIM University List of universities and colleges in Singapore
