   Narasimha (Sanskrit: नरसिंह IAST: Narasiṁha, lit. man-lion),  Narasingh, Narsingh and Narasingha in derivative languages is an avatar of the Hindu god Vishnu and one of Hinduism's most popular deities, as evidenced in early epics, iconography, and temple and festival worship for over a millennium. Narasiṁha is often visualised as having a human-like torso and lower body, with a lion-like face and claws. This image is widely worshipped in deity form by a significant number of Vaiṣṇava groups. Vishnu assumed this form on top of Himvat mountain (Harivamsa). He is known primarily as the 'Great Protector' who specifically defends and protects his devotees in times of need.Steven J. Rosen, Narasiṁha Avatar, The Half-Man/Half-Lion Incarnation, p5 Vishnu is believed to have taken the avatar to destroy the demon king Hiranyakashipu.  The word Narasimha means 'lion-man'/'half man and half lion'. His other names are- There are references to Narasiṁha in a variety of Purāṇas, with 17 different versions of the main narrative.Steven J. Rosen, Narasiṁha Avatāra, The Half-Man/Half-Lion Incarnation, p1 The Valmiki Ramayana (7.24), Harivaṁśa (41 & 3.41-47), Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.16-20), Bhagavata Purāṇa (Canto 7), Agni Purāṇa (4.2-3), Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa(2.5.3-29), Vayu Purāṇa (67.61-66), Brahma-Purāṇa  (213.44-79), Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṇa(1.54), Kūrma Purāṇa (1.15.18-72), Matsya Purāṇa(161-163), Padma Purāṇa(Uttara-khaṇḍa 5.42), Śiva Purāṇa (2.5.43 & 3.10-12), Liṅga Purāṇa (1.95-96) and Skanda Purāṇa 7 (2.18.60-130) all contain depictions of the Narasiṁha Avatāra. There is also a short reference in the Mahābhārata (3.272.56-60) and a Gopāla Tapani Upaniṣad (Narasiṁha tapani Upaniṣad), earliest of Vaiṣṇava Upaniṣads named in reference to him. The Ṛg Veda contains an epithet that has been attributed to Narasiṁha. The half-man, half-lion avatāra is described as: like some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming. Source:(RV.I 154.2a).  There is an allusion to a Namuci story in RV.VIII 14.13: With waters' foam you tore off, Indra, the head of Namuci, subduing all contending hosts. This short reference is believed to have culminated in the full puranic story of Narasiṁha.  Bhagavata Purāṇa describes that in his previous avatar as Varāha, Viṣṇu killed the asura Hiraṇayakṣa. The younger brother of Hirṇayakṣa, Hiraṇyakaśipu wanted revenge on Viṣṇu and his followers. He undertook many years of austere penance to take revenge on Viṣṇu:Bhag-P 7.4.1Lord Brahma was very much satisfied by Hiraṇyakaśipu's austerities, which were difficult to perform. Brahma thus offers the demon a boon and Hiraṇyakaśipu asks for immortality.  Brahma tells him this is not possible, but that he could bind the death of Hiraṇyakaśipu with conditions. Hiraṇyakaśipu agreed:  O my lord, O best of the givers of benediction, if you will kindly grant me the benediction I desire, please let me not meet death from any of the living entities created by you. Grant me that I not die within any residence or outside any residence, during the daytime or at night, nor on the ground or in the sky. Grant me that my death not be brought about by any weapon, nor by any human being or animal. Grant me that I not meet death from any entity, living or nonliving created by you. Grant me, further, that I not be killed by any demigod or demon or by any great snake from the lower planets. Since no one can kill you in the battlefield, you have no competitor. Therefore, grant me the benediction that I too may have no rival. Give me sole lordship over all the living entities and presiding deities, and give me all the glories obtained by that position. Furthermore, give me all the mystic powers attained by long austerities and the practice of yoga, for these cannot be lost at any time. Brahma said, Tathāstu (so be it) and vanished.  Hiraṇyakaśipu was happy thinking that he had won over death.Bhag-P, Canto 7  7.3.35-38 One day while Hiraṇyakaśipu performed austerities at Mandarācala Mountain, his home was attacked by Indra and the other devatās.Bhag-P 7.7.6 "The victorious demigods plundered the palace of Hiraṇyakaśipu, the king of the demons, and destroyed everything within it. Then Indra, King of heaven, arrested Prahalāda's mother, Hiraṇyakaśipu's wife Kayādu, the Queen" At this point the Devarṣi (divine sage) Nārada intervenes to protect Kayādu, whom he describes as sinless.Bhag-P 7.7.8 "Nārada Muni said: O Indra, King of the demigods, this woman is certainly sinless. You should not drag her off in this merciless way. This chaste woman is the wife of another. You must immediately release her." Following this event, Nārada takes Kayādu into his care and while under the guidance of Nārada, her unborn child (Hiraṇyakaśipu's son) Prahālada, becomes affected by the transcendental instructions of the sage even at such a young stage of development. Thus, Prahlāda later begins to show symptoms of this earlier training by Nārada, gradually becoming recognised as a devoted follower of Viṣṇu, much to his father's disappointment. Hiraṇyakaśipu furious at the devotion of his son to Viṣṇu, as the god had killed his brother. Finally, he decides to commit filicide.Bhag-P 7.8.3-4 "Thus he finally decided to kill his son Prahlad. Hiraṇyakaśipu was by nature very cruel but each time he attempts to kill the boy, Prahlāda is protected by Viṣṇu's mystical power. When asked, Prahlāda refuses to acknowledge his father as the supreme lord of the universe and claims that Viṣṇu is all-pervading and omnipresent. Hiraṇyakaśipu points to a nearby pillar and asks if 'his Viṣṇu' is in it and says to his son Prahlāda: O most unfortunate Prahlāda, you have always described a supreme being other than me, a supreme being who is above everything, who is the controller of everyone, and who is all-pervading. But where is He? If He is everywhere, then why is He not present before me in this pillar?   Prahlāda then answers, He was, He is and He will be. In an alternate version of the story, Prahlāda answers,He is in pillars, and he is in the smallest twig. Hiraṇyakaśipu, unable to control his anger, smashes the pillar with his mace, and following a tumultuous sound, Viṣṇu in the form of Narasiṁha appears from it and moves to attack Hiraṇyakaśipu in defense of Prahlāda. In order to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu and not upset the boon given by Brahma, the form of Narasiṁha is chosen. Hiraṇyakaśipu can not be killed by human, deva or animal. Narasiṁha is neither one of these as he is a form of Viṣṇu incarnate as a part-human, part-animal.  He comes upon Hiraṇyakaśipu at twilight (when it is neither day nor night) on the threshold of a courtyard (neither indoors nor out), and puts the demon on his thighs (neither earth nor space). Using his sharp fingernails (neither animate nor inanimate) as weapons, he disembowels and kills the demon.Bhag-P 7.8.29Lord Narasiṁha-deva placed the demon on his lap, supporting him with his thighs, and in the doorway of the assembly hall the lord very easily tore the demon to pieces with the nails of his hand. Kūrma Purāṇa describes the preceding battle between the Puruṣa and demonic forces in which he escapes a powerful weapon called Paśupāta and it describes how Prahlāda's brothers headed by Anuhrāda and thousands of other demons were led to the valley of death (yamalayam) by the lion produced from the body of man-lion avatar.Soifer, p.85: K.P.1.15.70 The same episode occurs in the Matsya Purāṇa 179, several chapters after its version of the Narasiṁha advent. It is said that even after killing Hiraṇyakaśipu, none of the present demigods are able to calm Narasiṁha's wrath. So the demigods requested Prahlada to calm down the Lord, and Narasimha, who had assumed the all-powerful form of Gandaberunda returned to more benevolent form after that.http://www.gsbkerala.com/narasimha.htmhttp://www.dharmakshetra.com/avatars/narasimha.html In other stories, all the gods and goddesses call his consort, Lakṣmī, who assumes the form of Pratyangira and pacifies the Lord. According to a few scriptures, at the request of Brahma, Shiva took the form of Sharabha and successfully pacified him. Before parting, Narasiṁha rewards the wise Prahlāda by crowning him as the king. Narasiṁha is also a protector of his devotees in times of danger. Near Śrī Śailaṁ, there is a forest called Hatakeśvanam, that no man enters. Śaṅkarācārya entered this place and did penance for many days. During this time, a Kāpālika, by name Kirakashan appeared before him. He told Śrī Śaṅkara that he should give his body as a human-sacrifice to Kālī. Śaṅkara happily agreed. His disciples were shocked to hear this and pleaded with Śaṅkara to change his mind, but he refused to do so saying that it was an honor to give up his body as a sacrifice for Kālī and one must not lament such things. The Kāpālika arranged a fire for the sacrifice and Śaṅkara sat beside it. Just as he lifted his axe to severe the head of Śaṅkara, Viṣṇu as Narasiṁha entered the body of the disciple of Śaṅkarācārya and Narasiṁha devotee, Padmapada. He then fought the Kāpālika, slayed him and freed the forest of Kapalikas. Ādi Śaṅkara composed the powerful Lakṣmī-Narasiṁha Karāvalambaṁ Stotram at the very spot in front of Lord Narasiṁha. Due to the nature of Narasiṁha's form (divine anger), it is essential that worship be given with a very high level of attention compared to other deities. In many temples only lifelong celibates (Brahmācārya) will be able to have the chance to serve as priests to perform the daily puja. Forms where Narasiṁha appears sitting in a yogic posture, or with the goddess Lakṣmī are the exception to this rule, as Narasiṁha is taken as being more relaxed in both of these instances compared to his form when first emerging from the pillar to protect Prahlāda.  A number of prayers have been written in dedication to Narasiṁha avatāra. These include:  The Narasiṁha Mahā-Mantra oṁ hrīṁ kṣauṁ ugraṁ viraṁ mahāviṣṇuṁ jvalantaṁ sarvatomukham ।  nṛsiṁhaṁ bhīṣaṇaṁ bhadraṁ mṛtyormṛtyuṁ namāmyaham ॥ O' Angry and brave Mahā-Viṣṇu, your heat and fire permeate everywhere. O Lord Narasiṁha, you are everywhere. You are the death of death and I surrender to You.   Narasiṁha Praṇāma Prayer namaste narasiṁhāya, prahlādahlāda-dāyine, hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ, śilā-ṭaṅka nakhālaye I offer my obeisances to Lord Narasiṁha, who gives joy to Prahlāda Mahārāja and whose nails are like chisels on the stone like chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu.  ito nṛsiṁhaḥ parato nṛsiṁho, yato yato yāmi tato nṛsiṁhaḥ, bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁho, nṛsiṁhaṁ ādiṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye Lord Nṛsiṁha is here and also there. Wherever I go Lord Narasiṁha is there.  He is in the heart and is outside as well. I surrender to Lord Narasiṁha,  the origin of all things and the supreme refuge.Steven J. Rosen, Narasiṁha Avatar, The Half-Man/Half-Lion Incarnation   Daśāvatāra Stotra by Jayadeva tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śrṅgaṁ, dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam, keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadiśa hare O Keśava! O Lord of the universe. O Hari, who have assumed the form of half-man, half-lion! All glories to You! Just as one can easily crush a wasp between one's fingernails, so in the same way the body of the wasp-like demon Hiraṇyakaśipu has been ripped apart by the wonderful pointed nails on your beautiful lotus hands.(from the Daśāvatāra-stotra composed by Jayadeva)   Kāmaśikhā Aṣṭakam by Vedānta Deśika tvayi rakṣati rakṣakaiḥ kimanyaiḥ, tvayi cārakṣāti rakṣākaiḥ kimanyaiḥ । iti niścita dhīḥ śrayāmi nityaṁ, nṛhare vegavatī taṭāśrayaṁ tvam ॥8॥ O Kāmaśikhā Narasiṁha! you are sarva śakthan. When you are resolved to protect some one, where is the need to seek the protection of anyone else? When you are resolved not to protect some one, which other person is capable of protecting us?. There is no one. Knowing this fundamental truth, I have resolved to offer my śaraṇāgatī at your lotus feet alone that rest at the banks of Vegavatī river.   Divya Prabandham 2934 āḍi āḍi agam karaindhu isai pāḍip pāḍik kaṇṇīr malgi engum nāḍi nāḍi narasingā endru, vāḍi vāḍum ivvāl nuthale! I will dance and melt for you, within my heart, to see you, I will sing in praise of you with tears in joy, I will search for Narasiṁha and I am a householder who still searches to reach you (to attain Salvation).   Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Karavalamba Stotram by Sri Adi Sankarahttp://www.prapatti.com/slokas/english/narasimha_kshetram.pdf Srimat Payonidhi Nikethana Chakra Pane, Bhogeendra Bhoga Mani Rajitha Punya Moorthe, Yogeesa Saswatha Saranya Bhavabdhi Potha, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 1 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, Who lives in the ocean of milk, Who holds the holy wheel as weapon, Who wears the gems of the head, Of Adhisesha as ornaments, Who has the form of good and holy deeds, Who is the permanent protection of sages, And who is the boat which helps us cross, This ocean of misery called life, Please give me the protection of your hands. Brahmendra, Rudra Arka Kireeta Koti, Sangattithangri Kamala Mala Kanthi Kantha, Lakshmi Lasath Kucha Saroruha Raja Hamsa, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 2 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, Whose feet is touched by the crowns, Of Brahma, Indra, Shiva and Sun, Whose shining feet adds to his effulgence, And who is the royal swan playing, Near the breasts of Goddess Lakshmi, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Gora Gahane Charathe Murare, Marogra Bheekara Mruga Pravardhithasya, Aarthasya Mathsara Nidha Chain Peedithasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 3 Oh Great God Lakshmi Narsimha, Oh Lord who killed the Asura called Mura, I have been traveling in the dark forests of day to day life, Where I have been terrified by the lion called desire, And scorched by the heat called competition, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Koopam Adhi Ghora Magadha Moolam, Samprapya Dukha Satha Sarpa Samakulasya, Dheenasya Deva Krupana Padamagadasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 4 Oh Great God Lakshmi Narasimha, I have reached the very dangerous and deep, Bottom of the well of day to day life, And also being troubled by hundreds, Of miseries which are like serpents, And am really miserable and have, Reached the state of wretchedness and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Sagara Vishala Karala Kala, Nakra Graham Grasana Nigraha Vigrahasya, Vyagrasya Raga Rasanormini Peedithasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 5 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have reached this wide unfathomable ocean of day to day life, And I have been caught by black deadly, Crocodiles called time which are killing me And I am also afflicted by waves of passion, And attachments to pleasures like taste and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samasra Vrukshamagha Bheeja Manantha Karma, Sakha Satham Karana Pathramananga Pushpam, Aroohasya Dukha Phalitham Pathatho Dayalo, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 6 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have climbed the tree of worldly life, Which grew from the seed of great sin, Which has hundreds of branches of past karma's, Which has leaves which are parts of my body, Which has flowers which are the result of Venus, And which has fruits called sorrow, But I am falling down from it fast and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Sarpa Ghana Vakthra Bhyogra Theevra, Damshtra Karala Visha Daghdha Vinashta Murthe, Naagari Vahana Sudhabhdhi Nivasa Soure, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 7 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, Oh, Lord who rides on the enemy of snakes, Oh, Lord who lives in the ocean of nectar, The serpent of family life has opened, Its fearful mouth with very dangerous, Fangs filled with terrible venom, Which has destroyed me and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Dava Dahanathura Bheekaroru, Jwala Valee Birathi Dhighdha Nooruhasya, Thwat Pada Padma Sarasi Saranagathasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 8 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have been scarred badly by the fire of daily life, And even every single hair of my body, Has been singed by its fearful flames, And I have taken refuge in the lake of your lotus feet, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Jala Pathithasya Jagan Nivasa, Sarvendriyartha Badisartha Jashopamasya, Proth Ganditha Prachoora Thaluka Masthakasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 9 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have been caught in this net of daily life, And all my organs are caught in that web, And the five senses which is the hook, Tears apart my head from me, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsara Bheekara Kareeendra Karabhigatha, Nishpishta Marmma Vapusha Sakalarthi Nasa, Prana Prayana Bhava Bhhethi Samakulasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 10 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have been struck by the fearful king of elephants, Which is the worldly illusion, and my vital parts, Have been completely crushed, and I suffer, From thoughts of life and death, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Andhasya Me Viveka Maha Danasya, Chorai Prabho Bhalibhi Rindriya Nama Deyai, Mohanda Koopa Kuhare Vinipathathasya, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 11 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have become blind because, the sense of discrimination, Has been stolen from me by the thieves of „senses‟, And I who am blind, have fallen in to the deep well of passion, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Baddhvaa Gale Yamabhataa Bahutarjayantah, Karshhanti Yatra Bhavapaashashatairyutam Maam. Ekaakinam Paravasham Chakitam Dayaalo Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 12 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I have been tied by the soldiers of the God of death, By numerous ropes of worldly attachments, And they are dragging me along by the noose around the neck, And I am alone, tired and afraid, and so Oh merciful one, Please give me the protection of your hands. Lakshmi Pathe Kamala Nabha Suresa Vishno, Vaikunta Krishna Madhu Soodhana Vishwaroopa, Brahmanya Kesava Janardhana Chakrapane, Devesa Dehi Krupanasya Karavalambam - 13 Oh King of Devas, Who is the Lord of Lakshmi, who has a lotus on his belly, Who is Vishnu, the lord of all heavenly beings, who is Vaikunta, Who is Krishna , who is the slayer of Madhu, Who is one with lotus eyes, Who is the knower of Brahman, Who is Kesava, Janardhana, Vasudeva, Please give me the protection of your hands. Ekena Chakramaparena Karena Shamkha- Manyena Sindhutanyaaamavalambya Tishhthan, Vaame Karena Varadaabhayapadmachihnam, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 14 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, Who holds Sudarshana, the holy wheel in one hand, Who holds the conch in the other hand, Who embraces the daughter of ocean by one hand, And the fourth hand signifies protection and boons, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Samsaara Saagara Nimajjana Muhyamaanam Diinam Vilokaya Vibho Karunaanidhe Maam, Prahlaada Kheda Parihaara Paraavataara Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 15 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, I am drowned in the ocean of day to day life, Please protect this poor one, oh, Lord, Oh treasure of compassion, Just as you took a form to remove the sorrows of Prahlada, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Prahlaada Naarada Paraashara Pundariika- Vyaasaadi Bhaagavata Pungavah Rinnivaasa , Bhaktaanurakta Paripaalana Paarijaata, Lakshmi Nrsimha Mama Dehi Karavalambam - 16 Oh Great God Lakshmi Nrsimha, Who dwells in the hearts of great sages like Prahlada, Narada, Parashara, Pundarika and Vyasa, Who loves his devotees and is the wish giving tree, That protects them, and so, Please give me the protection of your hands. Lakshminrisimha Charana Abja Madhuvratena Stotram Kritam Shubhakaram Bhuvi Shankarena Ye Tatpathanti Manujaa Haribhakti Yuktaa- Ste Yaanti Tatpada Saroja Makhandaruupam - 17 This prayer which blesses earth with good things, Is composed by Sankara who is a bee, Drinking deeply the honey from the lotus feet of Lakshmi Nrsimha, And those humans who are blessed with devotion to Hari, Will attain the lotus feet of the Brahman. In South Indian art – sculptures, bronzes and paintings – Viṣṇu's incarnation as Narasiṁha is one of the most chosen themes and amongst Avatāras perhaps next only to Rāma and Kṛṣṇa in popularity. Lord Narasiṁha also appears as one of Hanuman's 5 faces, who is a significant character in the Rāmāyaṇa as Lord (Rāma's) devotee. There are several forms of Narasiṁha, but 9 main ones collectively known as Nava-narasiṁha: In Ahobilam, Andhra Pradesh, the nine forms are as follows: Forms from Prahlad story: The following three refer to His ferocious aspect: Others: In Andhra Pradesh, a panel dating to third-fourth century AD shows a full theriomorphic squatting lion with two extra human arms behind his shoulders holding Vaiṣṇava emblems. This lion, flanked by five heroes (vīra), often has been identified as an early depiction of Narasiṁha.Abdul Waheed Khan, An Early Sculpture of Narasiṁha, Andhra Pradesh Government Archaeological Series 16, Hyderabad: Government of Andhra Pradesh, 1964. Standing cult images of Narasiṁha from the early Gupta period, survive from temples at Tigowa and Eran.Alexander Cunningham, Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports IX (1873-75), p.47 These sculptures are two-armed, long maned, frontal, wearing only a lower garment, and with no demon-figure of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Images representing the narrative of Narasiṁha slaying the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu survive from slightly later Gupta-period temples: one at Madhia and one from a temple-doorway now set into the Kūrma-maṭha at Nachna, both dated to the late fifth or early sixth century A.D.Michael W. Meiste, Man and Man-Lion: The Philadelphia Narasiṁha, Artibus Asiae, Vol. 56, No. 3/4 (1996), pp. 291–301 An image of Narasiṁha supposedly dating to second-third century AD sculpted at Mathura was acquired by the Philadelphia Museum of Art in 1987. It was described by Stella Kramrisch, the former Philadelphia Museum of Art's Indian curator, as "perhaps the earliest image of Narasiṁha as yet known". This figure depicts a furled brow, fangs, and lolling tongue similar to later images of Narasiṁha, but the idol's robe, simplicity, and stance set it apart. On Narasiṁha's chest under his upper garment appears the suggestion of an amulet, which Stella Kramrisch associated with Visnu's cognizance, the Kauṣtubha jewel. This upper garment flows over both shoulders; but below Hiranyakasipu, the demon-figure placed horizontally across Narasiṁha's body, a twisted waist-band suggests a separate garment covering the legs. The demon's hair streams behind him, cushioning his head against the man-lion's right knee. He wears a simple single strand of beads. His body seems relaxed, even pliant. His face is calm, with a slight suggestion of a smile. His eyes stare adoringly up at the face of Viṣṇu. There is little tension in this figure's legs or feet, even as Narasiṁha gently disembowels him. His innards spill along his right side. As the Matsya purana describes it, Narasiṁha ripped "apart the mighty Daitya chief as a plaiter of straw mats shreds his reeds". Based on the Gandhara-style of robe worn by the idol, Michael Meiste altered the date of the image to fourth century AD. Deborah Soifer, a scholar who worked on texts in relation to Narasiṁha, believes that "the traits basic to Viṣṇu in the Veda remain central to Viṣṇu in his avataras" and points out, however, that:  we have virtually no precursors in the Vedic material for the figure of a man-lion, and only one phrase that simply does not rule out the possibility of a violent side to the benign Viṣṇu.  Soifer speaks of the enigma of Viṣṇu's Narasiṁha avatāra and comments that how the myth arrived at its rudimentary form [first recorded in the Mahābhārata], and where the figure of the man-lion came from remain unsolved mysteries.Soifer, 73 An image of Narasiṁha, dating to the 9th century, was found on the northern slope of Mount Ijo, at Prambanan, Indonesia.Jan Fontein, et al. (1990). The sculpture of Indonesia, p. 145 Images of Trivikrama and Varāha avatāras were also found at Prambanan, Indonesia. Viṣṇu and His avatāra images follow iconographic peculiarities characteristic of the art of central Java. This includes physiognomy of central Java, an exaggerated volume of garment, and some elaboration of the jewelry. This decorative scheme once formulated became, with very little modification, an accepted norm for sculptures throughout the Central Javanese period (circa 730–930 A.D.). Despite the iconographic peculiarities, the stylistic antecedents of the Java sculptures can be traced back to Indian carvings as the Chalukya and Pallava images of the 6th–7th centuries AD.Debjani Paul (1978) Deity or Deified King? Reflections on a Unique Vaiṣṇavite Sculpture from Java', Artibus Asiae, Vol. 40, No. 4 (1978), pp. 311–333. In Rājopadhyāya Brahmins of Nepal, there is a tradition of celebrating the procession ceremony of the deity Narasiṁha avatar, in Lalitpur district of the Kathmandu Valley in Nepal. The Lunar fifth day of the waning phase of the moon, in the holy Soli-lunar Śrāvaṇa month i.e. on Śrāvaṇa Kṛṣṇa Pañcamī  of the Hindu Lunar Calendar is marked as auspicious day for the religious procession, Nṛsiṁha Yātrā. This tradition of the holy procession has been held for more than a hundred years. This is one of the typical traditions of the Rājopadhyāya Bramhins, the Hindu Bramhans of the locality. In this Nṛsiṁha Yātrā, each year one male member of the Rājopadhyāya community gets the chance to be the organizer each year in that particular day. He gets his turn according to the sequence in their record, where the names of Rājopadhyāya bramhins are registered when a brahmāṇa lad is eligible to be called as a Bramhan.A person is eligible for all kinds of rituals as a Bramhan only after his Cuḍa-karma is marked. Temples indicated with * and in italics are actually Places of Pilgrimage (Tīrtha Yātrā).      Agnilochana (अग्निलोचन) - the one who has fiery eyes Bhairavadambara (भैरवडम्बर) - the one who causes terror by roaring Karala (कराल) - the one who has a wide mouth and projecting teeth Hiranyakashipudvamsa (हिरण्यकशिपुध्वंस) - the one who killed Hiranyakashipu Nakhastra (नखास्त्र) - the one for whom nails are his weapons Sinhavadana (सिंहवदन) - the whose face is of lion Mrigendra (मृगेन्द्र) - king of animals or lion Baladeva - the great form The Narasiṁha Mahā-Mantra Narasiṁha Praṇāma Prayer Daśāvatāra Stotra by Jayadeva Kāmaśikha Aṣṭakam by Vedānta Deśika Divya Prabandham 2954 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Karavalamba Stotram by Sri Adi Sankara Narasiṁha indicates God's omnipresence and the lesson is that God is everywhere.  For more information, see Vaishnav Theology. Narasiṁha demonstrates God's willingness and ability to come to the aid of His devotees, no matter how difficult or impossible the circumstances may appear to be. Prahlāda's devotion indicates that pure devotion is not one of birthright but of character. Prahlāda, although born an asura, demonstrated the greatest bhakti to God, and endured much, without losing faith. Narasiṁha is known by the epithet  in Sanskrit which translates to Animal-Man. From a philosophical perspective. Narasiṁha is the very icon of Vaiṣṇavism, where jñāna (knowledge) and Bhakti are important as opposed to Advaita, which has no room for Bhakti, as the object to be worshipped and the worshipper do not exist. As according to Advaita or Māyāvāda, the jīva is Paramātma. Ugra-narasiṁha Kroddha-narasiṁha Vīra-narasiṁha Vilamba-narasiṁha Kopa-narasiṁha Yoga-narasiṁha Aghora-narasiṁha Sudarśana-narasiṁha Lakṣmī-narasiṁha Chātra-vata-narasiṁha (seated under a banyan tree) Yogānanda-narasiṁha (who blessed Lord Brahma) Karañja-narasiṁha Uha-narasiṁha Ugra-narasiṁha Krodha-narasiṁha Malola-narasiṁha (With Lakṣmī on His lap) Jvālā-narasiṁha (an eight armed form rushing out of the pillar) Pavana-narasiṁha (who blessed the sage Bharadvaja) Stambha-narasiṁha (coming out of the pillar) Svayam-narasiṁha (manifesting on His own) Grahaṇa-narasiṁha (catching hold of the demon) Vidāraṇa-narasiṁha (ripping open of the belly of the demon) Saṁhāra-narasiṁha (killing the demon) Ghora-narasiṁha Ugra-narasiṁha Candā-narasiṁha Pañcamukha-Hanumān-narasiṁha, (appears as one of Śrī Hanuman's five faces.) Pṛthvī-narasiṁha, Vayu-narasiṁha, Ākāśa-narasiṁha, Jvalana-narasiṁha, and Amṛta-narasiṁha, (representing the five elements) Jvālā-narasiṁha (with a flame-like mane) Lakṣmī-narasiṁha (where Lakṣmī pacifies Him) Prasāda/Prahlāda-varadā-narasiṁha (His benign aspect of protecting Prahlad) Chatrā-narasiṁha (seated under a parasol of a five-hooded serpent) Yoga-narasiṁha or Yogeśvara-narasiṁha (in meditation) Āveśa-narasiṁha (a frenzied form) Aṭṭahasa-narasiṁha (a form that roars horribly and majestically strides across to destroy evil) Cakra-narasiṁha, (with only a discus in hand) Viṣṇu-narasiṁha, Brahma-narasiṁha and Rudra-narasiṁha Puṣṭi narasiṁha, (worshipped for overcoming evil influences) Ahobilam or Ahobalam is a major center of pilgrimage in South India, located in allagadda mandal in the Nandyal Taluka of Kurnool district in Andhra Pradesh, India. According to local legend, this is where Lord Narasiṁha blessed Prahlāda and killed the demon Hiranyakashipa. It is an important place of worship for Vaiṣṇavas and is one of the 108 Divya Desams. Penna Ahobilam Lakṣmī Narasiṁha temple Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy, in Dharmapuri, Karimnagar District,Telangana state. It is said that at Dharmapuri, Narasiṁha Deva meditated in Yoga mudra, after his Ugrarūpa. Kotla-Narasimhulapalle, Karimnagar, Telangana state Kadiri Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy temple in Kadiri, Anantapur Dist, Andhra Pradesh. Śrī Yogānanda Narasiṁha Swamy, Vedadri, near Vijayawada Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, Nacharamgutta, Medak district, Telangana. Śrī Panakala Narasiṁha Swamy, Mangalagiri, near Vijayawada Śrī Śobhanācala Vyāghra Narasiṁha Swamy, Aagiripalli, near Vijayawada Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Antarvedi, Sakhinetipalle, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Peruru Village, Amalapuram, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Yadagiri Gutta, near Bhongir, Nalgonda District, Telangana. See Yadagirigutta (Temple) Śrī Matsyagiri Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Devalayam, Vemula Konda, Valigonda mandal, Nalgonda district,Telangana. The temple of Lakṣmī Narasihma swamy is on the rock hill (konda) in Mastya avataram. Śrī Varāha Narasiṁha Swamy, is the combination of Varaha avatar and Narasiṁha avatar. When Prahlada was thrown into the sea, Śrī Varaha Narasiṁha swamy protected prahlada and raised a mountain. This mountain is the Simhachalam *Simhachalam, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh Yoga Narasiṁha temple also known as Dakshina Simhachalam Singarayakonda, Ongole, Andhra Pradesh. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Mallooru, Warangal District (~70&nbsp;km from Bhadrachalam), Telangana. Śrī Yogānanda Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Mattapalli (at the confluence of Krishna and Musi rivers), about 15&nbsp;km from Huzurnagar taluq, Nalgonda District, Telangana. (Bus available from Miryalaguda/Kodada). Vadapally, Near Miryalaguda, Nalgonda District, Telangana. Śrī Lord Lakṣmī-Narasiṁha Swamy temple, Korukonda, near Rajahmundry, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh. Śrī Malayadri Lakṣmī Narasiṁha temple, Malakonda, near Kundakur, Prakasam district, Andhra Pradesh. Śrī Prasanna Narasiṁha Swamy temple, Singarakonda, Prakasham district, Andhra Pradesh Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Khammam, Khammam District, Telangana. Śrī Penusila Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Penchalakona, Nellore district, Andhra Pradesh Śrī Limbadri Narasiṁha Swamy, Bheemgal taluk, Nizamabad district, Telangana. Cheeryala Sree Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Devastanam, Cheeryala, Keesara Mandal, Rangareddy district, Telangana. Phani Giri gutta, Near Kottapet, Hyderabad, RangaReddy District, Telangana state Vedagiri Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhaswamy, Narasimha Konda, Near Nellore, Nellore district, Andhra Pradesh. Śrī Jvālā Narasiṁha Temple, Parvathapuram, Feerjadiguda, Uppal, HYD,Telangana state Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Sigotam(singapatnam), Kollapur, Mahabubnagar district, Telangana. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, Road No.12 Banjara Hills, Hyderabad, Telangana. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple of Penchala Kona, Nellore(dt), Andhra Pradesh Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple garlavoddu, enkoor mandal, Khammam district, Telangana. Guttameeda Narasiṁha swamy Temple Inugurti village, K Samudram Mandalam, Khammam District, Telangana. Tarigonda Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Tarigonda, Gurramkonda mandal, Chittoor Dist. A.P Narasiṁha Swamy Temple Kalwa Village, Adilabad Dist. Telangana. Śrī Nallakunta Lakṣmī Narsimha swamy Temple, Nallagutta,RR Dist, Near Jeedimetla bus stand;Hyderabad,Telangana. Narasimhaswamy Temple, Marripudi, Prakasam Dist.Andhra Pradesh. Sri Ugranarasimha (furious god) also called Jwala Narsima (meaning fire) – temple located in Raybagh taluk, Belgaum district said to be the most powerful Narsimha idol (temple is ancient where lord Ugranarsima resides underground) Śrī Guru Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Śāligrama, Udupi district, Karnataka. Narasiṁha Idol here is in Yogānanda Narasiṁha posture and is from the 8th century as per historians. Balele Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, Narasiṁha Gudda, Rajarajeshwari Nagar, Bangalore, Karnataka Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple at Roopena Agrahara, Hosur Main Road, Bangalore, Karnataka. This is the only temple in India which has "Narasiṁha Meru" belonging to ancient period. "Narasiṁha Meru" is a hill shaped cakra made specifically for Narasiṁha Swamy. Pradakshana to this Chakra and Narasiṁha Swamy will clear kuja doṣa. Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha, on a hilltop fortress at Melkote, Nagamangala, Mysore District, Karnataka. In Kannada, the term means, top (mele) fort (kote). The fort, situated on a near-vertical hill is a strategic area, overlooking the plains. Melkote is also the site of the famous Cheluvanarayana Temple and the annual Vairamudi festival, where the deity is adorned with a crown of dazzling uncut diamonds. Śrī Narasiṁha Swami Zarni Cave Temple, Bidar District, Karnataka - It is said that Lord Narasiṁha after killing Hiranyakashpu, proceeded to kill a demon named Jalasura. Jalasura was a staunch devotee of Lord Śiva. After he was killed by Lord Narasiṁha, Jalāsura turns into water starts flowing from Lord's feet. And to this day water keeps flowing from lord’s feet and fills the cave. Śrī Yoga Mudre Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swami, Mudugere, near Hassan, Karnataka. Considered one of the most powerful forms of the Deity. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha, Marehalli, Malavalli taluk Mandya district Karnataka. Śrī Śoḍaśa Bahu Narasiṁha Swamy, Karpara Kshetra, Koppara village, Raichur District, Karnataka.Koppar Śrī Narasiṁha Devaru(Also known as Vruksharoopi Narasiṁha Swamy Temple) located in Raichur District, Devadurga Taluk, this Śrī Kṣetra is about 6&nbsp;km from Devadurga. Śrī Yoganarasiṁha Devālaya, Mysore, Karnataka. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Malleswaram, Bangalore Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Hatyal, C N Halli, Tumkur, Karnataka Śrī Ugra Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Maddur, Karnataka Śrī Kambada Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Sugganahalli, near Kudur, Tumkur district, Karnataka Śrī Kambada Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Sondalagere, Kunigal taluq, Tumkur district, Karnataka Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Śrīrangapatna, Mandya district, Karnataka this temple is situated near Śrī Raṅganātha Swamy Temple, ŚrīRangapatana Town, Mysore. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Kammasandra, Nelamangala Taluk, Bangalore Rural District, Karnataka Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Balepet,Balepet Circle, Near upparpet Police Station, Bangalore. Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, Bhadravathi, Karnataka,(built by Hoysalas)located in old town area of Bhadravati. Śībi Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Sheebi, Tumkur Dist, Karnataka. Shri Yoga Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy, Shri Bhoga Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy temples, Devarayanadurga, Karanataka. Śrī Ugra Narasiṁha, Śrī Vijayendra Tirtha Prathistapitha, Moolky, Karnataka Śrī Lakṣmī-Narasiṁha swamy temple, Doddadalavatta, Madhugi taluq, Tumkur district, Karnataka Śrī Lakṣmī-Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Holenarsipura, Hassan district, Karnataka Sāvandurga Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Savana Durga, Magadi taluk, Ramanagar District Holay Narasipura, Hassan district, Karnataka. Hatyaalu Betta, Tiptur Taluk, Tumkur District, Karnataka Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy Devasthana at Gorur, Hassan District, Karnataka Lakṣmī narasimhaswamy Temple at Nagamangala, Hassan District. Gunja Narasiṁhaswamy Temple at T. Narasipura, Chamarajanagar District. Śrī Narasiṁhaswamy Temple at Jekkenahalli, Tumkur District. Śrī Lakṣmī narasiṁha swamy Temple at B. R. Koppulu, Śrīrangapattana. Thoravi Narasiṁhaswamy Temple at Bijapur. Śrī Narasiṁhaswamy Temple, Śrī Kṣetra Shurpali on the banks of river Kṛṣṇa Tq. Jamkhandi Dist: Bagalkot Narasiṁha Temples run by GSB community in Karnataka are located at Mulki (Śrī Ugra Narasiṁha of S.V. Temple), Mogarnad (Panemangalore) and Kambada Narasiṁha at Nagar (Shimoga District) Kambada Narasiṁha Swamy Temple at Alisandra, Nagamangala, Mandya District. (Behind Nagathihalli on Bangalore - Mangalore road close to bellur cross) Śrī Gunjam Narasiṁha Swamy, Baburayana Koppalu, Śrīrangapatna,Mysore. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, On O.P.H Road, Shivajinagara, Bangalore, behind Bowring Hospital. Śrī YogaNarasiṁha Devaru Temple, (Angaara Narasiṁha) Narasiṁha Teertha, Sree Padaraja Mutt at Mulbagilu Kolar District. Śrī Nadi Narasiṁha Temple,on the banks of Kanva river, Dodda Mallur, Channapatna, this place is about 2&nbsp;km from the famous Aprameya Swamy Temple on the way to Bangalore-Mysore Highway. Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, with Narasiṁha Dandam, at KereThonnur/Thondanur, built on small hillock situated at Śrīrangapatna Taluk, Mandya District, this place is about 8&nbsp;km from Pandvapura, and 20&nbsp;km from Melekote, on Melekote-Śrīrangapatna Highway. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, No.224, 7th Cross, Teachers Colony, Kaderenahalli, Banashankari 2nd Stage, Bangalore - 560070. Śrī.Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Bhuvaneshwari Nagar, Near Jayanthi Tiles Factory, R. T. Nagar Post, Bangalore - 560032. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple (Sudarshana Narasiṁha) Ahoabilla Mutt, on 3rd Main Road, Prakashnagar, Bangalore - 21. (next to Mudhaliar Choultry) Śrī Kambada Narasiṁha Swamy Temple,(also known as Ranganatha Swami temple)in Tattekere Village, Solur Hobli, this place is also called as Dhurvasamuni Kṣetra, about 4&nbsp;km from Solur Bus stand on the way to Kunigal. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Sripathihalli, Kalya post, Magadi Tlq, Ramanagar District Śrī Champakarnya Lakṣmī NarasiṁhaSwamy, Champakaranya Beta a small hillock just behind the famous Champakadhamaswamy Temple, Temple Road, Bannerghatha Village, Bangalore. Śrī Varadha Yoga Bhoga NarasiṁhaSwamy, Shanthigrama, Hassan dist. Śrī Yoga NarasiṁhaSwamy, Gorur, Hassan dist. Śrī Lakshmi NarasiṁhaSwamy, Attiguppe, Vijayanagar, Bangalore. Sri Lakshminarasimha Swamy temple at Akki Hebbalu, KR Pet, Mandya district. Narahari telangana Shri Ugra Nrusinha Mandir, Anji(Nrusinha), Tal Ghatanji, Dist Yavatmal Śrī Narsimha Temple- Madgi,Center in Wainganaga River, Tah. Tumsar, Dist. Bhandara, 441913 Maharashtra. Religious Fair every year at the end of month December. Śrī Lakṣmī Narsimha Temple in Ranjani, Tal Ambegaon, near Manchar, District Pune-410504, Maharashtra. Śrī Jvālā Narasiṁha Temple in Kole Narasiṁhapur, Walva, Sangli District, Maharashtra. Śrī Ugra Narasiṁha Temple, Holi, Nanded, Maharashtra Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, 1420 Sadashiv Peth, Pune, Maharashtra. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple in Ranjani, Tal Ambegaon, near Manchar, District Pune, Maharashtra. Tathavade, Near Chinchwad, Pune district, Maharashtra Nira Narsingpur, Indapur taluq, Pune district, Maharashtra Śrī Lakṣmī Narsimha Temple in Veling (Mhardol), Tal Ponda, Goa Pokharni, Parbhani district, Maharashtra. Sangawade, Taluka Karveer, District Kolhapur, Maharashtra (uniqueness here is that, Goddess Laxmi is sitting on right lap of the deity whereas else where she is on the other side) Śrī Lakṣmī Narsimha Temple, Dhom, Tal. Wai, District Satara, Maharashtra At Post - Nittur, Taluka - Chandgad, Dist- Kolhapur (around 40&nbsp;km inside maharashtra from Belgaum. It is said that this temple was built by Pandvas when they were in exile. This is ancient temple in a big rock, it is engraved in a big solid rock. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Mandir, Partur, Dist Jalna, Maharashtra. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Mandir, Mandavgan,dist ahmednagar Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Mandir, Mayani tal khatav Dist Satara old peth mayani,behind the postoffice,Dashputre wada Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Mandir, Raher, Tal Naigaon(Kh), Dist Nanded, Maharashtra - Hemadpanthi Mandir on banks of Godavari river Shri Laxmi narsimha temple, pusad, chowbara chowk in old pusad Shri Laxmi Nrusimha Mandir, Kasaba Sangameshwar, Tal Sangameshwar, Dist Ratnagiri Shri Narasimha Mandir, shivaji square, wardha, Dist wardha Sri Navaneetha Krishnan Sri Lakshmi Narasimhar Temple (1500 years ancient), MMTC colony,Nanganallur, Chennai - 61 Śrī  Malola Narasiṁha Swamy peetam velachery chennai 600042 Singaperumal Koil Sri Ugra Narasimhar, at Tambaram, 25&nbsp;km from Tambaram and the temple is just 100 meters off the GST Road. Śrī Azhagaiya Nrsinga Perumal Temple,  at Ennayiram, Ponducherry area, 123&nbsp;km outskirt by the Cholan dynasty. Ramapuram Narasiṁhar, also known as Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhar, at Ramapuram, Chennai. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Kovil, Nangavalli (Near Mettur) Salem district, Tamil Nadu. Śrī Azhagiya Singar at Parthasarathy Kovil in Tiruvellikeni, Chennai. Śrī Narasiṁha temple, Parikkal, Tamil Nadu Śrī Yoga Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy temple, Ghatikachala, Sholinghur, Tamil Nadu. Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Kovil at Chintalavadi, Tamil Nadu Śrī Kāṭṭtu Azhagiya Singar, Srirangam, Tiruchirapalli Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, Ukkadam, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu Śrī Ukkara Narasiṁha Temple, Namakkal, Tamil Nadu Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Thirukoil, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu Narasingam Yoga Narasimha Perumal Temple Aanaimalai, Othakkadai, Madurai, Tamil Nadu Śrī Ugra Narasiṁha Temple, Singaperumalkoil, near Chengalpattu Ugra Narasiṁha at Śrī Prasanna Venkatachapathy Temple, Keelapavoor, near Tenkasi also known as South Ahobhilam Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy Temple at Velachery, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swami Temple, (Lakṣmī Narasiṁha with 4 hands, in Śānta rūpa with His consort(Lakshmi|Lakṣmī) on His right lap (usually He will have His consort(Lakṣmī) on His left lap).], vellore District. Padalathri Narasiṁha Swamy, Singa Perumal Koil, near Chennai, Tamil Nadu Nava Narasiṁhar Temple, Avaniyapuram, Tamil Nadu Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Keelavasal, near thanjore palace, Thanjavur. Śrī Yoga Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Vallam, Thanjavur Dist. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, injeemedu, near Vandavasi, Tamil Nadu. Śrī Amirthavailli Nayaga Samadha Śrī Yogānanda Narasiṁha Swamy Temple Sogathur 6&nbsp;km from Vandavasi, Tiruvannamail DT. and 46&nbsp;km from Kancheepuram Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhar Temple, Polur, near Thiruvannamalai Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhar Temple, PV Kalathur, near Chengalpet Śrī Yoga Narasiṁhar Temple, Kanchipuram - (Tiruvelukkai one of the 108 divya desams) Śrī Bhārgavī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Narasapuram (Sandar Setty Palli), Hosur Taluk, Krishnagiri District Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Krishnagiri, Krishnagiri District. 1500 years old temple Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhar temple, Ammapettai, Thanjavur (Moolavar - wooden daity is carved in Vellerukku) (20&nbsp;km east of Thanjavur, towards Nagapatnam) Śrī Vīra Narasiṁhar (Thiru Thanjai Yali temple) Palli Agraharam, Thanjavur = One of the 108 Diya sthalams Śrī Yoga Narasiṁhar, East Gate, Thanjavur Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhaswamy,Poovarasamkuppam,Villupuram Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhaswamy temple, Singirikoil, Cuddalore. Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁhaswamy temple, halepuram,near pennagaram, Dharmapuri district Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy temple, Narasingapuram, (Via) Perambakkam to Arakkonam Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy temple, Pethanayakanpalayam,Attur,salem(dt),Tamil Nadu Sri Padmanabhaswamy temple: Lord Narasiṁha Murthy is one of the main deities in the temple. Śrī Narasiṁhaswamy Mahakshetram(Thuravoor Mahakshethram), Thuravoor, Cherthala, Alappuzha Chathankulangara temple in Chengannur, Alappuzha District, Kerala Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy temple,Yeroor, kollam, kerala Śrī Narasiṁhaswami Temple, Aymanam, Kottayam, Kerala Anayadi Pazhayidam Śrī Narasiṁha Swami Temple, Sooranad, Kollam, Kerala Sri Edappurathu Lakshmi Narasimha Moorthi Temple, Puthuruthy, Kerala Kulasserry Temple Thrissur, Kerala Śrī Narasiṁhaswami Temple, Kadungalloor, Aluva Śrī Narasiṁhaswami Temple, Manakkad, Todupuzha, Idukki District Śrī Narasiṁha Parthasarathy Temple, Thiruvangore, Kozhikode West Pattissery Śrī VISHNU Temple CHALISSERY PALAKKAD Narasiṁha Temples run by GSB community in Kerala are located at Manjeshwar, Ullal, Thuravoor and Alappuzha Śrī Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple. Thalasserry, 670101. Kerala. This is an important pilgrim centre for GS Brahmins in the Northern parts of Kerala, and is located in the heart of Tellicherry town, in the Kannur district of Kerala. The Temple is less than half a kilometre from both the Railway station and the Bus stand. The temple and prathista faces North which is a unique feature. The temple established in 1831 A.D. Srinivasa Kovil, thekkumbhagom, Tripunithura - Here the god is Ugranarasimha. Ernakulam District Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Kadungalloor, Alwaye, 683 108, Kerala, Pandavath Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Aymanam,  Near Kottayam Town, Kerala. Nechiyil Sree Narasiṁha kshetram, Rg:No 203/93, Cherapadum,(po) k.v.kavu, malappuram, kerala,673637 Śrī Narasiṁha Swamy Temple, Peruva, Kottayam District, Keralam Muriyamangalam Narasiṁha swamy Temple,Mamala,Thrivankulam,Ernakulam Dist (near Chottanikkara Devi temple) Kerala. Śrī Ramamangalam Bala Narasiṁha Temple,Muvattupuzha to piravom route ( via ) pampakkuda. 15&nbsp;km, Ernakulam, Kerala. Sree Shadkala Govinda Marar sung here. Both the highest koddi Maram of Kerala for Narasiṁha and shortest Koddi Maram for Ovu ( Pranala) Thangi Unni Bhootham is here in this Temple.30&nbsp;km from Ernakulam Railway station. Narasiṁha Moorthy Temple - Thiruvazhiyadu - Nemmara - Palakkad Dist. Sri Narasiṁha Moorthy Temple - Rishinaradamangalam - Palakkad Dt. Sri-Lakshmi Narasimhamoorthy Temple,Parakkal Pazhayannur,Thrissur DT,Kerala Narsinghji Temple in Hindaun, Rajasthan Śrī Narsinghji temple, Amer, Rajasthan Śrī Narsinghji Temple at Gudha, Rajasthan Śrī Narsinghji Temple at Garhi, Hindon-Karoli Road, Hindaun, Rajasthan Śrī Narsingh Mandir, Hasampur, neemkathana, sikar, Rajasthan Narsinghji Ka Mandir, Holidada, Ajmer, Rajasthan Narsinghji Ka Mandir, Lokhotiyon Chowk, Bikaner, Rajasthan Narsingh Mandir, Daaga Chowk, Bikaner, Rajasthan Narsiṁha Mandir, Khandela, Sikar, Rajasthan Śrī khakhee jee ki bagichi,Bidasar,Churu,Rajasthan Sri Lakshmi nursigh temple.(Lalit) Azad chowk. kotputlli. Jaipur Talala Gir  Near River Junagadh Dist Gujarat. (Patel) Megdi, Garuḍa Taluk (Tehsil), Bageshwar District, Uttaranchal Narsinghji + Navgrahvatika + NrisinghKund, Goverdhan, Mathura District, Uttar Pradesh Narasiṁha mandir, Indore. Narsinghji temple, Ghadiyali Pole, Vadodara, Gujarat. Narsinghpur, Madhya Pradesh Śrī Marjāra Nṛsiṁha Temple, in his mighty cat-lion form near Nṛsiṁhanātha, Baragarh district, Oḍiśā Narasiṁha Temple, near Gundicha Temple, Puri, Oḍiśā Nṛsiṁha mandira, Nalabanta, Aska, Ganjam, Oḍiśā Nṛsiṁha mandira, Sunamba Street, Aska, Ganjam, Oḍiśā Nṛsiṁha mandira, Bada Bazar, Bramhapur, Oḍiśā Śrī Bhakti Lakṣmī Narasiṁha Temple, London, United Kingdom Vāra-Lakṣmī Narasiṁhanātha Temple, Warsaw, Poland Siṁhachalam (ISKCON), Jandelsbrunn, Bavaria, Germany.http://www.simhachalam.de/index.php?id=homepage-en Ugra Narsimha Tempal In new sivil Hospital Road Asarwa, AHMEDABAD - GUJARAT(Mahesh Shrimali) Shri Narsimha Tempal Dudheshwar Road near Mahakali Tempal, Ahmedabad- Gujarat Narsimha Tempal In Uttarsanda Nadiyad Gujarat Shri Narsimha Tempal In Sherthagam GUJ. Narsimha Tempal JYOTIMATH Uttrakhand India Narsinghji Gufa Temple,Hindaun, Rajasthan Löwenmensch figurine Narasiṁha Purāṇa Narasiṁha Śatkam
