    The National Institutes of Technology (NITs) are a group of public engineering colleges of India. These institutes have been declared by Act of Parliament as institutions of national importance. On their inception decades ago, all NITs were referred to as Regional Engineering Colleges (RECs) and were governed by their respective state governments. NITs were founded to promote regional diversity and multi-cultural understanding in India. Comprising thirty autonomous institutes, they are located in one each major state/territory of India. In 2007,the Indian government declared these schools as Institute of National Importance. NITs offer degree courses at bachelors, masters, and doctorate levels in various branches of engineering and technology. All NITs are autonomous which enables them to set up their own curriculum. Admission to NITs was done by the erstwhile All India Engineering Entrance Examination, now replaced by Joint Entrance Examination Main (JEE Main) conducted across India.Central Counselling Board(CCB) was conducting the Online counselling for admission into NITs till 2012. It was then replaced by Central Seat Allocation Board(CSAB) which held the seat allocation process in NITs till 2014. From 2015, Joint Seat Allocation Authority (JoSAA)  allocated the seats in IITs,IIITs and NITs. Joint Seat Allocation Authority 2015 (JoSAA 2015) conducted the joint admission process for a total of 31 NITs. Govt. announced setting up one more NIT in the newly formed state of Andhra Pradesh in Tadepalligudem which will start functioning from the academic year 2015-16. NIT AP would start functioning at Sri Vasavi Engineering College campus temporarily and may set up permanent campus at Tadepalligudem.  The Government started fourteen RECs between 1959 and 1965, at Bhopal, Allahabad, Calicut, Durgapur, Kurukshetra, Jamshedpur, Jaipur, Nagpur, Rourkela, Srinagar, Surathkal, Surat, Trichy, and Warangal. It established one in Silchar in 1967 and added two others located at Hamirpur in 1986, and Jalandhar in 1987. The RECs were jointly operated by the central government and the concerned state government. Non-recurring expenditures and expenditures for post-graduate courses during the REC period were borne by the central government, while recurring expenditure on undergraduate courses was shared equally by central and state governments. The success of technology-based industry led to high demand for technical and scientific education. Due to the enormous costs and infrastructure involved in creating globally respected Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT), in 2002 MHRD Minister Murli Manohar Joshi decided to upgrade RECs to "National Institutes of Technology" (NITs) instead of creating IITs. The central government controls NITs and provides all funding. In 2002, all RECs became NITs. The upgrade was designed along the lines of the prestigious Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) after it was concluded that RECs had potential as proven by the success of their alumni and their contributions in the field of technical education. Subsequently, funding and autonomy for NITs increased, and they award degrees which have raised their graduates' perceived value. These changes implemented recommendations of the "High Powered Review Committee" (HPRC). Department-related Parliamentary standing committee on human resource development 178th report on The National Institutes of Technology Bill, 2006". Accessed 6 July 2007. The HPRC, chaired by Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, submitted its report entitled "Strategic Road Map for Academic Excellence of Future RECs" in 1998. In 2002, MHRD issued NIT status to three more colleges, located at Patna (Bihar Engineering College&nbsp;— a 110-year-old college), Raipur (Government Engineering College), and Agartala (Tripura Engineering College). Based on the request of state governments and feasibility, future NITs are either converted from existing institutes or can be freshly created. The 21st (and the first brand-new) NIT is planned for Imphal in the north-eastern state of Manipur at an initial cost of Rs. 500 crores. In 2010, the government announced setting up ten new NITsCentral Counselling Board  in the remaining states/territories. This would lead to every state in India having its own NIT. With the technology based industry's continuing growth, the government decided to upgrade twenty National Institutes of Technology to full-fledged technical universities. Parliament passed enabling legislation, the National Institutes of Technology Act in 2007 and took effect on 15 August of that year. The target is to fulfill the need for quality manpower in the field of engineering, science, and technology and to provide consistent governance, fee structure, and rules across the NITs. The text of the NIT Act 2007 National Institute of Technology Act 2006"Three Bills passed in 15 minutes", "The Hindu", 15 May 2007. Accessed 6 July 2007. The law designates each NIT an Institute of National Importance (INI). Average NIT funding increased to  100 crores by year 2011. On average, each NIT also receives  20-25 crore under World Bank funded Technical Education Quality Improvement Program (TEQIP I and TEQIP II).  The President of India is the ex officio visitor of all the NITs. The NIT Council works directly under him and it includes the minister-in-charge of technical education in Central Government, the Chairmen and the Directors of all the NITs, the Chairman of University Grants Commission (India), the Director General of CSIR, the Directors of other selected central institutions of repute, members of Parliament, Joint Council Secretary of Ministry of Human Resource and Development, nominees of the Central Government, AICTE, and the Visitor. Below the NIT Council is each NITs Board of Governors. The Board of Governors of every individual NIT consists of the following members: The Director serves under the Board of Governors, and is the school's chief academic and executive officer. Academic policies are decided by its Senate, which is composed of some professors and other representatives. The Senate controls and approves the curriculum, courses, examinations, and results. Senate committees examine specific academic matters. The teaching, training, and research activities of various departments of the institute are periodically reviewed to maintain educational standards. The Director is the ex officio Chairman of the Senate. The Deputy Director is subordinate to the Director. Together they manage the Deans, Heads of Departments, Registrar, President of the Students' Council, and Chairman of the Hall Management Committee. Deans and Heads of Departments in NITs are administrative postings rather than career paths. Faculty members serve as Deans and Heads of Departments for limited periods, typically 2 to 3 years, then returning to regular faculty duties. The Registrar is the chief administrative officer and overviews day-to-day operations. Below the Head of Department (HOD), are the various faculty members (professors, assistant professors, and lecturers). The Warden serves under the Chairman of the Hall Management Committee. Courses are divided into semesters with evaluation on the basis of credits, which allows for proportional weighting based on the course's importance. For each semester, grades range from 3 to 10. Semester evaluations are independently. The weighted average of the semesters is used to compute the cumulative grade point average (CGPA). NITs are implementing dual degree programs, integrated postgraduate studies that complete in 5 years rather than the 6 year conventional track of a Bachelor's followed by a Master's degree. These programs encourage academic research, and began with mathematics and computing. Stringent faculty recruitment and industry collaboration also contribute to NIT success. Faculty other than lecturers must have a Ph.D. and relevant teaching and industry experience. Existing faculty who do not meet these criteria enroll under a Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) at IITs, ISM and IISc.   NITs provide on-campus housing to students, research scholars, and faculty members.http://www.nitc.ac.in/nitc/NIT_HOSTEL/index.htm   Students live in hostels, also known as halls, throughout their college life. Most have single accommodation but many live in double or triple rooms during their initial years. Every hostel has a recreation room equipped with cable television, magazines, newspapers, and indoor games and in-room Internet connectivity. Every hall has its own cafeteria managed by the college or by a local private organization. NITs also have a common cafeteria for students and a separate cafeteria for professors. During vacations, hostel dining is generally closed and the common cafeterias serve students who stay on campus. All the NITs have an athletic ground and facilities for field, indoor and aquatic events.www.nitrkl.ac.in NIT campuses across India arrange official welcome parties and interaction sessions to acquaint newcomers with senior students and professors. Faculties and researchers from IITs, ISM and IISc organize occasional technical seminars and research labs. NITs have a Central Library equipped with technical books, literature, fiction, scientific journals, and other electronic material. Most have digitized their libraries. Some provide an intranet library facility. Every departmental library has high-speed connectivity. Electronic libraries allow students access to online journals and other periodicals through the AICTE-INDEST consortium, an initiative by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Students also have access to IEEE documents and journals.http://www.mnnit.ac.in/facilities/library.htm   While some have video conferencing facilities, others are upgrading under the World Bank funded TEQIP scheme.   Some NITs individually conduct elections to elect student body a general secretary and vice president. These representatives are generally responsible for communicating with the college management and media, organising festivals, and also for various development programmes in their college. Some NITs (such as NIT, Rourkela, SVNIT, Surat and VNIT, Nagpur) have recently adopted online voting process. The committee which monitors the flow of funds has a student body representative. This committee also includes the chairman of board, an MHRD representative, and NIT professors. But due to some disturbance in voting process, there have been no elections since 2008 in SVNIT, Surat.http://www.nitc.ac.in/nitc/SAC.pdf  The Disciplinary Committee (DISCO) consists of the Director, the student affairs officer, and professors. and reports to MHRD. DISCO regulates student activities and combats student harassment and illegitimate student politics. After a series of harassment incidents, all NITs took strict measures especially to protect first year students. Tribune News Service. "Bail pleas of NIT ragging accused rejected", "The Tribune", Chandigarh, India, 18 October 2005. Accessed 6 July 2007. Popular extra curricular activities include National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service Scheme (NSS), Indian Society for Technical Education (ISTE), and annual college festivities. Students at NITs run hobby clubs such as Linux User Groups (LUGs), music clubs, debate clubs, literary clubs, and web design teams. Students also publish campus magazines which showcase student creativity and journalism. The first Linux User group in India,  Bharat Linux User Group was formed in early 1997 at NIT Surat (SVNIT). Students conduct regular quizzes and cultural programs. They also present research papers and participate in national level technical festivals at IITs, ISM, IISc and NITs. Most NITs promote entrepreneurship by creating on-campus incubation centers under the STEP program.ECELL &#124; E-Cell , NIT TrichyE-cell VNIT Popular extra curricular activities include National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service Scheme (NSS), Indian Society for Technical Education (ISTE), and annual college festivities. Students at NITs run hobby clubs such as Linux User Groups (LUGs), music clubs, debate clubs, literary clubs, and web design teams. Students also publish campus magazines which showcase student creativity and journalism. The first Linux User group in India,  Bharat Linux User Group was formed in early 1997 at NIT Surat (SVNIT). Students conduct regular quizzes and cultural programs. They also present research papers and participate in national level technical festivals at IITs, ISM, IISc and NITs. Most NITs promote entrepreneurship by creating on-campus incubation centers under the STEP program. Organization for Inter-NIT Student Activities (O-INSA) coordinates cultural, technical, sports and other groups. NITs compete annually in an Inter-NIT sports meeting, which rotates among schools. Winners get cash prizes and trophies. Boys and girls compete separately. During February and March, NITs conduct annual sports contests in their respective locations. However, since 2007-2008, Inter NIT meetings have not been held during the academic calendar, to facilitate participation of more NITs and to avoid students missing class. In recent years, National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur has been the most successful. NITs conduct technical and cultural festivals to showcase student talents. Technical festivals include research paper presentations, business quizzes, robotics competitions etc. Some NITs conduct online coding contests, attracting participants from multinational corporations and international universities. NITs also conduct cultural festivals with celebrity and student participants, including those from other schools. Festivals last 3 to 4 days and are usually held all around year depending upon institute's academic calendar. Corporations through sponsorships (generally asked by students)and college administration help fund these events. Organizing committee generally comprises faculty advisers and student coordinators. Structure of organizing committee varies from fest to fest. These fest  are not as large as some of IITs in terms of participation, crowd and prizes but are organized with greater efficiency (participation per rupee spent in fund) as they don't have funds as much as that of IITs have but participation is remarkable. . NIT Arunachal Pradesh conducts two festivals in an academic year , Addovedi and Atulyam which are the technical and cultural festival respectively.Both the festivals are inter college festival and a large number of students from the North Eastern region participate in it. NIT Jalandhar(Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar) annually conducts 3 days Cultural Festival "Utkansh" generally held in month of March and 3 days Technical Festival "techNITi" generally held in month of November or February. Both festivals attract thousands of students from all across the country every year.  Utkansh comprises more than 40 competitive events, 20+ fun or informal events, DJ Nite, Popular Nite, Star Nite, Punjabi Nite, Dandiya Nite,LAN Gaming etc. In 2014, Utkansh have received participation of students from 50 different colleges across country. These fests are growing bigger every year since they started in 2005 and with a budget of merely 5-10% of fests of IITs. TechNiti comprises more than 70 competitive events and various fun events. Celebrities like Farhan Saeed, Amrinder Gill, Gary Sandhu, Gippy Grewal,Neeru Bajwa, Jass Gill, Prabh Gill, Babbal Rai, Ranjit Bawa, have performed during previous versions of these fests. Further bands like Faridkot, Local Train set stages in beats while Magician Christopher James, Juggler Pierrick Banana, Singer Siddharth Mohan, Kavi Dr Kumar Vishwas entertained their audience.Various competitions like RoboWars, Coding rounds, JAM, Lan Gaming, Linux workshops, Guest lectures etc take place during the fest. Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur has many festivals with the major ones being All these festivals are recognized as the Central India's largest festivals. Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology organizes Avishkar, the technical festival which runs for 3 days, Gnosiomania, the largest knowledge festival of India which runs for a week, Culrav, the cultural festival, and an inter-NIT-sports festival. National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur conducts a National Level technical festival in March, and is called Ojass, immediately followed by Utkarsh, the cultural festival. Also, the Metallurgy and Materials Science department of the college holds its own festival Technica. NIT Bhopal organizes a student technical-cultural week known as Techno MAFFICK every year in the month of march.But in 2012 it was cancelled by its new director Dr.Appu Kuttan K.K. as a part of disciplinary actions. NIT Agartala conducts two fests, a techfest known as "Aayam"NIT Agartala - Current Students and a cultural fest known as "Mokshaa". Recstacy, popularly known as RECS, is NIT Durgapur's annual social and cultural festival.  Aarohan is the Annual National Techno-Management festival which is organised during even semesters and lasts for four days. It is aimed at technical, arts as well as management students by offering a plethora of events, including lectures, seminars, workshops, competitions, paper presentations, exhibitions, quizzes, model displays and robotics events.  Other fests include Mukti, The Quizzitch Cup, Motor Zundung, Ank and Verve. National Institute of Technology, Warangal organises 2 major festivals in an academic year- Technozion(Technical) and Spring Spree(Cultural). Both festivals attract thousands of students across the country every year. National Institute of Technology Calicut conducts two annual festivals, Tathva, its Techno-management festival, and Ragam, its Cultural festival. NIT Hamirpur annually conducts a national level cultural festival called "Hill 'Ffair" in fall and an engineering festival called "Nimbus" in spring. NIT Patna's technical and cultural festivals are CORONA and Melange respectively. NIT Rourkela organizes the largest techno-management festival in the state of Odisha, named "InnoVision" (formerly "Confluence") and also the spring festival, "Nitrutsav" annually in the month of November and March, respectively. National Institute of Technology Srinagar celebrates its annual techno-management festival Techvaganza during April. It is an annual three day science and technology festival of the institute. There are exhibitions and a display of technology from all parts of India. The festival is organized, financially managed and conducted entirely by the students of the Institute, with sponsorships from reputed companies. It will be again held on 2013. S V National Institute of Technology, Surat celebrates student-organised festivals like MindBend, Sparsh, Autumnfest, Quest (by ACM), Chunouti (Sports festival), JoyFest (by iIndia), MMNCT and Prakriti (organised by Applied Science department). NIT Surathkal hosts the  biggest cultural extravaganza in South India called Incident and also organizes a technical fest, Engineer which claims a participation of around a hundred colleges and is acclaimed as South India's biggest Technical Fest after Shastra of IIT Madras. NIT Trichy organizes a technical fest called "Pragyan" and one of the biggest cultural festivals in Tamil Nadu called "Festember". NIT Silchar organises Incandescence-The techno-cultural fest. Under its umbrella comes Sankriti the cultural fest and Technoesis the technical. NIT Silchar also organises Bizarcade the biz fest for the budding entrepreneurs of India and Thundermarch, the rock fest. National Institute of Technology, Sikkim celebrates its annual technical festival called ABHIYANTRAN. In which lecturers from abroad and some prestigious institutions address the audience . NITs compete annually in an Inter-NIT sports meeting, which rotates among schools. Winners get cash prizes and trophies. Boys and girls compete separately. During February and March, NITs conduct annual sports contests in their respective locations. However, since 2007-2008, Inter NIT meetings have not been held during the academic calendar, to facilitate participation of more NITs and to avoid students missing class. In recent years, National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur has been the most successful. NITs conduct technical and cultural festivals to showcase student talents. Technical festivals include research paper presentations, business quizzes, robotics competitions etc. Some NITs conduct online coding contests, attracting participants from multinational corporations and international universities. NITs also conduct cultural festivals with celebrity and student participants, including those from other schools. Festivals last 3 to 4 days and are usually held all around year depending upon institute's academic calendar. Corporations through sponsorships (generally asked by students)and college administration help fund these events. Organizing committee generally comprises faculty advisers and student coordinators. Structure of organizing committee varies from fest to fest. These fest  are not as large as some of IITs in terms of participation, crowd and prizes but are organized with greater efficiency (participation per rupee spent in fund) as they don't have funds as much as that of IITs have but participation is remarkable. . NIT Arunachal Pradesh conducts two festivals in an academic year , Addovedi and Atulyam which are the technical and cultural festival respectively.Both the festivals are inter college festival and a large number of students from the North Eastern region participate in it. NIT Jalandhar(Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar) annually conducts 3 days Cultural Festival "Utkansh" generally held in month of March and 3 days Technical Festival "techNITi" generally held in month of November or February. Both festivals attract thousands of students from all across the country every year.  Utkansh comprises more than 40 competitive events, 20+ fun or informal events, DJ Nite, Popular Nite, Star Nite, Punjabi Nite, Dandiya Nite,LAN Gaming etc. In 2014, Utkansh have received participation of students from 50 different colleges across country. These fests are growing bigger every year since they started in 2005 and with a budget of merely 5-10% of fests of IITs. TechNiti comprises more than 70 competitive events and various fun events. Celebrities like Farhan Saeed, Amrinder Gill, Gary Sandhu, Gippy Grewal,Neeru Bajwa, Jass Gill, Prabh Gill, Babbal Rai, Ranjit Bawa, have performed during previous versions of these fests. Further bands like Faridkot, Local Train set stages in beats while Magician Christopher James, Juggler Pierrick Banana, Singer Siddharth Mohan, Kavi Dr Kumar Vishwas entertained their audience.Various competitions like RoboWars, Coding rounds, JAM, Lan Gaming, Linux workshops, Guest lectures etc take place during the fest. Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur has many festivals with the major ones being All these festivals are recognized as the Central India's largest festivals. Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology organizes Avishkar, the technical festival which runs for 3 days, Gnosiomania, the largest knowledge festival of India which runs for a week, Culrav, the cultural festival, and an inter-NIT-sports festival. National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur conducts a National Level technical festival in March, and is called Ojass, immediately followed by Utkarsh, the cultural festival. Also, the Metallurgy and Materials Science department of the college holds its own festival Technica. NIT Bhopal organizes a student technical-cultural week known as Techno MAFFICK every year in the month of march.But in 2012 it was cancelled by its new director Dr.Appu Kuttan K.K. as a part of disciplinary actions. NIT Agartala conducts two fests, a techfest known as "Aayam" and a cultural fest known as "Mokshaa". Recstacy, popularly known as RECS, is NIT Durgapur's annual social and cultural festival.  Aarohan is the Annual National Techno-Management festival which is organised during even semesters and lasts for four days. It is aimed at technical, arts as well as management students by offering a plethora of events, including lectures, seminars, workshops, competitions, paper presentations, exhibitions, quizzes, model displays and robotics events.  Other fests include Mukti, The Quizzitch Cup, Motor Zundung, Ank and Verve. National Institute of Technology, Warangal organises 2 major festivals in an academic year- Technozion(Technical) and Spring Spree(Cultural). Both festivals attract thousands of students from all across the country every year. National Institute of Technology Calicut conducts two annual festivals, Tathva, its Techno-management festival, and Ragam, its Cultural festival. NIT Hamirpur annually conducts a national level cultural festival called "Hill 'Ffair" in fall and an engineering festival called "Nimbus" in spring. NIT Patna's technical and cultural festivals are CORONA and Melange respectively. NIT Rourkela organizes the largest techno-management festival in the state of Odisha, named "InnoVision" (formerly "Confluence") and also the spring festival, "Nitrutsav" annually in the month of November and March, respectively. National Institute of Technology Srinagar celebrates its annual techno-management festival Techvaganza during April. It is an annual three day science and technology festival of the institute. There are exhibitions and a display of technology from all parts of India. The festival is organized, financially managed and conducted entirely by the students of the Institute, with sponsorships from reputed companies. It will be again held on 2013. S V National Institute of Technology, Surat celebrates student-organised festivals like MindBend, Sparsh, Autumnfest, Quest (by ACM), Chunouti (Sports festival), JoyFest (by iIndia), MMNCT and Prakriti (organised by Applied Science department). NIT Surathkal hosts the  biggest cultural extravaganza in South India called Incident and also organizes a technical fest, Engineer which claims a participation of around a hundred colleges and is acclaimed as South India's biggest Technical Fest after Shastra of IIT Madras. NIT Trichy organizes a technical fest called "Pragyan" and one of the biggest cultural festivals in Tamil Nadu called "Festember". NIT Silchar organises Incandescence-The techno-cultural fest. Under its umbrella comes Sankriti the cultural fest and Technoesis the technical. NIT Silchar also organises Bizarcade the biz fest for the budding entrepreneurs of India and Thundermarch, the rock fest. National Institute of Technology, Sikkim celebrates its annual technical festival called ABHIYANTRAN. In which lecturers from abroad and some prestigious institutions address the audience .  This is a list of some of the notable alumni of the National Institutes of Technology in India.   Name !! Established !! Short Name !! City/Town !! State/UT !! Website NIT Kurukshetra 1963 (2002) NITKKR Kurukshetra Haryana nitkkr.ac.in NIT Calicut 1961 (2002) NITC Calicut Kerala nitc.ac.in NIT Delhi 2010 NITD New Delhi Delhi nitdelhi.ac.in NIT Agartala 1965 (2006) NITA Agartala Tripura nita.ac.in NIT Durgapur 1960 (2003) NITDGP Durgapur West Bengal nitdgp.ac.in NIT Goa 2010 NITG Farmagudi Goa nitgoa.ac.in NIT Pondicherry 2010 NITPY Karaikal Pondicherry nitpy.ac.in Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology Bhopal 1960 (2002) MANIT Bhopal Madhya Pradesh manit.ac.in Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur 1963 (2002) MNIT Jaipur Rajasthan mnit.ac.in Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology Allahabad 1961 (2001) MNNIT Allahabad Uttar Pradesh mnnit.ac.in NIT Manipur 2010 NITMN Imphal Manipur nitmanipur.ac.in NIT Meghalaya 2010 NITM Shillong Meghalaya nitm.ac.in NIT Mizoram 2010 NITMZ Aizawl Mizoram nitmz.ac.in/ NIT Nagaland 2010 NITN Dimapur Nagaland nitnagaland.ac.in Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar 1987 (2002) NITJ Jalandhar Punjab nitj.ac.in NIT Jamshedpur 1960 (2002) NITJSR Jamshedpur Jharkhand nitjsr.ac.in Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology Nagpur 1960 (2002) VNIT Nagpur Maharashtra vnit.ac.in NIT Patna 1886 (2004) NITP Patna Bihar nitp.ac.in NIT Raipur 1956 (2005) NITRR Raipur Chhattisgarh nitrr.ac.in NIT Rourkela 1961 (2002) NITRKL Rourkela Odisha nitrkl.ac.in NIT Sikkim 2010 NITSKM Ravangla Sikkim nitsikkim.ac.in NIT Silchar 1967 (2002) NITS Silchar Assam www.nits.ac.in NIT Srinagar 1960 (2003) NITSRI Srinagar Jammu and Kashmir www.nitsri.net Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology Surat 1961 (2003) SVNIT Surat Gujarat svnit.ac.in NIT Surathkal 1960 (2002) NITK Mangalore Karnataka nitk.ac.in NIT Trichy 1964 (2003) NITT Trichy Tamil Nadu nitt.edu NIT Uttarakhand 2010 NITUK Srinagar Uttarakhand nituk.ac.in NIT Warangal 1959 (2002) NITW Warangal Telangana nitw.ac.in NIT Arunachal Pradesh 2010 NITAP Yupia Arunachal Pradesh www.nitap.in NIT Hamirpur 1986 (2002) NITH Hamirpur Himachal Pradesh nith.ac.in NIT Andhra Pradesh 2015 NITA Tadepalligudem Andhra Pradesh nitandhra.ac.in Name !! Alma mater !! Achievements Upasana Taku NIT, Jalandhar Co-founder, Mobikwik N Chandrasekaran NIT, Trichy Chief executive officer, Tata Consultancy Services C. P. Gurnani NIT, Rourkela Chief executive officer, Mahindra Satyam K. V. Kamath NIT, Surathkal CEO of ICICI Bank, Padma Bhushan Awardee Nelabhotla Venkateswarlu NIT, Allahabad CEO, Emami Limited Srini Raju NIT, Kurukshetra Chairman, Peepul Capital, iLabs VCF, Former CEO of Cognizant Technology Solutions & Satyam Enterprise Solutions Dinesh Keskar NIT, Nagpur Senior VP, Boeing Aircraft Trading and Head Boeing India. Pradeep Kar NIT, Nagpur Founder of Microland Technologies,and also the founder of the portal Indya.com Baldev Raj NIT, Raipur Director of Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research Name !! Alma mater !! Achievements Prafulla Kumar Das NIT, Rourkela (REC) Engineer-in-chief, Odisha (Retd.). Deep Joshi NIT, Allahabad Recipient of Magsaysay award & Padma Shri, Social activist, founder of PRADAN(NGO) Nitish Kumar NIT, Patna Chief minister of Bihar Suresh Pachouri NIT, Bhopal Member of Parliament Dawood Danesh Jafari NIT, Srinagar Minister of Finance & Economic Affairs, Iran Prabhakaran Paleri NIT, Calicut Former director general, Indian Coast Guard Dr.Thomas Abraham NIT, Jaipur Chairman of the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin, coined the term PIO Ajit Jogi NIT, Bhopal First chief minister of Chhattisgarh also a former lecturer at NIT Raipur. Abhishek Singh NIT, Raipur Member of Parliament from Rajnandgaon Region Ram Vinay Shahi NIT, Jamshedpur Longest-serving power secretary of India Hemant Karkare NIT, Nagpur Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) chief, killed during the November 2008 Mumbai Terrorist Attacks. Balram Singh Yadav NIT, Kurukshetra Superintending Engineer, Irrigation Department, Uttar Pradesh Name !! Alma mater !! Achievements Samir Barua NIT, Nagpur Director, Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad Siva S. Banda NIT, Warangal Director of the Control Science Center of Excellence and Senior Scientist in Control Theory for the Air Vehicles Srinidhi Varadarajan NIT, Warangal Creator of SystemX and currently working at Virginia Tech. K. R. Sridhar NIT, Trichy Former advisor to NASA on Mars missions and nanotechnology. Baldev Raj NIT, Raipur Recipient of Padma Shri, former director of the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, currently the Chairman of BOGs at National Institute of Technology Pondicherry. Chairman -An Eminent Technologist / Engineer / Educationist to be nominated by the Govt. of India. Member Secretary- Director of the NIT. Nominee of the Ministry of HRD, Govt. of India. Nominee of the Department of the Higher / Technical Education of the respective state government. Head of another Technical Institution in the region or an eminent Technologist to be nominated by Central Govt. Director, IIT (in the region) or his nominee. Nominee of the UGC not below the rank of a Dy Secretary. Nominee of the AICTE not below the rank of an Advisor. An Alumnus of the Institute from amongst alumni in Education / Industry to be nominated by Board of Governors. Two representatives representing large, medium and small scale Industries to be nominated by Central Government. One Professor and one Assistant Professor of the Institute by rotation. AXIS, the annual technical festival generally held in September. Consortium, the annual Entrepreneurship Summit held in January. Aarohi, the annual cultural festival held in February. Quizfest, the annual quiz competition held in February. All India Inter NIT meet, previously VNIT Sports Fest held in January. AXIS, the annual technical festival generally held in September. Consortium, the annual Entrepreneurship Summit held in January. Aarohi, the annual cultural festival held in February. Quizfest, the annual quiz competition held in February. All India Inter NIT meet, previously VNIT Sports Fest held in January. Indian Institutes of Technology Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad Indian Institutes of Management
