      Neoconservatism (commonly shortened to neocon) is a political movement born in the United States during the 1960s among Democrats who became disenchanted with the party's domestic and especially foreign policy. Many of its adherents became politically famous during the Republican presidential administrations of the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and 2000s. Neoconservatives peaked in influence during the administrations of George W. Bush and George H W Bush, when they played a major role in promoting and planning the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Prominent neoconservatives in the Bush administration included Paul Wolfowitz, John Bolton, Elliott Abrams, Richard Perle, Robert Kagan and Paul Bremer. Senior officials Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, while  not identifying themselves as neoconservatives, listened closely to neoconservative advisers regarding foreign policy, especially the defense of Israel, the promotion of democracy in the Middle East, and the buildup of American military forces to achieve these goals. The neocons have influence in the Obama White House, and neoconservatism remains a staple in both parties' arsenal.Alexandra Homolar-Riechmann, "The moral purpose of US power: neoconservatism in the age of Obama." Contemporary Politics 15.2 (2009): 179-196. abstractRobert Singh, "Neoconservatism in the age of Obama,"" in Inderjeet Parmar and Linda B. Miller, eds., Obama and the World: New Directions in US Foreign Policy (Routledge 2014) pp 29-40 The term "neoconservative" refers to those who made the ideological journey from the anti-Stalinist Left to the camp of American conservatism.Justin  Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The biography of a movement (Harvard UP, 2010) pp 6-11.   Neoconservatives typically advocate the promotion of democracy and promotion of American national interest in international affairs, including by means of military force, and are known for espousing disdain for communism and for political radicalism.[ ] Britannica – Academic Edition. Retrieved 11 November 2012.[ ]www.merriam-webster.com/. Retrieved 11 November 2012. The movement had its intellectual roots in the Jewish monthly review magazine  Commentary, published by the American Jewish Committee.Murray Friedman, The neoconservative revolution: Jewish intellectuals and the shaping of public policy (Cambridge University Press, 2005)Benjamin Balint, Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine that Transformed the Jewish Left into the Neoconservative Right (PublicAffairs, 2010) They spoke out against the New Left, and in that way helped define the movement.Gal Beckerman, in "The Neoconservatism Persuasion", The Forward, 6 January 2006. C. Bradley Thompson, a professor at Clemson University, claims that most influential neoconservatives refer explicitly to the theoretical ideas in the philosophy of Leo Strauss (1899–1973),   though in doing so they may draw upon meaning that Strauss himself did not endorse.  The term "neoconservative" was popularized in the United States during 1973 by Socialist leader Michael Harrington, who used the term to define Daniel Bell, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and Irving Kristol, whose ideologies differed from Harrington's. Cited in:  The "neoconservative" label was used by Irving Kristol in his 1979 article "Confessions of a True, Self-Confessed 'Neoconservative.'" His ideas have been influential since the 1950s, when he co-founded and edited the magazine Encounter.  Another source was Norman Podhoretz, editor of the magazine Commentary from 1960 to 1995. By 1982 Podhoretz was terming himself a neoconservative, in a New York Times Magazine article titled "The Neoconservative Anguish over Reagan's Foreign Policy". During the late 1970s and early 1980s, the neoconservatives considered that liberalism had failed and "no longer knew what it was talking about," according to E. J. Dionne. Seymour Lipset asserts that the term "neoconservative" was used originally by a socialist to criticize the politics of Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA).   Jonah Goldberg argues that the term is ideological criticism against proponents of American modern liberalism who had become slightly more conservative  (Both Lipset and Goldberg are frequently described as neoconservatives). Historian Justin Vaisse, in a book-length study for Harvard University Press, writes that Lipset and Goldberg are in error: "neoconservative" was used by socialist Michael Harrington to describe three men - noted above - who were not in SDUSA, and neoconservatism is a definable political movement.Barry Gewen, "Leave No War Behind" The New York Times Book Review, 11 June 2010 The term "neoconservative" was the subject of increased media coverage during the presidency of George W. Bush,Marshall, J.M. "Remaking the World: Bush and the Neoconservatives". From Foreign Affairs, November/December 2003. Retrieved 1 December 2008.Fukuyama, F. (19 February 2006). After Neoconservatism. New York Times Magazine. Retrieved 1 December 2008. with particular emphasis on a perceived neoconservative influence on American foreign policy, as part of the Bush Doctrine.see "Administration of George W. Bush". Through the 1950s and early 1960s, the future neoconservatives had endorsed the American Civil Rights Movement, racial integration, and Martin Luther King, Jr. From the 1950s to the 1960s, there was general endorsement among liberals for military action to prevent a communist victory in Vietnam.Robert R. Tomes, Apocalypse Then: American Intellectuals and the Vietnam War, 1954-1975 (2000) p. 112. Neoconservatism was initiated by the repudiation of the New Deal coalition by the American New Left: Black Power, which accused Northern Jews of hypocrisy on integration and supported Israel in the Six-Day War; "anti-anticommunism", and which during the late 1960s included substantial endorsement of Marxist–Leninist politics; and the "new politics" of the New left, which Norman Podheretz said was too close to the counterculture and too alienated from the majority of the population.  Many were particularly alarmed by what they claimed were anti-semitic sentiments from Black Power advocates.Benjamin Balint, Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine That Transformed the Jewish Left Into the Neoconservative Right (2010), p. 100-118 Irving Kristol edited the journal The Public Interest (1965–2005), featuring economists and political scientists, which emphasized ways that government planning in the liberal state had produced unintended harmful consequences.Irving Kristol, "Forty good years," Public Interest, Spring 2005, Issue 159, pp. 5-11 is Kristol's retrospective in the final issue. Interestingly enough, many early Neoconservative political figures were disillusioned Democratic politicians and intellectuals, such as Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who served in the Nixon Administration, and Jeane Kirkpatrick, who served as President Ronald Reagan's UN Ambassador. A substantial number of neoconservatives were originally moderate socialists associated with the right-wing of the Socialist Party of America (SP), and its successor, Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA). Max Shachtman, a former Trotskyist theorist who developed a strong antipathy towards the New Left, had numerous devotees among SDUSA with strong links to George Meany's AFL-CIO.  Following Shachtman and Meany, this faction led the SP to oppose an immediate withdrawal from the Vietnam War, and oppose George McGovern in the Democratic primary race (and to some extent, the general election). They also chose to cease their own party-building and concentrated on working within the Democratic Party, eventually influencing it through the Democratic Leadership Council.Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard University Press, 2010), p.214-219  Thus the Socialist Party ceased to be in 1972 and SDUSA emerged (Most of the left-wing of the party, led by Michael Harrington, immediately abandoned SDUSA).Martin Duberman, A Saving Remnant: The Radical Lives of Barbara Deming and David McReynolds (The New Press, 2013)Maurice Isserman, The Other American: The Life Of Michael Harrington (Public Affairs, 2001), p.290-304  SDUSA leaders associated with neoconservatism include Carl Gershman, Penn Kemble, Joshua Muravchik, and Bayard Rustin.Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard University Press, 2010), p.71-75Jack Ross, The Socialist Party of America: A Complete History (University of Nebraska Press, 2015), the entire Chapter 17 entitled "Social Democrats USA and the Rise of Neoconservatism"Dylan Matthews, "Meet Bayard Rustin" Washingtonpost.com, 28 August 2013"Table: The three ages of neoconservatism" Neoconservatism: Biography of Movement by Justin Vaisse-official website Norman Podhoretz's magazine Commentary of the American Jewish Committee, originally a journal of liberalism, became a major publication for neoconservatives during the 1970s. Commentary published an article by Jeane Kirkpatrick, an early and prototypical neoconservative, albeit not a New Yorker.  Many neoconservatives had been leftist during the 1930s and 1940s, when they opposed Stalinism. After World War II, they continued to oppose Stalinism and to endorse democracy during the Cold War. Of these, many were from the JewishOxford University Press about the Prodigal Sons book: "...that it's easy to forget that most grew up on the edge of American society-- poor, Jewish, the children of immigrants. Prodigal Sons retraces their common past..." intellectual milieu of New York City.Alexander Bloom, Prodigal sons: the New York intellectuals and their world (1986) p. 372."Empire builders - Neoconservatives and their blueprint for US power", The Christian Science Monitor (2004) As the policies of the New Left made the Democrats increasingly leftist, these intellectuals became disillusioned with President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society domestic programs. The influential 1970 bestseller The Real Majority by Ben Wattenberg expressed that the "real majority" of the electorate endorsed economic liberalism but also social conservatism, and warned Democrats it could be disastrous to adopt liberal positions on certain social and crime issues. The neoconservatives rejected the counterculture New Left, and what they considered anti-Americanism in the non-interventionism of the activism against the Vietnam War. After the anti-war faction took control of the party during 1972 and nominated George McGovern, the Democrats among them endorsed Washington Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson instead for his unsuccessful 1972 and 1976 campaigns for president. Among those who worked for Jackson were future neoconservatives Paul Wolfowitz, Doug Feith, and Richard Perle.Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (2010) ch 3. During the late 1970s, neoconservatives tended to endorse Ronald Reagan, the Republican who promised to confront Soviet expansionism. Neocons organized in the American Enterprise Institute and the Heritage Foundation to counter the liberal establishment.Arin, Kubilay Yado: Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy. Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013.   In another (2004) article, Michael Lind also wrote   Neoconservatism draws on several intellectual traditions. The students of political science Professor Leo Strauss (1899–1973) comprised one major group. Eugene Sheppard notes that, "Much scholarship tends to understand Strauss as an inspirational founder of American neoconservatism."Eugene R. Sheppard, Leo Strauss and the politics of exile: the making of a political philosopher (2005) p. 1. Strauss was a refugee from Nazi Germany who taught at the New School for Social Research in New York (1939–49) and the University of Chicago (1949–1958).Allan Bloom, "Leo Strauss: September 20, 1899 – October 18, 1973," Political Theory, November 1974, Vol. 2 Issue 4, pp. 372-392, an obituary and appreciation by one of his prominent students. Strauss asserted that "the crisis of the West consists in the West's having become uncertain of its purpose." His solution was a restoration of the vital ideas and faith that in the past had sustained the moral purpose of the West. Classical Greek political philosophy and the Judeo-Christian heritage are the essentials of the Great Tradition in Strauss's work.John P. East, "Leo Strauss and American Conservatism," Modern Age, Winter 1977, Vol. 21 Issue 1, pp. 2-19 online. Strauss emphasized the spirit of the Greek classics, and West (1991) argues that for Strauss the American "Founding Fathers" were correct in their understanding of the classics in their principles of justice. For Strauss, political community is defined by convictions about justice and happiness rather than by sovereignty and force. He repudiated the philosophy of John Locke as a bridge to 20th-century historicism and nihilism, and defended liberal democracy as closer to the spirit of the classics than other modern regimes. For Strauss, the American awareness of ineradicable evil in human nature, and hence the need for morality, was a beneficial outgrowth of the premodern Western tradition.Thomas G. West, "Leo Strauss and the American Founding," Review of Politics, Winter 1991, Vol. 53 Issue 1, pp. 157-172. O'Neill (2009) notes that Strauss wrote little about American topics but his students wrote a great deal, and that Strauss's influence caused his students to reject historicism and positivism. Instead they promoted a so-called Aristotelian perspective on America that produced a qualified defense of its liberal constitutionalism.Johnathan O'Neill, "Straussian constitutional history and the Straussian political project," Rethinking History, December 2009, Vol. 13 Issue 4, pp. 459-478. Strauss influenced Weekly Standard editor William Kristol, editor John Podhoretz, and military strategist Paul Wolfowitz.Barry F. Seidman and Neil J. Murphy, eds. Toward a new political humanism (2004) p. 197.Sheppard, Leo Strauss and the politics of exile: the making of a political philosopher (2005) pp. 1-2.   A theory of neoconservative foreign policy during the final years of the Cold War was articulated by Jeane Kirkpatrick, in "Dictatorships and Double Standards,"Jeane Kirkpatrick, J (November 1979). ""Dictatorships and Double Standards", Commentary Magazine Volume 68, No. 5. published in Commentary Magazine during November 1979. Kirkpatrick criticized the foreign policy of Jimmy Carter, which endorsed detente with the USSR. She later served the Reagan Administration as Ambassador to the United Nations.Noah, T. (Dec. 8, 200). Jeane Kirkpatrick, Realist. Slate Magazine. Retrieved 8 July 2012. In "Dictatorships and Double Standards," Kirkpatrick distinguished between authoritarian regimes and the totalitarian regimes such as the Soviet Union; she suggested that in some countries democracy was not tenable and the U.S. had a choice between endorsing authoritarian governments, which might evolve into democracies, or Marxist–Leninist regimes, which she argued had never been ended once they achieved totalitarian control. In such tragic circumstances, she argued that allying with authoritarian governments might be prudent. Kirkpatrick argued that by demanding rapid liberalization in traditionally autocratic countries, the Carter administration had delivered those countries to Marxist-Leninists that were even more repressive. She further accused the Carter administration of a "double standard," of never having applied its rhetoric on the necessity of liberalization to communist governments. The essay compares traditional autocracies and Communist regimes: Kirkpatrick concluded that while the United States should encourage liberalization and democracy in autocratic countries, it should not do so when the government risks violent overthrow, and should expect gradual change rather than immediate transformation. She wrote: "No idea holds greater sway in the mind of educated Americans than the belief that it is possible to democratize governments, anytime and anywhere, under any circumstances... Decades, if not centuries, are normally required for people to acquire the necessary disciplines and habits. In Britain, the road [to democratic government] took seven centuries to traverse. ... The speed with which armies collapse, bureaucracies abdicate, and social structures dissolve once the autocrat is removed frequently surprises American policymakers."  During the 1990s, neoconservatives were once again opposed to the foreign policy establishment, both during the Republican Administration of President George H. W. Bush and that of his Democratic successor, President William Clinton. Many critics charged that the neoconservatives lost their influence as a result of the end of the USSR. After the decision of George H. W. Bush to leave Saddam Hussein in power after the first Iraq War during 1991, many neoconservatives considered this policy, and the decision not to endorse indigenous dissident groups such as the Kurds and Shiites in their 1991-1992 resistance to Hussein, as a betrayal of democratic principles. Ironically, some of those same targets of criticism would later become fierce advocates of neoconservative policies. During 1992, referring to the first Iraq War, then United States Secretary of Defense and future Vice President Richard Cheney said:  Within a few years of the Gulf War in Iraq, many neoconservatives were endorsing the ouster of Saddam Hussein. On 19 February 1998, an open letter to President Clinton was published, signed by dozens of pundits, many identified with neoconservatism and, later, related groups such as the PNAC, urging decisive action to remove Saddam from power.Solarz, Stephen, et al. "Open Letter to the President", 19 February 1998, online at IraqWatch.org. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Neoconservatives were also members of the so-called "blue team", which argued for a confrontational policy toward the People's Republic of China and strong military and diplomatic endorsement for the Republic of China (also known as Formosa or Taiwan). During the late 1990s, Irving Kristol and other writers in neoconservative magazines began touting anti-Darwinist views, as an endorsement of intelligent design. Since these neoconservatives were largely of secular origin, a few commentators have speculated that thisalong with endorsement of religion generally – may have been a case of a "noble lie", intended to protect public morality, or even tactical politics, to attract religious endorsers.  The Bush campaign and the early Bush administration did not exhibit strong endorsement of neoconservative principles. As a presidential candidate, Bush had argued for a restrained foreign policy, stating his opposition to the idea of nation-building and an early foreign policy confrontation with China was managed without the vociferousness suggested by some neoconservatives. Also early in the administration, some neoconservatives criticized Bush's administration as insufficiently supportive of Israel, and suggested Bush's foreign policies were not substantially different from those of President Clinton.  Bush's policies changed dramatically immediately after the September 11, 2001, attacks. During Bush's State of the Union speech of January 2002, he named Iraq, Iran, and North Korea as states that "constitute an axis of evil" and "pose a grave and growing danger". Bush suggested the possibility of preemptive war: "I will not wait on events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws closer and closer. The United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons.""The President's State of the Union Speech." White House press release, 29 January 2002."Bush Speechwriter's Revealing Memoir Is Nerd's Revenge". The New York Observer, 19 January 2003 Some major defense and national-security persons have been quite critical of what they believed was a neoconservative influence in getting the United States to go to war against  Iraq.Douglas Porch, "Writing History in the "End of History" Era-- Reflections on Historians and the GWOT,"  Journal of Military History, October 2006, Vol. 70 Issue 4, pp. 1065-1079. Former Nebraska Republican U.S. senator and incumbent Secretary of Defense, Chuck Hagel, who has been critical of the Bush administration's adoption of neoconservative ideology, in his book America: Our Next Chapter wrote:   The Bush Doctrine of preemptive war was stated explicitly in the National Security Council text "National Security Strategy of the United States," published 20 September 2002: "We must deter and defend against the threat before it is unleashed ... even if uncertainty remains as to the time and place of the enemy's attack. ... The United States will, if necessary, act preemptively." The choice not to use the word 'preventive' in the 2002 National Security Strategy, and instead use the word 'preemptive' was largely in anticipation of the widely perceived illegality of preventive attacks in international law, via both Charter Law and Customary Law. Policy analysts noted that the Bush Doctrine as stated in the 2002 NSC document had a strong resemblance to recommendations presented originally in a controversial Defense Planning Guidance draft written during 1992 by Paul Wolfowitz, during the first Bush administration."The evolution of the Bush doctrine", in "The war behind closed doors". Frontline, PBS. 20 February 2003. The Bush Doctrine was greeted with accolades by many neoconservatives. When asked whether he agreed with the Bush Doctrine, Max Boot said he did, and that "I think [Bush is] exactly right to say we can't sit back and wait for the next terrorist strike on Manhattan. We have to go out and stop the terrorists overseas. We have to play the role of the global policeman. ... But I also argue that we ought to go further.""The Bush Doctrine." Think Tank, PBS. 11 July 2002. Discussing the significance of the Bush Doctrine, neoconservative writer William Kristol claimed: "The world is a mess. And, I think, it's very much to Bush's credit that he's gotten serious about dealing with it. ... The danger is not that we're going to do too much. The danger is that we're going to do too little.""Assessing the Bush Doctrine", in "The war behind closed doors." Frontline, PBS. 20 February 2003.   John McCain, who was the Republican candidate for the 2008 United States Presidential election, endorsed continuing the second Iraq War, "the issue that is most clearly identified with the neoconservatives". The New York Times reported further that his foreign policy views combined elements of neoconservatism and the main competing conservative opinion, pragmatism, also known as realism:    Barack Obama campaigned for the Democratic nomination during 2008 by attacking his opponents, especially Hillary Clinton, for originally endorsing Bush's Iraq-war policies. He gave the impression he would reverse such policies. However, Obama adopted the main parts of the Bush policy for Iraq, naming Clinton to the State Department and keeping Robert Gates (Bush's Defense Secretary), and David Petraeus (Bush's ranking general in Iraq), as well as implementing the "surge" of military force. By 2010, U.S. forces had switched from combat to a training role in Iraq and they left in 2011.Stephen McGlinchey, "Neoconservatism and American Foreign Policy", Politikon: The IAPSS Journal of Political Science, Vol 16, 1 (October 2010).   The neocons had little influence in the Obama White House, but neoconservatism remains a staple in Republican Party arsenal. During the early 1970s, Socialist Michael Harrington was one of the first to use "neoconservative" in its modern meaning. He characterized neoconservatives as former leftistswhom he derided as "socialists for Nixon"who had become more conservative. These people tended to remain endorsers of social democracy, but distinguished themselves by allying with the Nixon administration with respect to foreign policy, especially by their endorsement of the Vietnam War and opposition to the USSR. They still endorsed the welfare state, but not necessarily in its contemporary form. Irving Kristol remarked that a neoconservative is a "", one who became more conservative after seeing the results of liberal policies. Kristol also distinguished three specific aspects of neoconservatism from previous types of conservatism: neo-conservatives had a forward-looking attitude from their liberal heritage, rather than the reactionary and dour attitude of previous conservatives; they had a meliorative attitude, proposing alternate reforms rather than simply attacking social liberal reforms; they took philosophical ideas and ideologies very seriously.Kristol, Irving. "American conservatism 1945-1995". Public Interest, Fall 1995. During January 2009, at the end of President George W. Bush's second term in office, Jonathan Clarke, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs, proposed the following as the "main characteristics of neoconservatism": "a tendency to see the world in binary good/evil terms", a "low tolerance for diplomacy", a "readiness to use military force", an "emphasis on US unilateral action", a "disdain for multilateral organizations" and a "focus on the Middle East"."Viewpoint: The end of the neocons?", Jonathan Clarke, British Broadcasting Corporation, 13 January 2009.  In foreign policy, the neoconservatives' main concern is to prevent the development of a new rival. Defense Planning Guidance, a document prepared during 1992 by Under Secretary for Defense for Policy Paul Wolfowitz, is regarded by Distinguished Professor of the Humanities John McGowan at the University of North Carolina as the "quintessential statement of neoconservative thought". The report says: "Our first objective is to prevent the re-emergence of a new rival, either on the territory of the former Soviet Union or elsewhere, that poses a threat on the order of that posed formerly by the Soviet Union. This is a dominant consideration underlying the new regional defense strategy and requires that we endeavor to prevent any hostile power from dominating a region whose resources would, under consolidated control, be sufficient to generate global power." According to Lead Editor of e-International Relations, Stephen McGlinchey, "Neo-conservatism is something of a chimera in modern politics. For its opponents it is a distinct political ideology that emphasizes the blending of military power with Wilsonian idealism, yet for its supporters it is more of a 'persuasion' that individuals of many types drift into and out of. Regardless of which is more correct, it is now widely accepted that the neo-conservative impulse has been visible in modern American foreign policy and that it has left a distinct impact". Neoconservatives claim the "conviction that communism was a monstrous evil and a potent danger." They endorse social welfare programs that were rejected by libertarians and paleoconservatives. Neoconservatism first developed during the late 1960s as an effort to oppose the radical cultural changes occurring within the United States. Irving Kristol wrote: "If there is any one thing that neoconservatives are unanimous about, it is their dislike of the counterculture."Kristol, What Is a Neoconservative? 87. Norman Podhoretz agreed: "Revulsion against the counterculture accounted for more converts to neoconservatism than any other single factor."Podhoretz, 275. Neoconservatives began to emphasize foreign issues during the mid-1970s.Vaisse, Neoconservatism (2010) p. 110.  During 1979 an early study by liberal Peter Steinfels concentrated on the ideas of Irving Kristol, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Daniel Bell. He noted that the stress on foreign affairs "emerged after the New Left and the counterculture had dissolved as convincing foils for neoconservatism .... The essential source of their anxiety is not military or geopolitical or to be found overseas at all; it is domestic and cultural and ideological."Steinfels, 69. Neoconservative foreign policy is a descendant of so-called Wilsonian idealism. Neoconservatives endorse democracy promotion by the U.S. and other democracies, based on the claim that they think that human rights belong to everyone. They criticized the United Nations and detente with the USSR. On domestic policy, they endorse a welfare state, like European and Canadian conservatives and unlike American conservatives. According to Norman Podhoretz, During April 2006 Robert Kagan wrote in The Washington Post that Russia and China may be the greatest "challenge liberalism faces today": During July 2008 Joe Klein wrote in Time that today's neoconservatives are more interested in confronting enemies than in cultivating friends. He questioned the sincerity of neoconservative interest in exporting democracy and freedom, saying, "Neoconservatism in foreign policy is best described as unilateral bellicosity cloaked in the utopian rhetoric of freedom and democracy."Klein, Joe "McCain's Foreign Policy Frustration" Time, 23 July 2008. During February 2009 Andrew Sullivan wrote he no longer took neoconservatism seriously because its basic tenet was defense of Israel:  Neoconservatives respond to charges of merely rationalizing aid for Israel by noting that their "position on the Middle East conflict was exactly congruous with the neoconservative position on conflicts everywhere else in the world, including places where neither Jews nor Israeli interests could be found—not to mention the fact that non-Jewish neoconservatives took the same stands on all of the issues as did their Jewish confrères."Joshua Muravchik, "The Past, Present, and Future of Neoconservatism" Commentary October 2007. While neoconservatism is concerned primarily with foreign policy, there is also some discussion of internal economic policies. Neoconservatism generally endorses free markets and capitalism, favoring supply-side economics, but it has several disagreements with classical liberalism and fiscal conservatism: Irving Kristol states that neocons are more relaxed about budget deficits and tend to reject the Hayekian notion that the growth of government influence on society and public welfare is "the road to serfdom." Indeed, to safeguard democracy, government intervention and budget deficits may sometimes be necessary, Kristol argues. Further, neoconservative ideology stresses that while free markets do provide material goods in an efficient way, they lack the moral guidance human beings need to fulfill their needs. Morality can be found only in tradition, they say and, contrary to libertarianism, markets do pose questions that cannot be solved solely by economics. "So, as the economy only makes up part of our lives, it must not be allowed to take over and entirely dictate to our society."Murray, p. 40. Critics consider neoconservatism a bellicose and "heroic" ideology opposed to "mercantile" and "bourgeois" virtues and therefore "a variant of anti-economic thought." Political scientist Zeev Sternhell states, "Neoconservatism has succeeded in convincing the great majority of Americans that the main questions that concern a society are not economic, and that social questions are really moral questions."Zeev Sternhell: The Anti-Enlightenment Tradition. New Haven, Yale University Press, 2010 ISBN 978-0-300-13554-1 p. 436. Many moderate conservatives oppose neoconservative policies and have sharply negative views on it.  For example, Stefan Halper and Jonathan Clarke (a libertarian based at Cato), in their 2004 book on neoconservatism, America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order,say that neocons "propose an untenable model for our nation's future" (p 8) and then  outline what they think is the inner logic of the movement: characterized the neoconservatives, at that time, as uniting:  Starting during the 1980s, disputes concerning Israel and public policy contributed to a conflict with paleoconservatives. Pat Buchanan terms neoconservatism "a globalist, interventionist, open borders ideology."Tolson 2003. Paul Gottfried has written that the neocons' call for "permanent revolution" exists independently of their beliefs about Israel,"Fatuous and Malicious" by Paul Gottfried. LewRockwell.com, 28 March 2003. characterizing the neos as "ranters out of a Dostoyevskian novel, who are out to practice permanent revolution courtesy of the U.S. government" and questioning how anyone could mistake them for conservatives."Goldberg Is Not the Worst" by Paul Gottfried. LewRockwell.com, 20 March 2003. What make neocons most dangerous are not their... and calling everyone and his cousin an anti-Semite, but the leftist revolutionary fury they express.He  has also argued that domestic equality and the exportability of democracy are points of contention between them.Paul Gottfried's Paleoconservatism article in "American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia" (ISI:2006) Responding to a question about neoconservatives in 2004, William F. Buckley said: "I think those I know, which is most of them, are bright, informed and idealistic, but that they simply overrate the reach of U.S. power and influence."Sanger, Deborah, "Questions for William F. Buckley: Conservatively Speaking", interview in The New York Times Magazine, 11 July 2004. Retrieved 6 March 2008 Trotskyism is the type of communism advocated by Leon Trotsky in opposition to Stalin (who had Trotsky murdered). Some critics have argued that since the founders of neo-conservatism included some ex-Trotskyites, that therefore Trotskyist traits continue to characterize ideologies and practices of neo-conservatism. During the Reagan Administration, the charge was made that the foreign policy of the Reagan administration was being managed by ex-Trotskyists. This claim was called a "myth" by :"A 1987 article in The New Republic described these developments as a Trotskyist takeover of the Reagan administration", wrote . This "Trotskyist" charge has been repeated and even widened by journalist Michael Lind during 2003 to assert a takeover of the foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration by former Trotskyists; Lind's "amalgamation of the defense intellectuals with the traditions and theories of 'the largely Jewish-American Trotskyist movement' [in Lind's words]" was criticized during 2003 by University&nbsp;of&nbsp;Michigan professor Alan&nbsp;M. Wald, who had discussed Trotskyism  in his history of "the New York intellectuals".  The question of 'Shachtmanism' The charge that neoconservativism is related to Leninism has been made, also. Francis Fukuyama identified neoconservatism with Leninism during 2006. He wrote that neoconservatives: The term neoconservative may be used pejoratively by self-described paleoconservatives, Democrats, liberals, progressives, or libertarians. Critics take issue with neoconservatives' support for interventionistic foreign policy. Critics from the left take issue with what they characterize as unilateralism and lack of concern with international consensus through organizations such as the United Nations. Kinsley quotes Rich Lowry, whom he describes as "a conservative of the non-neo variety", as criticizing the neoconservatives "messianic vision" and "excessive optimism"; Kinsley contrasts the present-day neoconservative foreign policy to earlier neoconservative Jeane Kirkpatrick's "tough-minded pragmatism".Martin Jacques, "The neocon revolution", The Guardian, 31 March 2005. Retrieved 25 December 2006. (Cited for "unilateralism".)Rodrigue Tremblay, "The Neo-Conservative Agenda: Humanism vs. Imperialism", presented at the Conference at the American Humanist Association annual meeting Las Vegas, 9 May 2004. Retrieved 25 December 2006 on the site of the Mouvement laïque québécois. Critics from both the left and right have assailed neoconservatives for the role Israel plays in their policies on the Middle East.[ ] Dual Loyalty?, By Rebecca Phillips, ABC News, 15 March 2003[ ] Joe Klein on Neoconservatives and Iran, Jeffrey Goldberg, The Atlantic, 29 July 2008 Neoconservatives respond by describing their shared opinion as a belief that national security is best attained by actively promoting freedom and democracy abroad as in the democratic peace theory through the endorsement of democracy, foreign aid and in certain cases military intervention. This is different from the traditional conservative tendency to endorse friendly regimes in matters of trade and anti-communism even at the expense of undermining existing democratic systems. Republican Congressman Ron Paul has been a longtime critic of neoconservativism as an attack on freedom and the U.S. Constitution, including an extensive speech on the House floor addressing neoconservative beginnings and how neoconservatism is neither new nor conservative. Paul Krugman in a column named 'Years Of Shame' commemorating the tenth anniversary of 9/11 attacks, criticized the Neoconservatives for causing a war unrelated to 9/11 attacks and fought for wrong reasons. (Cited for "criticism by a significant source".)[ ] Paul Krugman’s allegation of 9/11 shame — is he right?, Greg Sargent, Washington Post, 12 September 2011 John McGowan, professor of humanities at the University of North Carolina, states, after an extensive review of neoconservative literature and theory, that neoconservatives are attempting to build an American Empire, seen as successor to the British Empire, its goal being to perpetuate a Pax Americana. As imperialism is largely considered unacceptable by the American media, neoconservatives do not articulate their ideas and goals in a frank manner in public discourse. McGowan states, In the run up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, charges of dual loyalty were levelled against Jewish neoconservatives from across the political spectrum. A heated debate ensued, and the controversy continues into the present due to concerns over the neoconservatives stance toward Iran. An ABC News article providing an overview of the debate in the run up to the Iraq war stated.Critics of U.S. Iraq policy, on the right and the left, have drawn accusations of anti-Semitism for asserting that certain members of Bush's administration (namely Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz; Richard Perle, chairman of the Pentagon's Defense Policy Board; and Douglas Feith, undersecretary of defense for policy) have dual loyalty — interests in both the United States and Israel.[ ] Dual Loyalty? Are Israeli Interests ‘The Elephant in the Room’ in the Conflict With Iraq? Rebecca Phillips, ABC News, March 15, 2003 Patrick Buchanan issued a statement in a cover article for the American Conservative, "Neocons say we attack them because they are Jewish. We do not. We attack them because their warmongering threatens our country, even as it finds a reliable echo in Ariel Sharon".[ ] Whose War? Partick J. Buchanan, American Conservative, 24 March 2003 Jeffery Goldberg of the Atlantic interviewed Joe Klein in 2008.My friend and former colleague Joe Klein has made himself quite the figure of controversy over the past few weeks. First, he suggested that Jewish neoconservatives have "divided loyalties;" then… he argued that McCain has surrounded himself with "Jewish neoconservatives" who want war with Iran.[ ] Joe Klein on Neoconservatives and Iran, Jeffery Goldberg, The Atlantic, July 29, 2008 Joe Klein refuted the charges of anti-Semitism in his reply, stating that he was "anti-neoconservative".Listen, people can vote whichever way they want, for whatever reason they want.  I just don't want to see policy makers who make decisions on the basis of whether American policy will benefit Israel or not.  In some cases, you want to provide protection for Israel certainly, but you don't want to go to war with Iran. When Jennifer Rubin or Abe Foxman calls me antisemitic, they're wrong. I am anti-neoconservative.  I think these people are following very perversely extremist policies and I really did believe that it was time for mainstream Jews to stand up and say, "They don't represent us, they don't represent Israel." Mickey Kaus of Slate has noted that "Max Boot, Pete Wehner, Jennifer Rubin, Paul Mirengoff  and Abraham Foxman of the Anti-Defamation League  all wrote confidently outraged responses to Klein's raising of the "divided loyalties", and went on to opine that "It should be possible to publicly debate whether some "Jewish neoconservatives," among others, too easily convinced themselves that America's and Israel's interests happily coincided in the prosecution of the war".[ ] Klein Lives: Have the rules changed?, Mickey Kaus, Slate, Tuesday, 1 July 2008 Glen Greenwald also issued a response in support of Klein. As I’ve documented previously, the very same right-wing advocates who scream "anti-semitism" at anyone, such as Klein, who raises the issue of devotion to Israel themselves constantly argue that American Jews do — and should — cast their votes in American elections based upon what is best for Israel. They nakedly trot out the "dual loyalty" argument in order to manipulate American Jews to vote Republican in U.S. elections (e.g.: "the GOP supports Israel and Obama doesn't; therefore, American Jews shouldn’t vote for Obama"), while screaming "anti-semitism" the minute the premise is used by their political opponents.[ ] The right’s game-playing with "dual loyalty" and "anti-Semitism" accusations day, "Those who seek war with Iran endlessly exploit "dual loyalty" claims in order to promote their political agenda, while screaming "anti-Semitism" at political opponents who make the same claim.", Glen Greenwald, Salon, Wednesday 2 July 2008 The allegations of dual loyalty were met with counter accusations of anti-Semitism. David Brooks derided the "fantasies" of "full-mooners fixated on a... sort of Yiddish Trilateral Commission", beliefs which had "hardened into common knowledge... In truth, people labeled neocons (con is short for 'conservative' and neo is short for 'Jewish') travel in widely different circles..." Barry Rubin argued that the neoconservative label is used as an antisemitic pejorative:   The list includes public people identified as personally neoconservative at an important time or a high official with numerous neoconservative advisers, such as George W. Bush and Richard Cheney.     Newt Gingrich (R) – U.S. Representative from Georgia's 6th congressional district (1979–1999), Speaker of the House of Representatives (1995–1999) and 2012 presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani (R) – Mayor of New York City (1996–2002) and 2008 presidential candidatehttp://reason.com/blog/2007/07/10/rudy-the-neo-conhttp://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/03/05/why-neocons-love-the-strongman.html Paul Wolfowitz (R) – State and Defense Department official R. James Woolsey, Jr. - Director of Central Intelligence, Under Secretary of the Navy, green energy lobbyist. Richard Perle – Assistant Secretary of Defense, lobbyist. Jeane Kirkpatrick (R) – Ambassador to the United Nations. Scooter Libby – Chief-of-Staff to Cheney. John R. Bolton - Ambassador to the United Nations (2005-2006), recess appointee. Elliot Abrams (R) – foreign policy adviser. William G. Boykin – under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. Eliot A. Cohen – US State Department Counselor 2007-2009, now Robert E. Osgood Professor of Strategic Studies at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at the Johns Hopkins University. Victoria Nuland –  Assistant Secretary of State, foreign policy adviser to Vice President Dick Cheney."Reckless in Kiev: Neocons, Putin and Ukraine". Al Jazeera. 10 March 2014. Robert Kagan – Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution, Historian, founder of the Yale Political Monthly, adviser to Republican political campaigns,  and adviser to Hillary Rodham Clinton at the State Department.  Kagan calls himself a "liberal interventionist" rather than "neoconservative." Kagan is the husband of Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland. Francis Fukuyama (former neoconservative) – Senior Fellow at the Center on Democracy, Development and the Rule of Law at Stanford, former-neoconservative, political scientist, political economist, and author. Victor Davis Hanson – Martin and Illie Anderson Senior Fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, columnist and author. Michael Ledeen – Freedom Scholar chair at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, former US government consultant, author, columnist. Nathan Glazer – Professor of sociology, columnist, author. Harvey Mansfield – William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of Government at Harvard University, author. Donald Kagan - Sterling Professor of Classics and History at Yale University. Irving Kristol (Deceased) – Publisher, journalist, columnist. William Kristol – Founder and editor of The Weekly Standard, professor of political philosophy and American politics, political adviser. Norman Podhoretz – Editor-in-Chief of Commentary. John Podhoretz – Editor-at-Large of Commentary, presidential speech writer, author. Irwin Stelzer – International economics and business columnist, editor at The Weekly Standard, Oxford fellow. Charles Krauthammer – Pulitzer Prize winner, columnist, physician. David Frum – Journalist, Republican speech writer, columnist. Oriana Fallaci (Deceased) – Italian – U.S.permanent resident journalist and writer. Jennifer Rubin - Columnist and blogger for The Washington Post Jonah Goldberg - Columnist for National Review Joshua Muravchik - Resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute Michael Rubin - Resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute Frederick Kagan Resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute[ ] Empires Without Imperialism: Anglo-American Decline and the Politics of Deflection, Jeanne Morefield, Oxford University press, 2014, p. 73The Culture of Immodesty in American Life and Politics: The Modest Republic, Claes Glyn, eds. Michael P. Federici, Richard M Gambl, and Mark T Mitchell, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013The Strange Death of Republican America: Chronicles of a Collapsing Party, Sydney Blumenthal, Union Square Press, 2008 Jonathan S. Tobin - Senior online editor of Commentary Daniel Pipes (former neoconservative) - Historian, writer, and political commentator. Fred Barnes - Executive editor of the news publication The Weekly Standard Douglas Murray (author) - British writer, journalist and political commentator. Foundation for Defense of Democracies Henry Jackson SocietyK. Dodds, K. and S. Elden, "Thinking Ahead: David Cameron, the Henry Jackson Society and BritishNeoConservatism," British Journal of Politics and International Relations (2008), 10(3): 347–63. Hudson Institute Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Project for the New American Century American Enterprise Institute Commentary Front Page Magazine The Public Interest The Weekly Standard The Washington Free Beacon Factions in the Republican Party (United States) Globalization Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism Neoconservatism in Japan New Right Liberal Hawk Liberal internationalism Paleoconservatism Project for a New American Century Trotskyism Albanese, Matteo. "The Concept of War in Neoconservative Thinking", IPOC, Milan, 2012.Translated by Nicolas Lewkowicz. ISBN 978-8867720002 Auster, Lawrence. "Buchanan's White Whale", FrontPageMag, 19 March 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Buchanan, Patrick J.. "Whose War", The American Conservative, 24 March 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Bush, George W., Gerhard Schroeder, et al., "Transcript: Bush, Schroeder Roundtable With German Professionals", The Washington Post, 23 February 2005. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Critchlow, Donald T. The conservative ascendancy: how the GOP right made political history (2nd ed. 2011) Dean, John. Worse Than Watergate: The Secret Presidency of George W. Bush, Little, Brown, 2004. ISBN 0-316-00023-X (hardback). Critical account of neo-conservatism in the administration of George W. Bush. Frum, David. "Unpatriotic Conservatives", National Review, 7 April 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Gerson, Mark, ed. The Essential Neo-Conservative Reader, Perseus, 1997. ISBN 0-201-15488-9 (paperback), ISBN 0-201-47968-0 (hardback). Gerson, Mark. "Norman's Conquest: A Commentary on the Podhoretz Legacy", Policy Review, Fall 1995, Number 74. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Gray, John. Black Mass, Allen Lane, 2007. ISBN 978-0-7139-9915-0. Hanson, Jim The Decline of the American Empire, Praeger, 1993. ISBN 0-275-94480-8. Halper, Stefan and Jonathan Clarke. America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order, Cambridge University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-521-83834-7. Kagan, Robert, et al., Present Dangers: Crisis and Opportunity in American Foreign and Defense Policy. Encounter Books, 2000. ISBN 1-893554-16-3. Kristol, Irving. Neo-Conservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea: Selected Essays 1949-1995, New York: The Free Press, 1995. ISBN 0-02-874021-1 (10). ISBN 978-0-02-874021-8 (13). (Hardcover ed.) Reprinted as Neoconservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea, New York: Ivan R. Dee, 1999. ISBN 1-56663-228-5 (10). (Paperback ed.) – . "What Is a Neoconservative?", Newsweek, 19 January 1976. Lara Amat y León, Joan y Antón Mellón, Joan, "Las persuasiones neoconservadoras: F. Fukuyama, S. P. Huntington, W. Kristol y R. Kagan", en Máiz, Ramón (comp.), Teorías políticas contemporáneas, (2ªed.rev. y ampl.) Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia, 2009. ISBN 978-84-9876-463-5. Ficha del libro Lara Amat y León, Joan, "Cosmopolitismo y anticosmoplitismo en el neoconservadurismo: Fukuyama y Huntington", en Nuñez, Paloma y Espinosa, Javier (eds.), Filosofía y política en el siglo XXI. Europa y el nuevo orden cosmopolita, Akal, Madrid, 2009. ISBN 978-84-460-2875-8. Ficha del libro Lasn, Kalle. "Why won't anyone say they are Jewish?", Adbusters, March/April 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Lewkowicz, Nicolas. "Neoconservatism and the Propagation of Democracy", Democracy Chronicles, 11 February 2013. Mann, James. Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet, Viking, 2004. ISBN 0-670-03299-9 (cloth). Mascolo, Georg. ""A Leaderless, Directionless Superpower: interview with Ex-Powell aide Wilkerson", Spiegel Online, 6 December 2005. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Muravchik, Joshua. "Renegades", Commentary, 1 October 2002. Bibliographical information is available online, the article itself is not. Muravchik, Joshua. "The Neoconservative Cabal", Commentary, September 2003. Bibliographical information is available online, the article itself is not. Prueher, Joseph. U.S. apology to China over spy plane incident, 11 April 2001. Reproduced on sinomania.com. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Podoretz, Norman. The Norman Podhoretz Reader. New York: Free Press, 2004. ISBN 0-7432-3661-0. Roucaute Yves. Le Neoconservatisme est un humanisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2005.ISBN 2-13-055016-9. Roucaute Yves. La Puissance de la Liberté. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2004.ISBN 2-13-054293-X. Ruppert, Michael C.. Crossing the Rubicon: The Decline of the American Empire at the End of the Age of Oil, New Society, 2004. ISBN 0-86571-540-8. Ryn, Claes G., America the Virtuous: The Crisis of Democracy and the Quest for Empire, Transaction, 2003. ISBN 0-7658-0219-8 (cloth). Stelzer, Irwin, ed. Neoconservatism, Atlantic Books, 2004. Smith, Grant F. Deadly Dogma: How Neoconservatives Broke the Law to Deceive America. ISBN 0-9764437-4-0. Solarz, Stephen, et al. "Open Letter to the President", 19 February 1998, online at IraqWatch.org. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Strauss, Leo. Natural Right and History, University of Chicago Press, 1999. ISBN 0-226-77694-8. Strauss, Leo. The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism, University of Chicago Press, 1989. ISBN 0-226-77715-4. Tolson, Jay. "The New American Empire?", U.S. News and World Report, 13 January 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006. Wilson, Joseph. The Politics of Truth. Carroll & Graf, 2004. ISBN 0-7867-1378-X. Woodward, Bob. Plan of Attack, Simon and Schuster, 2004. ISBN 0-7432-5547-X. Arin, Kubilay Yado: Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy. Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013. Balint, Benjamin V. Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine that Transformed the Jewish Left into the Neoconservative Right (2010) Dorrien, Gary. The Neoconservative Mind. ISBN 1-56639-019-2, n attack from the Left Ehrman, John. The Rise of Neoconservatism: Intellectual and Foreign Affairs 1945 – 1994, Yale University Press, 2005, ISBN 0-300-06870-0, friendly analysis Eisendrath, Craig R. and Melvin A. Goodman. Bush League Diplomacy: How the Neoconservatives are Putting The World at Risk (Prometheus Books, 2004), ISBN 1-59102-176-6. Friedman, Murray. The Neoconservative Revolution: Jewish Intellectuals and the Shaping of Public Policy. Cambridge University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-521-54501-3. Grandin, Greg."Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism." Metropolitan Books Henry Holt & Company, 2006.ISBN 978-0-8050-8323-1 Heilbrunn, Jacob. They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons, Doubleday (2008) ISBN 0-385-51181-7 Heilbrunn, Jacob. "5 Myths About Those Nefarious Neocons," Washington Post, 10 Feb. 2008 Kristol, Irving. "The Neoconservative Persuasion". Lind, Michael. "How Neoconservatives Conquered Washington", Salon, 9 April 2003. Vaïsse, Justin. Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard U.P. 2010), translated from the French "Neoconservatism: Key Figures",The Christian Science Monitor. Steigerwald, Bill. "So, what is a 'neocon'?" Stelzer, Irwin. "Nailing the neocon myth". The Times (London) Selden, Zachary, "Neoconservatives and the American Mainstream". Selden is director of the Defence and Security Committee of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly. Fukuyama, Francis. "After Neoconservatism". Archived copy of original New York Times article. Also available in .pdf Thompson, Bradley C. (with Yaron Brook). Neoconservatism. An Obituary for an Idea. Boulder/London: Paradigm Publishers, 2010. ISBN 978-1-59451-831-7. Kristol Confesses: Neoconservatism Is Not Conservative, by Samuel Francis Paul Gottfried and Claes Ryn on Leo Strauss, by Kevin MacDonald Adam Curtis. The Power of Nightmares, BBC. Archive. Booknotes interview with Irving Kristol on Neoconservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea, 24 September 1995.
