 New Rochelle  is a city in Westchester County, New York, United States, in the southeastern portion of the state. In 2007, the city had a population of 73,260, making it the seventh-largest in the state of New York. As of the 2010 Census, the city's population had increased to 77,062. In 2008, New Rochelle was recognized by the American Podiatric Medical Association (APMA) as one of the 100 Best Walking Cities in the United States, and the second best in New York State after nearby New York City.Best Walking Cities Finder In November 2008 Business Week magazine listed New Rochelle as the best city in New York State, and one of the best places nationally, to raise children.The Best Places to Raise Kids 2009 accessdate=2008-11-24 In 2014, New Rochelle was voted a best city to live in. Five hundred and fifty cities with a population greater than 65,000 were evaluated based on several factors. New Rochelle ranked 13th on the list, the only city in Westchester County. The article can be found at http://patch.com/new-york/newrochelle/247-wall-st-new-rochelle-among-americas-50-best-cities-live The European settlement was started by refugee Huguenots (French Protestants) in 1688, who were fleeing religious persecution in France (such as dragonnade) after the revocation by the king of the Edict of Nantes. Many of the settlers were artisans and craftsmen from the city of La Rochelle, France, thus influencing the choice of the name of "New Rochelle".  Some 33 families established the community of la Nouvelle-Rochelle in 1688. A monument containing the names of these settlers stands in Hudson Park, the original landing point of the Huguenots.Historical Landmarks of New Rochelle, Morgan Seacord 1938 pg.6 Thirty-one years earlier, the Siwanoy Indians, a band of Algonquian-speaking Lenape (also known as the Delaware by English colonists) sold their land to Thomas Pell. In 1689 Pell officially deeded 6,100 acres (25&nbsp;km2) for the establishment of a Huguenot community.New York - A Guide to The Empire State, Work Projects Administration of New York pg.245 Jacob Leisler is an important figure in the early histories of both New Rochelle and the nation. He arrived in America as a mercenary in the British army and later became one of the most prominent merchants in New York. He was subsequently appointed acting-governor of the province, and it was during this time that he acted on behalf of the Huguenots.History of Westchester County, New York, J. Thomas Scharf, A.M., LL.D., p688 Of all the Huguenot settlements in America founded with the intention of being distinctly French colonies, New Rochelle most clearly conformed to the plans of its founders. The colony continued to attract French refugees until as late as 1760. The choice of name for the city reflected the importance of the city of La Rochelle and of the new settlement in Huguenot history and distinctly French character of the community. French was spoken, and it was common practice for people in neighboring areas to send their children to New Rochelle to learn the language.Historical Landmarks of New Rochelle, Morgan H. Seacord and William S. Hadaway, pg.94  In 1775, General George Washington stopped in New Rochelle on his way to assume command of the Army of the United Colonies in Massachusetts.New Rochelle On-line The British Army briefly occupied sections of New Rochelle and Larchmont in 1776. Following British victory in the Battle of White Plains, New Rochelle became part of a "Neutral Ground" for General Washington to regroup his troops. After the Revolutionary War ended in 1784, patriot Thomas Paine was given a farm in New Rochelle for his service to the cause of independence. The farm, totaling about 300 acres (1.2&nbsp;km2), had been confiscated from its owners by state of New York due to their Tory activities. The first national census of 1790 shows New Rochelle with 692 residents. 136 were African American, including 36 who were freemen and the remainder slaves. Through the 18th century, New Rochelle had remained a modest village that retained an abundance of agricultural land. During the 19th century, however, New York City was a destination from the mid-century on by waves of  immigration, principally from Ireland and Germany. More established American families left New York City and moved into this area. Although the original Huguenot population was rapidly shrinking in relative size, through ownership of land, businesses, banks, and small manufactures, they retained a predominant hold on the political and social life of the town. The 1820 Census showed 150 African-Americans residing in New Rochelle, six of whom were still slaves. The state had abolished slavery with by a gradual plan; children of slave mothers were born free and all slaves were freed by 1827. In 1857 the Village of New Rochelle was established within the borders of the Town of New Rochelle. A group of volunteers created the first fire service in 1861. In 1899, a bill creating the New Rochelle City Charter was signed by Governor Theodore Roosevelt. It was through this bill that the Village and Town of New Rochelle were joined into one municipality. In 1899, Michael J. Dillon narrowly defeated Hugh A. Harmer to become New Rochelle's first mayor. The recently established city charter designated a board of aldermen as the legislative unit (with two members to be elected from each of four wards, and 10 elected from the city at-large.[ ]   By 1900 New Rochelle had a population of 14,720. Throughout the city, farms, estates, and wooded homesteads were bought up by realty and development companies.New Rochelle Online - History:20th Century Planned residential neighborhoods such as Rochelle Park, one of the first planned communities in the country, soon spread across the city, earning New Rochelle the sobriquet "City of Homes".If You're Thinking of Living in: NEW ROCHELLE, New York Times, 1987 In 1909, Edwin Thanhouser established Thanhouser Film Corporation. Thanhouser's Million Dollar Mystery was one of the first serial motion pictures.The Thanhouser Company of New Rochelle, a Dossier;Author=Anthony Slide;Published=1974 In 1923, New Rochelle resident Anna Jones became the first African-American woman to be admitted to the New York State Bar.New Rochelle Online - History:20th Century Poet and resident James J. Montague captured the image of New Rochelle in his 1926 poem "Queen City of the Sound".:"New Rochelle The City of Huguenots"; The City of New Rochelle - Chamber of Commerce;1926, The Knickerbocker Press, New Rochelle, NY In 1930, New Rochelle recorded a population of 54,000, up from 36,213 only ten years earlier. During the 1930s, New Rochelle was the wealthiest city per capita in New York state and the third wealthiest in the country.New Rochelle Online - History:20th Century By the end of the century, the Metro North railroad station was rebuilt along with a $190 million entertainment complex, nicknamed New Roc City, which features a 19-screen movie theater, an IMAX theater, an indoor ice-hockey arena, mini-golf, go karts, an arcade, restaurants, a hotel, loft-apartments and a mega supermarket. The complex was built on the site of the former New Rochelle Mall, which had opened in 1968.New Roc City complex opens in New Rochelle, AllBusiness, September 29, 1999 In 2014, led by Mayor Noam Bramson, New Rochelle solidified its relationship with RDRXR, http://www.newrochelleny.com/index.aspx?nid=1015 to transform the downtown area signaling the beginning of the largest and most important economic development initiative in the city’s history. Initiated to not only keep its patrons and citizens but to also attract new ones, as well as spurring new economic development that'll be beneficial to the masses, the superlative and prodigious journey began. New Rochelle is located at the southeastern point of continental New York State. It lies on the Long Island Sound, bordered on the west by Pelham, Pelham Manor and Eastchester, by Scarsdale to the north and east, and Mamaroneck and Larchmont to the east. The city lies  north of the New York City border (Pelham Bay Park in The Bronx). According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 13.2 square miles (34.3&nbsp;km2). The city has a rough triangle shape, approximately 10 miles (16&nbsp;km) from north to south and 1.5 miles (2&nbsp;km) from east to west at its widest point. As measured by the census of 2000, New Rochelle had a population of 72,182 people, 24,275 occupied households, and 17,546 families residing in the city. The population density was 6,973.5 people per square mile (2,692.7/km²). There were 26,995 housing units at an average density of 2,608.0 per square mile (1,007.0/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 68% White, 19% African American, 0.20% Native American, 4% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 6% from other races, and 3% from two or more races. 20% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. In the city the population was spread out with 24.0% under the age of 18, 8.7% from 18 to 24, 29.5% from 25 to 44, 22.2% from 45 to 64, and 15.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 90.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.9 males. There were 26,189 households out of which 32.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.5% were married couples living together, 12.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.0% were non-families. 28.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.29. 19,312 residents of New Rochelle were enrolled in school, with 2,743 in pre-school or kindergarten, 8,105 in elementary school, 3,704 in high school and 5,030 in college or graduate school. Out of 42,872 individuals over the age of 25, 20% (9,766)  had no high school diploma, 23% (11,325) were high school graduates, 14% (6,710) achieved some level of college education, 5% (2,347) held an associate degree, 19% (9,120) held a bachelor's degree and 20% (9,604) possessed a graduate or other advanced degree. The working population was 35,262, 95.7% of whom were employed. The occupational breakdown had 42% working in 'management', 25% working in 'sales', 17% in 'services', 8% in 'construction', and 7% in 'production and transport'. The average daily commute was 30 minutes, with 60% driving to work, 12% carpooling, 18% traveling via public-transportation and 7% using other means. According to the 2007 Census Bureau estimates, the median income for a household in the city was $64,756 and the median income for a family was $88,004.2006 American Community Survey, Data Profile Highlights: New Rochelle city, New York, U.S. Census Bureau website About 9.8% of the population lived below the poverty line. New Rochelle is commonly referred to as the Home Town because of the significant amount of single-family, residential development that exists throughout most of the city. While the formerly industrial downtown section is more densely developed, with condominiums, high rises, offices, shopping centers, affordable housing complexes, a medical center, nursing homes, two college campuses and an inter modal transportation hub, the rest of the city consists of sprawling, residential neighborhoods. There are more than 11,500 single family units within the city, more than that of neighboring Larchmont, Mamaroneck and Scarsdale combined. The total number of separate households surpasses 26,000, more than that of neighboring Pelham, Pelham Manor, Eastchester, Scarsdale, Mamaroneck and Larchmont combined. Some of the country's most expensive real estate can be found in New Rochelle. The north end of the city (10804) is ranked in Forbes magazine's list of the '500 most expensive zip-codes' in the country. According to the list, the average household income was $199,061 and the average home price was over $752,000. Homes in Premium Point, a gated section of the city on Long Island Sound, are priced anywhere from $2 to $20 million. The three newest residential developments, 'Kensington Woods', 'The Greens at Cherry Lawn' and 'Riviera Shores', are all gated communities with single family homes priced from $2 million. With a population approaching 80,000 residents, New York State law dictates that the city provide an adequate amount of affordable housing units. New Rochelle has historically met and surpassed state requirements. It is working  to replace the existing Weyman Avenue Projects with more community-centered, townhouse-style housing units. By embracing the needs of the poor, New Rochelle sets a precedent for other suburban communities to follow. Neighboring towns, including Mamaroneck, Larchmont and Scarsdale, have failed to meet the minimal affordable housing requirements set by the state. Popular consensus is that the presence of the poor precludes that of the middle-class and the wealthy. Considering the large number of working-class and affordable housing units found 'Downtown', the high property values prevalent throughout most of the city reflects the true economic diversity of New Rochelle. It is home to a range of families, from the financially disadvantaged to the very wealthy. One of 'the wealthiest people in the United States,' according to Forbes magazine, was longtime New Rochelle resident and businessman Sidney Frank.  Within the greater city borders are many established neighborhoods and subsections, several of which are larger in both size and population than neighboring towns of Larchmont, Bronxville and Pelham Manor. The public community areas most noted include: Bayberry, Beechmont, Bloomingdale Estates, Bonniecrest, Daisy Farms, Davenport Neck, Echo Manor, Forest Heights, Forest Knolls, French Ridge, Glen Island, Glenwood Lake, Heathcote, Lake Isle, Larchmont Woods, Lyncroft, Northfield, North Ridge, Paine Heights, Pinebrook, Premium Manor, Quaker Ridge, Residence Park, Rochelle Heights, Sans Souci, Scarsdale Downs, Shore Road, Sutton Manor, Vaneck Estates, Ward Acres, Wilmot Woods and Wykagyl. Premium Point, Kensington Woods and Cherry Lawn are gated neighborhoods accessible only by those immediate residents.  Since 1932, New Rochelle has operated under a Council-Manager form of government. The City Manager is the chief administrative officer of the city selected to carry out the directives of the Council. The Manager monitors the city's fiscal condition and enforces its ordinances and laws. The City Manager is involved in the discussion of all matters coming before Council yet has no final vote. The City Council is the legislative body consisting of the Mayor and six council members. The Mayor serves as the presiding officer of the Council. Since 1993, the City has had six council districts, with one council member elected from and by each district. The Council functions to set policy, approve the annual budget, appoint the City Manager and City Clerk, and enact local laws, resolutions & ordinances.New Rochelle On-line According to the New Rochelle Police Department, New Rochelle is the safest city of its size in New York State and the fifth safest city of its size in the United States.The Journal News,'New Rochelle Police Report: City is Fifth Safest of Its Size in the Nation', by Leslie Korngold http://www.newrochelledowntown.com/articles/?article=85 The majority of crimes committed within New Rochelle are non-violent property crimes, including burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson. Property crime, on a scale of 1 (low crime) to 10, is 4 compared to the US average of 3. Violent crime (murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) is 3, equal to the US average.Sperling's Best Places| New Rochelle, New York Crime Data The New Rochelle Fire Department (NRFD) provides fire protection and first responder emergency medical services to the city of New Rochelle.http://www.newrochelleny.com/index.aspx?NID=325 The New Rochelle Fire Department responds to approximately 8,000 emergency calls annually. The city also contracts with a commercial ambulance service, Transcare Emergency Medical Ambulance Services, to provide dedicated ALS Ambulances to the city 24/7, 365. Two ambulances from Transcare EMS are stationed at two New Rochelle Fire Department firehouses in the southern and northern sections of the city.http://www.newrochelleny.com/index.aspx?NID=385 The New Rochelle Fire Department is sub-divided into 2 main divisions of operation: Fire and Emergency Operations and Support Services. Each of these divisions are commanded by a Deputy Chief.http://www.newrochelleny.com/index.aspx?nid=386http://www.newrochelleny.com/DocumentCenter/View/3393 The Fire and Emergency Operations Division is commanded by 4 Deputy Chiefs, 1 per shift/squad, who reports to the Chief of Department/Fire Commissioner. This division supervises the department's 8 fire companies and 155 uniformed members. The NRFD currently operates out of 5 Fire Stations, located throughout the city, under the command of a Deputy Chief/Tour Commander per shift. The New Rochelle Fire Department also operates and maintains a fire apparatus fleet of 5 Engines, 3 Ladders, 1 Rescue, and numerous Special, Support, and Reserve Units. In addition to the 5 Fire Stations, the NRFD also operates a Fire Headquarters administrative building.http://www.newrochelleny.com/Facilities.aspx?Page=detail&RID=6 center" caption="" widths="190px" heights="160px       The Town of New Rochelle formed its first professional police department in 1885, 14 years before the city incorporated in 1899. The Department currently has 186 sworn officers and a total staff of more than 250. In 1993 the Department was certified as an accredited agency by the New York State Law Enforcement Accreditation Council. Special programs include community oriented policing through the 'Police and Community Together' (PACT) program, harbor patrol, and a bicycle patrol.The New Rochelle Police Department (A Brief History), New Rochelle Police Department website, accessed September 16, 2008 center" caption="" widths="190px" heights="160px     Sound Shore Medical Center, also known as Montefiore New Rochelle Hospital is a not-for-profit health care organization located in New Rochelle that treats over 85,000 patients annually and operates the only New York State Area Trauma Center in southern Westchester County. Ambulance service is provided by Transcare EMS, which operates 3 Paramedic-staffed Medic Ambulances throughout the city.   The shoreline within the City of New Rochelle measures , but due to many irregularities and off-shore islands, the actual length of the waterfront is . The unusual coastal features have over the years earned it the nickname, "the Queen City of the Sound."Nicknames of American Cities, Towns, and Villages:past & present, Gerard L. Alexander, pg.69 Special Libraries Association 1951 The City has an impressive collection of parklands and nature preserves, with  of inland waters,  of public park lands and  of park lets. The city is served by the City School District of New Rochelle, which operates a public high school, two junior high schools and ten elementary schools. On seven separate occasions, the City's schools have received the prestigious Blue Ribbon Award from the U.S. Department of Education. New Rochelle High School is one of the most diverse high schools in the country; the student body represents over 60 different countries from around the world. The school offers over 240 courses including honors, research and advanced placement courses. Libraries are operated by the New Rochelle Public Library System which is part of the county-wide Westchester Library System. The Japanese Weekend School of New York, a Japanese weekend school, has its offices in New Roc City in New Rochelle."補習校事務所." Japanese Weekend School of New York. Retrieved on July 8, 2013.  As of 2006 the school had about 800 students, including Japanese citizens, and Japanese Americans, at locations in Westchester County and Long Island.Matsuda, Akiko. "Learning their mother tongue." The Journal News. August 16, 2006. p. A1. Retrieved on July 8, 2013. "Atsushi Kaizuka, assistant principal of the Japanese Weekend School of New York, which serves about 800 Japanese or Japanese American students at its Westchester and Long Island schools, said Matthews' attempt seemed to be an uphill battle. " Major highways include Interstate 95 and the Hutchinson River Parkway. Interstate 95 serves as the main route through New Rochelle with four exits directly serving the city. The Hutchinson River Parkway, which is designated for passenger vehicles only, runs through much of the city. Substantial congestion on the Parkway occurs in both directions during the morning and evening rush-hour. The Boston Post Road, also known as Main Street in downtown New Rochelle, is used as a major artery during the morning and evening commute. Most traffic via the Post Road is short distance or fairly local, yet vehicles have utilized Route 1 during times of heavy congestion on I-95 as a re-route. The city has a commuter railroad station served by Metro North and Amtrak.http://www.amtrak.com/servlet/ContentServer?pagename=Amtrak/am2Station/Station_Page&c=am2Station&cid=1080080550830&ssid=98  By 1848, the New York & New Haven opened their line along Long Island Sound. After the Civil War, proposals for new railroads reached new levels. Banking that the city would continue to grow northward, the New York, Westchester and Boston Railway Company was established to serve the large populations moving to the suburbs. Two main lines were built as part of the NYW&B; the Port Chester line and the White Plains line. While the populations of some communities served by the NYW&B did grow between 1912 and 1937, the growth was not sufficient or fast enough to provide adequate business for the railroad, and service was discontinued on December 31, 1937. New Rochelle has been home to a variety of industries over the years, including: Thanhouser Film Studios, Terrytoons Studios, P.J. Tierney Diner Manufacturing (now DeRaffele Manufacturing Company), Flynn Burner Company, New York Seven Up (Joyce Beverages, Inc), RawlPlug, Inc., the Longines Symphonette Society, Conran's USA. Manufacturing and warehousing has declined since the 1990s as industrial land near both exits from Interstate 95 have been converted to "big box" retailer use. New Rochelle remains a center of business, home to the corporate headquarters of Sidney Frank Importing, Blimpies, East River Savings Bank, and Somnia Anesthesia Services. Title=Division and diversity: Community transition in postwar America, 1945--1970. New Rochelle, New York, a case study|Page= author=Guttman, Gail Kaplan, Ph.D.|Publisher= Columbia University|Date= 2001 New Rochelle’s ‘sister city’ is La Rochelle, France, a city and commune of western France with a (population 78,000 in 2004). There has been a 'friendly relationship' between the two cities since 1910.    Columbia Island - a small island (appx.  square) situated between  Davids' Island and Pea Island. Up until 1940 it was known as Little Pea Island. CBS purchased it and built a concrete foundation to support a transmitter building topped by a  tall antenna tower for WCBS-AM. (Reprint) The transmitter remained in operation until the 1960s, when the station was moved to nearby High Island. Execution Rocks Lighthouse - centered in the middle of Long Island Sound, just south of Davids' Island. The structure was built in 1849 and includes a  tall tower and the ‘keeper's house’. It is rumored that the lighthouse's site got its name before the American Revolutionary War when British colonial authorities executed people by chaining them to the rocks at low tide and allowing the rising water to drown them. In reality, the name was chosen to reflect the historically dangerous shipping area created by the rocks exposure during low tides. Huckleberry Island - a  island owned by the Huckleberry Indians, Inc., a club within the New York Athletic Club. The island is an important nesting site for waterbirds such as egrets and night herons. Leland Castle - a 19th-century Gothic Revival castle built as the summer residence of Simeon Leland, a wealthy New York City hotel entrepreneur. It has since been acquired by the College of New Rochelle and is used as an art gallery available to the public. St. John's Wilmot Church - a historic Episcopal parish located in the northern end of the City at the intersection of North Avenue and Wilmot Road, formerly referred to as “Cooper's Corner”. Thomas Paine Historical Site - a historical nexus within the city, the site comprises: the country home of the American pamphleteer and Revolutionary War hero Thomas Paine, his burial site, monument, and a museum. Paine's Cottage was built in 1793 and is a National Historic Landmark. The Thomas Paine Memorial Building, built in 1925, houses the library and museum collection of the Thomas Paine National Historical Association. Also on the site is the Brewster Schoolhouse, one of the oldest structural relics in Westchester County. Trinity-St. Paul's Episcopal Church - added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2006. It is located at the northwest corner of Huguenot Street (also known as the Boston Post Road) and Division Street. This church represents the body of the majority group of New Rochelle's founding Huguenot French Calvanistic congregation that conformed to the liturgy of the established Church of England in June 1709. King George III gave Trinity its first charter in 1762. After the Revolutionary War, Trinity became a parish of the Protestant Episcopal Church of America. Yacht, sailing and rowing clubs dot the coast on Long Island Sound and beach clubs line the shores of Davenport Neck. Beckwithe Point, The Greentree Country Club and The Surf Club are the largest of the private shore clubs, providing waterfront recreation to members during the summer season. The New York Athletic Club sits on Travers Island, located on the border of New Rochelle and Pelham Manor. Echo Bay Yacht Club and Huguenot Yacht Club are several well known, private yacht clubs in the city. New York Sailing School and New Rochelle Rowing Club each have histories dating back over 100 years. The City operates a large marina with 300 slips and 150 mooring spaces. Glen Island — In 1879 John H. Starin, a former U.S. Congressman and New York transportation king, bought five islands which he named 'Glen Island ' and created perhaps the first theme park open to the public. His 12 steamboats transported millions of New York residents and others to the attractions which included a zoo, a natural history museum, a railway, a German beer garden (around the castle-like structure which still stands today), a bathing beach, and a Chinese pagoda. Today the park is a  island property connected to the mainland by a drawbridge built in the 1920s. One of the main features of the park is its pristine, crescent shaped beach offering access to Long Island Sound. Five Islands Park is a series of islands connected by small footbridges and pathways, offers playground, sports, hiking and camping facilities for all residents to enjoy. Hudson Park encompasses  along the city's harbor front and includes a beach for residents, the city boathouse, greenhouses, the shore station of the United States Coast Guard and several yacht and rowing clubs. The park is traditionally accepted as the original landing place of the Huguenot settlers. A granite boulder with bronze tablets commemorates the event. Davids' Island, a  island of the coast of the city, is being transformed from a former American military base (Fort Slocum) into a park and environmental preserve. Beginning just after the Civil War, the island was a military base used to protect New York Harbors, during World War I it served as an army recruitment station and up until 1967, it maintained various ‘Cold War’ facilities. Today it is home to a variety of plants, birds, and animals. These include the endangered Kemp’s Ridley sea turtle, and rare birds such as osprey and least terns. Davids Island also supports valuable wetlands, rare rocky intertidal areas, and sandy beaches. The waters surrounding the Island are home to Winter Flounder, Atlantic Herring, and Atlantic Silversides. Ward Acres, located in the North End, is a combination of untouched forest, wild lawns and meadows, acres of hiking, exercise trails and historic horse stables/cemeteries. In 2007, The Westchester County Department of Conservation produced a Natural Resource Management Plan in order to identify and protect the natural resource needs of the park. It encompasses , with the forests divided into four main sections, each distinct in both general characteristics and species presence. It's formed by a portion of a former private state that contained a horse farm, and by an old railroad right of way. It includes a  fenced-in dog run, and it is the only park in the City in which residents can walk a dog without a leash.Ward Acres Natural Resource Management Plan and Biodiversity List http://www.newrochelleny.com/WardAcresNRMPFinal.pdf The Leatherstocking Trail is a  long, inter-municipal hiking trail situated between New Rochelle and Mamaroneck, eventually linking into Saxon Woods County Park. It is part of a larger "Colonial Greenway Trail" in which it connects to Twin Lakes/Nature Study and Saxon Woods parks.http://www.westchestergov.com/planning/Design/ColonialGreenway11x17.pdf Sheldrake Lake which formerly served as a reservoir supplying the areas drinking water, is now a  park and nature conservancy promoting an increased understanding of the local ecology. Twin Lakes Park, combined with the adjacent Nature Study Woods comprise  of woods, marsh, lakes, ponds and some fields along the Hutchinson River in New Rochelle’s Northend. There are many foot trails weaving through woods, marshlands, fields and around two large lakes (formerly reservoirs). Wykagyl Country Club is located in the Wykagyl section of New Rochelle on North Avenue just south of Quaker Ridge Road.  Golfweek magazine ranks Wykagyl as one of America's Top 100 Classic Courses. Pelham Country Club, straddles the border of New Rochelle and Pelham Manor. The course is a mile from the Westchester-New York City border and Pelham Bay Park. New Rochelle Tennis Club located in Wykagyl is one of the oldest lawn-tennis organizations in the country. Hudson Montessori - private Montessori school in Wykagyl serving pre-kindergarten level through fifth grade. Iona Grammar - all-boys Catholic grammar school on Stratton Road serving grades one through eight (subsumed into Iona Preparatory School). Iona Preparatory School - all-boys Catholic school serving grades kindergarten through 12. Mount Tom Day School - private day school serving pre-k level through second grade. The school is housed in the mansion of renowned 20th-century American artist and illustrator J.C. Leyendecker. The school bordered New Rochelle Academy, a prep school (N-12) that closed down in 1987. The Thornton Donovan School - co-ed preparatory school in Beechmont. The Ursuline School - all-girls Catholic school in Wykagyl serving grades six through 12. Salesian High School - all-boys Roman Catholic high school (grades nine through 12) The College of New Rochelle - The largest women's Catholic college in the United States, founded by the sisters of the Ursuline Order. Iona College - Catholic college founded by the Congregation of Christian Brothers. Monroe College - provides professional, career oriented and business centered education. In the early 20th century New Rochelle was home to one of the first movie studios in the country, Edwin Thanhouser's Thanhouser Film Corporation. Originally located on the corner of Warren and Grove Street, the company moved to Main Street near Echo Avenue after a devastating fire in 1913. The studio is noted for filming the first serial in motion pictures named Million Dollar Mystery.Thanhouser Films: An Encyclopedia and History, 1909-1918. Q. David Bowers Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, the oldest and most widely known rendition of Robert Louis Stevenson's  short story Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, was filmed in New Rochelle.Cinema History of Dr.Jekyll and Mr. Hyde Terrytoons animation studio was located in New Rochelle from 1928 to 1968. Its most popular characters include Mighty Mouse, Gandy Goose, Dinky Duck, Deputy Dawg, Luno and Heckle and Jeckle.Terrytoons Titles The song Happy To Keep His Dinner Warm from the Broadway show How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying is about Rosemary's desire to become a trophy wife and live in a mansion in New Rochelle.Our Musicals, Ourselves: A Social History of the American Musical Theater By John Bush Jones, page.185 Paul Whiteman, referred to as the "king of Jazz" by Duke Ellington, commissioned George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue which was premiered by Whiteman's orchestra at the Glen Island Casino in 1924. Whiteman made his home in New Rochelle for many years. The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers takes place in New Rochelle.The Story Of Vernon And Irene Castle: Review tvguide.com George M. Cohan's song "Forty-five Minutes from Broadway" is about New Rochelle in the late 1890s.George M. Cohan in His Own Words By Chip Deffaa, George Michael Cohan, page.48 It still takes about forty-five minutes to travel to Broadway by train and foot from New Rochelle. In the Warner Brothers musical film Footlight Parade (1933), Ruby Keeler references New Rochelle in the line "Gee I'm sorry that I ever, ever, Left my little home in New Rochelle". In 1992 the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being culturally and historically, significant. Musical Give My Regards To Broadway references New Rochelle. and so does Guys and Dolls  Ragtime, a novel written by New Rochelle resident E. L. Doctorow and set in New Rochelle, was released in 1976 and later became a successful Broadway show, and a major motion picture of the same name.From 'Ragtime' to Rich Mosaic; New Rochelle, Diverse Suburb, Once a Leafy Enclave - New York Times Peter DeRose wrote Deep Purple while sitting in his garden in New Rochelle. Robert Allen composed "Home For The Holidays" and the Johnny Mathis hit "Chances Are" in New Rochelle. Jerry Bock was a resident of New Rochelle when he wrote the musical Fiddler On The Roof. New Rochelle resident J. Fred Coots wrote Santa Claus Is Coming To Town, one of the biggest best sellers in American musical history. The early 1960s TV hit The Dick Van Dyke Show starring Dick Van Dyke and Mary Tyler Moore as Rob and Laura Petrie. The Petrie family lived on Bonnie Meadow lane in the North-end of the city.The Dick Van Dyke Show By Ginny Weissman, Coyne Steven Sanders, page.2 The classic 70's song American Pie was written by New Rochelle resident Don McLean. In "search of an upscale, posh community", CBS chose New Rochelle as the setting for its science fiction television series Now and Again. The film Catch Me If You Can is loosely based on the story Frank Abagnale, who grew up in New Rochelle in the 1960s.Catch Me If You Can - Trailer - Cast - Showtimes - The New York TimesOn Location; New Rochelle? No, Yonkers, The New York Times The famous Mean Joe Green Coca-Cola commercial was shot in New Rochelle in 1979.Dallas Morning News | News for Dallas, Texas | SportsDay: Where Are They Now? The 1986 horror film "Scream for Help" was shot in New Rochelle.Scream for help (1986) movies.com The 1988 novel The Devil's Arithmetic was set in New Rochelle at the beginning of the book. The 1991 film Soap Dish, starring Robert Downey, Jr., Kevin Kline, Whoopie Goldberg, Gary Marshall and Sally Field, several references are made to the New Rochelle Tennis Club. The producer of the 'The Sun Also Sets' is being mocked by members of his tennis club who prefer to call it 'The Sun Also Sucks'. When the show has a reversal of fortune and the ratings soar, the shows producer invites the young director to "come play tennis with me up at my club in New Rochelle. It's a lovely place, you'll love it". Scenes in Goodfellas were filmed on Alfred Lane, off Quaker Ridge Road in the Pinebrook Heights neighborhood.  The house of the parents of Henry Hill's eventual wife, Karen, is on Alfred Lane.  Henry goes across the street and pistol whips the neighbor after the neighbor sexually attacked Karen.Film locations for Goodfellas In the 1994 film City Slickers II, the main character Mitch Robbins and his wife Barbara live in New Rochelle, having moved there from Manhattan where they lived in the original film, City Slickers Page 1, City Slackers The 1996 romantic comedy Love Is All There Is was filmed at the Greentree Country Club on Davenport Neck.Love Is All There Is (1996), Cast and Credits Yahoo! Movies The Oscar-nominated Burt Reynolds film Starting Over includes a school carnival scene filmed at what is now known as the Hudson Montessori School on Quaker Ridge Road. Scenes in the movie Michael Clayton, released in 2007 and starring George Clooney, were filmed in New Rochelle. The character James 'Spike' Thompson (Dexter Fletcher) in the ITV series Press Gang comes from New Rochelle, but lives in Norbridge, England. Scenes of the movie Burn After Reading, starring Brad Pitt and George Clooney, were filmed in Sutton Manor.WEST GOES EAST- New York Post The music video for the song "Dance, Dance" by the band Fall Out Boy takes place in the gymnasium of Salesian High School in New Rochelle.Fall Out Boy Get Into The Teen Spirit For Homecoming 'Dance' mtv.comFall Out Boy Makes a Video (2005) imbd.com The 2005 novel The Midnight Oil, by Ken Knight, features New Rochelle as the home of the main character "Jonny Faster" who runs a porn film production company in the story. Portions of Chasing the Green (2008), starring  Jeremy London and Ryan Hurst, were filmed in the city.DP Seth Melnick Gives Panasonic's AG-HPX500 its Feature Debut With Chasing the Green, October 24, 2007 In the 5th episode of the 8th season of 24, the doctor lives in New Rochelle, on Brook Street. National Register of Historic Places listings in New Rochelle, New York New Rochelle official website New Rochelle Police Department New Rochelle Fire department Downtown New Rochelle City School District of New Rochelle New Rochelle Public Library New Rochelle Council on the Arts New Rochelle Art Association New Rochelle Opera Sound Town Report
