 The New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) is a public research university in the University Heights neighborhood of Newark, New Jersey. NJIT is New Jersey's Science & Technology University. Centrally located in the New York metropolitan area its campus is within walking distance of downtown Newark. New York City, 9 miles (14.5&nbsp;km) and under 30 minutes away, is directly accessible from campus via public transit. Founded in 1881 with the support of local industrialists and inventors, especially Edward Weston (334 US Patents), NJIT opened as Newark Technical School in 1884. Application oriented from inception the school grew into a classic engineering college – Newark College of Engineering (NCE) – and then, with the addition of a School of Architecture in 1973, into a polytechnic university that is now home to five colleges and one school. NJIT opened with 88 students. As of fall 2014, the university enrolls more than 10,600 students, over 2,200 of whom live on campus. Architecturally significant buildings include Eberhardt Hall, the Campus Center, and the Central King Building &ndash; in the Collegiate Gothic style &ndash; which is being renovated into a STEM center. Planned facilities include a Wellness and Events Center that will house a 3,500-seat venue for social and sporting events. NJIT offers 50 undergraduate (Bachelor of Science/Arts) majors and 78 graduate (Masters and PhD) programs. Via its Honors College it also offers professional degree programs in collaboration with other institutions. These include accelerated programs in medicine (M.D.) with Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, St. George's University School of Medicine, and American University of Antigua, and an accelerated engineering + law program (BS, JD) with Seton Hall Law School. An early leader in distance learning – it trademarked the term "Virtual Classroom" – NJIT offers a wide range of on-line courses and degrees. The university is organized into 27 academic departments. Three departments, Biological Sciences, History, and Theater Arts, are federated with Rutgers-Newark whose campus borders NJIT's. With a student population that is almost 20% international NJIT consistently ranks among the 10 most ethnically diverse national universities in the country. It has multiple study abroad options along with extensive co-op, internship, and service opportunities.  According to PayScale (2015–16) NJIT ranks 19th among Engineering Schools and 34th among Research Universities in the US by Salary Potential. NJIT is categorized as a high research activity (RU/H) university by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education.Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark New Jersey. Retrieved 26 April 2015. Its NSF fundings were approximately $107 million in 2013, and $106 million in 2014.https://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/profiles/site?method=rankingBySource&ds=herd  Areas of focus include: applied mathematics, materials science, biomedical engineering, signal processing, transportation planning, and solar-terrestrial physics - of which the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research is a world leader. A key actor in regional economic development, NJIT hosts the Enterprise Development Center (EDC), an on-campus business incubator that houses over 90 start-ups, and the New Jersey Innovation Institute (NJII) which offers R&D services to business. NJIT is Land-grant university. It is also a Sea-grant college, and a member of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture. A leader in the graduate education of students that are underrepresented in STEM fields, it has participated in the McNair Scholars Program since 1999. The NJIT Highlanders (NCAA Division I) primarily compete in the Atlantic Sun Conference. The New Jersey Institute of Technology has a history dating back to the early Industrial Age. Originally introduced from Essex County on 3-24-1880 and revised with input from the Newark Board of Trade in 1881, an act of the New Jersey State Legislature essentially drew up a contest to determine which municipality would become home to the state's urgently needed technical school. The challenge was straightforward: the state would stake "at least $3,000 and not more than $5,000" and the municipality that matched the state's investment would earn the right to establish the new school. The Newark Board of Trade, working jointly with the Newark City Council, launched a feverish campaign to win the new school. Dozens of the city's industrialists, along with other private citizens, eager for a work force resource in their home town, threw their support behind the fund-raiser. By 1884, the collaboration of the public and private sectors produced success. Newark Technical School was ready to open its doors. The first 88 students, mostly evening students, attended classes in a rented building at 21 West Park Street. Soon the facility became inadequate to house an expanding student body. To meet the needs of the growing school, a second fund-raiser—the institution's first capital campaign—was launched to support the construction of a dedicated building for Newark Technical School. In 1886, under the leadership of the school's dynamic first director, Dr. Charles A. Colton, the cornerstone was laid at the intersection of High Street and Summit Place for the three-story building later to be named Weston Hall, in honor of the institution's early benefactor. A laboratory building, later to be called Colton Hall, was added to the campus in 1911. Dr. Allan R. Cullimore led the institution from 1920 to 1949, transforming Newark Technical School into Newark College of Engineering (name adopted in 1930). Campbell Hall was erected in 1925, but due to the Depression and World War II, only the former Newark Orphan Asylum, now Eberhardt Hall, was purchased and renovated by the college in the succeeding decades. Cullimore left an unpublished history of the institution dated 1955. As of 1946, about 75% of the freshman class had served in the U. S. Armed Forces. Cullimore Hall was built in 1958 and two years later the old Weston Hall was razed and replaced with the current seven-story structure. Doctoral level programs were introduced and six years later, in 1966, an , four building expansion was completed.  With the addition of the New Jersey School of Architecture in 1973, the institution had evolved into a technological university, emphasizing a broad range of graduate and undergraduate degrees and dedication to significant research and public service. While Newark College of Engineering remains, in 1975 a new university name—New Jersey Institute of Technology—was chosen to represent the institution's expanded mission.  The establishment of a residential campus and the opening of NJIT's first dormitory (Redwood Hall) in 1979 began a period of steady growth that continues today under the Landscape Master Plan. Two new schools were established at the university during the 1980s, the College of Science and Liberal Arts in 1982 and the School of Industrial Management in 1988. The Albert Dorman Honors College was established in 1994, and the newest school, the College of Computing Sciences, was created in 2001. As of Fall 2013 there are 5 residence halls on campus: Redwood Hall, Cypress Hall, Oak Hall, Laurel Hall, and the Dorman Honors Residence, in addition to several Greek houses. In 2003, the launch of the new Campus Center on the site of the former Hazell Hall centralized campus social events. Construction of a new Atrium, Bookstore, Information Desk, Dining Hall, computer lab, and new student organization offices continued into 2004. In 2005, a row of automobile chop shops adjacent to campus were demolished. In 2006, construction of a new off-campus residence hall by American Campus Communities commenced in the chop shops' prior location. The new hall which opened in 2007 is dubbed the University Centre. Robert A. Altenkirch was inaugurated as president on May 2, 2003 and retired in 2012. He succeeded Saul K. Fenster, who was named the university’s sixth president in 1978. On January 9, 2012, NJIT Trustees named Joel Bloom president. Also in 2005, Eberhardt Hall was fully renovated and re-inaugurated as the Alumni Center and the symbolic front door to the university. Its restored tower was the logo of the former Newark College of Engineering and was designed by Kevin Boyajian and Scott Nelson. A rebranding campaign with the current slogan, "NJIT – New Jersey's Science and Technology University – The Edge in Knowledge", was launched to emphasize NJIT’s unique position as New Jersey's preeminent science-and-technology-focused research university. Recently, the school has changed its accredited management school into an AACSB-accredited business school. The business school focuses on utilizing technology to serve business needs. The school benefits from its close location to New York City; the financial capital of the world. It is located 25 minutes from Wall Street. The school has also strong academic collaboration with Rutgers business school. NJIT has a tie-up with Heritage Institute of Technology for summer internships. In 2009, the New Jersey School of Architecture was transformed into the College of Architecture and Design (CoAD). Within the college, the New Jersey School of Architecture continues, and it is joined by the newly established School of Art + Design. In June 2010, NJIT officially completed its purchase of the old Central High School building which sits in between NJIT and Rutgers–Newark campus. With the completion of the purchase, Summit Street (from Warren Street to New Street) would be totally converted into a pedestrian walkway from a public street. The existing old 'Central High School' building is earmarked to be extensively renovated, preserved and used as classrooms as per the Campus Master Plan[ ]  which includes tearing down of Kupfrian Hall to create more greenery. Travel and Leisure's October 2013 issue named the university among America's ugliest college campuses, citing the 2013 Princeton Review survey which rated it as the least beautiful college campus in the country, and noting that the university "suffers from a mishmash of architectural styles" ranging from the "Gothic" Eberhardt Hall, a former orphans' asylum, to the "crematorium Modernism" Redwood residence hall. As of the fall of 2014, the university has 7,550 undergraduate students, 3,096 graduate students, and 489 full-time and adjunct faculty. The male-to-female student ratio is about 3.2:1 and the student-to-faculty ratio is 18:1. The university awarded 2,242 degrees in 2014 including 1129 Bachelors, 1058 Masters, and 55 PhDs. Enrollment, currently at 10,646, is projected to reach 14,248 by 2020. After NJIT cut ties with its alumni association in 2008 and started a new alumni organization, the former alumni association sued NJIT. NJIT spent $460,000 in legal fees defending the lawsuit filed by its former alumni association. The alumni clashed with NJIT administrators over money, the location of the association's offices, campus expansion plans and the role of the alumni organization at the school.http://www.nj.com/education/2014/03/njit_spent_460k_defending_alumni_group_lawsuit.html NJIT eventually won the legal battle against its alumni, after 6 years.http://palmstreetblockassociation.org/news/njit-wins-legal-battle-with-former-alumni-association/ The admission criteria consists of... The average SAT score (math + verbal only) for enrolling freshmen in Fall 2014 is 1,192 (629 Math, 563 Verbal). The average SAT score (math + verbal only) and GPA for enrolling freshmen in the Honors College in 2008 is 1323 and 3.65 respectively. The minimum SAT score (math + verbal only) for enrolling freshmen in the accelerated BS/MD program - run in combined with New Jersey Medical School (Rutgers) - is 1400.[ ] One of the oldest and largest professional engineering schools in the United States, Newark College of Engineering offers 13 undergraduate degree programs, 16 master’s and 10 doctoral degree programs. Undergraduate enrollment is more than 2,500, and more than 1,100 are enrolled in graduate study. The 150-member faculty includes engineers and scholars who are widely recognized in their fields. The college has been providing quality engineering education since 1919. An estimated one in four professional engineers in the State of New Jersey are NCE alumni. Furthermore, the more than 40,000 living NCE alumni work in virtually every region of the whole world, often as CEOs or presidents of large engineering companies. NCE alumni have been pioneers and leaders in such fields as aerospace, television, telecommunications, plastics, electronics and environmental engineering. The College of Science and Liberal Arts was formed in 1982. It was originally known as the Third College because it had been preceded by NJIT’s Newark College of Engineering and the New Jersey School of Architecture. In 1986 the name of the college was changed to the College of Science and Liberal Arts as a result of a more sharply defined mission and direction. Growing steadily ever since, CSLA has spawned two of NJIT’s six schools and colleges: Albert Dorman Honors College, which evolved out of the Honors Program that was founded in CSLA in 1985, and the College of Computing Sciences, which developed out of CSLA’s Computer and Information Science Department. Today the college consists of six academic departments: CSLA also houses: The College of Architecture and Design houses the School of Architecture (SoA) and the School of Art and Design. The college offers undergraduate degrees in architecture, digital design, industrial design, and interior design as well as graduate degrees in architecture, infrastructure planning, and urban systems.  The CoAD is the only college at NJIT to have its own designated library.  The library contains only materials related to the majors offered in CoAD in the form of periodicals, reference materials, rare books, visual materials (i.e. architectural drawings, prints, postcards, maps, etc.), digital databases, and a materials library. The college offers a pre-college summer program for high school students. The Computer Science department, part of the College of Computing Sciences, is the largest at NJIT, comprising more than one fifth of the student population. It is also the largest computer science department among all research universities in the New York metropolitan area. The department offers a full range of degree programs in computer science (BA/BS, MS and PhD), in addition to emerging interdisciplinary  programs: Telecommunication, (MS), Bioinformatics (BS/MS), and Computing and Business (BS/MS). The Bioinformatics degree is also available in a pre-med option. The School of Management offers programs in finance, accounting, marketing, management information systems, international business, technological entrepreneurship, and corporate communications in conjunction with Rutgers University. The School of Management was established in 1988 and was accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business in 1997. In 2006 and 2007, the Princeton Review named NJIT among the "Nation's Best 282 Business Schools".[ ]   NJIT offers a Bachelor of Science program (four years, 124 credits), a Master of Science in management program (30 credits), and two Master of Business Administration (MBA) programs: One regular (48 credits; two years for full-time students, three or four years for part-time students) and the other an accelerated 18-month Executive MBA program for managers and professionals. In 1985, NJIT established an Honors Program to encourage and challenge its brightest and most motivated students. Dr. Richard Sher, Professor of History and Associate Dean of the College of Science and Liberal Arts, was its first director. The approach taken was to stimulate students intellectually with a thorough and well-balanced education. Special activities, rigorous courses, lectures and a colloquium series made up the program. The first twenty-eight Honors students began their studies in the Fall of 1985, growing to 160 in 1990. The first graduates had succeeded academically and obtained jobs in prominent corporations or had chosen to further their education by entering graduate training or schools of medicine or law. Ms. Ruth Baker succeeded Dr. Sher as Director of the Honors Program in 1991. Under Ms. Baker's direction, and with the assistance of Dr. Dennis Donahue as Faculty Coordinator and Honors Advisor, she worked with President Saul K. Fenster, Dr. William Mech of the National Collegiate Honors Council, deans, and faculty to formulate the Honors College. President Fenster engaged Albert Dorman, class of '45, in the development of NJIT's fifth college. Mr. Dorman's special interest and generous endowment helped to create the Albert Dorman Honors College in 1995. Mr. Dorman's endowment, along with other gifts, allowed the Honors College to attract a greater number of students, growing from 230 in 1995 to 630 students today. Honors scholarships were created, and a strong educational foundation was fashioned. Dr. Joel Bloom, Vice President for Academic & Student Services, was named the first Dean of the Honors College, Dr. Dennis Donahue the Associate Dean, and Ms. Lois Chipepo-Hodges Assistant to the Dean. Other changes included a stronger and more active Honors student council and a greater variety of colloquium lectures, study trips, research activities, and publications. A new emphasis on developing leadership has helped add an additional focus. In January 2001 Dr. David Reibstein became the second Associate Dean of the College. In the 2000-01 school year, with the continued growth of the college, the new position of Assistant Dean for Recruitment was created, followed by the creation of the position of Assistant Dean for Academics in January 2004. By the 2008-09 year, the Honors College had seen major increases in the number of honors courses offered (to nearly 50) and in the number of research and other projects undertaken by its students. New programs, including new accelerated programs in medicine, dentistry, optometry, physical therapy and law; and the Honors STS major, added to the diversity of offerings. New outreach activities, such as summer teachers’ institutes, were initiated. The College’s first five-year Strategic Plan was adopted by the Board of Visitors in 2001, and a second plan in 2008. The first plan's enrollment goals having been met, the new plan emphasizes academic enhancements such as students' Individual Education Plans, innovative honors courses, dual majors and minors, increased student research, leadership programs, and international study. In May 2010 the Honors College celebrated its fifteenth anniversary as a college. From its start of twenty-eight students in 1985 to well over 600 Honors Scholars in 2010-11, there have been many changes in the Honors Program.  The university is known foremost for its research capabilities in many fields, especially nanotechnology, solar-terrestrial physics, polymer science, and the development of a smart gun technology. The university research centers include the National Center for Transportation and Industrial Productivity and SmartCampus. The university hosts the Metro New York FIRST Robotics office. The university also hosts the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research which owns and operates the Big Bear Solar Observatory, the world's largest solar observatory, located in Big Bear Lake, California, and operates the Owens Valley Solar Array, near Bishop, California.  In the past, NJIT was home to the Computerized Conferencing and Communications Center (CCCC), a premier research center for furthering the state of the art in Computer-mediated communication. The systems that resulted from this research are the Electronic Information Exchange System, as well as the continuations: The Electronic Information Exchange System 2 (EIES2), and the Tailorable Electronic Information Exchange System (TEIES). One of the foremost developments of EIES was that of the "Virtual Classroom", a term coined by Dr. Starr Roxanne Hiltz. This was the first e-learning platform in the world, and was unique in that it evolved onto an existing communications system, rather than having a system created specifically for it. Their missions completed, the CCCC and EIES were terminated in the mid-90s. The university currently operates a Class-10 cleanroom and a Class-1000 cleanroom on campus for academic and research purposes including counter-bioterrorism research. The university also maintains an advanced 67-node supercomputer cluster in its Mathematics Department for research purposes.  NJIT conducts cybersecurity research in a number of areas including cross-domain information sharing, data security and privacy, data mining for malware detection, geospatial information security, secure social networks, and secure cloud computing. The university is designated a National Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cyber Defense Education through the 2020 academic year by the National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security.   NJIT sponsors 20 sports teams including 3 club-level teams. NJIT's teams are called the Highlanders. The school colors are red and white with navy. Most of NJIT's teams compete at the NCAA-Division I level (full membership 1 September 2009) as members of the Atlantic Sun Conference (A-Sun). Before joining A-Sun NJIT had been the only NCAA Division I basketball independent - having been left without a home when the 2010–13 NCAA conference realignment ended in the demise of the Great West Conference. All of the other schools in the A-Sun conference are located in Southeast. Several NJIT teams have affiliations outside of A-Sun. Men's volleyball and men's swimming and diving - two sports not sponsored by A-Sun - compete in the Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association (EIVA) and Coastal Collegiate Swimming Association (CCSA) respectively. The women's tennis team plays as a single-sport member of the America East Conference. The club-level ice hockey team plays in the Colonial States College Hockey Conference. On 6 December 2014 NJIT's basketball team (unranked and independent) made headlines on national sports reports when they defeated the nationally-ranked (#17) Michigan Wolverines. The sports available at NJIT are: Over 70% of NJIT students commute to campus. The Residence Life community currently consists of over 2,200 students. There are five residence halls on the NJIT campus. Redwood Hall was the first constructed in 1978 followed by Cypress, Oak and Laurel halls. Each hall has a unique character with Cypress and Redwood being primarily freshman halls and Laurel and Oak designated upperclassmen halls. The Warren Street Village opened in the Fall 2013 semester, including housing in the Dorman Honors Residence and several Greek houses which together add space for nearly 600 students. The Dorman Honors Residence also houses the Albert Dorman Honors College and several dining facilities. A new almost-on-campus resident hall completed in 2007 known as University Center (run by American Campus Communities) just beside the InfoTech building also accommodates students from NJIT and neighboring Rutgers–Newark, New Jersey Medical School (Rutgers), and Seton Hall University. Food services on campus are provided by Gourmet Dining Services or GDS. Taco Bell, Spice Cafe, a salad shop (Leafs & Grains), coffee shop (Tech Café), sandwich shop (Part of Leafs & Grains) and a convenience store (The C-Store) are also all available on campus. GDS also operates The Highlander Club (also known as The Pub) on the third floor of the campus center. Here, students can order take-out food of different varieties such as burgers, wings, and personal pizzas. A special 21 and over section also offers alcohol for sale. There are also "grease" trucks, that are located on campus, which serve food. Since its founding in 1881, NJIT has issued degrees to more than 77,000 graduates. NJIT alumni have gone on to pursue distinguished careers in many sectors. NJIT accused a dean and professor of abusing his power as dean, hiring a woman he lived with for a job and changing a business colleague’s grade from an “F” to an “A,”. The dean and professor denied the charges and filed a lawsuit in 2011 accusing NJIT of unfairly suspending him from his $175,400-a-year job after he fell out of favor with top school officials. In 2013, NJIT stripped tenure and fired the dean and professor.http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2013/10/njit_strips_tenure_and_fires_professor_for_first_time_in_school_history.html High school academic record Standardized test scores (SAT or ACT scores) Class rank Portfolio (applicants to the Architecture, Digital Design, Industrial Design and Interior Design majors are required to submit a portfolio of creative work)  Biological Sciences Chemistry and Environmental Science Federated History Humanities Mathematical Sciences Physics Department of Aerospace Studies Rutgers/NJIT Theatre Arts Program Interdisciplinary Program in Materials Science Center for Applied Mathematics and Statistics Center for Solar Research Big Bear Solar Observatory Owen’s Valley Solar Array (M)     Baseball (M) (W) Basketball (M)     Bowling (club-level) (M) (W) Cross Country (M) (W) Fencing (M)     Ice Hockey (club-level), compete in the Colonial States College Hockey Conference (ACHA Division 2 club hockey) (M)     Lacrosse (M)     Rugby (club-level), compete in the Tri-State Conference for Collegiate Rugby (M) (W) Soccer (M)     Swimming & Diving, compete in the Coastal Collegiate Swimming Association (M) (W) Tennis (M) (W) Track & Field (M) (W) Volleyball, men compete in the Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association (M)( W) Cheer Team Parts of Emmy Award-winning television drama series The Sopranos were shot on the NJIT campus in 2005 after the completion of a $83.5-million campus makeover.[ ]  On January 30, 2014, NJIT hosted a national-level cybersecurity conference organized in partnership with US-Israel Binational Industrial R&D (BIRD) Foundation, The Israel Economic Mission in NYC and Rutgers University. Approximately 100 participants including representatives of industry, government, and research gathered to discuss the issue of cyber/physical convergence; to hear solutions presented by Israeli/US companies; and to learn about BIRD’s funding for up to $1 million towards innovative R&D collaborations between U.S. and Israeli companies. Edward Dickson, Director of the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security & Preparedness gave opening remarks. Other organizations involved included the Army National Guard, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and various corporations with cyber security interests such as ADP, Prudential and Standard & Poor’s. US News & World Report’s 2010 Annual Guide to America’s Best Colleges Today named NJIT 115th (Tier-1) overall in the National Universities category. It was also rated as the 7th most ethnically diversified university among universities in this category and as one of the best public national universities in the country.  It was ranked by U.S. News & World Report (2011) as 139th (Tier-1) overall and the 5th most ethnically diversified National University. It was ranked 138th among National Universities in 2012. U.S. News & World Report (2011) also ranked NJIT's Graduate School (Engineering) as 86th overall in the nation. NJIT is ranked 11th in the nation (2009) for conferring bachelor's degrees in engineering to African Americans, according to Diverse: Issues in Higher Education. The Oct. 17, 2006 issue of U.S. News & World Report named NJIT’s program as 6th in the nation based on enrollment in ABET-accredited engineering schools and fifth in the nation based on the age of the program.[ ] NJIT was ranked by Princeton Review as one of top 50 best value public colleges in 2009. Princeton Review (2010 Edition) ranked NJIT's AACSB-accredited School of Management among the 301 best MBA programs in United States. Princeton Review (2012 Edition) ranked NJIT's AACSB-accredited School of Management among the 296 best MBA programs in United States. NJIT's School of Management was ranked as an Excellent Business School (3-Palm rating and top 150 in USA) by Eduniversal. NJIT was ranked 351-400th place university in the world by Times Higher Education in 2011–2012. NJIT was ranked 434th out of around 20000 colleges and universities in the world by Webometrics in Jan 2011.[ ] NJIT was ranked 135th out of 662 universities in USA in R&D expenditures in 2007 by the National Science Foundation (NSF). NJIT is currently ranked (2007) by the Chronicle of Higher Education as #9 in Information Technology / Information Systems and #10 in Mathematics in the United States for faculty productivity. NJIT was ranked among the top 100 world universities in Computer Science both in 2009[ ]  and in 2010[ ] by Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU). NJIT was ranked 1st for average amount paid to full-time professors in the nation among public universities. NJIT was ranked the 19th most popular National University in USA by US News and World Report 2010. NJIT was ranked 499th[ ]   overall and 132nd[=http://www.highimpactuniversities.com/fac3.html  ]   for its Engineering, Computing, and Technology Faculty in the world by High Impact Universities in 2010. In 2013, NJIT was ranked the #1 college "value" in the country (based on cost vs. starting salary of recent graduates), by BuzzFeed. In 2015, NJIT was ranked 370 on Forbes' list of the America's Top 650 Colleges In 2015, NJIT was ranked #1 on Business Insider's list of "most underrated colleges" in America (high graduation employment & high average salary) In 2015, NJIT was ranked in the Top 25 colleges for earning six figures before attaining a graduate degree in Time's Money list. A. Michael Noll (class of 1961), dean at University of Southern California. Pierre Ramond (class of 1965), distinguished professor of physics at University of Florida. Victor J. Stenger (class of 1956), professor of physics at University of Hawaii who authored 9 books. Yuriy Tarnawsky (class of 1956), professor of Ukrainian literature and culture at Columbia University. John Pelesko (class of 1997),  Professor and Chair of the Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Delaware. Frederick Eberhardt (class of 1884), president of Gould & Eberhardt, a Newark-based machine tool manufacturer, and one of 88 in NJIT's inaugural class. Vince Naimoli (class of 1962), owner of the Tampa Bay Devil Rays Jim Stamatis (class of 1985), vice president at Louis Berger Group. Dick Sweeney (class of 1982), co-founder of Keurig. Robert S. Dow, Senior Partner, former Managing Partner of Lord Abbett, and Olympic Fencer. Ellen M. Pawlikowski (class of 1978), 4-Star General of the United States Air Force, elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 2014. Harry L. Ettlinger (class of 1950), one of the Monuments Men. Awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2015. Paul Sarlo, Democratic New Jersey state senator Funsho Williams, (MSc 1974), Nigerian civil servant and politician. Jeannette Brown, chemist, historian, writer Gerard J. Foschini, prominent telecommunications engineer at Bell Labs. Winner of the prestigious IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal. Beatrice Hicks (1919–1979), founder of the Society of Women Engineers Paul Charles Michaelis, researcher of magnetic bubble memory John J. Mooney (MSc 1960) – Inventor of the three-way catalytic converter. Winner of National Medal of Technology. T. J. O'Malley (class of 1936), aerospace engineer Wally Schirra (1923–2007), astronaut. Only person to fly in all of America's first three space programs (Mercury, Gemini and Apollo) Charles Speziale (class of 1970), scientist at NASA Langley Research Center and professor at Boston University. Kazuo Hashimoto (Honorary Doctorate, class of 1994), inventory of Caller-ID system and telephone answering machine. Rah Digga (class of 19??), American rapper who is a member of Flipmode Squad 2 Chainz Honorary Doctorate in Botany (2015) JeVont'a Blackson (class of 2014), accused of stabbing numerous people before robbing them Raymond E. Blum (class of 1950), speed skater in the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland Hernan (Chico) Borja (class of 1980), professional soccer player Isaiah Wilkerson (class of 2012), professional basketball player Chris Flores (class of 2013), professional basketball player Leroy Tomkins (class of 2014), professional basketball player Ryan Rattazzi (class of 2010), professional table tennis player Sanam Parikh (class of 2014), major league vapist Kareem Awad (class of 2015), competitor in Major League Eating Yoshisada Yonezuka, deceased judo coach at NJIT, and head of United States Olympics judo team Jim Engles, men's basketball head coach Jesse Agel, men's basketball assistant head coach Charles A. Colton, 1st president, 1881–1918 Daniel Hodgdon, 2nd president, 1918–1920 Allan Cullimore, 3rd president, 1920–1947 Robert Van Houten (class of 1930), 4th president, 1947–1970 William Hazell, 5th president, 1970–1975 Saul Fenster, 6th president, 1978–2002 Robert Altenkirch, 7th president, 2003–2011 Joel Bloom, 8th president, 2012–present Ali Akansu, professor of electrical and computer engineering Yeheskel Bar-Ness, professor emeritus of electrical and computer engineering Joel Bloom, president Ian Gatley, professor of physics Philip R. Goode, professor of physics Louis J. Lanzerotti, distinguished research professor of physics Starr Roxanne Hiltz, professor emerita of information systems Moshe Kam, Dean of the Newark College of Engineering, and professor of electrical and computer engineering.  49th President and CEO of IEEE. Burt Kimmelman, professor of English David Kristol, professor emeritus of biomedical engineering Gregory Kriegsmann, professor of mathematics David Rothenberg, professor of music and philosophy Sunil Saigal, distinguished professor of civil engineering. Kamalesh Sirkar, professor of chemical engineering Murray Turoff, professor emeritus of computer and information systems Leslie Kanes Weisman, professor of architecture Erol Gelenbe, professor of computer science at NJIT, dean at the University of Central Florida and professor at Imperial College London. Lillian Gilbreth, professor at NJIT, and first female member of the National Academy of Engineering. Michael Hinchey, professor of computer science at NJIT, and professor at the University of Limerick. Paul Magriel, mathematics professor at NJIT, and leading backgammon player. Donald Pederson, lecturer of engineering at NJIT, and dean at the University of California-Berkeley. Gary Thomas, deceased, provost and vice-president at NJIT, and Chancellor of the University of Missouri–Rolla (currently known as Missouri University of Science and Technology). New Jersey Institute of Technology Vector NJIT Capstone Program 2007–08 NJIT Highlanders men's basketball team Arnold Air Society ^&nbsp; To calculate the ratio of men to women select table CSD-B (found in this reference) and divide the total enrollment of men by the total enrollment of women. ^&nbsp; EIES History. NJIT Highlanders Athletics
