    Nile Gregory Rodgers (born September 19, 1952) is an American musician, producer, and guitarist. He is the lead guitarist and co-founding member with Bernard Edwards of the band Chic, which has been active since 1976 and was one of the most successful groups of the disco era. Although he recorded three solo albums during the 1980s and 1990s, and one as part of the short-lived group Outloud, Rodgers has found more success in collaboration as producer and performer with many artists including Sister Sledge, Diana Ross, Tina Arena, David Bowie, Duran Duran, Madonna, INXS, Britney Spears and more recently, Daft Punk, Pharrell Williams, Avicii, Disclosure, Sam Smith, Pitbull, Lady Gaga, Kylie Minogue, Nervo and Laura Mvula. His mother became pregnant at age 13, and gave birth to him in New York City. His parents and soon Jewish step-father were all Beat-niks, and heavy heroin users throughout his childhood. With music all around him in his childhood, he tried out all of his school's band instruments, before a love of the Beatles and John Lennon drew him towards the electric guitar, and especially the Fender Stratocaster. He began his career as a session guitarist in New York, touring with the Sesame Street band in his teens led by Joe Raposo, and then working in the house band at Harlem’s world famous Apollo Theater, playing behind Screamin' Jay Hawkins, Maxine Brown, Aretha Franklin, Ben E. King, Betty Wright, Earl Lewis and the Channels, Parliament Funkadelic, and many other legendary R&B artists. In his teens Rodgers was a member of the Harlem chapter of the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense. He remains friendly with numerous former Panthers, including Professor Jamal Joseph.  Nile met bassist Bernard Edwards in 1970 when both were working as touring musicians for the Sesame Street stage show. Together they formed The Big Apple Band, and worked as back-up musicians for the vocal group New York City (“I'm Doin' Fine Now”). New York City’s one hit allowed them to tour extensively, even opening for The Jackson 5 on the American leg of their first world tour in 1973. The band dissolved after their second album failed to yield a hit, but Nile and Bernard joined forces with drummer Tony Thompson, and worked and recorded as a Funk Rock band called The Boys, which played numerous gigs up and down the East Coast. Despite major label interest in their demos, they could not get a record deal when the record companies discovered they were black, as they thought that black rock artists would be too hard to promote. The band continued playing mostly local bars. As the Big Apple Band, Rodgers and Edwards worked with Ashford & Simpson, Luther Vandross, and many others. Since another New York artist, Walter Murphy, had a band also called The Big Apple Band, Rodgers and Edwards were forced to change their band’s name to avoid confusion. Thus, in 1977 the band was renamed as Chic. Rodgers has stated that a major inspiration was a Roxy Music gig he saw in London:   Between gigs, they recorded their first album with then-boss Luther Vandross, who provided background vocals on the group’s early recordings. The band scored numerous top ten hits and helped propel disco to new levels of popularity. Chic’s chart-topping songs "Le Freak", "I Want Your Love", "Everybody Dance", "Dance, Dance, Dance", "My Forbidden Lover", and "Good Times" became club/pop/R&B standards.  "Le Freak" was composed after being turned away from Studio 54, after being invited by Grace Jones.  "Le Freak" is Atlantic Records’ only triple platinum selling single and "Good Times" shot to the No. 1 spot in spite of the "Disco Sucks" backlash in 1979. The success of Chic's first singles led Atlantic to offer Rodgers and Edwards the opportunity to produce any act on its roster. They chose Sister Sledge, whose 1978 album, We Are Family, peaked at No. 3 and remained on the charts well into 1979. The first two singles, "He's the Greatest Dancer" and the title cut "We Are Family" both reached No. 1 on the R&B chart, and No. 6 and No. 2, respectively on the Pop chart. "He’s the Greatest Dancer" was sampled in 1998 on Will Smith’s "Gettin' Jiggy Wit It". As the Chic Organization’s tight sound became increasingly sought-after, Rodgers and Edwards began record production with numerous artists, together or individually. In 1980, Rodgers and Edwards wrote and produced the album Diana for Diana Ross, yielding the smash hits "Upside Down" and "I'm Coming Out". Chic’s song "Good Times" played a pivotal role in the explosion of hip hop music, as an interpolation of the song's bass line and the record’s string-section sample was the bedrock of The Sugarhill Gang's "Rapper's Delight", the first multiple-platinum Hip Hop single. The Chic Organization produced the smash hit "Spacer" for French disco act Sheila and B. Devotion and Deborah Harry’s 1981 solo album Koo Koo. Chic dissolved in 1983 after its final contractual Atlantic album, Believer and Soup For One (a film soundtrack). At that time Rodgers began a solo career producing his first album Adventures in the Land of the Good Groove. Rodgers produced the 1983 album Talkback, by Canadian New Wave/New Romantic band Spoons, which included the hits "Old Emotions" and "The Rhythm". Rodgers produced David Bowie's biggest selling album Let's Dance with several hit singles including "China Girl", "Modern Love" and the title track, "Let’s Dance". He produced the single "Original Sin" by INXS. Duran Duran worked extensively with Rodgers after he remixed their largest selling hit single, "The Reflex" in 1984 and followed up with "The Wild Boys" on their 1984 live album Arena. It was rumored that Rodgers had become a member of Duran Duran when they released the album Notorious, but he only acted as a co-producer and session musician on that album. That same year he produced Madonna's blockbuster album Like a Virgin, spawning her two signature hits "Material Girl" and the album's title track, "Like a Virgin". The album saw an unofficial reunion of Chic's core members, with Rodgers, Edwards, drummer Tony Thompson and keyboard player Robert Sabino all contributing. Rodgers also joined Robert Plant’s platinum selling studio band The Honeydrippers, on the album The Honeydrippers: Volume One. This period sparked Rodgers’ interest in soundtracks, the first of which were Alphabet City, Gremlins ("Out Out" – Peter Gabriel), Against All Odds ("Walk Through the Fire" – Peter Gabriel), That's Dancing ("Invitation to Dance" – Kim Carnes), White Nights (numerous songs) and The Fly ("Help Me") – Bryan Ferry). In 1985, Rodgers produced albums for Sheena Easton, Jeff Beck, Thompson Twins, Mick Jagger, and many others, while still finding time to perform at Live Aid with Madonna and the Thompson Twins. He was awarded No. 1 Singles Producer In the World in Billboard magazine to close out the year. In 1986, he produced Duran Duran's Notorious album, which yielded a No. 2 title track hit, "Notorious".  During a live set, Simon Le Bon introduced Rodgers by saying, "Well, this band went through a difficult time and it might not have made it if it weren't for this gentleman."  Rodgers contributed to numerous other projects and appearances with members of the band throughout the 1980s. He also produced albums for Grace Jones, Earth Wind and Fire’s vocalist Phillip Bailey, and Al Jarreau. Rodgers performed on "Higher Love" with Steve Winwood, and records for Cyndi Lauper, Howard Jones, and David Sanborn. He then worked on the soundtrack for Laurie Anderson’s Home of the Brave. Rodgers formed the short-lived experimental band Outloud in 1987, with David Letterman’s guitarist, composer, and vocalist Felicia Collins and acclaimed French session musician, producer, composer, and keyboardist Philippe Saisse; the trio released a single album, Out Loud, on Warner Bros. Records. In 1988, Rodgers composed his first orchestral soundtrack for the film Coming to America (the second highest grossing film of the year) starring Eddie Murphy. Rodgers followed this with soundtracks for White Hot (the world’s first Hi-Def feature motion picture), and Earth Girls Are Easy. The latter would pair him with The B-52’s. In 1989 he co-produced their comeback multi-platinum album Cosmic Thing, which had the hit singles "Love Shack", "Roam", "Cosmic Thing" and "Deadbeat Club". That year he also produced Workin' Overtime, Diana Ross’ return to Motown, a deal that scored her an executive position at the label, along with releases by the Dan Reed Network, Slam, and Duran Duran’s compilation, Decade, which was appropriately titled. It was the most successful decade for Rodgers and also for many of the artists he worked with.  In September 1990, Epic Records released the Rodgers produced Vaughan Brothers album, Family Style, shortly after the untimely death of guitar virtuoso Stevie Ray Vaughan. Early in this decade he also produced projects for David Bowie, Eric Clapton, The B-52s, David Lee Roth, Ric Ocasek, The Dan Reed Network, Cathy Dennis, Patty Griffin, Jimmie Vaughan, The Stray Cats and many other artists, along with continuing soundtrack work on Thelma and Louise, Cool World and The Beavis and Butt-head Experience (co-writer of “Come to Butt-head”). After a 1992 birthday party where Rodgers, Bernard Edwards, Paul Shaffer and Anton Fig played old Chic hits to rapturous response. Rodgers and Edwards reformed a new version of Chic. They recorded a fresh crop of material for the album Chic-Ism and performed live worldwide. In 1995, he played on the track "Money" from Michael Jackson's album HIStory. In 1996, Rodgers released the album Chic Freak and More Treats in Japan, containing re-recordings of old Chic material with guest vocalists including Ashford and Simpson, Taja Sevelle, Simon Le Bon and Christopher Max. Bernard Edwards also appeared, alongside regular Chic vocalist Sylver Logan Sharp and drummer Omar Hakim. In April 1996, Rodgers was honored as the JT Super Producer of the Year. He performed with Bernard Edwards, Sister Sledge, Steve Winwood, Simon Le Bon and Slash in a series of commemorative concerts in Japan, which provided a career retrospective. Unfortunately, Rodgers found his longtime musical partner and close friend, Bernard Edwards dead in his hotel room the morning after their last performance. A year later Rodgers returned to Japan to pay homage to his fallen partner. In 1999, Rodgers released Live at the Budokan, a live recording of the April 17, 1996 JT Super Producer concert and made the decision not to make any overdubs or changes in order to keep the purity of his last performance with Edwards. He started playing live concerts again while composing and producing music for film soundtracks: Beverly Hills Cop III, Blue Chips, The Flintstones and Feeling Minnesota (working with Bob Dylan), to name but a few. In 1997, Notorious BIG released "Mo Money Mo Problems" sampling Rodgers & Edwards' song "I'm Coming Out" from Diana Ross's 1980 platinum album, diana. "Mo Money, Mo Problems" topped the Billboard Hot 100 for two weeks and was nominated for the 1998 Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group. In 1998, Rodgers founded Sumthing Else Music Works record label and Sumthing Distribution, an independent music label distributor. Sumthing focuses on distributing a fast-growing new genre: video game soundtracks. Its titles include the complete Halo and Resident Evil franchises and other well-known Triple-A game soundtracks like Gears of War and Borderlands. Rodgers focused on many soundtrack projects, film and video games alike. Among them were: Rush Hour 2, Snow Dogs and Semi-Pro starring Will Ferrell, who co-wrote the title song “Love Me Sexy” with Rodgers. In 2002–03 he co-produced Astronaut, with the original five members of Duran Duran. Also in 2002, Rodgers appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation CD Red Hot and Riot.  The CD, a tribute to the music and positive social message of afropop pioneer, Fela Kuti, featured Rodgers on remakes of Kuti songs "Water No Get Enemy" and "Zombie (Part Two)". Rodgers appeared on "Water No Get Enemy" alongside influential hip-hop and R&B artists, D'Angelo, Macy Gray and The Soultronics, and on "Zombie (Part Two)" with famous jazz trumpeter Roy Hargrove.  All proceeds of the CD were donated to charities working towards greater AIDS awareness. The September 11 attacks prompted Rodgers to create the We Are Family Foundation (WAFF) to help promote the healing process. To begin, he organized a re-recording of the song he and Edwards wrote for Sister Sledge called "We Are Family" with more than 200 musicians, celebrities, and personalities. Director Spike Lee filmed the "We Are Family" music video and director Danny Schechter filmed a documentary depicting the recording sessions called The Making and Meaning of We Are Family. The film was chosen as a Sundance Film Festival Special Selection in 2002. Rodgers then produced another "We Are Family" music video involving more than 100 beloved children's television characters. The children's music video airs as a public service announcement on Disney Channel, Nickelodeon, and PBS stations promoting a common humanity and celebrating the vision of a global family. Rodgers received the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) NY Chapter's Governor's Lifetime Achievement Award and the Heroes Award. On September 19, 2005, he was honored at the Dance Music Hall of Fame in New York when he was inducted for his many outstanding achievements as a producer, along with former bandmate Bernard Edwards. Chic has been nominated to the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame 10 times – 2003, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016.  Rodgers served as co-musical director for the tribute concert to Ahmet Ertegün at the Montreux Jazz Festival in the summer of 2006. The concert included performances by Chic, Robert Plant, Steve Winwood, Stevie Nicks, Kid Rock, Ben E. King, Chaka Khan, George Duke (co-music director), Paolo Nutini and many other artists who were signed to Ertegün's Atlantic Records. A PBS documentary, Atlantic Records: The House That Ahmet Built, uses footage from this show, as it was one of the last times Ertegün would be captured on video. In 2010, Rhino Records released a four-CD box set, Nile Rodgers Presents The Chic Organization, Volume 1: Savoir Faire, which for the first time collected tracks from all of the acts produced by The Chic Organization up to their original break-up in 1983. Rodgers provided sleevenotes for the set, which was also reissued in 2013. Rodgers' critically acclaimed autobiography entitled Le Freak: An Upside Down Story of Family, Disco, and Destiny was published by Spiegel & Grau, a Random House imprint, in late 2011. It was named one of the top 10 of the 25 Greatest Rock Memoirs of All Time by Rolling Stone. "This is a rich, warm tale of a fascinating life in the golden age of New York – and pop." - The Guardian. He has additionally stayed active in music since the reunion of The Chic Organization by touring as CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers and producing live events. In recent years, he has continued to collaborate with an array of musicians including his 2014 three-time Grammy Award winning collaboration with Daft Punk, Avicii, Disclosure and Sam Smith among many others. In October 2011, Rodgers worked with singer Adam Lambert in New York on a song entitled "Shady" for Lambert's second album, Trespassing.  Both Rodgers and Lambert tweeted enthusiastically about the collaboration, and Rodgers also mentioned it on his blog Planet C. In February 2012, Rodgers announced that he was collaborating with electronic band Daft Punk for their latest album, "teasing out their R&B influences". During a live interview for the UMFTV at the 2013 Ultra Music Festival in Miami, Rodgers confirmed that he was working with Daft Punk, as well as recording multiple tracks with Avicii, and mentioned work with Chase & Status and Felix da Housecat. On March 31, 2013 BBC Four broadcast a documentary about his music life, Nile Rodgers: The Hitmaker, starting from the point that Chic was formed until the present, including stories about his involvement in producing numerous hits and albums for some of the world`s best artist and bands. True to his word, Rodgers performed on Daft Punk's chart-topping album Random Access Memories. Rodgers co-wrote and played guitar on three tracks:  "Give Life Back to Music", "Lose Yourself to Dance", and "Get Lucky". On April 21, 2013 "Get Lucky" entered the official UK Singles Chart at No. 3, despite having been available for little more than 24 hours, and rose to No. 1 on April 28, 2013. In an interview with Official Charts Company, Rodgers said, “I’ve had big records and Number 1s; I have had records that were Number 1 in the United States but nowhere else… I’ve had records which have done well [in the UK], but not in the States. But to have this ubiquitous record, that is a hit everywhere… It’s amazing to me! I’m out on the road and I can hear it wherever I go. I’m flabbergasted!” Rodgers declined to perform "Get Lucky" live until performing it live with Daft Punk, but at Chic's live shows in 2013, the record would usually be played immediately after the group's set, with Rodgers remaining on stage to lead the crowd in clapping and singing along. After Rodgers performed the song with Daft Punk at the Grammy Awards in January 2014, "Get Lucky" was added to the setlist for Chic's 2014 live dates. On June 28, 2013 CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers' performance at the Glastonbury Festival in the UK was aired live on BBC. The performance was given a five star review by The Guardian with the headline, "The West Holts stage saw some of the greatest pop music ever made, expertly played by a ferociously well-drilled band ". Noel Gallagher from Oasis also commented, "My favourite act at this year’s Glastonbury, when I went, was not the Rolling Stones, as great as they were; was not the Arctic Monkeys, as good as they were; was not Disclosure, as good as they were; but it was Chic. They were fucking mega. Absolutely out of this world." In July 2013, Rhino Records released Nile Rodgers Presents The Chic Organization Up All Night (The Greatest Hits), a compilation album featuring songs written, played or produced by Rodgers and Bernard Edwards for Chic and various artists including Diana Ross, Sister Sledge, Carly Simon, Debbie Harry, Johnny Mathis, Sheila & B. Devotion and Norma Jean Right. Up All Night reached #2 on the UK Compilation Album Chart for the week ending July 13, 2013.  In October 2013, Rhino released Nile Rodgers Presents The Chic Organization Up All Night (The Greatest Hits Disco Edition) that includes a medley taken from CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers' live performance at the 2013 Glastonbury Festival. In August 2013, the track "Mandou Bem" was released by the Brazilian band Jota Quest with the participation of Nile Rodgers. Rodgers co-produced and played guitar on Tensnake's track "Love Sublime" featuring Nile Rodgers and Fiora. Janelle Monáe opened for CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers at the iTunes Festival in London on September 14, 2013. On October 10, 2013, Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards were nominated to the Songwriters Hall of Fame. CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers, opened The X Factor (UK TV series) live show on November 2, 2013 for Disco week.  They performed a medley of hits including "Le Freak", "He's The Greatest Dancer" and "Good Times". On January 26, 2014 Rodgers performed "Get Lucky" with Daft Punk on the Grammy Awards, along with Pharrell Williams and Stevie Wonder, with a medley including elements of Chic's "Le Freak" and Wonder's "Another Star". Rodgers won three Grammy Awards for his work with Daft Punk and Random Access Memories including Best Pop Duo/Group Performance, Record of the Year and Album of the Year. In March 2014, Rolling Stone named Nile Rodgers one of the 50 Most Important People in EDM, stating, "The full scope of Nile Rodgers' career is still hard to fathom, and it's not just ongoing, it's in overdrive." On May 8, 2014 "The Nile Rodgers Global Creator's Award" was presented to Rodgers by Paul Williams during the Canadian Music Week Festival in Toronto.  The Award was originally called "The Global Creator's Award" and it was renamed in 2014 in honor of Rodgers.http://www.audioblood.com/2014/05/music-legend-nile-rodgers-receives-inaugural-global-creators-award/ On May 21, 2014, the IMS (International Music Summit) Legends Award was presented to Rodgers in Ibiza by Simon LeBon. Rodgers noted upon receiving the award: "I am extremely honored to follow Pete Tong, Carl Cox and Fatboy Slim as the fourth recipient of the IMS Legends Award at the IMS Legends dinner.  The Award means a lot to me from the IMS - an event which has been instrumental in introducing me to so many incredible artists in the electronic space... I have so much love tonight." http://www.express.co.uk/news/showbiz/477506/Simon-Le-Bon-surprises-Nile-Rodgers-with-award-dedication On May 22, 2014, Johnny Marr presented Rodgers with the Ivor Novello Awards' "Special International Award". "You hear his heart with his right hand and his soul with his left." Marr remarked upon giving Nile the award. "I hope you feel loved now because you are. You showed what a guitar player could be and what music could be, and always carried yourself with such dignity, grace and positivity." http://www.johnnymarrplaysguitar.com/2014/05/johnny-presents-ivor-novello-award-to-nile-rodgers/ On July 4, 2014, CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers headlined the 2014 Essence Festival curated by Prince. Special guests performing with Chic during a segment of the show that highlighted Chic's songwriting and production work for other artists, were Kathy Sledge for Sister Sledge's "We Are Family", Janelle Monáe for Sister Sledge's "He's the Greatest Dancer" and Prince for David Bowie's "Let's Dance". Rodgers' solo single "Do What You Wanna Do (IMS Anthem)" was released on August 10, 2014 to benefit his We Are Family Foundation. Rodgers is currently working with Mark Ronson on Duran Duran's upcoming album to be released in 2015. CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers headlined Bestival on September 7, 2014 on the Isle of Wight, UK. Rodgers told Bestival founder, Rob da Bank, he and CHIC would headline if he built the world's largest disco ball. Guinness Book of World Records verified Bestival's disco ball as the largest ever built at 10.33 meters in diameter. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame nominated CHIC for the 9th time with their 2015 nomination.http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/09/showbiz/music/rock-hall-of-fame-nominees-2015/ On December 16, 2014, The GRAMMY's announced that CHIC's hit single "Le Freak" would be inducted into The GRAMMY Hall of Fame.http://www.grammy.com/news/grammy-hall-of-fame-class-of-2015 Nile Rodgers was the 2015 Honoree of the Producers and Engineers Wing of the Recording Academy.http://variety.com/2015/music/news/recording-academy-honoree-nile-rodgers-still-old-school-after-all-these-years-1201419936/ In February 2015, he won the Goldene Kamera award for musical lifetime achievement. In March 2015, it was announced that Nile Rodgers was working with Kylie Minogue for her new Christmas album. It was also announced that Rodgers and Grace Jones would be supporting acts for Minogue at the British Summer Time on 21 July 2015. On March 20, 2015, Rodgers released CHIC's first single in more than 23 years, "I'll Be There", with a live streamed concert from The Roundhouse in London, UK.http://pitchfork.com/news/58896-nile-rodgers-enlists-supermodel-karlie-kloss-for-chics-ill-be-there-video/  The song, created by Rodgers from original CHIC outtake tapes from the 70s, features original band members', the late bassist Bernard Edwards and drummer Tony Thompson, and vocalists Alfa Anderson and Luci Martin.http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/nile-rodgers-shares-funky-new-chic-single-ill-be-there-20150320 The music video was filmed by fashion photographers/filmmakers, Inez and Vinoodh, and stars supermodel Karlie Kloss.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2OXoSLANXIY The song went to #1 on Billboard's Dance Music Chart, June 20, 2015.http://www.billboard.com/charts/dance-club-play-songs/2015-06-20 In June 2015 pretended to be a busker on London's South Bank. Rodgers admitted that he 'Didn't draw much of a crowd until I started playing dance music."[ ] On August 4 and 5, 2015, Rodgers launched FOLD Festival (FreakOut! Let's Dance). A multi-day event with a diverse line-up of artists including Beck, Duran Duran, Chaka Kahn, Keith Urban, Janelle Monáe, Ginger Minj, CHIC and many others. Rodgers announced this event is to now take place on a yearly basis, with 2016 already in the works. Rodgers was presented with the 2015 BMI Icon Award at the BMI R&B / Hip Hop Awards on August 28, 2015 in Los Angeles, CA.http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6678662/nile-rodgers-icon-bmi-2015-r-and-b-hip-hop-awards Rodgers collaborated with Lady Gaga to remake CHIC's hit, "I Want Your Love" for Tom Ford's Spring/Summer 2016 collection video in lieu of a fashion show.http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/watch-lady-gaga-nile-rodgers-update-chics-i-want-your-love-20151002 Rodgers plays a 1960 Fender Stratocaster with a 1959 neck, affectionately nicknamed "The Hitmaker", which he acquired as a trade-in at a small shop in Miami Beach, Florida. Exceptionally light, it has a maple fingerboard and bears a well-worn white finish. Rodgers claims that it does not sound like any other Stratocaster in the world. In his autobiography, Le Freak, An Upside Down Story of Family, Disco and Destiny, Rodgers stated:One day, following a gig in Miami, Nard got me to trade in my prized jazz guitar, a hollow-bodied Gibson Barney Kessel, for a sleek solid-bodied Fender Stratocaster, the six-string equivalent of trading in a Range Rover for a Porsche. The local act that opened for us played on our equipment, and their guitar player sounded better than I did on my own amplifier. Nard convinced me it was the guitar that made the difference. His soul-man makeover plan was working. He came to my room to admire my new guitar and showed me the style the other guy had played on my amp. He fingered the chords with his left hand, and his right hand would continuously play sixteen notes to the bar while accenting the main parts of the rhythm. He called it "chucking." Bernard used to be a guitar player before he switched to bass, and one lesson was all I needed. For the next few nights straight, while my roommate pursued all manner of trysts, I was having a love affair in the bathroom with my new ax. In just a few days, I'd emerge as a chucking funk guitarist who knew more jazz chord inversions than most of my R&B counterparts. The Fender Custom Shop introduced a limited edition Nile Rodgers Hitmaker Stratocaster guitar, a recreation of Rodgers' own guitar, in January 2014. In January 2011 Rodgers revealed on his website that he had aggressive prostate cancer, which had been diagnosed in October 2010. As a result, he started a cancer blog called "Walking on Planet C" detailing his status and upcoming projects. On July 29, 2013, Rodgers posted on Twitter that he had been given the all-clear regarding his cancer. In November 2013, he gave an interview to BBC News talking about Daft Punk, Madonna, Diana Ross and beating cancer.    Chic (1977) C'est Chic (1978) Risqué (1979) Real People (1980) Take It Off (1981) Soup For One (soundtrack, Chic/various artists) (1982) Tongue in Chic (1982) Believer (1983) Chic-Ism (1992) Live at the Budokan (1999) Nile Rodgers Presents The Chic Organization Up All Night (Greatest Hits) (Chic, various artists) (2013) Nile Rodgers Presents The Chic Organization Up All Night (Greatest Hits Disco Edition) (Chic, various artists, live CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers performance) (2013) It's About Time (2016) Adventures In The Land Of The Good Groove (1983) B-Movie Matinee (1985) Outloud (1987) Chic Freak and More Treats (1996) Norma Jean, Norma Jean Wright (1978) We Are Family, Sister Sledge (1979) King of the World, Sheila B. Devotion (1980) Love Somebody Today, Sister Sledge (1980) diana, Diana Ross (1980) I Love My Lady, Johnny Mathis (1981) UNRELEASED Koo Koo, Debbie Harry (1981) unknown title, Fonzi Thornton (1982) UNRELEASED Let's Dance, David Bowie (1983) Situation X, Michael Gregory (1983) "Invitation To Dance", Kim Carnes (1983) Trash It Up, Southside Johnny & The Asbury Jukes (1983) Original Sin, INXS (1984) Like a Virgin, Madonna (1984) "The Reflex", "The Wild Boys", Duran Duran (1984) "Out Out'", Peter Gabriel (1984) Flash, Jeff Beck (1985) She's The Boss, Mick Jagger (1985) Here's to Future Days, Thompson Twins, (1985) Do You, Sheena Easton (1985) When The Boys Meet The Girls, Sister Sledge (1985) Home of the Brave, Laurie Anderson (1986) Notorious, Duran Duran (1986) Inside Story, Grace Jones (1986) Inside Out, Philip Bailey (1986) L Is For Lover, Al Jarreau (1986) "Help Me", Bryan Ferry (1986) "Moonlighting Theme", Al Jarreau (1987) "Route 66" [Nile Rodgers Mix], Depeche Mode (1987) Cosmic Thing, The B-52's (1989) Slam, Dan Reed Network (1989) Decade: Greatest Hits, Duran Duran (1989) So Happy, Eddie Murphy (1989) Workin' Overtime, Diana Ross (1989) Family Style, Vaughan Brothers (1990) Move To This, Cathy Dennis (1990) The Heat, Dan Reed Network (1991) Fireball Zone, Ric Ocasek (1991) "Real Cool World", David Bowie (1992) Good Stuff, The B-52's (1992) Black Tie White Noise, David Bowie (1993) Your Filthy Little Mouth, David Lee Roth (1994) Azabache, Marta Sánchez (1997) Us, Taja Sevelle (1997) Samantha Cole, Samantha Cole (1997) On And On, All-4-One (1998) Everything is Cool, SMAP (Japan) (1998) Su Theme Song, SMAP (Japan) (1998) Just Me, Tina Arena (2001) Dellali, Cheb Mami (2001) "We Are Family", Nile Rodgers All Stars (We Are Family Foundation) (2001) Only A Woman Like You, Michael Bolton (2002) Shady Satin Drug, Soul Decision (2004) Astronaut, Duran Duran (2004) Glitter Girl *Evil Side*, MorissonPoe, Perfect Dark Zero Soundtrack (2005) Pearl Necklace, MorissonPoe, Perfect Dark Zero Soundtrack (2005) Hotel Room Service (Songwriter for Pitbull) (2009) "Shady", Adam Lambert ft. Sam Sparro and Nile Rodgers Trespassing (2012) "Get Lucky" ft. Pharrell Williams and Nile Rodgers, Random Access Memories Daft Punk (2013) "Give Life Back to Music", Random Access Memories, Daft Punk (2013) "Lose Yourself to Dance" Random Access Memories, Daft Punk (2013) "Lay Me Down", Avicii featuring Adam Lambert and Nile Rodgers True, (2013) "What is Right", Chase & Status ft. Abigail Wyles and Nile Rodgers (2013) "Les Chansons De L'Innocence Retrouvée", Etienne Daho (2013) "Mandou Bem", Jota Quest ft. Nile Rodgers (2013) "Together", Disclosure, Sam Smith, Jimmy Napes and Nile Rodgers (2013) "Love Sublime", Tensnake ft. Nile Rodgers and Fiora (2013) "Do What You Wanna Do", Nile Rodgers (2014) "Le Freak Remix", Go ThinkBig with Nile Rodgers and Rudimental (2014) "Number 1", Mystery Skulls ft. Brandy and Nile Rodgers, Forever (2014) "Magic", Mystery Skulls ft. Nile Rodgers and Brandy, Forever (2014) "I'll Be There", CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers (2015) "Back In the Old School", CHIC ft. Nile Rodgers (2015) "The Other Boys", NERVO ft. Kylie Minogue, Jake Shears and Nile Rodgers, Collateral (album) (2015) "Pressure Off", Duran Duran ft. Janelle Monáe and Nile Rodgers, Paper Gods (2015) "Boomerang", Emin ft. Nile Rodgers, (2015) "Blecaute", Jota Quest ft. Anitta and Nile Rodgers, (2015) "Overcome", Laura Mvula ft. Nile Rodgers, (2016)  Soup For One (1982) Alphabet City (1984) Coming to America (1988) Earth Girls Are Easy (1989) White Hot (1989) Beverly Hills Cop III (1994) Blue Chips (1994) Curdled (1996) Public Enemy (1999) Rise of Nations (2003) Game Halo 2 Soundtrack (2004) Game Conker: Live & Reloaded (2005) Game Perfect Dark Zero (2005) Game Halo 3 Soundtrack (2007) Game Daryl Easlea, Everybody Dance: Chic and the Politics of Disco, Helter Skelter Publishing (October 24, 2004), ISBN 1-900924-56-0 Nile Rodgers Official Site Nile Rodgers IMDB Sumthing Distribution We Are Family Foundation Interview on The Sound of Young America (now Bullseye with Jesse Thorn) Wax Poetics interview with Nile Rodgers Rodgers Still Chic After All These Years
