      Nondualism, also called non-duality, "points to the idea that the universe and all its multiplicity are ultimately expressions or appearances of one essential reality." It is a term and concept used to define various strands of religious and spiritual thought. It is found in a variety of Asian religious traditions and modern western spirituality, but with a variety of meanings and uses. The term may refer to: * Buddhist Madhyamaka, which says there is no absolute, transcendent reality beyond our everyday reality; * Chinese Mahayana, but also neo-Vedanta, which says that there is no absolute difference between the relative world and "absolute" reality; Its Asian origins are situated within both the Vedic and the Buddhist tradition and developed from the Upanishadic period onward. The oldest traces of nondualism in Indian thought may be found in the Chandogya Upanishad, which pre-dates the earliest Buddhism, while the Buddhist tradition added the highly influential teachings of śūnyatā; the two truths doctrine, the nonduality of the absolute and the relative truth; and the Yogachara notion of "pure consciousness" or "representation-only" (vijñaptimātra). The term has more commonly become associated with the Advaita Vedanta tradition of Adi Shankara, which took over the Buddhist notions of anutpada and pure consciousness but gave it an ontological interpretation, and provided an orthodox hermeneutical basis for heterodox Buddhist phenomology. Advaita Vedanta states that there is no difference between Brahman and Ātman, and that Brahman is ajativada, "unborn," a stance which is also reflected in other Indian traditions, such as Shiva Advaita and Kashmir Shaivism. Vijñapti-mātra and the two truths doctrine, coupled with the concept of Buddha-nature, have also been influential concepts in the subsequent development of Mahayana Buddhism, not only in India, but also in China and Tibet, most notably the Chán (Zen) and Dzogchen traditions. The western origins are situated within Western esotericism, especially Swedenborgianism, Unitarianism, Transcendentalism and the idea of religious experience as a valid means of knowledge of a transcendental reality. Universalism and Perennialism are another important strand of thought, as reflected in various strands of modern spirituality, New Age and Neo-Advaita, where the "primordial, natural awareness without subject or object" is seen as the essence of a variety of religious traditions. Dictionary definitions of "nondualism" are scarce.Jerry Katz, Definition of Nondualism According to Espín and Nickoloff, "nondualism"  The main definitions are the nonduality of Atman and Brahman (Advaita), the nonduality of Absolute and relative (Advaya), and nondual consciousness. A distinction can be made between advaya and advaita: The distinction between advaya and advaita was made by Murti in his classic work "The Central Philosophy of Buddhism", while "nondual consciousness" is a western, inclusive understanding of various strands of eastern religiosity. "Advaya" is a non-essentialist, epistemological approach, which questions what we can know about reality. It states that there is no absolute, transcendent reality beyond our everyday reality. It also denies the existence of inherently existing "things" or "essences": nothing has an inherent "essence." According to this definition or usage, nonduality refers to the nonduality between absolute and relative. It is the recognition that ultimately every"thing" is devoid of an everlasting and independent "essence", and that this emptiness does not constitute an "absolute" reality in itself.. It is a non-essentialist, or non-absolutist, position, denying any "transcendent" reality. It is exemplified by Madhyamaka Buddhism, and its insight into the "emptiness", or non-existence, of inherently existing "things", and the "emptiness of emptiness": emptiness does not in itself contitute an absolute reality. It is the Middle Way between eternalism ("things" have an inherent essence) and annihilationism or nihilism (nothing exists). In Chinese Buddhism the Two truths doctrine was reinterpreted as an ontological teaching, positing the nonduality of two ontological levels of reality, namely phenomenal or relative reality, and absolute reality. Based on their understanding of the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra the Chinese supposed that the teaching of the Buddha-nature was, as stated by that sutra, the final Buddhist teaching, and that there is an essential truth above sunyata and the two truths of Madhyamaka. "Advaita" is an essentialist, ontological approach, which states that there is transcendent absolute reality which constitutes our core identity, namely Brahman (Vedanta) or Vijñāna. According to this definition or usage, nonduality refers to "Advaita", which means that there is no difference between Ātman and Brahman or Vijñāna, "pure consciousness." It is an essentialist position, which asserts the existence of an absolute reality that transcends everyday reality Advaita is best known from the Advaita Vedanta tradition of Adi Shankara, who states that Brahman is pure Being, Consciousness and Bliss (Sat-cit-ananda). Only Brahman is real; the empirical world is unreal, appearance. Yet, Advaita Vedanta is closely related to Madhyamaka via Gaudapda, who took over the Buddhist doctrines that ultimate reality is pure consciousness (vijñapti-mātra) Shankara harmonised Gaudapada's ideas with the Upanishadic texts, and provided an orthodox hermeneutical basis for heterodox Buddhist phenomology. Advaita has become a broad current in Indian culture and religions, influencing subsequent traditions like Kashmir Shaivism. Vijñapti-mātra and the two truths doctrine, coupled with Buddha-nature, have also been influential concepts in the subsequent development of Mahayana Buddhism, not only in India, but also in China and Tibet, most notable in the Chán (Zen) and Dzogchen traditions. Nondualism as a modern spiritual movement is a Universalist or Perennialist, and essentialist approach, in western spirituality. It blends Asian religions and philosophies with the Perennial philosophy, attempting to transcend the fundamental differences between advaya and advaita. Various traditions are seen as grounded in a similar non-dual experience, which is expressed in different ways by different traditions. Nondual consciousness is   The idea of a "nondual consciousness" has gained attraction and popularity in western spirituality and New Age-thinking. It is recognized in the Asian traditions, but also in western and Mediterranean religious traditions, and in western philosophy. David Loy sees non-duality between subject and object as a common thread in Taoism, Mahayana Buddhism, and Advaita Vedanta. According to Dasgupta and Mohanta, note that non-dualism developed in various strands of Indian thought, both Vedic and Buddhist, from the Upanishadic period onward. The oldest traces of nondualism in Indian thought may be found in the Chandogya Upanishad, which pre-dates the earliest Buddhism, establishing the identity of microcosm and macrocosm in the Vedic ritual offerings. Pre-sectarian Buddhism may also have been responding to the teachings of the Chandogya Upanishad, rejecting some of its metaphysics. Advaya is the non-duality of conventional and ultimate truth. It has its origins in Madhyamaka-thought, which is built on earlier Buddhist thought, and expressed in the two truths doctrine. This was further developed and re-interpreted in Chinese Buddhism, where the two truths doctrine came to refer to the nonduality of absolute and relative, re-incorporating essentialist notions. Various schools of Buddhism discern levels of truth. This started in Indian Buddhism, where the Madhyamaka non-essentialist and epistemological approach asserted a strong influence. But there also was an essentialist approach, with the concept of Buddha-nature and the three bodies of the Buddha: The idea of levels of truth was taken over in Chinese and Eas-Asian Buddhism, were it took an essentialist and ontological turn:   The distinction between the two truths (satyadvayavibhāga) was fully expressed by the Madhyamaka-school. Madhyamaka, also known as Śūnyavāda, refers primarily to a Mahāyāna Buddhist school of philosophy founded by Nāgārjuna. In Madhyamaka, the two truths refer to conventional and ultimate truth. Conventionally, "things" exist, but ultimately, they are "empty" of any existence on their own, as described in Nāgārjuna's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā:  "Emptiness" is a consequence of pratītyasamutpāda (dependent arising), the teaching that no dharma ("thing") has an existence of its own, but always comes into existence in dependence on other dharmas. According to Madhyamaka all phenomena are empty of "substance" or "essence" () because they are dependently co-arisen. Likewise it is because they are dependently co-arisen that they have no intrinsic, independent reality of their own. Madhyamaka also rejects the existence of an absolute reality or Self. Ultimately, "absolute reality" is not an absolute, or the non-duality of a personal self and an absolute Self, but the deconstruction of such reifications. It also means that there is no "transcendental ground," and that "ultimate reality" has no existence of its own, but is the negation of such a transecendental reality, and the impossibility of any statement on such an ultimately existing transcendental reality: it is no more than a fabrication of the mind. Susan Kahn further explains:  Tsongkhapa, a highly influential Tibetan Madhyamika, states that "things" do exist conventionally, but ultimately everything is dependently arisen, and therefor void of inherent existence.Patrick Jennings, Tsongkhapa: In Praise of Relativity; The Essence of Eloquence This means that conventionally things do exist, and that there is no use in denying that. But it also means that ultimately those things have no 'existence of their own', and that cognizing then as such results from cognitive operations, not from some unchangeable essence.Susan Kahn, The Two Truths of Buddhism and The Emptiness of Emptiness Tsongkhapa:  Yogācāra (Sanskrit; literally: "yoga practice"; "one whose practice is yoga") is an influential school of Buddhist philosophy and psychology emphasizing phenomenology and (some argue) ontologyBuddhahood Embodied: Sources of Controversy in India and Tibet by John Makransky. SUNY Press: 1997. ISBN 0-7914-3431-1 [ ] through the interior lens of meditative and yogic practices. It developed within Indian Mahāyāna Buddhism in about the 4th century CE.Zim, Robert (1995). Basic ideas of Yogācāra Buddhism. San Francisco State University. Source: [ ] (accessed: October 18, 2007). The Yogācārins defined three basic modes by which we perceive our world.  These are referred to in Yogācāra as the three natures of perception.  They are: Also, regarding perception, the Yogācārins emphasized that our everyday understanding of the existence of external objects is problematic, since in order to perceive any object (and thus, for all practical purposes, for the object to "exist"), there must be a sensory organ as well as a correlative type of consciousness to allow the process of cognition to occur. The Trikaya-formule, which was first systematized by the Yogacara school. The three bodies are: When Buddhism was introduced to China, in the 1st century CE, Buddhism was understood through comparisons of its teachings to Chinese terms and ways of thinking. Immortality and emptiness, central notions in Taoism, gave a frame of reference for the understanding of reincarnation and sunyata. In the Chinese thinking of that time reincarnation was only possible if there was a soul or essence to reincarnate. Early Chinese Buddhism therefore assumed that this was also the teaching of the Buddha. In the 6th century CE it dawned that anatman and sunyata are central Buddhist teachings, which make the postulation of an eternal self problematic. Another point of confusion was the Two truths doctrine of Madhyamaka, the relative truth and the absolute truth. Chinese thinking took this to refer to two ontological truths: reality exists of two levels, a relative level and an absolute level. But in Madhyamaka these are two epistemological truths: two different ways to look at reality. Based on their understanding of the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra the Chinese supposed that the teaching of the Buddha-nature was, as stated by that sutra, the final Buddhist teaching, and that there is an essential truth above sunyata and the two truths. The Huayan school or Flower Garland is a tradition of Mahayana Buddhist philosophy that flourished in China during the Tang period. It is based on the Sanskrit Flower Garland Sutra (S. Avataṃsaka Sūtra, C. Huayan Jing) and on a lengthy Chinese interpretation of it, the Huayan Lun.  The name Flower Garland is meant to suggest the crowning glory of profound understanding. Huayan teaches the Four Dharmadhatu, four ways to view reality:   The teachings of Zen are expressed by a set of polarities: Buddha-nature - sunyata, absolute-relative, sudden and gradual enlightenment. The Lankavatara-sutra, a popular sutra in Zen, endorses the Buddha-nature, emphasized purity of mind, which can be attained in gradations. The Diamond-sutra, another popular sutra, emphasizes sunyata, which "must be realized totally or not at all". The Prajnaparamita Sutras emphasize the non-duality of form and emptiness: form is emptiness, emptiness is form, as the Heart Sutra says. According to Chinul, Zen points not to mere emptiness, but to suchness or the dharmadhatu. The idea that the ultimate reality is present in the daily world of relative reality fitted into the Chinese culture which emphasized the mundane world and society. But this does not tell how the absolute is present in the relative world. This question is answered in such schemata as the Five Ranks of Tozan and the Oxherding Pictures. The polarity of absolute and relative is also expressed as "essence-function". The absolute is essence, the relative is function. They can't be seen as separate realities, but interpenetrate each other. The distinction does not "exclude any other frameworks such as neng-so or "subject-object" constructions", though the two "are completely different from each other in terms of their way of thinking".Park, Sung-bae  (1983). Buddhist Faith and Sudden Enlightenment. SUNY series in religious studies. SUNY Press. ISBN 0-87395-673-7, ISBN 978-0-87395-673-4. Source: [ ] (accessed: Friday April 9, 2010), p.147 In Korean Buddhism, essence-function is also expressed as "body" and "the body's functions."Park, Sung-bae (2009). One Korean's approach to Buddhism: the mom/momjit paradigm. SUNY series in Korean studies: SUNY Press. ISBN 0-7914-7697-9, ISBN 978-0-7914-7697-0. Source: [ ] (accessed: Saturday May 8, 2010), p.11 A metaphor for essence-function is "A lamp and its light", a phrase from the Platform Sutra, where Essence is lamp and Function is light.Lai, Whalen (1979). "Ch'an Metaphors: waves, water, mirror, lamp". Philosophy East & West; Vol. 29, no.3, July, 1979, pp.245–253. Source: [ ] (accessed: Saturday May 8, 2010) Tantra is a religious tradition that originated in India the middle of the first millennium CE, and has been practiced by Buddhists, Hindus and Jains throughout south and southeast Asia. It views humans as a microcosmos which mirrors the macrocosmos. Its aim is to gain access to the energy or enlightened consciousness of the godhead or absolute, by embodying this energy or consciousness through rituals. It views the godhead as both transcendent and immanent, and views the world as real, and not as an illusion:  Although Buddhism had merely become extinct in India at the time of Islamic rule, Tantrism was kept alive in the Hindu yogic traditions, such as the Nath, from which the Inchegeri Sampradaya of Nisargadatta Maharaj descends. Ramakrishna too was a tantric adherent, although his tantric background was overlaid and smoothed with an Advaita interpretation by his student Vivekananda. Advaita took over from the Madhyamika the idea of levels of reality. Usually two levels are being mentioned, but Shankara uses sublation as the criterion to postulate an ontological hierarchy of three levels:advaita-vision.org, Discrimination "Advaita" refers to knowledge of a differenceless entity, namely Vijñāna (Yogacara), Brahman (Vedanta), or Shiva (Shaivism). Although the Advaita Vedanta school of Adi Shankara is best known for the term "advaita," it is also propagated by other traditional and modern schools and teachers. "Advaita", Sanskrit a, not; dvaita, dual, is usually translated as "nondualism", "nonduality" and "nondual". The term "nondualism" and the term "advaita" from which it originates are polyvalent terms. The English word's origin is the Latin duo meaning "two" prefixed with "non-" meaning "not". The first usage of the terms are yet to be attested. The English term "nondual" was also informed by early translations of the Upanishads in Western languages other than English from 1775. These terms have entered the English language from literal English renderings of "advaita" subsequent to the first wave of English translations of the Upanishads. These translations commenced with the work of Müller (1823–1900), in the monumental Sacred Books of the East (1879). Max Müller rendered "advaita" as "Monism" under influence of the then prevailing discourse of English translations of the Classical Tradition of the Ancient Greeks, such as Thales (624 BCE–c.546 BCE) and Heraclitus (c.535 BCE–c.475 BCE). Several schools of Vedanta teach a form of nondualism. The best-known is Advaita Vedanta, but other nondual Vedanta schools also have a significant influence and following, such as Vishishtadvaita Vedanta and Shuddhadvaita, both of which are bhedabheda.   The nonduality of the Advaita Vedantins is of the identity of Brahman and the Atman.Craig, Edward (general editor) (1998). Routledge encyclopedia of philosophy: Luther to Nifo, Volume 6. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-07310-3, ISBN 978-0-415-07310-3. Source: [ ] (accessed: Thursday April 22, 2010), p.476 The oldest exposition of Advaita Vedanta is written by Gauḍapāda (6th century CE), who has traditionally been regarded as the teacher of Govinda bhagavatpāda and the grandteacher of Shankara. Gaudapda took over the Buddhist doctrines that ultimate reality is pure consciousness (vijñapti-mātra) and "that the nature of the world is the four-cornered negation". Gaudapada "wove [both doctrines] into a philosophy of the Mandukaya Upanisad, which was further developed by Shankara. Gaudapada also took over the Buddhist concept of "ajāta" from Nagarjuna's Madhyamaka philosophy, which uses the term "anutpāda".  "Ajātivāda", "the Doctrine of no-origination" or non-creation, is the fundamental philosophical doctrine of Gaudapada. Adi Shankara (788 - 820), systematized the works of preceding philosophers, and provided an orthodox hermeneutical basis for heterodox Buddhist phenomology. Dasgupta and Mohanta note that Buddhism and Shankara's Advaita Vedanta are not opposing systems, but "different phases of development of the same non-dualistic metaphysics from the Upanishadic period to the time of Sankara."   Vishishtadvaita Vedanta, is another main school of Vedanta, which teaches the nonduality of the qualified whole, in which Brahman alone exists, but is characterized by multiplicity. It can be described as "qualified monism," or qualified non-dualism," or "attributive monism." According to this school, the world is real, yet underlying all the differences is an all-embracing unity, of which all "things" are an "attribute.". Ramanuja, the main proponent of Vishishtadvaita philosophy contends that the Prasthana Traya ("The three courses"), namely the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Brahma Sutras are to be interpreted in a way that shows this unity in diversity, for any other way would violate their consistency. Vedanta Desika defines Vishishtadvaita using the statement: Asesha Chit-Achit Prakaaram Brahmaikameva Tatvam— Brahman, as qualified by the sentient and insentient modes (or attributes), is the only reality. Neo-Vedanta, also called "neo-Hinduism" and "Hindu Universalism",Frank Morales, Neo-Vedanta: The problem with Hindu Universalism is a modern interpretation of Hinduism which developed in response to western colonialism and orientalism, and aims to present Hinduism as a "homogenized ideal of Hinduism" with Advaita Vedanta as its central doctrine. Neo-Vedanta, as represented by Vivekananda and Radhakrishnan, is indebted to Advaita vedanta, but also reflects Advaya-philosophy. A main influence of neo-Advaita was Ramakrishna, himself a bhakta and tantrika, and the guru of Vivekananda. According to Michael Taft, Ramakrishna reconciled the dualism of formless and form. Ramakrishna regarded the Supreme Being to be both Personal and Impersonal, active and inactive:   Radhakrishnan acknowledged the reality and diversity of the world of experience, which he saw as grounded in and supported by the absolute or Brahman. According to Anil Sooklal, Vivekananda's neo-Advaita "reconciles Dvaita or dualism and Advaita or non-dualism":  Radhakrishnan also reinterpreted Shankara's notion of maya. According to Radhakrishnan, maya is not a strict absolute idealism, but "a subjective misperception of the world as ultimately real."Michael Hawley, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888—1975), Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy According to Sarma, standing in the tradition of Nisargadatta Maharaj, Advaitavāda means "spiritual non-dualism or absolutism", in which opposites are manifestations of the Absolute, which itself is immanent and transcendent:    Advaita is also a central concept in various schools of Shaivism, such as Kashmir Shaivism and  and Shiva Advaita. Kashmir Shaivism is a school of Śaivism, described by Abhinavagupta as "paradvaita", meaning "the supreme and absolute non-dualism".Piyaray L. Raina, Kashmir Shaivism versus Vedanta – A Synopsis It is categorized by various scholars as monisticKashmir Shaivism: The Secret Supreme, Swami Lakshman Jee, pp. 103 idealism (absolute idealism, theistic monism,The Trika Śaivism of Kashmir, Moti Lal Pandit realistic idealism,The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism, Mark S. G. Dyczkowski, pp. 51 transcendental physicalism or concrete monism.) Kashmir Saivism is based on a strong monistic interpretation of the Bhairava Tantras and its subcategory the Kaula Tantras, which were tantras written by the Kapalikas.Flood, Gavin. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P.164-167 There was additionally a revelation of the Siva Sutras to Vasugupta. Kashmir Saivism claimed to supersede the dualistic Shaiva Siddhanta.Flood, Gavin. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.61 Somananda, the first theologian of monistic Saivism, was the teacher of Utpaladeva, who was the grand-teacher of Abhinavagupta, who in turn was the teacher of Ksemaraja.Flood, Gavin. D. 2006. The Tantric Body. P.66 The philosophy of Kashmir Shaivism can be seen in contrast to Shankara's Advaita.Consciousness is Everything, The Yoga of Kashmir Shaivism, Swami Shankarananda pp. 56-59 Advaita Vedanta holds that Brahman is inactive (niṣkriya) and the phenomenal world is an illusion (māyā). In Kashmir Shavisim, all things are a manifestation of the Universal Consciousness, Chit or Brahman.Pratyãbhijñahṛdayam, Jaideva Singh, Moltilal Banarsidass, 2008 p.24-26The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism, By Mark S. G. Dyczkowski, p.44 Kashmir Shavisim sees the phenomenal world (Śakti) as real: it exists, and has its being in Consciousness (Chit).Ksemaraja, trans. by Jaidev Singh, Spanda Karikas: The Divine Creative Pulsation, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, p.119 Kashmir Shaivism was influenced by, and took over doctrines from, several orthodox and heterodox Indian religious and philosophical traditions. These include Vedanta, Samkhya, Patanjali Yoga and Nyayas, and various Buddhist schools, including Yogacara and Madhyamika, but also Tantra and the Nath-tradition. Advaita is also part of other Indian traditions, which are less strongly, or not all, organised in monastic and institutional organisations. Although often called "Advaita Vedanta," these traditions have their origins in vernacular movements and "householder" traditions, and have close ties to the Nath, Nayanars and Sant Mat traditions.   Ramana Maharshi (30 December 1879 – 14 April 1950) is widely acknowledged as one of the outstanding Indian gurus of modern times. Ramana's teachings are often interpreted as Advaita Vedanta, though Ramana Maharshi never "received diksha (initiation) from any recognised authority".Sri Ramanasramam, "A lineage of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi?" Ramana himself did not call his insights advaita:  The Natha Sampradaya, with Nath yogis such as Gorakhnath, introduced Sahaja, the concept of a spontaneous spirituality. Sahaja means "spontaneous, natural, simple, or easy"[ ] (accessed: Friday November 6, 2009) The Inchegeri Sampradaya of Siddharameshwar Maharaj and Nisargadatta Maharaj belongs to the Nath-tradition. Siddharameshwar Maharaj calls turiya the "Great-Causal Body", and counts it as the fourth body. He describes his method of self-enquiry, in which the three bodies are recognized as "empty" of an essence or the sense of "I am". This knowledge resides in the fourth body or turiya, and cannot be described. It is Turiya, the state before Ignorance and Knowledge. Vijñapti-mātra and the two truths doctrine, as understood in Chinese Buddhism, are closely linked to Buddha-nature. Those teachings have had a profound influence on Mahayana Buddhism, not only in India, but also in China and Tibet, most notably the Chán (Zen) and Dzogchen traditions. They may be related to an archaic form of Buddhism which is close to Brahmanical beliefs, elements of which are preserved in the Nikayas, and survived in the Mahayana tradition. Contrary to popular opinion, the Theravada and Mahayana traditions may be "divergent, but equally reliable records of a pre-canonical Buddhism which is now lost forever." The Mahayana tradition may have preserved a very old, "pre-Canonical" tradition, which was largely, but not completely, left out of the Theravada-canon. Vijñapti-mātra, "consciousness-only" or "representation-only" is one of the main features of Yogācāra philosophy. It is often used interchangeably with the term citta-mātra, but they have different meanings. The standard translation of both terms is "consciousness-only" or "mind-only." Several modern researchers object this translation, and the accompanying label of "absolute idealism" or "idealistic monism". A better translation for vijñapti-mātra is representation-only. According to Kochumuttom, Yogacara is a realistic pluralism. It does not deny the existence of individual beings,  but denies the following:  Vijñapti-mātra then means "mere representation of consciousness":  The term vijñapti-mātra replaced the "more metaphysical" term citta-mātra used in the Lankavatara Sutra. The Lankavatara Sutra "appears to be one of the earliest attempts to provide a philosophical justification for the Absolutism that emerged in Mahayana in relation to the concept of Buddha". It uses the term citta-mātra, which means properly "thought-only". By using this term it develops an ontology, in contrast to the epistemology of the term vijñapti-mātra. The Lankavatara Sutra equates citta and the absolute. According to Kochumuttom, this not the way Yogacara uses the term vijñapti:  The Buddhist teachings on the Buddha-nature may be regarded as a form of nondualism.King (1991), Buddha Nature, SUNY Press Buddha-nature is the essential element that allows sentient beings to become Buddhas.Williams, Paul. Buddhist Thought. Routledge 2000, page 160. The term, Buddha nature, is a translation of the Sanskrit coinage, 'Buddha-dhātu', which seems first to have appeared in the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra,Paul Williams, Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations, Second Edition, Routledge, Oxford, 2009, p. 317 where it refers to 'a sacred nature that is the basis for [beings'] becoming buddhas.'Kevin Trainor, Buddhism: The Illustrated Guide, Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 207 The term seems to have been used most frequently to translate the Sanskrit "Tathāgatagarbha". The Sanskrit term "tathāgatagarbha" may be parsed into tathāgata ("the one thus gone", referring to the Buddha) and garbha ("womb"). The tathagatagarbha, when freed from avidya ("ignorance"), is the dharmakaya, the Absolute.   The Buddha-nature and Yogacara philosophies have had a strong influence on Chán and Zen. The continuous pondering of the break-through kōan (shokan) or Hua Tou, "word head", leads to kensho, an initial insight into "seeing the (Buddha-)nature. According to Hori, a central theme of many koans is the 'identity of opposites', and point to the original nonduality. Victor Sogen Hori describes kensho, when attained through koan-study, as the absence of subject-object duality. The aim of the socalled break-through koan is to see the "nonduality of subject and object",  in which "subject and object are no longer separate and distinct." Zen Buddhist training does not end with kenshō. Practice is to be continued to deepen the insight and to express it in daily life, to fully manifest the nonduality of absolute and relative. To deepen the initial insight of kensho, shikantaza and kōan-study are necessary. This trajectory of initial insight followed by a gradual deepening and ripening is expressed by Linji Yixuan in his Three mysterious Gates, the Four Ways of Knowing of Hakuin, the Five Ranks, and the Ten Ox-Herding Pictures which detail the steps on the Path. In Tibetan Buddhism, the essentialist position is represented by shentong, while the nonimalist, or non-essentialist position, is represented by rangtong. Shentong is a philosophical sub-school found in Tibetan Buddhism. Its adherents generally hold that the nature of mind, the substratum of the mindstream, is "empty" () of "other" (), i.e., empty of all qualities other than an inherently existing, ineffable nature. Shentong has often been incorrectly associated with the Cittamātra (Yogacara) position, but is in fact also Madhyamaka,Stearns p. 72 and is present primarily as the main philosophical theory of the Jonang school, although it is also taught by the SakyaStearns p. 61 and Kagyu schools. According to Shentongpa (proponents of shentong), the emptiness of ultimate reality should not be characterized in the same way as the emptiness of apparent phenomena because it is prabhāśvara-saṃtāna, or "luminous mindstream" endowed with limitless Buddha qualities.Lama Shenpen, Emptiness Teachings. Buddhism Connect (accessed March, 2010) It is empty of all that is false, not empty of the limitless Buddha qualities that are its innate nature. The contrasting rangtong view, of the followers of Prasaṅgika Mādhyamaka, is that all phenomena are sunyata, empty of self-nature, and that this "emptiness" is itself only a qualification, not a concrete existing "absolute" reality. This position is associated with the Madhyamaka school, which dominates both Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhism. Dzogchen is concerned with the "natural state", and emphasizing direct experience. The state of nondual awareness, is called rigpa. This primordial nature is clear light, unproduced and unchanging, free from all defilements. Through meditation, the Dzogchen practitioner experiences that thoughts have no substance. Mental phenomena arise and fall in the mind, but fundamentally they are empty. The practitioner then considers where the mind itself resides. Through careful examination one realizes that the mind is emptiness. Karma Lingpa (1326–1386) revealed "Self-Liberation through seeing with naked awareness" (rigpa ngo-sprod,) which is attributed to Padmasambhava. The text gives an introduction, or pointing-out instruction (ngo-spro), into rigpa, the state of presence and awareness. In this text, Karma Lingpa writes the following regarding the unity of various terms for nonduality:  A popular western understanding of "nondualism" is "nondual consciousness", the experience of "a primordial, natural awareness without subject or object"Undivided Journal, About the Journal called turiya and sahaja in Hinduism, and luminous mind, Buddha-nature and rigpa (among other terms) in Buddhism. It is used interchangeably with Neo-Advaita.  All terms refer to the Absolute, and its usage is different from adyava, the non-dualism of conventional and ultimate truth. This nondual consciousness is seen as a common stratum to different religions. Several definitions or meanings are combined in this approach, which makes it possible to recognize various traditions as having the same essence. According to Renard, many forms of religion are based on an experiential or intuitive understanding of "the Real" Though the notion of nondualism as common essence is a modern notion, some of the included traditions themselves also refer to levels of truth which transcend even non-dualism. In Kashmir Shaivism, the term  "paradvaita" is being used, meaning "the supreme and absolute non-dualism".Piyaray L. Raina, Kashmir Shaivism versus Vedanta – A Synopsis And Gaudapada, the grandteacher of Shankara, states that, from the absolute standpoint, not even "non-dual" exists. Nondualism as common essence prefers the term "nondualism", instead of monism, because this understanding is "nonconceptual", "not graspapable in an idea". Even to call this "ground of reality" "One" or "Oneness" is attributing a characteristic to that ground of reality. The only thing that can be said is that it is "not two" or "non-dual":Swami Jnaneshvara, Faces of Nondualism According to Renard, Alan Watts has been one of the main contributors to the popularisation of the non-monistic understanding of "nondualism".  The notion of "religious experience" can be traced back to William James, who used the term "religious experience" in his book, The Varieties of Religious Experience. The origins of the use of this term can be dated further back. In the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries, several historical figures put forth very influential views that religion and its beliefs can be grounded in experience itself. While Kant held that moral experience justified religious beliefs, John Wesley in addition to stressing individual moral exertion thought that the religious experiences in the Methodist movement (paralleling the Romantic Movement) were foundational to religious commitment as a way of life.Issues in Science and Religion, Ian Barbour, Prentice-Hall, 1966, page 68, 79 Wayne Proudfoot traces the roots of the notion of "religious experience" to the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834), who argued that religion is based on a feeling of the infinite. The notion of "religious experience" was used by Schleiermacher and Albert Ritschl to defend religion against the growing scientific and secular critique, and defend the view that human (moral and religious) experience justifies religious beliefs. Such religious empiricism would be later seen as highly problematic and was&nbsp;— during the period in-between world wars&nbsp;— famously rejected by Karl Barth.Issues in Science and Religion, Ian Barbour, Prentice-Hall, 1966, page 114, 116-119 In the 20th century, religious as well as moral experience as justification for religious beliefs still holds sway. Some influential modern scholars holding this liberal theological view are Charles Raven and the Oxford physicist/theologian Charles Coulson.Issues in Science and Religion, Ian Barbour, Prentice-Hall, 1966, p. 126-127 The notion of "religious experience" was adopted by many scholars of religion, of which William James was the most influential. The idea of nonduality as "the central essence" is a universalistic and perennialist idea, which is part of a modern mutual exchange and synthesis of ideas between western spiritual and esoteric traditions and Asian religious revival and reform movements. Western predecessors are, among others, Swedenborgianism, Unitarianism, Orientalism, Transcendentalism, Theosophy, the idea of a Perennial Philosophy, New Age, and Wilber's synthesis of western psychology and Asian spirituality. Eastern movements are the Hindu reform movements such as Vivekananda's Neo-Vedanta and Aurobindo's Integral Yoga, the Vipassana movement, and Buddhist modernism. The western world has been exposed to Indian religious since the late 18th century. In 1785 appeared the first western translation of a Sanskrit-text. It marked the growing interest in the Indian culture and languages. The first translation of Upanishads appeared in two parts in 1801 and 1802, which influenced Arthur Schopenhauer, who called them "the consolation of my life". Early translations also appeared in other European languages. Transcendentalism was an early 19th-century liberal Protestant movement that developed in the 1830s and 1840s in the Eastern region of the United States. It was rooted in English and German Romanticism, the Biblical criticism of Herder and Schleiermacher, and the skepticism of Hume.Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Transcendentalism The Transcendentalists emphasised an intuitive, experiential approach of religion.Jone John Lewis, What is Transcendentalism?" Following Schleiermacher, an individual's intuition of truth was taken as the criterium for truth. In the late 18th and early 19th century, the first translations of Hindu texts appeared, which were also read by the Transcendentalists, and influenced their thinking. They also endorsed universalist and Unitarianist ideas, leading to Unitarian Universalism, the idea that there must be truth in other religions as well, since a loving God would redeem all living beings, not just Christians.Barry Andrews, THE ROOTS OF UNITARIAN UNIVERSALIST SPIRITUALITY IN NEW ENGLAND TRANSCENDENTALISM  Among the transcendentalists' core beliefs was the inherent goodness of both people and nature. Transcendentalists believed that society and its institutions&mdash;particularly organized religion and political parties&mdash;ultimately corrupted the purity of the individual. They had faith that people are at their best when truly "self-reliant" and independent. It is only from such real individuals that true community could be formed. The major figures in the movement were Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, Margaret Fuller and Amos Bronson Alcott. A major force in the mutual influence of eastern and western ideas and religiosity was the Theosophical Society. It searched for ancient wisdom in the east, spreading eastern religious ideas in the west. One of its salient features was the belief in "Masters of Wisdom", "beings, human or once human, who have transcended the normal frontiers of knowledge, and who make their wisdom available to others". The Theosophical Society also spread western ideas in the east, aiding a modernisation of eastern traditions, and contributing to a growing nationalism in the Asian colonies. The Perennial Philosophy sees nondualism as the essence of all religions. Its main proponent was Aldous Huxley, who was influenced by Vivekanda's Neo-Vedanta and Universalism. According to the Perennial Philosophy, there is an ultimate reality underlying the various religions. This ultimate reality can be called "Spirit" (Sri Aurobindo), "Brahman" (Shankara), "God", "Shunyata" (Emptiness), "The One" (Plotinus), "The Self" (Ramana Maharshi), "The Dao" (Lao Zi), "The Absolute" (Schelling) or simply "The Nondual" (F. H. Bradley). Ram Dass calls it the "third plane" — any phrase will be insufficient, he maintains, so any phrase will do. This popular approach finds supports in the "common core-thesis". According to the "common core-thesis", different descriptions can mask quite similar if not identical experiences: The "common-core thesis" is criticised by "diversity theorists" such as S.T Katz and W. Proudfoot. They argue that   The New Age movement is a Western spiritual movement that developed in the second half of the 20th century. Its central precepts have been described as "drawing on both Eastern and Western spiritual and metaphysical traditions and infusing them with influences from self-help and motivational psychology, holistic health, parapsychology, consciousness research and quantum physics". The term New Age refers to the coming astrological Age of Aquarius.Melton, J. Gordon – Director Institute for the Study of American Religion. New Age Transformed, retrieved 2006-06 The New Age aims to create "a spirituality without borders or confining dogmas" that is inclusive and pluralistic. It holds to "a holistic worldview", emphasising that the Mind, Body and Spirit are interrelatedMelton, J. Gordon – Director Institute for the Study of American Religion. New Age Transformed, retrieved 2006-06 and that there is a form of monism and unity throughout the universe.Michael D. Langone, Ph.D. Cult Observer, 1993, Volume 10, No. 1. What Is "New Age"?, retrieved 2006-07 It attempts to create "a worldview that includes both science and spirituality" and embraces a number of forms of mainstream science as well as other forms of science that are considered fringe. Neo-Advaita is a New Religious Movement based on a modern, western interpretation of Advaita Vedanta, especially the teachings of Ramana Maharshi.  Neo-Advaita is being criticized for discarding the traditional prerequisites of knowledge of the scriptures and "renunciation as necessary preparation for the path of jnana-yoga". Notable neo-advaita teachers are H. W. L. Poonja, his students Gangaji Andrew Cohen, and Eckhart Tolle. An alternative to the Perennialist and essentialist (neo-)Advaita understanding of nondualism is offered by some Madhyamaka-inspired writers.Emptiness. Buddhist and BeyondThe Non-BuddhistEmptiness teachings The classical Madhyamaka-teachings are complemented with western (post-modern) philosophy,Review of Richard Rorty's "Philosophy and Social Hope" critical sociology,Patrick jennings (2014), Tsongkhapa: In Praise of Relativity; The Essence of Eloquence and social constructionism.emptiness.co, Review of Kenneth J. Gergen's "An Invitation to Social Construction" These approaches stress that there is no transcendental reality beyond this phenomenal world,[Susan Kahn, The Two Truths of Buddhism and The Emptiness of Emptiness and in some cases even explicitly distinguish themselves from (neo-)Advaita approaches.emptiness.co, Coming from the Advaitic/Awareness Teachings? Special Pointers Apart from Hinduism and Buddhism, nondualist notions may also be discerned in other religious traditions. Sikhism is a monotheistic religion which holds the view of non-dualism. A principal cause of suffering in Sikhism is the ego (haumai or ahankar in Punjabi), the delusion of identifying oneself as an individual separate from the surroundings. From the ego arises the desires, pride, emotional attachments, anger, lust, etc., thus putting humans on the path of destruction. According to Sikhism, the true nature of all humans is the same as God, and everything that originates with God. The goal of a Sikh is to conquer the ego and realize one's true nature or self, which is the same as God's. The gurmukh has realized nondial knowledge.   Taoism's wu wei (Chinese wu, not; wei, doing) is a term with various translations and interpretations designed to distinguish it from passivity. The concept of Yin and Yang, often mistakenly conceived of as a symbol of dualism, is actually meant to convey the notion that all apparent opposites are complementary parts of a non-dual whole.Paul A. Erickson, Liam D. Murphy. A History of Anthropological Theory. 2013. p. 486 Subud is a spiritual movement that began in Java, Indonesia in the 1920s as a movement founded by Muhammad Subuh Sumohadiwidjojo. Java has been a melting pot of religions and cultures, which has created a broad range of religious belief. Muhammad Subuh claimed that Subud is not a new teaching or religion but only that the latihan kejiwaan itself is the kind of proof that humanity is looking for. The name "Subud" is an acronym that stands for three Javanese words, Susila Budhi Dharma, which are derived from the Sanskrit terms suzila, bodhi and dharma.J. Gordon Melton. Encyclopedia of American Religions. 1996. p. 828 The basis of Subud is a spiritual exercise commonly referred to as the latihan kejiwaan, the guidance from "the Power of God" or "the Great Life Force". The latihan is a vivid encounter which is fresh, alive and personal. It evolves and deepens over time. According to Jay Michaelson, nonduality begins to appear in the medieval Jewish textual tradition which peaked in Hasidism. According to Michaelson:    The Cloud of Unknowing an anonymous work of Christian mysticism written in Middle English in the latter half of the 14th century advocates a mystic relationship with God. The text describes a spiritual union with God through the heart. The author of the text advocates centering prayer, a form of inner silence. According to the text God can not be known through knowledge or from intellection. It is only by emptying the mind of all created images and thoughts that we can arrive to experience God. According to the text God is completely unknowable by the mind. God is not known through the intellect but through intense contemplation, motivated by love, and stripped of all thought.Paul de Jaegher, Donald Attwater Christian Mystics of the Middle Ages: An Anthology of Writings 2004, p. 86 Christian Science has been described as nondual. In a glossary of terms written by the founder, Mary Baker Eddy, matter is defined as illusion, and when defining 'I, or Ego' as the divine in relationship with individual identity, she writes "There is but one I, or Us, but one divine Principle, or Mind, governing all existence" – continuing – ". . .whatever reflects not this one Mind, is false and erroneous, even the belief that life, substance, and intelligence are both mental and material.", p.588 According to the teachings of The Infinite Way, God is a non-dual experience. Joel Goldsmith wrote that thought and ideas in the mind take people away from the realization of God. To experience God, he recommended meditation and for the subject to tune into the present moment so duality of the subject disappears. The former nun and contemplative Bernadette Roberts is considered a nondualist by Jerry Katz. Thomism, though not non-dual in the ordinary sense, considers the unity of God so absolute that even the duality of subject and predicate, to describe him, can be true only by analogy. In Thomist thought, even the Tetragrammaton is only an approximate name, since "I am" involves a predicate whose own essence is its subject.Koren, Henry J (1955). An Introduction to the Science of Metaphysics. B. Herder Book Co. ISBN 1258017857, ISBN 978-1258017859 Since its beginning, Gnosticism has been characterized by many dualisms and dualities, including the doctrine of a separate God and Manichaean (good/evil) dualism. Ronald Miller interprets the Gospel of Thomas as a teaching of "nondualistic consciousness". page 29, 63 Sufism and Irfan (Arabic تصوف taṣawwuf) are the mystical traditions of Islam. There are a number of different Sufi orders that follow the teachings of particular spiritual masters, but the bond that unites all Sufis is the concept of ego annihilation through various spiritual exercises and a persistent, ever-increasing longing for union with the divine.Peter Koslowski. The Concept of God, the Origin of the World, and the Image of the Human in the World Religions. 2013 p. 110 Reza Aslan has written: The central doctrine of Sufism, sometimes called Wahdat-ul-Wujood or Wahdat al-Wujud or Unity of Being, is the Sufi understanding of Tawhid (the oneness of God; absolute monotheism).Amin Banani, Richard Hovannisian, Georges Sabagh. Poetry and Mysticism in Islam: The Heritage of Rumi. 1994. p. 70 Put very simply, for Sufis, Tawhid implies that all phenomena are manifestations of a single reality, or Wujud (being), which is indeed al-Haq (Truth, God). The essence of Being/Truth/God is devoid of every form and quality, and hence unmanifest, yet it is inseparable from every form and phenomenon, either material or spiritual. It is often understood to imply that every phenomenon is an aspect of Truth and at the same time attribution of existence to it is false. The chief aim of all Sufis then is to let go of all notions of duality (and therefore of the individual self also), and realize the divine unity which is considered to be the truth. Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi, (1207–1273), one of the most famous Sufi masters and poets, has written that what humans perceive as duality is in fact a veil, masking the reality of the Oneness of existence:  Scholar Jay Michaelson identifies the origins of non-dualism proper founded in the Neoplatonism of Plotinus within Ancient Greece,Michaelson, Jay (2009). Everything Is God: The Radical Path of Nondual Judaism. Shambhala Publications. ISBN 1-59030-671-6, ISBN 978-1-59030-671-0. Source: [ ] (accessed: Thursday May 6, 2010), p.130 and employs the ambiguous binary construction of "the West". Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Ananda Coomaraswamy used the writing of Plotinus in their own texts as a superlative elaboration upon Indian monism, specifically Upanishadic and Advaita Vedantic thought. Ananda Coomaraswamy has compared Plotinus' teachings to the Hindu school of Advaita Vedanta (advaita meaning "not two" or "non-dual"),Swami-krishnananda.org Advaita Vedanta and Neoplatonism have been compared by J. F. Staal,J. F. Staal (1961), Advaita and Neoplatonism: A critical study in comparative philosophy, Madras: University of Madras Frederick Copleston, Aldo Magris and Mario Piantelli,Special section "Fra Oriente e Occidente" in Annuario filosofico No. 6 (1990), including the articles "Plotino e l'India" by Aldo Magris and "L'India e Plotino" by Mario Piantelli Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (ed.)(1952), History of Philosophy Eastern and Western, Vol.2. London: George Allen & Unwin. p.&nbsp;114 Gwen Griffith-Dickson, and John Y. Fenton.John Y. Fenton (1981), "Mystical Experience as a Bridge for Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion: A Critique", Journal of the American Academy of Religion, p.&nbsp;55 The joint influence of Advaitin and Neoplatonic ideas on Ralph Waldo Emerson is considered by Dale Riepe.Dale Riepe (1967), "Emerson and Indian Philosophy", Journal of the History of Ideas Process philosophy, and especially Alfred North Whitehead's blend, has sought to develop a worldview that avoids ontological dualism but still provides a distinction between body, mind and soul.See also the Process Psychology entry. The notion of "experience" has been criticised. Robert Sharf points out that "experience" is a typical Western term, which has found its way into Asian religiosity via western influences. Insight is not the "experience" of some transcendental reality, but is a cognitive event, the (intuitive) understanding or "grasping" of some specific understanding of reality, as in kensho or anubhava. "Pure experience" does not exist; all experience is mediated by intellectual and cognitive activity. A pure consciousness without concepts, reached by "cleaning the doors of perception", would be an overwhelming chaos of sensory input without coherence. The idea of a common essence has been questioned by Yandell, who discerns various "religious experiences" and their corresponding doctrinal settings, which differ in structure and phenomenological content, and in the "evidential value" they present. Yandell discerns five sorts: The specific teachings and practices of a specific tradition may determine what "experience" someone has, which means that this eperience" is not the proof of the teaching, but a result of the teaching. The notion of what exactly constitutes "liberating insight" varies between the various traditions, and even within the traditions. Bronkhorst for example notices that the conception of what exactly "liberating insight" is in Buddhism was developed throughout time. Whereas originally it may not have been specified, later on the four truths served as such, to be superseded by pratityasamutpada, and still later, in the Hinayana schools, by the doctrine of the non-existence of a substantial self or person. And Schmithausen notices that still other descriptions of this "liberating insight" exist in the Buddhist canon.  Various Metaphors for nondualisms General Orientalism Buddhism Advaita Vedanta Resources Criticism     advaya, the nonduality of conventional and ultimate truth, or relative and Absolute reality: advaita, the non-difference of Ātman and Brahman or the Absolute; it is best known from Advaita Vedanta, but can also be found in Kashmir Shaivism, popular teachers like Ramana Maharshi and Nisargadatta Maharaj, and in the Buddha-nature of the Buddhist tradition; "nondual consciousness", the non-duality of subject and object; this can be found in modern spirituality. Advaya refers to the nonduality of conventional and ultimate truth, or the relative (phenomenal) world and the Absolute; Advaita refers to the non-difference of Atman and Brahman, the related concepts of vijñapti-mātra and Buddha-nature in Buddhism; and to "nondual consciousness."  It is not just the knowing of this as information but the actual perception of what appears as life as that - not two. The Two truths doctrine of the Madhyamaka The Three Natures of the Yogacara The Trikaya-formule, which was first systematized by the Yogacara school, consisting of The Dharmakāya or Truth body which embodies the very principle of enlightenment and knows no limits or boundaries; The Sambhogakāya or body of mutual enjoyment which is a body of bliss or clear light manifestation; The Nirmāṇakāya or created body which manifests in time and space.Welwood, John (2000). The Play of the Mind: Form, Emptiness, and Beyond, accessed January 13, 2007 The Four Dharmadhatu of Huayan Buddhism Absolute and relative in Zen Essence-Function, or Absolute-relative in Chinese and Korean Buddhism Parikalpita (literally, "fully conceptualized"): "imaginary nature", wherein things are incorrectly comprehended based on conceptual construction, through attachment and erroneous discrimination. Paratantra (literally, "other dependent"): "dependent nature", by which the correct understanding of the dependently originated nature of things is understood. Pariniṣpanna (literally, "fully accomplished"): "absolute nature", through which one comprehends things as they are in themselves, uninfluenced by any conceptualization at all. The Dharmakāya or Truth body which embodies the very principle of enlightenment and knows no limits or boundaries; The Sambhogakāya or body of mutual enjoyment which is a body of bliss or clear light manifestation; The Nirmāṇakāya or created body which manifests in time and space. All dharmas are seen as particular separate events; All events are an expression of the absolute; Events and essence interpenetrate; All events interpenetrate.  (paramartha, absolute), the absolute level, "which is absolutely real and into which both other reality levels can be resolved". This experience can't be sublated by any other experience.  (vyavahara), or samvriti-saya (empirical or pragmatical), "our world of experience, the phenomenal world that we handle every day when we are awake". It is the level in which both jiva (living creatures or individual souls) and Iswara are true; here, the material world is also true.  (pratibhasika, apparent reality, unreality), "reality based on imagination alone". It is the level in which appearances are actually false, like the illusion of a snake over a rope, or a dream. Numinous experiences - Monotheism (Jewish, Christian, Vedantic) Nirvanic experiences - Buddhism, "according to which one sees that the self is but a bundle of fleeting states" Kevala experiences - Jainism, "according to which one sees the self as an undestructible subject of experience" Moksha experiences - Hinduism, Brahman "either as a cosmic person, or, quite differently, as qualityless" Nature mystical experience Abheda Acosmism (belief that the world is illusory) Anatta (Belief that there is no self) Cosmic Consciousness Dualism Emanationism Henosis (Union with the absolute) Kenosis (Self-emptying) Maya (illusion) (Cosmic illusion) Monad (philosophy) Neo-Advaita Nihilism Oceanic feeling Open individualism Panentheism Pantheism (Belief that God and the world are identical) Pluralism (metaphysics) Process Psychology Rigpa Shuddhadvaita Sunyata (Emptiness). The All Turiya Yanantin (Complementary dualism in Native South American culture) Jewel Net of Indra, Avatamsaka Sutra Blind men and an elephant Eclipse Hermaphrodite, e.g. Ardhanārīśvara Mirror and reflections, as a metaphor for the continuum of the subject-object in the mirror-the-mind and the interiority of perception and its illusion of projected exteriority Great Rite Sacred marriage Susan Kahn, The Two Truths of Buddhism and The Emptiness of Emptiness Patrick Jennings, Tsongkhapa: In Praise of Relativity; The Essence of Eloquence Emptiness, Buddhist and Beyond Nigel Wellings (2009), Is there anything there? – the Tibetan Rangtong Shentong debate Acharya Mahayogi Sridhar Rana Rinpoche, Vedanta vis-a-vis Shentong David Loy, Enlightenment in Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta: Are Nirvana and Moksha the Same? Alexander Berzin Archives, Nonduality in Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta David Paul Boaz, Unbounded Wholeness: Dzogchen and Advaita Vedanta in a Postmodern World Eric T. Reynolds, On the relationship of Advaita Vedānta and Mādhyamika Buddhism nonduality.com Non-duality Magazine Undivided. The Online Journal of Nonduality and Psychology Online Seminar on NonDuality Sarlo's Guru Rating Service: list of nondual teachers advaita.org.uk, Western Teachers and Writers Swami Jnaneshvara, Faces of Nondualism After Non Duality Jed McKenna, Non-Dualist Fundamentalism Gregory Desilet, Derrida and Nonduality
