   Northern California, often abbreviated NorCal, is the northern portion of the U.S. state of California. Spanning the state's northernmost 48 counties, in contrast to the 10 counties of Southern California, its main population centers include the San Francisco Bay Area (anchored by the cities of San Francisco, San Jose, and Oakland), the Greater Sacramento area (anchored by the state capital Sacramento), and the Metropolitan Fresno area (anchored by the city of Fresno). Northern California also contains redwood forests, along with the Sierra Nevada including Yosemite Valley and part of Lake Tahoe, Mount Shasta (the second-highest peak in the Cascade Range after Mount Rainier in Washington), and the northern portion of the Central Valley, one of the world's most productive agricultural regions. The 48-county definition is not used for the Northern California Megaregion, one of the 11 megaregions of the United States. The megaregion's area is instead defined from Metropolitan Fresno north to Greater Sacramento, and from the Bay Area east across Nevada state line to encompass the entire Lake Tahoe-Reno area. Native Americans arrived in northern California at least as early as 8,000 to 5,000 BC and perhaps even much earlier, and successive waves of arrivals led to one of the most densely populated areas of pre-Columbian North America. The arrival of European explorers from the early 16th to the mid-18th centuries, did not establish European settlements in northern California. In 1770, the Spanish mission at Monterey was the first European settlement in the area, followed by other missions along the coast—eventually extending as far north as Sonoma County.   Northern California is not a formal geographic designation.  California's north-south midway division is around 37° latitude, near the level of San Francisco.  Popularly, though, "Northern California" usually refers to the state's northernmost 48 counties. This definition coincides with the county lines at 35° 47′ 28″ north latitude, which form the southern borders of Monterey, Kings, Tulare and Inyo counties. The term is also applied to the area north of Point Conception and the Tehachapi Mountains. Because of California's large size and diverse geography, the state can be subdivided in other ways as well.  For example, the Central Valley is a distinct region in itself both culturally and topographically from coastal California, though in northern versus southern California divisions, the Sacramento Valley and most of the San Joaquin Valley are usually placed in northern California. The state is often considered as having an additional division north of the urban areas of the San Francisco Bay Area and Sacramento metropolitan areas. Extreme northern residents have felt under-represented in state government and in 1941 attempted to form a new state with southwestern Oregon to be called Jefferson, or more recently to introduce legislation to split California into two or three states.  The coastal area north of the Bay Area is referred to as the North Coast while the interior region north of Sacramento is referred by locals as the Northstate.  Since the events of the California Gold Rush, northern California has been a leader on the world's economic, scientific, and cultural stages. From the development of gold mining techniques and logging practices in the 19th century that were later adopted around the world, to the development of world-famous  and online business models (such as Apple, Hewlett-Packard, Google, Yahoo!, and eBay), northern California has been at the forefront of new ways of doing business. In science, advances range from being the first to isolate and name fourteen transuranic chemical elements, to breakthroughs in microchip technology. Cultural contributions include the works of Ansel Adams, George Lucas, and Clint Eastwood, as well as beatniks, the Summer of Love, winemaking, the cradle of the international environmental movement, and the open, casual workplace first popularized in the Silicon Valley dot-com boom and now widely in use around the world. Other examples of innovation across diverse fields range from Genentech (development and commercialization of genetic engineering) to CrossFit as a pioneer in extreme human fitness and training. It is also Home to one of the largest Air Force Bases on the West Coast, and the largest of California, Travis Air Force Base.   Northern California's largest metropolitan area is the San Francisco Bay Area which includes the cities of San Francisco, San Jose, Oakland, and their many suburbs. In recent years the Bay Area has drawn more commuters from as far as Central Valley cities such as Sacramento, Stockton, Fresno, Turlock and Modesto. With expanding development in all these areas, the San Francisco Bay Area, Monterey Bay Area, and central part of the Central Valley and Sierra Nevada foothills may now be viewed as part of a single megalopolis. The 2010 U.S. Census showed that the Bay Area grew at a faster rate than the Greater Los Angeles Area while Greater Sacramento had the largest growth rate of any metropolitan area in California.   The state's larger inland cities are considered part of northern California in cases when the state is divided into two parts. Important cities in the region not in major metropolitan areas include Eureka on the far North Coast, Redding, at the northern end of the Central Valley, Chico, and Yuba City in the mid-north of the Valley, as well as Fresno and Visalia on the southern end. Though smaller in every case except for Fresno than the larger cities of the vast region, these smaller regional centers are often of historical, and perhaps inflated economic importance for their respective size, due to their locations, which are primarily rural or otherwise isolated. Inhabited for millennia by Native Americans, from the Shasta tribe in the north, to the Miwoks in the central coast and Sierra Nevada, to the Yokuts of the southern Central Valley, northern California was among the most densely populated areas of pre-Columbian North America. The first European to explore the coast was Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo, sailing for the Spanish Crown; in 1542, Cabrillo's expedition  sailed perhaps as far north as the Rogue River in today's Oregon.  Beginning in 1565, the Spanish Manila galleons crossed the Pacific Ocean from Mexico to the Spanish Philippines, with silver and gemstones from Mexico.  The Manila galleons returned across the northern Pacific, and reached North America usually off the coast of northern California, and then continued south with their Asian trade goods to Mexico. In 1579, northern California was visited by the English explorer Sir Francis Drake who landed north of today's San Francisco and claimed the area for England. In 1602, the Spaniard Sebastián Vizcaíno explored California's coast as far north as Monterey Bay, where he went ashore.  Other Spanish explorers sailed along the coast of northern California for the next 150 years, but no settlements were established. The first European inhabitants were Spanish missionaries, who built missions along the California coast.  The mission at Monterey was first established in 1770, and at San Francisco in 1776.  In all, ten missions stretched along the coast from Sonoma to Monterey (and still more missions to the southern tip of Baja California).  In 1786, the French signaled their interest in the northern California area by sending a voyage of exploration to Monterey. The first twenty years of the 19th century continued the colonization of the northern California coast by Spain.  By 1820, Spanish influence extended inland approximately 25 to  from the missions.  Outside of this zone, perhaps 200,000 to 250,000 Native Americans continued to lead traditional lives.  The Adams-Onís Treaty, signed in 1819 between Spain and the young United States, set the northern boundary of the Spanish claims at the 42nd parallel, effectively creating today's northern boundary of northern California. Russians, from Alaska, were moving down the coast, and in 1812 established Fort Ross, a fur trading outpost on the coast of today's Sonoma County.  Fort Ross was the southernmost point of expansion, meeting the Spanish northern expansion some  north of San Francisco. In 1841, as the American presence in northern California began to increase and politics began to change the region, a deal was made with John Sutter and the Russians abandoned their northern California settlements. After Mexico gained independence from Spain in 1821, Mexico continued Spain's missions and settlements in northern California as well as Spain's territorial claims.  The Mexican Californios (Spanish-speaking Californians) in these settlements primarily traded cattle hides and tallow with American and European merchant vessels.  In 1825, the Hudson's Bay Company established a major trading post just north of today's Portland, Oregon.  British fur trappers and hunters then used the Siskiyou Trail to travel throughout northern California.  The leader of a further French scientific expedition to northern California, Eugene Duflot de Mofras, wrote in 1840 "...it is evident that California will belong to whatever nation chooses to send there a man-of-war and two hundred men."  By the 1830s, a significant number of non-Californios had immigrated to northern California.  Chief among these was John Sutter, a European immigrant from Switzerland, who was granted   centered on the area of today's Sacramento. American trappers began entering northern California in the 1830s. In 1834, American visionary Ewing Young led a herd of horses and mules over the Siskiyou Trail from missions in northern California to British and American settlements in Oregon. Although a small number of American traders and trappers had lived in northern California since the early 1830s, the first organized overland party of American immigrants to arrive in northern California was the Bartleson-Bidwell Party of 1841 via the new California Trail. Also in 1841, an overland exploratory party of the United States Exploring Expedition came down the Siskiyou Trail from the Pacific Northwest. In 1846, the Donner Party earned notoriety as they struggled to enter northern California. When the Mexican-American War was declared on May 13, 1846, it took almost two months (mid-July 1846) for word to get to California. On June 14, 1846, some 30 non-Mexican settlers, mostly Americans, staged a revolt and seized the small Mexican garrison in Sonoma. They raised the "Bear Flag" of the California Republic over Sonoma. The "Bear Flag Republic" lasted only 26 days, until the U.S. Army, led by John Frémont, took over on July 9. The California state flag today is based on this original Bear Flag, and continues to contain the words "California Republic." Commodore John Drake Sloat ordered his naval forces to occupy Yerba Buena (present San Francisco) on July 7 and within days American forces controlled San Francisco, Sonoma, and Sutter's Fort in Sacramento. The treaty ending the Mexican-American War was signed on February 2, 1848, and Mexico formally ceded Alta California (including all of present-day northern California) to the United States. The California Gold Rush took place almost exclusively in northern California from 1848&ndash;1855.  It began on January 24, 1848, when gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill in Coloma."[E]vents from January 1848 through December 1855 [are] generally acknowledged as the 'Gold Rush' .... After 1855, California gold mining changed and is outside the 'rush' era."   News of the discovery soon spread, resulting in some 300,000&nbsp;people coming to California from the rest of the United States and abroad. San Francisco grew from a tiny hamlet of tents to a boomtown, and roads, churches, schools and other towns were built.  New methods of transportation developed as steamships came into regular service and railroads were built.  However, the Gold Rush also had negative effects: Native Americans were attacked and pushed off traditional lands, the native oyster species became overharvested and nearly wiped out all the way into the Pacific Northwest, and gold mining caused environmental harm. The Gold Rush also increased pressure to make California a U.S. state. Pro-slavery politicians initially attempted to permanently divide northern and southern California at 36 degrees, 30 minutes, the line of the Missouri Compromise. But instead, the passing of the Compromise of 1850 enabled California to be admitted to the Union as a free state.  The decades following the Gold Rush brought dramatic expansion to northern California, both in population and economically&nbsp;– particularly in agriculture.  The completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad in 1869, with its terminus in Sacramento, meant that northern California's agricultural produce (and some manufactured goods) could now be shipped economically to the rest of the United States.  In return, immigrants from the rest of the United States (and Europe) could comfortably come to northern California.  A network of railroads spread throughout northern California, and in 1887, a rail link was completed to the Pacific Northwest.  Almost all of these railways came under the control of the Southern Pacific Railroad, headquartered in San Francisco, and San Francisco continued as a financial and cultural center. Substantial tensions during this era included nativist sentiments (primarily against Chinese immigrants), tensions between the increasing power of the Southern Pacific Railroad and small farmers, and the beginnings of the labor union movement. Northern California's economy is noted for being the de facto world leader in industries such as high technology (software, semiconductor/micro-electronics, biotechnology and medical devices/instruments), as well as being known for clean power, biomedical, government, and finance.  Other significant industries include tourism, shipping, manufacturing, and agriculture.  Its economy is diverse, though more concentrated in high technology, and subject to the whims of venture capital than any other major regional economy in the nation especially within Silicon Valley, and less dependent on oil and residential housing than Southern California.  It is home to the state capital, as well as several Western United States regional offices in San Francisco, such as the Federal Reserve and 9th Circuit Court. Northern California has warm or mild to cold climate, which the sierra gets snow in the late fall through winter, perhaps spring. Summers are a bit warm and dry while Winters are rather cool and wet. The high temperatures range from 50's to 30's in the winters while as summers temperatures range is 90's to 60's or 50's. Snow gets covered on the mountains in mid January through February. Fog occurs infrequently or occurs normally in the west and coast. The population of the forty-eight counties of northern California has shown a steady increase over the years.Historical census data by U.S. Census BureauU.S. Census data for year 2000  The 1850 census almost certainly undercounted the population of the area, especially undercounting a still substantial Native American population.  The largest percentage increase outside the Gold Rush era (51%) came in the decade of the 1940s, as the area was the destination of many post-War veterans and their families, attracted by the greatly expanding industrial base and (often) by their time stationed in northern California during World War II.  The largest absolute increase occurred during the decade of the 1980s (over 2.1 million person increase), attracted to job opportunities in part by the expansion taking place in Silicon Valley and the Cold War era expansion of the defense industry. The 2010 U.S. Census revealed that northern California grew at a faster rate than Southern California in the 2000s with a rate slightly higher than the state average.  The U.S. National Park System controls a large and diverse group of parks in northern California. The best known is Yosemite National Park, which is displayed on the reverse side of the . Other prominent parks are the Kings Canyon-Sequoia National Park complex, Redwood National Park, Pinnacles National Park, Lassen Volcanic National Park and the largest in the contiguous forty-eight states, Death Valley National Park.  Other areas under federal protection include Muir Woods National Monument, Giant Sequoia National Monument, Devils Postpile National Monument, Lava Beds National Monument, Point Reyes National Seashore, the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, and the Cordell Bank and Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuaries (both off the coast of San Francisco).  Included within the latter National Marine Sanctuary is the Farallon National Wildlife Refuge; this National Wildlife Refuge is one of approximately twenty-five such refuges in northern California. National forests occupy large sections of northern California, including the Shasta-Trinity, Klamath, Modoc, Lassen, Mendocino, Eldorado, Tahoe, and Sequoia national forests, among others.  Included within (or adjacent to) national forests are federally protected wilderness areas, including the Trinity Alps, Castle Crags, Granite Chief, and Desolation wilderness areas. In addition, the California Coastal National Monument protects all islets, reefs, and rock outcroppings from the shore of northern California out to a distance of 12 nautical miles (22.22&nbsp;km), along the entire northern California coastline.  In addition, the National Park Service administers protected areas on Alcatraz Island, the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, and the Whiskeytown National Recreation Area.  The NPS also administers the Manzanar National Historic Site in Inyo County, the Rosie the Riveter/World War II Home Front National Historical Park in Richmond, and the Tule Lake Unit of the World War II Valor in the Pacific National Monument outside of Tulelake.   Northern California hosts a number of world-renowned universities including Stanford University and University of California, Berkeley. Top-tier public graduate schools include Boalt Hall and Hastings law schools and UC San Francisco, a top-ranked medical school, and UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, the largest vet school in the United States. *UC Berkeley *UC Davis *UC Hastings *UC Merced *UC San Francisco *UC Santa Cruz *  California Maritime Academy *  Chico State *  CSU East Bay *  CSU Monterey Bay *  Fresno State *  Humboldt State *  Sacramento State *  San Francisco State *  San Jose State *  Sonoma State *  Stanislaus State (Partial list) (Partial list)   The following regions are entirely or partly within northern California: Population figures are the most recent figures contained in the respective Wikipedia articles, in the List of cities in California (by population), or in the State of California, Department of Finance 2007 estimates. Northern California is home to three of the state's four extended metropolitan areas that are home to over three-fourths of the region's population as of the 2010 United States Census:Excerpted from 2010 United States Census The following are major central business districts: See also categories:       The following airports currently have regularly scheduled commercial service: Interstates: U.S. Routes:  Principal State highways: Largest cities (city proper) in northern California 1 - San Jose 2 - San Francisco 3 - Fresno 4 - Sacramento 5 - Oakland 6 - Stockton 7 - Fremont 8 - Modesto 9 - Santa Rosa 10 - Elk Grove 11 - Salinas 12 - Hayward 13 - Sunnyvale 14 - Visalia 15 - Concord 16 - Roseville 17 - Santa Clara 18 - Vallejo 19 - Berkeley 20 - Fairfield 21 - Richmond 22 - Antioch 23 - Daly City 24 - San Mateo 25 - Clovis 26 - Vacaville 27 - Redding 28 - Chico 29 - San Leandro 30 - Citrus Heights 31 - Tracy 32 - Livermore 33 - Merced 34 - Napa 35 - Redwood City 36 - Mountain View 37 - Alameda 38 - Folsom 39 - San Ramon 40 - Pleasanton City Population (2010) Alameda 73,812 Antioch 102,372 Berkeley 112,580 Brentwood 51,481 Chico 86,187 Citrus Heights 83,301 Clovis 95,631 Concord 122,067 Cupertino 58,302 Daly City 101,123 Davis 65,622 Elk Grove 153,015 Fairfield 105,321 Folsom 72,203 Fresno 510,365 Fremont 214,089 Hanford 53,967 Hayward 144,186 Livermore 80,968 Lodi 62,134 Madera 61,416 Manteca 67,096 Merced 78,958 Milpitas 66,790 Modesto 201,165 Mountain View 74,066 Napa 76,915 Novato 51,904 Oakland 390,724 Palo Alto 64,403 Petaluma 57,941 Pittsburg 63,264 Pleasanton 70,285 Porterville 54,165 Rancho Cordova 64,776 Redding 89,861 Redwood City 76,815 Richmond 103,701 Rocklin 56,974 Roseville 118,788 Sacramento 466,488 Salinas 150,441 San Francisco 805,235 San Jose 945,942 San Leandro 84,950 San Mateo 97,207 San Rafael 57,713 San Ramon 72,148 Santa Clara 116,468 Santa Cruz 59,946 Santa Rosa 167,815 South San Francisco 63,632 Stockton 291,707 Sunnyvale 140,081 Tracy 82,922 Tulare 59,278 Turlock 68,549 Union City 69,516 Vacaville 92,428 Vallejo 115,942 Visalia 124,442 Walnut Creek 64,173 Watsonville 51,199 Woodland 55,468 Yuba City 64,925 Metropolitan region Population San Francisco Bay Area 7,468,390 Greater Sacramento 2,461,780 Metropolitan Fresno 1,081,315 Sport!!League!!Team!!Venue Baseball MLB Oakland Athletics (American League) O.co Coliseum San Francisco Giants (National League) AT&T Park Basketball NBA Golden State Warriors Oracle Arena Sacramento Kings Sleep Train Arena Football NFL Oakland Raiders O.co Coliseum San Francisco 49ers Levi's Stadium Ice hockey NHL San Jose Sharks SAP Center Soccer MLS San Jose Earthquakes Avaya Stadium Arena Football AFL San Jose SaberCats SAP Center Tilden Regional Park Alum Rock Park Angel Island Bidwell Park Big Basin Redwoods State Park Castle Rock State Park Butano State Park Farallon Islands Golden Gate Park Henry Coe State Park Humboldt Redwoods State Park Lake Tahoe Basin East Bay Regional Park District Butano State Park Marble Mountain Wilderness Mount Tamalpais State Park Suisun Marsh Sacramento River Turtle Bay Exploration Park McArthur-Burney Falls Memorial State Park Wilder Ranch State Park Sequoia National Park Six University of California campuses: Eleven California State University campuses: A large number of local community colleges Brandman University Dominican University Drexel University Sacramento Fresno Pacific University Holy Names University Mills College Northwestern Polytechnic University Pacific Union College Stanford University Santa Clara University St. Mary's College Simpson University Touro University California University of San Francisco University of the Pacific William Jessup University American Institute of Mathematics Bodega Marine Laboratory Hopkins Marine Station Joint Genome Institute Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Lick Observatory Long Marine Laboratory Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute NASA Ames Research Center Owens Valley Radio Observatory Pacific Institute Point Reyes Bird Observatory White Mountain Research Station Alameda Alpine Amador Butte Calaveras Colusa Contra Costa Del Norte El Dorado Fresno Glenn Humboldt Inyo Kings Lake Lassen Madera Marin Mariposa Mendocino Merced Modoc Mono Monterey Napa Nevada Placer Plumas Sacramento San Benito San Francisco San Joaquin San Mateo Santa Clara Santa Cruz Shasta Sierra Siskiyou Solano Sonoma Stanislaus Sutter Tehama Trinity Tulare Tuolumne Yolo Yuba Big Sur Cascade Range Central California Central Coast Central Valley Coastal California East Bay (SF) Eastern California Emerald Triangle Gold Country Greater Sacramento Klamath Basin Lake Tahoe Lassen Peak Lost Coast Metropolitan Fresno Mount Shasta North Bay (SF) North Coast Russian River Sacramento Valley San Francisco Bay Area San Francisco Peninsula San Joaquin Valley Santa Clara Valley Shasta Cascade Sierra Nevada Silicon Valley South Bay (SF) Telecom Valley Tri-Valley Trinity Alps Wine Country Yosemite Yuba-Sutter Area San Francisco Financial District Downtown Oakland Downtown Sacramento Downtown San Jose Arcata-Eureka Airport Charles M. Schulz - Sonoma County Airport Chico Municipal Airport Del Norte County Airport Fresno Yosemite International Airport Mammoth-Yosemite Airport Merced Municipal Airport Modesto City-County Airport Monterey Regional Airport Oakland International Airport Porterville Municipal Airport Redding Municipal Airport Sacramento International Airport San Francisco International Airport San Jose International Airport Stockton Metropolitan Airport Visalia Municipal Airport Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) - commuter subway connecting most of the core Bay Area including San Francisco and Oakland with their suburbs with ongoing expansion to San Jose and Antioch Caltrain - commuter rail between San Francisco to Gilroy (south of San Jose) Muni Metro (San Francisco) VTA Light Rail (San Jose) Altamont Commuter Express (ACE) - commuter train connecting Stockton and the Central Valley with San Jose and the Bay Area Sacramento Regional Transit District light rail Amtrak: California Zephyr - connects Chicago to the Bay Area Capitol Corridor - San Jose to Auburn (eastern suburb of Sacramento) Coast Starlight - coastal train between Los Angeles and Seattle with northern California stops in San Jose, Oakland, and Sacramento San Joaquin - Central Valley train linking Bakersfield in Southern California to Sacramento and Oakland AC Transit Arcata and Mad River Transit System County Connection El Dorado Transit Eureka Transit Service Fairfield and Suisun Transit Fresno Area Express Golden Gate Transit Lake Transit Mendocino Transit Authority Monterey-Salinas Transit Porterville City Operated Local Transit Redwood Transit System SamTrans San Benito Express SF MUNI San Joaquin Regional Transit District Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Santa Cruz Metro Solano Express SolTrans Sonoma County Transit Tri Delta Transit VINE (Napa County) Blue & Gold Fleet Alameda/Oakland Ferry Alameda Harbor Bay Ferry Angel Island - Tiburon Ferry Golden Gate Ferry  Interstate 80 (Eastshore Freeway/Lincoln Highway)  Interstate 280 (Southern Embarcadero Freeway/Southern Freeway/Junipero Serra Freeway/Sinclair Freeway)  Interstate 380  Interstate 580 (Eastshore Freeway/MacArthur Freeway/Brown Freeway)  Interstate 680 (Joseph P. Sinclair Freeway/Donald D. Doyle Highway/Blue Star Memorial Highway/Luther E. Gibson Freeway)  Interstate 780  Interstate 880 (Nimitz Freeway)  Interstate 980 (Grove-Shafter Freeway)  Interstate 238  Interstate 205 (Robert T. Monagan Freeway)  Interstate 5 (Golden State Freeway/West Side Freeway)  Interstate 505   Interstate 80 Business (Capital City Freeway)  U.S. Route 6  U.S. Route 50 (El Dorado Freeway)  U.S. Route 101 (South Valley Freeway/Bayshore Freeway/James Lick Freeway/Central Freeway/Redwood Highway/Michael J. Burns Freeway/Redwood Highway)  U.S. Route 395  U.S. Route 97  U.S. Route 199  State Route 1 (Pacific Coast Highway/Cabrillo Highway)  State Route 3  State Route 4  State Route 9  State Route 12  State Route 13 (Ashby Avenue/Tunnel Road/Warren Freeway)  State Route 17  State Route 24  State Route 29  State Route 35 (Skyline Boulevard)  State Route 36  State Route 37 (Sears Point Tollway)  State Route 41 (E.G. Lewis Highway, Yosemite Freeway, Southern Yosemite Highway, Wawona Road)  State Route 44  State Route 49 (Golden Chain Highway) // State Route 61 (Webster Tube/Posey Tube/Doolittle Drive/Davis Street)  State Route 70  State Route 82 (Monterey Highway/El Camino Real/Mission Street)  State Route 84  State Route 85 (Stevens Creek Freeway/West Valley Freeway/Norman Y. Mineta Highway/CHP Officer Scott M. Greenly Memorial Freeway)  State Route 89  State Route 92 (J. Arthur Younger Freeway/Jackson Street)  State Route 99  State Route 108  State Route 113  State Route 120  State Route 121  State Route 132  State Route 140 / State Route 185 (International Boulevard/East 14th Street/Mission Boulevard)  State Route 160 (North Sacramento Freeway/River Road)  State Route 236  State Route 237  State Route 238 (Mission Boulevard, Foothill Boulevard)  State Route 254 (Avenue of the Giants)  State Route 262 (Mission Boulevard)  State Route 275 (Tower Bridge Gateway)  State Route 299 209&nbsp;&mdash; Northern San Joaquin Valley (Stockton, Modesto, and Merced). 408&nbsp;&mdash; Most of Santa Clara County (San Jose and Gilroy). 415&nbsp;&mdash; San Francisco, Daly City, and Marin County. One of the three original Area Codes in California. 510&nbsp;&mdash; Inner East Bay (Oakland, Berkeley, Richmond, and Fremont).  Originally part of area code 415. 530&nbsp;&mdash; A large northeastern section of the region including Tehama County, Shasta County, Lassen County, Yuba County, Sutter County, Butte County, and Nevada County.  Split from area code 916 in 1997-1998. 559&nbsp;&mdash; Southern San Joaquin Valley (Madera, Fresno, and Visalia). 628&nbsp;&mdash; Overlay with 415. 650&nbsp;&mdash; San Francisco Peninsula (San Mateo, Redwood City, and Palo Alto).  Originally part of area code 415. 669&nbsp;&mdash; Overlay with 408. 707&nbsp;&mdash; The North Coast section of the region from Sonoma County to the Oregon border. Cities include Eureka, Ukiah, Santa Rosa, Napa, Vallejo and Fairfield. 831&nbsp;&mdash; Monterey, San Benito and Santa Cruz Counties.  Originally part of area code 408. 916&nbsp;&mdash; Sacramento County and the Sacramento suburbs in western Placer and El Dorado Counties. One of the three original area codes in California, formerly covered all areas now within 530. 925&nbsp;&mdash; Outer East Bay (Concord, Pittsburg, Walnut Creek, San Ramon, Pleasanton and Livermore).  Originally part of area codes 415 and 510.For current information, see nanpa.com, the North American Numbering Plan Administration site. California Golden Bears Stanford Cardinal Laguna Seca Raceway (motorsport) Sonoma Raceway (motorsport) Olympic Club (golf) Silverado Country Club (golf) TPC Harding Park (golf) TPC Stonebrae (golf) Pac-12 Football Championship Game (college football) Emerald Bowl (college football) AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am (golf) Frys.com Open (golf) Swinging Skirts LPGA Classic (golf) Grand Prix of Sonoma (motorsport) Toyota/Save Mart 350 (motorsport) Monterey Sports Car Championships (motorsport) Superbike World Championship (motorsport) California megapolitan areas Central California History of California through 1899 History of the west coast of North America Jefferson (proposed Pacific state) Megaregions of the United States Southern California
