   Nuclear winter (also known as atomic winter) is a largely hypothetical global climatic effect of war and natural wildfires, that is most frequently suggested to follow after the combined combustion pollution from the burning of at least 100 city sized areas, at firestorm-intensity. With the term specifically being coined to refer to computer model results were this smoke remained for year-to-decade long intervals and caused massive planet-wide temperature drops/"winters" for as long as it remained. The Climate models that are in the public-domain, suggest that the ignition of 100 firestorms that are comparable in intensity to that observed in Hiroshima in 1945 would produce a threshold-level nuclear winter. The burning of these firestorms would result in the injection of soot (specifically Black carbon) into the Earth's stratosphere, producing an anti-greenhouse effect, that lowers the Earth's surface temperature. With the models concluding that the size of this effect, from the cumulative products of 100 of these firestorms, would unmistakably cool the global climate by approximately 1&nbsp;°C, largely eliminating the magnitude of anthropogenic global warming for two to three years; with which the authors speculate, but do not model, would have global agricultural losses as a consequence. Whereas a much larger number of firestorms, which were the initial focus of the computer modelers that coined the term in the 1980s, as these were speculated to be ignited by any countervalue city-airburst nuclear weapon policy during a US-Soviet total war, suggest a decadal long nuclear winter. With summer cooling by about 20&nbsp;°C in core agricultural regions of the US, Europe and China, and by as much as 35&nbsp;°C in Russia. Cooling produced due to a 99% reduction in the natural solar radiation reaching the surface of the planet in the first few years, gradually clearing over several decades.http://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/nuclear/ As nuclear devices need not be involved in the ignition of a firestorm, the term is a common misnomer,A Nuclear Winter's Tale: Science and Politics in the 1980s, Lawrence Badash, page 242-244 due in greatest part by the vast majority of the published papers stating, without qualitative justification, that nuclear explosions are the cause of the modeled firestorm effects. Whilst the only phenomenon that is scrutinized and computer modeled in the nuclear winter papers is the climate forcing agent of firestorm-soot, a product which can and is, ignited and formed by a myriad of other, more common, means. On the fundamental level, it is known that firestorms can inject soot smoke/aerosols into the stratosphere, as each natural occurrence of a wildfire firestorm has been found to "surprisingly frequently" produce minor "nuclear winter" effects, with short-lived, almost im-measurable drops in surface temperatures, confined to the global hemisphere that they burned in.Fire-Breathing Storm Systems. NASARussian Firestorm: Finding a Fire Cloud from Space. NASA Earth Observatory, 2010 This is somewhat analogous to the frequent volcanic eruptions that inject sulfates into the stratosphere and thereby produce minor, to negligible, volcanic winter effects. A suite of satellite- and aircraft-based firestorm-soot-monitoring instruments are at the forefront of attempts to accurately determine the lifespan, quantity, injection height, and optical properties of this smoke.NASA to study how pollution, storms and climate mix 2013Wildfires Smoke Crosses the Atlantic July 2, 2013 NASACanadian and Siberian Boreal Fire Activity during ARCTAS Spring and Summer Phases. American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2009, (Conference paper) Information regarding all of these properties is necessary to truly ascertain the length and depth of the cooling effect of firestorms, independent of the nuclear winter computer model projections. Presently, from satellite tracking data, stratospheric smoke aerosols are removed in a time span under approximately two months, and the existence of any hint of a tipping point into a new stratospheric condition where the aerosols would not be removed within this timeframe, remains to be determined.   The nuclear winter scenario assumes that 100 or more city firestormsMassive global ozone loss predicted following regional nuclear conflict 2008 "50 Hiroshima-size (15 kt) bombs could generate 1–5 Tg of black carbon aerosol particles in the upper troposphere, after an initial 20% removal in "black rains" induced by firestorms..." & "the 1 to 5 Tg soot source term derives from a thorough study of the smoke produced by firestorms..."Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1994 "the injection height of the smoke is controlled by the energy release from the burning fuel not from the nuclear explosion." are ignited by the nuclear explosions of a nuclear war,http://bos.sagepub.com/content/68/5/66.abstract Self-assured destruction: The climate impacts of nuclear war.  Alan Robock, Owen Brian Toon. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, September/October 2012; vol. 68, 5: pp. 66-74 and the firestorms lift large enough amounts of sooty smoke into the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, soot lifted by the movement offered by the pyrocumulonimbus clouds that form during a firestorm. At  above the Earth's surface, the absorption of sunlight could further heat the soot in the smoke, lifting some or all of it into the stratosphere, where the smoke could persist for years, if there is no rain to wash it out. This aerosol of particles could heat the stratosphere and block out a portion of the sun's light from reaching the surface, causing surface temperatures to drop drastically, and with that, it is predicted surface air temperatures would be akin to, or colder than, a given region's winter for months to years on end. The modeled stable inversion layer of hot soot between the troposphere and high stratosphere that produces the anti-greenhouse effect was dubbed the "Smokeosphere" by Stephen Schneider et al. in their 1988 paper."A Nuclear Winter's Tale By Lawrence Badas" pg 184William R. Cotton, Roger A. Pielke, Sr Cambridge University Press, 2007, pg 216http://assets.cambridge.org/97805218/40866/frontmatter/9780521840866_frontmatter.pdf Although it is common in the climate models for the city firestorms to be ignited by nuclear explosions, they need not be ignited by nuclear devices; more conventional ignition sources can instead be the spark of the firestorms. As prior to the previously mentioned solar heating effect, the soot's injection height is controlled by the rate of energy release from the firestorm's fuel, not the size, or lack thereof, of an initial nuclear explosion. For example, the mushroom cloud from the bomb dropped on Hiroshima reached a height of six kilometers (middle troposphere) within a few minutes and then dissipated due to winds, while the individual fires  within the city took almost three hours to form into a firestorm and produce a "pyrocumulus" cloud, a cloud that is assumed to have reached upper tropospheric heights, as over its multiple hours of burning, the firestorm released an estimated 1000 times the energy of the bomb.Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism pg 1994. Altitudes of smoke columns. While the firestorm of Dresden and Hiroshima and the mass fires of Tokyo and Nagasaki occurred with mere months separating them in 1945, the more intense and conventionally lit Hamburg firestorm occurred in 1943. Despite this, these five fires potentially placed five percent as much smoke into the stratosphere as the hypothetical 100 nuclear-ignited fires of modern models.Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism pg 1998. "...fires occurred within a few months of each other in 1945, the Hamburg mass fire occurred in 1943. These five fires potentially placed 5% as much smoke into the stratosphere as our hypothetical nuclear fires. The optical depth resulting from placing 5 Tg of soot into the global stratosphere is about 0.07, which would be easily observable even with techniques available in WWII." While it is believed that the effects of the mass of soot emitted by 100 firestorms (one to five teragrams) would have been detectable with technical instruments in WWII, only five percent of that would not have been possible to observe at that time.  The exact timescale for how long this smoke remains, and thus how severely this smoke affects the climate once it reaches the stratosphere, is dependent on both chemical and physical removal processes.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear pg 25-55 The most important physical removal mechanism is "rainout", both during the "fire-driven convective column" phase—which produces "black rain" near the fire site—and rainout after the convective plume's dispersal, where the smoke is no longer concentrated and thus "wet removal" is believed to be "very efficient."Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1994 However these efficient removal mechanisms in the troposphere are avoided in the Robock 2007 study, where solar heating is modeled to quickly "loft" the soot into the stratosphere, "detraining" or separating the darker soot particles from the fire clouds' whiter water condensation.Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1994–1996 Once in the stratosphere, the physical removal mechanisms having an impact on the timescale of the soot particles' residence are how quickly the aerosol of soot collides and coagulates with other particles via Brownian motion,An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear pg 25Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1997–1998Transformation and removal J. Gourdeau, LaMP Clermont-Ferrand, France, March 12, 2003 and falls out of the atmosphere via gravity-driven dry deposition, and the time it takes for the "phoretic effect" to move coagulated particles to a lower level in the atmosphere. Whether by coagulation or the phoretic effect, once the aerosol of smoke particles are at this lower atmospheric level, cloud seeding can begin, permitting precipitation to wash the smoke aerosol out of the atmosphere by the wet deposition mechanism. The chemical processes that affect the removal are dependent on the ability of atmospheric chemistry to oxidize the carbonaceous component of the smoke, via reactions with oxidative species such as ozone and nitrogen oxides, both of which are found at all levels of the atmosphere,Distribution & concentration (2) Dr. Elmar Uherek – Max Planck Institute for Chemistry Mainz, April 6, 2004Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1999 At one time it was thought that carbonaceous aerosol might be consumed by reactions with ozone (Stephens et al., 1989) and other oxidants, reducing the lifetime of soot at stratospheric altitudes. However recent data shows that the reaction probability for such loss of soot is about 10^-11 so it is not an important process on times scales of several years (Kamm et al., 2004). A full simulation of stratospheric chemistry, along with additional laboratory studies, would be needed to evaluate the importance of these processes. It should be noted that rate constants for a number of potentially important reactions are lacking. and which also occur at greater concentrations when air is heated to high temperatures, which will be discussed later. Historical data on residence times of aerosols, albeit a different mixture of aerosols, in this case stratospheric sulfur aerosols and volcanic ash from megavolcano eruptions, appear to be in the one-to-two-year time scale.How Volcanoes Work – volcano climate effects The satellite tracking of wildfire smoke aerosols from the 17 North American pyrocumulonimbus-cloud-injection events in 2002, indicates that the aerosols are removed in a time span under approximately two months, although the exact mechanisms by which they are removed, and the existence of any hint of a tipping point into a new stratospheric condition were the aerosols would not be removed within this timeframe, remains to be experimentally determined. Aerosol–atmosphere interactions are still poorly understood.B. Geerts Aerosols and climateGlory Science: Global Aerosol Climatology Project  Sooty aerosols can have a wide range of properties, as well as complex shapes, making it difficult to determine their evolving atmospheric Optical depth value. The conditions present during the creation of the soot are believed to be considerably important as to their final properties, with soot generated on the more efficient spectrum of burning efficiency considered almost "elemental carbon black," while on the more inefficient end of the burning spectrum, greater quantities of partially burnt/oxidized fuel are present. These partially burnt "organics" as they are known, often form "tar balls" and "brown carbon" during common lower-intensity wildfires, and can also coat the purer carbon black particles.New Insights on Wildfire Smoke Could Improve Climate Change Models. Discussing the paper "Morphology and Mixing State of Individual Freshly Emitted Wildfire Carbonaceous Particles."LANL study: Wildfire smoke’s effect on climate underestimatedResearch: wildland fire smoke, including tar balls, contribute to climate change more than previously thought However, as the soot of greatest importance is that which is injected to the highest altitudes by the pyroconvection of the firestorm—a fire being fed with storm-force winds of air—it is estimated that the majority of the soot under these conditions is of the more oxidized carbon black nature.Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1996–1997 "Optical properties of soot particles", "mass fires are likely to completely oxidize the fuels that are readily available" A study presented at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in December 2006 found that even a small-scale, regional nuclear war could disrupt the global climate for a decade or more. In a regional nuclear conflict scenario where two opposing nations in the subtropics would each use 50 Hiroshima-sized nuclear weapons (about 15 kiloton each) on major populated centres, the researchers estimated as much as five million tons of soot would be released, which would produce a cooling of several degrees over large areas of North America and Eurasia, including most of the grain-growing regions. The cooling would last for years, and according to the research could be "catastrophic".Regional Nuclear War Could Devastate Global Climate, Science Daily, December 11, 2006The published papers that were first presented at the AGU Meeting. A 2008 study by Michael J. Mills and coauthors, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, found that a nuclear weapons exchange between Pakistan and India using their current arsenals could create a near-global ozone hole, triggering human health problems and causing environmental damage for at least a decade.as PDF The computer-modeling study looked at a nuclear war between the two countries involving 50 Hiroshima-sized nuclear devices on each side, producing massive urban fires and lofting as much as five million metric tons of soot about  into the mesosphere. The soot would absorb enough solar radiation to heat surrounding gases, causing a series of surface chemistry reactions that would break down the stratospheric ozone layer protecting Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. A "nuclear summer" is a hypothesized scenario in which, after a nuclear winter has abated, a greenhouse effect then occurs due to CO2 released by combustion and methane released from the decay of the organic matter that froze during the nuclear winter. It is supported scientifically far less, than nuclear winter, as a risk. In 1952, a few weeks prior to the Ivy Mike (10.4 megaton) test on Elugelab island, there was a concern that the "small particles"/aerosols lifted by the explosion might cool the Earth. Major Norair Lulejian, USAF, and astronomer Natarajan Visvanathan, studied this possibility reporting their findings in Effects of Superweapons Upon the Climate of the World. According to a document by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, this report was the initial study of the "nuclear winter" concept that was popularized by others decades later. It indicated no appreciable chance of explosion-induced climate change.Defense Threat Reduction Agency DTRIAC SR -12-001 CASTLE BRAVO:FIFTY YEARS OF LEGEND AND LORE A Guide to Off – Site Radiation Exposures January 2013 pg 27 Following numerous surface bursts of high yield "Hydrogen bomb" explosions on Pacific Proving Ground islands such as those of Ivy Mike in the year 1952 and Castle Bravo (15 megaton) in 1954, The Effects of Nuclear Weapons by Samuel Glasstone was published in 1957 which contained a section entitled "Nuclear Bombs and the Weather" (pages 69–71), which states: "The dust raised in severe volcanic eruptions, such as that at Krakatoa in 1883, is known to cause a noticeable reduction in the sunlight reaching the earth … The amount of [soil or other surface] debris remaining in the atmosphere after the explosion of even the largest nuclear weapons is probably not more than about 1 percent or so of that raised by the Krakatoa eruption. Further, solar radiation records reveal that none of the nuclear explosions to date has resulted in any detectable change in the direct sunlight recorded on the ground."Samuel Glasstone, The Effects of Nuclear Weapons, Washington DC, Government Printing Office, 1956, p.69 In the 1966 RAND corporation memorandum The Effects of Nuclear War on the Weather and Climate by E. S. Batten, while primarily analysing potential dust effects from surface bursts,Committee on the Atmospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, Washington D.C., National Academy Press, 1985, pg 185 it notes "in addition to the effects of the debris, extensive fires ignited by nuclear detonations might change the surface characteristics of the area and modify local weather patterns...however, a more thorough knowledge of the atmosphere is necessary to determine their exact nature, extent, and magnitude."The Effects of Nuclear War on the Weather and Climate by E. S. Batten 1966 In the 1985 The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, it argues that a "plausible" estimate on the amount of stratospheric dust injected following a surface burst of 1 megaton is 0.3 teragrams, of which "8 percent" would be in the submicron/micrometer range.Committee on the Atmospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, Washington D.C., National Academy Press, 1985, Chapter: 4 Dust pg 17-25 The potential cooling from soil dust was again looked at in 1992, in a US National Academy of Sciences (NAS)National Academy of Sciences, Policy implications of greenhouse warming: Mitigation, adaptation and the science base. National Academy Press, Washington DC, 1992, pp. 433–464. report on geoengineering, which estimated that about 1010 kg [100 teragrams] of stratospheric injected soil dust with particulate grain dimensions of 0.1 to 1 micrometer would be required to mitigate the warming from a doubling of atmospheric , that is, to produce ~ 2 degree celsius of cooling. In 1969, Paul Crutzen discovered that NOx (oxides of nitrogen) could be an efficient catalyst for the destruction of the ozone layer/stratospheric ozone.http://stason.org/TULARC/science-engineering/ozone-depletion-intro/24-Will-commercial-supersonic-aircraft-damage-the-ozone-laye.html#.VC48hVfvmlA#ixzz3F3juJCny With studies on the potential effects of NOx generated by engine heat in stratosphere flying Supersonic Transport(SST) airplanes in the 1970s serving as a backdrop,http://www.bmartin.cc/pubs/82cab/http://stason.org/TULARC/science-engineering/ozone-depletion-intro/24-Will-commercial-supersonic-aircraft-damage-the-ozone-laye.html#.VC48hVfvmlA John Hampson in 1974 suggested in the journal Nature that due to the nuclear fireballs creation of atmospheric NOx, a full-scale nuclear exchange could result in depletion of the ozone shield, possibly subjecting the earth to ultraviolet radiation for a year or more.Committee on the Atmospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, Washington D.C., National Academy Press, 1985 Hampson's hypothesis "led directly",http://www.bmartin.cc/pubs/88Hampson.html in 1975, to the United States National Research Council (NRC) reporting on the models of ozone depletion following nuclear war in the book Long-Term Worldwide Effects of Multiple Nuclear-Weapons Detonations. In this 1975 book it states that a nuclear war involving 4000Mt (megaton) from present arsenals would probably deposit much less dust in the stratosphere than the Krakatoa eruption, judging that the effect of dust and oxides of nitrogen would probably be slight climatic cooling which "would probably lie within normal global climatic variability, but the possibility of climatic changes of a more dramatic nature cannot be ruled out".National Research Council, Long-term worldwide effects of multiple nuclear weapons detonations, Washington DC, National Academy of Sciences, 1975, p.38 While on the issue of fireball generated NOx and ozone layer loss therefrom, its model calculations in the early-to-mid 1970s on the effects of a nuclear war with the use of large numbers of multi-megaton yield detonations returned conclusions that this could reduce ozone levels by 50 per cent or more in the northern hemisphere.Committee on the Atmospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, Washington D.C., National Academy Press, 1985, pg 186The global health effects of nuclear war Published in Current Affairs Bulletin, Vol. 59, No. 7, December 1982, pp. 14-26 More reliably, in 1976 a study on the experimental measurements of an earlier atmospheric nuclear test as it affected the ozone layer found that nuclear detonations are tentatively exonerated in depleting ozone, after initially discouraging model calculations. This link is to the abstract; the whole paper is behind a paywall. In total about 500 megatons were atmospherically detonated between 1945 and 1971,Radiological Consequences of Nuclear Testing for the Population of the Former USSR (Input Information, Models, Dose, and Risk Estimates)O. A. Pavlovski. Atmospheric Nuclear Tests NATO ASI Series Volume 35, 1998, pp 219-260 with a peak occurring in 1961–62, when 340 megatons were detonated in the atmosphere by the United States and Soviet Union.http://www.atomicarchive.com/Docs/Effects/wenw_chp2.shtml During this 1-2 year peak, counting only the multi-megaton range detonations in the two nations nuclear test series, a total yield estimated at 300 megatons of energy was released, due to this, 3 x 10^34 additional molecules of nitric oxide(about 5000 tons per megatonNuclear weapons archive, Carey Mark Sublette 5.2.2.1 "The high temperatures of the nuclear fireball, followed by rapid expansion and cooling, cause large amounts of nitrogen oxides to form from the oxygen and nitrogen in the atmosphere (very similar to what happens in combustion engines). Each megaton of yield will produce some 5000 tons of nitrogen oxides.") are believed to have entered the stratosphere, and while ozone depletion of 2.2 percent was noted in 1963, the decline had started prior to 1961 and is believed to have been caused by other meteorological effects, thus the 1985 book The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange states: "one can not draw definite conclusions about the effects of nuclear explosions on stratospheric ozone".Committee on the Atmospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange, Washington D.C., National Academy Press, 1985, pg 117 In 1982 Australian physicist Brian Martin, who frequently corresponded with John Hampson,John Hampson's warnings of disaster, 1988 penned a short historical synopsis on the history of interest in the effects of the direct NOx generated by nuclear fireballs, and in doing so, also outlined Hampson's other non-mainstream viewpoints, particularly those relating to greater ozone destruction from upper-atmospheric detonations as a result of any widely used anti-ballistic missile(ABM-1 Galosh) system.John Hampson's warnings of disaster, 1988 Crutzen of course knew of Hampson's work, and also had received correspondence from Hampson around 1980. His own impression was that nuclear explosions above the stratosphere probably wouldn't lead to nitrogen oxides at a low enough altitude to destroy a lot of ozone. However, Martin ultimately concludes that it is "unlikely that in the context of a major nuclear war" ozone degradation would be of serious concern. Singling out views about potential ozone loss and therefore increases in Ultraviolet light leading to the widespread destruction of crops, as advocated by journalist Jonathan Schell in his popular 1982 book The Fate of the Earth, as highly unlikely. More recent accounts on the specific ozone layer destruction potential of NOx species, are much less than earlier assumed from simplistic calculations, as "about 1.2 million tons" of natural and anthropogenic generated stratospheric NOx is believed to be formed each year according to Robert P.Parson in the 1990s. The first published suggestion that a cooling of climate or winter could be an effect of a nuclear war, appears to have been originally put forth by Poul Anderson and F.N Waldrop in their post war story "Tomorrow's Children", which was contained in the March 1947 issue of the Astounding Science Fiction magazine, the story which is primarily about a team of scientists hunting down mutants,The History of the Science Fiction Magazine, Volume 1 By Michael Ashley, pg 186 warns of a "Fimbulwinter" caused by dust that blocked sunlight after the recent fictitious nuclear war and speculates that this may even trigger a new ice age.The encyclopedia of Science Fiction, Nuclear winterTwilight World, A Science Fiction Novel of Tomorrow's Children Hardcover – January 1, 1961 by Poul Anderson. " Weart (1988), chap. 12. Warning of a Fimbulwinter caused specifically by dust that blocked sunlight appeared on p. 68 of Poul Anderson and F.N.Waldrop, "Tomorrow’s Children," Astounding Science-Fiction, March 1947, pp. 59-79, reprinted as first part of Poul Anderson, Twilight World (NY: Torquil, 1961), according to Bartter (1988), pp. 220-21" Anderson went on to publish a novel based partly on this story in 1961 titling it; Twilight World.Twilight World, A Science Fiction Novel of Tomorrow's Children Hardcover – January 1, 1961 by Poul Anderson. " Weart (1988), chap. 12. Warning of a "Fimbulwinter" caused specifically by dust that blocked sunlight appeared on p. 68 of Poul Anderson and F.N.Waldrop, "Tomorrow’s Children," Astounding Science-Fiction, March 1947, pp. 59-79, reprinted as first part of Poul Anderson, Twilight World (NY: Torquil, 1961), according to Bartter (1988), pp. 220-21" Similarly in 1985 it was noted by T.G Parsons that the story Torch by C. Anvil, which likewise appeared in Astounding Science Fiction magazine but in the April 1957 edition, contains the essence of the "Twilight at Noon"/"nuclear winter" hypothesis. In the story a nuclear warhead ignites an oil field and the soot produced "screens out part of the sun's radiation" which results in Arctic temperatures for much of the population of North America and the Soviet Union.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war pg 61 The 1988 Air Force Geophysics Laboratory publication An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war by Muench, H. Stuart et al. contains a chronology and review of the major reports on the nuclear winter hypothesis from 1983-86. In general these reports arrive at similar conclusions as they are based on the same "assumptions, the same basic data" with minor model-code differences "to arrive at the same answer". They skip the modeling steps of assessing the possibility of fire and the initial fire plumes and instead start the modeling process with a "spatially uniform" "soot cloud" which has found its way into the atmosphere.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war pg 3-10 In 1981, William J. Moran began discussions and research in the NRC on the dust effects of a large exchange of nuclear warheads, having seen a possible parallel in the dust effects of a war with that of the asteroid created K-T boundary and its popular analysis a year earlier by Luis Alvarez in 1980.The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange (1985) Chapter: Appendix: Evolution of Knowledge About Long-Term Nuclear Effects, p.186 An NRC study panel on the topic met in December 1981 and April 1982 in preparation of the release of The Effects on the Atmosphere of a Major Nuclear Exchange in 1985. As part of a study on the creation of oxidizing species such as NOx and ozone in the troposphere after a nuclear war,On the 8th Day – Nuclear Winter Documentary (1984) 21:40 launched in 1980 by Ambio, a journal of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Paul Crutzen and John Birks began preparing for the 1982 publication of a calculation on the effects of nuclear war on stratospheric ozone, using the latest models for the time. However they found that in part as a result of the trend towards more numerous but less energetic, sub-megaton range nuclear warheads(made possible by the ceaseless march to increase ICBM warhead accuracy/Circular Error Probable) the ozone layer danger was "not very significant".He and John Birks were preparing for publication in 1982 a calculation of the effects of nuclear war on ozone using the latest models. They found that, due to the trend towards smaller warheads, this effect was not very significant. But then they chanced on the idea that smoke from fires ignited by nuclear blasts might absorb sunlight. It was after being confronted with these results that they "chanced" upon the notion, as "an afterthought" of nuclear detonations igniting massive fires everywhere and most crucially, the smoke from these conventional fires, then going on to absorb sunlight and with that surface temperatures plummeting.He and John Birks were preparing for publication in 1982 a calculation of the effects of nuclear war on ozone using the latest models. They found that, due to the trend towards smaller warheads, this effect was not very significant. But then they chanced on the idea that smoke from fires ignited by nuclear blasts might absorb sunlight. In early 1982 the two colleagues circulated a draft paper with the first suggestions of alterations in short-term climate from fires, presumed to occur following a nuclear war. Later in the same year, the special issue of Ambio devoted to the possible environmental consequences of nuclear war by Crutzen and Birks was titled "Twilight at Noon" and largely anticipated the nuclear winter hypothesis. The paper which looked into fires and their climatic effect discussed particulate matter from large fires, nitrogen oxide, ozone depletion and the effect of nuclear twilight on agriculture. Crutzen and Birks' calculations suggested that smoke particulates injected into the atmosphere by fires in cities, forests and petroleum reserves could prevent up to 99% of sunlight from reaching the Earth's surface, with this darkness persisting "for as long as the fires" burned, which was assumed to be many weeks, with climatic consequences: "The normal dynamic and temperature structure of the atmosphere would therefore change considerably over a large fraction of the Northern Hemisphere, which will probably lead to important changes in land surface temperatures and wind systems." A policy implication of their work was that a successful nuclear decapitation strike could have severe climatic consequences for the perpetrator. Interest in nuclear war environmental effects also arose in the USSR. After becoming aware of the papers by N.P.Bochkov and E.I.Chazov, Russian atmospheric scientist Georgy Golitsyn applied his research on dust-storms to the situation following a large nuclear war. His suggestion that the atmosphere would be heated and that the surface of the planet would cool appeared in The Herald of the Academy of Sciences in September 1983.Igor Shumeyko, Heavy dust "nuclear winter", 2003-10-08 In 1982, the so-called TTAPS team (Richard P. Turco, Owen Toon, Thomas P. Ackerman, James B. Pollack and Carl Sagan) undertook a 1-dimensional computational modeling study of the atmospheric consequences of nuclear war, publishing their results in Science in December 1983. The phrase "nuclear winter" was coined by Turco just prior to publication.US Military History Companion In this early paper, TTAPS used assumption based estimates on the total smoke and dust emissions that would result from a major nuclear exchange, and with that, began analyzing the subsequent effects on the atmospheric radiation balance and temperature structure as a result of this quantity of assumed smoke. To compute dust and smoke impacts, they employed a one-dimensional microphysics/radiative-transfer model of the Earth's lower atmosphere (to the mesopause), which defined only the vertical characteristics of the global climate perturbation. Upon learning of the TTAPS scenarios, Vladimir Alexandrov and G. I. Stenchikov also published a report in 1983 on the climatic consequences of nuclear war based on simulations with a three-dimensional global circulation model. (Two years later Alexandrov disappeared under mysterious circumstances.) Richard Turco and Starley L. Thompson were critical of the Soviet model, Turco calling it "a primitive rendition of an obsolete US model". Both however largely rescinded their "demeaning" and "particularly harsh" quotes some time later, stating that this Soviet model had the same weaknesses as all others and applauded Alexandrov's "pioneering contribution" that "deserved special recognition".An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war pg 59 In 1984 the WMO commissioned Georgy Golitsyn and N. A. Phillips to review the state of the science.They found that studies generally assumed a scenario that half of the world's nuclear weapons would be used, ~5000&nbsp;Mt, destroying approximately 1,000 cities, and creating large quantities of carbonaceous smoke – 1– being most likely, with a range of 0.2– (NAS; TTAPS assumed ). The smoke resulting would be largely opaque to solar radiation but transparent to infra-red, thus cooling by blocking sunlight but not causing warming from enhancing the greenhouse effect. The optical depth of the smoke can be much greater than unity. Forest fires resulting from non-urban targets could increase aerosol production further. Dust from near-surface explosions against hardened targets also contributes; each Mt-equivalent of explosion could release up to 5 million tons of dust, but most would quickly fall out; high altitude dust is estimated at 0.1-1 million tons per Mt-equivalent of explosion. Burning of crude oil could also contribute substantially.G.S. Golitsyn, N.A. Phillips, Possible climatic consequences of a major nuclear war, World Meteorological Organization, 1986 The 1-D radiative-convective models used in these studies produced a range of results, with coolings up to 15–42&nbsp;°C between 14 and 35 days after the war, with a "baseline" of about 20&nbsp;°C. Somewhat more sophisticated calculations using 3-D GCMs produced similar results: temperature drops of between 20 and 40&nbsp;°C, though with regional variations.(Alexandrov and Stenchikov (1983); Covey, Schneider and Thompson (1984) All calculations show large heating (up to 80&nbsp;°C) at the top of the smoke layer at about 10&nbsp;km; this implies a substantial modification of the circulation there and the possibility of advection of the cloud into low latitudes and the southern hemisphere. The report  made no attempt to compare the likely human impacts of the post-war cooling to the direct deaths from explosions. In 1990, in a paper entitled "Climate and Smoke: An Appraisal of Nuclear Winter," TTAPS give a more detailed description of the short- and long-term atmospheric effects of a nuclear war using a three-dimensional model:"Nuclear Winter Theorists Pull Back" The New York Times, January 23, 1990 First 1 to 3 months: Following 1 to 3 years:   Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and Iraqi threats of igniting the country's 800 or so oil wells were made, speculation on the cumulative climatic effect of this, presented at the World Climate Conference in Geneva that November in 1990, ranged from a nuclear winter type scenario, to heavy acid rain and even short term immediate global warming.KUWAITI OIL FIRES – MODELING REVISITED As threatened, the wells were set ablaze by the retreating Iraqis by March 1991 and the 600 or so successfully set Kuwaiti oil wells were not fully extinguished until November 6, 1991, eight months after the end of the war,GulfLink Summary of Oil Well fires and they consumed an estimated six million barrels of oil daily at their peak intensity. In articles printed in the Wilmington morning star and the Baltimore Sun newspapers of January 1991, prominent authors of nuclear winter papers – Richard P. Turco, John W. Birks, Carl Sagan, Alan Robock and Paul Crutzen together collectively stated that they expected catastrophic nuclear winter like effects with continental sized impacts of "sub-freezing" temperatures as a result of if the Iraqis went through with their threats of igniting 300 to 500 pressurized oil wells and they burned for a few months.Wilmington morning Star January 21’st, 1991 Later when Operation Desert Storm had begun in late January 1991, coinciding with the first few oil fires being lit, Dr. S. Fred Singer and Carl Sagan discussed the possible environmental impacts of the Kuwaiti petroleum fires on the ABC News program Nightline. Sagan again argued that some of the effects of the smoke could be similar to the effects of a nuclear winter, with smoke lofting into the stratosphere, a region of the atmosphere beginning around  above sea level at Kuwait, resulting in global effects and that he believed the net effects would be very similar to the explosion of the Indonesian volcano Tambora in 1815, which resulted in the year 1816 being known as the Year Without a Summer. He reported on initial modeling estimates that forecast impacts extending to south Asia, and perhaps to the northern hemisphere as well. Sagan stressed this outcome was so likely that, "It should affect the war plans."https://web.archive.org/web/20120119014904/https://www.cfa.harvard.edu/~scranmer/SPD/crichton.html Singer, on the other hand, said that his calculations showed that the smoke would go to an altitude of about  and then be rained out after about three to five days and thus the lifetime of the smoke would be limited. Both height estimates made by Singer and Sagan turned out to be wrong, albeit with Singers narrative being closer to what transpired, with the comparatively minimal atmospheric effects remaining limited to the Persian Gulf region, with smoke plumes, in general, lofting to about  and a few times as high as . Sagan later conceded in his book The Demon-Haunted World that his predictions obviously did not turn out to be correct: "it was pitch black at noon and temperatures dropped 4–6&nbsp;°C over the Persian Gulf, but not much smoke reached stratospheric altitudes and Asia was spared." Sagan and his colleagues expected that a "self-lofting" of the sooty smoke would occur when it absorbed the sun's heat radiation, with little to no scavenging occurring, whereby the black particles of soot would be heated by the sun and lifted/lofted higher and higher into the air, thereby injecting the soot into the stratosphere, a position where they argued it would take years for the sun blocking effect of this aerosol of soot to fall out of the air, and with that, catastrophic ground level cooling and agricultural impacts in Asia and possibly the Northern Hemisphere as a whole. The Atmospheric scientist tasked with studying the atmospheric impact of the Kuwaiti fires by the National Science Foundation, Peter Hobbs, stated that "the fires' modest impact suggested that "some numbers [used to support the Nuclear Winter hypothesis]... were probably a little overblown." Hobbs found that at the peak of the fires, the smoke absorbed 75 to 80% of the sun’s radiation.  The particles rose to a maximum of , and when combined with scavenging by clouds the smoke had a short residency time of a maximum of a few days in the atmosphere.Airborne Studies of the Smoke from the Kuwait Oil Fires Hobbs, Peter V; Radke, Lawrence F Science; May 15, 1992; 256,5059 Pre-war claims of wide scale, long-lasting, and significant global environmental impacts were thus not borne out, and found to be significantly exaggerated by the media and speculators, with climate models by those not supporting the nuclear winter hypothesis at the time of the fires predicting only more localized effects such as a daytime temperature drop of ~10&nbsp;°C within ~200&nbsp;km of the source.Environmental effects from burning oil wells in Kuwait by K. A. Browning, R. J. Allam, S. P. Ballard, R. T. H. Barnes, D. A. Bennetts, R. H. Maryon, P. J. Mason, D. McKenna, J. F. B. Mitchell, C. A. Senior, A. Slingo & F. B. Smith, Nature Publishing Group, 30 May 1991 The idea of oil well and oil reserve smoke pluming to the stratosphere serving as a main contributor to the soot of a nuclear winter was a central tenet of the early climatology papers on the hypothesis; they were considered more of a possible contributor than smoke from cities, as the smoke from oil has a higher ratio of black soot, thus absorbing more sunlight. Hobbs compared the papers' assumed "emission factor" or soot generating efficiency from ignited oil pools and found, upon comparing to measured values from oil pools at Kuwait, which were the greatest soot producers, the emissions of soot assumed in the nuclear winter calculations are still "too high". Following the results of the Kuwaiti oil fires being in disagreement with the core nuclear winter promoting scientists, the 1990s nuclear winter papers generally attempted to distance themselves from suggesting oil well and reserve smoke will reach the stratosphere. In 2007, a nuclear winter study, which will be discussed later, noted that modern computer models have been applied to the Kuwait oil fires, finding that individual smoke plumes are not able to loft smoke into the stratosphere, but that smoke from fires covering a large area like some forest fires can lift smoke into the stratosphere, and this is supported by recent evidence that it occurs far more often than previously thought.http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/pyrocb.html Fire-Breathing Storm Systemshttp://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/fires/main/siberia-smoke.html Satellite Sees Smoke from Siberian Fires Reach the U.S. Coast 2012http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2010-08/nrl-nss082610.php Forest Fire Smoke in the Stratosphere: New Insights Into Pyrocumulonimbus CloudsIn-situ observations of mid-latitude forest fire plumes deep in the stratosphereEO Newsroom: New Images – Smoke Soars to Stratospheric HeightsObservations of Boreal Forest Fire Smoke in the StratosphereFromm et al., 2006, Smoke in the Stratosphere: What Wildfires have Taught Us About Nuclear Winter, Eos Trans. AGU, 87(52), Fall Meet. Suppl., Abstract U14A-04 The study also suggested that the burning of the comparably smaller cities, which would be expected to follow a nuclear strike, would also loft significant amounts of smoke into the stratosphere: However the above simulation notably contained the assumption that no dry and wet deposition/rain would occur. Based on new work published in 2007 and 2008 by some of the authors of the original studies, several new hypotheses have been put forth.Climatic Consequences of Nuclear Conflict Department of Environmental Sciences, Rutgers UniversityEnvironmental consequences of nuclear war by Owen B. Toon, Alan Robock, and Richard P. Turco. Physics Today, December 2008. However far from being "new", the very same beginning to "significant" nuclear winter effects, was in the mid 1980s models, similarly regarded to have been a threat from a total of 100 or so city firestorms.Atmospheric effects and societal consequences of regional scale nuclear conflicts and acts of individual nuclear terrorism. Atmos ChemPhys 7:1973–2002 pg 1989 - "At that time, significant climate effects were expected from 100 high yield weapons being used on 100 cities, but given the large numbers of weapons then available such a scenario did not seem likely. Here we estimate the smoke generated from 100 low yield weapons being used on 100 targets." A minor nuclear war with each country using 50 Hiroshima-sized atom bombs as airbursts on urban areas could produce climate change unprecedented in recorded human history. A nuclear war between the United States and Russia today could produce nuclear winter, with temperatures plunging below freezing in the summer in major agricultural regions, threatening the food supply for most of the planet. The climatic effects of the smoke from burning cities and industrial areas would last for several years, much longer than previously thought. New climate model simulations, which are said to have the capability of including the entire atmosphere and oceans, show that the smoke would be lofted by solar heating to the upper stratosphere, where it would remain for years. Compared to climate change for the past millennium, even the smallest exchange modeled would plunge the planet into temperatures colder than the Little Ice Age (the period of history between approximately A.D. 1600 and A.D. 1850). This would take effect instantly, and agriculture would be severely threatened. Larger amounts of smoke would produce larger climate changes, and for the 150 teragrams (Tg) case produce a true nuclear winter (1&nbsp;Tg is 1012&nbsp;grams), making agriculture impossible for years. In both cases, new climate model simulations show that the effects would last for more than a decade. A study published in the Journal of Geophysical Research in July 2007,Abstract on Journal of Geophysical Research website "Nuclear winter revisited with a modern climate model and current nuclear arsenals: Still catastrophic consequences",archive.org copy of paper originally available on Rutgers University website used current climate models to look at the consequences of a global nuclear war involving most or all of the world's current nuclear arsenals (which the authors judged to be one the size of the world's arsenals twenty years earlier). The authors used a global circulation model, ModelE from the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, which they noted "has been tested extensively in global warming experiments and to examine the effects of volcanic eruptions on climate." The model was used to investigate the effects of a war involving the entire current global nuclear arsenal, projected to release about 150 Tg of smoke into the atmosphere, as well as a war involving about one third of the current nuclear arsenal, projected to release about 50&nbsp;Tg of smoke. In the 150 Tg case they found that: In addition, they found that this cooling caused a weakening of the global hydrological cycle, reducing global precipitation by about 45%. As for the 50 Tg case involving one third of current nuclear arsenals, they said that the simulation "produced climate responses very similar to those for the 150 Tg case, but with about half the amplitude," but that "the time scale of response is about the same." They did not discuss the implications for agriculture in depth, but noted that a 1986 study which assumed no food production for a year projected that "most of the people on the planet would run out of food and starve to death by then" and commented that their own results show that, "This period of no food production needs to be extended by many years, making the impacts of nuclear winter even worse than previously thought." In 2014, Michael J. Mills (at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research, NCAR), Owen B. Toon (of the original TTAPS team), Julia Lee-Taylor, and Alan Robock published "Multi-decadal global cooling and unprecedented ozone loss following a regional nuclear conflict" in the journal Earth's Future.Multi-decadal global cooling and unprecedented ozone loss following a regional nuclear conflict by M.J. Mills, O.B. Toon, J. Lee-Taylor, and A. Robock (2014), Earth's Future, 2, doi:10.1002/2013EF000205.  The authors used computational models developed by NCAR to simulate the climatic effects of a regional nuclear war in which 100 "small" (15 kt) weapons are detonated over cities.  They concluded, in part, that global ozone losses of 20-50% over populated areas, levels unprecedented in human history, would accompany the coldest average surface temperatures in the last 1000 years. We calculate summer enhancements in UV indices of 30-80% over Mid-Latitudes, suggesting widespread damage to human health, agriculture, and terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Killing frosts would reduce growing seasons by 10-40 days per year for 5 years. Surface temperatures would be reduced for more than 25 years, due to thermal inertia and albedo effects in the ocean and expanded sea ice. The combined cooling and enhanced UV would put significant pressures on global food supplies and could trigger a global nuclear famine. The TTAPS study was widely reported and criticized in the media. Later model runs in some cases predicted less severe effects, but continued to support the overall conclusion of significant global cooling.Nuclear winter: science and politicsDoes Anybody Remember The Nuclear Winter? Recent studies (2006) substantiate that smoke from urban firestorms in a local nuclear war would lead to long lasting global cooling but in a less dramatic manner than a global nuclear war, while a 2007 study of the effects of global nuclear war supported the conclusion that it would lead to full-scale nuclear winter. The original work by Sagan and others was criticized as a "myth" and "discredited theory" in the 1987 book Nuclear War Survival Skills, a civil defense manual by Cresson Kearny for the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Kearny said the amount of cooling would last only a few days. According to the 1988 publication An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war, Kearny's criticisms were directed at the excessive amount of soot that the modelers assumed would reach the stratosphere, citing a Soviet study that modern cities would not burn as firestorms, as most flammable city items would be buried under [non combustible] rubble and that the TTAPs study included a massive overestimate on the size and extent of non-urban wildfires that would result from a nuclear war.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war, pg 59 The TTAPs authors responded that, amongst other things, they did not believe target planners would intentionally blast cities into rubble, but instead argued fires would begin in relatively undamaged suburbs when nearby sites were hit, and partially conceded his point about non-urban wildfires.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war, pg 60 While Kearny, who was not a climate scientist himself, based his cooling estimate of a few days entirely on the 1986 paper "Nuclear Winter Reappraised"Thompson, Starley L & Schneider, Stephen H Nuclear Winter Reappraised in Foreign Affairs, Vol. 64, No. 5 (Summer, 1986), pp. 981-1005 by Starley Thompson and Stephen Schneider. However, a 1988 article by Brian Martin in Science and Public Policy states that although their paper concluded the effects would be less severe than originally thought, with the authors describing these effects as a "nuclear autumn", other statements by Thompson and SchneiderStephen H. Schneider, letter, Wall Street Journal, 25 November 1986.'Severe global-scale nuclear war effects reaffirmed', statement resulting from SCOPE-ENUWAR workshop in Bangkok, 9–12 February 1987. show that they "resisted the interpretation that this means a rejection of the basic points made about nuclear winter". In addition, the authors of the 2007 study above state that "because of the use of the term 'nuclear autumn' by Thompson and Schneider [1986], even though the authors made clear that the climatic consequences would be large, in policy circles the theory of nuclear winter is considered by some to have been exaggerated and disproved [e.g., Martin, 1988]." And in 2007 Schneider emphasized the danger of serious climate changes from a limited nuclear war(Pakistan and India)  of the kind analyzed in the 2006 study above, saying "The sun is much stronger in the tropics than it is in mid-latitudes. Therefore, a much more limited war [there] could have a much larger effect, because you are putting the smoke in the worst possible place."Climate scientists describe chilling consequences of a nuclear war by Brian D. Lee (8 January 2007) Russell Seitz, Associate of the Harvard University Center for International Affairs, argues that the models' assumptions give results which the researchers want to achieve and is a case of "worst-case analysis run amok". Seitz's opposition caused the proponents of nuclear winter to issue responses in the media, and while both sides made important points, they were largely incapable of collaborating as the proponents believed it was simply necessary to show only the possibility of climatic catastrophe, often a worst-case scenario, while opponents insisted that to be taken seriously, nuclear winter should be shown as likely under "reasonable" scenarios.pg 251 A Nuclear Winter's Tale Badash One of these areas of contention, as elucidated by Lynn R. Anspaugh, is upon the question of which season should be used as the backdrop for the US-USSR war models, as most models choose the summer in the Northern Hemisphere as the start point to produce the maximum soot lofting and therefore eventual winter effect, whereas it has been pointed out that if the firestorms occurred in the winter months, when there is much less intense sunlight to loft soot into a stable region of the stratosphere, the magnitude of the cooling effect from the same number of firestorms as ignited in the summer models, would be negligible according to a January model run by Covey et al.The Medical Implications of Nuclear War ( 1986 ) pg 570 John Maddox, editor of the journal Nature,  issued a series of skeptical comments about nuclear winter studies during his tenure,John Maddox, "From Santorini to armageddon", Nature, 307, 12 January 1984, page 107.John Maddox, "Nuclear winter not yet established", Nature, 308, 1 March 1984, page 11. being a long-time critic of environmental doomsdayism,http://www.uow.edu.au/~bmartin/pubs/88spp.html his critical analysis of the hypothesis is regarded to have withstood the test of time.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear pg 57  Similarly S. Fred Singer was a long term vocal critic of the hypothesis in the journal and in televised debates with Carl Sagan."Is the 'nuclear winter' real?", Nature, 310, 23 August 1984, page 625.45. S. Fred Singer, "On a 'nuclear winter'" (letter), Science, 227, 25 January 1985, page 356.'An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war' pg 57 Lynn R. Anspaugh also expressed frustration that although a managed (Chapleau, Ontario) forest fire in Canada on 3 August 1985 is said to have been lit by proponents of nuclear winter, with the fire potentially serving as an opportunity to do some basic measurements of the optical properties of the smoke and smoke-to-fuel ratio, which would have helped refine the estimates of these critical model inputs, the proponents did not indicate that any such measurements were made.The Medical Implications of Nuclear War ( 1986 ) pg 572 Peter V. Hobbs, who would later successfully attain funding to fly into and sample the smoke clouds from the Kuwait oil fires in 1991, also expressed frustration that he was denied funding to sample the Canadian, and other forest fires in this way.'An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war' pg 62 Richard Turco(of TTAPs fame) simply wrote a 10-page memorandum with information derived from his notes and some satellite images, that the smoke plume reached 6&nbsp;km in altitude.'An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war' pg 62 In 1986, atmospheric scientist Joyce Penner from the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory published an article in Nature in which she focused on the specific variables of the smoke's optical properties and the quantity of smoke remaining airborne after the city fires and found that the published estimates of these variables varied so widely that depending on which estimates were chosen the climate effect could be negligible, minor or massive.Nature 324, 222 – 226 (20 November 1986); doi:10.1038/324222a0 Uncertainties in the smoke source term for ‘nuclear winter’ studies The assumed optical properties for black carbon in more recent nuclear winter papers(2006) are still "based on those assumed in earlier nuclear winter simulations".NUCLEAR WINTER REVISITED WITH A MODERN CLIMATE MODEL AND CURRENT NUCLEAR ARSENALS: STILL CATASTROPHIC CONSEQUENCES In 1987 P. M. Kelly of the University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit stated that "although there are a handful of vociferous critics, the atmospheric community is united in its conclusion that the threat of nuclear winter is genuine". William R. Cotton Professor of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University, specialist in cloud physics modeling and co-creator of the highly influential,Original RAMS paperGoogle Scholar Over 1900 papers have referenced the original RAMS paper. and previously mentioned RAMS atmosphere model, had in the 1980s modeled and supported the predictions made by earlier nuclear winter papers,Pg 184 & 185, A Nuclear Winter's Tale. MIT press but has since reversed this position according to a book co-authored by him in 2007, stating that, amongst other systematically examined assumptions; far more rain out/wet deposition of soot will occur than is assumed in modern papers on the subject and that "We must wait for a new generation of GCMs to be implemented to examine potential consequences quantitatively".William R. Cotton, Roger A. Pielke, Sr Cambridge University Press, 2007, pg 205 to 219 The contribution of smoke from the ignition of live non-desert vegetation, living forests and so on near to many missile silos, a source of smoke originally brought up in the initial Twilight at Noon paper and also found in the popular TTAPs publication, was found after examination by Bush and Small in 1987, that the burning of live vegetation would contribute only slightly to the estimated total "nonurban smoke production". With the vegetations potential to sustain burning only probable if it is within a radius or two from the surface of the nuclear fireball, which is at a distance that would also experience extreme blast winds that would influence any such fires.A Note on the Ignition of Vegetation by Nuclear Weapons DOI: 10.1080/00102208708952566 B. W. BUSHa & R. D. SMALLa.  pages 25-38 Combustion Science and Technology Volume 52, Issue 1-3, 1987An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear pg 24,25 & 67 This reduction in the estimate of nonurban smoke is supported by the earlier preliminary Estimating Nuclear Forest Fires publication of 1984,An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war pg 60 and by the 1950-60s in-field examination of tropical forests after Operation Castle,W. L. Fons and Theodore G. Storey, Operation Castle, Project 3.3, Blast Effects on Tree Stand, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Division of Fire Research, Secret – Restricted Data, report WT-921, March 1955 and Operation Redwing.– Operation Redwing, Technical Summary of Military Effects, Programs 1-9, nuclear weapon tests report WT-1344, ADA995132, 1961, p 219. In a paper by the United States Department of Homeland Security finalized in 2010, fire experts stated that due to the nature of modern city design and construction, with the U.S.&nbsp; serving as an example, a firestorm is unlikely after a nuclear detonation in a modern city.Page 24 of Planning Guidance for response to a nuclear detonation. Written with the collaboration of FEMA & NASA to name a few agencies. This is not to say that fires won't occur over a large area after a detonation, but that the fires would not coalesce and form the all important stratosphere punching firestorm plume that the nuclear winter papers require as a prerequisite assumption in their climate computer models. The nuclear bombing of Nagasaki for example, did not produce a firestorm.Glasstone & Dolan (1977) Thermal effects Chapter pg 304 This was similarly noted as early as 1986-88, when the assumed quantity of fuel "mass loading"(the amount of fuel per square meter) in cities underpinning the winter models was found to be too high and intentionally creates heat fluxes that lofts smoke into the lower stratosphere, yet assessments "more characteristic of conditions" to be found in real-world modern cities, had found that the fuel loading, and hence the heat flux the results from burning, would rarely loft smoke much higher than 4&nbsp;km.An assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear pg 15 & 30-31 During the early 1980s, Fidel Castro recommended to the Kremlin a harder line against Washington, even suggesting the possibility of nuclear strikes. The pressure stopped after Soviet officials gave Castro a briefing on the ecological impact on Cuba of nuclear strikes on the United States.http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv//nukevault/ebb285/ Previously Classified Interviews with Former Soviet Officials Reveal U.S. Strategic Intelligence Failure Over Decades In 2010 Alan Robock, a co-author of nuclear winter papers was summoned to Cuba to help Castro promote his new view that nuclear war would bring about Armageddon, Robock's 90 minute lecture was later aired on nationwide television in the country. However, according to Robock, in so far as getting US government attention and affecting nuclear policy, he has failed. In 2009, together with Owen Toon, he gave a talk to the United States Congress but nothing transpired from it and the then presidential science adviser, John Holdren, did not respond to their requests in 2009 or at the time of writing in 2011.  In an interview in 2000, Mikhail Gorbachev, in response to the comment "In the 1980s, you warned about the unprecedented dangers of nuclear weapons and took very daring steps to reverse the arms race," said "Models made by Russian and American scientists showed that a nuclear war would result in a nuclear winter that would be extremely destructive to all life on Earth; the knowledge of that was a great stimulus to us, to people of honor and morality, to act in that situation."Mikhail Gorbachev explains what's rotten in Russia However a 1984 US Interagency Intelligence Assessment expresses a far more skeptical and cautious approach by stating that as the hypothesis is not convincing scientifically, they predicted that Soviet nuclear policy would be to maintain their strategic nuclear posture, such as their fielding of the high throw-weight SS-18 missile and they would merely attempt to exploit the hypothesis for propaganda purposes, such as directing scrutiny on the US portion of the nuclear arms race. Moreover, it goes on to express the belief that if Soviet officials did begin to take nuclear winter seriously, it would probably make them demand exceptionally high standards of scientific proof for the hypothesis, as the implications of it would undermine their military doctrine—a level of scientific proof which perhaps could not be met without field experimentation.Interagency Intelligence Assessment (1984): The Soviet Approach to Nuclear Winter, page 18 & 19 The un-redacted portion of the document ends with the suggestion that substantial increases in Soviet Civil defense food stockpiles might be an early indicator that Nuclear Winter was beginning to influence Soviet upper echelon thinking.Interagency Intelligence Assessment (1984): The Soviet Approach to Nuclear Winter, page 20 In 1985 Time magazine noted "the suspicions of some Western scientists that the nuclear winter hypothesis was promoted by Moscow to give anti-nuclear groups in the U.S. and Europe some fresh ammunition against America's arms buildup."Jacob V. Lamar Jr., David Aikman and Erik Amfitheatrof, "Another Return from the Cold", Time, Monday, Oct. 7, 1985 In 1986, the Defense Nuclear Agency document An update of Soviet research on and exploitation of Nuclear winter 1984–1986 charted the minimal research contribution on, and Soviet propaganda usage of, the nuclear winter phenomenon. Dr. Vitalii Nikolaevich Tsygichko, a Senior Analyst at the Soviet Academy of Sciences, author of the study, Mathematical Model of Soviet Strategic Operations on the Continental Theater, and a former member of the General Staff, has said that Soviet military analysts discussed the idea of a "nuclear winter" (although they did not use that exact term) years before U.S. scientists wrote about it in the 1980s.http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv//nukevault/ebb285/ Starley L. Thompson, of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, says that Soviet research into nuclear winter in 1983 used US computer models that had been developed in the early 1970s.Laurence Badash, A Nuclear Winter's Tale Soviet intelligence officer Sergei Tretyakov, who defected in 1990, maintained that "the KGB was responsible for creating the entire nuclear winter story to stop the Pershing II missiles".Pete Earley, "Comrade J: The Untold Secrets of Russia's Master Spy in America After the End of the Cold War", Penguin Books, 2007, ISBN 978-0-399-15439-3, pp. 167-77  In 1989 Carl Sagan and colleague Richard Turco wrote a policy implications paper that appeared in Ambio that suggests that as nuclear winter is a "well-established prospect", both superpowers should jointly reduce their nuclear arsenals to "Canonical Deterrent Force" levels of 100-300 individual warheads each, such that in "the event of nuclear war [this] would minimize the likelihood of nuclear winter."Policy Implications of Nuclear Winter Richard Turco and Carl Sagan Ambio Vol. 18, No. 7 (1989), pp. 372-376 As the implications of nuclear winter began to be taken seriously in the late 1980s, military analysts turned to reinforce "existing trends" in warhead miniaturization, of higher accuracy and lower yield nuclear warheads. This trend, enabled by GPS navigation etc., was motivated by the desire to still destroy the target but while reducing the severity of fallout collateral damage depositing on neighboring, and potentially friendly, countries. As it relates to the likelihood of nuclear winter, the hazard from thermal radiation ignited fires would also be reduced. While the TTAPS paper had described a 3000&nbsp;Mt counterforce attack on ICBM sites; Michael Altfeld of Michigan State University and political scientist Stephen Cimbala of Pennsylvania State University argued that smaller, more accurate warheads and lower detonation heights could produce the same counterforce strike with only 3&nbsp;Mt and produce less climatic effects, even if cities were targeted, as lower fuzing heights, such as surface bursts, would limit the range of the burning thermal rays due to terrain masking and shadows cast by buildings,http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11897 A Nuclear Winter's Tale: Science and Politics in the 1980s, Lawrence Badash, p.235 while also temporarily lofting far more radioactive soil into the atmosphere. This logic is similarly reflected in the 1984 Interagency Intelligence assessment, which suggests that targeting planners would simply have to consider target combustibility along with yield, height of burst, timing and other factors to reduce the amount of smoke to safeguard against the potentiality of a nuclear winter. Therefore, as a consequence of attempting to limit the target fire hazard by reducing the range of thermal radiation with fuzing for surface and sub-surface bursts, this will result in a scenario where the far more concentrated, and therefore deadlier, local fallout that is generated following a surface burst forms, as opposed to the comparatively dilute global fallout created when nuclear weapons are fuzed in air burst mode.The Medical implications of nuclear war by Fredric Solomon, Robert Q. Marston, Institute of Medicine (U.S.), National Academies, 1986, p. 106 Altfeld and Cimbala also argued that belief in the possibility of nuclear winter would actually make nuclear war more likely, contrary to the views of Sagan and others, because it would inspire the development of more accurate, and lower explosive yield, nuclear weapons.Badash, Laurence, A Nuclear Winter's Tale, p.242 As it suggests that the replacement of the then Cold War viewed strategic nuclear weapons in the multi-megaton yield range, with weapons of explosive yields closer to tactical nuclear weapons, such as the Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator, would safeguard against the nuclear winter potential. Tactical nuclear weapons, on the low end of the scale have yields that overlap with large conventional weapons, and are therefore often viewed "as blurring the distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons", making the prospect of using them "easier" in a conflict.CRS Report for CongressNuclear Weapon Initiatives: Low-Yield R&D, Advanced Concepts, Earth Penetrators, Test ReadinessUpdated March 8, 2004 Jonathan Medalia Specialist in National Defense Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade DivisionNational Defense Authorization Act For Fiscal Year 2006  A number of solutions have been proposed to mitigate the potential harm of a nuclear winter if one appears inevitable; with the problem being attacked at both ends, from those focusing on preventing the growth of fires and therefore limiting the amount of smoke that reaches the stratosphere in the first place, to food production under dimmed skies with the assumption that the very worst-case analysis results of the nuclear winter models prove accurate and no other mitigation strategies are fielded. In a report from 1967, techniques included various methods of applying liquid nitrogen, dry ice, and water to nuclear-caused fires.W. E. Shelberg and E. T. Tracy. "Countermeasure Concepts for Use Against Urban Mass Fires From Nuclear Weapon Attack" U.S. Naval Radiological Defense Laboratory, San Francisco, California 1967. The report considered attempting to stop the spread of fires by creating firebreaks by blasting combustible material out of an area, possibly even with nuclear weapons, along with the use of preventative Hazard reduction burns. According to the report, one of the most promising techniques investigated was initiation of rain from seeding of mass-fire thunderheads and other clouds passing over the developing, and then steady-state, firestorm.  David Denkenberger and Joshua Pearce have proposed in Feeding Everyone No Matter What a variety of alternate foods which convert fossil fuels or biomass into food without sunlight to address nuclear winter.[ ] – Matt Novak. "How We'd Feed Ourselves After The Apocalypse." PaleoFuture Gizmodo Dec 16, 2014. The solution using a fossil fuel energy source is natural-gas-digesting bacteria.- [ ] "UniBio A/S – turns NG to fish food" One example of a biomass alternate food is that mushrooms can grow directly on wood without sunlight.Hazeltine, B. & Bull, C. 2003 Field Guide to Appropriate Technology. San Francisco: Academic Press. Another example is that cellulosic biofuel production typically already creates sugar as an intermediate product. The minimum annual global wheat storage is approximately 2 months.Thien Do, Kim Anderson, B. Wade Brorsen. "The World’s wheat supply." Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service To feed everyone despite nuclear winter, years of food storage prior to the event has been proposed. While the suggested masses of preserved food would likely never get used as a nuclear winter is comparatively unlikely to occur, the stockpiling of food would have the positive result of ameliorating the impact of the far more frequent distruptions to regional food supplies caused by lower-level conflicts and droughts. There is however the danger that if a sudden rush to food stockpiling occurs without the buffering effect offered by Victory gardens etc., it may exacerbate current food security problems by elevating present food prices.  Despite the name "nuclear winter", nuclear events are not necessary to produce the modeled climatic effect.Pp. 242-244, A Nuclear Winter's Tale by Lawrence Badas In an effort to find a quick and cheap solution to the global warming projection of at least two degrees of surface warming as a result of the doubling in CO2 levels within the atmosphere, through solar radiation management(a form of climate engineering) the underlying nuclear winter effect has been looked at as perhaps holding potential. Besides the more common suggestion to inject sulfur compounds into the stratosphere to approximate the effects of a volcanic winter, the injection of other chemical species such as the release of a particular type of soot particle, to create minor "nuclear winter" conditions, has also been proposed by Paul Crutzen and others.Albedo Enhancement by Stratospheric Sulfur Injections: A Contribution to Resolve a Policy Dilemma? Paul J. Crutzen release soot particles to create minor "nuclear winter" conditionsClimate engineering: A critical review of approaches to modify the global energy balance.J. Feichter, T. Leisner. pg 87. Besides sulfur injections some other chemical species have been proposed for injection into the stratosphere. For instance the injection of soot particles as a consequence of a nuclear conflict has been studied in "nuclear winter" scenarios... According to the threshold/minor "nuclear winter" computer models,http://climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/pdf/ToonRobockTurcoPhysicsToday.pdf if one to five teragrams of firestorm-generated sootMassive global ozone loss predicted following regional nuclear conflict 2008 "the 1 to 5 Tg soot source term derives from a thorough study of the smoke produced by firestorms..." is injected into the low stratosphere, it is modeled, through the anti-greenhouse effect, to heat the stratosphere but cool the lower troposphere and produce 1.25&nbsp;°C cooling for two to three years; after 10 years, average global temperatures would still be 0.5&nbsp;°C lower than before the soot injection.   Similar climatic effects to "nuclear winter" followed historical supervolcano eruptions, which plumed sulfate aerosols high into the stratosphere, with this being known as a volcanic winter. Similarly, extinction-level comet and asteroid impacts are also believed to have generated impact winters by the pulverization of massive amounts of fine rock dust. This pulverized rock can also produce "volcanic winter" effects, if sulfate-bearing rock is hit in the impact and lofted high into the air, and "nuclear winter" effects, with the heat of the heavier rock ejecta igniting regional and possibly even global forest firestorms. This global "impact firestorms" hypothesis, initially supported by Wolbach, Melosh and veteran nuclear winter modeler Owen Toon, suggests that as a result of massive impact events, the small sand-grain-sized ejecta fragments created can meteorically re-enter the atmosphere forming a hot blanket of global debris high in the air, potentially turning the entire sky red-hot for minutes to hours, and with that, burning the complete global inventory of above-ground carbonaceous material, including rain forests.Reigniting the Cretaceous-Palaeogene firestorm debate Claire M. Belcher, Journal of Geology. doi: 10.1130/focus122009.1. v. 37 no. 12 p. 1147–1148. OPEN ACCESS This hypothesis is suggested as a means to explain the severity of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, as the earth impact of an asteroid about 10&nbsp;km wide which precipitated the extinction is not regarded as sufficiently energetic to have caused the level of extinction from the initial impact's energy release alone. The global "impact firestorms"/firestorm winter, however, has been questioned in more recent years (2003–2013) by Claire Belcher,no fiery extinction for dinosaurs, BBC 2003Constraints on the thermal energy released from the Chicxulub impactor: new evidence from multi-method charcoal analysis. Claire Belcher et al. 2004 doi: 10.1144/0016-764904-104 v. 162 no. 4 p. 591-602 Tamara GoldinNew Scientist magazine. Dinosaur-killing impact set Earth to broil, not burn. 2009Impact firestorms, Tamara Goldin, Springer. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences 2013, p 525 and H. Jay Melosh,Self-shielding of thermal radiation by Chicxulub impact ejecta: Firestorm or fizzle? Tamara J. Goldin and H. Jay Melosh 2009. doi: 10.1130/G30433A.1 v. 37 no. 12 p. 1135–1138Dinosaur-Killing Firestorm Theory Questioned by Ker Than |December 28, 2009 with this re-evaluation being dubbed the "Cretaceous-Palaeogene firestorm debate" by Belcher. The issues raised by these scientists in the debate are the perceived low quantity of soot in the sediment beside the fine-grained iridium-rich asteroid dust layer, if the quantity of re-entering ejecta was perfectly global in blanketing the atmosphere, and if so, the duration and profile of the re-entry heating, whether it was a high thermal pulse of heat or the more prolonged and therefore more incendiary "oven" heating, and finally, how much the "self-shielding effect" from the first wave of now-cooled meteors in dark flight contributed to diminishing the total heat experienced on the ground from later waves of meteors, in part due to the Cretaceous period being a high-atmospheric-oxygen era, with concentrations above that of the present day.Cretaceous wildfires and their impact on the Earth system. Cretaceous Research Volume 36, August 2012, Pages 162–190 In 2013, Owen Toon et al. were critical of the re-evaluations the hypothesis is undergoing. It will be difficult to successfully tease out the percentage contribution of the soot in this period's geological sediment record from living plants and fossil fuels present at the time,Soot in Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary clays worldwide: is it really derived from fossil fuel beds close to Chicxulub? in much the same manner that the fraction of the material ignited by the meteor's heating effects will be difficult to determine, as other ignition sources that were also present at, or soon after, the impact such as mantle lava flows complicate the matter. 10 to 25% of soot injected is immediately removed by precipitation, while the rest is transported over the globe in 1 to 2 weeks SCOPE figures for July smoke injection: 22&nbsp;°C drop in mid-latitudes 10&nbsp;°C drop in humid climates 75% decrease in rainfall in mid-latitudes Light level reduction of 0% in low latitudes to 90% in high smoke injection areas SCOPE figures for winter smoke injection: Temperature drops between 3 and 4&nbsp;°C 25 to 40% of injected smoke is stabilised in atmosphere (NCAR). Smoke stabilised for approximately 1 year. Land temperatures of several degrees below normal Ocean surface temperature between 2 and 6&nbsp;°C Ozone depletion of 50% leading to 200% increase in UV radiation incident on surface. Doomsday device Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, a similarly controversial hypothesis that an impact event & fires triggered the last ice age. Younger Dryas, most recent ice age, ended approximately 10,000 BC, the event may be linked with the birth of agriculture. Impact event Impact winter Volcanic winter Krakatoa, 1883 eruption, which caused approximately 1 kelvin of global cooling for 2 years due to sulfate emissions. Year Without a Summer, 1815, created by a volcanic eruption in Tambora. Laki, 1783 eruption of an Icelandic volcano which produced continentally localized cooling for 1–2 years. Toba catastrophe theory, a controversial hypothesis that a volcanic winter produced by the eruption of a volcano in Toba, Indonesia, created a human population bottleneck approx 80,000 years ago. List of states with nuclear weapons Global dimming, global reduction in ground insolation, due to the atmospheric injection of aerosols from various sources. Nuclear darkness, hypothetical global nuclear war induced deep, and prolonged, dimming of daylight during the nuclear winter. Nuclear summer, hypothetical prediction of a prolonged increase in global temperatures following the end of a nuclear war. List of wildfires List of historic fires Dalton minimum, 1790 to 1830, a period of prolonged solar minimum activity, resulting in Earth receiving lower insolation values. Maunder Minimum, 1645 to 1715, a period of deeper solar minimum activity resulting in reduced insolation and coinciding with the little ice age. On the 8th Day – Nuclear winter documentary (1984) filmed by the BBC and available on Internet video hosting websites; chronicles the rise of the hypothesis, with lengthy interviews of the prominent scientists who published the nascent papers on the subject.On the 8th Day – Nuclear winter documentary (1984) The Cold and the Dark: The World after Nuclear War: A book co-authored by Carl Sagan in 1984 which followed his co-authoring of the TTAPS study in 1983. Threads: A 1984 docu-drama that Carl Sagan assisted in an advisory capacity. A Path Where No Man Thought: Nuclear Winter and the End of the Arms Race: A book authored by Richard P. Turco and Carl Sagan, published in 1990; it explains the nuclear winter hypothesis and, with that, advocates nuclear disarmament. The Encyclopedia of Earth, Nuclear Winter Lead Author: Alan Robock. Last Updated: July 31, 2008 Nuclear Winter Simulation Animation New studies of climatic consequences of regional nuclear conflict from Alan Robock, including links to new studies published in 2007. Golitsyn, G.S. and Phillips, N.A. WCRP, Possible climatic consequences of a major nuclear war, WCP-113, WMO/TD #99, 1986. Guide to Nuclear Winter Study Papers, 1972–1993. Lawrence Livermore Laboratory
