  An oath of office is an oath or affirmation a person takes before undertaking the duties of an office, usually a position in government or within a religious body, although such oaths are sometimes required of officers of other organizations. Such oaths are often required by the laws of the state, religious body, or other organization before the person may actually exercise the powers of the office or any religious body. It may be administered at an inauguration, coronation, enthronement, or other ceremony connected with the taking up of office itself, or it may be administered privately.  In some cases it may be administered privately and then repeated during a public ceremony. Some oaths of office are a statement of loyalty to a constitution or other legal text or to a person or other office-holder (e.g., an oath to support the constitution of the state, or of loyalty to the king). Under the laws of a state it may be considered treason or a high crime to betray a sworn oath of office. The Constitution of Belarus requires the president-elect to recite the following oath before taking office: In Belgium, the King is not crowned but swears the constitutional oath in front of both Chambers of the federal parliament in the Palace of the Nation in Brussels. The assembly room is rebuilt for this occasion. First, the parliamentary session of the Federal Chamber of Representatives and the Senate is opened. The joint session is presided over by the presidents of the Chamber and the Senate. Afterwards, the King is announced by the usher in the country's three official languages: le Roi – de Koning – der König. The King enters the assembly room and sits on the throne in the center. After a speech of the President of the Chamber, the King is invited to take the constitutional oath. This happens in the three official languages:    In English: I swear that I will observe the constitution and laws of the Belgian people, preserve the country's independence and guarantee its territorial integrity. (Article 91 of the Belgian Constitution) The King makes his inaugural speech. The President of the Senate congratulates the King. The Royal Band of the Belgian Naval Component performs the Belgian national anthem and the European anthem. The King leaves and the parliamentary session is closed. 101 cannon shots are fired. The prime minister, the ministers and state secretaries of the Belgian federal government swear an oath in front of the Belgian King. Also the minister-presidents of the Flemish government, of the Walloon government, of the government of the French community, of the government of the German-speaking community and of the Brussels-Capital region government swear the oath at the King. The other members of these governments do not take the oath at the King, but in front of their respective parliaments. They may choose to take the oath in one or more of the country's languages.    In English: I swear fidelity to the King, obedience to the constitution and to the law of the Belgian people. The members of the Chambers of Representatives, the Senate, the Flemish Parliament, the Walloon Parliament, the Parliament of the French Community, the Parliament of the German-speaking Community and the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region have to swear the following oath:    In English: I swear obedience to the constitution. All public servants in judiciary and administration, officers of the civil guards and the army and servants in general of any public office have to swear the same oath as ministers. Flemish mayors and the members of municipal executive and the city council in Flanders have following oath: "Ik zweer de verplichtingen van mijn mandaat trouw na te komen" (I swear to fulfill the duties of my office faithfully). In Walloon the following version is used: "Je jure fidélité au Roi, obéissance à la Constitution et aux lois du peuple belge."  The affirmation required by the Constitution of Brazil to be taken by the president-elect upon entering into office is as follows: Constitution of the Federative Republic of Brazil, art. 78Constituiусo The vice-president is required to take the same pledge. The affirmations of office required of members of the National Congress of Brazil are specified in the rules of procedure of each house (the Chamber of Deputies and Senate) The internal rules of the Supreme Federal Court set out the affirmation that must be taken by justices upon their investiture. Other judges make different affirmations, as provided for by law or in the internal rules of each Court. The Constitution and laws of the several states and the organic laws of the municipalities also specify affirmations that must be made by the key officers of those entities. The Commonwealth realms share the same person as their individual monarch. There is only one coronation ceremony, held in Westminster Abbey, wherein the Coronation Oath is taken. The Oath includes elements pertaining to the monarch's role as Supreme Governor of the Church of England as well as the oath-taker's separate roles as monarch of his or her other realms. The Coronation Oath (from the Order of Service for the Coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953) is administered by the Archbishop of Canterbury in the form of questions: Then the Queen, arising out of her chair, supported by peers and with the Sword of State being carried before her, goes to the altar to make her solemn oath in the sight of all the people to observe the promises by laying her right hand upon the Holy Gospel in the great Bible (which was before carried in the procession and is now brought from the altar by the Archbishop, and tendered to her as she kneels upon the steps), saying: Then the Queen kisses the Bible and signs the Oath.Rules of Royal Succession: Eleventh Report of Session 2010-12, p. 29Rebecca Stefoff, Monarchy, p. 11  All members of the Australian Parliament are required to take before taking their seat in Parliament an Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance before the Governor-General of Australia. The requirement to take the oath is set out in section 42 of the Australian Constitution and the wording of the oath and affirmation are set out in a schedule to the Constitution. The oath is: The affirmation is:  Upon taking office, the Governor-General of Australia is required to take the above Oath of Allegiance as well as a second Oath of Office: In addition to swearing the Oath of Allegiance upon becoming a Member of Parliament, the Prime Minister, Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries also recite an Oath of Office upon entering office. The wording of this oath is not prescribed within the Constitution and is ultimately determined by the Prime Minister of the day. Traditionally the oath has repeated the swearing of allegiance to the Sovereign, although this is not required. The current Oath of Office is:  The Governor General of Canada is required to take the "Oath for the due execution of the Office of Our Governor General and Commander-in-Chief in and over Canada, and for the due impartial administration of justice", which includes swearing allegiance to the reigning Canadian monarch the viceroy is to represent. This oath must be administered by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada or a puisne justice and, though not demanded, this is usually done during a swearing-in ceremony in the Canadian Senate chamber. The Clerk of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada administers the Oath of Office and Oath of Allegiance to ministers, including the prime minister of Canada, at Rideau Hall. The Oath of Office is as follows: Ministers who choose to take the oath as an affirmation use declare instead of swear and omit so help me God. When not already members of the privy council, ministers also take the oath for members of the privy council. The prime minister's oath is slightly different:  The Chief Justice of New Zealand administers the oath of office at the installation of new Governors-General of New Zealand. The oath is as follows: Made by HM The Queen at her coronation, 2 June 1953: Archbishop: Will you solemnly promise and swear to govern the Peoples of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, Pakistan, and Ceylon, and of your Possessions and the other Territories to any of them belonging or pertaining, according to their respective laws and customs? Queen: I solemnly promise so to do. Archbishop: Will you to your power cause Law and Justice, in Mercy, to be executed in all your judgements? Queen: I will. Archbishop: Will you to the utmost of your power maintain the Laws of God and the true profession of the Gospel? Will you to the utmost of your power maintain in the United Kingdom the Protestant Reformed Religion established by law? Will you maintain and preserve inviolably the settlement of the Church of England, and the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government thereof, as by law established in England? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of England, and to the Churches there committed to their charge, all such rights and privileges, as by law do or shall appertain to them or any of them? Queen: All this I promise to do. Then the Queen arising out of her Chair, supported as before, the Sword of State being carried before her, shall go to the Altar, and make her solemn Oath in the sight of all the people to observe the premisses: laying her right hand upon the Holy Gospel in the great Bible (which was before carried in the procession and is now brought from the Altar by the Arch-bishop, and tendered to her as she kneels upon the steps), and saying these words: The things which I have here before promised, I will perform and keep. So help me God. http://www.royal.gov.uk/ImagesandBroadcasts/Historic%20speeches%20and%20broadcasts/CoronationOath2June1953.aspx Made by HM The Queen at her Accession Council, 8 February 1952: “I, [Name] by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of My other Realms and Territories King, Defender of the Faith, do faithfully promise and swear that I shall inviolably maintain and preserve the Settlement of the true Protestant Religion as established by the Laws made in Scotland in prosecution of the Claim of Right and particularly by an Act entitled ‘An Act for securing the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Government’ and by the Acts passed in the Parliament of both Kingdoms for Union of the two Kingdoms, together with the Government, Worship, Discipline, Rights and Privileges of the Church of Scotland.” All the following oaths may be replaced at the request of the maker by affirmations (which do not invoke the name of God, but are otherwise in the same terms). The Oath of Allegiance and the Official Oath, as set out in the Promissory Oaths Act 1868 are required to be taken by various office-holders. The Oath of Allegiance is in the following form:  The Official Oath is in the following form:  The Oath of Allegiance and Official Oath shall be tendered to and taken by each of the following office-holders as soon as may be after his acceptance of office: The oaths were formerly also taken by the First Lord of the Admiralty, the Chief Commissioner of Works and Public Buildings, the President of the Poor Law Board, the Commander-in-Chief, and the Postmaster General. In relation to Ireland, the oaths were formerly also taken by the Lord Lieutenant, the Lord Chancellor, the Commander of the Forces and the Chief Secretary for Ireland.Promissory Oaths Act 1868, Schedule The Oath as to England is to be tendered by the Clerk of the Council, and taken in presence of Her Majesty in Council, or otherwise as Her Majesty shall direct. The Oath as to Scotland is to be tendered by the Lord President of the Court of Session at a sitting of the Court. Privy Counsellors take office on being "sworn of the Privy Council". It was formerly regarded as criminal to disclose the form of Privy Council oath, which includes an undertaking of secrecy as to the proceedings in Council (where the Oath is taken). On 28 July 1964 it was published by the President of the Council in answer to a written parliamentary question. Members of the House of Commons or of the House of Lords are required to take the oath of allegiance in the House at the beginning of a new Parliament, as well as after a Demise of the Crown. Section 84 of the Scotland Act 1998 requires members of the Scottish Parliament to take the Oath of Allegiance at a meeting of the Parliament. Members of the Scottish Executive and junior Scottish Ministers are additionally required to take the Official Oath. Section 20 of the Government of Wales Act 1998 requires members of the National Assembly for Wales to take the oath of allegiance. A Welsh form of the Oath is prescribed by the National Assembly for Wales (Oath of Allegiance in Welsh) Order 1999. The Judicial Oath and the Oath of Allegiance (see above) are to be taken by each of the following- The oaths were formerly taken by Lord Chief Justice,Omitted by the Supreme Court Act 1981 the Master of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, The Lord Justices of the Court of Appeal in Chancery, the Vice Chancellors, the Puisne Justices of the Queen's Bench, the Puisne Justices of the Common Pleas, the Puisne Barons of the Exchequer, the Judge of the Admiralty Court,  the Judge of the Probate Court. In Ireland the oaths were formerly taken by the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, The Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal in Chancery, the Vice Chancellor, the Puisne Justices of the Queen's Bench, the Puisne Justices of the Common Pleas, The Puisne Barons of the Exchequer, The Judge of the Probate Court, the Judges of the Landed Estates Court, the Judge of the Admiralty Court, the Judges of the Court of Bankruptcy and Insolvency, the Recorder of Dublin, and Justices of the Peace for Counties and Boroughs. In Northern Ireland all references to the Sovereign were removed by the Justice (Northern Ireland) Act 2002. Section 19(2) provides that the oath is&nbsp;—  Section 19(3) provides that the affirmation and declaration is&nbsp;—  All recruits to the British Army, Royal Air Force must take an oath of allegiance upon joining these armed forces, a process known as "attestation". Those who believe in God use the following words: Others replace the words "swear by Almighty God" with "solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm". Recruits to the Royal Navy do not swear an oath as they are not established under the Armed Forces Act 1996 (which prescribes the oath), being established instead under the Royal Prerogative. A person appointed to the office of constable of a police force in Scotland is required to make the following declaration: "I hereby do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of constable."Written Answer, Hansard In Costa Rica, the oath of office is administered to the President-elect on Inauguration Day, and to all other public officials on the day of the undertaking of their duties. The oath of office for the President of Costa Rica is administered to him, or her, by the President of the Asamblea Legislativa de Costa Rica. It is established in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Costa Rica (Article 194): Before assuming duty, the President-elect of the Republic takes oath of office before the judges of the Constitutional Court swearing loyalty to the Constitution: Before assuming duty, the President-elect of the Republic and the ministers takes oath of office : In Fiji, the oath of office for the President of Fiji and Vice-President of Fiji are set out in Chapter 17 of the Constitution of Fiji. In Finland, the oath of office  is sworn by The oath of office is:  Those who do not want to swear the religious oath may give an affirmation. In this case, the words "promise and swear before almighty and all-knowing God" are replaced by "promise and affirm by my honor and by my conscience". Policemen and some other persons executing justice make a written affirmation of office instead of an oath. The text of the affirmation is  In Finnish practice, the oaths of office are given only once. If the person who has given an oath or affirmation moves to another duty where such oath is required, the oath is not given anew. The President of Finland gives the following affirmation of office: Finnish judges and justices of all courts are required to give the following oath: Those taking an affirmation do not use the parts involving God. All Finnish cabinet ministers are required to give both the general oath or affirmation of office and the oath of judge, unless they have given these oaths and affirmations before. Like the general oath of office, the oath of judge is given only once. All Finnish conscripts are required to give the military oath or affirmation. The oath or affirmation is given in the end of the basic training using the formula:  The oath of office of the Federal President, Federal Chancellor, and other federal ministers in Germany is as follows: Grundgesetz der Bundesrepublik Deutschland, Art. 56 The religious affirmation may be omitted. The first (and only) chancellor to do this was Gerhard Schröder in 1998. Each of the 16 Länder (states) has its own oath of office for the Minister Presidents and other ministers, also for the Länder employees. The oath for soldiers in Germany reads as follows: Depending on the oath's interpretation, the following translation is also possible: In both of the above, conscripts say "vow" instead of "swear", and the religious affirmation is not added for conscripts since the vow is not an actual oath. The oath for federal Beamte: The oath of office of the President of Ghana is as follows: For members of the Parliament of Ghana, the oath is: Article 59 of the Constitution of Greece states that members of parliament must take the following oath: Article 33 of the Constitution of Greece states that the President of the Hellenic Republic must take the following oath: Article 181 of the Guatemalan Constitution provides that the incoming president of Guatemala should raises his or her right arm up to shoulder-level before the President of the Congress of Guatemala and say the following oath of office in Spanish: Afterwards, the outgoing President passes him the Guatemalan flag (the Banda Presidential), which is worn from the left shoulder to the right rib, to the new President along with the presidential pin and with the Constitutional Collar. The oath of office for the Chief Executive is as follows: The oath of office for the Principal Officials is as follows: The oath of office for the unofficial members of the Executive Council is as follows: The oath of office for the members of the Legislative Council  is as follows: The oath of office of judges is as follows: During the colonial era, the Governors of Hong Kong were required by Hong Kong Royal Instructions and Hong Kong Letters Patent to take the Oath of Allegiance, the Official Oath and the Judicial Oath of the United Kingdom before assuming the office. The oath of office for the President of India is as follows: The oath of office for the Vice-President of India is as follows: The oath of office for Judges of Supreme Court or High Court is as follows: Based on the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia Article 9 about the Oath of Office and Promise of President and Vice-President: Before assuming office, the President and the Vice-President shall take the oath of office according to their religions, or solemnly promise before the People's Consultative Assembly or the People's Representative Council as follows: The President's/Vice-President's Oath of Office: The President's/Vice-President's Promise: The oath of office for the President of Iran is as follows: For members of the Majlis of Iran, the oath is as follows: According to the Iranian Constitution, MPs belonging to religious minorities may swear by the holy books of their respective faiths. Iranian judges of all courts are required to give the following oath:  The Constitution of Ireland specifies, for each of three offices, a "declaration" which the holder must "make and subscribe" before taking office.Constitution of Ireland, Articles 12.8, 31.4, 34.5.1° The declarations' references to God were criticised in a 1993 report of the United Nations Human Rights Committee. The 1996 Constitution Review Group proposed that the President and members of the Council of State should be permitted to substitute a non-religious affirmation. In contrast, it recommended a uniform non-religious oath for all judges, on the basis that impartiality was more central to the judicial function and would be compromised by providing a choice of words. The "solemn declaration" for members of the Garda Síochána was revised in 2005. Its reference to God may be omitted. Members pledge not to "belong to or subscribe to, any political party or secret society whatsoever".Section 16, Garda Síochána Act 2005 Irish Statute Book.  In the Defence Forces, the "Oath or Declaration" differs between permanent and reserve forces, and between commissioned officers and enlisted members.Schedules 6–10, Defence Act 1954  Irish Statute Book The wording makes no reference to God; it was changed in 1979 when women were first admitted.Section 6, Defence (Amendment) (No. 2) Act, 1979 Irish Statute Book.  Members of the Oireachtas and of the Government do not make any oath. From the foundation of the Irish Free State in 1922, both had to make an oath of allegiance to the Constitution and of fidelity to King George V.Constitution of the Irish Free State (Saorstát Eireann) Articles 17, 55  This controversial provision of the 1921 Anglo-Irish TreatyAnglo-Irish Treaty 1921 Article 4 contributed to the Civil War of 1922–23. The Oath was abolished by Fianna Fáil in 1932–33.Constitution (Removal of Oath) Act, 1933 Since then, Oireachtas members are required by standing orders to sign the roll before first taking their seats. The Governor-General of the Irish Free State took the same Oath of Allegiance and Oath of Office as the Governor General of Canada. This did not take place in public. In Israel, the Basic Laws specify oaths of office of high-ranking members of the government. For the President of Israel, there is a "Declaration of Loyalty": In the Knesset, the oath of office (or "declaration of allegiance") is as follows:  The Prime Minister of Israel has to make the following "declaration of allegiance" upon taking office: Each of the other Ministers has to swear:  The oath of office for the President of the Republic is:   The oath for the Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet is:   In Lebanon, the president must take the following oath before the Parliament: Article 5 of the Constitution of Luxembourg prescribes the following oath for a new Grand Duke: The oath for a Regent is: A Lieutenant of the Grand Duke takes an oath to respect the Constitution, but no exact text is prescribed. Deputies at the Chamber of Deputies (the Luxembourg parliament) take the following oath upon taking office: All civil servants take the following oath: Article 37 of the Federal Constitution requires the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) and his deputy to take the Oath of Office before the Conference of Rulers. The Yang di-Pertuan Agong take the oath of office as follows: Next, the Deputy Yang di-Pertuan Agong take the oath of office as follows: Federal Constitution requires the various executive and legislative members to take the Oath of Office and Allegiance as follows: The oath is read according to the various section of the Constitution: The Members of Parliament will take the Oath based on Article 59 (1) of the Federal Constitution as follows: Article 124 of the Federal Constitution requires the Chief Justice, the President of the Appeal Court, Chief Judge of the High Court, higher court justice and judicial commissioners to take the Oath of Office and Allegiance as follows: Article 87 of the Mexican Constitution provides that the incoming president of Mexico should raise his or her right arm up to shoulder-level before the  Congress of Mexico and say the following oath of office in Spanish: Afterwards, the outgoing President passes him the presidential sash (the Banda Presidential), which is worn from the left shoulder to the right rib, to the new President. Article 79 of the Constitution of Moldova provides that the President, no more than 45 days after his election, and before the Parliament and Constitutional Court, gives the following oath: The oath of office for the monarch of the Netherlands, which in accordance with Article 32 of the Constitution is to be declared as soon as possible after the King or Queen takes office in a public united meeting of the States General in the capital of Amsterdam, is as follows:  After this declaration the chairman of the States General, in the name of the States General, the States of the Netherlands Antilles and the States of Aruba, pronounces the following solemn declaration: The declaration shall then be sworn or confirmed by each of the members individually. The oath of office for ministers and state secretaries, which shall be administered by the King, and for members of Parliament is as follows:  The oath of office for civil servants is as follows:  As soon as the King, being of age, accedes to the Government, he shall take the following oath before the Storting (article 9 of the Constitution of Norway):The Constitution of Norway If the Storting is not in session at the time, the oath shall be made in writing in the Council of State and be repeated solemnly by the King at the first subsequent Storting. The oath of office of the President of Pakistan is as follows: The oath of office of the Prime Minister of Pakistan is as follows: The oath of office of the President of the Philippines is as follows: The oath from the Filipino language version of the constitution was used for the inauguration of Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Joseph Estrada and Benigno Aquino III: The oath of office requirement for all public officers and employees of the government including every member of the armed forces is follows: The oath of office for members of the Board of Tax Appeals is as follows: Filipino version:   "So help me God" (Tak mi dopomóż Bóg) formula at the end is optional. "So help me God" (Tak mi dopomóż Bóg) formula at the end is optional. The Constitution of Portugal requires that the following oath be taken by the President-elect upon entering into office: In Portuguese:  In English:  The Roman Catholic Church requires all of its clergy before ordination and most of those promoted to positions of authority to make a "Profession of Faith," as below. It is very similar to the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed (referred to as the Symbol of Faith). Further, all of those promoted to positions of authority (vicars general, judicial vicars, episcopal vicars, pastors of parishes and superiors within religious orders) or with teaching responsibilities (rectors of seminaries, professors at seminaries, heads or Catholic universities or professors on the faculties of Catholic colleges and universities who teach subjects involving religion), and all those ordained deacons (and therefore all those who will also later be ordained priests) to take the following "Oath of Fidelity" Article 82 of the Constitution of Romania provides that the President, before the Chamber of Deputies and Senate in joint session, gives the following oath: Article 32 of the Law 215 (23 April 2001) provides that all local officials (Local Councilors, Mayors, County Councilors and County Council Presidents), before the assembled Councils and the Prefect of the County, give, in Romanian the following oath.   The religious formula may be omitted. The oath of office of the President of Russia is prescribed in the Constitution of Russia, in Chapter 4 (The President of the Russian Federation), Article 82: 1. When taking office the President of the Russian Federation shall take the following oath of loyalty to the people: 2. The oath shall be taken in a solemn atmosphere in the presence of members of the Council of the Federation, deputies of the State Duma and judges of the Constitution Court of the Russian Federation. During the Coronation of the Russian monarch, after his anointing, but prior to  partaking of Holy Communion, the Tsar recited a coronation oath, in which he swore to preserve the autocracy intact and to rule his realm with justice and fairness.R. Monk Zachariah (Liebmann), "Martyrology of the Communist Yoke: The Life of Tsar-Martyr Nicholas II", The Orthodox Word, 153 (1990), pg. 200.  At The Royal Passion-Bearer: Tsar-Martyr Nicholas Alexandrovich Romanov II, pg. 4.  Retrieved on 2010-01-01. The oath of office of the President of Singapore is as follows:  The Prime Minister of Singapore swears 2 oaths: the Oaths of Office and Oath of Affirmation respectively:  For Ministers of the Cabinet of Singapore, they swear the Oaths of Allegiance and Execution of Office respectively:  For members of the Parliament of Singapore, it is: Schedule 2 of the Constitution of South Africa specifies the oaths or affirmations of office for the various high offices of state. These oaths are sworn before the Chief Justice or another judge designated by the Chief Justice. The President and any Acting President swears the following oath: The Deputy President swears the following oath: Ministers and Deputy Ministers of the Cabinet swear the following oath: Members of the National Assembly, the National Council of Provinces and the provincial legislatures swear the following oath:  Premiers, Acting Premiers and Members of the Executive Council of a province swear the following oath: Judges and acting judges swear the following oath: Article 61 of the Spanish Constitution requires the King to take the following oath as soon as practicable after ascending to the Throne and before performing any other official duty: The heir to the Crown, upon becoming of age, and any Regents, upon taking office, are required by the Constitution to take the same oath, adding to it a vow of allegiance to the King. In an inauguration ceremony a new Spanish Prime Minister takes an oath or affirmation of office over an open Constitution, which may be next to a cross and a Bible, and before the King of Spain and other dignitaries. In Sweden, a judge, whether a legally trained judge or a lay judge () shall take the following oath before assuming the duties of their office: In Chinese territory currently administered by the Republic of China (mostly Taiwan and surrounding islands), oath of office is required to be taken by the President-elect before he assuming office. The Oath of office for the President of the Republic of China is specified in the Constitution of the Republic of China (Article 48):  All members of the Turkish Parliament, as well as cabinet ministers that are not members of parliament are required to take the following oath in a parliamentary session before taking office.  The Turkish President takes a slightly modified version of this oath: All members of the Turkish Armed Forces should take the following oath before starting their service:  In Ukraine, the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine administers the oath of office. The President-elect recites the oath with his hand on the Constitution and the Peresopnytsia Gospels. The Ukrainian text of the oath according to the article 104 is: The official English translation:  While the oath-taking dates back to the First Congress in 1789, the current oath is a product of the 1860s, drafted by Civil War-era members of Congress intent on ensnaring traitors. In 1789, the 1st United States Congress created an oath to fulfill the requirement of Article VI of the United States Constitution:  It also passed the Judiciary Act of 1789, which established an additional oath taken by federal judges: The outbreak of the Civil War quickly transformed the routine act of oath-taking into one of enormous significance. In April 1861, a time of uncertain and shifting loyalties, President Abraham Lincoln ordered all federal civilian employees within the executive branch to take an expanded oath. When Congress convened for a brief emergency session in July, members echoed the president's action by enacting legislation requiring employees to take the expanded oath in support of the Union. This oath is the earliest direct predecessor of the modern version of the oath. When Congress returned for its regular session in December 1861, members who believed that the Union had as much to fear from northern traitors as southern soldiers again revised the oath, adding a new first section known as the "Ironclad Test Oath." The war-inspired Test Oath, signed into law on July 2, 1862, required "every person elected or appointed to any office ... under the Government of the United States ... excepting the President of the United States" to swear or affirm that they had never previously engaged in criminal or disloyal conduct.Chap. CXXVIII. 12 Stat. 502 from "A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation:  U. S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774 - 1875". Library of Congress, Law Library of Congress. Retrieved March 24, 2012. Those government employees who failed to take the 1862 Test Oath would not receive a salary; those who swore falsely would be prosecuted for perjury and forever denied federal employment. The 1862 oath's second section incorporated a different rendering of the hastily drafted 1861 oath. Although Congress did not extend coverage of the Ironclad Test Oath to its own members, many took it voluntarily. Angered by those who refused this symbolic act during a wartime crisis, and determined to prevent the eventual return of prewar southern leaders to positions of power in the national government, congressional hard-liners eventually succeeded by 1864 in making the Test Oath mandatory for all members. The Senate then revised its rules to require that members not only take the Test Oath orally, but also that they "subscribe" to it by signing a printed copy. This condition reflected a wartime practice in which military and civilian authorities required anyone wishing to do business with the federal government to sign a copy of the Test Oath. The current practice of newly sworn senators signing individual pages in an oath book dates from this period. As tensions cooled during the decade following the Civil War, Congress enacted private legislation permitting particular former Confederates to take only the second section of the 1862 oath. An 1868 public law prescribed this alternative oath for "any person who has participated in the late rebellion, and from whom all legal disabilities arising therefrom have been removed by act of Congress."Chap. CXXXIX. 15 Stat. 85 from "A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U. S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774 - 1875". Library of Congress, Law Library of Congress. Retrieved March 24, 2012. Northerners immediately pointed to the new law's unfair double standard that required loyal Unionists to take the Test Oath's harsh first section while permitting ex-Confederates to ignore it. In 1884, a new generation of lawmakers quietly repealed the first section of the Test Oath, leaving intact the current affirmation of constitutional allegiance. In the United States, the oath of office for the President is specified in the Constitution (Article II, Section 1): The oath may be sworn or affirmed (in which case it is called an affirmation instead of oath). Although not present in the text of the Constitution, it is customary for modern presidents to say "So help me God" after the end of the oath. For officers other than the President, the expression "So help me God" is explicitly prescribed, but the Judiciary Act of 1789 also explains when it can be omitted (specifically for oaths taken by court clerks): "Which words, so help me God, shall be omitted in all cases where an affirmation is admitted instead of an oath."Judiciary Act of 1789, Sec. 7. Retrieved 2009-01-24. The Constitution (Article VI, clause 3) also specifies:  At the start of each new U.S. Congress, in January of every odd-numbered year, newly elected or re-elected Members of Congress – the entire House of Representatives and one-third of the Senate – must recite an oath: This oath is also taken by the Vice President, members of the Cabinet, federal judges and all other civil and military officers and federal employees other than the President. In the United States, federal judges are required to take two oaths. The first oath is this: The second is the same oath that members of Congress take: Federal statute specifically says that the latter oath "does not affect other oaths required by law."}, Oath of Office. See United States Uniformed Services Oath of Office. The oaths of state and local officials are largely patterned on the federal oath of constitutional allegiance. Typical would be the oath taken by all New York government officials:  (So help me God is traditionally added.) All elected county officials and the appointed officers such as clerk and master, and deputies to these officers, are required to take an oath of office which actually consists of two oaths: the constitutional oath, and an oath for the particular office or fidelity oath (Tenn. Const. Art. X,Sec. 1).  The following is combination fidelity and constitutional oath:  The simple constitutional oath and fidelity oath are taken by persons who do not have a more specific oath prescribed by law (T.C.A. § 8-18-111). This basic oath is used upon entering the following offices: County Executive/Mayor County Clerk (or deputy county clerk by substituting the word "appointed" for "elected") County Register (or deputy register by substituting the word "appointed" for "elected") Chief administrative officer of the county highway department County commissioners may the use the same basic oath as noted above, but phrased as follows:  Clerks of court, deputy clerks of court, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, assessors of property and deputy assessors, constables with law enforcement powers, constables without law enforcement powers, general sessions court judges, and school board members in Tennessee all have specific variations of their oaths of office. The President of Venezuela, upon assumption of the office on his inauguration, is asked by the Speaker of the National Assembly (until 1999, the Senate President, on behalf of the entire National Federal Congress), holding a copy of the Constitution of Venezuela, the following: With the right hand on the shoulder level he answers with a "Yes I swear" and the Speaker then responds: "If you do so, before God and the Fatherland your duties will be performed, and it will be demanded of you if you not. Therefore, in the name of the Republic and by the authority of the law, I investiture you as Constitutional President of the Republic as of this moment for this term period." Then the Presidential Sash (with the colors and coat of arms from the Flag of Venezuela and Medal is turned over to him from the outgoing President, but if the case is that of succession due to death of office of his predecessor both items are cased and are given to him by the National Assembly President instead. If reelected the method is the same as after the sudden death of the President while in office. Office !! Declaration: In the presence of Almighty God I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare that I will... President ...maintain the Constitution of Ireland and uphold its laws, that I will fulfil my duties faithfully and conscientiously in accordance with the Constitution and the law, and that I will dedicate my abilities to the service and welfare of the people of Ireland. May God direct and sustain me. Member of the Council of State ...faithfully and conscientiously fulfil my duties as a member of the Council of State. Judge ...duly and faithfully and to the best of my knowledge and power execute the office of (office) without fear or favour, affection or ill-will towards any man, and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws. May God direct and sustain me. Article of the Constitution !! Office 43 (6) Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Chief Secretary to the Government 43B (4) Parliamentary Secretary 57 (1A) (a) Speaker and Deputy Speakers of the House of Representatives 142 (6) Royal Commissioners First Lord of the Treasury (also the Prime Minister) Chancellor of the Exchequer Lord Chancellor Lord President of the Council Lord Privy Seal Secretaries of State President of the Board of Trade Lord Steward Lord Chamberlain Earl Marshal Master of the Horse Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Paymaster General Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland (the First Minister of Scotland) Keeper of the Privy Seal of Scotland Lord Clerk Register Advocate General for Scotland Lord Justice Clerk. President of the Supreme Court Deputy President of the Supreme Court Justices of the Supreme Court Lord Chancellor of Great Britain Recorder of London Master of the Court of ProtectionMental Health Act 1983, section 93(3) Justices of the Peace Lord Justice General and Lord President of the Court of Session Lord Justice Clerk Judges of the Court of Session Temporary judges of the Court of Session and High Court of Justiciary appointed under section 35(3) of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)(Scotland) Act 1990 Sheriffs principal The Chancellor of Justice and the Assistant Chancellor of Justice The chief of staff () of the office of the President of Finland, the following officials of the Finnish Government, the office of the Chancellor of Justice or of any government ministry: heads of office () the secretaries and under-secretaries of state () heads of section () heads of central agencies provincial governors heads of diplomatic or consular missions all career military personnel of Finnish Defence Forces and the Finnish Border Guard prison governors Coronation Oath Act 1688 Oath of allegiance Oath of enlistment Oath of citizenship List of U.S. presidential swearing-ins U.S. Senate: Oath of Office U.S. Code, Title 5, Sec. 3331: Oath of Office Pictures of various world leaders taking their oaths of office Steve Sheppard, What Oaths Meant to the Framers' Generation: A Preliminary Sketch, 2009 Cardozo L. Rev. De Novo 273.
