    The Order of the Phoenix is a secret organisation in the Harry Potter series of fiction books written by J. K. Rowling. Founded by Albus Dumbledore to fight Lord Voldemort and his followers, the Death Eaters, the Order lends its name to the fifth book of the series, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. Before the Harry Potter series starts – when the character Lord Voldemort declared war on the wizarding world – Albus Dumbledore, headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and a highly upstanding and powerful citizen of the wizarding world attempted to take control of the situation by founding the Order of the Phoenix. Several characters joined the organisation, seeking to prevent Voldemort from taking over the wizarding world and establishing a tyrannical new world order. During this period, before the events of the Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, the Order sustained heavy losses, including the murders of minor characters such as the Prewetts, the Bones and the McKinnons. The Longbottoms were also tortured to insanity at the hands of Bellatrix Lestrange. Voldemort's first reign of terror ended after the murders of James and Lily Potter, and the unsuccessful attempt to murder Harry Potter at the beginning of the series. The spell rebounded on to him, and severely diminished Voldemort's powers and as a result the Order was temporarily disbanded due to the lack of any further threat. When Harry Potter reported that Voldemort had returned towards the end of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Dumbledore reactivated the Order. Many of the original members returned and were soon joined by recruits who effectively replaced those who had died in service during the first conflict. The Order established their headquarters at Number Twelve, Grimmauld Place, Sirius Black's family home, during the interval between the fourth and fifth books in the series. Dumbledore was the Secret-Keeper for the Order, meaning that only he could reveal the location of the Order's headquarters to others. Dumbledore's death at the hands of Severus Snape in book six made the location vulnerable and it was abandoned in favour of The Burrow as a result. The Order led the fight against Voldemort in the fifth instalment during which the Minister of Magic refused to accept the return of Voldemort. In the fifth book, some Order members took turns guarding Sybill Trelawney's prophecy, which referred to Voldemort's downfall and Harry's role in defeating him. Rubeus Hagrid, the Hogwarts Grounds Keeper and an original Member of the Order, was accompanied by Olympe Maxime in an attempt to recruit the giants to the Order's cause. Some members also participated in a battle at the Department of Mysteries near the end of the fifth book. Order members patrolled Hogwarts, the Wizarding school, on the night of Dumbledore's death in Half-Blood Prince, fighting the Death Eaters who managed to enter the castle. In the series finale, attention turned to escorting the Death Eaters' main target, Harry Potter, from his summer home with the Dursleys' to the Weasleys' Burrow. Later in the novel, after Voldemort's takeover of the Ministry had succeeded, some Order members hosted "Potterwatch", a secret pirate radio programme providing news on the Wizarding World that Voldemort's regime did not want the general population to know. During the climax of the book, most of the Order, aided by Dumbledore's Army, the Hogwarts staff and the older students, Slytherin house members excluded, fought against the Death Eaters in the Battle of Hogwarts, in which several Order members and other allies lost their lives. As the Order was created primarily to combat Voldemort and his Death Eaters, it is unknown if the Order stayed together after Voldemort's death at the end of the story, or whether it disbanded as it had after Voldemort's first fall. The following characters were members of the Order of the Phoenix during Lord Voldemort's initial rise to power and several years prior to the main events of the Harry Potter series. Many of these characters later served as members of the revived Order. These characters joined the Order when Dumbledore reactivated it after Lord Voldemort's return at the end of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. This is a list of notable members of the Order of the Phoenix. Albus Dumbledore, Severus Snape and Rubeus Hagrid have their own pages. Minerva McGonagall is listed under Hogwarts staff. Sirius Black, nicknamed Padfoot because his Animagus form takes the shape of a dog, is the last heir to the House of Black, a once notable pure-blood Wizarding family. He is the older brother of Regulus Arcturus Black and a cousin of Narcissa Malfoy, Andromeda Tonks, and Bellatrix Lestrange. He rejected his family's pure-blood elitism and reverence for the Dark Arts. In contrast to his home life, Sirius greatly enjoyed life at Hogwarts. He was proud of the fact that he was the only Black to be sorted into Gryffindor. He was inseparable from his best friend James 'Prongs' Potter and befriended Remus 'Moony' Lupin and Peter 'Wormtail' Pettigrew. Sirius, along with James, bullied Severus Snape while they were at school, nicknaming him "Snivellus". Sirius left home at the age of sixteen and took refuge with James and his parents. His outraged mother burned his name off the family tree, but he was left financially independent by his Uncle Alphard's generous bequest (hence Alphard's name was burnt off as well). After leaving school, he remained close friends with James and his wife, Lily, and was best man at their wedding. When Harry was born, the Potters named Sirius as his godfather. When the Potters went into hiding from Voldemort, Sirius was going to be their Secret-Keeper. Sirius convinced James and Lily to switch Secret-Keepers at the last moment to Peter Pettigrew, believing that Voldemort would never think to hunt him and would attack Sirius instead. However, Pettigrew betrayed James and Lily, and they were murdered by Voldemort. Harry survived and was rescued by Rubeus Hagrid, the gamekeeper of Hogwarts. Sirius asked Hagrid to give Harry to him, since he was Harry's godfather, but Hagrid, under Dumbledore's orders, refused and instead took Harry to live with the Dursleys. Sirius gave Hagrid his flying motorbike, saying he wouldn't need it. In his rage, Sirius tracked Pettigrew down and challenged him.  During the confrontation Pettigrew faked his own death and killed twelve Muggles, framing Sirius for betraying the Potters and the murder of Pettigrew and the Muggles. Sirius was arrested and sent to Azkaban without trial by Bartemius Crouch Senior. Unlike most of the other Azkaban prisoners, Sirius was able to keep his sanity because he knew he was innocent; and because as an Animagus he was less vulnerable to the effects of the Dementors when in his dog form. Twelve years later in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Sirius sees a picture of the Weasley family on the front cover of the Daily Prophet taken from the then Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, in which a rat stands perched on Ron's shoulder. The rat is Ron's pet, Scabbers, and Sirius recognises Pettigrew in his Animagus form, seeing a toe was missing. This knowledge clears his mind and enables him to escape Azkaban. He accomplishes this feat by transforming into his Animagus dog form. His severe weight loss from malnutrition and the Dementors' lack of ability to differentiate between unsophisticated canine emotions and insanity allows him to slip through his cell bars. After his escape, Sirius takes refuge in and around Hogsmeade. Knowing that the Dementors are stationed around Hogsmeade and at Hogwarts, Sirius remains in his Animagus form during this time, and is able to enter the Hogwarts grounds without being detected by the Dementors. He makes several unsuccessful attempts to kill Pettigrew, until his presence is detected by the students and teachers of Hogwarts when he tries to enter Gryffindor Tower, and the school's security is increased. Towards the end of Prisoner of Azkaban, Harry, Ron, and Hermione confront Sirius, and Harry attempts to kill him. Lupin, however, who has learned that Sirius is innocent after seeing Pettigrew's name on the Marauder's Map, prevents Harry from doing so.  Scabbers is unmasked as Pettigrew, and Harry begins to view Sirius as a surrogate father, with Sirius even offering to let Harry live with him. Events swiftly turn against him again – Pettigrew escapes and Sirius is captured by the Dementors at Hogwarts and sentenced to the "Dementor's Kiss". Harry and Hermione help him escape with Buckbeak, a hippogriff who had also been unjustly condemned. In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Sirius advises Harry on how to complete the Triwizard Tournament tasks, and provides background on Death Eaters. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, he takes refuge in his ancient family home at 12, Grimmauld Place, which he allows to be used as the Order headquarters. His confinement (on Dumbledore's orders) causes depression, and he is frequently withdrawn and antagonistic. He hates the House-Elf Kreacher, who for him represents the House he hated. Kreacher meanwhile resents Sirius for his rejection of the Black Family. When Sirius briefly leaves the house to see Harry off to Hogwarts, his Animagus form is recognised by Draco and Lucius Malfoy, resulting in more threats and warnings. Sirius acts as an older brother figure to Harry throughout the book but, according to Rowling, "what Harry craves is a father".The Leaky Cauldron and MuggleNet interview Joanne Kathleen Rowling: Part Two Sirius encourages Harry to oppose Dolores Umbridge and her reforms, and strongly approves of Harry starting the secret defensive tutorial group for students, Dumbledore's Army. He demonstrates a high level of trust in and respect for Harry, willingly answering his questions about the Order and Voldemort. With his growing power, Voldemort implants a false vision into Harry's mind that Sirius is captive and under torture at the Department of Mysteries. Determined to rescue Sirius, Harry and his friends gain access to the Department of Mysteries, but are ambushed by Death Eaters. Snape, however, alerts the Order that the students have gone to the Ministry after confirming that Sirius is safe at Grimmauld Place. Several Order members arrive at the Ministry, Sirius among them, and battle the Death Eaters. During a frenzied duel with his hated cousin Bellatrix Lestrange, Sirius taunts her for failing to harm him. Bellatrix strikes Sirius with a curse, sending him backwards into an enchanted archway in the Death Chamber, killing him.  Harry finds it hard to recover from this event. Sirius's will stated that his possessions, home and house-elf Kreacher are to be inherited by Harry. Sirius makes a final appearance toward the end of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows when he is summoned in semi-living substantial form by the Resurrection Stone to help Harry walk through the Forbidden Forest and sacrifice his life to Voldemort. Later, it was revealed that Harry named his first child James Sirius Potter, after his father James and his godfather Sirius. Sirius was portrayed by Gary Oldman in the film adaptations of Prisoner of Azkaban, Goblet of Fire, Order of the Phoenix, and Deathly Hallows – Part 2. Sirius as a teenager made a brief appearance in Order of the Phoenix (played by James Walters). Young Sirius also appeared in Deathly Hallows, portrayed by Rohan Gotobed. In the film versions, Sirius has curly, brown hair with blue eyes. In the book, he is described as having straight (long and matted after 12 years in Azkaban, but soon cut short) black hair and grey eyes. Fleur Isabelle Delacour is a student of Beauxbatons Academy in France, and is selected as a champion in the prestigious Triwizard Tournament. Her maternal grandmother is a Veela, from whom Fleur inherited her silvery-blonde hair, pale eyes, good looks, and ability to enchant men. It is revealed in the Tournament wand inspection that the core of Fleur's wand is a Veela hair from the head of her grandmother. During the Triwizard Tournament, Fleur is initially aloof and unfriendly despite receiving much admiration from the boys, especially Ron. During the second task of the Tournament, she attempts to rescue her sister Gabrielle Delacour from the lake, but fails, hindered by the Grindylows. When Harry rescues Gabrielle instead, Fleur is extremely grateful, despite her sister being in no real danger, and becomes much warmer towards both Harry and Hogwarts. Fleur takes last place in the Triwizard Tournament due to being Stunned during the last task. In the following year, Fleur works at Gringotts with Bill Weasley, whom she already met during the Tournament, and the pair get engaged. Bill is attacked by werewolf Fenrir Greyback and severely mauled near the end of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince in the Battle of the Astronomy Tower. However, since Greyback is in his human form at the time of the attack, Bill suffers only partial lycanthropic contamination. Though Molly Weasley, who largely disapproves of Fleur, assumes that she will no longer wish to marry Bill, Fleur is adamant that their wedding plans go unchanged and proudly declares that Bill's wounds are a sign of his bravery in her eyes, adding, 'I am good looking enough for the both of us' anyway. Her fierce, loving loyalty to her fiancé earns her much respect from most of Bill's erstwhile disapproving family, especially Molly, who is finally forced to admit that their love is genuine. In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Fleur and Bill take part in the operation to escort Harry safely to the Burrow, and they witness Mad-Eye Moody being killed by Voldemort. The couple have their wedding and reception at the Burrow, but the event is interrupted when Death Eaters attack after the fall of the Ministry of Magic. The newlyweds later provide safe haven for the trio and others rescued from Malfoy Manor at Shell Cottage, their home. Both Bill and Fleur are combatants for the Order during the Battle of Hogwarts, and survive the battle. The couple go on to have three children: Victoire, Dominique and Louis.J.K.Rowling – A Year in the Life; James Runcie; Independent Television (ITV); 2007 French actress and model Clémence Poésy portrays Fleur in the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire and both parts of the Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows film adaptation. Aberforth Dumbledore is Albus Dumbledore's brother. He is the younger brother by some three years, and the less skilled of the two; as such, he is usually left in the background while his brother basks in the glory of his comparative success. After his parents' deaths and Albus's return home to look after their unstable sister Ariana, Aberforth quarrels with his brother and his brother's friend, Gellert Grindelwald, over their plans to start a new order, neglecting Ariana. Grindlewald began torturing him, leading to the three dueling. This argument results in Ariana's accidental death at the hands of one of them. At Ariana's funeral, Aberforth publicly confronts Albus and strikes him, breaking his nose. Eventually, Aberforth becomes the owner and barman of the Hog's Head inn. He is known for his strong affinity with goats. His Patronus takes the form of a goat, and he recounts to the trio that as a boy he fed the goats in company with his sister, Ariana. His tavern also, according to Harry's description in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, has a faint smell of goats. In the film adaptation, a bleating goat can be seen shuffling about in the back of the pub. It is not until Deathly Hallows that Aberforth plays an important role in the series by taking Harry, Ron, and Hermione into his bar before the Death Eaters can capture them. Aberforth later reveals to the trio some facts they did not know about the history of the Dumbledore family. While being held prisoner in Malfoy Manor, Harry briefly glimpses Aberforth's eye in the remaining shard of the two-way mirror he was given by Sirius. Aberforth bought its counterpart from Mundungus Fletcher. Using the mirror to watch over the trio, Aberforth sends Dobby to rescue them and the other prisoners from the Manor. He liked Dobby and was upset to hear Bellatrix Lestrange killed him. Aberforth allows the resistance fighters to use a secure passageway from the Hog's Head to the Room of Requirement through Ariana's portrait, it being the only unguarded entrance into Hogwarts. This passage is used to evacuate underage students from Hogwarts and, according to Neville, it was also used by members of Dumbledore's Army to get food when they were living in the Room of Requirement, because that is one thing the Room of Requirement would not do. Aberforth leaves the Order, believing the war against Voldemort is lost. However, he quickly joins the Battle of Hogwarts, and is last seen Stunning Augustus Rookwood. According to Rowling, Aberforth survives the battle, and is still "at the Hog's Head, playing with his goats".Harry Potter Jim McManus appeared briefly as Aberforth in the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.http://www.the-leaky-cauldron.org/#article:8596 Casting confirmation at The Leaky Cauldron Ciarán Hinds plays Aberforth in a larger role in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 2. Arabella Doreen Figg, better known simply as Mrs Figg, a Squib, surreptitiously watches over Harry while he is at home with the Dursleys. She is a Chekhov's gun, first mentioned as a seemingly insignificant neighbour who takes care of Harry in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. She has a lifelong love of cats and does "a roaring trade" in crossbred Cats and Kneazles, their magical variant.J.K.Rowling Official Site, Section: Extra Stuff Though she maintains a good Muggle cover, Mrs Figg is a Squib, a non-magical being born to a family of wizards. Within the Order of the Phoenix, Mrs Figg functions as one of Dumbledore's liaisons between the magical and Muggle worlds. In Order of the Phoenix, she aids Harry after he and his cousin Dudley Dursley are attacked by two Dementors, and chooses to reveal herself to him. Mrs Figg explains to Harry that she deliberately made Harry's stays with her unpleasant so that the Dursleys would continue to send him to her, though she would have preferred to do otherwise. When the Ministry of Magic tries to have Harry expelled from Hogwarts for under-age use of magic (after he cast a Patronus charm to protect himself and his cousin) Mrs Figg's testimony before the Wizengamot is crucial in allowing Harry to stay at Hogwarts. However, according to Rowling, Squibs are incapable of seeing Dementors, and it is suggested by her manner during the trial that she has been prompted what to say with regard to the Dementors.Order of the Phoenix - Chapter 8 The Hearing  In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Mrs Figg attends Dumbledore's funeral at Hogwarts. Mrs Figg was portrayed by Kathryn Hunter in the film adaptation of Order of the Phoenix. Mundungus "Dung" Fletcher is mentioned in passing in some of the earlier books in the series, but it is not until the second chapter of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix that he makes his first appearance. Mundungus is described as a "squat, unshaven man" with "short, bandy legs", "long, straggly ginger hair", and "bloodshot, baggy eyes that gave him the doleful look of a basset hound". He is involved in many illegal activities, yet he seems confined to relatively minor crimes, such as theft and trading stolen goods on the black market. Many members of the Order have mixed feelings about him, but he is very loyal to Dumbledore, who once got him out of serious trouble. His connections enable him to hear rumours and information rolling around the shadier segments of the wizarding population, which could potentially prove instrumental in the fight against Voldemort. He is briefly mentioned in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire where following the Death Eaters attack at the Quidditch World Cup, Mundungus put in an insurance claim to the Ministry of Magic for a twelve-bedroomed tent with an en-suite jacuzzi, while in reality he had been sleeping under a cloak propped on sticks. As a member of both the original and the newly reformed Order of the Phoenix, he is assigned guard duty to protect Harry, but abandons his position to conduct a shady cauldron-trading deal, leaving a critical opening through which Dementors manage to attack Harry. In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Harry catches Mundungus outside the Three Broomsticks trying to sell what had been Sirius's property (which now belongs to Harry after Sirius's death) to Aberforth, and the boy confronts him. Mundungus goes into hiding but is later jailed in Azkaban for impersonating an Inferius during a botched robbery. In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Mundungus has managed to get out of prison, but the circumstances are unclear. He is Confunded by Snape, and gives the idea of using the Polyjuice Potion and six Potter decoys to the Order and helps with the escort of Harry from Privet Drive. He travels with Mad-Eye Moody on a broomstick as one of the Potter decoys. During the flight from Privet Drive, he flees when Voldemort himself shows up. It is later revealed by Kreacher that, included in the property he stole from 12 Grimmauld Place in the previous book was a heavy locket from the drawing room. That locket was the Slytherin's locket Horcrux. Then Kreacher is sent by Harry to capture Mundungus, who reveals that Umbridge took the locket from him. Andy Linden plays Mundungus Fletcher in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1. Remus John Lupin, nicknamed Moony, first appears in Prisoner of Azkaban as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. Most of the students hold him in extremely high regard and love his hands-on teaching style. During his tenure, he gives Harry private lessons in casting the Patronus Charm, to aid him in fighting off the Dementors patrolling the Hogwarts grounds. It is revealed in the climax of Prisoner of Azkaban that Professor Lupin is a werewolf. He turns into a werewolf at every full moon and only retains his human mind while transformed by drinking the Wolfsbane Potion prepared for him by Snape. Dumbledore, one of the few wizards who are sympathetic towards his condition, made arrangements for Lupin to attend Hogwarts as a child, where he became close friends with James (Prongs) Potter, Sirius (Padfoot) Black, and Peter (Wormtail) Pettigrew. Until the climax of Prisoner of Azkaban, Professor Lupin believes Sirius to be guilty of betraying James and Lily and killing Pettigrew. Upon discovering that Sirius is innocent, and that the very much alive Pettigrew is the traitor, Professor Lupin helps Sirius explain the truth to Harry, Ron, and Hermione in the Shrieking Shack. However, Professor Lupin had forgotten to take the Wolfsbane Potion that night and so, when touched by moonlight, transforms into a werewolf with no control over his actions. Sirius, in dog form, drives Lupin safely away from the others into the Forbidden Forest, where he wakes the next morning restored to his human body and mind. Snape, however, furious over Sirius's eventual escape and his resultant loss of the Order of Merlin promised to him by Cornelius Fudge, publicly reveals the nature of Professor Lupin's lycanthropy. Anticipating a public outcry in response to the threat he himself agrees he poses to the students, Professor Lupin resigns from his post. Long after resigning as a teacher, Lupin remains a friend to Harry. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix Lupin joins the newly reformed Order of the Phoenix and is part of the advance guard which escorts Harry from the Dursley family home in the book's opening chapters. Lupin is rarely seen in Grimmauld Place as he is often away performing secret tasks for the Order. Later in the book, Harry sees his father and Sirius bully a school aged Snape through Snape's memory. Lupin doesn't participate in the bullying and gives several small indications that he disapproves of his friends' behaviour, but does nothing to stop them despite being a prefect. When Harry confronts Lupin about the scene he witnessed in the Pensieve, Lupin expresses regret at never having had the courage to tell his friends when they were "out of order". Later, Lupin participates in the battle at the Department of Mysteries where he duels and overpowers Lucius Malfoy. In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Lupin reveals that it was Fenrir Greyback who bit him when he was a child. Towards the climax of the book, Lupin is one of the defenders of Hogwarts when Death Eaters penetrate the school, and after Dumbledore's death, it is revealed that Nymphadora Tonks has fallen in love with him despite a thirteen-year age gap. He resists becoming involved with her because of the many risks posed by his lycanthropy, and insists that she deserves someone "young and whole". By the opening of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, it is revealed that Lupin and Tonks have married. Later in the book, Lupin informs Harry, Ron and Hermione that Tonks is pregnant. However, feeling ashamed that he has turned Tonks into an outcast and guilty that his unborn child has a high chance of inheriting lycanthropy, Lupin plans to leave Tonks and their baby. This results in an intense argument between him and Harry, who insists that Lupin's actions are cowardly. Eventually, Lupin recognises the truth in Harry's words and returns to his wife in time for the birth of their son, Teddy Lupin, and subsequently asks Harry to be the boy's Godfather, which duty and honor he accepts. Lupin remains active in the Order throughout the year. He provides the casualty reports section on the pirate radio station Potterwatch under the pseudonym of Romulus. Lupin commands a group of defenders on the school grounds during the Battle of Hogwarts. Both Lupin and Tonks die in combat, killed by Antonin Dolohov and Bellatrix Lestrange respectively. At the time of his death, Lupin was the last surviving member of his group of friends. Rowling has since stated that she originally intended for both Lupin and Tonks to survive, but finally killed them off to compensate for the last-minute reprieve she gave to Arthur Weasley in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. Lupin, along with Sirius, James, and Lily, makes one last appearance in the series when Harry uses the Resurrection Stone to bring them forth to comfort him. He expresses his regret that Teddy will never know his father, but says that he will know why he died: trying to make a world in which his son could live a better life. In the film series, Lupin is portrayed by David Thewlis as an adult, and by James Utechin as a teenager. Both Harry Potter director David Yates and J.K Rowling have stated that Remus Lupin is their favourite character of the whole series. Both Lupin's first name, Remus, and the pseudonym he uses on Potterwatch, Romulus, are a reference to the Roman mythological twin brothers Romulus and Remus, who are said to have had a wolf foster-mother. Furthermore, Remus' last name, Lupin, refers to the Latin word lupus, which means wolf. Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody is perhaps the most famous Auror in the modern times of the Wizarding World, single-handedly responsible for capturing numerous wizard criminals. He is also said never to have killed his quarry, even when permitted to do so, unless he had no other choice. Moody's face is badly scarred; he has lost several body parts while fighting Dark wizards, including his left eye, lower left leg, and part of his nose; and he is cautious – some characters might say paranoid – in that he refuses to eat or drink anything which he himself did not prepare. He has replaced his missing eye with a magical one that can rotate 360 degrees and see through almost everything (including walls, doors, Invisibility Cloaks, and the back of his own head). He walks with a pronounced limp due to his prosthetic leg, and uses a walking staff. He frequently exclaims "Constant vigilance!" to encourage wizards to be on their guard against the dark arts, and keeps a number of devices in his office to alert him to the presence of potential enemies. Before his retirement from the Aurors' Office, he was Nymphadora Tonks' mentor, and still regards her as his protégée. In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Moody is appointed as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts, coming out of retirement as a favour to Dumbledore. Shortly before the school year begins, however, Moody is attacked by Barty Crouch, Jr., who subdues him with the Imperius Curse and takes Polyjuice Potion to assume his appearance. He keeps the real Moody alive as a source both of Polyjuice potion ingredients and of personal information helpful in putting the impersonation over, and takes Moody's place at Hogwarts. Moody's well-known habit of carrying around his own drinks in a private hip flask allows Crouch to take the Polyjuice Potion as needed to sustain the masquerade without raising suspicion. Crouch/Moody becomes noted for teaching and demonstrating normally higher-level topics to Harry's fourth-year class (such as the Unforgivable Curses). He is a demanding teacher who expects students to work. He puts up with very little, for example punishing Draco Malfoy by transforming him into a ferret to stick up for Harry when Malfoy was tormenting him. And yet, he can be compassionate; he takes Neville Longbottom off for a cup of tea and a talk after Neville is badly shaken by the demonstration of the Cruciatus Curse. Crouch/Moody also mentors Harry, encouraging and tutoring him in the three Triwizard Tournament tasks. After Harry unexpectedly returns alive from the graveyard battle with Voldemort, Crouch/Moody takes Harry back to his office, questions him about Voldemort and what happened in the graveyard, and reveals that he is working for Voldemort. He then prepares to kill Harry, but Dumbledore, McGonagall, and Snape stop him. Having neglected to take his hourly dose of Polyjuice potion, Crouch transforms back to his own appearance and, under the influence of Veritaserum, confesses everything. Dumbledore then rescues the real Moody from his magic trunk., chapter 36 In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the real Moody has joined the newly re-formed Order, and leads the party transferring Harry from 4 Privet Drive to Number 12 Grimmauld Place. He appears at the climax of that book, arriving to the battle at the Department of Mysteries after being tipped off by Snape. He also appears with Lupin and Tonks at the very end, when they give the Dursleys a warning concerning their treatment of Harry., chapter 38 Moody only features briefly in Half-Blood Prince. In Deathly Hallows he is killed by Voldemort after being abandoned by Mundungus Fletcher, who was acting as a Potter decoy. The Order is unable to recover his body; but later his magical eye is found by Harry mounted on Dolores Umbridge's office door to spy on Ministry of Magic employees. Harry retrieves the eye, disgusted that it would be used in such a way, and buries it at the base of an old tree in Mad-Eye's memory. Moody is portrayed by Brendan Gleeson in the film series.  James Potter, nicknamed Prongs, is the father of Harry Potter.  James met Sirius Black, Remus Lupin and Peter Pettigrew when they entered Hogwarts. When James, Sirius and Peter discovered that Remus is in fact a werewolf, the three of them illegally learned to become Animagi to accompany Remus safely during his transformations and keep him under control. It is during this time that they discovered almost all the secret passageways of Hogwarts and designed the Marauder's Map. At school, James is said to have been a talented player on the Gryffindor Quidditch team. In the film version of Philosopher's Stone, Harry and his friends find James's name listed on a plaque as a Seeker on his Quidditch team; however, Rowling stated in an interview that she intended him to be a Chaser. Rowling describes James and Harry as having similar attributes: the same thin face, same hands, and the same untidy black hair sticking up at the back, and nearly the same height as his son during their school days. However, Rowling also describes James as having hazel eyes and a slightly longer nose than Harry does. Like Harry, James is generally described to be a good, loyal friend who "regarded it as the height of dishonour to mistrust his friends"., chapter 5 Characters in the books often comment on James's personality, about which Rowling comments that "there was a lot of good in James".  The Hogwarts student population seems to have admired James back in his day, and teachers respected his talent, though not his behaviour. His popularity, however, was not universal, as a mutual hatred sprang up between him and Snape.JK Rowling's World Book Day Chat, 4 March 2004 Snape constantly tells Harry that James was "exceedingly arrogant",, chapter 14 and on one occasion, Sirius admits that he and James could sometimes be "arrogant little berks" but that "[James] grew out of it" (which Lily is said to have noted by their seventh year). He became Head Boy in his seventh year along with Lily Evans as Head Girl. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, after seeing a scene from Snape's memories within a Pensieve of a fifteen-year-old James and Sirius bullying Snape, Harry agrees with Snape's assessment of his father's arrogance. According to Dumbledore in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, however, James and Snape shared a rivalry not unlike that of Draco Malfoy and Harry. In addition, Lupin tells Harry that Snape "never lost an opportunity to curse James". According to an interview with Rowling, "James always suspected Snape harboured deeper feelings for Lily, which was a factor in James's behaviour to Snape." However, when Sirius attempts to lure Snape into the Shrieking Shack where Lupin stays during his werewolf transformations, James prevents him from entering the tunnel under the Whomping Willow, thus saving Snape's life; albeit - as Snape points out - this also saved James from expulsion. After graduating from Hogwarts, James – along with Lily and his friends – become "full-time fighters" for the Order, and do not hold regular jobs, supporting his family and Lupin, whose status as a werewolf made him unemployable, on family gold. In an interview, Rowling revealed that James and Lily were asked by Voldemort to join the Death Eaters, but refused, making it "one strike against them before they were even out of their teens". When his son Harry becomes Voldemort's target, the Potters go into hiding and name Pettigrew as their secret keeper. However, on 31 October 1981, the Potters' whereabouts are betrayed by Pettigrew, and they are attacked by Voldemort without warning at their home in Godric's Hollow. James urges his wife to take Harry and run while he holds Voldemort off. Wandless, he is killed. He briefly appears in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as a result of Priori Incantatem, when Harry's wand and Voldemort's meet, showing the most recent spells cast by each – in the case of Voldemort's wand, the most recent lives taken. He makes a final appearance at the end of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows through the use of the Resurrection Stone. James and Sirius are the heroes of the Harry Potter prequel, an 800-word story set three years before Harry's birth. The two friends are riding Sirius's motorbike and are chased by two Muggle policemen for breaking the speed limit. The policemen attempt to arrest them when three Death Eaters on broomsticks fly down towards them. James and Sirius use the police car as a barrier and the Death Eaters crash into it. In the end, they escape from the policemen by flying away on the motorbike. In the film series, James is portrayed by Adrian Rawlins as an adult, Robbie Jarvis as a teenager and Alfie McIlwain as a child.https://twitter.com/benedictclarke/status/107892013030055936 Lily Potter (née Evans) is the mother of Harry Potter. Born 30 January 1960, she is described as being very pretty,, chapter 34 with startlingly green almond-shaped eyes and thick, long, dark red hair. In addition, Slughorn says Lily is one of the brightest students he ever taught, with a natural and intuitive ability at Potions., chapter 4, chapter 4 She is one of the "all-time favourite students" of star collector Horace Slughorn, who describes her as "vivacious", "charming", "cheeky", and "very funny" and notes that he "often told her she should have been in Slytherin", yet that would be impossible as Lily was a Muggleborn, and Slytherin house doesn't take in any other than Halfbloods and Purebloods., chapter 22 Rowling describes Lily as being "a bit of a catch"; she was a popular girl for whom many boys had romantic feelings. Although Lily is Muggle-born, she is an extremely gifted witch at the top of her class. She was named a prefect in her fifth and sixth years at Hogwarts, and became Head Girl in her seventh year. Lily's sister Petunia Dursley despised her for being a witch and viewed her as a "freak", although Petunia is later revealed to have been envious of her abilities. Rowling stated that Lily did receive warning letters for testing the limits of the Statute of Secrecy.J.K.Rowling Official Site Lily's Patronus is a doe, presumably to pair with James's Animagus shape of a stag (also the form of Harry's Patronus).The question ("James's Patronus is a stag, and Lily's is a doe, is that a coincidence?") mistakenly refers to James's Patronus as a stag, a fact never mentioned in any of the books or by Rowling. However, Rowling did not correct the mistake. She responded 'No' and merely elaborated that Patronuses can mutate to reflect "the love of one's life...because they so often become the 'happy thought' that generates a Patronus". After witnessing a memory from Snape about Lily's and James's time as Hogwarts students, Harry gathers the impression that Lily hated James, but Sirius and Lupin assure him that she did not; they "simply got off on the wrong foot", because Snape and James hated each other, and Snape was Lily's best friend, at the time, despite him sorting into Slytherin., chapter 29 Rowling confirmed this view when asked how Lily and James had gotten together if Lily hated him. Lupin tells Harry that after James matured, Lily started seeing him in their seventh year. Rowling later echoed Lupin's words, describing it as James having to "[tone] down some of his more 'bombastic' behaviour". They married soon after leaving Hogwarts, with Sirius as best man at their wedding. The old, pre-Hogwarts friendship between Lily and Snape is fully revealed in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, along with the fact that Snape harboured unrequited romantic feelings for Lily from childhood. Rowling states that while Lily loved Snape as a friend, she might have returned those romantic feelings if Snape had not become so seriously involved in the Dark Arts. Their relationship ends in their fifth year at Hogwarts, when Snape, in his anger and humiliation at being jinxed by James and Sirius, unthinkingly calls Lily a "Mudblood" after she defended him. After leaving Hogwarts, Snape became a Death Eater and informed Voldemort of half of an overheard prophecy, which Voldemort takes to refer to Lily and her son, Harry. Fearing for Lily's life, Snape joins the Order as a spy for Dumbledore, in exchange for what he hopes will be Dumbledore's protection of Lily. Voldemort offered Lily the chance to step aside before he killed Harry because of Snape's request to spare Lily's life, but Lily refused and Voldemort killed her., chapter 33 The result of her selfless act of love manifested itself two ways: when Voldemort attempted to kill Harry with the Killing Curse the spell backfired, rendering Voldemort non-corporeal. The lingering protection afforded to Harry by Lily's sacrifice rendered Voldemort unable to touch him physically. The second way in which Harry is protected by Lily's sacrifice occurs when Petunia takes Harry in. Dumbledore told Harry that he had extended Lily's protection to Privet Drive, because Lily and Petunia are related by blood. This protection ends when Harry comes of age at 17. Though Harry bears a great resemblance to his father, it is often noted that he has Lily's eyes. Dumbledore has said that Harry's deepest nature is much more similar to his mother's. In a 1999 interview, Rowling stated; "Harry has his father's and mother's good looks. But he has his mother's eyes, and that's very important in a future book".1999: Accio Quote!, the largest archive of J.K. Rowling interviews on the web That future book was Deathly Hallows. In Snape's death scene in that novel, after having passed on his memories to Harry, he whispers to Harry: "Look... at... me..." In one of Snape's memories, it is revealed that Dumbledore persuades Snape to protect Harry after Lily's death by mentioning the fact that he has "precisely" the same eyes as his mother. His last words to Harry were simply a desire to see Lily's eyes before he died. Harry's dead parents are seen five times in the books (not counting their appearances in numerous magical photographs). Firstly in Philosopher's Stone Harry sees James and Lily in the Mirror of Erised. Secondly during Harry's struggle with Voldemort in Goblet of Fire they appear momentarily, along with other victims killed by Voldemort's wand. They appear in Snape's memories in both Order of the Phoenix and Deathly Hallows, and finally in Deathly Hallows when Harry makes his self-sacrificing walk into the Forbidden Forest, determined to let Voldemort kill him without offering resistance, Harry's parents walk at his side and Lily tells him how proud they are of him. In an interviewAug 28, 2012: "Daniel Radcliffe talks to J.K. Rowling: EXCLUSIVE VIDEO" Entertainment Weekly conducted by Daniel Radcliffe, Rowling revealed that Lily Potter's maiden name, Evans, was based on the real name of the author George Eliot, Mary Anne Evans. Lily is portrayed by Geraldine Somerville as an adult in the film series, and by Susie Shinner as a teenager and Ellie Darcey-Alden as a child. Kingsley Shacklebolt is a senior Auror who acts as informer for the Order within the Ministry of Magic. He is first introduced in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, when he volunteers to be one of the members of the Advance Guard that escorted Harry from the Dursleys' home to Number 12, Grimmauld Place. Kingsley is in charge of the search for Sirius in the Ministry; however, knowing Sirius is innocent, he is supplying the Ministry false information that Sirius is in Tibet. He is present in the scene of the fifth book when Harry is confronted about Dumbledore's Army, after Marietta Edgecombe betrays it to Dolores Umbridge. Kingsley swiftly modifies Marietta's memory, but to avoid suspicion from the Ministry, Dumbledore is forced to hex him too as he flees. Kingsley takes part in the battle at the Department of Mysteries, and appears to be very skilled at duelling as he is seen fighting two Death Eaters at once. However, after Sirius is killed, he continues the duel with Bellatrix Lestrange, during which Kingsley is hit by a spell that causes a "loud bang" and he hits the ground "yelling in pain". In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, the new Minister of Magic, Rufus Scrimgeour, appoints Kingsley to the Muggle Prime Minister's office, posing as a secretary, but being the Prime Minister's guard. It is revealed in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that Kingsley is one of the few wizards that the Dursleys seem to like, due to his skill at blending in well with Muggles and his calm, collected demeanour. In that book, Kingsley first appears with other Order members to move Harry from the Dursleys' home to safety in the Burrow. Later in the book, he manages to send a timely warning to Bill and Fleur's wedding using his Patronus, a lynx, when Voldemort overthrows the Ministry of Magic, giving the guests a chance to escape. He continues to guard the Prime Minister, but is eventually forced to flee. He later is heard preaching equal rights for Muggles and Wizards on the pirate radio programme "Potterwatch" under the pseudonym "Royal". In the Battle of Hogwarts he is first seen organising those who remained to fight. He is later seen dueling an unnamed Death Eater, and ends up duelling Voldemort himself, alongside Minerva McGonagall and Horace Slughorn, but after Bellatrix's death, Voldemort's anger erupts; Kingsley and the two others are defeated (although not killed). Kingsley is appointed temporary Minister for Magic following the death of Voldemort and the deposition of Voldemort's puppet ruler, Pius Thicknesse. However, it was later revealed by Rowling in an interview that Kingsley did become the new Minister permanently, revolutionising the Ministry itself. George Harris appeared as Kingsley in the movies Order of the Phoenix and both parts of Deathly Hallows. Nymphadora Tonks is a Metamorphmagus, and an Auror. Her name means "Gift of the Nymphs". She despises her given name and prefers to be called by her surname alone. She is still referred to as "Tonks" by her peers even after her marriage. She is described as having "a pale heart-shaped face, dark twinkling eyes", and is usually depicted with different hair colours, which she can change at will. Tonks is seen to be notoriously clumsy and unskilled at household spells. Nymphadora is the only daughter of Ted and Andromeda Tonks, the latter being sister to Bellatrix Lestrange and Narcissa Malfoy; Nymphadora is therefore Draco Malfoy's first cousin yet she never addresses him as family, alluding to him simply as "the Malfoy boy". Tonks is sorted into Hufflepuff,What House was Tonks In? and graduates from Hogwarts one year before Harry enters, after which she begins three years of Auror training; under Moody's tutelage, she qualifies as an Auror one year before her first appearance in Order of the Phoenix. Tonks and Kingsley act as spies for the Order in the Ministry. She helps to escort Harry first from the Dursleys' house to Order headquarters, and later to the Hogwarts Express. Tonks later fights the Death Eaters at the Department of Mysteries, in which she is injured by Bellatrix, and has to be taken to St Mungo's. During Half-Blood Prince, Tonks is stationed at Hogsmeade and assigned to guard Hogwarts. Harry observes she is constantly depressed and rarely smiles also he sees her hair is a mousy brown instead of its usual bright bubble-gum pink. After Dumbledore's death, it is revealed that Tonks has fallen in love with Lupin, and her Patronus has as a result changed to the form of a wolf. Lupin is reluctant to return her affections arguing that he is "too old, too poor, and too dangerous" for her. Because of this, she falls into a depression that disturbs her magical abilities. However, early in Deathly Hallows, Tonks announces that she has recently married Remus Lupin. Tonks accompanies twelve Order members to take Harry from the Dursleys' home to The Burrow. She flies with Ron, who impersonates Harry using Polyjuice Potion to throw the Death Eaters off the real Harry's trail. During the aerial battle, Tonks fights Bellatrix again, and injures Bellatrix's husband, Rodolphus. Later in the book, Remus reveals Tonks is pregnant. He leaves her for a brief period, believing that he, through their marriage, has caused her to become an outcast and their unborn child would be better off without him, but changes his mind and returns to her side after a heated argument with Harry. In April of the seventh book, Tonks gives birth to Teddy Remus Lupin, named after her father and husband. Towards the end of the book, Tonks and Lupin join the Battle of Hogwarts. During the battle, Tonks is killed by Bellatrix, and Lupin is killed by Antonin Dolohov, leaving Teddy an orphan to be raised by his maternal grandmother, Andromeda. In an interview shortly after the release of Deathly Hallows, Rowling confessed that she had originally intended for Tonks and Lupin to survive the series ending, but felt that she had to kill them after she spared Arthur Weasley in Order of the Phoenix. Natalia Tena played Tonks in the film versions of Order of the Phoenix, Half-Blood Prince and Deathly Hallows. Arthur Weasley is the patriarch of the Weasleys, a family of wizards who are considered "blood traitors" by Death Eaters for their interest in the Muggle world. He is married to Molly Weasley with whom he has seven children, including Ron, Harry's best friend. During his time at Hogwarts, Arthur belonged to the house of Gryffindor. Arthur is described as being tall and thin, and as having a receding hairline and horn-rimmed glasses. An affable, light-hearted man, he tends not to be the authority figure in the family; his wife Molly handles that area. Arthur works for the Ministry of Magic, initially in the Misuse of Muggle Artefacts Office. He is obsessed with learning about Muggle customs and inventions and owns a large collection of mostly Muggle used items. His department lacks funding, and his salary is insufficient to provide for a vast family, leaving his family finances precarious. Mr Weasley first appears in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, when Harry stays with the Weasley family at The Burrow during the summer before the first term of Hogwarts begins. In this book, Lucius Malfoy tries to discredit Arthur when Harry and Ron are seen flying his enchanted car and by placing Tom Riddle's diary in Ginny's cauldron so that she can open the Chamber of Secrets and take the blame for the attacks on Muggle-borns. However, Lucius fails to fulfil his objective and the diary is destroyed. At the start of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Arthur wins a large cash prize in a sweepstakes and uses it to take the whole family on a holiday to Egypt. After they return, Arthur thinks that Harry should know (what he [Arthur] then believes to be) the truth about Sirius Black. In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, it seems that Arthur does not fully believe the stories of Harry's abuse at the hands of the Dursleys until he witnesses what they think about Harry and the Wizarding world and is stunned to see them so eager to say goodbye to him, before taking him to the Quidditch World Cup. At the beginning of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, Mr Weasley is a member of the Order, and accompanies Harry to his visit in the Ministry. During one of his shifts in the Ministry guarding Sybill Trelawney's prophecy, Voldemort's pet snake Nagini attacks him. Harry, who is mentally connected with Voldemort, manages to see this in a vision and is able to warn the Hogwarts authorities. Arthur is subsequently saved just in time and sent to St Mungo's Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, where he fully recovers. Rowling has revealed that in the original draft for Order of the Phoenix she planned to kill Arthur.Deathly Hallows Draft She changed her mind, however, saying that she could not kill Arthur as he is one of the few good fathers in the series. However, as she "wanted to kill parents", she spared Arthur's life in exchange for Lupin's and Tonks's. In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Arthur has been promoted to Head of the Office for the Detection and Confiscation of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects. In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Arthur is part of the group that moves Harry from Privet Drive for the last time, accompanied by his son Fred who acted as one of the seven Potters. Arthur continues to work in the Ministry but all his movements are tracked. When it is discovered that Ron is travelling with Harry and not sick at home, the Weasleys are forced to hide. Arthur reappears in the Battle of Hogwarts, in which he loses his son Fred, and is joined by Percy Weasley in defeating Pius Thicknesse. Arthur Weasley appears in every film except the first, and is portrayed by Mark Williams. William Arthur "Bill" Weasley  is the eldest son of Arthur and Molly Weasley. He is described to be "hard-working" and "down-to-earth", but possesses a fondness for "a bit of adventure, a bit of glamour"., chapter 5 During his time at Hogwarts, Bill becomes both a prefect and Head Boy, with 12 O.W.L.s to his credit. Later, he works for Gringotts Bank in Egypt as a Curse-Breaker. He makes his first full appearance in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, where he is described as being a good-looking young man, sporting long red hair tied back in a ponytail and a single fang earring. When Fleur spies Bill at Hogwarts as he and Mrs Weasley paid a visit to Harry during the Triwizard Tournament, she eyes him with "great interest". Bill returns to Britain to work with the Order in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. He meets Fleur at Gringotts head office in London where she is employed at the time, giving her lessons to improve her English. After a year long relationship, the couple get engaged, and Bill brings his fiancée home to get to know his family, who disapprove of her. Bill fights against the Death Eaters' attack at Hogwarts near the end of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, where he is attacked by werewolf Fenrir Greyback, who disfigures him. As Greyback was in human form at the time of the attack, Bill suffers only partial lycanthropy contamination; permanent scarring of his face, and an acquired liking for very rare beef. Fleur, who regards his wounds as a proud sign of his bravery, is adamant that their wedding proceed as scheduled, impressing Bill's family about the match's strength. In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Fleur and Bill take part in getting Harry escorted safely from the Dursleys' house, and they witness Mad-Eye Moody being killed by Voldemort himself, which they announce upon their return to the Burrow. The couple have their wedding there and later provide safe haven for the trio and several others in their home, Shell Cottage. Both Bill and Fleur were combatants during the Battle of Hogwarts, and both survived the battle. Bill and Fleur later have three children: Victoire, Dominique and Louis. Richard Fish appeared as Bill briefly in the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. Domhnall Gleeson, the son of actor Brendan Gleeson (Alastor Moody in the series), plays Bill Weasley in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows and the roller coaster ride Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts at The Wizarding World of Harry Potter – Diagon Alley in Universal Studios Florida. Charlie  Weasley is the second son of Arthur and Molly Weasley and is described as having a build like that of his brothers Fred and George: shorter and stockier than Bill, Percy and Ron. He has a broad, good natured face, which is slightly weather beaten and very freckly. His arms are muscly, and one of them has a long shiny burn. While at Hogwarts, he was a prefect,, chapter 9 a Quidditch Captain, and a legendary Seeker for the Gryffindor Quidditch team. His skills as a Seeker were so good that it was said, "He could have been capped for England if he hadn't gone off chasing dragons." After school, Charlie chooses to go to Romania to work with dragons as a Dragon Keeper. At Harry, Ron and Hermione's request, he takes Hagrid's baby dragon, Norbert, an illegally hatched Norwegian Ridgeback, into his care in Harry's first year, and he is part of a team of Dragon Keepers that brings four dragons of different breeds to Hogwarts in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire for the First Task of the Triwizard Tournament. During the second rise of Voldemort, Charlie's task in the Order is to try to rally support abroad. Charlie returns to the Burrow in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows to participate in his brother Bill's wedding as best man. He enters the later part of the Battle of Hogwarts, alongside Horace Slughorn, at the head of reinforcements for the defenders, and survives the battle without serious injury. He does not marry or have children, since he "preferred dragons to women", according to Rowling. Alex Crockford appeared as Charlie in a brief cameo in the film adaptation of Prisoner of Azkaban. Molly Weasley (née Prewett) is married to Arthur Weasley and mother of seven children, including Ron Weasley, who becomes Harry Potter's best friend. Molly is born into the pure-blood Prewett family, being the sister of Gideon and Fabian Prewett. The character is first introduced in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, when she kindly tells Harry how to cross the barrier through to Platform Nine and Three-Quarters. In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, she is furious with Fred, George, and Ron after she discovers that they flew their parents' enchanted car to rescue Harry from his aunt and uncle who had imprisoned him in his room. At the beginning of the school year, Molly sends Ron a Howler, screaming at him in anger that he and Harry flew the family car again, this time to Hogwarts. In Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, the Weasleys win the Daily Prophet draw and use the gold on a trip to Egypt to visit Bill. They return to Britain and stay at the Leaky Cauldron with Harry and Hermione. Harry overhears Mr and Mrs Weasley arguing one night about telling Harry the truth about the supposed connection between Sirius Black and Harry; Arthur feels Harry should know the truth but Molly, feeling the truth would terrify him, assures him Harry will be perfectly safe at Hogwarts with Dumbledore's protection, and orders Percy Weasley to keep an eye on Harry at the school. When Harry arrives at the Burrow in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Molly finds out about Fred and George's experimentation with dangerous sweets they were manufacturing and tells them off before leaving for the Quidditch World Cup; however, after the Dark Mark appears over the sky at the World Cup campsite, Molly is upset for yelling at Fred and George, worried that something might have happened to them after she treated them so horribly. Towards the climax of that book, Molly and Bill arrive at Hogwarts to see the Third Task of the Triwizard Tournament, acting as family guests to Harry. After the return of Voldemort, Dumbledore asks Molly and Bill to join the Order and fight in the impending Second War. Molly comforts Harry and, for the first time in his life, he has someone to be there for him, like a mother. Molly and the Weasleys are staying at the Order headquarters, Number Twelve, Grimmauld Place, in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, where she and Sirius fight over how much to tell Harry about the Order's operations. Days later, Molly is found in the drawing room, with a boggart that transforms into her dead family members and Harry, and confesses her nightmares of losing more family members to Voldemort and the Death Eaters. At the beginning of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Molly clashes with Bill's fiancée, Fleur Delacour; however, at the end of the novel, when Molly rushes to Hogwarts with her husband and Fleur to tend to her son Bill, who had been ferociously attacked by Fenrir Greyback, Fleur is greatly offended when Molly jumps to the conclusion she will break up with Bill due to his scarring, letting her know in no uncertain terms that as far as she is concerned, she is "good-looking enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show is zat my husband is brave!"Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince (New York: Scholastic, Inc.), 2005, page 623. Fleur and Molly unexpectedly hug and begin to see each other in a much more positive light. At the beginning of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Molly and Arthur offer the Burrow as Order headquarters when Grimmauld Place is no longer safe. She feels immensely uncomfortable with the trio's decision to drop out of Hogwarts, and initially attempts to dissuade them from doing so. As the novel progresses, the family is forced to head for safety at Auntie Muriel's home. At the end of the book, Molly and her entire family fight in the Battle of Hogwarts. Upon seeing the death of Fred, she becomes devastated, and is pushed to the edge when Bellatrix Lestrange almost strikes Ginny with the Killing Curse. Enraged, she engages Bellatrix in an intense duel, killing her with a curse that hits her in the chest. Rowling has stated that the reason she had Molly kill Bellatrix was to show Molly's great powers as a witch and to provide a contrast between Molly's consumption with "maternal love" and Bellatrix's with "obsessive love". The Chicago Tribunes Courtney Crowder lists Molly Weasley as her favourite literary mother, describing her as the "original Mama Grizzly", citing her many touching moments with Harry as well as the final book in the series, where "her feelings jumped off the page" as testament to her strong personality. Crowder summarises Molly's character as "levelheaded, yet willing to fight, intelligent, welcoming, and above all, extremely loving". In a Mother's Day article Molly was also voted the third greatest celebrity mum by The Flowers and Plants association who see the character as "formidable, practical, creative and resourceful". Bob Smietana of Christianity Today links Molly's defence of Ginny in the final book into a wider theme in the series about the strength of parental love, which he feels to carry considerable emotional weight. Empire listed Molly Weasley 21st on their Top 25 Harry Potter characters. Novelist Stephen King notes that, when Molly calls Bellatrix a "bitch" after she sees the Death Eater trying to kill Ginny was "the most shocking bitch in recent fiction", and that it shows how adult the books had become. Julie Walters portrays Molly Weasley in every film except Goblet of Fire, in which her role in the novel is cut out. In 2003 her portrayal of Molly was voted the second-best screen mother ever, behind Julia Roberts' Erin Brokovich.    Character Accomplishments and Operations Sirius Black Escaped from Azkaban and proceeded to serve in the revived Order. Helped defeat two Death Eaters in battle. Killed by his cousin Bellatrix Lestrange, in a battle within the Department of Mysteries. Also Godfather to Harry and best friend to James Potter. Left his house and Kreacher to Harry. Edgar Bones Murdered along with his wife and children by Death Eaters during the first Wizarding War. Edgar Bones was the brother of the Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, Amelia Bones. His niece, Susan Bones, is a Hufflepuff student in Harry Potter's year at Hogwarts. Caradoc Dearborn Went missing during the First Wizarding War; presumably killed by Death Eaters. Dedalus Diggle Met Harry Potter several times before it was revealed that he was a member of the Order of the Phoenix. Diggle was part of the Advance Guard who helped Harry escape from the Dursleys' house in the fifth book. In the final instalment of the series, he helped take the Dursleys to a protected area. The Death Eaters later burned his house in a raid, but Diggle was unharmed. Diggle was portrayed by David Brett in the film adaptation of Philosopher's Stone. Elphias Doge Dumbledore's schoolmate. He wrote an obituary of Dumbledore for The Daily Prophet and openly defended Dumbledore's integrity during the final instalment of the series. He was also part of the Advance Guard in the fifth book. In Order of the Phoenix, Doge is played by Peter Cartwright but was replaced by David Ryall in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. Aberforth Dumbledore Brother of Albus Dumbledore. Bartender of The Hog's Head in Hogsmeade village and possibly a member of the revived Order. Able to obtain useful information for the Order due to his post. Assisted Harry in avoiding Death Eaters and entering Hogwarts in Deathly Hallows. He sent Dobby to rescue Harry and other prisoners from the cellar of Malfoy Manor. He also helped defend the school during the Battle of Hogwarts, defeating Augustus Rookwood. Albus Dumbledore Founder of the original Order and revived it following Voldemort's return to power. Headmaster of Hogwarts for several decades. Regarded as the greatest wizard of his time, and as the only wizard Lord Voldemort ever feared. Killed by Severus Snape, but planned his death. Benjy Fenwick Blasted to pieces by Death Eaters. Only "bits of him" were recovered. Arabella Figg An elderly female Squib, who was enlisted by Dumbledore to watch over Harry during his childhood from her home in his neighbourhood. She later told Harry that she regretted treating him poorly when he visited her, but that the Dursleys would not have sent Harry to her if they thought he'd enjoyed it. Served in the revived Order. Mundungus Fletcher Thief and con man who Dumbledore once helped "out of a tight spot" and in return kept Dumbledore notified of things he would hear from the criminal element of the Wizarding World. He was a reluctant member of the group sent to retrieve Harry in Deathly Hallows and panicked when Voldemort pursued him, disapparating to an unknown location and leaving Alastor Moody to be killed by Voldemort. Rubeus Hagrid Care of Magical Creatures Teacher at Hogwarts as well as Keeper of Keys and Grounds. He was charged with the task of rescuing Harry from the destroyed Potter house in Godric's Hollow on Halloween 1981 and bringing him via Sirius's flying motorcycle to the Dursley's house. Served in the revived Order. During the escape from the Dursleys, Harry and Hagrid were both nearly killed in the crash of the flying motorcycle. Frank and Alice Longbottom Neville Longbottom's parents. They were also prominent Aurors, and had "thrice defied" Voldemort by 1981. Tortured to the point of insanity with the Cruciatus Curse by a group of Death Eaters led by Bellatrix Lestrange, who were looking for information on Voldemort's whereabouts. Since then, Frank and Alice reside in a closed ward of St Mungo's Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries. James Payton portrayed Frank Longbottom briefly in Order of the Phoenix. Remus Lupin A member of the first order, also served in the revived Order as an integral part of the Advance Guard sent to safeguard Harry Potter, as he was someone whom Harry would recognise and instantly trust. Later went underground to infiltrate the Werewolf community, to see whose side they would take in the war. Later married Nymphadora Tonks and had one child, Teddy Lupin. Killed by Antonin Dolohov and Bellatrix in the Battle of Hogwarts. Minerva McGonagall Deputy Headmistress, Transfiguration teacher, and Head of Gryffindor House at Hogwarts. Also served in the revived Order. Extremely supportive of Dumbledore and his ideals. Led the defence of the castle during the Battle of Hogwarts, and near the end, duelled Voldemort along with Kingsley Shacklebolt and Horace Slughorn. Marlene McKinnon Killed by Death Eaters (among them Travers, according to Igor Karkaroff) together with her whole family. Dorcas Meadowes The only known member of the Order apart from the Potters who was personally killed by Lord Voldemort during the first War. Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody A member of the original Order during the first Wizarding War. Was brought out of retirement by Albus Dumbledore but was attacked, imprisoned, and impersonated by Bartemius Crouch Jr. Was scheduled to teach the post of Defence Against the Dark Arts in the fourth book. Also rejoined to serve in the revived Order. Killed by Voldemort as he accompanied Mundungus Fletcher (disguised as Harry Potter) to a safehouse. His eye was later taken by the Death Eaters and recovered by Harry Potter. Peter Pettigrew Nicknamed "Wormtail" in his childhood for his unregistered Animagus form, he was friend to Sirius Black, James Potter and Remus Lupin. He later defected to the Death Eaters and betrayed James and Lily Potter, which resulted in their deaths. Killed by his own magical hand, which had been fashioned for him by Voldemort for his job well done in catching Harry and bringing Harry to Voldemort. Sturgis Podmore A member of the Ministry of Magic who guarded the Prophecy until he was arrested by a Ministry security guard for trying to break into the Department of Mysteries. For this, he was sentenced to Azkaban for six months. Harry, Ron and Hermione speculated that Lucius Malfoy had placed him under the Imperius Curse. It was once revealed that he was in possession of an invisibility cloak. Lily and James Potter Killed by Voldemort, who was attempting to kill their one and a half-year old son Harry. Fabian and Gideon Prewett Molly Weasley's brothers, killed during the First War. It took five Death Eaters (including Antonin Dolohov) to kill the two of them. Molly gave Fabian's watch to Harry on his seventeenth birthday. Emmeline Vance Part of the Advance Guard that helped Harry in his escape from the Dursleys in the fifth book. Death Eaters killed her in the summer of 1996 on information Snape claims to have given, as described in  Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. However, as Snape was revealed to have been working on Dumbledore's side all along in Deathly Hallows, it raises doubts as to whether he really did provide information that could have been used to kill her. She is portrayed by Brigette Millar in Order of the Phoenix. Character Accomplishments and Operations Fleur Delacour Most likely joined after becoming engaged to Bill Weasley. Helped move Harry from the Dursleys to the Burrow and nursed Harry and his friends in Shell Cottage after Dobby's death in Deathly Hallows. Fought in the Battle of Hogwarts. Severus Snape After learning that Voldemort was planning to kill Lily Potter to get to the young Harry, Snape turned secret agent for Dumbledore against the Death Eaters. Later, serving as a re-doubled agent in the second war. He was the Potions Master at Hogwarts, and his Patronus took the form of a doe, the same as Lily Potter's, the only one whom he had ever loved. Snape delivered the Sword of Godric Gryffindor to Harry in the Forest of Dean using his Patronus. Killed by Voldemort's snake Nagini during the Battle of Hogwarts. Hestia Jones Part of the Advance Guard that helped Harry in his escape from the Dursleys in the fifth book. She then escorts the Dursleys into hiding at the beginning of the final book, along with Dedalus Diggle. Hestia is surprised to know that the Dursleys are unaware of Harry's importance in the anti-Voldemort movement, and later confronts them for the treatment they give to the boy. Kingsley Shacklebolt An Auror, member of The Advance Guard, secretary/bodyguard for the Muggle Prime Minister, leader of the search for Sirius Black during Order of the Phoenix, and part of the group that battled the Death Eaters in the Ministry at the end of Order of the Phoenix. Helped organise the Order members and fought during the Battle of Hogwarts, near the end of the battle duelling Voldemort himself. After Voldemort's death, he became Minister of Magic. Nymphadora Tonks Was a member of the Advance Guard, and a part of the group that battled the Death Eaters in the Ministry at the end of Order of the Phoenix. She was a Metamorphmagus, a person able to change her appearance at will, and an Auror. She married Remus Lupin, and had one child, Teddy Lupin, later revealed to have inherited his mother's metamorphmagus abilities. Later fought Death Eaters during the first attack on Hogwarts. Helped move Harry from the Dursleys to The Burrow in Deathly Hallows. Killed during the Battle of Hogwarts by her aunt, Bellatrix Lestrange. Arthur Weasley Assisted the Order by helping contact people who would believe Dumbledore and Harry's story in Order of the Phoenix. Bitten by Nagini while guarding the door to the Department of Mysteries in Order of the Phoenix. Helped move Harry from the Dursleys to The Burrow in Deathly Hallows. Fought against Pius Thicknesse, alongside his third son, Percy Weasley, in the Second Battle of Hogwarts. Bill Weasley Curse-breaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank, thus becoming a go-between for the Order and the Goblin community. Attacked and scarred by Fenrir Greyback during first attack on Hogwarts. Helped move Harry from the Dursleys to The Burrow in Deathly Hallows. Fought in the Battle of Hogwarts. Charlie Weasley Assigned to recruit foreign Order members during the summer of 1995. Led reinforcements, along with Horace Slughorn, in the Battle of Hogwarts. Molly Weasley Helped guard the Department of Mysteries in Order of the Phoenix, allowed the Order to use her house as headquarters in Deathly Hallows, and killed Bellatrix Lestrange during the Battle of Hogwarts."New Interview with J.K. Rowling for Release of Dutch Edition of 'Deathly Hallows'." (18 November 2007). The Leaky Cauldron. Retrieved 19 November 2007. The Harry Potter Lexicon item on the Order of the Phoenix
