   The Most Honourable Order of the Bath (formerly the Most Honourable Military Order of the Bath)The word "Military" was removed from the name by Queen Victoria in 1847. Letters Patent dated 14 April 1847, quoted in Statutes 1847. is a British order of chivalry founded by George I on 18 May 1725.Statutes 1725, although Risk says 11 May The name derives from the elaborate medieval ceremony for creating a knight, which involved bathing (as a symbol of purification) as one of its elements. The knights so created were known as "Knights of the Bath".Anstis, Observations, p4 George I "erected the Knights of the Bath into a regular Military Order".Letters patent dated 18 May 1725, quoted in Statutes 1725 He did not (as is commonly believed) revive the Order of the Bath,The purely legendary pre-history was associated with Henry IV. since it had never previously existed as an Order, in the sense of a body of knights who were governed by a set of statutes and whose numbers were replenished when vacancies occurred.Wagner, Heralds of England, p 357, referring to John Anstis, who proposed the Order, says: "He had the happy inspiration of reviving this ancient name and chivalric associations, but attaching it, as it never had been before, to an Order or company of knights."Perkins, The Most Honourable Order of the Bath, p1 "It can scarcely be claimed that a properly constituted Order existed at any time during the preceding centuries [prior to the reign of Charles II]" The Order consists of the Sovereign (currently Queen Elizabeth II), the  (currently The Prince of Wales), and three Classes of members:Statutes 1925, article 2 Members belong to either the Civil or the Military Division.Statutes 1925, article 5 Prior to 1815, the order had only a single class, Knight Companion (KB), which no longer exists. Recipients of the Order are now usually senior military officers or senior civil servants.Statutes 1925, articles 8–12 Commonwealth citizens not subjects of the Queen and foreigners may be made Honorary Members. The Order of the Bath is the fourth-most senior of the British Orders of Chivalry, after The Most Noble Order of the Garter, The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and The Most Illustrious Order of St Patrick (dormant).See, for example, the order of wear for orders and decorations, the Royal Warrant defining precedence in Scotland () or the discussion of precedence at http://www.heraldica.org/topics/britain/order_precedence.htm   In the Middle Ages, knighthood was often conferred with elaborate ceremonies. These usually involved the knight-to-be taking a bath (possibly symbolic of spiritual purification)Risk, History of the Order of the Bath, p6 during which he was instructed in the duties of knighthood by more senior knights. He was then put to bed to dry. Clothed in a special robe, he was led with music to the chapel where he spent the night in a vigil. At dawn he made confession and attended Mass, then retired to his bed to sleep until it was fully daylight. He was then brought before the King, who after instructing two senior knights to buckle the spurs to the knight-elect's heels, fastened a belt around his waist, then struck him on the neck (with either a hand or a sword), thus making him a knight.The Manner of making Knights after the custom of England in time of peace and at the Coronation, that is Knights of the Bath, quoted in Perkins, pp 5–14 It was this accolade which was the essential act in creating a knight, and a simpler ceremony developed, conferring knighthood merely by striking or touching the knight-to-be on the shoulder with a sword,According to Anstis (Observations, p73) such knights were sometimes known as Knights of the Sword or Knights of the Carpet or "dubbing" him, as is still done today. In the early medieval period the difference seems to have been that the full ceremonies were used for men from more prominent families. From the coronation of Henry IV in 1399 the full ceremonies were restricted to major royal occasions such as coronations, investitures of the Prince of Wales or royal Dukes, and royal weddings,Anstis, p66 and the knights so created became known as Knights of the Bath. Knights Bachelor continued to be created with the simpler form of ceremony. The last occasion on which Knights of the Bath were created was the coronation of Charles II in 1661. From at least 1625,Risk, p114 and possibly from the reign of James I, Knights of the Bath were using the motto Tria iuncta in uno (Latin for "Three joined in one"), and wearing as a badge three crowns within a plain gold oval.Nicolas, History of the orders of knighthood of the British empire, p38–9 These were both subsequently adopted by the Order of the Bath; a similar design of badge is still worn by members of the Civil Division. Their symbolism however is not entirely clear. The 'three joined in one' may be a reference to the kingdoms of England, Scotland and either France or Ireland, which were held (or claimed in the case of France) by English and, later, British monarchs. This would correspond to the three crowns in the badge.The later usage by the Order of the Bath does not make things any clearer. The presence of the rose, thistle and shamrock (symbols of England, Scotland and Ireland respectively) in the Collar supports the above claim. The shamrocks however were not added until the 19th century, probably as a result of a suggestion of Sir Joseph Banks, who in his proposal observed that the presence of the shamrock would "greatly augment the meaning of the motto" (Risk, p 115). A further explanation for the crowns is provided in the 1725 statutes of the Order. The coat of arms which was to appear on the Order's seal (Azure three imperial crowns Or, that is, three gold imperial crowns on a blue background) was described as being anciently attributed to King Arthur. Another explanation of the motto is that it refers to the Holy Trinity. Nicolas quotes a source (although he is sceptical of it) who claims that prior to James I the motto was Tria numina iuncta in uno (three powers/gods joined in one), but from the reign of James I the word numina was dropped and the motto understood to mean Tria [regna] iuncta in uno (three kingdoms joined in one).Nicolas, p 38, quoting Bishop Kennet Register and Chronicle Ecclesiastical and Civil from the Restoration of King Charles II faithfully taken from the manuscripts of the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, (1728) p410 The prime mover in the establishment of the Order of the Bath was John Anstis, Garter King of Arms, England's highest heraldic officer. Sir Anthony Wagner, a recent holder of the office of Garter, wrote of Anstis's motivations:  It was Martin Leake'sGarter King of Arms from 1754 to 1773, and an officer of arms for some 25 years before that opinion that the trouble and opposition Anstis met with in establishing himself as Garter so embittered him against the heralds that when at last in 1718 he succeeded, he made it his prime object to aggrandise himself and his office at their expense. It is clear at least that he set out to make himself indispensable to the Earl Marshal, which was not hard, their political principles being congruous and their friendship already established, but also to Sir Robert Walpole and the Whig ministry, which can by no means have been easy, considering his known attachment to the Pretender and the circumstances under which he came into office ... The main object of Anstis's next move, the revival or institution of the Order of the Bath was probably that which it in fact secured, of ingratiating him with the all-powerful Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole.Wagner, pp348, 357   The use of honours in the early eighteenth century differed considerably from the modern honours system in which hundreds, if not thousands, of people each year receive honours on the basis of deserving accomplishments. The only honours available at that time were hereditary (not life) peerages and baronetcies, knighthoods and the Order of the Garter (or the Order of the Thistle for Scots), none of which were awarded in large numbers (the Garter and the Thistle are limited to 24 and 16 living members respectively.) The political environment was also significantly different from today:  The Sovereign still exercised a power to be reckoned with in the eighteenth century. The Court remained the centre of the political world. The King was limited in that he had to choose Ministers who could command a majority in Parliament, but the choice remained his. The leader of an administration still had to command the King's personal confidence and approval. A strong following in Parliament depended on being able to supply places, pensions, and other marks of Royal favour to the government's supporters.Risk, p2  The attraction of the new Order for Walpole was that it would provide a source of such favours to strengthen his political position.In the words of his son, Horace Walpole, "The Revival of the Order of the Bath was a measure of Sir Robert Walpole, and was an artful bank of favours in lieu of places. He meant to stave off the demand for Garters, and intended that the Red [i.e. the Order of the Bath] should be a step to the Blue [the Order of the Garter]; and accordingly took one of the former for himself." Horace Walpole, Reminiscences (1788) George I having agreed to Walpole's proposal, Anstis was commissioned to draft statutes for the Order of the Bath. As noted above, he adopted the motto and badge used by the Knights of the Bath, as well as the colour of the riband and mantle, and the ceremony for creating a knight. The rest of the statutes were mostly based on those of the Order of the Garter, of which he was an officer (as Garter King of Arms).Nicolas, p237–8, Footnote The Order was founded by letters patent under the Great Seal dated 18 May 1725, and the statutes issued the following week.Risk, p4Statutes 1725 The Order initially consisted of the Sovereign, a Prince of the blood Royal as Principal Knight, a Great Master and thirty-five Knights Companion.Statutes 1725, article 2 Seven officers (see below) were attached to the Order. These provided yet another opportunity for political patronage, as they were to be sinecures at the disposal of the Great Master, supported by fees from the knights. Despite the fact that the Bath was represented as a military Order, only a few military officers were among the initial appointments (see List of Knights Companion of the Order of the Bath). They may be broken down into categories as follows (note that some are classified in more than one category):Risk, p15,16    The majority of the new Knights Companions were knighted by the King and invested with their ribands and badges on 27 May 1725.Risk, p16 Although the statutes set out the full medieval ceremony which was to be used for creating knights, this was not performed, and indeed was possibly never intended to be, as the original statutes contained a provisionStatutes 1725, article 6, the same article which state "[the Great Master shall] take especial care that ... the antient Rituals belonging to this Knighthood be observed with the greatest Exactness" allowing the Great Master to dispense Knights Companion from these requirements. The original knights were dispensed from all the medieval ceremonies with the exception of the Installation, which was performed in the Order's Chapel, the Henry VII Chapel in Westminster Abbey, on 17 June. This precedent was followed until 1812, after which the Installation was also dispensed with, until its revival in the twentieth century.No Installation had been held between 1812 and the coronation of George IV in 1821, by which time the number of knights exceeded the number of stalls in the chapel. To allow the knights to wear their collars at the coronation (which they could not do until installed) they were dispensed from the Installation, and this precedent was subsequently followed. (Risk, p43) The ceremonies however remained part of the Statutes until 1847.Risk, p10 Although the initial appointments to the Order were largely political, from the 1770s appointments to the Order were increasingly made for naval, military or diplomatic achievements. This is partly due to the conflicts Britain was engaged in over this period.Risk, p20 The Peninsular War resulted in so many deserving candidates for the Bath that a statute was issued allowing the appointment of Extra Knights in time of war, who were to be additional to the numerical limits imposed by the statutes, and whose number was not subject to any restrictions.Statute dated 8 May 1812, quoted in Statutes 1847 Another statute, this one issued some 80 years earlier, had also added a military note to the Order. Each knight was required, under certain circumstances, to supply and support four men-at-arms for a period not exceeding 42 days in any year, to serve in any part of Great Britain.Statute dated 20 April 1727, quoted in Statutes 1847 This company was to be captained by the Great Master, who had to supply four trumpeters, and was also to appoint eight officers for this body, however the statute was never invoked. In 1815, with the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Prince Regent (later George IV) expanded the Order of the Bath "to the end that those Officers who have had the opportunities of signalising themselves by eminent services during the late war may share in the honours of the said Order, and that their names may be delivered down to remote posterity, accompanied by the marks of distinction which they have so nobly earned." The Order was now to consist of three classes: Knights Grand Cross, Knights Commander, and Companions. The existing Knights Companion (of which there were 60)The Times, 10 January 1815, p3 became Knight Grand Cross; this class was limited to 72 members, of which twelve could be appointed for civil or diplomatic services. The military members had to be of the rank of at least Major-General or Rear Admiral. The Knights Commander were limited to 180, exclusive of foreign nationals holding British commissions, up to ten of whom could be appointed as honorary Knights Commander. They had to be of the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel or Post-Captain. The number of Companions was not specified, but they had to have received a medal or been mentioned in despatches since the start of the war in 1803. A list of about 500 names was subsequently published. Two further officers were appointed, an "Officer of arms attendant on the Knights Commanders and Companions", and a "Secretary appertaining to the Knights Commanders and Companions" The large increase in numbers caused some complaints that such an expansion would reduce the prestige of the Order. In 1847, Queen Victoria issued new statutes eliminating all references to an exclusively military Order. As well as removing the word 'Military' from the full name of the Order, this opened up the grades of Knight Commander and Companion to civil appointments, and the Military and Civil Divisions of the Order were established. New numerical limits were imposed, and the opportunity also taken to regularise the 1815 expansion of the Order.Letters Patent dated 14 April 1847The document by which the Prince Regent modified the structure of the Order in 1815 was a Warrant under the Royal sign-manual. This is of lesser authority than Letters Patent under the Great Seal, by which the Order and its Statutes were originally established. It had been questioned on a number of occasions whether the Statutes of the Order could be modified by anything less than such Letters Patent. The 1847 Letters Patent retroactively confirmed the validity of the 1815 document and the subsequent appointments to the Order The 1847 statutes also abolished all the medieval ritual, however they did introduce a formal Investiture ceremony, conducted by the Sovereign wearing the Mantle and insignia of the Order, attended by the Officers and as many GCBs as possible, in their Mantles.Risk, p61 In 1859 a further edition of the Statutes was issued; the changes related mainly to the costs associated with the Order. Prior to this date it had been the policy that the insignia (which were provided by the Crown) were to be returned on the death of the holder; the exception had been foreigners who had been awarded honorary membership. In addition foreigners had usually been provided with stars made of silver and diamonds, whereas ordinary members had only embroidered stars. The decision was made to award silver stars to all members, and only require the return of the Collar. The Crown had also been paying the fees due to the officers of the Order for members who had been appointed for the services in the recent war. The fees were abolished and replaced with a salary of approximately the same average value. The offices of Genealogist and Messenger were abolished, and those of Registrar and Secretary combined.Risk, p70 In 1910, after his accession to the throne, George V ordered the revival of the Installation ceremony, perhaps prompted by the first Installation ceremony of the more junior Order of St Michael and St George, held a few years earlier,Risk, p. 89 and the building of a new chapel for the Order of the Thistle in 1911.Perkins, p. 122 The Installation ceremony took place on 22 July 1913 in the Henry VII Chapel,Risk, p. 92Perkins, pp. 124–131 and Installations have been held at regular intervals since. Prior to the 1913 Installation it was necessary to adapt the chapel to accommodate the larger number of members. An appeal was made to the members of the Order, and following the Installation a surplus remained. A Committee was formed from the Officers to administer the 'Bath Chapel Fund', and over time this committee has come to consider other matters than purely financial ones.Risk, pp. 95–96 Another revision of the statutes of the Order was undertaken in 1925, to consolidate the 41 additional statutes which had been issued since the 1859 revision.16 in Queen Victoria's reign, 6 in Edward VII's and 19 in George V's. (Risk, p. 97) Women were admitted to the Order in 1971. In the 1971 New Year Honours, Jean Nunn became the first woman admitted to the order. In 1975, Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, an aunt of Elizabeth II, became the first (and to date only) woman to reach the highest rank, Dame Grand Cross. Princess Alice (née Douglas-Montagu-Scott) was a direct descendant of the Order's first Great Master,Risk, p. 102 and her husband, who had died the previous year, had also held that office. The British Sovereign is the Sovereign of the Order of the Bath. As with all honours except those in the Sovereign's personal gift,The Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order the Sovereign makes all appointments to the Order on the advice of the Government.  The next-most senior member of the Order is the Great Master, of which there have been nine: Originally a Prince of the Blood Royal, as the Principal Knight Companion, ranked next after the sovereign.Statutes 1725, article 4 This position was joined to that of the Great Master in the statutes of 1847.Letters Patent dated 14 April 1847, quoted in Statutes 1847 The Great Master and Principal Knight is now either a descendant of George I or "some other exalted personage"; the holder of the office has custody of the seal of the order and is responsible for enforcing the statutes.  The statutes also provide for the following: Regular membership is limited to citizens of the United Kingdom and of other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is Sovereign. Appointees are usually officers of the armed forces or senior civil servants, such as permanent secretaries.  Members appointed to the Civil Division must "by their personal services to [the] crown or by the performance of public duties have merited ... royal favour."Statutes 1925, article 9 Appointments to the Military Division are restricted by the minimum rank of the individual. GCBs must hold the rank of rear admiral, major general or air vice marshal.Statutes 1925, article 8 KCBs must hold the rank of captain in the Royal Navy, colonel in the Army or Royal Marines, or group captain in the Royal Air Force.Statutes 1925, article 10 CBs must be of the rank of lieutenant commander, major or squadron leader, and in addition must have been mentioned in despatches for distinction in a command position in a combat situation. Non-line officers (e.g. engineers, medics) may be appointed only for meritorious service in war time.Statutes 1925, article 12 Commonwealth citizens not subjects of the Queen and foreigners may be made Honorary Members.Statutes 1925, article 15 Queen Elizabeth II has established the custom of awarding an honorary GCB to visiting heads of state, for example Gustav Heinemann, and Josip Broz Tito (in 1972),The Times, 25 October 1972, p21 Ronald Reagan (in 1989), Lech Wałęsa (in 1991), Dr. Censu Tabone, President of Malta, in 1992, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, George H. W. Bush (in 1993),The Times, 1 December 1993, p24 Nicolas Sarkozy in March 2008, In 2012, former Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Turkish President Abdullah Gül, Slovenian President Dr Danilo Türk Mexican President Felipe Calderón, and South African President Jacob Zuma. Foreign generals are also often given honorary appointments to the Order, for example: Marshal Ferdinand Foch and Marshal Joseph Joffre during World War I; Marshal Georgy Zhukov,The Times, Issue 50193; 13 July 1945; pg. 4; col A King Abdul-Aziz of Saudi Arabia, General Dwight D. Eisenhower and General Douglas MacArthur during World War II;The Times, 27 May 1943, p4 and General Norman SchwarzkopfThe Times, 21 May 1991 and General Colin Powell after the Gulf War. A more controversial member of the Order was Robert Mugabe, whose honour was stripped by the Queen, on the advice of the Foreign Secretary, David Miliband, on 25 June 2008 "as a mark of revulsion at the abuse of human rights and abject disregard for the democratic process in Zimbabwe over which President Mugabe has presided." Honorary members do not count towards the numerical limits in each class.Statutes 1925, article 18 In addition the statutes allow the Sovereign to exceed the limits in time of war or other exceptional circumstances."In the event of any future wars or of any action or services civil or military meriting peculiar honour and reward...to increase the numbers in any of the said classes and in any of the said divisions". Statutes 1925, article 17  The Order of the Bath now has six officers:Court Circular, 17 May 2006 The office of Dean is held by the Dean of Westminster. The King of Arms, responsible for heraldry, is known as Bath King of Arms; he is not, however, a member of the College of Arms, like many heralds. The Order's Usher is known as the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod; he does not, unlike his Order of the Garter equivalent (the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod) perform any duties in the House of Lords. There were originally seven officers, each of whom was to receive fees from the Knights Companion both on appointment and annually thereafter. The office of Messenger was abolished in 1859. The office of Genealogist was abolished at the same time, but revived in 1913.Risk, p. 93 The offices of Registrar and Secretary were formally merged in 1859, although the two positions had been held concurrently for the previous century.Risk, pp. 13, 70 An Officer of Arms and a Secretary for the Knights Commander and Companions were established in 1815, but abolished in 1847.Statutes 1847, article 15 The office of Deputy Secretary was created in 1925. Under the Hanoverian kings certain of the officers also held heraldic office. The office of Blanc Coursier Herald of Arms was attached to that of the Genealogist, Brunswick Herald of Arms to the Gentleman Usher, and Bath King of Arms was also made Gloucester King of Arms with heraldic jurisdiction over Wales.Statute dated 17 January 1726 (according to Risk, p14). Both the 1812 and 1847 editions of the Statutes give the date as 17 January 1725, but this is most probably a misprint since the Order was not founded until May 1725, and the additional statute also specified the office holders by name. This was the result of a move by Anstis to give the holders of these sinecures greater security; the offices of the Order of the Bath were held at the pleasure of the Great Master, while appointments to the heraldic offices were made by the King under the Great Seal and were for life.Risk, p. 14      Members of the Order wear elaborate costumes on important occasions (such as its quadrennial installation ceremonies and coronations), which vary by rank: The mantle, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross, is made of crimson satin lined with white taffeta. On the left side is a representation of the star (see below). The mantle is bound with two large tassels.Statutes 1925, article 23 The hat, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights and Dames Commander, is made of black velvet; it includes an upright plume of feathers.The hat was made of white satin (Statutes 1725, article 8), but was changed to black velvet at the command of George IV for his coronation (Nicolas, p198). The hat is not explicitly specified in the 1847 or 1925 statutes The collar, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross, is made of gold and weighs 30 troy ounces (933 g). It consists of depictions of nine imperial crowns and eight sets of flowers (roses for England, thistles for Scotland and shamrocks for Ireland), connected by seventeen silver knots. On lesser occasions, simpler insignia are used: The star is used only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights and Dames Commander. Its style varies by rank and division; it is worn pinned to the left breast: The star for military Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists of a Maltese Cross on top of an eight-pointed silver star; the star for military Knights and Dames Commander is an eight-pointed silver cross pattée. Each bears in the centre three crowns surrounded by a red ring bearing the motto of the Order in gold letters. The circle is flanked by two laurel branches and is above a scroll bearing the words Ich dien (older German for "I serve") in gold letters. The star for civil Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists of an eight-pointed silver star, without the Maltese cross; the star for civil Knights and Dames Commander is an eight-pointed silver cross pattée. The design of each is the same as the design of the military stars, except that the laurel branches and the words Ich dien are excluded. The badge varies in design, size and manner of wearing by rank and division. The Knight and Dame Grand Cross' badge is larger than the Knight and Dame Commander's badge, which is in turn larger than the Companion's badge;Statutes 1925, articles 23,24,25 however, these are all suspended on a crimson ribbon. Knights and Dames Grand Cross wear the badge on a riband or sash, passing from the right shoulder to the left hip. Knights Commander and male Companions wear the badge from a ribbon worn around the neck. Dames Commander and female Companions wear the badge from a bow on the left side: The military badge is a gold Maltese Cross of eight points, enamelled in white. Each point of the cross is decorated by a small gold ball; each angle has a small figure of a lion. The centre of the cross bears three crowns on the obverse side, and a rose, a thistle and a shamrock, emanating from a sceptre on the reverse side. Both emblems are surrounded by a red circular ring bearing the motto of the Order, which are in turn flanked by two laurel branches, above a scroll bearing the words Ich dien in gold letters. The civil badge is a plain gold oval, bearing three crowns on the obverse side, and a rose, a thistle and a shamrock, emanating from a sceptre on the reverse side; both emblems are surrounded by a ring bearing the motto of the Order. On certain "collar days" designated by the Sovereign, members attending formal events may wear the Order's collar over their military uniform or eveningwear. When collars are worn (either on collar days or on formal occasions such as coronations), the badge is suspended from the collar. The collars and badges of Knights and Dames Grand Cross are returned to the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood upon the decease of their owners. All other insignia may be retained by their owners.  The Chapel of the Order is Henry VII Lady Chapel in Westminster Abbey.Statutes 1925, article 21 Every four years, an installation ceremony, presided over by the Great Master, and a religious service are held in the Chapel; the Sovereign attends every alternate ceremony. The last such service was in May 2014 and was attended by the Sovereign.Queen replaced by Charles in Order of the Bath service duties, BBC news, 9 May 2014. The Sovereign and each knight who has been installed is allotted a stall in the choir of the chapel. Since there are a limited number of stalls in the Chapel, only the most senior Knights and Dames Grand Cross are installed. A stall made vacant by the death of a military Knight Grand Cross is offered to the next most senior uninstalled military GCB, and similarly for vacancies among civil GCBs. Waits between admission to the Order and installation may be very long; for instance, Marshal of the Air Force Lord Craig of Radley was created a Knight Grand Cross in 1984, but was not installed until 2006. Above each stall, the occupant's heraldic devices are displayed. Perched on the pinnacle of a knight's stall is his helm, decorated with a mantling and topped by his crest. Under English heraldic law, women other than monarchs do not bear helms or crests; instead, the coronet appropriate to the dame's rank (if she is a peer or member of the Royal family) is used. Above the crest or coronet, the knight's or dame's heraldic banner is hung, emblazoned with his or her coat of arms. At a considerably smaller scale, to the back of the stall is affixed a piece of brass (a "stall plate") displaying its occupant's name, arms and date of admission into the Order. Upon the death of a Knight, the banner, helm, mantling and crest (or coronet or crown) are taken down. The stall plates, however, are not removed; rather, they remain permanently affixed somewhere about the stall, so that the stalls of the chapel are festooned with a colourful record of the Order's Knights (and now Dames) throughout history. When the grade of Knight Commander was established in 1815 the regulations specified that they too should have a banner and stall plate affixed in the chapel. This was never implemented (despite some of the KCBs paying the appropriate fees) primarily due to lack of space,Risk, p40 although the 1847 statutes allow all three classes to request the erection of a plate in the chapel bearing the member's name, date of nomination, and (for the two higher classes) optionally the coat of arms.Statutes 1847, article 18  Members of the Order of the Bath are assigned positions in the order of precedence.Statutes 1925, article 22 Wives of male members also feature on the order of precedence, as do sons, daughters and daughters-in-law of Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commander; relatives of female members, however, are not assigned any special precedence. Generally, individuals can derive precedence from their fathers or husbands, but not from their mothers or wives. (See order of precedence in England and Wales for the exact positions.) Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commander prefix "Sir," and Dames Grand Cross and Dames Commander prefix "Dame," to their forenames.Statutes 1925, article 20 Wives of Knights may prefix "Lady" to their surnames, but no equivalent privilege exists for husbands of Dames. Such forms are not used by peers and princes, except when the names of the former are written out in their fullest forms. Furthermore, honorary foreign members and clergymen do not receive the accolade of knighthood, and so are not entitled to the prefix "Sir", unless the former subsequently become Commonwealth citizens. Knights and Dames Grand Cross use the post-nominal "GCB"; Knights Commander use "KCB"; Dames Commander use "DCB"; Companions use "CB".www.honours.gov.uk summary of the Orders of Chivalry. The post-nominal letters are not mentioned in the Statutes of the Order Knights and Dames Grand Cross are also entitled to receive heraldic supporters.Statutes 1925, article 28 Furthermore, they may encircle their arms with a depiction of the circlet (a red circle bearing the motto) with the badge pendant thereto and the collar; the former is shown either outside or on top of the latter. Knights and Dames Commander and Companions may display the circlet, but not the collar, around their arms. The badge is depicted suspended from the collar or circlet. Members of the Military division may encompass the circlet with "two laurel branches issuant from an escrol azure inscribed Ich dien", as appears on the badge. Members of the Order of the Bath and their children are able to be married in Westminster Abbey in London.FAQ - Wesminster Abbey It is possible for membership in the Order to be revoked. Under the 1725 statutes the grounds for this were heresy, high treason, or fleeing from battle out of cowardice. Knights Companion could in such cases be degraded at the next Chapter meeting. It was then the duty of the Gentleman Usher to "pluck down the escocheon [i.e. stallplate] of such knight and spurn it out of the chapel" with "all the usual marks of infamy".Statutes 1725 art 3 Only two people were ever degraded &mdash; Lord Cochrane in 1813 and General Sir Eyre Coote in 1816, both for political reasons, rather than any of the grounds given in the statute. Lord Cochrane was subsequently reinstated, but Coote died a few years after his degradation.Risk, p30 Under Queen Victoria's 1847 statutes a member "convicted of treason, cowardice, felony, or any infamous crime derogatory to his honour as a knight or gentleman, or accused and does not submit to trial in a reasonable time, shall be degraded from the Order by a special ordinance signed by the sovereign". The Sovereign was to be the sole judge, and also had the power to restore such members.Statutes 1847, article 26 The situation today is that membership may be cancelled or annulled, and the entry in the register erased, by an ordinance signed by the Sovereign and sealed with the seal of the Order, on the recommendation of the appropriate Minister. Such cancellations may be subsequently reversed.Statutes 1925, article 30 William Pottinger, a senior civil servant, lost both his status of CB and Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (CVO) in 1975 when he was gaoled for corruptly receiving gifts from the architect John Poulson. Romanian president Nicolae Ceauşescu was stripped of his honorary GCB status by Queen Elizabeth II on 24 December 1989, the day before his execution. Robert Mugabe, the President of Zimbabwe, was stripped of his honorary GCB status by the Queen, on the advice of the Foreign Secretary, David Miliband, on 25 June 2008 "as a mark of revulsion at the abuse of human rights and abject disregard for the democratic process in Zimbabwe over which President Mugabe has presided." Vicky Pryce, former wife of Chris Huhne, was stripped of the honour by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 July 2013, following her conviction for perverting the course of justice. center Neck badge, awarded to Cecil Fane de Salis (1859-1948) in 1935 Star, awarded to Cecil Fane de Salis Star and neck Badge awarded to Sir Charles Taylor du Plat For people who have been appointed to the Order of the Bath, see the following categories:      Military rank (if any) Name Post-Nominals Year Appointed Admiral of the Fleet Sir Edward Ashmore 1974 Air Chief Marshal Sir Douglas Lowe 1977 Field Marshal The Lord Bramall 1979 Air Chief Marshal Sir David Evans 1979 Sir Douglas Wass 1980 Admiral Sir James Eberle 1981 Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Keith Williamson 1982 The Lord Armstrong of Ilminster 1983 Admiral Sir Desmond Cassidi 1983 Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Terry 1983 Sir William Fraser 1984 Marshal of the Royal Air Force The Lord Craig of Radley 1984 General Sir George Cooper 1984 Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Peter Harding 1988 Field Marshal Sir John Chapple 1988 Sir Peter Middleton 1989 Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick Hine 1989 Sir Derek Oulton 1989 Sir William Heseltine 1990 Admiral of the Fleet Sir Benjamin Bathurst 1991 Air Marshal Sir David Parry-Evans 1991 General Sir Brian Kenny 1991 Field Marshal The Lord Inge 1992 Admiral Sir Jock Slater 1992 The Lord Butler of Brockwell 1992 Air Chief Marshal Sir Michael Graydon 1993 General The Lord Ramsbotham 1993 Admiral Sir John Kerr 1993 Field Marshal The Lord Guthrie of Craigiebank 1994 General Sir John Waters 1994 Air Chief Marshal Sir Michael Alcock 1995 General Sir John Wilsey 1995 Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Johns 1997 General Sir Roger Wheeler 1997 The Lord Fellowes 1998 Rt Hon. Sir John Chilcot 1998 Admiral of the Fleet The Lord Boyce 1999 Field Marshal The Lord Walker of Aldringham 1999 General Sir Jeremy Mackenzie 1999 Sir Nigel Wicks 1999 Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Squire 2001 The Lord Wilson of Dinton 2001 Admiral Sir Nigel Essenhigh 2002 Sir Hayden Phillips 2002 Sir David Omand 2004 Admiral The Lord West of Spithead 2004 General Sir Michael Jackson 2004 Marshal of the Royal Air Force The Lord Stirrup 2005 Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Terry 2006 Sir Richard Mottram 2006 The Lord Janvrin 2007 General The Lord Dannatt 2008 Air Chief Marshal Sir Glenn Torpy 2008 Admiral Sir Jonathon Band 2008 Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope 2010 General Sir Nicholas Houghton 2011 Sir David Normington 2011 General The Lord Richards of Herstmonceux 2011 The Lord O'Donnell 2011 Air Chief Marshal Sir Stephen Dalton 2012 General Sir Peter Wall 2013 Sir Nicholas Macpherson 2015 Admiral Sir George Zambellas 2016 Air Chief Marshal Sir Andrew Pulford 2016 Military rank / Position Name Post-Nominals Year Appointed Appointment when awarded Head of state   Sultan Abdul Halim 1972 5th and 14th Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia Head of state   Luis Echeverría 1973 50th President of Mexico Head of state  Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani 1976 Emir of Qatar Head of state   Sultan Qaboos bin Said al Said 1982 Sultan of Oman Head of state   Lech Wałęsa 1991 2nd President of Poland Head of state  Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah 1992 Sultan of Brunei Head of state   George H. W. Bush 1993 41st President of the United States Head of state   Aleksander Kwaśniewski 1996 3rd President of Poland Head of state   Fernando Henrique Cardoso 1997 34th President of Brazil Head of state   Carlo Azeglio Ciampi 2000 10th President of Italy Head of state   Abdullah II of Jordan 2001 King of Jordan Heas of state  Thabo Mbeki 2001 2nd President of South Africa Head of state   Valdas Adamkus 2006 9th President of Lithuania Head of state   Toomas Hendrik Ilves 2006 4th President of Estonia Head of state   Abdullah Gül 2008 11th President of Turkey Head of state  Nicolas Sarkozy 2008 23rd President of France Head of state   Danilo Türk 2008 4th President of Slovenia Head of state   Felipe Calderón 2009 56th President of Mexico Head of state  Jacob Zuma 2010 4th President of South Africa Head of state   Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 2012 6th President of Indonesia Head of state    Park Geun-hye 2013 11th President of South Korea Head of state  François Hollande 2014 24th President of France Head of state   Tony Tan 2014 7th President of Singapore Head of state   Enrique Peña Nieto 2015 57th President of Mexico Head of state  Joachim Gauck 2015 11th President of Germany Royal consort   Henrik, Prince Consort of Denmark Consort of Queen Margrete II Head of state  Jacques Chirac 22nd President of France Head of state   Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan 2nd President of the United Arab Emirates Head of state   Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva 35th President of Brazil Knight Grand Cross () or Dame Grand Cross () Knight Commander () or Dame Commander () Companion () Members of the House of Commons: 14 The Royal Household or sinecures: 11 Diplomats: 4 The Walpole family, including the Prime Minister: 3 Naval and Army Officers: 3 Irish Peers: 2 Country gentlemen with Court Appointments: 2 1725&ndash;1749: John Montagu, 2nd Duke of MontaguNicolas, Appendix p. lxx gives the first four Great Masters, although he considers the latter three to have only been acting Great Masters 1749&ndash;1767: (Vacant) 1767&ndash;1827: Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany 1827&ndash;1830: Prince William, Duke of Clarence and St Andrews (later King William IV) 1830&ndash;1837: (Vacant) 1837&ndash;1843: Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex 1843&ndash;1861: Albert, Prince ConsortPrince Albert was appointed acting Great Master sometime in 1843, and the appointment was made substantive by the 1847 Statutes, article 4. Risk says that he was appointed acting Great Master on March 31, 1843, however The Times, reporting the death of the Duke of Sussex (22 April 1843, pp4–5) says that the office of acting Great Master became vacant on his death. At any rate when the executors of the Duke of Sussex delivered his insignia together with the seal and statutes to the Queen on 20 June (The Times, 21 June 1843, p6) Prince Albert was then acting Great Master. 1861&ndash;1897: (Vacant) 1897&ndash;1901: Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII)The Times, 22 June 1897, p10 1901&ndash;1942: Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn 1942&ndash;1974: Prince Henry, Duke of GloucesterThe Times, 25 February 1942, p7 1974&ndash;present: Charles, Prince of Wales. 120 Knights or Dames Grand Cross (GCB) (of whom the Great Master is the First and Principal) 355 Knights Commander (KCB) or Dames Commander (DCB) 1,925 Companions (CB) the Dean: John Hall, Dean of Westminster (ex officio) the King of Arms: Michael Boyce, Baron Boyce the Registrar and Secretary: Iain HendersonCourt Circular, 13 June 2006 the Deputy Secretary: Alexander Matheson of Matheson, yr. the Genealogist: Thomas Woodcock the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod: Charles Vyvyan Sovereign: Queen Elizabeth II Grand Master: Charles, Prince of Wales List of Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath List of Knights Companion of the Order of the Bath List of honorary British knights and dames List of people who have declined a British honour List of revocations of appointments to orders and awarded decorations and medals of the United Kingdom Search recommendations for the Order of the Bath on The UK National Archives' website. Brennan, I. G. (2004). "The Most Honourable Order of the Bath". Cambridge University Heraldic and Genealogical Society. (2002). "The Most Honourable Order of the Bath". Velde, F. R. (2003). "Order of Precedence in England and Wales".
