  Paleoconservatism (sometimes shortened to paleocon) is a conservative political philosophy found primarily in the United States stressing tradition, limited government and civil society, along with religious, regional, national and Western identity.For more discussion of defining elements of paleoconservative thought, see Scotchie, Joseph, ed., The Paleoconservatives: New Voices of the Old Right, 1999., Gottfried, Paul, The Conservative Movement, 1993., Gottfried's "Paleoconservatism" article in American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia (ISI:2006), and the "What Is Paleoconservatism?" symposium in Chronicles magazine, January, 2001"What Is Paleoconservatism?"  Paleoconservatives in the 21st century often highlight their points of disagreement with neoconservatives, especially regarding issues such as military interventionism, illegal immigration and high rates of legal immigration, as well as multiculturalism, affirmative action, free trade, and foreign aid. They also criticize social welfare and social democracy, which some refer to as the "therapeutic managerial state", the "welfare-warfare state" or "polite totalitarianism". They identify themselves as the legitimate heirs to the American conservative tradition.Woltermann, Chris. "What is paleoconservatism?" Telos. New York: Fall 1993. Elizabethtown College professor Paul Gottfried is credited with coining the term in the 1980s.Mcdonald Wesley. "Russell Kirk and the Prospects for Conservatism", Humanitas, Vol. 12, 1999. He says the term originally referred to various Americans, such as conservative and traditionalist Catholics and agrarian Southerners, who turned to anti-communism during the Cold War.Gottfried, Paul. "Paleoconservatism" in American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia (ISI:2006) Paleoconservatism is closely linked with distributism. Paleoconservative thought has been published by the Rockford Institute's Chronicles: A Magazine of American Culture. Politician Pat Buchanan was strongly influenced by its articles and helped create another paleocon publication, The American Conservative. Its concerns overlap those of the Old Right that opposed the New Deal in the 1930s and 1940s,Raimondo, Justin, Reclaiming the American Right: The Lost Legacy of the Conservative Movement, 1993. ISBN 1-883959-00-4. as well as American social conservatism of the late 20th century expressed, for example, in the book Single Issues by Joseph Sobran. The prefix paleo derives from the Greek root palaeo- meaning "ancient" or "old". It is somewhat tongue-in-cheek, and refers to the paleocons' claim to represent a more historic, authentic conservative tradition than that found in neoconservatism. Adherents of paleoconservatism often describe themselves simply as "paleo-." Rich Lowry of National Review claims the prefix "is designed to obscure the fact that it is a recent ideological creation of post-Cold War politics."Reaganism V. Neo-Reaganism, by Richard Lowry; The National Interest, Spring 2005 The paleoconservatives use the term conservative somewhat differently from some US opponents of leftism. Paleocons may reject attempts by Rush Limbaugh and others to graft short-term policy goals — such as school choice, enterprise zones, and faith-based initiatives — into the core of conservatism.  This is mainly due to the paleoconservatives' desire to see these incorporated as long-term institutional goals, rather than short-term victories for the movement itself.  In this way, paleocons are generally regarded as taking the "long view" toward US conservatism, willing to suffer temporary setbacks while never taking their aim off the goal of establishing the primacy of conservative thought into US politics. Moreover, Samuel T. Francis, Thomas Fleming and some other paleocons de-emphasized the "conservative" part of the "paleoconservative" label, saying that they do not want the status quo preserved.Francis, Samuel T., Beautiful Losers: Essays on the Failure of American Conservatism, 1993.Fleming, Thomas (2002-07-22) Home Bound, The New Republic  Fleming and Paul Gottfried called such thinking "stupid tenacity" and described it as "a series of trenches dug in defense of last year's revolution."Conservative Movement, p. xix. Francis defined authentic conservatism as "the survival and enhancement of a particular people and its institutionalized cultural expressions."  He said of the paleoconservative movement: The earliest mention of the word paleoconservative listed in NexisSearch conducted September 8, 2006. is an article by J. Patrick Lewis in the October 20, 1984, issue of The Nation, referring to academic economists who allegedly work to redefine poverty.J. Patrick Lewis (1984-10-20) "Willing Goodness," The Nation The American Heritage Dictionary (fourth edition) lists a generic, informal use of the term, meaning "extremely or stubbornly conservative in political matters." Outside of the United States, the word is sometimes spelled palaeoconservative. Many paleoconservatives identify themselves as "classical conservatives" and trace their philosophy to the Old Right Republicans of the interwar period which influenced the U.S. not to join the League of Nations, reduce immigration with the passage of the Immigration Act of 1924, and oppose Franklin Roosevelt. They often look back even further, to Edmund Burke, as well as the anti-federalist movement that stretched from the days of Thomas Jefferson to John C. Calhoun.Rockwell, Lew (2002-05-02) What I Learned From Paleoism, LewRockwell.com Paleoconservatives question the supposition that European culture and mores can ever be transplanted or even forced upon non-Western cultures, due to separate cultural heritages. As a result, paleocons are most distinctive in their emphatic opposition to open immigration by non-Europeans, and their general disapproval of U.S. intervention overseas. Sam Francis wrote: They are also strongly critical of neoconservatives and their sympathizers in print media, talk radio and cable TV news. Paleocons often say they are not conservatives in the sense that they necessarily wish to preserve existing institutions or seek merely to slow the growth of modern big-government conservatism.American Conservative Union Foundation They do not wish to be closely identified with the U.S. Republican Party.  Rather, they seek the renewal of "small 'r'" republican society in the context of the Western heritage, customs and civilization.American Conservative Union Foundation  Joseph Scotchie wrote: By contrast, paleocons see neoconservatives as empire-builders and themselves as defenders of the republic, pointing to Rome as an example of how an ongoing campaign of military expansionism can destroy a republic. On some issues, many paleocons are hard to distinguish from others on the conservative spectrum.  For example, they tend to oppose abortion on demandFor example, Single Issues, by Joseph Sobran. and gay marriage,http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/cgi-bin/hardright.cgi/Ethics_01A___Gay_Ma.writeback while supporting capital punishment, handgun ownership[ ]  and an original intent reading of the U.S. Constitution. On the other hand, paleocons are often more sympathetic to environmental protection, animal welfare, and anti-consumerism[ ] than others on the US Right. Paleoconservatives argue that since human nature is limited and finite, any attempt to create a man-made utopia is headed for disaster and potential carnage. Instead, they lean toward tradition, family, customs, religious institutions and classical learning to provide wisdom and guidance. Thomas Fleming stated this opposition to abstract ideals in a way that critic David Brooks called a "startling crescendo":  Historian W. Wesley McDonald explains the opposition to ideology this way:  Along these lines, Joseph Sobran, in his "Pensees", argues that Western civilization relies on civility at the center of the society: Certain paleoconservatives say that tradition is a better guide than reason.  For example, Mel Bradford wrote that certain questions are settled before any serious deliberation concerning a preferred course of conduct may begin.  This ethic is based in a "culture of families, linked by friendship, common enemies, and common projects." So a good conservative keeps "a clear sense of what Southern grandmothers have always meant in admonishing children, 'we don't do that'."quoted in The Rebuke of History, p. 233 Thomas Fleming calls tradition "a body of wisdom and truth and a set of attitudes and behavior handed down from one generation to another. It is our parents' respect for their grandfathers that we reflect when we refuse to think ourselves wiser than our ancestors and do not presume to condemn their shortcomings."  By following tradition, Joseph Sobran said that society can maintain continuity with the past, through words, rituals, records, commemorations, and laws: Furthermore, James Kalb argues that tradition succeeds where ideology fails because it includes habits and attitudes about things that are hard to articulate rationally.  Many aspects of social life resist clear definition, so technocratic approaches to social policy deserve suspicion:  Many paleocons also say that Westerners have lost touch with their classical and European heritage, to the point that they are in danger of losing their civilization.http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/cgi-bin/hardright.cgi/Back_to_Mordor.html?seemore=y Robert S. Griffin notes that paleocons fear the United States becoming a "secularized, homogenized, de-Europeanized, pacified, deluded, manipulated, lowest-common-denominator-leveled, popular-culture-dopified country"http://theoccidentalquarterly.com/vol5no2/52-griffin.html  Paleocons tend to dislike abstract principles presented without connection to concrete roots, like religion, heritage or traditional institutions. This distaste for universalism includes the doctrinal conclusions by socialists, neo-Thomists and Straussians. For example, Mel Bradford wrote in "A Better Guide Than Reason" (citing Michael Oakeshott) that:  Some paleocons also profess a conservative value-centered historicism, which Gottfried defines as "the belief that historical circumstances set values." This is distinguished from nihilism, postmodernism and moral relativism.  Samuel Francis argued that this position is a "Burkean appeal to tradition."[ ]   For example, Edmund Burke wrote in his "Reflections on the Revolution in France."  Claes Ryn says that life has "an enduring purpose, but one that manifests itself differently as individuals and circumstances are different."  He writes:  Anti-Federalism is another key aspect of paleoconservatism, which adherents see as an antitype to the managerial state. The paleocon flavor urges honoring the principle of subsidiarity, that is, decentralized government, local rule, private property and minimal bureaucracy.Conservatism FAQ In an international context, this view would be known as federalism and paleocons often look to John C. Calhoun for inspiration. As to the role of statecraft in society, Thomas Fleming says it should not be confused with soulcraft.  He gives his summary of the paleocon position:  Paleocons often argue that modern managerial society is a threat to stable families. Allan C. Carlson, former president of the Rockford Institute, argues that  He calls this a universal rule of human nature, true for Westerners and non-Westerners alike.  He also argues that happiness "comes through natural family bonds" and that "the future of any nation shall be by way of the family."  He defines family as "a man and a woman living in a socially sanctioned bond called marriage for the purposes of propagating and rearing children, sharing intimacy and resources, and conserving lineage, property, and tradition." Joseph Sobran picks up this same theme, saying that heterosexual marriage is hard-coded into human nature:  Paleocons also question the validity of gender feminism in similar ways, some questioning feminism in both its radical and moderate forms.  They say that the push for total gender equality dehumanizes both men and women, damaging the nuclear family and sacralizing abortion.  Certain attitudes toward feminism also create room for the managerial state to try engineering sexual equality. Gottfried described this position, which was influenced by scholar Allan Carlson, thus:  Allan C. Carlson says that we live in a "post-family order", in which elites no longer accept the centrality of family life.Thomas Fleming argues that this very denial means this system is doomed. http://www.chroniclesmagazine.org/cgi-bin/hardright.cgi/Ethics_O1A2__Gay_M.writeback  In response, he calls for a pro-active social conservatism that seeks "real alternatives to the centralized ‘corporate state’ that are compatible with liberty and family life."  He argues that there is a permanent tension between the family and "individualist, industrialized society." He says the modern "abstract state" too often sees the family as "its principal rival" and tries to suppress it.  It can also hurt family living by the unintended consequences of public policy with good intentions. He also chides U.S. Republicans "for consistently favoring Wall Street over Main Street." As an alternative to the "abstract state", Carlson argues the state must recognize that men and women "are different in reproductive, economic, and social functions", even though they share political and property rights.  He says that churches and other religious bodies must step in and help rebuild "family-centered communities."  As for common people, he says,  Carlson argues that the family's greatest challenge in the early 21st century comes from what he calls "soft totalitarianisms", which are "packaged around a militant secular individualism, but still seeking to build a marriage-free, post-family order."  This includes same-sex marriage, the Left's association of family values with abortion, and "equity feminism". Samuel T. Francis uses similar ideas to argue that society should regulate sexual behavior, specifically laws against sodomy and gays in the military."Sex and consequences", The Washington Times, February 2, 1993. Other contemporary luminaries include Donald Livingston, a Professor of Philosophy at Emory and corresponding editor for Chronicles;  Paul Craig Roberts, an attorney and former Reagan administration Treasury official; commentator Joseph Sobran (died 2010), a columnist and contributing editor for Chronicles; novelist and essayist Chilton Williamson, senior editor for books at Chronicles; classicist Thomas Fleming, editor of Chronicles; and historian Clyde N. Wilson, long-time contributing editor for Chronicles. Another prominent paleoconservative, Theodore Pappas,a former Chronicles managing editor is the current executive editor of Encyclopædia Britannica. — EB corporate site mentioning Pappas The movement combines disparate people and ideas that might seem incompatible in another context.  Such diversity of thought echoes the paleo opposition to ideology and political rationalism, reflecting the influence of thinkers like Russell Kirk and Michael Oakeshott. Pat Buchanan argues that a good politician must "defend the moral order rooted in the Old and New Testament and Natural Law" — and that "the deepest problems in our society are not economic or political, but moral."Pat Buchanan Responds To Lenora Fulani'S Resignation — Buchanan Campaign Press Releases — theinternetbrigade — Official Web Site   On the other hand, Samuel Francis complained that the "Religious Right" focuses on certain social issues and neglects other civilizational crises. Russell Kirk (1914–94) is a key figure in paleoconservatism, in that several of his books present an outline of a pervasive Anglo-American conservative tradition that exists despite many other distinctions.  His own career stretched long enough to for him to defend Robert A. Taft in the 1950s, write for National Review during the Cold War, criticize neoconservatism in the 1980s, and give speeches supporting Buchanan in 1992.  One neoconservative writer, Dan Himmelfarb, even refers to Kirk's The Conservative Mind as "the seminal work of paleoconservatism", even though it was first published in 1953. Kirk developed six "canons" of conservatism.  Gerald J. Russello described them thus: In addition, Kirk said Christianity and Western Civilization are "unimaginable apart from one another."  He said that "all culture arises out of religion. When religious faith decays, culture must decline, though often seeming to flourish for a space after the religion which has nourished it has sunk into disbelief.". Kirk called libertarians "chirping sectaries", quoting T. S. Eliot, and said that they and conservatives have nothing in common. He called the movement "an ideological clique forever splitting into sects still smaller and odder, but rarely conjugating."  He said a line of division exists between believers in "some sort of transcendent moral order" and "utilitarians admitting no transcendent sanctions for conduct."  He put libertarians in the latter category.. Kirk also popularized the Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke as the prototypical conservative — and many paleocons consider him a hallowed ancestor.  For them, he represents a vital link between the American right and the greater tradition of British customs and common law. As such, his ideas are a touchstone for a conservatism that respects tradition, while rejecting authoritarianism. In the United States, the Southern Agrarians, John T. Flynn, Albert Jay Nock, Garet Garrett, Robert R. McCormick, Felix Morley, and Richard M. Weaver among others, articulated positions that have proved influential among contemporary paleoconservatives. Some paleocons enthusiastically embrace the decentralizing tenets of the Anti-Federalists, such as John Dickinson and George Mason.  Neoconservative critic David Brooks lists William Jennings Bryan, T. S. Eliot, Allen Tate, John Crowe Ransom, Cleanth Brooks, and Walker Percy as major paleo influences.  The German-born and Calvinist political philosopher Johannes Althusius and his tract Politica, with its core emphasis on the principle of subsidiarity, has proven influential as well. Paul Gottfried once noted an "occasional paleo association with over-the-top Catholicism."  In fact, counter-revolutionary (Roman Catholic) European precursors to the paleoconservatives include Joseph de Maistre, Charles Maurras, Juan Donoso Cortés, Klemens Wenzel von Metternich, and Pope Pius IX, though they tend to carry influence limited to the Roman Catholic traditionalist subset of paleoconservatism. G. K. ChestertonSee, for example, Chesterton's poem "The Secret People", as well as ISI's scholarly analysis of him in Modern Age and Intercollegiate Review and Hilaire Belloc are also popular Catholic forebears of paleo thought.  As for Chesterton and Belloc, Joseph Sobran explained their relevance: Some non-Catholic paleocons, such as Sam Francis, complained that this tradition is overrepresented among conservative intellectuals, thus putting the movement out of step with Middle America.  He reluctantly acknowledged the Southern Presbyterian influence upon his own thinking.American Renaissance News: Parallel Lives: William F. Buckley vs. Samuel T. Francis  In addition, precursors of a Protestant paleoconservatism can be seen in 19th century figures such as Robert Lewis Dabney, Charles Hodge, Friedrich Julius Stahl, Abraham Kuyper and Guillaume Groen van Prinsterer. Many paleocons also look to more modernist or historicist sources, such as Machiavelli, Hobbes and even Gramsci for intellectual ammunition.  Contrarian Leftists such as Eugene Genovese, Christopher Lasch and Paul Piccone also influenced the movement.Conservative Movement, p.154 Samuel Francis even explored the nihilistic fiction of H. P. Lovecraft.American Renaissance News: Sam Francis  To them, such thinkers help explain modernity, power relationships, and show how managerial society subverted Western traditions.Russell Kirk and the Prospects for Conservatism, W. Wesley Mcdonald; Humanitas, Vol. 12, 1999, Some modern European continental conservatives, such as Frenchmen Jacques Barzun, Alain de Benoist, and René Girard, have a mode of thought and cultural criticism esteemed by many paleoconservatives. The southern conservative thread of paleoconservatism embodies the statesmanship of nineteenth-century figures such as John Randolph of Roanoke, John Taylor of Caroline and John C. Calhoun. It found modern expositors in Richard M. Weaver and Mel Bradford. Historian Paul V. Murphy argues that paleoconservatism is rooted in a group of intellectuals fascinated by antebellum culture and the Southern Agrarians, including Thomas Fleming, Clyde Wilson and Bradford. In the 1970s, Fleming, Wilson and Samuel Francis attended the University of North Carolina together, becoming what novelist Walker Percy called "the Chapel Hill conspiracy." Murphy wrote that they developed "a particularistic politics of states' rights and localism, which they combine with a cultural and social criticism defined by Christian and patriarchal organicism."Rebuke of History, p.218.  He also says the Southern traditionalist worldview evolved into what appeared in "Chronicles" from the mid-1980s onward, a focus on national identity mixed with regional particularity, plus skepticism of abstract theory and centralized power. They also said the mainstream view of the old South was distorted.  For example, Bradford said: In the 1995 "New Dixie Manifesto", Fleming and Michael Hill argued that Southerners are pelted with ethnic slurs, denied self-government and stripped of their symbols, including the Confederate flag.leagueofthesouth.net  Like any other people, they have the right to their history and cultural identity.  "After so many decades of strife", they wrote, "black and white Southerners of good will should be left alone to work out their destinies, avoiding, before it is too late, the urban hell that has been created by the lawyers, social engineers and imperial bureaucrats who have grown rich on programs that have done nothing to help anyone but themselves." Thomas DiLorenzo revisited the Southern paleo critique of Abraham Lincoln in his book, The Real Lincoln.  He gives it a paleolibertarian twist, saying the president followed mercantilism, protectionism and the example of Alexander Hamilton. He also said that the Civil War was about destroying the right of secession, not freeing slaves.  Furthermore, he claims that the praise Lincoln commonly receives from conservatives is misguided: As for the 1861–1865 conflict, Clyde Wilson suggest it be referred to as "The War to Preserve Southern Independence."  Fleming argues that secession was legal: Francis, while endorsing "authentic federalism," stopped short at supporting a contemporary return to Southern secessionism, saying it is impractical and that the main political line of division in the United States is not between the regions of North and South (insofar as such regions can still be said to exist) but between elite and nonelite.  He said that Middle Americans in both regions face the same threats.An Infantile Disorder, Chronicles, February 1998. David Brooks, a neoconservative critic, says that paleocons do not dream of seeing slavery reborn.  Instead, he concludes that they link rural communities to a transcendent order and ancient institutions:  William F. Buckley, Jr. was an unwitting influence on paleoconservatism.  During the Cold War, his National Review magazine vowed to stand "athwart history, yelling Stop."Introductory statement in the November 19, 1955 issue.  It promoted both Burke and Kirk, along with Frank Meyer's theory of fusionism; it suggested that conservatives and libertarians reduce arguments with one another and present a united front against Communism.for example,   Many first-generation paleocons were National Review supporters,The influence of future paleocons on the Buckley circle can be seen in  but slowly grew weary as the journal reflected more and more neoconservative influence,The paleocons' dispute with Buckley is described in Paul Gottfried's 1993 edition of The Conservative Movement starting in the 1970s. Chronicles founder Leopold Tyrmand complained that the movement gave political solutions to cultural problems.Conservative Movement, p.50. Open hostility broke out in the mid-1980s and was never resolved. Some paleocons argued that fusionism failed and suggested a new alliance on the right to stand outside the neoconservative consensus.  Pat Buchanan's statement that "We are old church and old right, anti-imperialist and anti-interventionist, disbelievers in Pax Americana" reflects this new coalition.What is Left? What is Right?  William Rusher, former publisher of Buckley's magazine, claims that paleocons are not "representative" conservatives. "The break between the National Review and the paleoconservatives is no tempest in a teapot", he says. "It may well determine the direction of American foreign policy for decades to come." One problem, according to Paul Gottfried and Samuel Francis, was that this was an "archaic conservatism."  This means it saw too much continuity between ancient traditions and the contemporary West, which was in "mortal combat" with Communists and other enemies.  Gottfried says the problem with this mindset, which he finds even in Russell Kirk, is that it missed that "the U.S. was then clearly on its way to becoming a self-identified multicultural society overseen by a post-Christian managerial elite." So these conservatives became too optimistic about modern-day civic virtue.  Looking back, Thomas Fleming remarked that  One notable group, the Intercollegiate Studies Institute (ISI), still follows the old fusionism. It showcases both neoconservative and Old Right ideas, such as anti-interventionism, limited government and cultural regionalism, in its publications and conferences. While it favors free-market solutions it tends to recognize the limitations of the market, or as economist Wilhelm Roepke says, "the market is not everything." ISI scholarship includes analysis of agrarian and distributist works, along with the idea of an "humane economy."For example,  One fusionist, James Burnham, left an important influence on paleocons, especially on Samuel Francis.  Paul Gottfried said that the two men believed that social forces create ideologies — and that "moral visions are the mere accompaniments of the process by which classes make themselves economically dominant and try to control other groups.""After Liberalism", p. g3  Burnham wrote in 1967: Burnham presented a theory of managerial bureaucracy, presenting a class of elites that gain power in government, business and the media, based on technical skill.  Here's how Francis, who said this theory inspired George Orwell's "1984", explained it: Francis, unlike some other paleocons, argued that the existence of managers alone is harmless.  Rather, the multiculturalist ideology they adopted drives it toward tyranny.  He said that "white, Christian, male-oriented, bourgeois values and institutions" are the principal restraints of managerial power, which this class seeks to undermine.  He explained: Francis also said, however, that ideology helps the managerial elite increase its grip on society:  As paleoconservatism germinated as a reaction to neoconservatism, most of its development as a distinct political tendency under that name has been in the United States, although there are parallels in the traditional Old Right of other Western nations.  French conservatives such as Jean Raspail,Williamson, Chilton, The Conservative Bookshelf, 2004, pgs. 265 — 270. and British conservatives such as Enoch Powell,Buchanan, Patrick J., State of Emergency, 2006, pgs. 187 -190. Peter Hitchens,Hitchens, Peter: The Abolition of Britain from Lady Chatterley to Tony Blair Quartet Books: 1999 Antony Flew (whom the Rockford Institute awarded the Ingersoll Prize),Antony Flew, "'Social' Justice Is Not Justice", Chronicles, July 1999. John Betjeman,George Watson, The Idea of Liberalism, 1985, page 54: 'Sir John Betjeman, a real conservative unimpressed by the promise of Neo-Conservatism, reserved the term "business executive" for his moments of bitterest disdain.' and Roger Scruton, page 4.  Scruton says of himself,  as well as Scruton's Salisbury Review and Derek Turner's Quarterly Review,edited by Derek Turner, a contributor to Chronicles as well as Australia's Sydney Traditionalist ForumThe Sydney Traditionalist Forum describes itself as "an association of young professionals who form part of the Australian paleoconservative, traditionalist conservative, and independent right." For more information, see their weblog SydneyTrads all emphasize skepticism, stability, and the Burkean inheritance, and may be considered broadly sympathetic to paleo values. For example, Hitchens wrote, in opposition to the Iraq War,  Note the One Nation movement in 1990s Australia, Germany's Junge Freiheit, and Italy's Lega Nord.Which has been the subject of positive articles in Chronicles such as   And compare the Russian dissidents Andrei NavrozovA corresponding editor to Chronicles  (see "Masthead" in lower-right corner of page) and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. See, for example, his 1974 speech Live Not By Lies While in the past, many paleocons have criticized Darwinism, as such theories become widely accepted in society, many paleoconservative intellectuals have become interested in the findings of anthropology, genetics, and sociobiology for insight into human behavior.See, for example, Fleming's "The Politics of Human Nature" or the work of Steve Salier.  Murphy says that Thomas Fleming was influenced by the works of writers like E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Edward O. Wilson.The Rebuke of History, p. 234.  While criticizing evolutionary biologists like Stephen Jay GouldSteve Sailer on Stephen Jay Gould on National Review Online they see evidence for traditional values in these fields.  The Rockford Institute even awarded sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson a 1989 Ingersoll Prize. Thomas Fleming takes a view of human nature that mixes classical philosophy with sociobiology.  He said, "the laws and decrees enacted by human government are mutable and sometimes tyrannical", yet "the laws of human nature, worked tight within the spirals of the genetic code, are unchanging and just."quoted in The Rebuke of History, p. 234.  Critic Tony Glaister describes the attitude thus: In this way, Fleming sees both the sexual revolution and abortion as "a revolution against human nature and against the most basic elements of human society." Differing views exist on the specific question of evolution vs. intelligent design.  Fleming says intelligent design is "a boneheaded piece of pseudo-science, almost as simplistic as the naive materialism that Darwinists teach."  Pat Buchanan says that "science itself points to intelligent design", such that the existence of natural laws, such as in gravity, physics or chemistry, implies "the existence of a lawmaker." Steve Sailer has argued that leftists downplay the "politically incorrect" implications of evolution.  Sailer writes, for instance, that Richard Dawkins dances around the real implications of kin selection theory: Eschewing Platonic definitions of race, Sailer argues that a race is better thought of in terms of common ancestry.  He argues: Pat Buchanan calls neoconservatism "a globalist, interventionist, open borders ideology."quoted in the New York Times on September 8, 2002. The paleoconservatives argue that the "neocons" are illegitimate interlopers in the conservative movement.  In 1986,"Fatuous and Malicious" by Paul Gottfried. LewRockwell.com, March 28, 2003. historian Stephen Tonsor, who rejects the label paleoconservative",Frum Forum, National Review, May 19, 2003. said:   a belief in a transcendent order, which Kirk described variously as based in tradition, divine revelation, or natural law; an affection for the "variety and mystery" of human existence; a conviction that society requires orders and classes that emphasize "natural distinctions;" a belief that property and freedom are closely linked; a faith in custom, convention and prescription, and a recognition that innovation must be tied to existing traditions and customs, which is a respect for the political value of prudence.. John James Duncan, Jr. – (1947–) Republican US Representative for Tennessee's 2nd congressional district (1988–)Kleinheider, "Knoxville Paper Praises Its Paleoconservative Congressman," Post Politics, April 24, 2008. Virgil Goode – (1946–) Republican US Representative for Virginia's 5th congressional district (1997–2009), 2012 Constitution Party presidential nomineeGoode, Virgil, "Lamar Smith Is Wrong — Time for A Moratorium On ALL Immigration!" VDare, Dec. 11, 2009. Walter B. Jones – (1943–) Republican US Representative for North Carolina's 3rd congressional district (1995–)Antle III, W. James, "The Paleocon Dilemma," American Conservative, Jan. 14, 2008. Howard Phillips – (1941–2013) Chairman of The Conservative Caucus and three time Constitution Party presidential nominee in 1992, 1996, and 2000 Tom Tancredo – (1945–) Republican US Representative for Colorado's 6th congressional district (1999–2009), 2010 Constitution Party Colorado gubernatorial nomineeKleefeld, Eric, "Tancredo's New Home...Paleoconservative Group Without Much Electoral Success," Talking Points Memo, July 26, 2010.  Horowitz, Carl F., "Profiling In an Age of Terrorism," Social Contract, Vol. 17, Fall 2006. Virginia Abernethy (1934–)"Backlash on the border" By Max Blumenthal, Salon.com Mel Bradford (1934–1993) John Derbyshire (1945–) Paul Gottfried (1941–)Dyga, Edwin, "The Social Injustice of the Religious Left," Quarterly Review, Autumn 2009. Russell Kirk (1918–1994) E. Christian Kopff (1946–)Francis, Samuel, "The Paleo Persuasion," American Conservative, Dec. 16, 2002. William S. Lind (1947–) Donald W. LivingstonPhillips, Dan, "Understanding the Paleoconservative Perspective on Life," Magic City Morning Star, Nov. 8, 2006. Claes G. Ryn (1943–)Simms, Brendan, "Neoconservatives are the heirs to Burke," Social Affairs Unit, Oct. 9, 2007. Roger Scruton (1944–)Interview with Roger Scruton, Orthodoxy Today, April 4, 2006. Clyde N. Wilson (1941–)PaleoConservatives: New Voices of the Old Right, pg. 179 Peter Brimelow (1947–)Horowitz, Carl. F., "Profiling In an Age of Terrorism," Social Contract, Fall 2006.Goldberg, Jonah, "Ideologues Have Hijacked an Important Debate," LA Times, Feb. 24, 2002. Pat Buchanan (1938–) Charles A. Coulombe (1960–) Samuel T. Francis (1947–2005)Goldberg, Jonah, "Arguments of Color," National Review Online, Jan. 21, 2002. Bill Kauffman (1959–) Scott McConnell (1952–) Robert Novak (1931–2009) Steve Sailer (1958–)Ponnuru, Ramesh, "My Favorite Paleos," National Review Online, May 28, 2008. Joseph Sobran (1946–2010)"Arguments of Color" Jonah Goldberg January 21, 2002 National Review Bob Conley (1965–)Hunter, Jack, "The Right Democrat ," American Conservative, July 28, 2008. James EdwardsSailer, Steve, "James Edwards’ Racism Schmacism — Combating PC Newspeak," VDare, August 1, 2010. Thomas FlemingUnpatriotic Conservatives" David Frum, April 7, 2003 National Review Abbeville Institute The American Cause Constitution Party Council of European Canadians John Randolph Club Rockford Institute Robert A. Taft Club Sydney Traditionalist Forum (Australia) The American Conservative Chronicles (magazine) The Distributist Review Liberty Watch Middle American News The New American Right Now! Quarterly Review The American Conservative SydneyTrads Taki's Magazine VDARE The American View Chuck Baldwin Live Radio Carpe Diem (99.8FM, 8-10pm Mondays, Sydney Australia) Ron Smith Show Anti-globalization movement Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural conservatism Liberal conservatism Libertarian conservatism Old Right Paleolibertarianism Traditionalist conservatism "The State of Conservatism: A Symposium", Intercollegiate Review, Spring 1986. "What Libertarians and Conservatives Say About Each Other: An Annotated Bibliography", by Jude Blanchette, LewRockwell.com, October 27, 2004. Buchanan, Patrick J., Where the Right Went Wrong: How Neoconservatives Subverted the Reagan Revolution and Hijacked the Bush Presidency, 2004. ISBN 0-312-34115-6 Francis, Samuel T., "Statement of Principles," published at various journals, Feb. 14, 2004. Kirk, Russell. The Politics of Prudence, 1993. ISBN 1-882926-01-3 Nisbet, Robert, Conservatism: Dream and Reality, 2001. ISBN 0-7658-0862-5 Response to Norman Podhoretz, by Patrick J. Buchanan, letter to The Wall Street Journal dated November 5, 1999. "Whose War?", by Patrick J. Buchanan, The American Conservative, March 24, 2003. "Neo-Con Invasion", by Samuel T. Francis. The New American, August 5, 1996 "Notes on Neoconservatism", by Paul Gottfried, World and I, September 1986. "What's In A Name? The Curious Case Of Neoconservative", by Paul Gottfried, VDare.com. "The Neoconservatives: An Endangered Species", by Russell Kirk. Heritage Foundation, Heritage lecture 178, December 15, 1988. "Among the Neocons", by Scott McConnell, The American Conservative, April 11, 2003. "The Ideology of American Empire", by Claes G. Ryn, Orbis 47 2003. "Why I Too Am Not a Neoconservative" by Stephen J. Tonsor. National Review, June 20, 1986. Brimelow, Peter, Alien Nation: Common Sense About America's Immigration Disaster, 1996. ISBN 0-06-097691-8 . . . Fleming, Thomas, ed., Immigration and the American Identity: Selections From Chronicles, 1985–1995, 1995. ISBN 0-9619364-7-9 Francis, Samuel T., "America Extinguished: Mass Immigration and the Disintegration of American Culture", 2002. ASIN B0006S696U "American Citizenship Is Precious", by Phyllis Schlafly, Phyllis Schlafly Report, November 2005. Streitz, Paul, "America First: Why Americans Must End Free Trade, Stop Outsourcing and Close Our Open Borders", 2006, ISBN 0-9713498-9-4. Williamson, Chilton, The Immigration Mystique: America's False Conscience, 1996. ISBN 0-465-03286-9 Buchanan, Patrick J., A Republic, Not an Empire: Reclaiming America's Destiny, 1999. ISBN 0-89526-272-X . Kauffman, Bill, America First!: Its History, Culture, and Politics, 1995. ISBN 0-87975-956-9 . Ryn, Claes, America the Virtuous: The Crisis of Democracy and the Quest for Empire, 2003. ISBN 0-7658-0219-8 . Bradford, M. E., Remembering Who We Are: Observations of a Southern Conservative, 1985. ISBN 0-8203-0766-1 . Kirk, Russell, America's British Culture, 1993. ISBN 1-56000-066-X Kopff, E. Christian, The Devil Knows Latin: Why America Needs the Classical Tradition, 2000. ISBN 1-882926-57-9 Nisbet, Robert, The Quest for Community: A Study in the Ethics of Order and Freedom, 1990. ISBN 1-55815-058-7 Roberts, Paul Craig, "The Missing Case for Free Trade", VDare, March 15, 2004. . Roepke, Wilhelm. The Social Crisis of Our Time, 1991. ISBN 1-56000-580-7 . . Woods, Thomas E. Jr., The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History , 2004. ISBN 0-89526-047-6 . . . . Breaking All the Rules (BATR) Conservative Heritage Times James Kalb's Conservatism FAQ
