    Pelargonium Sunset Western Garden Book, 1995:606–607 is a genus of flowering plants which includes about 200 species of perennials, succulents, and shrubs, commonly known as geraniums (in the United States also storksbills). Confusingly, Geranium is the botanical name (and also common name) of a separate genus of related plants often called cranesbills. Both genera belong to the family Geraniaceae. Linnaeus originally included all the species in one genus, Geranium, and they were later separated into two genera by Charles L’Héritier in 1789. Pelargonium species are evergreen perennials indigenous to temperate and tropical regions of the world, with many species in southern Africa. They are drought and heat tolerant, but can tolerate only minor frosts. Some species are extremely popular garden plants, grown as bedding plants in temperate regions. Pelargonium occurs in a large number of growth forms, including herbaceous annuals, shrubs, subshrubs, stem succulents and geophytes. The erect stems bear five-petaled flowers in umbel-like clusters, which are occasionally branched. Because not all flowers appear simultaneously but open from the centre outwards, this is a form of inflorescence is referred to as pseudoumbels. The flower has a single symmetry plane (zygomorphic), which distinguishes it from the Geranium flower, which has radial symmetry (actinomorphic). Thus the lower three (anterior) petals are differentiated from the upper two (posterior) petals. The posterior sepal is fused with the pedicel to form a hypanthium (nectary tube). The nectary tube varies from only a few millimeters, up to several centimeters, and is an important floral characteristic in morphological classification. Stamens vary from 2 to 7, and their number, position relative to staminodes, and curvature are used to identify individual species. There are five stigmata in the style. For the considerable diversity in flower morphology, see figure 1 of Röschenbleck et al. (2014) Leaves are usually alternate, and palmately lobed or pinnate, often on long stalks, and sometimes with light or dark patterns. The leaves of Pelargonium peltatum (Ivy-leaved Geranium), have a thick cuticle better adapting them for drought tolerance. Pelargonium is the second largest genus (after Geranium) within the Geraniaceae family, within which it is sister to the remaining genera of the family in its strict sense, Erodium, Geranium, and Monsonia including Sarcocaulon. The Geraniaceae have a number of genetic features unique amongst angiosperms, including highly rearranged plastid genomes differing in gene content, order and expansion of the inverted repeat.   The first species of Pelargonium known to be cultivated was P. triste, a native of South Africa. It was probably brought to the Botanical Garden in Leiden before 1600 on ships which stopped at the Cape of Good Hope. In 1631, the English gardener John Tradescant the elder bought seeds from Rene Morin in Paris and introduced the plant to England. By 1724 P. odoratissimum , P. vitifolium, P. inquinans, P. zonale and P. peltatum had been introduced to Europe. The name Pelargonium was first proposed by Dillenius in 1732, who described and illustrated seven species of geraniums from South Africa that are now classified as Pelargonium. Dillenius, who referred to these seven species with apparent unique characteristics as Geranium Africanum (African Geranium) suggested "Possent ergo ii, quibus novi generis cupido est, ea, quorum flores inaequales vel et irrregulares sunt, Pelargonia vocare" (It would be possible therefore, if anyone wishes to make a new genus [of these geraniums] of which the flowers are unequal or irregular, to call them Pelargonia).  The name was then formally introduced by Johannes Burman in 1738. However Carl Linnaeus who first formally described these plants in 1753 did not recognise Pelargonium and grouped together in the same genus (Geranium) the three similar genera Erodium, Geranium, and Pelargonium. Linnaeus' reputation prevented further differentiation for forty years. The eventual distinction between them was made by Charles Louis L'Héritier de Brutelle based on the number of stamens or anthers, seven in the case of Pelargonium. In 1774 P. cordatum, P. quercifolium, P. radula and P. crispum were introduced, followed by P. capitatum in 1790. Pelargonium is distinguished from the other genera in the Geraniaceae family by the presence of a hypanthium, which consists of an adnate nectar spur with one nectary, as well as a generally zygomorphic floral symmetry. De Candolle first proposed dividing the genus into 12 sections in 1824, based on the diversity of growth forms. (also available online at Gallica) Traditionally the large number of Pelargonium species have been treated as sixteen sections,Wayne Handlos. Geraniums Online. Central Coast Geranium Society 2010 based on the classification of Knuth (1912) who described 15 sections, as modified by Van der Walt et al. (1977-1997) who added Chorisma, Reniformia and Subsucculentia. These are as follows; All subdivision classifications had depended primarily on morphological differences till the era of phylogenetic analyses (Price and Palmer 1993).Robert A. Price and Jeffrey D. Palmer. Phylogenetic Relationships of the Geraniaceae and Geraniales from rbcL Sequence Comparisons. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden Vol. 80, No. 3 (1993), pp. 661-671 However phylogenetic analysis shows only three distinct clades, labelled A, B and C. In this analysis not all sections were monophyletic although some were strongly supported including Chorisma, Myrrhidium and Jenkinsonia, while other sections were more paraphyletic. This in turn has led to a proposal, informal at this stage of a reformulation of the infrageneric subdivision of Pelargonium. In the proposed scheme of Weng et al. there would be two subgenera, based on clades A+B, and C respectively and seven sections based on subclades. Subsequent analysis with an expanded taxa set confirmed this infrageneric subdivision into two groups which also correspond to chromosome length (  The Plant list currently accepts 250 species names. Röschenbleck lists 281 taxa. There is considerable confusion as to which Pelargonium are true species, and which are cultivars or hybrids. The nomenclature has changed considerably since the first plants were introduced to Europe in the 17th century. The name Pelargonium is derived from the Greek πελαργός, pelargós (stork), because the seed head looks like a stork's beak. Dillenius originally suggested the name 'stork', because Geranium was named after a crane — "a πελαργός, ciconia, sicuti vocamus Gerania, γερανός , grus" (as pelargos, the crane, as we call the Gerania, geranos, crane).   Pelargonium is a large genus within the Geraniaceae family, which has a worldwide distribution in temperate to subtropical zones with some 800 mostly herbaceous species. Pelargonium itself is native to southern Africa (including Namibia) and Australia. Southern Africa contains 90% of the genus, with only about 30 species found elsewhere, predominantly the East African rift valley (about 20 species) and southern Australia, including Tasmania. The remaining few species are found in southern Madagascar, Yemen, Iraq, Asia Minor, the north of New Zealand and isolated islands in the south Atlantic Ocean (Saint Helena and Tristan da Cunha) and Socotra in the Indian Ocean. The centre of diversity is in southwestern South Africa where rainfall is confined to the winter, unlike the rest of the country where rainfall is predominantly in the summer months. Most of the Pelargonium plants cultivated in Europe and North America have their origins in South Africa.   Pelargonium species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including angle shades. The Japanese beetle, an important agricultural insect pest, becomes rapidly paralyzed after consuming flower petals of the garden hybrids known as "zonal geraniums" (P. × hortorum). The phenomenon was first described in 1920, and subsequently confirmed.Davis, J.J. 1920. The green Japanese beetle. New Jersey Department of Agriculture Circular. 30: 33.Ballou, C. H. 1929. Effects of geranium on the Japanese beetle. Journal of Economic Entomology. 22: 289-293.Held, D. W. and Potter, D. A. 2003. Characterizing toxicity of Pelargonium spp. and two other reputedly toxic plant species to Japanese beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Environmental Entomology. 32: 873-880. Research conducted by Dr. Christopher Ranger with the USDA Agricultural Research Service and other collaborating scientists have demonstrated the excitatory amino acid called quisqualic acid present within the flower petals is responsible for causing paralysis of the Japanese beetle.Geraniums and Begonias: New Research on Old Garden Favorites (the March 2010 issue of Agricultural Research magazine.) Quisqualic acid is thought to mimic L-glutamic acid, which is a neurotransmitter in the insect neuromuscular junction and mammalian central nervous system. A study by the Laboratory of Apiculture & Social Insects group at the University of Sussex on the attractiveness of common garden plants to pollinators found that a cultivar of Pelargonium × hortorum was unattractive to pollinators in comparison to other selected garden plants such as Lavandula (lavender) and Origanum. Their main requirement is a warm, sunny, sheltered location. Many varieties will tolerate drought conditions for short periods. They are commonly seen in bedding schemes in parks and gardens, but can also be grown indoors as houseplants if given enough light. More compact erect and trailing varieties are ideal for window boxes and hanging baskets, in association with other half-hardy plants like lobelias, petunias and begonias. Thousands of pelargonium cultivars are available from garden centres or specialist suppliers during the spring and summer months. They are regular participants in flower shows and competitive events, with numerous societies devoted exclusively to their cultivation. They are easy to propagate vegetatively from cuttings. Despite not being frost-hardy, pelargoniums are extremely easy to grow and to propagate, but are usually grown as annuals. As they are evergreen perennials, they can be kept in flower throughout the winter months in a sufficiently favoured spot (or indoors). There are even one or two fully hardy species from Turkey. There are a number of methods for successfully overwintering pelargoniums in cooler zones than their native habitats. For large numbers of plants, and particularly soft-stemmed pelargoniums that cannot be kept in a semi-dormant state, softwood cuttings can be taken in late summer and the old woody plants discarded. The cuttings are then planted, and once rooted, overwintered in compost-filled trays in well-lit indoor sites, with minimal watering. If fed in late winter and the shoot tips pinched out to encourage bushy growth, they can be potted up in mid-spring and placed outside once the risk of frost has passed. For small numbers of plants or limited space, plants can be lifted before the first frost and cut back to , and placed in potting compost in a well-lit frost-free location, with minimal watering, and then repotted in mid-spring. Suitable for pelargoniums with tough woody stems where there are large numbers of plants. Plants can be lifted and allowed to dry out in a frost free location, wrapped in newspaper or hung. In early spring the roots can be soaked, and the plants cut back and then potted up. There was little attempt at any rational grouping of Pelargonium cultivars, the growing of which was revived in the mid twentieth century, and the origins of many if not most were lost in obscurity. In 1916 the American botanist Liberty Hyde Bailey (1858–1954) introduced two new terms for zonal and regal pelargoniums. Those pelargoniums which were largely derived from P. zonale he referred to as P. x hortorum (i.e. from the garden), while those from P. cucullatum  he named P. domesticum (i.e. from the home). In the late 1950s a list (the Spalding List) was produced in the United States, based on nursery listings and the 1897 list of Henri Dauthenay. It described seven groups, listing each cultivar with the list of its originator, and in most cases a date. These were Species, Zonals, Variegated-Leaved, Domesticum (Regals), Ivy-Leaved, Scented-Leaved and Old. In the 1970s the British Pelargonium and Geranium Society produced a checklist and the Australian Geranium Society started to produce a register but it was not completed till its author, Jean Llewellyn's death in 1999. None of these were published. The most complete list in its time was the 2001 compilation by The Geraniaceae Group, which included all cultivars up to 1959. Registration of cultivars is the responsibility of the Pelargonium & Geranium Society (PAGS: formed in 2009 from the British Pelargonium and Geranium Society and the British and European Geranium Society) which administers the International Register of Pelargonium Cultivars. PAGS is the International Cultivar Registration Authority (ICRA) of the  International Society for Horticultural Science for pelargoniums.  Cultivated pelargoniums are commonly treated as six groups in addition to species pelargoniums and primary hybrids. Ordered by position in PAGS classification. Abbreviations indicate Royal Horticultural Society usage. Of these, A, U and Sc groups are sometimes lumped together as Species Derived (Sppd). This term implies that they are closely related to a species from which they were derived, and do not fit into the R, I or Z groups. In addition to the primary groups, additional descriptors are used in creating a classification code. These include; These may then be combined to form the code, e.g. Pelargonium 'Chelsea Gem' (Z/d/v), inicating Zonal Double with variegated foliage. Crosses between groups are indicated with an x, e.g. Pelargonium 'Hindoo' (R x U), indicating a Regal x Unique cross.  Known as zonal geraniums because many have zones or patterns in the center of the leaves, and because their parentage includes Pelargonium zonale. Common names include “Storksbill”, “Fish or Horseshoe” Geraniums. They may also be referred to as Pelargonium x hortorum Bailey. Zonal pelargoniums are tetraploid, mostly derived from P. inquinans and P. zonale, together with P. scandens and P. frutetorum. The scarlet colouring is attributed to the contribution of P. inquinans. Mostly bush-type plants with succulent stems grown for the beauty of their flowers, traditionally red, salmon, violet, white or pink. Zonals are often the pelargoniums most confused with geraniums particularly in summer bedding arrangements. This incorrect nomenclature is widely used in horticulture, particularly in North America.  Flowers may be double or single. Zonals include a variety of plant types along with genetic hybrids such as hybrid ivy-leaved varieties that display little or no ivy leaf characteristics (the Deacons group), or the "Stellar" varieties. Hybrid zonals are crosses between zonals and either a species or species derived pelargonium. There are hundreds of zonal pelargoniums available for sale,Hutchinson Farm: Zonal Geraniums and like other cultivars are sold in series such as 'Rocky Mountain',Hutchinson Farm: Rocky Mountain Geraniums each of which is named after its predominant colour, e.g. 'Rocky Mountain Orange', 'White', 'Dark Red' etc.The University of Tennessee Gardens: Pelargonium x hortorum Rocky Mountain™ 'Dark Red'  Fancy Leaf Zonal Pelargoniums – besides having green leaves with or without zoning, this group also have variable coloured foliage that is sometimes used in classifying for exhibition purposes, e.g. ‘Bicolour’, ‘Tricolour’, ‘Bronze’ or ‘Gold’. Other foliage types are: ‘Black’ or ‘Butterfly’. There are an increasing number of these plants with showy blooms; Zonal pelargoniums have many flower types as follows; “Zonquil” pelargoniums result from a cross between Zonal pelargonium cultivars and P. quinquelobatum.   Also known as 'Ivy Geraniums".  Usually of lax growth (trailing), mainly due to the long thin stems, with thick, waxy ivy-shaped stiff fleshy evergreen leaves developed by the species P. peltatum to retain moisture during periods of drought. Much used for hanging pots, tubs and basket cultivation. In the UK the bulbous double-headed types are preferred whilst on the European continent the balcon single types for large-scale hanging floral displays are favoured. Ivy-leaved pelargoniums embrace all such growth size types including small-leaved varieties and genetic hybrid crosses, which display little or no zonal characteristics. May have bicolour leaves and may have flowers that are single, double or rosette. Ivy pelargoniums are often sold as series such as 'Great Balls of Fire', in a variety of colours such as 'Great Balls of Fire Burgundy'. Additional descriptive terms include;  These are large bush-type floriferous evergreen pelargoniums. In addition to "Regals" they are also known as “Show Pelargoniums”. In the United States they are often known as the "Martha Washington" or ‘"Lady Washington" pelargoniums. They are grown primarily for the beauty and richness of their flower heads, which are large. Most of those cultivars grown currently are the result of hybridization over the last 50 years. They are very short-jointed and compact, which results in their requiring very little work in order to create a floriforous and well-rounded plant. Flowers are single, rarely double, in mauve, pink, purple or white. They have rounded, sometimes lobed or partially toothed (serrated) leaves, unlike the Zonal groups, without any type of zoning. Additional descriptive terms include;  Angel pelargoniums are similar to Regal pelargoniums but more closely resemble P. crispum in leaf shape and growth habit. The majority of Angel cultivars originate from a cross between P. crispum and a Regal variety in the early part of the 20th century. Angels have grown in popularity in the last 30 years or so due mainly to an explosion of new varieties being released by specialist nurseries resulting from the work done by dedicated amateur hybridisers. These hybrisers have managed to obtain many new flower colour breaks and tighter growth habits resulting in plants suitable for all sorts of situations. Angels basically have the appearance of a small Regal with small serrated leaves and much smaller flowers and are more compact and bushy. The group extends to include similar small-leaved and -flowered types but usually with P. crispum in their parentage. They are mostly upright bush-type plants but there are some lax varieties that can be used for basket or hanging pot cultivation. Often called "pansy-faced" in the US. Some varieties have bicolour foliage. Other terms include ‘Langley-Smith Hybrids’.  The parentage of Unique pelargoniums is confused and obscure. One theory being a derivation from P. fulgidum, but a derivation from an older cultivar 'Old Unique’, also known as or ‘Rollinson’s Crimson’, in the mid-19th century is also claimed. Unique pelargoniums resemble upright Scented Leaf pelargoniums in being shrubby and woody evergreens. They have distinctly scented leaves, and small flowers with blotched and feathered petals. They may have bicolour foliage. Some types, popularly known in the hobby as hybrid uniques, have been crossed with Regal pelargoniums and, as a result of this cross, are much more floriferous. Unique in sense of not fitting into any of the above categories.  Shrubby evergreen perennials grown chiefly for their fragrance, may be species or cultivars but all must have a clear and distinct scented foliage. Scent is emitted when the leaves are touched or bruised with some scents aromatic, others pungent and in a few cases, quite unpleasant. Several of the scented leaved pelargoniums are grown for the oil ‘geranol’, which is extracted from the leaves and is an essential oil much used commercially in perfumery. The scent of some species growing in their natural habitat, acts as a deterrent to grazing animals who appear to dislike the emitted scent. Conversely, it also attracts other insect life to visit the bloom and pollinate the plant. The scented leaves can be used for potpourri and they also have a use as flavourings in cooking. Occasionally scented types can be found in the some of the other groups mentioned; for example, the Angels, having P. crispum in their genetic makeup, can often have a strong citrus scent. Leaves are lobed, toothed, incised or variegated. Growth habit is very variable, but the flowers are less prominent than other groups, and most closely resemble the species they originated from. These include:   The species are the forefathers of all the cultivar groups listed above. In general, the definition of a species is that it breeds true, and is to be found doing this in the "wild". Species pelargoniums have a large diversity of characteristics in habit, shape, size and colour, which probably accounts for them having retained their popularity for more than 300 years. A primary hybrid is recognised as being the resultant plant from a first-time cross between two different known species. Examples are P x ‘ardens’ – from P. lobatum x P. fulgidum (1810). P x ‘glauciifolium’ – from P. gibbosum x P. lobatum (1822). Usually, but not always, primary hybrids are sterile.   The following is a selection of pelargoniums which have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit: Pelargoniums rank as one of the highest number of potted flowering plants sold and also in terms of wholesale value. Other than being grown for their beauty, species such as P. graveolens are important in the perfume industry and are cultivated and distilled for their scents. Although scented pelargoniums exist which have smells of citrus, mint, pine, spices or various fruits, the varieties with rose scents are most commercially important. Pelargonium distillates and absolutes, commonly known as "scented geranium oil" are sometimes used to supplement or adulterate expensive rose oils. The oils of the scented pelargoniums contain citronellol, geraniol, eugenol, alpha pinene and many other compounds. The edible leaves and flowers are also used as a flavouring in desserts, cakes, jellies and teas. Scented-leafed pelargoniums can be used to flavor jellies, cakes, butters, ice cream, iced tea and other dishes, The rose-, lemon- and peppermint-scents are most commonly used. Also used are those with hints of peach, cinnamon and orange. Commonly used lemon-scented culinary species include P. crispum and P. citronellum. Rose-scenteds include P. graveolens and members of the P. ‘Graveolens’ cultivar group. Other species and cultivars with culinary use include the lime-scented P. ‘Lime,’ the lemon balm-scented P. ‘Lemon Balm,’ the strawberry-lemon-scented P. ‘Lady Scarborough’ and the peppermint-scented P. tomentosum. In herbal medicine, Pelargonium has been used for intestinal problems, wounds and respiratory ailments, but Pelargonium species have also been used for fevers, kidney complaints and other conditions. Geranium (Pelargonium) oil is considered a relaxant in aromatherapy, and in recent years, respiratory/cold remedies made from P. sidoides and P. reniforme have been sold in Europe and the United States. P. sidoides along with Echinacea is used for bronchitis. P. odoratissimum is used for its astringent, tonic and antiseptic effects. It is used internally for debility, gastroenteritis, and hemorrhage and externally for skin complaints, injuries, and neuralgia and throat infections. The essential oil is used in aromatherapy. It is also used to balance the hormonal system, menstrual flow, and clean the body of toxins. Pelargonin (pelargonidin 3,5-O-diglucoside) is a petal pigment of the scarlet pelargonium. The chemist, John Dalton, first realized that he was color blind in 1794 when he heard others describe the color of the flowers of the pink (Pelargonium zonale), as pink or red, when to him it looked either pink or blue, having no relationship to red at all.     section Campylia (Lindley ex Sweet) de Candolle section Chorisma (Lindley ex Sweet) de Candolle section Ciconium (Sweet) Harvey section Cortusina (DC.) Harvey section Glaucophyllum Harvey section Hoarea (Sweet) de Candolle section Isopetalum (Sweet) de Candolle section Jenkinsonia (Sweet) de Candolle section Ligularia (Sweet) Harvey section Myrrhidium de Candolle section Otidia (Lindley ex Sweet) de Candolle section Pelargonium (Sweet) Harvey section Peristera de Candolle section Polyactium de Candolle section Reniformia (Knuth) Dreyer section Subsucculentia J.J.A. van der Walt A. Zonal (Z) B. Ivy-leaved (I) C. Regal (R) D. Angel (A) E. Unique (U) F. Scented-leaved (Sc) G. Species Stellar (St) Cactus (Ca) Variegated (v) Dwarf (Dw) Coloured foliage (C) Double (d) Miniature (Min) (i) Basic Plants – Mature plants with foliage normally exceeding 7&nbsp;" (180&nbsp;mm) in height above the rim of the pot. For exhibition these should be grown in a pot exceeding  in diameter but not normally exceeding 6½&nbsp;" (165&nbsp;mm). (ii) Dwarf Plants – Smaller than basic. Mature plants with foliage more than 5&nbsp;" (125&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot, but not normally more than 7&nbsp;" (180&nbsp;mm). For exhibition should be grown in a pot exceeding 3½&nbsp;" (90&nbsp;mm) but not exceeding 4¾&nbsp;" (120&nbsp;mm). They should not exceed 200&nbsp;mm in height, grown in an 11&nbsp;cm pot. (iii) Miniature Plants – Slowly growing pelargoniums. Mature plants with foliage normally less than 5&nbsp;" (125&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot. For exhibition should be grown in a pot not exceeding 3½&nbsp;" (90&nbsp;mm). They should not exceed 125&nbsp;mm in height, grown in a 9&nbsp;cm pot. (iv) Micro-Miniature Plants – Smaller and more slowly growing than miniature pelargoniums. Mature plants with foliage normally less than 4&nbsp;" (100&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot. They should not exceed 75&nbsp;cm in height, grown in a 6&nbsp;cm pot. Usually no separate classes for these in exhibition and will therefore normally be shown as Miniature Zonals. (v) Deacon Varieties –Genetic hybrid similar to a large Dwarf. For exhibition (when shown in a separate class), usually grown in a pot not exceeding 5" (125mm), otherwise as for Dwarf Zonals. (vi) Stellar Varieties – A relatively modern genetic hybrid originating from the work done by the Australian hybridiser Ted Both in the late 1950s and 1960s from crosses between Australian species and Zonal types. Easily identifiable by their distinctive half-star-shaped leaves and slim-petalled blooms which create an impression of being star shaped (or five fingered). Single varieties tend to have larger elongated triangular petals whereas doubles tend to have thin feathered petals that are tightly packed together. For exhibition purposes there is a separate class for Stellar varieties, but being Zonals could be shown in an open class for Basic, Dwarf or Miniature Zonals (unless otherwise stated). Also known as "The Five-fingered Geraniums", "Staphysagroides", "Both’s Staphs", "Both’s Hybrid Staphs", "Fingered Flowers" and "Bodey’s Formosum Hybrids". (a) Bicolour – includes those with white or cream veined leaves or those with two distinct colours with clearly defined edges, other than the basic zone. (b) Tricolour – (May be Silver Tricolour (usually called a Silver Leaf) or a Gold Tricolour). (i) Gold Tricolour – Leaves of many colours including red and gold, but usually with clearly defined edges of golden yellow and having a leaf zone, usually red or bronze, that overlays two or more of the other distinct leaf colours, so that the zone itself appears as two or more distinct colours. (ii) Silver Tricolour or Silver Leaf – These tend to resemble a normal bi-colour leaf plant with two distinct colours usually of green and pale cream or white; the third colour is usually made up of bronze zoning. When this zoning overlays the green part of the leaf it is deemed to represent a silver colour. (c) Bronze Leaved – Leaves of Green or Golden/Green with a heavy bronze or chestnut coloured centre zone which is known as a medallion. For exhibition purposes, when exhibited in specific ‘Bronze’ Leaf class – Must have over 50% of leaf surface bronze coloured. The dwarf plant ‘Overchurch’ which has a heavy bronze medallion. (d) Gold Leaved – Leaves coloured golden/yellow or green/yellow but not showing a tendency to green. For exhibition purposes, when exhibited in specific ‘Gold’ Leaf class – Must have over 50% of leaf surface gold coloured. (e) Black Leaved – Leaves coloured black, purple-black or with distinct large dark zones or centre markings on green. (f) Butterfly Leaved – Leaves with a butterfly marking of distinct tone or hue in centre of leaf. This can be encompassed in many of the coloured leaf varieties. (a) Single Flowered (S) – each flower pip normally having no more than five petals. This is the standard flower set for all Pelargoniums. (b) Semi-Double Flowered (SD) – each flower pip normally having between six and nine petals. (c) Double Flowered (D)  – each flower pip composed of more than nine petals (i.e. double the standard flower set) but not ‘hearted’ like the bud of a rose. Below: the dwarf ‘Dovepoint’ which has full double blooms. (d) Rosebud (or Noisette) Group – each bloom fully double and ‘hearted’. The middle petals are so numerous that they remain unopened like the bud of a rose. (e) Tulip Flowered – having semi-double blooms that never fully open. The large cup shaped petals open just sufficiently to resemble a miniature tulip. (f) Bird’s-Egg Group – having blooms with petals that have spots in a darker shade than the base colour, like many birds eggs. (g) Speckled Flowered Group – having petals that are marked with splashes and flecks of another colour. See the picture of ‘Vectis Embers’ above. (h) Quilled (or Cactus Flowered Group, or Poinsettia in USA) – having petals twisted and furled like a quill. Hybrid Ivy — the result of Ivy X Zonal crosses, but still more closely resemble Ivy-Leafed pelargoniums. Fancy leaf — leaves with marked colur variation, together with or other than green. Miniature — miniature leaves and flowers, stems with short nodes, and compact growth. Listed as Dwarf Ivy (DwI) by RHS. e.g. 'Sugar Baby' Fancy Leaf —  leaves with marked variations in colour Decorative Pelargoniums (Decoratives) — descendants of older, less compact, smaller-flowered varieties that are more suited to outdoor conditions. These have smaller flowers than Regal, but are otherwise similar. e.g. ‘Royal Ascot’ Miniature — flowers and leaves similar to Regal, but miniature in form, with compact growth. other terms include “Pansy Geraniums”or “Pansy Pelargoniums”. e.g. ‘Lara Susan’ Oriental pelargoniums — the result of crosses between Regals and members of the Angel group (see below). Some have bicolour foliage. Almond - Pelargonium quercifolium Apple - Pelargonium odoratissimum Apple - Pelargonium cordifolium Apple/Mint - Pelargonium album Apricot/Lemon - Pelargonium scabrum Balsam - Pelargonium panduriforme Camphor - Pelargonium betulinum Celery - Pelargonium ionidiflorum Cinnamon - Pelargonium 'Ardwyck Cinnamon' Coconut - Pelargonium grossalarioides (Pelargonium parriflorum) Eau de Cologne - Pelargonium 'Brilliantine' Eucalyptus - Pelargonium 'Secret Love' Grapefruit - Pelargonium 'Poquita' Ginger - Pelargonium 'Torrento' or 'Cola Bottles' which is a variety of Pelargonium x Nervosum Hazelnut - Pelargonium 'Odorata Hazelnut Lavender - Pelargonium 'Lavender Lindy' Lemon - Pelargonium crispum Lemon - Pelargonium citronellum (Synonym - Pelargonium 'Mabel Grey') Lemon Balm - Pelargonium x melissinum Lime - Pelargonium x nervosum Myrrh - Pelargonium myrrhifolium Nutmeg - Pelargonium x fragrans Old Spice - Variety of Pelargonium x fragrans Orange - Pelargonium x citriodorum (Synonym - Pelargonium 'Prince of Orange) Peach - Pelargonium 'Peaches and Cream' Peppermint - Pelargonium tomentosum Pine - Pelargonium denticulatum Pineapple - Pelargonium 'Brilliant' Raspberry - Pelargonium 'Red Raspberry' Rose - Pelargonium graveolens (Synonym - Pelargonium roseum) Rose - Pelargonium capitatum Rose - Pelargonium radens Southernwood - Pelargonium abrotanifolium Spicy - Pelargonium exstipulatum Strawberry - Pelargonium x scarboroviae 'Attar of Roses' - a cultivar of P. capitatum 'Crowfoot Rose' - a cultivar of P. radens 'Dr. Livingston' - a cultivar of P. radens 'Grey Lady Plymouth' - a cultivar of P. graveolens 'Prince Rupert' - a cultivar of P. crispum Fiery-flowered stork's bill Pelargonium ignescens Scarlet Unique Scented Geranium  'Attar of Roses' (rose scented leaves, pink flowers) 'Citriodorum' (lemon scented leaves, rose pink flowers) 'Dolly Varden' (variegated leaves, scarlet flowers) 'Frank Headley' (cream vareigated leaves, salmon pink flowers) 'Fringed Aztec' (regal group - white & purple fringed flowers) 'Gemstone' (scented leaves, pink flowers) 'Grace Thomas' (lemon scented leaves, pale pink flowers) 'Joy' (pink & white frilled flowers) 'Lady Plymouth' (P. graveolens variegata - small mauve flowers) 'Lara Candy Dancer' (scented leaves, pale mauve flowers) 'Lara Starshine' (aromatic leaves, lilac flowers) 'L'Élégante' (ivy-leaved, trailing, white and purple flowers) 'Mabel Grey' (lemon-scented leaves, mauve flowers) 'Mrs Quilter' (bronze leaves, salmon pink flowers) 'Radula' (lemon & rose scented leaves, pink & purple flowers) 'Royal Oak' (balsam scented leaves, mauve flowers) 'Spanish Angel' (lilac & magenta flowers) 'Sweet Mimosa' (balsam-scented leaves, pale pink flowers) 'Tip Top Duet' (pink & wine-red flowers) P. tomentosum (peppermint-scented leaves, small white flowers) 'Voodoo' (crimson & black flowers) List of Pelargonium species Ellaphie Ward-Hilhorst, van der Walt and Vorster. Pelargoniums of Southern Africa 1988 (3 vols) Bakker, F. T., Culham, A. & Gibby, M. 1999. Phylogenetics and diversification in Pelargonium. Pp.&nbsp;353–374 in: Hollingsworth, P., Bateman, R. & Gornall, R. (eds.), Molecular Systematics and Plant Evolution. Chapman & Hall, London. also on Gallica Aedo and Félix Muñoz Garmendia. Some Notes on the Sectional Nomenclature of Geranium (Geraniaceae). Taxon Vol. 45, No. 1 (Feb., 1996), pp. 104-106 FT Bakker, A Culham, P Hettiarachi, T Touloumenidou and Mary Gibby. Phylogeny of Pelargonium (Geraniaceae) based on DNA sequences from three genomes. Taxon 53 (1) February 2004: 17–28 Jacqueline Yolande Yvette Lalli. In vitro pharmacological properties and composition of leaf essential oils and extracts of selected indigenous pelargonium (geraniaceae) species. Master of Pharmacy thesis, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2005. Pelargoniums. An Herb Society of America Guide. 2006 The Pelargonium Page: descriptions of botanical species with plant and habitat photos, illustrations and literature Pacific Bulb Society: Pelargonium (tuberous species) Plants for use: Pelargonium Fibrex Nurseries
