 Pinellas County is a county located in the state of Florida. As of the 2010 census, the population was 916,542. Its county seat is Clearwater, and its largest city is St. Petersburg. Pinellas County is included in the Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area.       Prior to European exploration and settlement the Pinellas peninsula, like all of Tampa Bay, was inhabited by the Tocobaga Indians, who built a town and large temple mound overlooking the bay in what is now Safety Harbor. The modern site is protected and can be visited as part of the County's Philippe Park. During the early 16th century Spanish explorers discovered and slowly began exploring Florida, including Tampa Bay. In 1528 Panfilo de Narvaez landed in Pinellas, and 10 years later Hernando de Soto is thought to have explored the Tampa Bay Area. By the early 18th century the Tocobaga had been virtually annihilated, having fallen victim to European diseases from which they had no immunity, as well as European conflicts. Later Spanish explorers named the area Punta Piñal (Spanish for "Point of Pines" or "Piney Point"). After trading hands multiple times between the British and the Spanish, Spain finally ceded Florida to the United States in 1821, and in 1823 the U.S. Army established Fort Brooke (later Tampa). In 1834 much of west central Florida, including the Pinellas peninsula (then known simply as West Hillsborough), was organized as Hillsborough County. The very next year Odet Philippe became the first permanent, non-native resident of the peninsula when he established a homestead near the site of the Tocobaga village in Safety Harbor. It was Philippe who first introduced both citrus culture and cigar-making to Florida. Around the same time, the United States Army began construction of Fort Harrison, named after William Henry Harrison, as a rest post for soldiers from nearby Fort Brooke during the Second Seminole War. The new fort was located on a bluff overlooking Clear Water Harbor, which later became part of an early 20th-century residential development (now historic district) called Harbor Oaks. University of South Florida archaeologists excavated the site in 1977 after Alfred C. Wyllie discovered an underground ammunition bunker while digging a swimming pool on his estate. Clearwater would later become the first organized community on the peninsula as well as the site of its first post office. The Armed Occupation Act, passed in 1842, encouraged further settlement of Pinellas, like all of Florida, by offering 160 acres (0.65&nbsp;km²) to anyone who would bear arms and cultivate the land. Pioneer families like the Booths, the Coachmans, the Marstons, and the McMullens established homesteads in the area in the years following, planting more citrus groves and raising cattle. During the American Civil War, many residents fought for the Confederate States of America. Brothers James and Daniel McMullen  were members of the Confederate Cow Cavalry, driving Florida cattle to Georgia and the Carolinas to help sustain the war effort. John W. Marston served in the 9th Florida Regiment as a part of the Appomattox Campaign. Many other residents served in other capacities. Otherwise the peninsula had virtually no significance during the war, and the war largely passed the area by.http://www.ussforthenry.com/USSFHpdf/Pinellas_Whitehurst.PDF Tarpon Springs became West Hillsborough's first incorporated city in 1887, and in 1888 the Orange Belt Railway was extended into the southern portion of the peninsula. Railroad owner Peter Demens named the town that grew near the railroad's terminus St. Petersburg in honor of his hometown. The town would incorporate in 1892. Other major towns in the county incorporated during this time were Clearwater (1891), Dunedin (1899), and Largo (1905). Construction of Fort De Soto, on Mullet Key facing the mouth of Tampa Bay, was begun in 1898 during the Spanish–American War to protect Tampa Bay from potential invading forces. The fort, a subpost of Fort Dade on adjacent Egmont Key (which lies in the mouth of Tampa Bay), was equipped with artillery and mortar batteries. Even into the early years of the 20th century, West Hillsborough had no paved roads, and transportation posed a major challenge. A trip to the county seat, across the bay in Tampa, was generally an overnight affair and the automobiles that existed on the peninsula at that time would frequently become bogged down in the muck after rainstorms. Angry at what was perceived as neglect by the county government, residents of Pinellas began a push to secede from Hillsborough. They succeeded, and on January 1, 1912 Pinellas County came into being.http://www.pinellascounty.org/PDF/HEObook.pdf The peninsula, along with a small part of the mainland were incorporated into the new county. Aviation history was made in St. Petersburg on January 1, 1914 when Tony Jannus made the world's first scheduled commercial airline flight with the St. Petersburg-Tampa Airboat Line from St. Petersburg to Tampa. The popular open-air St. Petersburg concert venue Jannus Live (formerly known as "Jannus Landing") memorializes the flight. The early 1920s saw the beginning of a land boom in much of Florida, including Pinellas. During this period municipalities issued a large number of bonds to keep pace with the needed infrastructure, such as roads and bridges. The travel time to Tampa was cut in half—from —by the opening of the Gandy Bridge in 1924, along the same route Jannus' airline used. It was the longest automobile toll bridge in the world at the time. Prohibition was unpopular in the area and the peninsula's countless inlets and islands became havens for rumrunners bringing in liquor from Cuba. Others distilled moonshine in the County's still plentiful woods. Like much of Florida, the Great Depression came early to Pinellas with the collapse of the real estate boom in 1926. Local economies became severely stressed, and by 1930, St. Petersburg defaulted on its bonds. Only after World War II would significant growth return to the area. During the war, the area's tourist industry collapsed, but thousands of recruits came to the area when the U.S. military decided to use the area for training. Area hotels became barracks. The Renaissance Vinoy Hotel was used as an Army training school. The area's women and girls participated in the war effort as well. Hundreds of girls from the area's most prominent families formed a group called the Bomb-a-Dears, holding dances, socializing with recruits, and selling war bonds. After the war many of these same soldiers remembered their war time experience in Pinellas well, and returned as tourist or residents. With the end of the Second World War, Pinellas would enter another period of rapid growth and development. In 1954 the original span of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge was opened, replacing earlier ferry service. By 1957 Clearwater was America's fastest growing city. The Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council was founded by the late mayor of St. Petersburg, Herman Goldner, who sought without success during the 1960s to consolidate various municipalities and unincorporated areas in south Pinellas County. Each year the council presents its Herman Goldner Award for Regional Leadership. Tragedy struck on May 9, 1980, when the southbound span of the original Sunshine Skyway Bridge was struck by the freighter MV Summit Venture during a storm, sending over  of the bridge plummeting into Tampa Bay. The collision caused ten cars and a Greyhound bus to fall  into the water, killing 35 people. The new bridge opened in 1987 and has since been listed as #3 of the "Top 10 Bridges" in the World by the Travel Channel. The county operates a  living history museum called Heritage Village containing more than 28 historic structures, some dating back to the 19th century, where visitors can experience what life was once like in Pinellas. Pinellas County celebrated 100 years of existence on January 1, 2012. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which  is land and  (55.0%) is water. It is the second-smallest county in Florida by land area, larger than only  Union County. Pinellas forms a peninsula bounded on the west by the Gulf of Mexico and on the south and east by Tampa Bay. It is  long and  wide at its broadest point, with  of coastline.    Elevation in the county ranges from mean sea level to its highest natural point of  near the intersection of SR 580 and Countryside Blvd. in Clearwater. Due to its small size and high population, by the early 21st century Pinellas County has been mostly built out, with very little developable land left available. The county has maintained a fairly large system of parks and preserves that provide residents and visitors retreat from the city and a glimpse of the peninsula's original state. Geologically, Pinellas is underlain by a series of limestone formations, the Hawthorne limestone and the Tampa limestone. The limestone is porous and stores a large quantity of water. The Hawthorne formation forms a prominent ridge down the spine of the county, from east of Dunedin, south to the Walsingham area and east towards St. Petersburg.http://www.pinellascounty.org/Plan/comp_plan/04natural/ch-1.pdf The 35 miles of beaches and dunes which make up the county's 11 barrier islands provide habitat for coastal species, serve as critical storm protection for the inland communities, and form the basis of the area's thriving tourism industry. The islands are dynamic, with wave action building some islands further up, eroding others, and forming entirely new islands over time. Though hurricanes are infrequent on this part of Florida's coast, they have had a major impact on the islands, with the Hurricane of 1848 forming John's Pass between Madeira Beach and Treasure Island, a hurricane in 1921 creating Hurricane Pass and cleaving Hog Island into Honeymoon and Caladesi Islands, and 1985's Hurricane Elena sealing Dunedin Pass to join Caladesi with Clearwater Beach.http://www.pinellascounty.org/Plan/comp_plan/05coastal/ch-2.pdf Between the barrier islands and the peninsula are several bodies of water, through which traverses a section of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway. From north to south they are: St. Joseph Sound between the islands and Dunedin, Clearwater Harbor between Clearwater and Clearwater Beach, and Boca Ciega Bay in the southern third of the county. Connecting Clearwater Harbor to Boca Ciega Bay is a thin, approximately  stretch of water known as The Narrows, which runs next to the town of Indian Shores. Extending from northeastern Boca Ciega Bay, Long Bayou separates Seminole from St. Petersburg near Bay Pines. Long Bayou once extended significantly farther up the peninsula until the northern portion was sealed off to create Lake Seminole. Extending further still from Long Bayou, the Cross Bayou Canal traverses the peninsula, crossing Pinellas Park in a northeasterly direction before emptying into Tampa Bay on the northwest side of St. Petersburg-Clearwater International Airport. Anderson Park Panorama Brooker Creek Nature Preserve walkway View of Lake Tarpon from John Chestnut Park Wall Springs View of St Joseph Sound from the old observation tower Boyd Hill Nature Preserve- A 245-acre park on the shores of Lake Maggiore in south St. Petersburg, operated by the city and featuring a nature center, bird-of-prey aviary, and over three miles of trails through a variety of ecosystems.Boyd Hill Nature Preserve website Hillsborough County extends along the shipping channel into the Gulf of Mexico and actually separates Pinellas County from Manatee County.   Several natural communities exist within the county, including areas of freshwater wetlands (dominated by bald cypresses and ferns), coastal mangrove swamps, sporadic hardwood hammocks (dominated by laurel oaks and live oaks, cabbage palms, and southern magnolias), low-lying, poorly drained pine flatwoods (dominated by longleaf pines and saw palmettos), and well-drained, upland sandhills (dominated by longleaf pines and turkey oaks) and sand pine scrub (dominated by sand pines, saw palmettos, and various oaks). Offshore ecosystems include the Tampa Bay estuary and numerous gulf seagrass beds. The county also maintains several artificial reefs Numerous bird species can be sighted in Pinellas, either as permanent residents or during the winter migration, including wading birds like great blue herons, egrets, white ibises and roseate spoonbills, aquatic birds like brown pelicans, white pelicans, and cormorants, numerous species of shorebirds, and very-common birds like seagulls and passerines like the blue jay, mockingbird, and crow. Ospreys are a commonly seen bird-of-prey, with other birds of prey like turkey vultures, red tailed hawks, great horned owls, screech owls, barn owls, and bald eagles, among others, seen as well. Gopher tortoises are found in many areas, the burrows they dig making them a keystone species. Coyotes, though often associated with the American West, are native-to and can be found in Pinellas. White-tailed deer, wild turkeys, bobcats, otters, and alligators can be found in the county as well. Sea turtles nest on the shores or Pinellas' barrier islands and have been threatened by development. Offshore, dolphins, sharks, and manatees are numerous as well, while closer inshore stingrays are a common sight, leading those in-the-know to do the "stingray shuffle" (shuffling up the sand to scare nearby stingrays off) when entering gulf waters. Species of fish commonly caught in the waters surrounding the county include spotted seatrout, red drum or redfish, snook, pompano, sheepshead, Spanish mackerel, grouper, mullet, flounder, kingfish, and tarpon. Like much of Florida, Pinellas County is home to several invasive species that propagate easily outside their (and their natural predators') native range. Examples of commonly seen invasives include Brazilian pepper, water hyacinth, Australian pine, melaleuca and air potato. These species are considered serious pests, and varying methods have been tried to eradicate them. Examples of invasive animals include the wild boar, which poses significant health and agricultural problems in Florida and can sometimes be found in Pinellas, and the monk parakeet, small flocks of which can sometimes be seen in flight or building nests on electrical poles or telecommunications towers.http://www.fpl.com/environment/exotic/exotic_and_invasive_species_index.shtml Pinellas gained some national attention as the home of the Mystery Monkey of Tampa Bay, a non-native, feral rhesus macaque that had been on the loose for approximately three years in the south of the county. No one was sure where the monkey came from, and a Facebook page set up for the monkey had over 84,000 likes (as of October 2012). The monkey was the subject of a sketch on the March 11, 2010 episode of the Colbert Report. As of February 2012, the monkey had apparently taken up semi-permanent residence behind a family's home at an undisclosed location in St. Petersburg, according to the Tampa Bay Times. Efforts to capture the monkey were reignited after it reportedly bit a woman living near where it had taken up residence, and the monkey was captured in late October 2012 and eventually was sent to live at Dade City's Wild Things, a  zoo north of Tampa.   Pinellas, like the rest of the Tampa Bay area, has a humid subtropical climate, resulting in warm, humid summers with frequent thunderstorms, and drier winters. Pinellas County's geographic position- lying on a peninsula between Tampa Bay and the Gulf of Mexico introduces large amounts of humidity into the atmosphere and serves to moderate temperatures. The geography of the peninsula also causes some variance in the county's average temperatures. St. Petersburg, further south on the peninsula, tends to have warmer daily average lows (by about 3 degrees) than areas such as Dunedin and Palm Harbor further north, though daily highs are very close. The north of the county also has fewer overall days of rain, but higher total annual precipitation when measured in inches, the county's south being prone to shorter, more frequent thunderstorms especially in the late summer. Freezing temperatures occur only every 2–3 years, with freezing precipitation occurring extremely rarely. Springs are usually short, mild, and dry, with occasional late-season cold fronts. Summertime weather is very consistent, with highs in the low 90s °F (around 32&nbsp;°C), lows in the mid-70s °F (around 24&nbsp;°C), accompanied by high humidity and an almost daily chance of afternoon thundershowers. The area experiences significant rainfall during its summer months (approximately May through October), with nearly two-thirds of annual precipitation falling between the months of June and September. The area is occasionally affected by tropical storms and hurricanes, but has not suffered a direct hit since 1921. Fall, like spring, is usually mild and dry, with the hurricane season extending through November and sometimes affecting the area. Many portions of St. Petersburg, especially along the bay and in south St. Petersburg, have tropical microclimates. Tropical trees such as royal palms and coconut palms and fruit trees like mangoes will grow in these microclimates. U.S. Census Bureau 2010 Ethnic/Race Demographics: In 2010, 6.5% of the population considered themselves to be of only "American" ancestry (regardless of race or ethnicity.) There were 415,876 households out of which 19.89% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.33% were married couples living together, 11.86% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.67% were non-families. 35.42% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.14% (4.53% male and 10.61% female) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.16 and the average family size was 2.79. The age distribution is 17.8% under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 23.0% from 25 to 44, 30.8% from 45 to 64, and 21.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46.3 years. For every 100 females there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.8 males. The median income for a household in the county was $45,258, and the median income for a family was $58,335. Males had a median income of $41,537 versus $35,003 for females. The per capita income for the county was $28,742. About 8.1% of families and 12.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.7% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those aged 65 or over. In 2010, 11.2% of the county's population was foreign born, with 50.3% being naturalized American citizens. Of foreign-born residents, 33.6% were born in Europe, 32.1% were born in Latin America, 20.9% born in Asia, 9.8% in North America, 3.0% born in Africa, and 0.6% were born in Oceania. As of 2000, there were 921,482 people, 414,968 households, and 243,171 families residing in the county. The population density was 1,271/km² (3,292/sq&nbsp;mi), making it the most densely populated county in Florida. There were 481,573 housing units at an average density of 1,720 per square&nbsp;mile (664/km²). The racial makeup of the county was 85.85% White (82.8% were Non-Hispanic White,) 8.96% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 2.06% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 1.14% from other races, and 1.64% from two or more races. 4.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. There were 414,968 households out of which 22.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.80% were married couples living together, 10.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.40% were non-families. 34.10% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.77. In the county the population was spread out with 19.30% under the age of 18, 6.40% from 18 to 24, 27.30% from 25 to 44, 24.50% from 45 to 64, and 22.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females there were 91.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.80 males. In 2000, 87.8% of persons age 25 or above were high school graduates, slightly above Florida's average of 84.9% for Florida. 26.7% of persons age 25 or above held a Bachelor's degree or higher, also slightly higher than Florida's rate of 25.6%. The median income for a household in the county was $37,111, and the median income for a family was $46,925. Males had a median income of $32,264 versus $26,281 for females. The per capita income for the county was $23,497. About 6.70% of families and 10.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.90% of those under age 18 and 8.20% of those age 65 or over. In 2000, as Florida's 6th and the nation's 53rd most populous county, Pinellas has a population greater than that of the individual states of Wyoming, Montana, Delaware, South Dakota, Alaska, North Dakota, and Vermont, as well as the District of Columbia. With a  population density (as of the 2000 Census) of 3292 persons/mi², Pinellas county is by far the most densely populated county in the state, more than double that of Broward County, the next most densely populated.http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/GCTTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=04000US12&-_box_head_nbr=GCT-PH1&-ds_name=DEC_2000_SF1_U&-format=ST-2 As of 2010, 87.17% of all residents spoke English as their first language, while 5.56% spoke Spanish, 0.78% Vietnamese, 0.70% French, 0.65% Greek, 0.56% German, and 0.52% of the population spoke Serbo-Croatian as their mother language. In total, 12.83% of the population spoke languages other than English as their primary language. The Board of County Commissioners governs all unincorporated areas of the county under the state's constitution, with the power to adopt ordinances, approve the county budget, set millages, and provide services. The county's municipalities, while governing their own affairs, may call upon the county for specialized services. The county administrator, appointed by and reporting to the Board, oversees most of the day-to-day operations of the county. As of 2013, The members of the Board of County Commissioners are as follows: The county's government website won a "Sunny Award" in 2010 for its proactive disclosure of government data from Sunshine Review. In national politics, Pinellas County, as part of the I-4 Corridor stretching from Tampa Bay to Orlando, is an important swing county in one of the nation's most critical swing states and is closely divided between its predominantly liberal largest city (St. Petersburg) and its predominantly suburban and conservative north and beaches. In the 2012 Presidential Election, Barack Obama won Pinellas with 52% of the vote (239,104 votes) to Mitt Romney’s 46.5% (213,258 votes), slightly narrower than Obama’s 2008 election results in Pinellas of 53% (248,299 votes) to John McCain’s 45% (210,066 votes). In 2004 Pinellas swung the other way, with George W. Bush winning a narrow plurality of 50% (225,686 votes) and John Kerry following closely behind with 49.51% (225,460 votes). In the 2012 U.S. Senate election, Pinellas voters helped re-elect U.S. Senator Bill Nelson over challenger Connie Mack IV with 59% of the vote, greater than his statewide average of 55%. In the 2010 Senate Election, Pinellas was one of only four Florida counties won by outgoing Republican Governor Charlie Crist, a St. Petersburg native, who won 42% of Pinellas voters running as an Independent in a three-way race with Republican nominee (and eventual winner) Marco Rubio and former Democratic U.S. Representative Kendrick Meek, who won 37% and 16.8% of the Pinellas vote, respectively. Statewide, Rubio won almost 49% of the vote to Crist's 29.7% and Meek's 20% in a highly polarized election that would witness Crist depart from the Republican party and eventually become a Democrat. Portions of Pinellas fall into Florida's, 12th, 13th, and 14th congressional districts, served by Republican Representative Gus Bilirakis, Republican U.S. Representative David Jolly, and Democratic Representative Kathy Castor, respectively. In state politics, portions of Pinellas are represented in the Florida Senate by Democratic State Senator Arthenia Joyner (District 19) and Republican State Senators Jack Latvala (District 20) and Jeff Brandes (District 22). In the Florida House parts of the county are represented by Republicans James Grant (District 64), Chris Sprowls (District 65), Larry Ahern (District 66), Chris Latvala (District 67), and Kathleen Peters (District 69) and Democrats Dwight Dudley (District 68) and Darryl Rouson (District 70). The county is served by the Pinellas County School District. The current superintendent is Dr. Michael Grego. The district, the nation's 24th largest, comprises 143 schools, including 72 elementary schools, 17 middle schools, 2 K-8 schools, 17 high schools, and 35 additional facitilities including ESE, adult ed, career/technical, and charters. A new middle school is in the works at East Lake High School. The district also operates the K-12 Pinellas Virtual School. Among the many notable magnet programs in the district are three International Baccalaureate (IB) programs, at St. Petersburg High School, Palm Harbor University High School, and Largo High School, the Center for Advanced Technologies (CAT) at Lakewood High School, the Pinellas County Center for the Arts (PCCA) at Gibbs High School, three middle school Centers for Gifted Studies, at Thurgood Marshall Fundamental, Morgan Fitzgerald, and Dunedin Highland Middle Schools, and Florida's only Fundamental High School, at Osceola High School. Two of the district's high schools are also ranked in Newsweek's 2012 list of America's Best High Schools.http://www.thedailybeast.com/content/newsweek/2012/05/20/america-s-best-high-schools.html Pinellas County Schools also offers many courses for academically advanced and gifted individuals. The county is also home to many private schools, including Admiral Farragut Academy, Canterbury School, Calvary Christian, Clearwater Central Catholic, Keswick Christian School, Shorecrest Preparatory School, and St. Petersburg Catholic High School, among others. Pinellas County is home several institutions of higher learning, including Eckerd College, the University of South Florida St. Petersburg, the multi-campus St. Petersburg College, the Stetson University College of Law in Gulfport, and the main campus of Schiller International University in Largo,"Home." Schiller International University. Retrieved on August 28, 2011 "Main Campus 8560 Ulmerton Road Largo, Florida 33771 " after previously being located in Dunedin.Helfand, Lorri. "Largo makes Schiller a priority." Clearwater Times (Edition of St. Petersburg Times). Thursday February 23, 2006. Page 1. Retrieved from Google News (83 of 108) on August 28, 2011. The Pinellas Public Library Cooperative (PPLC) serves county residents by coordinating activities, funding and information and facilitating borrowing across 15 its constituent systems within the county. Individual libraries are primarily funded and operated by their municipalities. PPLC provides digital recources, coordinated marketing, courier service between libraries, and a shared online publicly accessible catalog. The 15 constituent library systems or libraries are: PPLC was created on October 1, 1990 with Bernadette Storck as first administrator for the system.Lewis, Rochelle D."Countywide library card will be costly for some." St. Petersburg Times. September 11, 1990. Retrieved from Newsbank on April 18, 2015. After she retired, Mary Brown took over the position in April 2002."PPLC: History The current Executive Director is Cheryl Morales who started in June 2014."Library Cooperative taps new director." St. Petersburg Times. May 30, 2014. Retrieved from Newsbank on April 18, 2015. PPLC board members started out as a volunteer group but as of 2013 consist of two county commission appointees, four city managers and three county staffers."Long term library director is resigning" St. Petersburg Times. September 18, 2013. Retrieved from Newsbank on April 18, 2015. PPLC Library Directors Advisory Council, LDAC, is made up of the 14 Library Directors of governmental units in Pinellas County participating as full members of PPLC. The Council’s purpose is to advise the PPLC Executive Director and work in conjunction with the PPLC board in developing the Annual Plan of Service and the Long Range Plan of the Cooperative; initiate and implement specific projects and share experience and knowledge among its members; develop and maintain standardized policies when appropriate and possible."PPLC:Library Director Advisory Council PPLC member libraries share an online publicly accessible catalog, called the Pinellas Automated Library System (PALS). Library users may view holdings for all PPLC member libraries and request items to be picked up at their local branch. The catalog is also accessible through the library app, Pinellas Online Portal (POP) to search for books, movies and other library materials, place holds, check accounts, download eBooks, and access select databases."PPLC:Pinellas Online Portal PPLC publishes a monthly Library Calendar of Events with information on upcoming programs and events at all member libraries. It is available in print at all member libraries as well as online. PPLC works with member libraries to offer access to downloadable eBooks, audio books, music, movies, and databases for library cardholders. PPLC offers online library card registration. A free PPLC library card may be issued to Pinellas County property owners, residents of the unincorporated areas of Pinellas County, or residents of one of the member cities. Visitors to Pinellas County can pay to obtain library cards valid for a period of three or six months. Residents of Non-Member Pinellas County cities may obtain a library card for a yearly fee with a valid ID . PPLC participates in numerous literacy advocacy programs. PPLC works with READ Pinellas to increase adult and family literacy throughout Pinellas County. These services include the Born to Read Family Literacy Program and the Deaf Literacy Center. The Deaf Literacy Center (DLC) is a library-based literacy program for Deaf individuals and their families. DFC offers small group and individualized basic literacy instruction and support services in addition to traditional library and information services to the Deaf community. The Pinellas Public Library Cooperative libraries are also member of the Tampa Bay Library Consortium (TBLC). TBLC is a nonprofit Multitype Library Cooperative that assists and empowers over 100 libraries. All types of libraries – public, academic, school and specialized –are members. In addition to the 15 participating library system members, the Pinellas Public Library Cooperative office, which is located in Clearwater, houses the Talking Book Library.  The Talking Book Library is part of a nationwide network of cooperating libraries serving people who have difficulty using or reading regular print. Historical Economic Strengths:  Agriculture was the single most important industry in Pinellas until the early 20th century, with much of the best land devoted to citrus production. Cattle ranching was another major industry. In 1885 the American Medical Society declared the Pinellas peninsula the "healthiest spot on earth", which helped spur the growth of the tourist industry. Economy today While visitors and residents are drawn to the world-renowned white sand beaches of Pinellas County, a skilled workforce, high-quality universities and an entrepreneurial spirit make Pinellas the ideal climate for business. The infrastructure is in place and there are buildings, as well as construction-ready sites, available for every possible use. Anchored by the urban markets of Clearwater and St. Petersburg, Pinellas has the second largest base of manufacturing employment in Florida.  Fortune 500 technology manufacturers Jabil Circuit and Tech Data are headquartered here. Pinellas has diverse, yet symbiotic, industry clusters, including aviation/aerospace; defense/national security; medical technologies; business and financial services; and information technology. An extensive network of suppliers, service-providers and business associations support operations in these sectors. Relocating businesses can move to Pinellas and expect to begin growing immediately. Pinellas encourages innovation, and with industry giants HSN, Nielsen, ValPak and Catalina Marketing, it is rapidly becoming Florida’s hub for big data.  Through relationships with major universities and high-tech institutes, Pinellas has become a center for research and development in marine science, electronic instruments, medical devices, sensors, nanotechnology and health care. The county is home to numerous business accelerators, like the Tampa Bay Innovation Center and Gazelle Lab, which are committed to nurturing and building new ventures. Service industries such as healthcare, business services and education account for more than 200,000 jobs in the county, generating almost $19 billion in revenue. Other major sectors include retail, with close to 100,000 employees in jobs such as food service, bars, and retail sales generating $12 billion for the local economy in 2010, and industries related to finance, insurance and real estate with approximately 44,000 workers generating $8.5 billion in sales. Pinellas County's Largest Private Sector Target Industry Employers (2012): http://www.pced.org/demographics_data/subpage.asp?TopEmployers ♦ HSN (Home Shopping Network), 2,800 local employees ♦ Raymond James Financial, 2,600 local employees ♦ Bright House Networks, 2,000 local employees ♦ Fidelity Information Svc, 1,800 local employees ♦ Nielsen Media Research, 1,800 local employees ♦ Jabil Circuit, 1,600 local employees ♦ Tech Data, 1,500 local employees ♦ Honeywell Aerospace, 1,500 local employees More links to data: 2013 Pinellas County Economic Profile: http://www.pced.org/stats_forms/document.asp?id=108882 More Pinellas County Data: http://www.pced.org/demographics_data/subpage.asp?data Pinellas County's largest employers as of 2009 are: The Florida Orchestra splits its performances between Ruth Eckerd Hall, the Mahaffey Theater, and the Straz Center for the Performing Arts in Tampa. Clearwater Jazz Holiday held every October in Coachman Park in downtown Clearwater; in its 32nd year. Long established communities, particularly Old Northeast in St. Petersburg, Pass-a-Grille in St. Pete Beach, Harbor Oaks in Clearwater, and old Tarpon Springs contain notable historic architecture. The area has embraced farmer's markets, with St. Petersburg's Saturday Morning Market drawing large crowds, and other markets located weekly in several other parts of the county also seeing a growth in popularity. Downtowns in St. Petersburg and Dunedin, and many of the beaches, especially Clearwater Beach, all attract a vibrant nightlife. In addition to the above-mentioned Heritage Village, a number of small local history museums operate within the county: the Gulf Beaches Historical Museum in Pass-a-Grille, the St. Petersburg Museum of History on the downtown St. Petersburg waterfront, and the North Pinellas Historical Museum in Palm Harbor all provide visitors a glimpse of the area's history. Two botanical gardens are located within the county: The Florida Botanical Gardens, a part of the Pinewood Cultural Park in Largo, and Sunken Gardens, a former tourist attraction located in and now run by the City of St. Petersburg. Indian Shores is home to the Suncoast Seabird Sanctuary, currently the largest non-profit wild bird hospital in the United States and considered one of the top avian rehabilitation centers in the world. A variety of species can be found at the sanctuary, which is open 365 days a year and is free to the public. On Clearwater Beach is the Clearwater Marine Aquarium, a non-profit dedicated to the rescue, rehabilitation and release of injured marine animals and public education. CMA's best-known permanent resident, is Winter, a bottlenose dolphin who was rescued in December 2005 after having her tail caught in a crab trap. Her injuries sadly caused the loss of her tail; CMA successfully fitted Winter with a prosthetic tail which brought worldwide attention to the facility. Winter was the subject of the 2011 film Dolphin Tale, shot partially on location at CMA. On the south end of Anclote Key, off of Tarpon Springs, is the Anclote Key Light, a lighthouse built in 1887. The light is Pinellas County's only functioning lighthouse, and one of only two in the Tampa Bay Area. The light was deactivated in 1984, but by 2003 had been restored and as of 2013 continues to be in use. The island forms Anclote Key Preserve State Park and is accessible only by private boat. Dunedin is home to the Dunedin Brewery, Florida's oldest microbrewery. The Tampa Bay Area is home to three major professional sports teams and a number of minor-league and college teams. Regardless of the specific city where they play their games, all of the professional teams claim "Tampa Bay" in their name to signify that they represent the entire area. Professionally, baseball's Tampa Bay Rays play at Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg, while football's Tampa Bay Buccaneers and hockey's Tampa Bay Lightning both play in nearby Tampa. Two MLB teams come to Pinellas for spring training: the Philadelphia Phillies play at Bright House Field in Clearwater while the Toronto Blue Jays play at Dunedin Stadium in Dunedin. Minor League teams in the area include the Clearwater Threshers (formerly the Clearwater Phillies) who play at Bright House Field and the Dunedin Blue Jays who play Dunedin Stadium. The North American Soccer League's Tampa Bay Rowdies play at Progress Energy Park in St. Petersburg The Honda Grand Prix of St. Petersburg is held every spring on the downtown St. Petersburg waterfront. Other popular fishing locations include Pier 60 on Clearwater Beach and the Gulf and Bay Piers at Fort De Soto Park, as well as countless spots along the bridges and passes of the area, among many others. Pinellas County's coastal geography, with a long system of barrier islands on the Gulf and small-to-large mangrove islands dotting the waters on all sides, provides for an extensive series of blueways that are enjoyed by kayakers of all ability levels. The county also maintains a series of artificial reefs in the Gulf which are popular spots for fishing and scuba divinghttp://www.pinellascounty.org/utilities/reef/default.htm The county's two largest freshwater lakes, Lake Tarpon (accessible through Chestnut and Anderson parks) and Lake Seminole (accessible through Lake Seminole Park), are popular for water skiing, jet-skiing, and sailing, as well as for fishing and kayaking. Both the North Beach of Fort De Soto Park (2005) and Caladesi Island (2008) have been named by Dr. Beach as America's Top Beach. Pinellas County, as a part of the Tampa Bay Area (the nation's 14th largest television markethttp://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-content/uploads/2009/08/2009-2010-dma-ranks.pdf), is served by fourteen local broadcast television stations, as well as a variety of cable-only local stations. More than 70 FM and AM stations compete for listenership in what is the nation's 19th largest radio market. Major daily newspapers serving Pinellas are the Tampa Bay Times, known as the St. Petersburg Times from 1884–2011 and first in circulation and readership, and The Tampa Tribune. The Times also distributes a free daily (Monday-Friday) tabloid called tbt* in the most heavily populated areas of the county. Creative Loafing Tampa is the main alternative weekly. iLovetheBurg.com is an award-winning and popular online source of information for downtown St. Petersburg.   The CSX railroad company operates branch lines of the former Seaboard Air Line and Atlantic Coast Line railroads. It has daily rail traffic from north Tampa though Safety Harbor, Clearwater, Largo, and into downtown St. Petersburg and the adjacent industrial areas. As of March 2008, the portion of the railroad in downtown St. Petersburg and the adjacent western industrial areas is abandoned and being dismantled. There is a small rail yard north of downtown St. Petersburg. A large section of former CSX railroad line in the county was converted in the 1980s and 1990s into the Pinellas Trail. The Pinellas Suncoast Transit Authority (PSTA) operates 205 buses and trolleys servicing 37 routes across the county, with major stops at all commercial centers. Along the Gulf Beaches, PTSA operates the Suncoast Beach Trolley. PTSA also offers two express routes to downtown Tampa via the Howard Frankland and Gandy Bridges, connecting with Tampa's HartLine, and connects with Pasco's PCPT in Tarpon Springs to continue service in that county. The system's two main bus terminals are located in downtown Clearwater and downtown St. Petersburg. During fiscal year 2005-06, PSTA transported 11,400,484 passengers.http://www.psta.net/index.php Proposals are currently being developed by community leaders for a light rail system which would connect the regional core cities of Clearwater, St. Petersburg, and Tampa. The proposal, which has won the backing of the Clearwater and St. Petersburg City Councilshttp://oldnortheast.patch.com/articles/city-council-weighs-in-on-light-rail would rely on a 1% sales tax and would have to go before voters for approval. http://www.pinellascounty.org/justice/law_enforcement.htm     Movies filmed in Pinellas County include:       Year Democrat Republican 2012 52.1% 239,104 46.5% 213,258 2008 53.6% 248,299 45.3% 210,066 2004 49.5% 225,460 49.6% 225,686 2000 50.3% 200,657 46.4% 184,849 1996 49.1% 184,748 40.4% 152,155 1992 38% 160,528 37.6% 159,121 1988 41.7% 152,420 57.8% 211,049 1984 34.8% 128,574 65.2% 240,612 1980 40.1% 138,428 53.8% 185,728 1976 48.0% 141,879 50.8% 150,003 1972 30.0% 77,197 69.8% 179,541 1968 32.3% 68,209 51.7% 109,235 1964 55.0% 98,381 45.0% 80,414 1960 36.31% 58,054 63.7% 101,779 Anclote Key- offshore of Tarpon Springs and the northernmost point in the county Howard Park- a man-made pocket beach created in the 1960s Three Rooker Bar- the most geologically recent of Pinellas' barrier islands Honeymoon Island Hurricane Pass Caladesi Island Dunedin Pass- shoaled and closed in the 1980s, linking Caladesi Island and Clearwater Beach Clearwater Beach Clearwater Pass Sand Key- the longest of Pinellas' barrier islands John's Pass Treasure Island Blind Pass Long Key (St. Pete Beach) Pass-a-Grille Channel Shell Key Tierra Verde- on the bay side of Shell Key, links the mainland to Ft. De Soto. Created by a dredge-and-fill project that merged several smaller Keys, including Cabbage and Pine Keys Bunces Pass Mullet Key- home to Ft. De Soto and the southernmost point in the county Pinellas National Wildlife Refuge Honeymoon Island State Park Caladesi Island State Park Anclote Key Preserve State Park Pasco County, Florida — north Hillsborough County, Florida — east and south White (non-Hispanic) (82.1% when including White Hispanics): 76.9% (17.7% German, 15.5% Irish, 12.6% English, 8.9% Italian, 4.3% Polish, 4.0% French, 2.6% Scottish, 1.9% Scotch-Irish, 1.7% Dutch, 1.4% Swedish, 1.4% Greek, 1.1% Russian, 1.0% French Canadian, 0.9% Norwegian, 0.8% Welsh, 0.8% Hungarian, 0.5% Czech, 0.5% Portuguese, 0.5% Ukrainian) Black (non-Hispanic) (10.3% when including Black Hispanics): 10.0% (0.6% Subsaharan African, 0.5% West Indian/Afro-Caribbean American [0.2% Jamaican, 0.1% Haitian, 0.1% Trinidadian and Tobagonian, 0.1% Other or Unspecified West Indian]) Hispanic or Latino of any race: 8.0% (2.4% Mexican, 2.4% Puerto Rican, 0.9% Cuban) Asian: 3.0% (0.8% Vietnamese, 0.7% Other Asian, 0.6% Indian, 0.5% Filipino, 0.3% Chinese, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Japanese) Two or more races: 2.2% American Indian and Alaska Native: 0.3% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander: 0.1% Other Races: 2.0% (0.6% Arab) Janet Long - At-Large District #1 (2012–Present) Pat Gerard - At-Large District #2 (2014–Present) Charlie Justice - At-Large District #3 (2012–Present) Dave Eggers, Single-Member District #4 (2014–Present) Karen Seel, Single-Member District #5 (1999–Present) John Morroni - Single-Member District #6 (2000–Present) Ken Welch - Single-Member District #7 (2000–Present) Mark Woodard - County Administrator (2014–present) Barbara S. Ponce Public Library Clearwater Public Library System Dunedin Library East Lake Community Library Gulf Beaches Library Gulfport Library Largo Library Oldsmar Library Palm Harbor Library Pinellas Talking Book Library Safety Harbor Library St. Petersburg Public Library System St. Pete Beach Library Seminole Community Library Tarpon Springs Library Pinellas County School District (Public; 13,905 employees. Headquartered in Largo) Home Shopping Network (Private; 4,000 employees. Corporate headquarters in St. Petersburg) Pinellas County Government (Public; 4,000 employees. Headquartered in Clearwater) City of St. Petersburg (Public; 3,500 employees) Times Publishing Company (Private; 3,187 employees. Headquartered in St. Petersburg) Raymond James Financial (Private; 3,022 employees. Corporate headquarters in St. Petersburg) Pinellas County Sheriff’s Office (Public; 2,800 employees. Headquartered in Largo) Nielsen Media Research (Private; 2.669 employees in Oldsmar) Morton Plant Hospital (Private, 2,448 employees in Clearwater) Bay Pines VA Medical Center (Public; 2,330 employees in St. Petersburg) Museum of Fine Arts near the Pier in downtown St. Petersburg Salvador Dalí Museum in downtown St. Petersburg Florida Holocaust Museum in downtown St. Petersburg Morean Arts Center in downtown St. Petersburg Dr. Carter G. Woodson African American Museum in downtown St. Petersburg Leepa-Rattner Museum of Art on the Tarpon Springs Campus of St. Petersburg College Ruth Eckerd Hall in Clearwater Mahaffey Theater in St. Petersburg Palladium Theater in St. Petersburg Jannus Landing in St. Petersburg Skyway Fishing Pier State Park - Remnants of the approaches to the original Sunshine Skyway Bridge and the longest fishing pier in the world. Fred Marquis Pinellas Trail - 37-mile running and cycling trail over a former railroad bed connecting Tarpon Springs to St. Petersburg. Interstate 275 travels through St. Petersburg, connecting Pinellas to Manatee County to the south via the Sunshine Skyway Bridge and to Tampa to the northeast by way of the Howard Frankland Bridge. Two east-west spur routes, I-175 and I-375 provide access into/out of downtown St. Petersburg. U.S.19 is the main north-south highway through Pinellas County, traveling north from the Sunshine Skyway Bridge through St. Petersburg (where it is called 34th Street) and Clearwater, and continuing north to the Pasco County line. Currently, U.S. 19 from Pinellas Park to the Pasco County line is being upgraded to a freeway-style road, due to the cancellation of the proposed extension of Interstate 375 to Clearwater in the late 1970s. U.S. Route 92 runs through St. Petersburg as 4th Street and connects the city to south Tampa via Gandy Boulevard and the Gandy Bridge. North of Gandy Boulevard, 4th Street becomes State Road 687. CR 611 travels the length of the county and is known at various points as 49th Street, the Bayside Bridge, McMullen-Booth Road, and East Lake Road . 66th Street runs through St. Petersburg and Pinellas Park before merging with U.S. 19 in Largo. County Road 1 runs most of the length of the county and is known at various points as Park Street, Starkey Road, and Keene Road. Alternate U.S. 19 is a former section of U.S. 19 that runs from St. Petersburg through western portions of the county, close to the Gulf of Mexico, before reconnecting to U.S. 19 at the Pasco County line. Its route follows 5th Ave N, Tyrone Blvd, Seminole Blvd, and Missouri Ave, among others. Gulf Boulevard connects the county's barrier islands between St. Pete Beach and Clearwater Beach. Central Avenue is St. Petersburg's main east-west artery, traveling from the city's downtown at Tampa Bay to Treasure Island on the Gulf. Park Boulevard travels across the middle of the county, from Indian Shores on the Gulf, through Seminole and Pinellas Park before becoming Gandy Boulevard, and continuing to south Tampa via the Gandy Bridge. Ulmerton Road also runs across mid-county, from Indian Rocks Beach on the Gulf, through Largo to Northeast St. Petersburg, before merging directly into I-275 and continuing on to Tampa via the Howard Frankland Bridge East Bay Drive/Roosevelt Blvd. runs from the Gulf at Belleair Beach, across Largo to the east of the county, where it crosses Ulmerton Rd and I-275 before ending at its junction with 4th St. N and Gandy Blvd. SR 60/Gulf-to-Bay Boulevard travels across Clearwater from Clearwater Beach, connecting the city to Hillsborough County and the area around Tampa International Airport via the Courtney Campbell Causeway. State Road 580 connects downtown Dunedin (where it forms Main Street) to Oldsmar where it merges into Tampa Road. Tampa Road travels across Palm Harbor from Ozona on the Gulf, through Oldsmar to the Hillsborough County line, where it continues as Hillsborough Avenue. St. Petersburg–Clearwater International Airport Albert Whitted Airport Clearwater Executive Airpark Tampa International Airport is located across the bay in nearby Tampa. Clearwater Fire Rescue Dunedin Fire Rescue East Lake Fire Rescue Gulfport Fire Rescue Largo Fire Rescue Lealman Fire District Maderia Beach Fire Rescue Oldsmar Fire Rescue Palm Harbor Fire Rescue Pinellas Park Fire Rescue Pinellas Suncoast Fire District Safety Harbor Fire Rescue Seminole Fire Rescue St. Pete Beach Fire Rescue St. Petersburg Fire Rescue South Pasadena Fire Rescue Tarpon Springs Fire Rescue Treasure Island Fire Rescue Sunstar Paramedics Belleair Police Department Clearwater Police Department Gulfport Police Department Indian Shores Police Department Kenneth City Police Department Largo Police Department Pinellas County Sheriff's Office Pinellas Park Police Department St. Petersburg Police Department Tarpon Springs Police Department Treasure Island Police Department All Children's Hospital- St. Petersburg Bay Pines VA Medical Center- Located between St. Petersburg and Seminole in Bay Pines Bayfront Medical Center- St. Petersburg. Pinellas County's trauma center which operates Bayflite Edward White Hospital- St. Petersburg HealthSouth Rehabilitation Hospital- Largo Florida Hospital North Pinellas - Tarpon Springs Largo Medical Center- Largo Mease Countryside Hospital- Clearwater Mease Dunedin Hospital- Dunedin Morton Plant Hospital- Clearwater Northside Hospital and Tampa Bay Heart Institute- St. Petersburg Palms of Pasadena Hospital- St. Petersburg St. Anthonys Hospital- St. Petersburg St. Petersburg General Hospital- St. Petersburghttp://www.siliconbay.org/download/document/20080514_153534_19517.pdf Belleair Beach (2) Belleair Bluffs (3) Clearwater (5) Dunedin (6) Gulfport (7) Indian Rocks Beach (8) Largo (11) Madeira Beach (12) Oldsmar (14) Pinellas Park (15) Safety Harbor (18) Seminole (19) South Pasadena (20) St. Pete Beach (21) St. Petersburg (22) Tarpon Springs (23) Treasure Island (24) Belleair (1) Belleair Shore (4) Indian Shores (9) Kenneth City (10) North Redington Beach (13) Redington Beach (16) Redington Shores (17) Bardmoor Baskin Bay Pines Crystal Beach Curlew Bear Creek East Lake Feather Sound Gandy Greenbriar Harbor Bluffs Highpoint Innisbrook Lealman Oakhurst Ozona Palm Harbor Ridgecrest St. George Seminole Park South Highpoint Tierra Verde Wall Springs Walsingham West Lealman Sunlight Jr.- (2013) Spring Breakers- (2013) Magic Mike- (2012) Dolphin Tale (2011)- Filmed and set at the Clearwater Marine Aquarium Immortal Island (2011) A Fonder Heart (2011)- Scenes filmed in Clearwater Misconceptions (2008)- scenes filmed at Eckerd College Grace is Gone (2007)- scenes filmed at Fort De Soto Love Comes Lately (2007)- scenes filmed at Pass A Grille and St. Pete Beach Loren Cass (2006)- scenes filmed throughout St. Petersburg The Punisher (2004)- Scenes filmed at Fort De Soto and the Sunshine Skyway Bridge American Outlaws (2001)- scenes filmed at Fort De Soto Ocean's Eleven (2001)- single scene filmed at the Derby Lane Greyhound Track in St. Petersburg Great Expectations (1998)- Scenes filmed at Fort DeSoto Park in St. Petersburg Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)- scenes filmed at the Sereno Hotel (now gone) in St. Petersburg Cocoon (1985)- filmed and set in St. Petersburg Summer Rental (1985)- Filmed in St. Pete Beach Once Upon a Time in America (1984)- scenes filmed at the historic Don Cesar hotel on St. Pete Beach Porky's (1982)- based on actual occurrences at Boca Ciega High School in Gulfport the early 1960s National Register of Historic Places listings in Pinellas County, Florida Timeline of Pinellas County, Florida history Pinellas County Government / Board of County Commissioners Pinellas County Property Appraiser Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections Pinellas County Tax Collector Pinellas County Parks Department Pinellas County School District Pinellas County Sheriff's Office Clerk of the Circuit Court, Pinellas County Public Defender for the 6th Judicial Circuit serving Pinellas and Pasco Counties Office of the State Attorney, 6th Judicial Circuit Circuit and County Court for the 6th Judicial Circuit of Florida Pinellas Suncoast Transit Authority Pinellas Public Library Cooperative Clearwater Public Library Dunedin Public Library East Lake Community Library Gulf Beaches Public Library Gulfport Public Library Largo Public Library Oldsmar Public Library Palm Harbor Public Library Pinellas Park Public Library Pinellas County Talking Book Library Safety Harbor Public Library St. Petersburg Public Library St. Pete Beach Public Library Seminole Community Library Tarpon Springs Public Library Pinellas Planning Council Pinellas County Economic Development Metropolitan Planning Organization Greenlight Pinellas Pinellas County GIS Maps Southwest Florida Water Management District Pinellas Indicators A website for viewing and downloading geographically referenced statistics for Pinellas County Visit St. Petersburg-Clearwater The official visitor website of Pinellas County Convention and Visitors Bureau Pinellas County Historical Society USF Map Database Hillsborough County Maps from when Pinellas was part of Hillsborough USF Map Database Maps of early Pinellas County UF IFAS Extension in Pinellas County The Florida Botanical Gardens Master Gardener Program Pinellas News, newspaper with full text and full pages images from the Florida Digital Newspaper Library Gabber, newspaper with full text and full pages images from the Florida Digital Newspaper Library Pinellas Watershed Excursion interactive guide
