     Alecia Beth "Pink" Moore (born September 8, 1979) (stylized as ) is an American singer, songwriter, dancer and actress. Originally a member of the girl group Choice, Pink rose to fame as an R&B artist with her debut solo album, Can't Take Me Home (2000). The album was certified double platinum in the United States and spawned two Billboard Hot 100 top-ten hits, "There You Go" and "Most Girls". She gained further recognition with  the Moulin Rouge! soundtrack "Lady Marmalade", which gave Pink her first Grammy Award as well as her first number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100. Pink took more artistic control and pursued pop rock direction for her second album, Missundaztood (2001). It sold more than 15 million copies worldwide and yielded three U.S. top-ten singles, "Get the Party Started", "Don't Let Me Get Me", and "Just Like a Pill". Pink's third studio album, Try This (2003), generated considerably lower sales, but earned her the Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance. Pink revived her popularity with her fourth and fifth studio albums, I'm Not Dead (2006) and Funhouse (2008), with the latter containing her second U.S. number-one hit, "So What". Pink concluded the first decade of her career with the compilation album Greatest Hits... So Far!!! (2010), which featured Fuckin' Perfect and the chart-topping single "Raise Your Glass". Her sixth studio album, The Truth About Love (2012), debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and spawned the top-ten singles "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)", "Try", and "Just Give Me a Reason", with the latter becoming her fourth U.S. number-one single. In 2014, Pink recorded a collaborative album, rose ave., with Canadian musician Dallas Green under a folk music duo named You+Me. Noted for having "a strong signature voice and a literally acrobatic ability on stage", Pink has received mostly positive reception from music critics. She has sold over 200 million records worldwide. She has sold over 28 million albums in the United States. Her career accolades include three Grammy Awards, a Brit Award, and six MTV Video Music Awards. In 2009, Billboard recognized Pink as the Pop Songs Artist of the Decade. Pink was also the second most-played female solo artist in the United Kingdom during the 2000s decade, behind Madonna. VH1 ranked her number 10 on their list of the 100 Greatest Women in Music, while Billboard awarded her the Woman of the Year in 2013. At the 63rd annual BMI Pop Awards, she received the BMI President's Award for "her outstanding achievement in songwriting and global impact on pop culture and the entertainment industry." Alecia Beth Moore was born on September 8, 1979, in Doylestown, Pennsylvania, to nurse Judy and insurance salesman Jim Moore, a Vietnam veteran. Her father was Catholic (of Irish and German descent) and her mother was Jewish (of Lithuanian-Jewish and German-Jewish descent). She describes her background as: "I'm Irish-German-Lithuanian-Jew".Pink Laid Bare, Q Magazine, Issue 212, March 2004, (Ed, Paul Rees), EAN 9770955495176  Although a healthy baby at birth, she quickly developed asthma that plagued her through her early years. Pink attended Central Bucks High School West. When she was just a toddler, her parents began having marital problems, and before she was 10 her parents had divorced. Pink developed her voice early in life. In high school, Pink joined her first band, Middleground, but it disbanded upon losing a battle of the bands competition. As a teenager, she wrote lyrics as an outlet for her feelings, and her mother commented, "Her initial writings were always very introspective. Some of it was very black, and very deep, almost worrisome."Driven: Pink VH1. Retrieved October 31, 2007. She began performing in Philadelphia clubs when she was about 14. She adopted her stagename, "Pink", around this time. She had had that nickname for quite some time by that point, and initially it had been "a mean thing". She had gotten that name from the character "Mr. Pink" in the 1992 film Reservoir Dogs. Pink has said, "I was extreme. I went through phases from skateboarder, to hip-hopper, to rave child, to lead singer in a band. I did it all, and all at the same time." At 14, she was convinced to audition to become a member of the all-female group Basic Instinct, and earned a spot in the lineup. Ultimately, the group disbanded without releasing any material. At 16, Pink and two other teenage girls, Stephanie Galligan and Chrissy Conway, formed the R&B group Choice. A copy of their first song, "Key to My Heart", was sent to LaFace Records in Atlanta, Georgia, where L.A. Reid overheard it and arranged for the group to fly there so he could see them perform. After that, he signed them to a record deal. Since the three girls were under 18 at the time, their parents had to cosign the contract. The group relocated to Atlanta and recorded an album, which was never released, and "Key to My Heart" appeared on the soundtrack to the 1996 film Kazaam. During a Christmas party, Reid gave Pink an ultimatum: go solo or go home. Choice disbanded in 1998. After Choice disbanded, Pink signed a recording contract with LaFace Records and began working on her debut solo album with producers such as Babyface, Kandi Burruss and Tricky Stewart. Her debut single, "There You Go", was released in February 2000 and became her first top-ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, where it peaked at number seven. Internationally, the song also charted inside the top ten in Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. In April, Pink's debut album, Can't Take Me Home, was released to commercial success. Despite a moderate peak of 26 on the Billboard 200 chart, the album was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for two million units shipped in the United States. It also went platinum in the United Kingdom and multi-platinum in Australia and Canada, while selling over four million copies worldwide.[ ] Critical reception to the album was mixed. The album's second single, "Most Girls", peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and became her first chart-topping single in Australia. "You Make Me Sick" was released as the final single and reached number 33 on the Hot 100. Pink won the trophy for Female New Artist of the Year at the 2000 Billboard Music Awards. She was billed as a supporting act on the North American leg of NSYNC's No Strings Attached Tour throughout the Summer of 2000.Robert Mancini "Pink Lands 'NSYNC Tour, Plans New Video" MTV News. April 5, 2000. In 2001, Pink, alongside singers Christina Aguilera and Mýa as well as rapper Lil' Kim, performed a cover of "Lady Marmalade" for the soundtrack of the film Moulin Rouge!. In the US it became the most successful airplay-only single in history, as well as Pink's first #1 single. The success of the single was helped by its music video, which was popular on music channelsRebecca Murray Music From "Moulin Rouge" Makes History Interscope Geffen A&M Records. Retrieved August 10, 2007. and won the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year. The song won Pink's first Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Tired of being marketed as another cookie cutter pop act, as well as eager both to be seen as a more serious songwriter and musician and to perform the type of music she wanted to, Pink took her sound in a new direction and sought more artistic or creative control during the recording of her second album, Missundaztood.Teresa Wiltz Pop Princess Pink: Flush With Attitude The Washington Post. Retrieved June 2, 2002. She recruited Linda Perry, former singer of 4 Non Blondes (one of Pink's favorite groups in her teenage years).Jason Genegabus She'll get the party started with a show at the Blaisdell StarBulletin. Retrieved December 16, 2002. Pink moved into Perry's Los Angeles home where the pair spent several months writing songs for the album. Perry co-wrote and co-produced the album with Dallas Austin and Scott Storch, and according to VH1's Driven program, Antonio "LA" Reid of LaFace Records was not initially content with the new music Pink was making. The album, named Missundaztood because of Pink's belief that people had a wrong image of her, was released in November 2001. "Get the Party Started" was released as the lead single and peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100. It also became a worldwide hit, reaching number one in Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, Romania, and Spain, as well as spending four weeks at the top of the European Hot 100 Singles chart. At the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, its music video won in the categories of Best Female Video and Best Dance Video. The album's other singles—"Don't Let Me Get Me", "Just Like a Pill", and "Family Portrait"—were also radio and chart successes, with "Just Like a Pill" becoming Pink's second number-one hit in the United Kingdom. Missundaztood remains Pink's best-selling record with over 13 million copies sold worldwide. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), Missundaztood was the eight best-selling album of 2002 globally. Pink won a World Music Award for Best Selling American Pop/Rock Female Artist. She was also nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 45th Grammy Awards. Faith Hill's 2002 album, Cry, features a song co-written by Pink and Perry. In 2002, Pink headlined a tour of America, Europe and Australian, the Party Tour, as well as becoming a supporting act for Lenny Kravitz's American tour. Pink was named the Top Female Billboard 200 Artist of 2002.  In mid-2003, Pink contributed the song "Feel Good Time" to the soundtrack of the film Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle, in which she had a cameo appearance as a motocross race ramp owner/promoter. Featuring electronic music artist William Orbit, it became Pink's first single to miss the top 40 on Billboard's Hot 100 chart, although it was a hit in Europe and in Australia. It was later included on non-U.S. editions of Pink's third album, Try This, which was released on November 11, 2003. Eight of the 13 tracks were co-written with Tim Armstrong of the band Rancid. Linda Perry was featured on the album as a writer and musician. Despite the album reaching the top ten on album charts in the US, in Canada, in the UK, and in Australia, sales were considerably lower than those of Missundaztood. However, it did go platinum in the US. The singles "Trouble" and "God Is a DJ" did not reach the US top 40 but did reach the top ten in other countries, and "Last to Know" was released as a single outside North America. "Trouble" earned Pink the Best Female Rock Vocal Performance category at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards, and "Feel Good Time" was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. She toured extensively on the Try This Tour through Europe and Australia, where the album was better received. During the same period, a song Pink co-wrote with Damon Elliott was released on Mýa's album Moodring. In 2005, Pink collaborated with Lisa Marie Presley on the track "Shine", released on Presley's second album Now What. Pink took a break to write the songs for her fourth album, I'm Not Dead, which she said she titled as such because "It's about being alive and feisty and not sitting down and shutting up even though people would like you to."Julie Chen "Pink: Singing With Dad Was 'Awesome'". CBS News. July 12, 2006. Retrieved March 30, 2007. Pink worked with producers Max Martin, Billy Mann, Christopher Rojas, Butch Walker, Lukasz Gottwald, and Josh Abraham on the album. The album's release through LaFace Records in April 2006 was a substantial success throughout the world, particularly in Australia. The album reached the top ten in the US, the top five in the UK, No. 1 in Germany, and was No. 1 in Australia for two non-consecutive weeks. The album's lead single, "Stupid Girls", was Pink's biggest US hit since 2002 and earned her a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Its music video, in which she parodies celebrities such as Lindsay Lohan, Jessica Simpson, Mary-Kate Olsen, and Paris Hilton,Gardner, Elysa. "Pink's video pokes fun at 'Stupid Girls. USA Today. February 14, 2006. won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Pop Video. Subsequent singles "Who Knew" and "U + Ur Hand" were substantial hits in Australia and Europe, and they later became top ten singles in the US. in 2007. The non-US singles were "Nobody Knows", a minor hit in the UK, Australia and Germany; "Dear Mr. President", an open letter to the US President George W. Bush which featured the Indigo Girls and became a No. 1 hit in Belgium as well as a top five hit in Germany, Australia, and other countries; "Leave Me Alone (I'm Lonely)", a UK top 40 and Australian top five entry; and "'Cuz I Can". The album has sold over 1.3&nbsp;million copies in the US, as well as over 700,000 copies in Australia. The album proved very popular in Australia, with six top five singles and a record-breaking 62 weeks in the top 10; so far the album has gone 10 times platinum. In support of the album, Pink embarked on the world I'm Not Dead Tour, for which ticket sales in Australia were particularly high; she sold approximately 307,000 tickets in Australia, giving her the record for the biggest concert attendance for an arena tour by a female artist.Jonathon Moran Pink proves a hot ticket The Sunday Telegraph June 10, 2007. Retrieved June 24, 2007. One of the London shows on the tour was taped and released as a DVD, Pink: Live from Wembley Arena, where she sang Linda Perry's "Whats Up?". In 2006, Pink was chosen to sing the theme song for NBC Sunday Night Football, "Waiting All Day for Sunday Night", which is a take on "I Hate Myself for Lovin' You" by Joan Jett. She contributed a cover of Rufus's "Tell Me Something Good" to the soundtrack of the film Happy Feet, and lent her name to PlayStation to promote the PSP, a special pink edition of which was released.Official mini-site for the Pink PSP Sony Entertainment. Retrieved November 12, 2006. Pink collaborated with several other artists in 2006 and 2007, when she opened for Justin Timberlake on the American leg of his FutureSex/LoveShow Tour. She sang on the Indigo Girls album Despite Our Differences. She was featured on India.Arie's song "I Am Not My Hair" from the Lifetime Television film Why I Wore Lipstick to My Mastectomy. She wrote a song, "I Will", for Natalia's third album, Everything and More. "Outside of You", another song she co-wrote, was recorded by dance-pop singer Hilary Duff and released on her 2007 album Dignity. Pink recorded a song with Annie Lennox and twenty-two other female acts for Lennox's fourth solo studio album, Songs of Mass Destruction; titled "Sing", it was written as an anthem for HIV/AIDS, according to Lennox's website.Special section about Sing on Annie Lennox official website  In December 2007, a special edition Pink Box, which comprises her second to fourth albums and the DVD Live in Europe, was released in Australia. It reached the top twenty on the albums chart and was certified Gold, selling over 35,000 units.  On August 7, 2008, Pink's single "So What" was leaked online, and radio stations across Australia were quick to give it massive airplay. Less than six hours after the leak, "So What" was voted No.1 on Nova 100 Melbourne and shot to No.1 on the Today Network's national radio Hot30 Countdown. On August 22, Pink announced a new track, titled "Crystal Ball". On September 18, 2008, "So What" became her second number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100. Pink was the guest of honor at the 2008 ARIA Music Awards, which were held in Sydney, Australia, in October 2008. There she sang "So What". On November 3, 2008, Funhouse debuted at No. 1 on the ARIA charts. In Australia it sold over 86,000 units in its first week, and was eventually certified eleven times platinum. On November 23, 2008, Pink performed "Sober", the second single from Funhouse,  at the American Music Awards. The third single was "Please Don't Leave Me", with a video directed by Dave Meyers. In Australia, "Bad Influence" was released as the album's fourth single as a promotional single for her Funhouse Tour, and "Funhouse" was later released as the fifth single. However, "Bad Influence" was not released as a single in Europe until March 2010, which was after "Funhouse" had been released. In May 2009, Pink released a four-CD box set of her first four albums; this set peaked at No. 7 in the UK Album Chart. In 2009, Pink performed in The People Speak, a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's A People's History of the United States.[ ]  Pink's Funhouse Tour started in France on February 24, 2009, and continued through Europe until mid-May, with supporting act Raygun. Pink then performed a series of shows in Australia, all of which sold out. Between May and August 2009, she performed for a total of more than 600,000 Australian fans at 58 shows around the country. On September 13, 2009, Pink performed "Sober" while doing a trapeze act at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, where she was nominated for Best Female Video for "So What". On January 31, 2010, Pink did another trapeze act in the form of aerial silks at the 2010 Grammy Awards, this time performing the song "Glitter in the Air". She received a standing ovation. In 2013, Billboard ranked the performance as the best between 2000 and 2012. Billboard recognized Pink as the Pop Songs Artist of the Decade. According to the BBC countdown compiled by PPL, Pink was the second most-played female solo artist in the United Kingdom during the 2000s decade, behind Madonna. Pink was a soloist in the remake of the 1985 charity single, "We Are the World". She collaborated on the 2010 Herbie Hancock album, The Imagine Project, in which she sang Peter Gabriel's "Don't Give Up" with John Legend and contributed vocals to John Lennon's "Imagine" with Seal, India.Arie, Jeff Beck, Konono Nº1, Oumou Sangaré, and others. The last collaboration earned Pink a Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. She was featured on a track titled "Won't Back Down" for Eminem's 2010 album Recovery; Eminem explained that he included Pink because he "felt like she would smash this record." On July 15, 2010, during a concert in Nurnberg, Germany, Pink was preparing to end her concert with an aerial acrobatic routine when she was pulled offstage and onto a barricade below. Her left-side flywire had been activated before the right-side one had been properly attached to her harness.  She was taken to a local hospital where it was determined that she had not been seriously injured. Pink sold a total of 3,000,000 concert tickets on her 2009–10 worldwide tour, according to a statement on behalf of UK tour promoter Marshall Arts. In the first week of October 2010, Pink released "Raise Your Glass", the first single from her first compilation album, Greatest Hits... So Far!!!. The song celebrates a decade since Pink's debut in 2000 and is dedicated to her fans who have been supporting her over the years. The song peaked at #1 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Pink's tenth Top 10 hit, and her third number-one on the chart. She released the compilation album on November 12, 2010, and almost a month later she released the album's second single, named "Fuckin' Perfect." The song reached #2 on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at #1 in Germany. Pink voiced the character of Gloria in Happy Feet Two, which premiered on November 18, 2011 in the United States. She also sings the movie's theme song, "Bridge of Light". On October 7, 2011, RCA Music Group announced that it would be disbanding Jive Records, along with Arista Records and J Records. With the shutdown, Pink and all other artists previously signed to the labels would release any future material through RCA Records.  In February 2012, Pink confirmed that she was in the writing process for her next studio album, The Truth About Love. It was preceded with the release of its lead single, "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)", in July. The single peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100, while reaching number one in Australia and Hungary, and the top five in Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom. Released in September, The Truth About Love debut atop the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 281,000, making it her first number-one album in the United States. It also topped the charts in Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, Sweden, and Switzerland,http://australian-charts.com/showitem.asp?interpret=P!nk&titel=The+Truth+About+Love&cat=a and became the world's sixth best-selling album of 2012 according to the IFPI. The album was certified double platinum by the RIAA for two million copies shipped and has sold over seven million copies worldwide. The Truth About Love received positive response from music critics and was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards. "Try" was released as the second single from The Truth About Love in October 2012 and became a worldwide top-ten hit, peaking at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100. In February 2013, Pink released the fourth single, "Just Give Me a Reason", featuring guest vocal by Nate Ruess of fun. It became the most successful single from The Truth About Love, topping the record charts in more than 20 countries worldwide and becoming Pink's fourth number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100. According to the IFPI, the song was the fourth best-selling digital single of 2013 with 9.9 million copies sold worldwide. The song won the Billboard Mid-Year Award for Favorite Hot 100 No.1 Song, and garnered two nominations for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance and Song of the Year at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. Three further singles, "True Love", "Walk of Shame", and "Are We All We Are", was released throughout 2013 to less commercial success. On February 13, 2013, Pink kicked off her sixth tour, known as The Truth About Love Tour, in Phoenix, Arizona."Pink Extends Truth About Love Tour Plans With New Fall Leg". antiMusic.com Billboard released a statement on June 14, announcing that Pink held the No. 1 spot on their Hot Tours chart, as the American leg of her Truth About Love Tour grossed over $23.6 million. She still held the title a week later, as the European leg grossed $30.7 million. In addition to her work for The Truth About Love, Pink appeared on the track "Guns and Roses" on T.I.'s album Trouble Man: Heavy Is the Head. The song has been certified Gold by the ARIA for sales of 35,000 digital downloads shipped in Australia. She also wrote two songs, "I Walk Alone" and "Lie to Me", for Cher's new album, Closer to the Truth."Doing Timbaland's song 2nite,its GREAT,but High! Pink's 2 Songs 2wks", Twitter. Retrieved on July 30, 2013."Jason/Jake Shears. Pink, & Mystery Guest ! It's not a Duets Cd ,it's a Cher cd.", Twitter. Retrieved on July 30, 2013."Pink turned down judging spot on The Voice Australia", News.com.au. Retrieved on July 30, 2013. Pink starred as a sex addict alongside Gwyneth Paltrow and Mark Ruffalo in the 2013 movie Thanks for Sharing. The official trailer was released on June 27 and the movie premièred on September 20, 2013. Her legal name, Alecia Moore, is used for the movie credits. Her role as Dede was heavily praised by critics. robertbert.com comment on her performance saying "Of all the cast here, the least experienced is the pop singer Pink, yet she does the best acting in the film: natural, a little harsh, a little unstable. Pink, like Macy Gray in her Lee Daniels movie roles, knows instinctively how to behave on camera by just pretending that the camera isn't there."  Billboard named Pink Woman of the Year 2013. In December, the magazine also named The Truth About Love Tour the 3rd best selling tour of 2013 with $147.9 million in ticket sales; falling only behind Bon Jovi and Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour. Also in Billboards end of year charts, Pink was ranked the 6th top artist of 2013 and she scored her highest charting end-of-year song and album; with Just Give Me a Reason sitting at number 7 on the Hot 100 and The Truth About Love placing at number 8 on Billboard 200. In Australia, Pink has had an album placed at number one or two in the ARIA End of Year Albums Chart for six out of the past seven years as The Truth About Love topped the chart for two years in a row. She was the 9th top grossing music artist of 2013, with $20,072,072.32 earned. RCA Records later announced that they have signed Pink for a multi-album deal that will last for years to come. The singer was quoted about the deal saying "I am super-duper excited to continue onwards and upwards with RCA and my team there". It was announced in September 2014, that Pink and Dallas Green, lead singer of City and Colour, worked together on a collaborative album, under the band name You+Me. The album, titled rose ave., was released on October 14, 2014. The album debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 and at number one on the US Folk Albums chart. In August 2015, Pink recorded the theme song for thirteenth season of The Ellen DeGeneres Show. The song, "Today's the Day", was performed during the show's premiere week in New York City on September 10, 2015. Pink has named Janis Joplin and Madonna as two of her biggest musical influences. She said "[Joplin] was so inspiring by singing blues music when it wasn't culturally acceptable for white women, and she wore her heart on her sleeve. She was so witty and charming and intelligent, but she also battled an ugly-duckling syndrome. I would love to play her in a movie." Of Madonna she stated "I'd seen artists change styles and fail miserably, but I've also seen artists change and continue to do well. That's why Madonna has always been an inspiration for me." Additionally, Pink said "I wanted to do it my way with my career, and I had this arrogant notion that people weren't just interested in my music but me as a person. That was my bit of arrogance, I guess. That's something I learned from Madonna. I was a fan right from the first time I heard 'Holiday.'" Pink also won her first talent show singing Madonna's "Oh Father". As a child, she admired the leader of 4 Non Blondes, Linda Perry who she would later track down and form a close relationship on her second album. She said: "Literally this woman spoke to me. Being in pain and being on drugs and being misunderstood and, yeah she spoke my language. Without having to say anything, she could sing a note and it was what I was feeling. I used to sit at three or four o' clock in the morning, tripping on whatever, screaming 4 Non Blondes out the window until the cops were called". Other influences include Joan Jett, Mary J. Blige, Billy Joel, and Whitney Houston.Pink (I) – Biography Pink has a contralto vocal range. Throughout her career, she has received applause from critics for her powerful vocals. Her voice has been described as "raspy", "husky", and "distinctive." James Montgomery of MTV calls her "a deceptively good singer ... who can out-sing almost anyone". The Guardian describes her voice as "prodigious". Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times labelled her as "a powerhouse vocalist". Pink has also received acclaim for her "raw", "soulful" voice and her ability to emote. The Inquirer defined her voice as "husky" and "gutsy", further complimenting her for developing into a "powerfully emotive vocalist", while comparing her to Janis Joplin. The Star Tribune commends her by writing, "Her slightly raspy, slightly soulful voice made you feel the dysfunction in 'Family Portrait', the longing of 'Who Knew' and the empowerment in 'Perfect'." CNN has said that Pink is known for singing "with the right level of emotion". Fellow pop artist Kelly Clarkson believes that Pink's voice is "the best of our generation". Pink, aside from her musical feats, has also become known for her style and work outside of music. She has often been seen as "adventurous" with her hair, and has had styles such as fluorescent spikes to pink-streaked dreadlocks to a pitch-black skater cut. Regarding her style, she told InStyle "I'm eclectic. I'm a tomboy, but I'm kind of a hippie and kind of a gangster [...] I don't know if that's a good thing, but it is my thing." Pink is an animal-rights activist and a prominent campaigner for PETA, contributing her voice toward causes such as the protest against KFC. In conjunction with PETA, she criticized the Australian wool industry over its use of mulesing. In January 2007, she stated that she had been misled by PETA about mulesing and that she had not done enough research before lending her name to the campaign.Pink sheepish over boycott call Theage.com. Retrieved January 17, 2007. Her campaigning led to a headlining concert called PAW (Party for Animals Worldwide) in Cardiff, Wales on August 21, 2007.Contact Music. Pink Performing Live For 'Party for Animals Worldwide'. Contactmusic.com. Retrieved March 9, 2011. In 2015, she posed nude for PETA's "I'd Rather Go Naked Than Wear Fur", campaign.Zack Johnson, "Pink Stars in PETA's "I'd Rather Go Naked Than Wear Fur" Campaign, Appears on 90-Foot Times Square Billboard!" EOnline, February 11, 2015.  Pink is also outspoken about LGBT rights and supports same-sex marriage. In June 2012, Pink told Cosmopolitan magazine that her diet is mostly vegan, but she occasionally eats chicken and fish. Pink is also involved with several charities, including Human Rights Campaign, ONE Campaign, Prince's Trust, New York Restoration Project, Run for the Cure Foundation, Save the Children, Take Back the Night, UNICEF and World World Animal Protection.Look to the Stars: Pink's Charity Work As of May 2008, Pink has been officially recognized as an advocate for the RSPCA in Australia. On February 16, 2009, Pink announced she was donating $250,000 to the Red Cross Bushfire Appeal to aid the victims of the bushfires that swept through the Australian state of Victoria earlier that month. Pink stated that she wanted to make "a tangible expression of support". Pink also donated money to Autism Speaks. In August 2012, Pink became a spokesmodel for CoverGirl, featuring in a fall 2013 advertising campaign themed "beauty with an edge". Pink has been credited for breaking boundaries and pushing the envelope throughout her career. She is regarded as the "most trailblazing artist" of her pop generation. Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times says, "Pink stood up for her music, broke the music industry's mold and scored a breakout hit, challenging a school of teen singers to find their own sounds as well." He adds, "[Pink] also started a race among other teen pop stars like Christina Aguilera to add substance to their own sound."  Referring to her as a "powerhouse vocalist", Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times asked, "Why isn't she an even bigger star?" Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone commented: "I think people respond to her sense of independence and dedication. It inspires people&nbsp;... This is a prolific pop artist who is sometimes famous and successful, sometimes obscure, who nonetheless keeps making her own kind of music. Every few years, the spotlight comes back around to her—but her fans can trust that when the spotlight moves along, Pink will keep on writing Pink songs." Powers adds that her mix of rock-style rebellion, emotional rawness, humor, and "infectious" dance beats created "a model for the mashup approach of latter-day divas such as Avril Lavigne, Katy Perry, Kesha, and even Rihanna." James Montgomery of MTV describes her as "a fabulously fearless pop artist" who can "out-sing almost anyone out there. She can out-crazy Gaga or Lily. She's the total pop-star package, everything you'd want in a singer/entertainer/icon. And still, she remains oddly off the radar. Such is the price of busting borders, I suppose." Entertainment Weekly said: "She essentially invented the whole modern wave of Pop Diva Domination: You can draw a straight line from "Get This Party Started" to Katy Perry, Kesha, pre-messianic Lady Gaga, and post-weird Rihanna."  Glamour Magazine wrote: "When Pennsylvania-born Alecia Moore debuted in 2000, pop was dominated by long-locked blonds like Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera and Jessica Simpson. Pink changed the game. Without her, the last 13-years of big-voiced, tough chick music is hard to imagine." Jon O'Brien of AllMusic stated that Pink's music provided "the benchmark for the careers of Kelly Clarkson and Katy Perry, to name just two." "Although never quite achieving the cultural impact (and infamy) of contemporaries such as Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera, she's proved surprisingly durable and influential (would there be any Katy Perry or Ke$ha without Pink?)", wrote John Murphy of musicOMH in his review of The Truth About Love. In a 2012 cover story on Pink, The Advocate wrote: "The singer has changed the sound of modern pop music irrevocably [...] paving the path for many of today's most popular modern female artists, including Lady Gaga, Katy Perry, and Rihanna." Bill Brotherton of the Boston Herald seconded this notion while reviewing The Truth About Love Tour, saying: "It's hard to imagine that Katy Perry, Rihanna and even Gaga would have achieved superstar status without 33-year-old Alecia Moore leading the way." Following her performance at the American Music Awards of 2012, LZ Granderson of CNN wrote: "... our culture's biggest sin may well be the auto-tuned syrup we've allowed to dominate the pop charts. All-time chart records are handed to vacuous acts such as the Black Eyed Peas and singing awards are given to vocal lightweights such as Taylor Swift [...] But thank God for Pink. [...]  While Christina Aguilera has a tendency to oversing, Britney Spears can't sing, and Lauryn Hill sorta stopped singing, Pink has managed to carve a brilliant 13-year-career by being something that is incredibly rare these days—an artist." British soul singer Adele considers Pink's performance at Brixton Academy in London as one of "the most defining moments" in her life, saying "It was the Missundaztood record, so I was about 13 or 14. I had never heard, being in the room, someone sing like that live. I remember sort of feeling like I was in a wind tunnel, her voice just hitting me. It was incredible."  Pink's work has inspired several other artists including Kelly Clarkson, Taylor Swift, Katy Perry, Demi Lovato, Ashley Tisdale, Cher Lloyd, Victoria Justice, and Adele. Pink met professional motocross racer Carey Hart at the 2001 X Games in Philadelphia. Following a brief separation in 2003, Pink proposed to Hart in June 2005 during a Mammoth Lakes motocross race; she was "assisting" in his race and wrote "Will You Marry Me? I'm serious!" on a pit board. He initially didn't notice and continued on for another lap. When he did notice later, he veered off the track to accept right then. She then made him finish the race because she wouldn't marry a loser. They married in Costa Rica on January 7, 2006."Pink Marries Boyfriend in Costa Rica", People, January 7, 2006. Retrieved November 10, 2010. After months of speculation, Pink announced in February 2008 that she and Hart had separated."Pink blue after marriage bust-up". NEWS.com.au. Retrieved February 20, 2008. Hart subsequently appeared in the video for her 2008 song "So What",  which deals with their separation. The couple sought marriage counseling during their separation   in hopes of reconciliation.  In February 2010, Pink confirmed that she and Hart were back together.P!nk on The Oprah Winfrey Show, November 17, 2010 Hart appears with Pink in the music video for her songs "Just Give Me a Reason" and "True Love". In November 2010, Pink announced on The Ellen DeGeneres Show that she and Hart were expecting their first child. On June 2, 2011, Pink gave birth to their daughter, Willow Sage Hart. Pink is a supporter of attachment parenting. In 2010, she appeared on Forbes The Celebrity 100 list at #27, with earnings of $44 million. In 2011, she appeared on Forbes The Top-Earning Women in Music list at #6 with earnings of $22 million, with an average of $1 million per show on the road. In 2009, Billboard put her at the 6th place on their Money Makers list, listing her earnings as $36,347,658. In 2013, she appeared on Forbes list of Highest Paid Musicians, with the earnings of $32 million.  According to Nielsen SoundScan, Pink's album sales stand at 28 million copies in the United States. Pink has sold over 60 million albums and 130 million singles worldwide. Year Title Role Notes 2000 Ski to the Max Brena 2002 Rollerball Rock singer Cameo 2003 Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle Coal Bowl M.C. Cameo 2007 Catacombs Carolyn 2009 SpongeBob SquarePants Herself Episode: "SpongeBob's Truth or Square" 2010 Get Him to the Greek Herself Cameo 2011 Happy Feet Two Gloria (voice) 2013 Thanks for Sharing Dede credited as Alecia Moore 2015 "Janis: Little Girl Blue" Herself Can't Take Me Home (2000) Missundaztood (2001) Try This (2003) I'm Not Dead (2006) Funhouse (2008) The Truth About Love (2012) Rose Ave. (2014) Party Tour (2002) Try This Tour (2004) I'm Not Dead Tour (2006–07) Funhouse Tour (2009) The Funhouse Summer Carnival (2010) The Truth About Love Tour (2013–14)  / Vevo  / Sony Music Entertainment
