   Plautdietsch, or Mennonite Low German, was originally a Low Prussian variety of East Low German, with Dutch influence, that developed in the 16th and 17th centuries in the Vistula delta area of Royal Prussia. The word is the form, in that language, of Plattdeutsch (Low German). Plaut is the same word as German platt or Dutch plat, meaning 'flat' or 'low' (referring to the plains of northern Germany), and the name Dietsch corresponds etymologically to Dutch Duits and German Deutsch (both meaning "of the Tribe"http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=Dutch&allowed_in_frame=0 i.e."German"), which originally meant 'vernacular language' in all the continental West Germanic languages. Plautdietsch, an East Low German dialect was a German dialect like others until it was taken by Mennonite settlers to the south west of the Russian Empire starting in 1789. From there it evolved and subsequent waves of migration brought it to North America, starting in 1873, and mostly from there to Latin America starting in 1922. Plautdietsch is spoken by about 400,000 Russian Mennonites, most notably in the Latin American countries of Mexico, Bolivia, Paraguay, Belize, Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay, as well as in the United States and Canada (particularly Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Ontario). Today Plautdietsch is spoken in two major dialects that trace their division to Ukraine. These two dialects are split between the Old Colony Mennonites and New Colony. Many younger Russian Mennonites in Canada and the United States today speak only English. For example, Homer Groening, the father of Matt Groening (creator of The Simpsons), spoke Plautdietsch as a child in a Mennonite community in Saskatchewan in the 1920s, but his son Matt never learned the language. In 2007, Mexican filmmaker Carlos Reygadas directed the film Stellet Lijcht (Silent Light), set in a Mennonite community in Chihuahua, Mexico. Most of the film's dialogue is in Plautdietsch, which some of the actors had to learn phonetically. Other parts were played by people of the local community. Plautdietsch speakers today are mostly the descendants of Mennonites who fled from what is today the Netherlands and Belgium in the 16th century to escape persecution and resettled in the Vistula delta. They took with them their Dutch, Frisian and Dutch Low Saxon dialect, which over time they mixed with East Low German dialects, the so-called Weichselplatt, of the region. As Mennonites they kept their own (primarily Dutch and Low-German) identity, using Standard Dutch well into the 18th century. At the time of their migration to the Russian Empire, their spoken language resembled the dialects of the region with only some few Dutch elements.Welschen (2000-2005), 49-50; De Smet 1983. Their East Low German dialect is still classified as Low Prussian, or simply Prussian. Russian Mennonites trace their genealogical roots mostly to the Low Countries and north Germany, and to a lesser degree to southern Germany and Switzerland. Beginning in the late 18th century, the expanding Russian Empire invited Germans and many from the Kingdom of Prussia, including many Mennonites, to create new colonies north of the Black Sea in an area that Russia had recently acquired in one of the Russo-Turkish Wars. This is now part of Ukraine as well as other countries. Beginning in 1873, many Plautdietsch-speaking Mennonites migrated from the Russian Empire to the United States and Canada. In 1922 Plautdietsch-speaking Mennonites from Canada started to settle in Mexico, and in 1927 in Paraguay. In the 1930s Mennonites emigrated mainly from Soviet Ukraine directly to Brazil.  The first Mennonite settlement in Bolivia was founded in 1957 by Plautdietsch-speaking Mennonites from Paraguay. Soon very conservative Plautdietsch-speaking Mennonites from Canada, Mexico, and Belize also relocated to Bolivia, settling together. In 1986/7 a settlement was founded in Argentina by Plautdietsch-speaking Mennonites from other Latin American countries.  Plautdietsch-speaking communities in Latin America have mostly maintained their language, while also learning local languages. In North America, many Mennonites have adopted English as their common language. In Germany, many Mennonites have shifted to Standard German, with only the most conservative fraction maintaining use of the Plautdietsch dialect.  There is disagreement whether Plautdietsch is a language or a dialect. Some classify it as a dialect of Low German (Plattdüütsch) on the basis of mutual intelligibility. Others classify it as a language on the basis of sociolinguistic reasons. According to the Ausbausprache, Abstandsprache and Dachsprache framework, it is a dialect. Plautdietsch is primarily a spoken, not written language, without a Standard form. It shares grammatical and lexical similarities with other varieties of Low German, and in general it is intelligible to other Low German speakers after some acquaintance. On the other hand, it has several developments and sound shifts not found in any other Low German dialect.  As one might expect from a spoken language which traditionally lacked a consistent writing system, and which has been carried by speakers to several different territories where other languages prevail, several regional differences have developed. However, the major differences seem to have originated in the beginning of the 19th century in the two Mennonite settlements in New Russia (today Ukraine), known as Chortitza (Old Colony) and Molotschna (New Colony), as noted above. Some of the major differences between these two varieties are: A few other differences sometimes related to this issue are the exact pronunciation of the IPA c sound and words as jenau/jeneiw. According to some studies, those might be due to the level of education of the speaker, as well as the influence of Russian and standard German. Some Plautdietsch speakers might speak a mixture of both dialects. Those, for instance, who trace their origin to the Bergthal Colony in New Russia (Ukraine), a daughter colony of the Old Colony, show all the phonetic distinction of the Old Colony version, but they drop the final -n as the Molotschna speakers do. Plautdietsch has a Low German (Low Saxon) base, and as such, it does not show the effects of the High German consonant shift. This distinguished the High German dialects from the Low German dialects and all other Germanic languages.Plautdietsch does have some loan words from High German which do have the High German sound shift and are acceptable words in the language, according to Herman Rempel's Dictionary Kjenn Jie Noch Plautdietsch, eg. Spruch 'a recitation' http://www.mennolink.org/cgi-bin/dictcgi?ls1146. The basic distinctions between High German and Low German are: Like Dutch, Frisian and Low German, Plautdietsch only shows the mutation of th into d. As shown, while Dutch, English and German have experienced similar vowel shifts, Plautdietsch has only merged the old Germanic  sound with , while long  is retained in the Molotschna dialect. The Old Colony variety has fronted it to the now vacant . The deletion of r has been completed in most final positions, after front vowels and before alveolar consonants, but is still retained in the infinitive of verbs, after short vowels, and sometimes after back vowels as seen in the example Huarn, Hieena. All words with a /g/ or /k/ preceding or following a front vowel (/e/ or /i/, not counting schwa) have been shifted to /j/ and /c/ (the latter has been written as kj or tj), even if there is another consonant between the vowel and the consonant. An intervocalic /g/ is palatalized as /ɟ/, written gj or dj. (A similar event occurred with English, but not as generalized). Where an /e/ or /i/ has been sunken to /a/, the palatalized sound is retained. Also where German has a palatalization (of the shifted /ç/ consonant), Plautdietsch retains the palatalization (of /k/) even after lowering a front vowel. Most Anabaptists that settled in the Vistula Delta were of Dutch or northern German origins, and were joined by refugees from different parts of Germany and Switzerland, who influenced their developing language. After almost two centuries in West Prussia, German replaced Dutch as church, school and written language and has become a source from where words are borrowed extensively, especially for religious terms. Many of these words show the effects of the High German consonant shift (something you would not expect in a Low German dialect), even though they are otherwise adapted into Plautdietsch phonetics. Compare: This is the case particularly on nouns made out of verbs. The verb normally shows the unshifted consonant, whereas the noun has a shifted Germanized consonant: schluten, Schluss; bräakjen, Bruch (to close, closure; to break, a break) The first half of the 16th century was the onset of the rule of terror by the Duke of Alba in the Spanish Low Countries during the Dutch revolution ( Eighty years war), that was centered on religious freedom for the Protestants. As a result, many Mennonites and Reformed left the country. This continued in the 17th century, when the Dutch Reformed Church became the official religion, being less than indulgent to other types of Protestantism, let alone the types perceived as radical (non-violent, no bearing of arms, no recognition of worldly authorities). In the Low German language area, they left their language traces in particular at the lower Vistula, around Danzig and Elbing, and up the river towards Toruń. The Mennonites for a long time maintained their old language. In Danzig, Dutch as the language of the church disappeared about 1800. As a spoken language, the Mennonites took up the Vistula Low German, the vocabulary of which they themselves had already influenced. As a written language, they took up High German. It was this Vistula Low German or Weichselplatt that the Mennonites took with them and kept while migrating to Russia, Canada and elsewhere.De Smet (1983), 730 - 761. Wherever Mennonites settled, they found new foods and other items they were not familiar with, and when that happened, they took the name that local people used for those items. The following words are of Russian or Ukrainian origin: As Mennonites came into contact with new technology, they often adapted the names for the technologies they encountered. For those who had settled in North America in the 1870s, all new words were borrowed from English, and even though many left for South America only 50 years after their arrival, they kept and sometimes adapted these words into the Mennonite Low German Phonetics: Particularly words for auto parts are taken from English: hood, fender, brakes (along with the more Low German form Brams), spark plugs (pluralized Ploggen), but also words like peanuts, belt, tax. A special case is the word jleichen. It is an adaption of the English verb "to like", but taken from the German adverb gleich (equivalent of the English adverb "like", as in "This is like joking"). Plautdietsch speakers living in Spanish speaking countries use many words of Spanish in their daily speech, especially in business and communication (telephone, for instance) vocabulary. Two examples of words which are completely adapted into Mennonite Low German are Burra (Mexican Spanish burro, donkey) and Wratsch (Mexican Spanish huarache, sandal). Both have a Low German plural: Burrasch, Wratschen. The pure Low German words Äsel and Schlorr are seldom used in Mexico. The spelling of Plautdietsch has also been controversial. The main criteria for spelling systems have been: One problem has been what letters to use for sounds that do not exist in German, such as the palatal  and  sounds, which are both pronounced and spelled differently in various dialects of Plautdietsch. Old Colony speakers pronounce these sounds by striking the middle of the tongue against the palate. Others, especially speakers of the Molotschna dialect, instead strike the tongue against the alveolar ridge and spell them  and . Most Plautdietsch speakers' ears are not accustomed to realize these subtle, if not trivial, differences, and will often confuse one with the other. Other problematic areas: use or non-use of  for some words with /f/ sound, use or non-use of Dehnungs-h, when to double consonants and when not to. When comparing different writers, one must take into account the dialect of that writer. The most famous Plautdietsch writer, Arnold Dyck, wrote in the Molotschna dialect, though his origins were from the Old Colony. During his life he made many changes in his spelling system. His developments are the basis for the various spellings used today. In the following table, only his final system is taken into account, as used in his famous Koop enn Bua series, along with Herman Rempel (Kjennn Jie noch Plautdietsch?), Reuben Epp (Plautdietsche Schreftsteckja), J. Thiessen (Mennonite Low German Dictionary), J. J. Neufeld (Daut niehe Tastament) and Ed Zacharias (De Bibel). The latter two claim to write in the Old Colony dialect, as seen in their verb endings, while the other three use the Plautdietsch as spoken by the descendants of the Bergthal Colony, i. e. the Old Colony dialect with a loss of -n endings. Mennonite Low German has many sounds, including a few not found in other varieties of Low German. Where symbols for consonants occur in pairs, the left represents the voiceless consonant and the right represents the voiced consonant. Observations: According to the spelling system of De Bibel these sounds are spelled as follows: The vowel inventory of Plautdietsch is large, with 13 simple vowels, 10 diphthongs and one thriphthong. The  sound has been shifted to  in the Old Colony dialect, leaving the sound only as part of the ua diphthong. However, in certain areas and age groups, there is a heavy tendency to shift  sound up to . Pronunciation of certain vowels and diphthongs varies from some speakers to others; the diphthong represented by ee for instances is pronounced  or even  by some. Likewise the long vowels represented by au and ei might have a diphthong glide into  and , respectively. Low German grammar resembles High German, as the syntax and morphology is nearly the same as High German's. Over the years, Low German has lost some inflection. It is, however, still moderately inflectional, having two numbers, three genders, two cases, two tenses, three persons, two moods, two voices, and two degrees of comparison. Even though Low German has three genders, in the nominative case it has only two definite articles (like Dutch and Low Saxon); masculine and feminine articles are homophonous. However, masculine and feminine indefinite articles are still different (like German) and thus, the three genders can still be perfectly established. In the oblique case, the masculine has a special definite article, making it once more different from the feminine, which, like the neuter, does not change. In the plural number, all gender identification is lost (as in German, Dutch and Low Saxon); all plural determiners and adjective endings are homophonous with the feminine singular. Some Plautdietsch writers try to use a three case system with the definite articles, without much consistency. The system looks somewhat like this, some might use the dative neuter articles, others might not: All possessives (see under pronouns) are declined like in this way. With the form äa (her/their) an r has to be reinserted before adding endings (äaren, äare). Like High German, Mennonite Low German nouns inflect into two numbers: singular and plural, three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter, but only two cases, nominative and oblique. The historical dative and accusative have merged, even though some writers try to maintain a three cases distinction, which has been lost for most speakers, perhaps centuries ago. The oblique case is distinct from the nominative only in 1) personal pronouns: ekj froag am, hee auntwuat mie (I ask him, he answers me) 2) articles and demonstrative and possessive adjectives in the singular masculine gender: de Voda halpt dän Sän (the father helps the son) (observe: nouns are not inflected themselves) and 3) proper names, i. e. traditional Mennonite names: Peeta frajcht Marie-en, Marie auntwuat Peetren (Peter asks Mary, Mary answers Peter) The forming of plurals is complicated. Three major procedures can be established: 1) through an ending, -a, -en, -s, -sch or none at all; 2) voicing the final devoiced consonant and 3) fronting (and maybe lowering) a back vowel, which might require palatalization of a velar consonant. A given word could have one or two, all or none of these characteristics. No ending, no voicing, no vowel fronting: de Fesch de Fesch, daut Schop, de Schop, daut Been, de Been (fish, fishes; sheep, sheep; leg, legs) Voicing, no ending, no vowel fronting: Frint, Frind; Boajch, Boaj (friend/s, mountain/s) No ending, no voicing, vowel fronting: Foot, Feet (foot, feet) Voicing and vowel fronting, no ending: Hoot, Heed (hat/s) -a ending: only: Licht, Lichta (light/s) with voicing:  (picture/s) with vowel fronting: Maun, Mana (man, men) with voicing, vowel fronting and palatalization: Kaulf, Kjalwa (calf, calves) -en ending (the -en, -s and -sch endings have no vowel fronting) only: Näs Näsen, (nose/s) with voicing: de Tiet, de Tieden, de Erfoarunk, de Erfoarungen (time/s, experience/s) Words where a historical r is dropped require it to be reinserted: Däa, Däaren (door/s) Polysyllabic words with a vocalized r drop the final a: Sesta, Sestren (sister/s) An unstressed schwa also is dropped: Gaufel, Gauflen (fork/s) -s ending This class consists mainly of 1) short masculine and neuter nouns: Baul -s, Oarm -s (ball/s, arm/s) 2) words related with family members: Sän -s, Fru -es, (son/s, woman, women) and 3) masculine and neuter nouns ending in -el and -en (the latter may drop the n): Läpel, Läpels; Goaden, Goades (spoon/s; garden/s) -sch ending This class consists of masculine and neuter polysyllabic nouns ending with -a: de Voda, de Vodasch; daut Massa, de Massasch (father/s, knife, knives) For someone knowing (High) German, pluralizing is a fairly predictable process, with some exceptions: the -en ending covers pretty much the same words in both languages; the -a ending is the equivalent for the German -er plural, where German has Umlaut, Plautdietsch will have vowel fronting in most cases. The -s and -sch groups are made almost entirely of polysyllabic nouns which in German have no plural ending. The most problematic words are those with an -e plural ending in German. Although the entire class with no ending is made out of them, many other words are treated differently. For example, the plurals for Stool and Stock (chair and stick) are Steela and Stakja (compare German Stuhl, Stühle; Stock, Stöcke). Since they have their vowels fronted there seems to be no reason for the -a ending. Many others have been moved into the -en class: Jeboot, Jebooten (commandment/s, German: Gebot, Gebote). With some not so common words, there is no certainty about the correct plural, different speakers create them in different ways: the plural of Jesaz (law) could be Jesaza or Jesazen (German: Gesetz, Gesetze). The classical genitive is no longer used except in a few relic expressions. Instead, possession is expressed as in many German dialects with the his genitive, i. e. naming the possessor in the oblique case with the possessive adjective and the possessed object: Dän Maun sien Hus (the man's house). With proper nouns, and when the possessor is determined by a possessive adjective, the possessor is in the nominative case instead: Peeta sien Hus (Peter's house); mien Voda sien Hus (my father's house). Very long possessive clauses can be created: Mien Voda seine Mutta äare Mutta es miene Uagrootmutta (my father's mother's mother is my great grandmother). For inanimate or generalized constructions, the preposition von or a composition are used instead: De Lichta von de Staut/ de Stautslichta (the lights of the city). The diminutive is formed adding by -kje to the noun: de Jung, daut Jungkje; de Mejal, daut Mejalkje (the boy, the little boy; the girl, the little girl). All diminutive nouns take the neuter gender, with two exceptions: de Oomkje, de Mumkje, two forms used very commonly for mister/man/husband and mistress/woman/wife. These seem to have been created originally as diminutive forms of, respectively, Oom and Mumm (uncle and mother). Today they are no longer seen as diminutives, and therefore retain their respective masculine and feminine genders. With nouns ending in t or k, only -je is added; a few nouns ending in kj, an additional s is inserted: de Staut, daut Stautje, daut Buak, daut Buakje; daut Stekj, daut Stekjsje (the (little) city, the (little) book, the (little) piece). Plural diminished nouns take -s ending: Jungkjes, Mejalkjes; however, if the original plural requires fronting of a back vowel or has an -a ending, these features are retained before adding the diminutive suffix: de Stool, de Steela --> daut Stoolkje, de Steelakjes (chair/s, little chair/s) Some pronouns have two forms, different persons may use one or other form, or even alternate between them. Daut is used at the beginning of a sentence, but may be replaced for et in other positions. Possessive adjectives of the masculine (nominative case) or neuter gender. Otherwise they are declined like the indefinite article and determiners (see under article section). Demonstrative pronouns are frequently used instead of the personal pronouns. When used so, some people use special oblique forms for feminine and plural. When used strictly demonstrative, only the singular masculine has a special oblique form. Mennonite Low German verbs have six tenses. The present and first past tenses are inflected, while the second and third past and both future tenses are different words marked by auxiliary verbs. Verbs can have two moods: Declarative and Imperative, two voices: active and passive, and three persons:1st pers. sing., 2nd pers. sing., 3rd pers. sing., and plural. The basic conjugation pattern is as follows: To determine the stem, take the infinitive and drop the -en ending. There are a few modifications to this basic pattern: 1) If the stem ends with a plosive or fricative voiced consonant (d, g, j, soft s, w, zh), that consonant is devoiced in the 2nd and 3d persons of the present, since voiceless t and st automatically force the preceding consonant (compare the sound of the letter d in English lived and liked). 2) If the stem ends with a voiceless consonant (ch, f, jch, k, kj, p, hard s, sch, t) that consonant devoices the d, sd, d, den endings of the past tense (into t, st, t, ten) for the same reason. 3) If the stem ends with two consonants, the second one being a nasal or lateral, a schwa e is inserted to ease pronunciation. 4) Verbs with a diphthong and r have a special treatment; the r is dropped before endings are attached, and the st/sd of the second person is replaced by scht/zhd. Examples of a regular verbs: spälen (to play), lachen (to laugh), läwen (to live), odmen (to breathe) and roaren (to cry). The first one follows strictly the basic pattern, the others show the various adjustments needed as described above. If the inverted word order is used, the -en ending of the plural wie, jie (but not see) form is dropped, and a root-only form, identical to the 1st person singular, is used. As in English and Dutch, some verbs have a vowel change in past tense and past participle. As in German, some verbs might have a vowel change in second and third person of the singular in present tense as well. A few verbs that are strong in German are weak in Plautdietsch, but many German weak verbs are strong in Plautdietsch, however, when compared with Dutch and English, those are strong, too. GENERALITIES: Vowel changes in present tense are somewhat predictable: long ie and u change into short i; long ä/o change into e or a; diphthongs äa and oa are simplified to a. The first and third person of the past tense are identical (as in weak verbs). With only a few exceptions (like the verb sajen), all voiced consonants are devoiced in the three persons of the singular past, the nasal ng and nj are retained in second person, but devoiced in first and third person. The past tense has the same vowel through all persons. If there is a vowel change from ä to e or a in the present tense, that feature is retained in the singular imperative. The plural form for wie/jie in the inverted word order keep the final consonant voiced. A small groups of verbs are more irregular: the auxiliaries sennen and haben, the modal verbs, and a few verbs that originally where monosyllabic and with time a -nen ending has evolved: The present participle, formed of the infinitive plus a -t ending, is not often used. It appears in idiomatic expressions like aunhoolent bliewen (to persist), and in a few adjective forms, which have to be inflected for number, gender and case, the -t is voiced into -d: koaken, koakendet Wota (to boil, boiling water). The past participle of weak verbs is formed with je- plus the stem of the verb plus -t. A voiced consonant is devoiced to go along with t, the inserted e between double consonant is retained, the r after a long vowel is dropped. For the weak verbs given above the past participles are: jespält, jelacht, jejäft, jeodemt, jeroat. The past participle for strong and anomalous verbs is hard to predict, they could be formed in five or six different ways: Adjectives are frequently made from the past participle by attaching an adjective inflection ending and voicing the final t; if the preceding consonant is voiced, with -en participles the e is dropped:  (to draw, drawn, a drawn picture) koaken, jekoakt, eene jekoakte Ieedschock (to boil, boiled, a boiled potato) stälen, jestolen, een jestolna Hunt (to steal, stolen, a stolen dog) Except for the present and simple past, all other tenses are constructed with the aid of the auxiliary verbs sennen, haben, woaren: Some intransitive verbs take sennen instead of haben as auxiliary verbs if they: 1) indicate a motion from one place to another, or 2) indicate a change of condition, or 3) the verbs sennen (to be) and bliewen (to keep being, to remain). Example: ekj sie jekomen, ekj sie oolt jeworden, ekj sie jewast (I have come, I have become old, I was). In some communitites of Plautdietsch speakers, the religious prohibition of James 4:13-14 is interpreted to proscribe the simple use of the first person in talking about future plans or efforts. In such communities it is considered proper to use a softening introductory phrase such as "Ekj proove," (I try, or will try, or alternately I will want to) to avoid giving offense. Mennonite Low German also shows a rich inflectional system in its adjectives. Although once even richer, simplification has done its work here too, leaving Mennonite Low German with only three genders: feminine, masculine and neuter, and two comparison degrees: Comparative and Superlative. The plural of all genders is identical to the feminine singular. Strong and weak neuter declension: after the definite article daut or the demonstratives daut and dit (neuter form of that, this) the t is dropped and a form identical to the feminine and plural is used. In other situations, as with indefinite articles, possessive adjectives or without article, the strong form is used. The oblique is used only in the masculine singular. However, if a preposition-article compound is used with a neuter noun, then the oblique would be used. Example: em grooten Hus, but: en daut groote Hus, en een grootet Hus. There is no predicate form for the superlative, a preposition-article compound with the oblique or weak neuter is used: aum woamsten, or: oppet woamste, or newly just the neuter form without preposition: daut woamste: Zemorjes es et woam, opp Meddach woat et woama, no Meddach es et aum woamsten/ oppet woamste/ daut woamste (in the morning it is warm, at noon it is getting warmer, after noon it is the warmest) The predicate form is used in predicate sentences for all genders: De Maun es oolt, de Fru es oolt, daut Hus es oolt (the man is old, the woman is old, the house is old) Plautdietsch preposition inventory is rich. Some of the most common: Observation: the numeral eent (one) is declined like the indefinite article (masculine een [oblique eenen], feminine eene, neuter een) or a demonstrative or possessive pronoun (eena [oblique eenen], eene, eent for the respective genders); when counting, the neuter form eent is used. Instead of fiew, alw, twalw, some speakers say fief, alf, twalf (5, 11, 12). The ordinal for 11th and 12th are: alfta, twalfta; from 13-19 use the ordinal + da: drettieenda (13th) ; from 20-99 use the ordinal + sta: fiew un twintichsta (25th). All ordinal numbers are declined like an adjective, the forms given here are masculine nominative. The partitive numbers for 1/10, 1/11, 1/12 are een Tieedel, een Alftel, een Twalftel, for 13–19 add -del to the ordinal number, for 20–99 add -stel. Mennonite Low German shows similarity with High German in the word order. The basic word order is subject–verb–object as in English. Indirect objects precede direct objects as in English John gives Mary a present. But that is where similarities end. A dependent verb, i.e. an infinitive or past participle comes at the end of the sentence where in English it would be placed immediately after the main verb, as shown in the following: Mennonite Low German word order: Jehaun haft dän Desch jemoakt (John has the table made). English word order: John has made the table. Mennonite Low German, like High German has been referred to as verb-second (V2) word order. In embedded clauses, words relating to time or space, can be placed at the sentence's beginning, but then the subject has to move after the main verb to keep that verb in second position. This pattern is demonstrated here: Mennonite Low German word order: Nu sie ekj schaftich. More Examples: Dan jeef de Kjennich seine Deena eenen Befäl. (Then the king gave his servants an order) Also, effects tend to be placed last in the sentence. Example: En daut Kuffel wia soo väl Wota, daut et äwarand (In the cup, there was so much water, that it overflowed). Mennonite Low German has syntactic patterns not found in High German, or at least not as often, such as the repetition of a subject, by a pronoun. Example: Mien Hoot dee haft dree Akjen. My hat it has three corners. Questions, orders and exclamations have a verb first word order: Hast du daut oole Hus aun de fefte Gauss jeseenen? (Have you seen the old house on fifth street?). All questions are arranged like this. There is no auxiliary verb to form questions. If there is a question word, that word precedes the verb: Wua es dien Voda jebuaren (Where is your father born?). As in English, when using verbs in the imperative mood, it is not necessary to specify the person addressed, but it can be added for emphasis: Brinj (du) mie emol dän Homa (Please, (you,) bring the hammer to me). The word emol is frequently asked to soften the order as a word for please. Example of an exclamation: Es daut vondoag oba kolt! (Is it cold today!). Dependent clauses As in High German, in dependent clauses, the verb goes at the end: Ekj well morjen miene Mutta besieekjen, wan ekj Tiet hab. (I want to visit my mother, if I have time). Observe the construction of: if I have time. However, when a dependent clause has an infinitive or past participle, this rule is no longer strictly applied; there is a strong tendency to move the finite (main) verb before the infinitive or participle, the direct object (or even a long circumstantial complement): Example: German word order requires a sentence structure like: Hee fruach mie, auf ekj miene Mutta jistren daut Jelt jejäft haud. (Translation: He asked me if I had given the money yesterday to my mother.) Even though this sounds right and perfectly understandable, most speakers would rearrange these same words as follows: Hee fruach mie, auf ekj miene Mutta jistren haud daut Jelt jejäft. Another example: Hee sajcht, daut sien Brooda jrod no de Staut jefoaren es/ Hee sajcht, daut sien Brooda jrod es no de Staut jefoaren (He says that his brother has just gone to the city). Observe: the verb precedes a prepositional phrase, but an adverb is still placed before it.  The Lord's Prayer in Plautdietsch, another form of Low German and Dutch.      Old Colony dialect Molotschna dialect Contemporary other Low German Standard (High) German meaning of word verbs and other -en endings räden räde reden reden to speak, to talk oa diphthong Froag  Froag  Fraag Frage question u/y sound Hus/Hüs  Hus  Huus Haus house s/ts sound Zol (Ssol)  Zol (Tsol)  Tahl Zahl number German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English High German pf, f = Low German p Pfeife Piep pijp pipe Apfel Appel Aupel appel apple High German z, s, ss, ß = Low German t Zunge Tung Tung tong tongue was wat waut wat what essen eten äte(n) eten to eat Fuß Foot Foot voet foot High German ch = Low German k machen maken moake(n) maken to make High German t = Low German d tun doon doone(n) doen to do Teil Deel Deel deel part (compare "dole", "deal") High German b = Low German v, f Leben Leven Läwe(n) leven life Korb Korf Korf korf basket English th = other Germanic languages d danken danken danke(n) danken to thank Original vowel sound German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English Wein  Wien  Wien  wijn  wine  Feuer  Füür  Fia  vuur  fire  Haus  Huus  Hus  (Mol),  (OCol) huis  house  High German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English  to  Fisch, dünn Fisch, dünn Fesch, denn vis, dun fish, thin  to  helfen, rennen hölpen, rennen halpe(n), rane(n) helpen, rennen to help, to run  to 1 Luft, Brust Luft, Borst Loft, Brost lucht, borst air (Latinate root)/archaic loft,breast  to  Mann, Hand Mann, Hand Maun, Haunt man, hand man, hand High German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English grün, schön gröön, schöön jreen, scheen groen, mooi/schoon green, beautiful {compare archaic sheen} to ei  Heu, rein Hau, rein Hei, rein hooi, schoon/rein hay, clean  to e, a Götter Gödder Jetta goden gods High German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English Herz Hart Hoat hart heart machen maken moake(n) maken make fragen fragen froage(n) vragen ask (compare Old English fraegn) hoch hooch huach hoog high Horn, Hörner Hoorn, Höörn Huarn, Hieena hoorn, hoorns horn, horns Proto-Germanic High German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English  =  Wasser, Vater, Name Water, Vader, Naam Wota, Voda, Nomen water, vader, naam water, father, name  = ee  Seele, eins, zwei Seel, een, twee Seel, eent, twee ziel, één, twee soul, one, two  = oo 1 rot, Hut root, Hoot root, Hoot rood, hoed red, hood German Low German Plautdietsch Dutch English gestern güstern jistren gisteren yesterday geben geven jäwen geven give Kirche Kark Kjoakj kerk church Brücke Brüch Brigj brug bridge Milch Melk Malkj melk milk recht recht rajcht recht right Plautdietsch High German Low German Dutch English hinja hinter achter achter behind (after) Zol Zahl Tall tal number (compare "(to) tell" as in "I can't tell how many there are".) jreessen grüßen gröten groeten greet kjamfen kämpfen fechten; kempen vechten fight Plautdietsch Origin English Mejal Margell girl Kujel Kuigel male pig Plautdietsch High German English Russian Ukrainian Bockelzhonn Aubergine aubergine баклажан (baklazhan, “eggplant”) баклажан (baklazhan, “eggplant”) Arbus/Erbus/Rebus Wassermelone watermelon арбуз (arbuz) гарбуз (harbuz, “squash, melon”) Schisnikj Knoblauch garlic чеснок  (chesnok) часник  (chasnyk) English word Adapted PD word IPA alternate word bicycle Beissikjel Foaraut highway Heiwä Huachwajch truck Trock - A. Dyck H. Rempel R. Epp J. Thiessen J. J. Neufeld Ed Zacharias word meaning Molotschna Bergthal Old Colony verb endings saje saje saje saje sajen sajen say c sound Tjoatj Kjoakj Kjoakj Tjoatj Kjoakj Kjoakj church Dehnungs-h ahm am ahm ahm am am him oa diphthong Froag Froag Froag Froag Fruog Froag question ia/iə diphthong Lea, learen, jeleat Lea, learen, jeleat Lea, learen, jeleat Lea, learen, jeleat Lea, learen, jeleat Lia, lieren, jelieet teaching, learn, learned u/ü du dü du du du du you consonant doubling rollen, jerollt, Golt rollen, jerollt, Golt rollen, jerollt, Golt rollen, jerollt, Golt rollen, jerollt, Gollt rollen, jerolt, Golt roll, rolled, gold ua/ya diphthong Wuat, Buak Wuat, Büak Wuat, Büak Wuat, Büak Wuut, Buuk Wuat, Buak word, book [s/ts] sound Zocka Ssocka Zocka Zocka Tsocka Zocka sugar [f] sound von fonn von von fonn von from Bilabial Labio-dental Alveolar Post-alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal &nbsp;1 &nbsp;2 Plosive      3   &nbsp;4 Fricative  &nbsp;5  &nbsp;6  &nbsp;7  &nbsp;8  &nbsp;9 Flap &nbsp;10 Approximant &nbsp;10 Lateral  &nbsp;11 Front Central Back Close  1 Near-close Close-mid Open-mid Open 2 Symbol Example IPA IPA orthography English translation bitt '(he) bites' Biet 'piece' but '(he) builds' Schepp 'ship' bät 'bit' Pell 'pill'  de 'the' Baul 'ball' Bad 'bed' Boll 'bull' Rot 'advice' Rua 'tube, pipe' Buck 'stomach' Beet 'beet' Boot 'boat' wia '(he) was' wieet 'worth' wäa 'who' Boa 'bear' wua 'where' Wuat 'word' Bua 'farmer' Buak 'book' Bea 'beer' Definite Indefinite Number Singular Plural Singular Gender masc fem neuter all masc fem neuter Nominative de de daut de een eene een Oblique dän eenen* Number Singular Plural Gender masc fem neut all Nominative de de daut de Accusative dän Dative däm däm Masc. Nom. Mas. Obj. Feminine Neuter Plural all this dis disen dise dit dise that, proximal dee dän dee daut dee that, distal jan janen jane jan jane which woon woonen woone woon woone such a soon soonen soone soon soone my mien mienen miene mien miene Singular Plural Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Nominative de Mensch de Sonn daut Hüs de Menschen de Sonnen de Hiesa Oblique dän Mensch de Sonn daut Hüs de Menschen de Sonnen de Hiesa Singular Plural Person 1st 2d 3d masc 3d fem 3d nt 1st 2d 3d Nominative ekj du hee see daut (et) wie jie dee, see Oblique mie die am ar (äa) ons junt (ju) an (äant) Reflexive sikj sikj Possessive Adjectives mien dien sien äa sien ons jun äa masc fem nt plural Nominative dee dee daut dee Oblique dän dee/däa daut dee/dän - 1st sing 2nd sing 3rd sing plural present stem stem + st stem + t infinitive* past stem + d stem + sd stem + d stem + den imperative - stem - stem + t ekj du hee, see, daut wie, jie, see ____ wie, jie spälen, to play present späl spälst spält spälen späl past späld spälsd späld spälden späld imperative - späl (du) - spält (jie) lachen, to laugh present lach lachst lacht lachen lach past lacht lachst lacht lachten lacht imperative - lach (du) - lacht (jie) läwen, to live present läw läfst läft läwen läw past läwd läwsd läwd läwden läwd imperative - läw (du) - läft (jie) odmen, to breathe present odem odemst odemt odmen odem past odemd odemsd odemd odemden odemd imperative - odem (du) - odemt (jie) roaren, to cry present roa roascht roat roaren roa past road roazhd road roaden road imperative - roa (du) - roat (jie) ekj du hee, see, daut wie, jie, see ____ wie, jie finjen, to find present finj finjst finjt finjen finj past funk fungst funk fungen fung Imperative finj (du) finjt (jie) sieekjen, to seek present sieekj sieekjst sieekjt sieekjen sieekj past socht sochst socht sochten socht Imperative sieekj (du) sieekjt (jie) sajen, to say present saj sajchst sajcht sajen saj past säd sätst säd säden säd Imperative saj (du) sajcht (jie) jäwen, to give present jäw jefst jeft jäwen jäw past jeef jeefst jeef jeewen jeew Imperative jeff (du) jäft (jie) schriewen, to write present schriew schrifst schrift schriewen schriew past schreef schreefst schreef schreewen schreew Imperative schriew (du) schrieft (jie) moaken, to make present moak moakst moakt moaken past müak müakst müak müaken Imperative moak{dü} moakt{jie} ekj du hee, see, daut wie, jie, see ____ wie, jie sennen, to be present sie (senn) best es sent sent past wia wieescht wia wieren wia Imperative sie (du) siet (jie) haben, to have present hab hast haft haben hab past haud hautst haud hauden haud Imperative hab (du) habt (jie) kjennen, can, to be able present kaun kau(n)st kaun kjennen kjenn past kunn ku(n)st kunn kunnen kunn Imperative - - stonen, to stand present sto steist steit stonen sto past stunt stuntst stunt stunden stund Imperative sto (du) stot (jie) ekj du hee, see, daut wie, jie, see ____ wie, jie Perfect hab jespält hast jespält haft jespält haben jespält hab wie jespält Plusquamperfect haud jespält haudst jespält haud jespält hauden jespält haud wie jespält Future woa spälen woascht spälen woat spälen woaren spälen woa wie spälen Conditional wudd spälen wurscht spälen wudd spälen wudden spälen wudd wie spälen Future II woa jespält haben woascht jespält haben woat jespält haben woaren jespält haben woa wie jespält haben Predicate Masculine Fem/Pl/Weak Neuter Strong Neuter** Oblique*** Positive woam woama woame woamet woamen Comparative woama woamra woamre woamret woamren Superlative woamst- woamsta woamste woamstet woamsten 0-9 0 null 1 eent 2 twee 3 dree 4 vea 5 fiew 6 sas 7 säwen 8 acht 9 näajen 10-19 10 tieen 11 alf 12 twalf 13 drettieen 14 vieetieen 15 feftieen 16 sastieen 17 säwentieen 18 achttieen 19 näajentieen 20-90 0 null 10 tieen 20 twintich 30 dartich 40 vieetich 50 feftich 60 zastich 70 zäwentich 80 tachentich 90 näajentich 0-99 0 null 11 alw 22 twee un twintich 33 dree un dartich 44 vea un vieetich 55 fiew un feftich 66 sas un zastich 77 säwen un zäwentich 88 acht un tachentich 99 näajen un näajentich ordinal 1st ieeschta 2d tweeda 3d dredda 4th vieeda 5th fefta 6th sasta 7th säwenda 8th achta 9th näajenda partitive 1/2 haulf, de Halft 1/3 een Dreddel 1/4 een Vieedel 1/5 een Feftel 1/6 een Sastel 1/7 een Säwendel 1/8 een Achtel 1/9 een Näajendel Plautdietsch Low German Dutch Ons Voda em Himmel, Uns Vadder in'n Heven, Onze Vader, die in de hemel zijt, lot dien Nome jeheilicht woare; laat hilligt warrn dien Naam. Uw naam worde geheiligd. lot dien Rikjdom kome; Laat kamen dien Riek, Uw (konink)rijk kome. lot dien Welle jedone woare, laat warrn dien Will, Uw wil geschiede, uck hia oppe Ead, soo aus em Himmel; so as in'n Heven, so ok op de Eer. op aarde zoals in de hemel. jeff ons Dach fe Dach daut Broot, daut ons fehlt; Uns dääglich Brood giff uns vundaag Geef ons heden ons dagelijks brood, en vejeff ons onse Schult, un vergiff uns unse Schuld, en vergeef ons onze schuld, soo aus wie den vejewe, dee sich jeajen ons veschuldicht ha; as wi de vergeven hebbt, de an uns schüllig worrn sünd. zoals ook wij vergeven onze schuldenaars / zoals ook wij aan anderen hun schuld vergeven; en brinj ons nich en Vesekjunk nenn, Un laat uns nich versöcht warrn, En leid ons niet in verzoeking / in bekoring, oba rad ons von Beeset. man maak uns frie vun dat Böös. maar verlos ons van de boze / het kwade. wiels die jehet daut Rikj, Denn dien is dat Riek Want van U is het koninkrijk, en dee Krauft en dee Harlichtjeit en Eewichtjeit. un de Kraft un de Herrlichkeid in Ewigkeid. en de kracht en de heerlijkheid in eeuwigheid. This shift is still active, as some speakers { including a few from Hague} still retain the older pronunciation.  shifted to  before voiced consonants. Spelling should be as phonetic as possible. German spelling rules should be applied whenever possible. // –  as in Kjinja ('children') // –  as in Hunga ('hunger') // –  and  as in Kjoakj ('church') and Brigj ('bridge') // – no letter, but has to be used if a word that begins with a vowel or a prefix is added to a word which by itself starts with a vowel: ve'achten (to despise) // –  could be written  or : Fada ('male cousin'), Voda ('father'). The only criterion is the spelling of these words in German.  is spelled  as in German: Wota ('water') // – at the beginning of a word and between vowels  is written : sajen ('to say'), läsen ('to read'). The  sound is written  at the beginning of a word (where some speakers pronounce it ),  between vowels and final after a short vowel: Zocka ('sugar'), waussen ('to grow'), Oss ('ox'). At the end of a word after a long vowel or consonant both are written , the reader has to know the word to pronounce the correct sound: Hos  ('rabbit'), Os  ('carrion'). The combination of a short  and a voiced  adds still more confusion to this, as in the word Kos  ('goat'). // –  and  as in School ('school') and ruzhen ('rush').  and  represent  and  at the beginning of a word and if a prefix is attached to a word starting with  or : spälen ('to play') bestalen ('to order'). // –  as in Joa ('year'). The  sound is written  after consonants, ,  and : Erfolch ('success'), Jesecht ('face'), Jewicht ('weight'), läach ('low'). After , it is written  to differentiate it from : rajcht ('right') // –  is written , only occurs after back vowels: Dach ('day'), Loch ('hole').  (an allophone of ) is rendered  between vowels and final: froagen ('to ask'), vondoag ('today'). At the beginning of a word and before consonants, g has the  sound. // –  is a flap (like the Spanish r), or depending on the person, even a trill (like Spanish ), before vowels: root ('red'), groot ('big'), Liera ('teacher');  pronounced as an approximant (English r) before a consonant, at the end and in the -ren endings of Old Colony speakers: kort ('short'), ar ('her'), hieren ('to hear'). The uvular German r  is not heard in Plautdietsch. // –  is an allophone of  that occurs after vowels in words like Baul and well.  is rounded and is heard only in the Old Colony and Bergthal groups.  is an allophone of  preceding an  or a palatal consonant. English sound equivalents are approximate. Long vowels ä and o do not have a diphthong glide. In colloquial speech the indefinite article is reduced practically to a "n", or "ne" if feminine. If used so, there is no case distinction. However, when used as a numeral, meaning "one", the diphthong "ee" is heavily stressed and the oblique form of the masculine gender is used. There is no indefinite plural article; een has no plural. some are like the weak verbs: jejäft, jesajcht (given, said); others are formed of je- plus infinitive: jestonen (stood); some, including modal verbs, of je- plus first person past tense: jehaut; jesocht, jekunt (had, sought, been able); others of je- plus plural past: jefungen (found); Those with an ee or oo in past tense are simplified to ä/o: jeschräwen, jedonen (written, done) the past participle of sennen is jewast (been) aun, on, in: de Klock henjt aun de Waunt (the clock is hanging on the wall) äwa, over, about besied, beside, next to bie, by, at bowa, over buta, except, besides derch, through en, in fa, for hinja, behind hinjaraun, following something else jäajen, against mank, among met, with no, to, after onen, without opp, on to, to tweschen, between (twixt) unja, under ver, in front of von, of(relative to) Russian Mennonite (speakers of Plautdietsch all around the globe) East Low German Low Prussian Plautdietsch-Freunde (Germany-based NGO, worldwide documentation and promotion of Plautdietsch) Living in a Perfect World (National Geographic documentary) Silent Light, film by Carlos Reygadas Alexanderwohl Mennonite Church, a Low German Mennonite Church, in Goessel, Kansas, USA Pennsylvania Dutch Hutterite German (not closely related linguistically, but also used primarily by an Anabaptist group) Neufeld, Eldo: Plautdietsch-English, English-Plaudietsch, Munich 2005. Rempel, Herman: Kjenn Jie Noch Plautdietsch? A Mennonite Low German Dictionary, PrairieView Press, 1995. ISBN 1-896199-13-5. Thiessen, Jack: Mennonite Low German Dictionary / Mennonitisch-Plattdeutsches Wörterbuch, University of Wisconsin, 2003. ISBN 0-924119-09-8. Zacharias, Ed Ons Ieeschtet Wieedabuak, 2009. ISBN 978-1-55383-223-2. Neufeld, Eldo: Plautdietsch Grammar, 72 pages, Munich 2010. Siemens, Heinrich: Plautdietsch - Grammatik, Geschichte, Perspektiven, Bonn 2012. De Bibel, Kindred Productions, 2003. ISBN 0-921788-97-5. De Smet, Gilbert: "Niederländische Einflüsse im Niederdeutschen" in: Gerhard Cordes and Dieter Möhn (eds.), Handbuch zur niederdeutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft, Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 1983. ISBN 3-503-01645-7, pp.&nbsp;730 – 761. Epp, Reuben: The Story of Low German & Plautdietsch, Reader's Press, 1996. ISBN 0-9638494-0-9. Epp, Reuben: The Spelling of Low German and Plautdietsch, Reader's Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-9638494-1-0. McCaffery, Isaias. Wi Leahre Plautdietsch: A Beginner's Guide to Mennonite Low German, Mennonite Heritage Museum, 2008. ISBN 978-0-615-24765-6. Welschen, Ad (2000–2005): Course Dutch Society and Culture, International School for Humanities and Social Studies ISHSS, University of Amsterdam. Was ist Plautdietsch (in Low German) Plautdietsch-Freunde e.V. (Germany based NGO, world wide documentation and promotion of Plautdietsch) Opplautdietsch.de - Plautdietsch Radio e.V. Detmold, Germany Plautdietsch.ca - written and audio resources Dialect Literature and Speech, Low German from the Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Pennsylvania German vs Plautdietsch among Mennonites Plautdietsch online Dictionary and grammar guide Plautdietsch lexicon with English-Plautdietsch index and category tree (thesaurus) German to Plautdietsch, Plautdietsch to German and Russian to Plautdietsch online Dictionary (Author Waldemar Penner) Peter Wiens - a German Plautdietsch blogger Plautdietsch course (project)
