 The Pontiac Grand Prix is an automobile which was produced by Pontiac from 1962 to 2008. First introduced as part of Pontiac's full-size model offering for the 1962 model year, the Grand Prix name was also applied to cars in the personal luxury car market segment and the mid-size offering, positioned below the large Bonneville in Pontiac's model lineup.     The Grand Prix first appeared in the Pontiac line for the 1962 model year, as a replacement for the Ventura. It was essentially a standard Pontiac Catalina coupe with minimal outside chrome trim and a sportier interior (bucket seats and a center console). The performance-minded John De Lorean, head of Advanced Engineering at Pontiac, contributed to the development of both the Grand Prix and the GTO. Early models were available with Pontiac performance options, including the factory-race Super Duty 421 powertrain installed in a handful of 1962 and 1963 cars. The full-size Catalina-based Grand Prix sold well through the 1960s.  The first Grand Prix was similar to other full-sized Pontiacs since it was Catalina hardtop coupe trimmed to standards similar to the larger top-line Bonneville. The Grand Prix featured a distinctive grille and taillights. The bucket seats upholstered Morrokide vinyl while nylon loop-blend carpeting covered the floor and lower door panels. The center console-mounted transmission shifter included a storage compartment and a tachometer. The rear bench seat included a center fold-down armrest and a speaker grille that could be made functional with the extra-cost Bi-Phonic rear speaker. Included were a padded instrument panel, deluxe steering wheel, courtesy lights, and other features. The standard engine was the Bonneville's   V8 with four-barrel carburetor and dual exhausts. Optional were a 389 Tri-Power with three two-barrel carburetors and , and two other higher-output 389s including a four-barrel version rated  and  Tri-Power. Late in the model year a "street" version of the larger 421, primarily a racing engine in 1961 and most of 1962, became available, but only in a four-barrel form rated at . Pontiac also offered the  Super Duty with two four-barrel carburetors, rated at , as a US$2,250 option (when the base Grand Prix listed at US$3,490). Also standard was a three-speed manual transmission, while optional transmissions included a Borg-Warner T-10 four-speed with Hurst shifter or the three-speed Roto Hydra-matic. For 1963, the Grand Prix received revised sheetmetal shared with other full-size Pontiacs, but with its own squared-off roofline with a concave rear window that contrasted with the convertible-like roofline of the 1962 Grand Prix and continued on the 1963 to 1964 Catalina and Bonneville. Also new was a Pontiac-trademark split grille with vertical headlights and round parking lights and "hidden" taillights out back. Aside from grillework, taillight covering and bumpers, chrome trim was limited to lower rocker panels, wheel arches and roofline. Inside, the GP continued with luxurious interiors featuring bucket seats upholstered in Morrokide vinyl and separated by a console that was now built into the instrument panel containing a vacuum gauge and real walnut trim on the instrument panel and a dash mounted tachometer (manual transmission), along with revised custom pedal trim plates. A wide assortment of options were available including power steering, brakes, windows and driver's seat; air conditioning, eight-lug aluminum wheels with integrated brake drums, Safe-T-Track differential and other items. New options this year included an AM/FM radio, cruise control and a tilt steering wheel that could be adjusted to seven different positions. The  389 four-barrel V8 remained the standard engine. A new lineup of optional engines was introduced this year which included the  389 Tri-Power and three versions of the larger 421&nbsp;in³ V8 including a standard four-barrel version rated at , a  Tri-Power option, and the 421 HO option with Tri-Power carburetion and . The same selection of transmissions continued including the standard three-speed manual, optional four-speed manual or three-speed Roto Hydra-matic. Brakes were  drums. The 1964 Grand Prix received only minor appearance changes from the 1963 edition. Those included a revised grille (based on the 1964 Bonneville/Catalina) with new "GP" logos and rear deck trim with new taillights, still hidden, again following the shape of the other big '64 Pontiacs). Revised upholstery trims highlighted the interior, still featuring expanded Morrokide vinyl bucket seats and console as standard equipment. Engine offerings were mostly unchanged from 1963 except that the standard  389 four-barrel V8 gained three , with the extra-cost Hydra-matic transmission. The standard three-speed manual and optional Hydra-matic transmissions were unchanged from 1963, however, a new GM-built Muncie four-speed available in either a wide-ratio M-20 or close-ratio M-21 options replaced the Borg-Warner T-10.  Grand Prixs and all other full-sized Pontiacs were completely restyled for 1965 featuring more rounded bodylines with Coke-bottle profiles, and a  increase in wheelbase to  (for Grand Prix, Catalina, and all Safari station wagons — Bonneville and Star Chief increased proportionally from  to ). While other Pontiac coupes received the semi-fastback rooflines shared with other GM divisions, Grand Prixs retained the exclusive squared-off roofline with concave rear window but a bit more rounded than the 1963-64 version. The old GM-X frame was replaced with a new box-frame with side perimeter rails. Interiors were revised with all-new instrument panels featuring a larger dose of walnut trim which now extended to the center console standard with bucket seats, along with a new steering wheel with horn bars replacing the horn ring used in previous years. The standard bucket seats could be upholstered either in expanded Morrokide vinyl or a new cloth-and-Morrokide trim. New for 1965 was a no-cost bench seat option with center armrest available with either upholstery choice. New options included an automatic air conditioning system. This system, first introduced by Cadillac in 1964, was available in addition to the regular Circ-L-Aire Conditioning. Hazard flashers were also optional. Engine offerings were revised for 1965. The standard four-barrel 389&nbsp;in³ V8 was uprated to  with a manual transmission or  with automatic. Optional engines included a 389 Tri-Power and 421 four-barrel — both rated at ; a 421 Tri-Power rated at  and the 421 HO Tri-Power with . The standard three-speed and optional four-speed manual transmissions were carried over from 1964, however, a new three-speed Turbo Hydra-matic transmission with torque-converter that was similar in principle to Ford's Cruise-O-Matic and Chrysler's Torqueflite replaced the older three-speed fluid coupling Roto Hydra-matic (along with the four-speed Super Hydra-matic in Bonneville and Star Chief models). The Turbo Hydra-matic also featured the now-standardized P-R-N-D-S-L shift quadrant pattern in place of the P-N-D-S-L-R setup of previous Hydra-matics. A 1965 Grand Prix road test was featured in the February, 1965 issue of Motor Trend magazine, much of which was devoted the entire Pontiac lineup receiving M/T "Car of the Year" honors for 1965. Other Pontiac road tests in that issue included a GTO convertible, Tempest Custom sedan, Catalina Vista hardtop sedan, and Bonneville hardtop coupe. The 1966 Grand Prix received only minor appearance revisions from the 1965 edition including a new more rounded split grille and new taillight trim. Inside, a revised instrument panel included a squared off gauge panel and new Strato bucket seats in either Morrokide or cloth upholstery with higher seatbacks and more contoured cushions for improved lateral support. The Strato buckets were standard equipment along with a console, but a notchback bench seat with center armrest was a no-cost option. Engine offerings were largely unchanged from 1965 except that the  Tri-Power 389 option was discontinued, leaving only the larger 421 available with the three two-barrel carb option, which was offered for the last time this year due to a new General Motors edict that banned the use of multi-carb options on all GM cars with the exception of the Chevrolet Corvette starting with the 1967 model year. Revised sheetmetal with more rounded wasp-waisted styling highlighted the 1967 Grand Prix and other full-sized Pontiacs, along with the addition of a new Grand Prix convertible. Also new to the GP were concealed headlights with horizontal mounting (all other full-size '67 Pontiacs retained the vertical headlights for one more year), concealed windshield wipers and ventless front windows on hardtop coupes. Out back were louvered taillights similar to those found on the GTO. Inside, Strato bucket seats and console were still standard equipment with Morrokide vinyl or cloth upholstery, or a no-cost optional notchback bench seat with either trims. Other changes included a revised instrument panel and door panel trim. Under the hood, the 389 V8 was replaced by a new  V8 with four-barrel carburetor, dual exhausts and . Similarly, the 421 V8 was replaced by a new  V8 rated at  or an HO version with  - both with four-barrel carburetors. Both the 400 and 428 V8s were basically bored out versions of the older 389/421 block but with various internal improvements including bigger valves and improved breathing capabilities. New this year was a dual master-cylinder braking system and optional front disc brakes along with Rally II wheels. Also new for 1967 was an energy-absorbing collapsable steering column. Plus, Pontiac added an 8-track Stereo tape player. The Grand Prix convertible would be a one-year only offering and dropped after this one year. The 1968 Grand Prix received a new "beak-nose" grille and bumper with concealed headlights and revised rear deck/bumper with L-shaped taillights, plus side reflector markers to meet a new federal safety mandate. The convertible was discontinued, leaving only the hardtop coupe for '68. The standard   V8 was unchanged from 1967 aside from revisions in order to meet the 1968 emission regulations, both Federal and California. Both optional  V8s received higher power ratings of  for the base version and  the HO. Interior trim only received minor changes from 1967 aside from revised door panels. This would be the final year for the Grand Prix to be based on the B-body full-sized car platform. The 1969 GP would be all-new with an exclusive bodyshell but its chassis design was based on the smaller Pontiac A-body intermediates (Tempest, LeMans, and GTO).   For 1969, John Z. DeLorean, Pontiac's general manager at the time, ordered the development of an all-new Grand Prix based on a slightly stretched version of the intermediate GM A platform, which was dubbed the G-body. The previous platform was based on the  wheelbase from the Catalina, but on 1969 models it was decreased to . This smaller, lighter car at last had its own body and Pontiac's longest-ever hood.Flory, p. 632. Like the previous generation (for which a convertible was a one-year-only offering in 1967), the new Grand Prix would be offered only as a 2-door hardtop. Even the model names took elements of old Duesenbergs (J and SJ trim). Development of the new intermediate-based 1969 Grand Prix began in April 1967 after a few prototype GPs were built on the full-sized Pontiac platform as originally planned. DeLorean and other Pontiac planners decided to make the switch in light of declining sales of the full-sized Grand Prix in comparison to competition from unique personal cars in both the luxury and sporty car fields including the Ford Thunderbird, Buick Riviera and Oldsmobile Toronado at the luxury end, along with the emerging ponycars such as the Ford Mustang and Pontiac's own new-for-1967 Firebird. To save product development costs, it was decided that while the newest GP would have a unique bodyshell of its own, the car would use the basic chassis and drivetrain from the A-body intermediates (Tempest, Le Mans and GTO), in much the same manner Ford created the original Mustang in 1964 using the basic chassis and drivetrain from the compact Ford Falcon. Going this route greatly reduced development costs overall and permitted Pontiac to concentrate on more effort to upgrade the styling and sheetmetal, along with interior appointments. This move also enabled Pontiac to reduce development time for the 1969 GP from the usual 36&nbsp;months required for a new model to less than 18&nbsp;months. The new model also refocused attention on performance, with increased installation percentages for manual transmissions and engine options up to the  428 HO. Two engine sizes were offered with two power options were available in each engine size; a  or  , as well as a  or   V8. The 1969 Grand Prix featured a sporty interior with a wraparound cockpit-style instrument panel that placed most controls and gauges within easy reach of the driver, and was named the "Command Seat". The "Strato" bucket seats were separated by a console slanted toward the driver that included the customary floor shifter, storage compartment, and ashtray integrated into the instrument panel. Upholstery choices included standard expanded Morrokide vinyl or cloth and Morrokide, or an extra-cost leather trim. The leather interior option also included cut-pile carpeting replacing the regular nylon loop rug that came with standard interior trims. Innovations introduced on the 1969 Grand Prix included a concealed radio antenna, which amounted to two wires in the windshield; an optional built-in electrically heated rear window defogger and side-impact beams inside the doors. Also new were flush-mounted "pop-open" exterior door handles instead of the normal door handles featuring a grab handle and push button. The 1969 Grand Prix now competed in the intermediate-sized personal luxury car market segment with sales reached over 112,000 units, well above the 32,000 full-sized models built in 1968. The similar Chevrolet Monte Carlo followed in 1970. Ford and Chrysler responded by producing plusher versions of their Ford Torino and Dodge Charger intermediates, but both eventually created new models to enter the battle—the Ford Elite and Mercury Cougar XR-7 in 1974 and Chrysler Cordoba in 1975. The GP and the others were consider as smaller and lower-priced alternatives to the more expensive personal-luxury cars of the day including the Ford Thunderbird, Buick Riviera, and Oldsmobile Toronado along with the even pricier Cadillac Eldorado and Lincoln Continental Mark III. The basic 1969 bodyshell continued until the 1972 model year with a major facelift in 1971, but only minor detail revisions in 1970 and 1972. Pontiac also in 1969 built a concept Grand Prix using a steam power engine designated the SE 101.  The SE 101 had its standard gasoline engine replaced with a  steam engine designed by GM engineering in conjunction with the Besler brothers."GM Takes Its Wraps Off Its Steam Cars." Popular Science, July 1969, p. 84-85. Negative aspects were the weight of the engine,  heavier than a V8, and cost being three times more expensive to make. Vertical grille inserts replaced the horizontal bars of the 1969, movement of "Grand Prix" nameplates from the lower cowls to the rear C-pillars and the vertical chromed louvers from the C-pillars down to the lower cowls, highlighted the 1970 Grand Prix. The optional  V8 rated at 370 and  in 1969 was replaced by a new   with  of torque at 3,100&nbsp;rpm. The base 350&nbsp;hp  engine was still standard, but a low-compression 400&nbsp;CID engine was available with a two-barrel carburetor. An automatic transmission was offered as a no cost option. Interior trim also received minor revisions, and a bench seat with center armrest returned as a no-cost option to the standard Strato bucket seats and console. Bench seat-equipped Grand Prixs got a steering column-mounted shifter with the automatic transmission along with a dashboard-mounted glovebox, replacing the console-mounted shifter and glovebox of bucket-seat cars. Power front disc brakes became standard equipment this year. Due to the success of the 1969 Grand Prix, other GM divisions followed suit and introduced similar cars for 1970. The Chevrolet Monte Carlo used the same basic G-body as the GP but with a two-inch shorter wheelbase (116 vs. the GP's 118) and a long hood, though still shorter than the Grand Prix's, but still considered an upscale vehicle for GM's lowest-priced division. Oldsmobile, whose larger and more expensive front-drive Toronado was a direct competitor to the Thunderbird, decided to further capitalize on strong sales of its intermediate Cutlass line by introducing a new Cutlass Supreme coupe with a formal roofline similar to the GPs but on the standard  wheelbase used for two-door A-body intermediates and the same lower sheetmetal used on other Cutlass models. Both the Monte Carlo and Cutlass Supreme were also much lower in price, primarily due to smaller  standard engines for both, and that many items standard on the GP were optional on those models — however, all three cars with similar equipment were actually much closer in price than the base sticker prices suggest. The introduction of the Monte Carlo and Cutlass Supreme did, however, cut into the Grand Prix's dominance, and sales dropped 40%. 65,750 Grand Prixs were built in 1970. Variations of the 1969 GP's central V-nose grille appeared on other 1970 Pontiacs including the full-sized cars and intermediate Tempest/Le Mans series. The 1970 Ford Thunderbird styling change was reportedly ordered by Ford Motor Co. president Bunkie Knudsen, who moved from GM to Ford in 1968 after a long career at GM which included the position of general manager for the Pontiac Motor Division from 1956 to 1961 and ordered the addition of the Grand Prix to the 1962 model lineup. A new integrated bumper/grille and larger single headlights replacing the quad lights of 1969-70 models marked the introduction of the 1971 Grand Prix along with a new slanted boattail-style rear with taillights built into the bumper. Interior revisions amounted to new trim patterns for cloth and vinyl upholstery patterns for both the bench and bucket seats, but the leather interior option was discontinued. Engine choices included the standard  V8 with four-barrel carburetor and dual exhausts, rated at ; and the optional four-barrel  V8 rated at . Both engines received substantially lower compression ratios (8.4:1 for 1971 compared to 10.25:1 in 1970) as part of a GM-corporate edict that required engines to use lower-octane regular leaded, low lead or unleaded gasoline beginning with the 1971 model year. Transmission offerings initially were carried over from previous years, including the standard three-speed manual, or optional four-speed stick or Turbo Hydra-Matic. However, at mid-year, Turbo Hydra-Matic automatic became standard equipment and the manual shifters were dropped. Variable-ratio power steering was made standard equipment as well. New power ratings were put into effect, requiring manufacturers to post net horsepower with all accessories installed (vs. gross rating without the accessories). This system gave a more realistic measure of power that customers actually saw. The base  four-barrel engine then produced  after the switch to the net-rating system, and the  in SJ models also dropped in power to  (net). Customers who wanted the higher powered 455 SJ model paid $195 to get Rally gauges, body-colored mirrors, SJ badging, a no-maintenance AC Delco battery and other amenities. 1971 looked to be a good sales year for the Grand Prix, but in mid-September 1970, a corporate wide labor strike halted all GM production for 67&nbsp;days. The strike also delayed the production of the second generation Grand Prix by one year in 1973. Production numbers for 1971 were lower than 1970 with only 58,325 units being produced. The strike cut into production and sales along with other possible factors including lower horsepower ratings and intense competition from Chevy's Monte Carlo and Oldsmobile's Cutlass Supreme. Minor styling revisions included a new cross-hatch grille up front and triple cluster taillights in back. Inside, the burled-elm trim was replaced by a new teakwood design and upholstery trim patterns for vinyl and cloth selections were revised for both bucket and bench seat offerings. Engine offerings remained the same as before with the major change being the change in power measurements from the previous gross method on a dynamometer to the new net ratings as installed in a vehicle with accessories and emission equipment which made the horsepower ratings of 1972 models much lower "on paper" than their 1971 counterparts though actual performance did not change much between the two years. Under the net horsepower measurement system, the standard  V8 with four-barrel carburetor was rated at  while the optional  with four-barrel carb was rated at . At mid-year, Pontiac released a radial tire option for the Grand Prix, which increased the wheel diameter from the standard  to . The radial donuts, provided by the division's usual tire suppliers, included Firestone 500s and B.F. Goodrich Lifesaver T/As. This was the first time that Pontiac offered a radial tire option which actually became a reality. In 1968, Pontiac announced a radial tire option for the GTO that was quickly discontinued due to production problems. Also at mid-year, a new "Fasten Seat Belts" light with buzzer was added per Federal safety regulation. This light was located in the speedometer pod and the speedometer was changed from displaying a high of , back to . An all-new Grand Prix was scheduled for 1972. However, a 67-day corporate-wide strike at GM in late 1970 that hobbled the 1971 model introduction set back 1972 model production plans and the new A and G-body cars planned for 1972 were delayed for introduction by one year to the 1973 model year. Production numbers increased substantially after two years of decline, reaching 91,961 units and only second place to the 1969 model.   All A-bodies, including the Grand Prix, were redesigned for 1973. This generation was larger and heavier, due partly to the federally mandated  crash bumpers. Although large V8s were still available, performance was on the decline due to another federal standard—a new emissions control system. The most notable styling feature of this generation was the appearance of the fixed opera window, replacing the previous disappearing rear side glass. This year's Grand Prix switched from pillarless hardtop design to a pillared "Colonnade" hardtop with frameless door glass as did all GM intermediates in response to proposed federal safety standards regarding roll-over protection that would have ultimately spelled the end of pillarless and convertible bodystyles, a mandate that never materialized. The 1973-77 GM intermediates with their pillared hardtop design were often referred to as "Colonnade hardtop coupes" or "Colonnade hardtop sedans". Front and rear styling of the 1973 Grand Prix turned out be an evolution of the 1971 and 1972 models with a vertical-bar V-nose grille and single headlamps along with the new federally mandated 5&nbsp;mph (8&nbsp;km/h) front bumper. The rear featured a revised boattail-like trim with square-taillights above the bumper. Inside, a new instrument panel continued the wraparound cockpit theme of previous models with new African Crossfire Mahogany facing on the dashboard, console and door panels, which was "real" wood in contrast with the simulated woodgrain material found in most car interiors during that time. The Strato bucket seats were completely new with higher seatbacks and integrated headrests in Morrokide or scivvy cloth trims, and optional recliners and adjustable lumbar support, with a notchback bench seat offered as a no-cost option. The standard drivetrain consisted of the four-barrel  V8 rated at  and the Turbo Hydra-Matic transmission. Also standard were power steering and power brakes. A four-barrel  was optional and included with the "SJ" option that also added a rally gauge cluster and a radial tuned suspension with front and rear sway bars, Pliacell shock absorbers, and radial-ply tires. Although the Third Generation Grand Prix was indeed bulkier and heavier than its predecessor, handling was good for a large car, due to improvements in suspension design. The introduction of radial-ply tires was also a boon for handling. GM's "A" body cars' front suspensions were based on the Chevrolet Camaro and Pontiac Firebird during this production run. Grand Prix production set a new record of over 150,000&nbsp;units, despite intense competition from a similar restyled Chevy Monte Carlo, and "near" personal luxury coupes such as Buick's all-new Century Regal and Oldsmobile's Cutlass Supreme — both of whose styling and appointments were very similar to the GP and Monte, and even shared the same squared-off formal roofline with opera windows - but used the standard A-body coupe body and  wheelbase shared with lower-priced models. The success of the GP (and Monte) led to direct responses from Ford Motor Company the following year with a larger  Ford Elite and Mercury Cougar, which were followed by Chrysler entries in 1975, the Dodge Charger and Chrysler Cordoba. The 1974 Grand Prix received a revised split grille with vertical bars that was entirely above the bumper. Out back, the boattail effect was softened somewhat due to a new federally mandated  bumper that was added to the similar mandated front bumper introduced in 1973. The license plate and fuel filler were moved above the bumper and taillight lenses were revised. The interior trim remained virtually unchanged from 1973, with standard seating choices, including Strato bucket seats with center console or notchback bench seat with an armrest and cloth or Morrokide upholstery. The bucket seats were available with optional recliners and adjustable lumbar support. However, the real African Crossfire Mahogany trim was replaced by a simulated material for the instrument panel due to splintering problems on 1973 models; the "real" wood was continued on the console and door panels for another two years. Also, a new cut-pile carpeting replaced the nylon loop rugs of previous years. Also new for 1974 was a federally mandated interlock system that required the driver and front-seat passenger to fasten their seat belts in order to start the car. This regulation, which was very unpopular with the buying public, was offered only this one year and on some early 1975 models. It was rescinded by Congressional action. Engines were carried over from 1973, including the  V8 (standard on the Model J) and  (standard on the Model SJ, optional on the Model J). A Turbo Hydra-Matic transmission, variable-ratio power steering, and power brakes were standard equipment on both models. In addition to the 455 V8, the Model SJ also added a Rally Gauge Cluster, "SJ" identification, and a radial-tuned suspension similar to Pontiac's Grand Am. Radial tires were also a new option on the Model J this year. Sales of Grand Prixs for the 1974 model year dropped from 1973's record of around 150,000&nbsp;units to just under 100,000&nbsp;units primarily due to new competition in the intermediate personal-luxury car market from a new upsized Mercury Cougar XR-7 coupe and Ford Elite, both based on the Dearborn's intermediate Torino/Montego platform. Still, 1974 was the third best-selling year to date for the Pontiac Grand Prix. A revised grille with fewer vertical bars and revised taillight lenses marked the 1975 Grand Prix. Changes included the addition of GM's High Energy electronic ignition and a catalytic converter that mandated the use of unleaded gasoline. Radial tires became standard on all models. A new luxury LJ model was added as the new top model. The base Model J remained available, as well as the SJ. The LJ included pinstriping and a velour interior trim. Speedometers were revised with numerals now topping at  rather than the 120 or  readings found in previous years and speed readings in kilometers were added. The addition of the catalytic converter spelled the end of dual exhaust for 1975 and detuning of engines. The  V8 (standard on J and LJ models) dropped from 230 to  while the  (standard on SJ, optional on J and LJ) was detuned from 250 to . New for 1975 was a more economical   with two-barrel carburetor, which was available as a no-cost option on J and LJ models. Early 1975 models featured the seat belt interlock system introduced on all 1974 models that required both the driver and front passenger to fasten their seat belts in order to start the vehicle. However, Congressional action to rescind that regulation, which led automakers to discontinue the device and permitted dealers and garages to disconnect the device on cars so-equipped. Sales dropped to 86,582&nbsp;units thanks to an aging design, continued recession resulting from the 1973-74 energy crisis, substantially higher prices for all 1975-model cars due to that year's safety and emission control regulations, and intense competition from Ford's Cougar and Elite, and Chrysler Corporation's two new entries in this class including the Chrysler Cordoba and Dodge Charger SE. Model mix was 64,581 base J models, 7,146 SJs, and 14,855 of the new LJ. A new split vertical bar "waterfall" grille and quad rectangular headlights in front and revised taillight lenses out back highlighted the 1976 Grand Prix. The same three model designations continued (J, SJ and LJ) with the LJ and SJ offering the same trim and equipment levels as in 1975 with the exception being the SJ downgraded to a standard  V8. The base Model J underwent a number of content changes to cut the base price by around $500 to be more competitive with other mid-sized personal luxury cars. Those changes for the "J" included a smaller   V8 as the base powerplant and some downgrading of interior trim that included a new notchback bench seat made standard equipment and the Strato bucket seats/console became optional. Features such as a cushioned steering wheel and custom pedal trim plates became optional on Model J, but remained standard on LJ and SJ, both of which also continued to include Strato bucket seats as standard equipment. All models got a new simulated rosewood trim for the dash, door panels and console (with bucket seats) that replaced the African Crossfire Mahogany trim of previous years. Upholstery choices included cloth or Morrokide vinyl bench or bucket seats on the Model J, velour buckets on the LJ or Morrokide buckets on the SJ. Leather interior trim was a new extra-cost option available with the Strato bucket seats and LJ and SJ models. Both the "LJ" and "SJ" models came standard with a   V8 that was optional on the Model J. The   was optional on all models. In celebration of Pontiac's 50th anniversary in 1976, a number of special edition Grand Prix were produced. These models were based on the LJ model, featured removable Hurst T-tops, Rally II wheels, special "Anniversary Gold" paint (actually the new Cadillac Seville's "Autumn Gold) accented by a white opera roof and white side protection. Among the other distinctions was special badging with Golden hood and trunk medallions and a Golden "arrow head" logo in the (standard) sport steering wheel. Mechanically, they were similar to the regular models. This was the only anniversary model offered by Pontiac. Grand Prix production increased: sales went up to 228,091&nbsp;units total (a plus of 226%), making this Bicentennial year the best in Grand Prix' history — and second in its class only to the Chevrolet Monte Carlo with 353,272&nbsp;units. This included 110,814 base model Js, 88,232&nbsp;SJs, and 29,045&nbsp;LJs (including 4,807 Golden Anniversary editions and a single demonstrator with Pontiac's not yet introduced  V8 engine. Revised grille work with fewer vertical bars, a stand-up hood ornament and revised taillight lenses with "GP" logos highlighted the 1977 Grand Prix, which was the final year for the 1973-vintage bodyshell which was set to be replaced by a downsized GP for 1978. The same three models (J, LJ and SJ) were carried over with engine revisions. The base Model J got Pontiac's new   V8 as standard equipment, which was a bit too small and underpowered to propel a 4,000-pound car. Optional engines included a   V8 or  ; those two engines standard on the LJ and SJ models, respectively. Each of those engines were Pontiac-built units as in previous years, but offered in 49 of the 50 states. Because Pontiac's own V8 engines could not meet the more stringent California emission standards set for 1977, all Grand Prixs (and other Pontiac models) sold in California were powered by Oldsmobile-built engines including Lansing's  "Rocket V8" for J and LJ, and the  Rocket V8 standard on the SJ and optional on the other two GPs in California. Due to a shortage of Olds 350 engines resulting from record sales of Cutlasses and reduced production of that engine due to a plant conversion to build a Diesel V8 beginning in 1978, a few 1977 Grand Prixs destined for California reportedly came off the line with a Chevrolet-built  V8. Grand Prix sales increased to an all-time high of over 270,000&nbsp;units for 1977, the last year for this bodystyle, despite competition from a newly downsized and lower-priced Ford Thunderbird introduced this year and a restyled Mercury Cougar XR-7 whose bodyshell switched to the T-Bird this year from the discontinued Ford Torino/Mercury Montego.   1978 brought a downsizing of the Grand Prix and the other A-bodies. This version of the A-body also received some sheetmetal revisions for 1981. The 1978 GP was about  shorter and  lighter than the 1977 model with an overall length of  and a  wheelbase. For the first time in Grand Prix history, a V8 engine was not standard equipment. In order to meet Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) mandates set after 1973-74 energy crisis, a Buick-built  V6 was standard equipment on the base model (formerly the Model J) and two versions of the Pontiac  V8 (Chevy  V8 in California) were optional. The luxury LJ model came standard with the  301 V8 with two-barrel carburetor while the sporty SJ was powered by a  301 V8 with four-barrel carburetor. Top speed for the six-cylinder was about , while the top-of-the-line  V8 was . A floor-mounted three-speed manual transmission was standard equipment with the V6 on the base model and the three-speed Turbo Hydra-Matic automatic was optional. Turbo Hydra-Matic was standard on LJ and SJ models and base models with either of the optional V8 engines. Standard seating choices by model included a notchback bench seat with cloth or Morrokide vinyl in the base GP, a pillowed velour cloth notchback bench seat in the LJ or Strato bucket seats in cloth or Morrokide in the SJ. The Strato buckets were optional on the base GP and a 60/40 split bench was optional on both base and LJ models. Viscount leather upholstery was available with bucket seats on SJ models. A new crosshatch grille and revised taillight lenses were the only appearance changes made to the 1979 Grand Prix. The same models, base, LJ and SJ continued as before as did the basic engine lineup including the  Buick V6 standard on base and LJ models, the   Pontiac V8 with two-barrel carburetor that was optional on both of those models, and the  301 V8 with four-barrel carburetion that was standard on the SJ and optional on the other models. Transmissions remained the same as before with the three-speed manual standard with the V6 engine on the base model and automatic transmission optional. The automatic transmission was standard on LJ and SJ models and all models when a V8 engine was ordered. Again, the Pontiac V8s were not available in California, where they were replaced by Chevy  rated at 140 and . A new and one-year-only option this year was a four-speed manual transmission available with the  four-barrel or two-barrel V8 on all models. Only 232 4-speed/301 V8 cars were built. The 1980 Grand Prix returned to a vertical bar grille and featured new taillight lenses with "GP" logos. Automatic transmission was standard equipment on all models and the two-barrel  Pontiac V8 was replaced by a new  V8 rated at . The Buick 231 V6 and the four-barrel version of the Pontiac 301 V8 were carried over from the previous year as was the Chevy 305 V8 offered in California. A minor reskinning of the sheetmetal for improved aerodynamics marked the 1981 Grand Prix along with a new grille design and revised tail section. The SJ model was dropped and a new Brougham series was now the flagship of the Grand Prix line. The Brougham models came standard with all power options, a plush cloth interior similar to the full-sized Bonneville Brougham, and a half roof vinyl top with coach lamps. The base and LJ models continued as before. All models now came standard with the Buick  V6 with the  Pontiac V8 available as an extra cost option (Chevy  V8 in California). The  V8 was discontinued and a new option this year was the Oldsmobile-built  Diesel V8, which was not often ordered due to high cost of around $700 and poor reliability. The year 1981 was also the last for Pontiac Motor Division to offer its own V8 engine due to an emerging GM corporate engine policy that determined Pontiac would build only four-cylinder engines and Buick only V6 engines, leaving Chevrolet and Oldsmobile to build V8 engines for most GM cars and trucks, while Cadillac would produce its own aluminum-block V8 that debuted in 1982. From 1982-on, all V8-equipped Pontiacs were equipped with Chevy or Olds engines. The 1982 Grand Prix was a virtual re-run of the 1981 model with no appearance changes to note. No gasoline-powered V8 engines were offered this year (in the U.S. only — Canadian GPs were available with the Chevy 305 V8 as an option in '82), leaving only the standard  Buick V6, a larger Buick  V6 and the Olds  Diesel V8. The A-body line became front-wheel-drive, leaving the rear-wheel-drive midsize platform as the G-body. The downsized four-door Bonneville was now related to the Grand Prix. The automatic climate control option was also dropped in 1981, leaving just a manual climate controls on all models. Also most 1982 models had a two tone interior. Front suspension was independent with wishbones, coil springs, antiroll bars and telescopic shocks while the rear still had a live axle. 1983 Grand Prix models specifically had no hood ornament and trim, and no rear trunk lock cover. One significant engine change to note was the  V6 was discontinued and the gas-powered V8 returned after a one-year absence (on U.S. models) in the form of a  Chevy . 1983 also marked the end of the LJ series, as the LE model would be added in for model year 1984. Some minor changes and revisions marked the 1984 Grand Prix, including a new octangular Pontiac hood ornament, gauges with orange needles and red markings (previous 1978–1983 Grand Prix gauges had white needles), a T-shaped console shifter, an updated bucket seat design, as well as a woodgrain plate above the glove box (previous 1978–1983 Grand Prixs used a black plate). A new optional four spoke steering wheel was also available. The base and Brougham models continued as before but the LJ was replaced by a new LE model. Same engines continued as before including the Buick  V6, Chevy  V8 and Olds  Diesel V8≈. A new option this year was the Turbo Hydra-Matic 200-4R four-speed overdrive automatic available with the 305 V8 for improved highway gas mileage. For 1985, Grand Prix's now included a new checkerboard grille design, as well as an optional two tone paint scheme with a fading body stripe. New taillights with an octagonal 'GP' logo also debuted. 1985 marked the last year for the flat rear deck panel in the interior, as by 1986 laws mandated cars to have a third brake light installed. New rectangular digital ETR stereo system options were introduced and replaced the dial pushbutton stereos. Some more rarer options specific for the 1985 Pontiac Grand Prix include a factory rear spoiler, rare aluminum turbo finned wheels, and a full size spare tire. The standard engine for 1985 was the  Buick built 3.8&nbsp;L V6 with a  Chevy 5.0&nbsp;L V8 optional. The 5.7&nbsp;L Olds Diesel V8 was dropped from the option list. Equipment levels were Standard, LE, and Brougham. An ad for the 1985 GP promoted the fact that its instrument panel still used dials for gauges. It was highlighted by a question similar to one long used in advertisements for Dial soap since the late 1950s, "Aren't You Glad We Use Dials. Don't You Wish Everybody Did?"  An updated taillight design with three sections was the only major change to the 1986 Grand Prix. A new 2+2 model was offered for homologation of an aerodynamic coupe body for NASCAR competition, like Chevrolet's 1986 Monte Carlo SS Aerocoupe. 2+2-specific pieces are an aero nose, bubble rear glass and a fiberglass trunklid with integral spoiler. All 2+2 models came equipped with a corporate  four-barrel engine, the 200-4R four-speed automatic transmission and 3.08:1 rear axle ratio. They have a two-tone paint job with silver on top and gray on the bottom, with 2+2 decals and striping and 15x7 steel Rally II wheels.  Modestly successful on superspeedways, where its bulbous rear end earned it a nickname of "the whale", the 2+2 design was seriously flawed for street use.  Since the enormous rear glass was fixed (not an opening hatch), it forced adoption of a dramatically shortened trunk opening.  Although it had modest horsepower, benign handling and design compromises, there were only approximately 1,225 Grand Prix 2+2s built in 1986 and all found buyers. While the 3.8&nbsp;L V6 remained standard for the regular Grand Prix, a fuel-injected 4.3&nbsp;L Chevrolet 90° V6 was added to the option list for models other than the 2+2. This engine was available with a three-speed or a four-speed automatic transmission. The 1987 Grand Prix was basically a rerun of the 1986 model aside from the discontinuation of the 2+2 model. The same three models were continued including base, LE and Brougham. Engine offerings again included the standard Buick 3.8&nbsp;L V6, the Chevrolet 4.3&nbsp;L V6 or optional Chevrolet 5.0&nbsp;L V8. This would be the last year for the G-body Grand Prix, which would be replaced by the all-new W-body version in 1988. The 1987 was also the last GP to feature rear-wheel-drive, V8 engines (until late-2005) and separate body-on-frame construction.   The first front-wheel drive W-body Grand Prix coupes were built in October 1987, and released on January 12, 1988 for the 1988 model year. This generation Grand Prix was built in Kansas City, Kansas. The Grand Prix was introduced as base, LE and SE coupes. All featured GM's MPFI 2.8 L V6 that made  and  of torque. A five-speed manual or four-speed automatic were the transmissions offered. The LE was well equipped with power windows and door locks and digital dashboard with analogue tachometer. SE models upgraded with power front seats with multiple lumbar, side bolster, side wing adjustments, an AM/FM Cassette stereo, and a trip computer and compass located in the center of the dash. Some models of this generation have the rare feature of a split front bench seat with a column shifter. Another unique feature only found on the Grand Prix is the combination lock for the glove box, rather than a key. Grand Prix was Motor Trend's Car of the Year for 1988. A host of changes upgraded the Grand Prix for 1989. Air conditioning was standard, and the 2.8&nbsp;L was replaced by GM's new 3.1 L MPFI V6 that produced  mid-way through the model year. For 1989, the 3.1&nbsp;L was only mated to a four-speed automatic transmission, while the remaining 2.8 was mated to either manual or automatic transmissions. A new trim level was offered for 1989, a limited-edition turbo coupe that featured an ASC/McLaren turbocharged version of GM's 3.1&nbsp;L V6 (Only 749 were produced). Output was , 65 more than last year. A four-speed automatic was the only transmission offered. The coupe was an SE model with body work such as hood louvers and extra body cladding(which will be the most controversial design element in the years to come). The interior featured more equipment, and only seated four, in contrast to the LE's five seats. The full analog gauges would become the 1990-93 sport cluster, and the basis for the new instrument cluster to replace the digital cluster for 1990. In 1990, the base model was dropped in favor of a sedan version (replacing the 6000 which ended production the next year and the Canada-only Tempest), entering production on September 12, 1989. A notable introduction for the Grand Prix in 1990 is the new STE (Special Touring Edition) which replaced the STE model of the Pontiac 6000. In contrast to that model, it trades in all-wheel-drive for the available Turbo 3.1&nbsp;L V6. Standard features include a cassette stereo with equalizer and eight speakers (a compact disc player was optional), remote keyless entry, eight-way power driver's seat with multiple lumbar and sidewing adjustments for both front seat occupants, and a compass/trip computer that was more informative than the units in the SE and turbo coupes. An LE sedan was also available for 1990, standard with a 2.3&nbsp;L Quad 4 engine and a 3-speed automatic, the first use of an inline 4 cylinder engine in a Grand Prix. The 2.8&nbsp;L V6 engine was discontinued, while the 3.1&nbsp;L engine gained widespread availability and a standard five-speed manual transmission. For 1991, the Grand Prix Turbo coupe was replaced by a new GTP version. This model sported a 3.4&nbsp;L DOHC V6 that produced  with a five-speed manual transmission or 200 with the optional four-speed automatic. Inside, the GTP was essentially the same as the Turbo. One notable exception was the available optional Heads Up Display only shared with the Cutlass Supreme. The exterior used mini-quad headlamps (along with all other Grand Prix coupes), "GTP Grand Prix" and "24 Valve V6" badges. The STE Turbo was replaced by a 3.4&nbsp;L STE and could be ordered with the automatic transmission or manual transmission. For the SE coupe, the B4U package featured GTP bodywork and aluminum wheels. An SE sedan also became available, and featured STE-like styling at a lower price. The LE coupe was discontinued for 1991. Anti-lock braking system (ABS) is optional on all models for 1992, the 2.3&nbsp;L Quad 4 engine was dropped, and the LE sedan gained the SE/STE front lightbar. Most LE Sedans ordered for Rental fleets had full power options. A special edition only for 1992 was "Richard Petty Edition" of only 1000 units. This edition featured a special red, white or blue paint, special twin dual cam motor, special badging featuring Richard Petty's signature, special wheel well and ground effects, spoiler, Richard Petty black and white center caps, transmission shift modification which allowed a button for 2nd gear start or normal use, combination locking glove box, blue paint on inner web on wheel matching exterior paint, and "fan appreciation tour" badging making it one of the rarest Grand Prix ever produced. This was the last year of the old style B4U bodykit. There was a special edition model with metallic green paint, as well as gold rims and pinstriping. It was also the last year that a manual transmission could be ordered as an option. This was also the last year for the style of dashboard used 1988–1993.  For 1994, Grand Prix goes through a mid-generation "facelift" inside and out, as well as a reshuffling of the lineup. First, LE and STE models are discontinued. The GT and GTP become option packages on the SE sedan and coupe, respectively. These option packages include the revised 3.4&nbsp;L V6, sport suspension, ground effects. Outside, there is a new front and rear fascia and new ground effects. Inside, a new instrument panel hosts dual airbags, much larger and easier to use controls, and seatbelts are moved to the B-pillars rather than the doors on sedans only; coupes retain the automatic seatbelt design. Under the hood, the 3.1&nbsp;L V6 is changed to the 3100 SFI V6 with , while the 3.4&nbsp;L V6 has . The Grand Prix Sedan also had a slight tail light revision using the amber over red pattern as opposed to the red over amber in years past; however, the coupe's tail lights remained the same. Mirrors on some models were painted in body color. For 1995, the center console on floor shift models received a minor redesign. This was also the last year for the BYP body cladding package. The 3.4&nbsp;L DOHC V6 gained  with intake and exhaust improvements. All Grand Prix coupes received a sport package with five-spoke alloy wheels and dual exhaust. This is the last year for the fifth-generation Grand Prix.  In 1990, work began on a redesigned Grand Prix alongside other W-body vehicles under design chief John Manoogian II. By 1993, a final design was approved and show concept developed during the latter half of 1994. On January 4, 1995, General Motors unveiled the 300 GPX Concept at the 1995 North American International Auto Show in Detroit. This was a near-exact preview of a redesign for the Grand Prix, due within the 1996 calendar year. In January 1996, the 1997 Grand Prix was unveiled at the Detroit Auto Show. Promoted for its "wide track" appearance and racy styling, the second generation W-body Grand Prix sold well. It brought back a modern interpretation of an appearance introduced in 1966, called coke bottle styling.http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1995-01-08/travel/9501080142_1_taurus-and-sable-gm-models-v-6articles.orlandosentinel.com/1995-10-26/topic/9510250297_1_new-grand-prix-pontiac-1997-grand The first 1997 Grand Prix was built on August 12, 1996. There were two trim levels available from 1996; the SE and GT (GT available in coupe and sedan body styles). The Grand Prix came as a base SE sedan or a sportier GT coupe and sedan, as well as with a high-performance GTP package—available for GT models in either body style. Coupes and sedans shared similar styling, except for rear doors and quarter panels. The GTP was an option package under the GT trim level and later became its own trim level. The base engine on the SE was the only engine carried over from the previous generation, the 3.1&nbsp;L V6. The GT had a 3.8&nbsp;L V6 (3800 Series II) which was an option on the SE. The 3800 Series&nbsp;II was on the Ward's 10 Best Engines list for 1995–1997. The GTP added an Eaton M90 supercharger (also used in the 1996–2003 Bonneville) to the 3.8&nbsp;L, boosting power from  to . GTP trim level featured a "performance shift" button on the shifter that raised the transmission shift points. Front bucket seats came standard, while a 45/55 split bench seat was available as an option on the SE sedan only. Few changes occurred this year, except that traction control now was available with the supercharged engine. Airbags were "depowered" to deploy with reduced force. The tire-pressure monitor was dropped. Also on models equipped with 3.8L N/A powerplants (VIN K), the 4T65E 4 speed automatic transmission was used in favor of the 4T60E previously used. To add some excitement, Pontiac also launched a special pace car model. This model celebrated the 40th running of the Daytona 500 on February 15, 1998. The pace-car replicas had special Medium Gulf Blue Metallic paint, unique "Sparkle Silver" 16-inch torque star aluminum wheels, custom decaling, a plaque notating the specific model number and custom door panels. Also standard was a heads-up-display that projected the speed onto the windshield. 1,500 were produced, with 200 of the 1,500 getting sunroofs. Detail changes marked the '99 editions of Pontiac's midsize coupe and sedan. New wheel choices were the main visual change this year. The non-supercharged 3800 Series V6 engine gained five horsepower. This was also the last year that the SE model had the optional non-supercharged 3800 V6. GT models got a standard rear spoiler this year. The coolant overflow reservoir was relocated from being in front of the intake box to being mounted to the passenger strut tower. Available  alloy wheels came in a new 5-spoke design. The one new option was a Bose 8-speaker audio system. The standard 3.1&nbsp;L V6, installed in SE models, gained 15 horsepower (now 175). New standard equipment included rear child-seat anchors and an anti-theft system that disabled the starter unless the proper ignition key was used. Pontiac also launched a Daytona 500 pace-car replica, with silver paint, unique  aluminum wheels, functional hood vents, a NASCAR-inspired decklid spoiler, polished quad exhaust tips, and Daytona decals. Only 2,000 were planned. OnStar, formerly unavailable on the Grand Prix, was made standard on GTP, optional only on GT. The SE got revised frontal styling in the form of the GT and GTP front bumper cover in place of the older SE-specific front fascia, standard rear spoiler, and in-trunk emergency release; manual dual-zone climate-control replaced the optional electronic automatic unit previously offered. A Special Edition Package was added this year that could be applied to the GT and GTP models. This package adds the NASCAR-inspired rear spoiler and roof fences, hood-mounted heat extractors, and polished dual-outlet exhaust tips previously offered on the 2000 Pace Car Replica and also adds a two tone interior, 15-spoke chrome wheels, and the requisite badging. New for 2002 was a $2,695 40th Anniversary option package which included the NASCAR-inspired rear spoiler and roof fences, polished dual-outlet exhaust tips, hood with heat extractors, and 15-spoke chrome wheels previously offered with the 2001 Special Edition package. Unique elements such as the Dark Cherry Metallic paint, 40th Anniversary badges, and Ruby Red and Graphite interior trim with the 40th Anniversary logo embroidered on the front seats and floormats differentiated this option package from the previous year's offering. One 40th Anniversary Sedan was further customized with a lowering package, different wheels, and exhaust for SEMA and featured in Hot Rod Magazine as the GP40. The lowering package, provided by GM Accessories, consisted of new front and rear adjustable springs, adjustable front and rear dampers and  Z-rated tires mounted on forged aluminum wheels. GM Accessories also provided performance brake pads, drilled and slotted brake rotors (front and rear), a cat-back exhaust system, and a low-restriction air filter. The SE gained standard cruise control and dual-zone climate control, and GTs got a standard power driver's seat and CD player. This was the last year of the two-door coupe. The SE model can be identified by a single exhaust pipe and different rear bumper cover. OnStar now an option on GTP. The last Coupe rolled off the assembly line on July 19, 2002. Pontiac dropped the coupe version (2-door) for 2003 and made anti-lock brakes and traction control optional instead of standard on most of the remaining sedans. The Limited Edition option package was offered for GT and GTP models made this year. This option package consisted of unique blue-tinted glass fog light lenses, "Limited Edition" badging, carbon fiber instrument cluster, two-tone cloth/leather interior, and a raised spoiler resembling the original GT/GTP/SE spoiler set atop three aerodynamic pillars.  The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) gives the 1997–2003 Grand Prix an Acceptable overall score for their frontal impact test. In March 2008, GM announced a recall all 1997–2003 Grand Prix GTP models (as well as sister car Buick Regal GS) due to a problem that causes fires in the engine compartment. Over 230 fires were reported. This recall affected over 200,000 vehicles equipped with the supercharged 3800 Series II engine. GM sent a letter to the owners of these vehicles on March 13, 2008, instructing them not to park in garages or carports until the problem was resolved. The recall for the Supercharged engine involved changing the left (front) valve cover gasket, as oil leaks onto the exhaust manifold may cause engine fires. Some believed this recall did not fix the fire problem, and instead the problem is likely faulty fuel rail quick disconnect o-rings. There have been reports of fires happening after the recall has been performed. In April 2009, the recall already posted for the Supercharged iterations of the 3800 Series II was expanded to cover all 3800 Series II engine-equipped vehicles after many fires were reported with Grand Prix GT and 3.8&nbsp;L equipped SE versions, as well as the sister car Buick Regal LS. The recall for the non-supercharged V6 was to remove the front spark plug retainer and a valve cover gasket is not changed on non-supercharged 3.8 engines. The recall covered nearly 1.5 million vehicles. In October 2015, GM announced a third recall for the 3800 V6 engines (RPO L26, L32, L36, and L67). This recall covers nearly 1.4 million vehicles including the 1997-2004 Pontiac Grand Prix. As of October 27, 2015, there is no remedy for this recall.  As of May 2008, Grand Prixs from the model years of 01-03 that were outfitted with OnStar cannot be activated due to outdated technology. OnStar's wireless services are provided by Verizon Wireless, which switched fully to digital cellular communications. Grand Prixs of model years 2001 to 2002 have OnStar systems that are Analog cellular capable only. Some 2003 models may have had modules that could be upgraded to digital-ready.   The Grand Prix was updated for 2004 on a revised version of the GM W platform and was unveiled at the 2002 Chicago International Auto Show on February 7, 2002 as the Grand Prix G-Force Concept. The series production version was unveiled at the Los Angeles International Auto Show on January 3, 2003. The Grand Prix came in four different option groups; GT1, GT2, GTP, and GTP Comp-G ("Competition Group").http://www.chicagoautoshow.com/concepts/vehicle/2002/pontiac/g-force/ The GT1 and fancier GT2 have the Series III 3800 V6 engine, putting out 200&nbsp;hp (150&nbsp;kW) and 230&nbsp;lb·ft (310 Nm) of torque, while both GTPs have the supercharged (Eaton Gen 5 Supercharger) 3800 Series III V6 engine with 260&nbsp;hp (195&nbsp;kW) and 280&nbsp;lb·ft (380 Nm) of torque. A Competition Group (Comp-G) package was available for the GTP that included red painted brake calipers (same brakes as the 'standard' GTP), sport tuned suspension, heads-up display (also in GT2 model), 4-speed automatic transmission with paddle-style TAPShift, StabiliTrak dynamic control system, 3.29 axle ratio, performance tires and Magnasteer II. Also, a 10-spoke light weight wheel was standard with the Comp-G package but could be 'upgraded' to the GTP optional wheel. The newly redesigned model mostly received positive reviews from critics regarding its distinctive styling, performance, and reliability. Commencing with this generation, the 2-door coupe version of the Grand Prix was no longer an available body style. The timing of the disappearance of the Grand Prix coupe coincided with GM's reintroduction of the 2-door Pontiac GTO. The Grand Prix came with a head-up display. A 2004 Pontiac Grand Prix GT2 "Special Edition" was also offered in very limited supply, this model included special chrome spoke wheels, heated leather seats, the Monsoon sound system, and the heads-up display.  This Special Edition has the Pontiac SE name badging on the side of the car just behind the front wheels. The Grand Prix remained basically unchanged from 2004. With the Base sedan, GT, GTP, and the new GXP. The base model and GT had the naturally aspirated 3.8&nbsp;L V6, with the GTP having the 3.8&nbsp;L V6 with supercharger. The Comp-G package was still available for the GTP with an added door emblem denoting the Comp-G package.  When the GXP debuted later in the 2005 model year, the Competition Group was dropped, but several features were retained in a Sport package available on the GTP for the rest of that model year. The GXP powerplant is the LS4 V8, a 5.3&nbsp;L Displacement on Demand (active fuel management) engine based on the LS1 block. Output of this version is 303&nbsp;hp (226&nbsp;kW)/323&nbsp;lb·ft (438 N·m). It has a shortened crankshaft, and a host of other modifications to make it fit into a front-wheel-drive vehicle. The GXP also has a 4-speed automatic transmission with paddle-style TAPshift, heads-up display, vented cross drilled brakes with PBR calipers, performance tuned suspension with Bilstein gas-charged struts (sits about  lower than other GP models), Magnasteer II, and StabiliTrak dynamic control system. Also, the DIC will display G-Force (maximum achieved for lateral, acceleration, and deceleration) information when the car is not moving.  Cosmetically, the GXP differs from the other models with more aggressive bodywork including a different front clip, wheel well cooling vents on the front fenders, a different rear bumper, and twin-dual polished exhaust. The Grand Prix GXP also offers a unique feature of the different-width  polished Alcoa Forged aluminum wheels. The front wheels are  wide, and the rear wheels are  wide. For 2006, a "Special Edition" body package was added which came with a same colored grille, new front and rear "diffuser" type bumpers, lower side skirts, and wheels. The three options are the Grand Prix, powered by the 3800 Series III V6, the GT, now powered by the 3800 Series III Supercharged V6, and the GXP, powered by the LS4 V8. The GTP designation was discontinued from the Grand Prix line and applied as the top trim of the G6. All General Motors 3.8&nbsp;L Buick V6 powered cars become the first SULEV compliant vehicles. That model year gave it the car's final update by adding GM badges near the front doors until the Grand Prix was pulled from Pontiac's lineup after 2008. For the 2007 model year the model remained Base, GT, and GXP. Also, the active displacement management capability on the 5.3&nbsp;L V8 (GXP) was renamed to "Active Fuel Management" from "Displacement on Demand", while the GXP trim includes a  V8 engine with a firmer suspension, performance tires, heated leather seats, a heads-up display, and  wheels. 2008 was the Pontiac Grand Prix's last year. For 2008, Pontiac did not offer the GT trim, but continued to offer both a base and GXP trim. The base trim is offered with a  V6 engine and  wheels. Several new colors were also added for the 2008 model year.  The last Pontiac Grand Prix rolled off the assembly line on April 24, 2008 The Pontiac Grand Prix was replaced by the G8 for the 2008–2009 model year. Production of the G8, however, ended in June 2009. The Pontiac brand was dissolved in 2010 as part of GM's Chapter 11 reorganization. The IIHS gives the Grand Prix a Good overall score in the frontal impact test and a "Marginal" overall score for models equipped with side curtain airbags in the side impact test. 2006 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Crash Test Ratings:     Frontal Driver:  Frontal Passenger:  Side Driver:  Side Rear Passenger:  Rollover: 
