     Public holidays, as it is known in the United States of America, are largely controlled by private sector employers who employ approximately 62% of the total U.S. population who are given paid time off. A typical work week is generally 40 hours a week with a Saturday-Sunday weekend. Public holidays with paid time off is generally defined to occur on a day that is within the employee's work week. When a holiday occurs on Saturday or Sunday, that holiday is shifted to either Friday or Monday. Most employers follow a holiday schedule similar to the federal holidays of the United States, with exceptions or additions. The federal holiday schedule mainly benefits employees of government and government regulated businesses. However, this sector only comprises 15% of the working population. At the discretion of the employer, other non-federal holidays such as Christmas Eve and the Day after Thanksgiving are common additions to the list of paid holidays while Columbus Day and Veterans Day are common omissions. Besides paid holidays are festival and food holidays that also have wide acceptance based on sales of goods and services that are typically associated with that holiday. Halloween and Valentine's Day are such examples of widely celebrated uncompensated holidays. With the exception of blue law holidays such as Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Easter, most other holidays observed are not mandated by any government, whether it be at the federal, state, or local levels. Public holidays had their origins from established federal holidays that were enacted by Congress. They were typically observed on days that have significance for various sectors of American society and are observed at all levels of society including government, the private sector, and are typically derived from the history, religion and the cultures of the U.S. demographics and have changed over time. Observances of holidays are most commonly observed with paid time off, however, many holiday celebrations are done with festivities without time off. Some are observed with community work depending on the meaning of the holiday. They are however not mandated by any government, agencies, whether it be federal, state, or local governments. There are no national holidays on which all businesses are closed by law. Federal holidays are only established for certain federally chartered and regulated businesses (such as federal banks), and for Washington, D.C. All other public holidays are created by the States; most states also allow local jurisdictions (cities, villages, etc.) to establish their own local holidays. As a result, holidays have not historically been governed at the federal level and federal law does not govern business opening. Some states restrict some business activities on some holidays.Massachusetts, for example, forbids most retailers from opening on Thanksgiving and Christmas: Attorney General's Office, "Sunday and Holiday Openings" [ ] Some holidays are mandated in some states for certain kinds of businesses by the Blue Laws. For example, some businesses cannot open on Thanksgiving Day in some New England states if the businesses operated on more than 5000 square feet of space. The most notable businesses to close on such occasions are car dealerships and establishments selling alcohol. , there are eleven federal holidays in the United States, ten annual holidays and one quadrennial holiday (Inauguration Day). Pursuant to the Uniform Monday Holiday Act of 1968 (effective 1971), official holidays are observed on a Monday, except for New Year's Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.Uniform Monday Holiday Act  While all current federal holidays have also been made public holidays in all 50 states for federal organizations, each state is not bound to observe the holidays on the same dates as the federal holidays. Many states also have additional holidays that are not observed by the U.S. federal government. Many businesses likewise observe certain holidays as well, which are also not mandated by any government agency. A list of "recommended diversity holidays" recognizes many cultures that range from Christianity to Islam, as well as racial diversity where various ethnic holidays such as St. Patrick's Day, Kwanzaa, Diwali, Mardi Gras, and Cinco de Mayo are celebrated by individuals in the workplace, as a matter of best practice. In light of recent race issues in the United States, many municipalities both at the city and state levels have begun celebrating Malcolm X Day and Rosa Parks Day in addition to Martin Luther King, Jr. Day to embrace the mostly disenfranchised African American community in the form of festivals and parades if not done as a legal public holiday. Illinois and Berkley, California are two places where Malcolm X is honored with a legal holiday with offices closed whereas Missouri honored Rosa Parks on her birthday. Today, the United States is the 85th most ethnically diverse in the world. While the popularity of each public holiday cannot easily be measured, the holiday with the highest greeting card sales is Christmas. Major retail establishments such as malls, shopping centers and most retail stores close only on Thanksgiving and Christmas and some on Easter Sunday as well, but remain open on all other holidays (early closing on Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, and sometimes on other major holidays). Virtually all companies observe and close on the major holidays (New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas). Some non-retail business close on the day after Thanksgiving, while some (such as federal banks and post offices) are not allowed to close on the day after Thanksgiving. Some smaller businesses normally open on Sunday will close on Easter Sunday, if it is their experience they will have very few customers that day.    The holidays most marketed and celebrated is evidenced by displays seen in retail stores and on the media. Some of these holidays are also known as Hallmark holidays based on the sales of greeting cards, candy, or gifts in general. These holidays are not necessarily celebrated with paid time off, but with festivals in the form of parties and food. The following list shows the 10 most celebrated holidays based on food, greeting card, and festivals.   The labor force in the United States comprises about 62% (as of 2014) of the general population. In the United States, 97% of the private sector businesses determine what days this sector of the population gets paid time off, according to a study by the Society for Human Resource Management. The following holidays are observed by the majority of the U.S. businesses with paid time off:   This list of holidays is based off the official list of Federal Holidays by Year from the U.S. Government. The holidays however are at the discretion of employers whose statistics are measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Another list from the Society for Human Resource Management shows actual percentages of employers offering paid time off for each holiday. The term "major holiday" (bolded) coincides for those holidays that 90% or more of employers offered paid time off. * List of Federal Holidays by Year from the U.S. Government (see Office of Personnel Management) ** Additional holidays referenced by the Society for Human Resource Management: Good Friday 26%, Easter Monday 6%, Yom Kippur 7%, Day before Thanksgiving 3-8%, Day after Thanksgiving 69-75%, Day before Christmas Eve 33%, Christmas Eve 78-79%, Day after Christmas 40-64%, Day before New Years Eve 25-71% depending if it falls on a weekend, New Years Eve 71%, Passover 3%, Hanukkah 1%, Ramadan 1%, Ash Wednesday 1%, Diwali 1%, Eid al-Adha 1%, Vietnamese New Year   This sector of the population is entitled to paid time off designated as Federal holidays by Congress in Title V of the United States Code (). Both federal and state government employees generally observe the same federal holidays. U.S. banks generally observe the federal holidays because of their reliance on the U.S. Federal Reserve for certain activities such as wire transfers and Automated Clearing House (ACH) transactions. For example, JP Morgan Chase observes all federal holidays except Columbus Day, while U.S. Bank observes all of them. The New York Stock Exchange also closely follows the federal holidays except for Columbus Day. However, the agency also has extra holidays on the day before Independence Day and Good Friday.   Not to be confused with tax holidays In general, most state governments follow those of the federal government. However, while that is true for most states, every state includes and omits holidays to fit the culture relevant to its population. See also: State of Alabama Legal Holidays See also: Perry County, Alabama Calendar See also: Alaska State Holidays See also:Arizona State Holidays See also: Arkansas State Holidays See also: California Department of Human Resources - State Holidays The U.S. state of California has separate definitions of "state holidays" which are different from "legal holidays". See also: California Education Code 37220-37223 See also: California Legal Holidays California's "legal holidays" are defined by the California Employment Development Department. These are "legal holidays" that do not necessarily correspond to California's state holidays. EDD offices generally remain open on the days not designated as a state holiday. See also: City of Berkeley: Holiday and Reduced Service Days Schedule See also: San Francisco City and County Holidays See also: West Hollywood City Holidays See also: Colorado State Holidays See also: Connecticut Department of Administrative Services State Holidays See also State of Delaware - State Holidays See also: District of Columbia Department of Human Resources Holidays See also: Florida State Holidays Chapter 110 Section 117 Florida's laws separately defines "paid holidays" versus "legal holidays", which does not have any obligation to include as "paid holidays".  See also: Florida Legal Holidays Chapter 683 Section 1 Florida's laws separate the definitions between paid versus legal holidays. The following list shows only the legal holidays that were not defined as "paid holidays": See also: Florida Circuit Court Holidays See also: Miami-Dade Government Holidays See also: Georgia State Holidays   See also: Hawaii State Government Holidays See also: Idaho State Holidays See also: Illinois Department of Central Management Services State Holidays See also: Chicago City Holidays See also: Indiana State Personnel State Holidays See also: Iowa Department of Administrative Services See also: State of Kansas Employee Service Center See also: State Holidays Kentucky Personnel Cabinet See also: Louisiana State Holidays See also: Louisiana Court Holidays See also: Maine Public Holidays See also: Maryland State Employee Holidays See also: Massachusetts Legal Holidays See also: Michigan State Holidays See also: Minnesota Court Holidays See also: Mississippi State Holidays See also: Missouri State Holidays See also: Montana State Holidays See also: Nebraska Health and Human Services State Holidays See also: Nevada State Holidays See also: New Hampshire State Holidays   See also : New Jersey State Holidays See also: New Mexico State Holidays   See also: New York State Holidays See also: North Carolina Human Resources State Employee Holidays - December 23,24,25,26 - Day before Christmas Eve, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, and Day after Christmas (adjusted if any falls on the weekend) See also: North Dakota State Holidays See also: Ohio State EmployerHolidays See also: Ohio Law Chapter 5 See also: Oklahoma State Holidays See also: Oregon Legal Holidays See also: Pennsylvania State Holidays   See also: Rhode Island State Holidays See also: South Carolina Holiday Leave See also: Schedule of Office Closures for State-recognized holidays See also: Tennessee State Holidays See also: Official Texas State Holidays Texas law designates that the state businesses be "partially staffed" on the following holidays. These holidays can be replaced with an optional holiday per the state employee's choice, but will give up one of these in lieu of the optional holiday. Texas law allows a state employee to replace a partial staffing holiday with one of the following holidays. On these holidays, the state agency is generally required to stay open with minimum staff.   See also: Utah State Holidays See also: Vermont State Holidays See also: Virginia State Holidays See also: Washington State Holidays See also: West Virginia State Holidays See also: State of Wisconsin Legal Holidays See also: Wisconsin Public School Observance Days Wisconsin's public schools are obligated to observe the 21 days designated by Wisconsin Statute section 118.02 on the designated day unless the day falls on Saturday or Sunday, in which case would move the observance to either the preceding Friday or following Monday. The statutes require the public schools to include instruction relating to the holidays. In this list of holidays, all schools remain open. See also: Wyoming State Holidays  Blue laws in the United States vary by state. Blue laws are laws designed to enforce religious standards. Many states prohibit selling alcoholic beverages for on- and off-premises sales in one form or another on Sundays at some restricted time. Blue laws may also prohibit retail activity on days other than Sunday. Most notably, this affects businesses on Thanksgiving and Christmas where some businesses legally cannot open. While most federal holidays are observed at the state level, some of these holidays are observed with different names, are observed on different days, or completely not observed in some states of the United States.  a. For example, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day is known officially as Martin Luther King, Jr./Civil Rights Day in Arizona, and New Hampshire, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert E. Lee's Birthdays in Arkansas, Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in Florida, and Maryland, Martin Luther King Jr. / Idaho Human Rights Day in Idaho, and Martin Luther King's and Robert E. Lee's Birthdays in Mississippi.  b. Washington's Birthday is known officially as President's Day in Alaska, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Maryland, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Tennessee, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming, Washington-Lincoln Day in Colorado (CRS 24-11-101), Ohio, Lincoln/Washington/Presidents' Day in Arizona, George Washington's Birthday and Daisy Gatson Bates Day in Arkansas, Presidents' Day in Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Vermont, Washington's Birthday/President's Day in Maine, Presidents Day in Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Jersey, and Oregon, Lincoln's and Washington's Birthday in Montana, Washington and Lincoln Day in Utah, and George Washington Day in Virginia.  The day after Thanksgiving is observed in lieu of Columbus Day in Minnesota.  Columbus Day is listed as a state holiday in New Hampshire although state offices remain open.  President's Day, Good Friday (11am-3pm), Juneteenth Day (June 19), Columbus Day, Veteran's Day, Partisan Primary Election Day, and General Election Day are listed as a state holiday in Wisconsin although state offices remain open.   The religious and cultural holidays in the United States is characterized by a diversity of religious beliefs and practices. However, the First Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ...." and Article VI specifies that "no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States." As a result, various religious faiths have flourished, as well as perished, in the United States. A majority of Americans report that religion plays a "very important" role in their lives, a proportion unique among developed nations. The majority of Americans (73–80%) identify themselves as Christians and about 15–20% have no religious affiliation. According to the American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS) (2008) 76% of the American adult population identified themselves as Christians, with 51% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant or unaffiliated, and 25% professing Catholic beliefs. The same survey says that other religions (including, for example, Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively make up about 4% of the adult population, another 15% of the adult population claim no religious affiliation, and 5.2% said they did not know, or they refused to reply. According to a 2012 survey by the Pew forum, 36 percent of Americans state that they attend services nearly every week or more.   According to the National Institute of Health, about 86% of the U.S. population drinks alcohol recreationally or socially. In the United States, the holidays that are considered the most "festive" are generally regarded as some of the "most drunken holidays." Celebrations usually revolve around barbecues and beer. Although many of these holiday lack any official status, these holidays are generally observed by the drinking culture for the fact that these holidays revolve around drinking. One measurement of the popularity of these holidays can be measured by the amount of alcohol purchased for the occasion. One particular survey names New Years Eve as the holiday for which the most alcohol is consumed based on sales. While many holidays are listed, some are generally notable for their drinking requirement while others are known for abstinence.   African Americans make up about 12% of the U.S. population. While some customs have come from abroad, many of the customs were developed inside the United States. Kwanzaa, for example, is a custom has greatly influenced American culture originating from the "turbulent 60's" when race relations in the United States was at its lowest. Most of the newer holidays revolve around a particular civil rights activist and have recently gained attention from city and state level governments. At the federal level, only Martin Luther King, Jr. was honored.    With 73% of the U.S. population identifying themselves as Christian, many holidays from the liturgical calendar are observed by this segment of the population. With 94% of businesses including federal, state, and local governments closing on Christmas, arguably the most significant holiday of the Christian religion, and with the blue laws in the United States legally binding in some states, many stores are also closed on Christmas, but with a relatively small exception. For example, convenience stores operating on less than 5,000 square feet of space such as 7-Eleven and CVS Pharmacy can remain open. A reference in A Christmas Story shows a Chinese restaurant being the only establishment open on Christmas. Some private businesses and certain other institutions are closed on Good Friday. The financial market and stock market is closed on Good Friday. Most retail stores remain open although some might close early. Public schools and most universities are closed on Good Friday, either as a holiday of its own, or part of spring break. The postal service operates, and banks regulated by the federal government do not close for Good Friday. Many companies, including banks, malls, shopping centers and most private retail stores that normally open on Sundays are closed on Easter.   According to some sources, the Hindu holidays of Diwali and Holi are commonly celebrated as a "mainstream" holiday throughout the United States, not only by Indian Americans or peoples of Indian descent. Many firms that hire a people from India will even go as far as observing the holidays with a celebration within the company or even approving it as a paid day off. Holi, the "festival of colors" has inspired a Broadway musical based on this festival. New York City Council has voted on a resolution that may make Diwali and Holi a legal holiday in Resolution 1863-2013. As of August 2013, the resolution has passed and the holidays are now officially legal holidays in New York City. CNN reported that the Diwali holiday is shown in American pop culture through an episode of The Office.   According to various sources, the three most commonly celebrated Jewish holidays are Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur and Hanukkah. Passover and Yom Kippur in addition to Rosh Hashannah and Hanukkah are recognized as an optional state level holiday in the U.S. state of Texas All Jewish holidays start the night before, as that is when the Jewish day begins.   According to various sources, the major holidays of Ramadan, Eid al-Fitr, and Eid al-Adha have been recognized in the United States. Awareness of these holidays can be found in calendars published by major calendar manufacturers. According to Al-Jazeera, schools in the U.S. states of New York and Michigan (mainly Dearborn) may begin to close in observance of all Muslim holidays.  In addition to the federal/national holidays, many religious, ethnic, and other traditional holidays populate the calendar, as well as observances proclaimed by officials and lighter celebrations. These are rarely observed by businesses as holidays (Except for Easter and most often also on Good Friday); indeed, many are viewed as opportunities for commercial promotion. Because of this commercialization, some critics apply the deprecatory term Hallmark holiday to such days, after the Hallmark greeting card company.     Rank !! Holiday !! Percentage of Americans celebrating !! Sales in billions !! Music symbolic of holiday !! Remarks 1 Christmas 90-95% $630.5 We Wish You A Merry Christmas Christmas celebrations are evidenced by decorations which give off light and exchanging of gifts between family members and friends. Most popular based on greeting card sales. About 6.5 billion cards per year or $8 billion annual sales. Also known for having the second highest church attendance. Major symbols of this holiday are the Christmas tree and Christmas music. 2 Halloween 93.7% $6.9 Monster Mash Halloween celebrations are evidenced by children knocking door to door asking for treats, and costumed adolescents playing tricks on various households. Most popular based on candy sales, amounting to $2.6 billion in 2015. Sales of $6.9 billion in 2015 includes candy, costumes, and pumpkin sales, all of which are directly attributed to this holiday. 3 Thanksgiving 87% (part of Christmas sales) Christmas songs One sixth of all turkeys eaten annually happens around Thanksgiving. Holiday accounts for 46 million turkeys, compared with 22 million consumed on Christmas and 19 million on Easter. Reduced turkey prices usually occur around Thanksgiving. 4 Independence Day 79% $68.0(Part of Back to School sales) Yankee Doodle Holiday is best known for fireworks and barbecues. 45% of American celebrate the 4th of July with fireworks, accounting for about $675 million in fireworks sales. 71% of American celebrate the Fourth with barbecues making it the number one holiday for barbecuing, beating out Memorial Day at 57% and Labor Day at 55%. 5 Easter 80% $16.4 Highest church attendance happens on Easter. 6 New Year's Day 72% (Part of Christmas sales) Auld Lang Syne Known for being the most drunk holiday. This is evidenced by the spike in sales around "the holidays", which usually happens between Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve. 7 Mother's Day 84.2% $19.9 Known for having the strongest restaurant sales, even compared with Valentine's Day. It is also known for high church attendance after Easter and Christmas. 8 Valentine's Day 85% $18.9 Holiday accounts for 73% of annual flower sales. Holiday comes in second in terms of annual restaurant sales. 9 Father's Day 75.4% $12.7 Holiday accounts for the highest sales of ties and neck wear annually, around $12.7 billion. 10 Super Bowl Sunday 75.8% $14.3 Americans eat about 1.25 billion chicken wings annually during Super Bowl Sunday. Date !! *Official Name !! Percentage of Americans celebrating !! **Percentage of businesses offering paid time off !! Remarks January 1 (Fixed) New Year's Day 72% 96% Celebrates beginning of the Gregorian calendar year. Festivities include counting down to 12:00 midnight on the preceding night, New Year's Eve, often with fireworks display and party. The ball drop at Times Square in New York City has become a national New Year's festivity. Traditional end of Christmas and holiday season. Third Monday in January Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. 26% 34-38% Honors Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Civil Rights leader, who was actually born on January 15, 1929; combined with other holidays in several states. Some cities and municipalities hold parades; and more recently, the 1994 King Holiday and Service Act, which was passed to encourage Americans to transform the King Holiday into a day of citizen action volunteer service, has gained in popularity (sometimes referred to as a National Day of Service). January 20 Inauguration Day N/A 0% Celebrates the United States presidential inauguration, every 4 years. While this is a federal holiday, this is not a "public holiday". Only Washington, D.C.. observes this day besides the federal government. Third Monday in February Presidents' Day 52% 34-35% Washington's Birthday was first declared a federal holiday by an 1879 act of Congress. The Uniform Holidays Act, 1968, shifted the date of the commemoration of Washington's Birthday from February 22 to the third Monday in February (between February 15 and 21, meaning the observed holiday never falls on Washington's actual birthday). Because of this, combined with the fact that President Lincoln's birthday falls on February 12, many people now refer to this holiday as "Presidents' Day" and consider it a day honoring all American presidents. However, neither the Uniform Holidays Act nor any subsequent law changed the name of the holiday from Washington's Birthday to Presidents' Day. Last Monday in May Memorial Day 21% 95% Honors the nation's war dead from the Civil War onwards; marks the unofficial beginning of the summer season. (traditionally May 30, shifted by the Uniform Holidays Act 1968) July 4 (Fixed) Independence Day 79% 97% Celebrates the signing of the Declaration of Independence from British rule, also called the Fourth of July or simply "The Fourth". Fireworks celebration are held in many cities throughout the nation. Boston, Massachusetts is famous for its "Boston Pops Fireworks Spectacular" with music and fireworks First Monday in September Labor Day 53% 95% Celebrates the achievements of workers and the labor movement; marks the unofficial end of the summer season. Second Monday in October Columbus Day 8% 13-16% Honors Christopher Columbus, the first European to land in mainland Americas after Leif Erikson. November 11 (Fixed) Veterans Day 43% 16-21% Honors all veterans of the United States armed forces. It is observed on November 11 to recall the end of World War I on that date in 1918 (major hostilities of World War I were formally ended at the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month of 1918 when the Armistice with Germany went into effect). Fourth Thursday in November Thanksgiving Day 87% 97% Traditionally celebrates the giving of thanks for the autumn harvest. Traditionally includes the sharing of a turkey dinner. December 25 (Fixed) Christmas 90%–95% 94% The most widely celebrated holiday of the Christian year, Christmas is observed as a commemoration of the birth of Jesus of Nazareth. Holiday !! Number of U.S. states observed with government offices closed !! Remarks New Year's DayMemorial DayIndependence DayLabor DayVeterans DayThanksgiving DayChristmas Day 50 These holidays are unanimously observed by the state governments of all 50 states. Martin Luther King Jr. Day 45 Signed into law in 1983, but was not observed by all states until 2000, with Utah officially observing as a paid state holiday. Wyoming was the first state to observe in 1990. Five states observe this day do not observe this day with the exact name, using alternate name "Civil Rights Day" or holiday is combined to also honor Robert E. Lee. Presidents' Day 38 Alternatively observed separately as George Washington's or Lincoln's Birthday. Columbus Day 23 Fewer than half the states recognize Columbus Day. Day after Thanksgiving 18 Observed by Delaware, Florida, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia. Good Friday 12 Observed by Connecticut, Delaware, Guam, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota, Puerto Rico, and Tennessee. Election Day 10 Observed by Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Montana, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island Lincoln's Birthday 5 Observed by Connecticut, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey, and New York Day after Christmas 5 Observed by Kentucky, Michigan, North Carolina, South Carolina, and the US Virgin Islands. Confederate Memorial Day 4 Observed by Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and South Carolina Inauguration Day 1 Observed by Washington, D.C.. Date !! Name !! Remarks 1st Sunday in February Super Bowl Sunday Usually served at a private party while watching the Super Bowl. 1st Tuesday in February Mardi Gras Any alcohol. March 17 St. Patrick's Day usually celebrated with green beer. 1st week of April Opening Day Ale or lager. May 5 Cinco de Mayo Usually celebrated with a Mexican alcohol like tequila or Margarita July 4 Independence Day Typically served while eating hot dogs and Hamburgers. 1st week in October Oktoberfest Usually German beer October 31 Halloween Usually served at Halloween parties. December 31 New Years Eve Traditionally with champagne and is considered the "most drunk" of all American holidays. More alcohol is consumed on this holiday than any other day. Date !! Name!! Remarks Dec. 26toJan. 1 Kwanzaa Kwanzaa is a week-long celebration held in the United States and in other nations of the Western African diaspora in the Americas. The celebration honors African heritage in African-American culture, and is observed from December 26 to January 1, culminating in a feast and gift-giving. Kwanzaa has seven core principles (Nguzo Saba). It was created by Maulana Karenga, and was first celebrated in 1966–67. Third Monday of January Martin Luther King, Jr. Day Martin Luther King, Jr. Day is the only American federal holiday marking the birthday of an African American. It is observed on the third Monday of January each year, which is around King's birthday, January 15. February Black History Month Also known as the "African American History Month" which was set aside as an observance of important leaders of the African diaspora. Feb. 4orDec. 1 Rosa Parks Day Currently observed in the states of California, Missouri, and Ohio to honor the late civil rights leader Rosa Parks. Rosa Parks Day was created by the California State Legislature and first celebrated February 4, 2000. The holiday was first designated in the U.S. state of Ohio championed by Joyce Beatty, advocate who helped Ohio's legislation pass to honor the late leader. In 2015, Missouri has declared Rosa Parks Day a legal holiday. April 16 (DC) Emancipation Day Currently observed in Washington, D.C., Mississippi, Texas (as Juneteenth), Kentucky, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, in observance of the emancipation of slaves of African descent. It is also observed in other areas in regard to the abolition of serfdom or other forms of servitude. May 19 Malcolm X Day Currently observed in Berkley, California, and Illinois, this holiday honors Malcolm X as a civil rights leader as a legal holiday with offices closed. Various municipalities such as Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. have festivals commemorating the civil rights leader. June 19 Juneteenth Juneteenth is a holiday that commemorates the announcement of the abolition of slavery in Texas in June 1865, and more generally the emancipation of African-American slaves throughout the Confederate South. Celebrated on June 19, the term is a portmanteau of June and nineteenth and is recognized as a state holiday or special day of observance in most states. 2nd Sunday in June African New Year Celebrated as the "Odunde Festival" as a one-day festival and mostly a street market catered to African-American interests and the African diaspora. It is derived from the tradition of the Yoruba people of Nigeria in celebration of the new year. It is centered at the intersection of Grays Ferry Avenue and South Street in the U.S. city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Date !! Name !! Remarks January 6 Epiphany Epiphany (from Greek epiphaneia, "manifestation"), falls on the 12th day after Christmas. It commemorates the manifestation of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, as represented by the Magi, the baptism of Jesus, and the miracle of the wine at the marriage feast at Cana. One of the three major Christian festivals, along with Christmas and Easter. Epiphany originally marked the beginning of the carnival season preceding Lent, and the evening preceding it is known as Twelfth Night. January 7 Orthodox Christmas January 7th is the Gregorian Calendar equivalent of December 25 on the Julian Calendar still observed by the Russian and other Eastern Orthodox Churches. February 14 Valentine's Day St. Valentine's Day, or simply Valentine's Day is named after one or more early Christian martyrs named Saint Valentine, and was established by Pope Gelasius I in 496 AD. Modern traditional celebration of love and romance, including the exchange of cards, candy, flowers, and other gifts. February or March, date varies Mardi Gras and Ash Wednesday A festive season (Carnival) leading up to Shrove Tuesday or Mardi Gras. Closes with Ash Wednesday (40 days before Easter, not counting Sundays), which starts the penitential season of Lent in the Western Christian calendar. March 17 St. Patrick's Day A holiday honoring Saint Patrick that celebrates Irish culture. Primary activity is simply the wearing of green clothing ("wearing o' the green"), although drinking beer dyed green is also popular. Big parades in some cities, such as in Chicago, where there is also a tradition of dyeing the Chicago River green. Sunday before Easter Palm Sunday Celebration to commemorate the entry of Jesus into Jerusalem. The Friday before (western) Easter Good Friday Friday of Holy Week, when Western Christians commemorate the crucifixion and death of Jesus. Good Friday is a holiday in some individual counties and municipalities, as well as a state holiday in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky,[ ]  Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota, Tennessee and Texas. State and local government offices and courts are closed, as well as state-chartered banks and in these jurisdictions. Federal banks and post offices that are located in buildings that close for Good Friday and Easter will also be closed. Good Friday is also a holiday in U.S. territories of Guam, U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Many public and private schools, colleges, universities and private-sector businesses; and the New York Stock Exchange and financial markets are closed on Good Friday. Sunday following the Paschal Full Moon, date varies from March 22 to April 25, inclusive (see Computus), Easter Celebration of the resurrection of Jesus in most Western Christian churches. A minority of Protestant churches do not observe Easter. Eastern Orthodox (including Western Rite), Oriental Orthodox and some Neo-Celtic churches observe Easter according to a different calendar, usually on a later Sunday (thus they also observe Palm Sunday and Good Friday on different days than Western Christians). Many Americans decorate hard-boiled eggs and give baskets of candy, fruit, toys and so on, especially to children; but gifts of age-appropriate Easter baskets for the elderly, the infirm and the needy are increasingly popular. An annual Easter Egg Roll has been held at the White House South Lawn for young children on Easter Monday since President Hayes started the tradition in 1878.http://www.whitehouse.gov/eastereggroll Not a federal holiday due to the fact that it always falls on a Sunday, which is a non-working day for federal and state employees. Many companies that are normally open on Sunday close for Easter. October 31 Halloween Originally the end of the Celtic year, it now celebrates Eve of All Saint's Day. Decorations include jack o'lanterns. Costume parties and candy such as candy corn are also part of the holiday. Kids go "trick-or-treating" to neighbors who give away candy. It is not generally observed by businesses, and is one of the most popular holidays in the U.S. December 8 Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Immaculate Conception is a dogma of the Catholic Church maintaining that the Virgin Mary was kept free of original sin from her moment of conception. Companies in some states will give day off to their employees. December 24 Christmas Eve Day before Christmas. Virtually every business closes early, though a few remain open 24 hours. December 25 Christmas Christmas celebrates the birth of Jesus Christ. It is a Federal Holiday. Date !! Name !! Remarks February or March (depends on Hindu calendar) Holi Holi () () is a spring festival also known as Festival of Colors, and sometimes Festival of Love.Yudit Greenberg, Encyclopedia of Love in World Religions, Volume 1, ISBN 978-1851099801, page 212The New Oxford Dictionary of English (1998) ISBN 0-19-861263-X - p.874 "Holi /'həʊli:/ noun a Hindu spring festival ...". It is an ancient Hindu religious festival which has become popular with non-Hindus in many parts of South Asia, as well as people of other communities.Ebeling, Karin (2010), Holi, an Indian Festival, and its Reflection in English Media; Die Ordnung des Standard und die Differenzierung der Diskurse: Akten des 41. Linguistischen Kolloquiums in Mannheim 2006, 1, 107, ISBN 978-3631599174 October or November (depends on Hindu calendar) Diwali Diwali ( or ) also called the Festival of lights", is an ancient Hindu festival celebrated in autumn every year.The New Oxford Dictionary of English (1998) ISBN 0-19-861263-X - p.540 "Diwali /dɪwɑːli/ (also Divali) noun' a Hindu festival with lights...".Diwali Encyclopedia Britannica (2009) The festival spiritually signifies the victory of light over darkness, knowledge over ignorance, good over evil, and hope over despair.Jean Mead, How and why Do Hindus Celebrate Divali?, ISBN 978-0-237-534-127Diwali - Celebrating the triumph of goodness Hinduism Today (2012) The festival preparations and rituals typically extend over a five-day period, but the main festival night of Diwali coincides with the darkest, new moon night of the Hindu Lunisolar month Kartik. In the Gregorian calendar, Diwali night falls between mid-October and mid-November. Date !! Name !! Remarks Usually April (very rarely starts in March or ends in May) (depends on Hebrew Calendar) Passover פסח A seven- or eight-day festival in Judaism (seven days in Israel, eight outside of Israel), commemorating the Exodus of the Jews from Egypt. For Karaite Jews, Passover is the holiest day of the year and is the festival that marks the beginning of the year. Some Christian groups celebrate Passover instead of Easter. In many regions with large Jewish communities, schools close for all or part of Passover. In some regions with large Jewish populations, schools may close. May or Early June (depends on Hebrew Calendar) Shavuot שבעות A two-day (one in Israel) festival celebrating the receiving of the Torah, or bible, at Sinai. Many people have the custom to eat dairy foods, specifically cheesecake. September (depends on Hebrew calendar) Rosh Hashanah ראש השנה Observed by Jewish people. Traditional beginning of the Jewish High Holidays. It also celebrates the beginning of a new year on the Hebrew calendar. In regions with large Jewish populations, schools and universities may close on Rosh Hashanah. It is a widely accepted custom to dip an apple in honey on the first night. Unlike other holidays where the Diaspora (outside of Israel) celebrate extra days, this holiday is observed for two days everywhere. September or October (depends on Hebrew calendar) Yom Kippur יום כיפור Observed by Jewish people. This day marks the end of the Ten Days of Penitence that began with Rosh Hashanah. It is described in Leviticus as a "Sabbath of rest," and synagogue services begin the preceding sundown, resume the following morning, and continue to sundown. Orthodox and many Conservative Jews fast on Yom Kippur. In regions with large Jewish populations, schools and universities may close on Yom Kippur. October (depends on Hebrew calendar) Sukkot סוכות A nine-day (eight in Israel) holiday celebrating the huts Jews lived in for forty year after the Exodus before getting to Israel. It also celebrates the cloud of glory that protected the Jews in the desert during the same period. Jews eat, and some sleep, in a special hut called a sukkah outside their home for the first seven days. Also, the 'four species' or 'Arba Minim', ארבע מינים, the Lulav לולב or Palm Fran, the Etrog אתרוג or citron, the Aravot ערבות or willow branch, and the Hadasim הדסים, are shaken in the sukkah in the morning, as well as during prayers. The Seventh Day, known as Hoshanah Rabbah הושנה רבה is the last day of the season of repentance started on Rosh Hashanah, and has extra prayers in addition to the extra holiday prayers. The Eighth day is known as Shemini Atzeret שמיני עצרת and is to some degree considered a different holiday. The ninth day (or part of the eighth in Israel) is known as Simchat Torah שמחת תורה and celebrates he finishing of one cycle of reading the Torah or bible, and includes much joyous singing and dancing with the Torah scrolls during prayers. In many regions with large Jewish communities, schools close for all or part of Passover. December (very rarely starts in November or ends in January), (depending on Hebrew calendar) Hanukkah חנוכה An eight-day Jewish holiday commemorating the rededication of the Second Temple in Jerusalem at the time of the Maccabean Revolt of the 2nd century BC. Candelabras are lit, one candle on the first night and adding one candle per night. It is also a widely accepted custom to spin a top-like toy called a dreidel, and to give coins to the children. March (rarely at the end of February)(depends on the Hebrew calendar) Purim פורים A one-day holiday, celebrated the Jews being saved from a plot by Haman, the second-in-command to Persian king, Achasverosh, or Xerxes, to exterminate every single Jew. It is generally celebrated by reading the Book of Esther in Synagogue the preceding night (which, like all Jewish holidays, is actually part of the holiday) and in the morning, giving charity, giving presents of food baskets to at least two friends, and having a celebratory feast. Unlike most other Jewish holidays (other than Hannukah), work is allowed including using electricity, and other prohibited actions on Sabbath, and other holidays. The day before (or the Thursday before, if Purim is on a Sunday) is a fast day commemorating the fast of Esther before she met with King Achashverosh. In Jerusalem, Purim is celebrated the day after the rest of the world. Date !! Name !! Remarks depends on Muslim calendar(in this year is on June and July) Ramadan Ramadan ( , ;  ; Urdu / Punjabi رَمْضان ; ) is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar;BBC - Religions. Retrieved 2012-07-25 Muslims worldwide observe this as a month of fasting. This annual observance is regarded as one of the Five Pillars of Islam. The month lasts 29–30 days based on the visual sightings of the crescent moon, according to numerous biographical accounts compiled in the hadiths. The word Ramadan comes from the Arabic root ramiḍa or ar-ramaḍ, which means scorching heat or dryness. Fasting is fard ("obligatory") for adult Muslims, except those who are ill, traveling, pregnant, breastfeeding, diabetic or going through menstrual bleeding.Fasting (Al Siyam) -  - Page 18, el Bahay el Kholi, 1998 Fasting the month of Ramadan was made obligatory (wājib) during the month of Sha'aban, in the second year after the Muslims migrated from Mecca to Medina. depends on Muslim calendar (in this year is on 16 of July) Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Fitr ( , , "festival of breaking of the fast"), also called Feast of Breaking the Fast, the Sugar Feast, Bayram (Bajram), the Sweet Festival and the Lesser Eid, is an important religious holiday celebrated by Muslims worldwide that marks the end of Ramadan, the Islamic holy month of fasting (sawm). The religious Eid is a single day and Muslims are not permitted to fast on that day. The holiday celebrates the conclusion of the 29 or 30 days of dawn-to-sunset fasting during the entire month of Ramadan. The day of Eid, therefore, falls on the first day of the month of Shawwal. This is a day when Muslims around the world show a common goal of unity. The date for the start of any lunar Hijri month varies based on the observation of new moon by local religious authorities, so the exact day of celebration varies by locality. However, in most countries, it is generally celebrated on the same day as Saudi Arabia(lunar calendar). depends on Muslim calendar (in this year is on 24 of September) Eid al-Adha Eid al-Adha (   meaning "Festival of the sacrifice"), also called the Feast of the Sacrifice, the Major Festival, the Greater Eid, Kurban Bayram (; ), Eid e Qurban () or Bakr'Eid (), is the second of two religious holidays celebrated by Muslims worldwide each year. It honors the willingness of Abraham (Ibrahim) to sacrifice his young first-born son Ishmael (Ismail) as an act of submission to God's command, before God then intervened to provide Abraham with a lamb to sacrifice instead.Diversity Calendar: Eid al-Adha, University of Kansas Medical Center In the lunar-based Islamic calendar, Eid al-Adha falls on the 10th day of Dhu al-Hijjah and lasts for four days. In the international Gregorian calendar, the dates vary from year to year, drifting approximately 11 days earlier each year. Date !! Name !! Remarks February 2 Groundhog Day The day on which folklore states that whether or not a local groundhog casts a shadow determines if the spring season will arrive early or on time. March 8 International Women's Day A day set aside to honor women and their accomplishments in history. April 1 April Fools' Day A day that people commonly play tricks or jokes on family, friends, and co-workers, especially in English-speaking nations. Sometimes called "the Feast of All Fools" as a play on the feast days of saints; there is no evidence the holiday has any Christian religious origins. April 22 (varies by location and observance) Earth Day A celebration of environmentalism. Last Friday in April Arbor Day A day for planting trees. May 1 May Day In most other countries, May 1 is International Workers' Day, the equivalent of Labor Day, which commemorates the labor movement and the ultimate triumph of socialism over capitalism. This theme borrows from the pagan origins of May Day which emphasized the change in season and the triumph of the warm sun over the cold winter. The holiday is often celebrated with parades and protests for workers' rights and other broad social issues. May 5 Cinco de Mayo Primarily a celebration of Mexican culture by Mexican-Americans living in the United States. Although this is the anniversary of the victory of the Mexican Army over the French at the Battle of Puebla in 1862, Cinco de Mayo is far more important in the USA than in Mexico itself, often celebrated even by non-Mexican-Americans. Additionally, this "holiday" is often mistaken by Americans as being Mexican Independence Day, which is actually observed on September 16. Second Sunday in May Mother's Day Honors mothers and motherhood (made a "federal holiday" by Presidential order, although most federal agencies are already closed on Sundays) First Sunday in June Children's Day Proclaimed by President George W. Bush in 2001 to honor children.Children's Day June 14 Flag Day Commemorates the adoption of the flag of the United States, in 1777. June 27 Helen Keller Day Commemorates the achievements of Helen Keller and the blind. Third Sunday in June Father's Day Honors fathers and fatherhood. August 26 Women's Equality Day Celebrates the fight for, and progress towards, equality for women. Established by the United States Congress in 1971 to commemorate two anniversaries: Passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution ensuring Woman Suffrage in 1920 and a nationwide demonstration for equal rights, the Women's Strike for Equality, in 1970. First Sunday after Labor Day (Second Sunday if Independence Day falls on a Monday to avoid conflicting with Patriot Day, always celebrated on September 11) Grandparent's Day Similar to Mother's/Father's Day but honoring grandparents and grandparenthood. September 11 Patriot Day Commemorates the attacks on the World Trade Center (New York City), The Pentagon (Washington, D.C.), and United Airlines Flight 93 in 2001. September 17 Constitution/Citizenship Day Commemorates the adoption of the Constitution of the United States. October Oktoberfest 16-day folk festival drinking beer. Modeled after the original Oktoberfest from Munich, Germany. October 6 German-American Day Commemorates the date in 1683 when 13 German families from Krefeld near the Rhine landed in Philadelphia. These families subsequently founded in Germantown, Pennsylvania, the first German settlement in the original thirteen American colonies. October 9 Leif Erikson Day Honors Leif Erikson, the Norse Viking explorer, who led the first Europeans to discover and set foot in the New World. First Tuesday after the first Monday in November Election Day or Democracy Day Observed by the federal and state governments in applicable years; legal holiday in some states. Day After Thanksgiving Black Friday Traditionally the beginning of the Christmas shopping season in the United States. "Black Friday" is not a holiday under that name, but California and some other states observe "The Day After Thanksgiving" as a holiday for state government employees. Virtually all schools, colleges, and universities are also closed, along with many non-retail private sector businesses. Federal government offices, post offices and federally chartered banks must open on Black Friday (unless the President issues an executive order or proclamation allowing them to close). It is called "Black Friday" because it begins the sales period when most American retailers make their profits for the year. Contrary to popular belief, Black Friday is not the busiest sales day of the year (that honor belongs to Christmas Eve, December 24). Rather, it is the barometer by which retailers are able to gauge December sales and whether they will indeed end the year "in the black" (instead of "in the red"). A busy Black Friday almost invariably indicates a busy shopping season, while poor sales on Black Friday usually herald a very slow season. December 7 Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day Day to mourn the attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese on December 7, 1941. December 31 New Year's Eve Final Day of the Gregorian year. Usually accompanied by much celebration, such as party and fireworks. Virtually every company and retail outlet closes early, except for stores that sell alcoholic beverages and party supplies. New Year's Day Memorial Day Independence Day Labor Day Thanksgiving and the day after Christmas Eve and Christmas New Year's Eve All federal holidays 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed "Robert E. Lee/Martin Luther King Birthday" 3rd Monday in February - this federal holiday is renamed "George Washington/Thomas Jefferson Birthday" 4th Monday in April - Confederate Memorial Day 1st Monday in June - Jefferson Davis' birthday 2nd Monday in October - Renamed Columbus Day / Fraternal Day / American Indian Heritage Day All Alabama state holidays February on a Tuesday (varies) - Mardi Gras All Alabama state holidays February on a Tuesday (varies)- Mardi Gras All Alabama state holidays 2nd Monday in November - Obama Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day Last Monday in March - Seward's Day October 18 - Alaska Day All federal holidays 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed "Dr. Martin Luther King Jr./Civil Rights Day" 2nd Monday in February - this federal holiday is renamed "Lincoln/Washington/Presidents' Day" All federal holidays except Columbus Day 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed "Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert E. Lee's Birthdays" 3rd Monday in February - this federal holiday is renamed "George Washington's Birthday and Daisy Gatson Bates Day" December 24 - Christmas Eve All federal holidays except Columbus Day March 31 - César Chávez Day Friday after 4th Thursday - Day after Thanksgiving All California state holidays (schools closed) January 23 - Ed Roberts Day (schools open, but with related instructions) January 30 - Fred Korematsu Day of Civil Liberties (schools open, but with related instructions) February 6 - Ronald Reagan Day (schools open, but with related instructions) February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday (schools closed) February 15 - Susan B. Anthony Day (schools open, but with related instructions) March 5 - Death of Crispus Attucks (schools open, but with related instructions) March 7 - Birthday of Luther Burbank / Arbor Day (schools open, but with related instructions) March 30 - Vietnamese Veterans Day (schools open, but with related instructions) April 6 - California Poppy Day (schools open, but with related instructions) April 21 - John Muir Day (schools open, but with related instructions) 2nd Wednesday in May - Day of the Teacher (schools open, but with related instructions) May 22 - Harvey Milk Day (schools open, but with related instructions) 4th Monday in September - Native American Day (schools closed) October 25 - Larry Itliong Day (schools open, but with related instructions) All California state holidays February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday March/April (date varies) - Good Friday April 15 - Emancipation Day September 9 - California Admission Day 4th Monday in September - Native American Day 2nd Monday in October - Columbus Day (reincluded because California state has omitted it from its list of state holidays) All California holidays except Cesar Chavez Day February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday 3rd Friday in May - Malcolm X Day 2nd Monday in October - Indigenous People's Day All California holidays except Cesar Chavez Day 2nd Monday in October - Columbus Day (added because the holiday was omitted by the California state government) All California holidays except Cesar Chavez Day and the Day after Thanksgiving May 22 - Harvey Milk Day All federal holidays All federal holidays February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday March/April variable date - Good Friday All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day March/April variable date - Good Friday Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day After Thanksgiving Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day (in even-numbered years) All federal holidays January 20 - Inauguration Day (every 4 years) April 16 - Emancipation Day All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day The Friday after the fourth Thursday in November - Friday after Thanksgiving All Florida state holidays January 19 - Robert E. Lee Day February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday 2nd Monday in February - Washington's Birthday (reincluded because the holiday is not listed under the Florida government holidays) February 15 - Susan B. Anthony Day February (date varies) - Shrove Tuesday / Mardi Gras March/April - Good Friday April 2 - Pascua Florida Day April 26 - Confederate Memorial Day June 2 - Birthday of Jefferson Davis June 14 - Flag Day 2nd Monday in October - renamed holiday as Columbus and Farmers' Day 1st Tuesday after 2nd Monday - Election Day All Florida state holidays 2nd Monday in February - Presidents' Day (reincluded because the Florida state government omits this holiday) March/April (date varies) - Good Friday October (date varies) - Rosh Hashannah October (date varies) - Yom Kippur All Florida state holidays 2nd Monday in February - Presidents' Day (reincluded because the Florida state government excludes this date) 2nd Monday in October - Columbus Day (reincluded because the Florida state government excludes this date) All federal holidays except President's Day January 19 - Robert E. Lee's Birthday, observed the 4th Friday of November Last Monday in April - Confederate Memorial Day December 24 - Washington's Birthday Observed. If December 24 is a Wednesday, then this holiday is observed on Friday December 26. All federal holidays March 5-Guam Discovery Day Good Friday July 21-Liberation Day (Guam) November 2-All Souls' Day December 8-Lady of Camarin Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day March 26 - Prince Jonah Kuhio Kalanianaole Day March/April - Good Friday June 11 - Kamehameha Day 3rd Friday in August - Statehood Day Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day (in even-numbered years) All federal holidays 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed "Martin Luther King, Jr.-Idaho Human Rights Day" All federal holidays February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day (in even-numbered years) Friday after 4th Thursday - Day after Thanksgiving All Illinois state holidays except the Day after Thanksgiving 1st Monday in March - Pulaski Day All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday variable date - Good Friday Tuesday after 1st Monday in May - Primary Election Day Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - General Election Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Lincoln's Birthday to occur on Day after Thanksgiving December 24 - Washington's Birthday to occur on Christmas Eve All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day March/April (variable date) - Good Friday (half holiday) Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving December 24 - Christmas Eve December 31 - New Year's Eve All federal holidays except Columbus Day February (variable date) - Mardi Gras March/April (variable date) - Good Friday Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day (in even-numbered years) All Louisiana state holidays November 1 - All Saints' Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving December 24 - Christmas Eve December 31 - New Year's Eve All Louisiana state holidays January 20 - Inauguration Day (every 4 years) All federal holidays 3rd Monday in April - Patriots' Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays Tuesday after 1st Monday in November- Presidential Election Day (every 4 years) Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Native American Heritage Day All federal holidays 3rd Monday in April - Patriots' Day All Massachusetts state holidays March 17 - Evacuation Day June 17 - Bunker Hill Day All federal holidays Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - General Election Day (even numbered years only) Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving December 24 - Christmas Eve December 31 - New Year's Eve All federal holidays except Columbus Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays except Columbus Day 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed "Martin Luther King's and Robert E. Lee's Birthdays" Last Monday in April - Confederate Memorial Day Last Monday in May - renamed National Memorial Day / Jefferson Davis Birthday November 11- renamed Armistice Day (Veterans Day) All federal holidays February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday May 8 - Truman Day All federal holidays Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - General Election Day All federal holidays Last Friday in April - Arbor Day Friday after 4th Thursday - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays except Columbus Day. Last Friday in October - Nevada Day 4th Friday in November - Family Day All federal holidays (offices remain open on Columbus Day)[ ] 3rd Monday in January - this federal holiday is renamed Martin Luther King, Jr. Civil Rights Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays March/April - Good Friday Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday Friday after 4th Thursday in November - holiday in lieu of Presidents' Day All federal holidays February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day.http://oshr.nc.gov/state-employee-resources/benefits/leave/holidays March/April - Good Friday Friday after 4th Thursday of November - Day After Thanksgiving All federal holidays except Columbus Day All federal holidays All Ohio state holidays Last Friday in April - Arbor Day 4th Saturday in September - Native American Day October 1 - Ohio statehood day October 11 - Casimir Pulaski Day Tuesday after 2nd Monday in November- Election Day December 1 - Rosa Parks Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving December 26 - Day after Christmas All federal holidays except Columbus Day All federal holidays March/April - Good Friday Tuesday after 2nd Monday in November - Election Day Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays January 6 - Three Kings Day/Epiphany March 22 - Emancipation Day variable date - Good Friday July 25 - Constitution of Puerto Rico Day November 19 - Discovery of Puerto Rico Day December 24 - Christmas Eve (Holiday observance begins at noon local time) All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday 2nd Monday in August - Victory Day Tuesday after 1st Monday in November - Election Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day May 10 - Confederate Memorial Day Thursday after 4th Friday - Day after Thanksgiving December 23 - Christmas Eve December 26 - Day after Christmas All federal holidays except Columbus Day 2nd Monday in October - Native Americans Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day March/April - Good Friday December 24 - Christmas Eve All federal holidays except Columbus Day. Friday after 4th Thursday in November - Friday after Thanksgiving December 24 - Christmas Eve December 26 - Day after Christmas January 19 - Confederate Heroes Day March 2 - Texas Independence Day April 21 - San Jacinto Day June 19 - Emancipation Day in Texas August 27 - Lyndon Baines Johnson Day March/April (date varies)- Good Friday March 31 - Cesar Chavez Day (added in section 662.013, was not one of the original "optional holidays" declared in 1999) September/October (date varies) - Rosh Hashanah September/October (date varies) - Yom Kippur All federal holidays January 6 - Three Kings Day March 31 - Transfer Day Holy Thursday Good Friday Easter Monday July 3 - Emancipation Day Fourth Monday in July - Hurricane Supplication Day Second Monday in October - this federal holiday (Columbus Day) is renamed "Virgin Islands-Puerto Rico Friendship Day" October 25 - Hurricane Thanksgiving November 1 - Liberty Day December 26 - Christmas Second Day December 31 - New Year's Eve All federal holidays July 24 - Pioneer Day All federal holidays except Columbus Day 1st Tuesday in March - Town Meeting Day 3rd Monday in August - Bennington Battle Day All federal holidays Friday before 3rd Monday in January - Lee–Jackson Day Wednesday before 4th Thursday - Day before Thanksgiving Friday after 4th Thursday - Day after Thanksgiving December 24 - Christmas Eve All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day. All Friday holidays are celebrated on Saturday and all Monday holidays are celebrated on Tuesday to account for the time zone difference with the states. Weekday holidays such as Thanksgiving are celebrated as they fall.Wake Island Biosecurity Management Plan, U.S. Air Force, 611th Air Support Group and 611th Civil Engineer Squadron, October 2012, Edition 3.0, http://eaest.com/pdf/06Component_Plan_D_Biosecurity_Mngt_Plan.pdf March 22 - Wake Island Day December 5 - King of Thailand's Birthday All federal holidays except Columbus Day All federal holidays June 20 - West Virginia Day 4th Friday in November - Day after Thanksgiving All federal holidays except Washington's Birthday and Columbus Day December 24 - Christmas Eve December 31 - New Year's Eve January 15 - Martin Luther King Jr. Day February 12 - Lincoln's Birthday February 15 - Susan B. Anthony Day February 22 - Washington's Birthday March 4 - Casimir Pulaski Day March 17 - "The Great Hunger" in Ireland April 9 - Prisoners of War Remembrance Day April 13 - American's Creed Day April 19 - Patriots' Day April 22 - Environmental Awareness Day April 29 - Arbor Day June 14 - Robert La Follette Sr. Day September 16 - Mildred Fish Harnack Day September 16 - Wisconsin Day September 17 - Constitution Day September 18 - POW-MIA Recognition Day September 23 - Bullying Awareness Day September 28 - Francis Willard Day October 9 - Leif Erikson Day October 12 - Columbus Day November 11 - Veterans Day All federal holidays 3rd Monday in January - renamed Martin Luther King, Jr. / Wyoming Equality Day January 1 – New Year's Day Last Monday in May – Memorial Day Known officially as National Memorial Day in Alabama, and Memorial Day / Decoration Day in Idaho. Observed with Jefferson Davis' Birthday, and known officially as National Memorial Day / Jefferson Davis' Birthday, in Mississippi. July 4 – Independence Day First Monday in September – Labor Day November 11 – Veterans Day Known officially as Armistice Day in Mississippi. Fourth Thursday in November – Thanksgiving December 25 – Christmas Super Bowl Sunday (the first or second Sunday in February; the day of the National Football League's championship, festivities generally including in-home parties and watching the game on television with beverages and snacks) Cricket World Cup is watched by a quarter of the world's population. Its popularity in the United States has made many offices and shops close particularly where Indians and Pakistanis work. Super Tuesday (political event, variable) 420 (April 20th; counterculture holiday in which participants meet and consume cannabis) Tax Freedom Day (day in which an average citizen is said to have worked enough to pay his or her taxes for the year) Opening Day (first week of April; the beginning of the Major League Baseball season and an unofficial indication that summer is approaching) Tax Day (federal and state tax deadline, (April 15) or if on weekend or holiday, next closest Monday or business day) Star Wars Day (unofficial holiday created by fans to honor the Star Wars franchise. Typically May 4 for the pun "May the fourth be with you") Pi Day (March 14) (On March 14 for the pi number 3.14) Free Comic Book Day (an annual promotional effort started in 2002 to bring in new consumers to independent comic book stores, takes place the first Saturday in May) Go Skateboarding Day (June 21). International Talk Like a Pirate Day (September 19): a tongue-in-cheek holiday celebrating Pirate culture Oktoberfest (celebrated most often in areas with contemporary or historic populations of German heritage) Black Friday (Busy shopping day where stores lower prices the Friday after Thanksgiving, traditionally the start of the Christmas shopping season) Small Business Saturday (The day after Black Friday; encourages holiday shoppers to patronize brick and mortar businesses that are small and local) Cyber Monday (The equivalent of Black Friday, except online, the Monday after Black Friday) Festivus (December 23): made famous on the television show Seinfeld. Spring break (one week in late winter or spring that schools are off) Summer vacation (summer months in which schools are off) United States federal observances Holidays in Puerto Rico Mexican fiestas in the United States Easter controversy Christmas controversy Hallmark holiday Tax holiday Work–life balance (United States) U.S. Department of Commerce Federal Holiday Calendar Text of Federal Holiday Legislation Bizarre American Holidays – a comprehensive compilation of special recognition given both to months and individual days. Unfortunately, the origins of the commemorations aren't provided. Infoplease: State Holidays Federal Holidays: Evolution and Application, CRS Report for Congress, 98-301 GOV, updated February 8, 1999, by Stephen W. Stathis
