     Pune ( ;) (Marathi: पुणे) is the ninth-most populous city in India and the second largest in the state of Maharashtra after the state capital city of Mumbai. Pune is also the 101st largest city in the world, by population.http://www.citymayors.com/statistics/largest-cities-mayors-1.html It is situated  above sea level on the Deccan plateau, on the right bank of the Mutha river. Pune city is the administrative headquarters of Pune district and was once the centre of power of the Maratha Empire  established by Shivaji Maharaj. In the 18th century, Pune became the political centre of the Indian subcontinent, as the seat of Peshwas who were the prime ministers of the Maratha Empire. Pune is considered the cultural capital of Maharashtra. Since the 1950s and 1960s, Pune has a traditional old-economic base . Most of the old industries continue to grow. The city is also known for its manufacturing and automobiles industries, as well as for research institutes of information technology(IT), education, management and training, which attract migrants, students, and professionals from India, South East Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Pune is also one of the fastest growing cities in the Asia-Pacific region. The ‘Mercer 2015 Quality of Living rankings’ evaluated local living conditions in more than 440 cities around the world where Pune ranked at 145, second in India after Hyderabad(138). It also highlights Pune among evolving business centers and emerging 9 cities around the world with citation "Hosts IT and automotive companies" The oldest reference to the place is found inscribed on a Rashtrakuta Dynasty copper plate dated 937 C.E., which refers to the town as Punya-Vishaya. Pune's Timeline By the 13th century, it had come to be known as  Punawadi (पुनवडी). The erstwhile British name 'Poona' was replaced by the more traditional ' Pune ' in the year 1978 . However outsiders may still call the city Poona. The 'Poona Cantonment' (Camp) was officially renamed 'Pune Cantonment' in 2006.  Copper plates dated 858&nbsp;AD and 868&nbsp;AD show that by the 8th century an agricultural settlement known as Punnaka existed where Pune is today. The plates indicate that this region was ruled by the Rashtrakuta dynasty. The Pataleshwar rock-cut temple complex was built during this era. Pune was part of the territory ruled by Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri from the 9th century to 1327. In 1595, Maloji Raje Bhosale was appointed the jagirdar of Pune by the Mughal Empire. Pune was ruled by the Ahmadnagar Sultanate until it was annexed by the Mughals in the 17th century. Pune was part of the Jagir (Fiefdom) granted to Maloji Bhosale in 1599 for his services to the Nizamshahi of Ahmadnagar. His grandson, Shivaji, the founder of Maratha Empire, was born in Shivneri fort not far from Pune. Shivaji was brought up by his mother in Pune. Pune changed hands a few times between the Mughals and the Marathas in the period between 1660 AD to 1705 AD. When Chhatrapati Shahu succeeded to the Maratha throne in 1707, he wanted to declare Satara the capital but his chief administrators, the Peshwa who were the real power behind the throne, decided Pune was to be their headquarters. In 1626 AD, Shahaji Raje Bhosale (father of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj) appointed Rango Bapuji Dhadphale as the administrator of Pune. He was one of the first main developers of the town, overseeing the construction of some markets and residential areas like Kasba Peth, Somwar Peth, Raviwar Peth and Shaniwar Peth. After the destruction of the town in raids by the Adil Shahi dynasty in 1630 AD and again between 1636 AD and 1647 AD, Dadoji Konddeo, the successor to Dhadphale, oversaw the reconstruction of the town. He stabilised the revenue collection and administrative systems of areas around Pune and in neighbouring area of the Maval region. In addition, he developed effective methods to manage disputes and to enforce law and order. Construction on the Lal Mahal began in 1631 AD. The Lal Mahal was completed in 1640 AD. Jijabai is said to have commissioned the building of the Kasba Ganapati temple. The Ganesha idol consecrated at this temple has been regarded as the presiding deity (gramadevata) of the city. Despite bitter opposition from some Maratha Jagirdars, Shivaji was crowned Chhatrapati in 1674 AD, thus founding the Maratha Empire. He oversaw further development in Pune, including the construction of Guruwar Peth, Somwar Peth, Ganesh Peth and Ghorpade Peth. Shivaji encouraged the development of dams in Parvati and Kondhwa regions of Pune for agricultural purposes. Pune and its surrounding villages were the major recruitment areas for Shivaji's army between 1645 AD and 1680 AD. Between 1660 AD and 1670 AD the town was captured by Mughal General Shahista Khan, but was recaptured by the Marathas in 1670 AD after the Battle of Sinhagad. Shivaji often used Pune as his transit base during his major campaigns such as Varhad-Karanja (1673), AhemadaNagar District (1675), Karnataka (1677) and Jalna (1679). During the 27-year-long conflict between the Marathas and the Mughals, the town was occupied by Aurangzeb from 1703 to 1705; during this time, the name of the town was changed to "Muhiyabad". Two years later, once again the Marathas recaptured Sinhagad fort and later Pune city from the Mughals.   Chhatrapati Shahu, grandson of Shivaji, realised the importance of Pune and asked most of the Maratha army to be stationed in Pune because of its central location. Various regions such as Konkan, Khandesh, Marathwada, South Maharashtra, North Karnataka can be reached from Pune in just 3 to 4 days. He also asked his army to report to the Peshwa at Pune location for fast expeditions, finances rather than relying on Satara, the seat of the Chhatrapati. In 1720, Baji Rao I was appointed Peshwa (Prime Minister) of the Maratha Empire by Shahu. He moved his base from Saswad to Pune in 1728 and in the process laid the foundation for turning what was a Kasbah into a large city. Bajirao also started construction of Shaniwar Wada on the right bank of the Mutha River The construction was completed in 1730, ushering in the era of Peshwa control of the city. The patronage of the Maratha Peshwas resulted great expansion of Pune with the construction of many temples and bridges in the city, including the Lakdi Pul and the temples on Parvati Hill. Bajirao Peshwa also constructed an underground aqueduct to bring water from Katraj Lake to Shaniwar Wada. The aqueduct is still operational. Pune prospered as a city during the reign of Nanasaheb Peshwa. He developed Saras Baug, Heera Baug, Parvati Hill and new commercial, trading, and residential localities. Sadashiv Peth, Narayan Peth, Rasta Peth and Nana Peth were developed in this era. The Peshwa's influence in India declined after the defeat of Maratha forces in the Battle of Panipat but Pune remained the seat of power until their final defeat by the British East India Company. In 1802, Pune was captured by Yashwantrao Holkar in the Battle of Pune, directly precipitating the Second Anglo-Maratha War of 1803–1805. During this period, Sardar Apajiram Sahastrabuddhe was the Kotwal of the city (further adopted Kotwal as surname)     The Third Anglo-Maratha War broke out between the Marathas and the British in 1817. The Peshwas were defeated at the Battle of Khadki (then spelt Kirkee) on 5 November near Pune and the city was seized by the British. It was placed under the administration of the Bombay Presidency and the British built a large military cantonment to the east of the city (now used by the Indian Army). The Pune Municipality was established in 1858. Navi Peth, Ganj Peth (now renamed Mahatma Phule Peth) were developed during the British Raj. Pune was an important centre in the social and religious reform movements of the late 19th century. Prominent social reformers and freedom fighters lived here, including Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Vitthal Ramji Shinde, Dhondo Keshav Karve, Mahatma Jyotirao Phule and Dr. Raghunath Karve. Vinayak Damodar Savarkar resided in Pune when he enrolled in Fergusson College in 1902. In late 1896, Pune was hit by bubonic plague. By the end of February 1897, the epidemic was raging with a mortality rate twice the norm and half the city's population fled. A Special Plague Committee was formed under the chairmanship of W.C. Rand, an Indian Civil Services officer. He brought troops to deal with the emergency. Although these measures were unpopular, the epidemic was under control by May. On 22 June 1897, during the Diamond Jubilee celebration of the coronation of Queen Victoria, Rand and his military escort were killed by the Chapekar brothers. A memorial to the Chapekar brothers exists at the spot on Ganeshkhind Road (University Road) between the Reserve Bank and the Agricultural College. Pune was prominently associated with the struggle for Indian independence. In the period between 1875 and 1910, the city was a major centre of agitation led by Gopal Krishna Gokhale and Bal Gangadhar Tilak. The city was also a centre for social reform led by Mahatma Jyotirao Phule, feminist Tarabai Shinde, Dhondo Keshav Karve and Pandita Ramabai. They demanded the abolition of caste prejudice, equal rights for women, harmony between the Hindu and Muslim communities, and better schools for the poor.Ramachandra Guha, "The Other Liberal Light," New Republic 22 June 2012 Mohandas Gandhi was imprisoned at Yerwada Central Jail several times and placed under house arrest at the Aga Khan Palace in 1942–44, where both his wife and aide Mahadev Desai died. After Indian independence in 1947 from Britain, Pune saw a lot of development, such as the establishment of the National Defence Academy at Khadakwasla and the National Chemical Laboratory at Pashan. Pune serves as the headquarters of the Southern Command of the Indian Army. Industrial development started in the 1950s and '60s in Hadapsar, Bhosari, Pimpri and Parvati. Telco (now Tata Motors) started operations in 1961, which gave a huge boost to the automobile sector. In July 1961, the Panshet and Khadakwasla dams broke and their waters flooded the city, destroying large sections of the old city, particularly along the river bank. The disaster led to the introduction of modern town planning concepts and the development of parts of Pune. The economy of the city witnessed a boom in the construction and manufacturing sectors. By 1966, the city had expanded in all directions. In 1990, Pune began to attract foreign capital, particularly in the information technology and engineering industries; new businesses like floriculture and food processing, wineries started to take root in and around the city. In 1998, work on the six-lane Mumbai-Pune expressway began, the expressway being completed in 2001. IT Parks were established in Aundh, Hinjawadi and on Nagar Road. In 2008, the Commonwealth Youth Games took place in Pune, which encouraged additional development in the northwest region of the city. In July 2009, India's first death due to H1 N1 occurred in Pune. Later the city became an epicentre of swine flu due to the large number of H1 N1 cases. On 13 February 2010, a bomb exploded at the German Bakery in the upmarket Koregaon Park neighbourhood on the east side of Pune, killing 17 and injuring 60. The explosion is now suspected to be an improvised explosive device using an ammonium nitrate fuel oil mix. The blast was a first in what was until then the relatively safe environment of Pune. During the first week of June 2013, heavy rainfall caused casualties, landslide near Katraj Ghat very near to city limit believed to be "Modern South Gate" of the city. This unfortunate incident highlighted the need for preservation of hills and prevention of encroachment on natural water resources .    Pune is located  above sea level on the western margin of the Deccan plateau. It is situated on the leeward side of the Sahyadri mountain range, which forms a barrier from the Arabian Sea. It is a hilly city, with its highest hill, Vetal Hill, rising to  above sea level. Just outside the city, the Sinhagad fort is located at an altitude of 1,300&nbsp;m. It lies between 18° 32"North latitude and 73° 51"East longitude. Central Pune is located at the confluence of the Mula and Mutha Rivers. The Pavana and Indrayani Rivers, tributaries of the Bhima River, traverse the northwestern outskirts of metropolitan Pune. Pune lies very close to the seismically active zone around Koyna Dam, about   south of the city, and has been rated in Zone 3 (on a scale of 2 to 5, with 5 being the most prone to earthquakes) by the India Meteorological Department. Pune has experienced some moderate-intensity and many low-intensity earthquakes in its history. Earthquakes felt in Pune with a magnitude of more than 3.0 are listed below.  The city of Pune can be divided into the following zones: The Pune Metropolitan Area also includes the following areas, located roughly to the northwest. These are administered by the Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation. Pune has a hot semi-arid climate (BSh) bordering with tropical wet and dry (Aw) with average temperatures ranging between . Pune experiences three seasons: summer, monsoon, and winter. Typical summer months are from February to May, with maximum temperatures ranging from . The warmest month in Pune is April; although summer doesn't end until May, the city often receives heavy thundershowers in May (and humidity remains high). Even during the hottest months, the nights are usually cool due to Pune's high altitude. The highest temperature ever recorded was  on 30 April 1897. The monsoon lasts from June to October, with moderate rainfall and temperatures ranging from . Most of the  of annual rainfall in the city falls between June and September, and July is the wettest month of the year. Hailstorms are also common in this region. Winter begins in November; November in particular is referred to as the Rosy Cold (literal translation) (). The daytime temperature hovers around  while night temperature is below  for most of December and January, often dropping to . The lowest temperature ever recorded was  on 17 January 1935. The population of the Pune urban agglomeration had been around 4,485,000 in 2005. The migrating population rose from 43,900 in 2001 to 88,200 in 2005. According to the Pune Municipal Corporation, 40% of the population lived in slums in 2001. The sharp increase in censorial decade of 1991–2001 can be attributed to the absorption of 38 fringe villages into the city. The average literacy rate of Pune was 86.15 in 2011 compared to 80.45 in 2001. Marathi is the official and most widely spoken language, while English and Hindi are understood and spoken. Pune has a great Marathi influence as it was the bastion of the Maratha Empire.   Hinduism is the dominant religion in Pune. Many Churches, Mosque, Gurudwaras, Buddhist Viharas, Jewish synagogues, Jain temples and other religious buildings are found throughout the city. Major  communities by religion include  Hindus, Muslims, Jains, Sikhs, Buddhist and Christians. The most prominent Hindu temple in Pune is the Parvati Temple, located on Parvati hill and visible from most of the inner suburbs. The most visited temple is likely the Chaturshringi Temple, located on the slopes of a hill in the northwest of the city. During Navratri, there is a large fair at the temple and worshippers gather from around the country to pray here. The presiding Deity of the city is the Kasba Ganapati, whose temple is located in Kasba Peth in central Pune. Sarasbaug Ganpati is also a prominent landmark in Pune. The Rock-cut Pataleshwar Temple is believed to be one of the oldest temples in the city. Since 1894, Pune has celebrated Ganeshotsav as an eleven-day-long festival, in which most neighbourhoods put up a Pandal (a temporary tent like structure) with an idol of Ganesha, often amidst a religious setting, complete with decorative lights and festive music. This festival culminates with a parade of Ganesh idols from across the city carried to the local rivers to be immersed (Ganesh visarjan). The Kasba Ganapati, as the presiding deity of the city, is the first in this parade. The idea of a public celebration was initiated by Lokmanya Tilak in Pune, and has since spread to other places in Maharashtra and beyond. The (Samadhi) (shrines)  of Bhakti Saints, Dnyaneshwar and Tukaram Maharaj, are located near Pune at Alandi and Dehu respectively. The Palkhis carrying the sandals of both saints stop in Pune on their annual journey to Pandharpur in the Hindu month of Jyeshtha (June to early July). Islam is the second largest religion in Pune. Pune has a large number of Mosques, the most prominent of which are Chand Tara Masjid, Jaama Masjid, and Azam Campus Masjid. Chand Tara Masjid, located in Nana Peth, is one of the biggest and most important mosques in Pune as it is the city headquarters (markaz) for the Tablighi Jamaat. The Eid-gah Maidan located near Golibar Maidan on Shankar Sheth Road witnesses a large gathering of people for Eid namaz on Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha. There are a significant number of Christians residing in Pune. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Poona (Latin: Poonen (sis)) is located here. It is a part of the Ecclesiastical province of Mumbai established in 1854 as the Apostolic Vicariate of Pune from the Apostolic Vicariate of Bombay. On 1 September 1886, it was promoted to the Diocese of Pune. Protestantism arrived in the 19th century when the British took over from the Maratha Empire. American missionaries were the first to start evangelising local people, building many churches and schools in Pune. Pune's Christians are also called Marathi Christians because of their use of the Marathi language. The Vineyard Workers' Church is a popular place of Christian worship in Dapodi, a village near Pune. Pune is known for its Marathi-speaking Jews. The Ohel David Synagogue (popularly known as Lal Deval in Marathi or Red Temple) built by Baghdadi Jewish businessman and philanthropist, David Sassoon is renowned. David Sassoon died in the city in 1864. The Shrutisagar Ashram, located at Phulgaon off the Nagar road, houses the Vedanta Research Centre and a unique temple of Dakshinamurthy, located near the confluence of the Bhima, Bhama and Indrayani rivers. It was established in 1989 by Swami Swaroopanand Saraswati. Here one can find detailed explanations of śruti and smriti (including the Vedas, Bhagavad Gita, Upanishads and Puranas) in Marathi and English.   Pune has been associated with several significant spiritual teachers. Osho lived and taught in Pune for much of the 1970s and 1980s. The Osho International Meditation Resort, one of the world's largest spiritual centres, is located in the Koregaon Park area. It has visitors from over a hundred countries. Pune is also the birthplace of Meher Baba, although his followers usually travel to Meherabad to visit his tomb. Hazrat Babajan, identified by Meher Baba as one of the five Perfect Masters, lived the final 25&nbsp;years of her life in Pune. She was an Afghan Muslim noted for her great age and outdoor existence. She established her final residence first under an Azadirachta indica tree near Bukhari Shah's mosque in Rasta Peth and later under another A. indica tree in the then-dilapidated section of Pune called Char Bawdi where she remained for the rest of her life. There is a shrine erected in her honour in Pune, around the tree under which she made her final home. The ISKCON movement has a presence in the city at the Sri Radha Kunjbihari Mandir. There is a significant Punjabi population in Pune. There are a number of Gurudwaras (Sikh Temples) for Sikhs. Gurudwaras in Camp, Kharki, Aundh, Pimpri, Akrudi, Budhwar Peth are the prominent ones. The Camp Gurudwara is one of the main gurudwaras, with more than 300 people visiting it every day. It is named as "Guru Nanak Darbar" and some people also call it "Hollywood Gurudwara". This complex includes a charitable hospital, community kitchen for Langar and Sarai for refugees. B. K. S. Iyengar, an internationally known yoga master, established the Ramamani Iyengar Memorial Yoga Institute in Pune in 1975, to train students in Iyengar Yoga. Pune enjoys the presence of one of the eight ashrams of the Art Of Living Foundation - The Triveni Ashram, Pune. It is situated about 33&nbsp;km from the main city and about 2 kilometers from Markal, in the Alandi District. The ashram is so named because it situated close the Sangama or confluence of three rivers - Bhima, Bhama and Indrayani. The ashram was opened in 2007.     As one of the largest cities of India and major centre of learning with several colleges and universities, Pune is emerging as a prominent location for IT and manufacturing. Pune has the eighth largest metropolitan economy  and the sixth highest per capita income in the country. The automotive sector is prominent in Pune. It is home to the Automotive Research Association of India, which is responsible for the homologation of all vehicles available in India. All sectors of the automotive industry are represented, from two-wheelers and autorickshaws to cars, tractors, tempos, excavators and trucks. Automotive companies like Tata Motors, Mahindra & Mahindra, Mercedes Benz, Force Motors (Firodia-Group), Kinetic Motors, General Motors, Land Rover, Jaguar, Renault, Volkswagen, and Fiat have set up greenfield facilities near Pune, leading The Independent to cite Pune as India's "Motor City". Several automotive component manufacturers like Saint-Gobain Sekurit, TATA Autocomp Systems Limited, Robert Bosch GmbH, ZF Friedrichshafen AG, Visteon, and Continental AG are located here. One of the leading global consulting firms, Frost & Sullivan, is located on Baner Road.Hyundai heavy industries construction equipment plant,Posco coul center and LG electronics plant. India's largest engineering conglomerate, the Kirloskar Group, was the first to bring industry to Pune by setting up Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd. in 1945 at Kirkee in Pune. The Group was originally set up in Kirloskarwadi. Kirloskar Brothers Limited (India's largest manufacturer and exporter of pumps and the largest infrastructure pumping project contractor in Asia), Kirloskar Oil Engines (India's largest diesel engine company), Kirloskar Pneumatics Co. Ltd., and other Kirloskar companies are based in Pune. The Hinjewadi IT Park (officially called the Rajeev Gandhi IT Park) is a project being started by MIDC to house the IT sector in Pune. When completed, the Hinjawadi IT Park is expected to encompass an area of about . The estimated investment in the project is . To facilitate economic growth, the government made liberal incentives in its IT and ITES Policy, 2003 and leased properties on MIDC land. The IT sector employs more than 70,000 people. Software giant Microsoft intends to set up a  project in Hinjewadi.  Pune Food Cluster development project is an initiative funded by the World Bank. It is being implemented with the help of SIDBI, Cluster Craft to facilitate the development of the fruit and vegetable processing industries in and around Pune. Pune has also emerged as a new startup hub in India with tech startups like Pubmatic, Firstcry.com, Storypick.com, TripHobo.com, TastyKhana.com(Acquired by Foodpanda), Swipe setting up base in Pune. The Meetings, Incentives, Conferencing, Exhibitions trade is expected to get a boost once the Pune International Exhibition and Convention Centre (PIECC) completes in 2017. The 97-hectare PIECC will boast a seating capacity of 20,000, with a floor area of 13,000m2. It will have seven exhibition centres, a convention centre, a golf course, a five-star hotel, a business complex, shopping malls, and residences. The US$115&nbsp;million project is developed by the Pimpri-Chinchwad New Town Development Authority. Nowadays a growing number of automotive dealerships are springing up all over the city. They include luxury car makers like Jaguar Land Rover, Mercedes Benz, BMW, Audi, and motorcycle manufacturers like Kawasaki, KTM, and Harley Davidson. The emergence of industrial Pune began in the early 1960s, with mechanical engineering industries arriving. Pune's proximity to Mumbai, good climate, and availability of talent made it a destination for large firms like Tata Motors (TELCO then), Thermax, Buckau Wolf (ThyssenKrupp now), Kirloskar Group, KSB Pumps, Cummins, Hindustan Antibiotics, and several others. Serum Institute of India, the world's fifth largest vaccine producer by volume has a manufacturing plant located in Pune. Today, Pune has a diverse industrial population. It is one of India's most important automotive hubs, with some domestic and international auto giants manufacturing here, including Daimler Benz, Jaguar Land Rover, MTU FN and Volkswagen. Pune is home to one of the world's three largest two-wheeler manufacturers, Bajaj Auto Pune is also home to large IT companies such as Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys, Amdocs, KPIT, Cybage, Accenture, Persistent Systems, and thousands of small IT companies and start-ups which thrive in the highly skilled resource pool from this city's engineers. Hinjawadi, a small village on the outskirts of Pune has been developed as an IT hub. The Rajiv Gandhi Infotech Park located here houses many software companies like IBM, Wipro, Tata Technologies, AtoS, Tech Mahindra, Geometric Limited etc. Pune is the largest hub in India for German companies. According to the Indo-German Chamber of Commerce, Pune has been the single largest hub for German companies for the last 60&nbsp;years. Over 225 German companies have set up their businesses here. The industrial township of Pimpri Chinchwad, adjacent to the main city, is dotted with over 4,000 manufacturing units.  The city of Pune is managed by the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC). The Corporation consists of 149 directly elected councillors, who are led by the Mayor of Pune, a titular position mainly acting as an ambassador and representative of the city. Actual executive power is vested in the Municipal Commissioner, an officer of the Indian Administrative Service who is appointed by the Government of Maharashtra. The Pune Municipal Corporation was ranked 8th out of 21 Cities for best governance & administrative practices in India in 2014. It scored 3.5 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3. Pune Metropolitan Regional Development Authority (PMRDA) formed in 2015 is responsible for the integrated development of the metro region. Currently its jurisdiction extends over . Apart from the PMC, four other administrative bodies are active within the Pune Metropolitan Area: A plan to establish a single Pune Metropolitan Regional Development Authority (PMRDA), consisting of the combined municipal councils, corporations, and other local governments of Pune, Pimpri-Chinchwad, Lonavala, Talegaon, Bhor, Shirur, Saswad, the three cantonments and hundred villages near the city, has been considered since 1997, but has still not been put into place. This body would be the executing authority which would acquire and develop reserve land to improve the infrastructure of the Pune metropolitan area. The Pune Police is headed by the Police Commissioner of Pune, an officer of the Indian Police Service. The Pune Police report to the state ministry.  Pune was the largest military camp for the British forces during the Raj and the architecture in the cantonment area is very evocative of the era. The majority of the old Cantonment land in the city is now occupied by the Indian Army for the housing of its garrisons and officers. The Southern Command, a World War II Indian Army formation, has its headquarters in Pune cantonment. The city is home to Lohegaon Aerodrome (previously RAF Station Pune), the city's airport and Indian Air Force airfield for the Sukhoi-30MKI multi-role strike fighters. The National Defence Academy (NDA) is an integrated military training centre that provides education up to the graduation level and joint training for cadets of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. The NDA estate is spread over  of land in Khadakwasla near Pune and contains apart from NDA facilities, a mini sanctuary and Peacock Bay, a thumb-shaped inlet into the VIP residential area of the Faculty at the Academy, where the NDA sailing/boating facilities are housed. The lake itself is now known as Khadakvasla Lake, earlier known as Lake Fife in the British era, and is one of the lakes that provide water to Pune city. Pune also hosts College of Military Engineering, also commonly referred to as CME, which trains students in Engineering subjects related to the military. It also has the Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC), Pune, for Medical Study along with Nursing Courses for the Indian army. Pune and Khadki Area have centres of Bombay Sappers (Bombay Engineer Group), a regiment of the Indian Army Corps of Engineers. Pune also hosts the Military Intelligence Training School and Depot which offers diploma courses in Counter Intelligence, Combat Intelligence, Aerial Imagery and Interpretation etc.  Pune has over a hundred educational institutes and more than nine deemed universities apart from the University of Pune, which is the second largest University in the country (based on total number of colleges), students from all over the world studying at the colleges of the University of Pune. Pune has a large student population, and a large number of quality academic and research institutes.  Public schools (known locally as "municipality schools") are run by the Pune Municipal Corporation, and are affiliated with the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education. Private schools are run by educational trusts or individuals. The seven schools are older than any other schools of Pune; those are Bhave school, Nutan Marathi Vidyalay, Camp Education Society School, The Bishop's School, Stella Maris High School , St.Anne's High School and New English School. Pune also has a large number of Convent Schools, though almost all Jesuits from foreign nations who ran these institutions  have left India.  They are usually affiliated to either the state board or to national education boards, such as the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education, CBSE or NIOS boards. Pune is the largest centre for Japanese learning in India. Other languages, including German, which is taught at the Goethe-Institut, and French, which is taught at Alliance Française, are popular in the city.   Most colleges in Pune are affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University, established in 1948. Seven other universities have also been established in the city.  The College of Engineering Pune, now an autonomous institute of the government of Maharashtra, founded in 1854, is the third oldest engineering college in Asia. The Deccan Education Society was founded by several local citizens in 1884, including social and political activist Bal Gangadhar Tilak, and was responsible for founding Fergusson College in 1885. This society maintains and operates 32 institutes in Pune. Vishwakarma Institute of Technology is 1st Self Financed Autonomous college of Maharashtra. It is also 1st and only autonomous college in its category among University of Pune affiliated colleges. Maharashtra Institute of Technology is a top engineering college among non autonomous colleges under Pune University. Pune Institute of Computer Technology is the first college to start courses in fields like CS,ECE&IT. Symbiosis International University, which operates 33 colleges and institutions in the city, includes colleges such as Symbiosis Institute of Business Management (SIBM, Pune), Symbiosis Centre for Management and Human Resource Development (SCMHRD),Symbiosis Law School (SLS) and Symbiosis Institute of International Business (SIIB) which are ranked amongst the top management and law institutes in the country and Symbiosis Institute of Computer Studies and Research (SICSR) which is one of the few colleges in India that promotes open source technology. Pune is also home to Symbiosis Institute of Technology of the Symbiosis family. ILS Law College, established by the Indian Law Society, is one of the top ten law schools in India. Established medical schools such as the Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC) and Byramjee Jeejeebhoy Medical College train students from all over Maharashtra and India and are amongst the top medical colleges in India. The AFMC consistently ranks among the top five medical colleges in India. Film and Television Institute of India is located on Law College road. The Lalit Kala Kendra is an undergraduate department of Music, Dance and Drama on the Savitribai Phule Pune University campus that has been operational since 1987. This department features a combination of Gurukul and formal education systems. Another important institution for students who are working part-time during the day is the St. Vincent College of Commerce as it gives them an opportunity to study in the evening hours. This college was founded by the Society of Jesuits and is located in Pune Camp.  Pune is home to some of India's important research institutes. Some of the major research centres are:  Pune is said to be the cultural capital of the state of Maharashtra. It epitomises Marathi culture, which lays emphasis on education, arts and crafts, music, and theatre. Pune has emerged as a centre of modern architecture in India, with prize-winning buildings. Pune culture reflects a blend of traditions with modernity, along with hosting classical shows. Sorghum and Pearl millet are the main ingredients of traditional Pune food. Specialties include Misal Pav, Puran Poli (a dessert bread), Pithla bhakri, Panipuri, Bhelpuri, and Pav Bhaji. Mastani, a thick milkshake containing dried fruit, is a speciality of the city. Another speciality is Bakarvadi, a crispy snack item. Vada Pav, Misal Pav, Poha, Dabeli, and Bhelpuri are popular street food items. Being a Metropolitan city, Pune also boasts a wide variety of restaurants, serving cuisines from all over the world.  In addition to its temples, historical attractions in and around Pune include the rock-cut Pataleshwar cave temple, Aga Khan Palace, Shaniwarwada, Lal Mahal, and Sinhagad fort. Shinde Chhatri, located at Wanowrie, is a memorial dedicated to the Great Maratha Sardar, Maharaja Mahadaji Shinde (Scindia)  who was instrumental in establishing the Maratha supremacy over North India The city is known for its British Raj and the Garden city movement layout of the Cantonment in the early twentieth century. Notable architects who have worked in Pune include B.V.Doshi, Charles Correa, Achyut Kanvinde, and Christopher Charles Benninger. Modern master pieces in Pune include the IUCAA by Correa and a number of campuses by Benninger, including his studio complex called India House. His award winning campuses include the Mahindra United World College of India, the YMCA Campsite at Mulshi, the Samundra Institute of Maritime Studies, and Suzlon One Earth.  Prominent museums in Pune include the Raja Dinkar Kelkar Museum, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Museum of Indian History, Mahatma Phule Museum, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Museum, and the Pune Tribal Museum.  The College of Military Engineering has an archive and an equipment museum which has a rail exhibit with a metre-gauge train. Pune has public gardens such as the Kamala Nehru Park, Sambhaji Park Shahu Udyan, Peshwe Park, Saras Baug, Empress Garden, Taljai Hills, and Bund Garden. The Pu La Deshpande Udyan is a replica of the Korakuen Garden in Okayama, Japan. The Aga Khan Palace was built in 1892 by Sultan Muhammed Shah Aga Khan III in Pune. The Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park is located at Katraj, close to the city. The zoo, earlier located at Peshwe Park, was merged with the reptile park at Katraj in 1999. Besides this, certain spots in Pune such as Hanuman Tekdi, Vetaal Tekdi, and Taljai forest are popular haunts for nature lovers.  As the agro-pharmaceutical business has dwindled in recent decades, immigration from erstwhile tribal peoples now accounts for seventy percent of population growth and education syllabi have not adjusted in accordance with other industrialised regions. This has created what has become an exclusive environment in the government's expansion of education infrastructure, and Marathi literati have received a number of grants in areas that were previously ignored. Both experimental and professional theatre receive extensive patronage from the Marathi community. The Tilak Smarak Mandir, Bala Gandharva Rang Mandir, Bharat Natya Mandir, Yashwantrao Chavan Natyagriha, and Sudarshan Rangmanch are prominent theatres in the city. Ganesh Kala Krida Rangamanch is the largest closed theatre in the city, with a seating capacity of 45,000. The Sawai Gandharva Sangeet Mahotsav, one of the most prominent and sought-after Indian classical music festivals in India is held in Pune every year in December. It commemorates the life and achievements of Pt. Sawai Gandharva. The concept of Diwāḷī Pahāṭ originated in Pune as a music festival on the morning of the festival of Diwali.   Popular games and sports in Pune include Athletics, Cricket, Basketball, Badminton, Field Hockey, Football, Tennis, Kabaddi, Paragliding, Kho-Kho, Rowing and Chess. The Pune International Marathon is an annual Marathon conducted in Pune. The 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games were held in Pune. The popular game of badminton, played worldwide, originated in Pune. It was created by British military officers stationed in Poona (now Pune) and can be traced to the mid-1800s. Initially, balls of wool referred to as ball badminton were preferred by the upper classes in windy or wet conditions, but ultimately the shuttlecock stuck. This game was further developed in England and rules were set out, and what we see today is international badminton rules. Badminton Cricket is played between clubs affiliated with the Maharashtra Cricket Association, which maintains a domestic cricket team (the Maharashtra cricket team). This team, one of three based in the state of Maharashtra, competes in interstate matches and leagues such as the Ranji Trophy. Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is the venue for National and One Day International matches. It has been named after the First Prime Minister of Independent India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. An Indian Premier League cricket team based in Pune began play in 2011. The team, named Pune Warriors India was bought for ₹17.02&nbsp;billion or $370&nbsp;million. It was the most expensive team in the Indian Premier League, and was owned by the Sahara Group. This team was later expelled from the league  before the 7th season of the IPL started due to financial issues between Sahara Group and IPL.Pune Warriors India&nbsp;– The Team  As a home ground for the Pune Warriors, the Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium was built in Gahunje on Mumbai&nbsp;– Pune express way and was inaugurated on 1 April 2012. The Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium has a seating capacity of 55,000 and is built on the Mumbai Pune Expressway. Since the expulsion of Pune Warriors from the IPL, Subrata Roy Stadium has been used by the Maharashtra state team. In 2016 & 2017 seasons of Indian Premier League, a new franchise from Pune will play. The team is owned by Sanjiv Goenka's RPG Group.  Pune Football Club, also known as Pune F.C., is a recently founded football club that plays in the I-League. It was established on August 2007. FC Pune City is an Indian Super League football franchise in Pune, Maharashtra, that will begin play in September 2014 during the inaugural season of the Indian Super League. The club is owned and operated by Bollywood actor Hrithik Roshan, Wadhawan Group and Italian football club ACF Fiorentina. FC Pune City is well known for signing the best football players in India and big names from overseas. Bharat FC is the latest football based in Pune. The club. which plays Indian Football League, was founded by Kalyani Group in 2014. DSK Shivajians Football Club is an Indian football club based in Pune, Maharashtra. DSK Shivajians was founded in 1987 and in 2013 they played their first ever national season in the 2013 I-League 2nd Division; The aim being promotion to the top tier of Indian football: the I-League. English club Liverpool announced a partnership with DSK Shivajians in India. The partnership is pertinent in the academy setup, with academy players trained by coaches representing Liverpool playing for DSK Shivajians U19.[ Pune has basketball at the Deccan Gymkhana club and at Fergusson College. The National Education Foundation organises Enduro3, a cross country adventure race in Pune. It is normally a two or three-day event with activities like cycling, trekking, river-crossing, and rifle shooting. The city has been host to the 2009 FIVB Men's Junior World Championship. Pune Race Course, located in Pune Cantonment, was built in 1830 over  of land. The land is controlled by the Indian Army. The racing season is from July to October every year. The Royal Western India Turf Club manages the racecourse. The course has two training tracks and two racing surfaces. Major racing events include the Pune Derby, RWITC Invitational, Independence Cup, and the Southern Command Cup. Pune Skatepark - A skateboarding park built in the Sahakarnagar area, consisting of an eight-foot bowl in a 3,000 square foot flatground. It is the first skatepark in India built by the government with approximately seventy lakhs spent on the project. The Gliding Centre is an undertaking of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Civil Aviation Department, Government of India. This uses two seater Sailplanes, LET L-23 Super Blaník and other LET Gliding Planes. The flying season starts from October and continues up to May or early June. The club is closed during the monsoons.  Prominent sporting institutions in Pune include the Nehru Stadium, the Deccan Gymkhana, the PYC Hindu Gymkhana, The Poona Golf Club, The Poona Cricket Club, and the Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex at Balewadi. The Nehru Stadium is the home ground of the Maharashtra cricket team, and has hosted many prominent cricket events, including one of the matches in the 1996 Cricket World Cup. The Deccan Gymkhana has hosted Davis Cup matches on several occasions. The facility at Balewadi hosted the National Games in 1994 as well as the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games. The Royal Connaught Boat Club is one of several boating clubs on the Mula-Mutha river. A new cricket stadium, Pune International Cricket Centre renamed as Subroto Roy Cricket Stadium, is under construction in Gahunje on the Mumbai-Pune Expressway near Pune. This stadium will be the headquarters for the Maharashtra Cricket Association and home for the Maharashtra cricket team. It will be a state-of-the-art stadium, and will host the home matches of Sahara Pune Warriors, IPL team of Pune. Prominent sportspersons hailing from Pune include cricketer D. B. Deodhar, Chandu Borde, father-son cricketing duo Hemant and Hrishikesh Kanitkar, tennis players Radhika Tulpule, Gaurav Natekar and Nitin Kirtane, and table-tennis player Sujay Ghorpade. Abhijit Kunte and Pravin Thipsay are chess grandmasters and national champions. Dhanraj Pillay is ex-captain of the Indian national field hockey team. Pune has a rugby team, men's and women's, registered with the IRFU as Rugby Football Sports Pune (RFS Pune). As of November 2010, RFS Pune has qualified for First Division Rugby, while placing second in the Callaghan Cup Held in Chennai in the same month. Pune offers much promise in this sport. The women's team has been the national cup holder for 2 consecutive years and thrice since the all India women's 7s 2009. Till date, the Pune Women's team has 13 and counting India international players When the Elite Football League of India was introduced in August 2011, Pune was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season, although the team's games will be played in Balewadi. All 56&nbsp;games of EFLI's opening season will be played at the Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex, which will be retrofitted to host the sport. Named the Pune Marathas, it will be Pune's first professional American football franchise.    Pune International Airport is an international Airport at Lohegaon, operated by the Airports Authority of India. It shares its runways with the neighbouring Indian Air Force base. In addition to domestic flights to all major Indian cities, this airport serves international direct flights to Dubai (operated by Air India Express) and to Frankfurt (operated by Lufthansa). The Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation is responsible for the design and construction of a New Pune International Airport. The area between Chakan and Rajgurunagar, around the villages of Chandus and Shiroli, is being considered as a construction site. If constructed here, it will be at a distance of  from central Pune. With the construction of this new International Airport, Pune city will be connected to many important international destinations such as London, New York, Singapore, Hong Kong and Tokyo. They have passed tender for Pune International Airport at Chakan Pune. This project will be complete by December 2017.    Local trains (EMUs) connect Pune to the industrial town of Pimpri-Chinchwad and the hill station of Lonavala, while daily express trains connect Pune to Mumbai, Hyderabad, Delhi, Nagpur, Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi, Coimbatore, Chennai, Bangalore, Allahabad, Kanpur, Howrah, Jammu Tawi, Darbhanga, Goa, Gwalior, Varanasi, Bhubaneswar, Patna, and Jamshedpur. At Pune, there is diesel locomotive shed and electric trip shed. The Pune Railway Station is administered by the Pune Railway Division of the Central Railways. All the railway lines to Pune are broad gauge. The city also has a Motive power depot located at Ghorpadi. It is operated for Diesel Locomotives. The Pune Metro system has been proposed and is being planned in consultation with Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, the corporation which built and operates the Delhi Metro. It will be a combination of elevated and underground sections, with initial routes being planned between Pimpri-Swargate and Vanaz-Ramwadi.      Both public and private transport are popular in Pune. Public buses within the city and its suburbs are operated by the Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML). The PMPML operates the Pune Bus Rapid Transit system, the first of its kind in India, in which dedicated bus lanes were supposed to allow buses to travel quickly through the city. In reality, the project has turned out to be a failure receiving little to no patronage from the local citizenry. Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation runs buses from its main stations in Shivajinagar, Pune station, and Swargate to all major cities and towns in Maharashtra and neighbouring states. Private companies too run buses to major cities throughout India. Pune is well-connected to other cities by Indian highways and state highways. National Highway 4 (NH 4) connects it to Mumbai, Bangalore and Kolhapur. NH 9 to Hyderabad, and NH 50 to Nashik. State highways connect it to Ahmednagar, Aurangabad, and Alandi. The Mumbai-Pune Expressway, India's first six-lane high-speed expressway, was built in 2002, and has reduced travel time between Pune and Mumbai to almost two hours. A ring road is being planned for the convenience of heavy traffic. Pune is served by two intra-city highways: Old Pune-Mumbai Highway and Katraj-Dehu Road Bypass, a part of National Highway 4. The Nashik City-Pune Highway NH 50 will be part of the golden triangle (Nashik-Pune-Mumbai).    Hadshi Temple pune   Year Date !! Magnitude !! Epicentre 2004 17 May 2004 3.2 Katraj Region, Pune, Maharashtra 2008 30 July 2008 4.2 Koyna Dam, Koynanagar, Maharashtra 2012 14 April 2012 4.9 Satara district, Maharashtra Zone!! Neighbourhood!! Description Old City The seventeen Peths (burroughs, formerly markets) of Pune These were established and developed during the Maratha and Peshwa rule, and are referred to as the old city. New City&nbsp;– Inner District Deccan Gymkhana, Erandawane, Prabhat Road, Law College Road in the west; Camp, Bund Garden and Koregaon Park in the east; Swargate, Parvati Hill, Sahakarnagar, Mukund Nagar, Maharshi Nagar, Gultekdi and Salisbury Park to the south. Bounded on the north by the Mula-Mutha river. New City&nbsp;– Outer District Khadki, Aundh and Ganeshkhind in the northwest; Kothrud and Paud Road in the west; Dattawadi, Anandnagar, Sahakarnagar in the southwest; Lullanagar in the southeast; Yerwada, Wadgaon Sheri, Chandan Nagar, Kalyani Nagar,  and Shastri Nagar, in the northeast; Vishrantwadi in the north; Ghorpadi, Fatimanagar, Wanowrie and Hadapsar South to the east. Several educational institutes are located in the Kothrud, Nagar Road, Bund Garden Road neighbourhoods Suburbs Baner, Balewadi and Pashan in the northwest; Bavdhan,Karve-Nagar and Warje in the west; Wadgaon Budrukh in the southwest; Katraj, Wanawadi, NIBM, Lullanagar, Kondhwa, Undri and Mohammedwadi in the southeast; Wagholi, Kharadi, Viman Nagar, Mundhwa in the east; Dhanori and Kalas to the north.. Kharadi and Hadapsar are home to large IT parks. Proposed Expansion Mahalunge, Sus, Bavdhan Budrukh, Kirkatwadi, Pisoli, Lohegaon, Kondhwe Dhavde, Kopare, Nande, Uttam Nagar, Khadakwasla, Sadesatra Nali, Manjri, Narhe, Shivane, Ambegaon Khurd, Undri, Dhayari, Ambegaon Budruk, Urali Devachi, Mantarwadi, Holkarwadi, Authade (Handewadi), Wadachiwadi, Shiwalewadi, Phursungi and Yeolewadi 28 new villages are to be merged in PMC limits Zone!! Neighbourhood!! Description Pimpri and its surroundings Pimpri industrial area, Pimprigaon, Chikhli, Kalewadi, Kasarwadi, Phugewadi and Pimple Saudagar Pimpri industrial area, and other residential areas, are included in this zone. Pimple Saudagar has become a new hub of residential areas within the limits of Pimpri-Chinchwad because of its proximity to Hinjewadi IT Park Chinchwad and its surroundings Chinchwadgaon, Thergaon, Tathawade Industrial cum residential area Dapodi and its surroundings Old Sangvi, Wakad, Hinjawadi, Pimple Nilakh, Pimple Gurav and New Sangvi Industrial area in Hinjawadi; other areas are residential. Information Technology (IT) parks at Hinjawadi area Bhosari and its surroundings Bhosari, Moshi, Dighi, Dudulgaon and Charholi Budruk Industrial areas are at Moshi and Dighi; others are residential areas Nigdi, Akurdi and its surroundings Akurdi, Nigdi, Ravet, Talawade Residential area. Information Technology (IT) parks at Talawade area Club Sport League Venue Duration Pune Warriors India Cricket Indian Premier League Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium 2010–2013 Maharashtra cricket team Cricket Ranji Trophy and Vijay Hazare Trophy Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium 1934 – Pune F.C. Football I-League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2007 – Puneri Paltan Kabaddi Star Sports Pro Kabaddi League Balewadi Sports Complex 2014- Pune Pistons Badminton Indian Badminton League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2013 – Pune Strykers Field Hockey World Series Hockey PCMC Hockey Stadium 2012 – Pune Marathas American Football Elite Football League of India Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2011 – FC Pune City Football Indian Super League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2014 – Pune Marathas Tennis Champions Tennis League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2014 – Bharat FC Football I-League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2014 – DSK Shivajians F.C. Football I-League Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex 2013 – Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC), responsible for Pimpri-Chinchwad and its surroundings Khadki Cantonment Board (KCB), responsible for Khadki Pune Cantonment Board (PCB), responsible for Pune Cantonment Dehu Road Cantonment Board, responsible for the Dehu Road area Agharkar Research Institute (ARI) Armament Research Development Establishment (ARDE) Army Institute of Technology (AIT) Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI) Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (BORI) Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC)cdac.in Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (CMET) Electronics Test and Development Centre (ETDC): under the STQC directorate, it is a leading testing and certification centre. Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics High Energy Materials Research Laboratory (HEMRL) Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune (IISER, Pune) Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM): scientists at IITM has made significant achievements in tropical weather Inter-university Centre for Astronomy & Astrophysics (IUCAA) Lupin Limited – Research Park, Situated at Nande Village is leading Pharma Research Institute, Spread in 19 acre of land National AIDS Research Institute (NARI) National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS) National Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA) National Chemical Laboratory (NCL): one of the leading chemical research establishments in India National Informatics Centre (NIC) National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) National Institute of Construction Management and Research (NICMAR)-India's most reputed institute for Construction Management National Institute of Virology (NIV) National Research Centre for Grapes (NRCG) National School of Leadership (NSL) San Jose, , since 1992 Vacoas-Phoenix,  Shivaji - Maratha Empire Bajirao Peshwa - Maratha Empire Ajaypal Singh Banga, USA based corporate executive and Political advisor to the US President Anu Aga, industrialist Arun Nigavekar, educationist Baba Kalyani, industrialist Bal Gangadhar Tilak, (1856-1920)- Indian Nationalist leader Bhimsen Joshi, Hindustani classical vocalist B. K. S. Iyengar, Yoga guru Cyrus Poonawala, businessman Deepika Samson, actress Dhanraj Pillay, hockey player Hrishikesh Kanitkar, former Indian crickter Ivan Menezes ,-CEO Diageo Mahatma Jyotiba Phule, social reformer Milind Date flutist and composer Nilu Phule, actor P. A. Inamdar, educationalist Pankaj Advani, billiards and snooker player Parth Samthaan, television actor and Bollywood aspirant Raghunath Mashelkar, scientist Rahul Bajaj, industrialist Sanjeev Abhyankar singer Savitribai Phule, social reformer Shanta Shelke, writer Shantanurao Laxmanrao Kirloskar, industrialist Sharad Talwalkar, comedian Suresh Tendulkar, economist Betzalel Kupchik, Chabad Rabbi Sumedh Mudgalkar, actor Saloni, very intelligent debugger, movie fan Make In Maharashtra Peths in Pune Roads of Pune Pune Neighborhoods New Pune International Airport Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited List of Maratha dynasties and states List of twin towns and sister cities in India 2010 Pune bombing Joshi-Abhyankar serial murders  for Pune City and District for Pune Corporate City Pune has emerged as one of the most favorable cities for investing in residential real estate in the year 2015
