   Quicksilver (Pietro Maximoff) is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character first appeared in the comic book X-Men #4 (March 1964) and was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby. Quicksilver has the superhuman ability to move at great speeds. In most depictions, he is a "mutant", a human born with natural superhuman powers. In comic book stories beginning in 2015, he is the product of genetic experimentation by the High Evolutionary. Quicksilver most commonly appears in fiction associated with the X-Men, having been introduced as an adversary for the superhero team. In later stories, he became a superhero himself. He is the twin brother of the Scarlet Witch and, in most depictions, the son of Magneto. Debuting in the Silver Age of comic books, Quicksilver has featured in several decades of Marvel continuity, starring in the self-titled series Quicksilver and as a regular team member in superhero title the Avengers. The character has also appeared in a range of movie, television, and video game adaptations. Two separate live-action versions of the character have been adapted by two different film studios: Aaron Taylor-Johnson portrays the character in a mid-credits cameo in the Marvel Studios film Captain America: The Winter Soldier and reprises the role as a supporting character in  Avengers: Age of Ultron as a part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, while Evan Peters portrayed Quicksilver in the film X-Men: Days of Future Past and will reprise the role in X-Men: Apocalypse. In 2006, IGN named Quicksilver #23 on their list of "The Top 25 X-Men Of All Time" commenting that "Quicksilver was the shining example of a villain turned good," and as #44 on their list of the "Top 50 Avengers". Quicksilver first appears in X-Men #4 (March 1964) and was created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby.  The character initially appears as an antagonist to the X-Men, although before long he becomes a member of the Avengers and appears as a regular character in that title beginning with Avengers #16 in May 1965.  He has made numerous other appearances in that title, and other related titles, sometimes as a member of the team, sometimes as an ally, and sometimes as an antagonist. From 1991 to 1993 Quicksilver was a regular character in the first volume of X-Factor. The series emphasized the character's irritability and arrogance, which writer Peter David felt were a natural consequence of his powers, explaining:   Quicksilver also starred in Quicksilver, a regular ongoing eponymous series that began in November 1997 and ran for 13 issues. The character also played a pivotal role in the House of M and Avengers: The Children's Crusade Quicksilver appeared as a supporting character in Avengers Academy from issue #1 (Aug 2010) through its final issue #39 (Jan 2013). He appears as one of the members of All-New X-Factor, which was launched in 2014 as part of the second Marvel NOW! wave. Writer Peter David's handling of the character in that book earned the character a 2014 @ssie award from Ain't It Cool News.  AICN's Matt Adler commented that David writes the character best, and that the "arrogant, impatient speedster" made the title worth following."AICN COMICS 10th Annual @$$IE AWARDS Day Five: Best Crossover/Event! Favorite Superhero! Best Ongoing Series!". Ain't It Cool News. March 7, 2014.   The character first appears with his twin sister, the Scarlet Witch (Wanda Maximoff), as a part of the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants. The siblings were originally presented as mutants, with Pietro possessing superhuman speed and Wanda able to control probability. The pair are recruited by their father Magneto after he saves Wanda from a mob after she accidentally causes a house to burst into flame. Quicksilver stays with her to protect her.X-Men #4 (March 1964) He has Jewish ancestry, from his father.X-Men: Magneto Testament #1 After several confrontations with the X-Men,X-Men #5 (May 1964); #6 (July 1964); #7 (Sept. 1964) they depart when Magneto and his lackey the Toad are abducted by the cosmic entity the Stranger.X-Men #11 (May 1965) They then travel back to Europe. Pietro and his sister reform and are recruited by Iron Man to the superhero team the Avengers, after they discover they are advertising for new members and want to get support for themselves.Avengers #16 (May 1965) Together with leader Captain America and former villain Hawkeye, the four become the second generation of Avengers, and are later dubbed "Cap's Kooky Quartet". Quicksilver first thought he should be leader, though he is captured by the Mole Man on the first mission. He is rescued by the Avengers, who defeat the Minotaur without him, and would sometimes quarrel with the other members. The Scarlet Witch becomes close friends with Hawkeye and both become loyal members of the team until Wanda is accidentally shot on a mission against Magneto. Quicksilver then flees from the Avengers with his wounded sister.Avengers #47 - 49 (Dec. 1968 - Feb. 1969) The pair accompany Magneto back to his mid-Atlantic base,Uncanny X-Men #43 (April 1968) where the character captures the X-MenUncanny X-Men #44 (May 1968) and Pietro skirmishes with the X-Man Cyclops.Uncanny X-Men #45 (June 1968) After a solo appearance by Quicksilver in the title The Amazing Spider-Man,Spider-Man #71 (April 1969) the twins finally realize that Magneto is actually the true villain. Pietro and Wanda reappear in the title X-Men and are then kidnapped along with several other mutants by the robot Sentinels, and are subsequently freed by the X-Men.X-Men #59 - 60 (Aug. - Sept. 1969) The character reappears in the title Avengers, and advises the team that Wanda has been kidnapped and taken to another dimension by the warlord Arkon.Avengers #75 - 76 (April - May 1970) After Wanda is rescued, Pietro and his sister rejoin the team. During one mission Quicksilver is wounded by a SentinelAvengers #104 (Oct. 1972) and is found by Crystal, a member of the Inhumans.Fantastic Four #131 (Feb. 1973) Crystal nurses Pietro back to health, and the pair are eventually married.Fantastic Four #150 (Sep. 1974) Pietro and Wanda also meet Robert Frank - formerly World War II hero the Whizzer - who was present at Mount Wundagore (the birthplace of the siblings) with his wife at the time of their birth. Frank briefly joins the Avengers, believing Pietro and Wanda to be his children.Giant-Size Avengers #1 (1974) The Scarlet Witch also becomes romantically involved with her Avengers teammate the android Vision. Although Pietro initially disapproves, he eventually gives his blessing to their marriage.Giant-Size Avengers #4 (1975)  Quicksilver features with the Inhumans and Fantastic Four against the villain the Sphinx in a Fantastic Four annual,Fantastic Four Annual #12 (1977) and the siblings' origin is explored in the title Avengers when romani Django Maximoff kidnaps Pietro and Wanda and returns to Mount Wundagore in the country of Transia, where they were born. After a battle with the Avengers against the Elder God Chthon, the siblings learn from Bova, one of the New Men created by the character the High Evolutionary, that they are the children of Maximoff, and not Robert Frank.Avengers #185 – 187 (July–Sept. 1979) Quicksilver then returns to Attilan (city of the Inhumans)Avengers #188 (Oct. 1979) and in the title Fantastic Four is revealed to have had a daughter (Luna) with Crystal.Fantastic Four #240 (March 1982) During the limited series Vision and the Scarlet Witch, Magneto forces Bova to reveal the truth about his missing children, who are revealed to be Pietro and Wanda. After their mother Magda dies in childbirth, the children are given by the High Evolutionary to Django Maximoff to raise as his own. Pietro and Wanda reject Magneto when told.Vision and the Scarlet Witch #1 - 4 (Nov. 1982 - Feb. 1983) His marriage to Crystal is also strained when she has an affair.Vision and the Scarlet Witch vol. 2, #1 - 12 (Oct. 1985 - Sept. 1986) Crystal's uncle Maximus the Mad uses technology to cause Quicksilver to become psychotic.West Coast Avengers Annual #1 (1986) This drove him to frame the Avengers for treason as his perceptions are twisted to perceive them as having 'betrayed' him, forcing them to escape the government-sponsored Freedom Force, and then deal with Quicksilver's new 'team' of LMD-based duplicates of the Zodiac, until the Vision convinces Pietro to stand down by showing him images of his newborn nephews. Quicksilver battles the West Coast AvengersWest Coast Avengers #33 - 36 (July - Sept. 1988) and is captured by the Inhumans and cured of his condition.X-Factor Annual #2 (Jan. 1987) In an effort to repent for his actions, Pietro aids the Avengers West Coast against Magneto and the villain Immortus, who has captured Wanda.Avengers West Coast #56 - 57 (Mar. - Apr. 1990); 60 - 62 (Aug. - Oct. 1990) Although successful, Pietro refuses to return to Crystal and joins the now U.S. government-sponsored superhero team X-Factor.X-Factor #71 - #94 (Oct. 1991 - Sept. 1993) The character and Crystal are reunited during the storyline "Bloodties" when the Avengers, X-Factor and X-Men team to stop a group of mutant terrorists who kidnap their daughter Luna, and are responsible for a civil war on the island nation of Genosha. After dealing with the threat, Quicksilver learns of Crystal's relationship with Avenger the Black KnightAvengers #343 (Jan. 1992) and leaves, also resigning from X-Factor.Bloodties - Avengers #368 (Nov. 1993); X-Men vol. 2, #26 (Nov. 1993); Avengers West Coast #101 (Dec. 1993); Uncanny X-Men #307 (Dec. 1993) & Avengers #369 (Dec. 1993) The character also features in a self-titled limited series, with Quicksilver taking daughter Luna and traveling to Mt. Wundergore, aiding the High Evolutionary and his Knights of Wundagore against villains Exodus and the Man Beast. Quicksilver uses the experimental Isotope E to augment his powers, allowing him to move at greater supersonic speeds. A future version of Pietro called "Nestor" appears and reveals that his powers are not speed but rather temporal based.Quicksilver #1 - 12 (Nov. 1997 - Nov. 1998) Quicksilver also rejoins a reformed AvengersAvengers Vol. 3 #1 (Feb. 1998) and features briefly in the second volume of Heroes for Hire.Heroes for Hire vol. 2 #16 (Oct. 1998) & Annual #1 (1998)  Under the All-New, All-Different Marvel branding, the character will be part of the Uncanny Avengers. Quicksilver features in the limited series Magneto Rex, and with half-sister Polaris spies on their father Magneto, who is now the ruler of Genosha. Quicksilver is banished when he rallies the Avengers against Magneto.Magneto Rex #1 (April 1999); #2 - 3 (June - July 1999) Quicksilver makes sporadic appearances in Avengers and the mutant titles Mutant X, X-Factor and X-Men until featuring in the limited series X-Men: Age of Apocalypse in a battle with the despot Apocalypse.X-Men: Age of Apocalypse #1 - 5 (May 2005) & #6 (June 2005) Quicksilver plays a pivotal role in the limited series House of M, convincing his now mentally unstable sister Wanda to use her abilities to warp reality and create a world where mutants are in a majority and humans are the minority—with Magneto established as absolute ruler—while also giving their fellow heroes their own greatest desires—having abducted Professor X to read the minds of the heroes—to discourage them from trying to restore history and stop them from killing Wanda. Thanks to Wolverine retaining his memories, along with the mysterious Layla Miller, many of Earth's heroes regain their memories and battle Magneto, who also remembers and realizes that Pietro is to blame for this mistake. Magneto kills Quicksilver (crushing his body with a robot Sentinel) in a rage at this perceived 'abuse' of his dream, although the character is resurrected and the normal reality restored when the Scarlet Witch witnesses this, telling Magneto he cares more for mutants than his own children. In retaliation the Scarlet Witch has also depowered 98% of the mutant population, which by accident includes Quicksilver.House of M #1 - 2 (Aug. 2005); #3 - 4 (Sept. 2005); #5 - 6 (Oct. 2005); #7 (Nov. 2005); #8 (Dec. 2005) The story continues in the limited series Son of M, with Quicksilver, desperate to regain his powers, exposing himself to the Terrigen Mist (the source of the Inhumans' mutations and abilities) and inserts Terrigen crystals into his body—all without permission from Black Bolt. Courtesy of the Terrigen crystals, Quicksilver gains new "time jumping" powers and kidnaps his daughter Luna. Quicksilver discovers the crystals can restore mutant abilities but have an extreme effect on non-Inhuman physiology, causing several deaths.Son of M #1 - 6 (Feb. - July 2006) & X-Factor #20 (June 2007) Quicksilver and Crystal meet again in the direct sequel, limited series Silent War, when Black Bolt demands the return of the crystals. When Crystal sees how he has mutated, she declares their marriage annulled according to Inhuman law.Silent War #1 - 6 (March - Aug. 2007) In the title X-Factor the crystals are removed from Quicksilver's body by another mutant, leaving him powerless once again.X-Factor #20 (June 2007) Destitute and jailed for vagrancy in the one-shot X-Factor: The Quick and the Dead, Quicksilver has a series of hallucinations and inexplicably regains his super speed. Escaping jail, Quicksilver rescues an innocent and rediscovers his desire to be a hero.X-Factor: The Quick and the Dead #1 (July 2008) Quicksilver appears in the title The Mighty Avengers and is used as a pawn by Elder God Chthon, with the character's spirit trapped in the arcane tome called the Darkhold. The Avengers defeat Chthon, and Quicksilver's consciousness is "downloaded" into the body of Vision, before being restored to his own body.Mighty Avengers #21 - 23 (Jan. - March 2009) Quicksilver joins the team after learning that it is Wanda (Asgardian god Loki in disguise) who brought the team together.Mighty Avengers #24 (April 2009) After the events of the Secret Invasion storylineSecret Invasion #1 - 8 (June 2008 - Jan. 2009) the character is publicly exonerated of former crimes, with an unknown Skrull being blamed (although Henry Pym, Maximoff's daughter Luna, and Avengers butler Jarvis are aware of the lie). Quicksilver also resumes wearing his original green costume.Mighty Avengers #25 (July 2009) Quicksilver loses the respect of his daughter Luna when he lies to the Inhumans and claims that many of his past actions were actually perpetrated by a Skrull impostor,Mighty Avengers #31 (Jan. 2010) although Pym tolerates the lie as he feels that Quicksilver deserves a chance to redeem himself. Quicksilver finally learns that the person he thought was his sister is actually Loki in disguise. Enraged, he and the rest of the team travel to the Isle of Silence to set a trap for the god of mischief. After imprisoning Loki in a device designed by Hank Pym, he begins torturing the god for information about Wanda's whereabouts. Loki offers no information about her and manages to contact Thor to beg for his help. Thor arrives and attacks Quicksilver for the way he is treating Loki. He is able to outrun the thunder god's lightning but is eventually overpowered.Mighty Avengers #34 (Apr. 2010) He is one of the Avengers who joins Hercules, Amadeus Cho and their allies in an assault on Olympus Group Headquarters. He battles Amazon warrior women alongside ZeusIncredible Hercules #139 (Feb. 2010) and helps a wounded Wolverine defeat the Huntsman, stabbing him through the chest with his own weapon.Incredible Hercules #141 (Apr. 2010) Quicksilver is later summoned by the Ghost using Amadeus Cho's technology, to defend Asgard against the Thunderbolts. He single handedly defeats Mister X who is in possession of the Spear of Odin. Mr. X isn't able to react quickly enough despite his abilities and Quicksilver viciously beats him down with a piece of debris.Mighty Avengers #35 He is seen alongside the other Avengers against the Void-possessed Sentry in the events of Siege.Mighty Avengers # 36 Quicksilver is searching for his sister in Wundagore when Magneto and the Young Avengers go to find the Scarlet Witch. After trying to abduct his nephew Wiccan so he can assist him in finding his sister, he is stopped by his father and his other nephew, Speed. After Wiccan suggests that maybe Magneto actually did want to make up for his past, he became angry and said, "Nephew the last time I allowed myself to believe that..... My father tried to kill me". Quicksilver prepares to fight his father but when debris from his rampage strikes his sister it is found that the Scarlet Witch there is actually a Doombot in disguise. The journey takes Quicksilver and his comrades all the way to Latveria so they rescue the Scarlet Witch. After the Scarlet Witch turns herself in to the X-Men and the Avengers a fight breaks out between the two groups. After being knocked out along with all the other Avengers and X-Men by his sister, he is finally reunited with his sister.Avengers: The Children's Crusade #2 Quicksilver joins the teaching staff of Avengers Academy to teach young students how to become heroes. He does so in order to distance himself from the legacy of his father Magneto.Avengers Academy #1 One of the new students, Finesse, figures out that his story about being abducted by Skrulls is a lie. She blackmails him into giving her "private lessons" on everything he learned during his time with the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants.Avengers Academy #2 Finesse convinces Quicksilver to help her search for the Taskmaster, who might be her biological father. After arriving at what they thought was an abandoned training camp, they found it still in use and quickly captured the criminals they found there. Quicksilver returned to the mansion and encountered Tigra, who was upset because some of the students assaulted the Hood on her behalf. During a heated exchange Quicksilver managed to convince her that kicking them out of the Academy for trying to help would only turn them against becoming heroes.Avengers Academy #9 At the new campus for the Avengers Academy (where the Faculty are offering to train other superpowered youths), Quicksilver is revealed to be mentoring Lightspeed as a teacher's assistant.Avengers Academy #21 In the miniseries "Magneto: Not a Hero", Joseph is resurrected under unknown circumstances and forms a new Brotherhood of Mutants with Astra and mutated deformed versions of Blob, Mastermind, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, and Toad. It is soon revealed that the mutated versions of Blob, Mastermind, Quicksilver, Scarlet Witch, and Toad are clones created by Joseph.Magneto: Not a Hero #1-4 Quicksilver has joined the privately owned superhero team X-Factor.All-New X-Factor #1 When confronted during a press conference by Fatale over his actions meant to repower mutants and his lying about a Skrull having been responsible, Pietro finally admitted in public that he had been responsible and had tried to avoid facing the consequences; by doing this, he earned his daughter's respect back, and the two reconciled.All-New X-Factor #12 Wanda and other heroes and villains experienced a moral inversion during a clash with the Red Onslaught.Avengers & X-Men: AXIS #3 Quicksilver and Magneto try to talk the inverted Wanda down, but when Wanda attacks them with a curse designed to punish her blood relatives that only affects Quicksilver, Wanda realizes that Magneto is not their biological father.Avengers & X-Men: AXIS #7 Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch later take a trip to Counter-Earth.Uncanny Avengers Vol. 2 #1-2 After being tracked down and defeated by Luminous (a female who was created by the genetic material of Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver), Pietro and Wanda were brought to the High Evolutionary himself. He revealed to them that they are actually the long thought deceased children of Django and Marya Maximoff, Anna and Mateo. He also told them the truth where they were not mutants at all, but they had been experimented on by the High Evolutionary. After escaping from the High Evolutionary's experimentations, Pietro and Wanda located the Avengers Unity Division (who had traveled to the Counter-Earth looking for the twins) and helped the inhabitants of Lowtown (a refuge for the High Evolutionary's rejects) from their creator's assault.Uncanny Avengers Vol. 2 #4 After the High Evolutionary is defeated and he escapes into a portal with Luminous, Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch return to Earth with the Avengers Unity Division.Uncanny Avengers Vol. 2 #5 Quicksilver was originally presented as a mutant capable of moving and thinking at superhuman speeds. Originally capable of running at the speed of sound, exposure to the High Evolutionary's Isotope E made it possible for the character to run at supersonic speeds of up to Mach 10 and resist the effects of friction, reduced oxygen, and kinetic impact while moving at super-speeds. Also, he has a fast metabolism and can heal more rapidly than the average human. The character's speed allows him to perform feats such as create cyclone-strength winds; run up walls and cross bodies of water. It has been revealed that one of the reasons for his abrasive and impatient personality is that it seems to him that the rest of the world is moving in slow motion and that he is constantly waiting for it to catch up. As he once explained, "Have you ever had a day where you are at the ATM and you are in a hurry because you're running late but the person in front of you doesn't know how to use the ATM and they're taking forever? Now imagine what it must be like to spend every day surrounded by people who don't know how to use the ATM."X-Factor Vol. 1, issue #87: "The X-Amination" Quicksilver loses his powers of speed when his sister removes most of his mutant powers, but gains new powers courtesy of the Inhumans' Terrigen Mist. The mist gives Quicksilver the ability to displace himself out of mainstream time and space and "jump" into the future. The character can summon several time-displaced duplicates of himself and appear to teleport by "jumping" into the future and then returning to the present at a new location. By voluntarily embedding fragments of the Terrigen Crystals into his own body, the character could empower former mutants with extreme versions of their superhuman abilities. However, the effect was usually fatal. The crystals are subsequently forced from the character's body by the mutant Rictor, leaving him without these abilities. After having a series of hallucinations, Quicksilver saw a woman in mortal danger and felt a desire to be a hero then regains his mutant powers in order to save the woman's life.X-Factor: The Quick and the Dead #1 It was later revealed that he actually was a normal child that was put through several experiments by the High Evolutionary which granted his powers.Uncanny Avengers (vol. 2) #4 In the DC/Marvel crossover JLA/Avengers, Pietro first appears being brainwashed by Starro when the Avengers battle him. Thanks to a combination of Wanda's magic and Ms. Marvel's powers, they manage to get Starro's probe off of him.JLA/Avengers #1 When he and the other Avengers go to the DC Universe, he becomes interested in the Speed Force and becomes obsessed with defeating The Flash, but he fails twice. During the final battle in the Savage Land, he finally defeats the Flash, but only does so because there is no Speed Force in the Marvel Universe.JLA/Avengers #2 He makes an appearance in the final battle with Krona, but it is very brief. He also appears at the end as one of the heroes that started out the entire event.JLA/Avengers #4 In the limited series Marvel Zombies, Earth-2149 is contaminated with a virus that turns victims into flesh-eating zombies, with Quicksilver infected when bitten by a "zombified" Mystique (who at the time was impersonating his sister Wanda). This results in the rapid spread of the zombie virus, as Quicksilver is able to infect hundreds around the world in a short amount of time.Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness #1 - 5 (May - Sep. 2007) The character reappears in the limited series Marvel Zombies 3, revealed to be working for a "zombified" Wilson Fisk. Quicksilver is eventually lured into a trap by the Earth-616 Machine Man and subsequently destroyed.Marvel Zombies 3 #1 - 4 (Dec. 2008 - March 2009) The zombie virus spreads to a different Quicksilver in 'Earth Z', who is featured in the limited series Marvel Zombies Return. Here, his body is capable of operating independent of the head.Marvel Zombies: Return #5 When the zombies from Earth-2149 cross over into Earth-Z, Quicksilver is transformed into a zombie, and in Marvel Zombies Return #5 is one of the few remaining zombies left who fought against Spider-Man and his New Avengers, attempting to steal a canister containing the 'cure' that Spider-Man had developed, only for the wall-crawler to accidentally pull Quicksilver's head off when trying to catch him with his webbing. He was ripped apart very violently by then.Marvel Zombies Return #5 (Sep. 2009) Limited series Marvel 1602 depicts Quicksilver as Petros, the assistant (and secretly, son) of the High Inquisitor of the Spanish Catholic Church, Enrique.Marvel 1602 #1 - 8 (Nov. 2003 - June 2004) Ultimate Marvel features a version of the character warped by constant abuse from Magneto. The character is faster than the Earth-616 version, stating that as a teenager he was already capable of reaching speeds of Mach 10.Ultimates #1 - 7 (Mar. - Sep. 2002); #8 (Nov. 2002); #9 (Apr. 2003); #10 (July 2003); #11 (Sep. 2003); #12 (Nov. 2003); #13 (Apr. 2004); Ultimates 2 #1 - 6 (Feb. - July 2005); #7 (Sep. 2005); #8 (Nov. 2005); #9 (Jan. 2006); #10 (Mar. 2006); #11 - 12 (July - Aug. 2006); #13 (Feb. 2007) After he and his sister, the Scarlet Witch, defected from their father's Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy, they joined the Ultimates. The twin siblings also share an incestuous relationship. During the Ultimate X-Men's Magnetic North story arc, he watched over his father while he was imprisoned in the Triskelion, and threatened to kill him.Ultimate X-Men #61-65 (Jul.-Nov. 2005) In The Ultimates 3, he and his sister are apparently killed; however, Quicksilver later resurfaced at the end of the Absolute Power story arc, and killed Moira MacTaggert.Ultimate X-Men #100 (Feb. 2009) In Ultimatum #5, Quicksilver assassinated Cyclops as he is giving a speech at Washington DC, using the same bullet that was used to murder the Scarlet Witch.Ultimatum #5 (Jul. 2009) Following the deaths of major characters of the X-Men and the Brotherhood, Pietro began to search for new Brotherhood team members. Mystique, Sabretooth and Teddy (the son of Blob) joined him in Wundagore, along with an apparently reborn Wanda.Ultimate Comics: Ultimate X #5 Following his sister's orders, Quicksilver tried to help the White House, only resulting in the death of many mutants at the hands of Nimrod Model Sentinels, which were controlled by the Reverend Stryker before his death. When Pietro arrived in Egypt, he met his father, Erik, completely alive.Ultimate Comics: X-Men #6 However, this was revealed to be an illusion from Sinister.Ultimate Comics: X-Men #13 He attempts to manipulate his younger half-brother, Jimmy Hudson, but is defeated.Ultimate Comics: Wolverine #1-4 Later, he helps Reed Richards assemble some of the Infinity Gems and joins his team of Dark Ultimates.Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #25 Quicksilver is fatally wounded after he turns against Richards and Kang, and chooses to die by Wanda's graveside.Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #29 Quicksilver and Scarlet Witch appear in the What If? story "What If the X-Men Died on their First Mission?" as allies of Beast following the demise of the X-Men and upon the menace by Count Nefaria and his Ani-Men. Although invited to join the newly formed team upon the success of their mission, both decline in favor of their current commitments, although they promise their aid if they are needed.What If vol. 2 #9 (1990) In the one-shot X-Men Noir, Peter Magnus is a former college track star, and works in the Homicide Department of the NYPD with his father: Eric Magnus, Chief Detective and the leader of The Brotherhood.X-Men Noir #1 (Dec. 2008)       Quicksilver appeared as a part of the Avengers in a few episodes of the Captain America portion of The Marvel Super Heroes in 1966, voiced by Len Carlson.Episode 8: "The Coming of the Swordsman/Vengeance Is Ours/Emissary of Destruction" Quicksilver guest-stars in three episodes of X-Men, voiced by Adrian Egan. Quicksilver is a recurring character in the animated series X-Men: Evolution, voiced by Richard Ian Cox. Quicksilver appears as a member/leader of the Brotherhood of Mutants in the animated series Wolverine and the X-Men, voiced by Mark Hildreth. He appears in the episodes "Hindsight" Pt. 2, "Timebomb", "Past Discretions", "Battle Lines", "Backlash", and the three part series finale "Foresight". Quicksilver is featured in The Super Hero Squad Show episode "Hexed, Vexed, and Perplexed", voiced by Scott Menville. Quicksilver appears in the 2014 film X-Men: Days of Future Past, played by Evan Peters.X-Men: Days Of Future Past Quicksilver controversy: writer Simon Kinberg speaks Bryan Singer shot all of Quicksilver's scenes in 3,600 frames per second. A viral marketing website for the film shows that Quicksilver broke eight world records in track and field events, causing a scandal, and prompting athletics officials to adopt a genetic testing policy in partnership with Trask Industries preventing mutants from competing in professional sporting events."1977 World Record Scandal". X-Men: 25 Moments. Retrieved December 31, 2014. Peters will reprise his role as Quicksilver in the upcoming 2016 film X-Men: Apocalypse. In this film, his real name is Peter. Aaron Taylor-Johnson signed on to play Quicksilver in the 2015 film Avengers: Age of Ultron. Taylor-Johnson first appeared as the character in a mid-credits scene of the 2014 film Captain America: The Winter Soldier. Pietro and his sister Wanda (Elizabeth Olsen) are captives of Baron Strucker, having volunteered themselves to be experimented upon by Hydra. Although, both Taylor-Johnson and Olsen signed multi-picture deals for their characters, producer Kevin Feige stated that there are no future plans for Quicksilver, who is killed in the film's climax. Quicksilver appears as a supporting character in Captain America and the Avengers. Quicksilver has a brief cameo appearance in the video game X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse. Quicksilver appears as a boss in the PSP, PS2, and Wii versions of Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2, voiced by Robert Tinkler. Quicksilver appears as a playable character in Marvel Super Hero Squad: The Infinity Gauntlet, with Scott Menville reprising his role. Quicksilver appears in the X-Men: Destiny video game, voiced by Sunil Malhotra. Quicksilver is a playable character in the Facebook game Marvel: Avengers Alliance. Quicksilver is a playable character in Marvel Super Hero Squad Online. Quicksilver is a playable character in Lego Marvel's Avengers, voiced by Aaron Taylor-Johnson.
