     The Research Triangle, commonly referred to as simply The Triangle, is a region in the Piedmont of North Carolina in the United States, anchored by North Carolina State University, Duke University, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and the cities of Raleigh and Durham and the towns of Cary and Chapel Hill. The eight-county region, officially named the Raleigh–Durham–Cary–Chapel Hill combined statistical area (CSA), comprises the Raleigh-Cary and Durham–Chapel Hill metropolitan areas and the Dunn, Henderson, Oxford, and Sanford Micropolitan Statistical Areas. A 2013 Census estimate put the population at 2,037,430, making it the second largest metropolitan area in the state of North Carolina behind Charlotte. The Raleigh–Durham television market includes a broader 24-county area which includes Fayetteville, and has a population of 2,726,000 persons.Nielsen Station Index, Viewers in Profile, Raleigh–Durham (Fayetteville), NC May 2010 The "Triangle" name was cemented in the public consciousness in the 1950s with the creation of Research Triangle Park, home to numerous high-tech companies and enterprises. Although the name is now used to refer to the geographic region, "the Triangle" originally referred to the universities, whose research facilities, and the educated workforce they provide, have historically served as a major attraction for businesses located in the region. The region should not be confused with The Triad, which is a North Carolina region adjacent to and directly west of the Triangle comprising Greensboro, Winston-Salem, and High Point, among other cities. Most of the Triangle is part of North Carolina's second, fourth, and thirteenth congressional districts. Depending on which definition of the Research Triangle region is used, as few as three or as many as 16 counties are included as part of the region. All of these counties when included hold a population over 2,167,000 people. * - Most restrictive definition, comprising the three core counties of Wake, Durham and Orange ‡ - U.S. Census Bureau definition, taken from the counties included in the Raleigh–Durham–Cary-Chapel Hill Combined Statistical Area ¶ - Most liberal definition of the Research Triangle region, as defined by the Research Triangle Regional Partnership Raleigh–Durham–Cary-Chapel Hill Combined Statistical Area  Population (Census Estimates 2014) 2,075,126    The Triangle region, as defined for statistical purposes as the Raleigh–Durham–Cary CSA, comprises eight counties, although the U.S. Census Bureau divided the region into two metropolitan statistical areas and one micropolitan area in 2003.  The Raleigh-Cary metropolitan area comprises Wake, Nash, Franklin, and Johnston Counties; the Durham-Chapel Hill metropolitan area comprises Durham, Orange, Chatham, and Person Counties; and the Dunn micropolitan area comprises Harnett County.  However, for all intents and purposes it still functions as a single metropolitan area. Some area television stations define the region as Raleigh–Durham–Fayetteville. Fayetteville, North Carolina, is over  from Raleigh, but is part of the Triangle television market. Chapel Hill was long considered the third "point" of the Triangle," but Cary has since overtaken it in population. Public secondary education in the Triangle is similar to that of the majority of the state of North Carolina, in which there are county-wide school systems (the exception is Chapel Hill-Carrboro City Schools within Orange County but apart from Orange County Schools).  Based in Cary, the Wake County Public School System, which includes the cities of Raleigh and Cary, is the largest school system in the state of North Carolina and the 18th-largest in the United States, officially recording an enrollment of 139,599 students on the 20th day of the 2009-10 school year.http://www.wcpss.net/demographics/   Other larger systems in the region include Durham Public Schools (about 33,000 students) and rapidly growing Johnston County Schools (about 31,000 students).  With the significant number of universities and colleges in the area and the relative absence of major league professional sports, NCAA sports are very popular, particularly those sports in which the Atlantic Coast Conference participates, most notably basketball. The North Carolina Tar Heels (representing the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), NC State Wolfpack (representing North Carolina State University in Raleigh), and Duke Blue Devils (representing Duke University in Durham) are all members of the ACC. Rivalries among these schools are very strong, fueled by proximity to each other, with annual competitions in every sport. Adding to the rivalries is the large number of graduates the high schools in the region send to each of the local universities. It is very common for students at one university to know many students attending the other local universities, which increases the opportunities for "bragging" among the schools. The four ACC schools in the state, Duke, North Carolina, North Carolina State, and Wake Forest University (the last of which was originally located in the town of Wake Forest before moving to Winston-Salem in 1956), are referred to as Tobacco Road by sportscasters, particularly in basketball. All four teams consistently produce high-caliber teams. Each of the Triangle-based universities listed has won at least two NCAA Basketball national championships. Three historically black colleges, including recent Division I arrival North Carolina Central University and Division II members St. Augustine College and Shaw University also boost the popularity of college sports in the region.  The region has only one professional team of the four major sports, the Carolina Hurricanes of the NHL, based in Raleigh. Since moving to the Research Triangle region from Hartford, Connecticut, they have enjoyed great success, including winning a Stanley Cup. With only one top-level professional sports option, minor league sports are quite popular in the region. The Durham Bulls in downtown Durham are a AAA Minor League baseball affiliate of the Tampa Bay Rays, and the Carolina Mudcats, based in Zebulon, 10 miles east of Raleigh, are the Advanced-A affiliate of the Atlanta Braves. In Cary, the Carolina RailHawks play in the second-level North American Soccer League (not to be confused with the former league of the same name). The area also had a team in the fledgling World League of American Football - however, the Raleigh–Durham Skyhawks, coached by Roman Gabriel, did not exactly cover themselves in glory; they lost all 10 games of their inaugural (and only) season in 1991. The team folded after that, being replaced in the league by the Ohio Glory, which fared little better at 1-9, ultimately suffering the same fate - along with the other six teams based in North America - when the league took a two-year hiatus, returning as a six-team all-European league in 1995. With over 1200 active participants in multiple recreation centers and university campuses throughout the area, Research Triangle is home to one of the largest badminton communities in the Southeastern United States. The American Badminton Academy is also located here in a dedicated facility with seven permanent courts. The Academy is unique among U.S. badminton facilities in that it hosts an international player development program run by Dennis Christensen, an Olympic-level coach from Denmark. Anchored by leading technology firms, government and world-class universities, medical centers and schools, the area's economy has performed exceptionally well. Significant increases in employment, earnings, personal income, and retail sales are projected over the next 15 years. The region's growing high-technology community includes such companies as IBM, SAS Institute, Cisco Systems, NetApp, Red Hat, EMC Corporation, and Credit Suisse First Boston. In addition to high-tech, the region is consistently ranked in the top three in the U.S. with concentration in life science companies. Some of these companies include GlaxoSmithKline, Biogen Idec, BASF, Merck & Co., Novo Nordisk, Novozymes, and Pfizer. Research Triangle Park and North Carolina State University's Centennial Campus in Raleigh support innovation through R&D and technology transfer among the region's companies and research universities (including Duke University and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill). The area has fared relatively well during the late-2000s recession, ranked as the strongest region in North Carolina by the Brookings Institution and among the top 40 in the country.  The change in unemployment during 2008 to 2009 was 4.6% and home prices was 2%.  The Greensboro metropolitan area was listed among the second-weakest and the Charlotte area among the middle in the country.    The Research Triangle region is served by these hospitals and medical centers:   The Triangle proper is served by two major interstate highways: I-40 and I-85, their spurs: I-440 and I-540, and seven U.S. Routes: 1, 15, 64, 70, 264, 401,  and 501. US Highways 15 and 501 are multiplexed through much of the region as US 15-501. I-95 passes 30 miles east of Raleigh through Johnston County, with a spur route, I-495, connecting I-95 at Rocky Mount, NC to Raleigh via the US 64-264 Bypass. The two interstates diverge from one another in Orange County, with I-85 heading northeast through northern Durham County toward Virginia, while I-40 travels southeast through southern Durham, through the center of the region, and serves as the primary freeway through Raleigh.  The related loop freeways I-440 and I-540 are primarily located in Wake County around Raleigh.  I-440 begins at the interchange of US 1 and I-40 southwest of downtown Raleigh and arcs as a multiplex with US 1 northward around downtown with the formal designation as the Cliff Benson/Raleigh Beltline (cosigned with US 1 on three-fourths of its northern route) and ends at its junction with I-40 in southeast Raleigh.  I-540, sometimes known as the Raleigh Outer Loop, extends from the US 64-264 Bypass to I-40 just inside Durham County, where it continues across the interstate as a state route (NC 540), prior to its becoming a toll road from the NC 54 interchange to the current terminus at NC Highway 55 near Holly Springs. I-95 serves the extreme eastern edge of the region, crossing north-south through suburban Johnston County. U.S. Routes 1, 15, and 64 primarily serve the region as limited-access freeways or multilane highways with access roads.  US 1 enters the region from the southwest as the Claude E. Pope Memorial Highway and travels through suburban Apex where it merges with US 64 and continues northeast through Cary. The two highways are codesignated for about  until US 1 joins I-440 and US 64 with I-40 along the Raleigh–Cary border.  Capital Boulevard, which is designated US 1 for half of its route and US 401 the other is not a limited-access freeway, although it is a major thoroughfare through northeast Raleigh and into the northern downtown area. North Carolina Highway 147 is a limited-access freeway that connects I-85 with Toll Route NC 540 in northwestern Wake County. The older, toll-free portion of the four-lane route — known as the Durham Freeway or the I.L. "Buck" Dean Expressway — traverses downtown Durham and extends through Research Triangle Park to I-40. The Durham Freeway is often used as a detour or alternate route for I-40 through southwestern Durham the Chapel Hill area in cases of traffic accident, congestion or road construction delays. The tolled portion of NC 147, called the Triangle Expressway—North Carolina's first modern toll road when it opened to traffic in late 2011—continues past I-40 to Toll NC 540. Both Toll NC 147 and Toll NC 540 are modern facilities which collect tolls using transponders and license plate photo-capture technology.   A partnering system of multiple public transportation agencies currently serves the Triangle region under the joint GoTransit branding. Raleigh is served by the Capital Area Transit (CAT) municipal transit system, while Durham has the Durham Area Transit Authority (DATA) system.  Chapel Hill is served by Chapel Hill Transit, and Cary is served by C-Tran public transit systems.  However, Triangle Transit, formerly called the Triangle Transit Authority (TTA), works in cooperation with all area transit systems by offering transfers between its own routes and those of the other systems. Triangle Transit also coordinates an extensive vanpool and rideshare program that serves the region's larger employers and commute destinations. Plans have been made to merge all of the area's municipal systems into Triangle Transit, and Triangle Transit also has proposed a regional rail system to connect downtown Durham, downtown Cary and downtown Raleigh with multiple suburban stops, as well as stops in the Research Triangle Park area. The agency's initial proposal was effectively cancelled in 2006, however, when the agency could not procure adequate federal funding. A committee of local business, transportation and government leaders currently are working with Triangle Transit to develop a new transit blueprint for the region, with various modes of rail transit, as well as bus rapid transit, open as options for consideration.      The General Assembly of North Carolina chartered the Raleigh–Durham Aeronautical Authority in 1939, which was changed in 1945 to the Raleigh–Durham Airport Authority. The first new terminal opened in 1955. Terminal A (now Terminal 1) opened in 1981. American Airlines began service to RDU in 1985. RDU opened the  runway, 5L-23R, in 1986. American Airlines opened its north-south hub operation at RDU in the new Terminal C in June 1987, greatly increasing the size of RDU's operations with a new terminal including a new apron and runway. American brought RDU its first international flights to Bermuda, Cancun, Paris and London. In 1996, American Airlines ceased its hub operations at RDU due to Pan Am and Eastern Airlines.  Pan Am and Eastern were Miami's main tenants until 1991, when both carriers went bankrupt. Their hubs at MIA were taken over by United Airlines and American Airlines. This created a difficulty in competing with US Airways' hub in Charlotte and Delta Air Lines' hub in Atlanta, Georgia for passengers traveling between smaller cities in the North and South. Midway Airlines entered the market, starting service in 1995 with the then somewhat novel concept of 50-seat Canadair Regional Jets providing service from its RDU hub primarily along the East Coast. Midway, originally incorporated in Chicago, had some success after moving its operations to the midpoint of the eastern United States at RDU and its headquarters to Morrisville, NC. The carrier ultimately could not overcome three weighty challenges: the arrival of Southwest Airlines, the refusal of American Airlines to renew the frequent flyer affiliation it had with Midway (thus dispatching numerous higher fare-paying businesspeople to airlines with better reward destinations), and the significant blow of September 11, 2001. Midway Airlines filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy on August 13, 2001, and ceased operations entirely on October 30, 2003. In February 2000, RDU was ranked as the nation's second fastest-growing major airport in the United States, by Airports Council International, based on 1999 statistics. Passenger growth hit 24% over the previous year, ranking RDU second only to Washington Dulles International Airport. RDU opened Terminal A south concourse for use by Northwest and Continental Airlines in 2001. The addition added  and five aircraft gates to the terminal. Terminal A became designated as Terminal 1 on October 26, 2008. In 2003, RDU also dedicated a new general aviation terminal. RDU continues to keep pace with its growth by redeveloping Terminal C into a new state-of-the-art terminal, now known as Terminal 2, which opened in October 2008.Raleigh–Durham International Airport Carriers at RDU International Airport: In addition to RDU, several smaller publicly owned general-aviation airports also operate in the metropolitan region: Several licensed private general-aviation and agricultural airfields are located in the region's suburban areas and nearby rural communities: These licensed heliports serve the Research Triangle region: A number of helipads (i.e. marked landing sites not classified under the FAA LID system) also serve a variety of additional medical facilities (such as UNC Hospitals in Chapel Hill), as well as private, corporate and governmental interests, throughout the region. Amtrak serves the region with the Silver Meteor, Silver Star, Palmetto, Carolinian, and Piedmont routes. Although still in the planning and evaluation phases as of the end of 2014, the SEHSR (Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor) project is expected to serve the area. Notable shopping centers and malls: Other shopping centers Notable locally based or independent retailer: Film festivals and events: Notable performing arts and music venues: Theatre and dance events: Music festivals: The area is part of the Raleigh–Durham–Fayetteville television designated media area and is the 25th-largest in the country with 1,135,920 households (2014) included in that area and the second largest television market in North Carolina.  It is part of the Raleigh–Durham Nielsen Audio radio market (code 115) and is the 42nd-largest in the country with a population of 1,365,900. The Raleigh–Durham–Fayetteville market is defined by Nielsen as including Chatham, Cumberland, Dunn, Durham, Granville, Halifax, Harnett, Hoke, Johnston, Lee, Moore, Northampton, Orange, Robeson, Vance, Wake, Warren, Wayne, and Wilson Counties, along with parts of Franklin County. Numerous newspapers and periodicals serve the Triangle market. The Triangle is part of the Raleigh–Durham–Fayetteville Designated Market Area for broadcast television.  As of 2012, the area had risen one spot to the 21st-largest in the country with 1,143,420 television households, surpassing Charlotte which dropped two spots in list.2012 local Nielsen DMAs This area includes these television stations: Raleigh is home to the Research Triangle Region bureau of the regional cable TV news channel News 14 Carolina. The Triangle is home to North Carolina Public Radio, a public radio station/NPR provider that brings in listeners around the country. Raleigh and a large part of the Triangle area is Arbitron radio market #43. Stations include:   FM stations:  AM stations: Triangle North Carolina  '*Piedmont Atlantic      County 2014 Estimate 2010 Census Change Chatham County Durham County Franklin County Granville County Harnett County Johnston County Lee County Nash County Orange County Person County Vance County Wake County Total Team !! League !! Sport !! Venue (capacity) Carolina Hurricanes NHL Hockey PNC Arena (18,680) Durham Bulls IL (AAA) Baseball DBAP (10,000) Carolina Mudcats CL (A) Baseball Five County Stadium (6,500) Carolina RailHawks NASL (D2) Soccer WakeMed Soccer Park (10,000) Raleigh Flyers AUDL Ultimate WakeMed Soccer Park (10,000) / Cardinal Gibbons High School Station\Route !! Silver Meteor !! Silver Star !! Palmetto !! Carolinian !! Piedmont Rocky Mount (RMT) X X X X Wilson (WLN) X X Selma (SSM) X X Fayetteville (FAY) X X Southern Pines (SOP) X Raleigh (RGH) X X X Cary (CYN) X X X Durham (DNC) X X Greater Raleigh metropolitan area, North Carolina museums Museum name Image City Type Notes Ackland Art Museum Chapel Hill Art Artspace Raleigh Art Ayr Mount Hillsborough History Bennett Place State Historic Site Durham History Carolina Basketball Museum Chapel Hill Sports Carolina Tiger Rescue Pittsboro Science Contemporary Art Museum of Raleigh Raleigh Art Duke Homestead Durham History Joel Lane Museum House Raleigh History Kidzu Children's Museum Chapel Hill Children Legends of Harley Drag Racing Museum Raleigh Sports Marbles Kids Museum Raleigh Children formerly Exploris Meredith College Galleries Raleigh Art Mordecai Mansion Raleigh History Morehead Planetarium and Science Center Chapel Hill Science home to astronaut training for years Museum of Life and Science Durham Science includes small outdoor zoo North Carolina Museum of Art Raleigh Art expanded in 2010 North Carolina Museum of History Raleigh History also home to North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame North Carolina Museum of Natural Science Raleigh Science annual BugFest and Astronomy Days Raleigh City Museum Raleigh History North Carolina State Capitol Raleigh History North Carolina State University Insect Museum Raleigh Science Nasher Museum of Art Durham Art NCCU Art Museum Raleigh Art Page-Walker Arts & History Center Cary History The Imperial Centre for the Arts & Sciences Rocky Mount Art & Science Primary cities and towns A - Raleigh B - Durham C - Chapel Hill D - Cary E - Morrisville F - Apex G - Holly Springs H - Fuquay-Varina I - Garner J - Knightdale K - Wendell L - Zebulon M - Rolesville N - Wake Forest O - Hillsborough P - Carrboro Q - Pittsboro R - Clayton S - Youngsville T - Franklinton U - Creedmoor V - Stem W - Butner Counties 1 - Wake County 2 - Durham County 3 - Orange County 4 - Chatham County 5 - Harnett County 6 - Johnston County 7 - Franklin County 8 - Granville County Parks and bodies of water a - Research Triangle Park b - Umstead State Park c - Jordan Lake d - Haw River e - Harris Lake f - Lake Wheeler g - Lake Benson h - Falls Lake Interstate highways 1 - I-40/I-85 2 - I-85 3 - I-40 4 - I-440 5 - I-540 13 - I-495 Other major highways 1 - US 15 2 - US 1 3 - US 401 4 - US 64 5 - US 70 6 - US 401 7 - US 1 8 - US 15-501 9 - US 64 10 - US 70 11 - US 501 12 - NC 147 13 - US 64-264 14 - US 64 Business Chatham‡¶ Durham*‡¶ Edgecombe¶ Franklin‡¶ Granville‡¶ Harnett‡¶ Johnston‡¶ Lee‡¶ Moore¶ Nash‡¶ Orange*‡¶ Person‡¶ Vance‡¶ Wake*‡¶ Warren¶ Cary  (town), 145,693 Chapel Hill (town), 58,424 Rocky Mount (partially) Campbell University Central Carolina Community College Duke University Durham Technical Community College Louisburg College Meredith College North Carolina Central University North Carolina State University Piedmont Community College Shaw University Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary and The College at Southeastern St. Augustine's College University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Vance-Granville Community College Wake Technical Community College William Peace University American Airlines BASF Bayer Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina The Body Shop Burt's Bees Cisco Systems Credit Suisse Group Duke University Durham Public Schools DuPont Eaton Fidelity Investments Environmental Protection Agency General Electric GlaxoSmithKline IBM LabCorp Lenovo Netapp North Carolina state government (including University of NC system) Pfizer (Pfizer Poultry Health) Progress Energy PNC (PNC Financial Services Group, Inc.) Qualcomm Quintiles Red Hat Research Triangle Institute SAS Institute Sony Ericsson Syngenta Teleflex Medical Toyota United States Forest Service Verizon Wake County Public School System Hospitals of the Duke University Health System Duke Ambulatory Surgery Center (Durham) Duke Children's Hospital and Health Center (Durham) Duke Raleigh Hospital (formerly Raleigh Community Hospital) Duke University Medical Center (Durham) Duke Regional Hospital (formerly Durham Regional Hospital) Person Memorial Hospital (Roxboro) Hospitals of the UNC Health Care system Chatham Hospital (Siler City) Nash General Hospital (Rocky Mount) North Carolina Cancer Hospital (Chapel Hill) North Carolina Children's Hospital (Chapel Hill) North Carolina Memorial Hospital (Chapel Hill) North Carolina Neurosciences Hospital (Chapel Hill) North Carolina Women's Hospital (Chapel Hill) Rex Hospital (Raleigh) Johnston Medical Center (Smithfield) Hospitals of the WakeMed system WakeMed Raleigh Campus (formerly Wake Memorial Hospital and Wake Medical Center) WakeMed Cary Hospital (formerly Western Wake Medical Center) Other hospitals and medical centers Central Regional Hospital,(Butner) Dorothea Dix Hospital (Raleigh) Durham VA Medical Center (Durham) Franklin Regional Medical Center (Louisburg) Harnett Health System (Dunn) Betsy Johnson Regional Hospital Angier Medical Services Good Hope Hospital Betsy Johnson Cancer Research Clinic Central Harnett Hospital Medical Schools Duke University School of Medicine University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine Campbell University School of Osteopathic Medicine Air Canada, the airport's first international carrier, introduced service to Toronto in 1996. Southwest Airlines, the nation's largest low-cost carrier, began service to RDU in 1999. America West (merged with US Airways in 2005) began service at RDU in 2002 with flights to Phoenix and Las Vegas JetBlue began nonstop service between RDU and New York and Boston in 2006, with additional service to Fort Lauderdale, which began in January 2008. Triangle North Executive Airport , Louisburg Raleigh Exec , Sanford Johnston County Airport , Smithfield Horace Williams Airport , Chapel Hill Harnett Regional Jetport , Erwin Person County Airport , Roxboro Siler City Municipal Airport  , Siler City Bagwell Airport , Garner Ball Airport , Louisburg Barclaysville Field Airport , Angier Brooks Field Airport , Siler City CAG Farms Airport , Angier Charles Field Airport , Dunn Cox Airport , Apex Crooked Creek Airport , Bunn Dead Dog Airport , Pittsboro Deck Airpark Airport , Apex Dutchy Airport , Chapel Hill Eagle's Landing Airport , Pittsboro Field of Dreams Airport , Zebulon Fuquay/Angier Field Airport , Fuquay-Varina Hinton Field Airport , Princeton Kenly Airport , Kenly Lake Ridge Aero Park Airport , Durham Miles Airport , Chapel Hill North Raleigh Airport , Louisburg Peacock Stolport Airport , Garner Raleigh East Airport , Knightdale Riley Field Airport , Bunn Ron's Field Ultralight Airport , Pittsboro Triple W Airport , Raleigh Womble Field Airport , Chapel Hill Betsy Johnson Memorial Hospital Heliport , Dunn—publicly owned; medical service Duke University North Heliport , Durham—privately owned; public medical service Garner Road Heliport , Raleigh—publicly owned; state government service Holly Green Heliport , Durham—private Sky-5 Heliport , Raleigh—private, owned by Sky-5 Inc. (WRAL-TV) Sprint MidAtlantic Telecom Heliport , Youngsville—private; corporate service Wake Medical Center Heliport , Raleigh—publicly owned; medical service Western Wake Medical Center Heliport , Cary—publicly owned; medical service Triangle Town Center and Commons (Raleigh; 1,431,091&nbsp;ft²) The Streets at Southpoint (Durham; 1,336,000&nbsp;ft²) Crabtree Valley Mall (Raleigh; 1,326,000&nbsp;ft²) Cary Towne Center (Cary; 914,252&nbsp;ft²) Northgate Mall (Durham; 857,099&nbsp;ft²) Crossroads Plaza (Cary; 1,300,000&nbsp;ft²) Cameron Village (Raleigh; 656,000&nbsp;ft²) Golden East Crossing (Rocky Mount; 574,000&nbsp;ft²) Carolina Premium Outlets (Smithfield; 440,000&nbsp;ft²) University Place (Chapel Hill; 366,000&nbsp;ft²) Carr Mill Mall (Carrboro; 86,000&nbsp;ft²) Tanger Outlet Center (Mebane; 317,000&nbsp;ft²) North Hills Mall & Plaza (Raleigh) South Hills Mall & Plaza (Cary) Brier Creek Commons (Raleigh) Brightleaf Square (downtown Durham) South Square Mall - defunct (Durham) A Southern Season - the nation's largest gourmet retailer (Chapel Hill) Flicker Film Festival - Carrboro Full Frame Documentary Film Festival - Durham Escapism Film Festival - Durham Retrofantasma Film Festival - Durham Nevermore Film Festival' - Durham North Carolina Gay & Lesbian Film Festival - Durham The Time Warner Cable Music Pavilion at Walnut Creek - Raleigh Koka Booth Amphitheatre at Regency Park - Cary Progress Energy Center for the Performing Arts - downtown Raleigh PNC Arena - Raleigh Durham Performing Arts Center - Durham Carolina Theatre - Durham American Dance Festival - Durham Hopscotch Music Festival - Raleigh ProgDay - Chapel Hill The News & Observer, the major daily Raleigh newspaper and the region's largest, with a significant regional and statewide readership (especially to the east of the Triangle) The Herald-Sun, the major daily Durham newspaper Garner News, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Garner in southern Wake County The Apex Herald, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Apex in western Wake County Holly Springs Sun, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Holly Springs in southwestern Wake County Butner-Creedmoor News The Weekly community newspaper for southern Granville County and surrounding areas Cleveland Post, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Cleveland and nearby northwestern Johnston and southern Wake Counties Fuquay-Varina Independent, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Fuquay-Varina in southwestern Wake County The Wake Weekly, a weekly community newspaper serving suburban Wake Forest, northern Wake County and southern Franklin County The Chatham Journal, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Pittsboro and surrounding Chatham County The Clayton News-Star, a weekly community newspaper for suburban Clayton and western Johnston County The Daily Record, the daily community newspaper for suburban Dunn and surrounding Harnett County The Courier-Times, the semiweekly community newspaper for suburban Roxboro and Person County The Triangle Business Journal, a weekly regional economic journal Cary Magazine, a bi-monthly magazine that boasts 65,000 readers for Cary and western Wake County Chapel Hill Magazine, a local bi-monthly magazine that serves 12,500 households and 1,600 businesses of Chapel Hill, Carrboro, Hillsborough and northern Chatham County The News and Observer distributes a number of free regional papers through its delivery system. The Cary News, a weekly community newspaper serving the city of Cary and western Wake County The Chapel Hill News, a weekly community newspaper serving Chapel Hill, suburban Orange County and northeastern Chatham County The Clayton News-star, a weekly community newspaper serving Clayton, NC The Durham News, a weekly community newspaper serving Durham County Midtown Raleigh News, a weekly community newspaper serving downtown Raleigh North Raleigh News, a weekly community newspaper serving the northern Raleigh suburbs The Herald, a weekly community newspaper serving the western Wake and Johnston Counties The Eastern Wake News, a weekly community newspaper serving suburban eastern Wake County Southwest Wake News, a weekly community newspaper serving Apex, Holly Springs, Fuquay and southern Wake County Garner-Cleveland Record, the weekly community newspaper for suburban Garner in southern Wake County The Independent Weekly, a free weekly regional independent journal published in Durham The Carolina Journal, a monthly free regional newspaper published in Raleigh The Raleigh Downtowner, a free monthly magazine for downtown Raleigh and environs The Raleigh Hatchet, a free monthly magazine The Daily Tar Heel, the free weekday (during the regular academic year) student newspaper at UNC-Chapel Hill Technician, the free weekday (during the regular academic year) student newspaper at NC State University in Raleigh The Chronicle, a free daily newspaper for (but independent of) Duke University and its surrounding community in Durham The Blotter, a free monthly regional literary journal Fifteen-501, a free magazine for the Durham–Chapel Hill area (named for nearby U.S. Route 15-501) Acento Latino, a free Spanish-language weekly regional newspaper published in Raleigh The Cary Citizen, a free daily news source for the greater Cary and western Wake County area The Raleigh Telegram, a free daily news source for the greater Raleigh area The Wake Forest Gazette, a free weekly news site for items of local Wake Forest interest WUNC-TV (4, Chapel Hill), the PBS member station and viewer-supported flagship station of the University of North Carolina television network WRAL-TV (5, Raleigh), the CBS→NBC affiliate, owned by Capitol Broadcasting Company WTVD (11, Durham), the ABC O&O, owned by ABC Owned Television Stations WNCN (17, Goldsboro), the NBC→CBS affiliate, owned by Media General WLFL (22, Raleigh), the CW affiliate, owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group WTNC-LD (26, Durham), the UniMás O&O, owned by Univision Communications WRDC (28, Durham), the My Network TV affiliate, owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group WRAY-TV (30, Wilson), the TCT O&O, owned by Tri-State Christian Television WUVC-DT (40, Fayetteville), the Univision O&O, owned by Univision Communications WRPX-TV (47, Rocky Mount) and WFPX-TV (62, Fayetteville), the ION Television O&O's, owned by ION Media Networks WRAZ-TV (50, Raleigh), the Fox affiliate, owned by Capitol Broadcasting Company 88.1 FM WKNC (NCSU) College Radio from N.C. State University 88.5 FM WRTP (RTN) Christian ("His Radio WRTP") 88.7 FM WXDU (DU) College Radio from Duke University 88.9 FM WSHA (SU) NPR/Jazz from Shaw University 89.3 FM WXYC (UNC) College Radio from UNC-Chapel Hill 89.7 FM WCPE Classical & Opera Music 90.5 FM WVRD (Liberty University) Christian 90.7 FM WNCU (NCCU) NPR/Jazz from N.C. Central University 91.1 FM W216BN (RTN) Christian ("His Radio WRTP") 91.5 FM WUNC (UNC) NPR affiliate from UNC-Chapel Hill 92.5 FM WYFL (BBN) Christian Programs from Bible Broadcasting Network 93.3 FM WERO (NM License, LLC) CHR ("Bob 933") 93.5 FM WRLY-LP Community Radio 93.9 FM WNCB (CC) Country music ("B93.9") 94.7 FM WQDR-FM (CMG) Country ("94.7 QDR") 96.1 FM WBBB (CMG) Adult hits ("Radio 96.1") 96.5 FM WDNC The Buzz (Flagship for Duke Football and Basketball) (Fox Radio) 96.7 FM WKRX Country ("Kickin' Country") 96.9 FM WWPL (CMG) Urban ("The New 96.9 BZJ") 97.5 FM WQOK (R1) Hip Hop ("K-97.5") 97.9 FM WCHL (News Talk and Tar Heel Station) 98.1 FM WQSM (Cumulus) CHR ("Q-98") 98.9 FM W255AM (RTN) Christian ("His Radio WRTP") 99.3 FM WDNC The Buzz (Flagship for Duke Football and Basketball) (Fox Radio) 99.9 FM WCMC (CBC) Sports ("99.9 The Fan ESPN Radio") (Flagship for Carolina Hurricanes) 100.7 FM WRDU (CC) Classic Hits ("100.7, The River") 101.1 FM WYMY (CMG) Spanish ("La Ley 101.1 FM") 101.5 FM WRAL (CBC) Adult Contemporary ("Mix 101.5") 102.3 FM WKJO (NCM) CHR/Dance ("Pulse 102") 102.5 FM WPLW (NCM) CHR/Dance ("Pulse 102") 102.9 FM WKIX (CMG) Oldies ("Kix 102.9") 103.3 FM WAKG (PB) Country ("103.3 WAKG") 103.5 FM WCOM-LP Community Radio, Variety 103.9 FM WNNL (R1) Urban Gospel ("103.9, The Light") 104.3 FM WFXK (R1) Urban Adult Contemporary ("Foxy 104") 104.7 FM WPTK Popular Standards ("Just Right Radio 104.7 and AM 850") 105.1 FM WDCG (CC) CHR ("G-105") 106.1 FM WTKK (CC) Talk 106.7 FM WKVK (EMF) Contemporary Christian 107.1 FM WFXC (R1) Urban Adult Contemporary ("Foxy 107") 107.7 FM W299AQ (RTN) Christian ("His Radio WRTP") 107.9 FM W300AR (RTN) Christian ("His Radio WRTP") 540 AM WETC Spanish 570 AM WFNL Comedy ("Funny 570") 620 AM WDNC The Buzz (Flagship for Duke Football and Basketball) (Fox Radio) 680 AM WPTF News, Talk & Sports ("NewsRadio 680 WPTF") 750 AM WAUG Urban Programming from St. Augustine's College 850 AM WPTK Popular Standards ("Just Right Radio 104.7 and AM 850") 1030 AM WDRU Christian ("The Truth, 1030") 1240 AM WPJL Christian 1310 AM WTIK Spanish 1360 AM WCHL News, Talk & Sports 1410 AM WRJD Spanish Christian 1430 AM WRXO Country ("Simulcast of WKRX-FM") 1490 AM WDUR East Asian 1530 AM WLLQ Spanish 1550 AM WCLY ESPN Deportes 1590 AM WHPY Christian 1 Top City for Small Business (Raleigh, NC) -- Bizjournals, February 2009 1 America’s Smartest Cities (Raleigh–Durham, NC) -- The Daily Beast, October 2009 1 Fastest-Growing Metropolitan Area in the Country (Raleigh–Cary, NC) -- U.S. Census Bureau, March 2009 1 Best Place for Business and Careers (Raleigh, NC) -- Forbes.com, March 2009 3 Best Places to Launch a Small Business (Raleigh, NC) -- CNNMoney.com, October 2009 3 Hot Cities for Entrepreneurs (Raleigh–Durham) - Entrepreneur Magazine, September, 2005 1 High Tech Region (Raleigh–Durham) -- "Daring To Compete: A Region-to-Region Reality Check," Silicon Valley Leadership Group, September 16, 2005 2 Top Business Opportunity Metros (Durham MSA, Raleigh–Cary MSA) -- 2005 Mayor's Challenge "Top Business Opportunity Metros", Expansion Management, July 11, 2005 5 U.S. Life Sciences Clusters (Greater Raleigh–Durham) -- "The Greater Philadelphia Life Sciences Cluster", Milken Institute, June 2005; May 2009Milken Institute Publications - Research Reports - The Greater Philadelphia Life Sciences Cluster: An Economic and Comparative Assessment 1 City (Greater Raleigh–Durham) for Biotechnology—Milken Institute, June 2005 2 City (Greater Raleigh–Durham) for Life Sciences Human Capital—Milken Institute, June 2005 4 City (Greater Raleigh–Durham) for Life Sciences Workforce—Milken Institute, June 2005 1 City Where Americans Are Relocating (Raleigh, NC) -- Forbes.com, April 2009 3 Best Places to Live in America—Forbes, 2003[ ]  8 Best Big Cities for Jobs (Raleigh–Cary, NC) -- Forbes.com, May 2009 One of Top 10 University Markets that Has Its Act Together (Raleigh–Durham–Chapel Hill) -- Southern Business & Development, Summer 2005 5 Best Knowledge Worker Metro (Raleigh–Cary MSA) -- "Knowledge Worker Quotient", Expansion Management, May 2005 1 Most Unwired City (Raleigh–Durham–Chapel Hill) -- Forbes.com 2009 1 Best Place to Work (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, RTP), # 4 (NIEHS) and # 1 Academic Institution (UNC-Chapel Hill) for Postdocs -- "Best Places to Work for Postdocs: 2005", The Scientist, February 14, 2005 1 of America's Most Entrepreneurial Campuses (UNC Chapel Hill) -- Forbes, October 22, 2004 4 Top Pro-business State -- "Pollina Corporate Top 10 Pro-business States for 2005: Keeping Jobs in America", Pollina Corporate Real Estate, Inc., 2005 4 Best State in Health Care and Availability -- "Health Care Cost Quotient", Expansion Management, February, 2005 9 Top State in Nanotechnology—Small Times, March 2005 10 Top Venture Capital State—Moran Stahl & Boyer LLC, Site Selection, July 2005 Piedmont Crescent Piedmont Triad Greater Raleigh Chamber of Commerce Research Triangle Regional Partnership Triangle Wiki - Local wiki for the Triangle Bing maps Google maps
