   A residual-current device (RCD), or residual-current circuit breaker (RCCB), is a device to quickly disconnect current to prevent serious harm from an ongoing electric shock. Injury may still occur in some cases, for example if a human falls after receiving a shock. In the United States and Canada, the device is more commonly known as a ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), ground fault interrupter (GFI) or an appliance leakage current interrupter (ALCI). In the United Kingdom, these are better known by their initials RCD, and a combined RCD+MCB is known as a RCBO (residual-current circuit breaker with overcurrent protection). In Australia, they are sometimes known as safety switches or a RCD. An earth leakage circuit breaker (ELCB) may be a residual-current device, although an older type of voltage-operated earth leakage circuit breaker also exists.  In German speaking countries the device is sometimes known as FI where the F stands for fault (Fehler) and I for the symbol that represents Electric current. These electrical wiring devices disconnect a circuit when it detects that the electric current is not balanced between the energized (line) conductor(s) and the return (neutral) conductor. Under normal circumstances, these two wires are expected to carry matching currents, and any difference usually indicates that a short circuit or other electrical anomaly is present. Even a small leakage current can mean a risk of harm or death due to electric shock if the leaking electric current passes through a human; a current of around 30&nbsp;mA (0.030&nbsp;amperes) is potentially sufficient to cause cardiac arrest or serious harm if it persists for more than a small fraction of a second. RCDs/RCCBs are designed to disconnect the conducting wires quickly enough to prevent serious injury from such shocks. (This is commonly described as the RCD/RCCB being "tripped".) A RCD does not provide protection against unexpected or dangerously high current when current is flowing in the usual wires in the circuit, therefore it cannot replace a fuse or protect against overheating or fire risk due to overcurrent (overload) or short circuits if the fault does not lead to current leakage. Therefore RCDs are often used or integrated as a single product along with some kind of circuit breaker, such as a fuse or miniature circuit breaker (MCB), which adds protection in the event of excessive current in the circuit. RCDs also cannot detect the situation where a human accidentally touches both conductors at the same time, since the flow of current through an expected device, an unexpected route, or a human, are indistinguishable if the current returns through the expected conductor. RCDs are usually testable and resettable devices. Commonly they include a button that when pressed, safely creates a small leakage condition, and a switch that reconnects the conductors when a fault condition has been cleared. Depending upon their design, some RCDs disconnect both the energized and return conductors upon a fault, while others only disconnect the energized conductor and rely upon the return conductor being at ground (earth) potential.  The former are commonly known as "double-pole" designs; the latter as "single-pole" designs.  If the fault has left the return wire "floating" or not at its expected ground potential for any reason, then a single-pole RCD will leave this conductor still connected to the circuit when it detects the fault. RCDs are designed to disconnect the circuit if there is a leakage current.  By detecting small leakage currents (typically 5–30 mA) and disconnecting quickly enough ( File:Differential residual current circuit interrupter.JPG|CHINT's RCBO File:Schneider Electric A9D31620.JPG|Schneider Electric File:ABB RCBO.jpg|ABB  Major differences exist regarding the manner in which an RCD device will act to disconnect the power to a Circuit/Appliance. Two differing nomenclatures are in use to identify what is essentially the main feature viz. either Active or Passive, & Latching or non-Latching. All RCD devices have a 'latching' feature.  The 'latch' becomes 'set' when the device is 'armed' - typically by moving a switch to the 'on' position, or depressing a 'reset' button.  Once armed, the device permits power to flow until some 'electrical' event occurs that causes the 'latch' to become un-set.  That trigger is normally intended to be the detection of a serious electrical irregularity, but un-latching can also occur by the disconnection of the power; such power-disconnection is not regarded as an 'irregular' event, & includes such events as a user disconnecting the power intentionally, or a temporary power failure attributed to the electricity service provider. 'Active' devices operate to un-latch the RCD device when ANY power 'irregular' event, OR a simple power-disconnection, occurs.  So-called 'Passive' devices are triggered solely by 'irregular' electrical activity - NOT by any simple interruption in the power supply. When triggered by an 'irregular' event, the 'latch' becomes un-set, & power-disconnection is forced, as it is if the device is of the 'Active' variety & a power-disconnection is detected. 'Passive' devices operate to 'un-latch' the RCD device solely when the power-irregularity demands attention, but will remain 'latched' throughout any period when the power is not connected, & remain 'latched' & ready to continue usage in its 'protected' mode as soon as the power-supply is restored. RCD devices installed within a Consumer Power-Distribution Unit are almost always of the 'Passive' variety, so that household appliances such a refrigerators & freezers will resume their normal mode of operation as soon as the power-supply resumes normal operation.  RCD units of the 'portable' type, are mostly of the 'Active' variety that will cause all trigger-events to un-latch the settings - specifically to avoid power-resumption when disconnected power is restored; that variety of action, is particularly directed towards appliances such as garden machinery that could become dangerous if such became re-activated without personal supervision; however, it is possible to obtain a few types of Latched/Passive devices for 'permanent' incorporation into the power-line of selected appliances - typically embodied within a hard-wired plug-top form such as the British 'Rectangular-pin' variety. A further variety of fitting for an RCD device, is by incorporation within a wall-socket - such as a special form of the British 'Rectangular-pin' variety, where a choice of either 'Active' or 'Passive' fittings are available - presumably on the presumption that the user will be aware of the nature of the appliances to be so connected & will restrict the usage of such wall-sockets accordingly. The number of poles represents the number of conductors that are interrupted when a fault condition occurs.  RCDs used on single-phase AC supplies (two current paths), such as domestic power, are usually one- or two-pole designs, also known as single- and double-pole. A single-pole RCD interrupts only the energized conductor, while a double-pole RCD interrupts both the energized and return conductors. (In a single-pole RCD, the return conductor is usually anticipated to be at ground potential at all times and therefore safe on its own, however see limitations below). RCDs with three or more poles can be used on three-phase AC supplies (three current paths) or to disconnect an earth conductor as well, with four-pole RCDs used to interrupt three-phase + neutral supplies.  Specially designed RCDs can also be used with both AC and DC power distribution systems. The following terms are sometimes used to describe the manner in which conductors are connected and disconnected by an RCD: * Single-pole / SP / one-pole - the RCD will disconnect the energized wire only. * Double-pole / DP / two-pole - the RCD will disconnect both the energized and return wires. * 1+N and 1P+N – non-standard terms used in the context of RCBOs, at times used differently by different manufacturers. Typically these terms may signify that the return (neutral) conductor is an isolating pole only, without a protective element (an unprotected but switched neutral), or that the RCBO provides a conducting path and connectors for the return (neutral) conductor but this path remains uninterrupted when a fault occurs (sometimes known as "solid neutral"),Explanation on voltimum.com.au, by specialist Ian Richardson. or that both conductors are disconnected for some faults (such as RCD detected leakage) but only one conductor is disconnected for other faults (such as overload).http://docs-asia.electrocomponents.com/webdocs/01e3/0900766b801e3b4d.pdf (states that there is "2 pole switching of phase [energized] and neutral [return]", but then only identifies the energized conductor as being protected against "overloads and short circuits"). The rated current of an RCD is chosen according to the maximal sustained load current it is expected to carry, so generally if the RCD is connected in series with a single fuse or circuit-breaker, the rated current of the RCD shall be at least the same as the fuse or circuit breaker, though in the case of an RCD feeding many circuit breakers, an allowance for load diversity may or may not be permissible depending on the type of load expected. RCD sensitivity is expressed as the rated residual operating current, noted IΔn. Preferred values have been defined by the IEC, thus making it possible to divide RCDs into three groups according to their IΔn value: Note that the nominal value of residual current indicated above is not an absolute value. More information is presented below. There are two groups of devices: Standard IEC 60755 (General requirements for residual current operated protective devices) defines three types of RCD depending on the characteristics of the fault current. The surge current refers to the peak current an RCD is designed to withstand using a test impulse of specified characteristics (an  impulse, named after the time constants of the rise and fall of current). The IEC 61008 and IEC 61009 standards impose the use of a 0.5 µs of 100&nbsp;kHz damped oscillator wave (ring wave) to test the ability of residual-current protection devices to withstand operational discharges with a peak current equal to 200 A. With regard to atmospheric discharges, IEC 61008 and 61009 standards establish the  surge current test with 3 kA peak current but limit the requirement to RCDs classified as "selective". A ground fault circuit interrupter circuit breaker (GFCI breaker in USA and Canada) and residual-current breaker with overload (RCBO in Europe) are devices that combine the functions of a residual-current device with a circuit breaker. They detect both supply imbalance and overload current. In Europe, RCDs can fit on the same DIN rail as the MCBs, however the busbar arrangements in consumer units and distribution boards can make it awkward to use them in this way.  If it is desired to protect an individual circuit, an RCBO (residual-current circuit breaker with overcurrent protection) can be used. This incorporates an RCD and a miniature circuit breaker in one device. Electrical plugs with incorporated RCD are sometimes installed on appliances that might be considered to pose a particular safety hazard, for example long extension leads, which might be used outdoors, or garden equipment or hair dryers, which may be used near a bath or sink. Occasionally an in-line RCD may be used to serve a similar function to one in a plug. By putting the RCD in the extension lead, protection is provided at whatever outlet is used even if the building has old wiring, such as knob and tube, or wiring that does not contain a grounding conductor. In North America, GFI receptacles can be used in cases where there is no grounding conductor, but they must be labeled as "ungrounded". An ungrounded GFI receptacle will trip using the built-in "test" button, but will not trip using a GFI test plug, because the plug tests by shorting a small current from line to the non-existent ground. Electrical sockets with included RCDs are becoming common. RCDs can be tested with  built-in test button to confirm functionality on a regular basis. RCDs may not operate correctly if wired improperly, so they are generally tested by the installer to verify correct operation. Use of a solenoid voltmeter from live to earth provides an external path and can test the wiring to the RCD. Such a test may be performed on installation of the device and at any "downstream" outlet. A residual-current circuit breaker cannot remove all risk of electric shock or fire. In particular, an RCD alone will not detect overload conditions, phase-to-neutral short circuits or phase-to-phase short circuits (see three-phase electric power). Over-current protection (fuses or circuit breakers) must be provided. Circuit breakers that combine the functions of an RCD with overcurrent protection respond to both types of fault. These are known as RCBOs and are available in 2-, 3- and 4-pole configurations. RCBOs will typically have separate circuits for detecting current imbalance and for overload current but use a common interrupting mechanism. An RCD helps to protect against electric shock when current flows through a person from a phase (live / line / hot) to earth. It cannot protect against electric shock when current flows through a person from phase to neutral or from phase to phase, for example where a finger touches both live and neutral contacts in a light fitting; a device cannot differentiate between current flow through an intended load from flow through a person, though the RCD may still trip if the person is in contact with the ground (earth), as some current may still pass through the persons finger and body to earth. Whole installations on a single RCD, common in older installations in the UK, are prone to "nuisance" trips that can cause secondary safety problems with loss of lighting and defrosting of food. Frequently the trips are caused by deteriorating insulation on heater elements, such as water heaters and cooker elements or rings.  Although regarded as a nuisance, the fault is with the deteriorated element and not the RCD: replacement of the offending element will resolve the problem, but replacing the RCD will not. In the case of RCDs that need a power supply, a dangerous condition can arise if the neutral wire is broken or switched off on the supply side of the RCD, while the corresponding live wire remains uninterrupted. The tripping circuit needs power to work and does not trip when the power supply fails. Connected equipment will not work without a neutral, but the RCD cannot protect people from contact with the energized wire. For this reason circuit breakers must be installed in a way that ensures that the neutral wire cannot be switched off unless the live wire is also switched off at the same time. Where there is a requirement for switching off the neutral wire, two-pole breakers (or four-pole for 3-phase) must be used. To provide some protection with an interrupted neutral, some RCDs and RCBOs are equipped with an auxiliary connection wire that must be connected to the earth busbar of the distribution board. This either enables the device to detect the missing neutral of the supply, causing the device to trip, or provides an alternative supply path for the tripping circuitry, enabling it to continue to function normally in the absence of the supply neutral. Related to this, a single-pole RCD/RCBO interrupts the energized conductor only, while a double-pole device interrupts both the energized and return conductors. Usually this is a standard and safe practice, since the return conductor is held at ground potential anyway. However because of its design, a single-pole RCD will not isolate or disconnect all relevant wires in certain uncommon situations, for example where the return conductor is not being held, as expected, at ground potential, or where current leakage occurs between the return and earth conductors. In these cases, a double-pole RCD will offer protection, since the return conductor would also be disconnected. The world’s first high-sensitivity earth leakage protection system (i.e. a system capable of protecting people from the hazards of direct contact between a live conductor and earth), was a second-harmonic magnetic amplifier core-balance system, known as the magamp, developed in South Africa by Henri Rubin. Electrical hazards were of great concern in South African gold mines, and Rubin, an engineer at the company F.W.J. Electrical Industries, initially developed a cold-cathode system in 1955 which operated at 525 V and had a tripping sensitivity of 250 mA. Prior to this, core balance earth leakage protection systems operated at sensitivities of about 10 A. The cold cathode system was installed in a number of gold mines and worked reliably. However, Rubin began working on a completely novel system with greatly improved sensitivity, and by early 1956, he had produced a prototype second-harmonic magnetic amplifier-type core balance system (South African Patent No. 2268/56 and Australian Patent No. 218360).  The prototype magamp was rated at 220 V, 60 A and had an internally adjustable tripping sensitivity of 12.5–17.5 mA. Very rapid tripping times were achieved through a novel design, and this combined with the high sensitivity was well within the safe current-time envelope for ventricular fibrillation determined by Charles Dalziel of the University of California, Berkeley, USA, who had estimated electrical shock hazards in humans.  This system, with its associated circuit breaker, included overcurrent and short-circuit protection. In addition, the original prototype was able to trip at a lower sensitivity in the presence of an interrupted neutral, thus protecting against an important cause of electrical fire. Following the accidental electrocution of a woman in a domestic accident at the Stilfontein gold mining village near Johannesburg, a few hundred F.W.J. 20 mA magamp earth leakage protection units were installed in the homes of the mining village during 1957 and 1958.  F.W.J. Electrical Industries, which later changed its name to FW Electrical Industries, continued to manufacture 20 mA single phase and three phase magamp units. At the time that he worked on the magamp, Rubin also considered using transistors in this application, but concluded that the early transistors then available were too unreliable. However, with the advent of improved transistors, the company that he worked for and other companies later produced transistorized versions of earth leakage protection. In 1961, Dalziel, working with Rucker Manufacturing Co., developed a transistorized device for earth leakage protection which became known as a Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI), sometimes colloquially shortened to Ground Fault Interrupter (GFI).  This name for high-sensitivity earth leakage protection is still in common use in the U.S.A.Charles F. Dalziel, Transistorized ground-fault interrupter reduces shock hazard,  IEEE Spectrum, January 1970 The Professional Engineer, Official Journal of the Federation of Societies of Professional Engineers of South Africa, pp 67, Vol 6(2) 1977 Earl W. Roberts, Overcurrents and Undercurrents – All about GFCIs: Electrical Safety Advances through Electronics, Mystic Publications, Mystic CT, 1996 Edward L. Owen, Power System Grounding Part II: RCD & GFCI, IEEE Industry Applications Magazine, July/August 1996 Forging ahead: South Africa’s Pioneering Engineers, G R Bozzoli, Witwatersrand University Press, 1997  In the early 1970s most North American GFCI devices were of the circuit breaker type.  GFCIs built into the outlet receptacle became commonplace beginning in the 1980s. The circuit breaker type, installed into a distribution panel, suffered from accidental trips mainly caused by poor or inconsistent insulation on the wiring. False trips were frequent when insulation problems were compounded by long circuit lengths. So much current leaked along the length of the conductors' insulation that the breaker might trip with the slightest increase of current imbalance. The migration to outlet receptacle based protection in North American installations reduced the accidental trips and provided obvious verification that wet areas were under electrical code-required protection. European installations continue to use primarily RCDs installed at the distribution board, which provides protection in case of damage to fixed wiring; In Europe socket-based RCDs are primarily used for retro-fitting.  Regulations differ widely from country to country.  In most countries, not all circuits in a home are protected by RCDs. If a single RCD is installed for an entire electrical installation, any fault may cut all power to the premises. In Australia and New Zealand, residual current devices have been mandatory on power circuits since 1991 and on light circuits since 2000.SAA Wiring Rules AS/NZS 3000:2007, Including Amendments 1 & 2, SAI Global Limited A minimum of two RCDs is required per domestic installation. All socket outlets and lighting circuits are to be distributed over circuit RCDs. A maximum of three subcircuits only, may be connected to a single RCD. Austria regulated residual current devices in the ÖVE E8001-1/A1:2013-11-01 norm (most recent revision).  It has been required in private housing since 1980.  The maximum activation time must not exceed 0.4 seconds.  It needs to be installed on all circuits with power plugs with a maximum leakage current of 30 mA and a maximum rated current of 16 A.ÖVE E8001-1/A1:2013-11-01 Additional requirements are placed on circuits in wet areas, construction sites and commercial buildings. Belgian domestic installations are required to be equipped with a 300 mA residual current device that protects all circuits. Furthermore, at least one 30 mA residual current device is required that protects all circuits in "wet rooms" (e.g. bathroom, kitchen) as well as circuits that power certain "wet" appliances (washing machine, tumble dryer, dishwasher). Electrical underfloor heating is required to be protected by a 100 mA RCD. These RCDs must be of type A. Since NBR 5410 (1997) residual current devices and grounding are required for new construction or repair in wet areas, outdoor areas, interior outlets used for external appliances, or in areas where water is more probable like bathrooms and kitchens. Denmark requires 30 mA RCDs on all circuits that are rated for less than 20 A (circuits at greater rating are mostly used for distribution). This was first introduced in 1975 for new buildings, and then for all buildings in 2008. Since 1 May 1984, RCDs are mandatory for all rooms with a bath tub or a shower. Since June 2007 Germany requires the use of RCDs with a trip current of no more than 30 mA on sockets rated up to 20 A which are for general use. (DIN VDE 0100-410 Nr. 411.3.3). The Italian law (n. 46 March 1990) prescribes RCDs with no more than 30 mA residual current (informally called "salvavita"—life saver) for all domestic installations to protect all the lines. The law was recently updated to mandate at least two separate RCDs for separate domestic circuits. Magnetic and thermal protection has been compulsory since 1968. From January 2003, all new circuits originating at the switchboard supplying lighting or socket outlets (power points) in domestic buildings must have RCD protection. Residential facilities (such as boarding houses, hospitals, hotels and motels) will also require RCD protection for all new circuits originating at the switchboard supplying socket outlets. These RCDs will normally be located at the switchboard. They will provide protection for all electrical wiring and appliances plugged into the new circuits.Residual current devices - ACC by Ministry of Consumer Affairs’ Energy Safety Service (ACC Website, December 2002 ISBN 0-478-26322-8)  In North America, RCD (“GFCI”) receptacles invariably have rectangular faces and accept so-called decora face plates. GFCI outlets can be mixed with regular outlets or with switches in a multigang box with a standard cover plate.  Arc-fault circuit interrupters (AFCI) are required by current NEC code in locations such as sleeping rooms and incorporate GF protection.  As a result, the slightly more  expensive called "Pannikutti" GFCI circuit breakers for load centers are less commonly used in residential applications. In Canada and the United States, two-wire (ungrounded) (NEMA-1) outlets may be replaced with GFCIs to protect against electrocution, and a grounding wire does not need to be supplied to that GFCI. The outlet must be labeled as such. The GFCI manufacturers provide tags for the appropriate installation description. GFCI receptacles can be connected to also protect all the downstream receptacles on that circuit. GFCI devices approved for protection against electric shock trip at 5&nbsp;mA within 25&nbsp;ms. A GFCI device which protects equipment (not people) is allowed to trip as high as 30&nbsp;mA of current; this is known as an Equipment Protective Device (EPD). "RCDs" with trip currents as high as 500 mA are sometimes deployed in environments (such as computing centers) where a lower threshold would carry an unacceptable risk of accidental trips. These high-current RCDs serve for equipment and fire protection instead of protection against the risks of electrical shocks. GFCI outlets are required by code in most places where an easy path to ground exists, such as wet areas, rooms with uncovered concrete floors and outdoor areas. In the U.S.,  successive editions of the National Electrical Code required GFCIs for  additional areas: underwater swimming pool lights (1968); construction sites (1974); bathrooms and outdoor areas (1975); garages (1978); near hot tubs or spas (1981); hotel bathrooms (1984); kitchen counter receptacles (1987); crawl spaces and unfinished basements (1990); wet bar sinks (1993);  and laundry sinks (2005).  In the United States, the American Boat and Yacht Council requires both GFCIs for outlet and Equipment Leakage Circuit Interrupters (ELCI) for the entire boat. The difference is GFCIs trip on 5 mA of current whereas ELCIs trip on 30 mA after up to 100 ms. The greater values are intended to provide protection while minimizing nuisance trips. In Norway, it has been required in all new homes since 2002, and on all new sockets since 2006. Turkey requires the use of RCDs with no more than 30 mA and 300 mA in all new homes since 2004. This rule was introduced in RG-16/06/2004-25494 .[ ], Procedure of Electrical Installation Projects The previous  16th Edition of the IEE Electrical Wiring Regulations required use of RCDs for socket outlets that were liable to be used by outdoor appliances. Normal practice in domestic installations  was to use a single RCD to cover all the circuits requiring RCD protection (typically sockets and showers) but to have some circuits (typically lighting) not RCD protected. This was to avoid a potentially dangerous loss of lighting should the RCD trip. Protection arrangements for other circuits varied. To implement this arrangement it was common to install a consumer unit incorporating an RCD in what is known as a split load configuration, where one group of circuit breakers is supplied direct from the main switch (or time delay RCD in the case of a TT earth) and a second group of circuits is supplied via the RCD. This arrangement had the recognised problems that cumulative earth leakage currents from the normal operation of many items of equipment could cause spurious tripping of the RCD, and that tripping of the RCD would disconnect power from all the protected circuits. The current edition (17th) of the regulations requires that all socket outlets in most domestic installations have RCD protection, though there are exemptions. Cables buried in walls must also be RCD protected (again with some specific exemptions). {Refer to 17th Edition Amendment 1 effective from January 2012} Provision of RCD protection for circuits present in bathrooms and shower rooms reduces the requirement for supplementary bonding in those locations.   Two RCDs may be used to cover the installation, with upstairs and downstairs lighting and power circuits spread across both RCDs. When one RCD trips, power is maintained to at least one lighting and power circuit. Other arrangements, such as the use of RCBOs, may be employed to meet the regulations. The new requirements for RCDs do not affect most existing installations unless they are rewired, the distribution board is changed, a new circuit is installed, or alterations are made such as additional socket outlets or new cables buried in walls. RCDs used for shock protection must be of the 'immediate' operation type (not time-delayed) and must have a residual current sensitivity of no greater than 30 mA. If it can be shown that spurious tripping would cause a greater problem than the risk of the electrical accident the RCD is supposed to prevent (examples might be a supply to a critical factory process, or to life support equipment), RCDs may be omitted, providing affected circuits are clearly labelled and the balance of risks considered, this may include the provision of alternative safety measures. high sensitivity (HS): 6 – 10 – 30 mA (for direct-contact / life injury protection), medium sensitivity (MS): 100 – 300 – 500 – 1000 mA (for fire protection), low sensitivity (LS): 3 – 10 – 30 A (typically for protection of machine). G (general use) for instantaneous RCDs (i.e., without a time delay); minimal break time: immediate, maximal break time: 200 ms for 1× IΔn, 150 ms for 2× IΔn, and 40 ms for 5× IΔn. S (selective) or T (time-delayed) for RCDs with a short time delay (typically used in circuits containing surge suppressors); minimal break time: 130 ms for 1×  IΔn, 60 ms for 2× IΔn, and 50 ms for 5× IΔn, maximal break time: 500 ms for 1× IΔn, 200 ms for 2× IΔn, and 150 ms for 5× IΔn. Type AC: RCD for which tripping is ensured for residual sinusoidal alternating currents. Type A: RCD for which tripping is ensured as for type AC, for residual pulsating direct currents, for residual pulsating direct currents superimposed by a smooth direct current of 6&nbsp;mA, with or without phase-angle control, independent of the polarity. Type B: RCD for which tripping is ensured as for type A, for residual sinusoidal currents up to 1&nbsp;kHz, for residual sinusoidal currents superposed by a pure direct current, for pulsating direct currents superposed by a pure direct current, for residual currents that may result from rectifying circuits three-pulse star connection or six-pulse bridge connection, two-pulse bridge connection line-to-line with or without phase-angle monitoring, independently of the polarity. Insulation monitoring device Domestic AC power plugs and sockets GFCIs Fact Sheet (Consumer Product Safety Commission)  Test of RCCB as per IEC 61008/61009 (Residual Current Device Testing) 
