  Terrance "Terry" Gerin (born October 7, 1975) is an American professional wrestler, better known by his ring name Rhino (also spelled Rhyno) currently signed with WWE. In addition to his appearances with WWE, Rhino is also known for his appearances with Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) from 1999 to 2001, with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) from 2005 to 2010 and with Ring of Honor (ROH) from 2011 to 2013.Rhino returns to TNA - 411 Mania.com He is a two-time world champion, having held the ECW World Heavyweight Championship and NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Other titles held by Rhino over the course of his career include the United States Championship, the ECW Television Championship, and WWE Hardcore Championship. Gerin trained as a wrestler at the Can-Am Wrestling School located in Windsor, Ontario under Scott D'Amore, who he later reunited with in TNA. He debuted in 1994 on the Detroit independent circuit under the ring name Terry Richards. Gerin made three appearances in WCW.  The first two being on Saturday Night as enhancement talent. The first appearance was on the August 5, 1995 episode in a losing effort against "Hacksaw" Jim Duggan and the second was on September 9, 1995 episode on an episode in which he lost a WCW World Television Championship match to then champion The Renegade.  His third and final appearance was against Road Warrior Hawk on the September 24, 1995 edition of WCW WorldWide.  Gerin made an appearance on the November 6, 1995 episode of Monday Night Raw losing to Henry O. Godwinn. Gerin later adopted the ring name Rhino Richards and began wrestling in Canada, where he formed a stable known as "THUG Life" with Joe Legend, Zakk Wyld (Keith Assoun), Christian Cage, Bloody Bill Skullion, Brett Kimball, and Sexton Hardcastle (later named Edge). He had feuds with Beautiful Brian Fury and Alexis Machine which were part of HotSeat Productions. In 1997, Gerin relocated to Hanover, Germany, where he began competing for the Catch Wrestling Association (CWA) under the ring name "Rhino Richards". On October 10, 1998, he teamed with XL Legend to win the vacant CWA World Tag Team Championship, defeating Rico de Cuba and August Smisl. The titles were vacated in October 1998 when Gerin left the promotion after signing with Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW). Gerin debuted in ECW in 1999 as Rhino. Rhino quickly joined forces with Steve Corino and Jack Victory. Rhino and Corino challenged Tommy Dreamer and Raven for the ECW World Tag Team Championship at Anarchy Rulz, but were defeated. In late 1999, Rhino began feuding with The Sandman, and at November to Remember he teamed with the Impact Players to defeat Dreamer, Raven, and Sandman. On March 12, 2000, Rhino lost to Super Crazy in the finals of a tournament for the World Television Championship at Living Dangerously. He won the title on April 22, defeating Yoshihiro Tajiri at CyberSlam. He lost the title to Kid Kash on August 26, but regained it a little over two weeks later on September 9. Throughout mid-2000, Rhino continued to feud with The Sandman, defeating him in title matches at Hardcore Heaven and Heatwave. In the course of the match with The Sandman at Hardcore Heaven, Rhino performed a Rhino Driver to the Sandman's wife and valet, Lori. At Heatwave, Rhino attacked the couple before his match and attempted to force Lori's head into a toilet. Rhino won the World Heavyweight Championship on January 7, 2001 at Guilty as Charged, defeating Sandman in a squash match immediately after The Sandman had won the title from Steve Corino in a three-way tables, ladders, chairs, and canes match. He defended the title twice afterwards, defeating The Sandman on January 12 and Spike Dudley on January 13, 2001 on the last two ECW shows before ultimately becoming both the final World Heavyweight Champion and World Television Champion due to the company folding in April.  Following the closure of ECW, Gerin signed a contract with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF). He debuted on the March 19, 2001 episode of Raw, in Albany, New York at the Pepsi Arena, under the ring name Rhyno as a heel, aligning himself with Edge and Christian. Rhyno went on to help Edge and Christian defeat The Hardy Boyz and The Dudley Boyz for the WWF Tag Team Championship in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match at WrestleMania X-Seven. on the April 17, 2001 edition of Smackdown, Rhyno defeated Kane to win the Hardcore Title. at Backlash (2001), Rhyno defeated Raven to retain the WWF Hardcore Championship. at Judgment Day (2001),  Rhyno, Edge, and Christian went on to form a stable with Kurt Angle known as Team RECK, with all four members reaching the semi-finals of the King of the Ring. Rhyno was eliminated from the event by the eventual winner, Edge. Following this, he went on to compete for the Hardcore Championship, which he won on three occasions in mid-2001. On the July 9 episode of Raw, Rhyno "invaded" the WWF along with other ECW wrestlers. The group, led by former ECW owner Paul Heyman, went on to merge with rival organisation WCW later that night, forming The Alliance.at Invasion, Rhyno competed in the main event the Inaugural Brawl match; five-on-five tag team match where Team WCW & ECW (Booker T, Diamond Dallas Page, (WCW) Rhyno and The Dudley Boyz (Bubba Ray Dudley and D-Von Dudley)(ECW))  defeated Team WWF (Stone Cold Steve Austin, Kurt Angle, Chris Jericho, The Undertaker and Kane), Rhyno feuded with Chris Jericho due to Jericho insulting Stephanie McMahon, the on-screen owner of ECW, on numerous occasions. One notable moment during the feud saw Rhyno Gore Jericho through the SmackDown! stage set on the August 9 episode of SmackDown!. at SummerSlam (2001), Rhyno faced Chris Jericho in a losing effort. On September 23 at Unforgiven, he defeated fellow ECW alumnus Tajiri for the WCW United States Championship. He held the title for just under a month before losing to Kurt Angle on the October 22 episode of Raw. As a result of his loss, Rhyno was "suspended" from The Alliance on the October 25 episode of SmackDown!. The suspension was an angle concocted to explain Rhyno's absence while he underwent cervical fusion surgery for two herniated discs in his neck. The surgery was successfully performed on November 12, 2001. Rhyno returned to WWE television thirteen months later on the February 27, 2003 episode of SmackDown!, aligning himself with Chris Benoit and thus becoming a face for the first time in his WWE career. Rhyno and Benoit went on to unsuccessfully challenge Team Angle for the Tag Team Championship in a triple threat tag team match (also involving Los Guerreros) at WrestleMania XIX. Rhyno and Benoit continued to team together until Vengeance, when Rhyno turned on Benoit during a United States Championship match against Eddie Guerrero, thus turning heel once again. at Judgment Day (2003), Rhyno teamed with Spanky, and Chris Benoit in a losing effort against John Cena and The Full Blooded Italians (Chuck Palumbo and Johnny Stamboli). Rhyno continued to wrestled on SmackDown! pursuing the United States Championship on several occasions. at SummerSlam (2003), Rhyno competed in a Fatal four-way match for the WWE United States Championship but failed to win the title. at the Royal Rumble (2004) Rhyno competed in the 30-man Royal Rumble match where he entered at #6 but was eliminated by Chris Benoit.  In March 2004, Rhyno was drafted to the Raw brand in the 2004 WWE Draft Lottery. Later that night he faced Chris Benoit for the World Heavyweight Championship in a losing effort. In July he turned face again by first squashing then heel Lance Storm in a match and then forming a tag team with Tajiri. The duo challenged for the World Tag Team Championship on several occasions throughout 2004.In January 2005 on an episode of Raw Rhyno lost a Royal Rumble qualifying match to Edge Rhyno was released from his WWE contract on April 9, 2005 along with his friend Matt Hardy due to a public argument with his wife that took place at the WrestleMania 21 afterparty. He made his final appearance on WWE television at the WWE-produced ECW reunion pay-per-view One Night Stand on June 12, where he lost to Sabu.  After time on the independent circuit, Gerin made his debut in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) on July 17, 2005 as Rhino, reverting to the ECW spelling of his wrestling name. He debuted by hitting then-NWA World Heavyweight Champion Raven with the Gore following a match with Abyss at No Surrender, thus debuting as both a villain and a member of Planet Jarrett. These events led to a match being scheduled between the team of Rhino and Jeff Jarrett and the team of Raven and the returning Sabu at Sacrifice on August 14. During the Sacrifice preshow, Director of Authority Larry Zbyszko informed Jarrett, who had lobbied for a title shot for several weeks, that if he could pin Raven, he would receive a shot at the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Unbreakable. However, should Jarrett lose the match, he would be prohibited from receiving a world title shot for one year. Later that night, during the tag match, Jeff Hardy returned to TNA, attacking Jarrett and enabling Rhino to Gore and pin Raven. An irate Jarrett, furious at having lost his shot at the title, watched as Zbyszko announced Rhino to be the new number one contender immediately after the pay-per-view went off the air. Rhino faced Raven at Unbreakable in a match which saw him accidentally Gore a shopping cart in homage to his Hardcore Championship bout with Raven at Backlash in the WWF. Despite interference from Jarrett, Raven retained his title after hitting Rhino with an Even Flow DDT. Rhino fought Jeff Hardy in the main event of the debut episode of Impact! on Spike TV on October 1. The match was declared a no-contest after both Abyss and Sabu interfered. At Bound for Glory, Rhino, Abyss, Sabu, and Hardy faced each other in a Monster's Ball match, which Rhino won after hitting a second rope Rhino Driver on Hardy. Later that night, Rhino won a 10-man Gauntlet match to determine who would face Jeff Jarrett for his NWA World Heavyweight Championship after Kevin Nash, Jarrett's scheduled opponent, was rushed to the hospital due to a legitimate injury. Rhino went on to defeat Jarrett and win the title. Rhino lost the NWA World Title to Jeff Jarrett on a 2-hour prime time special episode of Impact! on November 3. Starting with the November 26 episode of Impact!, TNA started airing promos about Rhino's career and personal life in preparation for his title rematch at Turning Point. He lost the rematch after a guitar shot and interference from all of Team Canada.  Rhino then wrapped up a brutal feud with Abyss, who (due to his alignment with Planet Jarrett) halted Rhino's war on Team Canada. The feud saw Abyss Black Hole Slam Rhino on to several chairs, and Rhino smash Abyss through a steel wall with the Gore. Their singles feud ended at Against All Odds when Rhino Gored Abyss off of a fifteen-foot ramp on to four tables. In April, Rhino became a member of Sting's four-man team of "Warriors", joining A.J. Styles and Ron Killings to fight Jeff Jarrett's "Army" in a Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown. On June 9, after Rhino defeated Jeff Jarrett at a TNA house show in the old ECW Arena in Philadelphia, he publicly acknowledged that he had been offered a contract to come back to WWE and wrestle for the new ECW. Rhino, however, decided to stay with TNA. On July 11, Rhino made an open challenge against WWE for their current incarnation of ECW. The shocking revelation was that he did not like the direction of the new ECW and threw the "real" ECW World Heavyweight Championship (hidden in a burlap sack as Rhino stated WWE threatened legal action if he showed it) into an oil drum and burned it (he later admitted that it was a replica, and he still has the original belt at his home). He then feuded with Monty Brown and Samoa Joe. This resulted in the three men competing at Hard Justice, which ended with Samoa Joe winning by pinning Monty Brown after slamming Brown through a table. Rhino then entered into a feud with Christian Cage, playing off their former history together in WWE, Japan, and Canada. The feud continued when Christian and Gerin faced off in an Eight Mile Street Fight at Bound for Glory, on October 22. Christian won after a con-chair-to with a ladder, a broken table, a street sign, and some chairs on top of Rhino. This feud culminated on the November 16 episode of Impact!, where he faced Cage in a six-sides of steel barbed wire match. Cage won the match after Rhino's Gore sent him through the door of the cage. Towards the end of 2006, Rhino entered into a program with A.J. Styles. This started with Rhino trying to help Styles with his situation with Christopher Daniels, only to have Styles pull away and accuse Rhino of getting into his business, thus turning him heel. Rhino would lose to Styles at Turning Point after Styles faked a knee injury and then pinned Rhino with a roll-up. The Rhino-Styles feud continued into 2007. At Final Resolution, Rhino defeated Styles in a Last Man Standing match. Rhino set up tables in anticipation of sending Styles through them with a Gore. Styles, however, saw what was happening and declined to get up, thus losing. After the match, Rhino swore he was not through with Styles and gave him a Rhino Driver on the entrance ramp. At Against All Odds, Styles defeated Rhino in a Motor City Chain match after dodging a Gore and rolling up Rhino for the pin. A.J. Styles then challenged any wrestler in TNA to wrestle him at Destination X in the debut of the Elevation X match and Rhino accepted the challenge. At Destination X, Rhino defeated A.J. Styles in the Elevation X match after a Gore, and stomping on Styles fingers. On March 22, Rhino was chosen as the third member of Kurt Angle's team for the Lockdown match, along with Samoa Joe and eventually Jeff Jarrett and Sting. Team Angle was successful at Lockdown after defeating Christian's Coalition in a Lethal Lockdown match. Rhino had a big spot in the match when he Gored Tomko through the cage door.  Rhino went through short feuds with Christopher Daniels and The Latin American Xchange before moving on to his next big feud with James Storm. On the June 21 Impact!, Storm and Robert Roode defeated Rhino and Eric Young. Following the match, Storm poured beer on Rhino, causing him to snap. Two weeks later, Rhino had a sit-down interview with Mike Tenay and revealed that he was a recovering alcoholic, and that caused him to snap after being covered with beer. The feud between Rhino and Storm resulted in a match at Victory Road. Storm won the match after hitting Rhino with a beer bottle. After the match was over Storm and Jackie Moore attacked Rhino and poured beer into his mouth and left him bleeding in the ring. At Hard Justice, Rhino lost a Bar Room Brawl to Storm, after Storm smashed a beer bottle into the back of Rhino's head, but Rhino beat him at No Surrender. After the match, he Gored Moore. Rhino then feuded with Raven, resulting in a Monster's Ball match at Bound for Glory between Rhino, Raven, Abyss, and Black Reign which Abyss won. At Turning Point, he was scheduled to participate in a match teaming with Abyss to take on Black Reign and Rellik, but he was replaced by Raven due to injury. After battling a kayfabe alcoholism relapse (brought on by the James Storm storyline), Rhino officially made his return at Against All Odds when he Gored Storm, which caused Eric Young to retain his World Drinking Championship. On March 9, Rhino defeated Storm at Destination X, in the second official Elevation X Match, making Rhino 2-0 in Elevation X. The next week, Christian Cage had to find a tag partner to help him fight A.J. Styles and Tomko. He asked Rhino but he refused, due to their past history (Cage had since turned face). Tomko, Styles, and Team 3D attacked Cage after his tag team match with Kevin Nash. The following week on Impact!, Cage managed to get Rhino on his side during an interview with Jeremy Borash. At Lockdown in the Lethal Lockdown match, Rhino pinned Storm to get the win for Cage's team. Rhino went on to form a tag team with Cage and they competed in the Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament to crown new tag team champions by beating The Motor City Machine Guns (Chris Sabin and Alex Shelley) to qualify. The tournament took place at Sacrifice where they beat the team of Robert Roode and Booker T, but lost in the second round to Team 3D after Brother Ray hit Rhino with a kendo stick. Rhino would beat James Storm to qualify for the King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary, where Samoa Joe retained the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. Since then, Rhino formed a tag team with Christian Cage. At Hard Justice, Rhino and Christian Cage defeated Team 3D to end their feud.  The team of Rhino and Christian Cage apparently disbanded with Cage going to main events and Rhino along with then TNA Women's Champion Taylor Wilde starting a feud with The Beautiful People and Cute Kip shortly after Hard Justice. At Bound for Glory IV, Rhino along with ODB and Rhaka Khan (who recently turned face) defeated The Beautiful People and Cute Kip in a Bimbo Brawl. On the October 23 episode of Impact!, Rhino confronted Sheik Abdul Bashir over political views. He was later attacked by Bashir. The feud ended after Rhino got revenge and defeated Sheik at Turning Point. On the November 20 episode of Impact!, Rhino attacked The Main Event Mafia, but the Mafia fought back and placed him in a casket. The next week, Rhino officially joined A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe, naming the group the TNA Frontline. Rhino decided the Frontline had to have more members if they wanted to beat the Main Event Mafia, and, much to the surprise and questioning of the group, asked Team 3D to join the Frontline. Later in the night, Team 3D agreed to join the Frontline, helping Styles and Joe attack the Mafia. At Genesis, Rhino lost to Sting in a World Heavyweight Title match. At the Lockdown pre-show, Eric Young defeated Danny Bonaduce. After the bout, Bonaduce attacked Young, but Rhino came to the ring to aid Young and then Gored Bonaduce. Afterwards, Rhino began an angle that aired on television, where he would train and mentor Jesse Neal, a former member of the military, to become a pro wrestler. However, in training Jesse Neal, Rhino has become quite frustrated leading to a very short temper. This led to a tag match on August 13, 2009 where when Jesse lost the match making a "rookie mistake" by refusing a hot tag to Rhino. Rhino turned heel later by goring his former protege, Jesse Neal. Then his former mentors Team 3D had realized what a selfish man Rhino was, thus leading to a feud between them. Rhino appeared at No Surrender to face new superstar Bobby Lashley. Despite Goring Lashley twice, Rhino was defeated following a knockout punch. On the October 15 episode of Impact!, he lost a stretcher match to Bobby Lashley. The following week, Rhino would start an angle where he claimed that TNA was favoring the younger talent of the company, while trying to force veterans like himself out of the company. After weeks of persuasion, on the November 5 episode of Impact! Team 3D turned heel and joined Rhino in his cause. At Turning Point Rhino along with Team 3D defeated Matt Morgan, Hernandez and D'Angelo Dinero after a Gore by Rhino. On the November 19 episode of Impact! Jesse Neal turned heel and joined Rhino and Team 3D. Two weeks later, Suicide joined Morgan, Hernandez and Dinero to level the playing field. At Final Resolution, Morgan, Hernandez, Dinero and Suicide defeated Neal, Team 3D and Rhino in an eight-man elimination tag team match. When Hulk Hogan and Eric Bischoff took over TNA at the beginning of 2010, Rhino's angle was discontinued and Team 3D reverted to being faces and began feuding with The Nasty Boys.  After being absent from television for four months, Rhino returned on the July 1 episode of Impact!, appearing in the Impact! Zone crowd beside fellow ECW alumni Tommy Dreamer, Raven and Stevie Richards, thus seemingly turning back into a face. On the July 15 episode of Impact! Rhino, Dreamer, Raven, Richards, Brother Devon, Pat Kenney and Al Snow, led by Mick Foley, aligned themselves with the TNA World Heavyweight Champion Rob Van Dam by attacking Abyss and the rest of the TNA locker room. The following week, TNA president Dixie Carter agreed to give the ECW alumni their own reunion pay–per–view event, Hardcore Justice: The Last Stand, as a celebration of hardcore wrestling and a final farewell to the company. At the event Rhino defeated Al Snow and Brother Runt in a three-way match. On the following episode of Impact!, the ECW alumni, known collectively as EV 2.0), were assaulted by A.J. Styles, Kazarian, Robert Roode, James Storm, Douglas Williams and Matt Morgan of Ric Flair's  stable, who thought they did not deserve to be in TNA. During the assault Abyss came out, fought Rob Van Dam backstage and caused him storyline injuries, which forced him to vacate the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and led to EV 2.0 looking for revenge. On the August 26 episode of Impact! Rhino called out Abyss for what he had done and then laid him out with a Gore. At No Surrender Abyss defeated Rhino in a Falls Count Anywhere match. At Bound for Glory Rhino, Dreamer, Raven, Richards and Sabu defeated  members Styles, Kazarian, Morgan, Roode and Storm in a Lethal Lockdown match. Shortly afterwards Rhino's contract with TNA expired, but he remained with the promotion on a per night deal. At Turning Point EV 2.0 faced Fortune in a ten-man tag team match, where each member of EV 2.0 put their TNA careers on the line. In the end, EV 2.0 lost the match and Sabu was released from TNA. On the following episode of Impact!, Rhino revealed himself as the man within EV 2.0, who had been calling Eric Bischoff, trying to get to be a part of his Immortal stable, which had led to dissension between Rob Van Dam, who wanted to find out the traitor, and the rest of EV 2.0, by costing Van Dam his match against Kazarian and afterwards hitting Tommy Dreamer with a chair, turning heel in the process. On the November 18 episode of Impact! Rhino explained that Bischoff had agreed to re–sign him as long as he turned on the rest of EV 2.0. The following week Dreamer defeated Rhino in a Street Fight. After the match Rhino attacked Dreamer, but was then chased away by Rob Van Dam, who challenged him to a First Blood match at Final Resolution, which Van Dam ended up winning. On the following episode of Impact! Bischoff refused to give Rhino a contract with TNA and had Fortune and Immortal remove him from the arena. On June 20, 2014, Rhino returned to TNA during the Impact Wrestling tapings, as he attacked Bully Ray on behalf of Ethan Carter III to help him win a Tables match, re-establishing himself as a heel in the process. On the July 17 episode of Impact Wrestling, Rhino and Ethan Carter III defeated Tommy Dreamer and Bully Ray and on the July 24 episode of Impact Wrestling, Rhino, Ethan Carter III and Rockstar Spud defeated Tommy Dreamer, Bully Ray, and Devon in a 6-man New York City street fight. On the August 7 episode of Impact Wrestling, Rhino, Ethan Carter III, Snitsky, and Rycklon faced Team 3D, Tommy Dreamer and Al Snow in an Eight-Man Hardcore War but lost the match. On the August 20 episode of Impact Wrestling, EC3 blamed Rhino for Dixie Carter being put through a table two weeks prior and viciously attacked him. This turned Rhino face once again. on the August 28 episode of Impact, Rhino faced Ethan Carter III in a losing effort. On the September 3 episode of Impact , Rhino defeated Rockstar Spud. On the September 11 episode of Impact Wrestling, Rhino defeated Rockstar Spud. On the September 18 episode of Impact Wrestling, Rhino was defeated by Ethan Carter III in a NYC Street Fight. The match this was Rhino's final TNA appearance and his TNA Profile was moved to the Alumni Section of TNA's roster page on February 13, 2015. Gerin debuted in Juggalo Championship Wrestling (JCW) at the 2004 musical festival Gathering of the Juggalos, where he defeated Abyss. At the following year's event, he participated on behalf of the company in "JCW vs. TNA: Three Day War." Gerin returned to Juggalo Championship Wrestling in 2011, saving JCW Heavyweight Champion Corporal Robinson from an attack by Breyer Wellington and Butler Jeeves. Teaming with The Weedman, 2 Tuff Tony, and Jailbird Man, he defeated the team of Baby Bitch Boy, The Bumpin' Uglies, and Bull Pain at the company's first internet pay-per-view Hatchet Attacks. At Up in Smoke, Rhino saved Tony from an attack by Sabu and Rob Conway, turning him into a fan favorite. He and Tony were then scheduled for a tag team match against the two at St. Andrew's Brawl. Since his departure from TNA, Rhino has appeared in several independent promotions across the United States and Canada. In May 2011, Rhino took part in New Japan Pro Wrestling's (NJPW) first tour of the United States, the Invasion Tour 2011. In the main event of the first night on May 13 in Rahway, New Jersey, Rhino teamed with Charlie Haas in a tag team match, where they defeated IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi and Togi Makabe after Rhino pinned Makabe. At the following day's event in New York City, Rhino pinned Kazuchika Okada in a six-man tag team match, where he teamed with Davey Richards and Homicide against Okada, Makabe and Ryusuke Taguchi. On the third and final day of the tour, Rhino was defeated by Makabe in the main event, a "South Philadelphia Street Fight", at the former ECW Arena. On May 29 Rhyno appeared in Dutch Pro Wrestling beating Kenzo Richards in an Extreme rules match. He also wrestled in Resistance Pro Wrestling. On February 17, 2012, at Vicious Circle, he was defeated by the RPW Heavyweight Champion Harry Smith.http://www.cagematch.de/?id=1&nr=75842 Rhino had another chance for the title at Obsession, where Smith put on the line his RPW title and Rhino, his ECW World Heavyweight Championship, but the match endend without a winner.http://www.cagematch.de/?id=1&nr=76450 The last match between them took place on May 11, 2012, at A Small Deadly Space, where Rhino was defeated by Smith, with Raven as Special Referee. On September 1, he was defeated in a match against Bill Collier for the PWR Heavyweight Championship in Wattsburg, Pennsylvania.http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=83505 On October 4, he wrestled against the FWE Heavyweight Champion Tommy Dreamer at the Family Wrestling Entertainment's first PPV, Back 2 Broolyn, but was defeated.http://www.cagematch.de/?id=1&nr=84415 On October 6, 2012, Rhino participated in the House of Hardcore's first show, defeating Sami Callihan. On May 30, 2014 Rhino won the UCW (Universal Championship Wrestling) Heavyweight title. He faced "The Natural" Chase Stevens in a street fight after "The Headliner" Chris Michaels was a no-show. On November 17, Rhino reached a tournament final to crown the first Extreme Rising World Championship,http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=88124 he reached the final round on December 29 but was defeated by Stevie Richards.http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=89696 On June 6, 2014, Rhino and Abyss were defeated by Tommy Dreamer and Devon at Tommy Dreamer's House of Hardcore.http://www.pwinsider.com/ViewArticle.php?id=86138&p=4 Rhino is scheduled to make his Championship Wrestling Entertainment debut in Port St. Lucie, FL on April 10, 2015. on July 18, 2015 at House of Hardcore IX, Rhino faced Austin Aries in a losing effort. On November 1st 2015, Rhyno challenged the PWP (Pro Wrestling Pride) Champion Big Grizzly, in a championship match in Paignton, Devon in the UK. Grizzly successfully defended his title, and it was later revealed that Rhyno will re-challenge Big Grizzly in December. In June 2012, he worked a week-long tour for St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador-based Legend City Wrestling working with the likes of Mike Hughes and fellow TNA alumnus Kiyoshi.http://www.cagematch.de/?id=1&nr=79625 On September 16, 2014 Rhino teamed up with Mike Hughes against Kilgrave & Apolo.  Rhino was revealed to be the bodyguard hired by Prince Nana to protect The Embassy from Homicide on June 13, 2011. In his debut match for the promotion on June 26 at Best in the World 2011, Rhino was defeated by Homicide in a Street Fight. In his next ROH appearance at the Death Before Dishonor IX pay-per-view on September 17, Rhino and fellow Embassy member Tommaso Ciampa defeated Homicide and Jay Lethal in a tag team match. In late 2011, after not appearing in ROH events for a couple of months, Rhino was removed from the ROH roster on the ROH website, signifying his departure from the company. Gerin returned to Ring of Honor television in April 2012 being traded from the Embassy to Truth Martini's House of Truth and was announced as the opponent of "Die Hard" Eddie Edwards for the ROH Border Wars pay per view on May 12. Rhino was defeated by Edwards via pinfall. On September 15 at Death Before Dishonor X: State of Emergency, Rhino unsuccessfully challenged Kevin Steen for the ROH World Championship. However, soon after he was hired by the members of S.C.U.M. to attack the #1 contender Jay Lethal, but was stopped by Steen. At ROH 11th Anniversary Show, Rhino attacked Lethal after his match against Steen. At the June 23 tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling, S.C.U.M. was forced to disband, after being defeated by Team ROH in a Steel Cage Warfare match. Gerin left ROH, shortly thereafter.  Rhyno made an unannounced return to WWE on February 12, 2015 during the taping of its developmental program WWE NXT, defeating Elias Samson. The episode aired on February 18, 2015http://www.wwe.com/shows/wwenxt/2015-02-18/wwe-nxt-results-2015-02-18-27116777 and later that night WWE added Gerin on to the NXT roster as "Rhyno".http://www.wwe.com/superstars/rhyno After a few weeks of defeating local competitors, Rhyno announced that he was in NXT to win the NXT Championship. On the April 15 episode of NXT, Rhyno fought Sami Zayn in a losing effort. On the May 6 episode of NXT, after  defeating Bull Dempsey, Rhyno would challenge Baron Corbin to a match at NXT TakeOver: Unstoppable, which he subsequently lost. On the June 3 episode of NXT, following his loss to Finn Bálor, Rhyno would Gore Bálor into the stage, turning heel in the process. On the July 1 episode of NXT, Rhyno would team up with Kevin Owens in a losing effort against Bálor and Samoa Joe. In August, Rhyno and Baron Corbin would compete in the Dusty Rhodes Tag Team Classic, where they would defeat The Ascension in the First Round, followed by defeating Johnny Gargano and Tommaso Ciampa in the Quarterfinals. At NXT TakeOver: Respect, Rhyno and Corbin would defeat Jason Jordan and Chad Gable in the Semifinals before losing to Finn Bálor and Samoa Joe in the Finals later that night. On the October 14 episode of NXT, Rhyno would compete in a Battle Royal to determine the new number one contender for the NXT Championship, where he would be eliminated by Corbin. The following week on NXT, Rhyno would face Corbin in a losing effort. On the December 7, 2015 episode of Raw, Rhyno made his main roster return as a face, where he joined The Dudley Boyz and Tommy Dreamer as part of a revamped incarnation of The ECW Originals, confronting The Wyatt Family before competing in an 16-man Elimination Fatal 4-Way Tag Team match, where they were eliminated by The League of Nations. At TLC: Tables, Ladders and Chairs, the ECW Originals would face the Wyatt Family in an 8-man Elimination Tag Team Tables match, which they lost, and in an eight-man Extreme Rules tag team match the following night on Raw in a losing effort. Gerin made his film debut in the 2011 horror film Death from Above, alongside fellow wrestler Kurt Angle. Gerin is close friends with Adam Copeland, best known by his ring name Edge. Following the SmackDown taping on September 16, 2011, Gerin made a one-night return to WWE as a part of an "Appreciation Night" to celebrate Edge's career. He also made an appearance at Edge's induction ceremony into the WWE Hall of Fame Class of 2012.   Finishing moves The Gore (Striking spear) Rhino Driver (Spike piledriver, sometimes from the second rope or the ring apron through a table) – ECW/TNA Signatures moves Belly-to-belly suplex Death Valley driver Fireman's carry cutter Release powerbomb Scoop powerslam Spinning spinebuster Managers Steve Corino Jack Victory Cyrus Stephanie McMahon-Helmsley Truth Martini Nicknames "The Rookie Monster" "The Big F'n Deal" "The Man Beast" "Dr. Kill" "The War/Gore Machine" Entrance themes "For Whom the Bell Tolls" by Metallica (CWA) "Body Count's In The House" by Body Count (ECW; 1998) "Debonaire" by Dope (ECW/Independent circuit; 1999–2001, 2011–present) "Tusk" by Jim Johnston (WWF/E/NXT; 2001–2004, 2015) "Stampede" by Dale Oliver (TNA; July 17, 2005 – October 2, 2010) Border City Wrestling BCW Can-Am Television Championship (1 time) Canadian Wrestling's Elite CWE Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with AJ Sanchez Catch Wrestling Association CWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Joe Legend (1) and Jean-Pierre Lafitte (1) European Wrestling Promotion EWP World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Extreme Championship Wrestling ECW World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) ECW World Television Championship (2 times) Full Global Alliance Wrestling FGA Heavyweight Championship (1 time) International Wrestling Cartel IWC World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Jersey All Pro Wrestling JAPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Lancaster Championship Wrestling LCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)https://www.facebook.com/LancasterChampionshipWrestling/photos/a.118459581602737.20956.118450748270287/723708064411216/?type=1&theater NWA Mid-South NWA Mid-South Unified Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Prime Time Wrestling PTW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Pro Wrestling Illustrated PWI Ranked him #10 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2001 Pure Wrestling Association Carrot Cup (2015) – with Tommy Dreamerhttp://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=136017 Rockstar Pro Rockstar Pro Championship (1 time)http://www.cagematch.net/?id=5&nr=2332 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling NWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Gauntlet for the Gold (2005 – Heavyweight) TNA Turkey Bowl (2008) Universal Championship Wrestling UCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Universyl Wrestling Enterprises UWE Heavyweight Championship (1 time) USA Xtreme Wrestling UXW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Series Wrestling WSW Heavyweight Championship (1 time, inaugural) World Wrestling Federation WCW United States Championship (1 time) WWF Hardcore Championship (3 times) Xtreme Intense Championship Wrestling XICW Midwest Heavyweight Championship (3 time, current)
