  Rhino is a fictional supervillain appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Although more than one character has assumed the identity of the Rhino, the first of these, and the one primarily associated with that identity, is Aleksei Sytsevich, who was created by writer Stan Lee and artist John Romita, Sr., and first appeared in The Amazing Spider-Man #41 (Oct. 1966). Debuting in the Silver Age of Comic Books, the Rhino has been featured in other Marvel-endorsed products such as , arcade and video games, and merchandise such as action figures and trading cards. A version of the Rhino using powered battle armor, portrayed by Paul Giamatti, appeared in the 2014 film The Amazing Spider-Man 2. Described by writer Mike Conroy as "famously one of Spider-Man's dimmest villains",Conroy, Mike. 500 Comicbook Villains, Collins & Brown, 2004. the character debuted in The Amazing Spider-Man #41 - 43 (Oct. - Dec. 1966) as a thug for hire working for an Eastern Bloc country. He volunteers to participate in an experiment that bonds a super strong polymer to his skin and also augments his strength and speed. The Rhino returned in Hulk, vol. 2, #104 (June 1968), and although he dies at the end of the story, the character proved popular enough to be revived, becoming a perennial opponent for both Spider-Man and the Hulk. The character achieved significant exposure in the 1980s and 1990s, appearing in both a solo capacity and as a villain for hire in over a dozen titles. Significant appearances included starring in the limited series Deadly Foes of Spider-Man #1 - 4 (May - Aug. 1991); the "Flowers for Rhino" storyline in Spider-Man's Tangled Web # 5 - 6 (Oct. - Nov. 2001), which is told from the character's perspective; and Punisher War Journal vol. 2, #13 - 15 (Jan. - Mar. 2008), in which the Rhino begins to rethink his lifestyle. After being empowered, Aleksei Sytsevich is directed by the agents who gave him his powers to kidnap Colonel John Jameson in order to obtain extraterrestrial spores to which Jameson has been exposed. The Rhino betrays the scientists who empowered him and goes on a rampage, eventually being defeated by the superhero Spider-Man. He is imprisoned and kept there with sedation but soon breaks out and continues to try to kidnap Jameson. Spider-Man uses a web imbued with a chemical developed by Curt Connors to melt off his Rhino armor and then knocks him unconscious.The Amazing Spider-Man #41–43 (Oct. – Dec. 1966) After serving his entire prison term, the Rhino is approached by the same scientists with a more powerful, removable suit. The Rhino agrees to find and kidnap Bruce Banner for his knowledge of gamma radiation, and trains to fight Banner in his Hulk form. However, he finds himself hopelessly overpowered by the Hulk, who shrugs off his strongest blows, pummels him to the brink of death, and leaves him in a coma.Hulk vol. 2, #104 (June 1968) The character is brought out of his coma by the Leader months later. The Leader plans to interrupt Banner's wedding to Betty Ross using a ray to transform him into the Hulk and make him kill Ross; he revived the Rhino to protect him from the Hulk's inevitable desire for revenge. However, the Rhino betrays the Leader by attacking Banner the moment he transforms. The Rhino is still unable to harm the seemingly invulnerable Hulk, and he turns on the Leader after the Leader accidentally shoots him. Rhino is caught in the explosion of the Leader's ship and left in a coma.Hulk vol. 2, #124 (Feb. 1970) Leader, who was paralyzed after a previous encounter with Hulk, finds and takes mental control of the still-comatose body of Rhino and attacks Hulk. The battle eventually leads to an alien world, where Leader abandons control of Rhino and flees. Bruce and an unconscious-but-now-recovered Rhino travel back to Earth via a rocket.Hulk vol. 2, #157–159 (Nov. 1972 – Jan. 1973) The Rhino reappears with Abomination, and the pair activate a gamma bomb at the Hulkbuster base in an attempt to destroy Hulk. Jim Wilson deactivates the bomb, and Hulk tricks the villains during combat, forcing them to collide and knock each other unconscious.Hulk vol. 2, #171 (Jan. 1974) Rhino reappears as a member of the supervillain team, the Emissaries of Evil (consisting also of Egghead, the Cobalt Man and Solarr), in search of a rare jewel. Opposed by superhero team, the Defenders, Rhino and Solarr initially hold their own until defeated by Doctor Strange.Defenders #42–43 (Dec. 1976 – Jan. 1977) While in hiding, Rhino is found and outwitted by scientist Doc Samson and is eventually defeated.Hulk vol. 2, #218 (Dec. 1977) The Rhino battles Doc Samson and Spider-Man.Marvel Team-Up #102 (Feb. 1981) The Rhino teams up with Moonstone; Blackout and Electro in an unsuccessful attempt to escape the research complex Project: Pegasus.Avengers #236–237 (Oct. – Nov. 1983) Rhino also battles Fantastic Four member, the Thing, during an attempt to remove his body suit.Thing #24 (June 1985) The Rhino joins the criminal group the Sinister Syndicate to battle Spider-Man.Amazing Spider-Man#280–281 (Sep. – Oct. 1986) Rhino also battles Iron Man in the city of Los Angeles.Iron Man #238 (Jan. 1989) Rhino and accomplice Blacklash, in the employ of criminal mastermind Justin Hammer, also hunt and capture a fellow villain Scorpion, who has absconded with advanced weaponry.Amazing Spider-Man #319 (Sep. 1989) The Rhino teams with other villains in two unsuccessful attempts to kill Spider-Man.Acts of Vengeance: Spectacular Spider-Man #160 (Jan. 1990)Deadly Foes of Spider-Man #1–4 (May – Aug. 1991) Rhino receives an intelligence boost via surgery and becomes a genius, eventually undergoing surgery again to reverse the process when life becomes dull.Spider-Man's Tangled Web #5–6 (Oct. – Nov. 2001) The Rhino is defeated by a diminutive Deadpool (courtesy of the Pym Particles);Cable & Deadpool #36–37 (Mar. – Apr. 2007), Rhino appears during the Civil War storyline where he assists the Chameleon in attacking Spider-Man.Civil War: Peter Parker Spider-Man #1 (Dec. 2007). Marvel Comics. When Rhino robs a bank and a security guard is accidentally killed, he is humiliated by the Punisher and saved by Spider-Man before being killed. Rhino is then captured by Alyosha Kravinoff (the son of Kraven the Hunter). Kravinoff, who is collecting a zoo of animal-themed superhumans, is defeated by Punisher, with a despondent Rhino and other villains being freed.Punisher War Journal vol. 2, #13–15 (Jan. – Mar. 2008) Feeling remorse from the accidental killing, Rhino sends a letter and money to the security guard's widow. Rhino decides to make amends and repay the Punisher for the previous rescue by aiding him on a case. At the conclusion of the story, Rhino is allowed to leave and is told to "be good",Punisher War Journal vol. 2, #23 (Nov. 2008) eventually returning to aid the vigilante.Punisher War Journal Annual #1 (Dec. 2008) Rhino later persuades Punisher to not kill Michael Watts, the third Stilt-Man.Punisher War Journal vol. 2, #26 During "The Gauntlet" storyline, Rhino decides to give up his life of crime entirely. He surrenders to the police and pleads guilty to all charges against him. S.H.I.E.L.D. removes his Rhino costume, and he is sentenced to 25 years in Ryker's Island. The Russian Mafia and other criminal gangs try to recruit him, but he denies them, even going so far as to completely avoid a breakout at one point. For his good behavior and cooperation, he is released early on parole. Upon release, he is met by Doctor Tramma, who wants to re-invent the Rhino. Sytsevich declines Doctor Tramma's offer and tries to begin a new life, dating (and eventually marrying) a waitress and residing in a small apartment in Yonkers. Doctor Tramma eventually uses someone else to create a new and improved Rhino. Sytsevich feels he needs to face and kill the new Rhino to get rid of him, but Spider-Man convinces him to promise otherwise and helps Sytsevich keep his new life by defeating the new Rhino.Amazing Spider-Man #617 (March 2010) The new Rhino attacks Sytsevich at one of J. Jonah Jameson's press meetings. Feeling he could not break his promise to Spider-Man, Sytsevich lies to the new Rhino, telling him he will agree to fight him in his suit, but he instead goes into hiding with his wife Oksana. Before they arrive at their safehouse, the new Rhino attacks again, and Oksana dies as a result. Sytsevich redons his old Rhino suit and attacks the new Rhino. With one hit, Sytsevich completely destroys the new Rhino's suit. Spider-Man begs Sytsevich to stop, but the grief-stricken Rhino disregards him and kills the new Rhino.The Amazing Spider-Man #625 (March 2010) Rhino is invited by Doctor Octopus to join his supervillain team where he becomes involved in securing some specific items for him. He shows up after Spider-Man makes Freak collide with Vulture. Spider-Man talks him down from a fight.The Amazing Spider-Man #644. Marvel Comics. Rhino is later seen as a member of Doctor Octopus' Sinister Six.The Amazing Spider-Man #648. Marvel Comics. During the "Ends of the Earth" storyline, Rhino is among the Sinister Six when Spider-Man and the Avengers engage them on the Mediterranean coasts. Rhino defeats Thor after Thor sends Electro into the atmosphere.The Amazing Spider-Man #683 Rhino is seen guarding one of Doctor Octopus' facilities in Korea. He fights Spider-Man, Black Widow and Silver Sable and is defeated by Spider-Man's electrical webbing.The Amazing Spider-Man #685. Marvel Comics. Rhino reveals he wanted to watch the world burn, stating that the loss of his wife had changed him, and that he is prepared to die. When Doctor Octopus self-destructs his own lair, Rhino pins Silver Sable to the floor in a flooding corridor, telling Spider-Man he will remain there, taking Silver Sable with him to death. Knowing Spider-Man will blame himself for his fellow hero's death, Rhino sees it as an opportunity for revenge. Rhino and Silver Sable are apparently drowned, despite Spider-Man's defeating Doctor Octopus.The Amazing Spider-Man #687. Marvel Comics. While in Doctor Octopus' dying body, Spider-Man meets him and Oksana in the afterlife during a post-mortem experience.Slott, Dan (w). The Amazing Spider-Man #700. Marvel Comics. As part of the All-New, All-Different Marvel event, Rhino resurfaces months later having survived his apparent demise. He has remained in hiding in Tahuexco, Guatemala. A mysterious Red-Suited Man approaches Aleksei and persuades him to do the mysterious man's bidding. Although Rhino was not up to it at first, he takes up the Red-Suited Man's offer when he has a somehow-revived Oksana by his side.The Amazing Spider-Man Vol 4 #2. Marvel Comics. Mutagenic chemical and radiation treatments, including gamma ray bombardment, provides Rhino with superhuman strength, heightened levels of speed and stamina and a high degree of durability. The Rhino's superhuman speed allows him to run and/or exercise at high velocities, especially over short distances. He frequently "charges" his opponents in this manner, enabling him to cause great harm to most enemies and the surrounding area. Rhino is notorious, however, for his lack of agility and slow reaction time. This makes it nearly impossible for him to change direction when running at such high speeds and causes him to miss his target and collide with the wrong object. The Rhino's enhanced musculature is much more efficient than that of a normal human and generates considerably less fatigue toxins during physical activity. At his peak, he can exert himself physically for up to 24 hours before the build up of fatigue toxins in his blood starts to impair him. The Rhino has some experience in hand-to-hand combat, though he is generally much more of a brawler. Even so, his extreme levels of strength, stamina and resistance to injury make him a formidable opponent regardless of a foe's superior fighting skills. The Rhino possesses a thick polymer mat suit that resembles the physique of a rhinoceros and covers his entire body except for his face. The suit is highly resistant to damage and extreme temperatures, and it is also equipped with two horns, designed to mimic the general shape and function of actual rhinoceros horns, capable of penetrating two-inch plate steel. His first suit, more crude in overall design, was originally bonded to his skin, and he was unable to remove it. This suit was eventually destroyed and a second, removable suit, more form-fitting in its design, was created by Justin Hammer. This suit was given to Rhino after he underwent additional gamma ray treatments that further heightened his powers. The new suit was also designed to enhance some of his powers, using gamma ray treatments. Without the suit, Rhino still possesses great superhuman strength and is highly resistant to conventional physical injury, such as most high-caliber bullets, extreme temperatures and impact forces. While wearing the suit, his strength is slightly increased, while his durability is enhanced to a much more significant degree. The suit also allows him to withstand high-caliber bullets, exposure to temperature extremes of cold and heat without the suit cracking or melting or his own bodily tissues suffering damage, falls from great heights, light anti-tank weaponry, explosive concussions and potent acids without sustaining injury. When Aleksei Sytsevich declines Doctor Tramma's offer to be upgraded, Doctor Tramma finds another subject and equips him with a high-tech rhino suit that was supposed to be given to Aleksei Sytsevich. The second Rhino comes after Aleksei, feeling that he had to destroy the original Rhino if he was going to ascend. Spider-Man defeats the second Rhino who then escapes. While lifting a makeshift dumbbell made out of a pole and two trucks, the second Rhino is called up by a mysterious person telling him where he can find Aleksei. The Rhino attacks Aleksei at one of J. Jonah Jameson's press meetings. Aleksei lies to the second Rhino, agreeing to fight him in his suit but instead going into hiding with Oksana. However, before they arrive at their safehouse, the second Rhino attacks again and Oksana dies as a result. Aleksei dons his old Rhino suit, totals the new Rhino's suit as his suit was stronger, and kills the unnamed wearer. In the alternate reality seen in the "Age of Apocalypse" storyline, Rhino was one of Death's soldiers on the Moon at Apocalypse's recovery base the Ship. Death captured superhumans and brought them to the Ship and used the Terrigen Mist to turn them into warped powerful monsters for him to control. Rhino was one of the super humans that were captured. He joined Death and other of his henchmen and fought Magneto and the X-Men on the moon. He ends up fighting Rogue but is defeated easily by one punch.Age of Apocalypse #4. Marvel Comics Rhino was seen as a member of the Avengers who travelled through time to stop Charnel, an entity that had been ravaging his future-Earth for decades. He had been partnered with She-Hulk for twenty years. He was killed in action.Death's Head 2 #4 (1992). Marvel Comics Rhino is among the villains enthralled by Krona in the last issue to defend his stronghold. He is shown defeating Triathlon.JLA/Avengers #3 In the alternate reality seen in the "House of M" storyline, Rhino is the bodyguard of Peter Parker. When Parker sends Rhino to question Crusher Hogan, wrestling under the alias "Green Goblin", Rhino injures Hogan, hospitalizing him. Now in hiding from the authorities, Rhino is approached by the Green Goblin looking for aid in defeating Parker. Rhino betrays the Green Goblin enlisting his friends Electro, Ox and Vulture to attack the Green Goblin, unmasking him to reveal Peter Parker.Spider-Man: House of M #1-3. Marvel Comics Rhino was among the zombified villains that attempted to devour Galactus and joined the undead Sinister Six. When the other zombies were done eating Galactus, Zombie Hulk and Zombie Spider-Man tore off Rhino's head and body and both each eating it, also both stating that it did not taste good.Marvel Zombies #3. Marvel Comics Rhino appeared within the MC2 Universe in the pages of Mr. and Mrs. Spider-Man. Whilst visiting the hospital with his sick aunt, Rhino briefly loses his temper as he is told to fill in his forms in order for his aunt to receive her meds, before calming down. Waiting in line, he once again comes face to face with Peter Parker, who is with his own family. Remembering that he once threatened Peter under the orders of Harry Osborn, Rhino assures Peter what he did was simply business, and the two call a truce. They spend the remainder of Peter's visit exchanging stories of their lifestyle choices, and part with a better understanding of each other.Mr. and Mrs. Spider-Man #1. Marvel Comics The Ultimate Marvel version is Alex O'Hirn who uses a suit of armor known as R.H.I.N.O. (Robotism Heuristic Intelligence Navigable Operative) that he stole from the U.S. Military.Ultimate Spider-Man #123 Using the R.H.I.N.O. armor's incredible strength, he robbed a Manhattan bank, charging the vault head-first, destroying it. He then rampaged through a busy street to make his escape, destroying anything in his path, including police cars, with ease. The original Spider-Man tries to escape school in order to confront him but is stopped by various incidents. Iron Man arrives, stops the R.H.I.N.O. assault and captures him by the time Spider-Man catches up. R.H.I.N.O. was then taken into military custody.Ultimate Spider-Man #28. Marvel Comics R.H.I.N.O. was later seen being soundly defeated by Spider-Man.Ultimate Spider-Man Annual #1. Marvel Comics During the "Divided We Fall" storyline, R.H.I.N.O. faces off against Captain America and the U.S. Army. The new Spider-Man uses his venom blasts to create a shortcut into the R.H.I.N.O. armor and defeat him.Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man Vol. 2 #14. Marvel Comics In the "Spider-Verse" storyline, the Earth-001 version of Rhino appears as a member of Verna's Hounds. He accompanied Verna and the Earth-001 version of Scorpion to Earth-21205 to hunt the Hobgoblin (who was the identity of this world's Peter Parker). Rhino, Verna, and Scorpion were stopped by the Spider-Woman of Earth-65.Spider-Verse Team-Up #2 He later helps Verna and the Earth-001 versions of Hammerhead and Ox attack the Spider-Totems on Earth-8847. On Earth-65, Aleksei Sytsevich is a mercenary who was hired by Kingpin and Matt Murdock to kill George Stacy. Though he doesn't appear as the Rhino, Aleksei is depicted as large, having gray skin, and sporting blue hair. He was stopped by Spider-Woman. Officer Frank Castle later interrogated him on who ordered the hit on George Stacy. Aleksei told him that Kingpin was the one who ordered the hit.Spider-Gwen #1. Marvel Comics      Rhino made two appearances in the first season of the 1967 Spider-Man cartoon, voiced by Ed McNamera. In the episode "Horn of the Rhino", Rhino steals some military equipment to try to make an explosive weapon which Spider-Man is blamed for, but Spider-Man realizes he is hiding in the rhinoceros enclosure of a zoo. Rhino is defeated with pepper and Spider-Man baking some mud with a heating device. In the episode "The Golden Rhino", Rhino steals a shipment of gold in order to make a gold statue of himself, which he succeeds in after stealing more gold, but is captured by Spider-Man's new webbing: instant steel. He later "returned" in a third-season budget-saving "mishmash" episode called "Rhino" which uses footage from his other episodes and where he also attempts to make another gold statue of himself, but is again webbed up. Rhino appears several times in Spider-Man: The Animated Series, voiced by Don Stark (except episode "The Six Fight Again" where he is voiced by Richard Moll). While his origin is not detailed in the series, he still retains his abilities from the comics. Here, he is shown as very unintelligent. First appearing in the episode "The Alien Costume" Pt. 1, he is hired by the Kingpin to steal a mineral from John Jameson's space shuttle after crash landing to Earth. Kingpin later sent Rhino to obtain another item where he fights Spider-Man in his black suit. Spider-Man fights the suit's urges to finish off Rhino. In the episode "The Alien Costume" Pt. 3, Spider-Man encounters Rhino on the rooftops and fights him where Rhino commented how he missed his black suit that he wore in their last encounter. Rhino was assisted in battle by Shocker who manages to bury Spider-Man in rubble. By the time Spider-Man emerges from the rubble, he finds that Rhino and Shocker have been webbed up by Eddie Brock who had recently become Venom. In the episodes "The Insidious Six" and "Battle of the Insidious Six", Rhino later becomes a member of the Insidious Six after he, Doctor Octopus, Chameleon, Mysterio, Scorpion, and Shocker are sprung from prison by Kingpin. As in one episode, Spider-Man easily fools him into thinking he is Chameleon and tricks him into attacking the other Insidious Six members. In the "Six Forgotten Warriors" episodes, Rhino was brought back together with the Insidious Six with Vulture acting as Mysterio's replacement. When looking for the keys for Red Skull's doomsday device, Rhino attacks Robert Frank. After Kingpin was badly hurt by Electro (who in this show is Red Skull's son Rheinholdt Kragarov), Rhino left with Doctor Octopus and Scorpion as they aren't going to get paid for their services. Rhino appeared in The Spectacular Spider-Man, voiced by Clancy Brown. Originally a common petty thug under the Big Man, Alex O'Hirn was partnered with Flint Marko. The two friends had repeated run-ins with Spider-Man. Having grown frustrated at constantly being dupes and punching bags. Concerned about Spider-Man's constant interference in his business, the Big Man had O'Hirn used as one of the guinea pigs in Norman Osborn's illegal experiments, in which O'Hirn's body was infused with Dr. Otto Octavius's highly durable titanium resin armor modeled after a rhinoceros. Although he proves to be one of Spider-man's most physically powerful foes, the costume has a major weakness in that it obstructs his pores. Now only able to perspire through his face, Rhino must periodically stop fighting and drink water, lest he overheat, a weakness Spider-Man utilizes to defeat him. The costume also inhibits his ability to manipulate small objects such as elevator buttons. The character appears in episodes such as "Group Therapy", "Reinforcement", "Accomplices" and "Opening Night". Rhino first appears in the Ultimate Spider-Man episode "The Rhino", with Alex O'Hirn voiced by Daryl Sabara and Rhino voiced by Max Mittelman in the initial appearance followed by Daryl Sabara voicing him in later appearances. This version of Alex O'Hirn is a teenager who was bullied by Flash Thompson and has been drinking a vial of rhinoceros serum (a serum similar to the Lizard serum that was among the animal serums made by Doctor Octopus in an earlier episode) that he stole from Oscorp to transform into a humanoid rhinoceros. Spider-Man and Power Man encounter Rhino at the burning Oscorp building and end up rammed into a tree by Rhino who makes off with some exotic animal-related chemicals. Spider-Man and Power Man later stakeout another Oscorp building and find Rhino charging towards an Oscorp train. Spider-Man and Power Man fight Rhino with the resulting fight causing Rhino to gash Power Man's leg. As Rhino charges towards Spider-Man, S.H.I.E.L.D. arrives causing Rhino to retreat with his "medicines". The next day, Peter Parker anticipates that Alex is responsible, as Spider-Man sees Alex drink a chemical that transforms him into Rhino. Spider-Man fights Rhino to keep him from attacking Flash Thompson while trying to reason with him. Spider-Man then works to protect Flash Thompson and not even Spider-Man's electro-webs could phase Rhino. When Spider-Man finds Flash Thompson at his house near a gas station, Spider-Man gets Flash Thompson away from the gas station when Rhino causes it to explode. Spider-Man tells Flash Thompson to call for help as he continues to fight Rhino. When Rhino starts charging towards Flash Thompson, Spider-Man tries to reason with Rhino while doing a bucking bronco move on him. In the nick of time, Power Man arrives and grabs Rhino by the horn. Spider-Man tells Flash that Rhino is actually Alex. Spider-Man traps Rhino on some oil as Spider-Man and Power Man double-team on Rhino enough for Rhino to regress back to Alex O'Hirn. As Alex is arrested by S.H.I.E.L.D., Flash Thompson apologizes to Alex as a female S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent tells Flash that they'll take care of Alex. In the episode "The Sinister Six", Rhino appears as a member of Doctor Octopus's Sinister Six along with Electro, Kraven the Hunter and Beetle. He joins in exchange for the promise of more the Rhino formula. In the episode "Return of the Sinister Six", Rhino is sprung out of Ryker's Island and is equipped with a tank-like armor. When the Sinister Six are reassembled (although Scorpion replaces Beetle), Rhino once again fight Spider-Man and then Power Man. He also assists in the Sinister Six's assault on Iron Patriot (Norman Osborn). After the Green Goblin's rampage, Goblin was able to defeat Rhino and Dr. Octopus while Spider-Man defeated the other Sinister Six members. In the episode "Rampaging Rhino", Dr. Connors tells Spider-Man that Rhino is unable to become Alex O'Hirn again after running an analysis on him. Flash (who has since reformed and become "Agent Venom") and Rhino continue their old rivalry when Rhino escapes from the Tri-Carrier. With help from the Hulk and his newly upgraded Iron Spider Hulkbuster armor, Spider-Man temporary subdues Rhino in a tunnel after a long destructive fight across the city. However Rhino gets back up to attack Hulk. Spider-Man and Hulk then reason with Alex on a human level which leads to Spider-Man, Hulk, and Rhino working to keep the tunnel from collapsing. Upon making it to Queens, Rhino was unable to have the courage to go into his house and turns himself over to the S.H.I.E.L.D. Agents. With the help of Hulk, Spider-Man persuaded Nick Fury to let Rhino try out as a student at the S.H.I.E.L.D. Academy. Fury agrees to the terms while holding Spider-Man responsible for Rhino's actions. In the episode "Ant-Man" Rhino continued his educated at the S.H.I.E.L.D. Academy, he took part in a lesson taught by Ant-Man. When Doctor Octopus escaped from his cell, he helped Nova, Dagger, and Agent Venom battle him. In the episode "Attack of the Synthezoids" he worked alongside Spider-Man, Agent Venom, and Cloark and Dagger to fight Arnim Zola's Synthezoids. In the episode "The Revenge of Arnim Zola" he helped Spider-Man, Cloak and Agent Venom fight more Synthezoids. When he and Agent Venom are captured by Zola, Spider-Man helps them escape. They return the favor by helping Spider-Man escape from Arnim Zola. In the episode "Contest of Champions, Part 4", he was one of the heroes Spider-Man rescued from the Grandmaster. Paul Giamatti plays the Rhino as one of the villains in The Amazing Spider-Man 2.Nealey, Joshua (February 5, 2013). "'The Amazing Spider-Man 2' synopsis revealed, Paul Giamatti and Colm Feore officially join cast". Hypable. In an interview with visual-effects supervisor Jerome Chen, he states that the armor was "put together out of surplus Soviet-era military gear that Oscorp had sold back in the '80s", with Aleksei modifying the armor.Labrecque, Jeff (May 8, 2014). "'Spider-Man 2': How did they create Rhino and destroy Times Square? -- EXCLUSIVE GIFs". Entertainment Weekly. In the film, Aleksei Sytsevich is a dim-witted and boastful Russian mobster whose theft of Oscorp plutonium is foiled by Spider-Man. Following the defeat of Electro and Green Goblin, Aleksei Sytsevich is given a rhinoceros-themed combat/mechanical suit of powered armor by Gustav Fiers that features heavy machine guns and missile launchers. After a shootout with police, he is confronted by Spider-Man and engages in a fight, with Spider-Man using a manhole cover swung at the Rhino's horn as the film ends. Paul Giamatti confirmed that Rhino would return in The Amazing Spider-Man 3.Weintraub, Steve (October 2, 2013). "Paul Giamatti Talks PARKLAND, DOWNTON ABBEY, THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN 2 and 3, the Sinister Six, and More". Collider. It was later announced that the Amazing Spider-Man franchise was cancelled and that it will be rebooted with a new film set in Marvel Cinematic Universe. Rhino's first video game appearance was in the 1989 game Doctor Doom's Revenge, along with other Marvel villains such as Electro, Batroc the Leaper and Doctor Doom himself. Rhino appears as a boss in The Amazing Spider-Man for the Game Boy. Rhino makes an appearance in Spider-Man/X-Men: Arcade's Revenge. He and Carnage team up to defeat Spider-Man at the end of his second level. Rhino appears as a boss in The Incredible Hulk for the SNES, Sega Genesis, SMS and Sega Game Gear. Rhino appears as a mini-boss in the 1995 game Spider-Man Animated Series for the SNES and Sega Genesis. Rhino appears in the PlayStation, Dreamcast, and Nintendo 64 Spider-Man game, voiced by Dee Bradley Baker. Rhino attacks both Spider-Man and the Black Cat. Spider-Man uses the surrounding machinery in his battle. Rhino appears as a boss in the Game Boy Advance game Spider-Man: Mysterio's Menace. Rhino appears briefly in the Spider-Man 2 video game, voiced by John DiMaggio. The player briefly engages in a "Boss Battle" with him. This game's version of the Rhino has spikes on parts of his costume and claws on his fingers. In the PC version of Spider-Man 2, the Rhino is the first villain Spider-Man battles in the game. In the first battle, the Rhino escapes his maximum security prison after Spider-Man takes out numerous crooks. Later on in the game, Spider-Man and Rhino meet multiple times in Oscorp. In the PC Game, after Spider-Man defeats several crooks trying to make a jail break at the Maximum Security Prison in New York, Rhino breaks out and starts a fight with Spider-Man. Rhino then makes a run for it and is caught in a laser cage made by the police. Spider-Man engages Rhino in the cage and makes him smash into the cage until its power wears down. Rhino eventually gets through the cage completely after Spider-Man dodges him once more, but the villain is defeated when he rams a pole into a gas station that blows up and sends Rhino flying away from the blast. Rhino's unconscious body is taken by Doctor Octopus, leaving Spider-Man to take down the fire with fire hydrants. Rhino is later seen again in the game when Doctor Octopus attacks Oscorp, and Spider-Man has to fight Rhino in a generator room, defeating him by making him smash into six generators that electrocute him into submission. However, Rhino meets up with Spider-Man again in a small room with four tubes containing (what seems to be) liquid nitrogen. Evading Rhino, Spider-Man destroys the tubes and escapes the room as it freezes leaving Rhino frozen in the chamber. The Ultimate Marvel version of Rhino is a boss Spider-Man fights in the 2005 Ultimate Spider-Man game, voiced by Bob Glouberman. When he first appeared, Spider-Man attempts to chase him while he causes destruction on the way. When he goes into a car lot, Spider-Man attempts to take him down by hitting him on his back multiple times. After Spider-Man defeated him, he was revealed to be a short man. He speaks mostly in Latin, seems to be very smart, and works for Bolivar Trask as his company made the R.H.I.N.O. armor. Strangely, this makes him the exact opposite of the original Rhino. In the characters page, R.H.I.N.O.'s name is shown to be Alex O'Hirn, and the web site for the game reveals that he originally designed the armor to be controlled by a computer before concluding that his own mind was more powerful than any computer and using the suit for himself. Rhino appears in the touch screen app Spider-Man: Total Mayhem. He is a boss in the level: Rhino - serious rampage. He appears originally in level 1, where he throws a car at Spider-Man after he defeats Sandman (Flint Marko) The game appears to be set in the Ultimate universe, however, Rhino is less intelligent, suggesting a slightly different universe. Rhino appears as a boss in the video game Marvel: Ultimate Alliance, voiced by Steven Blum. He is a member of Doctor Doom's Masters of Evil. He and Shocker were first seen working with Arcade. They are later seen guarding a defeated Heimdall. Rhino has special dialogue with Thing and Venom. He is in the Thing's simulation disk which takes place on the S.H.I.E.L.D. Omega Base where Thing must protect a frozen Mister Fantastic. John DiMaggio reprises his role of Rhino in Spider-Man: Friend or Foe. In the game, Rhino was one of the many villains that Mysterio kidnapped and placed under his control. He was sent to Tangaroa Island to guard a meteor shard. After Spider-Man defeats him and frees him of the Control Amulet, Rhino agrees to help Spider-Man and becomes a playable character. Steven Blum reprises his role of Rhino who appears in the Spider-Man 3 video game. This version does not don a full costume, but rather a large part of his body is scaly and bumpy like that of a rhinoceros, while his mask resembles that of his traditional costume. Dr. Stillwell forces Scorpion to free Rhino (who was caught by Spider-Man in the second game). Rhino accidentally knocks out Scorpion, and runs off. Observing the event, Spider-Man decides to look into MechaBioCon. Spider-Man allies with Scorpion to turn him back to normal. When Spider-Man and Scorpion reach Dr. Stillwell's hideout, Stillwell orders Rhino to destroy them. Rhino defeats Scorpion, but Spider-Man defeats Rhino by tying him up with web lines and dropping several enormous ceiling blocks on top of him, knocking him unconscious. Rhino appeared in Spider-Man: Web of Shadows, voiced by Fred Tatasciore. Spider-Man encounters him on Ryker's Island when on his mission to break out the Tinkerer. Unlike his other incarnations, he actually aids Spider-Man (as he is needed to break certain obstacles in the level), though he still presents some danger because he will sometimes launch indiscriminate attacks that can hurt the enemies in the level and Spider-Man. With Rhino's help, Spider-Man manages to take down the security system which leads them to a lift leading out of Ryker's Island. If the player chooses the Red Suit path, Spider-Man tricks Rhino into going back the way they came in order to get himself captured again. If the player chooses the Black Suit Path, Spider-Man lets Rhino go through the exit and tells him to look for any flying super-powered characters stating to Rhino that he will need his help later. In the game's PlayStation 2 and PSP versions, Rhino serves as a guard for Spencer Smythe's underground laboratory. It was also mentioned that Kraven the Hunter was hunting Rhino. Rhino appears exclusively in the Nintendo DS version of Spider-Man: Edge of Time. Rhino takes Anti-Venom's place as the one who fuses with Walker Sloan and Doctor Octopus to become into the monster Atrocity (voiced by Fred Tatasciore). Fred Tatasciore reprises his role as Rhino in The Amazing Spider-Man video game."The Amazing Spider-Man - Rhino Reveal Traile". IGN/YouTube. February 23, 2012. In this version, Alex O'Hirn is a low-level thug that corrupt Oscorp executive Rajit Ratha and a reluctant Dr. Michael Morbius used a serum on that was created using the notes of Dr. Curt Connors's research. The result of the serum used on Alex O'Hirn transforms him into a hybrid of a man and a rhinoceros.Webb, Charles (February 24, 2012). "The Rhino Crashes Into Activision's Upcoming 'The Amazing Spider-Man'". MTV. Rhino appears as a boss in Marvel Heroes, voiced by Benjamin Diskin. Rhino appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes, voiced by Robin Atkin Downes.Miller, Greg (July 20, 2013). "LEGO Marvel Super Heroes: Characters and Cast Revealed". IGN. Captain America, Storm, and Thing fight Rhino at the island where Asteroid M was being launched from. The heroes managed to defeat Rhino. Rhino appears in the mobile version of The Amazing Spider-Man 2 video game, voiced again by Robin Atkin Downes. Rhino appears in Jim Butcher's Spider-Man novel The Darkest Hours, in which he and Spider-Man are forced to ally against the family of Morlun, and the two old foes gain a deeper respect for one another. Indeed, listening to Aleksei's life story, Peter finds out that the two of them are not all that different and have had many of the same problems in life. Also, Rhino points out that he hates his costume, but must wear it because it's what his clients expect. Rhino will appear as one of the villains in the Marvel Universe: LIVE! stage show."Character Reveals for Marvel Universe LIVE!" Marvel Comics. November 25, 2013. Rhino has been reproduced in action figure form several times by Toy Biz, first as part of their Spider-Man: The Animated Series line, then as part of Spider-Man Classics, and finally as part of their Marvel Legends series. The Spider-Man Classics figure was later repainted and reissued by Hasbro. The character has been reproduced in mini-bust form by Art Asylum (as part of their Rogues Gallery collection) and as both a bust and statue by Bowen Designs. Rhino has also been immortalized as a comiquette statue by Sideshow Collectibles. Rhino at Marvel.com Rhino's profile at Spiderfan.org
