    RMIT University  (officially Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology) is an Australian public university of technology and design based in Melbourne, Victoria. RMIT was founded in 1887 by grazier, politician and public benefactor the Hon Francis Ormond—as the Working Men's College of Melbourne. Its foundation campus is located in Melbourne City, and is a contiguous part of the northern area of the city centre. It opened as a night school for instruction in art, science and technology—to support the industrialisation of Melbourne during the 19th century. It had an initial enrollment of 320 students. As of 2013, it has an enrollment of around 82,000 students across vocational, undergraduate and postgraduate levels. In addition to its Melbourne City foundation campus, RMIT also has two radial campuses in the Melbourne metropolitan area—located in the northern suburbs of Bundoora and Brunswick;Campuses and maps - Campuses. RMIT University, retrieved 3 July 2013 as well as training and research sites in the Melbourne metropolitan area and the Grampians state region—located in the western suburb of Point Cook and the town of Hamilton respectively.Campuses and maps - Sites. RMIT University, retrieved 3 July 2013 Outside Australia, it has two branch campuses in Asia—located in Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi, Vietnam; and a liaison centre in Europe—located in Barcelona, Spain. According to the 2015/16 QS World University Rankings, RMIT University was ranked 273 in the world. http://www.topuniversities.com/universities/rmit-university RMIT University was also ranked 20th in the world for art & design subjects, making it the top design school in Australia. It is also ranked 33rd in Architecture and in the top 100 universities globally in Accounting and Finance; Mechanical and Electrical Engineering; Computer Science and Information Systems.     The original Working Men's College of Melbourne was founded by Scottish-born grazier, politician and public benefactor the Hon. Francis Ormond. Initial planning began in 1881, with Ormond basing his model for the College on the Royal College of Art and the Working Men's College in London, and antecedents of the present day University of London and University of Brighton. Ormond donated the sum of £5000 toward the foundation of the College. He was supported in the Victorian Parliament by Charles Pearson and in the Melbourne Trades Hall by William Murphy. The workers' unions of Melbourne rallied their members to match Ormond's donation. The site for the College, on the corners of Bowen Street and La Trobe Street, opposite the Melbourne Public Library, was donated by the Victorian Government. The Working Men's College of Melbourne opened on June 4, 1887 with a gala ceremony at the Melbourne Town Hall, becoming the fifth tertiary education provider in the then colony of Victoria (the Melbourne Athenaeum was founded in 1839, the University of Melbourne in 1853, the Ballarat School of Mines in 1870 and the Bendigo School of Mines in 1873). It took 320 enrollments on its opening night. It opened as a night school for instruction in "art, science and technology"—in the words of its founder—"especially to working men".Ross, C. Stuart (1912). Francis Ormond - Pioneer, Patriot, Philanthropist. London: Melville and Mullen. pp76-84 Ormond, who was a firm believer in the transformative power of education, also believed the College would be of "great importance and value" to the industrialisation of Melbourne during the late-19th century. In 1904, it was incorporated under the Companies Act as a private college. Between the turn of the 20th century and the 1930s, it expanded over the neighbouring Old Melbourne Gaol and constructed buildings for new art, engineering and radio schools. It also made its first contribution to Australia's war effort through training of returned military personnel from World War I. Following a petition by students, it officially changed its name to the Melbourne Technical College in 1934. The expanded College made a greater contribution to Australia's effort during World War II by training a sixth of the country's military personnel—including the majority of its Royal Australian Air Force communication officers. It also trained 2000 civilians in munitions manufacturing and was commissioned by the Australian Government to manufacture military aircraft parts—including the majority of parts for the Beaufort Bomber. Following World War II, in 1954 it became the first Australian tertiary education provider to be awarded royal patronage (by Elizabeth II) and officially changed its name to the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in 1960. During the mid-20th century, it restructured itself as a provider of both general higher and vocational education and pioneered dual sector education in Australia. During this time, it also began a long-term engagement with South-East Asia—beginning under the Australian Government's Colombo Plan. In 1979, the neighbouring Emily McPherson College of Domestic Economy joined with RMIT. Following a merger with the Phillip Institute of Technology in the north Melbourne metropolitan area,History of RMIT, RMIT Institute, retrieved 22 September 2012 RMIT was made a public university by act of the Victorian Government in 1992—under the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Act 1992.Parliament of Victoria (1992), Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Act 1992 (repealed), section 1, Australasian Legal Information Institute (online), retrieved 22 September 2012 During the 1990s, the university underwent a rapid expansion and amalgamated with a number of nearby colleges and institutes. The Melbourne College of Decoration and Design joined RMIT in 1993 to create a new dedicated design TAFE school, followed by the Melbourne College of Printing and Graphic Arts in 1995. Also in 1995, the university opened its first radial campus in Bundoora in the outer-north Melbourne metropolitan area. And, in 1999, it acquired the Melbourne Institute of Textiles campus in Brunswick in the inner-north Melbourne metropolitan area—for its design TAFE schools. At the turn of the 21st century, RMIT was invited by the Vietnamese Government to establish the country's first foreign-owned university.Our heritage, RMIT International University, retrieved 27 September 2012 Its first international branch campus opened in Ho Chi Minh City in 2001 and a second in Hanoi in 2004. In 2013, it established a modest presence in Barcelona."RMIT Europe launches in style". RMIT University (11 July 2013), retrieved 3 July 2013 The Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology is a public university  created under the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Act 1992 by the Government of Victoria,, section 4(1) and continues in accordance with the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Act 2010., section 1 The university trades under the name "RMIT University" which is a registered business name and trademark.Our name, RMIT University, retrieved 17 September 2012Trading names and corporation company formation policy, provisions 1&2, RMIT University, retrieved 22 September 2012 It is composed of the academic colleges and schools, research centres and institutes of the Royal Melbourne Institute of TechnologyOrganisational Chart, RMIT University, retrieved 30 August 2014 and is governed by the RMIT Council and is managed by the RMIT Chancellery., section 8(2)(a)(b)RMIT Council Governance Charter, RMIT University, retrieved 30 August 2014 "RMIT Group" is the business unit of the university and consists of the entities controlled by the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, including wholly owned subsidiaries such as: the RMIT Foundation and RMIT Training (including RMIT English Worldwide and RMIT Publishing); its international holdings companies: RMIT Spain (trading as RMIT Europe) and RMIT Vietnam; as well other commercial interests and sub-entities.Annual Report 2013, p. 30, RMIT University, retrieved 30 August 2014   RMIT is governed by a council consisting of 21 members,, section 11(1) who are responsible for the "general direction and superintendence of the University". The council is led by the RMIT Chancellor as an ex officio member who serves as its governor-in-council.RMIT Council Governance Charter, 4. Chancellor's Responsibilities, RMIT University, pp3-4, retrieved 22 September 2012, section 11(2)(a) RMIT's vice-chancellor and president, as well as the chair of the academic board, are also ex officio members of the council., section 11(2)(b)(c) Five members of the council are elected via a direct ballot of the staff and students of the university., section 11(5)(a)(b) They consist of three staff members elected to represent the higher education, vocational education and general staff,Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.1(d), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 and two students elected to represent higher education and vocational education students.Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.1(e), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The remaining members are appointed directly by the governor-in-council, or by a vote of the sitting council members.Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.1(f), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.1(h), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The members appointed to the council are required to possess a substantial expertise in academic or financial management, vocational education or training experience, and be drawn from beyond the university community.Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.3(a)(b)(c), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012Statute 2.1 - The Council, section 1.4, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The RMIT chancellor and its governor-in-council, since January 1, 2011, has been telecommunications businessman and nuclear physicist Ziggy Switkowski AO.Council members. RMIT University, retrieved 14 December 2014 The council grants power over all academic and administrative affairs of RMIT to the vice-chancellor and president—who is the chief executive officer of the university.Statute 3.3 - The Vice-Chancellor and President, section 3, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The vice-chancellor and president is "responsible for the conduct of the University's affairs in all matters"., section 26(6)(a) The management of RMIT's colleges and portfolios is then delegated by the Vice-Chancellor and President to a team of Deputy and Pro Vice-Chancellors as well as senior executives., section 26(7)Vice-Chancellor and President, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 RMIT's vice-chancellor and president, since 1 February 2015, is information technology businessman and former vice-chancellor of the United Kingdom's Open University, Martin G. Bean CBE.to lead RMIT. 10 July 2014. RMIT News. RMIT University. Retrieved 14 August 2014 The requirements for the conferring of an academic degree of RMIT is determined and approved by the academic board.Statute 2.8 - The Academic Board, section 3(a), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The board consists of the chancellery as ex officio members,Statute 2.8 - The Academic Board, section 1(b), RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 and up to a further 46 members—of which 34 must be elected by staff and students.Statute 2.8 - The Academic Board, section 1, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 Those conferred an academic degree of the university may use the post-nominal letters "RMIT" with the abbreviation of their degree title.RMIT award abbreviation, RMIT University, retrieved 28 September 2012 RMIT University is separated into two divisions: the Higher Education Division and the vocational education and training (VET) Division.Statute 2.7 - The Higher Education Division of the University, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012Statute 2.10 - The Technical and Further Education Division of the University, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The divisions are responsible for RMIT's 23 academic schools (20 higher education schools including a graduate/professional school and three VET schools). The schools are grouped into three academic portfolios which are referred to as colleges.Statute 2.9 - The Academic Portfolios, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012Our education, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 The higher education schools offer both undergraduate and postgraduate degrees, while the TAFE schools offer vocational certificates and diplomas. According to the 2013 QS World University Rankings, its schools are ranked within the top 100 worldwide in the subjects of accounting, communication and media studies, computer science and information systems.    The three academic colleges of RMIT are the College of Business (BUS), College of Design and Social Context (DSC) and College of Science, Engineering and Health (SEH). In addition to its academic colleges, the university has a dedicated Portfolio of Research and Innovation (R&I). It contains RMIT's four major research institutes. Its colleges and schools also contain a large number of research centres and groups, of which are independent of research portfolio, and focus on their respective academic areas. College of Business College of Design and Social Context College of Science, Engineering and Health Portfolio of Research and Innovation The above institutes are in the process of being shut down.  RMIT primarily focuses on applied research as well as outcome-related research and consultancy services, and has extensive partnerships with government and industry. It specifically focuses its research in the areas of design, technology, health, globalisation and sustainability. Its dedicated Portfolio of Research and Innovation operates on a similar scale to its colleges. It is responsible for the (soon to be abolished) major research institutes in: Design Research, Global Cities Research, Health Innovations Research and Platform Technologies Research. The four institutes operated on the same scale as RMIT's schools. It also contains a specialist research school in order to foster excellence in research methodology and pedagogy. In addition to the Portfolio of Research and Innovation, over 50 research centres operate independently within RMIT's colleges and schools—as well as a large number of smaller research groups.  According to the QS World University Rankings, RMIT is ranked as a five star university in the areas of: research, employability, teaching, facilities, internationalisation, innovation, engagement, specialisation.QS Stars, QS World University Rankings, retrieved 24 October 2013 In 2015, according to the QS World University Rankings, RMIT University was ranked 20th in the world for art & design subjects, making it the top design school in Australia, and 31st in Architecture. RMIT was also ranked 51-100 in the world in the subjects of: accounting and finance, computer science and information systems, engineering - electrical and electronic, and engineering - mechanical. In 2009, RMIT was ranked as the top entrepreneurial university in Australia (12th in the World)—according to the  GSEA's Top Entrepreneurial Universities List,"Global Student Entrepreneur Awards release second annual Top Entrepreneurial Universities List", Thomson Reuters (19 October 2009), retrieved 16 September 2012 and, in 2010, as the top advertising university of the decade in Australia (5th in the World)—according to the YoungGuns International Awards."RMIT and AWARD School make the YoungGuns top 10 global ad schools, ranking 5th and 6th", Campaign Brief (9 September 2010), retrieved 16 September 2012 Times Higher Education rankings placed RMIT in the 93rd position of 100 universities under 50 years old. In 2011, RMIT was recognised by Australian Skeptics with a Bent Spoon Award for their teaching of Chinese, chiropractic, and energy medicines - all of which lack scientific rigour.The Bent Spoon Award | Australian Skeptics Inc The prize was awarded during the national convention of Australian Skeptics in Sydney      Melbourne City:  RMIT's foundation campus is its Melbourne City campus, which is located in the northern section of the Melbourne city centre. It was established in 1887—as the  Working Men's College of Melbourne, in a single building on the corner of La Trobe Street and Bowen Street. As of 2010, the campus occupies a gross floor area of  over 68 buildings.2010 Pocket Statistics: Infrastructure - Property, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012 The City campus is a contiguous part of the Melbourne city centre's northern section. Most buildings are concentrated around six city blocks (in an area of roughly ) north of the Hoddle Grid. It is bound by La Trobe Street to the south, Lygon Street and Russell Street to the east, Queensberry Street and Victoria Street to the north, Elizabeth Street and Swanston Street to the west. The densest area of the campus, east of Swanston Street, is sometimes referred to as the "RMIT Quarter" of the City.Webb, Carolyn (14 July 2012), "RMIT's wave of progress", The Age, Fairfax Media, retrieved 27 September 2012O'Neill, Tamsin (ed.) (24 July 2008), "RMIT University's landmark building", Green Magazine, retrieved 27 September 2012 RMIT's City campus is noted for its variety of heritage Victorian and striking contemporary architecture.RMIT's historic buildings, RMIT University, retrieved 23 September 2012 Historic buildings on the campus include the former Melbourne Gaol chapel (1860), original Working Men's College (1887), Storey Hall (1887), Forresters' Hall (1888), former Melbourne Magistrates' Court (1914), off-site Capitol Theatre (1924) and former Emily McPherson College (1927). Notable contemporary buildings on the campus include Building 8 (1993), the Design Hub (2011) and the Swanston Academic Building (2012).  Bundoora: The Bundoora campus was established in 1992. It is located 18&nbsp;km from the City campus in the outer northern suburb of Bundoora. The campus is divided into 'East' and 'West' by Plenty Road. In a contrast to the urban City campus, the Bundoora West campus is set amongst almost  of parkland.Bundoora campus, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012 Programs in aerospace engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, medical sciences and social sciences are offered at the Bundoora campus.  Brunswick: The Brunswick campus became a part of RMIT in 1999 as a dedicated site for its design TAFE schools. It is located 6&nbsp;km from the City campus in the inner northern suburb of Brunswick. Prior to its annexation by RMIT, it was the campus of the former Melbourne Institute of Textiles for nearly 50&nbsp;years.Brunswick campus, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012 Programs in fashion design, graphic design, printing, publishing and textiles are offered at the Brunswick campus.  Other sites: RMIT's flight training programs are conducted from its site at the Royal Australian Air Force's historic Williams base.Point Cook site, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012 It is located 20&nbsp;km from the City campus in the outer south-western suburb of Point Cook. RAAF Williams is the world's oldest operating air force base and the birthplace of the Royal Australian Air Force.RAAF Williams, Royal Australian Air Force, Department of Defence, Government of Australia, retrieved 27 September 2012 The university also has a regional research site in the rural town of Hamilton.Hamilton site, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012 It is located 300&nbsp;km north-west of the City campus in regional Victoria—just south of the Grampians National Park. The Potter Rural Community Research Centre at the site focuses on rural and regional issues in a global context.Potter Rural Community Research Network, RMIT University, retrieved 27 September 2012  Ho Chi Minh City: In 1998, RMIT was invited by the Vietnamese Government to establish the country's first foreign-owned university. In 2001, it purchased and restored a 19th-century French Colonial building and grounds in District 3, Ho Chi Minh City. The building, located on Pham Ngoc Thach Street, is informally referred to as "the Castle" by students.Pham Ngoc Thach site, RMIT International University, retrieved 27 September 2012 Today, the Pham Ngoc Thach site remains a radial site of the present Ho Chi Minh City campus. The present Ho Chi Minh City campus is located in the Phu My Hung area of the Saigon South development in District 7.Saigon South campus, RMIT International University, retrieved 27 September 2012 The first academic buildings on the large purpose-built campus opened in 2005. In 2011, its recreation complex and residential centres opened.  Hanoi: The Hanoi campus was established in 2004. It was initially located in the Van Phuc Diplomatic Compound in the government precinct of the Ba Dinh District, Hanoi. In 2007, it also acquired a building in the Dong Da District to accommodate rising student numbers. It consolidated its two buildings in a newly built tower overlooking Ngoc Khanh Lake in the Ba Dinh District in 2010.Hanoi campus, RMIT International University, retrieved 27 September 2012     Other partners: RMIT teaches and/or accredits programs for the Hong Kong Art School and Shanghai Institute of Foreign Trade in China, Singapore Institute of Management in Singapore and Taylor's University in Malaysia.Study an RMIT program in your country, RMIT University, retrieved 22 September 2012  Barcelona: In 2013, RMIT established a coordinating centre in Barcelona, Spain. The centre will offer a variety of programs in conjunction with RMIT's partners in Europe, including a dual master's program in architecture—which will facilitate the RMIT School of Architecture and Design's participation in the reconstruction of Antoni Gaudí's basilica Sagrada Família.RMIT University de Australia se expande en Europa, PR Newswire (5 April 2013), retrieved 20 April 2013 (in Spanish).     University Library is the central libraries network of RMIT. It has five locations across RMIT's three Australian campuses.About the University Library, RMIT University, retrieved 28 September 2012 Swanston Library is the largest in the network, and is located in Building 8 at the City campus.Swanston Library, hours, contacts and location, RMIT University, retrieved 28 September 2012 Swanston Library is also reported to be amongst the top five libraries in all of Melbourne.M Magazine article (27 July 2008), The Age, Fairfax Media Other libraries in the network are the Brunswick Library, Bundoora East Library, Bundoora West Library and Carlton Library (the latter of which is also at the City campus). RMIT's City campus also benefits from its proximity to the State Library of Victoria—the central public reference library and the largest library in Melbourne. In addition to its libraries network, RMIT schools also maintain their own specialised collections. Notable examples of school-maintained collections are the AFI Research Collection,AFI Research Collection, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 RMIT Design Archives and National Aerospace Resource.RMIT Design Archives, RMIT University, retrieved 28 September 2012National Aerospace Resource Centre, RMIT University, retrieved 28 September 2012 Two libraries are located at RMIT's Vietnam campuses; Beanland Library and Hanoi Library.Vietnam Library, RMIT International University, accessed 28 September 2012 The Beanland Library is the largest of the two libraries, and is located at the Ho Chi Minh City campus.Beanland Library, RMIT International University, retrieved 28 September 2012 Selected research of RMIT academics and postgraduate students can be accessed through the RMIT Research Repository—an open access database of peer-reviewed published articles, conference papers, books and chapters, etc.Research Repository, RMIT University, retrieved 8 March 2013 Documents held by the RMIT Research Repository are also indexed by Google Scholar, National Library of Australia and WorldCat. As of March 2013, there are more than 19,000 records in the Repository. The university's subsidiary RMIT Publishing also owns and operates the Informit online library database, which consists of research from across Australia and the Asia-Pacific.Informit, RMIT Publishing, retrieved 28 September 2012About Us, RMIT Publishing, retrieved 28 September 2012  The university's major public art gallery is RMIT Gallery located at the City campus.RMIT Gallery, Public Galleries Association of Victoria, retrieved 30 September 2012 The gallery runs a highly regarded and regularly changing program of Australian and international exhibitions,RMIT Gallery exhibitions, RMIT Gallery, retrieved 30 September 2012 and focuses on contemporary art, design and visual culture. It is located in the historic original section of Storey Hall on Swanston Street and is considered to be one of Melbourne's most vibrant art galleries.RMIT Gallery, visitmelbourne.com, Tourism Victoria, Government of Victoria, retrieved 30 September 2012 It also publishes widely on art and design research in partnership with RMIT Publishing.RMIT Gallery publications, RMIT Gallery, retrieved 30 September 2012 The campus union RMIT Link operates the First Site Gallery at the City campus which focuses on emerging artists and is located beneath RMIT Gallery.First Site Gallery, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012First Site Gallery is for RMIT student exhibitions, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 Link also manages the Artland program at the Brunswick campus.Artland, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 Artland consists of 16 sites around the campus and Brunswick streets showcasing work of design students. In addition to the Story Hall galleries, many of RMIT's schools also manage their own discipline-relevant galleries. Notable examples of school-managed galleries are the School of Art's main and Project Space galleries,School of Art galleries, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 Media and Communication's field36 Gallery,field36 Gallery, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 Architecture and Design's Virtual Reality Centre and Design Hub galleries.Virtual Reality Centre visualisation resources, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 The School of Art's renowned public art program also produces art in public spaces projects around RMIT's campuses as well as the greater Melbourne city centre and metropolitan area.Art in a Public Space, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 University Art Collection RMIT Gallery is also charged as the caretaker of RMIT's permanent art collection.University art collection, RMIT Gallery, retrieved 30 September 2012 It includes the substantial Linsday Edwards Collection of fine art and invaluable W.E. Macmillan Collection of gold and silver—as well as a number of other sub-collections.Skilled Hand and Cultivated Mind, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 The Linsday Edwards Collection has a strong focus on Australian art. It holds works by leading Australian artists (many of which are RMIT alumni or former faculty); such as Howard Arkley, John Brack, Leonard French, Roger Kemp, Inge King, Max Meldrum, John Olsen, Lenton Parr, Fred Williams and others. A history of the art collection is documented in the publication A Skilled Hand and Cultivated Mind: A Guide to the Architecture and Art of RMIT.   RMIT Link is the Institute's campus union.About us, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 It exists to sponsor and promote social, cultural, educational, sporting and recreational programs and activities among the RMIT community, and to provide such facilities and services at RMIT's Australian campuses.Statute 10.1 - The RMIT Union, section 2, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 Link is separated into two divisions: Arts & Culture and Sports & Recreation. It is a controlled entity under the authority of RMIT's Council.Statute 10.1 - The RMIT Union, section 3, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 Arts & Culture manages a number of extra-curricular arts collectives.Arts collectives, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 It also offers workshop and seminars as well as funding for arts initiatives,Workshops and seminars, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 and runs a free cinema program at the City and Bundoora campuses.Free cinema, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 Sports & Recreation manages RMIT's semi-professional sports teams, which are collectively known as the Redbacks,University sports, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012 and has an elite athlete funding program.Elite athletes, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012  It offers funding for community-based social sports clubs on RMIT's Australian campuses,Community sports, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012  and also runs community and charity sporting events and tournaments.Community events, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012  It also operates the City campus gym,City Fitness, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012  and co-owns a ski lodge on Mount Buller.Preston Alpine Ski Lodge, RMIT Link, retrieved 30 September 2012   RMIT's University Student Union (RUSU) is the independent body representing students enrolled at RMIT.About RUSU, RMIT University Student Union, retrieved 30 September 2012 It was founded in 1944 by John Storey Jr. who was its inaugural president—and after whom Storey Hall at the City campus is also named.John Storey, RMIT University, retrieved 30 September 2012 RUSU's objective is to safeguard the interests and rights of students,RMIT University Student Union Constitution, section 2.1.1, RMIT University Student Union, retrieved 30 September 2012 and to advance education, welfare, social life and cultural activities of students.RMIT University Student Union Constitution, section 2.1.3, RMIT University Student Union, retrieved 30 September 2012 RUSU has a number of departments advocating various elements of student life. It also supports academic, cultural, political, spiritual and special interest clubs and societies run by students.Clubs, RMIT University Student Union, retrieved 30 September 2012 Departments:    Student media: RMIT operates several student accommodation facilities including: RMIT Village, Cambridge Court, College Square and Rooms International (on RMIT's City campus), all of which operate as self-catered apartment complexes. Twelve other student hostels are also operated by other providers. Some of the traditional residential colleges of the nearby University of Melbourne also reserve places for RMIT students. The college fees include all catering, utilities, academic and pastoral support. The colleges affiliated with RMIT include:  RMIT's Spiritual Centre is a multi-faith place of worship located on the City campus. It is housed in the historic Old Melbourne Gaol chapel, built in 1860.The Gaol History, Old Melbourne Gaol, National Trust of Australia, retrieved 30 September 2012 The centre provides a contemplative space to all staff and students of RMIT, regardless of their faith and without showing favour to any one faith, and houses the RMIT Chaplaincy services. RMIT has chaplains representing Buddhist, Christian, Jewish and Muslim faiths of various denominations as well as for Integral spirituality.About us, RMIT Chaplaincy, retrieved 30 September 2012  Graduates of RMIT are considered to be some of the most employable in the world. In 2011, in a survey of over 5000 employers, the QS World University Rankings placed RMIT at 51st in the world for graduate employability.RMIT, QS World University Rankings, retrieved 30 September 2012 As of 2011, the university has an alumni community of around 280,000 graduates in 130 countries.Annual Report 2011, p 61, RMIT University, retrieved 16 September 2012Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ). RMIT Alumni. RMIT University. Retrieved 6 October 2012  Examples of RMIT people" widths="130px" heights="130px" perrow="6 Richard Casey, 16th Governor General of Australia (FRMIT) Rob Hulls, former Attorney-General of Victoria (Law) Peter Ryan, former Deputy Premier of Victoria (Law) Rove McManus, comedian and television host (RMITV) Andrew Stockdale, lead singer and guitarist of Wolfmother (Arts) Mai Phương Thúy, 2006 Miss Vietnam (Business) James Wan, film director and writer (Arts) John Safran, documentary maker (Arts) Charles Billich, artist (Arts) Jim Stynes, Australian rules footballer and charity worker (Social Science) Lydia Lassila, skier, Winter Olympic gold medalist (Applied Science) James Tomkins, three-time Olympic gold medalist (Business)  A notable graduation tradition of RMIT is its graduation parade. The parade is town and gown-style academic procession which proceeds from the City campus down the major city thoroughfare of Swanston Street to Federation Square (until 2002 the parade culminated outside the Melbourne Town Hall).Graduation Parade, RMIT University, retrieved 1 October 2012 Graduands and faculty march in full academic regalia and receive a military escort from the central marching band of the Royal Australian Air Force. The parade is welcomed at Federation Square by the Lord Mayor of Melbourne—on behalf of the city and its citizens. The mayor grants RMIT's vice-chancellor a "writ of passage" to proceed with the graduation ceremony, which takes place at the Docklands Stadium.Melbourne Graduation Ceremony, RMIT University, retrieved 1 October 2012 Texts:    Ranking!!2010!!2011!!2012!!2013!!2014!!2015 THE Rankings - Top 100 under 50 QS World University Rankings Overall Ranking 223 228 246 291 304 QS World University Rankings - Art & Design QS World University Rankings - Architecture QS World University Rankings - Law & Legal Studies QS World University Rankings - Economics & EconometricsTop 200 in Economics 2011 QS World University Rankings - AccountingTop 150 in Accounting and  Finance 2011-12 QS World University Rankings - Communication & Media StudiesTop 200 in Communication & Media Studies 2011-13 QS World University Rankings - Engineering - Electrical and Electronic QS World University Rankings - Engineering - Civil and Structural QS World University Rankings - Computer Science and Information Systems RMIT School of Accounting RMIT School of Business IT and Logistics RMIT School of Business TAFE RMIT School of Economics, Finance and Marketing RMIT School of Management RMIT Graduate School of Business and Law RMIT School of Architecture and Design RMIT School of Art RMIT School of Design TAFE RMIT School of Education RMIT School of Fashion and Textiles RMIT School of Global, Urban and Social Studies RMIT School of Media and Communication RMIT School of Property, Construction and Project Management RMIT School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering RMIT School of Applied Sciences RMIT School of Civil, Environmental and Chemical Engineering RMIT School of Computer Science and Information Technology RMIT School of Electrical and Computer Engineering RMIT School of Engineering TAFE RMIT School of Health Sciences RMIT School of Life and Physical Sciences RMIT School of Mathematical and Geospatial Sciences RMIT School of Medical Sciences RMIT Design Research Institute RMIT Global Cities Research Institute RMIT Health Innovations Research Institute RMIT Platform Technologies Research Institute RMIT School of Graduate Research Activities - manages events, festivals, markets and parties on all RMIT's campuses Campuses - representation of students on general matters relating to RMIT's campuses Clubs and Societies - see: List of clubs and societies of the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Education - campaigns on education matters and is run in collaboration with other departments Environment - advocates environmental responsibility and sustainability on RMIT's campuses International Students - supports and advocates the rights of international students Postgraduate Students - the representative body of postgraduate students Queer - supports and advocates the rights of RMIT's LGBT community Womyn's - supports and advocates the rights of women Realfoods - RUSU's organic fair trade vegetarian cafe, located in the main cafeteria at the City campus Catalyst - student magazine, distributed free every month of the academic year since 1944 RMITV - student television production company, broadcasting since 1987, and co-founder of the C31 community television station Student Youth Network (SYN) - student radio station, broadcasting across the Melbourne metropolitan area on 90.7 FM and on DAB+. Though many RMIT students participate in SYN programs, SYN is wholly independent of both RMIT and RUSU organisationally. 3RRR - RMIT's former radio station, founded as 3RMT in 1976, now independently funded but still used by the University International House Janet Clarke Hall Newman College (limited number) Queen's College St Mary's College University College Whitley College List of universities in Australia Melbourne RMIT University Vietnam Official Australian website Official Vietnamese website Official European website Official alumni website
