   Robert Fredrick "Rob" Paulsen III (born March 11, 1956) is an American voice actor, singer and former actor who has done many voice roles in various films, television shows and video games. He is best known for providing the voices of Raphael and Donatello from the 1987 cartoon and 2012 cartoon respectively of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Yakko Warner and Dr. Otto Scratchansniff from Animaniacs, Pinky from Pinky and the Brain and Animaniacs, and the title character in The Mask. In total, Paulsen has been the voice of over 250 different animated characters and performed in over 1000 commercials. He continues to play parts in dozens of cartoons as well as characters in animated feature movies. He began his voice-over career in 1983 with the mini-series G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero, where he played "Snow Job" and "Tripwire".  A few years later, his career launched into more roles such as "Cobra Slavemaster" and reprising "Snow Job" and "Tripwire" on G.I. Joe,  "Corky" on The Snorks, "Marco Smurf" on the later seasons of The Smurfs, "Boober" on the animated version of Fraggle Rock, "Hadji" in The New Adventures of Jonny Quest and the title character – "Saber Rider" and the villain "Jesse Blue" on Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs. During the 1980s, Paulsen also explored the field of live action films. His first movie was Eyes of Fire in 1983. He played supporting roles in Body Double, Stewardess School, Warlock, and Mutant on the Bounty. He appeared in television shows during this time as well, such as MacGyver and St. Elsewhere. He mentioned in an interview, regarding his role in Body Double, that he would not want his child (who was very young at the time of the interview) to see the movie, so he could not really be proud of his work. Paulsen became more prevalent in the world of advertising as well. In the 1980s, he had been the announcer for the sitcom Cheers and continued to secure roles as an announcer. He appeared as the voice of "Mr. Opportunity", spokesman of Honda commercials on TV and radio, the announcer for Buffalo Dick's Radio Ranch, and the spokesman for Lucky Stores, a West Coast grocery store chain, before it was acquired by Albertsons in 1998.  He provided the voice of "Dog" in the Taco Bell kids meal commercials from 1996 to mid-1997, with Eddie Deezen as the voice of "Nacho" the cat. However, Paulsen's most famous advertising role was in the original commercial of the now ubiquitous Got Milk? campaign. The famous commercial, Who shot Alexander Hamilton in that famous duel?, aired in 1993, and launched the Got Milk? campaign into a monstrously successful enterprise. Paulsen continues to be one of the most sought-after commercial voice actors in the industry. He can be currently heard as the voice of singing Mr Mini-Wheat in the Mini- Wheats commercials in Canada. From 1987 to 1995, Paulsen voiced Raphael and various supporting characters in the original 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series. Originally starting as a five-part miniseries, the series continued for ten seasons and 193 episodes. It was a great success and became an instant pop culture symbol. Paulsen has said that Raphael's voice is very similar to his natural voice. He returned to the franchise as Donatello for the new 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series on Nickelodeon.  Throughout the early 1990s, Paulsen continued to co-star in animated series, which allowed him to branch further into radio and television announcements and dropped live action acting from his repertoire. In 1993, he voiced "Antoine D'Coolette" in ABC's series Sonic the Hedgehog, and "Arthur", an insecure accountant in a moth costume (wings included), in the superhero series The Tick in 1995, replacing Micky Dolenz, who had originally played Arthur. In 1993, he starred as the title character in both Mighty Max and The Mask. Also at this time, he starred in what became one of his most popular roles, "Yakko Warner" of Animaniacs. Paulsen also provided the voice of "Pinky" from  both Animaniacs and its spin-off Pinky and the Brain, a show which won him several Annie Awards and a Daytime Emmy in 1999. He also did a number of characters in Tiny Toon Adventures, including "Fowlmouth", "Arnold the Pit Bull", and "Concord Condor". In the direct-to-video movie Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation, he did the voices for "Banjo Possum", "Mr. Hitcher" (who would also appear in other episodes), and "Johnny Pew". Paulsen has provided voices for a great amount of characters, among which are Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff and Pinky in Animaniacs, Steelbeak in Darkwing Duck, "Brick" and "Boomer" in The Powerpuff Girls, Atchan in Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi,  Spooky the Tuff Little Ghost in The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper, Ogden O. Ostrich in Channel Umptee-3, Hathi in Jungle Cubs, "Reuben" in Lilo & Stitch: The Series, "Jack Fenton", "The Box Ghost", "Nicolai Technus", and "The Vulture Ghosts" in Danny Phantom, "Carl Wheezer" and "Butch" in Jimmy Neutron, "Mark Chang", "King Grippulon", "Happy Peppy Gary" and "Bucky McBadbat" in The Fairly OddParents, Peck the Rooster in Barnyard and Back at the Barnyard, and "Gordon" in the Nickelodeon cartoon Catscratch. He was also the voice of "Rothchild" in the early episodes of Samurai Jack. Additionally, Paulsen provided the voice of "P.J. Pete" in Goof Troop, A Goofy Movie and An Extremely Goofy Movie, as well as the voices of Ratchet and Dr. Debolt in the TaleSpin pilot episode and introductory TV movie Plunder & Lightning. He also did the voices of Boober Fraggle, Sprocket and Marjory the Trash Heap in the animated version of Fraggle Rock, as well as Gwizdo in the Dragon Hunters movie. He also voiced "Zeek" and "Joshua" in K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments, Rude Dog in Rude Dog and the Dweebs, and Archie the Raccoon, A.K.A. Ze Archer, in "Mask of the Raccoon" on The Penguins of Madagascar. He reprised his role as "Throttle" in the 2006 Biker Mice from Mars, and also provided the voices of 2T Fru-T, Mike Ellis, Dark Comet and Ronald in the 2001 cartoon series Butt-Ugly Martians. He also portrayed the voice of Chomper and Strut in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure, Spike and Rinkus in The Land Before Time sequels and Spike in the TV series, but Spike was played anonymously in the original The Land Before Time. Paulsen also played Mo in The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water. Paulsen also voiced the robot "D.E.C.K.S." in the early 90s TV series Wake, Rattle, and Roll. Paulsen was best known to Transformers fans as the voices of the Autobots Air Raid, Chase, Haywire, Fastlane and Slingshot in The Transformers. In video games, much voice talent has bled over from television and radio voice actors. Paulsen has appeared in video games such as Doom 3 and ClayFighter 63⅓. He played "Fluffy", the Chinese-crested dog, in 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue, an Irish-talking pubtender in the 1996 video game Toonstruck, and "Morte", a floating, talking skull, in Planescape: Torment, as well as "Anomen Delryn" in Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn and "Gray Fox" in Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes and Super Smash Bros. Brawl as an assist trophy. He provided the voice for Erik the Swift of The Lost Vikings in its second installment. He portrayed "Tobli" and "Lian Ronso" in the English version of Square Enix's Final Fantasy X-2 and has played the lead character in Bubsy.  Although an extremely minor role, Paulsen has also done the voice for the Greek soldiers in God of War. He voiced Jaq and The Grand Duke from the Cinderella world in Square Enix's and Disney's Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep. In the video game The Nightmare Before Christmas: Oogie's Revenge, he did the voice of "Igor". He also reprised his role as "Yakko Warner", "Dr. Otto Scratchansniff", and "Pinky" in Animaniacs: The Great Edgar Hunt. Rob Paulsen voiced the lead character, Lazarus Jones, in the PS2 game Ghosthunter, and played The Duck Avenger in Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows. Rob also voiced Alfredo Fettuccini, Bob the Ghost Pirate, Lookout and Ghost Priest in The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition. He voiced the Fox and the Mouse in the Green Eggs and Ham PC game. He also voiced "Tlaloc" in Tak and the Power of Juju. Most recently he has voiced The Riddler in Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes, a role he reprised in Lego Batman: The Movie – DC Super Heroes Unite. Rob is the voice of talking alien dog Beak-Beak in Armikrog, Paulsen also voices Smash Hit in Skylanders: SuperChargers. Paulsen is also the off camera voice of the syndicated television series Funniest Pets & People, which is seen on Superstation WGN and other television stations throughout the United States and abroad. It was not long before Paulsen returned to Warner Bros. Animation, which had diverged into a new era of television serials (following what is sometimes referred to as the "Silver Age of Animation"). Paulsen appeared as "Rev Runner" of the new show Loonatics Unleashed and starred in Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island. He was also the voice of the character "Squeeky" on the TV show Danger Rangers.  He voiced "Ichabeezer" and "Tom Celeriac" (a play on Tom Selleck) in VeggieTales in the House for Netflix.  Paulsen also provides the voice for the Honda character "Mr. Opportunity."  In the Rob Zombie animated film, The Haunted World of El Superbeasto, Paulsen voiced the characters "El Gato" and "Commandant Hess", among some others.  He also has a role as "Ditto", one of the alien forms on Ben 10, as Rhomboid Vreedle of the Vreedle Brothers and Baz-El in Ben 10: Alien Force, two characters that he reprised, along with a new character, Magister Patelliday on Ben 10: Ultimate Alien  and Ben 10: Omniverse. Paulsen is also the current voice of classic Disney character "José Carioca". Rob became the new voice of "Prince Eric" of Disney's The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea since Christopher Daniel Barnes failed to reprise the role in 2000, though Barnes did return to voice the character in the Kingdom Hearts series when Paulsen was unavailable.Behind the Voice Actors: Prince Eric Behind the Voice Actors, Retrieved January 5, 2015 He is also the voice of Peck the Rooster and other minor characters in the Nickelodeon computer-animated series Back at the Barnyard and various characters on the Disney Channel animated series The Replacements. He is the voice of Bobble in the Tinker Bell movies. Paulsen also played the titular character for an animated web series based on the video game Bravoman for Bandai Namco's ShiftyLook division. Paulsen has been nominated for an Annie Award for his role of Pinky for 4 consecutive years, which he won in 1996, 1997, and 1999. In 1999, he also won the Daytime Emmy Award for voicing Pinky. In 2004, he was nominated for his role of the Troubadour in Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers, and in 2005, he was nominated for his role in The Happy Elf.  Paulsen has been a regular industry guest and featured panelist at San Diego Comic-Con International over the past several years. He has also appeared at animation industry-related events, such as the World Animation Celebration in 1998, among many others. He has also been a guest at several anime conventions, including JACON, Mikomicon, and Anime Overdose. Paulsen was a guest of honor at Anthrocon in 2007. He has recently started doing "Rob Paulsen Live" seminars across the U.S. to talk of his career, sign autographs, and talk with fans. Sometimes, people in attendance would request him to sing the famous Yakko's World number, where he sings all the nations of the world with his Yakko voice in a fast-paced delivery without rehearsing. In May 2011, working with social media and web producer Chris Pope, Paulsen rolled out a brand new website RobPaulsenLive.com, as well as a weekly audio podcast called Talkin' Toons with Rob Paulsen, which is managed and deployed by The Tech Jives Network. Episodes are currently recorded before a live audience at The Improv in Hollywood, California on a biweekly basis. In June 2011, Paulsen made announcements that he was taking his show on the road with his "Lots of laughs and autographs" tour. Working closely with a team that included Chris Pope, his publicist, and others he made his first successful tour in Atlanta, Georgia, which happened on July 30, 2011, and another in Dallas, Texas on September 17, 2011, that required two seminars, one in the afternoon and one in the evening, as they were so popular.  Paulsen was born in Detroit, Michigan. He is married to Parrish Todd and has one son, Ashton. In an interview with a Chicago TV station, Paulsen described himself as "a singer who decided to become an actor." Growing up in Grand Blanc, Michigan, Paulsen sang in choirs throughout his youth and adolescence and began performing in plays in grammar schools. However, his idol growing up was Gordie Howe of the Detroit Red Wings; he considered the arts to be a secondary career choice, primarily interested in becoming a professional hockey player. Paulsen has long supported charity organizations, and donated considerably for cancer research. He has worked a lot for GOALmodels, a program for adolescents, and is a sponsor of Camp Will-A-Way, a camp for mentally and physically disabled children. Paulsen also donates funds from autographs to the Wounded Warrior Project and Operation Smile. Paulsen voices most of the characters with his original accent which is American, but he used a British accent to voice Strut in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure and Brunch in Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf, while using a Scottish accent to voice Bobble in the Tinker Bell movies. In his role as Pinky, Paulsen used an exaggerated Cockney accent, especially in earlier episodes. He even used a Brooklyn accent for Reuben in Lilo & Stitch: The Series.   ABC Weekend Special – Spike Funnybunny, Moe Weasel, Policeman Ace Ventura: Pet Detective – Stanley Ipkiss/The Mask The Addams Family – Mr. Normanmeyer, Van Swash, Additional Voices Adventure Time – Additional Voices Adventures from the Book of Virtues – Peter, Classmate The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer, Mr. and Mrs. Wheezer, Butch Pakovski, Principal Willoughby, Additional Voices Aladdin – Omar American Dragon: Jake Long – Groom, Additional Voices The Angry Beavers – Terrence Animaniacs – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto von Scratchansniff, Porky Pig, Additional Voices Attack of the Killer Tomatoes – Mummato, Tomato Worm The Batman – Kid Batman: The Animated Series – Jay ("I've Got Batman in My Basement") Back at the Barnyard – Peck, RoboPeck, Skunky, Joey, Badger, Pizza Twin #1 Ben 10 – Ditto Ben 10: Alien Force – Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle Ben 10: Ultimate Alien – Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle, Magister Patelliday Ben 10: Omniverse – Magister Patelliday, Rhomboid Vreedle, Ditto, Captain Kork, Tummy Head, Gorvan, Phil, Gutrot Biker Mice from Mars – Throttle, Fred the Mutant, Additional Voices Biker Mice from Mars (2006 TV series) – Throttle, Hairball, Additional Voices The Blues Brothers Animated Series – Benny Fingers, Doctor The Boondocks (TV series) – The Art Teacher, Additional Voices Bump in the Night – Squishington Butt-Ugly Martians – 2-T Fru-T, Mike, Ronald Buzz Lightyear of Star Command – AP-06, Additional Voices Camp Lazlo – Additional Voices Can You Teach My Alligator Manners? – Al Capitol Critters – Additional Voices The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper – Spooky the Tuff Little Ghost CatDog – Hotdog, Hamburger (Meat, Dog's Friends), Additional Voices Catscratch – Gordon Quid Centerville – Mitch & Brad Challenge of the GoBots – Additional Voices Channel Umptee-3 – Ogden Ostrich ChalkZone – Vinnie Raton, Walrus, Craniac Chip 'n Dale Rescue Rangers – Captain Finn, Flash The Wonder Dog, Chief Marley, Shakabaka, Darby Spree Chowder – VG, Dom, Additional Voices Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island – Coconut Fred Codename: Kids Next Door – Rupert Puttkin /The Great Puttinsky, Shaunie Fulbright, Robin Food, Additional Voices The Crow: Stairway to Heaven – James Curious George – Compass, Charkie, Mr. Glass, Mr. Reloj, Additional Voices Dan Dare: Pilot of The Future – The Mekon Danger Rangers – Squeaky Danny Phantom – Jack Fenton, Nicolai Technus, The Box Ghost Darkwing Duck – Steelbeak Dave the Barbarian – Malsquando, Additional Voices Denver, the Last Dinosaur – Nick, Chet Detention – Uncle Kelly Dexter's Laboratory – Major Glory, Puppet Pal Mitch, Additional Voices Dino-Riders – Faze, Kameelian Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears – Gusto Gummi Disney's House of Mouse – José Carioca Doc McStuffins – Sir Kirby Duck Dodgers – Mac Gopher, Porko, Captain Peters, Axl Gator DuckTales – Gladstone Gander El Tigre: The Adventures of Manny Rivera – Additional Voices Eloise: The Animated Series – Bill The Fairly OddParents –  Mark Chang, Happy Peppy Gary, King Gripullon, Bucky McBadbat, Mr. Ed Ledly, Additional Voices Fish Hooks – Magic Hamster Mirror, Additional Voices Fish Police – Richie The Flintstone Kids – Additional Voices Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends – Additional Voices Fraggle Rock: The Animated Series – Boober Fraggle, Sprocket, Marjory the Trash Heap, Henchy Fraggle, Rhinestone Doozer, Additional Voices Freakazoid! – Yakko Warner, Additional Voices Funniest Pets & People – Announcer Gargoyles – Helios Gary the Rat – Additional Voices Generator Rex – Providence Agent Jackson, Providence Tech, Additional Voices G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1985 TV series)  – Snow Job, Tripwire, Flash (ARAH), WWI American Warrior, Cobra slavemaster Goof Troop – P.J., Additional Voices Gravity Falls – Additional Voices The Greatest Adventure: Stories from the Bible – Moki Green Lantern: The Animated Series – Goggan, Bumpy The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy – Tooth Fairy, Additional Voices Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law – Baba Louie, Kids, Announcer Henry Hugglemonster – Denzel Dugglemonster Higglytown Heroes – Barber Hero Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi – Atchan, Additional Voices The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange – Broccoli Alien Overlord, Marshmallow Warriors, Dr. Sigmund Fruit, Dr. Fruitenstein, Thomas Jefferson, Rock, Apricot, President Dane, Junior Histeria! – Mr. Smartypants, Sammy Melman, Additional Voices I Am Weasel – Stevie, Admiral Algebra Doll Jackie Chan Adventures – Magister #2, Punk Magister Jake and the Never Land Pirates – Bobble The Jetsons – Jacque Nova, Hall Monitor Johnny Bravo – Green Swoosh Jungle Cubs – Hathi, Akela, Additional Voices Justice League – Lightray K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments – Zeek, Josephat and Joshua Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness – Han Sr. The Land Before Time – Spike/Ruby's Father/Angry Apatosaurus #1/Hidden Runner/Mo/Milo/Stegosaurus Leader/Guido/Lambeosaurus Larryboy: The Cartoon Adventures – Additional Voices The Legend of Prince Valiant – Robert Draconarius, Prince Edwin, Soldier The Legend of Tarzan – Radio Voice The Life and Times of Juniper Lee – 10th Level Warlock, Leonard the Goblin, Additional Voices Lilo & Stitch: The Series – Reuben Loonatics Unleashed  – Rev Runner, Gorlop, Mr. Leghorn (2nd Time) The Looney Tunes Show – Mac Gopher, Chuck Berost MacGyver – Rogers Mad – Lex Luthor, Various The Magician – Cosmos, Sonny Boy The Mask: Animated Series – Stanley Ipkiss/The Mask Megas XLR – V'arsin Mickey Mouse  – Referee Mickey Mouse Works – José Carioca Midnight Patrol: Adventures in the Dream Zone – Nightmare Prince The Mighty B! – Additional Voices Mighty Ducks – Shecky 'The Comedian' Carter, Dr. Swindle Mighty Max – Mighty Max Mrs. Munger's Class – Rock and Lance The New Adventures of Jonny Quest – Hadji New Kids on the Block – Additional Voices The New Woody Woodpecker Show – Additional Voices The New Yogi Bear Show – La Bamba Bear Oh Yeah! Cartoons – Mother Goose, Home Owner Ozzy & Drix – Travis Lum, Backseat The Penguins of Madagascar – Various Pepper Ann – Larry, Danny Phantom 2040 – Sean One, Heisenberg, Additional Voices Phineas and Ferb – Additional Voices Pinky and the Brain – Pinky Pinky, Elmyra & the Brain – Pinky Planet Sheen – Doppy Dopweiler The Plucky Duck Show – Mr. Bughari, Furrball, Additional Voices Poochini's Yard – Additional Voices Popples – Puzzle Pound Puppies – King (AKA No-Name) (Uncredited) Pound Puppies (2010) – Pet Delivery Guy, Suds, Yakov The Powerpuff Girls – Brick, Boomer, Additional Voices Planet Sheen – Doppy Power Eons: Super Legends – Demeon (Ninja Storm) ProStars – Additional Voices A Pup Named Scooby Doo – Professor Digby/Were-Doo Quack Pack – Nigel Nightshade Random! Cartoons – Solomon Fix, Danny, Tickle Monster, Handycat, Drillbit, and Flavio Randy Cunningham: 9th Grade Ninja – Jacques The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest – Hadji, Additional Voices Recess – Additional Voices Regular Show – Additional Voices Rick and Morty – Snowball Road Rovers – Gas Station Attendant Robot and Monster – Bob, Scale Rocko's Modern Life – Additional Voices Rude Dog and the Dweebs – Rude Dog Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs – Saber Rider, Jesse Blue Sabrina: The Animated Series – Uncle Zamboni Samurai Jack – Rothchild Savage Dragon – Octopus Scooby-Doo! Ghastly Goals – Julio Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated – Winslow Fleach, Radio Newsman The Secret Saturdays – Baron Finster, Car Driver Slimer and the Real Ghostbusters – Robby, Additional Voices The Smurfs – Marco Smurf (1985) Snorks – Corky Sonic the Hedgehog – Antoine D'Coolette Space Cats – Thomas 'Tom' Spacecat, Chelsie Pipshire Spider-Man – Morris Bench/Hydro-Man St. Elsewhere – Ryan S. Hope Star vs. the Forces of Evil – Gustav Stripperella – Carl, Milton Gibbs The Super Hero Squad Show – Werewolf by Night, Baron Strucker Super Secret Secret Squirrel – Anteater, Snooper and Blabber SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron – Hard Drive, Al The Sylvester & Tweety Mysteries – Mechanic Tak and the Power of Juju – Party Juju, Judge Juju, Gillbert TaleSpin (Plunder & Lightning) – Ratchet and Dr. Debolt Tasty Time with ZeFronk – Frankie "ZeFronk" Taz-Mania – Digeri Dingo, Francis X. Bushlad, Axl Gator, Timothy Platypus, Marvin the Martian Teacher's Pet – Ian Wazselewski Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987 TV series) – Raphael, Zach the Fifth Turtle, Wingnut, HiTech, The Grybyx, Mister Ogg, Professor Sopho, Tokka, Additional Voices Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2012 TV series) – Donatello, Shopkeeper, 80's Raphael, Speed Demon Donatello, Cat Owner, Other Guy, Sir Paul, Triceraton Pilot, Sumo Glen, Triceraton Commander Teen Titans – The Source, Quiz Monkey Host, Stunt Show Host ThunderCats – Shen, Rezard The Tick (1994 TV series) – Arthur (Season 2 and Season 3), Brainchild (1st Time), Crusading Chameleon, Captain Mucilage, The Forehead, The Terror The Transformers – Air Raid, Chase, Fastlane, Slingshot This Just In! – Jimmy Fallon Time Squad – Buck Tuddrussel Timon & Pumbaa – Banzai, Cheetata Tiny Toon Adventures – Arnold the Pitbull, Banjo the Woodpile Possum, Blink Winkleman, Concord Condor, Cooper DeVille, Fowlmouth, Foxy, Sneezer's Dad, Peter Hastings, Porky Pig (in "The Wacko World of Sports"), Vanilla Lice Tom & Jerry Kids – Additional Voices Totally Spies – Diminutive Smalls (Season 1), Asian guard TripTank – John, Groom, Dad T.U.F.F. Puppy – Bird Brain Ultimate Spider-Man – Batroc the Leaper, Boomerang, Additional Voices Wake, Rattle, and Roll – D.E.C.K.S The Weekenders – Cousin Phillip, Carl What's New, Scooby-Doo? – Avery Orenthal, Government Agent, Jamison Steven Ripley, Travis Knox Where's Wally?: The Animated Series – Additional Voices Wild West C.O.W.-Boys of Moo Mesa – Cacklin' Kid Wildfire – Additional Voices The Wizard of Oz – Additional Voices Yo Yogi! – Dick 'Dickie' Dastardly, Chuck Toupee, Super Snooper, Robin Hood, Waiter, Wee Willie the Gorilla, Additional Voices VeggieTales – Mr. Beet VeggieTales in the House – Ichabeezer, Bacon Bill, Junior's Dad, Tom Celeriac, Additional Voices 101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure – Danny A Gnome Named Gnorm – Gnorm A Goofy Movie – P.J. Pete An Extremely Goofy Movie – P.J. Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet the Wolfman – Mr. Rochelle The Ant Bully – Beetle Balto II: Wolf Quest – Muru Bambi II – Friend Bear Barnyard – Peck, a goofy chicken and one of Otis' friends / Pizza Twin #1 Batman: Gotham Knight – Sal Maroni Bat Thumb – No Face, Commissioner Body Double – Cameraman Bubsy: What Could Possibly Go Wrong? – Bubsy Bobcat Cinderella II: Dreams Come True – Jaq/Grand Duke/The Baker/Sir Hugh/Bert/Flower Vendor Cinderella III: A Twist in Time – The Grand Duke and Jaq Charlotte's Web 2: Wilbur's Great Adventure – Farley the Fox Chip 'n Dale Rescue Rangers: To the Rescue – Detective Donald Drake, Additional Voices Comic Book: The Movie – Voice Actor Cranberry Christmas – Mr. Whiskers Doraemon: Nobita and the Green Giant Legend – Gian Dragon Hunters – Gwizdo Elvira's Haunted Hills – Adrian Eyes of Fire – Jewell Buchanan The Fox and the Hound 2 – Chief, Additional Voices The GodThumb – Mickey, Toll Booth Guard G.I. Joe: The Movie  – Snow Job Hamburger: The Motion Picture – Security Guard Happily N'Ever After – Amigo 2 The Happy Elf The Haunted World of El Superbeasto – El Gato/Commandant Hess Hoodwinked Too! Hood vs. Evil – Johann, Bad Shatner, Bad Kelley I'm Mad – Yakko Warner and Dr. Scratchansniff Jetsons: The Movie – Additional Voices Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer/Mr. and Mrs. Wheezer/Kid in Classroom Jimmy Neutron: Win, Lose and Kaboom! – Carl Wheezer, Mr. and Mrs. Wheezer, Test Pilot, Announcer Jimmy Neutron: Attack of the Twonkies – Carl, Mr. Wheezer, Butch The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour – Carl Wheezer, Announcer The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour 2: When Nerds Collide! – Carl, Anti-Fairy Walla The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour 3: The Jerkinators! – Carl, Eustace, Butler, Bucky McBadbat Jonny's Golden Quest – Hadji Jonny Quest vs. The Cyber Insects – Hadji Lady and the Tramp II: Scamp's Adventure – Otis The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure – Spike / Strut / Chomper The Land Before Time III: The Time of the Great Giving – Spike / Kosh The Land Before Time IV: Journey Through the Mists – Spike The Land Before Time V: The Mysterious Island – Spike The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire – Rinkus and Spike The Land Before Time VIII: The Big Freeze – Spike ans Stegosaurus Leader The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water – Spike, Littlefoot's constantly hungry "spiketail" friend, and Mo, Littlefoot's newly dubbed "mud brother" who had been separated from his family and washed away from the ocean. The Land Before Time X: The Great Longneck Migration – Spike The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses – Spike/Kosh The Land Before Time XII: The Great Day of the Flyers – Spike/Mo/Guido/Kosh The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends – Spike/Beipiaosaurus #4 The Land Before Time: Journey of the Brave – Spike Lego Batman: The Movie – DC Super Heroes Unite – Riddler Leroy & Stitch – Reuben (Experiment 625), Squeak (Experiment 110), Houdini (Experiment 604), Forehead (Experiment 044) The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea – Prince Eric The Little Mermaid: Ariel's Beginning – Ink Spot & Swifty Lone Wolf McQuade – Man at festival Mannequin – Cop #4 Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse – Jaq and additional voices Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers – The Troubadour Mickey's House of Villains – Hades (singing only) Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas – Additional Voices Mulan II – Prince Jeeki Otra Película de Huevos y un Pollo – Confi The Pirate Fairy – Bobble Pixie Hollow Games – Bobble, a wispy tinker fairy with large glasses / Buck, a new animal fairy and Fawn's partner Pocahontas II: Journey to a New World – Additional Voices Porco Rosso – Additional Voices The Powerpuff Girls Movie – Hota Wata, Killa Drilla, Blah-Blah Blah-Blah, The Doot Da Doot Da Doo Doos Return to Neverland – Pirates Rusty Rockin' with Judy Jetson – Sky Rocker Scooby-Doo! and the Reluctant Werewolf – Brunch Scooby-Doo! in Arabian Nights – Prince Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers – Shreako and Dispatcher Scooby-Doo! Music of the Vampire – Vampire Actor #2, the Sheriff, and Teen Vampire "Spaceballs" – Spaceball with comb and Dink (Voice) (Uncredited) Stitch! The Movie – Additional Voices Steel Magnolias – Delivery guy Stewardess School – Larry Falkwell Teacher's Pet – Ian Wazselewski Tinker Bell – Bobble, a wispy tinker fairy with large glasses who helps Tink out; he is usually found with Clank or with Cheese, a mouse. Tinker Bell and the Lost Treasure  – Bobble, a wispy tinker fairy with large glasses / Grimsley, a tall troll / Mr. Owl Tinker Bell and the Great Fairy Rescue – Bobble, a wispy tinker fairy with large glasses and the best friend of Clank. Secret of the Wings – Bobble, a wispy tinker fairy with large glasses and Clank's best friend. Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation – Fowlmouth, Johnny Pew, Mr. Hitcher, Banjo Possum, Hotel Manager and the Bike Carrier Tom and Jerry: Blast Off to Mars - Computer Voice, Worker #1, Worker #2 Tom and Jerry: The Fast and the Furry – Irving, Dave Tom and Jerry and the Wizard of Oz – Hickory/Tin Man Top Cat and the Beverly Hills Cats – James the Chauffeur, Lester Pester, Tour Bus Driver Tweety's High-Flying Adventure – Sphinx, Ship Crewman, Casino Cat Wakko's Wish – Yakko, Pinky and Dr. Otto Scratchansniff Warlock – Gas Station Attendant Yogi the Easter Bear – Easter Bunny, Male Ranger Animaniacs Game Pack – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Scratchansniff Animaniacs Splat Ball – Yakko, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff Animaniacs: The Great Edgar Hunt – Yakko, Pinky and Dr. Otto Scratchansniff 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue – Fluffy Armikrog – Beak-Beak, PresidANTs Baldur's Gate II – Shadows of Amn – Anomen Delryn / Saerk Farrahd / Biff The Understudy / Qadeel Baldur's Gate – Kivan, Volo, Prism, Telmen Barnyard – Peck Biker Mice from Mars (2006 video game) – Throttle, Hairball, Claw Tooper Blazing Dragons – Mervin the Magician, Inventor of Basebal Bubsy 2 – Bubsy Bubsy in Fractured Furry Tales – Bubsy Clay Fighter 63 1/3 – Bonkers Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows – PK The Fairly OddParents: Breakin' da Rules – King Gripploun, Dog Catcher, Fairy Judge, Guard, Anti-Fairies, Squirrelly Scouts, Arthur, Gilded Arches The Fairly OddParents: Shadow Showdown – Mark Chang, Oberon, Quince, Ape King, Chamberlain, The Shadow Final Fantasy X-2 – Additional Voices Ghosthunter – Officer Lazarus Jones Giants: Citizen Kabuto – Timmy the Smartie Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer, King Goobot / Yokian 1, Ooblar / Yokian 2, Yokian 3, Retroland Worker Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep – Jaq, Grand Duke Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes – Riddler Metal Arms: Glitch in the System – Additional Voices Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes – Gray Fox Orion Burger – Wilbur Wafflemeier Planescape: Torment – Mortimer 'Morte' Rictusgrin Sacrifice – Zyzyx The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition – Bob, The Lookout, Alfredo Fettucini SpongeBob SquarePants featuring Nicktoons: Globs of Doom – Technus, Carl Wheezer, Traloc Super Smash Bros. Brawl – Gray Fox Tekken 4 – Additional Voices (uncredited) Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Turtles in Time – Raphael Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles – Donatello The Sopranos: Road to Respect – Gil Tom and Jerry in War of the Whiskers – Tyke, Eagle Toonstruck – Lugnut, Mee, Barman Skylanders: SuperChargers  - Smash Hit Lost Odyssey  - Technician Amures Tak 2: The Staff Of Dreams  - Tlaloc, Dead Juju, Giant Misunderstanding Juju Doom 3  - Research Director Larry Bullman Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes  - Ninja Bravoman as Bravoman, Alpha Man, and additional voices Sock Puppet Theatre as various Nostalgia Critic as himself and Pinky Jimmy Neutron's Nicktoon Blast (2003) – Carl Wheezer Gran Fiesta Tour Starring The Three Caballeros (2007) – José Carioca Rob Paulsen at SBV Talent Rob Paulsen Talkin' Toon Live Weekly Video Podcast on Ustream Rob Paulsen at Voicechasers.com
