     Robert James Smith (born 21 April 1959) is an English musician. He is the lead singer, guitarist, lyricist and principal songwriter of the rock band The Cure, and its only constant member since its formation in 1976. NY Rock describes him as "pop culture's unkempt poster child of doom and gloom," and asserts that some of his songs are a "somber introspection over lush, brooding guitars." Smith's guitar-playing and use of flanging, chorusing and phasing effects put him among the forefront of the gothic rock and new wave genres. He also played guitar in the band Siouxsie and the Banshees. Smith is a multi-instrumentalist, known for his unique stage look, such as teased hair, smudged makeup, and his distinctive voice. Smith was born in the Lancashire town of Blackpool and is the third of four children born to James Alexander and Rita Mary (née Emmott) Smith.Barbarian, L., Steve Sutherland and Robert Smith. Ten Imaginary Years (1988) Zomba Books, p. 121; ISBN 0-946391-87-4Apter, Jeff, Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, pp. 3–4; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 Smith came from a musical family – his father sang and his mother played the piano.Apter, Jeff, Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, p. 15; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 Raised Catholic,Sandall, Robert, "Disintegration" (Robert Smith Interview), Q Magazine, May 1989 he later became an atheist. When he was three years old, in December 1962 his family moved to Horley, Surrey, where he later attended St Francis Primary School, before the family moved to Crawley, West Sussex, in March 1966, where Smith attended St Francis Junior School. He later attended Notre Dame Middle School (1970–72) and St Wilfrid's Comprehensive School, Crawley (1972–77). Both Robert and his little sister Janet had piano lessons;Simmons, Sylvie, "Everything Falls Apart", Revolution, September 1989. Smith said that Janet "was a piano prodigy, so sibling rivalry made me take up guitar because she couldn't get her fingers around the neck."Gore, Joe, "Confessions of a Pop Mastermind", Guitar Player, September 1992. He told Chris Heath of Smash Hits magazine that from about 1966 (when Smith turned seven years old) his brother Richard (thirteen years Robert's senior) taught him "a few basic chords" on guitar, "but I didn't have any dreams of becoming anything at that age".Heath, Chris. "Robert Smith This Is Your Life", Smash Hits, May 1986 Smith began taking classical guitar lessons from the age of nine, "with a student of John Williams, a really excellent guitarist ... I learned a lot, but got to the point where I was losing the sense of fun. I wish I'd stuck with it." Smith was quoted as saying that his guitar tutor "was horrified by my playing",Thompson, Dave, and Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 5; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 and that Robert consequently gave up formal tuition and instead began teaching himself to play by ear, listening to Richard's record collection. Smith claims he was thirteen or fourteen when he became more serious about rock music and "started to play and learn frenetically".Tellier, Emmanuel, "Les Attrapes-Coeurs de Robert Smith, The Cure", Les Inrockuptibles, pp. 22–28, October 1997 Up until December 1972 Robert did not have a guitar of his own, and had been borrowing his brother Richard's for some time, "so he gave me his guitar for Christmas. But I'd commandeered it anyway – so whether he was officially giving it to me at Christmas or not, I was going to have it!"Hermanson, Wendy, Robert Smith Remembers a Christmas Gift, Launch.com/Yahoo! Music, 6 December 1999. One rock biographer (Jeff Apter) maintains that the guitar Smith received for Christmas of 1972 was from his parents, and equates this item with Smith's notorious Woolworth's 'Top 20' guitar, later used on many of The Cure's earliest recordings.Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, p. 25; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 Smith was quoted in several earlier sources as saying he purchased the Top 20 himself for £20, in 1978.Thompson, Dave, and Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 8; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Doran, Rachel. "The Cure – A History", Spiral Scratch, 16 April 1992Staff. "The Gothfather", Guitar World, June 1996 Smith told Guitar Player magazine that the Woolworth's Top 20 was his "very first electric" guitar. (see Musical influences) Smith described Notre Dame Middle School as "a very free-thinking establishment" with an experimental approach; a freedom he claimed to have abused. On one occasion, Smith said that he wore a black velvet dress to Notre Dame and kept it on all day "because the teachers just thought 'oh, it's a phase he's going through, he's got some personality crisis, let's help him through it'." According to Smith "four other kids" beat him up after school, although Jeff Apter notes that Smith has given several conflicting versions of the story. Apter also reports that Smith put in minimal effort at Notre Dame, sufficient to gain pass marks, and quotes Smith as saying:  Smith's secondary school, St Wilfrid's, was reportedly stricter than Notre Dame.Apter, Jeff, Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, pp. 23–24; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 In the summer of 1975, Smith and his school bandmates sat their O Level exams, but only he and Michael Dempsey stayed on to attend sixth form at St Wilfrid's (1976–77).Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 12; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 Smith has claimed that he was expelled from St Wilfrid's as an "undesirable influence" after their band Malice's second live performance shortly before Christmas 1976, which took place at the school and allegedly caused a riot.  According to Dave Bowler and Bryan Dray, biographers of The Cure, the school expelled ex-Malice co-founder Marc Ceccagno along with Smith, whose new band, called Amulet, played the December school show.Bowler, Dave & Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 11; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 Smith has given conflicting accounts of his alleged expulsion: elsewhere saying that he was merely suspended, and that it was because he didn't get along with the school headmaster,Black, Johnny, "Curious Case of the Cure", London Times, 26 April 1989. and, on another occasion, claiming that he was suspended "because my attitude towards religion was considered wrong. I thought that was incredible".Wilde, John, "Lipstick Traces", Melody Maker, 29 April 1989.  Robert Smith has said that his first band when he was fourteen consisted of "my brother Richard, some of his friends and my younger sister Janet. It was called The Crawley Goat Band – brilliant!" However, while The Crawley Goat Band may have been Smith's first regular group, he would have been just thirteen when he and his Notre Dame schoolmates gave their first one-off performance together as The Obelisk; an early incarnation of what would eventually become The Cure. The Obelisk featured Robert Smith (still playing piano at this point), alongside Marc Ceccagno (lead guitar), Michael Dempsey (guitar), Alan Hill (bass) and Laurence "Lol" Tolhurst (percussion) and, according to The Cure's official biography Ten Imaginary Years, gave their only performance at a school function in April 1972. Jeff Apter, however, dates the performance to April 1973,Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of the Cure, (2009), Omnibus Press, p. 26; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 which is at variance with Smith and his bandmates having already left Notre Dame Middle School by this time. During the latter part of 1972, the nucleus of Smith, Ceccagno, Dempsey and Tolhurst had gone on to secondary school together at St Wilfrid's Comprehensive, where they and their friends continued playing music together. Smith said that they were known simply as "the group" "because it was the only one at school so we didn't need a name." Dempsey, who eventually moved from guitar to bassist for "the group", said that another name they toyed with was the Brat's Club – a reference to Evelyn Waugh's A Handful of Dust. Smith said that "the group" eventually became Malice, "sort of a sub-metal punk group -with Michael Dempsey, Laurence and two other blokes." According to the band's Ten Imaginary Years biography, between January and December 1976, the shifting line-up for Malice featured several "other blokes", with founding guitarist Marc Ceccagno being replaced by Porl Thompson, an early drummer known only as "Graham" replaced by Lol Tolhurst, and "Graham's brother" replaced by vocalist Martin Creasy. By 1977, Malice had become Easy Cure. In the formative stages of the Cure, Smith did not intend to become the lead vocalist of the group. Bowler and Dray note that the Obelisk had "featured Dempsey and Ceccagno as guitarists and him [Robert] on piano as very much a background player."Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 10; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 As "the group" gradually became Malice and began regular rehearsals in January 1976, Smith was still one of several floating members who "used to fluctuate between five and fifteen" according to Smith. Of their first "proper" rehearsal at St Edwards Church, Robert said  By December 1976, Graham's brother had been replaced by vocalist Martin Creasy, a journalist with The Crawley Observer, whose brief tenure with the group was a live débâcle according to those involved.Barbarian, L., Steve Sutherland & Robert Smith, Ten Imaginary Years, (1988), Zomba Books; ISBN 0-946391-87-4 By January 1977 Malice had changed their name to Easy Cure,Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 6; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 partly to distance themselves from these earlier shows. Both drummer Lol Tolhurst and bassist Mick Dempsey are also noted as having performed vocals with the group in the early years. Tolhurst also sang on a cover of "Wild Thing" at Malice's early shows,Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 6; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0) and Dempsey sang backing vocals on songs like "Killing An Arab", and even recorded lead vocals on one track on The Cure's debut album, for their cover of Hendrix's "Foxy Lady".Cure News 5, May 1988.Cure News 11, October 1991 During March 1977, a vocalist named Gary X came and went, and was replaced by Peter O'Toole, described as "a demon footballer and Bowie fan" who made his singing debut in April. O'Toole remained Easy Cure's steady front man for several months while the group played the local pub circuit, "building up an enormous local following", and was even the singer on the home demo tapes that landed them their first recording contract with Hansa Records. By the time Easy Cure entered London's Sound And Vision Studio to record for Hansa in October 1977, however, O'Toole had left to work on a Kibbutz in Israel. Smith then fell into the vocalist role by default, since no better replacement appeared. He told Musician magazine in 1989:  Smith was also not the sole songwriter or lyricist in the group during their early years; the name 'Easy Cure' came from a song penned by Lol Tolhurst,Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray. The Cure – Faith (1995). Sidgwick & Jackson. p. 15; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 while "Grinding Halt" began as a Tolhurst lyric that Smith shortened to the first half of each line.Apter, Jeff, Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, p. 90; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8The Easy Cure "group home demo" of "Grinding Halt" from March 1978, with Tolhurst's longer original lyric, was later released on Deluxe Edition (2004) of Three Imaginary Boys. Between 1978–79, Smith composed and recorded demo versions of some of The Cure's definitive early songs on his sister Janet's Hammond organ with a built-in tape recorder, including "10:15 Saturday Night".Beebe Lapriore, Elaine. "Rediscovering the Cure: Group's 1979 Debut Arrives at Last", The Washington Post, 15 December 2004; retrieved 15 October 2012."Robert Smith home demo" version of "10:15 Saturday Night", recorded in February 1978, appears on the 2004 Deluxe Edition of Three Imaginary Boys. By the time the NME interviewed the band in October 1979 during their tour with Siouxsie and the Banshees, Smith was acknowledged as the principal writer of "almost all of The Cure's songs and lyrics", and stated that he was uncomfortable playing and singing songs that weren't his own.Pearson, Deanne, "No Image, No Style, No Bullshit", NME, 6 October 1979. Following his return from the Banshees' tour, Smith also composed most of the music for the album Seventeen Seconds using the Hammond, a drum machine and his trademark Top 20 Woolworth's guitar, during a home demo session in his parents' basement, while most of the lyrics had been written in one night in Newcastle.Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of the Cure, (2009), Omnibus Press, p. 106; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8Some of the new songs, however, had been debuted live while on the Banshees tour.(Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene, The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press,  p. 18; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0) Michael Dempsey, discussing his own departure from the group at this time, later remarked:  Although Smith wrote most of the lyrics for Seventeen Seconds, many were also rewritten by the group during the recording of the album itself. Dempsey's replacement Simon Gallup described the collective writing process to Sounds in 1980:  Lol Tolhurst later stated that he, Simon Gallup and Robert Smith all wrote lyrics for The Cure's early albums, and that the group dynamic only changed after their 1982 album Pornography:  Tolhurst claimed to have written the lyrics for "All Cats Are Grey" from the 1981 album Faith, which he later re-recorded with his own project, Levinhurst. In contrast to Tolhurst's recollection of their songwriting as a group effort, in 1982 Smith claimed to have written "90 per cent of the 'Pornography' album", and that he therefore couldn't leave The Cure, because it wouldn't be The Cure without him.Sutherland, Steve, "The Incurables", Melody Maker, 18 December 1982. For their first four albums (Three Imaginary Boys, Seventeen Seconds, Faith and Pornography), all members of the group had received equal songwriting credits. With Simon Gallup's departure reducing the group to a duo, and Tolhurst quitting drums to start taking keyboard lessons, from July 1982 until Gallup's return in February 1985, according to Smith, much of the writing and recording process within The Cure effectively became a solo effort. While the songwriting of their next single, "Let's Go to Bed" was credited to both Smith and Tolhurst, Smith later claimed that Tolhurst was credited with keyboards despite not playing anything.  Nonetheless, Tolhurst was credited as co-writer of five of the eight songs featured on 1983's singles and b-sides collection Japanese Whispers (including "Let's Go to Bed" and "The Walk"), while "The Love Cats", "Lament" and "The Dream" were credited to Smith only.True, Chris. "Japanese Whispers – The Cure", Allmusic.com; retrieved 29 October 2012. Of 1984's The Top, Smith would say it was "the solo album I never made",Inskeep, Thomas. "The Cure – The Top/The Head on the Door/Kiss Me Kiss Me Kiss Me", Stylus Magazine, 20 November 2006; retrieved 29 October 2012. having played nearly all instruments himself except for drums (by Andy Anderson),Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 58; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 with Porl Thompson contributing saxophone to one song ("Give Me It"). Tolhurst is obliquely credited in the album's liner notes with performing "other Instruments", and shared co-writing credits with Smith for only three of the ten album tracks.Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009), Omnibus Press, p. 200; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8  Robert Smith met Steve Severin of Siouxsie and the Banshees at a Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire gig at the London YMCA on 3 August 1979.Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 15; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Sutherland, Steve, "History of the Cure – Part 1", Melody Maker, 1990 Both the Banshees and The Cure had been signed to Polydor and its imprint Fiction, respectively, by Chris Parry, and Smith was already a fan of the Banshees. The pair hit it off, and Severin invited Smith to accompany the Banshees on a UK tour in support of their second album Join Hands. The two bands embarked on the tour later in August, and meanwhile in September Banshees singer Siouxsie Sioux contributed backing vocals to "I'm Cold", the b-side to The Cure's next single "Jumping Someone Else's Train" (released in November),Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 16; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 A few dates into the Join Hands tour, however, the Banshees' guitarist John McKay and drummer Kenny Morris quit the band hours before they were due to go on stage in Aberdeen, placing the tour in limbo. Determined not to let the tour end, Smith volunteered to replace McKay temporarily on condition that The Cure remained the opening act, while ex-Slits drummer Budgie joined on drums.Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 53; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 The tour resumed on 18 September, with Smith playing in both bands each night. At the tour's end, Smith returned full-time to The Cure. Steve Severin has attributed Smith's transition from a reticent figure to a more enigmatic front person to Smith's early experiences playing with Siouxsie and the Banshees  Smith meanwhile conceived the Cult Hero side-project to collaborate with bassist Simon Gallup of The Magspies, recorded at Morgan Studios in October 1979.Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray. The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 49; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 With some leftover time in the studio from the Cult Hero sessions, Smith also produced recordings by The Magspies and a young vocal and percussion duo The Obtainers (described by Steve Sutherland of Melody Maker as "two 11-year olds banging on pots and pans"), for the fledgling independent label Dance Fools Dance co-founded by Robert Smith and Ric Gallup, elder brother of Simon. The Cult Hero single was released on the Fiction Records label in December 1979, while the Magspies/Obtainers split single appeared on Dance Fools Dance the following year.Gallup, Ric, "A Tale of Incest", Clinic No. 4, September 1980Butler, Daren, The Cure on Record, (1995), Omnibus Press, pp. 10–15. ISBN 0-7119-3867-9Some sources (e.g.  Butler's The Cure on Record) suggest that the Magspies/Obtainers single was released in 1979, whereas its release was announced by Ric Gallup of Dance Fools Dance (via the Cure's Clinic newsletter) as a new single in late 1980. On 3 and 4 April 1980 at the Rainbow Theatre in London, Robert Smith and Matthieu Hartley (also of The Magspies, Cult Hero and by this time, The Cure) were among the many guest members of a unique line-up of The Stranglers to play two protest concerts for Hugh Cornwell, who had been imprisoned on drugs charges in late 1979.Clinic No. 4, September 1980Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene, The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 23. ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 Joy Division were also one of the support bands on the second night. Recordings from the event were later released as The Stranglers and Friends – Live in Concert in 1995. Also during April, Smith provided backing vocals for the Associates' debut album The Affectionate Punch, released in August 1980. At the time, the Associates were also signed to Fiction Records, and had been joined in late 1979 by former Cure bassist Michael Dempsey.Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure-A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, pp. 19, 22; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 54; ISBN 0-283-06229-0. The Associates' front man Billy Mackenzie was a friend of Smith's for more than 20 years, and The Cure song, "Cut Here" (from 2001's Greatest Hits album), was written in response to Mackenzie's suicide in 1997. As Smith told Jam! Showbiz following the release of "Greatest Hits":   During 1981, The Cure received a home demo tape from And Also The Trees and immediately became friends.Strutt, Anthony, Lol Tolhurst: Interview, Pennyblack Music, 31 July 2008; retrieved 26 October 2012. Front-man Simon Huw Jones later told Abstract Magazine that The Cure were AATT's "biggest fans, the first people who came up to us and said 'we think you're great'" and that the two groups were mutually influenced by one another."And Also The Trees" (Interview), Abstract Magazine Issue 5, March 1985. The group joined The Cure in support of the Eight Appearances tour of Scotland and Northern England during November and December 1981, together with 1313, featuring Steve Severin and Lydia Lunch,Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene, The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 32; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 and the following year Robert Smith together with Cure/Banshees co-producer Mike Hedges co-produced And Also The Trees' 1982 cassette release From Under The Hill. Smith was initially to have also produced the band's debut single "The Secret Sea", but instead Lol Tolhurst stepped in as producer between 1982–84, both for the band's first two singles, and for their self-titled debut album.Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary (1988), Omnibus Press, pp. 38, 51; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 Smith would again collaborate with And Also The Trees in 1991 (see → Remixes, Cranes, Pirate Ships, And Also The Trees). In the wake of The Cure's Fourteen Explicit Moments tour, which culminated in the departure of Simon Gallup and the temporary dissolution of The Cure, in June 1982, Smith began collaborating with Steve Severin of Siouxsie and the Banshees again. Although released under the name of The Cure, the only personnel to perform on the original Flexipop single release of "Lament" in August 1982 were Robert Smith and Steve Severin, and soon afterwards, Smith admitted that The Cure as a band now existed in name only.Thompson, Dave, and Jo-Ann Greene, The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, pp. 38–39; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray.  The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, pp. 92–93; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 That August, Smith briefly resurrected the Dance Fools Dance label to record and release the single "Frame One" by Crawley gothic/post-punk outfit Animation.Gilbert, Pat, "A History of The Cure (Part 2)". Record Collector, August 1993. In September, Smith with former Cure drummer Lol Tolhurst (now on keyboards) and session drummer Steve Goulding went into the studio to record a "blatant pop single" at the instigation of Fiction Records manager Chris Parry. Smith was reportedly so unhappy with the resultant track "Let's Go to Bed" that he attempted to have the single released under the name of Recur, feeling that the single let Cure fans down.Sutherland, Steve, "History of The Cure Part 2", Melody Maker, 1990.Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray. The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, pp. 94–97; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 During October, Smith and Severin also recorded early demos for what would become The Glove's "Punish Me With Kisses" single, at Mike Hedges' studio "The Playground". Smith also returned to touring as a live guitarist with Siouxsie and The Banshees from November, following the collapse of then-Banshee John McGeoch from nervous exhaustion one week before the band were due to go on tour."Say Fast 12 Times: British Switch Hitters", Trouser Press, 2 January 1983. His return to guitar duties with the group prompted Smith to remark:  He later said that he was "fed up" and "really disillusioned" with the pressures of playing in The Cure, and that "The Banshees thing came along and I thought it would be a really good escape". Gothic rock journalist/biographer Jo-Ann Greene noted that Smith's replacement of McGeoch "left a bad taste in many people's mouths, as [McGeoch] was informed of his sacking only a week after his recovery from a brief spell of clinical depression". In a later interview with Guitar World magazine, Smith concurred that McGeoch was "a sadly underrated and unappreciated guitarist" and that he had "left the Banshees under a bit of a cloud, but he stayed friendly with me and Severin". Returning to England from the Banshees' tour of Australia, New Zealand and Japan in January 1983, Smith was approached the following month by Nicholas Dixon, a young choreographer with The Royal Ballet, to score a choreographed adaptation of Les Enfants Terribles. To test the idea, Smith and Severin recorded a reworking of The Cure's "Siamese Twins", with Lol Tolhurst on drums, and Anne Stephenson and Virginia Hewes (later known as Ginni Ball) of The Venomettes on violins, which was performed on BBC Two's music programme Riverside in March 1983, featuring two dancers choreographed by Dixon. Despite a positive critical reception, however, neither Dixon nor Smith were happy with the results, and the Les Enfants Terribles project was shelved indefinitely.Thompson, Dave, and Jo-Ann Greene, The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 42. ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Severin was unavailable for the television appearance, so Porl Thompson appeared miming the bass, disguised in a long coat and hat. The Venomettes were a string and vocal performance group associated with the Batcave scene during the early 1980s, whose members collaborated with Marc Almond (as part of Marc and the Mambas), Andi Sexgang, Siouxsie and the Banshees and This Mortal Coil, among others. Stephenson and Hewes had previously performed on the Siouxsie and the Banshees' album A Kiss in the Dreamhouse, while fellow Venomette Martin McCarrick later became a full-time member of the Banshees.  Smith and Severin meanwhile co-wrote the music to the Marc and the Mambas song "Torment", which also featured The Venomettes, and appeared on the album Torment and Toreros,Almond, Marc. Tainted Life: The Autobiography, Sidgwick & Jackson, (1999), p. 205; ISBN 978-0-28306-340-4 while The Venomettes (McCarrick, Stephenson and Hewes) all performed strings in the studio with The Glove. Between March and June 1983, Smith was in the studio recording with The Glove, Siouxsie and The Banshees and (ostensibly) The Cure;  prompting him to remark:   Smith and Severin had first discussed collaborating on an external side-project in 1981, although their respective commitments to The Cure and the Banshees had previously left no time for the project. From May 1983, however, with The Cure on hold and Siouxsie and Budgie working together as The Creatures, recording of The Glove's album Blue Sunshine began in earnest. Budgie's then girlfriend Jeanette Landray, formerly a dancer with Zoo, was recruited to perform vocals, while Andy Anderson from Brilliant was brought in to play drums. The Glove took its name from the "murder mitten" from the Beatles' animated feature Yellow Submarine, while the album title came from a B-movie by the same name about a potent strain of LSD that caused people to lose their hair and turn into homicidal maniacs many years after their first trip.Sutherland, Steve, "The Glove Will Tear Us Apart", Melody Maker, 3 September 1983. Severin said of the project:  Smith described the creation of the album by saying:  As well as Barbarella, Yellow Submarine and the eponymous Blue Sunshine, films cited as having fuelled the project included The Brood, Evil Dead, The Helicopter Spies and Inferno. Retrospectively, the Melody Maker's Steve Sutherland described The Glove as "a manic psychedelic pastiche". The Glove's Blue Sunshine album and its lead single "Like an Animal" were both released in August 1983,Butler, Daren, The Cure on Record, (1995), Omnibus Press, pp. 47–50; ISBN 0-7119-3867-9 followed by the Siouxsie and The Banshees' single "Dear Prudence" (a cover of the Beatles' song) in September, all on the Banshees' own label Wonderland Records. According to the Banshees' authorised biography, "Dear Prudence" had been recorded at Smith's insistence to document his time with the group, and it became their biggest hit, reaching number 3 on the UK Singles Chart.Paytress, Mark. Siouxsie & the Banshees: The Authorised Biography, (2003), Sanctuary, pp. 137, 143; ISBN 1-86074-375-7. Shortly before the group's scheduled Royal Albert Hall concerts in September and October 1983, Siouxsie and the Banshees were also invited to participate in an episode of Channel 4's television series "Play at Home", which they agreed to in order to take advantage of having the upcoming concerts filmed. Robert had previously suggested to Severin that "the Banshees shouldn't be doing tours, they should be doing something really ambitious like The Wizard of Oz on stage", and Severin decided to adapt this idea for the "Play at Home" episode, substituting The Wizard of Oz concept with Alice in Wonderland to tie the theme with the Banshees' Wonderland recording label. The result was a 45-minute television programme featuring performances from Siouxsie and the Banshees, The Glove and The Creatures, in which all four members of the Banshees appeared in a recreation of the Mad Hatter's Tea Party dressed as Alice, while each individual member scripted their own solo character performance and monologue. Musical interludes included The Glove performing "A Blues in Drag", The Creatures playing "Weathercade" and the whole band performing "Circle". The programme (which didn't air on television until the following year) concluded with live footage of Siouxsie and the Banshees playing "Voodoo Dolly" and "Helter Skelter" live at the Royal Albert Hall.Houlston, Billy. "Play at Home", The Siouxsie and the Banshees File: Phase Three, Issue 3 & 4, October 1984. Meanwhile, both The Glove's second single, "Punish Me With Kisses", and the Banshees' live double album and companion video, Nocturne from the Albert Hall shows, appeared in November. In March 1984, the next Banshees single to feature Robert Smith on guitar, "Swimming Horses" was released, followed by "Dazzle" in May, and finally the album Hyæna in June – Smith having left the Banshees the month prior to release, citing health issues due to his overloaded schedule.Thompson, Dave, and Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary, (1988), Omnibus Press, pp. 51–58; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0Paytress, Mark. Siouxsie & the Banshees: The Authorised Biography, (2003), Sanctuary, pp. 142–143; ISBN 1-86074-375-7. Meanwhile, in between commitments to The Cure, The Glove and the Banshees, Smith also found time to perform on Tim Pope's Syd Barrett-inspired[ ]   "I Want To Be A Tree" single.Butler, Daren, The Cure on Record, (1995), Omnibus Press, p. 56. ISBN 0-7119-3867-9 Pope at the time was the regular director of promotional videos for The Cure, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Marc Almond, among others, but was taken aback when his fame on American MTV as a video director began to rival that of the bands he worked for."Tim Pope – I Want To Be A Tree" (Fiction/Polydor Promotional Folder), 1984. He described the project as "a real piss-take of what was going on in America", prompted by people referring to "Tim Pope Videos", and said that he "felt really strongly that they were not Tim Pope videos, they were Cure videos or Siouxsie videos or whatever".Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray, The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, p. 108; ISBN 0-283-06229-0 Over the 1983 Christmas holidays, Pope and a friend, Charles Gray, recorded what Pope described as "this really stupid song" that they had co-written years earlier as teenagers. Pope made an accompanying video for his showreel, asking several of the artists he worked with (The Cure, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Soft Cell, Talk Talk, The Style Council, Paul Young and Freur) to "come along and slag me off on the showreel". He then played the artists the song, while filming their reactions to it. The Old Grey Whistle Test screened the video, which Pope says resulted in several record deals being offered. The song was re-recorded with Robert Smith playing most instruments in January 1984, produced by Chris Parry, and was released on Fiction Records (with a new video) in June, reaching number 34 in the British charts. 1987 saw the release of the double album Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, with the singles "Hot, Hot, Hot!" and "Just Like Heaven" becoming popular in the US. A world tour following the album's release drew millions into stadiums. The line-up included Simon Gallup, Boris Williams, Roger O'Donnell, Lol Tolhurst, Porl, and Robert Smith. With the completion of the Blue Sunshine project and his departure from Siouxsie and the Banshees, by 1984 Robert Smith had returned to recording and touring with The Cure as his full-time primary band. Between 1985 and 1996, his musical outings beyond The Cure were comparatively rare, with notable exceptions including remix work for And Also The Trees and Cranes. During 1989, Smith and producer Mark Saunders remixed 7'’ and 12'’ versions of the song "The Pear Tree", by And Also The Trees. The "Round Mix" of the song also appeared on the band's album Farewell to the Shade in 1989, followed by a US-only release of The Pear Tree EP the following year."Questions and Answers", Cure News 10, December 1990Raggett, Ned,"The Pear Tree" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 9 October 2012.Raggett, Ned, "Farewell to the Shade" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 9 October 2012. In December that year while mixing The Cure's live album Entreat, Robert also recorded a solo cover version of Wendy Waldman's "Pirate Ships",Credited by Smith to Judy Collins, who had previously also recorded a version of the song – see "Judith – Judy Collins" (review), Allmusic. Retrieved 12 October 2012. originally intended for Rubáiyát: Elektra's 40th Anniversary; a compilation album celebrating the history of The Cure's US label Elektra Records.Smith, Jerry, "Kiss Me Kiss Me Kiss Me FM", NME, 15 September 1990. Instead, however, the full band line-up of The Cure recorded "Hello, I Love You" by The Doors for Elektra, and "Pirate Ships" did not see official CD release until Disintegration's "Deluxe Edition" reissue in 2010.[ ]  "Pirate Ships" did, however, see release as a download from The Cure's website in 2001 – see "The Cure's 'Disintegration' gets 3CD deluxe reissue in 2010, plus 'In Orange' on DVD", Slicing Up Eyeballs, 8 August 2009; retrieved 12 October 2012. In 1992, Smith invited Cranes to support The Cure live on the Wish Tour.Laurence, Alexander, "Cranes – An Interview with Alison Shaw", at FreeWilliamsburg.com, June 2002; retrieved 10 October 2012., "Loved Cranes" (Dedicated/Arista Press Release), 1994. For one of the French dates of the tour (Stade Couvert Régional, Liévin, 15 November 1992), Cranes vocalist Alison Shaw was ill and the group had to revise their entire set, with Robert Smith replacing Alison's vocal melodies on 6-string bass, and joined by The Cure's guitarist Porl Thompson.Hartmann, Olivier, & Laurence Fabien, "Forever Interview", Prémonition (No. 14), September 1993.Thompson had also joined the group on stage on 8 November, and on the final night of the tour in Ireland on 3 December, Cranes joined The Cure on stage for the final encore of the Cure's "Forever". Cranes wrote most of their next album (1993's Forever) while on the Wish Tour,Moed, Alison, "Cranes", NET Magazine, June 1993. and the album's title was partly influenced by touring with The Cure.Raggett, Ned, "Forever" (Review), Allmusic. Retrieved 10 October 2010. In 1993, Smith and Bryan "Chuck" New remixed the extended 12'’ version of Cranes' single Jewel from the album; Smith again contributing his trademark Fender Bass VI sound and additional guitars to the remixed track. The single gave Cranes their first Top 30 single in Britain and Norway, and also became their biggest commercial breakthrough in the US.Raggett, Ned. Jewel (CD Single Review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 10 October 2012. From 1993, Smith's primary musical engagement was the recording of The Cure's album Wild Mood Swings, released in 1996 and followed by the Swing Tour, concluding in early 1997. He was meanwhile invited to perform at David Bowie's 50th Birthday concert at Madison Square Garden (9 January 1997), where he duetted with Bowie on "The Last Thing You Should Do" and "Quicksand".Lindsay, Cam, "Three Imaginary Decades", Exclaim!, July 2004. (Part of Exclaim!'s "Timeline" Features); retrieved 11 October 2012. Here Smith met Bowie's guitarist Reeves Gabrels and co-producer Mark Plati, leading to their collaboration on the single "Wrong Number".Sullivan, Jim. "Robert Smith Gets Happy", The Boston Globe, 28 November 1997"The Cure "Galore – The Singles 1987–1997": 'Song Thoughts' by Robert", www.thecure.com, November 1997. (Smith's "Song Thoughts" no longer appears on the band's official site, but have been archived by the chainofflowers.com fan-site; retrieved 11 October 2012). Although released under the name of The Cure, "Wrong Number" was one of several "one-off" studio projects recorded during this period by Robert Smith either performing solo, or with guest musicians from outside the full-time line-up of The Cure. Earlier versions of the song had already been recorded by the band, but Plati and Smith completely reconstructed the track, built around a sampled drum loop by Cure drummer Jason Cooper. Smith and Plati added keyboards, effects and new vocals, while Gabrels laid down "a gazillion guitar tracks".Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of the Cure, (2009), Omnibus Press, pp. 279–280; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 Recorded in August,  "Wrong Number" was released in October 1997 as the new promotional single to accompany The Cure's Galore singles compilation album. In February 1998, Robert again collaborated with Reeves Gabrels in the studio, co-writing, singing and playing on the song "Yesterday's Gone" (eventually finding its way to CD release in 2000). The following month, Smith was again recording solo between RAK and Outside studios, assisted this time by co-producer Paul Corkett, whose production credits included Nick Cave, Björk, Placebo, Tori Amos and Suede. These sessions produced "More Than This" (not to be confused with the Roxy Music song) for The X-Files: The Album, and a cover of Depeche Mode's "World in My Eyes" for the tribute album For the Masses. Again, both were released under the name of The Cure, but were essentially Robert Smith solo recordings. Smith said: Having made a guest appearance on an episode of South Park earlier in the year (see → South Park: Mecha-Streisand), Smith again collaborated with Trey Parker under the name COGASM, featuring Reeves Gabrels and Jason Cooper, releasing the track "A Sign from God" for the film Orgazmo. Smith's contribution to "Yesterday's Gone" appeared on Gabrels' solo album Ulysses (Della Notte) released in 1999 via Internet and in 2000 on CD by E-magine Music.Parker, Lyndsey, Reeves Gabrels Interview, LAUNCH.com/Yahoo! Music, 29 November 2000; retrieved 12 October 2012. Smith's musical activity between 1999 and 2002 was again dominated by The Cure, including recording of the Bloodflowers album followed by the "Dream Tour" in 2000, and the 2001 release of their Greatest Hits compilation. In 2002, as Exclaim! magazine's Cam Lindsay later observed, The Cure became "the band to namedrop as a musical influence, sparking rejuvenation for their career. Artists such as Deftones, Mogwai, Tricky and Thursday praise the band and stress their influence, while others like Hot Hot Heat and the Rapture receive constant comparisons". From 2003–2004 a steady succession of guest vocal performances were released with other recording artists "feat. Robert Smith". Smith wrote the words and sang "Perfect Blue Sky (feat. Robert Smith)" for Dutch electronic music producer Junkie XL's album Radio JXL: A Broadcast from the Computer Hell Cabin, released in June 2003;Hubbard, Michael. "JXL prepares to broadcast", BBC News Online, 12 June 2003. Retrieved 13 October 2012. "All of This (feat. Robert Smith)" for Blink-182's self-titled album released in November,Kot, Greg "Blink-182 (2003)" (review), Entertainment Weekly, 21 November 2003; retrieved 12 October 2012. and "Believe (feat. Robert Smith)" on veteran Bowie guitarist Earl Slick's Zig Zag album, released 9 December 2003. Slick meanwhile contributed guitars to the Mark Plati mix of "A Forest" featured on the Join The Dots box-set on 27 January 2004.True, Chris, "Join the Dots: B-Sides & Rarities, 1978–2001 – The Cure" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 13 October 2012. Although issued under the moniker of The Cure, the "Mark Plati mix" was in fact an entirely new recording resulting from the studio collaborations between Slick, Plati and Smith. Smith had also recorded vocals for another completely new version of "A Forest" during 2003, this time billed as a cover version by the German electronic duo "Blank & Jones (feat. Robert Smith)".Jeffries, David, "A Forest – Blank & Jones" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 12 October 2012. Released in September 2003, the single reached number 14 in the German Top100 Singles charts, and three separate remixes later appeared on the 2004 album Monument; "A Forest" being described by AllMusic's Rick Anderson as "the centerpiece of the album".Anderson, Rick, "Monument – Blank & Jones" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 12 October 2012. January 2004 also saw the single release of Junior Jack's "Da Hype (feat. Robert Smith)",Hogwood, Ben, "RA Reviews: Junior Jack – Da Hype (Single)", Resident Advisor, 24 December 2003. which also appeared on the Belgium-based Italian house music producer's album Trust It in March.Jeffries, David, "Trust It – Junior Jack" at Allmusic.com; retrieved 13 October 2012. During the same month, an exclusive re-recording of The Cure's "Pictures of You", remixed by Australian electronic musician/producer Paul Mac and released under the banner "Robert Smith – Pictures of You (Paulmac mix)", featured in the soundtrack to the Australian "rave culture" film One Perfect Day. "Truth Is (Featuring – Robert Smith)" appeared on former Nine Inch Nails drummer and co-founder Chris Vrenna's second Tweaker album 2 a.m. Wakeup Call, released 20 April 2004.Anderson, Rick "2 A.M.  Wakeup Call – Tweaker" (review) at Allmusic.com; retrieved 13 October 2012. In 2004, on 17 September at Old Billingsgate Market in London, Robert joined Blink-182 live onstage to perform "All of This" during the MTV Icon tribute to The Cure.Weber, Tim, "The Cure take the icon test", BBC News Online, 20 September 2004; retrieved 13 October 2012. On 21 October, Robert stood in as one of three guest presenters for John Peel on BBC Radio 1, just days before Peel's death.Underworld presented the show on 19 October, and Siouxsie Sioux on 20 October. Peel died on 25 October 2004. Near the end of the year, Robert Smith made two guest appearances live at Wembley Arena; first joining Placebo on 5 November on their song "Without You I'm Nothing" and The Cure's  "Boys Don't Cry",[ ]   followed by Blink-182 on 6 December to perform "All of This" and again, "Boys Don't Cry". In June 2005, Smith appeared on Smashing Pumpkins/Zwan front man Billy Corgan's solo debut TheFutureEmbrace, sharing vocal duties during the refrain for Corgan's cover of the Bee Gees song "To Love Somebody".Sylvester, Nick, "Billy Corgan: The Future Embrace" (review), Pitchfork Media, 19 June 2005; retrieved 12 October 2012. In November 2006, Robert appeared on UK trance and trip hop act Faithless's album To All New Arrivals, on the track "Spiders, Crocodiles & Kryptonite", featuring prominent samples of The Cure's "Lullaby", for which Smith recorded a new performance of the original vocal.Mawer, Sharon, "To All New Arrivals (review), Allmusic. Retrieved 12 October 2012. Another guest vocal on Paul Hartnoll of Orbital's song "Please" was released as a single[ ]   and appeared on The Ideal Condition in May 2007.Petch-Jex, Andy, "Paul Hartnoll – The Ideal Condition" (review) at Music OMH; retrieved 12 October 2012. Placebo's Steve Hewitt meanwhile announced plans to launch a solo dance/drum'n'bass-influenced album under the working title of Ancient B to feature Smith singing some tracks, and bassist Jon Thorne of Lamb. From 2010–2012, as well as continuing to collaborate with other artists as a guest performer, several cover versions were released by Robert Smith performing solo. Unlike his previous solo covers (such as "Pirate Ships" and "World In My Eyes"), these were officially released under the name of Robert Smith, rather than The Cure. In 2010, he contributed a cover of "Very Good Advice" from the 1951 film adaptation of Alice in Wonderland to the album Almost Alice; a companion release to Tim Burton's adaptation of Alice in Wonderland, while "Pirate Ships" from 1989 also saw release on CD for the first time. Further guest vocalist/lyricist collaborations "feat. Robert Smith" during 2010 included the single "J'aurai tout essayé" (a reworking of Smith and Earl Slick's "Believe") by French Canadian rock singer, guitarist and fellow Bowie/Mark Plati/Earl Slick collaborator Anik Jean and the single version of Crystal Castles' cover version of Platinum Blonde's "Not in Love", released on Fiction Records, 6 December 2010. In June 2011, electronic dance act The Japanese Popstars from Northern Ireland released their album Controlling Your Allegiance in the UK, including the track "Take Forever (Ft. Robert Smith)",The album was released in Japan in March 2011, and teasers of the Robert Smith track were available from the Chain of Flowers fan-site. See: "Teaser: The Cure's Robert Smith and The Japanese Popstars, 'Take Forever'",  Slicing Up Eyeballs, 19 March 2011; retrieved 12 October 2012. and the following month, a solo cover version of "Small Hours" by British singer-songwriter and guitarist John Martyn (1948–2009) was released on the tribute album  Johnny Boy Would Love This. On 25 October 2011, instrumental rock band 65daysofstatic released the track "Come to Me" featuring Robert Smith as a free download, coinciding with the release of their album We Were Exploding Anyway.Fuentes, Caroline, "Free Download: 65daysofstatic's Electric Rock Track 'Come To Me'",  Rolling Stone, 26 October 2011; retrieved 12 October 2012. In 2012 Robert again recorded a solo cover version for a Tim Burton project;  this time covering Frank Sinatra's 1957 hit song "Witchcraft" for Frankenweenie Unleashed!, a 14-track collection of songs "inspired by" the filmmaker's stop-motion film, Frankenweenie, released on 25 September 2012. In 2015, Smith contributed vocals to the song "Please" from the album 8:58, a project by Paul Hartnoll. The track is in fact a reworking of the track of the same name from The Ideal Condition, which he also contributed vocals for.https://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/8-58-deluxe/id965261837 On 15 June 2015, The Twilight Sad will release a single with a double A side, featuring Smith covering 'There's A Girl In The Corner', originally from The Twilight Sad's album Nobody Wants to Be Here and Nobody Wants to Leave.http://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/22/the-cure-robert-smith-cover-the-twilight-sad-theres-a-girl-in-the-corner-listen-to Robert Smith has credited his older siblings Richard and Margaret with exposing him to rock music such as The Beatles and The Rolling Stones when he was six years old. He has said that his early songwriting "was influenced by early Beatles – the sense of a three-minute guitar-pop song",Anon, "Black Celebration", CMJ New Music Report, 27 December 1999. and early in his career The Cure's second single Boys Don't Cry was compared by British music paper Record Mirror to "John Lennon at 12 or 13". Alex and Rita Smith encouraged their children's musical development, as Smith told French magazine Les Inrockuptibles: "my parents were lending us their stuff; my mum made me listen to a lot of classical music to enable me to have a larger vision of music". When Robert was eight years old in 1967, Richard played him "Purple Haze" by Jimi Hendrix, who became hugely influential.Anon, Hi 5, Rolling Stone Australia, December 1993 Of this period, Robert Smith later went on to say:  Smith was ten years old in 1969 when he first began listening to Nick Drake's album Five Leaves Left:  It was not long afterwards that Robert Smith attended his first rock concert – Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight Festival. At the age of thirteen in 1972, Smith first saw David Bowie on television, performing Starman on Top of the Pops. He later recalled:  Smith said that the first LP he ever purchased with his pocket-money was The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars. According to Apter, Bowie also paved the way for Smith's love of Glam rock bands such as Slade, Sweet and T. Rex, and during the same period, Robert also became a fan of Roxy Music. Rita and Alex Smith maintained their supportive attitude: "My mum and dad ... were encouraging us to talk [about] the records we liked", said Smith. "I remember staggering talks about Slade and Gary Glitter." Smith said that he was fifteen when he first heard Alex Harvey, and that The Sensational Alex Harvey Band was the first and only group he ever really followed.  Smith soon became influenced by the emergence of the UK punk scene of 1977, and has cited The Sex Pistols, The Stranglers, Elvis Costello, The Buzzcocks and Siouxsie and the Banshees as important influences on his own music from this period. He described the release of Anarchy in the UK by the Sex Pistols as  Elsewhere Smith said that "The Stranglers were my favourite punk band" and that  Regarding both Siouxsie and Buzzcocks' influence on his early output, Smith said: Ian Birch (of Melody Maker) recognised the Banshees' influence on Smith's band early on, comparing The Cure's 1978 debut single Killing An Arab favourably to Siouxsie's Hong Kong Garden (released a few short months earlier).Birch, Ian. "Practical poprock", Melody Maker, 24 March 1979. Along with the Banshees, early Cure gigs from 1978–1979 supporting post-punk bands such as Wire and Joy Division influenced Robert shift in musical direction from The Cure's 1979 album, Three Imaginary Boys, to 1980's sophomore effort, Seventeen Seconds. Smith said that, in the early days of The Cure  Playing support for Wire (at Kent University in October 1978) gave Smith the idea "to follow a different course, to hold out against the punk wave ... Wire pointed out another direction to me." Smith began sporting his trademark and cult style of smeared red lipstick, eye-liner, pale complexion, artfully dishevelled black hair, black clothes and trainers in the early 1980s, around the same time as the Goth subculture took off. However, Smith denies any credit for this trend and claims it is a coincidence that the styles are similar, stating that he wore makeup since he was young and further saying: "It's so pitiful when 'Goth' is still tagged onto the name The Cure." The sombre mood of early albums, combined with Smith's on-stage persona, cemented the band's   "gothic" image. The band's aesthetic went from gloomy to psychedelic beginning with The Top. In 1986, Smith altered his image by appearing on-stage and in press photos sporting short spiky hair and polo shirts (this can be seen in The Cure in Orange, a concert in the south of France released on video in 1987). This new haircut made the headlines on MTV news. Although Smith's public persona could be deemed to portray a depressed image, he has stated that his songs do not convey how he feels all, or even most of the time:"At the time we wrote Disintegration ... it's just about what I was doing really, how I felt. But I'm not like that all the time. That's the difficulty of writing songs that are a bit depressing. People think you're like that all the time, but I don't think that. I just usually write when I'm depressed." Smith has a tenor vocal range. In the band's earliest period, he used a soft vocal style on the demos of "10:15 Saturday Night" and "Boys Don't Cry", and a frenetic punk style on "I Just Need Myself". Both of those styles were left behind as a third emerged during the production of the band's debut album, Three Imaginary Boys. This new sound, which can be heard on most of the final versions of songs from that period, became the signature Smith sound, which he generally abandoned during Seventeen Seconds era'. Around that time, Smith said he wanted to improve his singing, the opposite of his goal in 1984: he remarked in the documentary Ten Imaginary Years that he tried to sing badly on the album The Top.   Smith's songwriting has developed a range of styles and themes throughout his career. Some songs incorporate literary paraphrase, such as Camus' novel L'Etranger in "Killing an Arab" (1978), and "How Beautiful You Are" (1987), based on a poem by Baudelaire. The song "The Drowning Man" (1981) is also a reference to the Gormenghast books by Mervyn Peake. Others involve punk metafiction ("So What"), surrealism ("Accuracy"), straightforward rock/pop ("Boys Don't Cry", "I'm Cold"), and poetic mood pieces ("Another Day" and "Fire in Cairo"). In subsequent decades, Smith explored more poetic moods, which accorded with New Order and other bands of that genre. In an interview in 2000, Smith said that "there is one particular kind of music, an atmospheric type of music, that I enjoy making with The Cure. I enjoy it a lot more than any other kind of sound". When Smith was asked about the 'sound' of his songwriting, Smith said that he did not "think there is such a thing as a typical Cure sound. I think there are various Cure sounds from different periods and different line-ups." In a 1992 interview with Guitar Player magazine, Smith shared insights from his first guitar lessons—undertaken at the age of 9 years—and his guitar-playing style, as well as his habit of purposely detuning the "E" (first) string on his guitars. Of his first lessons, Smith stated:  I started on classical guitar, actually. I had lessons from age nine with a student of John Williams, a really excellent guitarist. [...] I learned a lot, but got to the point where I was losing the sense of fun. I wish I'd stuck with it. I still read music, but it takes me too long to work through a piece. Smith also described his detuning process:  I don't know what it adds, but the guitar just doesn't sound quite right to me normally. In the studio, I often defy the tuners, particularly with keyboard overdubs. I even change the speed of the tape to detune some parts. I think a lot of players presented with the same guitar and told to tune it themselves would come up with something drastically different. And the way you play [guitar] affects the perceived tuning. If Porl [Thompson] and I tune together and play the same thing, but he plays hard and I play soft, it will sound completely off. Speaking about Wish in 1992, Smith also offered the following input on how detuned instruments played a significant role in the album, and the challenges of capturing the sound live. "A lot of things on our record [Wish] that sound like heavy chorusing are actually just detuned instruments. The only drawback to that is onstage it's very confusing sometimes, especially with lots of phasing effects going on.  It turns into this overwhelming pulsing sound, and you can't hear anything." While recording the Cure's debut Three Imaginary Boys album in 1978, Smith's guitar during this period was a Woolworth's Top 20 electric guitar, and was told by Chris Parry to use a more suitable instrument, so Smith went out and purchased a Fender Jazzmaster (based on Smith's having recently seen Elvis Costello playing one on Top of The Pops,[ ]   but then decided to have the Top 20 Pickup installed into the Jazzmaster, giving it a 3rd pickup.  Smith explained this guitar customization in 1992: "The third pickup [in the Fender Jazzmaster] is from a Woolworth's Top 20 guitar, my very first electric. I took it in to record our first album, along with a little WEM combo amp. [Manager/producer] Chris Parry, who was paying for the record, said," you can't use that!" We went out and bought a Fender Jazzmaster, and I immediately had the Top 20 pickup installed in it, which really upset Chris. I played the entire Three Imaginary Boys album through a Top 20 pickup. It's a brilliant guitar, though I actually bought it because of how it looked."  Smith's notable guitar work was first heard on the first Cure single Killing An Arab which was released in Dec. 1978, where Smith performed an intricate Middle Eastern sounding descending and ascending guitar riff to accompany the song, as well as the B-side 10:15 Saturday Night, where Smith played the heavily-distorted solo that's featured in the song. Smith would soon expand on his guitar style further with the Cure's second album Seventeen Seconds, notably on the singles A Forest, where Smith played an extended solo-outro on his Jazzmaster, as well as Play For Today, where Smith demonstrated an intricate use of harmonics. With every Cure album release on-ward, Smith would soon incorporate a number of different guitars and sounds into the Cure’s repertoire with stylistic versatility and craftsmanship over the course of thirty years.  Notably, starting with The Top, in 1984, Smith started incorporating Spanish acoustic guitars (notably on the songs "Birdmad Girl", and The Caterpillar), and from the mid-80’s onward Smith included more acoustic guitar instrumentation on later Cure songs such as "The Blood", as well as notable singles such as In Between Days, Just Like Heaven, and Friday I’m In Love.  On the 1987 release Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Smith showcased a diverse style of guitar playing across the 17-track album.   Notably on the opening track "The Kiss" where Smith played an extended Wah-wah pedal introductory solo that opened the LP, as well as the single Hot Hot Hot!!! where Smith included an intricate funk playing style that intersected with Porl Thompson's guitar lines.  Another ingredient of Smith’s guitar sound is the Fender VI, which proved to be a staple of the Cure’s sound during the early 80’s on Cure albums such as  “Faith”, and was later played by Smith on the 1989 release “Disintegration”.  Smith shared the following input of his use of the Fender VI: "I added the six-string bass on the Faith album. I think [producer] Mike Hedges stole it. I'm not sure from whom, but he said they'd never miss it. He worked with a lot of big-name artists and he felt it was his duty as a socialist to relieve them of some of their worldly possessions. So he gave me that at the end of Seventeen Seconds. I actually wrote "Primary" on it and incorporated it into a few other things.” http://www.musicfanclubs.org/cure/press/I11.html Smith started incorporating more distortion and feedback sounds and textures on albums such as “Wish” where Smith predominantly played a Gibson Chet Atkins as well. Speaking to The Hit in 1985, Smith gave a frank assessment of his approach to guitar playing, and musicianship in general.  "I'm not technically a good player but at least I don't sound like anyone else.  For me the idea of being a musician has nothing to do with technical ability, but I suppose you have to have a certain amount to be able to put ideas into music.  I think it's important to get past the stage of being comfortable with an instrument. You need the capacity to learn - most people tend to stay at the same level, which [I think] is boring to listen to." An early "pop culture" reference to The Cure is found in the eleventh episode of BBC2's anarchic alternative comedy series The Young Ones, from 1984. The series featured regular cameo performances from British rock and pop groups of the period, such as Motörhead, The Damned, and Madness. As the episode's title "Sick" suggests, all four of the main characters (Vyvyan, Rick, Neil and Mike) are ill, prompting Vyvyan to send Mike to the pharmacy for medicine. Neil remarks: "I hope Mike hurries back with the cure!" to which Vyvyan replies, "No Neil, Neil, it's madness this week." The band Madness then performs a musical cameo. Rock biographers Bowler and Dray note that increasing popular interest in The Cure in America during the mid-late 1980s became "a pat shorthand for TV and film writers to indicate mixed up children – the Steve Martin film Parenthood uses a bedroom poster of Robert to underline the point that 'this adolescent is confused and miserable'".Bowler, Dave, and Bryan Dray. The Cure – Faith, (1995), Sidgwick & Jackson, pp. 126–127; ISBN 0-283-06229-0  Notwithstanding the aforesaid "pat shorthand" references in mainstream media, during the late 1980s and 1990s, a number of film, television and comic book portrayals also paid genuine homage to Smith's iconic stature in pop culture. In 1988, a Spin magazine interview with Smith reported that "the director of Pee-wee's Big Adventure" (i.e., Tim Burton) had asked Robert to make an appearance in a film. The Cure's keyboardist Roger O'Donnell has since revealed that during recording of the Disintegration album (1988–89), Burton had approached the group about providing the soundtrack to the 1990 film Edward Scissorhands, and even sent them the script. In a 1991 article discussing inspirations behind the look of the film's lead character, Entertainment Weekly (citing Burton and costume designer Colleen Atwood) reported that "the character's retro hair and penchant for leather clearly draw on punks like the Cure's Robert Smith".Benatar, Giselle & Benjamin Svetsky. "Scissorhandsome", Entertainment Weekly, 11 January 1991; retrieved 19 October 2012. Burton himself is a self-proclaimed fan of The Cure,Rogers, Georgie. "Burton wants Cure", 26 February 2009; retrieved 19 October 2012. whose own sartorial style has often been likened to that of Smith.Cawein, P. Elizabeth. "Blur And Libertines Talk Reunions, Robert Smith In The Running For Mighty Boosh Film + More From The NME Shockwave Awards", Fader, 26 February 2009: "It was also a big night for The Cure, with the band taking home the award for Godlike Genius (presented by Tim Burton, for no other discernable reason than that he looks eerily like Robert Smith)..."; retrieved 27 October 2012.Collis, Clark. "'Alice in Wonderland' soundtrack details revealed: Robert Smith,  Pete Wentz, and Franz Ferdinand to contribute tracks"; 12 January 2010: "The soundtrack ... features contributions from Burton hair-a-like Robert Smith..."; retrieved 27 October 2012. In 1996, Smith confirmed to French magazine Télérama that Burton had approached The Cure about a number of collaborations, and regularly kept in touch with the group about each of his latest film projects, but that they had thus far always been too busy either touring or recording to contribute.Jarno, Stephane & Frederic Peguillan, Télérama, 24 April 1996. Burton asked Smith to score the soundtrack for Sleepy Hollow (1999), but Smith said that "they were postponing it so much that I got involved with [The Cure's album] Bloodflowers and let it aside".Vianna, Luciano, "Blood flower opens up The Cure's wounds", Folha de S.Paulo (Brazil), 10 January 2000. English transcript at Chainofflowers.com. In 2009 Burton presented Smith with the Shockwaves NME Godlike Genius Award, saying that when he was "chained to a desk" and "fucking depressed" during his time as a young animator for Disney, "this music was the only thing that saved me. I just want to thank you for inspiring me." Shortly after the award ceremony, Burton again reiterated to BBC 6 Music his long-standing admiration for The Cure, and his desire to collaborate with them. For his part, Smith said that Burton presenting the Godlike Genius award "makes it all that more special". Burton's unfaltering dedication eventually paid off; Smith has since contributed music to Burton's Almost Alice and Frankenweenie Unleashed! album projects (See → guest vocals + solo cover versions).  Neil Gaiman, author and creator of Vertigo Comics' The Sandman (1989–1996), based the appearance of his lead character partly on that of Robert Smith, and partly on himself in his twenties.Sanderson, Peter, "Comics in Context #72: F. O. G.", 11 February 2005. Retrieved 19 October 2012. Other illustrators of the character over the course of the series' run have also drawn influence from other popular musicians; Sam Kieth, for instance, describes his rendering of the Sandman character as the "David Bowie/guy-from-the-Cure" version, and said that the Robert Smith look of the character was "really heavily championed" by Neil Gaiman and DC Comics editor Karen Berger.McCabe, Joseph & Sophia Quach. Hanging Out With the Dream King: conversations with Neil Gaiman and his collaborators. Fantagraphics, (2004), pp. 59–60; ISBN 9781560976172. Mike Dringenberg, on the other hand, compares Kieth's Sandman to Ron Wood and Keith Richards of The Rolling Stones, and asserts "my version ... was more like Peter Murphy or Robert Smith."McCabe, Joseph & Sophia Quach. Hanging Out With the Dream King: conversations with Neil Gaiman and his collaborators. Fantagraphics, (2004), p. 76; ISBN 9781560976172. Conversely, Kelley Jones, who illustrated the Dream Country and Season of Mists (volumes 3 & 4 in the series), said he "just hated The Cure" and thus based his own version of the character on the angular gestures and facial features of Bauhaus front-man Peter Murphy instead.McCabe, Joseph & Sophia Quach. Hanging Out With the Dream King: conversations with Neil Gaiman and his collaborators. Fantagraphics, (2004), p. 92; ISBN 9781560976172. Gaiman said that early conceptual sketches for the character by Leigh Baulch and Dave McKean drew influence from David Bowie's Aladdin Sane persona, and Bono from U2.Gaiman, Neil, "Neil Gaiman – FAQ – Comics"; retrieved 19 October 2012. Cure posters were also "known to creep into the background of some of the sandman stories" and Smith told fans that he was flattered by Gaiman's reference, and thought The Sandman was "a brilliant series".  The lyrics of Robert Smith, as well as Joy Division's Ian Curtis, are quoted and referenced extensively throughout James O'Barr's comic book series The Crow, which, like Gaiman's Sandman, also first appeared on shelves in 1989. One issue of The Crow dedicated an entire page to reprinting the lyrics from the Cure song "The Hanging Garden", and O'Barr said that he was listening a lot to The Cure's early albums such as Seventeen Seconds and Faith while he was writing the story. O'Barr, however, has downplayed the influence of Robert Smith on the lead character Eric Draven's physical appearance, saying that "the idea that the look has been inspired by him has really been overblown" and that the visual aspect of the character owed more to Peter Murphy and Iggy Pop.Weiss, Arlene R., "Let The Picture Tell The Story" (Interview With "The Crow" Author, Artist, Musician James O'Barr), December 1994 (published 26 September 2011); retrieved 19 October 2012. Smith said that the song "Burn", The Cure's contribution to the 1994 film adaptation's soundtrack, was deliberately written and performed in the style of "The Hanging Garden"."Questions & Answers", Cure News 15, September 1994. Garth Ennis's Muzak Killer stories for 2000 AD Comics from 1991 also contain visual references in the form of characters resembling Robert Smith,Shirley, Ian, Can Rock & Roll Save the World?: An Illustrated History of Music and Comics, (2005), S.A.F. Publishing, p. 132; ISBN 0-946719-80-2.Wolk, Douglas, "Dredd Reckoning: Every Judge Dredd book, reviewed", 25 March 2012; retrieved 19 October 2012. and again, Smith himself is a self-professed fan of 2000 AD. Revolutionary Comics produced a biographical comic book on The Cure in 1991 as Issue No. 30 of Rock n Roll Comics series, and the following year Personality Comics produced their own Cure biography in the form of Music Comics 4: The Cure. Ian Shirley, author of Can Rock & Roll Save the World?: An Illustrated History of Music and Comics, considers the fact "that the Cure have spawned two biographical comics ... just shows the impact that Robert Smith and his Goth chic had upon America in the 1990s".Shirley, Ian. Can Rock & Roll Save the World?: An Illustrated History of Music and Comics, (2005), S.A.F. Publishing, p. 74; ISBN 0-946719-80-2. Gothic horror and fantasy writer Poppy Z. Brite in her vampire novel Lost Souls (1992) uses a poster of Robert Smith on a bedroom wall as a sexual prop during a homoerotic encounter between two of her characters, Laine and Nothing. Colin Raff of the New York Press described "Poppy Z. Brite's enthusiastic appraisal of Robert Smith's mouth in her depiction of a fictional blowjob" as "an example of the unfortunate habit of many fiction writers (especially since the 1980s) to invoke pop stars and their lyrics with un-ironic [sic] reverence, resulting in prose about as reflective as voyeuristic journalism, bad porn and bumperstickers".Raff, Colin, "A post-mortem on Gothic: Four Hundred Years of Excess, Horror, Evil and Ruin", New York Press, 3 October 2000; retrieved 19 October 2012. In television comedy programmes during the early 1990s, Smith was sometimes the subject of lampooning. MTV's Half Hour of Comedy Hour (1990–1991), for example, featured a mock episode of This Old House in which a parody of Smith's Disintegration-era persona is seen asking building contractors to leave his house in a semi-demolished state to retain the sense of "urban decay". The Mary Whitehouse Experience (1992) poked fun at Smith's attempts to use lighter pop music to "show his happier side", by presenting a series of sketches in which Smith (played by Rob Newman) performs comedic novelty songs "The Laughing Policeman", "Tie Me Kangaroo Down, Sport", "Ernie", "Crash Bang Wallop", the theme to the children's programme Play Away, and the WWI soldiers' "Chinese crackers in your arsehole" parody version of the patriotic anthem "Rule, Britannia!". Newman portrayed Smith dolefully wailing the lyrics over a backdrop of gloomy Cure-styled mope-rock. Another of the series' regular characters, Edward Colanderhands, appears in one episode as a member of The Cure's audience. Another sketch on The Mary Whitehouse Experience revolved around "Ray: a man afflicted with a sarcastic tone of voice", also portrayed by Newman, and presented in the style of a Medical case history. Ray’s catchphrase was "oh no, what a personal disaster". In the series' final episode, Ray is given a copy of The Cure's Disintegration LP as a present, and is so overwhelmed that he can no longer speak in a sarcastic tone, and spontaneously begins speaking Flemish. In the closing scene, Ray has a chance meeting with the real Robert Smith in a cameo appearance, who punches Ray in the face and declares "oh no, what a personal disaster". Rob Newman and David Baddiel's live comedy video, History Today (1992), also features Newman's Robert Smith character, singing the children's songs "Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes" and "I'm a Little Teapot". Smith later made another cameo in the comedy duo's spin-off series Newman and Baddiel in Pieces (1993). In a scene where David Baddiel fantasises about his own funeral, Smith appears graveside, saying: "I've never been this miserable. I always preferred him to the other one" (i.e. Newman), before leading a conga of mourners in party-hats around the graveyard. Mike Leigh's 1997 film Career Girls depicts the reunion of two women who formerly shared both a flat and a love of The Cure as teenagers in the 1980s, featuring the band's music and imagery throughout. Smith was invited by Leigh to the premiere, which Smith described as "one of the weirdest afternoons of my life ... There's one bit in the film when they see a poster for The 13th, the first single from the last album, and she says to her friend, 'Are they still releasing records?' And I thought that was really unfair -'The unchanging man in the changing world.'"Stevenson, Jane, "Surviving The Cure", Toronto Sun, November 2001. In 1998, Smith voiced an animated version of himself in the Mecha-Streisand episode of South Park (Season One, Episode 12), in which he battles "Mecha" Barbra Streisand (see: Mechagodzilla) in "a battle of Godzilla vs. Mothra scale"Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, p. 282; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 that completely destroys the town of South Park, Colorado. Streisand is portrayed as an "evil, egotistical diabolical bitch" who wants to conquer the world with an ancient stone accidentally discovered by the character Pip and taken credit for the find by Eric Cartman, known as the 'Diamond of Pantheos'. The only people who can stop her are film critic Leonard Maltin, actor Sidney Poitier along with Smith. To battle Mecha-Streisand, Smith transforms into "Smithra" (see: Mothra), who has the ability of "robot punch", and ultimately defeats the monster by taking it by the tail and hurling it into space. Smith offers to roshambo Cartman to get his Walkie-Talkie back, and immediately kicks Cartman in the groin, causing him to drop the walkie-talkie. At the end of the episode as Smith walks off into the sunset, Kyle Broflovski calls out "Disintegration is the best album ever!"; Cartman adding "Robert Smith kicks ass!".  At the time, the episode brought South Park their highest ratings to date, with approximately 3,208,000 viewers; about 40,000 more than tuned into ABC's Prime Time Live. Comedy Central's debut screening in February 1998 marked the first time a cable station had beaten one of the Big Three television networks during prime time viewing, and "Robert Smith Kicks Ass" T-shirts were reportedly "doing a healthy trade among Cure fans" soon afterwards.Apter, Jeff, Never Enough: The Story of The Cure, (2009) Omnibus Press, p. 283; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 Smith later described the impact of the episode on his twenty-odd nieces and nephews to Q magazine: "Being in South Park has made a huge impact on their lives. Now that I'm a cartoon character I'm fully accepted into their world".Malins, Steve, "Robert Smith – Cash For Questions", Q, February 2000. He told Belgian magazine Humo:  Interviewed by Placebo's Brian Molko for Les Inrockuptibles magazine, Smith said that Trey Parker and Matt Stone sent him the script, but deliberately left some portions blank "to keep the surprise. They didn't want anybody to know, they wanted to shock. When I saw myself, I found it surrealistic."Molko, Brian, "A Cure ouvert", Les Inrockuptibles, November 2001. In another interview set up by Entertainment Weekly, Smith described the process to Pete Wentz of Fall Out Boy:  He told Wentz that the "Disintegration is the best album ever!" scene was "one of my greatest moments in life". In 2004, in an episode of The Mighty Boosh, "Nanageddon" (Series 2, episode 11), the character Vince Noir offers Howard Moon the opportunity to spend the evening with two goth girls, on the condition that he dresses like a goth. Vince produces a can of "Goth Juice: the most powerful hairspray known to man, made from the tears of Robert Smith". In the same episode The Moon sings "The Love Cats" over the credits. On the same night that Smith was presented with the Godlike Genius Award by Tim Burton at the Shockwaves NME Awards, The Mighty Boosh also won "Best TV Comedy". Asked by NME.com backstage after the ceremony if there were any plans for more pop-star cameos in The Mighty Boosh, series co-creator and co-star Noel Fielding replied "We're trying to get hold of Robert Smith for the film – I want him to be my uncle ... That would be great!" The look of Cheyenne (played by Sean Penn), the main character in director Paolo Sorrentino's 2011 film This Must Be the Place, is inspired by Smith's appearance. Smith is married to Mary Theresa Poole (born 3 October 1958), whom he met in drama class at St Wilfrid's when he was 14. They do not have children, as they decided early in life and in their marriage that they did not want children. Smith adds that he "does not feel responsible enough to bring a child into the world". Smith and Poole have 25 nephews and nieces. Smith later revealed that early in his musical career, Mary had not always shared his confidence and vision for The Cure's future, which was a significant motivating factor to his ensuring that the band was successful.Collins, Britt. "An interview with Robert Smith", Lime Lizard, March 1991. It has been reported by the Daily Express that Mary used to be a model and worked as a nurse with intellectually disabled children; but, as The Cure became more financially successful during the mid-1980s, Mary gave up her day job so that the couple would not have to spend so much time apart.Wigg, David. "The Perfect Cure!", Daily Express, 26 May 1986."New Wave – romantiek op de Orient Express" (New Wave romance on the Orient Express), Hit Krant, July 1986. Smith stated more than once that he was regarded within the couple as Mary's boyfriend, rather than Mary as Smith's girlfriend.Balfour, Brad, "Cure All", Spin Magazine, March 1988.Sweeting, Adam, "Curiouser and Curiouser", Spin Magazine, July 1987. Smith told The Face that he had once left a video camera running in their home "and after a couple of hours you forget that it's on and I was quite horrified at the amount of rubbish we say to each other. It's like listening to mental people ... I feel more natural in the company of people who are mentally unbalanced because you're always more alert, wondering what they're going to do next...". He claimed that Mary "used to dress as a witch to scare little children", that she sometimes dressed up as Robert Smith in his pyjamas, and that he could never take people home "because I never know who is going to answer the door"."A Suitable Case for Treatment", The Face, October 1985. While The Cure was recording the Wish album at Shipton Manor, Oxfordshire between 1991 and 1992, among the objects pinned to the wall was "Mary's Manor Mad Chart", listing seventeen members of the Manor's staff and residents (including The Cure and their entourage) "in order of instability". Mary was ranked in second place, after a woman named Louise who worked in the kitchen. "We all voted", said Smith, "and we had an award night. It was very moving".Sawyer, Miranda, "Strange Days", Q, May 1992 Smith has said his mother Rita "wasn't supposed to have me", which was the reason for the significant age gap between him and his elder two siblings. "And once they got me, they didn't like the idea of having an only child, so they had my sister. Which is good, because I would have hated not having a younger sister". He has described his younger sister Janet as a "piano prodigy" and "the family's musical genius", but said that she was too shy to become a performer herself. Janet Smith knew Porl Thompson, the erstwhile "second" guitarist of The Cure, since they were children,Tesseyre, Cecile. "The Cure", Paris Match, August 1986. and the pair began dating during Thompson's early tenure as lead guitarist for Malice and the Easy Cure.Apter, Jeff. Never Enough: The Story of the Cure, (2009), Omnibus Press, pg. 34; ISBN 978-1-84772-739-8 As well as having participated in The Crawley Goat Band since around 1973, Robert's sister Janet played keyboards as a member of Cult Hero in 1979, and their older sister Margaret contributed backing vocals to the project.Barbarian, L., Steve Sutherland and Robert Smith. Ten Imaginary Years, (1988) Zomba Books; ISBN 0-946391-87-4 Janet, together with Simon Gallup's then-girlfriend Carol (both dressed as schoolgirls), with real-life schoolboys "The Obtainers", sang backing vocals for The Cult Heroes' live performance at The Marquee (London), opening for The Passions in March 1980.Thompson, Dave & Jo-Ann Greene. The Cure – A Visual Documentary (1988), Omnibus Press, p. 22; ISBN 0-7119-1387-0 The Cure's in-house design company "Parched Art" (Porl Thompson and Andy Vella) created the album cover for The Cure's The Head on the Door using a manipulated photograph of Janet taken by Porl."Questions and Answers", Cure News 4, January 1988Butler, Daren, The Cure on Record, (1995), Omnibus Press, p. 61; ISBN 0-7119-3867-9 During the mid-1980s, Janet gave up a professional career as a pianist to spend more time with Porl and The Cure, and the couple were married in March 1988."Questions and Answers", Cure News 5, May 1988 Janet is also credited with having taught Robert's guitar technician Perry Bamonte to play piano while The Cure were recording Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, prior to Bamonte joining the group as keyboardist in 1990.Phillips, Shaun. "Making Up The Cure", VOX, November 1992  Smith has said that he is generally uncomfortable with interviews and conversations with strangers and does not express an interest or desire to engage in either. In addition to this, although he has a presence on multiple social networks, he does not actively use it, instead using it as an official presence to prevent imposters. Smith has described himself as a "liberal kind of guy" and has described himself as a socialist, but he is "uncomfortable with politicised musicians". He sported a 'citizens, not subjects' slogan on his guitar on tour in 2012 and 2013. See The Cure discography from 1976 (start) to present      "I'm a Cult Hero" single (1979) The Stranglers and Friends – Live in Concert (1995) Guitar on "Get a Grip" and "Hanging Around". Recorded 1979 The Affectionate Punch (1980) Backing vocals "Yeh Yeh Yeh" and "Lifeblood" split single (1980) Producer "Frame One" single (1982) Producer From Under the Hill cassette (1982) Co-producer The Pear Tree EP (1989) Smith and Mark Saunders co-produced the remixes; one of which also appears on some CD editions of the Farewell to the Shade album Blue Sunshine (1983) Torment and Toreros (1983) Smith co-wrote the song "Torment" with Marc Almond and Steve Severin Nocturne (1983) Hyæna (1984) "I Want to be a Tree" single (1984) "Jewel" single (1993) Smith remixed and played on the single versions "A Sign From God" single (1998) From the Orgazmo soundtrack Ulysses (Della Notte) (2000) Vocals and other instruments on the track "Yesterday's Gone" Radio JXL: A Broadcast from the Computer Hell Cabin (2003) Vocals on the track "Perfect Blue Sky" "A Forest" single (2003) Vocals Monument (2004) Vocals on the cover version of "A Forest" Blink-182 (2003) Vocals on the track "All of This" Zig Zag (2003) Vocals on the track "Believe" "Da Hype" single (2003) Vocals Trust It (2004) Vocals on the track "Da Hype" 2 a.m. Wakeup Call (2004) Vocals on the track "Truth Is" TheFutureEmbrace (2005) Backing vocals on the cover version of "To Love Somebody" To All New Arrivals (2006) Vocals on the track "Spiders, Crocodiles & Kryptonite" "Please" single (2007) Vocals The Ideal Condition (2007) Vocals on the track "Please" MTV Unplugged: Korn (2007) Vocals on the track "Make Me Bad/In Between Days" "J'aurai tout essayé" single (2010) Vocal duet "Not in Love" single (2010) Vocals Controlling Your Allegiance (2011) Vocals on the track "Take Forever" We Were Exploding Anyway (2011) Vocals on the track "Come To Me" "It Never Was The Same" single (2015) Vocals on the cover version of There's a Girl in the Corner "Pictures of You (Paul Mac Remix)" (Cure cover version) (2004) From the One Perfect Day Soundtrack "Very Good Advice" (Kathryn Beaumont cover version) (2010) From the Almost Alice album "Small Hours" (John Martyn cover version) (2011) From the Johnny Boy Would Love This tribute album "Witchcraft" (Frank Sinatra cover version) (2012) From the Frankenweenie Unleashed! album Robert Smith at Pictures of You Robert Smith interview at Stereo Warning
