 Traditional rank amongst European royalty, peers, and nobility is rooted in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Although they vary over time and between geographic regions (for example, one region's prince might be equal to another's grand duke), the following is a reasonably comprehensive list that provides information on both general ranks and specific differences. Note that many titles listed may also be used by lesser nobles – non-sovereigns – depending on the historical period and state. The sovereign titles listed below are grouped together into categories roughly according to their degree of dignity; these being: imperial (Emperor, Empress, etc), high royal (King of Kings etc), royal (King/Queen, sovereign Grand Duke or Grand Prince, etc), others (sovereign Prince, sovereign Duke, etc), and religious. Imperial titles High royal titles Royal titles Princely, ducal, and other sovereign titles Religious titles  Several ranks were widely used (for more than a thousand years in Europe alone) for both sovereign rulers and non-sovereigns. Additional knowledge about the territory and historic period is required to know whether the rank holder was a sovereign or non-sovereign. However, joint precedence among rank holders often greatly depended on whether a rank holder was sovereign, whether of the same rank or not. This situation was most widely exemplified by the Holy Roman Empire (HRE) in Europe. Almost all of the following ranks were commonly both sovereign and non-sovereign within the HRE. Outside of the HRE, the most common sovereign rank of these below was that of Prince. Within the HRE, those holding the following ranks who were also sovereigns had (enjoyed) what was known as an immediate relationship with the Emperor. Those holding non-sovereign ranks held only a mediate relationship (meaning that the civil hierarchy upwards was mediated by one or more intermediaries between the rank holder and the Emperor). Regarding the titles of Grand Duke, Duke and Prince: In all European countries the sovereign Grand Duke (or Grand Prince in some eastern European languages) is considered to be the third highest monarchic title in precedence, after Emperor and King. In Germany, a sovereign Duke (Herzog) outranks a sovereign prince (Fürst). A cadet prince (Prinz) who belongs to an imperial or royal dynasty, however, may outrank a duke who is the cadet of a reigning house e.g. Wurttemberg, Bavaria, Mecklenburg or Oldenburg. The children of a sovereign Grand Duke may be titled "Prince" (Luxembourg, Tuscany, Baden, Hesse-Darmstadt, Saxe-Weimar) or "Duke" (Oldenburg) in accordance with the customs of the dynasty. The heir of the throne of a Grand Duchy is titled "Hereditary Grand Duke", as soon as he reaches the full legal age (majority). Children of a sovereign (i.e. ruling) Duke and of a ruling Prince (Fürst) were, however, all titled prince (Prinz). The heir apparent to a ruling or mediatised title would usually prepend the prefix Erb- (hereditary) to his or her title, e.g. Erbherzog, Erbprinz, Erbgraf, to distinguish their status from that of their junior siblings. Children of a mediatised Fürst were either Prinzen or Grafen (counts), depending upon whether the princely title was limited to descent by masculine primogeniture or not. In the German non-sovereign nobility, a Duke (Herzog) still ranked higher than a Prince (Fürst).  The distinction between the ranks of the major nobility (listed above) and the minor nobility, listed here, was not always a sharp one in all nations. But the precedence of the ranks of a Baronet or a Knight is quite generally accepted for where this distinction exists for most nations. Here the rank of Baronet (ranking above a Knight) is taken as the highest rank among the ranks of the minor nobility or gentry that are listed below. In Germany, the constitution of the Weimar Republic in 1919 ceased to accord privileges to members of dynastic and noble families. Their titles henceforth became legal parts of the family name, and traditional forms of address (e.g., "Hoheit" or "Durchlaucht") ceased to be accorded to them by governmental entities. The last title was conferred on 12 November 1918 to Kurt von Klefeld. The actual rank of a title-holder in Germany depended not only on the nominal rank of the title, but also the degree of sovereignty exercised, the rank of the title-holder's suzerain, and the length of time the family possessed its status within the nobility (Uradel, Briefadel, altfürstliche, neufürstliche, see: German nobility). Thus, any reigning sovereign ranks higher than any deposed or mediatized sovereign (e.g., the Fürst of Waldeck, sovereign until 1918, was higher than the Duke of Arenberg, head of a mediatized family, although Herzog is nominally a higher title than Fürst). However, former holders of higher titles in extant monarchies retained their relative rank, i.e., a queen dowager of Belgium outranks the reigning Prince of Liechtenstein. Members of a formerly sovereign or mediatized house rank higher than the nobility. Among the nobility, those whose titles derive from the Holy Roman Empire rank higher than the holder of an equivalent title granted by one of the German monarchs after 1806. In Austria, nobility titles may no longer be used since 1918. In Switzerland, nobility titles are prohibited and are not recognized as part of the family name. Below is a comparative table of corresponding royal and noble titles in various European countries.  Quite often, a Latin 3rd declension noun formed a distinctive feminine title by adding -issa to its base, but usually the 3rd declension noun was used for both male and female nobles, except for Imperator and Rex. 3rd declension nouns are italicized in this chart. See Royal and noble styles to learn how to address holders of these titles properly.   &nbsp; Emperor,Empress King,Queen Grand Duke/Grand Prince,Grand Duchess/Grand Princess Archduke,Archduchess Duke,Duchess (Prince)-Elector,Electress Prince,"Prince" (Prinz in German, Prins in Swedish, Prinssi in Finnish, "Principe" in Spanish) can also be a title of junior members of royal houses. In the British system, for example, prince is not a rank of nobility but a title held exclusively by members of the royal family.Princess Viceroy,Vicereine Marquess/Margrave,Marchioness/Margravine Earl / Count,Countess Viscount,Viscountess Baron,Baroness BaronetDoes not confer nobility in the British system.Baronetess KnightNon-hereditary. Does not confer nobility in the British system.  See also squire and esquire. / Dame Esquire, Gentleman LatinLatin titles are for etymological comparisons.  They do not accurately reflect their medieval counterparts. Imperator/Caesar,Imperatrix/Caesarina Rex, Regina Magnus Dux/Magnus Princeps,Magna Ducissa, Magna Principissa Archidux,Archiducissa Dux,Ducissa Princeps Elector Princeps,Principissa Prorex,Proregina Marchio,Marchionissa Comes,Comitissa Vicecomes,Vicecomitissa Baro,Baronissa &nbsp; Eques Nobilis Homo (N.H.) Bulgarian Цар,Царица Крал, Кралица Велик Княз, Велика Княгиня Ерцхерцог, Ерцхерцогиня Херцог, Херцогиня Курфюрст,Курфюрстина Княз, Княгиня Вице-крал,Вице-кралица Маркиз, Маркиза Граф, Графиня Виконт, Виконтеса Барон,  Баронеса Баронет, Дама Рицар, Дама Господин Czech Císař,Císařovna Král,Královna Velkovévoda,Velkovévodkyně Arcivévoda,Arcivévodkyně Vévoda,Vévodkyně Kurfiřt,Kurfiřtka Kníže,Kněžna10 Místokrál/VicekrálMístokrálovna/Vicekrálovna Markýz/MarkraběThe title Markýz was not used in Bohemia and thus referred only to foreign nobility, while the title Markrabě (the same as the German Markgraf) is connected only to a few historical territories (including the former marches on the borders of the Holy Roman Empire, or Moravia).Markýza/Markraběnka Hrabě,Hraběnka Vikomt,Vikomtka/Vikomtesa Baron,Baronka Baronet Rytíř Pán,Paní Danish Kejser,Kejserinde Konge Dronning Storhertug, Storhertuginde Ærkehertug, Ærkehertuginde Hertug, Hertuginde Kurfyrste,Kurfystinde Prins/Fyrste Prinsesse/Fyrstinde Vicekonge,Vicedronning Markis, Markise Greve Grevinde, Komtesse Vicegreve,Vicegrevinde/Vicekomtesse Baron, Friherre,Baronesse, Friherreinde Baronet,  Baronetesse Ridder Junker Dutch Keizer,Keizerin Koning,Koningin Groothertog,Groothertogin Aartshertog,Aartshertogin&nbsp; Hertog,Hertogin Keurvorst,Keurvorstin Prins/Vorst,Prinses/Vorstin Onderkoning,Onderkoningin Markies/Markgraaf,Markiezin/Markgravin Graaf,Gravin Burggraaf,Burggravin Baron,Barones(se) Erfridder Ridder Jonkheer FinnishFinland accorded the noble ranks of Ruhtinas, Kreivi, Vapaaherra and Aatelinen. The titles Suurherttua, Arkkiherttua, Vaaliruhtinas, Prinssi, Markiisi, Jaarli, Varakreivi, Paroni, and Baronetti were not granted in Finland, though they are used of foreign titleholders. Keisari, Kuningas, Suuriruhtinas, Prinssi, and Herttua have been used as official titles of members of the dynasties that ruled Finland, though not granted as titles of nobility.  Some feudally-based privileges in landowning, connected to nobily related lordship, existed into the nineteenth century; and fiefs were common in the late medieval and early modern eras.  The title Ritari was not commonly used except in the context of knightly orders. The lowest, untitled level of hereditary nobility was that of the "Aatelinen" (i.e. "noble"). Keisari,Keisarinna (or Keisaritar, obsolete) Kuningas,Kuningatar Suurherttua/Suuriruhtinas,Suurherttuatar/Suuriruhtinatar Arkkiherttua,Arkkiherttuatar Herttua,Herttuatar Vaaliruhtinas,Vaaliruhtinatar Prinssi/Ruhtinas,Prinsessa/Ruhtinatar Varakuningas,Varakuningatar Markiisi/Rajakreivi,Markiisitar/Rajakreivitär Jaarli/Kreivi,Kreivitär Varakreivi,Varakreivitär Paroni, Vapaaherra,Paronitar, Rouva/ Vapaaherratar Baronetti, "Herra" (=fiefholder),Herratar Aatelinen/Ritaristyle of wife: Rouva &nbsp; French Empereur,Impératrice Roi,Reine Grand-Duc,Grande-Duchesse Archiduc, Archiduchesse Duc,Duchesse Prince-électeur,Princesse-électrice Prince,Princesse Viceroi,Vicereine Marquis,Marquise Comte,Comtesse Vicomte,Vicomtesse Baron,Baronne Baronnet Chevalier Ecuyer,Gentilhomme German Kaiser,Kaiserin König,Königin Großherzog/Großfürst,Großherzogin/Großfürstin Erzherzog, Erzherzogin Herzog,Herzogin Kurfürst, Kurfürstin Prinz/Fürst,Prinzessin/FürstinIn central Europe, the title of Fürst or kníže (e.g. Fürst von Liechtenstein) ranks below the title of a duke (e.g. Duke of Brunswick). The title of Vizegraf was not used in German-speaking countries, and the titles of Ritter and Edler were not commonly used. Vizekönig,Vizekönigin Markgraf,In the German system by rank approximately equal to Landgraf and Pfalzgraf.Markgräfin Graf,Gräfin Vizegraf, BurggrafVizegräfin, Burggräfin Baron, Herr, FreiherrBaronin, Frau, Freifrau, Freiin &nbsp; Ritter Junker (Prussia), Edler (Austria),Junkerin, Edle Greek domestic Αυτοκράτωρ, Αυτοκράτειρα Βασιλεύς, Βασίλισσα Μέγας Δούκας, Μεγάλη Δούκισσα Aρχιδούκας, Aρχιδούκισσα Δούκας,  Δούκισσα Eκλέκτορας Δεσπότης, Δέσποινα Aντιβασιλέας, Αντιβασίλησσα Μαρκήσιος, Μαρκησία Κόμης, Κόμισσα Υποκόμης, Υποκόμισσα Bαρώνος Βαρωνίσκος Ιππότης, Ντάμα Νωβελίσσιμος, Νωβελίσσιμα; Hungarian Császár,császárnő Király,királynő Nagyherceg, fejedelem, vajdanagyhercegnő, fejedelemasszony, - Főherceg,főhercegnő Herceg,hercegnő Választófejedelem, (választófejedelemnő) Királyi herceg,királyi hercegnő Alkirály,alkirálynő Márki, őrgrófmárkinő, őrgrófnő Grófgrófnő Várgróf, vikomtVárgrófnő (vikomtnő) Báró,bárónő Baronet,baronetnő Lovag (vitézThe "vitéz" title was introduced in Hungary after 1920. In preceding ages simply meant a warrior or a courageous man.) Nemes,nemesasszony Icelandic Keisari,keisarynja Konungur, kóngur,drottning Stórhertogi, stórhertogaynja Hertogi,hertogaynja Kjörfursti, kjörfurstynja Prins/fursti, prinsessa/furstynja Vísikonungur,vísidrottning Markgreifi,markgreifynja Greifi, jarlgreifynja, jarlkona Vísigreifi,vísigreifynja Barón, fríherra,barónessa Riddari Aðalsmaður, aðalskona Italian Imperatore,Imperatrice Re,Regina Granduca,Granduchessa Arciduca,Arciduchessa Duca,Duchessa Principe Elettore,Principessa Elettrice Principe,Principessa Viceré,Viceregina Marchese,Marchesa Conte,Contessa Visconte,Viscontessa Barone,Baronessa Baronetto Cavaliere Nobile, Nobiluomo Luxembourgish Keeser,Keeserin Kinnek, Kinnigin Groussherzog,Groussherzogin Erzherzog,Erzherzogin Herzog,Herzogin Kuerfierscht,Kuerfierschtin Prënz/Fierscht,Prënzessin/Fierschtin Vizekinnek,Vizekinnigin Markgrof/Marquis,Markgrofin/Marquise Grof,Grofin/Comtesse Vizegrof/Vicomte,Vizegrofin/Vicomtesse Baron,Baroness(e) Ritter Maltese Imperatur,Imperatriċi Re/Sultan,Reġina/Sultana Gran Duka,Gran Dukessa Arċiduka,Arċidukessa Duka,Dukessa Prinċep Elettur,Prinċipessa Elettriċi Prinċep,Prinċipessa Viċirè,Viċireġina Markiż,Markiża Konti,Kontessa Viskonti,Viskontessa Baruni,Barunessa Barunett Kavallier &nbsp; Norwegian Keiser,Keiserinne Konge,Dronning Storhertug, Storhertuginne Erkehertug,Erkehertuginne Hertug,Hertuginne Kurfyrste,Kurfyrstinne Prins/Fyrste,  Prinsesse/Fyrstinne Visekonge,Visedronning Marki,Markise Jarl / Greve,Grevinne Vikomte/Visegreve,Visegrevinne Baron, Friherre,Baronesse, Friherreinde &nbsp; Ridder Adelsmann,  Adelskvinne PolishIn keeping with the principle of equality among noblemen, no noble titles (with few exceptions) below that of prince were allowed in Poland. The titles in italics are simply Polish translations of western titles which were granted to some Polish nobles by foreign monarchs, especially after the partitions. Instead of hereditary titles, the Polish nobility developed and used a set of titles based on offices held.  See "szlachta" for more info on Polish nobility. Cesarz, Cesarzowa Król,Królowa Wielki Książę,Wielka Księżna ArcyksiążęArcyksiężna Diuk (Książę),(Księżna) Książę Elektor,Księżna Elektorowa Książę,Księżna Wicekról, Wicekrólowa Markiz/Margrabia,Markiza/Margrabina Hrabia,Hrabina Wicehrabia,Wicehrabina Baron,Baronowa Baronet Rycerz/ Kawaler Szlachcic Portuguese Imperador, Imperatriz Rei, Rainha Grão-Duque, Grã-Duquesa Arquiduque,Arquiduquesa; Duque, Duquesa Príncipe-Eleitor,Princesa-Eleitora; Príncipe, Princesa Vice-rei, Vice-rainha Marquês, Marquesa Conde, CondessaIn Portugal, a baron or viscount who was a "grandee of the kingdom" () was called a "baron with grandness" () or "viscount with grandness" (); each of these grandees was ranked as equal to a count. Visconde, Viscondessa Barão,  Baronesa Baronete,Baronetesa; Cavaleiro Fidalgo Russian Imperator/Tsar, Imperatritsa/Tsaritsa Koról/Tsar, Koroléva/Tsaritsa Velikiy Knyaz, Velikaya Kniagina Ertsgertsog,Ertsgertsoginya Gertsog,Gertsoginya Kurfyurst,Kurfyurstina Kniaz,KniaginaFor domestic Russian nobility, only the titles Kniaz and Boyar were used before the 18th century, when Graf was added. Vitse-koról,Vitse-koroléva Markiz,Markiza,Boyar,Boyarina Graf,Grafinya Vikont,Vikontessa Baron,Baronessa Baronet Rytsar &nbsp; Serbian Car,Carica Kralj, Kraljica Veliki vojvoda, Velika vojvodkinja Nadvojvoda/Herceg, Nadvojvodkinja/Hercoginja Vojvoda, Vojvodkinja Princ,Princeza Knez, Kneginja Ban,Vicereine Markiz, Markiza Grof, Grofica Vikont, Vikontica Baron,  Baronica/Baronesa Barunet, Baruneta Vitez Gospodin Spanish Emperador,Emperatriz Rey,Reina Gran Duque,Gran Duquesa Archiduque,Archiduquesa Duque,Duquesa Príncipe Elector, Princesa Electora; Príncipe,Princesa Virrey,Virreina Marqués,Marquesa Conde,Condesa Vizconde,Vizcondesa Barón,Baronesa Baronet Caballero Escudero, Hidalgo Slovak Cisár,Cisárovná Kráľ,Kráľovná Veľkovojvoda,Veľkovojvodkyňa Arcivojvoda,Arcivojvodkyňa Vojvoda,Vojvodkyňa Kurfirst/Knieža voliteľ/Knieža volič Knieža, Kňažná Miestokráľ/Vicekráľ Markíz,Markíza Gróf,Grófka Vikomt,Vikontesa Barón,Barónka Baronet Rytier &nbsp; Slovene Cesar, Cesarica Kralj, Kraljica Veliki vojvoda, Velika vojvodinja Nadvojvoda, Nadvojvodinja Vojvoda, Vojvodinja Volilni knez, Volilna kneginja Knez, Kneginja Podkralj, Podkraljica Markiz, Markiza Grof, Grofica Vikont, Vikontinja Baron,  Baronica Baronet, Baronetinja Vitez Oproda Swedish Kejsare,Kejsarinna Kung,Drottning Storhertig/Storfurste,Storhertiginna/Storfurstinna Ärkehertig,ärkehertiginna Hertig,hertiginna KurfursteKurfurstinna Prins/Furste,Prinsessa/FurstinnaNo noble titles were granted after 1906 when the unicameral legislatures (Eduskunta) were established, removing the constitutional status of the so-called First Estate. However, noble ranks were granted in Finland until 1917 (there, the lowest, untitled level of hereditary nobility was "Aatelinen", or "noble"; it was in essence a rank, not a title). Vicekung,Vicedrottning Markis/markgreve,markisinna/markgrevinna Greve,Grevinna Vicomte,Vicomtessa Baron, Herre, Friherre,Baronessa, Fru, Friherreinde &nbsp; Riddare/Frälseman,Fru &nbsp; Turkish İmparator, İmparatoriçe Kral, Kraliçe Grandük, Grandüşes Arşidük, Arşidüşes Dük, Düşes Veliaht Prens, Veliaht Prenses Prens, Prenses Vezir; Marki, Markiz Kont, Kontes Vikont, Vikontes Baron, Barones Baronet, Baronetes Şövalye Bey, Efendi Welsh Ymerawdwr, Ymerodres Brenin, Brenhines Archddug, Archdduges Archddug, Archdduges Dug, Duges &nbsp; Tywysog, Tywysoges Marcwis/Ardalydd, Ardalyddes Iarll/Cownt, Iarlles/Cowntes Iarll, Iarlles Barwn, Barwnes Barwnig, Barwniges Marchog &nbsp; The word monarch is derived from the Greek μονάρχης, monárkhēs, "sole ruler" (from μόνος, mónos, "single" or "sole", and , árkhōn, archon, "leader", "ruler", "chief", the word being the present participle of the verb ἄρχειν, árkhein, "to rule", "to lead", this from the noun ὰρχή, arkhē, "beginning", "authority", "principle") through the Latinized form monarcha. The word sovereign is derived from the Latin above. Autocrat is derived from the Greek :  ("self") and  ("to hold power"), and may be translated as "one who rules by himself". Emperor, from the Latin Imperator, meaning "commander" or "one who commands". In English, the feminine form is Empress (the Latin is imperatrix). The realm of an emperor or empress is termed an Empire. Other words meaning Emperor include: Caesar, the appellation of Roman emperors derived from the Roman dictator Julius Caesar, whose great-nephew and adopted son Gaius Julius Caesar Augustus became the first emperor of Rome. Augustus' four successors were each made the adoptive son of his predecessor, and were therefore legally entitled to use "Caesar" as a constituent of their names; after Nero, however, the familial link of the Julio-Claudian dynasty was disrupted and use of the word Caesar continued as a title only. Tsar / Czar / Csar / Tzar, derived from Caesar, the feminine form Tsarina, primarily used in Bulgaria, and after that in Russia and other Slavic countries. Kaiser, derived from Caesar, primarily used in Germanic countries. Basileus, from Mycenaean Greek meaning "chieftain", later used for the Roman emperors of the Byzantine period. Samraat, (Sanskrit: samrāṭ or सम्राज् samrāj) is an Ancient Indian title sometimes translated into modern English as "Emperor". The feminine form is Samrãjñī. Chhatrapati, (Devanagari: छत्रपती) is the Indian royal title equivalent to an Emperor.  The word ‘Chhatrapati’ is from Sanskrit  chatra (roof or umbrella) and pati (master/Owner/ruler); Chhatrapati thus indicates a person who gives shade to his followers and protects their success. King of Kings mostly used in Christian contexts to denote Jesus Christ or the Christian Roman emperors of the Late Empire and Byzantine periods. Shahanshah, literally "King of Kings" a corruption of the Middle Persian šāhān šāh, meaning "King's King." Used in Persia and surrounding countries. Taewang, literally "Supreme King", a Korean title for the rulers of the Goguryeo Empire and later dynasties such as the Kingdom of Joseon. Nəgusä Nägäst, title of the Emperors of Ethiopia, meaning "King of Kings". Mansa, title of the Emperors of the Mali Empire, meaning King of Kings. Mepe-Mepeta, Georgian for "King of Kings." Khagan, derived from Khan of Khans, meaning king of kings in the Mongol Empire, the Ottoman Empire and the Bulgarian Empire. High king, A king who rules over lesser kings. Mahārāja, Sanskrit for a "great king" or "high king". Padishah, Persian pād "master" and shāh "king". Used in the Ottoman Empire. Anax, from Mycenaean wanax for "High King". Outranked Basileus in Mycenaean usage. Nam-Lugal High kings of ancient Sumer (Mesopotamia). Pharaoh, "Man of the Great House (Palace)" used in Ancient Egypt to denote the High kings of the upper and lower kingdoms of the Nile river valley. Ard Rí, Gaelic for high king, most notably used for high kings of Ireland and Scotland. Bretwalda, high kings of Anglo-Saxon England. Yang di-Pertuan Agong, the official title of the Malaysian head of state, and means "He who is Made Supreme Lord" and is generally glossed in English as "king". The officeholder is elected from among the heads of the nine royal states, so the office may also be analogous to that of a high king. King, from the Germanic *kuningaz, roughly meaning "son of the people." (See: Germanic kingship) Loss of sovereignty or fief does not necessarily lead to loss of title. The position in the ranking table is however accordingly adjusted. The occurrence of fiefs has changed from time to time, and from country to country. For instance, dukes in England rarely had a duchy to rule. The realm of a King is termed a Kingdom (sovereign kings are ranked above vassal kings) Rex Latin for "ruler". Cognate with Raja, Rí, Reign, Regina, etc. Raja, Indian for "ruler and King.". Cognate with Latin Rex, Gaelic Rí, etc. Rana, was used to be a title for martial sovereignty of Rajput kings in India. Deshmukh, Indian for "ruler and king." Rí, Gaelic title meaning king, of which there were several grades, the highest being Ard Rí (High king). Cognate with Indian Raja, Latin Rex, and ancient Gaulish rix. Khan, from the Turco-Mongol word for "lord," like Duke it was originally a military rank. A Khan's realm is called a Khanate. Lamane, "master of the land" or "chief owner of the soil" in old Serer language were the ancient hereditary kings and landed gentry of the Serer people found in Senegal, the Gambia and Mauritania. The Lamanes were guardians of Serer religion and many of them have been canonized as Holy Saints (Pangool). Eze, the Igbo word for the King or Ruler of a kingdom or city-state. It is cognate with Obi and Igwe. Oba, the Yoruba word for King or Ruler of a kingdom or city-state. It is used across all the traditional Yoruba lands, as well as by the Edo, throughout Nigeria, Benin, and Togo. Shah, Persian word for King, from Indo-European for "he who rules" Sultan, from Arabic and originally referring to one who had "power", more recently used as synonym for King. Malik, Arabic for King. Tlatoani, Ruler of the atlepetl or city state in ancient Mexico. Title of the Aztec Emperors. The word literally means "speaker" in Nahuatl, but may be translated into English as "king". Ajaw, In Maya meaning "lord", "ruler", "king" or "leader". Was the title of the ruler in the Classic Maya polity. A variant being the title of K'inich Ajaw or "Great Sun King" as it was used to refer to the founder of the Copán dynasty, K'inich Yax K'uk' Mo'. Lakan, Filipino title (mostly on the island of Luzon) which, together with the term Datu in the Visayas and Mindanao, is an equivalent of Raja and thus glossed as "king" or "sovereign prince". Tuanku, literally "My Lord", the title of the kings of the nine Royal states of Malaysia; all princes and princesses of the Royal Families also receive the appellation Tengku, Maad a Sinig, King of Sine, a pre-colonial kingdom of the Serer people. From the old Serer title "Maad" (king). Maad Saloum, King of Saloum, a pre-colonial kingdom of the Serer people. Ratu, A Fijian chiefly title that is also found in Javanese culture. Teigne, King of Baol, previously a pre-colonial Serer kingdom. Nizam, The word is derived from the Arabic language Nizām (نظام), meaning order, arrangement. Nizām-ul-mulk was a title first used in Urdu around 1600 to mean Governor of the realm or Deputy for the Whole Empire. Queen, from the Germanic *kwoeniz, or *kwenon, "wife"; cognate of Greek γυνή, gynē, "woman"; from PIE *gʷḗn, "woman". The female equivalent of a King, or the consort of a King; a Queen's realm is also a kingdom. Rani, Indian for Queen. See Raja, above. Shahbanu, Persian for Empress. See Shah, above. Sultana, Arabic for Queen. See Sultan, above. Malika, Arabic for Queen. Ix-ajaw, See Ajaw above, it was a title was also given to women, though generally prefixed with the sign Ix ("woman") to indicate their gender. Diyan, Filipino feminine equivalent of "Datu". See Datu Hara, Filipino feminine equivalent of "Raha". See Raja, above.  Sovereign Grand Dukes or Grand Princes are considered to be part of the reigning nobility ("Royalty", in German Hochadel; their correct form of address is "Royal Highness")Meyers Taschenlexikon Geschichte 1982, vol 1, p21-22 Prince, from the Latin princeps, meaning "first citizen". The feminine form is Princess. Variant forms include the German Fürst and Russian Tsarevich (царевич) and the feninine form Tsarevna (царевна). Bai, Filipino feminine equivalent of a prince. Ginoo, Ancient Filipino equivalent to noble man or prince (now used in the form "Ginoóng" as the analogue to "mister"). Morza, a Tartar title usually translated as "prince", it ranked below a Khan. The title was borrowed from Persian and Indian appellation Mirza added to the names of certain nobles, which itself derived from Emir. Knyaz, a title found in most Slavic languages, denoting a ruling or noble rank. It is usually translated into English as "Duke". Despot, Greek for "lord, master", initially an appellation for the Byzantine emperor, later the senior court title, awarded to sons and close relatives of the emperor. In the 13th-15th centuries borne by autonomous and independent rulers in the Balkans. Duke, from the Latin Dux, meaning "leader," a military rank in the late Roman Empire. Variant forms include Doge, and Duce; it has also been modified into Archduke (meaning "chief" Duke), Grand Duke (literally "large," or "big" Duke; see above under royal titles), Vice Duke ("deputy" Duke), etc. The female equivalent is Duchess Sheikh, is often used as a title for Arab royal families, Some Emirs of the Arabian Peninsula use the title Sheikh,as do other members of the extended family Emir, often rendered Amir in older English usage; from the Arabic "to command." The female form is Emira (Amirah). Emir is the root of the English military rank "Admiral" Mir, According to the book Persian Inscriptions on Indian Monuments, Mir is most probably an Arabized form of Pir. Pir  in Old Persian and Sanskrit means the old, the wise man, the chief and the great leader. It was Arabized as Mir then, with Al(A) (Arabic definite article), it was pronounced as Amir. Bey, or Beg/Baig, Turkish for "Chieftain." Begum, female royal and aristocratic title from Central and South Asia. Beylerbey, Bey of Beys. Atabeg, word is a compound of two Turkic words: ata, "ancestor", and beg. Beg Khan, concatenation of Baig and Khan. Khagan Bek, title used by Khazars. Buumi, first in line to the throne in Serer pre-colonial kingdoms. Thilas, second in line to the throne in Serer pre-colonial kingdoms. Loul, third in line to the throne in Serer country. Dey, title given to the rulers of the Regency of Algiers and Tripoli under the Ottoman Empire from 1671 onwards. Sahib, name of Arabic origin meaning "holder, master or owner." Zamindar, were considered to be equivalent to lords and barons in some cases they were seen as independent, sovereign princes. Jagir, also spelled as Jageer (Devanagari: जागीर, Persian: جاگیر, ja- meaning "place", -gir meaning "keeping, holding") The feudal owner/lord of the Jagir were called Jagirdar or Jageerdar Sardar, also spelled as Sirdar, Sardaar or Serdar, is a title of nobility (sir-, sar/sair- means "head or authority" and -dār means "holder" in Sanskrit and Avestan) Pope, derived from Latin and Italian papa, the familiar form of "father" (also "Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church and Vicar of Christ"); once wielding substantial secular power as the ruler of the Papal States and leader of Christendom, the Pope is also the absolute ruler of the sovereign state Vatican City Caliph, was the ruler of the caliphate, an Islamic title indicating the successor to Muhammad. Both a religious and a secular leader; the Ottoman sultans continued to use Caliph as another of their titles. However, in later Ottoman times the religious function was practically exercised by the Sheikh ül-Islam; after the establishment of the Turkish Republic, a solely religious Caliphate, held by members of the Sultans' family, was established for a short period of time. Saltigue, the high priests and priestesses of the Serer people. They are the diviners in Serer religion. Archduke, ruler of an archduchy; used exclusively by the Habsburg dynasty and its junior branch of Habsburg-Lorraine which ruled the Holy Roman Empire (until 1806), the Austrian Empire (1804-1867), and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (1867-1918) for imperial family members of the dynasty, each retaining it as a subsidiary title when founding sovereign cadet branches by acquiring thrones under different titles (e.g., Tuscany, Modena); it was also used for those ruling some Habsburg territories such as those that became the modern so-called "Benelux" nations (Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg); The title was created in 1358 by the Habsburgs themselves to establish a precedence of their princes over the other titleholders of high nobility of the era; therefore the rank was not recognized by the other ruling dynasties until 1453Meyers Taschenlexikon Geschichte 1982, vol 2, p106 Grand Duke, ruler of a Grand Duchy; nowadays considered to be in precedence the third highest monarchial rank in the western world, after "Emperor" and "King" or "Queen"; in many eastern European languages (Russian, Lithuanian etc) called "Grand Prince" Grand Prince, ruler of a grand principality; a title primarily used in the medieval Russian principalities; it was also used by the Romanovs of the Russian Empire for members of the imperial family, although more commonly translated into English as Grand Duke Duke, ruler of a duchy,A duke who is not actually or formerly sovereign, or a member of a reigning or formerly reigning dynasty, such as British, French, Portuguese, Spanish and most Italian dukes, is a non-dynastic noble ranking above a marquis. also for junior members of ducal and some grand ducal families Prince, Prinz in German; junior members of a royal, grand ducal, ruling ducal or princely, or mediatised family. The title of Fürst was usually reserved, from the 19th century, for rulers of principalities—the smallest sovereign entities (e.g., Liechtenstein, Lippe, Schwarzburg, Waldeck-and-Pyrmont) -- and for heads of high-ranking, noble but non-ruling families (Bismarck, Clary und Aldringen, Dietrichstein, Henckel von Donnersmarck, Kinsky, Paar, Pless, Thun und Hohenstein, etc.). Cadets of these latter families were generally not allowed to use Prinz, being accorded only the style of count (Graf) or, occasionally, that of Fürst (Wrede, Palffy d'Erdod) even though it was also a ruling title. Exceptional use of Prinz was permitted for some morganatic families (e.g., Battenberg, Montenuovo) and a few others (Carolath-Beuthen, Biron von Kurland). In particular Crown prince, Kronprinz in German, was reserved for the heir apparent of an emperor or king Dauphin, title of the crown prince of the royal family of France, as he was the de jure ruler of the Dauphiné region in southeastern France (under the authority of the King) Infante, title of the cadet members of the royal families of Portugal and Spain Elector, Kurfürst in German, a rank for those who voted for the Holy Roman Emperor, usually sovereign of a state (e.g. the Margrave of Brandenburg, an elector, called the Elector of Brandenburg) Marquess, Margrave, or Marquis (literally "Count of a March" (=Border territory)) was the ruler of a marquessate, margraviate, or march Landgrave (literally "Land Count"), a German title, ruler of a landgraviate Count, theoretically the ruler of a county; known as an Earl in modern Britain; known as a Serdar in Montenegro and Serbia Viscount (vice-count), theoretically the ruler of a viscounty or viscountcy Freiherr a German word meaning literally "Free Master" or "Free Lord" (i.e. not subdued to feudal chores or drudgery) is the German equivalent of the English term "Baron", with the important difference that unlike the British Baron, he is not a "Peer of the Realm" (member of the high aristocracy)Meyers Taschenlexikon Geschichte 1982, vol 1, p22 & vol 2, p198 Baron, theoretically the ruler of a barony – some barons in some countries may have been "free barons" (liber baro) and as such, regarded (themselves) as higher barons. Baronet is a hereditary title ranking below Baron but above Knight; this title is granted only in the British Isles and does not confer nobility. Dominus was the Latin title of the feudal, superior and mesne, lords, and also an ecclesiastical and academical title (equivalent of Lord) Vidame, a minor French aristocrat Vavasour, also a petty French feudal lord Seigneur or Knight of the Manor rules a smaller local fief Knight is the basic rank of the aristocratic system Patrician is a dignity of minor nobility or gentry (most often being hereditary) usually ranking below Knight but above Esquire Fidalgo or Hidalgo is a minor Portuguese and Spanish aristocrat (respectively; from filho d'algo, lit. son of wealth, mediaeval Galician-Portuguese "algo" = wealth, riches, fortune, nowadays "algo" = something) Nobile (aristocracy) is an Italian title of nobility for prestigious families that never received a title Principalía the aristocratic class of Filipino nobles, through whom the Spanish Monarchs ruled the Philippines during the colonial period (c. 1600s to 1898). Edler is a minor aristocrat in Germany and Austria during those countries' respective imperial periods. Jonkheer is an honorific for members of noble Dutch families that never received a title; An untitled noblewoman is styled Jonkvrouw, though the wife of a Jonkheer is a Mevrouw or, sometimes, Freule, which could also be used by daughters of the same Skartabel is a minor Polish aristocrat. Scottish Baron is a hereditary feudal nobility dignity, outside the Scots peerage, recognised by Lord Lyon as a member of the Scots noblesse and ranking below a Knight but above a Scottish LairdRuling of the Court of the Lord Lyon (26/2/1948, Vol. IV, page 26): "With regard to the words 'untitled nobility' employed in certain recent birthbrieves in relation to the (Minor) Baronage of Scotland, Finds and Declares that the (Minor) Barons of Scotland are, and have been both in this nobiliary Court and in the Court of Session recognised as a 'titled nobility' and that the estait of the Baronage (i.e. Barones Minores) are of the ancient Feudal Nobility of Scotland".There are actually three Scottish dignities that are types of a Scottish Baron; these are (in descending order of rank): Scottish feudal Earl, Scottish Feudal Lord, and Scottish feudal Baron (the general name for the dignity listed above among the ranks of aristocratic gentry). in the British system. However, Scottish Barons on the European continent are considered and treated equal to European barons. Laird is a Scottish hereditary feudal dignity ranking below a Scottish Baron but above an Esquire Esquire is a rank of gentry originally derived from Squire and indicating the status of an attendant to a knight or an apprentice knight; it ranks below Knight (or in Scotland below Laird) but above GentlemanThe meaning of the title Esquire became (and remains) quite diffuse, and may indicate anything from no aristocratic status, to some official government civil appointment, or (more historically) the son of a knight or noble who had no other title above just Gentleman.In the United States, where there is no nobility, the title esquire is sometimes arrogated (without any governmental authorization) by lawyers admitted to the state bar. Junker is a noble honorific, meaning "young nobleman" or otherwise "young lord" Gentleman is the basic rank of gentry, historically primarily associated with land or manorial lords; within British Commonwealth nations it is also roughly equivalent to some minor nobility of some continental European nations Bibi, means Miss in Urdu and is frequently used as a respectful title for women in South Asia when added to the given name Clergy, Ecclesiastical Addresses, Prince of the church Courtesy title False titles of nobility Forms of address in the United Kingdom Nobiliary particle Petty kingdom Royal and noble styles Hereditary titles Unequal and Morganatic Marriages in German Law Noble, Princely, Royal, and Imperial Titles British noble titles Fake titles
