  Rutland is a village located mostly in LaSalle County that stretches into Marshall County, Illinois, United States. It is part of the Ottawa&ndash;Streator Micropolitan Statistical Area, and at the 2000 census, the population was 354. The village was founded by Jacob Griffin as New Rutland in 1855 when Griff killed all the natives approximately 200 members of the Vermont Emigration Association paid $10 each for a plot of land. The original location of the town-site was exclusively within LaSalle county. However, an additional ten blocks of land was added October 20, 1856 that was located primarily in adjacent Marshall County. Donated by Jim Flynn, HISTORICAL SKETCHES OF EARLY RUTLAND, IL, Taken from the Rutland Record Centennial Edition (1955). The long defunct Rutland Record was revived for a single 20-page centennial issue on August 4. Much historical information from the Record's files was well organized into the articles. "" The Section House mentioned in these stories was a bunkhouse built by the Illinois Central on the way through here. It was a lone landmark at the time, pre-dating Rutland by a couple years. It stood just north of the mine dump where the little pond is now. This house became the first permanent Flynn home. It stayed in the family for 3 generations. My dad and his brother were born in this house. The T&E RR was actually the Toluca, Marquette, and Northern. It ran from Rutland to Toluca, then north to Spring Valley. It was owned by Charles Devlin, who also owned the Toluca coal mine and many other properties. There was no connection to the I.C. at Rutland. Park View Hall was an early church, school, jail, firehouse, and finally a town hall. It stood where the water works is now, north of the park. Two fires in the 1890s destroyed most of the original main street. The hotel stood on the corner where Harolds restaurant was. There was a stable behind for guest use. The G. A. Austin bldg is the corner one across the street north from Harold's.""Jim Flynn commentary of information originally published in the Rutland Record Centennial Edition (1955). "My first run over the ground where Rutland stands was in '53 or '54 probably. I think there were no other houses between Wenona and Minonk than the old Section House south of the town site (not occupied), the Dresser house near the Santa Fe crossing and Abram Allen's cabin south of Wenona. At this time Wenona was an aspiring city of three or four residents, shacks included, and a hotel, not quite so large and complete in all its appointments as the Grand Pacific or Palmer, but had lots of room to grow and to make other needed improvements. At this date the railway locomotives were burning wood as a principal fuel, for the storing of which long sheds had been erected. During the snow blockades of those early winters, trains could often reach Wenona from the north, where they had to be side tracked for an indefinite time to await the opening of the road south. Passengers could make themselves fairly comfortable by sleeping in the cars, but they had to be fed, and two or three trains of passengers would in a day exhaust the resources of the town, and it was arranged for the engines to bring provisions from LaSalle. I left 12 or 14 men in the cut, about where the Rutland depot now stands, in snow 5 to 8 feet deep while I walked to Wenona at 2 o'clock A. M. to meet an engine bringing provisions to have breakfast taken to the men. At another time three engines attached came with a large number of men and got as far as the third cut south, the Sullivan cut, where they got stuck in many feet of snow, the wind began to blow and in time became furiously cold. One engine was dug out, but no human effort could save the other two. The men were told to try to reach Wenona before dark, but some were late and many were frost bitten, but among the passengers on the siding were two M. D.s, who freely provided what assistance they could. We got a team to bring a load of straw, which was spread on the floor of the waiting room at the depot, where the men slept, and after breakfast were all right. It was in December that while the Wadleighs were completing the top of one chimney of their dwelling, casting a look to the north, a number of teams were seen wending toward Rutland, and upon their approach we discovered what appeared to be a funeral procession, and which in fact it proved to be, conveying the remains of a son of L. W. Cooley, a colonist who had found a living place in Wenona as a temporary home. Young Cooley's remains were the first to be buried in the cemetery ground at Rutland. Wolves were quite plentiful in those early days, and at the request of Mr. and Mrs. Cooley, we visited the spot where the interment was made quite often, that we might assure those parents that no harm had occurred to the grave of their son. The first sermon preached in Rutland was by Rev. Wm. Dunn of Wenona in 1856. The few citizens then here, together with the congregated mechanics, extemporized a hall in the loft at the hotel stable, seated it with plank, and at a named hour assembled and listened to a very good discourse. There was not much singing for want of books. Very few ladies attended, but quite a gathering of men, and time was very pleasantly spent for two hours..... While awaiting the arrival of our household goods and the lumber with which to build, I was free to roam the country which was full of novelty to an Easterner. The prairie was unbroken in every direction with the exception of about ten acres on the high ground west of town, where John H. Brevoort's residence now stands. This was broken the summer before and a well was dug by Abram Mullin, who soon sold the land to Mr. Burns. Aside from this small patch of breaking, the prairie as far as the eye could see was in its natural state, untouched by the hand of man. It was dotted all over with pond holes or little lakes, at that time full of water, in which sported flocks of wild geese and ducks. Great sandhill cranes abounded, flying in circles high in the air and emitting their harsh piercing notes, or stalking along some high ridge, looming up in the distance like long-legged giants. Scarcely a day passed that deer were not seen, a herd of a dozen or more passing over the railroad near the hotel, while the men were at work on the building. I have a vivid recollection of my frequent journeys to the Vermillion coal banks during the winters of 1856 and 1857. This was our only source of supply for coal in those days. The road nearly all the way from Rutland to Ancona was a mere wagon track across the unbroken prairie. There was such a rush for coal, that in order to be sure of getting a load in proper season, it was necessary to start as early as three o'clock in the morning, so as to be at the bank as soon as operations began for the day. Even then we were likely to have to wait till a score or more of earlier arrivals had secured their loads. The usually traveled track ran in a northeasterly direction, a mile or so north of the house of George Gray, which then stood alone, miles from any other. Not a hedge or fence, or a house, or a tree was to be seen until the improvements near Ancona were reached. Those lonely rides under the bright frosty stars, often with the thermometer far below zero, the unoccupied prairie stretching off for miles on either side of the ribbon-like track the faithful horses were striving to follow, were rather trying to the nerves of the beardless boy from village and school life in the East..... A large amount of prairie was broken in the vicinity of Rutland in 1856 and 1857. Most of the new comers did something at it. Ira Moore, John and Daniel Wadleigh, Willard Proctor, Pliny Moore and myself ran breaking plows the first spring. I broke about fifty acres on my father's land between two and three miles south of Rutland. Rattlesnakes abounded in the prairie grass. I killed a number while at work, and heard the ominous rattle of many more. Deer were frequently in sight, and a number of them sampled the contents of my lunch basket one day, while I was following the team at the other end of the strip a quarter of a mile away..... In undertaking a job of breaking soil near Lostant for the late Judge Parrett of Wenona, notwithstanding that cloth covers were provided for the horses, the green headed horse flies so annoyed and distracted the team that I was literally compelled to throw up the job..... The years '59 to '62, owing to the damaged condition of our finances, wildcat and state bank currency and low prices of farm products, made it pretty hard on some of the new settlers, and some of the weaker ones had to succumb and leave the country, but in a short time an era of prosperity came on, and the town and country around filled up rapidly with people from different states and Europe..... On the 6th of June I was united in marriage to Miss Sarah Stafford, who came with me on my third trip to Illinois, to share the labors of pioneer life. We reached my uncle Joel Skelton's on the 9th of August, 1851. The work of building a small house on the southwest corner of section 8 in later Bennington Twp. was completed soon. One room served as kitchen, parlor, and bedroom, and such constituted our home for two years, when we built on a small addition. Here the sod was turned over, large crops of corn, wheat and potatoes were grown. I delivered my first shelled corn to the Wenona station, 800 bushels in gunny sacks, which had been purchased by Palmer & Maxwell in Lacon. I also sold 15 bushels of potatoes to the section boss of Minonk. Getting lost on the prairie was of frequent occurrence. George Potts, while returning to my place with a load of timber, became so bewildered that he made several circles almost as round as a hoop, as the wagon track afterward showed. He finally found the way to L. Moulton's and was taken in almost frozen. An old lady and her son were lost one dark night about a half mile southwest of our place and no doubt would have perished, had I not found them on my way home from a prayer meeting and taken them in and kept them until morning."Rutland Record Centennial Edition (1955) (originally published in the Rutland Record, 24 July 1897). Winter began early in 1880, the month of November marked by waydown temperatures. It is noted that the mercury ran from six to eight degrees below zero from the 13th to the 23rd, the coldest for that time ever known here. On the 21st, ice raining commenced, the ice running from ten to twelve inches thick. On the 28th the mercury stood at 30 degrees below zero. For much of the time in December the temperature was from 10 to 20 degrees below. On January 10, 1881, the registry was 27 below. From this date to February 12 there were many heavy snowfalls. On the 27th the greatest rain and snow storm on record blocked all train and wagon roads, no trains moving for two days. On March 2 there began a snowstorm that lasted forty-eight hours and hit all roads so completely that not a train arrived or departed for five days. Fierce winds drove the snow into drifts from six to twelve feet in depth. On the highways carriages were obliged in many places to detour through fields. On March 18 another big snow storm came, shutting up the railroads again until the evening of the 22nd. No Chicago papers were received for five days. Big drifts remained into April and the weather was of the freezing kind. On April 11 it snowed all day and another downfall came on the 12th. Up to May 9 much snow was left. New Rutland Local, October, 1872 Many of our citizens have met, if they are not already acquainted with a tall, sprightly and genial old gentleman, who is during fair weather frequently seen on our streets, or often to be found about the store of Samuel Dorsey Jr. This is Samuel Dorsey Sr., who on the twelfth day of the present month, entered on his 85th year, having been born in Baltimore County, Maryland in 1789. Of Father Dorsey's eleven children, six by his first and five by his second marriage, nine are now living. He now has 102 grand and great-grandchildren, making his living descendants number in all 111. He remembers well of seeing Gen. George Washington during his passage through Baltimore in the spring of 1797, then on his way from Philadelphia to his home at Mt. Vernon. He describes him on that occasion as seated in a carriage drawn by six black horses, which were driven by three colored lads, one riding on each near horse. On February 10, 1851, the Illinois Central extension was chartered from Cairo, Illinois northward to Galena. When this section was completed in 1858, the I.C. boasted 705 miles of track. It was the longest railroad in the world. McLean County sought to collect property tax on railroad right-of-way holdings within the county. If McLean were successful, other counties would follow suit, thereby imposing a financial burden so great as to make the company's continued existence impossible. Attorney Abraham Lincoln was hired by the I.C. to represent its interests in this case. In 1856, after two years of litigation, the Illinois Supreme Court decided in favor of the railroad. Lincoln tendered a bill of $5,000, which was the largest fee he ever received for attorney services. The tracks were laid at a tremendous amount of labor and loss of life. Workers and their families lived in tents, moving as the road progressed. The men worked from first light until dark, six days a week, given Sundays off for personal needs. Pay was higher in summer than in winter due to longer daylight hours, ranging from some ninety cents to a dollar and twenty-five cents per day. Malaria and cholera were frequent visitors to the camps. Railroad records at Peru, Illinois, during one severe outbreak, record 130 deaths in two days. The victim's final rest came often in a nameless grave along the roadway. A story belonging to Daniel Flynn, fortunate survivor, illustrates the severity of those days: On a payday morning, when construction was at a point between present day Lostant and Tonica, the men assembled to begin the day's work to discover that their Foreman and two crewmen were absent. Soon a section car approached the camp, with the missing crewmen in custody of the Foreman and Paymaster, having bound them as prisoners. The later pair had devised a plan to flee with the payroll, leaving the entire crew at loss, but somehow drew suspicion and were captured in the act. As punishment for their intended deed, and in plain view of all the camp, the two bound men were thrown to the crossties and were beheaded with an axe. The axemen delivered the payroll, took their fair earnings for the period, and fled. Rutland station shipped during the month of April, 4,100,000 pounds of freight at an expense of about $5,000; during the week ending May 8, 1,600,000 pounds, at an expense of over $2,000; and during the week ending last Friday, 2,000,000 pounds were forwarded at an expense of $3,400. Up to one day last week, our station had issued this month 178 way bills, to 90 at Wenona, and yet our energetic agent, J. M. Shannon, is not allotted an assistant, which he greatly needs and in justice deserves. During the month of May past, about 365 car loads of grain were shipped from Rutland station, which, with other freight amounted to 7,415,765 pounds, on which the charges were $12,245. The passenger train going north and the south one at night have been withdrawn, and hereafter the mid-day freights will have a passenger coach attached. New Rutland Times, June 21, 1876 It rained seven days last week and was cold enough for snow part of the time. It was learned that the wheat crop is about ruined with the rain. Corn is injured considerably by the continued wet weather, and in some places the hail cut it to the ground. It is said that the Vermillion river was higher last Friday than it has been for 18 years. Laborers' wages are $1.50 to $1.75 per day. Work plenty. The market quotations are: Shelled corn, 25« cents; live hogs, $7.00; eggs, 10 cents; butter, 17 cents; common lumber, $10 per M. Where is the new board? Aren't they going to look after the sidewalks and street crossings? The crossing to the town pump is in a horrible condition. August 6, 1874 The coal shaft has recently been placed under the management of John Brevoort, who proceeds at once to put things in order for business. Our citizens are finding the New Rutland coal by far the healthiest and most profitable to burn, and after a few days there will be a constant supply kept on hand. September 10, 1874 Died: At New Rutland, Tuesday, Sept. 1st Henry, infant son of Andrew and Mary Winans, aged 5 months. At New Rutland, Friday, Sept. 4th Sarah A., youngest daughter of Moses P. and Ellen Ames. Aged 16 mo. At New Rutland, Saturday, Sept. 5th Theodore, only child of Levi and Jennie Bishop. Aged 1 year and 3 months. Saturday, December 17, 1895 The roads in this part of Illinois are in their worst stages. Last Monday proved almost impossible to drive through the streets of town. A solid freeze is what the farmers want to see the most of anything else, as they want to get their corn to market. Taken From the Rutland Record, Feb. 10, 1900 On October 20, 1855, we stepped from the car onto the platform at Wenona for the first time. In company with Mr. Burns, who was at that time making his headquarters at Uncle Charles Brown's Hotel, we engaged supper, lodging and board for a week. Sunday the 21st, we attended Church at the Presbyterian Chapel, then located about two or three squares west of the station house. Services were conducted by Rev. Dunn at 10:30&nbsp;a.m., there being no services in the afternoon. D. F. Wadleigh and your correspondent walked over the 4 miles of railroad track to the site of where now is located the very pretty village of Rutland. Coming as we both had from a state where hills were high and plenty, one can imagine our great surprise at seeing no elevation of land or boulders in our walk; but we quite lost our wit in surprise and wonder when we saw just ahead, as they rose in flight, what seemed to us then a good million of wild ducks and somewhere half as many geese and sand hill cranes. We walked over the location, viewed all that could be seen, then returned to Brown's for supper, going by railroad track, same as we had traveled down, for the good reason that there was no other road by which to march. Rutland Record 1904 William Maher had recovered from a severe illness. His daughter, Mrs. Elizabeth Cumerford, visited him. Arthur Wise was working for the Kankakee Construction Co. who was putting in sidewalks in Minonk. Charles Barclay bought a home in Rutland. Mrs. Mary Calvetti visited in Coal City. Miss Elizabeth Schmillen and Albert Weiland were the winners of prizes at a card party in Calvetti's Hall. Miss Nona Boyd and Ethele Roe secured the services of Theodore Rowland and his team, and on Saturday took their Sunday school classes of boys to the Sandy timber. On the return trip home they discovered that two of the piles in the Santa Fe bridge north of town were on fire, and Mr. Rowland and the boys put out the fire. Perhaps a wreck was averted, who knows. Many sensible horsemen are training their horses to approach motor vehicles without fear. William G. Sutton leased the Minonk Coal Mine from M. T. Ames. The Central Illinois Telephone has a notice that hereafter, patrons must call by number. The Cinnamon-Nelson corn sheller made record between 7 a.m. and 5:30 by shelling 5165 bushels of corn, the sheller being moved 2« miles during that time. A county seat editor says he prefers living in a small town, where the people will sympathize with you in trouble, and if you haven't any troubles, they will hunt some up for you! Dr. S. G. Peterson moved this week from over the P. H. Morris store to the fine new office rooms in the second story of G. L. Austin's new brick building, one of the best suite of rooms in the city. Winnie Watts had a birthday party at her home east of Rutland. Among the games was a crackerjack eating contest won by George Wakeman and Bertha Schafer. Otto Steinke, brother of Lewis Steinke, died of typhoid. William Temple is recovering from the effects of falling to the bottom of a well. Dr. Wm. Schoenneschofer of Lostant bought a fine bay team from Wiley Marshall. Venis Copp has purchased of Daniel Flynn an acre of land lying south of Mrs. G. Lutton's, and will erect a house. The lumber arrived Monday. Carl Witte returned from Chicago. He had an operation on his eye. Baer, Dawe, Witte, Quaintance, Maher, and Gray were aldermen. P. H. Morris was clerk, W. G. Sutton, president. Father Bobkiewicz gave a lecture on Temperance in Park View Hall. Wilson Mateer's little girl, Ellen, was tipped out of a cart and had her collar bone broken. Esta Foucht fractured his arm while playing "crack the whip". Frank Bederski and Celia Bobkiewicz were married. F. Z. Ames brought home a new 16 H. P. Rambler. The Record says "It is of good size with canopy top and will seat five persons. It is painted a carmine color and is run by gasoline." Mr. and Mrs. E. H. Golder's daughter Lorena broke her arm. Wm. Quaintance was a caller in Streator, attending the monthly horse sale. Ada Cheatham, a colored girl, died of consumption. The deceased had a beautiful voice and had taken part in services in the Methodist church. Bert Sauer and Miss Bertha Ensign were married. Katie and Annabel Fallon of Chicago are visiting with their relatives north of town. Ed Golder and Virgil Busroe are painting in Wenona. An automobile passed through Rutland, reportedly traveling from Wisconsin to St. Louis. The mud was bad, but they had the rear wheels bound with rope and attained a speed of 40 miles an hour. Harry Hakes entered high school. The enrollment was 45. Gus Mailander and two sisters, riding in a buggy, locked wheels with a phaeton occupied by Wiley Marshall. The Mailander's horse was thrown, one wheel broken, and the buggy otherwise damaged, but no one was injured. The population of Rutland had almost doubled in the last ten years - 1037 in 1902. The Republicans chartered the T. & E. train and gave a free ride to all who wished to hear Gov. Tanner speak at Toluca. A coach and five boxcars were used to haul the crowd. Nearly eighty people came up from Minonk. The play "Down in Dixie" was given with Henry Baer in the leading role of Colonel Harvey Wells, and Bert Wilson as Uncle Mosley, "faithful slave." Park View Hall was packed, standing room was all taken, and the sale of tickets stopped. Miss May Pleshe of Rutland and Tony Rachke of Toluca were married. Mr. and Mrs. Frank Copp were the attendants. Over $5400 was paid out to the coal shaft employees this week. There were 230 names on the pay roll. Charles W. Blandin was born in Vermont and came to Illinois in 1855. His wife was Deborah Johnson. He last resided on a farm north of Rutland and broke ninety acres in 1856 and built his first house, 16 feet square boarded up and down. His only neighbors were George Dresser and S. L. Bangs. Moving into the village of Rutland in 1863, he established a drug business which was later carried on by his only son, Fremont. Fremont, educated in law at Ann Arbor, was prominent in village life until his death. His wife was May Stanley of Streator. Vera McBride of Grand Ridge, Ann King and Fremont Blandin of Springfield, Leda Rowland of Decatur, and Stanley Blandin of near Chicago, are their children. Zimri F. Ames was born in York County, Maine on July 10, 1824. On March 1, 1858, he was married to Julia Fogg. He came to Marshall County Illinois, in the year 1857 and bought railroad land at $2O per acre. The following year he built a house on the farm, and it was there that he and his wife first lived. In 1867 he left the farm and built a large house in Rutland where he lived with his only son, Frank, and family. (This is the house where the John Young family lived, which burned in 1953.) Mr. Ames was an active and staunch temperance worker, and was a highly esteemed and worthy citizen. He and his wife were among the first members of the Rutland Advent Church. Frank Z. Ames, son of the pioneer, Zimri Ames, was for years one of Rutland's most progressive businessmen. He operated a grain business, and was later president of the Rutland Bank after M. C. Roe disposed of his interests. He was one of those who were instrumental in forming a company to give telephone service to the community. His wife was Hetty Duchesne. He had one sister, Mary, wife of Ed Whipple. Some years ago, Mr. Ames removed to Peoria with his family, and was associated with the Green Farm Management Service for many years. Always being active in church work, he is now chairman of the board of trustees of the First Methodist Church in Peoria. He owns several farms near Rutland and in his younger days resided on the farm. He was one of the first to build up the soil of his farms, which, like practically all farms in this area, had been depleted by crops grown for almost a century. Mr. Ames' daughters, Alta and Edna, reside with him. He has two sons, John of Minonk, and Kenneth, who is District Sales Manager of the Plains States for the Caterpillar Company of Peoria. One of the families who came here in the early days was that of Seneca Austin. He was born in New York. For a time he conducted a lumber yard and later a general store in which his son, George, became a partner. This store stood on the corner where Gapen's hardware store is located and the present building was erected by Mr. G. L. Austin. George Austin was married to Katherine Shull, a member of a pioneer family. Their four children Leslie, Fernie, Caro, and Ruth attended school here, Caro graduating in the class with Mae Craig and Katherine Schmillen. Soon after that Mr. Austin removed to Freeport. The two older children are deceased. He built the brick house which is part of the Rutland Nursing Home and his parents, who lived to a good old age, resided in part of it. George's brother Daniel lived on his farm east of Rutland and later moved to the home where Sheldon Rowland resides. His farm is the property of one of the Esbon Coons family. Mr. Coons was Daniel Austin's son-in-law. Nelson Cooper, born in Maryland, came west in the early "50"s, the trip being made overland in wagons. He was married to Maria Jacobsen, and the early years of their marriage were spent in and around Rutland, where he was engaged in the carpenter trade, building some of the earliest structures in this vicinity. He enlisted in Co. I, 1O4th Vol. Inf. In 1868 he bought the farm east of town now owned by Henry Janssen and it was Mr. Cooper's home until his death. One daughter, Mrs. Amy Fougeron, survives. Aaron Baker and his wife Katherine Nelson, natives of New York, after living for a time in Marshall Co., came to Groveland in 1859. After a few years he became the owner of the farm now part of the Dr. Peterson estate, where his grandson Leslie Baker now lives, and which John Baker owned for many years, later moving to California. One son William was a resident of Rutland in his later years. Thomas Boyd was an early settler, living on the Ervin farm northeast of Rutland until his death in 1894. Of his family, Edward K. and his wife who was Edna Price of Streator, live on their farm in this same area. One son, R. J. Boyd, was a resident of Rutland until his death. One daughter, Miss Mae Boyd, was an efficient teacher in the Rutland schools for thirty-two years and was highly respected by her pupils. She still lives here. S. L. Bangs was born in Massachusetts. His ancestors came from England in 1625, and his father was a soldier of the Revolution. He settled in 1856 on what has been known as the Bangs farm east of here. His daughter Sarah was a teacher in the early days as was Ed Bangs, who became prominent in the educational field in Illinois. One daughter married Dr. Hattan of Peru, and another, Frank Ireland, banker of Washburn, where a number of descendants reside. Members of this family also live in Lostant. Mr. Charles Cusac was born in Ohio. After his marriage to Louisa Smith, and service in the Civil War, he came to Marshall Co. He purchased a farm in Bennington Township in 1887 where his son Grant later resided. When he came to Illinois in 1865, he made the entire journey in a wagon, bringing his household goods, while his family came by train. He was the grandfather of Ray Cusac Sr. and Mrs. Edna Drummet. Absolom Cox, a native of West Virginia, came to Groveland Township in l867. He and his wife, Jennie Gabbert had no capital, but were people of industry and determined purpose, and acquired 16O acres of land. At one time Mr. Cox cradied wheat at the rate of four acres a day, and his wife did the binding. One daughter, Mrs. Ellen Livingston, resides in Minonk. Greenbury F. Crumrine whose wife was Mary A. Wilson was an early settler, coming to Rutland in 1866. Only one son, David, a mason by trade, lived in or near Rutland until his death. His son Ernest, who follows his father's occupation is assessor for Groveland Township and another son, William, was manager of the General Telephone Co. in this village for over twenty years until recently being transferred to Kewanee. John Drummet, a native of Germany, came to LaSalle Co. in 1864, and being a man of industry and enterprise, became the owner of a number of farms before his death. One son, Charles, who married Etta Sass, was a resident of the Rutland community until his death, and was prominent in business, school, and church activities, as was one daughter Katherine and husband Alfred Mateer, who later moved to Sterling. One son of John Drummet, William, became a Christian minister. Three grandsons, Ralph, Wayne, and Walter own and operate farms in the Rutland and Dana area, Wayne living on the home farm of his grandfather. Mrs. Charles Drummet is still a resident of Rutland. Thomas Dawes came to Rutland in 1865 and became a member of the firm of Brevoort and Dawes, hardware dealers. Later Mr. Brevoort sold out his interest to Mr. Dawes who successfully carried on the business until Feb. 1, 1895, when the building and stock were destroyed by fire. He built a new store building but retired from active business life. William Rohrer and son Fred were owners of the store in later years. In the building is now the Royal Blue Store. Mr. Dawes was one of Rutland's highly respected citizens and merchants.  He resided in his later years with his daughter, Mrs. Cordelia O'Neil on his farm east of Rutland. Dr. W. O. Ensign, descendant of Wm. Bradford of the Mayflower Pilgrims, spent his boyhood at the edge of the village of Madison, Ohio. After his education and service in the Civil War, he began the practice of medicine in New Rutland, continuing for almost forty-eight years. A successful doctor, he was also widely known in medical societies and veterans' organizations. His son, Herbert S. Ensign, a graduate of Knox College, became the editor of the Rutland Record. A man of high principles, he took an active part in the church, school and political activities of the village until his death. Dr. Ensign's wife, Frances J. Almy, was the daughter of an early physician, Dr. Henry A. Almy, with whom W. O. Ensign began the study of medicine. Dr. Almy lived in the home now occupied by Ernest Bridgeforth and Dr. Ensign in the Tucker home. Daniel Flynn, a native of Ireland, came to America in 1848. As a lad he lost both parents and two sisters to cholera, and the remaining children of the family were separated to foster homes. He hired aboard a ship bound for the United States, which, in the Atlantic crossing, was nearly lost in a storm. He landed in Baltimore, Maryland, and soon after married Anna Shea, of similar origin.  He assisted in the building of railroads in the East, and arrived in Chicago in 1850. In 1852 the family was living in Ottawa when cholera broke out and they moved to LaSalle and he began to work on the Illinois Central, which was being constructed through this area. In 1868 he came to Rutland. He was between 97 and 100 when he died at the home of his son John of Auburn. James F. and Tom Flynn of Rutland are his grandsons. Michael Ford, a prosperous farmer whose wife Ellen was a sister to John Loftus, came to Rutland in 1872 and took up residence north of Rutland where he lived until his death in 1915. His descendants own several farms in this area. One daughter Mary, who lived in Chicago for many years, is now a highly esteemed resident of this village. William Frink, born in Vermont in 1825, came to Illinois in 1855 but moved to Rutland in l859. He followed the occupation of farming until 1865 when he took up and continued to follow the wheelwright trade. A man of integrity, he was elected Justice of the Peace in 1889 and served as such until his death. One daughter, Jeanette, made her home in Rutland. Edward Golder was an expert painter and decorator and had many customers in surrounding towns. His wife was Jennie Willoughby. Mr. Golder was chairman of the committee who built the Methodist Chnrch, which was destroyed by fire. His excellent taste was shown in the finished edifice. His brother, Dell, was associated with him but later moved to California. Mr. Ed. Golder's daughter, Mrs. Lorena Buckingham, resides in California. Hale Parkhurst Jackson was born in Unity, Maine, and in that state enlisted in the Union Army. In 1868 he moved to Illinois and in 1876 moved to Iowa, returning to Rutland in 1883. He purchased the farm northwest of Rutland from the Kirkaldies who moved farther west. Of his several children, Frank H., lived in or near Rutland during his lifetime, where he was engaged in farming and raising of pedigreed stock and was a prominent auctioneer and later a merchant. His son, Hale Parkhurst, namesake of his grandfather, followed the occupation of his father, later becoming an insurance agent, and took an active part in politics until his sudden death this year. Two of his sisters, Mrs. Leila Bane and Mrs. Arthur Craig, reside here, and his wife, Ida, and daughter, Helen Fechter. Lewis Kelly, a native of Canada, came to Illinois in 1865, locating in or near Rutland. His first meal was eaten in the home of Dr. Allen. He and his father built an elevator, and he conducted a grain business, and for many years farmed the land along the Ill. Central right of way. In 1868 and 69, he told of attending a land sale in Minonk where land sold for less than $5 an acre. ln 1876 in the Rutland Christian Church he married Elizabeth Rohrer, and in 1925, forty-nine years later, he was buried from the church. His children left Rutland early in life. Walter, a brakeman, was injured while at work. He, for years, lived in Minonk and was agent for the Illinois Central. The only living children are Mrs. Lura Cox and Charles Kelly. The family resided in the home now owned by Mrs. Margaret Littlejohn. Peter Lutz, a native of Germany, father of Henry Lutz and grandfather of Peter Lutz, who lives on his farm north of Rutland, came to LaSalle Co. in 1855. He was a practical progressive farmer and an advocate of education. His wife was Katrina Heeder Houps. John Loftus, a native of Ireland, came from Baltimore in 1862 and settled two miles east of Rutland where his son John and Mrs. Anna Barclay and daughter now live. Prosperity attended him in his vocation as a farmer. One son, Michael, now deceased, was supervisor in Groveland township for many years, also a member of the school board for some time, and was active in political circles and community activities. A daughter, Hannah, was a teacher in Rutland. Richard Everetts was born in Vermont in 1837 and lived there until 1858 when he was married to Miss Johanna Welsh, and the young couple came west and settled near New Rutland. Mr. Everetts took up farming and followed it several years, then moved to the village. He enlisted in 1862 in Co. I of the 104th Illinois Volunteers Infantry. He saw hard service for two years and ten months, and took part in the Grand Review at Washington at the close of the war. Only one daughter of Mr. Everetts, Mrs. Nettie Rohrer, in her ninetieth year, survives. She was born in Rutland, and was for many years a resident, taking an active part in church and social life. At the death of her husband Charles, she took up residence in Minonk, where her daughter Mrs. Eairel Rowe lives. Frank Trs, son-in-law of Mr. Everetts, resides in Rutland. His wife was Lulu Everetts Rudiger. Miss Sara Everetts spent her life here except for a few years in Minonk with a niece, Helen Dishinger. Paul Florin, brother of Mrs. G. A. Sauer, for many years conducted a furniture and undertaking business. One son, Henry, is now a funeral director in Michigan. Lewis Farner, born in Germany in 1825, came to America in 1852, having had a long voyage of fifty days. A man of industry, he was first employed in Buffalo, later in LaSalle, Ill., but finally settled in Marshall Co., where he first purchased eighty acres of land, adding to this from time to time until his death. His wife was Annie Reef. His three children, Lewis, John, and Mrs. Mary Vincore, wife of Richard Vinecore, spent their adult lives in this community, taking an active part in church and community life. Lewis Farner was for twenty years a member of the Rutland school board. His grandson Robert, son of Fred Farner, is a 1955 graduate of medical school. Mr. and Mrs Garrett Lutton came to Rutland from Delta, Ohio in 1868. Four children, Mrs Prudence Tarbell, Mrs. Ruby Harris, Mrs Maggie Updegraff, and Ramsey Lutton resided here until death.  One grand daughter, Miss Bessie Kay, is the only descendant who maintains a home here. James Kelley, a native of Canada, at the age of 2O came to Illinois and found employment on the farm of William Gray and later worked for Richard Vinecore, Sr. He married in 1870 his employer's daughter, Martha Jane. After two years he moved to the farm southwest of Rutland owned by him for many years and in later years retired to Rutland.  His son, LeRoy, now deceased, moved to Colorado, but his daughter, Mrs. Maude Vivian, has lived here for most of her life. Her son, Virgil, a business man of Rutland and a musician of exceptional talent, is generous with his time and talents in community life. He resides with his mother. One of the early settlers north of town was Charles Fallon and his wife, Rose Ann Young Fallon. Mrs. Fallon died when their children were quite young, but her husband lived until 1904. His son, Kerrie, who owns and lives on his  father's farm, has lived in this community all his life. He married Miss Frieda Fecht. Dr. George Washington Gray was born in Ohio in 1845 and came to a farm five miles east and one mile north of Rutland with his parents. When twenty-one he went back to Zanesville and qualified himself for the dental profession. In 1871 he married Miss Sybeila Parret of Wenona and they went to house keeping on the Gray farm. Later he came to Rutland and took up his profession and continued for thirty-one years. Of their four children, Ada Young Stubblefield was a successful school teacher, and Mrs. Mabel Richey, a teacher of music. Edward moved to Minonk and became a successful business man. Mrs Richey, the only surviving member of the family, resides in Princeton. The Ingram family was one which in the early days came from West Virginia. Seth Ingram was the father of Samuel, George, and Seth Jr., and of Mrs. Perry Hoskins, Mrs. George Dolan, and Mrs. Robert Dague, who resided here. The brothers owned and operated farms. The farm now occupied by H. A. Rowland is the property of Mrs. Mary Kuney Jr., descendants of George Ingram. They reside at Aurora. Most of the members of this family left Rutland in their later years, but Miss Frances Ingram is now a resident here. Mr. and Mrs. Patrick Keenan came to Illinois in 1855, moving to Marshall County in 1864, where they purchased the Baldwin farm west of Rutland and later moved to the village. They were the parents of a number of children. One, Mrs. Agnes Patten, spent her adult life in Rutland, and Mrs. Katharine Hines was a resident for many years. William Maher, born in Ireland in 1834, came to LaSalle Co. in 186O. His wife, Marie O'Mera, and four children came to be with him in 1863. He lived in Rutland almost forty years and during that time he purchased the old coal shaft and for a number of years conducted a coal mining business. Of his children, James, a business man also active in politics spent his life in Rutland. One descendant in Rutland is Mrs. Arch O'Neil who has been Post-mistress for more than twenty years. A daughter, Kate, wife of Albert Cinnamon, resided in the community until her death. Two persons well worthy of mention in the history of our village are two men who have spent considerable time here although not residents of Rutland. S. P. Jackson, father of J. W. Jackson, who assists his wife, Mrs. lda Jackson, in the operation of the Rutland Nursing Home, reached the ripe old age of 100 years on April 17. He spent several weeks here earlier in the summer, and walked over to the business section daily. The other man, who will reach 100 years of age August 5, is the Rev. John Davidson, father of Mrs. J. A. Andrews. The Andrews family moved to Corona, Calif. last February, and her father returned to Ohio after spending months here. Thomas Maloney and his wife, Bridget, went to live on the farm east of town, now tenanted by Melvin Matter, in 1872 and it continued to be their home until death. One son, John, lived in Rutland until his death. The daughter Nora married Thomas Brennan. Her children, Marie and Thomas own the home farm and other property in this vicinity but live near Wenona. John McKay, who conducted a watch and clock repair business in Rutland for years, was a native of Missouri. He married Miss Taylor in that state in 1869. She was the daughter of pioneers in this state and before her marriage was a teacher at Pleasant Valley country school. Mr. McKay lived until he was ninety-five, being the last survivor of the Civil War in the county. Even in advancing years he had a keen mind and his interesting conversation was livened by his unusual wit. The Rutland Record in August 1926 gives an account of his journey home after discharge from the army, at the age of about nineteen. He was in a hospital in Wisconsin and he wished to go to Ft. Scott, Kansas. There was only one rail road in Kansas, and the stage coach was his chief means of travel. There were floods and streams swollen and some bridges washed out, so the stage couldn't run and he was at times obliged to walk many miles to cross streams. Mr. McKay has two children living in Rutland, Mrs. Honas Decker and Mrs. Luella Butcher. Alfred, son of Col. H. Mateer of Pennsylvania, was born in that state and came to Illinois in the sixties. He served four years in the Civil War and saw most stenuous service, being twice severely wounded. In Rutland, he was active in the G. A. R. post, and the Chr Rutland, he was active in the G. A. R. post, and the Christian Church, and held a number of public offices. One daughter, Miss Frances, was a teacher in Rutland for a number of years. Mary was the wife of William Sutton; Alfred, a merchant, who married Miss Katherine Drummet, moved to Sterling; and John died early in life. One son, Wilson, lived in Rutland. Samuel T. McGough was a descendant of Miles McGough, who came to America in 1640. He was one of the colony under Lord Calvert, and landed at Baltimore. Samuel, born in Ohio, married Margarette Patten. In 1857 he came to Illinois, later acquiring land south of Rutland, residing there the remainder of his life, and his son John spent his lifetime there. John's son, Jerome, and his daughter-in-law Ethel, reside on their farms south of Rutland. William Marshall, a native of Pennsylvania, and his wife, Irene Stokes, came to Putnam Co. in 1857, and in 1862 moved to Marshall Co., locating southwest of Rutland. Two children, Fred, on the home farm, and Miss Lucy, spent their lives here. Only one descendant, Irvin Marshall, resides here. Abram Mullin, born in Ohio of Quaker parents, whose father came from Virginia, moved to Illinois with his wife Mary Rowland, and settled near Rutland in 1856. He broke the prairie on the farm now tenated by James Schmillen, which has been the property of the family since that time. One grandson, J. M. Rohrer, lives in Eureka, and another, Earl Mullin, a lifelong resident of Rutland is deceased. His widow, Mabel Boyd Mullin, resides here. James Marshall and wife of West Virginia settled in 1864 in Groveland Township. Their only son Wiley resided here until his death. His son Glenn was an ambulance driver in World War I and was severely wounded. He now resides in Michigan. She is also the grand daughter of Henry Nelson, who in the early days owned and operated the farm, the home of Ralph Drummet. Mr. Nelson, a native of New York, came here before the Civil War, enlisting after his marriage and was in active service. His daughter, Ida married Ramsy Lutton, and Gertrude, William Hoskins. Mr. Nelson participated in the Grand Review of troops at Washington, D. C. at the close of the war. Cornelius O'Neil and his wife came from Philadelphia to Chicago in 1865 and the next year moved to Rutland, later residing on their farm northeast of town. Mr. O'Neil, a highly respected citizen, died in 1899. The home farm is now the property of his daughter, Mrs. Cora Foster, of Toluca who as was, her sister, Mrs. Theresa Cumming, a teacher in Rutland. One son, William, lived all his life on a farm in the community. Mrs. Ella McAvoy resides in Springfield. In 1859 there came to Rutland Willard Proctor, who selected land, and in the spring of 1856 built himself a house on the S.E. quarter of section 12, now an Ames farm. Later the house was moved to the east side of the railroad land and occupied by L. W. Cooley, later by G. F. Crumrine. Mr. Proctor improved his farm and in the early '6O's built the house now known as the property of Mary Marshall. Mr. Proctor was a citizen well known and highly respected in Bennington, as also in the village of Rutland where he lived for several years after selling the farm to Mr. Samuel Dorsey, who came from West Virginia. Mr. Proctor was for a few years engaged in the grain trade. In 1862 he enlisted as 1st Lieutenant, Co. I, 1O4th Illinois Volunteers, and upon the retirement of Capt. Wadleigh from ill health, was promoted to the Captaincy of said Co., a position held until the close of the war. Miss Jeanette Frink married Warren Proctor, who was born in 1847. In 1884 he came to Illinois and made his home with his uncle, Capt. Willard Proctor, a highly esteemed citizen of New Rutland who had seen arduous duty in the Civil War. Warren Proctor learned the trade of mason with Cornelius Snider and being a good workman he plied his trade for many miles around until a few years before his death. The Proctor's had one child, Edna Harms, wife of Harm Harms, and four of their children residing in or near Rutland are among the fourth generation descendants of the Rutland pioneers. It was in the fall of l855 when Thomas Patten moved many of his farm tools and machinery through our burg and located them upon land he secured south of our corporation.  Mr. Patten, a native of Ireland, came from Zanesville, Ohio and settled in Magnolia, Putnam county. He was a blacksmith by trade and opened a shop in that place, but later learned of the village starting at Rutland, and thinking it might be for his interest to move to a railroad town, came here, purchased land, built himself a shop near his residence and settled down to smithing, in which he made a respected and well-to-do citizen. Mr. Patten held the office of Commissioner of Highways for several years and gave great satisfaction for the prompt and faithful manner in which he discharged his duties. In old age he seemed to enjoy life as few persons of his years do. Mr. Patten's son, Thomas, and daughter, Nora Flynn, were lifelong residents of Rutland. The former was for years a rural mail carier, and a highly esteemed citizen. The pioneer, Thomas Patten, has a considerable number of descendants living in Rutland and surrounding area. Dr. Sophus G. Peterson was born in Denmark and as a young boy came to America with his parents and brothers. The family later located in Chicago and Dr. Peterson received his education there. He studied medicine at Rush Medical College, and soon after he finished his training came to Rutland to practice, continuing until his death in 1947, almost 5O years. One brother, Dr. Fred, for a time practiced in Varna and his youngest brother, Dr. Axel Peterson, in Toluca. The latter was associated with his brother in Rutland in surgical work. Dr. S. G. Peterson was a medical doctor and surgeon of exceptional ability and people from a wide area around Rutland were his patients. To these patients he was friend as well as physician, and well merited their great confidence and deep affection. His wife was Nettie McKinney Murphy. Mr. Wm. Quaintance, for over thirty-two years, owned a livery stable here. This was a business important in the early days, when men hired "rigs" for many occasions, such as on "dates" with their best girls. Mrs. Myrtle Busroe and Mrs. Frances O'Brien of Peoria are daughters of Mr. Quaintance. Among the families who long ago had a prominent part in the community life was that of Emanuel and Harriet Rohrer. They came to Bennington township in 1861 and in 1869 to Rutland. Each of five sons married a daughter of a pioneer in Rutland, John, who was a harness maker, married May Mullin; William, whose wife was Ellen Marsh, conducted a hardware store; Charles, a barber, married Nettie Everetts. Aaron's wife was Anna Marsh. He worked for many years as superintendent of the coal mine. George's wife was Carrie Willoughby, and he for a time operated a hotel in the village. One daughter, Elizabeth, married L. W. Kelly, farmer and grain dealer. All brothers named except George and Mrs. Kelly were residents of Rutland at the time of their death. J. J. Roe, one of Rutland's first settlers, was born in Marshall County, West Virginia in 1822. He was married to Sarah Cox and came from his eastern home to Illinois in 1864. He bought a farm two and one half miles east of Rutland (now the home of his great-granddaughter Helen Kline, and family,) and settled there. In January, 187O, he and his family moved to Rutland, into the house which W. B. Burns had built (Telephone Company house). They had nine children. Mr. Roe was very charitable, and gave liberally to all public institutions, and especially to the Christian Church. One son, S. M. Roe, spent his life here, another, Milton, was a prominent business man. Milton C. Roe was one of our most progressive business men in the past. The oldest son of John and Sarah Cox Roe, born in West Virginia in 1853, he came to this vicinity as a small boy. He married Miss Fannie Toothacher, a teacher. He conducted a grocery store and afterward started a banking business, selling the grocery to T. W. Mateer. He later sold the banking business to F. Z. Ames, and moved to Princeton where he owned farming land, thence to Florida where he died in 1935. One son, Ernest Roe, lives in Princeton. James Rowland was born near Buffalo, N. Y. in 1831. When he was four years old his family moved by covered wagon to Indiana, where a clearing was made in the forest for the cabin home. Settlers were scattered, but Indiana was friendly.  He married Elizabeth Zigler at Camden, and in 1865 came to LaSalle Co. where he was engaged in farming. He died in Rutland at the age of 94.  Of his large family, two children remained in Rutland, Theodore, deceased, who married Frances DuBois, and Sheldon, whose wife is Viola Wise. Michael Schmillen, born in Germany, came to America with his parents in 1869. They located on a farm northeast of Rutland and finally made a permanent home on the farm southwest of Rutland where Michael Schmillen died. He was a progressive farmer and became one of Bennington's prominent and honorable citizens. His wife was Mary Jane Peters. Of their eight children, Elizaheth, wife of Albert Weiland, Emma, who married Anthony Shook, Theresa, who married Lester McClure, and Joseph, whose wife was Katharine Patten, have always lived in this community and have been active in community affairs and in the Catholic church. Harvey Sutton and his family, after living on different farms in the area, came to Rutland in 1866. He purchased the Daniel Wadleigh property just west of Mrs. Mary Marshall's home and made this his home for many years, pursuing the trade of carpenter until 75 years of age. In this trade he was associated with his sons Alonzo, Robert, and William. One of the fine contributions of this family to the community was their singing. For years the Sutton quartet, made up of Alonzo and William Sutton, Merritt Allen and Wilson Mateer, furnished music for many occasions and was widely known. Alonzo Sutton's wife, Ella Baer, was also a talented singer. A. H. Trowbridge was born in Washington Co. Indiana, April 13, 1825. In the year 1849 he came to Illinois to look for land and traveled over almost all of this part of the state, but returned home without buying any. The following year, 185O, he came to Illinois again and bought government land near Rutland, five miles west, at $1.25 an acre. He made his return trip to Indiana, and on June 6, 1851, he was married to Sarah Stafford. Later in that same year he and his wife came to Illinois and commenced their new life on Mr. Trowbridge's farm west of Rutland. Together with his farming he taught music in the school houses and churches all around Pattonsburg and Rutland. He moved to Rutland in 1868 and labored for the Christian Church and was its pastor for four years. He then moved to Eureka to educate his children in the college there, and afterward returned to Rutland, where he took up his pastorate here.  Mrs. Trowbridge died, and on July 26, 1888, he was married to Mrs. J. C. Thompson, grandmother of Mrs. Ethel Quathammer and great-grandmother of Mrs. Helen Kline. James Vore, born in Pennsylvania and reared a Quaker, was a long time resident southwest of Rutland, coming here from Putnam Co. He married Miss Mary Crumrine. Their only child, Neal C., is deceased and the home farm is the property of Mrs. Luella Vore Butcher. One grandson, James Russell, resides in Minonk. A granddaughter, Mrs. Alice Johnson, lives in Montana and another, Gladys Vore, in California. An earIy settler was Richard Vinecore, whose wife was May Williams, a native of Wales. In 1856 this family moved to the farm one mile south and two miles west of Rutland, which was for sixty-one years the family home. Two daughters Martha, wife of James Kelly, and Miss Adaline lived in this community until death, as did two sons, Richard A., a successful farmer, and S. A. D. Vinecore, for many years hoisting engineer at the mine. Richard A. married Miss Mary Farner. Their son Lewis and wife reside in Rutland. Douglas married Miss Emma Cinnamon and three children, Ivor, Albert, and Mrs. Allen Pope, live there. Levi Webber, a successful farmer and stock raiser, came to this county in 1857 from New York. His wife was Elize Stewart. He and his family took an important part in the life of the community. One daughter, Miss Nellie, was an accomplished musisian and another, Mrs. Harriet Davison, a teacher of painting. One son, Stewart, moved to Montana. Mr. Webber's daughter Louise married Merrit Allen, and Nettie married Jason Winans. Another early resident was William Spangler. In 1863 he married Miss Mary Hall in his native state of Indiana. In 1866 he and his family drove through to Illinois, locating near LaRose, later moving to a farm two miles west of Rutland. Three of his daughters married sons of pioneers: Laura married John Farner; Ella married Lewis Farner; and Mabel married Robert Cinnamon. One son Robert married Emma Graver. All of these families, except Robert, resided and took an active part in school, church, and social activities until death. Robert, who lived in later years in Indiana, now spends a part of his time in Rutland with his daughter, Mrs. Wm. Bishop. George A. Sauer came to Rutland from Benson in 1885. His wife, Augusta Florin, whom he met while on a visit to Germany with his parents, held a position of great privilege as a companion of Princess Louise, reigning family of West Phalia. Mr. and Mrs. Sauer took a leading part in the social and religious life of the community and maintained a hospitable home. Mr. Sauer for many years had a grain elevator and later was owner, and with his five children, operated the "Big Store", for which a double brick building was erected on the north block across from the elevator. Mr. Sauer and his children were talented in music and contributed much in this way to church and community life. The children of the family now live elsewhere: Mrs. Elsa Perisho, Streator; Dr. Henry Sauer, Fairbury; Flora Sauer, a retired teacher, Oak Park; F. W. Sauer, insurance agent, LaSalle, Ernest Sauer, CPA, Tennessee. Jonathan Wilson, a veteran of the Civil War, married Miss Martha Crumrine in 1869, and they spent their entire married life in Rutland. Mr. Wilson took a keen interest in church. He was active in the G. A. R. circles, and in the Masonic Lodge. One daughter, Mrs. Estella Willoughby, is deceased. His son Albert, who followed the occupation of plumbing, resides in Hammond. Another family who now have no representatives in the village, but who in the early days had several members prominent in the community was that of Orrin Winans. His sons, Dwight, Sheldon, and Jason, and a daughter, Mrs. William Bird, were long time residents and died here. The three brothers, in the order named, married daughters of pioneers, Helen Way, Mary Wadleigh, and Nettie Webber. Orrin Winans and wife came from New York state in the early days and his home farm was that now owned by Leonard Coons east of Rutland, and occupied by his son Dale. Jason Winans served as supervisor in Groveland Township for several terms and as president of the village board. One granddaughter of Orrin Winans, Mrs. Perle Burns, resides in Joliet. Her mother was Mrs. Ella Winans of Grable. Rutland is located at . According to the 2010 census, Rutland has a total area of , all land.  As of the census of 2000, there were 354 people, 147 households, and 98 families residing in the village. The population density was 431.5 people per square mile (166.7/km²). There were 163 housing units at an average density of 198.7 per square mile (76.7/km²). The racial makeup of the village was 99.15% White, 0.28% African American, 0.28% from other races, and 0.28% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.28% of the population. There were 147 households out of which 28.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.5% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.7% were non-families. 27.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.96. In the village the population was spread out with 23.2% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 26.6% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 98.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.5 males. The median income for a household in the village was $31,500, and the median income for a family was $47,708. Males had a median income of $31,406 versus $18,864 for females. The per capita income for the village was $16,892. None of the families and 4.3% of the population were living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and 5.6% of those over 64.  http://genealogytrails.com/ill/lasalle/RutlandSketches.html 
