   The Saint Valentine's Day Massacre is the name given to the 1929 murder of seven mob associates and a mechanic of the North Side Irish gang led by Bugs Moran during the Prohibition Era. It resulted from the struggle between the Irish American gang and the South Side Italian gang led by Al Capone to take control of organized crime in Chicago. Former members of the Egan's Rats gang were also suspected of having played a significant role in the incident, assisting Capone. On February 14, 1929, five members of the North Gang, plus gang collaborators Reinhardt H. Schwimmer and John May, were lined up against the rear inside wall of the garage at 2122 North Clark Street, in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago's North Side, and murdered. Two of the shooters were dressed as uniformed policemen, while the others wore suits, ties, overcoats and hats, according to witnesses who saw the "police" leading the other men at gunpoint out of the garage after the shooting. John May's German Shepherd, Highball, who was leashed to a truck, began howling and barking, attracting the attention of two women who operated boarding houses across the street. One of the women, Mrs Landesman, sensed something was wrong and sent one of her tenants to the garage to see what was upsetting the dog. The woman ran out, sickened at the sight. Frank Gusenberg was still alive after the killers left the scene and was rushed to the hospital shortly after real police officers arrived at the scene. When the doctors had Gusenberg stabilized, police tried to question him but when asked who shot him, he replied, "No one shot me," despite having sustained fourteen bullet wounds. George "Bugs" Moran was the boss of the long-established North Side Gang, formerly headed by Dion O'Banion who was murdered by four gunmen five years earlier in his flower shop on North State Street.  Everyone who had taken command of the North Siders since O'Banion's rule had begun had been murdered, supposedly by various members or associates of the Capone organization. This massacre was allegedly planned by the Capone mob in retaliation for an unsuccessful attempt by Frank Gusenberg and his brother Peter to murder Jack McGurn earlier in the year and for the North Side Gang's complicity in the murders of Pasqualino "Patsy" Lolordo and Antonio "The Scourge" Lombardo – both had been presidents of the Unione Siciliana, the local Mafia, and close associates of Capone. Bugs Moran's muscling in on a Capone-run dog track in the Chicago suburbs, his takeover of several Capone-owned saloons that he insisted were in his territory, and the general rivalry between Moran and Capone for complete control of the lucrative Chicago bootlegging business were probable contributing factors to this incident. The plan was to lure Bugs Moran to the SMC Cartage warehouse on North Clark Street. Contrary to common belief, this plan did not intend to eliminate the entire North Side gang – just Moran, and perhaps two or three of his lieutenants. It is usually assumed that they were lured to the garage with the promise of a stolen, cut-rate shipment of whiskey, supplied by Detroit's Purple Gang, also associates of Capone. However, some recent studies dispute this, although there seems to have been hardly any other good reason for so many of the North Siders to be there. One of these theories states that all of the victims (with the exception of John May) were dressed in their best clothes, which would not have been suitable for unloading a large shipment of whiskey crates and driving it away – even though this is how they, and other gangsters, were usually dressed at the time. The Gusenberg brothers were also supposed to drive two empty trucks to Detroit that day to pick up two loads of stolen Canadian whiskey. On St Valentine's Day, most of the Moran gang had already arrived at the warehouse by approximately 10.30am Moran was not there, having left his Parkway Hotel apartment late. As Moran and one of his men, Ted Newberry, approached the rear of the warehouse from a side street they saw the police car pull up. They immediately turned and retraced their steps, going to a nearby coffee shop. On the way, they ran into another gang member, Henry Gusenberg, and warned him away from the place. A fourth gang member, Willie Marks, was also on his way to the garage when he spotted the police car. Ducking into a doorway, he jotted down the license number before leaving the neighborhood. Capone's lookouts likely mistook one of Moran's men for Moran himself – probably Albert Weinshank, who was the same height and build. That morning the physical similarity between the two men was enhanced by their dress: both happened to be wearing the same color overcoats and hats. Witnesses outside the garage saw a Cadillac sedan pull to a stop in front of the garage. Four men, two dressed in police uniform, emerged and walked inside. The two fake police officers, carrying shotguns, entered the rear portion of the garage and found members of Moran's gang and two gang collaborators, Reinhart Schwimmer and John May, who was fixing one of the trucks. The "police officers" then ordered the men to line up against the wall. The two "police officers" then signaled to the pair in civilian clothes who had accompanied them. Two of the killers opened fire with Thompson sub-machine guns, one with a 20-round box magazine and the other a 50-round drum. They were thorough, spraying their victims left and right, even continuing to fire after all seven had hit the floor. The seven men were ripped apart in the volley, and two shotgun blasts afterward all but obliterated the faces of John May and James Clark, according to the coroner's report. To give the appearance that everything was under control, the men in street clothes came out with their hands up, prodded by the two uniformed police officers. Inside the garage, the only survivors in the warehouse were Highball (May's alsatian) and Frank Gusenberg. Despite fourteen bullet wounds, he was still conscious, but died three hours later, refusing to utter a word about the identities of the killers. The Valentine's Massacre set off a public outcry that posed a problem for all mob bosses.Reppetto, Thomas A. "The "Get Capone" Drive: Print the Legend." American Mafia: A History of Its Rise to Power. New York: H. Holt, 2004. 121. Print. Since it was common knowledge that Moran was hijacking Capone's Detroit-based liquor shipments, police focused their attention on Detroit's predominantly Jewish Purple Gang. Mug shots of Purple members Jim Carrey, Fletch, Ryan Van Wart and his younger brother Harry, were picked out by landladies Mrs. Doody and Mrs. Orvidson, who had taken in three men as roomers ten days before the massacre; their rooming houses were directly across the street from the Clark Street garage. Later, these women wavered in their identification, and Fletcher, Lewis, and Harry Keywell were all questioned and cleared by Chicago Police. Nevertheless, the Keywell brothers (and by extension the Purple Gang) would remain ensnared in the massacre case for all time. Many also believed what the killers wanted them to believe – that the police did it. February 22, police were called to the scene of a garage fire on Wood Street where a 1927 Cadillac Sedan was found disassembled and partially burned. It was determined that the car had been used by the killers. The engine number was traced to a Michigan Avenue dealer, who had sold the car to a James Morton of Los Angeles. The garage had been rented by a man calling himself Frank Rogers, who gave his address as 1859 West North Avenue – which happened to be the address of the Circus Café, operated by Claude Maddox, a former St. Louis gangster with ties to the Capone organization, the Purple Gang, and a St. Louis gang called Egan's Rats. Police could not turn up any information about persons named James Morton or Frank Rogers. But they had a definite lead on one of the killers. Just minutes before the killings, a truck driver named Elmer Lewis had turned a corner only a block away from 2122 North Clark and sideswiped what he took to be a police car. He told police later that he stopped immediately but was waved away by the uniformed driver, whom he noticed was missing a front tooth. The same description of the car's driver was also given by the president of the Board of Education, H. Wallace Caldwell, who had also witnessed the accident. Police knew that this description could be none other than a former member of Egan's Rats, Fred 'Killer' Burke; Burke and a close companion, James Ray, were well known to wear police uniforms whenever on a robbery spree. Burke was also a fugitive, under indictment for robbery and murder in Ohio. Police also suggested that Joseph Lolordo could have been one of the killers, because of his brother Pasqualino's recent murder by the North Side Gang. Police then announced that they suspected Capone gunmen John Scalise and Albert Anselmi, as well as Jack McGurn himself, and Frank Rio, a Capone bodyguard. Police eventually charged McGurn and Scalise with the massacre. John Scalise, along with Anselmi and Joseph 'Hop Toad' Giunta, were murdered by Capone in May 1929, after Capone learned about their plan to kill him, and before he went to trial. The murder charges against Jack McGurn were finally dropped because of a lack of evidence, and he was just charged with a violation of the Mann Act: he took his girlfriend, Louise Rolfe, who was also the main witness against him and became known as the "Blonde Alibi", across state lines to marry. The case stagnated until December 14, 1929, when the Berrien County, Michigan Sheriff's Department raided the St. Joseph, Michigan bungalow of “Frederick Dane”, the registered owner of a vehicle driven by Fred "Killer" Burke. Burke had been drinking that night, rear-ended another vehicle and drove off. Patrolman Charles Skelly pursued, finally forcing Burke off the road. As Skelly hopped on the running board he was shot three times and died of his wounds later that night. The car was found wrecked and abandoned just outside St. Joseph and traced to Fred Dane. By this time police photos confirmed that Dane was in fact Fred Burke, wanted by the Chicago police for his participation in the St. Valentine's Day Massacre. When police raided Burke's bungalow, they found a large trunk containing a bullet-proof vest, almost $320,000 in bonds recently stolen from a Wisconsin bank, two Thompson submachine guns, pistols, two shotguns, and thousands of rounds of ammunition. St. Joseph authorities immediately notified the Chicago police, who requested that both machine guns be brought there at once. Through the then relatively new science of forensic ballistics, both weapons were determined to have been used in the massacre – and that one of Burke's Tommy guns had also been used to murder New York mobster Frankie Yale (who participated in O'Banion's murder) a year and a half earlier. Unfortunately, no further concrete evidence would surface in the massacre case. Burke would be captured over a year later on a Missouri farm. As the case against him in the murder of Officer Skelly was strongest, he was tried in Michigan and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment. Burke died in prison in 1940. January 8, 1935, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents surrounded a Chicago apartment building at 3920 North Pine Grove, looking for the remaining members of the Barker Gang. A brief shootout erupted, resulting in the death of bank robber Russell Gibson. Also taken into custody were Doc Barker, Byron Bolton, and two women. While interrogating agents got nothing out of Barker, Bolton (a hitherto obscure criminal) proved to be a "geyser of information", as one crime historian called him. Bolton, a former Navy machine-gunner and associate of Egan's Rats, had been the valet and sidekick of a slick Chicago hit man named Fred Goetz aka "Shotgun" George Ziegler. Bolton was privy to many of the Barker Gang's crimes and even pinpointed the Florida hideout of Ma and Freddie Barker (both of whom were killed in a shootout with the FBI a week later). To the agents' surprise, Bolton kept on talking and claimed to have taken part in the St. Valentine's Day Massacre with Goetz, Fred Burke, and several others. Because the FBI had no jurisdiction in a state murder case, they attempted to keep Bolton’s revelations confidential, until the Chicago American newspaper somehow got its hands on a second-hand version of the bank robber’s confession. The newspaper declared that the crime had been “solved”, despite being stonewalled by J. Edgar Hoover and the Bureau, who did not want any part of the massacre case. Garbled versions of Bolton’s story went out in the national media. Pieced together, his tale went like this: Bolton claimed that the murder of Bugs Moran had been plotted in “October or November” 1928 at a Couderay, Wisconsin resort owned by Fred Goetz. Present at this meet were Goetz, Al Capone, Frank Nitti, Fred Burke, Gus Winkeler, Louis Campagna, Daniel Serritella, William Pacelli, and Bolton himself. The men stayed two or three weeks, hunting and fishing when they were not planning the murder of their enemies. Byron Bolton claimed he and Jimmy Moran were charged with watching the S.M.C. Cartage garage and phoning the signal to the killers at the Circus Café when Bugs Moran arrived at the meeting. Police had indeed found a letter addressed to Bolton in the lookout nest (and possibly a vial of prescription medicine). Bolton guessed that the actual killers had been Burke, Winkeler, Goetz, Bob Carey, Raymond "Crane Neck" Nugent, and Claude Maddox (four shooters and two getaway drivers). Bolton gave an account of the massacre different from the one generally told by historians. He claimed that he saw only “plainclothes” men exit the Cadillac and go into the garage. This indicates that a second car was used by the killers. One witness, George Brichet, claimed to have seen at least two uniformed men exiting a car in the alley and entering the garage through its rear doors. A Peerless sedan had been found near a Maywood house owned by Claude Maddox in the days after the massacre, and in one of the pockets was an address book belonging to victim Albert Weinshank. Bolton further indicated he had mistaken one of Moran’s men to be Moran, after which he telephoned the signal to the Circus Café. When the killers (who had expected to kill Moran and maybe two or three of his men) were unexpectedly confronted with seven men, they simply decided to kill them all and get out fast. Bolton claimed that Capone was furious with him for his mistake (and the resulting police pressure) and threatened to kill him, only to be dissuaded by Fred Goetz. His claims were corroborated by Gus Winkeler's widow, Georgette, in both an official FBI statement and her memoirs, which were published in a four-part series in a true detective magazine during the winter of 1935–36. Georgette Winkeler revealed that her husband and his friends had formed a special crew used by Capone for high-risk jobs. The mob boss was said to have trusted them implicitly and nicknamed them the “American Boys”. Byron Bolton’s statements were also backed up by William Drury, a maverick Chicago detective who had stayed on the massacre case long after everyone else had given up. Bank robber Alvin Karpis later claimed to have heard secondhand from Ray Nugent about the massacre and that the “American Boys” were paid a collective salary of $2,000 a week plus bonuses. Karpis also claimed that Capone himself had told him while they were in Alcatraz together that Goetz had been the actual planner of the massacre. Despite Byron Bolton’s statements, no action was taken by the FBI. All the men he named, with the exceptions of Burke and Maddox, were all dead by 1935. Bank robber Harvey Bailey would later complain in his 1973 autobiography that he and Fred Burke had been drinking beer in Calumet City at the time of the massacre, and the resulting heat forced them to abandon their bank robbing ventures. Claude Maddox was questioned fruitlessly by Chicago Police, and there the matter lay. Crime historians are still divided on whether or not the “American Boys” committed the St. Valentine’s Day Massacre.  Over the years, many mobsters, in and out of Chicago, would be named as part of the Valentine's Day hit team. Two prime suspects are Cosa Nostra hit men John Scalise and Albert Anselmi; both men were effective killers and are frequently mentioned as possibilities for two of the shooters. In the days after the massacre, Scalise was heard to brag, “I am the most powerful man in Chicago.” He had recently been elevated to the position of vice-president in the Unione Siciliana by its president, Joseph Guinta. Nevertheless, Scalise, Anselmi, and Guinta would be found dead on a lonely road near Hammond, Indiana May 8, 1929. Gangland lore has it that Al Capone had discovered that the pair was planning to betray him. Legend states that at the climax of a dinner party thrown in their honor, Capone produced a baseball bat and beat the trio to death. The two Thompson submachine guns (serial numbers 2347 and 7580) found in Fred Dane’s (an alias for Fred Burke) Michigan bungalow were personally driven to the Chicago coroner’s office by the Berrien County District Attorney. Ballistic expert Calvin Goddard tested the weapons and determined that both had been used in the massacre. One of them had also been used in the murder of Brooklyn mob boss Frankie Yale, which confirmed the New York Police Department’s long-held theory that Burke, and by extension Al Capone, had been responsible for Yale's death. Gun No. 2347 had been originally purchased November 12, 1924, by Les Farmer, a deputy sheriff in Marion, Illinois, which happened to be the seat of Williamson County. Marion and the surrounding area were then overrun by the warring bootleg factions of the Shelton Brothers and Charlie Birger. Deputy Farmer was documented as having ties with Egan’s Rats, based 100 miles (160&nbsp;km) away in St. Louis. By the beginning of 1927 at the very latest, the weapon had wound up in Fred Burke's possession. It is possible he had used this same gun in Detroit’s Milaflores Massacre March 28, 1927. Gun No. 7580 had been sold by Chicago sporting goods owner Peter von Frantzius to a Victor Thompson (also known as Frank V. Thompson) in the care of the Fox Hotel of Elgin, Illinois. Some time after the purchase the machine gun wound up with James "Bozo" Shupe, a small-time hood from Chicago’s West Side who had ties to various members of Capone’s outfit. Both submachine guns are still in the possession of the Berrien County Sheriff's Department in St. Joseph, Michigan.   The garage, which stood at 2122 N. Clark Street, was demolished in 1967; the site is now a landscaped parking lot for a nursing home. There is still controversy over the actual bricks used to build the north inside wall of the building where the mobsters were lined up and shot. They were claimed to be responsible, according to stories, for bringing financial ruin, illness, bad luck and death to anyone who bought them. The bricks from the bullet-marked inside North wall were purchased and saved by Canadian businessman George Patey in 1967. His original intention was to use them in a restaurant that he represented, but the restaurant's owner did not like the idea. Patey ended up buying the bricks himself, outbidding three or four others. Patey had the wall painstakingly taken apart and each of the 414 bricks numbered, then shipped them to Canada. There are conflicting reports about what George Patey did with the bricks after he obtained them. In 1978, Time reported that Patey reassembled the wall and put it on display in a wax museum as a backdrop for gun-wielding gangsters shooting each other to the accompaniment of recorded gunshots. The wax museum later went bankrupt. Another source, an independent newspaper in the United Kingdom, reported in February 2000 that the wall toured shopping malls and exhibitions in the United States for a couple of decades. In 1968, Patey stopped exhibiting the bricks and put them into retirement. In 1971, Patey opened a nightclub called the Banjo Palace in Vancouver that had a Roaring Twenties theme and the famous bricks were installed inside the men's washroom with a Plexiglas shield, so that patrons could urinate and try to hit the targets painted on the Plexiglas. In a 2001 interview with an Argentinian journalist, Patey said, "I had the most popular club in the city. People came from high society and entertainment, Jimmy Stewart, Robert Mitchum." The bricks were placed in storage until 1997 when Patey tried to auction them on a website called Jet Set On The Net. The deal fell-through after a disagreement with the auction company. The last known substantial offer for the entire wall was made by a Las Vegas casino but Patey refused the $175,000 offer. In 1999, Patey tried to sell them brick by brick on his own website and sold about one hundred to gangster buffs. These came with signed certificates by Patey. Patey died December 26, 2004, having never revealed how much he paid for the bricks at auction. The remaining bricks of his massacre wall were given as an inheritance to his niece who sold them to the Mob Museum in Las Vegas, which opened February 14, 2012. While the wall is no longer complete because of Patey's sale of some bricks, it still remains the original massacre wall against which the seven men were lined up and killed by Capone-hired killers.   Peter Gusenberg, a frontline enforcer for the Moran organizations. Frank Gusenberg, the brother of Peter Gusenberg and also an enforcer. Frank was still alive when police first arrived on the scene, despite reportedly having fourteen bullets in his body. When questioned by the police and surrounding witness about the shooting, his only response was "Nobody shot me." He died three hours later. Albert Kachellek (alias "James Clark"), Moran's second-in-command. Adam Heyer, the bookkeeper and business manager of the Moran gang. Reinhardt Schwimmer, an optician who had abandoned his practice to gamble on horse racing (unsuccessfully) and associate with the Moran gang. Although Schwimmer called himself an "optometrist" he was actually an optician (an eyeglass fitter) and had no medical training. Albert Weinshank, who managed several cleaning and dyeing operations for Moran. His resemblance to Moran, including the clothes he was wearing, is what allegedly set the massacre in motion before Moran actually arrived. John May, an occasional car mechanic for the Moran gang, though not a gang member himself. May had two earlier arrests (no convictions) but was attempting to work legally. However, his desperate need of cash, with a wife and seven children, caused May to accept jobs with the Moran gang as a mechanic. The massacre is dramatized in a scene from the 1932 film Scarface. The massacre was dramatized in the 1958 Playhouse 90 production Seven Against the Wall. The massacre was used as a plot device in the 1959 film Some Like It Hot. The massacre was famously the subject of Roger Corman's 1967 film The St. Valentine's Day Massacre. This film, possibly the most well-known of all portrayals of the incident, is a mixture of solid historical facts and conjecture. The TV show The Wonder Years included an episode named "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre" that aired 13 February 1990 as episode 14 of its third season. The 1991 movie Oscar, starring Sylvester Stallone, includes a reference to the massacre as well. Stallone plays "Snaps" Provolone, a prominent gangster in Chicago in 1931. In a scene early in the movie, his accountant reminds him, "You were in Chicago... It was Saint Valentine's Day," at which Stallone and one of his goons exchange a knowing smile and a chuckle. The TV series Early Edition included a season four episode named “Everybody Goes to Rick’s”. Its story is based on the event. In a season four episode of The Golden Girls entitled "Valentine's Day", Sophia claims to have witnessed the massacre. The TV show Happy Endings, aired an episode entitled "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre." In the episode "Goodies Rule – O.K?", broadcast 21 December 1975, The Goodies lampoon the incident by dressing up as gangsters of the period and attacking the victims against the wall with pies instead of Thompson submachine guns. "The authorities were finally to sit up and take note of their activities after the events of February 14th, St Valentine's Day," The Goodies had formed a gang known as the "Unmentionables." In episode 14 of the sixth season of the TV series Bones, Agent Booth and Dr. Brennan celebrate Valentine's Day by shooting Thompson submachine guns at firing range "in honor of the St.Valentine's Day Massacre". In episode 10 of season two of The Spectacular Spider-Man, Silvermane states, while toasting with 'The Big Man' and 'Doctor Octopus' at a summit, ”To the Valentine's Day Massac-... summit.” The Untouchables: Capone Rising, the shelved prequel to The Untouchables, was to feature a fictionalised version of the massacre, depicted as a war between Capone's gang and Irish gangsters rallied by fictional Irish-American policeman James "Jim" Malone, the latter seeking revenge against Capone for murdering an innocent maid who witnessed one of his previous murders. Ted Danson's character "Becker" made a comment in an episode that 'the only person to ever celebrate Valentine's Day right was Al Capone". At the beginning of a case in Detective Conan (volume 33 in the manga, episode 266 in the anime), the protagonist mentioned this case. The crime scene was drawn non violently, only showing El Capone shooting guns and the victims dying without blood. International Theatresports Tournament, hosted by Vancouver Theatresports League Ska band Mark Foggo's Skasters made an album and a song called "St Valentine's Day Massacre" It also inspired the song "Valentine's Day" by singer/songwriter James Taylor and rapper 50 Cent's 2005 album The Massacre, initially titled "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre". In 1967 John Douglas "Jon" Lord, after The Artwoods and before Deep Purple, released the single "Brother, can you spare a dime" (Fontana 883)under the name of "St. Valentine's Day Massacre". The B-side was "Al's Party" which of course referred to the incident in New York in 1929. In 1981, Motörhead and Girlschool released a split EP under the title St. Valentine's Day Massacre. "The Valentine's Day Massacre" is a song on the 2009 album Lost Verses by the band The Red Shore. "The Touchables"  by Dickie Goodman is a 1960s top-ten hit that parodied the Valentine's Day Massacre using samples from popular songs. The song "Peacemaker" from Green Day's 21st Century Breakdown album has a line containing the words "This is a neo-St. Valentines Massacre" Singer Joe Bataan released an album in 1972 under the title "Saint Latin's Day Massacre" (Fania Records). On the 1974 Album, Alice Cooper's Greatest Hits,the front cover features artwork depicting the St. Valentine's Day Massacre. The song "Taking My Ball" in the album, "Relapse : Refill" by Eminem mentions this event in its lyrics. The Epic Rap Battles of History mentions the event in the video Al Capone vs Blackbeard. British group Paper Lace released the single "The Night Chicago Died" in 1974, fictionalizing similar events. "Valentines Massacre" – The Strasbourg massacre occurred on February 14, 1349, when several hundred Jews were publicly burnt to death, and the rest of them expelled from the city as part of the Black Death persecutions. It was one of the first and worst pogroms in pre-modern history. The nickname of the "St. Valentine's Day massacre" has also been used to refer to the sixth, and final match-up, between boxers Sugar Ray Robinson and Jake LaMotta, because it took place Valentine's Day in 1951, and because of the beating that LaMotta took, which caused the fight to be stopped in the 13th round. At Disney's Hollywood Studios' Great Movie Ride attraction a set of the ride is Chicago in the 1920s where a shootout takes place. One of the gangster's cars has a license plate of 021429, the date of the massacre. Since 1963, an annual route-finding contest played entirely on Rand McNally Road Atlases is called the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, as entrants must register by February 14. In 1974, the second Bob Dylan concert held on Sunday, February 14 at the Los Angeles-area Fabulous Forum climaxing the recording artist's 40-date hockey arena comeback tour was widely bootlegged by Inglewood, California-based underground record company Trademark of Quality under the title "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre". During the controversy created by National Party Leader Don Brash in New Zealand over his Orewa Speech on race relations, the first public opinion poll was released February 14, 2004. The poll was the biggest recorded swing in New Zealand political history and has been dubbed the Valentine's Day Poll Massacre by some commentators. The alleged paranormal aftermath of the massacre forms a portion of Supernatural Chicago by Neil Tobin, Necromancer. In 1979, the Dukes of Hazzard episode entitled "Daisy's Song" included a reference to the massacre.  When the music pirate Lester Starr (played by Ronnie Schell) found that the mob in his studio were getting rather edgy, he warned Daisy that "this happened once before on St. Valentine's Day". In 1988 and 1989 in season three and season four of The Golden Girls, Sophia Petrillo made a comment in season three about being at the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, but refused to make any further comments.  Later in the season four episode "Valentine's Day" she tells the story of how she, her husband, Sal, and father were on their way to a wedding, but had car trouble in Chicago.  When they pulled into a garage, Sophia's father goes to use the restroom and gets in line with the massacre victims.  Someone with a machine gun tells him to leave and he complies, hearing gunfire as he departs.  After the second round of shots the three take off with Sal, pushing the car to get away. The WWE (then WWF) used the nickname St. Valentine's Day Massacre for their pay-per-view St. Valentine's Day Massacre: In Your House that aired February 14, 1999. In 2014, Rockstar Games released downloadable content for Grand Theft Auto V titled "Valentine's Day Massacre" featuring suits from the '20s, a submachine gun modeled after the Thompson called the Gusenberg Sweeper (a reference to Frank and Peter Gusenberg, who both died in the massacre), A car modeled after Al Capone's armored Cadillac 341A Town sedan, and more. List of massacres in Illinois Braucher, Scott (March 19, 2012). "Life Member Dan Tortorell, 95, Was At St. Valentine's Day Massacre". National Press Photographers Association. Chicago Shimpo – The Chicago Japanese American News, Friday, October 10, 2008. Volume 6732, p.&nbsp;7. . Helmer, William and Arthur J. Bilek. The St. Valentine's Day Massacre: The Untold Story of the Bloodbath That Brought Down Al Capone. Nashville: Cumberland House, 2004. ISBN 978-1-58182-329-5. The True Story of the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, excerpted from Get Capone, by biographer Jonathan Eig (Chicago magazine) Haunted Chicago Mystery.net Mario Gomes Capone Museum MisterCapone.com. Official Site of Mr. Capone author, Robert J. Schoenberg ABC 7 Chicago shoots down massacre theory from the book "Get Capone"
