   Salisbury University is a public university in Salisbury, Maryland. Currently, Salisbury University offers 42 distinct undergraduate and 14 graduate degree programs.  Salisbury University, originally called the Maryland State Normal School, was opened on September 7, 1925 as a two-year institution to train elementary school teachers to help fill the teacher shortage in the state of Maryland. The original class of 105 students were greeted by Salisbury's first president, Dr. William J. Holloway, an experienced educator and the driving force behind the creation of the school. The curriculum was influenced by best practices established at Columbia's Teachers College, alma mater of six of Salisbury Normal School's eight original faculty. During the Great Depression, Maryland extended the required course of study at Normal Schools from two years to three years, and to four years in 1934, paving the way for the institution to become Maryland State Teachers College one year later.Salisbury University The Presidents of Salisbury University from 1925 to Present In 1935, its name was changed to Maryland State Teachers College, and in 1963 to Salisbury State College.  Between 1962 and 1995 several Masters Degree programs were approved. In 1988, the name was changed to Salisbury State University.  In 2001, the name was changed again to Salisbury UniversitySalisbury University University Proposes Name Change In 2007, construction was completed on the Teacher Education and Technology Center, located on the main campus.  Construction began in the fall of 2006Salisbury University SU Breaks Ground on New Teacher Education and Technology Center  and cost an estimated $75 million to complete. The building houses education and technology classrooms as well as a professional recording studio, and is equipped with state-of-the-art Smart Classroom technology. It also includes a satellite dining facility.Salisbury University Invest In The Salisbury University of Tomorrow In 2009, a multi-level parking garage on the east-campus located next to the sports fields was completed.Salisbury University Construction to Begin on New Parking Garage Two new buildings were completed in 2011; the Perdue School of Business and a new, upper classmen residence hall.Salisbury University SU Announces Plans for New Residence Hall The $55 million Perdue School of Business, named for Frank Perdue, was opened with a formal ribbon cutting ceremony on September 9, 2011. "Jim Perdue said his father would be proud of Perdue School accomplishments. “Just as my grandfather started the company on a solid foundation in 1920, this school really has a solid foundation for business education on Delmarva,” he added. The Arthur W. Perdue Foundation donated $8 million for the building, the largest gift for a capital project in SU history. The building also includes the Franklin P. Perdue Museum of Business and Entrepreneurship, one of the few campus-based museums devoted to business nationwide, said University archivist David Ranzan. With some $3.1 million in new technology, the traditional academic exterior houses the latest resources for students and faculty. There are four schools at the University, all of which are endowed (a rarity among public institutions):  The Charles R. and Martha N. Fulton School of Liberal Arts, endowed in 1989, is the largest and most diverse of the four schools within the University. The Fulton School champions both discipline-based and interdisciplinary programs. In addition, the School provides support for numerous faculty, University, and community initiatives, including the Nabb Research Center for Delmarva History and Culture, the Institute for Public Affairs and Civic Engagement, the Maryland Summer Center for the Arts, the Bobbi Biron Theatre Program, the Salisbury Symphony Orchestra, and the Center for Conflict Resolution. In the Fall of 2008, the School instituted a new, enhanced curriculum, moving from a three credit to a four credit course model intended to provide students with "a more rigorous, focused, and deeper learning experience."Salisbury University Fulton School of Liberal Arts Undergraduate Programs: Graduate Programs:  The Richard A. Henson School of Science and Technology was endowed in 1988.Salisbury University Richard A. Henson School of Science and Technology Undergraduate Programs: Graduate Programs:  The Franklin P. Perdue School of Business was established in 1986 and named for late alumnus Frank Perdue.Salisbury University Franklin P. Perdue School of Business Its new building was completed in 2011. Undergraduate Programs: Graduate Programs: The Samuel Seidel School of Education and Professional Studies dates back to the organization of the University.  In 1997, Samuel Seidel, a Salisbury businessman, donated a $1 million endowment.Salisbury University The Samuel W. and Marilyn C. Seidel Endowment Undergraduate Programs: Certification Tracks: Graduate Programs: The Thomas E. Bellavance honors program was established in 1981. The Honors program promotes academic excellence in a small, collegial environment. Special classes, cultural events, trips, and other opportunities are offered to help motivated students pursue intellectual and personal growth. The program fosters close individual contact between students and faculty and brings together students with many varied interests. Honors courses and activities are intended to enhance other educational opportunities available to Salisbury University students. Honors students also have access to the Honors Center for quiet study. Students get priority registration privileges as well. Prospective students at Salisbury University are invited to apply to the Honors program. To remain in the program, students must maintain a GPA of at least 3.25 and be able to graduate with a cumulative GPA of 3.5.  As of 2009, Salisbury University owns 56 buildings, with a total gross area of . The Salisbury University campus consists of .Salisbury University Facilities Master Plan Holloway Hall served as the original home of Maryland State Normal School at Salisbury upon its opening in 1925. The structure once served as the home for all teaching, student, and administrative functions at the school. Today, the building - renamed Holloway Hall after the retirement of Salisbury's first president, Dr. William J. Holloway - houses administrative offices, including the Office of the President, the Office of the Provost, Financial Aid, Registrar, Public Relations, Student Health Services, and Human Resources. The building also contains a number of unique, multi-purpose spaces, including the Auditorium (seating capacity of 776) and the Great Hall (originally used as the dining hall and later as the home for the Ward Museum of Wildfowl Art). The classroom space in the north wing of the structure was once the home of the Perdue School of Business.Salisbury University Dr. William James Holloway Fulton Hall serves as home for The Charles R. and Martha N. Fulton School of Liberal Arts at Salisbury University. The building serves as the north anchor of the campus' central mall. As the structure closest to Holloway Hall, Fulton Hall was built to complement Holloway's classical architecture styling. Fulton Hall includes the main University Gallery (home to temporary art exhibitions), classrooms, fine arts studios, photography lab, and a glass blowing facility. The building is also home to many of the University's performing arts facilities, including a 150-seat Black Box Theater (featuring a flexible 50' x 50' performance space), scene shop, costume shop, and music rehearsal facilities.Salisbury University Theatre & Dance Facilities  The Teacher Education and Technology Center at Salisbury University opened for use at the beginning of the 2008 Fall semester. In 2009, the  building earned Silver certification from the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification system under the United States Green Building Council.Salisbury University TETC Earns USGBC LEED Silver Certification The building also earned the distinction of being named one of the ten best-designed new higher education facilities by College Planning & Management magazine as part of its "2009 Education Design Showcase" issue.Salisbury University TETC Wins National Education Design Award The facility houses flexible classroom space, multi-purpose computer lab space, a satellite dining facility, distance-learning classrooms, integrated SMART classroom technology, and offices and support services for both the Seidel School, Fulton School, and Information Technology. The showcase Integrated Media Center, located on the third floor of the facility, includes both high-definition and standard-definition television production studios, twenty individual editing suites (video/audio), and audio production facilities. Henson Hall was dedicated on September 5, 2002 and contains classroom, support, and laboratory space for the Henson School of Science and Technology. Built at a cost of $37 million, the  facility houses the departments of biology, chemistry, physics, mathematics and computer science, and geography and geosciences. The building holds 12 classrooms, 32 teaching laboratories, and 20 research labs.Salisbury University University Dedicates Henson Science Hall The honors house was established in 2000, and is located off Camden Avenue, across east campus. It is open to students in the Bellavance Honors program, and includes a full kitchen, computer lab, and grand piano. The yard contains a gazebo, goldfish pond and a Japanese garden.  The south end of campus is home to the Guerrieri University Center (GUC) and the Commons Dining Hall, joined together by an indoor walkway called the "Link of Nations." The GUC houses the Office of Student Affairs, Student Activities office, two eateries (counter-service Gull's Nest and internet cafe Cool Beans), Career Services office, the Center for Student Achievement, and a large, multi-level lounge space. The Commons contains the main dining hall facility, campus bookstore, post office, and conference and meeting room facilities. There are currently ten on-campus residence halls at Salisbury University: Pocomoke, Nanticoke, Wicomico, Manokin, Choptank, Chester, Severn, Chesapeake, and St. Martin Halls and Dogwood Village. The residence halls are laid out in a variety of floorplans, including cluster and suite style. All traditional residence halls (Pocomoke, Nanticoke, Wicomico, and Manokin) are underwent extensive renovations to be converted to suite-style facilities. The first completed dorm, Pocomoke Hall, opened prior to the Spring 2010 semester, with renovations to the other three facilities completed by August 2011.  Salisbury University houses approximately 40% of all students in campus-affiliated housing. Housing is reserved for traditional freshmen. In addition to the on-campus, traditional dorms, Salisbury has partnerships with two nearby apartment complexes, University Park and University Village, with residents of those facilities having access to a shuttle system to main campus. Finally, Sea Gull Square, a new 600-bed, apartment-style complex, opened on main campus in August 2011. The Blackwell Library houses more than 250,000 bound volumes and provides an array of electronic resources.  The library also contains the university archives.  The library participates in an inter-campus loan program where students can order books from other university libraries within the University System of Maryland for temporary use. Blackwell Library is seen as one of Salisbury University's weaknesses as it was designed for a much smaller student population. In the 2009 edition of The Princeton Review's The Best 368 Colleges, Blackwell Library was listed at number 12 on the list entitled, "This is a Library?"Princeton Review College Rankings The University has placed a new campus library as its top facility priority, with a goal of developing the current site of Caruthers Hall into a new Academic Commons. This would place the new library at the heart of campus, between the Teacher Education and Technology Center and the Perdue School of Business. The new building for the Franklin P. Perdue School of Business, was partially funded by an $8 million gift from the Arthur W. Perdue Foundation.Salisbury University $8 Million Gift Announced For New Perdue School Building Perdue, Inc. chairman Jim Perdue said the donation was in honor of his father, former Perdue Farms president Frank Perdue. The , $56 million facility houses classroom and office space formerly located in the north wing of Holloway Hall. The University was awarded gold certification from the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification system under the United States Green Building Council for the Perdue building. The facility includes a Business Outreach Services Suite (BOSS), a Small Business Development Center, a Perdue Museum, meeting rooms, focus group rooms, specialized business lab space, an internet cafe, and an M.B.A. suite with case rooms.Salisbury University SU Breaks Ground on New Perdue School Building Completed in 2011 is "Sea Gull Square," a student residence hall and retail complex. Situated on the east side of the campus along Route 13, the facility includes more than 600 beds arranged in an apartment-style floorplan. A "Main Street-style" retail complex occupies the lower level and include shops, a fountain, and a clock tower. The facility is Salisbury University's largest student housing facility on the main campus.Salisbury University Campus Community Invited to Sea Gull Square Groundbreaking March 4 The Salisbury University campus was recognized by the American Association of Botanical Gardens and Arboreta as an arboretum in 1988. The Salisbury Campus features over 2,000 species of plant life, including magnolia, rhododendron, viburnum, Japanese maple, bald cypress, and Crape myrtle. Notable areas of interest on campus include the Pergola (near the University Commons), the Holloway Hall Courtyard Garden, the Bellavance Honors Center Japanese Garden, the Link of Nations, and the Miller Alumni Garden. The campus also features a collection of figurative sculpture, including pieces by such noted sculptors as Auguste Rodin (Coquelin Cadet), Daniel Chester French (Ralph Waldo Emerson), Augustus Saint-Gaudens (Diana), and Carl Akeley (Wounded Comrade). Salisbury University Arboretum The school has grown steadily since its founding and now is attended by 7,557 undergraduate and 647 graduate students.Salisbury University SU At-A-Glance Undergraduate minority enrollment is 18%. There are 2,648 spaces of 'campus-affiliated' housing, with 38% of full-time undergraduates residing in campus-affiliated housing. For 2010-11, Tuition and fees for Maryland residents are $6,908 annually and $15,404 for non-Maryland residents.Salisbury University Finances Including room and board, per annum expenses are approximately $15,120 and $23,616 for residents and nonresidents, respectively. About 74% of undergraduate students receive financial aid. Of $45 million in distributed aid for the Fall of 2009, $5.6 million was available in the form of scholarships (not necessarily academic), with the remainder based on need. According to recent statistics, Salisbury University has about 7,892 students enrolled.  53% of students are admitted.  7,527 students are undergraduates, 691 students are graduates, and 179 students are non-degree.  According to U.S. News Weekly, Salisbury University’s tuition rates for 2012-2013 are $7,700 in state and $16,046 out of state. Salisbury University's Office of Admissions is responsible for the processing of all admissions applications. Admissions have become increasingly more selective over recent years. For undergraduate admissions for the Fall 2009 entry term, Salisbury received 7,525 applications. Salisbury offered admission to 54% of those applicants. The incoming freshman class was 1,276 students.National Center for Educational Statistics College Navigator In the fall of 2006 the Faculty Senate at Salisbury University approved a plan to make the SAT an optional submission for admission to the university.Two More Colleges Drop ACT/SAT Requirements - Fairtest.org President Janet Dudley-Eshbach is quoted as saying of the SAT, "All they really do is evaluate how well someone does on a timed standardized test. It doesn’t measure motivation. It’s not really a level playing field. The test costs anywhere from $45 to $100, and some students take it again. The SAT prep course [can cost] about $800. Increasingly, we are finding students who don’t have the financial means to take the test — and certainly not a prep course. So our philosophy is, if you can demonstrate to us that you can achieve at least a 3.5 grade-point average, you should at least be given a try at Salisbury University."The Examiner Salisbury U Enjoys Rise in Popularity Salisbury University has ten female and nine male Division III NCAA teams.  The football team competes in the New Jersey Athletic Conference while all other sports participate in the Capital Athletic Conference. The University mascot is named "Sammy the Sea Gull."Salisbury University Sammy Sea Gull Biography The Sea Gull name evolved from the Salisbury State College Golden Gulls, which was chosen in 1948 by the SGA "Name the Mascot Contest". In 1963, due to the athletic teams being often referred to as SSC Gulls (C-Gulls), the mascot was changed to a sea gull.  In the 1970s the nickname "Sammy the Sea Gull" debuted. The university's Sports Information Department provides webcasts of home games for 11 Varsity teams, the bi-weekly show, "Squawk Talk," and highlights from various home games around the university campus on its website under the title of the Sea Gull Sports Network.Salisbury University Sea Gulls Sports Network home page Launched in January 2011, the Sea Gull Sports Network was intended to give Salisbury University sports fans the ability to watch home games when they could not attend them while giving additional access to each team and its members. In its first semester of existence (Spring 2011), SGSN would webcast 16 varsity events. The 2011-12 school year would see 106 live webcasts, along with the addition of game highlights and the debut of Squawk Talk, the network's bi-weekly studio production. In 2012-13, SGSN partnered with Stretch Internet, improving the quality of webcasts and giving the network the ability to produce even more webcasts. That year's webcast total increased to 140 live webcasts. While overseen by the Salisbury University Sports Information Department, SGSN is largely student-run as Salisbury students work as camera operators, technical directors, commentators, and administrators.  In addition to regular season and tournament play, the Sea Gulls compete for pride twice a year against other local universities.  In the fall, the football team competes against Frostburg State University for the Regents Cup.Salisbury University Fall 2002 In Touch  The men's lacrosse team competes in the spring against Washington College for the Charles B. Clark Cup.  This annual event is known among the two institutions as the "War on the Shore."  The two schools take turns every year hosting the event.Salisbury Sea Gulls Salisbury Wins Seventh-Straight Charles B. Clark Cup The American Cancer Society's Relay For Life is the biggest on campus event at Salisbury University. SU's Relay For Life has consistently raised upwards of $60,000 annually, making Salisbury University one of the top Relay teams per capita in the nation. Since its inception, it has raised over a half million dollars.Salisbury University Relay For Life Gears Up For 2007 The event traditionally takes place on the intramural sports fields, however during times of inclement weather the event has been moved indoors to the Maggs Physical Activity Center. This annual bike ride, usually held the first weekend in October, brings thousands of riders to Delmarva in what is the largest single-day tourism event in Wicomico County. The  or 100-kilometer ride has been named among the top ten century rides in the nation by Bicycling magazine. The Washington Post names it "by far the most popular local century" in the Maryland-Delaware-Virginia region.Zeidner, Rita. Sep. 2005. "Ride a Century" The ride starts and ends at SU, offering two routes. It is well known for its scenic halfway point at Assateague Island. BEACON is the applied research, experiential learning, and community outreach arm of the Franklin P. Perdue School of Business at Salisbury University.   Students and faculty from the Perdue School partner with regional decision makers to work on a wide variety of BEACON projects and programs. ShoreTRENDS, GraySHORE, and Bienvenidos a Delmarva are three notable BEACON initiatives.  BEACON is also the funding partner of the Perdue School's ShoreENERGY research program.  BEACON’s applied research and experiential learning activities have been recognized with a number of awards and citations, including an Evie Cutler Award for Public Service, a Shore Leadership Award for Economic Development, and two citations from the Governor of Maryland.Salisbury University BEACON PACE was launched in 1999 and is designed to create opportunities for students and faculty to become involved in the political and governmental life of the surrounding region. The mission of the Institute is to serve the public communities on the Eastern Shore of Maryland and the students and faculty of Salisbury University by enhancing our understanding of the public good, by fostering, in a non-partisan way, a more informed and responsible citizenry, and by promoting ethics and good government at the local and state levels through policy and polling research, through educational programs, and through projects in civic engagement.Salisbury University Institute for Public Affairs and Civic Engagement Salisbury University has many Fraternities and Sororities.Salisbury University Greek Life      Item!!Undergraduate!!Graduate!!Total Total Enrollment 7,557 647 8,204 Full-time enrollment 6,954 257 7,211 Part-time enrollment 603 390 993 % Female 55.5% 71.5% 56.6% % Male 44.5% 28.5% 43.4% Minority Race/Ethnicity African-American 11.8% 8.0% 11.5% American Indian 0.7% 0.5% 0.7% Asian/Pacific Islander 2.7% 1.3% 2.5% Hispanic 2.7% 1.3% 2.6% Nonresident Alien 0.5% 3.1% 0.7% Total Minority & Nonresident Alien 18.4% 14.2% 18.0% White 81.6% 85.8% 82.0% % In-State 87.2% 85.8% 87.1% % Out-of-State 12.2% 11.1% 12.1% Countries Represented 52 14 54 States/Territories&nbsp; Represented 28 15 31 Art (B.A., B.F.A.) Communication Arts (B.A.) Conflict Analysis & Dispute Resolution (B.A.) English (B.A.) ESOL/K-12 Certification (B.A.) Environmental Issues (B.A.) French (B.A.) History (B.A.) Interdisciplinary Studies (B.A.) International Studies (B.A.) Music (B.A.) Philosophy (B.A.) Political Science (B.A.) Psychology (B.A.) Sociology (B.A.) Spanish (B.A.) Theater (B.A.) Conflict Analysis & Dispute Resolution (M.A.) English (M.A.) History (M.A.) TESOL (Post-Baccalaureate Certificate) Biology (B.S.) Biology/ Environmental Marine Science (B.S.) Chemistry (B.S.) Clinical Laboratory Science/Medical Technology (B.S.) Computer Science (B.S.) Earth Science (B.S.) Geography and Geosciences (B.S.) Mathematics (B.S.) Nursing (B.S.) Physics (B.S.) Respiratory Therapy (B.S.) Applied Biology (M.S.) Applied Health Physiology (M.S.) Geographic Information Systems and Public Administration (M.S.) Nursing (M.S.) Middle School Mathematics (Post-Baccalaureate Certificate) Accounting (B.S.) Business Administration (International Business) (B.S.) Economics (B.A.) Finance (B.S.) Information Systems (B.S.) Management (B.S.) Marketing (B.S.) Business Administration (M.B.A.) Athletic Training (B.S.) Early Childhood Education (B.S.) Elementary Education (B.S.) Exercise Science (B.S.) Health Education (B.S.) Physical Education (B.S.) Social Work (B.A.S.W.) Grades 7-12: Biology; Chemistry; Earth Science; English; French; Health Education; History; Mathematics; Physics; Spanish Grades K-12: ESOL; Music; Physical Education Master of Arts in Teaching (M.A.T.) Master of Education (M.Ed.) Master of Education in Educational Leadership (M.Ed.) Master of Education Reading Specialist (M.Ed.) Mathematics Education (M.S.) Social Work (M.S.W.) Accounting American Studies (History) Anthropology Art Athletic Coaching Biology Business Administration Business Administration (MBA Track) Business Professional Writing (English) Chemistry Clinical Biochemistry (Health Sciences) Clinical Hematology (Health Sciences) Clinical Microbiology (Health Sciences) Clinical Transfusion Services (Health Sciences) Communication Arts Comparative Literature Computer Science Conflict Analysis & Dispute Resolution Creative Arts (Education) Dance Earth Science (Geography) Economics English English as a Second Language Environmental Studies Environmental Issues Environmental/Land Use Planning Ethnic and Intercultural Studies (IDIS) European Studies Exercise Science Finance French Gender Studies (IDIS) Geography Geographic Information Science German Gerontology (Sociology) Health History Information Systems (Business) International Studies Latin American Studies Marketing/Management Mathematics Music Philosophy Physics Political Science Psychology Religious Studies (IDIS) Social Studies (Education) Sociology Spanish Statistics (Mathematics) Theater Field Hockey Football Men's Soccer Women's Soccer Volleyball Men's Basketball Women's Basketball Baseball Men's Lacrosse Women's Lacrosse Softball Field Hockey - Five NCAA DIII titles (1986, 2003–2005, 2009)Salisbury Sea Gulls Field Hockey Football - Two ACFC titles (2004, 2005^)Salisbury Sea Gulls Football Men's Cross Country - Eight CAC titles (1997, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008)Salisbury Sea Gulls Cross Country Men's Soccer - Seven CAC titles (1999, 2000, 2002–2004,2007, 2008)Salisbury Sea Gulls Men's Soccer Volleyball - Six CAC titles (1998, 2000, 2004,2007, 2008, 2009)Salisbury Sea Gulls Volleyball Women's Cross Country - Six CAC titles (1996, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009) Women's Soccer - 4 CAC titles (1994, 2000, 2006, 2011)Salisbury Sea Gulls Women's Soccer Men's BasketballSalisbury Sea Gulls Men's Basketball Women's Basketball - three CAC titles (2000–2002)Salisbury Sea Gulls Women's Basketball Men's and Women's SwimmingSalisbury Sea Gulls Swimming Men's ice hockey Non-Varsity ACHASalisbury University Ice Hockey Baseball - eight CAC titles (1995, 2000–2002, 2004, 2006–2008), 2001 and 2004 South Region Champions and College World Series berthsSalisbury Sea Gulls Baseball Men's Lacrosse - ten NCAA DIII titles (1994, 1995, 1999, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2012); NCAA record 69 consecutive wins (April 17, 2003 - May 21, 2006)Salisbury Sea Gulls Men's Lacrosse Women's Lacrosse - two NCAA DIII titles (2010, 2013); six CAC titles (2000–2006)Salisbury Sea Gulls Women's Lacrosse Men's Rugby - Division 2 national champion (2013); Division 2 runner up (2012). Softball - eleven CAC titles (1995, 1997–2006)Salisbury Sea Gulls Softball Men's TennisSalisbury Sea Gulls Men's Tennis Women's Tennis - two CAC titles (2002, 2003)Salisbury Sea Gulls Women's Tennis Men's Track - Twelve CAC titles (1994–1996, 1998, 1999, 2004–2010) 5 individual National Championships (Cory Beebe, 400m Hurdles 2009, 20010: Brandon Fugett, Shot Put 2009, 2010: Delannie Spriggs, 55m Dash 2010) Team runner up 2010.Salisbury Sea Gulls Track & Field Women's Track - Two CAC titles (2010, 2011) Eric Arndt - Professional Wrestler competing in WWE as Enzo Amore Jake Bergey - Former professional Lacrosse Player Steve Bisciotti - Owner, Baltimore Ravens Football Team Talmadge Branch - Democrat in Maryland House of Delegates for District 45 Erica Messer - writer for The OC, Alias, and Criminal Minds Eric M. Bromwell - Democrat in Maryland House of Delegates for District 8 Norman Conway - Former Democrat in Maryland House of Delegates for District 38 B, Chairman of Appropriations Committee Jeannie Haddaway - Former Republican in Maryland House of Delegates for District 37B Scott Krinsky - Actor/Comedian, starred in the NBC series Chuck Dale Midkiff - Actor Frank Perdue - Former president of Perdue Farms, major contributor to Salisbury University.  The Perdue School of Business is named in his honor. Dan Quinn - Head Coach of the Atlanta Falcons. Justin Ready - Republican in Maryland State Senate for District 5 Kenneth D. Schisler - Former Maryland Delegate and former chair of the Maryland Public Service Commission. Mike Seidel - Weather Channel meteorologist J. Lowell Stoltzfus - Former Maryland Delegate and State Senator in Maryland State Senate for District 38. Kris Valderrama - Democrat in Maryland House of Delegates for District 26 Byron Westbrook - American football player, formerly of the Washington Redskins. Jennifer Hope Wills - Actress, starring in “Phantom of the Opera” on Broadway Alpha Sigma Phi Sigma Phi Epsilon Sigma Pi Pi Lambda Phi Kappa Sigma Sigma Tau Gamma Omega Psi Phi Alpha Phi Alpha Kappa Alpha Psi Phi Mu Zeta Tau Alpha Alpha Sigma Tau Delta Gamma Alpha Kappa Alpha Delta Sigma Theta Alpha Phi Omega Sigma Alpha Epsilon (through summer 2015)Daily Times SU extends suspension for troubled fraternitySalisbury University Statement on Unrecognized Groups Tau Kappa Epsilon (through summer 2015) Phi Beta Sigma (through spring 2017)SU’s Phi Beta Sigma fraternity suspended for hazing ACE African Student Association Alpha Omega Biol Society American Marketing Association Amnesty International Appropriations Board Art Club Art of Living Asian & Pacific Islander Club (APIC) Atheist Society Bacchus Gamma Ballroom Dancing Baptist Student Ministries BASIC Best Buddies Beta Alpha Psi Beta Beta Beta BioEnvirons Bound&Gagged improv comedy Bowling Club BT GLASS Campus Crusade Caribbean Student Association Casser Le Moule Catholic Campus Ministry Chemistry Society College Republicans Colleges Against Cancer Conflict Resolutions Club Delta Sigma Theta Democracy Matters Dems On Campus Disc Golf Dodgeball Club Economics Society Education Club (SNEA) Environmental Health Club Environmental Student Association Equestrian Club Evergreen Yearbook Exercise Science Club Fellowship of Christian Athletes Fencing Club Filipino American Cultural Association Financial Management Association Fishing Club Flyer Newspaper Future Filmmakers Club Geographic Society German Club Girls On Top (GOT) Glass Club Global Services Golf Club Gospel Choir Greek Council Habitat for Humanity Haidong Gumdo History Club Investment Management Association Interfraternity Council International Society Jewish Student Association Jui-Jitso Club Kappa Delta Pi Knitting Club Lambda Beta Lambda Pi Eta Leash On Life Maryland Student Legislators Math & Computer Science Club Medical Careers Society MENC (Tri Mu) Men's Club Volleyball Men's Ice Hockey Men's Lacrosse Club Men's Rugby Men's Ultimate Frisbee Mid-Atlantic Review Motorsports Club Mu Phi Epsilon Muslim Student Association (MSA) Mycology Club NAACP National Broadcasting Society OLAS Omicron Delta Kappa One Step Closer OpwallSU Outdoor Club Panhellenic Council Pashion & Fashion Models, Inc. (PAFM) PE Society Phi Alpha Literary Society Phi Alpha Theta Phi Beta Lambda - Future Business Leaders of America Phi Epsilon Kappa Philosophy Club Pi Gamma Mu Ping Pong Club POMS Dance Team Psychology Club Public Relations Student Society of America Quidditch Club Relay for Life Respiratory Therapy Residence Hall Association Saferide SAGE Sailing Club SGA Society for Human Resource Management SIE (Management Club) SOAP (Student Organization for Activity Planning) Social Work Club Sophanes Spanish Club Squawkappella StarNet Society Student Alumni Council Student Nurses Association Students for a Democratic Society Students for Safer Communities (SSC) SU Dance Company SU Step Squad SU Surf Club Tae Kwon Do The Objective Collective TRUTH UAS United Greens Untouchables Dance Company Vegetarian Student Association (VSA) Wesley Foundation Women's Club Lacrosse Women's Club Soccer Women's Club Ultimate (Flash) Women's Rugby WXSU Yoga & Meditation Young Life Salisbury University Arboretum The Electronic Gallery at Salisbury University Official Salisbury University website Official Salisbury University athletics website Student Government Association Salisbury University Seagulls - Official Athletic Site Delmarva Public Radio - Broadcast from the campus of Salisbury University University System of Maryland Salisbury University Maryland State Archives Salisbury University
