    The saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus) is also widely known by the common names, estuarine or Indo-Pacific crocodile, more rarely or informally referred to as the saltie, marine or sea-going crocodile. This species is the largest of all living reptiles, as well as the largest terrestrial and riparian predator in the world. The males of this species can reach sizes up to  and weigh up to . However, an adult male saltwater crocodile is generally between  in length and weighs , rarely growing larger. Females are much smaller and often do not surpass . As its name implies, this species of crocodile can live in salt water, but usually resides in mangrove swamps, estuaries, deltas, lagoons, and lower stretches of rivers. They have the broadest distribution of any modern crocodile, ranging from the eastern coast of India, throughout most of Southeast Asia, and northern Australia. The saltwater crocodile is a formidable and opportunistic hypercarnivorous, apex, ambush predator. It is capable of taking almost any animal that enters its territory, including fish, crustaceans, reptiles, birds, mammals, including other predators, and humans. Due to their size and distribution, saltwater crocodiles are the most dangerous extant crocodilian to humans. Crocodylus porosus is believed to have a direct link to similar crocodilians that inhabited the shorelines of the supercontinent Gondwana (which included what is now the Australian continent) as long ago as 98 million years and were survivors of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event. Fossils of Isisfordia, discovered in outback western Queensland (once a vast inland sea) though smaller in size, show attributes of direct lineage to Crocodylus porosus, suggesting it occupied a similar habitat, with vertebrae indicating it shared the ability to death roll during feeding. Incomplete fossil records make it difficult to accurately trace the emergence of the species. The genome was fully sequenced in 2007. The earliest fossil evidence of the species dates to around 4.0-4.5 million years ago  and no subspecies are known. Scientists estimate that C. porosus is an ancient species that could have diverged from 12 to 6 million years ago. Genetic research has unsurprisingly indicated that the saltwater crocodile is related relatively closely to other living species of Asian crocodile, although some ambiguity exist over what assemblage it could be considered part of based on variable genetic results. Other relatively broad-snouted species such as Mugger (C. palustris) and Siamese crocodiles (C. siamensis) seem to be the most likely candidates to bear the closest relation among living species.Brochu, C. A. (2000). "Congruence between physiology, phylogenetics and the fossil record on crocodylian historical biogeography", pp. 9-28 in Grigg, G. C., Seebacher, F. & Franklin, C. E. (eds.) Crocodilian Biology and Evolution. Surry Beatty & Sons (Chipping Norton, Aus.), . Currently, most sources state that the saltwater crocodile has no subspecies.Brazaitis, P. (2001). A Guide to the Identification of the Living Species of Crocodilians. Wildlife Conservation Society. However, based largely on morphological variability, some have claimed that not only are there subspecies but that C. porosus actually houses a species complex. In 1844, S. Müller and H. Schlegel attempted to describe crocodiles from Java and Borneo as a new species which they named C. raninus, subsequently given the informal common names of the Indonesian crocodile or Bornean crocodile. According to Ross (1992), specimens of C. raninus can reliably be distinguished both from Siamese crocodiles and true saltwater crocodiles on the basis of the number ventral scales and on the presence of four postoccipital scutes which are often absent in true saltwater crocodiles. Another attempt to derive a species came from Australia, Wells & Wellington (1985), was based upon large-bodied, relatively large-headed and short-tailed crocodiles from Australia. The type specimen reported for this so-called species was a crocodile nicknamed "Sweetheart" that was inadvertently killed in 1979 (drowned after overly-anesthetized in an attempt to relocate it after it had taken to attacking boats). However, this "species", C. pethericki, has later been largely considered as a misinterpretation of the physiological changes undergone by very large male crocodiles. However, Wells and Wellington ascertation that the Australian saltwater crocodiles may at least be distinctive enough from northern Asian saltwater crocodiles to warrant subspecies status, as could raninus from other Asian saltwater crocodiles, has been considered to possibly bear validity.Brochu, C. A. (2009). Phylogenetic relationships and divergence timing of Crocodylus based on morphology and the fossil record.   The saltwater crocodile has a wide snout compared to most crocodiles. However, it has a longer muzzle than the mugger crocodile; its length is twice its width at the base. The saltwater crocodile has fewer armour plates on its neck than other crocodilians. On this species, a pair of ridges runs from the eyes along the centre of the snout. The scales are oval in shape and the scutes are either small compared to other species or commonly are entirely absent. In addition, an obvious gap is also present between the cervical and dorsal shields, and small, triangular scutes are present between the posterior edges of the large, transversely arranged scutes in the dorsal shield. The relative lack of scutes is considered an asset useful to distinguish saltwater crocodiles in captivity or in illicit leather trading, as well as in the few areas in the field where sub-adult or younger saltwater crocodiles may need to be distinguished from other crocodiles.Ross, F. D. & Mayer, G. C. 1983. On the dorsal armor of the Crocodilia. In Rhodin, A. G. J. & Miyata, K. (eds) Advances in Herpetology and Evolutionary Biology. Museum of Comparative Zoology (Cambridge, Mass.), pp. 306-331. The adult saltwater crocodile's broad body contrasts with that of most other lean crocodiles, leading to early unverified assumptions the reptile was an alligator. The head is very large. The largest skull sized that could be scientifically verified was for a specimen in the Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle sourced to Cambodia, the skull length for this specimen was  (female skull lengths of over  are exceptional), with a mandibular length of  and a maximum width across the skull (near the base) of . The length of the specimen this came from is not known but based on skull-to-total-length ratios for very large saltwater crocodiles its length was presumably somewhere in the  range. Although it is the largest overall living crocodilian and reptile, other crocodilians may have a proportionately longer skull, namely the gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) and the false gharial (Tomistoma schlegelii), skull lengths in the latter have been verified up to  (the largest crocodilian skull verified for a living species), although both of these thin-snouted species have less massive skulls and considerably less massive bodies than the saltwater crocodile. The teeth are also long, with the largest teeth (the fourth tooth from the front on the lower jaw) having been measured at up to  in length. If detached from the body, the head of a very large male crocodile can reportedly weigh over  alone, including the large muscles and tendons at the base of the skull that lend the crocodile its massive biting strength. Young saltwater crocodiles are pale yellow in colour with black stripes and spots on their bodies and tails. This colouration lasts for several years until the crocodiles mature into adults. The colour as an adult is much darker greenish-drab, with a few lighter tan or grey areas sometimes apparent. Several colour variations are known and some adults may retain fairly pale skin, whereas others may be so dark as to appear blackish. The ventral surface is white or yellow in colour on saltwater crocodiles of all ages. Stripes are present on the lower sides of their bodies, but do not extend onto their bellies. Their tails are grey with dark bands.  Excluding the marine regions of the world, crocodiles are the largest living predator on land or in aquatic environments.Meyer, E. R. (1984). "Crocodilians as living fossils", pp. 105-131 in Living Fossils. Springer, New York. Newly hatched saltwater crocodiles measure about  long and weigh an average of . By their second year, young crocodiles grow to  long and weigh . Considering that they range in mass from the relatively tiny hatchling size to the massive size attainable in very large males, saltwater crocodiles are one of the most variable sized known vertebrates on earth. Males reach sexual maturity around  at around 16 years of age, while females reach sexual maturity at  and 12–14 years of age. An adult male saltwater crocodile is normally  long, weighing .Webb, G., & Manolis, S. C. (1989). Crocodiles of Australia. Reed Books. Adult males with stable home territories averaged  per one study. Yet another study found mature males to average . According to the Australian Government Department of the Environment the average adult male crocodile measures approximately  and weighs more than . In one case, mature males were attributed an average body weight of ,The Wildlife Year (1993). Editors of the Reader's Digest Press (ed.). Readers Digest; 1st edition. ISBN 978-0276420122. although Webb and Manolis (1989) attributed the average weight of adult males in Australian tidal rivers as only  at lengths of  (possibly representing a reduced body mass due to the species being in recovery after decades of overhunting at that stage). On the other hand, rare very large, aged males can exceed  in length and weigh more than . A governmental study from Australia accepts that the very largest members of the species are likely to measure  in length and weigh . The largest confirmed saltwater crocodile on record, shot in Papua New Guinea in May 1966 along the northeastern coast was  long, and weighed about .Grigg, G., & Kirshner, D. (2015). Biology and Evolution of Crocodylians. CSIRO PUBLISHING. Due to extensive poaching during the 20th century, such individuals are extremely rare today in most areas, as it takes a long time for the crocodiles to attain those sizes. Also, a possible earlier presence of particular genes may have led to such large-sized saltwater crocodiles, genes that were ultimately lost from the overall gene pool due to extensive hide hunting in the past. However, with recent restoration of saltwater crocodile habitat and reduced poaching, the number of large crocodiles is increasing, especially in Odisha. Recently, Guinness has accepted a claim of a ,  male saltwater crocodile living within Bhitarkanika Park in Odisha. However, while the estimated hulking mass of this giant is possible or even probable in a crocodile at this great a length,Grigg, G., & Gans, C. (1993). Morphology and physiology of the Crocodylia. The Australian Department of the Environment; Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. pp. 326-336. due to the difficulty of trapping and measuring a very large living crocodile, the accuracy of these dimensions has yet to be verified. Currently, four other crocodiles over  are claimed to live in the Bhitarkanika Park. In the future, if conservation efforts pay off, these large individuals could be more common. This species is the only extant crocodilian to regularly reach or exceed . A large male from Philippines, named Lolong, was the largest saltwater crocodile ever caught and placed in captivity. He was 20&nbsp;ft 3 in (6.17 m), and weighed 2,370&nbsp;lbs (1,075&nbsp;kg), but died in captivity on 10 February 2013. The main determinant of weight is length. The weight of a crocodile increases steeply as length increases. A 10-cm increase in a 1-m-long crocodile would result in a 900-g increase in weight, but a 34-kg gain in the case of a 5-m-long individual. This explains why individuals at  can weigh more than twice that of individuals at . Weight can also vary enormously based on condition and age; older males tend to outweigh younger ones, since they maintain prime territories with access to better, more abundant prey. For example, crocodiles at  long usually range in weight from . On average, though, these 4.8-m individuals would weigh around , and at  would weigh about . This species has the greatest sexual dimorphism of any modern crocodilian, with the females being much smaller than males. An extremely large male may be roughly twice the length of his female mate and may scale from five to ten times as much as she. Typical female body lengths range from . Females at  in length, such as Connie and Cookie, kept at the Australia Zoo, weigh . Similarly, the governmental Australian department of the environment states that the female averages about  in length and will weigh approximately . A female of a median length of  will weigh about . One tracking study found a series of adult females to measure from  and to weigh . Yet another study found adult females averaged . The average length of adult female crocodiles at Philippine crocodile farms was . It is possible for the largest females, measuring  or exceptionally more, to weigh up to .Curtis, L. K., Dennis, A. J., McDonald, K. R., Kyne, P. M., & Debus, S. J. (2012). Queensland's Threatened Animals. The largest female on record measured about . Due to the extreme sexual dimorphism of the species as contrasted with the more modest size dimorphism of other species, the average length of the species, stated as a median by  by Guggisberg (1972) and a midpoint of  by Brazaitis (1987), is only slightly more than some other extant crocodilians, i.e. roughly equal to that of a mature gharial, about  more than an adult false gharial and about  more than a Nile crocodile (C. niloticus), etc.Brazaitis, P. (1987). Identification of crocodilian skins. Pty Lim., Chipping Norton, Australia.       The saltwater crocodile is one of the three crocodilians found in India, the other two being the more regionally widespread, smaller mugger crocodile and the narrow-snouted, fish-eating gharial. Apart from the eastern coast of India, the saltwater crocodile is extremely rare on the Indian subcontinent. A huge population, consisting of many large adults, several over , including a monstrous afforementioned  male, is present within the Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary of Odisha and they are known to be present in smaller numbers throughout the Indian and Bangladeshi portions of the Sundarbans. The saltwater crocodile also persists in bordering Bangladesh as does the mugger and gharial.Choudhury, B.C. & de Silva, A. (2013). Crocodylus palustris. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Choudhury, B.C., Singh, L.A.K., Rao, R.J., Basu, D., Sharma, R.K., Hussain, S.A., Andrews, H.V., Whitaker, N., Whitaker, R., Lenin, J., Maskey, T., Cadi, A., Rashid, S.M.A., Choudhury, A.A., Dahal, B., Win Ko Ko, U., Thorbjarnarson, J & Ross, J.P. (2007). Gavialis gangeticus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species Populations are also present within the mangrove forests and other coastal areas of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in India. Saltwater crocodiles were once present throughout most of the island of Sri Lanka, but remain mostly within protected areas such as Yala National Park, which also has a large population of mugger crocodiles. In northern Australia (which includes the northernmost parts of the Northern Territory, Western Australia, and Queensland), the saltwater crocodile is thriving, particularly in the multiple river systems near Darwin (such as the Adelaide, Mary, and Daly Rivers, along with their adjacent billabongs and estuaries), where large individuals of more than  in length are not uncommon. The saltwater crocodile population in Australia is estimated at 100,000 to 200,000 adults. In Australia, the species coexists with the smaller, narrow-snouted Johnston's or freshwater crocodile (C. johnsoni).Crocodile Specialist Group. (1996). Crocodylus johnsoni. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.  Their range extends from Broome in Western Australia through the entire Northern Territory coast all the way south to Rockhampton in Queensland. The Alligator Rivers in the Arnhem Land region are misnamed due to the resemblance of the saltwater crocodile to alligators as compared to freshwater crocodiles, which also inhabit the Northern Territory. In New Guinea, they are also common, existing within the coastal reaches of virtually every river system in the country, such as the Fly River, along with all estuaries and mangroves, where they overlap in range but rarely in actuality or habitat with the rarer, less aggressive New Guinea crocodile (C. novaeguineae). They are also present in varying numbers throughout the Bismarck Archipelago, the Kai Islands, the Aru Islands, the Maluku Islands and many other islands within the region, including Timor, and most islands within the Torres Strait. The saltwater crocodile was historically known to be widespread throughout Southeast Asia, but is now extinct throughout much of this range. This species has not been reported in the wild for decades in most of Indochina and is extinct in Thailand,Humphrey, S. R., & Bain, J. R. (1990). Endangered animals of Thailand (No. 6). Sandhill Crane Press. Laos,Whitaker, R. (1982). "Status of Asian crocodilians", p. 237 in Crocodiles: Proceedings of the 5th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group of the Species Survival Commission of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources Convened at the Florida State Museum, Gainesville, Florida, USA, 12 to 16 August 1980. IUCN. Vietnam, and possibly Cambodia. The status of this species is critical within much of Myanmar, but a stable population of many large adults is present in the Irrawaddy Delta. Probably, the only country in Indochina still harbouring wild populations of this species is Myanmar.  Although saltwater crocodiles were once very common in the Mekong Delta (from where they disappeared in the 1980s) and other river systems, the future of this species in Indochina is now looking grim. However, it is also the least likely of crocodilians to become globally extinct due to its wide distribution and almost precolonial population sizes in Northern Australia and New Guinea. The saltwater crocodile has been long extinct in China, where it inhabited the southern coastal areas from Fujian province in the north to the border of Vietnam. References to large crocodiles that preyed on both humans and livestock appeared during the Han and Song Dynasties, where it occurred in the lower Pearl River near present-day Hong Kong and Macau, the Han River, the Min River in the north, portions of coastal Guangxi province and Hainan Island. The presence of crocodiles in Fujian province represent the northernmost distribution of the species. The population is sporadic in Indonesia and Malaysia, with some areas harbouring large populations (Borneo and Sumatra, for example) and others with very small, at-risk populations (e.g., Peninsular Malaysia). Despite the close proximity to the crocodile hotbed of northern Australia, crocodiles no longer exist in Bali. This species is also reportedly extinct on Lombok, Komodo, and most of Java.Klock, J. (2008). Historic Hydrologic Landscape Modification and Human Adaptation in Central Lombok, Indonesia from 1894 to the Present. In the southern Malaysian Peninsula as well as Borneo, salwater crocodiles may co-exist with the relatively narrow-snouted false gharial (as well as on Sumatra) and the closely related but usually smaller Siamese crocodile (as well as in Java).Bezuijen, M.R., Shwedick, B., Simpson, B.K., Staniewicz, A. & Stuebing, R. (2014). Tomistoma schlegelii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Bezuijen, M., Simpson, B., Behler, N., Daltry, J. & Tempsiripong, Y. (2012). Crocodylus siamensis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.  A small population may remain within Ujung Kulon National Park in western Java. The saltwater crocodile is also present in very limited parts of the South Pacific, with an average population in the Solomon Islands, a very small and soon to be extinct population in Vanuatu (where the population officially stands at only three) and a decent but at-risk population (which may be rebounding) in Palau. They once ranged as far west as the east coast of Africa to the Seychelles Islands. These crocodiles were once believed to be a population of Nile crocodiles, but they were later proven to be C. porosus.  Because of its tendency to travel very long distances at sea, individual saltwater crocodiles have been known to occasionally appear in areas far away from their general range. Vagrant individuals have historically been reported on New Caledonia, Iwo Jima, Fiji, and even in the relatively frigid Sea of Japan (thousands of miles from their native territory.) In late 2008-early 2009, a handful of wild saltwater crocodiles were verified to be living within the river systems of Fraser Island, hundreds of kilometres from, and in much cooler water than, their normal Queensland range. These crocodiles did indeed migrate south to the island from northern Queensland during the warmer wet season and presumably returned to the north upon the seasonal temperature drop. Despite the surprise and shock within the Fraser Island public, this is apparently not new behaviour, and in the distant past, wild crocodiles had been reported occasionally appearing as far south as Brisbane during the warmer wet season. Saltwater crocodiles generally spend the tropical wet season in freshwater swamps and rivers, moving downstream to estuaries in the dry season, and sometimes travelling far out to sea. Crocodiles compete fiercely with each other for territory, with dominant males in particular occupying the most eligible stretches of freshwater creeks and streams. Junior crocodiles are thus forced into the more marginal river systems and sometimes into the ocean. This explains the large distribution of the animal (ranging from the east coast of India to northern Australia), as well as its being found in the odd places on occasion (such as the Sea of Japan). Like all crocodiles, they can survive for prolonged periods only in warm temperatures, and crocodiles seasonally vacate parts of Australia if cold spells hit.  The primary behaviour to distinguish the saltwater crocodile from other crocodiles is its tendency to occupy salt water. Though other crocodiles also have salt glands that enable them to survive in saltwater, a trait which alligators do not possess, most other species do not venture out to sea except during extreme conditions.Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1997). Animal physiology: adaptation and environment. Cambridge University Press. The only other species to display regular seagoing behaviour is the American crocodile (C. acutus), but the American version is still not considered to be as marine-prone as the saltwater crocodile. As its alternate name "sea-going crocodile" implies, this species travels between areas separated by sea, or simply relies on the relative ease of travelling through water in order to circumvent long distances on the same land mass, such as Australia. In a similar fashion to migratory birds using thermal columns, saltwater crocodiles use ocean currents to travel long distances. In a study, 20 crocodiles were tagged with satellite transmitters; 8 of these crocodiles ventured out into open ocean, in which one of them travelled  in 25 days. Another specimen, a -long male, travelled  in 20 days. Without having to move around much, sometimes simply by floating, the current-riding behaviour allows for the conservation of energy. They will even interrupt their travels, residing in sheltered bays for a few days, when the current is against the desired direction of travel, until the current changes direction. Crocodiles also travel up and down in river systems, periodically. While most crocodilians are social animals sharing basking spots and food, saltwater crocodiles are more territorial and are less tolerant of their own kind; adult males will share territory with females, but drive off rival males. Saltwater crocodiles mate in the wet season, laying eggs in a nest consisting of a mound of mud and vegetation. The female guards the nest and hatchlings from predators. Generally very lethargic, a trait which helps it survive months at a time without food, the saltwater crocodile will usually loiter in the water or bask in the sun during much of the day, preferring to hunt at night. A study of seasonal saltwater crocodile behaviour in Australia indicated that they are more active and more likely to spend time in the water during the Australian summer; conversely, they are less active and spend relatively more time basking in the sun during the winter. Saltwater crocodiles, however, are among the most active of all crocodilians, spending more time cruising and active, especially in water. They are much less terrestrial than most species of crocodiles, spending less time on land except for basking. At times, they tend to spend weeks at sea in search of land and in some cases, barnacles have been observed growing on crocodile scales, indicative of the long periods they spend at sea.  Despite their relative lethargy, saltwater crocodiles are agile predators and display surprising agility and speed when necessary, usually during strikes at prey. They are capable of explosive bursts of speed when launching an attack from the water. They can also swim at  in short bursts, around three times as fast as the fastest human swimmers, but when cruising, they usually go at . However, stories of crocodiles being faster than a race horse for short distances across land are little more than urban legend. At the water's edge, however, where they can combine propulsion from both feet and tail, their speed can be explosive. While crocodilian brains are much smaller than those of mammals (as low as 0.05% of body weight in the saltwater crocodile), saltwater crocodiles are capable of learning difficult tasks with very little conditioning, learning to track the migratory route of their prey as the seasons change, and may possess a deeper communication ability than currently accepted.  Like most crocodilians, saltwater crocodiles are not fastidious in their choice of food, and readily vary their prey selection according to availability, nor are they voracious, as they are able to survive on relatively little food for a prolonged period. Because of their size and distribution, saltwater crocodiles hunt the broadest range of prey species of any modern crocodilian. The diet of hatchling, juvenile and subadult saltwater crocodiles has been subject to extensively greater scientific study than that of fully-grown crocodiles, in large part due to the aggression, territoriality and size of adults which make them difficult for biologists to handle without significant risk to safety, for both humans and the crocodiles themselves; the main method used for capturing adult saltwater crocodiles is a huge pole with large hooks meant for shark capture which restrict the crocodile's jaws but can cause damage to their snouts and even this is unproven to allow successful capture for crocodiles in excess of . The diet of adults is more likely to be based in reliable eye-witness accounts. Hatchlings are restricted to feeding on smaller animals, such as small fish, frogs, insects and small aquatic invertebrates. In addition to these prey, juveniles also take a variety of freshwater and saltwater fish, various amphibians, crustaceans, molluscs, such as large gastropods and cephalopods, birds, small to medium-sized mammals, and other reptiles, such as snakes and lizards. When crocodiles obtain a length of more than , the significance of small invertebrate prey fades in favor of small vertebrates including fish and smaller mammals and birds. The larger the animal grows, the greater the variety of its diet, although relatively small prey are taken throughout its lifetime. Among crustacean prey, large mud crabs of the genus Scylla are frequently consumed, especially in mangrove habitats. Ground-living birds, such as the emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) and different kinds of water birds, especially the magpie goose (Anseranas semipalmata), are the most commonly preyed upon birds, due to the increased chance of encounter.Messel, H., & Vorlicek, G. C. (1989). "Ecology of Crocodylus porosus in northern Australia", pp. 164-183 in Crocodiles: Their Ecology, Management and Conservation. IUCN. ISBN 2880329876 Even swift-flying birds and bats may be snatched if close to the surface of water, as well as wading birds while these are patrolling the shore looking for food, even down to the size of a common sandpiper (Actitis hypoleucos). Mammalian prey of juveniles and subadults are usually as large as the smaller species of ungulates, such as the greater mouse-deer (Tragulus napu) and hog deer (Hyelaphus porcinus). Various mammalian species including, monkeys (i.e. crab-eating macaques (Macaca fascicularis), long-tailed macaques (M. fascicularis) & proboscis monkeys (Nasalis larvatus),Otani, Y., ustine Tuugaz, A., Bernard, H., Matsuda, I., & Kinabalu, K. Opportunistic predation and predation-related events on long-tailed macaque and proboscis monkey in Kinabatangan, Sabah, Malaysia.), gibbons, porcupines, wallabies, mongoose, civets, jackals (Canis ssp.), turtles, flying foxes (Pteropus ssp.), hares (Lepus ssp.), rodents, badgers, otters,Kruuk, H. 1995. Wild Otters. New York, New York: Oxford University Press. fishing cats (Prionailurus viverrinus) and chevrotains are readily taken when encountered. Unlike fish, crabs and aquatic creatures, mammals and birds are usually found only sporadically in or next to water so crocodiles seem to search for places where such prey may be concentrated, i.e. the water under a tree holding a flying fox colony or spots where herds of water buffaloes feed. Studies have shown that unlike freshwater crocodiles (which can easily be killed by toads), saltwater crocodiles are partially resistant to cane toad (Rhinella marina) toxins and can consume them but only in small quantities and not enough to provide effective natural control for this virulent introduced pest. Large crocodiles, even the oldest males, do not ignore small species when the opportunity arises. On the other hand, sub-adult saltwater crocodiles weighing only  (and measuring ) have been recorded killing and eating goats (Capra aegagrus hircus) weighing 50 to 92% of their own body mass in Orissa, India, so are capable of attacking large prey from an early age. Actually the diet of specimens in juvenile to subadult range, since they feed on any animals up to their own size practically no matter how small, was more diverse than adults who often ignored all prey below a certain size limit.  Large animals taken by adult crocodiles include deer, such as sambar (Rusa unicolor), wild boar (Sus scrofa), Malayan tapirs (Tapirus indicus), kangaroos, orangutans (Pongo ssp.), dingos (Canis lupus dingo), and large bovines, such as banteng (Bos javanicus), water buffalo (Bubalus arnee), and gaur (Bos gaurus). However, larger animals are only sporadically taken due to the fact only large males typically attack very large prey and large ungulates and other sizeable mammals are only sporadically distributed in this species' range, outside of a few key areas such as the Sundarbans. Off-setting this, goats, water buffalo and wild boar/pigs have been introduced to many of the areas occupied by saltwater crocodiles and returned to feral states to varying degrees and thus can amply support large crocodiles. Any type of domestic livestock, such as chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus), sheep (Ovis aries), pigs, horses (Equus ferus caballus) and cattle (Bos primigenius taurus), and domesticated animals/pets may be eaten given the opportunity. As a seagoing species, the saltwater crocodile also preys on a variety of saltwater bony fish and other marine animals, including sea snakes, sea turtles, sea birds, dugongs (Dugong dugon), rays (including large sawfish), and small sharks. Most witnessed acts of predation on marine animals have occurred in coastal waters or within sight of land, with female sea turtles and their babies caught during mating season when the turtles are closer to shore and bull sharks being the only largish shark with a strong propensity to patrol brackish and fresh waters. However, there is evidence that saltwater crocodile do hunt while out in the open seas, based upon the remains of pelagic fishes that only dwell miles away from land being found in their stomachs.Callaway, J. M., & Nicholls, E. L. (Eds.). (1997). Ancient marine reptiles. Academic Press.Blaber, S. J. (2008). Tropical estuarine fishes: ecology, exploration and conservation. John Wiley & Sons. The hunting methods utilized by saltwater crocodiles are indistinct from any other crocodilian, with the hunting crocodile submerging and quietly swimming over to the prey before pouncing upperwards striking suddenly. Unlike some other crocodilians, such as alligators and even Nile crocodiles, they are not known to have hunted on dry land. Young saltwater crocodiles are capable of breaching their entire body into their air in a single upward motion while hunting prey that may be perched on low hanging branches. While hunting rhesus macaques, crocodiles have been seen to knock the monkeys off a bank by knocking them with their tail, forcing the macaque into water for easy consumption. However, whether tail use in hunting is intentional or just an accidental benefit is not definitely clear. As with other crocodilians, their sharp, peg-like teeth are well-suited to seize and tightly grip prey, but not designed to shear flesh. Small prey are simply swallowed whole, while larger animals are forcibly dragged into deep water and drowned or crushed. Large prey is then torn into manageable pieces by "death rolling" (the spinning of the crocodile to twist off hunks of meat) or by sudden jerks of the head. Occasionally, food items will be stored for later consumption once a crocodile eats its fill, although this can lead to scavenging by interlopers such as monitor lizards.   Saltwater crocodiles have the strongest bite of any animal today and a large saltwater crocodile can crush a full-grown bovid's skull between its jaws. A -long saltwater crocodile has been confirmed as having the highest bite force ever recorded for an animal in a laboratory setting, with a bite force value of  (surpassing the previous record of  made by a -long American alligator (Alligator mississippinesis)). Based on the regression of mean body mass and mean bite force, the bite forces of multiple crocodile species,  individuals were estimated at  to . The study, led by Dr. Gregory M. Erickson, also shed light to the larger, extinct species of crocodilians. Since crocodile anatomy has changed only slightly for the last 80 million years, current data on modern crocodilians can be used to estimate the bite force of extinct species. An  Deinosuchus would apply a force of , twice that of the latest, higher bite force estimations of Tyrannosaurus rex. The extraordinary bite of crocodilians is a result of their anatomy. The space for the jaw muscle in the skull is very large, which is easily visible from the outside as a bulge at each side. The nature of the muscle is extremely stiff, almost as hard as bone to the touch, such that it can appear to be the continuum of the skull. Another trait is that most of the muscle in a crocodile's jaw is arranged for clamping down. Despite the strong muscles to close the jaw, crocodiles have extremely small and weak muscles to open the jaw. The jaws of a crocodile can be securely shut with several layers of duct tape.Cogger, H.G. (1996). Reptiles and Amphibians of Australia. Chatswood, NSW: Reed Books.    Saltwater crocodiles mate in the wet season, when water levels are at their highest. In Australia, the male and female engage in courtship in September and October, and the female lays eggs between November and March. It is possible the rising temperatures of the wet season provoke reproductive behaviour in this species. While crocodilians generally nest every year, there have been several recorded cases of female saltwater crocodiles nesting only every other year and also records of a female attempting to produce two broods in a single wet season. The female selects the nesting site, and both parents will defend the nesting territory, which is typically a stretch of shore along tidal rivers or freshwater areas, especially swamps. Nests are often in surprisingly exposed location, often in mud with little to no vegetation around and thus limited protection from the sun and wind. The nest is a mound of mud and vegetation, usually measuring  long and  high, with an entrance averaging  in diameter. Some nests in unlikely habitats have occurred, such as rocky rubble or in a damp low-grass field. The female crocodile usually scratches a layer of leaves and other debree around the nest entrance and this covering is reported to produce an "astonishing" amount of warmth for the eggs (conicidentially these nesting habits are similar to those of the birds known as megapodes that nest in upland areas of the same Australasian regions where saltwater crocodiles are found).  The female typically lays from 40 to 60 eggs, but some clutches have included up to 90. The eggs measure on average  and weigh  on average in Australia and  in India. These are relatively small, as the average female saltwater crocodile weighs around five times as much as a freshwater crocodile, but lays eggs that are only about 20% larger in measurement and 40% heavier than those of the smaller species. The average weight of a new hatchling in Australia is reportedly . Although the female guards the nest for 80 to 98 days (in extreme high and low cases from 75 to 106 days), the loss of eggs is often high due to flooding and occasionally to predation. As in all crocodilians, the sex of the hatchlings is determined by temperature. at 28-30 degrees all hatchlings will be female, at 30-32 degrees 86% of hatchlings are male, and at 33 or more degrees predominantly female (84%). In Australia, goannas (Varanus giganteus) commonly eat freshwater crocodile eggs (feeding on up to 95% of clutch if discovered), but are relatively unlikely to eat saltwater crocodile eggs due to the vigilance of the imposing mother. A majority of the loss of eggs in the saltwater crocodile occurs due to flooding of the nest hole.  As in all crocodilian species, the female saltwater crocodile exhibits a remarkable level of maternal care for a reptile. She excavates the nest in response to "yelping" calls from the hatchlings, and even gently rolls eggs in her mouth to assist hatching. The female will then carry the hatchlings to water in her mouth (as Nile crocodile and American alligator females have been observed doing when their eggs hatch) and remains with the young for several months. Despite her diligence, losses of baby crocodiles are heavy due to various predators and unrelated crocodiles of their own species. Only approximately 1% of the hatchlings will survive to adulthood. By crocodilian standards, saltwater crocodile hatchlings are exceptionally aggressive to one another and will often fight almost immediately after being transported to water by their mother. The young naturally start to disperse after around 8 months, and start to exhibit territorial behaviour at around 2.5-year-old. They are the most territorial of extant crocodilians and, due to their aggressiveness to conspecifics, from the dispersed immature stage on, they are never seen in concentrations or loose groups as are most other crocodilians.Lang, J. W. (1987). "Crocodilian behaviour: implications for management", pp. 273-294 in Wildlife management: crocodiles and alligators. However, even females will not reach proper sexual maturity for another 10 years. Saltwater crocodiles that survive to adulthood can attain a very long lifespan, with a life expectancy upwards of 70 years, and some individuals may exceed 100 years. While adults have no natural predators aside from humans and potentially other saltwater crocodiles, baby saltwater crocodiles may fall prey to monitor lizards (occasionally but not commonly the numerous goanna in Australia and the Asian water monitor (Varanus salvator) further north), predatory fish (especially the barramundi (Lates calcarifer)), wild boars, rats, various aquatic and raptorial birds (e.g. black-necked storks (Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus) and white-bellied sea eagles (Haliaeetus leucogaster)), pythons, larger crocodiles, and many other predators.Leach, G., Delaney, R., & Fukuda, Y. (2009). Management program for the saltwater crocodile in the Northern Territory of Australia, 2009-2014. Department of Natural Resources, Environment, the Arts and Sport. Pigs and cattle also occasionally inadvertently trample eggs and nests on occasion and degrade habitat quality where found in numbers. Juveniles may also fall prey to tigers and leopards (Panthera pardus) in certain parts of their range, although encounters between these predators are rare and cats are likely to avoid areas with saltwater crocodiles.  In addition to being hunted for its meat and eggs, the saltwater crocodile has the most commercially valuable skin of any crocodilian; and unregulated hunting during the 20th century caused a dramatic decline in the species throughout its range, with the population in northern Australia reduced 95% by 1971. The years from 1940 to 1970 were the peak of unregulated hunting and may have regionally caused irreparable damage to saltwater crocodile populations. The species currently has full legal protection in all Australian states and territories where it is found&nbsp;– Western Australia (since 1970), Northern Territory (since 1971) and Queensland (since 1974). Illegal hunting still persists in some areas, with protection in some countries being grossly ineffective, and trade is often difficult to monitor and control over such a vast range. Despite this, the species has made a dramatic recovery in recent decades. Because of its resurgence, the species is considered of minimal concern for extinction. However, many areas have not recovered, some population surveys have shown that although young crocodiles are present, fewer than 10% of specimens spotted are in adult size range and no particularly large males, such as Sri Lanka or the Republic of Palau. This is indicative of both potential continued persecution and exploitation and a non-recovered breeding population.Gramantez, D. (2008) A case study of the Saltwater Crocodile Crocodylus porosus in Muthurajawela Marsh, Sri Lanka - Considerations for conservation. IUCN- Crocodile Specialist Group. In a more balanced population, such those from Bhitarkanika National Park or Sabah, Malaysia, 28% and 24.2% of specimens observed were in the adult size range of more than .Kar, S. K. (1992). "Conservation, research, and management of estuarine crocodiles Crocodylus porosus, respectively, of the crocodiles detected were Schneider in Bhitarkania Wildlife Sanctuary, Orissa: India during the last 17 years", pp. 222-242 in Crocodiles. Proceedings of the 11th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group . Currently, the species is listed in CITES as follows: Habitat loss continues to be a major problem. In northern Australia, much of the nesting habitat of the saltwater crocodile is susceptible to trampling by feral water buffalo, although buffalo eradication programs have now reduced this problem considerably. Even where large areas of suitable habitat remain, subtle habitat alterations can be a problem, such as in the Andaman Islands, where freshwater areas, used for nesting, are being increasingly converted to human agriculture. After the commercial value of crocodile skins waned, perhaps the greatest immediate challenge to implementing conservation efforts has been the occasional danger the species can be to humans and the resulting negative view of the crocodile. Of all the crocodilians, the saltwater crocodile has the strongest tendency to treat humans in its territory as prey, and have a long history of attacking humans who unknowingly stray into their territory. As a result of their power, intimidating size and speed, survival of a direct predatory attack is unlikely if the crocodile is able to make direct contact. By contrast to the American policy of encouraging a certain degree of habitat coexistence with alligators, the only recommended policy for dealing with saltwater crocodiles is to stay as far away from their habitat as is humanly possible, as they are exceedingly aggressive when encroached upon.  Exact data on attacks are limited outside Australia, where one or two fatal attacks are reported per year. From 1971 to 2013, the total number of fatalities reported in Australia due to saltwater crocodile attack was 106.Manolis, S. C., & Webb, G. J. (2013, September). "Assessment of saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus) attacks in Australia (1971–2013): implications for management", pp. 97-104 in Crocodiles Proceedings of the 22nd Working Meeting of the IUCN-SSC Crocodile Specialist Group. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. The low level of attacks may be due to extensive efforts by wildlife officials in Australia to post crocodile warning signs at numerous at-risk billabongs, rivers, lakes and beaches. Also, recent, less-publicised attacks have been reported in Borneo, Sumatra, Eastern India (Andaman Islands), and Burma. In Sarawak, Borneo, the average number of fatal attacks is reportedly 2.8 annually for the years from 2000 to 2003. In the Northern Territory in Australia, attempts have made to relocate saltwater crocodiles who've displayed aggressive behaviour towards humans but these have proven ineffective as the problem crocodiles are apparently able to find their way back towards their original territories. In the Darwin area from 2007-2009, 67-78% of "problem crocodiles" were identified as males.Delaney, R., Fukuda, Y., & Saalfeld, K. (2009). SALTWATER CROCODILE (Crocodylus porosus) MANAGEMENT PROGRAM. Northern Territory Government, Department of Natural Resources, Environment, the Arts and Sport.   Many attacks in areas outside Australia are believed to go unreported, with one study positing up to 20 to 30 attacks occur every year. This number may be conservative in light of several areas where humans and saltwater crocodiles co-exist in relatively undeveloped, low-economy and rural regions, where attacks are likely to go unreported.Sideleau, B., & Britton, A. R. C. (2012). "A preliminary analysis of worldwide crocodilian attacks", pp. 111-114 in Crocodiles Proceedings of the 21st Working Meeting of the IUCN-SSC Crocodile Specialist Group. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. However, claims in the past that saltwater crocodiles are responsible for thousands of human fatalities annually are likely to have been exaggerations and were probably falsified to benefit leather companies, hunting organizations and other sources which may have benefited from maximizing the negative perception of crocodiles for financial gain. Although it does not pay to underestimate such a formidable predator, one that has no reason to not view humans as prey, many wild saltwater crocodiles are normally quite wary of humans and will go out of their way to submerge and swim away from them, even in large adult males, if previously subject to harassment or persecution.Somaweera, R. & A. de Silva (2013). Using traditional knowledge to minimize human-crocodile conflict in Sri Lanka, pp. 257. In: Crocodiles. Proceedings of the 22nd Working Meeting of the IUCN-SSC Crocodile Specialist Group. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland. Some attacks on humans appear to be territorial rather than predatory in nature, with crocodiles over two years in age often attacking anything that comes into their area (including boats). Humans can usually escape alive from such encounters, which comprise about half of all attacks. Non-fatal attacks usually involve crocodiles of  or less in length. Fatal attacks, more likely to be predatory in motivation, commonly involve larger crocodiles with an average estimated size of . Under normal circumstances, Nile crocodiles are believed to be responsible for a considerably greater number of fatal attacks on humans than saltwater crocodiles. This is most likely because of the plethora of people in Africa who rely on riparian areas for their livelihood, which is less prevalent in most of Asia and certainly less so in Australia. In the Andaman Islands, the number of fatal attacks on humans has reportedly increased, the reason inferred due to habitat destruction and reduction of natural prey.Sivaperuman, C. (2014). Saltwater Crocodiles in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, with Special Reference to Human–Crocodile Conflict. Marine Faunal Diversity in India: Taxonomy, Ecology and Conservation, 453. During the Japanese retreat in the Battle of Ramree Island on 19 February 1945, saltwater crocodiles may have been responsible for the deaths of over 400 Japanese soldiers. British soldiers encircled the swampland through which the Japanese were retreating, condemning the Japanese to a night in the mangroves, which were home to thousands of saltwater crocodiles. Many Japanese soldiers did not survive this night, but their death mainly as a result of crocodile attacks has been doubted. Another notorious crocodile attack was in 1985, on ecofeminist Val Plumwood, who survived the attack.  According to Wondjina, the mythology of Indigenous Australians, the saltwater crocodile was banished from the fresh water for becoming full of bad spirits and growing too large, unlike the freshwater crocodile, which was somewhat revered. As such, Aboriginal rock art depicting the saltwater crocodile is rare, although examples of up to 3,000 years old can be found in caves in Kakadu and Arnhem land, roughly matching the species distribution. The species is frequently depicted in contemporary aboriginal art.  The species is featured on several postage stamps, including an 1894 State of North Borneo 12-cent stamp; a 1948 Australian 2 shilling stamp depicting an aboriginal rock artwork of the species; a 1966 Republic of Indonesia stamp; a 1994 Palau 20-cent stamp; a 1997 Australian 22-cent stamp; and a 2005 1 Malaysian ringgit postage stamp. The species has featured in contemporary Australian film and television including the "Crocodile" Dundee series of films and The Crocodile Hunter television series. There are now several saltwater crocodile-themed parks in Australia. The crocodile is considered to be holy on Timor. According to legend, the island was formed by a giant crocodile. The Papuan people have a similar and very involved myth and traditionally the crocodile was described as relative (normally a father or grandfather). Currently, the saltwater crocodile is the only extant crocodilian scientifically verified to exceed . Although several other species, including the Nile, Orinoco (C. intermedius) and American crocodiles as well as black caimans (Melanosuchus niger) and gharials are also claimed to reach or exceed such a length, these are based on old hunting records (although some of these are considered authentic per Guinness Records), ancedotes or are projection from remaining skull lengths and, unlike the saltwater crocodile, lengths in excess of  are considered exceptional rather than occasional. However, the largest size recorded for a saltwater crocodile is the subject of considerable controversy. The reason behind unverified sizes is either the case of insufficient/inconclusive data or exaggeration from the hunter's point of view. This section is dedicated to examples of the largest saltwater crocodiles recorded by any individual, amateur or professional, with the aim of satisfying the public interest without creating data pollution. While some of these may have been accurately measured, the lack of skulls, skins or detailed scientific examination places most outsized saltwater crocodiles as unverified and as merely ancedotal. Only a small handful of crocodiles have been measured accurately via scientifically verified methods as exceeding , as perhaps some hunters who've killed outsized crocodiles have measured "along the curves" (conforming to the body rather than in a straight line) which falsely boosts the length or with a partially curved tail which can take up to nearly a foot off the actual total length. Many giants have had their sizes estimated based upon skull length and even these can be made in error, unlike some other crocodilians, large saltwater crocodiles are relatively long-bodied and tailed compared to other big crocodilians so the ratio of skull length to total length is more accurate at 1:9 (i.e. the overall length is 9 times the skull length) rather than 1:7, also the mandibular part of the jaw may be taken as the skull length but this is inaccurate as it always greater than the actual (upper) skull length and falsely boosts the projected total length. Below, in descending order starting from the largest, are some examples of large crocodiles, confirmed or unconfirmed, recorded throughout history.     Appendix I (prohibiting all commercial trade in the species or its byproducts): All wild populations except for those of Australia, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea Appendix II (commercial trade allowed with export permit; import permits may or may not be required depending on the laws of the importing country): Australia, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea wild populations, plus all worldwide populations bred in captivity for commercial purposes A crocodile shot in the Bay of Bengal in 1840 was reported at . Furthermore, this specimen was claimed to have a belly girth of  and a body mass estimated . However, the skull of this specimen was examined by Guinness Records and found to be only  in length, indicating the above size was considerably exaggerated and the animal would have probably measured no more than . James R. Montgomery, who ran a plantation near to the Lower Kinabatangan Segama Wetlands in Borneo from 1926 to 1932, claimed to have netted, killed, and examined numerous crocodiles well over  there, including a specimen he claims measured . However, no one scientifically confirmed any of Montgomery's specimens and no voucher specimens are known. A crocodile shot in Queensland in 1957, nicknamed Krys the croc (named after the woman that shot the crocodile in July 1957; Krystina Pawlowski), was reported to be  long, but no verified measurements were made and no remains of this crocodile exist. A "replica" of this crocodile has been made as a tourist attraction. A crocodile killed in 1823 at Jalajala on the main island of Luzon in the Philippines was reported at . However the skull of the specimen is  long indicating an animal of approximately . The skull of a crocodile shot in Odisha, India, was claimed to measure  in life, but when given scholarly examination, was thought to have come from a crocodile of a length no greater than . A reported  crocodile was killed in the Hooghly River in the Alipore District of Calcutta. However, examinations of the animal's skull, one of the largest skulls known to exist for the species at  long, actually indicating it could have measured . In 2006, Guinness accepted a , 2,000-kg (4,400-lb) male saltwater crocodile living within Bhitarkanika Park in Odisha. In addition, this region may contain up to four other specimens would may reportedly measure in the range of  or more. S. Baker (1874) claimed that in Sri Lanka in the 1800s, specimens measuring  or more were commonplace. However, the largest specimen killed on the island that was considered authentic by Guinness Records was a suspected man-eater killed in the Eastern Province that measured exactly  in length. The record size for a crocodile from Papua New Guinea to be considered authentic by Guinness was a  specimen shot in May 1966 along the northeastern coast. This specimen had a belly girth of  and it weighed about , making it the largest known crocodile considered authentic. Another seemingly authentic notable New Guinea giant, which drowned after entanglement in a fisherman's net in 1979, measured , with a skull length of . In September 2011, a  specimen was captured alive in the Philippines, making it one of the largest specimens ever reliably measured snout-to-tail. This specimen, nicknamed Lolong and weighing roughly , had a past as a possible man-eater and was being kept alive as an attraction in a local zoo. Lolong died on 10 February 2013 due to stress and infection. With the death of Lolong, the largest pure saltwater crocodile in captivity in the world reverts to the prior record holder, a very old male named "Cassius" at the Edward River Crocodile Farm in Pormpuraaw, Queensland, who measures  in length and weighs approximately . Cassius places second among as the largest known living crocodilian in captivity to a specimen nicknamed "Yai", who is actually a captive-born hybrid (hatched in 1972) between a saltwater and a Siamese crocodile found at Samutprakarn Crocodile Farm and Zoo in Bangkok, Thailand. Yai dwarfs any known pure Siamese crocodile at a length of approximately  and a weight estimated at .Grenard, S. (1991). Handbook of alligators and crocodiles. Krieger Pub Co. ISBN 0894644351. The official, authentic record length for a crocodile from Australia was  for a specimen killed in the McArthur River in June 1960. Another confirmed Australian giant shot 16 years after that, an old male nicknamed "Big Gator" (despite actually being a crocodile, not an alligator) that was hunted and killed due to the fact that it had become a habitual predator of local cattle, was found after being shot to have measured  and weighed . Crocodile attack Crocodiles in India Fisheries Western Australia&nbsp;– Estuarine Crocodile Fact Sheet Saltwater crocodiles in freedom: Authentic pictures and descriptions Comprehensive Saltwater Crocodile web site unique information, plentiful images and video presentations Saltwater crocodile calls from Dr. Britton's crocodilian.com site Brief discussion from Dr. Britton and others discussing dromaeosaurid intelligence
