   Samuel Dale "Sam" Brownback (born September 12, 1956) is an American politician currently serving as Governor of Kansas. A member of the Republican Party, Brownback was first elected to the U.S. House of Representatives during the Republican Revolution of 1994, representing Kansas's 2nd congressional district for a single term, before running in a 1996 special election for the Senate seat previously held by Bob Dole. He won that election, and two regular elections following, serving until 2011. He ran for president in 2008, but withdrew before the primaries began and endorsed eventual Republican nominee John McCain. He was elected Governor of Kansas in 2010 and took office in January 2011. Brownback supported the 2007 Iraq War troop surge and has also voiced his support for Israel. He opposes same-sex marriage and has described himself as pro-life.Sam Brownback on the Issues As Governor, Brownback signed into law one of the largest income tax cuts in Kansas' history. Brownback turned down a $31.5 million grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to set up an insurance exchange as part of the federal health care reform law, signed a bill that blocked tax breaks for abortion providers, banned sex-selection abortions, and declared that life begins at fertilization. The income tax cut generated a substantial budget deficit and led some former and current Republican officials to criticize his leadership in the run-up to the 2014 gubernatorial election by endorsing his opponent, Paul Davis. Brownback was reelected in a close race with Davis. Sam Brownback was born on September 12, 1956, in Garnett, Kansas, the son of Nancy and Robert Brownback.1 He was raised in a farming family in Parker, Kansas; his distant ancestors, of German descent, settled in Kansas after leaving Pennsylvania following the Civil War.Brownback Presidential Campaign reprint of Weekly Standard article Eastland, Terry, Mr. Compassionate Conservative, The Weekly Standard, Volume 011, Issue 44, August 7 2006 Brownback was state president of the Kansas FFA Association, and was one of the national vice presidents of the National FFA Organization from 1976 to 1977.National FFA Organization: Prominent Former Members  While at Kansas State University, he was elected student body president and was a member of Alpha Gamma Rho.Kansas State University: Sam Brownback Landon Lecture February 22, 2006 He received his J.D. from the University of Kansas in 1982. After college, Brownback spent about a year working as a broadcaster; he hosted a weekly half-hour show.Kapochunas, Rachel. Brownback, Set to Launch GOP White House Bid, Will Fight from the Right, CQPolitics.com January 18 2007 Brownback is married to Mary Brownback (née Stauffer), whose family owned and operated Stauffer Communications until its sale in 1995.The New York Times Archives, "Media Concern Adds 12 Stauffer Papers", Published: June 16, 1995 They have five children: Abby, Andy, Elizabeth, Mark, and Jenna; two of their children are adopted.[ ] Brownback was an attorney in Manhattan, Kansas, before becoming the Kansas secretary of agriculture in 1986. In 1990, he was accepted into the White House Fellow program and detailed to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative from 1990 to 1991. Brownback then returned to Kansas to resume his position as secretary of agriculture and remained in that position until 1993. He was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1994 and next ran in the 1996 special election to replace Senator Bob Dole, who had resigned his seat during his presidential campaign, beating appointed Republican Sheila Frahm. Sheila Frahm was appointed to fill the seat of U.S. Senator Bob Dole when Dole resigned in 1996 to campaign for president. Brownback defeated Frahm in the 1996 Republican primary and went on to win the general election against Democrat Jill Docking. In 1998 Brownback was elected to a full six-year term, defeating Democrat Paul Feleciano. He won reelection in the 2004 Senate election with 69% of the vote, defeating his Democratic challenger, Lee Jones, a former Washington, D.C. lobbyist. Brownback was a member of the Judiciary Committee, the Senate Appropriations Committee (where he chaired the Subcommittee on District of Columbia when the Republicans were in the majority), the Joint Economic Committee, and the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as the Helsinki Commission, which he at one time chaired. The Helsinki Commission monitors compliance with international agreements reached in cooperation with Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Brownback did not run for reelection in 2010, in accordance with his support of term limits for members of Congress.http://monroecountyclarion.stltoday.com/articles/2007/03/22/opinions/sj2tn20070320-0321cla_garcia.ii1.txt In 2000, Brownback and Congressman Chris Smith led the effort to enact the Trafficking Victims Protection Act.Library of Congress: Thomas. House Resolution 3244. Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 President Clinton signed the legislation in October 2000. According to Christianity Today, the stronger enforcement increased the number of U.S. federal trafficking cases eightfold in the five years after enactment.Alford, Deann. "Free at Last", Christianity Today, February 21, 2007 As of August 12, 2007, in the 110th Session of Congress, Brownback had missed 123 votes due to campaigning (39.7 percent) – surpassed only by Tim Johnson (D) of South Dakota who due to a critical illness had missed 100% of the votes of the 110th Session, and John McCain (R) of Arizona with 149 votes missed due to campaigning (48.1 percent).Washington Post."Missed Votes", August 12, 2007 As of April 2012, Brownback had an approval rating of 34 percent according to a Survey USA Poll. A Republican polling company found his approval rating to be 51 percent in May 2012. On April 1, 2010, news sources reported that Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW) had urged an ethics investigation into a possible violation of the Senate's gifts rule by Republican senators lodging in a townhome owned by C Street Center, Inc., in turn owned by Christian-advocacy group The Fellowship.  According to the report, Brownback, three additional senators, and four U.S. representatives were staying in the townhome. CREW alleged that the property, rented out for $950 a month per person, was being let well under the rate of similar lodging in the neighborhood, which regularly ran from $4,400 to $7,500. Brownback supporters argued that the rooms rented out at C Street were not the equivalent of individual apartments with private bathrooms, kitchens, and living rooms. The lawmakers share communal space. Senator Tom Coburn's spokesman John Hart told The Hill: "Anyone who has spent 10 minutes on Craigslist would realize that C Street residents pay fair-market value," Hart said. "Residents at the [C Street] boarding house have one bedroom. Most share a bathroom. All pay for their own meals and share personal space with the other residents and guests. They even share the remote … they fight over their favorite channel." In addition, Hart stated that there are several Craigslist ads that demonstrate that $950 is fair market value for a room on Capitol Hill.cjonline.com  On December 4, 2006, Brownback formed an exploratory committee, the first step toward candidacy, and announced his presidential bid the next day."Favorite of religious right moves toward White House bid" by Associated Press. CNN, December 4, 2006. His views placed him in the social conservative wing of the Republican party, and he stressed his fiscal conservatism. "I am an economic, a fiscal, a social and a compassionate conservative", he said in December 2006.forbes On January 20, 2007, in Topeka, he announced that he was running for President in 2008.   On February 22, 2007, a poll conducted by Rasmussen Reports held that three percent of likely primary voters would support Brownback.news.yahoo.com  On August 11, 2007, Brownback finished third in the Ames Straw Poll with 15.3 percent of all votes cast. Fundraising and visits to his website declined dramatically after this event, as many supporters had predicted Brownback would do much better, and speculation began that the candidate was considering withdrawing from the campaign. This sentiment increased after his lackluster performance in the GOP presidential debate of September 5, broadcast from New Hampshire by Fox News Channel. He dropped out of the race on October 18, 2007, citing a lack of funds.[ ] He formally announced his decision on October 19.Republican Sam Brownback ends White House run Dallas Morning News October 19, 2007. Retrieved October 20, 2007. He later endorsed John McCain for president.  In 2008, Brownback acknowledged he was considering running for governor in 2010. In January 2009, Brownback officially filed the paperwork to run for governor. Polling agency Rasmussen Reports found that Brownback led his then-likely Democratic opponent, Tom Holland, by 31 points in May 2010.Election 2010: Kansas Senate, Rasmussen Reports, March 3, 2010. On June 1, 2010, Brownback named Kansas state Senator Jeff Colyer as his running mate."Brownback ticket gains surgeon as lieutenant", Wichita Eagle, June 2, 2010. On November 2, 2010, Brownback won over Holland with 63.3% of the vote, replacing Governor Mark Parkinson, who was sworn in after former Governor Kathleen Sebelius resigned from her position and accepted the appointment to US Secretary of Health and Human Services in 2009. As governor Brownback's demeanor is informal. At the Kansas capitol he may be found in the rotunda drinking coffee or in the hallways conversing with legislators. Two major goals were to eliminate income taxes and to increase spending on education, goals that have potential for conflict.  Brownback has proposed fundamental tax reform to encourage investment and generate wealth while creating new jobs. Consistent with those objectives, he also has proposed structural reforms to the state's largest budget items, school finance, Medicaid, and Kansas Public Employees Retirement System (KPERS), which have unfunded liabilities of $8.3 billion. Brownback sought to follow a "red state model", passing conservative social and economic policies. Brownback signed three anti-abortion bills in 2011. In April 2011, he signed a bill banning abortion after 21 weeks based on his belief that fetuses can feel pain at that point, and a bill requiring that a doctor get a parent's notarized signature before providing an abortion to a patient younger than 17.Kansas Governor Sam Brownback signs bills restricting abortion In May 2011, Brownback approved a bill prohibiting insurance companies from offering abortion coverage as part of general health plans unless the procedure is necessary to save a woman's life. The law also prohibits any health-insurance exchange in Kansas established under the federal Affordable Care Act from offering coverage for abortions other than to save a woman’s life.Brownback criticized for signing abortion bill A Kansas budget passed with Brownback's approval in 2011 blocked Planned Parenthood of Kansas and Mid-Missouri from receiving family planning funds from the state. The funding amounted to about $330,000 a year.Planned Parenthood may push to get funds from Kansas A judge has blocked the budget provision, ordered Kansas to begin funding the organization again, and agreed with Planned Parenthood that it was being unfairly targeted.Judge blocks de-funding of Planned Parenthood in Kansas In response, the state filed an appeal seeking to overturn the judge's decision.Kansas appeals order to block law defunding Planned Parenthood Brownback has defended anti-abortion laws in Kansas, including the Planned Parenthood defunding. "You can’t know for sure what all comes out of that afterwards, but it was the will of the Legislature and the people of the state of Kansas", Brownback said.Judge refuses to stay, pending appeal In May 2012, Brownback signed the Health Care Rights of Conscience Act, which "will allow pharmacists to refuse to provide drugs they believe might cause an abortion". In April 2013, Brownback signed a bill that blocked tax breaks for abortion providers, banned sex-selection abortions and declared that life begins at fertilization. The law notes that any rights suggested by the language are limited by U.S. Supreme Court decisions. On April 7, 2015, Brownback signed The Unborn Child Protection From Dismemberment Abortion Act, which bans the most common technique used for second-trimester abortions. This made Kansas the first state to do so.[ ][ ] Brownback tried to eliminate the Kansas Arts Commission by executive order; however, the Kansas state legislature defied Brownback by restoring $689,000 in appropriations.Kansas First State to Lose Its State Arts Commission – Governor Vetoes Funding [ ] Brownback responded by vetoing government funding for the Kansas Arts Commission in May 2011, making Kansas the first state to de-fund its arts agency.Kansas governor eliminates state's art funding The commission was created in 1966. The decision has been one of his most controversial during his tenure as governor, generating opposition from Kansas arts leaders and enthusiasts around the state. The National Endowment for the Arts informed Kansas that without a funded state arts agency, it would not receive a planned $700,000 federal grant.Arts Outposts Stung by Cuts in State Aid In April 2014, Brownback signed a school finance bill that would drive millions of dollars to Kansas schools. The bill also raised controversy by eliminating mandatory due process hearings, which are held before experienced teachers could be fired by the district.  "The bill also allows school districts to hire unlicensed teachers for science and math classes. And it creates a tax break for corporations that donate to private school scholarship funds." The resulting cuts in funding caused districts to shut down the school year early. In August 2011, Brownback announced he was declining a $31.5 million grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to set up an insurance exchange as part of the federal health care reform law. In May 2011, Brownback had directed the state's insurance commissioner to slow the implementation timeline for the exchange development. Upon announcing the refusal of the budgeted grant money for the state, his office stated, "There is much uncertainty surrounding the ability of the federal government to meet its already budgeted future spending obligations. Every state should be preparing for fewer federal resources, not more. To deal with that reality Kansas needs to maintain maximum flexibility. That requires freeing Kansas from the strings attached to the Early Innovator Grant." The move was unanimously supported by the delegates of the state party central committee at its August 2011 meeting, but a The New York Times editorial criticized Brownback for turning down the grant which could have helped ease the state's own budget: "Instead of letting Kansas design its own model program for an online computer exchange to help people choose among health insurance providers, Mr. Brownback’s rebuff increases the likelihood that the state must design one at its own expense or see federal officials create an exchange, as required under the new law." Brownback also signed into law the Health Care Freedom Act, based on model legislation published by the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC). Brownback was the only other governor to attend Governor Rick Perry's prayer event in August 2011.Brownback attends Rick Perry prayer event in TexasSam Brownback joins Rick Perry on stage About 22,000 people attended the rally, and Brownback and Perry were the only elected officials to speak.Prayer event draws crowd, controversy & Governor Brownback The decision resulted in some controversy and newspaper editorials demonstrating disappointment in his attendance of the rally.  In May 2012, Brownback signed into law one of the largest income tax cuts in Kansas' history. Brownback described the tax cuts as a live experiment, stating that "[on] taxes, you need to get your overall rates down, and you need to get your social manipulation out of it, in my estimation, to create growth. We’ll see how it works. We’ll have a real live experiment." The law eliminates income taxes for the owners of 191,000 businesses, and cuts individual's income tax rates. The income tax cuts would provide 231 million in tax relief in its first year, growing to 934 million after six years. A forecast from the Legislature’s research staff  indicated that a budget shortfall will emerge by 2014 and will grow to nearly 2.5 billion by July 2018. The cuts were based on model legislation published by the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC). In an op-ed dated May 2014 in The Wall Street Journal, titled "A Midwest Renaissance Rooted in the Reagan Formula", Brownback compared his tax cut policies with those of Ronald Reagan, and announced a "prosperous future" for Kansas, Oklahoma and Missouri, by having elected the economic principles that Reagan laid out in 1964. The act has received criticism for shifting the tax burden from wealthy Kansans to low- and moderate-income workers, with the top income tax rate dropping by 25%. Under Brownback, Kansas also lowered the sales tax and eliminated a tax on small businesses. The tax cuts helped contribute to Moody's downgrading of the state's bond rating in 2014. They also contributed to the S&P Ratings' credit downgrade from AA+ to AA in August 2014 due to a budget that analysts described as structurally unbalanced. As of June 2014, the state has fallen far short of projected tax collections, receiving $369 million instead of the planned-for $651 million. The tax cuts and the effect on the economy of Kansas, received considerable criticism in the media, including  Michael Hiltzik in the Los Angeles Times, the editorial board of the Washington Post, The New Republic, and the New York Times who described Brownback's "conservative experiment"  as a laboratory for policies that are "too far to the right", and that as a result, more than 100 current and former Republican elected officials endorsed his opponent in the 2014 gubernatorial race, Paul Davis. Grover Norquist defended the tax cuts as a model for the nation. In October 2013, Kansas state representative Paul Davis, the Democratic minority leader of the Kansas House of Representatives, announced he would challenge Brownback in the 2014 Kansas gubernatorial election.Davis enters bid for KS Governor In July 2014, more than 100 Kansas Republican officials endorsed his Democratic opponent Davis. These Kansas Republicans said their concern was related to deep cuts in education and other government services as well as the tax cuts that have left the state with a major deficit. Brownback was reelected, defeating Davis by just under a four percent margin. Brownback is pro-life and opposes abortion in all cases except when the life of the pregnant woman is in danger. He has a 100 percent pro-life voting record according to the National Right to Life Committee. Brownback also supports parental notification for minors who seek an abortion and opposes partial birth abortion. Brownback was personally anti-abortion though politically pro-choice during the early days of his career."Politics Attracted Brownback Early," Kansas City Star, October 27, 1996. Brownback has more recently stated, "I see it as the lead moral issue of our day, just like slavery was the lead moral issue 150 years ago."Pulliam, Sarah. "Q&A: Sam Brownback", Christianity Today, October 18, 2007. On May 3, 2007, when asked his opinion of repealing Roe v. Wade, Brownback said, "It would be a glorious day of human liberty and freedom.""California Republican debate transcript", MSNBC, May 3, 2007. In 2007, Brownback stated he "could support a pro-choice nominee" to the presidency, because "this is a big coalition party."California Republican debate transcript, May 3, 2007 Brownback has said he believes private donations should fund arts and culture in the state. In May 2011, Brownback eliminated by executive order and then subsequently vetoed government funding for the Kansas Arts Commission in response to state defiance of his executive order, making Kansas the first state to defund its arts commission. The commission was created in 1966. Brownback said in an interview, "I am not a supporter of a death penalty, other than in cases where we cannot protect the society and have other lives at stake."Interview with Senator Sam Brownback, David Shankbone, Wikinews, October 11, 2007. In a speech on the Senate Judiciary Committee, he questioned the current use of the death penalty as potentially incongruent with the notion of a "culture of life", and suggested it be employed in a more limited fashion.Sentencing Law and Policy (Blog by Douglas A. Berman): Senator Brownback questions death penalty and culture of life, February 3, 2006 He voted YES on making federal death penalty appeals harder and voted NO on maintaining the right of habeas corpus in death penalty appeals. These two votes occurred before his conversion to Catholicism in 2002 – since his conversion, he has echoed Pope John Paul II's remarks against the death penalty. Brownback visited refugee camps in Sudan in 2004 and returned to write a resolution labeling the Darfur conflict as genocide, and has been active on attempting to increase U.S. efforts to resolve the situation short of military intervention.The Washington Post: Policy Adrift on Darfur, page A25, December 27, 2005. He is an endorser of the Genocide Intervention Network, which called him a "champion of Darfur" in its Darfur scorecard, primarily for his early advocacy of the Darfur Peace and Accountability Act.DarfurScores.org: Champions of Darfur, operated by the Genocide Intervention Network, site. Retrieved August 21, 2006 He was rated 100 percent by the US Chamber of Commerce, indicating a pro-business voting record. He has consistently supported a low tax and spend policy for government. As governor he urged a flattening of the income tax to spur economic growth in Kansas. In December 2005, Brownback advocated using Washington, DC, as a laboratory for a flat tax.The New York Sun: D.C. May Be Flat Tax Laboratory, November 30, 2005DCist: A Flat Tax for the District?, December 2, 2005 He voted Yes on a Balanced-budget constitutional amendment. He opposed the Estate Tax. He was rated 100 percent by the Cato Institute, indicating a pro-free trade voting record. In 2005, the organization Republicans for Environmental Protection ("REP") gave Brownback a grade of 7 percent for the 107th United States Congress, but in 2006, increased the rating to 26%.Republicans for Environmental Protection 2005 Scorecard Senator Brownback supported an amendment to the Energy Policy Act of 2005, offered by Senator Jeff Bingaman, (D-NM), requiring at least 10 percent of electricity sold by utilities to originate from renewable resources. He has also supported conservation of rare felids & canids. He has voted for increased funding for international conservation of cranes. Brownback has supported oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and in the Gulf of Mexico, as a way to reduce dependence on foreign oil. He has promoted the use of renewable energy such as nuclear, wind, solar, and hydroelectric sources to achieve energy independence. Brownback has stated that he is a devout believer in a higher power and rejects macroevolution as an exclusive explanation for the development over time of new species from older ones. Brownback favors giving teachers the freedom to use intelligent design to critique evolutionary theory as part of the Teach the Controversy approach:  He has supported the Discovery Institute, hub of the intelligent design movement, and has argued extensively on their behalf during Discovery Institute intelligent design campaigns such as the Santorum Amendment, Teach the Controversy, and against the denial of tenure at Iowa State University to Institute Fellow Guillermo Gonzalez. The university insisted that    Gonzalez was denied due to sub-par research and academic performance, and not for his teaching intelligent design.Facts regarding status of tenure case at Iowa State, Iowa State UniversityEvolution Opponents on the Offensive in Senate, House Government Affairs Program, American Geological Institute.Breaking News: U.S. Senator Expresses Alarm Over Denial of Tenure to Gonzalez at Iowa State Discovery Institute, EvolutionNews.org, May 22, 2007. Brownback opposes a single-payer, government-run health-care system. He supports increased health insurance portability, eliminating insurance rejection due to pre-existing medical conditions, a cap on frivolous malpractice lawsuits, the implementation of an electronic medical records system, an emphasis on preventative care, and tax benefits aimed at making health-care insurance more affordable for the uninsured and targeted to promote universal access. He opposes government-funded elective abortions in accordance with the Hyde Amendment. He has been a strong supporter of legislation to establish a national childhood cancer database and an increase in funding for autism research. Brownback supports negotiating bulk discounts on Medicare drug benefits to reduce prices. In 2007, Senators Brownback and Sherrod Brown (D-OH) sponsored an amendment to the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007. The amendment created a prize as an incentive for companies to invest in new drugs and vaccines for neglected tropical diseases. It awards a transferable "Priority Review Voucher" to any company that obtains approval for a treatment for a neglected tropical disease. This provision adds to the market-based incentives available for the development of new medicines for developing world diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis and African sleeping sickness. The prize was initially proposed by Duke University faculty Henry Grabowski, Jeffrey Moe, and David Ridley in their 2006 Health Affairs paper: "Developing Drugs for Developing Countries."Developing Drugs For Developing Countries – Ridley et al. 25 (2): 313 – Health Affairs Brownback supports a bill that would introduce price transparency to the U.S. health care industry,PR Newswire: Senators and Hospital Groups Support New GPO Transparency Initiative, July 12, 2005 as well as a bill which would require the disclosure of Medicare payment rate information.U.S. Senator Sam Brownback press release: Brownback Introduces Medicare Payment Rate Disclosure Act, April 7, 2006 On December 16, 2006, Brownback gave an interview to the Christian Post, stating: "We can get to this goal of eliminating deaths by cancer in ten years." Brownback has a voting record that has tended to support higher legal immigration levelsImmigration Voting Report Card for Sen. Sam Brownback and strong refugee protection. Brownback was cosponsor of a 2005 bill of Ted Kennedy and John McCain's which would have created a legal path to citizenship for millions of illegal immigrants already present. On June 26, 2007, Brownback voted in favor of S. 1639, the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act.Search Results – THOMAS (Library of Congress)U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home &gt; Votes &gt; Roll Call Vote Brownback supports increasing numbers of legal immigrants, building a fence on Mexican border, and the reform bill "if enforced." While he initially supported giving guest workers a path to citizenship, Brownback eventually voted "Nay" on June 28, 2007.U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home &gt; Votes &gt; Roll Call Vote Brownback has said that he supports immigration reform because the Bible says to welcome the stranger.  Brownback supported a political surge coupled with the military surge of 2007 in Iraq and opposed the Democratic Party's strategy of timed withdrawal:  In May 2007 Brownback stated, "We have not lost war; we can win by pulling together" He voted Yes on authorizing use of military force against Iraq, voted No on requiring on-budget funding for Iraq, not emergency funding and voted No on redeploying troops out of Iraq by July 2007. He has also condemned anti-Muslim bigotry in name of anti-terrorism. On June 7, 2007, Brownback voted against the Habeas Corpus Restoration Act of 2007 when that bill came up for a vote in the Senate Judiciary Committee, on which Brownback sits.Countdown with Keith Olbermann, June 7, 2007. (The bill was passed out of the committee by a vote of 11 to 8.)Senate Begins Real Push on Habeas Corpus The bill aims to restore habeas corpus rights revoked by the Military Commissions Act of 2006.According to an Associated Press report by reporter Laurie Kellman,  In October 2007, Brownback announced his support for a plan designed by Benny Elon, chairman of Israel's right-wing NU/NRP party. Elon's positions include dismantling the Palestinian National Authority and Hamas and rejecting a two-state solution. The plan calls for the complete annexation of the West Bank by Israel, and the deportation of its Arab population to a new Palestinian state in present-day Jordan. In 1996, as a member of the House of Representatives, Brownback voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, which defined marriage for purposes of federal law as the union between a man and a woman.[ ] Brownback has stated that he believes homosexuality to be immoral as a violation of both Catholic doctrine and natural law. He has voted against gay rights, receiving zeros in four of the last five scorecards as a U.S. senator from the Human Rights Campaign. He opposes both same-sex marriage and same-sex civil unions. He opposes adding sexual orientation and gender identity to federal laws that address hate crime. He has declined to state a position on homosexual adoption, although a candidate for chair of the Kansas Republican Party claims he was blackballed by political operatives affiliated with Brownback for not opposing homosexual adoption. Brownback supported "don't ask, don't tell," the U.S. government's ban on openly homosexual people in the military. Brownback has associated with organizations such as the Family Research Council and American Family Association. Both organizations are listed as anti-gay hate groups by the Southern Poverty Law Center. In 2003, Brownback worked with Alliance for Marriage and Traditional Values Coalition to introduce a Senate bill containing the Federal Marriage Amendment, a proposed amendment to the United States Constitution that would federally prohibit same-sex marriage in the United States. The bill was a response to Goodridge v. Department of Public Health, the Massachusetts state court decision finding that same-sex couples had the right to marry in Massachusetts. In reaction to the Goodridge decision, Brownback stated that same-sex marriage threatened the health of American families and culture. In 2006, Brownback blocked the confirmation of federal judicial nominee Janet T. Neff because she had attended a same-sex commitment ceremony. At first, he agreed to lift the block only if Neff would recuse herself from all cases involving same-sex unions. Brownback later dropped his opposition. In April 2011, Brownback began work on a Kansas government program to promote marriage, in part through grants to faith-based an secular social service organizations. In June 2011, the administration revised contract expectations for social work organizations to promote married mother-father families. It explained the change as benefiting children. In January 2012, Brownback did not include Kansas's sodomy law in a list of unenforced and outdated laws that the legislature should repeal. Gay rights advocates had asked his administration to recommend its repeal because the law has been unenforceable since the Supreme Court's Lawrence v. Texas decision in 2003. In February 2012, the Brownback administration supported a religious freedom bill that would have stopped cities, school districts, universities, and executive agencies from having nondiscrimination laws or policies that covered sexual orientation or gender identity. In 2013, after oral arguments in United States v. Windsor, the U.S. Supreme Court case striking down part of the Defense of Marriage Act, Brownback publicly reaffirmed his opposition to same-sex marriage. In 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court denied petitions to review several federal appellate decisions overturning state bans on same-sex marriage. The court’s actions favored repeal of Kansas's ban on same-sex marriage because two of the appeals (Kitchen v. Herbert and Bishop v. Oklahoma) originated in the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, which includes Kansas. In response, Brownback defended Kansas's same-sex marriage ban as being supported by a majority of Kansas voters and criticized "activist judges" for "overruling" the people of Kansas. On February 10, 2015, Brownback issued an executive order rescinding protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender state workers that was put into place by then-Gov. Kathleen Sebelius eight years previously. In the edition of Feb 11 of The Daily Show, Jon Stewart suggested that an internet campaign similar to the  campaign for "santorum" neologism could introduce a sex-related neologism "brownbacking" in order to embarrass Brownback. Brownback supports adult stem cell research and cord blood stem cells. Brownback appeared with three children adopted from in vitro fertilization clinics to coincide with a Senate debate over the Cord Blood Stem Cell Act of 2005 to show his support for the bill and adult stem cell research. The Religious Freedom Coalition refers to children conceived through the adopted in vitro process as "snowflake children." The term, as proponents explain, is an extension of the idea that the embryos are "frozen and unique," and in that way are similar to snowflakes. Brownback supports the use of cord blood stem cell research for research and treatment. He opposes the use of embryonic stem cells in research or treatments for human health conditions. On September 27, 2006, Brownback introduced a bill called the Truth in Video Game Rating Act (S.3935), which would regulate the rating system of computer and video games. On June 15, 2006, President George W. Bush signed into law the Broadcast Decency Enforcement Act of 2005 sponsored by Brownback, a former broadcaster himself. The new law stiffens the penalties for each violation of the Act. The Federal Communications Commission will be able to impose fines in the amount of $325,000 for each violation by each station that violates decency standards. The legislation raises the fine by tenfold.Combs, Roberta. Christian Coalition of America, Washington Weekly Review, June 17, 2006  On September 3, 1997, Meredith O'Rourke, an employee of Kansas firm Triad Management Services, was deposed by the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs regarding her activities and observations while providing services for the company relative to fund raising and advertising for Brownback. The deposition claims that Triad circumvented existing campaign finance laws by channeling donations through Triad, and also bypassed the campaign law with Triad running 'issue ads' during Brownback's first campaign for the Senate.O'Rourke Deposition: September 3, 1997 He has said he does not believe there is an inherent right to privacy in the U.S. Constitution. He has, however, expressed disapproval of George W. Bush's assertions on the legality of the NSA wiretapping program.The Washington Post: David S. Broder: Bucking Bush on Spying, February 9, 2006 Brownback voted to maintain current gun laws: guns sold without trigger locks. He opposes gun control. Brownback is a lead sponsor of the International Marriage Broker Regulation Act of 2005 and frequently speaks out against the mail-order bride industry.Vatican Radio: Mail Order Nightmares [ ] Brownback introduced into the Senate a resolution (Senate Joint Resolution 4) calling for the United States to apologize for past mistreatment of Native Americans.THOMAS, Library of Congress entry on Senate Joint Resolution 4Brownback Applauds Committee Passage of Native American Apology Resolution. Press release, May 11, 2007 BROWNBACK, DORGAN APPLAUD SENATE PASSAGE OF NATIVE AMERICAN APOLOGY RESOLUTION Press release, October 7, 2009 Brownback's voting record on civil rights was rated 20 percent by the ACLU. He voted "yes" on ending special funding for minority and women-owned business and "yes" on recommending a Constitutional ban on flag desecration. He opposes quotas in admission to institutions of higher education. He voted "yes" on increasing penalties for drug offenses and voted "yes" on more penalties for gun and drug violations. Brownback voted against banning chemical weapons. He voted "yes" on reauthorizing the PATRIOT Act and voted "yes" on extending the PATRIOT Act's wiretap provision. In May 2007, Brownback stated that "Iran is the lead sponsor of terrorism around the world." He supports talks and peaceful measures with Iran, but no formal diplomatic relations. In April 2009, Brownback introduced the Congo Conflict Minerals Act of 2009 to require electronics companies to verify and disclose their sources of conflict minerals, such as cassiterite, wolframite, and tantalum. This legislation died in committee. However, measures to control the sale of conflict minerals were later included in the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which Brownback voted against. Year Democratic Votes Pct Republican Votes Pct Overall Turnout 1994 John Carlin 71,025 34.4% Sam Brownback 135,725 65.6% 206,750   In 1996, Bob Dole resigned from the U.S. Senate to focus on his campaign for U.S. President. Lieutenant Governor Sheila Frahm was appointed to Dole's Senate seat by Governor Bill Graves. Brownback defeated Frahm in the Republican primary and won the general election against Jill Docking to serve out the remainder of Dole's term.  Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies (Ranking Member) Subcommittee on Defense Subcommittee on Homeland Security Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies Subcommittee on the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, and Security Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, and the Internet Subcommittee on Competitiveness, Innovation, and Export Promotion Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine Infrastructure, Safety, and Security Committee on Energy and Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy Subcommittee on National Parks Subcommittee on Water and Power (Ranking Member) Special Committee on Aging Joint Economic Committee Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
