 Santa Clara University (also referred to as Santa Clara) is a private non-profit Jesuit university located in Santa Clara, California. It has 5,435 full-time undergraduate students, and 3,335 graduate students. Founded in 1851, Santa Clara University is the oldest operating institution of higher learning in California,U.S. News and World Report "Santa Clara University – Best Colleges 2010" and has remained in its original location for  years. The university's campus surrounds the historic Mission Santa Clara de Asis, which traces its founding to 1776. The campus mirrors the Mission's architectural style, and provides a fine early example of Mission Revival Architecture. The university offers bachelor's degrees, master's degrees, and doctoral degrees through its six colleges, the School of Arts and Sciences, School of Education and Counseling Psychology, Leavey School of Business, School of Engineering, Jesuit School of Theology, and School of Law. Santa Clara has produced Rhodes Scholarshttp://www.rhodeshouse.ox.ac.uk/rhodes-scholars-elect-class-of-2015/aven-satre-meloy and has been recognized as a top producer of Fulbright Scholars.http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20150428006767/en/Santa-Clara-University-Broncos-Win-Fulbright-Scholarships Santa Clara's alumni have made their presence felt on the national and international stage. Among Santa Clara's alumni are Governors, Congressmen, Mayors, Senators, and Presidential Cabinet Members. Santa Clara alumni founded Nvidia, Farmer's Insurance, and created JavaScript. Santa Clara's alumni have won a number of honors, including Pulitzer Prizes, the NBA MVP Award, and been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Santa Clara alumni have served as Mayors of San Francisco, Los Angeles, Oakland, San Jose, and Washington, DC. Both the current Governor and Lieutenant Governor of California attended Santa Clara. Santa Clara's sports teams are called the Broncos. Their colors are red and white. The Broncos compete at the NCAA Division I levels as members of the West Coast Conference in 19 sports. The Broncos own a long history of success on the national stage in a number of sports, including NCAA championships in both Men's and Women's soccer. Santa Clara's student athletes have also achieved success after graduation, with 54 MLB, 24 NFL, and 12 NBA players having attended the school. Of Santa Clara's Olympians, 14 have won gold medals.  The university is situated in Santa Clara, California, adjacent to the city of San Jose in Santa Clara County at the southern part of the Bay Area. It is commonly known by the abbreviation SCU; its students and 81,000 alumni, which live in all fifty states and around the world are called "Santa Clarans" or "Broncos" and its athletic teams are called the Broncos. The school is promoted as "the Jesuit university in Silicon Valley."Santa Clara University "FYI" Electronic Publication. [ ]. Accessed on April 30, 2011. Built around historic Mission Santa Clara, the present university is home to a population of approximately 5,435 undergraduate and 3,335 Master's, Juris Doctor, and PhD students. The institution employs 522 full-time faculty members, who are divided between four professional schools and the College of Arts and Sciences, all of which are located on the  mission campus. In July 2009 the Jesuit School of Theology at Berkeley (JST), formerly an independent institution, legally merged with the university, taking the name "Jesuit School of Theology of Santa Clara University." Although a division of SCU, it retains its campus in Berkeley, California. JST is one of two Jesuit seminaries in the United States with ecclesiastical faculties approved by the Vatican's Congregation for Catholic Education. The other, Weston Jesuit School of Theology, completed a similar affiliation with Boston College in June 2008, becoming Boston College School of Theology and Ministry.Boston College School of Theology and Ministry Accessed February 23, 2009 For the 2013–2014 academic year, the university's operating budget was $387 million, and its endowment was over $760 million.About Santa Clara University – Budget. Accessed on June 1, 2014. For the same period, undergraduate tuition and fees totaled $42,156 and the average cost of room and board was $12,546.About Santa Clara University – Tuition. Accessed on June 1, 2014. Santa Clara University is civilly chartered and governed by a board of trustees, which appoints the president. By internal statute, the president must be a member of the Jesuit order, although the members of the board are primarily non-Jesuits. About 42 Jesuit priests and brothers are active teachers and administrators in various departments and centers located on the main campus in Santa Clara. An additional 15 Jesuits currently hold faculty positions at the university's Jesuit School of Theology in Berkeley. Jesuits comprise around 7% of the permanent faculty and hold teaching positions in biology, computer engineering, counseling psychology, economics, English, history, law, philosophy, physics, political science, psychology, religious studies, and theater arts in addition to theology. They also serve in campus and residence-hall ministry, and some act as faculty directors in residential learning communities (RLC's). SCU maintains its Catholic and Jesuit affiliation and supports numerous initiatives intended to further its religious mission. Students are invited, but not required, to attend the Sunday evening student Masses in the mission church and encouraged to participate in campus ministry programs and lectures. All bachelor's degrees require three religious studies courses as part of the academic core. An emphasis on social justice is furthered through the Pedro Arrupe Partnership and Kolvenbach Solidarity programs, which offer service opportunities in the community and immersion opportunities throughout the world.About Us, Ignatian Center for Jesuit Education, Santa Clara University, 2011, retrieved March 5, 2012. The first two colleges in California were founded at the height of the Gold Rush in 1851, both in the small agricultural town of Santa Clara. Less than a year after California was granted statehood, Santa Clara College, forerunner of Santa Clara University, was the first to open its doors to students and thus is considered the state’s oldest operating institution of higher education. Shortly after Santa Clara began instruction, the Methodist-run California Wesleyan College received a charter from the State Superior Court on July 10, 1851—the first granted in California—and it began enrolling students in May of the following year. Santa Clara’s Jesuit founders lacked the $20,000 endowment required for a charter, which was eventually accumulated and a charter granted on April 28, 1855. Santa Clara bears the distinction of awarding California’s first bachelor's degree, bestowed upon Thomas I. Bergin in 1857, as well as its first graduate degree granted two years later.Santa Clara University Website [ ] Accessed 4/30/2011  Inheriting the grounds of Mission Santa Clara de Asís, Santa Clara University's campus, library holdings, art collection, and many of its defining traditions date back to 1777, almost 75 years before its founding. In January of that year, Saint Junipero Serra, a Spanish Franciscan friar, established Mission Santa Clara as the eighth of 21 Alta California missions. Fray Tomás de la Peña chose a site along the Guadalupe River for the future church, erecting a cross and celebrating the first Mass a few days later.Teresa Pugh, History of Mission Santa Clara de Asis, Santa Clara University, 2006. Natural disasters forced early priests to relocate and rebuild the church on several occasions, moving it westward and away from the river. Built of wood, the first permanent structure quickly flooded and was replaced by a larger adobe building in 1784. This building suffered heavy damage in an 1818 earthquake and was replaced six years later by a new adobe edifice.  The mission flourished for more than 50 years despite these setbacks. Beginning in the 1830s, however, the mission lands were repossessed in conjunction with liberal government policy implemented via the Mexico's secularization, and church buildings fell into disrepair. The Bishop of Monterey, Dominican Joseph Sadoc Alemany, offered the site to Italian Jesuits John Nobili and Michael Accolti in 1851 on condition that they found a college for California's growing Catholic population when it became part of the United States following the Mexican–American War (1846–48).Greene, Clay M. (1901) Souvenir of Santa Clara College Santa Clara: University Press In 1912 Santa Clara College became the University of Santa Clara, with the addition of the School of Engineering and School of Law. In 1925 the Leavey School of Business was founded. Women were first admitted in 1961 to what had been an all-men's university. In 2012, Santa Clara University celebrated 50 years of having women attend Santa Clara University. This step made Santa Clara University the first Catholic university in California to admit both men and women.Santa Clara Magazine - O Pioneers! In 1985, in part to avoid confusion with the University of Southern California (USC), the University of Santa Clara, as it had been known since 1912, changed its name to Santa Clara University. Diplomas were printed with the new name beginning with the graduating class of 1986. In 2001 the School of Education and Counseling Psychology was formed to offer Master's level and other credential programs. Over the last century and a half, the Santa Clara University campus, located in the heart of Silicon Valley along El Camino Real in Santa Clara has expanded to more than . In the 1950s, after the University constructed Walsh Hall and the de Saisset Museum on two of the last remaining open spaces on the old college campus, Santa Clara began purchasing and annexing land from the surrounding community. The first addition, which occurred slightly earlier, brought space for football and baseball playing fields. Thereafter, particularly in the 1960s when women were admitted to the school, more land was acquired for residence halls and other new buildings and facilities. In 1989 the Santa Clara University campus was unified when the The Alameda (California State Route 82), a major thoroughfare that had bisected the university, was rerouted. Several interior roads were also closed and were replaced by sparsely landscaped pedestrian malls and plazas. The current five-year campus plan calls for integration of these areas with the gardens of the campus core.http://129.210.20.25:81/pdfs/5yearplan.pdf The 1990s brought a number of campus additions, including the Music and Dance Building, a new science wing, the Arts and Sciences Building, the Malley Fitness Center, the Sobrato Residence Hall, and the first on-campus parking structure. Santa Clara carried out all deferred maintenance, including the renovation of Kenna Hall, the Adobe Lodge, and many other historic buildings. One unique feature of Santa Clara University's undergraduate education is the Residential Learning Community program. Eight Residential Learning Communities (RLCs), each with a distinct theme, integrate the classroom and resident life experience.Why RLCs?, Santa Clara University, retrieved March 5, 2012. Recently completed expansion projects include a new baseball field (Stephen Schott Stadium, 2005), a renovated basketball arena (Leavey Center, 2000), Kennedy Mall – the campus' first "green building" (2005),San Jose Mercury News.Commons at Kennedy Mall." Retrieved February 26, 2010. a Jesuit community residence (2006), a 194,000-square-foot (1.8 ha) library (2008), a new 85,000-square-foot (0.79 ha) building for the Leavey School of Business (2008), a new residence hall, Graham (2012), and a new Admission and Enrollment Services building (2012). Future changes include the new two-building complex for the school of law, consisting of a renovated Bannan Hall and replacement for the Heafey Law Library.[ ], Santa Clara University, retrieved May 20, 2013. The main entrance to the campus, Palm Drive, is closed to automobiles in order to create a pedestrian mall that "highlight[s] the Mission Church as the centerpiece of the campus."Palm Drive Construction will Create a New Gateway to Santa Clara University - University Press Releases - Santa Clara University. Scu.edu. Retrieved on 2013-07-29.  This effort will eventually create a new gateway to the Santa Clara campus. Santa Clara University is a private corporation owned and governed by a privately appointed Board of Trustees composed of 44 members. The University's administration consists of a president, a provost, an executive assistant to the president, a University General Counsel, vice presidents for the University's various departments, as well as vice provosts, assistant vice presidents, associate vice presidents, Executive Directors, Directors, Deans, a Chief Investment Officer, a University Registrar, a University Librarian, and an Athletic Director. The current president is Michael Engh, S.J., who became president January 2009. Santa Clara University is organized into six professional schools, the School of Arts and Sciences, School of Education and Counseling Psychology, SCU Leavey School of Business, School of Engineering, Jesuit School of Theology, and the School of Law. The University's professional schools are all led by an academic dean.  The College of Arts and Sciences offers Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Ancient Studies, Anthropology, Art History, Biochemistry, Biology, Chemistry, Classical Studies, Communication, Computer Science, Economics, Engineering Physics, English, Environmental Science, Environmental Studies, Ethnic Studies, History, Individual Studies, Latin and Greek, Latin Language and Literature, Liberal Studies, Mathematics, Modern Languages in French, German, Italian, and Spanish, Music, Philosophy, Physics, Political Science, Psychology, Public Health Science, Religious Studies, Sociology, Studio Art, Theatre and Dance, and Women's and Gender Studies.  The Leavey School of Business was founded in 1923 and accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business thirty years later. Students can earn a Bachelor of Science in Commerce, Master of Business Administration, Executive Master of Business Administration, and Master of Science in Information Systems (MSIS). Drew Starbird has been Dean of the school since 2010. Starbird is to be replaced by Caryn Beck-Dudley starting in the 2015–16 school year.  The School of Education, Counseling Psychology, and Pastoral Ministries was created in fall 2001, bringing together graduate programs in Counseling Psychology, Education, and Pastoral Ministries. Approximately 800 graduate students are enrolled in the school, with 200 studying psychology, 400 studying education, and the remainder studying pastoral ministries.  The School of Engineering was founded and began offering bachelor's degrees in 1912. Over the next century, the school added Master's and doctoral programs designed to meet  Silicon Valley's growing need for expert engineers. Today, the Valley provides opportunities for the school's students and faculty, particularly those in electrical engineering and information technology, to work closely with high-tech companies and government institutions. This ranges from individual internships to larger partnerships with projects such as O/OREOS.  The Jesuit School of Theology is a Divinity School of Santa Clara University located in Berkeley, California, and one of the member colleges of the Graduate Theological Union. The school was founded in 1934 and merged with Santa Clara University in 2009. Prior to its merger with Santa Clara University, it was known as the Jesuit School of Theology at Berkeley.  The School of Law was founded in 1911. The school offers the Juris Doctor degree. It also offers several double degree programs, including JD/Master of Business Administration and JD/Master of Science in Information Systems offered in conjunction with Santa Clara University's Leavey School of Business. The school offers Master of Laws degrees in Intellectual Property, which is ranked 6th in the nation, Law Firms Rank Schools ranked 96th, Part-time Law ranked 48th, International and Comparative Law, and U.S. Law for Foreign Lawyers. Santa Clara Law features specialized curricular programs in High Tech and Intellectual Property law, International Law, and Public Interest and Social Justice law. Santa Clara University School Profile: As of Fall 2012, Santa Clara had an enrollment of 5,250 undergraduate and 3,269 graduate and professional students (total of 8,519 students).  Men make up 52.3% of the total student population; women 47.7%. Santa Clara offers undergraduates the opportunity to pursue 45 majors in its three undergraduate schools and colleges: the College of Arts and Science, the School of Engineering, and the Leavey School of Business. Santa Clara University also has six graduate and professional schools, including the School of Law, School of Engineering, the Leavey School of Business, the School of Education and Counseling Psychology, and the Jesuit School of Theology (campus located in Berkeley, California). The student to faculty ratio is 12:1 with 71% of all classes being fewer than 30 students. The 2013 annual ranking of U.S. News & World Report categorizes it as 'more selective'. For the Class of 2018 (enrolled fall 2014), Santa Clara received 14,985 applications and accepted 7,395 (49.3%). Of those accepted, 1,328 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 17.4%.  SCU's freshman retention rate is 95%, with 86% going on to graduate within six years. The enrolled first-year class of 2018 had the following standardized test scores: the middle 50% range (25th percentile-75th percentile) of SAT scores was 590-680 for SAT Critical Reading and 620-700 for SAT Math, while the middle 50% range of ACT scores was 27-32. The average grade point average (GPA) was 3.67 (unweighted 4 point scale). For SCU's 2011–2012 school year, undergraduate tuition and fees were $37,368, room and board cost $11,742, and books estimated at $5,000, totaling $54,110. The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching classifies Santa Clara as a master's level university.  In U.S. News & World Report's rankings of master's universities (West) for 2016, Santa Clara University ranks 2nd overall, and is tied for 3rd for best undergraduate teaching. In 2016 U.S. News & World Report ranked the Leavey School of Business' Part-Time MBA program tied for 37th best in the nation.  The undergraduate business program was ranked 62nd in the nation by U.S. News & World Report for 2015  and 43rd in the nation by Bloomberg Businessweek in 2014. The School of Engineering was ranked by U.S. News & World Report as 14th in 2015 for engineering schools with focus on undergraduate and Master's engineering programs. Santa Clara's School of Law was ranked by U.S. News & World Report in 2016 as tied for 94th in the nation, with its Intellectual Property Law program recognized as tied for 4th nationally. In 2015 Forbes ranked Santa Clara University 85th out of the 650 best private and public colleges and universities in America. In 2008, the first year of the list, Santa Clara was ranked No. 318 out of 569. Kiplinger's Personal Finance ranked SCU 38th on the 2015 Best Values in Private Universities list, and 4th in California. The Princeton Review named Santa Clara University one of the nation’s best institutions for undergraduate education in its 2012 annual guidebook, The Best 376 Colleges. In its 2012 ranking of alumni financial success, intellectual development, and career preparation, "The Alumni Factor" listed Santa Clara 43rd out of the top 177 colleges and universities. PayScale in 2012 ranked Santa Clara 17th in the nation out of 606 schools in the category "Mid-Career Salary Rank for Private Schools", 28th out of 1,248 in "Overall College ROI Rank," and 23rd out of 458 in "ROI Rank for Private Universities." Santa Clara University was named to the 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 President's Higher Education Community Service Honor Roll for community service programs and student involvement. Santa Clara University made About.com's list of the top 23 Catholic Colleges and universities in the country Newsweek in 2012 ranked Santa Clara University as the second most beautiful college in America. SCU has the 3rd highest undergraduate graduation rate nationally (85 percent) among 626 national master's level universities. Three Centers of Distinction: Students have the option of living on campus in the residence halls. There are 9 residence halls, each part of one of the eight Residential Learning Communities (RLCs), encompassing a particular ideal, issue, or cultural theme.RLCs at a glance, Santa Clara University, retrieved March 5, 2012.   East Side  West Side Graduate students have the option of living in graduate campus residence halls and university sponsored housing, which includes: Santa Clara offer its students the opportunity to engage in over 125 registered student organizations (or clubs). RSO's are partially funded by the University via  the student government, ASG. These Organizations span from Athletic/Recreational, Careers/Pre-professional, Community Service, Ethnic/Cultural, Business Fraternities, Health/Counseling, Media/Publications, Music/Dance/Creative Arts, Political/Social Awareness to Religious/Philosophical. RSO groups include (but are not limited to): SCU also has nine Chartered Student Organizations (CSO's), including: Finally, SCU has several organizations that are not linked to the RSO or CSO structure, including: The Sustainability Council meets quarterly to guide efforts of the University's Office of Sustainability. The Council is currently drafting the University's Climate Action Plan for the American College and University Presidents Climate Commitment. The Sub-committees of the Council are broken into three committees of Stewardship, Education, and Outreach. The Committee of Environmental Stewardship seeks to reduce use of non-renewable resources, minimize pollution, and live more lightly on the land. All of the University's new projects and major renovations follow LEED standards. The Locatelli Student Activities Center, which was designed to be a LEED Gold Building, opened in 2010. In May 2007, an article published in the campus newspaper, The Santa Clara, reported that SCU IT specialist Michael Ballen was heading a project to digitize the SCU campus in the virtual world Second Life. Ballen purchased Santa Clara Island for $980 on a grant from the Technology Steering Committee. Digital models of de Saisset Museum, Mission Church, and the library were the first buildings to be featured on the island. Ballen stated that his "main emphasis [is] teaching and learning", and that "It's a way to get to the people who like to game and get them exposed to educational material."Jon McDonald, "Santa Clara enters virtual world in 'Second Life,'" The Santa Clara, May 24, 2007, updated January 11, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2012.Virtual Worlds Case Study: Santa Clara Island. NMC Virtual Worlds. Retrieved June 4, 2007. The Associated Student Government of Santa Clara University (ASGSCU) is Santa Clara University's student government, an elected representative body for undergraduate students. The Associated Student Government is made up of the Executive Board, the Senate, Community Development, and the Judicial Branch. The Santa Clara US Army ROTC Battalion was established in 1861 due to the outbreak of the American Civil War. The unit was known as the Senior Company of Cadets. On September 10, 1863, Leland Stanford, then Governor of California, presented the Corps of Cadets with forty Springfield rifles, Model 1839. Today, the rifles are preserved in the University Museum. In return for his generosity, an armory was built in his honor in 1936. The armory was located southwest of the athletic field with the pistol range located below the stage of the auditorium.Santa Clara University - College of Arts and Sciences -History of Army ROTC at SCU Fr. Paul Locatelli, S.J., (former) President of Santa Clara, was a cadet at the university prior to his military service and his entrance into the Jesuit Order. Two Jesuits from Santa Clara, Fr. McKinnon and Fr. McQuaide, volunteered as chaplains in the Spanish–American War. Both were part of Theodore Roosevelt's American Expeditionary Force that attacked San Juan Hill on July 1, 1898.ROTC history at Santa Clara University On February 2, 2010, the Santa Clara University ROTC "Bronco Battalion" won the MacArthur Award granted by the U.S. Army's Cadet Command and the General Douglas MacArthur Foundation. In 2011 the Santa Clara ROTC once again won the MacArthur Award. The award, named after late General Douglas MacArthur, is granted to the year’s most excellent Reserve Officers' Training Corps program among 33 battalions in the West Coast 8th Brigade. The award takes into consideration factors such as the battalion's physical fitness, navigation skills, leadership, and success in commissioning officers after ROTC.Santa Clara University ROTC Wins Prestigious MacArthur Award - University Press Releases - Santa Clara University   Santa Clara participates in NCAA's Division I and is a member of the West Coast Conference. It also participates in the West Water Polo Association for both men's and women's waterpolo. Santa Clara has 19 varsity sports (10 female, 9 male) and 18 club sports. The school colors are Santa Clara red and white (the school's football team uniforms featured gold trim) and the team mascot is the "Bronco," in past illustrations depicted as a "bucking bronco." The school is renowned for its successful men's and women's soccer programs in addition to historically successful men's basketball teams.  On February 2, 1993, Santa Clara president Paul Locatelli, S.J. announced the discontinuation of football at the university. For many years, Santa Clara participated in NCAA Division II in football, including reaching the NCAA Division II Championship semi-finals in 1980, because of an NCAA bylaw that allowed Division I schools to participate in lower divisions in football; however, the rule was changed in the mid-1990s, and the program forced to move into Division I-AA (now FCS). Other teams were Division I, including the men's and women's soccer teams, both of which are past NCAA Division I National Champions. The basketball teams have made regular appearances in NCAA Division I playoffs. Sports include boxing, cycling, equestrian, paintball, men's lacrosse, women's lacrosse, men's rugby, women's rugby, men's Ultimate, women's Ultimate, men's volleyball, women's volleyball, men's ice hockey, sailing, Shotokan karate, swimming, triathlon, and women's field hockey. Janet Napolitano, Secretary of Homeland Security Leon Panetta, Secretary of Defense Brandi Chastain, Olympian Khaled Hosseini, author Steve Nash, NBA MVP Mission Santa Clara gardens The Santa Clara Mission is a campus landmark. St. Joseph's Hall, housing the departments of English, Management, and Marketing SCU Law School's Bergin Hall Leavey School of Business Lucas Hall Saint Ignatius statue sits on the Kenna Lawn Nobili Hall, named after founder and first president of Santa Clara College, Italian Jesuit Gian Nobili De Saisset Museum Santa Clara University observatory Leavey Activities Center, a major venue for on-campus events     !! Undergraduate !! Graduate African American 3.1% 2.0% Asian American 14.9% 35.5% White American 46.5% 36.7% Hispanic American 18.2% 8.1% Native American 0.2% 0.2% Pacific Islander 0.3% 0.4% Two or more races 6.5% 1.8% Not reported 10.3% 15.3% The Ignatian Center for Jesuit Education is the result of a 2005 merger between the Bannan Center for Jesuit Education and the Pedro Arrupe Center for Community-Based Learning. In addition to maintaining the functions of these two programs, the Center has added Kolvenbach Solidarity Programs, which focus on student immersion trips to developing countries.http://www.scu.edu/ignatiancenter/students/immersions/about/index.cfm|date=April 2010 The Markkula Center for Applied Ethics provides an academic forum for research and dialogue concerning all areas of applied ethics. The center engages faculty, students, and members of the community as well as its own staff and fellows in ethical discussions in a number of focus areas, including business, health care, and biotechnology, character education, government, global leadership, technology, and emerging issues in ethics. The Miller Center for Social Entrepreneurship accelerates global, innovation-based entrepreneurship in service to humanity. Its strategic focus is on poverty eradication through its three areas of work: The Global Social Benefit Institute, Impact Capital, and Education and Action Research.http://www.scu.edu/MillerCenter The Center for Professional Development is a professionally oriented organization geared towards working professionals with graduate degrees in the areas of counseling psychology and education. The accredited Center offers classes in seminar and workshop form over the weekend. The Osher Lifelong Learning Institute The Executive Development Center The Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship The Center for Accounting Education and Practice The Equity Professional Instituter The Civil Society Institute The Food & Agribusiness Institute The Retail Management Institute The Center for Global Law & Policy The Center for Social Justice and Public Service The High Tech Law Institute The Institute for Redress and Recovery The Katherine & George Alexander Community Law Center The Northern California Innocence Project The Center for Advanced Study and Practice The Center for Nanostructures Bellomy Field: Bellomy is used for intramural sports and for casual student use. Kids on Campus: Santa Clara University's child care and preschool center, opened in 1969, serves children of SCU students, faculty, staff, and alumni. The program accommodates infants six weeks old to children age 6. Malley Fitness Center: Santa Clara University's center for recreational sports, indoor intramurals, weightlifting, and fitness classes. Malley Fitness Center has three full basketball/volleyball courts, a large weight room, two locker rooms, a 2,100-square-foot (200 square meter) multipurpose room, lounge space, and new offices for recreation and wellness programs. Mission Santa Clara de Asís: University Chapel and historical mission dating back to 1777. The current location is the third site; it was built in 1828, destroyed by fire in 1925, and rebuilt in 1929. Saint Clare School: The mission's first elementary school (K-8). Founded by the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur in 1856. Located behind Nobili Hall at Lafayette and Lexington Street. Saint Clare Parish and St. Clare Parish Hall: In 1926 St Clare's Parish was built one block behind the Mission Santa Clara to take over the parish functions of the Mission church after it suffered a fire in 1925. Graham Hall Campisi Hall Casa Italiana Sanfilippo Hall Sobrato Hall The University Villas Dunne Hall McLaughlin-Walsh Hall Nobili Hall Swig Hall Alviso House Bellarmine Hall Franklin House Locust House Market House Park Avenue Apartments St. Clare Hall University Square Studios Washington House SCEO, Santa Clara Entrepreneurs Organization is an organization that hosts speakers, workshops and helps connect student entrepreneurs to investors and potential partners. Santa Clara Accounting Associations is a pre-professional organization aimed at mentoring students who want to enter a career in accounting, through professional and social activities. Santa Clara Finance is a pre-professional organization aimed at mentoring students who want to enter a career in accounting, through providing an open forum for networking, and mentoring with the business community. Society of Women Engineers is an organization that empowers women to succeed and advance in the field of engineering, and to be recognized for their life-changing contributions as engineers and leaders through an array of training and development programs, networking opportunities, scholarships, outreach and advocacy activities. APB, the Activities Programming Board (est. 1994), is dedicated to providing the Santa Clara University community with quality university-wide programs. These programs enrich the student experience by fostering the development of a campus and off-campus community. APB serves to initiate student involvement and interaction by programming various activities. These activities provide opportunities to gain the experience of being a member of the Santa Clara community. SCCAP, Santa Clara Community Action Program is a community-based, service organization dedicated to applying activism and justice to address social issues in and around the campus community, providing students the ability to volunteer in areas of empowerment, education & mentoring, homelessness, health & disabilities. ASGSCU, the Associated Student Government of Santa Clara University, serves Santa Clara University undergraduates as official student representatives who promote opportunities for growth and expression, address student issues, and enrich a diverse, inclusive, and engaged community. The Redwood is the University's student run yearbook. It was founded in 1904 and is published every spring. On June 3, 2013, The Redwood published its first complete digital interactive yearbook to the Apple App Store. The app can be downloaded free of charge. The Santa Clara is the University's weekly student newspaper. It has been published since 1922. KSCU 103.3 FM is Santa Clara's own student-operated radio station providing a wide range of leadership opportunities in a variety of areas including music, budgeting, fundraising, promotions, management, and sports broadcasting. Santa Clara Review is a literary magazine. It publishes poetry, fiction, non-fiction, art, which are drawn nationally from students, staff, and community members. SCU EMS, Santa Clara University Emergency Medical Services, is a volunteer, student-run emergency service that responds to on-campus emergencies from 5&nbsp;pm until 8&nbsp;am. SCU Ruff Riders, the Athletics-focused student spirit organization Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (Accredited in Civil, Computer, Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering) American Bar Association and the State Bar of California The women's soccer team is consistently ranked in the top 25 nationally. Jerry Smith is the current head coach and led the program to a national title in the 2001 NCAA Women's Soccer Championship. Now married to Jerry Smith, Brandi Chastain was a member of the national title team. The men's basketball team has participated in the NCAA tournament on several occasions in past decades; the 1992–1993 team (led by future NBA MVP Steve Nash) was the second of seven No. 15 seeds to defeat Arizona the No. 2 seed in the tourney. On February 12, 2007, the men's basketball team snapped Gonzaga's 50-game home winning streak. At the time, it was the longest home winning streak in the NCAA. Kerry Keating is the current head coach leading his team to a 14–19 season in 2013–14. The women's basketball team started in 1963. Their most notable accomplishment was winning the WNIT in 1991. In 2014, JR Payne was hired as the coach.http://santaclarabroncos.com/sports/w-baskbl/2013-14/videos/20140414-nh8o6he8 The men's baseball program has enjoyed a storied past. The 1988 team, which still holds the best single-season record in program history, 43–18–1, participated in the West I Regional at Fresno State. That 1988 team lost in the regional to a John Olerud–led Washington State Cougar team, twice. The team was led by current Long Beach State coach Troy Buckley, World Series Champion Ed Giovanola (Atlanta Braves 1996), Detroit Tiger 1st Round pick Greg Gohr (1989), Kansas City Royal draft choice Victor Cole (1988), San Diego Padres draftee Matt Toole (1989), and Wes Bliven, a California Angel draft choice (1988). During the regular season, the 1988 squad snapped the 33 game winning streak of Fresno State. That team also knocked off nationally ranked teams such as Stanford University, UC Berkeley, Loyola Marymount University, and Pepperdine University. The coach of the 1988 team was John Oldham. Buck Shaw Stadium: Named after Lawrence T. "Buck" Shaw, the school's football coach (1936–1942) and an inductee into the College Football Hall of Fame. Shaw later coached at the University of California, Berkeley, and with the San Francisco 49ers and Philadelphia Eagles, whom he guided to the NFL Championship in 1960. The stadium, longtime home of Bronco football and baseball, is now entirely dedicated to SCU's soccer programs. The stadium was expanded to 10,300 seats after the 2007 season, and the soccer pitch and stadium facilities were modernized and improved. The stadium was temporarily home to Major League Soccer's San Jose Earthquakes, who began their return to the league in April 2008. Leavey Center: Santa Clara University's Arena is home to the men's and women's basketball teams and volleyball team. The Leavey Center is used as a concert venue and a hall for large lectures and speeches. The Leavey Center houses athletic department offices, a weight room, an academic center, team rooms, a video control room, lower and upper level seating, and a suite that overlooks the court. The university's pool is adjacent to the arena. The Leavy Center has a capacity of 4,500. SCU Softball Stadium; Located adjacent to Bellomy Field and the Leavey Center. Prior to the construction of this stadium, home games were played at West Valley College. Stephen Schott Stadium: Home to Santa Clara's baseball team, the $8.6 million Stephen Schott Stadium opened in April 2005.  The Stadium seats 1,500 fans in the stands and has additional seating in a suite. Degheri Tennis Center: Home to Santa Clara's Men's and Women's tennis team, the Santa Clara University tennis center opened in 1999 at a cost of $2.5 million. The facility includes nine championship lighted courts and seats for 750 spectators. The Sullivan Aquatic Center: Home to Santa Clara's men's and women's water polo teams, it opened in late 2008. Ron Hansen, author Francisco Jimenez, author Jon Ramon Aboitiz, Filipino billionaire Andy Ackerman, television director and producer, Seinfeld, Curb Your Enthusiasm, and Two and a Half Men. Everett Alvarez Jr., Navy Commander, first American pilot held as a POW in North Vietnam (over 8 years in captivity) Frank Arellanes, professional baseball player, Major League Baseball pitcher, commonly believed to be the first Mexican-American to play in the American League Reza Aslan, scholar and author (No god but God: The Origins, Evolution, and Future of Islam) Jeff Brazil, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist, Orlando Sentinel Jerry Brown, former and current Governor of California; former mayor of Oakland, California Giovanni Capriglione (MBA), Republican member of the Texas House of Representatives Mike Carey, National Football League (NFL) Official, first African-American Super Bowl Referee, founder of Seirus Innovation Brandi Chastain, two-time Olympic Gold Medalist, World Cup champion, U.S. National Team Member, author and broadcaster Dr. Alette Coble-Temple, Ms. Wheelchair California 2015 Rick Davis, member of the National Soccer Hall of Fame, professional soccer player, former captain and member of the United States men's national soccer team David Drummond, Senior Vice President and General Counsel, Google Bill Duffy, professional sports agent Brendan Eich, co-founder of the Mozilla Project and inventor of JavaScript Fred Franzia, CEO, Bronco Wine Company and Classic Wines of California John Fry, co-founder and President, Fry's Electronics Greg Gohr, former professional baseball player Ron Hansen, author Arthur Hull Hayes, former FDA Commissioner, first SCU Rhodes Scholar Khaled Hosseini, international best-selling author (The Kite Runner Julie Johnston, member of United States Women's National Soccer team, and member of the Chicago Red Stars of the National Women's Soccer League Jorma Kaukonen, member of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, guitarist for Jefferson Airplane Jack Kuehler, former President and Vice Chairman, IBM Thomas E. Leavey, co-founder of Farmers Insurance, co-founder of the Thomas and Dorothy Leavey Foundation Paul Locatelli, S.J., former President of Santa Clara University, Secretary of Higher Education for the Society of Jesus Zoe Lofgren, Representative of U.S. Congress, 16th District Jamby Madrigal, Filipino Senator and Philippine's 2010 Presidential candidate Chris Malachowsky, co-founder and Senior Vice President of Engineering and Operations, NVIDIA Kelly Moore, New York Times best-selling author Shemar Moore, model, actor Dee Dee Myers, former White House Press Secretary, author, and political commentator Janet Napolitano, Secretary of Homeland Security (Obama Administration) and former Governor of Arizona Steve Nash, retired professional basketball player, two-time NBA Most Valuable Player, eight-time NBA All-Star and two-time NBA Skills Challenge Champion Daniel Nava, professional baseball player with the Boston Red Sox, 2013 World Series champion Gavin Newsom, Lieutenant Governor of California, former Mayor of San Francisco Peter Oppenheimer, former Chief Financial Officer, Apple Inc. Leon Panetta, 23rd United States Secretary of Defense, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Obama Administration, former White House Chief of Staff, former Director, United States Office of Management and Budget, former Member of U.S. Congress, 17th District Dan Pastorini, former professional football player and pro bowler, Houston Oilers and Oakland Raiders Kurt Rambis, professional basketball player, four-time NBA title winner with the Los Angeles Lakers, Head Coach of the Minnesota Timberwolves Richard Riordan, former mayor of Los Angeles, California Matthew Roberts, CEO and President of OpenTable Albert J. Ruffo, former mayor of San Jose, California John A. Sobrato, American billionaire businessman Brian Swimme, cosmologist Richard Tallman, judge, U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals Nick Vanos, professional basketball player, played for the Phoenix Suns Anthony A. Williams, former mayor of Washington, D.C. Randy Winn, professional baseball player Giacomini, George F., Jr., and McKevitt, Gerald, S.J. Serving the Intellect, Touching the Heart: A Portrait of Santa Clara University, 1851–2000. Santa Clara University: 2000 McKevitt, Gerald. The University of Santa Clara : A History, 1851–1977. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1979 Corporate Authorship. University of Santa Clara: A History, From the Founding of Santa Clara Mission in 1777 to the beginning of the University in 1912. Santa Clara: University Press, 1912 Corporate Authorship. Souvenir of Santa Clara College. Santa Clara: University Press, 1901 Corporate Authorship. Santa Clara College Prospectus. Santa Clara, 1906
