      Sathya Sai Baba (born Sathya Narayana Raju; 23 November 192624 April 2011) was an Indian guru, and philanthropist.Richard Weiss, Victoria University of Wellington – The Global Guru: Sai Baba and the Miracle of the Modern; Available Online: http://www.nzasia.org.nz/downloads/NZJAS-Dec05/7_2_2.pdf He claimed to be the reincarnation of Sai Baba of Shirdi. Sai Baba's materialisations of vibhuti (holy ash) and other small objects such as rings, necklaces, and watches, along with reports of miraculous healings, resurrections, clairvoyance, bilocation, and alleged omnipotence and omniscience, were a source of both fame and controversy. His devotees considered them signs of his divinity, while sceptics viewed them as simple conjuring tricks. He further faced accusations over the years of sexual abuse and fraud, which he rejected as smear campaigns.Palmer, Norris W. "Baba's World". In:  The Sathya Sai Organisation, founded by Sathya Sai Baba "to enable its members to undertake service activities as a means to spiritual advancement", has over 1,200 Sathya Sai Centres (branches) in 126 countries. Through this organisation, Sathya Sai Baba established a network of free hospitals, clinics, drinking water projects, auditoriums, ashrams and schools. Almost everything known about Sathya Sai Baba's early life stems from the hagiography that grew around him, narratives that hold special meaning to his devotees and are considered by them to be evidence of his divine nature.Palmer, Norris W. "Baba's World". In:  According to these sources, Sathya Narayana Raju was born to Meesaraganda Easwaramma and Peddavenkama Raju Ratnakaram in the village of Puttaparthi, in what was the Madras Presidency of British India.Haraldsson, Erlendur, Miracles are my visiting cards – An investigative inquiry on Sathya Sai Baba, (1997 revised and updated edition published by Sai Towers, Prasanthi Nilayam, India), p. 55, ISBN 81-86822-32-1John Eade, Christopher Mele: Understanding the City:Contemporary and Future Perspectives His birth, which his mother Easwaramma asserted was by miraculous conception, was also said to be heralded by miracles. Sai Baba's siblings included elder brother Ratnakaram Sesham Raju (1921–1984), sisters Venkamma (1923–1993) and Parvathamma (1928–1998), and younger brother Janakiramiah (1930–2003). As a child, he was described as "unusually intelligent" and charitable, though not necessarily academically inclined, as his interests were of a more spiritual nature. He was uncommonly talented in devotional music, dance and drama. From a young age, he was alleged to have been capable of materialising objects such as food and sweets out of thin air.Alexandra Kent – Creating Divine Unity: Chinese Recruitment in the Sathya Sai Baba Movement of MalaysiaLarson's Book of World Religions and Alternative Spirituality  On 8 March 1940, while living with his elder brother Sesham Raju in Uravakonda, a small town near Puttaparthi, Sathya was apparently stung by a scorpion. He lost consciousness for several hours and in the next few days underwent a noticeable change in behaviour. There were "symptoms of laughing and weeping, eloquence and silence." It is claimed that then "he began to sing Sanskrit verses, a language of which he had no prior knowledge." Doctors concluded his behaviour to be hysteria. Concerned, his parents brought Sathya back home to Puttaparthi and took him to many priests, doctors and exorcists. One of the exorcists at Kadiri, a town near Puttaparthi, went to the extent of torturing him with the aim of curing him; Sathya seemingly kept calm throughout, which further worried his parents. On 23 May 1940, Sathya called household members and reportedly materialised prasad and flowers for his family members. His father became furious at seeing this, thinking his son was bewitched. He took a stick and threatened to beat him if Sathya did not reveal who he really was. On 20 October 1940, the young Sathya responded calmly and firmly "I am Sai Baba", a reference to Sai Baba of Shirdi. This was the first time he proclaimed himself to be the reincarnation of Sai Baba of Shirdi—a saint who became famous in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in Maharashtra and had died eight years before Sathya was born.Schulman, Arnold (1971). Baba. Viking Press. pp. 122–124. ISBN 0-670-14343-X. In 1944, a mandir for Sathya Sai Baba's devotees was built near the village of Puttaparthi. It is now referred to as the "old mandir".Murphet, Howard (1977), Man of Miracles, Weiser, ISBN 0-87728-335-4Bowen, David (1988). The Sathya Sai Baba Community in Bradford: Its origins and development, religious beliefs and practices. Leeds: University Press. ISBN 1-871363-02-0. The construction of Prashanthi Nilayam, the current ashram, began in 1948 and was completed in 1950. In 1954, Sathya Sai Baba established a small free general hospital in the village of Puttaparthi. He won fame for mystical powers and the ability to heal. In 1957 Sathya Sai Baba went on a North Indian temple tour. In 1963, Sathya Sai Baba suffered a stroke and four severe heart attacks, which left him paralysed on one side.Murphet, Howard (1977). Man of Miracles. Weiser. ISBN 0-87728-335-4 portions available online https://books.google.com/books?id=BPsVFqhclS0C&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q=&f=false These events culminated in an event where he apparently healed himself in front of the thousands of people gathered in Prashanthi Nilayam who were then praying for his recovery. On recovering, Sai Baba announced that he would one day next be reborn as an incarnation named Prema Sai Baba in the neighbouring state of Karnataka. He stated, "I am Siva-Sakthi, born in the gotra (lineage) of Bharadwaja, according to a boon won by that sage from Siva and Sakthi. Siva was born in the gotra of that sage as Sai Baba of Shirdi; Siva and Sakthi have incarnated as Myself in his gotra now; Sakthi alone will incarnate as the third Sai (Prema Sai Baba) in the same gotra in Mandya district of Karnataka State." He stated he would be born again eight years after his death at the age of 96, but died at the age of 84. On 29 June 1968, Sathya Sai Baba made his only overseas trip, to Kenya and Uganda. In Nairobi, he spoke of his personal mission:  In 1968, he established Dharmakshetra or the Sathyam Mandir in Mumbai. In 1973, he established the Shivam Mandir in Hyderabad. On 19 January 1981, in Chennai, he inaugurated the Sundaram Mandir. In a 1993 incident, four intruders armed with knives entered his bedroom, either as an assassination attempt or as part of a power struggle between his followers. Regardless, Sai Baba was unharmed. During the scuffle and the police response, the intruders and two of Sai Baba's attendants were killed. The official investigation left questions unanswered. In March 1995, Sathya Sai Baba started a project to provide drinking water to 1.2 million people in the drought-prone Rayalaseema region in the Anantapur district of Andhra Pradesh. In April 1999 he inaugurated the Ananda Nilayam Mandir in Madurai, Tamil Nadu. In 2001 he established another free super-speciality hospital in Bangalore to benefit the poor. In 2003, Sathya Sai Baba suffered a fractured hip when a student standing on an iron stool slipped and the boy and stool both fell on him. After that he gave darshana from a car or his porte chair. "However, he has been confined to a wheelchair for over two years now and his failing health has forced him to make fewer public appearances." After 2004, Sathya Sai Baba used a wheelchair and began to make fewer public appearances.  On 28 March 2011, Sai Baba was admitted to the Sri Sathya Sai Super Speciality Hospital at Prashantigram at Puttaparthi, following respiration-related problems. After nearly a month of hospitalisation, during which his condition progressively deteriorated, Sai Baba died on Sunday, 24 April at 7:40 IST, aged 84. Sai Baba had predicted that he would die at age 96 and would remain healthy until then. After he died, some devotees suggested that he might have been referring to that many lunar years, as counted by Telugu-speaking Hindus, rather than solar years,Mohammed Shafeeq. Post. Durban: 27 April 2011. pg. 4 and using the Indian way of accounting for age, which counts the year to come as part of the person's life.Sri Philip M. Prasad, Malayalam Daily. Kerala, India: 25 April 2011. "What Baba has foretold was indeed correct. According to the Roman calendar he has completed 85 years. But one can note that generally in all of Baba’s discourses Baba had been referring to the star (lunar) basis in calculations. In Indian astrology there are 27 stars in a month starting with Aswathy and ending with Revathy. Accordingly a year of 12 months is composed of 324 days. Sai Baba was born on 23 November 1925. From that day till his death day 24 April 2011 there were a total of 33,899 days. If this is divided with 324, we get 95 years and 54 days. Accordingly, under the star basis of calculation he was in his 96th year having completed 54 days when he left his physical body." Other devotees have spoken of his anticipated resurrection, reincarnation or awakening.The Hindustan Times, New Delhi: 25 April 2011. On 29 March 2011, Sathya Sai Baba was listed on the Watkins 100 Spiritual Power list. His body lay in state for two days and was buried with full state honours on 27 April 2011.News 9, 24 April 2011, 16:00 IST An estimated 500,000 people attended the burial, among them the Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Congress president Sonia Gandhi, then Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi,Cricketer Sachin Tendulkar and Union Ministers S. M. Krishna and Ambika Soni, as well as other political leaders and prominent figures. Sathya Sai Baba's death triggered an outpouring of grief from followers who included Indian politicians, movie stars, athletes and industrialists. Most remembered him as a pious, selfless person who worked to help others with the billions of dollars donated to his charitable trust. Political leaders who offered their condolences included the then Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa and the Dalai Lama. Famous cricketer Sachin Tendulkar, whose birthday was that day, cancelled his birthday celebrations. The Hindu newspaper reported that "Sri Sathya Sai Baba's propagation of spiritualism and preaching of Hindu philosophy never came in the way of his commitment to secular beliefs." The Government of Karnataka declared 25 and 26 April as days of mourning and Andhra Pradesh declared 25, 26, and 27 April as days of mourning.  On 17 June 2011, officials from the Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust (founded as a charitable Trust in India, and legally separate from religious activities),Radio Sai's E-Journal. Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust Press Meet, 28 June 2011, http://media.radiosai.org/Journals/Vol_09/01JUN11/11-press_meet_Part02.htm opened his private residence in the presence of government, bank and tax department officials, including retired Supreme Court Judge A P Mishra and retired judge of Karnataka High Court Vaidyanatha, an assessor approved by the Income Tax Department, and former Chief Justice of India P N Bhagavati.Deccan Herald, Tuesday 17 June. 2011, "Huge amount of gold, silver, cash found in Sai Baba's Chamber" http://www.deccanherald.com/content/169535/huge-amount-gold-silver-cash.html. In the private residence, which had been sealed since his death, they inventoried 98&nbsp;kg of gold ornaments, approximate value Rs 210&nbsp;million (US$4.7m), 307&nbsp;kg of silver ornaments, approximate value Rs 16&nbsp;million (US$0.36m), and Rs 116&nbsp;million (US$2.6m) in cash. The cash was deposited into the Sai Trust's account at the State Bank of India with payment of government taxes (thus transferring them from religious gifts to Trust assets.) The gold and other items were inventoried, assessed, and placed in secure storage. In July, district authorities inventoried an additional Rs 7.7&nbsp;million (US$0.17m) in valuables in another 4 rooms. The total value of these items is believed to exceed 7.8 million US dollars. Also inventoried at Yajurmandir were many articles stored and routinely given away as gifts in various ceremonies to devotees and those who performed selfless service, including thousands of pure silk sarees, dhotis, shirts, 500 pairs of shoes, dozens of bottles of perfume and hairspray, watches, a large number of silver and gold "mangala sutrams", and precious stones such as diamonds. There were also 750 saffron and white robes of the type Sai Baba wore. and this graphic In July 2011, a similar opening of his Bangalore-area ashram tallied 6&nbsp;kg of gold coins and jewellery, 245&nbsp;kg of silver articles and Rs 8&nbsp;million in cash. These items and goods are believed to have been donated over the years by Sathya Sai Baba's devotees from all over the world as religious gifts. On 2 September 2012, Satyajit Salian, a close aide of Sri Sathya Sai Baba, released to the media a declaration made by Sai Baba, and registered on 23 March 1967, in Bombay saying his relatives had no authority over the Sathya Sai Trust assets. The exact text of the declaration was: Satyajit Sailan also attached the attestation of Indulal Sha, who is the sole surviving witness to the original document. Satyajit Sailan said he has been in possession of the document since 1998, per the directions of Sai Baba. Officials from the Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust stated to the media that they would respect this will.  The Vahinis are a series of books by Sathya Sai Baba.  The Sathya Sai Organisation (or Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organization) was founded in the 1960s by Sathya Sai Baba. The first Sai Centres were started in India under the name of the "Sri Sathya Sai Seva Samithi".  The Sathya Sai Organisation originated to "to enable its members to undertake service activities as a means to spiritual advancement." The official mission of the Sathya Sai Organization is "to help its members realize the innate divinity within". The Sathya Sai Organisation publishes an official monthly magazine named Sanathana Sarathi, published by the Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust.http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/topic/Sanathana-Sarathi-(magazine) The English translation of the word Sanathana Sarathi means 'Eternal Charioteer'. Sathya Sai Baba stated that the main objective of the Sathya Sai Organisation "is to help man recognize the divinity that is inherent in him. So, your duty is to emphasize the One, to experience the One in all you do or speak. Do not give any importance to differences of religion or sect or status or colour. Have the feeling of one-ness permeate every act of yours. Only those who do so have a place in this Organization; the rest can withdraw."Sathya Sai Baba Sathya Sai Speaks IX, 35, 187–188 (old edition) The Sathya Sai Organisation reports that there are an estimated 1,200 Sathya Sai Baba Centres in 114 countries. However, the number of active Sathya Sai Baba followers is hard to determine. Estimates vary from 6 millionAdherents cites Chryssides, George. Exploring New Religions. London, UK: Cassells (1999) (10 million)*Brown, Mick (2000-10-28). "Divine Downfall". Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/main.jhtml?xml=/health/2000/10/28/tlbaba28.xml. Retrieved 2007-03-12*Edwards, Linda (2001). A Brief Guide to Beliefs: Ideas, Theologies, Mysteries, and Movements. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 0-664-22259-5. up to nearly 100 million.The Economist, "Sai Baba", 14 May 2011, p. 110. In India itself, Sai Baba drew followers predominantly from the upper-middle-class, the urban sections of society who have the "most wealth, education and exposure to Western ideas." In 2002, he claimed to have followers in 178 countries.Palmer, Norris W. "Baba's World". In:  Sathya Sai Baba founded a large number of schools and colleges, hospitals, and other charitable institutions in India and abroad, the total cost of which is usually estimated at Rs. 400&nbsp;billion (US$9 billion).   However, estimates as high as 1.4 trillion rupees (about US$31.5bn) have also been made. After his death, questions about the manner in which the finances of the organisation were going to be managed led to speculations of impropriety, with some reports suggesting that suitcases containing cash and/or gold had been removed from his personal lodgings.  Sathya Sai Baba's educational institutions aim to impart character education along with excellence in academics with emphasis on human values and ethics.Education for Life, The Sathya Sai Way, Times of India, Chennai, Special Report, 14 April-2010 [ ]   Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning (Deemed to be University), established in 1981, called Sri Sathya Sai University for some years, of which Sathya Sai Baba was the Chancellor, has four campuses, one at Puttaparthi for men, one at Whitefield, Bangalore for men, one at Anantapur for women, and one at Muddenahalli for men.  The Sri Sathya Sai Higher Secondary School was founded by Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba on 15 June 1981 in 'Sri Sathya Sai Vidya Giri' complex of Prasanthi Nilayam, Puttaparthi. This is a boarding school with separate hostel for boys and girls. The school caters to classes I to XII of the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi [CBSE]. For 2014, it was ranked in the top 10 CBSE schools of India. Sathya Sai Baba chaired the Muddenahalli-Sathya Sai Loka Seva School and Sri Sathya Sai Loka Seva Trust Educational Institutions in Muddenahalli. He has also taken over the Sri Sathya Sai loka Seva institutions, Alike, Karnataka from Madiyal Narayana Bhat, Currently it is headed by Gangadhar Bhat. In addition, a Sathya Sai Baba University and Medical School also a hospital and research institute are being constructed on over . Baba said that the campus will be modelled after Puttaparthi and will infuse spirituality with academics.  The Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust runs several general hospitals, two speciality hospitals, eye hospitals and mobile dispensaries and conducts medical camps in rural and slum areas in India.Times of India, "Sathya Sai Baba Trust to set up second superspecialty hospital at Bangalore", 29 May 2000 The Sri Sathya Sai General Hospital, Whitefield was opened in Whitefield, Bangalore, in 1977 and provides complex surgery, food and medicines free of cost. The hospital has treated over 2 million patients."Sai Baba hospital: A refuge to millions", 1 May 2001, Available online  The Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences, Puttaparthi is a 300-bed facility which provides free surgical and medical care and which was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao on 22 November 1991. The hospital is equipped 11 surgical theatres, five intensive care units, two cardiac catheterisation laboratories, medical and surgical wards, and a 24-hour emergency unit. "Leading doctors specialising in the fields of Cardiology, Cardio Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Urology, Ophthalmology etc. come from different parts of the World on their own and render their services free of cost."puttaparthi-info.comSouljourns Interview, An Interview with the current director of SSSIHMS. Dr. Choudhary Voleti speaks about SSSIHMS Puttaparthi and its growth. The hospital has a unique history of its own. On 23 November 1990, during his birthday discourse, Sri Sathya Sai Baba while talking about the inability of healthcare access to the poor declared within one year a tertiary care hospital will come up in the village of Puttaparthi, which will provide high-end care completely free to all the patients. The hospital was constructed in a record time of exactly one year and the first cardiothoracic operations were carried out successfully.http://www.sssbpt.info/ssspeaks/volume23/sss23-34.pdf    After the success of the first super speciality hospital, the Karnataka government offered Sathya Sai Baba 53 acres of land to establish another super speciality hospital in Whitefield.[ ]  The Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences, Whitefield is a 333-bed hospital,Deccan Harald: "Where service comes first" by Aruna Chandaraju, 17 January 2006 Available online  which was inaugurated on 19 January 2001 by Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee.The Hindu: Vajpayee hits out at high cost of medicare by A. Jayaram, 20 January 2001 Available onlineTimes of India, "Sai hospital to host health meet on Saturday", 14 January 2002, Available online The estimated cost of this second hospital was Rs 2000 million.puttaparthi-info.com The hospital has provided free medical care to over 250,000 patients.The Times of India: Super-Specialty hospital touches 250,000 cases by Manu Rao, Available online In November 1995, Sathya Sai Baba expressed his concern about the lack of drinking water in Rayalseema. In March 1995, the Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust commenced work on a project to supply pure drinking water to villages in the district of Anantapur. The project was completed in 1996 supplies water to 1.2 million people in about 750 villages in the drought-prone Anantapur district in Andhra Pradesh.The Week: Showers of Grace by Hiramalini Seshadri, 26 May 2002 . The Chennai drinking water project, completed in 2004, supplies water to Chennai through a rebuilt waterway named "Sathya Sai Ganga Canal".The Hindu: Chennai benefits from Sai Baba's initiative by Our Special Correspondent, 1 December 2004, Available onlineThe Hindu: Project Water by Hiramalini Seshadri, 25 June 2003, Available online Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi praised the Chennai water project and Sai Baba's involvement.Chennai Online: MK hails Sai Baba's service to mankind, 21 January 2007, Available onlineIBN: Karunanidhi shares dais with Sai Baba, 21 January 2007, Available online Other completed water projects include the Medak District Project benefiting 450,000 people in 179 villages and the Mahbubnagar District Project benefiting 350,000 people in 141 villages.The Hindu: Water projects: CM all praise for Satya Sai Trust by Our Staff Reporter, 13 February 2004,Available online In January 2007, the Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust said it would start a drinking water project in Latur, Maharashtra.The Hindu: Saibaba Trust to undertake drinking water project in Latur, 17 January 2007,Available online  In 2008, two million people in the state of Odisha were affected by floods. As a relief measure, the Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organization built 699 houses as part of their first phase in 16 villages by March 2009.Flood leaves behind a miracle, The Times of India, Chennai, Special Report, 14 April-2010 [ ] Sathya Sai Baba's Educare programme seeks to found schools throughout the world with the goal of educating children in the five human values. According to the Sai Educare site, schools have been founded in 33 countries, including Australia, Mexico, the United Kingdom and Peru.Sai Educare Website, authorized by the Sathya Sai Organization, Available online.  The Times of Zambia states, "The positive influence of Sathya Sai is unprecedented in the annals of education in Zambia. Sai Baba's education ideals as embodied in his human values-based approach in education are an eye-opener to educationists in Zambia." In Canada, the Fraser Institute, an independent Canadian research and educational organisation, ranked the Sathya Sai School of Canada as one of the top 37 elementary schools in Ontario. On 23 November 2001, the digital radio network Radio Sai Global Harmony was launched through the World Space Organization, United States. Michael Oleinikof Nobel (distant relative to Alfred Nobel and one of the patrons for the radio network) said that the radio network would spread Sathya Sai Baba's message of global harmony and peace.The Hindu, "Saibaba Gospel Goes on Air", 24 November 2001, Available online On 23 November 1999, the Department of Posts, Government of India, released a postage stamp and a postal cover in recognition of the service rendered by Sathya Sai Baba in addressing the problem of providing safe drinking water to the rural masses. In January 2007, an event was held in Chennai Nehru Stadium organised by the Chennai Citizens' Conclave to thank Sathya Sai Baba for the 2&nbsp;billion water project which brought water from the River Krishna in Andhra Pradesh to Chennai city. Four chief ministers attended the function.Felicitation for Water Project Indian Express. Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, a Sikh, said the country would remember Sathya Sai Baba as someone who "inspired millions to lead a moral and meaningful life." The Indian Department of Post released a commemorative stamp on the spiritual guru on the occasion of what would have been his 88th birthday during November 2013.    Puttaparthi, where Sathya Sai Baba was born and lived, was originally a small, remote South Indian village in Andhra Pradesh. Now there is an extensive university complex, a speciality hospital, and two museums: the Sanathana Samskruti or Eternal Heritage Museum, sometimes called the Museum of All Religions, and the Chaitanya Jyoti, devoted exclusively to the life and teachings of Sathya Sai Baba; the latter has won several international awards for its architectural design. There is also a planetarium, a railway station, a hill-view stadium, an administrative building, an airport, an indoor sports stadium and more.Places to see at Puttaparthi. Available online High-ranking Indian politicians such as the former president A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, former prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Andhra Pradesh former chief minister Konijeti Rosaiah and Karnataka chief minister B. S. Yeddyurappa have been official guests at the ashram in Puttaparthi.The Hindu, "A 5-point recipe for happiness" 24 November 2006 Available onlineThe Hindu, "Warm welcome to PM at Puttaparthi",12 February 2004 Available online It was reported that well over a million people attended Sathya Sai Baba's 80th birthday celebration, including 13,000 delegates from India and 180 other countries.Deccan Herald, "Sathya Sai's birthday celebrations on" by Terry Kennedy, 23 November 2005, Available online  Sathya Sai Baba resided much of the time in his main ashram, Prashanthi Nilayam (Abode of Highest Peace), at Puttaparthi. In the summer he often left for his other ashram, Brindavan, in Kadugodi, Whitefield, a town on the outskirts of Bangalore. Occasionally he visited his Sai Shruti ashram in Kodaikanal.The ashrams of Sathya Sai Baba. Referenced from the official Sathya Sai Organization website, Available online Sathya Sai Baba established three primary mandirs (spiritual centres) in India. The first mandir, founded in Mumbai in 1968, is referred to as either "Dharmakshetra" or "Sathyam". The second centre, established in Hyderabad in 1973, is referred to as "Shivam". The third, inaugurated on 19 January 1981 in Chennai, is called "Sundaram".  Certain scholarly sources describe the Sathya Sai Baba movement as Hindu.Alexandra Kent Divinity and diversity: a Hindu revitalization movement in Malaysia, NIAS, 2005Handoo, Jawaharlal in Asian Folklore Studies, Vol. 48, No. 2 (1989), pp. 326–32 reviewing Lawrence A. Babb's book Redemptive Encounters. Three Modern Styles in the Hindu Tradition page 1Nagel, Alexandra (note: Nagel is a critical former follower) "De Sai Paradox: Tegenstrijdigheden van en rondom Sathya Sai Baba"/"The Sai Paradox contradictions of and surrounding Sathya Sai Baba" from the magazine "Religieuze Bewegingen in Nederland, 'Sekten' "/"Religious movements in the Netherlands, 'Cults/Sects' ", 1994, nr. 29. published by the Free University of Amsterdam press, (1994) ISBN 90-5383-341-2 Dutch original: "Ofschoon Sai Baba gezegd heeft mensen van allerlei religieuze gezindten te helpen terug te gaan naar oude waarden en normen, en ofschoon zijn logo de symbolen van de andere grote godsdiensten bevat, is de sfeer rondom Sai Baba duidelijk hindoeïstisch gekleurd. Alle moslim-elementen bijv. waarvan verondersteld zou kunnen worden dat hij die zou hebben meegenomen uit zijn leven als Sai Baba van Shirdi, heeft hij laten vallen. Het enig echt herkenbare wat hij van Shirdi Baba nog heeft, is het veelvuldig gebruik van as, – wat hij dan niet uit een dhuni haalt zoals Shirdi Baba deed, maar materialiseert (of tevoorschijn goochelt)" Sathya Sai Baba's followers considered him to be the avatar of Shiva and Kalki. But John D. Kelly, as of 2006 a professor of anthropology at the University of Chicago, wrote in an article about Hindu missions in Fiji that the Sathya Sai Organization (which is part of the movement) rejected the label Hindu. According to Kelly, they see their founder as the "living synthesis of the world's religious traditions" and prefer to be classified as an interfaith movement. Internationally, Sathya Sai Baba devotees gather daily, or weekly on Sundays or Thursdays or both, for devotional songs, prayer,http://us.sathyasai.org/resources/06oct15CenterGuidelines12.pdf spiritual meditation, service to the community (Seva), and to participate in "Education in Human Values" (SSEHV) known as "Bal Vikas" (Blossoming of the Child). Followers believed in seeking the spiritual benefit of Sathya Sai Baba's darshan, scheduled for morning and afternoon each day. Sai Baba would interact with people, accept letters, materialise and distribute vibhuti (sacred ash) or call groups or individuals for interviews. Devotees considered it a great privilege to have an interview and sometimes a single person, group or family was invited for a private interview for answers to spiritual questions and general guidance. Accusations against Sathya Sai Baba by his critics over the years have included sleight of hand, sexual abuse, money laundering, fraud in the performance of service projects, and murder. In 1972 Abraham Kovoor made the first public criticism of Sathya Sai BabaRuhela S.P., Sri Sathya Sai Baba and the Press, pp. 1–5, 1997 ISBN 81-7533-041-4 when he looked into a claim publicly narrated by one devotee that Sathya Sai Baba had created a new model of a Seiko watch, and found the claim to be untrue.Ruhela S.P., How to Receive Sri Sathya Sai Baba's Grace, pp. 277, 2006 ISBN 81-7182-089-1 In April 1976, Hosur Narasimhaiah, a physicist, rationalist and then vice-chancellor of Bangalore University, founded and chaired a committee "to rationally and scientifically investigate miracles and other verifiable superstitions". Narasimhaiah wrote Sathya Sai Baba three widely publicised letters challenging him to perform his miracles under controlled conditions. The letters were ignored.Haraldson, op. cit, pp&nbsp;204–205 Sathya Sai Baba said that he ignored Narasimhaiah's challenge because he felt his approach was improper, adding that "Science must confine its inquiry only to things belonging to the human senses, while spiritualism transcends the senses. If you want to understand the nature of spiritual power you can do so only through the path of spirituality and not science. What science has been able to unravel is merely a fraction of the cosmic phenomena&nbsp;..."Interview given by Sathya Sai Baba to R. K. Karanjia of Blitz news magazine in September 1976 Available online Narasimhaiah's committee was dissolved in August 1977. According to Erlendur Haraldsson, the committee's formal challenge came to a dead end because of its negative attitude and perhaps because of the fanfare surrounding it. Narasimhaiah held the fact that Sathya Sai Baba ignored his letters to be one of several indications that his miracles were fraudulent.Haraldsson, pp 209 As a result of this episode, a public debate raged for several months in Indian newspapers.Haraldsson, op. cit., pp. 206 The Indian spiritual master Meher Baba referred to him as being tantric and using tantra for his reputed miracles. Indian rationalist Basava Premanand, who began campaigning against Sai Baba in 1976, unsuccessfully attempted to sue him in 1986 for violations of the Gold Control Act, citing Sathya Sai Baba's purported materialisations of gold objects. When the case was dismissed, Premanand unsuccessfully appealed on the grounds that claimed spiritual power is not a defence recognised in law. A 1995 TV documentary Guru Busters, produced by filmmaker Robert Eagle for the UK's Channel 4, accused Sathya Sai Baba of faking his materialisations. Clip The clip from the film was mentioned in the Deccan Chronicle, on 23 November 1992, in a front page headline "DD Tape Unveils Baba Magic".Haraldsson, op. cit., pp.&nbsp;295–301 But Haraldsson stated that, on investigating the DD video, researchers did not find evidence of fake materialisation. According to Haraldsson, the video was taken to a company that investigates corporate fraud, which found that it did not provide firm evidence of sleight of hand.Haraldsson, op. cit., pp 300, 295–301 In 1998, British journalist Mick Brown stated in his book The Spiritual Tourist that in his opinion claims of Sathya Sai Baba resurrecting American devotee Walter Cowan in 1971 were probably untrue.Mick Brown, The Spiritual Tourist, 1998, Bloomsbury Publishing, ISBN 1-58234-034-X "In the House of God", pp.&nbsp;73–74 His opinion was based on letters from the attending doctors presented in the magazine Indian Skeptic, published by Basava Premanand.Hislop, John S. My Baba and I 1985 published by Birth Day Publishing Company, San Diego, California ISBN 0-9600958-8-8, "The Resurrection of Walter Cowan", pages&nbsp;28–31 Brown also related, in the same book, his experiences with manifestations of vibuthi from Sathya Sai Baba's pictures in houses in London, which he felt were not fraudulent or the result of trickery.Brown Mick, The Spiritual Tourist, "The Miracle in North London", pp.&nbsp;29–30, 1998 ISBN 158234034X Brown wrote with regards to Sathya Sai Baba's claims of omniscience, that "sceptics have produced documentation clearly showing discrepancies between Baba's reading of historical events and biblical prophecies, and the established accounts." The Vancouver Sun in 2001 reported that Sathya Sai Baba told his adherents not to browse the InternetThe Vancouver Sun, 27 February 2001, Holy man? Sex abuser? Both? after Sathya Sai Baba said, "These teachings (the Vedas) are highly sacred. Today people are ready to believe all that they see on television and internet but do not repose their faith in the Vedic declarations. Internet is like a waste paper basket. Follow the 'innernet,' not the internet."http://www.sssbpt.info/ssspeaks/volume33/sss33-17.pdf In January 2002, a documentary produced by Denmark's national television and radio broadcast company, Danmarks Radio (DR), named Seduced By Sai Baba, analysed videos of public manifestations of Sathya Sai Baba, and suggested that they could be explained as sleight of hand. The documentary also presented interviews with Alaya Rahm where he alleged sexual abuse by Sai Baba. As a result, in 2002 the Parliament of the United Kingdom discussed the possible danger to male children of British families intending to visit the ashram of Sathya Sai Baba in case of individual audiences with the guru.[ ] UK Parliament official web site In 2004, the BBC produced a documentary titled The Secret Swami, as part of its series "The World Uncovered". One central theme of the BBC documentary was again Alaya Rahm's sexual abuse allegations against Sathya Sai Baba. This documentary interviewed him together with Mark Roche, who had spent 25 years of his life since 1969 in the movement and alleged abuse by Sai Baba. The show also featured allegations from Sai Baba critic Basava Premanand. Premanand stated in the documentary that, in his opinion, Sai Baba faked his materialisations. Here, he claimed that Sathya Sai Baba was "not just a fraud, but a dangerous sexual abuser". According to his interview, he had stories which spanned 30 years, and he stated that his stories were similar, a common practice being the rubbing of genitals with oil by the spiritual leader. Among his claims were that one ex-devotee claimed Sai Baba "put the oil on his hands, told me to drop my pants and rubbed my genitals with the oil". Premanand theorised that many Indian boys were abused but were never heard from because they were too afraid to speak out, alleging Sai Baba was well-connected with the elite and powerful of India. Sathya Sai Baba and his followers strongly rejected any allegations of misconduct. Devotee Bill Aitken was quoted by The Week as saying that Sathya Sai Baba's reputation had not been harmed by the negative stories published about him. He said that the more detractors railed against Sathya Sai Baba, the more new devotees went to see him.Aitken, Bill (27 November 2005),  In the article Divine Downfall, published in the Daily Telegraph, Anil Kumar, the ex-principal of the Sathya Sai Educational Institute, said that he believed that the controversy was part of Baba's divine plan and that all great religious teachers had to face criticism during their lives. Anil Kumar also said that allegations had been levelled at Sathya Sai Baba since childhood, but with every criticism he had become more and more triumphant.Brown, Mick (28 October 2000). "Divine Downfall". Daily Telegraph. In the book Redemptive Encounters: Three Modern Styles in the Hindu Tradition, Lawrence A. Babb wrote of Sathya Sai Baba, "Whoever he is, he is certainly more than the mere parlour magician many of his critics claim that he is." Sathya Sai Baba publicly responded to the allegations on 25 December 2000:  The Times of India on 26 December 2000 quoted Sathya Sai Baba as saying:  In an official letter made public in December 2001, Atal Bihari Vajpayee (then Prime Minister of India and a devotee of Sathya Sai Baba), P.N. Bhagwati (Former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India), Ranganath Misra (Chair Person, National Human Rights Commissioner of India and Former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India), Najma Heptulla (President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union; UNDP Distinguished Human Development Ambassador) and Shivraj Patil (Member of Parliament, India; Formerly of the Lok Sabha & Union Minister) all signed the following statement: 1/ http://www.karujayasuriya.lk/component/phocagallery/category/25-sai-baba.html  2/ http://archives.dailynews.lk/2005/06/07/news23.htm      Aishwarya Rai  References: http://indianexpress.com/photos/entertainment-gallery/aishwarya-rai-bachchans-solo-weekend-outing/#aishwarya-111 http://www.deccanchronicle.com/140428/entertainment-bollywood/gallery/aishwarya-rai-bachchan-pays-tribute-sri-sathya-sai-baba Alice ColtraneReference: http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/15/arts/music/15colt.html?_r=0 Alvin Kallicharan Arjuna Ranatungahttp://www.outlookindia.com/article.aspx?203376http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/devotees-continue-to-throng-puttaparthi/article1769117.ece url=http://ibnlive.in.com/videos/150050/baba-gave-me-comfort-when-i-was-struggling-ranatunga.html Atal Bihari Vajpayee Reference: http://currentnews.in/2011/05/09/sathya-sai%E2%80%99s-vajpayee-visit/ Nicolás Maduro  Gundappa Viswanath Indra Devi Reference: http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/30/world/indra-devi-102-dies-taught-yoga-to-stars-and-leaders.html Joan Brown Reference: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/john-seed/joan-brown-this-kind-of-b_b_1003775.html K. V. Kamath  K. Jayakumar Karu Jayasuriya Meera Sanyal Nirmal Chandra Suri Reference: Divine Grace, Sathya Sai Baba by the India Today Group Russi Karanjia  Sachin Tendulkar Sunil Gavaskar Sanath Jayasuriya Suri Bhagavantam Reference: Sai Baba: Man of Miracles by Howard Murphet International Sai Organization Sai Cast videos RadioSai Sanathana Sarathi Sai Love In Action
