        Sayyid (also spelled "Seyd", "Syed", "Sayed", "Sayyed", "Saiyid", "Seyed" and "Seyyed") (, or , ; meaning Mister) (plural Sadah , ) is an honorific title denoting males accepted as descendants of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad through his grandsons, Hasan ibn Ali and Husayn ibn Ali, sons of Muhammad's daughter Fatimah and his son-in-law Ali (Ali ibn Abi Talib).Ho, Engseng. 2006. Graves of Tarim. University of California Press. Berkeley. p. 149 Conventionally, descent is patrilineal.  However, in 1632 when an Ottoman court challenged a man wearing a sayyid's green turban he established that he was a sayyid on his mother's side, and this was accepted by the court.Sayyids and Sharifs in Muslim Societies: The Living Links to the Prophet,  ed. Kazuo Morimoto, pub. Routledge, 2012 ISBN 978-0-4155-1917-5 Daughters of sayyids are given the titles Sayyida, Alawiyah, or Sharifa. In some regions of the Islamic world, e.g., India, the descendants of Muhammad are given the title Amir or Mir, meaning "commander", "general", or "prince". Children of Sayyida mother but a non Sayyid father are referred to as Mirza.Titles of Sayyids. Written by Al- Sayyid Sadiq Al- Hossaini Al- Eshkevari. Translated by Mehdi sajjadi. In the Arab world, it is the equivalent of the English word "liege lord" or "master" when referring to a descendant of Muhammad, as in Sayyid Ali Sultan.Cleveland, W.L. & Bunton, M. (2009). A history of the modern middle east, 4th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Westview Press. This is the reason the word sidi (from the contracted form sayyidī, 'my liege') is used in the Arabic.People of India by Herbert Risely In the early period, the Arabs used the term Sayyid and Sharif to denote descendants from both Hasan and Husayn. However, in the modern era, the term 'Sharif' (for female it is called Sharifah ) has been used to denote descendants from Hasan and the term 'Sayyid' (for female it is called Sayyidah)  has been used to denote descendants from Husayn.Encyclopaedic Ethnography of Middle-East and Central Asia: A-I, Volume 1 edited by R. Khanam Although reliable statistics are unavailable, conservative estimates put the number of Sayyids in the tens of millions. The Sayyids are by definition a branch of the tribe of Banu Hashim, a clan from the tribe of Quraish that traces its lineage to Adnan and thence to Ishmael (Ismâ`îl) the son of Abraham (Ibrahim). Sayyids often include the following titles in their names to indicate the figure from whom they trace their descent.Islamic Names: An Introduction By Annemarie Schimmel NOTE: (For non-Arabic speakers) When transliterating Arabic words into English there are two approaches. 1Also, El-Husseini, Al-Husseini, Husseini, and Hussaini. 2Those who use the term Sayyid for all descendants of Ali ibn Abi Talib regard Allawis or Alavis as Sayyids. However Allawis are not descendants of Muhammad, as they are descended from the children of Ali and the women he married after the death of Fatima, such as Umm ul-Banin (Fatima bint Hizam). Those who limit the term Sayyid to descendants of Muhammad through Fatima, will not consider Allawis/Alavis to be Sayyids. 3This transliteration is usually reserved for the Alawites sect. The Sayyids are by definition a branch of the tribe of Banu Hashim, a clan from the tribe of Quraish that traces its lineage to Adnan and thence to Ishmael (Ismâ`îl) the son of Abraham (Ibrahim). Sayyids often include the following titles in their names to indicate the figure from whom they trace their descent. NOTE: (For non-Arabic speakers) When transliterating Arabic words into English there are two approaches. 1Also, El-Husseini, Al-Husseini, Husseini, and Hussaini. 2Those who use the term Sayyid for all descendants of Ali ibn Abi Talib regard Allawis or Alavis as Sayyids. However Allawis are not descendants of Muhammad, as they are descended from the children of Ali and the women he married after the death of Fatima, such as Umm ul-Banin (Fatima bint Hizam). Those who limit the term Sayyid to descendants of Muhammad through Fatima, will not consider Allawis/Alavis to be Sayyids. 3This transliteration is usually reserved for the Alawites sect. Sayyids (in  seyyed) are found in vast numbers in Iran. The majority of Sayyids migrated predominantly in the 15th to 17th century from Arab lands during the Safavid era. The Safavids began transforming the religious landscape of Iran by imposing Twelver Shiism on the populace. Since most of the population embraced Sunni Islam and since an educated version of Shiism was scarce in Iran at the time, Ismail imported a new Shia Ulama corps who predominantly were Sayyids from traditional Shiite centers of the Arabic speaking lands, such as Jabal Amel (of southern Lebanon), Bahrain and southern Iraq in order to create a state clergy. The Safavids offered them land and money in return for loyalty.The failure of political Islam, By Olivier Roy, Carol Volk, pg.170The Cambridge illustrated history of the Islamic world, By Francis Robinson, pg.72The Middle East and Islamic world reader, By Marvin E. Gettleman, Stuart Schaar, pg.42The Encyclopedia of world history: ancient, medieval, and modern ... By Peter N. Stearns, William Leonard Langer, pg.360 These scholars taught the doctrine of Twelver Shiism and made it accessible to the population and energetically encouraged conversion to Shiism.Shi‘ite Lebanon: transnational religion and the making of national identities, By Roschanack Shaery-Eisenlohr, pg.12–13 During the reign of Shah Abbas the Great, the Safavids also imported more Arab Shias which included predominantly Sayyids to Iran, built religious institutions for them, including many Madrasas (religious schools) and successfully persuaded them to participate in the government, which they had shunned in the past (following the Hidden imam doctrine).Science under Islam: rise, decline and revival, By S. M. Deen, pg.37 Common Sayyids family surnames in Iran are Husseini, Mousavi, Kazemi, Razavi, Tabatabaei, Hashemi, Hassani, Emami, Ladjevardi, Zaidi and Imamzadeh. Millions of people in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal claim Hashemite descent.2012 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. In 1901 the total number of Sayyids in British India was counted as 1,339,734."Sayyid.", Sarwat Elahi, Encyclopedia of World Cultures. 1996. Recent estimates show that in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal there are more than fifteen million Sayyids; eight million in Pakistan, seven million in India, over one million in Bangladesh and around seventy thousand in Nepal. Sayyids migrated many centuries ago from different parts of the Middle East, Central Asia (Turkestan), during the invasion of the Mongols, and other periods of turmoil such as during the periods of the Ghaznavid dynasty, Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal Empire, encompassing a timespan of roughly until the late 19th century. Sayyids migrated to Sindh in the north and settled there very early. Other early migrant Sayyids moved deep into the south, to the Deccan sultanates located in the Deccan Plateau region in the time of the Bahmani Sultanate, and later the Qutb Shahi kings of Golkonda, Nizam Shahi of Ahmednagar and other kingdoms of Bijapur, Bidar and Berar. Several visited India as merchants or escaped from the Abbasid, Umayyad, Safavid, and Ottoman Empires. Their name figures in Indian history at the breakup of the Mughal Empire, when the Sayyid Brothers created and dethroned Emperors at their will (1714–1720). The first Muslims appointed to the Council of India and the first appointed to the privy council were both Sayyids.Descendants of Prophet Muhammad in India By K D L Khan, Published on: January 14, 2012Countries and Their Cultures» South Asia» Sayyid In India, Sayyids of Hadramawt (who originated mainly from the Arabian Peninsula and the Persian Gulf) gained widespread fame. There is a big community of Sayyids settled in and around the Nanganallur region in Chennai. They can trace their ancestry directly to the Sayyids of Iraq.Early Modern India: Sayyids of Hadhramaut in Early Modern India Author: Omar Khalidi, Source: Asian Journal of Social Science, Volume 32, Issue 3, pages 329 – 352, Subjects: Social Sciences, Publication Year : 2004, DOI: 10.1163/1568531043584872, , E- The Sayyid population in India is distributed. The total population of Sayyids in India is 7,017,000, the largest populations being those of Uttar Pradesh (1,493,000), Maharashtra (1,108,000), Karnataka (766,000), Andhra Pradesh (727,000), Rajasthan (497,000), Bihar (419,000), West Bengal (372,000), Madhya Pradesh (307,000), Gujarat (245,000), Tamil Nadu (206,000),and Jammu & Kashmir is 25,000.Sayyids of India Ethnic People Profile Sayyids are also found in the north-eastern state of Assam, where locally they are also referred to as Dawans.Stratification, hierarchy, and ethnicity in North-east India, Ranjit K. Bhadra, Sekh Rahim Mondal, Daya Pub. House, 1991The Eastern Anthropologist, Volume 41, Ethnographic and Folk Culture Society, 1988 The earliest migration of Saiyeds from Afghanistan to North India took place in 1032 AD when Gazi Saiyyed Salar Sahu (general and brother-in-law of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni) and his son Ghazi Saiyyad Salar Masud established their military headquarters at Satrikh ( from Zaidpur) in the Barabanki district, Uttar Pradesh. They are considered to be the first Muslim settlers in North India. In 1033 AD Ghazi Saiyyad Salar Masud was killed at the battle of Bahraich, the location of his mazr. Ghazi Saiyyad Salar Masud had no children. In 462 Hijri/1070 AD Saiyed Abdullah ‘Zar-baqsh’ migrated from the city of Qom in medieval Persia to the place which is now known as Zaidpur in the Barabanki district. He was a Rizvi/Taqvi Saiyed and claimed to be 14th in descent from Muhammad. Saiyed Abdullah ‘Zar-baqsh’ married Bibi Yadgaar Bano the daughter of Gazi Saiyyed Salar Sahu of Satrikh. Saiyed Abdullah ‘Zar-baqsh’ established the town of Zaidpur and named the place after his only son Saiyed Zaid (born 462 Hijri/1070 AD).Shajraat-Taiyabaat a genealogy of Saiyeds of Zaidpur, published in 1916.Anwaar-e-Qom published in 1953. Iraqi Sayyids or Iraqi biradri in Eastern Uttar Pradesh are descendants of Sayyid Masud Al Hussaini who was a direct descendant of Muhammad's grandson Hussain ibn Ali and came to India from Iraq during the reign of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq. Syed Ahmed Rizvi Kashmiri and Khan Bahadur Aga Syed Hussain were both Rizvi Sayyids through Aaqa Meer Sayyid Hussain Qomi Rizvi whose sacred shrine is in the Zainageer Village of Sopore, Kashmir. Sayyids from Iran initially chose four places to settle in North India. These were Wasa Dargah, Hallaur, Baraha, Mohan and Bilgram.The Right Honourable Syed Ameer Ali: personality and achievements, Shan Muhammad, Uppal Pub. House, 1991 Sa'daat of Barha, Bilgram and Amroha are a few of the well - known groups of Sayyids around the world. The ancestor of Bārha Sayyids, Syed Abu'l Farah left his original home in Wasit, Iraq, with his twelve sons at the end of the 13th century (or the beginning of the 14th century) and migrated to India, where he obtained four villages in Sirhind-Fategarh, By the 16th century Abu'l Farah's descendants had taken over Bārha villages in Muzaffarnagar.The Encyclopaedia of Islam: Supplement : Fascicules 1–2, Clifford Edmund Bosworth, Brill Archive, 1980 The Sayyids of Mohan claim to trace their descent from one of the descendants of the Ali al-Ridha, Sayyid Mahmood Neshapuri who migrated to India from Iran and settled in Mohan.The Tempest: A Monthly Review of National Affairs, Volume 4, Issues 1–10, Tempest House, 1969 One of the branch of Moosavi and Nishapuri Sayyids from Mohan settled at Bijnor, near Lucknow.Medieval & modern India: new sources, 1000 -1986 AD, Idarah-i Adabiyat-i Delli, 2009 (Translation of twelve rare Urdu and Persian works.) The Sayyids of Bilgram are Hussaini Sayyids, who first migrated from Wasit, Iraq in the 13th century.Essays in Arabic Literary Biography: 1350 – 1850, Roger M. A. Allen, Joseph Edmund Lowry, Terri DeYoung, Devin J. Stewart, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 30-Dec-2009 Their ancestor, Syed Mohammad Sughra, a Zaidi Sayyid of Iraq arrived in India during the rule of Sultan Iltutmish. In 1217–18 the family conquered and settled in Bilgram.Islam in South Asia in Practice, Barbara D. Metcalf, Princeton University Press, 08-Sep-2009 The Sayyids of Kichaucha Sharif claim to trace their ancestry back to the illustrious saint Ashraf Jahangir Semnani who came from Semnan, Iran and settled at Kichaucha Sharif, in the Ambedkar Nagar district, Uttar Pradesh, India.Hayate Syed Ashraf Jahangir Semnani by Syed Waheed Ashraf, Published 1975 The Sayyids of Wasa Dargah trace their ancestry back to the Makhdoom Syed Hisamuddin who came from Kenan, Iran and settled at Wasa Dargah, in the Siddhartha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.Kanzul Anasab In addition, many of the early Sufi saints that came to North India belonged to Sayyid families. Most of these Sayyid families came from Central Asia, Iran, Yemen, Oman, Iraq, and Bahrain. Perhaps the most famous Sufi was Syed Salar Masud, from whom many of the Sayyid families of Awadh claim their descent.People of India Uttar Pradesh Volume XLII Part Three, edited by A Hasan & J C Das Sayyids of Salon (Raebareli), Jarwal (Bahraich), Kintoor (Barabanki) and Zaidpur (Barabanki) were well - known Taluqadars (feudal lords) of Awadh province.King Wajid Ali Shah of Awadh, Volume 1 by Mirza Ali Azhar, Royal Book Co., 1982 In Gujarat, most of the Sayyid families are descended from individuals invited by the Muslim rulers of Gujarat, as advisors and administrators, and granted jagirs. During the period of Sultan Mahmud Begada (1458 -1511) the Sayyid of Gothada, Thasra and Pali a Zaidi Sayyid -Saadat-e-Bara. Sultan Mahmud Begada provided land to three Sayyid brothers and a grant to settle there after the victory of Pavagadh fort. In 1484 the young Sultan, after laying siege for 20 months, conquered the fort on 21 November 1484. He then transferred his capital to Champaner which he completely rebuilt at the foothills of the Pavagadh fort, calling it Muhammadabad. During Mughal rule in Gujarat (1570–1750), they held the majority of the civil and ecclesiastical posts. For example, the Sayyids of Thasra, Kheda district were invited as administrators and judges by the Mughal Emperor, Aurangzeb, and provided land grants to settle there. They also provided an important element in the Mughal army, and many are still found in the old Muslim garrison towns such as Ahmedabad. In addition, many of the early Sufi saints that came to Gujarat belonged to Sayyid families. Most of these Sayyid families came from Central Asia, Iran, Yemen, Oman, Basra and Bahrain.Shajra-e-Nasab (Syed family tree,) Sadat e Gothada -Jahidali J.Saiyad, Gothada="ReferenceB" In Gujarat, the Sayyid have ten sub-divisions, the main ones being the Shirazi, Mattari, Bukhari, Naqvi, Tirmizi, Zaidi, Rifa'i, Bhaktari, Qadiriyyas, Chishti, Mahdavi, Kitoi, Mashadi, Idrusi, and Bahraini. Of these, the Bukhari Sayyids are perhaps the most well known. Their ancestor, Syed Burhanuddin Qutb-Alam was the patron saint of Sultan Muzaffar Shah, the first Muslim sultan of Gujarat. Even more well known was his son, Shah Alam, who flourished during the reigns of Qutibudin Shah and Mahmud Begada. It played an important role in the medieval and early modern history of Gujarat, and is now divided into several branches. Other prominent Sayyids include the Mahdavi family. They are now found mainly in Palanpur and Dabhoi, and claim descent from Muhammad Jaunpuri, the founder of the sect and his son in law, Syed Khundmir. They are the hereditary pirs of the Tai community. And finally, the family of the Nizari Ismaili pirs is perhaps the most influential of the Gujarat Sayyid. They are distributed all over Gujarat, and descend from Imam Shah, a famous medieval Ismaili missionary. The Dais (heads) of the Taiyabi (Mustaali/ Ismaili), mainly known in Gujarat as the Dawoodi Bohra, are also Sayyids. Other communities include the Bahrain Sayyid, whose ancestors arrived from Bahrain during the rule of Sultan Mahmud Begada, the Matari Syeds who arrived from the village of Mattar in Sindh during the period of Mughal rule. The ancestors of the Khodari Syeds were invited by the Nawabs of Junagadh, while those of the Bukhari Sayyids arrived from Central Asia at the invitation of Sultan Ahmed Shah. The community now speak both Gujarati and Urdu, and are concentrated in Kutch, Gandhinagar, Vadodara, and Bhavnagar, with two thirds of the Sayyid found in the village of Gothada, near Savli, Vadodara. The Sayyid of Gothada are Zaidi Sayyid – Saadat-e-Bara and others such as the Bukhari and Qadiri Sayyid also settled there.Shajra-e-Nasab (Syed family tree), Sadat e Gothada -Jahidali J.Saiyad, Gothada="ReferenceA" Kerala has its two-thousand-year-old association with Arabia. In Malayalam Thangal is an honorific Muslim title almost equivalent to the Arabic term Sayyid which is given to males believed to be descendants of Muhammad. The present day Thangals are supposed to be descended from Sayyid families, who migrated from the historic city of Tarim, in the Hadhramaut Province, Yemen, during the 17th century in order to propagate Islam on the Malabar Coast. Sayyids selected coastal areas to settle. The royal family of Arakkal in Kerala had Thangal origins.Hadrami diaspora in Indian Ocean territories, with special reference to Malabar By Zubair Hudawi  There are numerous Sayyids in Pakistan. Some of these Sayyids first migrated to Bukhara and then to South Asia. Many settled early in Sindh and Uch. There are many sayyids of both shia and sunni sects of Islam. Amongst the famous Sayyids who migrated to this region were Jalaluddin Surkh-Posh Bukhari and Sayyid Muhammad Al-Makki. Sayyid people of Pakistan are figured as the most prominent and well-established people of the country, with a number of them having become popular and well-known religious icons, political leaders and professionals. Furthermore, Pakistan currently holds the largest Sayyid population in all of South Asia. Sayyids are the biological descendants of Muhammad. All of them do not belong to one specific islamic sects. The Sayyids of this day and age associate themselves with different islamics sects.  Therefore throughout the islamic world there are shia und sunni Sayyids. The Sayyids of Punjab belong to the Hasani (descendants of Hasan), Husaini (descendants of Husayn), Zaidi (descendants of Zayd ibn Ali, grandson of Husayn), Rizvi, (descendants of Ali al-Ridha) and Naqvi (descendants of Ali al-Hadi).A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province: L.-Z, Volume 3 By H.A. Rose  Important Sayyid communities in South Asia include: Ibraheem al-Ghamar bin Hasan Muthanna had a son named Isma'eel ad-Deebaj. Ad-Deebaj had two sons: Hasan bin Isma'eel ad-Deebaj - he left a large progeny; and Ibraheem bin Isma'eel ad-Deebaj - he came to be known as Tabataba. It is mostly his progeny who have spread across Iran and Iraq who are known as the Tabatabai and use that as their last name. It was the children of Imam Hasan and their children who came to India as the first Muslims in Sind. This was in the time of Hajjaj bin Yusuf. Later many of them moved from Sind to other parts of India. Hasani Syeds populate a town named Rudawlee near Lucknow, in Punjab and in other areas of the sub-continent. These Sayyids are the descendants of the saint Syed Ashraf Jahangir Semnani who himself was a descendant of Husayn. One of the earliest settlements of Naqvis is reported from Nasirabad, Raibareli in North India.Naqvi Sadats migrated from Sabzevar, Iran and arrived in Nasirabad around 410 Hijri (around 1027 A.D.) and settled there. After some time adjacent Patakpur (Nasirabad), was also inhabited by Mu'mins and rechristened as Nasirabad after the name of Syed Naseerudin companion and sipahsalar of Hazrath Shah Jalal (Rh:). Nasirabad is the earliest known Naqvi Sadats of India. Naseerabad is the native land of Khandan e Ijtihad and a multitude of very high ranking scholars have come from there. The first Mujtahid from India, Dildar Ali Naseerabadi was from here and later his family came to be called "Khandan e Ijtihad" due to the heavy presence of high-ranking scholars. Some famous and known religious scholars from this lineage include Syedul Ulema Ayatullah Syed Ali Naqi Naqvi 'Naqqan', Jannat Ma'ab Ayatullah Syed Mohammad Naqvi, Ayatullah Aqa Hasan Sb, Ayatullah Syed Kalbe Hussain Naqvi, Hujjatul Islam Syed Kalbe Abid Naqvi, Hujjatul Islam Syed Kalbe Jawwad Naqvi, Hujjatul Islam Syed Hasan Zafar Naqvi (based in Karachi), Allama Syed Razi Jafar, Allama Nasir Ijtehadi, Dr Kalbe Sadiq, Hujjatul Islam Syed Ali Mohammad Naqvi. The Sadaat Amroha or Amrohi Syed are a community of Sayyids, historically settled in the town of Amroha, in Uttar Pradesh, India. Many members of the Sadaat Amroha community have migrated to Pakistan after independence and have settled in Karachi, Sindh. The Sadaat Bukhari of pargana Chail are Naqvi Syeds and being descended from syed Hussam aldin Bukhari ibn Sadruddin Rajju Qattal (brother of Jalaluddin Surkh-Posh Bukhari) ibn Syed Ahmed Kabir ibn Syed Jalaluddin Bukhari. Sadat-e-Bara (Urdu: ہسادات بار), sometimes pronounced Sadaat-e-Barha, are a community of Sayyids, originally from a group of twelve villages situated in the Muzaffarnagar district of Uttar Pradesh in India. This community had considerable influence during the latter days of the Mughal Empire. They were also found in the Karnal district and Haryana in India. Many members of this community have migrated to Pakistan after independence and have settled in Karachi, Khairpur State in Sind and Lahore. Zaidi Sayyed migrated from Jansath to the eastern part of Uttar Pradesh namely Sikanderpur, Kandipur in the Ambedkar Nagar district. These Sayyeds are descendants of Abul Farah Wasti who came to India from Wasit, Iraq in the late 13th century along with his four sons. The Gardēzī Sadaat is a Sadaat Muslim family of Sayyid from Gardez, Afghanistan; consequently known as ‘Gardēzī Sadaat’ in South Asia. Kintoor or Kintur is a village about  north-east of Badosarai in the Barabanki district, famous for the battle of Kintoor of 1858 during the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Hallaur or Hallor (Urdu, Persian and Arabic: هلور, Hindi: हल्लौर, Bhojpuri: हलूर) is a town or a big village in the north Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, situated near the banks of the West Rapti River. Residents of Hallaur are referred as Hallauri Wasa Dargah is a village in the eastern part of Uttar Paradesh. Situated  from Domariaganj.  A study of Y chromosomes of self-identified Syeds from the Indian subcontinent by Elise M. S. Belle, Saima Shah, Tudor Parfitt and Mark G. Thomas showed that "self-identified Syeds had no less genetic diversity than those non-Syeds from the same regions, suggesting that there is no biological basis to the belief that self-identified Syeds in this part of the world share a recent common ancestry. However, self-identified men belonging to the ‘Islamic honorific lineages’ (Syeds, Hashemites, Quraysh and Ansari) show a greater genetic affinity to Arab populations—despite the geographic distance—than do their neighbouring populations from India and Pakistan."Y chromosomes of self-identified Syeds from the Indian subcontinent show evidence of elevated Arab ancestry but not of a recent common patrilineal origin, Elise M. S. Belle & Saima Shah & Tudor Parfitt & Mark G. Thomas; Received: 11 March 2010 / Accepted: 28 May 2010 / Published online: 29 June 2010 In Northern India, 29% of the Shia Muslim belong to Haplogroup J. There are 18% belonging mainly to Haplogroup J2 and another 11% belong to Haplogroup J1, which both represent Middle Eastern lineages. But Haplogroup J2 reflects presence from the neolithic period in the subcontinent.http://www.plosone.org   J2 occurs among 11% of Austro-Asiatic tribals. The frequency of J2 is higher in South Indian castes (19%) than in North Indian castes (11%) or Pakistan (12%).(Sengupta 2006) J2 appears at 20% among the Yadavas of South India while among the Lodhas of West Bengal it is 32%. In Maldives, 22% of the Maldivian population were found to be haplogroup J2 positive.Ancestry of Maldives People in Light of Population Genetics: Maldivian Ancestry in light of Genetics-Middle Eastern and Sub-Saharan lineages in Indian Muslim populations Overall, the presence of J1 and J2 markers in Indian populations is thought to be at least 3000–4000 years old. However, the YDNA has already proven that the decedent of the hashemite should belong to J1 M267. J1 is the haplogroup of the sons of prophet Ibrahim. J1 include both, the son of Ismael adn son's of Jacob. Therefore, J2 are can not be Sayeds. There still some studies to confirm the SNP of the descendants of  Ali Ibni Abi Talib. It is believed that it should be L-859, however, that is not confirm yet. Currently, the genetic marker Haplogroup J1c3d is a strong contender for being the genetic signatures of the Sayyids, due to the haplogroup being predominantly found among people with the Y-chromosomal Aaron (Cohen Modal Haplotype CMH), who are people with patrilineal Jewish priestly caste known as Kohanim, which is passed down paternally from father to son. Currently research is ongoing on this topic at Family Tree DNA.-Background on Arabian YDNA J1 Project and Adnani ArabsThe Origin of Hagar/Hajar – J1c3d on 7th paragraph of article. Most of the Alawi Sayyids who moved to Southeast Asia were descendants of Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin, especially of Ba 'Alawi sada, majority descendants of migrants from Hadhramaut. Even though they are descendants of Imam Husain, it is uncommon for the female Sayyids to be called Sayyidah, they are more commonly called Sharifah. Most of them live in Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Moro Province in Philippines and Pattani.‘Strangers’ and ‘stranger-kings’: The sayyid in eighteenth-century maritime Southeast Asia By Jeyamalar Kathirithamby-WellsDevelopment of Islam in Southeast Asia by Alawi SayyidsSayyids and Sharifs in Muslim Society: The Living Links to the Prophet By Kazuo MorimotoSoutheast Asia (3 Volumes): A Historical Encyclopedia from Angkor Wat to East Timor By Keat Gin Ooi Some popular surnames of these Sayyids are al-Saqqaf, Shihab (or Shahab), al-Aidaroos, al-Habsyi (or al-Habshi), al-Kaff, al-Aththos, al-Haddad, al-Jufri (or al-Jifri), al-Muhdhar, al-Shaikh Abubakar, al-Qadri, al-Munawwar (see Ba 'Alawi sada for a more complete list). In the Ottoman Empire, tax breaks for "the People of the House" encouraged many people to buy certificates of descent or forge genealogies; the phenomenon of teseyyüd – falsely claiming noble ancestry – spread across ethnic, class, and religious boundaries. In the 17th century, an Ottoman bureaucrat estimated that there were 300,000 impostors; In 18th-century Anatolia,  nearly all upper-class urban people claimed descent from Muhammad. Ancestor !! Arabic style !! Arabic Last Name !! Persian Last Name !! Urdu Last Name Hasan ibn Ali al-Hasani الحسني او الهاشمي al-Hasani الحسني al-Hashemi الهاشمي Hashemi, Hasani, or Tabatabaei حسنى Hassani or Hasani  or Hashemi or Hashmi  Husayn ibn Ali al-Hussaini الحُسيني al-Hussaini الحسيني al-Hashemi الهاشمي Hashemi هاشمي Hussaini حسيني Hussaini حسيني Hashemi or Shah Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin al-Abidi العابدي al-Abidi العابدي Abedi  Abidi or Abdi  Zayd ibn Ali az-Zaidi الزيدي al-Zaydi الزيدي al-Hashemi الهاشمي Zaydi زيدي Zaidi زيدي Hashemi هاشمي Idris ibn Abdullah al-Idrisi الإدريسي al-Idrisi الإدريسي His descendants are mostly from the Maghreb Same as before Muhammad al-Baqir al-Baqari الباقري al-Baqiri الباقري Baqeri باقرى Baqri  Ja'far al-Sadiq al-Ja'fari  الجعفري al-Ja'fari or al-Sadiq/Sadegh or al-sherazi الصدق او الجعفري Jafari or Sadeghi جعفرى/ صادقي Jafri, Jafry or Jaffery  Musa al-Kadhim al-Mousawi الموسوي او الكاظمي al-Mousawi or al-Kadhimi الموسوي او الكاظمي Moosavi or Kazemi موسوى / کاظمى Kazmi  Ali al-Ridha ar-Radawi الرضوي al-Ridawi or al-Radawi الرضوي Razavi or Rezavi رضوى Rizvi or Rizavi  Muhammad at-Taqi at-Taqawi التقوي al-Taqawi التقوي Taqawi تقوى Taqvi  Ali al-Hadi an-Naqawi النقوي al-Naqawi النقوي or al-Bukhari البخاري Naqawi نقوى Naqvi  or Bhaakri/Bukhari  Hasan al-Askari al-Askari العسكري al-Askari العسکري or al-Bukhari البخاري al-Bukhari البخاري Bhaakri/Bukhari Ancestor !! Arabic style !! Arabic Last Name !! Persian Last Name !! Urdu Last Name Hasan ibn Ali al-Hasani الحسني او الهاشمي al-Hasani الحسني al-Hashemi الهاشمي Hashemi, Hasani, or Tabatabaei حسنى Hassani or Hasani  or Hashemi or Hashmi  Husayn ibn Ali al-Hussaini الحُسيني al-Hussaini الحسيني al-Hashemi الهاشمي Hashemi هاشمي Hussaini حسيني Hussaini حسيني Hashemi or Shah Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin al-Abidi العابدي al-Abidi العابدي Abedi  Abidi or Abdi  Zayd ibn Ali az-Zaidi الزيدي al-Zaydi الزيدي al-Hashemi الهاشمي Zaydi زيدي Zaidi زيدي Hashemi هاشمي Idris ibn Abdullah al-Idrisi الإدريسي al-Idrisi الإدريسي His descendants are mostly from the Maghreb Same as before Muhammad al-Baqir al-Baqari الباقري al-Baqiri الباقري Baqeri باقرى Baqri  Ja'far al-Sadiq al-Ja'fari  الجعفري al-Ja'fari or al-Sadiq/Sadegh or al-sherazi الصدق او الجعفري Jafari or Sadeghi جعفرى/ صادقي Jafri, Jafry or Jaffery  Musa al-Kadhim al-Mousawi الموسوي او الكاظمي al-Mousawi or al-Kadhimi الموسوي او الكاظمي Moosavi or Kazemi موسوى / کاظمى Kazmi  Ali al-Ridha ar-Radawi الرضوي al-Ridawi or al-Radawi الرضوي Razavi or Rezavi رضوى Rizvi or Rizavi  Muhammad at-Taqi at-Taqawi التقوي al-Taqawi التقوي Taqawi تقوى Taqvi  Ali al-Hadi an-Naqawi النقوي al-Naqawi النقوي or al-Bukhari البخاري Naqawi نقوى Naqvi  or Bhaakri/Bukhari  Hasan al-Askari al-Askari العسكري al-Askari العسکري or al-Bukhari البخاري al-Bukhari البخاري Bhaakri/Bukhari 1. The user may transliterate the word letter for letter, e.g., "الزيدي" becomes "a-l-z-ai-d-i". 2. The user may transcribe the pronunciation of the word, e.g., "الزيدي" becomes "a-zz-ai-d-i". This is because in Arabic grammar, some consonants (n, r, s, sh, t and z) cancel the l (ل) from the word "the" al (ال) (see sun and moon letters). When the user sees the prefixes an, ar, as, ash, at, az, etc... this means the word is the transcription of the pronunciation. An i, wi (Arabic), or vi (Persian) ending could perhaps be translated by the English suffixes ite or ian. The suffix transforms a personal name, or a place name, into the name of a group of people connected by lineage or place of birth. Hence Ahmad al-Hassani could be translated as Ahmad, the descendant of Hassan and Ahmad al-Manami as Ahmad from the city of Manami. For further explanation, see Arabic names. 1. The user may transliterate the word letter for letter, e.g., "الزيدي" becomes "a-l-z-ai-d-i". 2. The user may transcribe the pronunciation of the word, e.g., "الزيدي" becomes "a-zz-ai-d-i". This is because in Arabic grammar, some consonants (n, r, s, sh, t and z) cancel the l (ل) from the word "the" al (ال) (see sun and moon letters). When the user sees the prefixes an, ar, as, ash, at, az, etc... this means the word is the transcription of the pronunciation. An i, wi (Arabic), or vi (Persian) ending could perhaps be translated by the English suffixes ite or ian. The suffix transforms a personal name, or a place name, into the name of a group of people connected by lineage or place of birth. Hence Ahmad al-Hassani could be translated as Ahmad, the descendant of Hassan and Ahmad al-Manami as Ahmad from the city of Manami. For further explanation, see Arabic names. Hasani syeds of Rudauli District Barabanki Rizvi Sayyids of Zaidpur, Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh Sadaate Kichaucha or Ashrafi Saadat Sadaat Nasirabad Sadaat Amroha Sadaat Bukhari of Pargana Chail of Allahabad Saadat-e-Bara Zaidi Sadat Of Kandipur, Ambedkar Nagar, Uttar Pradesh Gardēzī Sadaat Nishapuri Sada'at of Kintoor, Barabanki Sayyids of Hallaur Sayyids of Wasa Dargah Sayyid of Gujarat Sayyid of Uttar Pradesh Abdul-Qadir Gilani, Sufi saint Abdullah Shah Ghazi, Sufi saint Ahmed al-Rifa'i &ndash; was the founder of the Rifa'i Sufi order. Sayyid Mir Jan, Sufi saint Bulleh Shah, Sufi saint of Punjab Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai (1842-1920) &ndash; one of the leaders of the Iranian Constitutional Revolution who played an important role in the establishment of democracy and rule of law in Iran Abu al-Qasim al-Khoei (1899–1992) &ndash; Shia marja' Agha Hasan Abedi (1922–1995) &ndash; Pakistani banker and founder of Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) Muntadhar al-Zaidi (b. 1979) &ndash; Iraqi broadcast journalist who served as a correspondent for Iraqi-owned, Egyptian-based Al-Baghdadia TV Ali Haider Tabatabai (1854–1933) &ndash; translated Thomas Gray's Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard from English to Urdu. He was head of the Translation Department of Osmania University, could speak write and understand English, German, French, Persian and Arabic. Abbas al-Musawi (c.1952–1992) &ndash; Lebanese Muslim cleric and leader of Hezbollah Hossein Kazemeyni Boroujerdi (b. 1958) &ndash; Iranian Twelver Shia Muslim cleric who advocates the separation of religion and government and has been imprisoned several times by the Iranian government Seyed Mehdi Hosseini Bami, (b. 1979) &ndash; Iranian composer of contemporary classical music. Ibrahim al-Jaafari (b. 1947) &ndash; former Prime Minister of Iraq Idries Shah, Sufi writer Syed Ahmed Rizvi Kashmiri (1901-1964) was a Shia Ayatollah in Kashmir Aga Syed Hussain (1876-1944) was a Governor of Kashmir, later the first Muslim Minister in Maharaja Rule in Kashmir Intezar Ahmed Abidi &ndash; former minister of Uttar Pradesh Irfan Abidi (1950–1997) &ndash; was a noted Pakistani scholar, religious leader, public speaker and poet Meher Ali Shah, Sufi Saint of Pakistan Mir-Hossein Mousavi (b. 1942) &ndash; is an Iranian reformist politician, artist and architect who served as the seventy-ninth and last Prime Minister of Iran from 1981 to 1989. He was a reformist candidate for the 2009 presidential election and eventually the leader of the opposition in the post-election unrest Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah (1935–2010) &ndash; foremost marja' of Lebanese Shia Muslims Muhammad Ahmad Al Mahdi (b. 1845-1885) &ndash; Mahdi, the messianic redeemer of the Islamic faith; Ruler of Nubia and Sudan Mohammad Khatami (b. 1943) &ndash; reformist Iranian politician and former President of Iran Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari (1905–1986) &ndash; an Iranian Grand Ayatollah of Iranian Azerbaijani origin Mohammad Mohammad Sadeq al-Sadr (1943–1999) &ndash; Shia marja' Sayed Ammar Nakshawani (b. 1981) &ndash; British-Iraqi Islamic historian, lecturer, and author Muhsin al-Hakim (1889–1970) &ndash; Shia marja' in the early 1960s Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin ibni Tuanku Syed Putra Jamalullail (b. 17 May 1943) &ndash; His Majesty was elected as the 12th Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Supreme Head / King) of Malaysia on 13 December 2001 until 2004. Syed Hamid Albar ( b. 15 January 1944) &ndash; was a senior Malaysian government minister in the 1990s and 2000s. He was the Minister for Home Affairs (2008–2009), Minister for Foreign Affairs (1999–2008), Minister for Defence (1995–1999) and Minister for Justice (1990–1995). He was a member of the Parliament of Malaysia from 1990 to 2013. Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas (b. 5 September 1931) &ndash; prominent contemporary Muslim philosopher and thinker from Malaysia. He is the author of twenty-seven authoritative works on various aspects of Islamic thought and civilisation, particularly on Sufism, cosmology, metaphysics, philosophy and Malay language and literature. Syed Mohammad Izhar Ashraf (1934-2012) was the Chief Patron of the All Indian Ulama, and Mashaikh Board (AIUMB) as well as a renowned Sufi scholar.
