   Scott Carl Johnson Rechsteiner (born July 29, 1962) is an American professional wrestler, better known by his ring name, Scott Steiner. Steiner wrestled in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) alongside his older brother Rick as The Steiner Brothers and as a member of the New World Order (nWo). He also wrestled for Jim Crockett Promotions (JCP), the World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment (WWF/E), Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA). Steiner has headlined numerous pay-per-view events throughout his career. As a singles wrestler, Steiner is a one time WCW World Heavyweight Champion, a two time WCW United States Heavyweight Champion, a two time WCW World Television Champion. He also became the seventh Triple Crown Champion in WCW's history. Steiner is also a successful tag team wrestler, as a twelve time World Tag Team Champion (seven times in World Championship Wrestling, twice in the World Wrestling Federation and twice in New Japan Pro Wrestling with Rick and once in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling with Booker T). Before becoming a professional wrestler, Rechsteiner was an amateur wrestler. Wrestling at 190&nbsp;lbs for the University of Michigan, he became a three time Big 10 runner-up, after finishing fifth as a freshman. In 1986, Rechsteiner became an NCAA Division I All American and placed sixth in the nation his senior year. Rechsteiner trained under Dr. Jerry Graham Jr. at Torio's Health Club in Toledo, Ohio, and debuted under his real name in the Toledo-based World Wrestling Association in 1986. On August 14, 1986, in Dearborn, Michigan, Rechsteiner defeated The Great Wojo for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship. He held the title until May 3, 1987, when he lost it back to Wojo in Toledo. He then formed a tag team with his trainer, Graham. On October 6, 1987, they defeated Chris Carter and Mohammad Saad for the WWA World Tag Team Championship. On December 6, they lost the title to Carter and Don Kent. In 1988, Rechsteiner joined the Memphis-based Continental Wrestling Association (CWA) under his real name. He formed a tag team with Billy Joe Travis, and defeated the Cuban Choir Boys for the CWA World Tag Team Championship on May 29. On June 6, they lost the title to Gary Young and Don Bass. Rechsteiner and Travis regained the title on June 27, and lost it to The Rock 'n' Roll RPMs (Mike Davis and Tommy Lane) on August 15. Rechsteiner formed a new tag team with Jed Grundy, and on February 18, 1989, they dethroned CWA World Tag Team Champions Robert Fuller and Jimmy Golden. Rechsteiner's third and final CWA reign ended on February 25, when Fuller and Golden regained the title. He left the CWA soon after.  Rechsteiner, under the ring name Scott Steiner, debuted in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) during a backstage interview at Chi-Town Rumble, later accompanying his brother Rick to the ring as he lost the NWA World Television Championship to Mike Rotunda.  Scott would begin wrestling in singles bouts on WCW programming before the Steiners began teaming together.  The Steiners lost their first high profile bout to Kevin Sullivan & Rotunda at Clash of the Champions VII but defeated them in a rematch at the Great American Bash 1989.  The Steiners also compete in the "King of the Hill" two-ring battle royal earlier in the show but were unsuccessful. During this time, the Steiners were managed by Missy Hyatt and often brought their pitbull Arnold to the ring.  Rick nervously began a relationship with a shy fan named "Robin Green" who eventually received a make-over and transformed into Woman.  Green was responsible for tripping up Scott at Clash of the Champions VIII and costing the Steiners the NWA World Tag Team Championship as well as luring Scott into a parking lot assault by Sullivan and her new masked tag team, Doom.  Doom, with Woman in their corner, would defeat the Steiners at Halloween Havoc '89 after Woman interfered. On November 1, 1989, in Atlanta, Georgia, The Steiner Brothers defeated The Fabulous Freebirds (Michael Hayes and Jimmy Garvin) for the NWA World Tag Team Championship. They held the title for over five months before losing it to Doom (Butch Reed and Ron Simmons) in Washington, D.C., at Capital Combat. The Steiner Brothers defeated The Midnight Express (Bobby Eaton and Stan Lane) for the NWA United States Tag Team Championship on August 24, in East Rutherford, New Jersey. During their title reign, WCW withdrew from the National Wrestling Alliance (in January 1991) and the title was renamed the WCW United States Tag Team Championship. The Steiner Brothers competed in a WarGames match at WrestleWar 1991, which received a five star rating from The Wrestling Observer. After winning the WCW World Tag Team Championship on February 18, they vacated the United States Tag Team Championship, on February 20. After they won the IWGP Tag Team Championship from Hiroshi Hase and Kensuke Sasaki at the WCW/New Japan Supershow on March 21, announcers began referring to them as "Triple Crown Champions". In 1990, Steiner began wrestling in singles matches. WCW's weekend TBS shows (Power Hour, Saturday Night, and Main Event), featured the WCW/NWA Gauntlet Series, in which a wrestler was selected to face a different top star on each show that weekend, winning $10,000 if they defeated all three. Steiner was the first to successfully "run the gauntlet" from September 21–23, defeating Bobby Eaton, Ric Flair and Arn Anderson. On January 30, 1991, Steiner had a WCW World Heavyweight Championship match against Flair at Clash of the Champions XIV: Dixie Dynamite, which ended in a time limit draw. He won the WCW World Television Championship on September 29, 1992. The Steiner Brothers left WCW for the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) that November, after a contract dispute with WCW Executive Vice President Bill Watts. The Steiner Brothers made their WWF television debut with a promo on the December 21, 1992 episode of Prime Time Wrestling. They appeared on the debut episode of Raw on January 11, 1993. Their pay-per-view debut came on January 24, at the 1993 Royal Rumble, where they defeated The Beverly Brothers (Blake and Beau). At WrestleMania IX on April 4, The Steiner Brothers defeated The Headshrinkers (Samu and Fatu). After WrestleMania, The Steiner Brothers feuded with Money Inc. (Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster). At King of the Ring on June 13, The Steiner Brothers and The Smokin' Gunns (Billy and Bart) defeated The Headshrinkers and Money Inc. in an eight-man tag match. The following evening in Columbus, Ohio, on the June 14 episode of Raw, The Steiner Brothers defeated Money Inc. for the WWF World Tag Team Championship. Money Inc. regained the title on June 16, at a house show in Rockford, Illinois, and lost it back to The Steiner Brothers at another house show, on June 19, in St. Louis, Missouri. The Steiner Brothers defended the title against The Heavenly Bodies (Tom Prichard and Jimmy Del Ray) at SummerSlam on August 30. On the September 13 episode of Raw in New York, New York, The Steiner Brothers defended the title against The Quebecers (Jacques and Pierre) in a "Province of Quebec Rules" match, wherein the title could change hands via disqualification. The match ended when the manager of The Quebecers, Johnny Polo, threw a hockey stick into the ring and Scott caught it. When the referee saw Scott holding the foreign object, he disqualified The Steiner Brothers and awarded the title to The Quebecers. Scott defeated Pierre in a singles match the following week on Raw. Steiner competed in the elimination match main event of Survivor Series, marking his only headlining WWF pay-per-view appearance. On January 22, 1994, Scott Steiner was the first entrant in the Royal Rumble. After nine minutes, he was eliminated by Diesel. Following this, the Steiner Brothers left the WWF in mid-1994. On July 28, 1995, The Steiner Brothers debuted in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW), at The Orange County Fairgrounds in Middletown, New York, defeating Dudley Dudley and Vampire Warrior. On August 4, in The Flagstaff in Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, they defeated Dudley Dudley and 2 Cold Scorpio. They made their ECW Arena debut on August 5, at Wrestlepalooza, teaming with Eddie Guerrero to lose to Scorpio, Dean Malenko, and Cactus Jack. On August 25, in Jim Thorpe, they defeated Scorpio and Malenko, and defeated Scorpio and Chris Benoit the following evening. On August 28, they defeated Dudley Dudley and Dances with Dudley in the Big Apple Dinner Theater in Kennett Square, Pennsylvania. At Gangstas Paradise on September 16, they teamed with Taz and lost to The Eliminators (John Kronus and Perry Saturn) and Jason. On September 23, in Middletown, they defeated Raven and Stevie Richards. Scott Steiner made his final ECW appearance on October 28, teaming with Taz and losing to The Eliminators.   The Steiner Brothers rejoined WCW in 1996. They won the World Tag Team Championship from Harlem Heat on July 24, but lost it back three days later. After the formation of the New World Order (nWo), the Steiner Brothers feuded with The Outsiders, who had won the World Tag Team Championship from Harlem Heat. From late 1997 into early 1998, Steiner underwent noticeable physical changes, such as massively increasing his muscle mass, cutting his signature  mullet and growing a goatee. During this time, Steiner began feuding with Buff Bagwell over who had the better physique. Before long, he began leaving Rick in the ring by himself during tag team matches, or starting the match without ever tagging his brother into it. On February 22, 1998, Steiner joined the nWo at SuperBrawl VIII, by attacking his brother Rick while they were defending the WCW World Tag Team Championship against The Outsiders. The next night, on Nitro, he adopted a new gimmick, dyeing his hair and beard blond and further increasing his muscle mass. Scott then adopted the nicknames "White Thunder", in reference to his bleached hair and goatee and his all-white singlet, and "Superstar", as a homage to "Superstar" Billy Graham. However, he soon discarded both nicknames, and instead proclaimed himself as "Big Poppa Pump". Steiner further altered his attire as he began wearing sunglasses and chain mail headgear as part of his ring entrance outfit. He then began teaming with former rival Buff Bagwell and remained a member of the nWo until the group disbanded in early 1999. In 1999, Steiner feuded with Goldberg, Diamond Dallas Page, Booker T, and Rey Misterio, Jr., and won the United States Heavyweight Championship and World Television Championship. In late 1999, he was sidelined with a back injury and stripped of the United States Heavyweight Title. On a December 1999 episode of Nitro, Steiner cut a promo to announce his retirement from professional wrestling due to this injury. Later that evening, he revealed himself to, in fact, be in fine health, turning on and attacking Sid Vicious. He continued to be a top heel into 2000 and joined the reformed nWo. After the nWo disbanded again, Steiner became one of the central members of Vince Russo and Eric Bischoff's New Blood stable. At Spring Stampede, he competed in a tournament for the WCW United States Championship, defeating The Wall by disqualification when he blinded him, which caused Wall to accidentally chokeslam the referee through a table instead. He then defeated Mike Awesome by submission with his finisher, the Steiner Recliner before ultimately winning the tournament after defeating Sting in the finals, albeit due to interference from Sting's previous opponent Vampiro. On November 26, 2000 at Mayhem, Steiner defeated Booker T to win the World Heavyweight Championship, becoming a Triple Crown Champion in the process. In January 2001, Steiner became the centerpiece of Ric Flair's Magnificent Seven stable. He feuded with Booker T over several months and pay-per-views until losing the World Heavyweight Championship back to him on the final episode of Nitro on March 26, 2001. After WCW was purchased by the WWF, Rechsteiner, unlike many of his colleagues, did not join the WWF and instead opted to wait until his contract with AOL Time Warner expired later that year before seeking other opportunities. After his contract with AOL-Time Warner expired in November 2001, Rechsteiner joined the World Wrestling All-Stars, where he was reunited with his former WCW valet Midajah. He appeared at WWA house shows in Europe and Australia throughout 2001 and 2002. At the third WWA pay-per-view, The Eruption, on April 12, 2002 at the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne, Steiner challenged Nathan Jones for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship. Despite the presence of WWA Commissioner Sid at ringside, Steiner was able to cheat his way to victory, striking Jones with the title belt and making Jones submit with the Steiner Recliner. Steiner held the belt for several months (although never defending it) before vacating it in November 2002, and leaving WWA for World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE). Before joining WWE, Steiner teamed with his brother Rick to defeat Hiroshi Tanahashi and Kensuke Sasaki on May 2, 2002 in Japan, on New Japan Pro Wrestling's 30th Anniversary show.  In October 2002, Rechsteiner signed a three-year contract with World Wrestling Entertainment, and returned to WWE television after an eight-year absence at Survivor Series in Madison Square Garden on November 17. There, Scott Steiner attacked Matt Hardy and Christopher Nowinski after they delivered a promo insulting New York City, establishing him as a face. Over the following weeks, General Managers Eric Bischoff and Stephanie McMahon both courted Steiner, each trying to sign him to their respective brand, Raw or SmackDown!. Bischoff was ultimately successful, after McMahon rejected Steiner's sexual advances. Once on Raw, Steiner feuded with World Heavyweight Champion Triple H, leading to title matches at the Royal Rumble and No Way Out. Steiner won the first match by disqualification after Triple H attacked him with a sledgehammer and lost the second match via pinfall. On April 14, Steiner faced off against Nowinski in a debate over the Iraq War. Later that year, Steiner formed a tag team with Test, with Stacy Keibler as their manager. The team lasted several months, and feuded with La Résistance. They broke up after Test turned heel and began misogynistically treating Keibler. On June 15, Steiner defeated Test in a grudge match to win the managerial services of Keibler at Bad Blood, but lost her back to Test in a rematch on the August 18 episode of Raw. At Unforgiven on September 21, Steiner faced Test with Keibler's managerial services again on the line with the extra stipulation that, if Steiner lost, he would become Test's manservant. Steiner lost after Keibler's interference backfired, and the tag team was reunited at Test's behest. After another mistake by Keibler cost the team a match on the September 29 episode of Raw, a frustrated Steiner belly to belly suplexed her, resulting in Steiner turning heel and teaming on better terms with Test as Keibler was forced to remain their reluctant manager. On December 1, Mick Foley fired in storyline Steiner and Test freeing Stacy as their manager. His last WWE match was as a part of the 2004 Royal Rumble, lasting over 6 minutes before being eliminated by Booker T. Steiner suffered an injury in 2004, sidelining him for two months. While injured, he was released from WWE on August 17. Rechsteiner underwent foot surgery in July 2004, having six screws inserted into his foot, a tendon transplant, and a bone graft. He then convalesced in a cast for eight months. Scott Steiner returned to the ring on August 28, 2005, in Asheville, North Carolina for the independent promotion, Universal Championship Wrestling, teaming with his brother Rick to defeat Disco Inferno and Jeff Lewis. He wrestled briefly in LAW, alongside Buff Bagwell, and feuded with the tag team Fame and Fortune.  Steiner debuted in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) at Destination X 2006, before making his Impact! debut on March 18, identifying himself as Jeff Jarrett's bodyguard. In subsequent weeks, he attacked TNA wrestlers and staff, demanding to be hired. At Lockdown on April 23, Steiner, Jarrett, and America's Most Wanted lost to Sting, A.J. Styles, Ron Killings, and Rhino in a Lethal Lockdown match. Steiner and Jarrett then challenged Sting and a partner of his choosing to face them at Sacrifice on May 14. Sting hinted at three potential partners (Buff Bagwell, Lex Luger and Rick Steiner) before choosing Samoa Joe. Sting and Joe defeated Steiner and Jarrett. After failing to defeat Sting to qualify for the third King of the Mountain match, Steiner lost to Samoa Joe at Slammiversary. At Victory Road, he faced Joe, Sting, and Christian Cage in a four-way bout to decide the number one contender for Jarrett's NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Sting pinned Steiner to win, and Steiner resumed his role as Jarrett's bodyguard. He then faced Christian Cage on the August 10 Impact, and was in Jarrett's corner at Hard Justice before disappearing from TNA. On February 8, 2007, Steiner returned as NWA World Heavyweight Champion Christian Cage's "special consultant", in Cage's match with Kurt Angle at Against All Odds, interfering to cost Angle the match and joining Christian's Coalition. Steiner eliminated Angle in a gauntlet match to determine a number one contender, then lost to him at Destination X. At Lockdown, Steiner was part of Team Cage, which lost to Team Angle in a Lethal Lockdown match. At Sacrifice, the Steiner Brothers reunited. They were scheduled to wrestle Team 3D in a "dream match" at Slammiversary, but Scott was replaced by Road Warrior Animal after suffering a severe throat injury (see below).More On Scott Steiner's Serious Injury Inside Report by TNAWrestlingNews.com Steiner returned on July 15, at Victory Road, costing Brother Ray a match. At Bound for Glory, The Steiner Brothers defeated Team 3D in a 2-out-of-3 Tables Match. At Genesis, they unsuccessfully challenged the tag team champions, Tomko and A.J. Styles.  At Turning Point Steiner competed in the "Feast or Fired Battle Royal", winning a briefcase containing a contract for a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match. On the December 13 episode of Impact!, he beat Petey Williams, B.G. James, and Christopher Daniels. Following the match, Jim Cornette offered him $50,000 for his briefcase, which he refused. Steiner then switched briefcases with Petey Williams (whose contained an X Division Title contract), stating afterwards he would get his original briefcase back the next week. At Against All Odds, Steiner defeated Williams to win both briefcases, after a distraction from an unknown woman later introduced as Rhaka Khan. After winning both cases, Steiner issued a challenge to anyone, which Williams answered. Williams lost after more interference by Khan. Steiner then took Williams as his protégé and gave him the X Division briefcase on the April 17 edition of Impact!. Later that night, Williams cashed in the opportunity, beating Jay Lethal for the X Division title with the Canadian Destroyer. At Sacrifice on May 11, Steiner cashed in his briefcase and faced Samoa Joe for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. He lost, and tore his ACL, sidelining him and requiring surgery.   On the October 30 Impact!, Steiner returned, joining The Main Event Mafia and attacking several wrestlers with a lead pipe. On the November 13 Impact!, he turned on former protégé Petey Williams after Williams tried to talk with him about the Main Event Mafia situation. Steiner threw him off a ladder and the Main Event Mafia attacked him backstage. At Genesis, Mick Foley, A.J. Styles and Brother Devon defeated Steiner, Booker T, and Cute Kip when Foley pinned Steiner after a double underhook DDT onto a steel chair. At Against All Odds, Steiner pinned Williams after a Steiner Screwdriver to end their feud. Steiner and Booker T then formed a tag team. At Victory Road, they defeated Beer Money, Inc. (James Storm and Robert Roode) for the World Tag Team Championship. At Bound for Glory, they lost the title to The British Invasion in a four way Full Metal Mayhem Tag Team match (which also included Team 3D and Beer Money). On the following episode of Impact!, Angle announced the disbanding of the Main Event Mafia, which Steiner refused to accept. Steiner then feuded with Bobby Lashley, defeating him in a Falls Count Anywhere Match at Turning Point. The next month, at Final Resolution, Lashley defeated Steiner in a Last Man Standing match. On February 4, 2010, Steiner's profile was removed from TNA's official website. His departure from the company was confirmed the following week. Steiner joined the Puerto Rican promotion World Wrestling Council (WWC) in March 2010, debuting in an angle where he attacked Universal Heavyweight Champion Ray González. On April 3, at Camino a la Gloria 2010, Steiner wrestled his first match for WWC, losing to González in a championship match. On April 24, he defeated González in a rematch to become the new Universal Heavyweight Champion. On May 29, he was stripped of the title, after a defense against González ended in a no contest. On July 11, González defeated Steiner (in a match refereed by Ricky Banderas) to regain the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship.   On the January 27, 2011 episode of Impact! (taped January 12), Steiner returned to TNA as a face, saving Kurt Angle, Matt Morgan, and Crimson from Fortune and Immortal. The next week, Fortune turned on Immortal and aligned themselves with Steiner, Angle and Crimson. On February 13, at Against All Odds, Steiner, James Storm and Robert Roode defeated Immortal members Rob Terry, Gunner and Murphy in a six-man tag match. Steiner pinned Gunner after the Frankensteiner. Steiner then began feuding with Rob Terry after Terry attacked him on the February 24 Impact!, during a "posedown" between the two. The following week, Steiner defeated Terry in a singles match. On the March 24 Impact!, Steiner formed a tag team with Crimson and defeated Ink Inc. (Jesse Neal and Shannon Moore). After the match, Moore disrespected Steiner. This led to a match between the two the following week, which Steiner won. On April 17, at Lockdown, Steiner and Crimson lost a four-way tag team number one contenders cage match to Ink Inc. On the next episode of Impact!, Steiner turned heel by attacking Matt Morgan, after they had each announced their intention to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. The two brawled backstage on the April 28 Impact!. On the May 26 episode of the now-renamed Impact Wrestling, Steiner interfered in and cost Morgan his match with Jeff Jarrett. On the June 2 Impact Wrestling, Steiner and Jarrett defeated Morgan and Kurt Angle, when Steiner pinned Morgan. At Slammiversary IX on June 12, Morgan defeated Steiner in a singles match to end the feud. On the June 30 episode of Impact Wrestling, Steiner joined Immortal. At Turning Point on November 13, Steiner and Bully Ray lost to former Immortal stablemates Mr. Anderson and Abyss in a tag team match. After three months of inactivity, Rechsteiner was released from TNA in March 2012. In 2010, Steiner defeated Brutus Beefcake to become Canadian Wrestling International (CWI)'s first Heavyweight Champion. He retained the title in matches against Kevin Nash and Big Van Vader. Following his departure from TNA, Steiner began performing for various European promotions on a European tour. On May 31, 2013, the Steiner Brothers won the Preston City Wrestling Tag Team Championship before losing it the following day. On June 2, Steiner won the Dutch Pro Wrestling Heavyweight Championship. On June 23, the Steiner Brothers defeated Eddie Kingston and Homicide at the House of Hardcore 2 event. On June 7, 2015, Steiner was pinned by Rob Van Dam at Citi Field`s Legends of Wrestling show. After the match Steiner and Doc Gallows attacked RVD leading to Goldberg coming to the aide of Van Dam and spearing Steiner. On May 18, 2015, Steiner was announced as part of the roster of the Global Force Wrestling (GFW) promotion. Rechsteiner appeared in the television program Charmed on February 1, 2001, playing "Mega Man" in the episode "Wrestling With Demons," alongside fellow WCW wrestlers Booker T and Buff Bagwell. He also appeared in the Disney Channel program The Jersey as himself. Scott Steiner is married and has two sons. On June 3, 2007, at a TNA house show in San Juan, Puerto Rico, Rechsteiner was kicked in the throat by his opponent, Apolo. After he began coughing up blood, he was taken by ambulance to a hospital, where he was diagnosed with a torn trachea and given five hours to live. He was put in an induced coma for two days, while doctors cut through his ribs and lung to repair the tear, then began draining fluid from his lungs (a process which lasted two weeks). Unable to fly (because the change in air pressure would have caused his lung to collapse), Rechsteiner eventually left Puerto Rico on a cruise ship and arrived on the mainland one week later. Rechsteiner's weight gain in the late 1990s led to allegations of steroid abuse, which he denied. He claims that, upon returning to World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in late 2002, he was asked to undergo a steroid test and agreed, on the condition that Triple H take one as well. He claims WWE did not follow through with either test. On April 21, 1998, in Cherokee County, Georgia, Rechsteiner threatened Georgia Department of Transportation employee Paul Kaspereen after Kaspereen informed him an exit ramp leading off Interstate 575 was closed. He then hit Kaspereen twice with his Ford F-250 pickup truck. Kaspereen was not badly hurt. Rechsteiner was subsequently arrested and, on March 17, 1999, pled guilty to aggravated assault and making terroristic threats (felonies carrying a maximum sentence of 30 years imprisonment). Under Georgian first-offender rules (which stipulate that a first-time offender will be found not guilty if they do not violate the terms of their probation) Judge C. Michael Roach sentenced Rechsteiner to ten days in the Cherokee County jail. He also placed him on a seven-year probation order, ordered him to pay USD$25,000 in fines, restitution, and legal fees, and ordered him to perform 200 hours of community service. Toward the end of his tenure in World Championship Wrestling, Rechsteiner engaged in a rivalry with wrestler Diamond Dallas Page after insulting Page's wife Kimberly during an interview. Kimberly had become upset with Rechsteiner after alleging drug paraphernalia found backstage belonged to Tammy Lynn Sytch, an accusation which (despite Sytch's vehement denial) led to her release from WCW. The acrimony between Rechsteiner and Page eventually escalated into violence, with the two men engaging in a brief locker room fight before being separated by other wrestlers. On the February 7, 2000 episode of Nitro, Rechsteiner angered WCW officials by making disparaging non-kayfabe remarks toward World Championship Wrestling and Ric Flair. During an in-ring promo, Rechsteiner claimed that when Flair appeared on WCW programming, "the people at home, all they did was grab their remote, change the channel to the WWF, and watch Stone Cold – a person you and your own friends got fired from here, 'cause you're a jealous old bastard!" He then called Flair an "ass-kissin', backstabbin', butt-suckin' bastard", before ending the tirade with the comment "WCW sucks!".Scott Steiner shoots on Ric Flair [Nitro - 7th Feb 00] He was suspended for two weeks with pay for the incident. In January 2001, Rechsteiner was arrested after assaulting Randall Mankins, an emergency medical technician employed by the Kernersville, North Carolina fire department. As part of a storyline on an episode of Nitro, Mankins entered the ring to tend to Michael Modest and Christopher Daniels, who were selling leg injuries inflicted by Scott Steiner. As he did, Rechsteiner struck him twice. The following morning he was arrested and charged with assault. The charges were dropped after it was determined Rechsteiner was not made aware Mankins was an actual EMT and not an actor. That same year, Rechsteiner also fought backstage with WCW road agent Terry Taylor. In December 2005, Rechsteiner, Lawrence Pfohl and Marcus Bagwell were removed from a flight from Minneapolis, Minnesota to Winnipeg, Manitoba following a disturbance on board the plane. They were detained for several hours before Rechsteiner and Bagwell were released and permitted to continue on their journey (Pfohl, however, was held without bail and later charged and jailed). Rechsteiner would later refer to the incident in his storyline interviews, describing himself as a violent criminal with little regard for the forces of law and order. Following his departure from TNA, Rechsteiner began expressing his disdain with TNA management, specifically Hulk Hogan and Eric Bischoff, via Twitter.  As a result, he was contacted by TNA's attorneys. After he continued making similar remarks, TNA filed a legal complaint against him in June 2012. Rechsteiner responded by filing a countersuit against TNA on September 10, claiming he was owed royalties. It was reported in November that a second lawsuit was filed by Rechsteiner, claiming he was injured as a result of TNA officials, including Hogan, allowing Jeff Hardy to wrestle him while Hardy was intoxicated. Rechsteiner was banned from attending the 2015 WWE Hall of Fame ceremony after Hogan's wife accused him of accosting her at a San Jose airport. Hogan's wife alleged that he threatened to kill Hogan and the couple subsequently reported the incident to police.  Rechsteiner denies making the death threat. 1 This Mid-Atlantic promotion, while currently operating out of the same region of the United States and having revised some of the championships used by the original Mid-Atlantic promotion, is not the same promotion that was once owned by Jim Crockett, Jr. and was sold to Ted Turner in 1988. It is just another NWA affiliated promotion.     Finishing moves Flatliner- WWE Frankensteiner, sometimes from the top ropeScott Steiner's profile at WrestlingData.com SSD – Steiner Screwdriver (Vertical suplex piledriver) – 1989–1994; used rarely thereafter Big Papa Powerbomb (Pop Up Powerbomb) – 2002; used rarely thereafter Steiner Recliner (Standing camel clutch) Super Samoan drop – 1997–present; used as a signature move in 1996 Signature moves Double underhook powerbomb Elbow drop, with theatrics Inverted DDT Multiple suplex variations Belly to back Dragon Exploder Northern Lights Vertical http://www.amazon.com/Steinerlined/dp/B0015HJD3W Spinning side / Overhead belly to belly, sometimes from the second rope Steiner-Line (Clothesline) Super fallaway slam With Rick Steiner Double team finishing moves Steiner DDT (Electric chair (Rick) and diving DDT (Scott) combination) Steiner Device (Electric chair (Rick) and diving clothesline (Scott) combination) Steinerizer (Electric chair (Scott) and diving bulldog (Rick) combination) Steiner-Line and German suplex combination With Booker T Double team finishing moves Double chokeslam Managers Missy Hyatt Ted DiBiase Midajah Stacy Keibler Rhaka Khan Nicknames "White Thunder" "Superstar" "Big Poppa Pump" "The Big Bad Booty Daddy" "The Genetic Freak" "Freakzilla" Entrance themes "Hot Stuff" by Donna Summer (WCW; used while teaming with his brother Rick) "Steinerized" by D. Conort, M. Seitz and J. Papa (WCW; used while teaming with his brother Rick) "Rockhouse" by Frank Shelley (WCW; used while a part of the New World Order) "Kevin Nash/Wolfpac Theme" performed by C-Murder and composed by Jimmy Hart and H. Helm (WCW; used while a part of the nWo Elite) "Main Event Mafia" by Dale Oliver (TNA; used while a part of the Main Event Mafia) "Immortal Theme" by Dale Oliver (TNA; used while a part of Immortal) "Steinerlined!" by Chris W. James (Independent circuit) National Collegiate Athletic Association 1983 Division I Big 10 – Fifth place 1984 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up 1985 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up 1986 Division I Big 10 – Runner-up 1986 Division I All American – Sixth place Canadian Wrestling's Elite CWE 123Approved.ca Television Championship (1 time)http://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=123509  Canadian Wrestling International CWI Heavyweight Champion (1 time, current) Continental Wrestling Association CWA World Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Billy Travis (2) and Jed Grundy (1) Dutch Pro Wrestling Dutch Heavyweight Championship (1 time) George Tragos/Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame Class of 2014http://www.pwinsider.com/ViewArticle.php?id=81532 Jim Crockett Promotions/World Championship Wrestling WCW World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) WCW United States Heavyweight Championship (2 times) WCW World Television Championship (2 times) NWA/WCW United States Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner NWA (Mid-Atlantic version)/WCW World Tag Team Championship (6 times) – with Rick Steiner Pat O'Connor Memorial Tag Team Tournament (1990) – with Rick Steiner Eighth Triple Crown Champion Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling1 NWA Mid-Atlantic Hardcore Championship (1 time, current)http://www.cagematch.net/?id=5&nr=1314 NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship (1 time) NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner New Japan Pro Wrestling IWGP Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Rick Steiner Preston City Wrestling PCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner Pro Wrestling America PWA Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rick Steiner Pro Wrestling Illustrated Match of the Year (1991) with Rick Steiner vs. Lex Luger and Sting at SuperBrawl Tag Team of the Year (1990, 1993) with Rick Steiner Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (1989) PWI ranked him #6 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 1991 PWI ranked him #77 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003 PWI ranked him #2 of the Top 100 Tag Teams of the "PWI Years" with Rick Steiner in 2003 Pure Action Championship Wrestling PACW Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Rick Steiner Ring Ka King RKK Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Abyss Stars and Stripes Championship Wrestling SSCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Total Nonstop Action Wrestling TNA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Booker T Feast or Fired (2007 – X Division Championship contract) World Wrestling All-Stars WWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Wrestling Association (Indianapolis) WWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) WWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Jerry Graham, Jr. World Wrestling Council WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Wrestling Federation WWF Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Rick Steiner Wrestling Observer Newsletter 5 Star Match (1991) with Brian Pillman, Sting and Rick Steiner, vs.  Ric Flair, Larry Zbyszko, Sid Vicious and Barry Windham (February 24, WarGames match, WrestleWar) Best Wrestling Maneuver (1989, 1990) Frankensteiner Match of the Year (1991) with Rick Steiner vs. Hiroshi Hase and Kensuke Sasaki at WCW/New Japan Supershow Tag Team of the Year (1990) with Rick Steiner Worst Worked Match of the Year (2003) vs. Triple H at Royal Rumble Solie's title histories TNA Profile GFW Profile
