   Scott Oliver Hall (born October 20, 1958) is an American former professional wrestler. He is best known for his work with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) under the ring name Razor Ramon, and with World Championship Wrestling (WCW) under his real name. Beginning with his time in the American Wrestling Association (AWA), Hall maintained a perennially high profile as a wrestler, as he became a four time WWF Intercontinental Champion (a record from 1995-1999), a two time WCW United States Heavyweight Champion, a one time WCW World Television Champion and a nine time world tag team champion (seven times in WCW, once in TNA, and once in the AWA). In addition, Hall is a two time world champion, having won the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship and the USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship. He is also notable for being a founding member of the New World Order (nWo). On April 5, 2014, Hall (as Razor Ramon) was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame. Hall began his career in 1984 in Championship Wrestling from Florida (CWF) and soon began a feud with Dusty Rhodes. He and Dan Spivey trained together in Florida (mainly under Rhodes, but also under Mike Rotunda and Barry Windham). When it was time for the two to debut as a tag team, Rhodes sent them to work in Jim Crockett's Charlotte, North Carolina based territory. Here, they debuted as American Starship, with Hall as under the ring name Starship Coyote and Spivey under the ring name Starship Eagle. They wore furry boots, bright masks and began matches with a T-shirt ripping routine similar to Hulk Hogan's. At first, American Starship were booked to wrestle infrequently; so much so that the two were given ground crew jobs for the Charlotte Orioles (which Jim Crockett owned at the time). When they did get in the ring, it was with little success. The highlight of their stay in Crocket's Mid Atlantic Championship Wrestling was a losing challenge to Arn and Ole Anderson for the NWA National Tag Team Championship. After leaving Crockett, the duo joined Bob Geigel's NWA Central States territory (based in Kansas City) in 1985. They received a shot at NWA Central States Tag Team Champions Marty Jannetty and "Bulldog" Bob Brown, but lost the match. Dan Spivey’s stay in the Central States territory was brief. He returned to the Carolinas and Crockett, jobbing in the freshly rebranded Jim Crockett Promotions as "American Starship" Eagle. Hall, meanwhile, stayed in Central States, receiving a solid push and gaining the respect of several established veterans, including Nick Bockwinkel and Larry Zbyszko (who wrestled to a time limit draw with the rookie Hall). Here, he also befriended Curt Hennig. Scott Hall joined the American Wrestling Association (AWA) in 1985, where he wrestled as "Magnum" Scott Hall and, later, "Big" Scott Hall. He wrestled as a babyface wrestler. Verne Gagne, the owner and promoter of the AWA, had wanted to push Hall to the same heights as he had Hulk Hogan, following Hogan's departure for Vince McMahon's World Wrestling Federation (WWF). Gagne had Hall use mannerisms and moves similar to Hogan. Hall formed a tag team with his more experienced friend Curt Hennig, whom he later would credit for cultivating his early professional wrestling career.Keller, Wade PWTorch Livecast – Wade Keller Interviews Scott Hall PWTorch (May 3, 2013). Retrieved on 9-08-2013. The team defeated Jimmy Garvin and Steve Regal for the AWA World Tag Team Championship on January 18, 1986, in a 58-minute match in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Referred to as the "Perfect Combination" by Pro Wrestling Illustrated, the champions defended against such challengers as Buddy Rose and Doug Somers, Nord the Barbarian and Boris Zhukov, and Bill and Scott Irwin. They lost the belts to Rose and Somers by countout (an unusual and unexplained deviation from the standard rule of pro wrestling) on May 17, after interference by Colonel DeBeers. After losing the title, Hall and Hennig soon parted ways. Hall then received shots at the AWA World Heavyweight Championship, against Stan Hansen and Rick Martel. Although Gagne wanted to put the belt on Hall, Hall hated the cold weather in the territory, recognized the AWA as a "sinking ship," and left for the NWA in 1989. The AWA would fold the following year. Scott Hall was brought into the National Wrestling Alliance's World Championship Wrestling (WCW) territory by Jim Ross in 1989, as part of the NWA's initiative to develop new, young stars (also including Brian Pillman and Sid Vicious). His first and only pay-per-view appearance during this time was at The Great American Bash: The Glory Days, where he participated in a King of the Hill battle royal. He then began jobbing regularly, then went on hiatus. From 1990 till 1991, Hall had a stint in the Puerto Rican promotion World Wrestling Council (WWC). On March 3, he defeated Miguel Pérez, Jr. for the WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship,. He lost it to Super Medic III on April 20.  Hall returned to WCW in 1991. He was renamed The Diamond Studd, a gimmick similar to Rick Rude's (both were cocky, vain and would invite attractive women from the audience into the ring). He was managed by Diamond Dallas Page. In his debut match, he squashed Tommy Rich on the June 14 edition of Clash of the Champions. He defeated Tom Zenk at The Great American Bash. He received a significant push in his early days with WCW but, by the end of 1991, it began to fade. At Clash of the Champions on September 2, The Diamond Studd lost to Ron Simmons. At Halloween Havoc 1991, the team of Studd, Abdullah the Butcher, Cactus Jack, and Big Van Vader lost to Sting, El Gigante, and The Steiner Brothers in a "Chamber of Horrors Match". On the November 19 edition of Clash of the Champions, Studd lost to Zenk in a rematch from The Great American Bash. After an injury sidelined him for Starrcade '91, Hall entered 1992 forming short-lived tag teams with Vinnie Vegas and Scotty Flamingo (as part of The Diamond Mine stable), as well as with members of Paul E. Dangerously's Dangerous Alliance. Hall began a feud with Dustin Rhodes in April 1992 when he interfered in two televised matches "The Natural" had with Bobby Eaton. The idea of adding him to the Dangerous Alliance was contemplated, but fell through, and Hall left WCW shortly after a final televised match against Ron Campbell on May 8. Hall joined the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) later that month, as Razor Ramon, a shady and stylish Cuban American bully from Miami. The character was modeled after the characters Tony Montana and Manny Ribera from the movie Scarface. Ramon's nickname (The Bad Guy) and catchphrase ("Say hello to The Bad Guy") derive from Montana's quotes: "Say hello to my little friend" and "Say goodnight to the bad guy". He would make his first appearance in a dark match on a Wrestling Challenge taping against Chris Hahn on May 18, 1992   Later in his career, Hall claimed he pitched the idea of a Scarface-like character during a meeting with Vince McMahon and Pat Patterson, as a joke. Hall quoted lines from the film with a Cuban accent and gave ideas for vignettes that would recreate several of the film's scenes, such as driving around South Florida in a convertible with a leopard-skin interior. Although taken right from the film, Hall claims McMahon and Patterson were nevertheless floored by the ideas and called him a "genius". Hall later learned that neither McMahon nor Patterson had ever seen nor heard of the film, and believed that Hall was coming up with the ideas himself. Patterson and McMahon came up with the name "Razor", but agreed with Hall's suggestion that it should be a nickname, and that the character should have a proper given name. Hall later asked Tito Santana for a Latino sounding name that starts with "R". Santana suggested "Ramon", Hall brought it back to McMahon and the name stuck. After weeks of introductory vignettes, Razor Ramon made his ring debut on the August 8, 1992 episode of Superstars, defeating local jobber Paul Van Dow with his finishing move, The Razor's Edge (previously called "The Diamond Death Drop" in WCW). Early on, Ramon would wear large gold chain necklaces to the ring. While handing them to an attendant at ringside he would threaten "Something happens to this, something gonna happen to you", and then flick his toothpick at the hapless attendant. Razor's first major angle began on the September 14 edition of Prime Time Wrestling, when he interfered in a WWF World Heavyweight Championship match between champion Randy Savage and Ric Flair, attacking Savage on the floor and enabling Flair to win the title. As a result, Razor and Savage started a feud, which later involved The Ultimate Warrior, after Warrior saved Savage from a post-match beating by Razor. Razor and Flair were scheduled to face The Ultimate Maniacs (Savage and Warrior) at Survivor Series. However, Warrior was fired from the WWF prior to the event and replaced by Flair's "executive consultant", Mr. Perfect (who made a face turn). Razor and Flair lost to Savage and Perfect via disqualification, for constantly double-teaming them. WWF World Heavyweight Champion Bret Hart was scheduled to defend his title against The Ultimate Warrior at the Royal Rumble, but Razor Ramon replaced Warrior after he left the company.Bret Hart talks Roddy Piper & Shawn Michaels. Aftermath. The Score Television Network. June 11, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2012. During the feud, Razor verbally disrespected Hart and the Hart wrestling family. Razor lost to Hart at the Royal Rumble, submitting to the Sharpshooter. The next month on Monday Night Raw, Razor won a 16-man battle royal, after Giant González — who was not a participant in the match — entered the ring and eliminated the other remaining participants, Tatanka and El Matador. Razor made his WrestleMania debut at WrestleMania IX, pinning former WWF World Heavyweight Champion Bob Backlund with a roll-up. The headlines in wrestling magazines after the event proclaimed that "The brawler beat the wrestler with wrestling". Razor defeated Tito Santana to qualify for the 1993 King of the Ring tournament. He lost in the quarterfinals to the eventual tournament winner (and old rival), Bret Hart. On the May 17 episode of Monday Night Raw he suffered an upset loss to jobber "The Kid" (who consequently became known as "The 1–2–3 Kid"). This started a feud between the two. It carried into the King of the Ring tournament and triggered a slow face turn for Razor, as he gained respect for The 1–2–3 Kid and support from the crowd. Ted DiBiase, however, did not show respect for Razor, making fun of him for losing to such a small jobber. Ramon's face turn was solidified when he helped The 1–2–3 Kid defeat DiBiase. The feud culminated at SummerSlam, where Ramon defeated DiBiase in DiBiase's final WWF match. On the October 4, 1993 edition of Monday Night Raw, a 20-man battle royal was held; the last two participants would face each other the next week for the vacant WWF Intercontinental Championship. Razor and Rick Martel were those final two. The next week on Raw, Razor pinned Martel after a Razor's Edge to win the Intercontinental Championship. At Survivor Series, Razor teamed with Marty Jannetty, Randy Savage, and The 1–2–3 Kid to take on the team of Martel, I.R.S, Adam Bomb, and Diesel. Razor (the team captain) eliminated the opposing captain, IRS, after scoring a pin following a Razor's Edge. Razor was eliminated from the match via countout after IRS hit him in the head with a briefcase, but his team went on to win the match, beginning a feud between the two captains. This feud culminated at the 1994 Royal Rumble, where IRS pinned Razor following interference from Shawn Michaels, however a second referee came down to the ring and restarted the match, where Razor immediately defeated IRS following a Razor's Edge. Around the same time, Ramon was in the early stages of a feud with Shawn Michaels over which man had the stronger claim to the Intercontinental Championship. Michaels had been stripped of the title months before due to "inactivity" (he was actually suspended during that time). He returned to television with his own version of the belt, claiming he was still the champion, since he hadn't been beaten for it. The matter was settled when Ramon defeated Michaels in a ladder match at WrestleMania X, becoming the undisputed Intercontinental Champion after retrieving both belts. This match was voted Pro Wrestling Illustrated's Match of the Year for 1994. It was also the first WWF match to receive a five star rating from Dave Meltzer in his Wrestling Observer Newsletter. On WWE.com, this match is ranked #5 of the Top 24 Matches in WrestleMania History. Razor continued to feud with Michaels and his bodyguard Diesel. On the April 30 episode of Superstars, he lost the Intercontinental Title to Diesel, after interference from Michaels.  Razor defeated Kwang to qualify for the 1994 King of the Ring tournament. He defeated Bam Bam Bigelow in the quarterfinals and Irwin R. Schyster in the semifinals, before losing in the final match to his old rival Bret Hart's younger brother, Owen, following interference from Jim Neidhart. At SummerSlam, Razor (with Walter Payton in his corner) defeated Diesel to win the WWF Intercontinental Championship for a second time, after Shawn Michaels accidentally hit Diesel with Sweet Chin Music. At Survivor Series, he captained a team called "The Bad Guys", consisting of himself, The 1–2–3 Kid, Davey Boy Smith, and The Headshrinkers (Fatu and Sione). They faced The Teamsters (Shawn Michaels, Diesel, Owen Hart, Jim Neidhart, and Jeff Jarrett). Ramon ended up the sole survivor of the match. This began a feud with Jeff Jarrett, which led into the next year. At the 1995 Royal Rumble, Razor lost the Intercontinental Championship to Jarrett, in controversial fashion; Jarrett had originally won the match by count-out, but demanded that the match be restarted so he could win the title. It was, and Jarrett pinned Razor with a small package. Razor faced Jarrett in a rematch for the Intercontinental Championship at WrestleMania XI, winning by disqualification when Jarrett's assistant The Roadie interfered. Jarrett retained the title, as a title cannot change hands by countout or disqualification. Razor defeated Jarrett and The Roadie at In Your House 1, in a handicap match. On May 16, Razor qualified for the King of the Ring tournament by defeating Jacob Blu. Razor defeated Jarrett in a ladder match at a May 19, 1995 house show to win his third WWF Intercontinental Championship. Razor Ramon was the first man to win the Intercontinental Title three times. Three days later (May 22), he lost the title back to Jarrett. On June 9, Razor suffered a rib injury during a ladder match rematch against Jarrett. Around this time, he had formed a team with Savio Vega, and Vega replaced Razor to defeat Irwin R. Schyster in the Free for All tournament match before the King of the Ring pay-per-view. Razor managed Vega throughout the tournament. He lost to Mabel in the final match. Razor and Vega lost to Men on a Mission (Mabel and Mo) at In Your House 2: The Lumberjacks, and lost a WWF (World) Tag Team Championship match to Owen Hart and Yokozuna on the August 7 episode of Raw. Razor had an Intercontinental Title ladder match (a rematch from Wrestlemania X) against the new champion Shawn Michaels at SummerSlam, but lost. He then began a feud with Dean Douglas. Razor defeated Douglas at In Your House 4 for the Intercontinental Championship, after Michaels had just forfeited the title to Douglas. Hall was the first man to win the title four times. In early 1996, Razor feuded with newcomer Goldust, leading to an Intercontinental Title match at the Royal Rumble. Razor lost the title to Goldust after Razor's former partner, The 1–2–3 Kid (who had previously made a heel turn), attacked him. He became associated with the backstage group known as The Kliq (also consisting of Kevin Nash (Diesel), Paul Levesque (Hunter Hearst Helmsley), Shawn Michaels, and Sean Waltman (The 1–2–3 Kid)). Razor Ramon was originally scheduled to face Goldust in a rematch for the title at WrestleMania XII in a Miami Street Fight, but Hall was suspended for six weeks by the WWF due to his drug use. He returned to WWF television at April's In Your House 7, where he lost to Vader. Hall was involved in "The MSG Incident". Because Hall and fellow Kliq member Kevin Nash were departing for WCW, the pair (along with Michaels and Levesque) broke kayfabe by celebrating and embracing in the ring together, though the characters they portrayed were supposed to be enemies. According to Hall, he went to WCW not for the money, because they offered him days off.  Hall returned  to WCW for a third time after leaving the WWF with an unannounced promo on May 27, 1996, in which he appeared from the crowd in street clothes and claimed to be "an outsider." On June 10, he was joined by Kevin Nash. They stated they were undertaking a hostile takeover of WCW, then slammed interviewer Eric Bischoff through the commentator's  table. The angle paralleled the real-life competition between WCW and the WWF.  At Bash at the Beach, Nash and Hall (now known as The Outsiders) challenged Sting, Lex Luger, and Randy Savage to a '3 vs. 3' match, saying they had a mystery partner. That partner turned out to be Hulk Hogan, and the three formed the New World Order (nWo). The stable stormed WCW, recruiting such stars as Syxx and The Giant. The Outsiders closed out 1996 with a victory over Sting and Lex Luger at Hog Wild, and a WarGames match win at Fall Brawl. They defeated Harlem Heat at Halloween Havoc for their first WCW World Tag Team Championship. They successfully defended the title against The Nasty Boys and The Faces of Fear in a three-way match at World War 3, and then again defeated The Faces of Fear at Starrcade. They lost the title to The Steiner Brothers at Souled Out, but two days later Eric Bischoff returned the title due to the fact that the referee wasn't the official referee for the match. The Outsiders held the World Tag Team Championship from February 24, 1997 to October 13, 1997, often facing The Steiner Brothers, Lex Luger and The Giant, and combinations of The Four Horsemen. Since Eric Bischoff (the Executive Vice President of WCW) was a member of the nWo, he used his power to return the title to The Outsiders on a technicality whenever they lost it. The Outsiders would also use the Freebird Rule to defend their title. They lost the titles to Lex Luger & The Giant at SuperBrawl VII but the next day the titles were returned by Bischoff. With Nash and Syxx out with injuries, Hall mostly wrestled singles matches in the last quarter of 1997. He submitted to Lex Luger in a grudge match at Halloween Havoc, with Larry Zbyszko as the guest referee. He won the 60 man battle royal at World War 3 1997 to earn a shot at the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. On the January 12, 1998 episode of Nitro, The Outsiders defeated The Steiner Brothers to win the WCW World Tag Team Championship for a fourth time. Hall wrestled Larry Zbyszko at Souled Out and lost by disqualification. The Outsiders lost the title back to The Steiner Brothers on the February 9 episode of Nitro. At SuperBrawl VIII, The Outsiders won the WCW World Tag Team Championship for a fifth time, again by defeating The Steiner Brothers. At Uncensored, Hall got his World Heavyweight Title shot against Sting, losing the match despite interference on his behalf from Dusty Rhodes. Hall was (legitimately) taken off TV for a short while and forced by WCW to enter rehab, after he and Nash showed up to the March 16, 1998 episode of Nitro heavily intoxicated and under the influence of painkillers.WCW Monday Nitro – Monday, 03/16/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-11. While Hall was absent, the nWo split into two feuding factions.  At Slamboree, Hall returned to team with Kevin Nash, for a tag title defense against Sting and The Giant. In a swerve, Hall turned on Nash, costing them the title, and switched sides to align himself with Hulk Hogan and his splinter faction, nWo Hollywood. On the July 6 episode of Nitro, Hall was handpicked by Hogan to wrestle United States Champion Bill Goldberg. Hall lost the match, giving Goldberg a shot at Hogan's World Heavyweight Championship later that night (which Goldberg won). Hogan publicly blamed Hall for the loss, and Hall was treated as a "weak link" by the rest of the nWo, especially Scott Steiner. On July 13, Hogan challenged Hall to a match on Nitro'. Kevin Nash (leader of the nWo "Wolfpac" faction) interfered in the match. As he was apparently about to Jacknife Powerbomb Hogan and regain Hall as his friend, Hall viciously attacked him, proving his allegiance to Hogan and nWo Hollywood. In the following weeks, Hall mocked Nash, calling himself "Medium Sexy (later "Super Sexy"), the Nash Killer." On the July 20 episode of Nitro, Hall (with The Giant) won the WCW World Tag Team Championship for a sixth time, defeating Sting and Nash after outside interference from Bret Hart (who was feuding with Sting at the time). This reign ended at Halloween Havoc, when Rick Steiner defeated The Giant and Scott Steiner (who replaced Hall) to win the title, even after Rick's partner Buff Bagwell had turned on him. Scott Hall (in character) began to appear drunk and disorderly, and bring alcohol to the ring. He vomited on Eric Bischoff, and in another vignette, Kevin Nash and fellow Wolfpac members Konnan and Lex Luger followed Hall to a local bar, where Hall and Nash had a physical confrontation. Hall and Nash faced each other on October 25 at Halloween Havoc. After hitting Hall with two Jacknife Powerbombs, Nash left the ring and lost the match by countout, in what was described by the commentators as an act of mercy. Hall was ejected from nWo Hollywood in late 1998, after Scott Steiner took control of the group in Hogan's absence. He then referred to himself as "The Lone Wolf". On November 30, 1998, Hall needed a tag partner to face Steiner and Horace Hogan. Initially, Hall said he would do it alone, but Kevin Nash came to the entrance and offered his help. The team (no longer billed as The Outsiders) won the match. At Starrcade, Hall, disguised as a security guard, used a stun gun on WCW Champion Goldberg during his title defense against Kevin Nash. Not having seen the interference, Nash powerbombed and covered Goldberg to become the WCW Champion, and break Goldberg's 173 match winning streak. Hall and Nash were allied again and, in January 1999, the two nWo factions rejoined. Hall feuded with Goldberg, and faced him in a "Ladder Taser match" on January 19 at Souled Out. He lost the match when Goldberg used the taser gun on him. At SuperBrawl IX, Hall defeated Roddy Piper for the WCW United States Heavyweight Championship. Shortly after, he suffered a foot injury which forced him to forfeit the title. Hall was not seen again until October 1999, when he and Kevin Nash began sitting at ringside during WCW television, proclaiming "the band was getting back together." On the November 8 episode of Nitro, Hall defeated Goldberg, Bret Hart, and Sid Vicious in a Texas Tornado ladder match to regain the United States Heavyweight Championship. Two weeks later, at Mayhem, he defeated Rick Steiner by forfeit to also win the WCW World Television Championship. He successfully defended both titles against Booker T later that night. Eight days later, on Nitro, Hall vacated the Television title by throwing it into a trash can. He was soon stripped of his United States title, after being sidelined with a knee injury. Hall and Nash teamed up to defeat Bret Hart and Bill Goldberg on the December 13 episode of Nitro, winning the WCW World Tag Team Championship for the sixth time together. Soon afterwards, Hall was injured again and the tag team title was vacated. After the nWo returned in December 1999, Hall joined Kevin Nash, Bret Hart, Jeff Jarrett, and Scott Steiner in what was coined "nWo 2000." Hall feuded with WCW World Heavyweight Champion Sid Vicious, and nWo teammate Jeff Jarrett, over the World Heavyweight Championship. Sid pinned Hall in a match also involving Jarrett at SuperBrawl on February 20. This was Scott Hall's last appearance in WCW. On Kayfabe Commentaries' "YouShoot" interview series in 2015, Hall said he was having an "on-and-off relationship with Emily Sherman, who was a production assistant and her uncle was Brad Siegel, president at TNT"; they were in Europe and a former girlfriend that worked at the hotel met with Hall at his room to which Sherman encountered them. As a result, Hall was asked not to go on the plane back. Reports indicate that Siegel was made aware of this and as a result, Hall had little chance to go back to WCW. Hall wrestled two non-televised matches in Extreme Championship Wrestling in 2000, first against Big Sal on November 10, then in a tag match with Jerry Lynn against Justin Credible  & Rhino on November 11 in a successful victory. He then wrestled in Japan, as well as on some independent shows in the United States. In New Japan Pro Wrestling, he was a part of nWo Japan/Team 2000/ArisTrisT, usually tagging with Masahiro Chono, fellow WCW alumni Scott Norton or Super J/Black Scorpion/nWo Sting. The highlights of his time in New Japan were defeats: a loss to All Japan Pro Wrestling (AJPW) Triple Crown Heavyweight Champion Keiji Mutoh and a loss to Hiroshi Tanahashi, who was a rookie at the time, trying to break into the heavyweight division. Six years after leaving the WWF to come back to WCW, Hall returned to the WWF in February 2002, and was reunited with fellow WWF stars Kevin Nash and Hollywood Hogan in a repackaged nWo. He feuded with Stone Cold Steve Austin, climaxing in a match at WrestleMania X8, which Austin won despite interference from Kevin Nash. On the March 25 episode of Raw, Hall was drafted to the Raw brand with the rest of the n.W.o, as a result of the new WWF brand split. Here, he feuded with Bradshaw, culminating in a match at Backlash, which Hall won with help from X-Pac. Hall then continued his feud with Austin. Hall was released from WWE after Insurrextion 2002 following incidents from the "Plane ride from Hell" incident.  His last appearance was in a 6-man tag match (Hall, Big Show, X-Pac vs Stone Cold Steve Austin, Bradshaw, and Ric Flair) on the May 6 episode of Raw.  It was also the reason why he was also not featured on WWE Smackdown! Shut Your Mouth as a playable character, and his spot on the nWo storyline on Season Mode was replaced by X-Pac. Hall worked for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) briefly in 2002, appearing on their first pay-per-view event. In late 2004, Hall returned to TNA, along with Kevin Nash, as TNA prepared for their first monthly pay-per-view, Victory Road. Hall joined Nash and Jeff Jarrett in the stable The Kings of Wrestling. The Kings of Wrestling lost to Randy Savage, Jeff Hardy, and A.J. Styles at Turning Point on December 5. Hall lost to Jeff Hardy at Final Resolution on January 16, 2005. On the November 1 episode of Impact!, Kevin Nash "predicted" Scott Hall would be Sting's mystery partner at Genesis. The next week, Hall made his return, rebuffing the romantic advances of Kurt Angle's wife, Karen, then battling Kurt in his dressing room. He stated he was in TNA solely to confront Nash. Hall asked Nash why he was not there to help him in his troubled past, and Nash responded that it was a result of his own nonstop partying and risk of losing his family. Hall then claimed that all was forgiven and the two embraced in the ring. He also revealed that he was not Sting's mystery partner. The reunited Outsiders and Samoa Joe began a feud with The Angle Alliance. They were scheduled to compete together at Turning Point, but Hall no-showed. On the January 4, 2010 three-hour Monday night live episode of Impact! Hall and Sean Waltman returned to TNA. That same night, Hulk Hogan made his TNA debut. Hall, Nash and Waltman quickly reformed their alliance, but Hogan kept himself out of the group, claiming "times have changed". The following week, the revived alliance was named "The Band". Hall was scheduled to team with Nash at Genesis in a match against Beer Money, Inc., but was replaced by Sean Waltman (as Syxx-Pac). In the end, Hall inadvertently cost his stablemates the match. On the next episode of Impact!, Hogan, displeased with the actions of The Band, had security remove Hall and Waltman from the arena, since they were not under contract with TNA. Despite this, Hall and Syxx-Pac continued returning to Impact! to assault various wrestlers. On the February 4 episode, they turned on Nash and beat him down. At Destination X, Hall and Syxx-Pac faced Nash and Eric Young in a tag team match, with The Band's TNA future on the line. In the end, Nash turned on Young and helped The Band win, earning them contracts with TNA. On the March 29 episode of Impact!, The Band lost a six-man tag team steel cage match to Eric Young, Rob Van Dam and Jeff Hardy. At Lockdown, Hall and Nash lost to Team 3D in a "St. Louis Street Fight". On the May 3 Impact!, Eric Young turned on Team 3D and joined The Band. On May 4, at the taping of the May 13 episode of Impact!, Hall teamed with Nash, cashed in his "Feast or Fired" contract and defeated Matt Morgan to win the TNA World Tag Team Championship. Nash later declared Young one third of the champions, citing the "Freebird Rule". On the June 14 Impact! taping, The Band was stripped of the Tag Team Championship, due to Hall's real-life legal problems. The following day, it was announced Hall had been released from TNA. On July 13, Hall made his return to wrestling for the World Wrestling Council (WWC) as Razor Ramon (though wearing WolfPac themed attire). He wrestled the main event of a WWC Anniversary tour show at the José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum in San Juan, against Carlito. He lost after Apollo interfered on Carlito's behalf. The next night, Hall won his second World Championship, the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship, by defeating Carlito and champion Apollo in a Three-Way Dance main event.  On August 4 and September 23, Hall successfully defended the title against Eddie Colón, Carlito's younger brother. On October 27, managed by Rico Casanova, he retained the title at WWC's Halloween Wrestling Xtravaganza, defeating Carlito's cousin, Orlando "Fireblaze" Colon. Hall no-showed his scheduled appearances on December 14 in Ponce (claiming travel problems) and December 15 in Caguas (claiming emotional problems).  Hall made his Juggalo Championship Wrestling (JCW) debut on August 12, 2007, at Bloodymania, losing to JCW Heavyweight Champion Corporal Robinson. In this match, Hall took his first ever bump on thumbtacks. On October 6, 2007, at Evansville Invasion, Corporal Robinson, Scott Hall, and Violent J formed the Juggalo World Order (JWO) stable. At the 2007 Hallowicked After Party, on October 31, Shaggy 2 Dope was introduced as a member of the group. After the main event, special guest referee Nosawa ripped off his referee shirt to reveal that he, too, was a member of the JWO. At Bloodymania II, Hall teamed with Kevin Nash, who proclaimed himself a member of the group. At the 2008 Hallowicked After Party, the JWO inducted its newest member, 2 Tuff Tony. On November 9, the Juggalo World Order "invaded" Total Nonstop Action Wrestling's Turning Point PPV, by purchasing front row tickets to the event. They promote their faction by flashing their JWO jerseys, before being removed from the building. The group expressed interest in "invading" WWE's 2009 Royal Rumble, but were unable, due to filming commitments for Big Money Rustlas in Los Angeles. They have also shown interest in "invading" Ring of Honor and Ultimate Fighting Championship. On May 3, 2010, Hall appeared in Continental Championship Wrestling. He and Syxx-Pac escorted Ricky Ortiz to the ring for his match with Navy Seal (which Ortiz won). On January 14, 2011, Hall managed Ortiz at a Vintage Pro Wrestling show with Ortiz, Hall made an impact costing Kennedy Kendrick the match but with Ortiz contuine beating on Kendrick it was reversed. On January 8, 2011, Scott Hall appeared at I Believe in Wrestling in Orlando, talking about his health before bringing out Ortiz for his match with "Hotshot" Mike Reed. Hall along with Nash and Waltman made an appearance at the 2011 Gathering of the Juggalos. On July 14, 2012, Hall appeared at Belleview Pro Wrestling, accompanying his son, Cody, to the ring for his match against Josh Hess.  On March 24, 2014, Hall was announced as the seventh and final inductee into that year's class of the WWE Hall of Fame. He was inducted in New Orleans on April 5, the night before WrestleMania XXX. Shawn Michaels, Triple H, X-Pac and Kevin Nash joined Hall onstage after his speech, reuniting The Kliq. WWE promotional material for the event referred to him solely as Razor Ramon, without footage or mention of his work under his real name. At WrestleMania XXX, Hall, as Razor Ramon, appeared onstage with the other Hall of Fame inductees. In 2014, Hall appeared on the August 11th 2014 episode of Raw for the first time since 2002 to reunite the nWo with Nash and Hulk Hogan to celebrate Hogan's birthday. On the January 19th, 2015 episode of Raw, Hall appeared with X-Pac and Kevin Nash to reunite the nWo, and along with the APA and The New Age Outlaws they beat down The Ascension, who had been insulting legends from past weeks. At WrestleMania 31, Hall, along with Nash and Hogan, reunited as the nwo to help Sting in his match against Triple H, who had D-Generation X helping on his behalf. On May 13, 2015, Global Force Wrestling (GFW) announced Hall as part of their roster. However, on May 18, 2015, Hall was released from his contract with GFW. During Hall's fourth reign as WWF Intercontinental Champion, he appeared in character as Razor Ramon on The Jerry Springer Show (this coming just before the show became sensationalized). As part of his appearance, Hall handed the Intercontinental Championship belt, T-shirts, chain necklaces, and tickets to WrestleMania XII to two preteens that had gotten ceremonially—but not legally—married on an episode of the show two years prior. One of the preteens had AIDS, while the other was a wrestling fan who liked Ramon.Razor Ramon on Jerry Springer. YouTube (2009-09-28). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. However, Hall ultimately did not compete at WrestleMania XII due to his suspension. On August 24, 2009, Hall began hosting a show on YouTube called Last Call with Scott Hall. Guests have included Sid Vicious, Kevin Nash, Ricky Ortiz, Larry Zbyszko, and Sean Waltman.Scott Hall TV. YouTube. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. On August 20, 2013, Hall appeared on HBO's Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel, along with Diamond Dallas Page and Jake Roberts to talk about how he and Roberts have been recuperating since moving in with Page. Razor Ramon has appeared in the video games WWF WrestleMania: The Arcade Game, WWE Wrestlemania X8 (as Scott Hall) and WWE 2K14. In the latter, Hall's nWo and Outsiders attires are available as downloadable content. Hall grew up in St. Mary's County, Maryland with his mother and brother and moved to Florida at age 17. Hall married Dana Lee Burgio in 1990. They divorced in 1998, remarried in 1999, and divorced again in 2001. He has a son (Cody Taylor, born 1991) and a daughter (Cassidy Lee, born March 27, 1995). In 1983, Hall was charged with second degree murder after shooting a man with his own gun (after wrestling it away from him) in an altercation outside of a nightclub in Orlando, Florida. According to Hall, this was done in self-defense. The charges were dropped due to lack of evidence. In a 2011 interview for ESPN, Hall admitted killing the man, and said he is unable to forget the incident.149. Youtube.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Hall's problems with drugs were made public in the late 1990s, and were incorporated into a controversial WCW storyline. During the storyline, Hall was arrested for keying a limousine while intoxicated outside of a night club in Orlando, Florida, causing $2,000 in damages. In 1998, Hall was also arrested for groping a 56-year-old woman outside a hotel in Baton Rouge, LA. Hall's ex-wife, Dana, attributed their 1998 divorce to Hall being unable to control his drug use. On October 10, 2008, Hall was arrested during a roast of The Iron Sheik, held at a Crowne Plaza hotel in New Jersey. A comedian, Jimmy Graham, had joked, "After The Sheik and Hacksaw Jim Duggan got caught snorting coke in the parking lot, his career fell faster than Owen Hart." An enraged Hall charged at Graham and knocked down a podium, then grabbed the microphone from him and yelled about how the joke was disrespectful to Hart.Scott Hall arrested for attack Retrieved on October 11, 2008 Graham described the incident on his MySpace page, claiming Hall was drunk at the time of the attack.Graham explains joke Retrieved on October 12, 2008 Hall was arrested on May 14, 2010, and charged with disorderly conduct and resisting a police officer. Police were called to the Hitching Post Bar in Chuluota, Florida after Hall (who had been "drinking heavily", according to the police report), "became aggressive". When they arrived, they found Hall yelling and cursing at amateur wrestling personalities and bar staff. Hall was told he was not allowed to return to the establishment. In his police statement, Hall described himself as an unemployed professional wrestler, despite having a job with TNA Wrestling (who would release him a month later). After his release from TNA, Hall checked into rehab paid for by WWE. Hall checked out of the rehab facility in early October 2010.Prowrestling.net. Prowrestling.net (2010-10-05). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. Weeks after he checked into rehab, Hall had both a defibrillator and a pacemaker implanted in his chest.(WWE) Scott Hall Talks Helping a Former WWE Star, Going Into Rehab and More. Yardbarker.com (2011-01-28). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. He was hospitalized twice in 2010 for double pneumonia (affecting both lungs).WWE Wrestling News, Rumors, Results & Spoilers|Rajah.com Scott Hall Reportedly Hospitalized Following Drug Overdose. Rajah.com (2011-04-07). Retrieved on 2013-11-29.  During this time, Hall started having seizures and was soon diagnosed with epilepsy, resulting in him requiring to take eleven different medications on a daily basis to treat his heart and seizure problems. Hall was the only member of The Kliq not on hand to see long-time friend Shawn Michaels inducted to the WWE Hall Of Fame. He had decided not to attend any WrestleMania XXVII festivities due to his doubts of his ability to remain sober in that type of environment.WWE News, Rumors, Results & InformationScott Hall Reportedly Hospitalized Following Drug Overdose. Rajah.com (2011-04-07). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. On April 6, Hall was reportedly taken to the hospital due to a seizure. Hall's representative, Geena Anac, issued a press release denying he had overdosed, saying that Hall was at home and doing fine that day. Anac said Hall was in the hospital that night to be treated for extremely low blood pressure, and that Hall visits his doctor on a regular basis while recovering from double pneumonia, for blood work and checkups.Former WWE Wrestler Scott Hall's Rep Denies Rumors Regarding Drug Over Dose. Mi2N.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-11. On April 8, Hall showed up for his appearance at a Top Rope Promotions wrestling show in Fall River, Massachusetts, apparently intoxicated. Hall, still wearing a hospital bracelet, was helped into the ring by two men because he was struggling to walk on his own. He cut a promo and was confronted by local wrestler Gino Giovanni, who was trying to begin his scheduled match with Justin Credible. After the match between Giovanni and Credible, Hall, slurring his words, tried to goad Giovanni back into the ring. On April 9, TMZ reported Hall had been taken to a hospital following the previous day's appearance. Hall was treated for cardiac issues and remained in the hospital for three days. According to medical reports, Hall was being treated after overdosing on both opiates and benzodiazepines. Top Rope Promotions released a statement on April 11, regarding Hall's behavior and performance. Promoter Steve Ricard said Hall had arrived the day before the event in a wheelchair with three bottles of prescription pills in his possession, and had demanded his appearance fee the next day, although he was already paid. Hall allegedly made many threats to the staff, and many demands regarding money and when he would perform. According to Ricard, Hall threatened to kill him if he screwed Hall over.WWE News, Rumors, Results & InformationTop Rope Promotions Blasts Scott Hall For Friday Night Incident. Rajah.com (2011-04-11). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. Longtime friend Kevin Nash commented on Hall's recent problems, saying that he will always be there for Hall. Nash also claimed that Hall is not a drug addict, but rather that he suffers from posttraumatic stress disorder Eric Bischoff, another of Hall's close friends and former boss, said he wished he knew how to help him, and that he was an amazing talent and a great person, but that his "demons" were killing him.WWE News, Rumors, Results & InformationKevin Nash & Eric Bischoff Comment On Scott Hall's Latest Incident. Rajah.com (2011-04-10). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. On May 8, following a worrying and confused telephone conversation with his ex-wife Dana, Hall abruptly ended the call. Dana alerted police to her concerns for his safety, and Hall allegedly had a verbal altercation with them (and her) when they attempted to enter his house. Dana said Hall was "threatening to beat them all up, doing the crotch chop thing to them, making a fool of himself, ranting and raving like a crazed mental person". Following this, Dana cut off all remaining ties with Hall.WWE News, Rumors, Results & InformationScott Hall In Very Bad Shape: Ex-Wife Gives Up After Final Effort To Help. Rajah.com (2011-05-09). Retrieved on 2011-10-11. Around this time, Scott and his estranged son Cody had a brief reconciliation and Hall began mentoring him to become a professional wrestler.  According to Dana, this reconciliation lasted only a month. On October 20, ESPN's E:60 featured a documentary detailing Hall's experience with drugs and alcohol. It included interviews with several of Hall's family members (including his ex-wife and his son, Cody), as well as several prominent figures and close friends from the wrestling industry (including Hulk Hogan, Kevin Nash, Sean Waltman, Eric Bischoff, and Stephanie McMahon).WWE, pro wrestler Scott Hall confront substance abuse, health issues – E:60 – ESPN. Espn.go.com (2011-10-19). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. On April 6, Hall was arrested in Chuluota, Florida at around 9:31&nbsp;p.m., by deputies of the Seminole County Sheriff's office. The arrest was later reported to be for a domestic disturbance involving his girlfriend, Lisa Howell. Hall allegedly choked Howell while he was drunk. He was taken to a hospital in Seminole County to be medically cleared prior to being taken to a drunk tank. Hall denied the choking allegations. In early 2013, former professional wrestler and fellow WCW alumnus Diamond Dallas Page invited Hall into his home in order for Hall to stay sober and "rebuild his life from the ground up... physically, mentally, professionally, and spiritually." Page also initiated a fundraising drive, which raised nearly $110,000 ($30,000 over their $80,000 goal) to pay for hip replacement surgery and dental work for Hall.Indiegogo fundraiser for Hall. Indiegogo.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. On May 17, 2014, Hall was due to appear at Big Time Wrestling's Wrestlefest event with his son, Cody. On that day, he sent a text message to promoter Kirk White saying he was in a dark place, refused to get out of bed and would not appear. His manager, Bill Behrens, released a statement saying he, Cody and Diamond Dallas Page failed to convince Hall to put aside "personal problems" and go to the show. On May 16, 2015 Hall appeared intoxicated at a Jersey Championship Wrestling show hosted by the Skate and Surf Festival in Asbury Park, NJ. Hall was seen at the Wonder Bar across the street from the festival all afternoon and failed to appear for his scheduled appearances. Later, while reentering the festival was told to leave by the show promoter and was physically escorted out by security. 1 Hall defended the championship with either Nash or Young under the Freebird Rule.   Finishing moves As Scott Hall Hall Buster (Bulldog)[ ]  – 1980s; used as a signature move thereafter Outsider's Edge (WCW / WWF) / nWo EdgeWCW Thunder – Thursday, October 29, 1998. Ddtdigest.com (1998-10-29). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. (WCW) (Crucifix powerbomb) As Razor Ramon Razor's Edge (Crucifix powerbomb) As The Diamond Studd Diamond Death Drop (Crucifix powerbomb) Signature moves Abdominal stretchWCW Monday Nitro – Monday, 07/20/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Belly to back superplexWCW/nWo Fall Brawl, 9/13/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. ChokeslamWCW Slamboree '98 – Sunday, 05/17/98. Ddtdigest.com (1998-05-17). Retrieved on 2013-11-29.WCW Monday Nitro – Monday, 09/28/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. - often used as a counter to a Hip toss Diving bulldogWCW Thursday Thunder – Thursday, 01/08/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Electric chair drop Fallaway slam, sometimes from the second rope Lariat,WCW Thunder – Thursday, 08/13/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. sometimes to a cornered opponentWCW Halloween Havoc '98, 10/25/98. Ddtdigest.com (1998-10-25). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Rolling elbow strike Multiple slaps to the back of the opponent's head Scoop slam Sleeper hold Two or three punches followed by a discus punchWCW/nWo Uncensored, 3/15/98. Ddtdigest.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Wrist-lock followed by multiple shoulder blocks Stables New World Order Managers Rico Casanova April Hunter Kevin Nash Diamond Dallas Page Dusty RhodesWCW Monday Nitro – Monday, 02/02/98. Ddtdigest.com (1994-05-02). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. Louie Spicolli Syxx Vincent Nicknames "The Bad Guy" "The Lone Wolf" Entrance themes "Born in the U.S.A." by Bruce SpringsteenThemes « Scott Hall « Wrestlers Database « CAGEMATCH – The Internet Wrestling Database. Cagematch.net (2012-12-14). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. (CWA) "Bad Boy" by Jim JohnstonWorld Wrestling Federation: The Anthology – Various Artists|Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards. AllMusic (2002-11-20). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. (WWF) "Rockhouse" by Frank ShelleyiTunes – Music – The History of Rock & Pop Vol. 1 by 5 Alarm Music. Itunes.apple.com (2008-11-15). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. (WCW/WWF; used while a part of the New World Order) "Kevin Nash/Wolfpac Theme" performed by C-Murder and composed by Jimmy Hart and H. HelmWCW Mayhem: The Music – Various Artists|Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards. AllMusic (1999-11-16). Retrieved on 2013-11-29. (WCW; used while a part of the nWo Wolfpac and the nWo Elite) "Ready or Not" by Fugees (ECW/WWC/NJPW/Independent circuit) "Marvelous Me" by Dale Oliver (TNA) American Wrestling Association AWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Curt Hennig Pro Wrestling Illustrated Match of the Year (1994) vs. Shawn Michaels in a ladder match at WrestleMania X Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (1992) Tag Team of the Year (1997) with Kevin Nash Ranked #7 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1994 Ranked #72 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003 Ranked #40 and #98 of the top 100 tag teams of the "PWI Years" with Kevin Nash and Curt Hennig, respectively, in 2003 United States Wrestling Association USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)Unified World Heavyweight Title (USWA). Wrestling-titles.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. World Championship Wrestling WCW United States Heavyweight Championship (2 times)19990221 – Scott Hall. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29.19991108 – Scott Hall. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. WCW World Television Championship (1 time)NWA/WCW World Television Title. Wrestling-titles.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. WCW World Tag Team Championship (7 times) – with Kevin Nash (6) and The Giant (1) World War 3 (1997) Total Nonstop Action Wrestling TNA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kevin Nash and Eric Young1 World Wrestling Council WWC Caribbean Heavyweight Championship (1 time)Caribbean Heavyweight Title. Wrestling-titles.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Wrestling Federation WWF Intercontinental Championship (4 times)Intercontinental Championship – Razor Ramon September 27, 1993 – April 13, 1994. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29.Intercontinental Championship – Razor Ramon August 29, 1994 – January 22, 1995. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29.Intercontinental Championship – Razor Ramon May 19, 1995 – May 22, 1995. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29.Intercontinental Championship – Razor Ramon October 22, 1995 – January 21, 1996. WWE.com. Retrieved on 2013-11-29. WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2014) Slammy Awards (2 times) Most Spectacular Match (1994)  vs. Shawn Michaels in a ladder match at WrestleMania X Match of the Year (1996) vs. Shawn Michaels at SummerSlam Wrestling Observer Newsletter 5 Star Match (1994) vs. Shawn Michaels in a ladder match at WrestleMania X Match of the Year (1994) vs. Shawn Michaels in a ladder match at WrestleMania X TNA profile Scott Hall Interview on Wrestling101.com
