   The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry (the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction in the United States often omits the and, while the English Constitution in the United Kingdom omits the Scottish), commonly known as simply the Scottish Rite or in the United Kingdom as the Rose CroixSupreme Council 33° - Introduction (although this is only one of its degrees), is one of several Rites of Freemasonry. A Rite is a progressive series of degrees conferred by various Masonic organizations or bodies, each of which operates under the control of its own central authority. In the Scottish Rite the central authority is called a Supreme Council. The Scottish Rite is one of the appendant bodies of Freemasonry that a Master Mason may join for further exposure to the principles of Freemasonry. In England and some other countries, while the Scottish Rite is not accorded official recognition by the Grand Lodge, there is no prohibition against a Freemason electing to join it. In the United States, however, the Scottish Rite is officially recognized by Grand Lodges as an extension of the degrees of Freemasonry.  The Scottish Rite builds upon the ethical teachings and philosophy offered in the craft lodge, or Blue Lodge, through dramatic presentation of the individual degrees. The thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite are conferred by several controlling bodies. The first of these is the Craft Lodge which confers the Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason degrees. Craft lodges operate under the authority of Grand Lodges, not the Scottish Rite. Although most lodges throughout the English-speaking world do not confer the Scottish Rite versions of the first three degrees, there are a handful of lodges in New Orleans and in several other major cities that have traditionally conferred the Scottish Rite version of these degrees.Germania Lodge #46, GL of Louisiana, USA "The Lodge works in the Scottish Rite Symbolic ritual - one of only ten Lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana which work in this historic ritual. The ten Scottish Rite Lodges comprise the 16th District of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana."Grand Loge de France FAQ "Q:"What rite is worked at the Grand Lodge of France?"  A:As mentioned above, and like most Grand Lodges in the world, the Grand Lodge of France mostly works the three Craft (Blue) degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite (A&ASR). However some Lodges work the Rectified Scottish Rite and some work Emulation, the latter in English."  There are records of lodges conferring the degree of "Scots Master" or "Scotch Master" as early as 1733. A lodge at Temple Bar in London is the earliest such lodge on record. Other lodges include a lodge at Bath in 1735, and the French lodge, St. George de l'Observance No. 49 at Covent Garden in 1736. The references to these few occasions indicate that these were special meetings held for the purpose of performing unusual ceremonies, probably by visiting Freemasons.Jackson, A.C.F. (1980). "Rose Croix: A History of the Ancient & Accepted Rite for England and Wales" (rev. ed. 1987). London: Lewis Masonic.  The Copiale cipher, dating from the 1730s,, on the official USC channel. says, "The rank of a Scottish master is an entirely new invention..." The seed of the myth of Stuart Jacobite influence on the higher degrees may have been a careless and unsubstantiated remark made by John Noorthouk in the 1784 Book of Constitutions of the Premier Grand Lodge of London. It was stated, without support, that King Charles II (older brother and predecessor to James II) was made a Freemason in the Netherlands during the years of his exile (1649–60). However, there were no documented lodges of Freemasons on the continent during those years. The statement may have been made to flatter the fraternity by claiming membership for a previous monarch. This folly was then embellished by John Robison (1739–1805), a professor of Natural Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, in an anti-Masonic work published in 1797. The lack of scholarship exhibited by Robison in that work caused the Encyclopædia Britannica to denounce it.Coil, Henry W. (1961) Article: "Stuart Masonry", pp. 634–637; and Article: "Robison, John", pp. 569–570. Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (rev. ed. 1996). Richmond, Va: Macoy Publ. Co. Inc. A German bookseller and Freemason, living in Paris, working under the assumed name of C. Lenning, embellished the story further in a manuscript titled "Encyclopedia of Freemasonry" probably written between 1822 and 1828 at Leipzig. This manuscript was later revised and published by another German Freemason named Friedrich Mossdorf (1757–1830).Coil, Henry W. (1961) Article: "Lenning, C." pp. 377–378; and "Mossdorf, Friedrich", pg. 435. Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (rev. ed. 1996). Richmond, Va: Macoy Publ. Co. Inc. Lenning stated that King James II of England, after his flight to France in 1688, resided at the Jesuit College of Clermont, where his followers fabricated certain degrees for the purpose of carrying out their political ends.Mackey, Albert G. (1909) Article: "Stuart Masonry" pp. 981–982. Encyclopedia of Freemasonry (rev. ed. 1946). Chicago, IL: Masonic History Co. By the mid-19th century, the story had gained currency. The well-known English Masonic writer, Dr. George Oliver (1782–1867), in his Historical Landmarks, 1846, carried the story forward and even claimed that King Charles II was active in his attendance at meetings—an obvious invention, for if it had been true, it would not have escaped the notice of the historians of the time. The story was then repeated by the French writers Jean-Baptiste Ragon (1771–1862) and Emmanuel Rebold, in their Masonic histories. Rebold's claim that the high degrees were created and practiced in Lodge Canongate Kilwinning at Edinburgh are entirely false.Coil, Henry W. (1961) Article: "Stuart Masonry", pp. 634–637. Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (rev. ed. 1996). Richmond, Va: Macoy Publ. Co. Inc. James II died in 1701 at the Palace of St. Germain en Laye, and was succeeded in his claims to the British throne by his son, James Francis Edward Stuart (1699–1766), the Chevalier St. George, better known as "the Old Pretender", but recognized as James III by the French King Louis XIV. He was succeeded in his claim by Charles Edward Stuart ("Bonnie Prince Charles"), also known as "the Young Pretender", whose ultimate defeat at the Battle of Culloden in 1746 effectively put an end to any serious hopes of the Stuarts regaining the British crowns. The natural confusion between the names of the Jesuit College of Clermont, and the short-lived Masonic Chapter of Clermont, a Masonic body that controlled a few high degrees during its brief existence, only served to add fuel to the myth of Stuart Jacobite influence in Freemasonry's high degrees. However, the College and the Chapter had nothing to do with each other. The Jesuit College was located at Clermont, whereas the Masonic Chapter was not. Rather, it was named "Clermont" in honor of the French Grand Master, the Comte de Clermont (Louis de Bourbon, Comte de Clermont) (1709–1771), and not because of any connection with the Jesuit College of Clermont.Coil, Henry W. (1961) Article: "Clermont, Chapter of", pg. 135. Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (rev. ed. 1996). Richmond, Va: Macoy Publ. Co. Inc. A French trader, by the name of Estienne Morin, had been involved in high degree Masonry in Bordeaux since 1744 and, in 1747, founded an "Ecossais" lodge (Scots Masters Lodge) in the city of Le Cap Français, on the north coast of the French colony of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti). Over the next decade, high degree Freemasonry continued to spread to the Western hemisphere as the high degree lodge at Bordeaux warranted or recognized seven Ecossais lodges there. In Paris in the year 1761, a patent was issued to Estienne Morin, dated 27 August, creating him "Grand Inspector for all parts of the New World". This Patent was signed by officials of the Grand Lodge at Paris and appears to have originally granted him power over the craft lodges only, and not over the high, or "Ecossais", degree lodges. Later copies of this Patent appear to have been embellished, probably by Morin, to improve his position over the high degree lodges in the West Indies. Early writers long believed that a "Rite of Perfection" consisting of 25 degrees, the highest being the "Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret", and being the predecessor of the Scottish Rite, had been formed in Paris by a high degree council calling itself "The Council of Emperors of the East and West". The title "Rite of Perfection" first appeared in the Preface to the "Grand Constitutions of 1786", the authority for which is now known to be faulty. It is now generally accepted that this Rite of twenty-five degrees was compiled by Estienne Morin and is more properly called "The Rite of the Royal Secret", or "Morin's Rite".Jackson(1980) pg. 37 However, it was known as "The Order of Prince of the Royal Secret" by the founders of the Scottish Rite, who mentioned it in their "Circular throughout the two Hemispheres"Full text of Circular hosted on the website of the AASR Orient of South Carolina or "Manifesto", issued on December 4, 1802.de Hoyos, Arturo, Scottish Rite Ritual, Monitor and Guide 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Council, 33°, S.J., 2009), pp. 937, 938. Morin returned to the West Indies in 1762 or 1763, to Saint-Domingue, where, armed with his new Patent, he assumed powers to constitute lodges of all degrees, spreading the high degrees throughout the West Indies and North America. Morin stayed in Saint-Domingue until 1766 when he moved to Jamaica. At Kingston, Jamaica, in 1770, Morin created a "Grand Chapter" of his new Rite (the Grand Council of Jamaica). Morin died in 1771 and was buried in Kingston. The one man who was most important in assisting Morin in spreading the degrees in the New World was a naturalized French subject of Dutch origin named Henry Andrew Francken. Morin appointed him Deputy Grand Inspector General as one of his first acts after returning to the West Indies. Francken worked closely with Morin and, in 1771, produced a manuscript book giving the rituals for the 15th through the 25th degrees. Francken produced at least two more similar manuscripts, one in 1783 and another about 1786. The second and third of these manuscripts included all the degrees from the 4th through the 25th.Jackson(1987) A Loge de Parfaits d' Écosse was formed on 12 April 1764 at New Orleans, becoming the first high degree lodge on the North American continent. Its life, however, was short, as the Treaty of Paris (1763) ceded New Orleans to Spain, and the Catholic Spanish crown had been historically hostile to Freemasonry. Documented Masonic activity ceased for a time and did not return to New Orleans until the 1790s. Francken traveled to New York in 1767 where he granted a Patent, dated 26 December 1767, for the formation of a Lodge of Perfection at Albany, which was called "Ineffable Lodge of Perfection". This marked the first time the Degrees of Perfection (the 4th through the 14th) were conferred in one of the thirteen British colonies. This Patent, and the early minutes of the Lodge, are still extant and are in the archives of Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction. (The minutes of Ineffable Lodge of Perfection reveal that it ceased activity on December 5, 1774. It was revived by Giles Fonda Yates about 1820 or 1821, and came under authority of the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction until 1827, when it was transferred to the Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction.) While in New York, Francken also communicated the degrees to Moses Michael Hays, a Jewish businessman, and appointed him a Deputy Inspector General. In 1781, Hays made eight Deputy Inspectors General, four of whom were later important in the establishment of Scottish Rite Freemasonry in South Carolina: ◊_ Isaac Da Costa Sr., D.I.G. for South Carolina; ◊_ Abraham Forst, D.I.G. for Virginia; ◊_ Joseph M. Myers, D.I.G. for Maryland; ◊_ and Barend M. Spitzer, D.I.G. for Georgia. Da Costa returned to Charleston, S.C., and established the "Sublime Grand Lodge of Perfection" in February 1783. After Da Costa's death in November 1783, Hays appointed Myers as Da Costa's successor. Joined by Forst and Spitzer, Myers created additional high degree bodies in Charleston and, by 1801, the Charleston bodies were the only extant bodies of the Rite in North America.Fox(1997) pp. 16–17 Although most of the thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite existed in parts of previous degree systems,de Hoyos, Arturo, "Development of the Scottish Rite Rituals", in Scottish Rite Ritual, Monitor and Guide 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Council, 33°, S.J., 2009), pp. 109-118. the Scottish Rite did not come into being until the formation of the Mother Supreme Council at Charleston, South Carolina, in May 1801. The Founding Fathers of the Scottish Rite who attended became known as "The Eleven Gentlemen of Charleston". Subsequently, other Supreme Councils were formed in Saint-Domingue in 1802, in France in 1804, in Italy in 1805, and in Spain in 1811. On May 1, 1813, an officer from the Supreme Council at Charleston initiated several New York Masons into the Thirty-third Degree and organized a Supreme Council for the "Northern Masonic District and Jurisdiction". On May 21, 1814 this Supreme Council reopened and proceeded to "nominate, elect, appoint, install and proclaim in due, legal and ample form" the elected officers "as forming the second Grand and Supreme Council...". Finally, the charter of this organization (written January 7, 1815) added, “We think the Ratification ought to be dated 21st day May 5815." Officially, the Supreme Council, 33°, N.M.J. dates itself from May 15, 1867. This was the date of the "Union of 1867", when it merged with the competing Cerneau "Supreme Council" in New York. The current Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction of the United States, was thus formed.de Hoyos, Arturo, "The Union of 1867" in Heredom (Washington, D.C.: Scottish Rite Research Society, 1995), vol. 5:7-45.  Born in Boston, Massachusetts on December 29, 1809, Albert Pike is asserted within the Southern Jurisdiction as the man most responsible for the growth and success of the Scottish Rite from an obscure Masonic Rite in the mid-19th century to the international fraternity that it became. Pike received the 4th through the 32nd Degrees in March 1853 from Dr. Albert G. Mackey, in Charleston, S.C., and was appointed Deputy Inspector for Arkansas that same year. At this point, the degrees were in a rudimentary form, and often only included a brief history and legend of each degree as well as other brief details which usually lacked a workable ritual for their conferral. In 1855, the Supreme Council appointed a committee to prepare and compile rituals for the 4th through the 32nd Degrees. That committee was composed of Albert G. Mackey, John H. Honour, William S. Rockwell, Claude P. Samory, and Albert Pike. Of these five committee members, Pike did all the work of the committee. In 1857 Pike completed his first revision of the 4°-32° ritual, and printed 100 copies. This revision, which Mackey dubbed the "Magnum Opus" was never adopted by the Supreme Council. According to Arturo de Hoyos, 33°, the Scottish Rite's Grand Historian, the Magnum Opus became the basis for future ritual revisions.de Hoyos, Arturo, Scottish Rite Ritual, Monitor and Guide 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Council, 33°, S.J., 2009), p. 114. In March 1858, Pike was elected a member of the Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, and in January 1859 he became its Grand Commander. The American Civil War interrupted his work on the Scottish Rite rituals. About 1870 he, and the Supreme Council, moved to Washington, DC, and in 1884 his revision of the rituals was complete. Scottish Rite Grand Archivist and Grand Historian de Hoyosde Hoyos, Arturo, Scottish Rite Ritual, Monitor and Guide 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Council, 33°, S.J., 2009), p. 115. created the following chart of Pike's ritual revisions:   Pike also wrote lectures for all the degrees which were published in 1871 under the title Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry.Coil, Henry W. (1961). Article: "Pike, Albert" pp. 472–475. "Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia" (rev. ed. 1995) Richmond, Va: Macoy Publ. Co. Inc.  In 2000 the Southern Jurisdiction revised its ritual.  The current ritual is based upon Pike's, but with some significant differences. Attainment of the third Masonic degree, that of a Master Mason, represents the attainment of the highest rank in all of Masonry.  Additional degrees are sometimes referred to as appendant degrees, even where the degree numbering might imply a hierarchy. They represent a lateral movement in Masonic education rather than an upward movement, and are degrees of instruction rather than rank.Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction website: Frequently asked questions - "Are Scottish Rite degrees higher than those of a Master Mason?" In 2000, the Southern Jurisdiction in the United States completed a revision of its ritual scripts. In 2004, the Northern Jurisdiction in the United States rewrote and reorganized its degrees.Freemasons for Dummies, Christopher Hodapp, ISBN 0-7645-9796-5, Hungry Minds Inc, U.S., 2005. pp. 224-225  Further changes have occurred in 2006.The Northern Light Magazine, November 2006; p. 6 "Ritual Changes." The current titles of the degrees and their arrangement in the Southern Jurisdiction remains substantially unchanged from the beginning. The list of degrees for the Supreme Councils of Australia, England and Wales, and most other jurisdictions largely agrees with that of the Southern Jurisdiction of the U.S.  However, the list of degrees for the Northern Jurisdiction of the United States is now somewhat different and is given in the table below.  The list of degrees of the Supreme Council of Canada reflects a mixture of the two, with some unique titles as well: The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite in each country is governed by a Supreme Council. There is no international governing body&nbsp;— each Supreme Council in each country is sovereign unto itself in its own jurisdiction. In the United States of America there are two Supreme Councils: one in Washington, D.C. (which controls the Southern Jurisdiction), and one in Lexington, Massachusetts (which controls the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction). They each have particular characteristics that make them different.  In the United States, members of the Scottish Rite can be elected to receive the 33° by the Supreme Council. It is conferred on members who have made major contributions to society or to Masonry in general. Based in Washington, D.C., the Southern Jurisdiction (often referred to as the "Mother Supreme Council of the World") was founded in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1801. It oversees the Scottish Rite in 35 states, which are referred to as Orients, and local bodies, which are called Valleys.Bremerton Valley of the Scottish Rite "Illustrious Brother James N. Reid, Jr., 33°, IGH, Personal Representative of the S.G.I.G. in the Orient of Washington"Jacksonville Valley of the Scottish Rite " The Mission of Scottish Rite Freemasonry in the Orient of Florida" In the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 33 members and is presided over by a Grand Commander. Other members of the Supreme Council are called "Sovereign Grand Inspectors General" (S.G.I.G.), and each is the head of the Rite in his respective Orient (or state). Other heads of the various Orients who are not members of the Supreme Council are called "Deputies of the Supreme Council". The Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction meets every odd year during the month of August at the House of the Temple, Scottish Rite of Freemasonry Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters, in Washington, D.C. During this conference, closed meetings between the Grand Commander and the S.G.I.G.'s are held, and many members of the fraternity from all over the world attend the open ceremony on the 5th of 6 council meeting days. In the Southern Jurisdiction, a member who has been a 32° Scottish Rite Mason for 46 months or more is eligible to be elected to receive the "rank and decoration" of Knight Commander of the Court of Honour (K.C.C.H.) in recognition of outstanding service. After 46 months as a K.C.C.H. he is then eligible to be elected to the 33rd degree, upon approval of the Supreme Council and Grand Commander."The Distinctive Regalia of the Scottish Rite" by Pete Normand, "The Scottish Rite Journal", October 2001, retrieved 9 April 2006 The Lexington, Massachusetts-based Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, formed in 1813, oversees the bodies in fifteen states: Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Wisconsin and Vermont.  The Northern Jurisdiction is only divided into Valleys, not Orients.Valleys of the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction  Each Valley has up to four Scottish Rite bodies, and each body confers a set of degrees. In the Northern Jurisdiction, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 66 members. All members of the Supreme Council are designated Sovereign Grand Inspectors General, but the head of the Rite in each Valley of the Northern Jurisdiction is called a "Deputy of the Supreme Council."  The Northern Council meets yearly. In the Northern Jurisdiction, there is a 46-month requirement for eligibility to receive the 33rd degree, and while there is a Meritorious Service Award (as well as a Distinguished Service Award), they are not  required intermediate steps towards the 33°. A recipient of the 33rd Degree is an honorary member of the Supreme Council and is therefore called an "Inspector General Honorary."  However, those who are appointed Deputies of the Supreme Council that are later elected to membership on the Supreme Council are then designated "Sovereign Grand Inspectors General."  In the Northern Jurisdiction a recipient of the 33rd Degree is an honorary member of the Supreme Council, and all members are referred to as a "Sovereign Grand Inspectors General."  In England and Wales, whose Supreme Council was warranted by that of the Northern Jurisdiction of the USA (in 1845),Bedfordshire Freemasonry website: Rose Croix Masonry, accessed 05 Oct 06 the Rite is known colloquially as the "Rose Croix" or more formally as "The Ancient and Accepted Rite for England and Wales and its Districts and Chapters Overseas" (continental European jurisdictions retain the "Écossais"). The only local bodies are Rose Croix Chapters; many degrees are conferred in name only, and degrees beyond the 18° are conferred only by the Supreme Council itself. All candidates for membership must profess the Trinitarian Christian faith and have been Master masons for at least one year.The Supreme Council 33° - Who Can Join? In England and Wales, the candidate is perfected in the 18th degree with the preceding degrees awarded in name only.  Continuing to the 30th degree is restricted to those who have served in the chair of the Chapter.  Elevation beyond the 30th degree is as in Scotland. In Scotland, candidates are perfected in the 18th degree, with the preceding degrees awarded in name only. A minimum of a two-year interval is required before continuing to the 30th degree, again with the intervening degrees awarded by name only.  Elevation beyond that is by invitation only, and numbers are severely restricted. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite appeared in France thanks to Grasse-Tilly in 1804 on his return from the Antilles. He founded the first Supreme Council in FrancePierre Mollier "Naissance et essor du Rite écossais ancien et accepté en France : 1804-1826", in "1804-2004 Deux siècles de Rite Ecossais Ancien Accepté en France", Dervy, 2004, pp. 70-113. that same year. The Grand Orient of France signed a treaty of union in December 1804 with the Supreme Council of the 33rd Degree in France; the treaty declared that "the Grand Orient united to itself"In the original: Le Grand Orient unit à lui. the Supreme Council in France. This accord was applied in fact until 1814. Thanks to this treaty, the Grand Orient of France took ownership, as it were, of the Scottish Rite. From 1805 to 1814, the Grand Orient of France administered the first 18 degrees of the Rite, leaving the Supreme Council of France to administer the last 15. In 1815, five of the leaders of the Supreme Council founded the Suprême Conseil des Rites within the Grand Orient of France. The original Supreme Council of France fell dormant from 1815 to 1821.The only known evidence of activity by this Supreme Council in this period is a rent receipt. Source: CG. The Suprême Conseil des Isles d'Amérique (founded in 1802 by Grasse-Tilly and revived around 1810 by Delahogue) breathed new life into the Supreme Council for the 33rd Degree in France, and they merged into a single organization: the Supreme Council of France. This grew into an independent and sovereign Masonic power. It created symbolic lodges (those composed of the first three degrees, which otherwise would be federated around a Grand Lodge or a Grand Orient). In 1894, the Supreme Council of France created the Grand Lodge of France, which became fully independent in 1904 when the Supreme Council of France ceased chartering new lodges. The Supreme Council of France still considers itself the overseer of all 33 degrees of the Rite, and relations between the two structures remain close, as witnessed by the two joint meetings that they organize each year. In 1964, the Sovereign Grand Commander Charles Riandey along with 400 to 500 members left the jurisdiction of the Supreme Council of France and joined the Grande Loge Nationale Française, considering that thanks to his resignation and despite the fact that the Supreme Council of France had continued to work without him, there was no longer a Supreme Council of France. Riandey then reinitiated the 33 degrees of the rite in Amsterdam; with the support of the Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, he founded a new Supreme Council, called the Suprême Conseil pour la France, the sole to be recognized by the Supreme Councils of the United States after it was designated as the sole authority of the Scottish Rite for France by the Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction (the oldest Supreme Council in the world) at the Barranquilla conference in 1970. France thus finds itself in the unusual situation of having three different and arguably legitimate Supreme Councils: In Canada, whose Supreme Council was warranted in 1874 by that of England and Wales, the Rite is known as Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.  The council is called "Supreme Council 33° Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of Canada". Canada's Supreme Council office is located at 4 Queen Street South in Hamilton, Ontario. There are 45 local units or "Valleys" across Canada.Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry in Canada website Degrees When Revised 1-3° 1872 4-14° 1861, 1870, 1883 15-16° 1861, 1870, 1882 17-18° 1861, 1870 19-30° 1867, 1879, 1883 31-32° 1867, 1879, 1883 33° 1857, 1867, 1868, 1880 (manuscripts only) Degree Southern JurisdictionA Bridge to Light, by Rex R. Hutchens; publ. 1995; 2nd Ed., 4th Printing, 2001; by The Supreme Council, 33°, Ancient & Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, So. Jurisdiction, U.S.A.; see also de Hoyos, Arturo, "Structure of the Scottish Rite" in Scottish Rite Ritual, Monitor and Guide 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Council, 33°, S.J., 2009), pp. 119-26. Northern JurisdictionFreemasons for Dummies, Christopher Hodapp, ISBN 0-7645-9796-5, Hungry Minds Inc, U.S., 2005. pp. 226-227 Canada England and WalesKeith B. Jackson, Beyond the Craft, 6th Edition, Lewis Masonic 2012 (ISBN 978-0853184058), p. 31. 4° Secret Master Master Traveler Secret Master 5° Perfect Master 6° Intimate Secretary Master of the Brazen Serpent Intimate Secretary 7° Provost and Judge 8° Intendant of the Building 9° Elu of the Nine Master of the Temple Elect of the Nine Elect of Nine 10° Elu of the Fifteen Master ElectFormerly "Master Elect of Fifteen." The Northern Light Magazine, November 2006 Elect of the Fifteen Elect of Fifteen 11° Elu of the Twelve Sublime Master Elected Elect of the Twelve Sublime Elect 12° Master Architect Master of Mercy Grand Master Architect 13° Royal Arch of Solomon Master of the Ninth Arch Royal Arch of Solomon Royal Arch of Enoch 14° Perfect Elu Grand Elect Mason Grand Elect Perfect and Sublime Mason Grand Elect Perfect and Sublime Master 15° Knight of the East,  or Knight of the Sword,  or Knight of the Eagle Knight of the East, orKnight of the Sword Knight of the Sword,  or Knight of the East 16° Prince of Jerusalem 17° Knight of the East and West 18° Knight Rose Croix Knight of the Rose Croix de Heredom Knight Rose Croix Sovereign Prince Rose Croix,  or Knight of the Pelican and Eagle 19° Grand Pontiff Brother of the Trail Grand Pontiff 20° Master of the Symbolic Lodge Master ad Vitam Venerable Grand Master 21° Noachite, orPrussian Knight Patriarch Noachite 22° Knight of the Royal Axe, orPrince of Libanus Prince of Libanus 23° Chief of the Tabernacle Knight of Valor Chief of the Tabernacle 24° Prince of the Tabernacle Brother of the Forest Prince of the Tabernacle 25° Knight of the Brazen Serpent Master of Achievement Knight of the Brazen Serpent 26° Prince of Mercy, orScottish Trinitarian Friend and Brother EternalFormerly "Prince of Mercy." The Northern Light Magazine, November 2006 Prince of Mercy 27° Knight of the Sun, orPrince Adept Knight of Jerusalem Commander of the Temple 28° Knight Commander of the Temple Knight of the Sun, orPrince Adept Knight of the Sun 29° Scottish Knight of Saint Andrew Knight of Saint Andrew 30° Knight Kadosh, orKnight of the White and Black Eagle Grand Inspector Knight Kadosh Grand Elected Knight Kadosh,  or Knight of the White and Black Eagle 31° Inspector Inquisitor Knight Aspirant Inspector Inquisitor Commander Grand Inspector Inquisitor Commander 32° Master of the Royal Secret Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret 33° Inspector General Sovereign Grand Inspector General John Mitchell - Received a patent April 2, 1795, from Barend Moses Spitzer granting him authority as Deputy Inspector General to create a Lodge of Perfection and several Councils and Chapters wherever such Lodges or Chapters were needed.  Born in Ireland in 1741, he came to America at an early age, was Deputy Quartermaster General in the Continental Army, and the first Grand Commander of the Supreme Council. Frederick Dalcho - A physician.  He served in the Army and for a while was stationed at Fort Johnson.  He formed a partnership with Dr. Isaac Auld, another of the original members, in 1801.  He was an outstanding orator and author.  In 1807 he published the 1st Edition of Ahiman Rezon.  He became an editor of the Charleston Courier, was a lay reader and deacon in the Episcopal Church and in 1818 was ordained a Priest. Alexander Francois Auguste de Grasse Tilly - A son of a French Admiral, and perhaps the most famously connected of all the original eleven.  He was the youngest of the members and was named to become the Grand Commander of the West Indian Islands.  He later moved to France and established the Supreme Council of France. Jean Baptiste Marie de La Hogue - He was a native of Paris and was a member of La Candeur Lodge in Charleston. Thomas Bartholemew Bowen - Was the first Grand Master of Ceremonies of the new Supreme Council.  He was a Major in the Continental Army and a printer by trade. Abraham Alexander - Was one of the first Sovereign Grand Inspectors General.  He was born in London in 1743, immigrated to Charleston in 1771.  He was a very prominent Jew and had been described as "a Calligraphist of the first order", which may account for his election as the first Grand Secretary General. Emanuel de la Motta - A Sovereign Grand Inspector General.  He was by trade a merchant and auctioneer.  He was a member of Friendship Lodge and was reported to be quite devoted to the study of Jewish Literature and Masonic Study. Isaac Auld - An eminent physician, associated in medical practice with Dr. Dalcho.  He was a rigid Congregationalist. Israel de Lieben - A Sovereign Grand Inspector General and the first Grand Treasurer General.  He was born in Prague and emigrated to America upon reaching Majority age.  He was known as "the liberal-headed Jew", who was "tolerant in his religious opinions and was considered to be intelligent, enterprising, liberal and generous. Moses Clava Levy - Was born in Krakow, Poland.  He was a prosperous merchant, was generous and helpful to the unfortunate and devoted to his adopted city and country. James Moultrie - Was the only native South Carolinian among the original members.  He was a Doctor of Medicine, and according to Albert Pike, "was one of the foremost Citizens of South Carolina". Isaac De Costa, one of the deputies commissioned to establish Morin's Rite of the Royal Secret in other countries, formed constituent bodies of the Rite in South Carolina in 1783, which eventually became, in 1801, The Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction.  All regular Scottish Rite bodies today derive their heritage from this body. The Suprême Conseil Grand Collège du Rite écossais ancien accepté (emerging from the Supreme Council of 1804 and constituted in 1815), affiliated with the Grand Orient de France. The Suprême Conseil de France (emerging from the Supreme Council of 1804 and then restored in 1821 by the Supreme Council of the Isles d'Amérique founded in 1802 in Saint-Domingue, the modern Haiti), affiliated with the Grand Lodge of France. The Suprême Conseil pour la France (emerging from the Supreme Council of the Netherlands, constituted in 1965), affiliated with the Grande Loge Nationale Française York Rite - An alternative group of Masonic appendant bodies. Masonic appendant bodies - An explanation of groups supplemental to "Blue Lodge" Freemasonry Esotericism Grand College of Rites - An appendant body dedicated to preserving disused Masonic rituals and the rites of defunct Masonic societies. Rite of Memphis-Misraim - A European Masonic order dating from the 19th century, including degrees based on the three Blue Lodge and thirty three Scottish Rite degrees, as well as additional esoteric degrees. List of Masonic Rites Supreme Council 33°,  Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction Supreme Council 33°, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, USA Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of Canada Supreme Council of the Ancient & Accepted Scottish Rite for Australia Scottish Rite Founding Fathers Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite for Russia Links to RiteCare Clinics which provide diagnostic evaluation and treatment of speech and language disorders, as well as learning disabilities in the Southern Jurisdiction, USA Masonic Learning Centers for Children, Inc. which provide tutoring for children with dyslexia in the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction Learning Centres for Children in Canada Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, a pediatric orthopedic hospital in Dallas, Texas Children's Healthcare of Atlanta at Scottish Rite
