  Sean Michael Waltman (born July 13, 1972) is an American professional wrestler. He wrestled for the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now called WWE) under the ring names 1–2–3 Kid and X-Pac intermittently between 1993 and 2002, World Championship Wrestling (WCW) as Syxx, and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) as Syxx-Pac and Sean Waltman. He is signed with WWE working in their Legends program. Waltman has won a dozen championships between WWE, WCW, and TNA; the majority were cruiserweight and tag team titles. He is the only wrestler to have held the TNA X Division Championship, the WCW Cruiserweight Championship and the WWF Light Heavyweight Championship; he also held the WCW Cruiserweight and WWF Light Heavyweight titles simultaneously.  He was also the final WWF Light Heavyweight Champion before the title was retired in favor of the Cruiserweight Championship he simultaneously held. He was part of The Kliq, a group of wrestlers known for their influence on WWF storylines in the mid-1990s."Kevin Nash Speaks On The Kliq & Their Backstage Influence" Waltman joined the school wrestling team in ninth grade, but quickly quit rather than cut his hair. After training under Boris Malenko, Joe Malenko, Masami Soronaka and Karl Gotch,The Steve Austin Show SASu=EP#51 "X-Pac Pt.1", PodcastOne.com (8:11) Waltman began his career as The Lightning Kid. He worked his way through various independent promotions, including Pro Wrestling America (PWA) and the Global Wrestling Federation (GWF), winning the PWA Light Heavyweight title, the PWA Iron Horse TV Title and the GWF Light Heavyweight Championship. During this time, Waltman worked extensively with Jerry Lynn in North America and Japan. They often wrestled each other, but also teamed up to win the PWA Tag Team titles twice in 1993. While working for Larry Sharpe & Dennis Coralluzzo's WWA Promotion on November 28, 1992 in Clementon, New Jersey his opponent "The Kamikaze Kid" Bill Wilcox" overshot a suicide dive and landed on Waltman's head, driving it to the concrete and causing a blood clot near his brain. He was hospitalized for three days, could not work for four months, and was advised to give up wrestling completely. As The Lightning Kid, Waltman had his WWF tryout match in Phoenix, Arizona, the day after WrestleMania IX, against fellow hopeful Louie Spicolli (soon known as Rad Radford in the WWF). He reminisced that he was lucky to have an opponent with a vested interest in an impressive match, rather than (as was then typical) a disinterested WWF veteran jobber like Virgil or Jim Powers.The Steve Austin Show SASu=EP#52 "X-Pac Pt.2", PodcastOne.com (27:00) After earning a contract, he made his TV debut as The Kamikaze Kid on Monday Night Raw on May 3, losing to Doink the Clown.Doink the Clown vs The Kamikaze Kid, from WWE.com He quickly became The Cannonball Kid, then simply The Kid. After several weeks as a jobber, he scored an upset pinfall on Razor Ramon on the May 17 episode Monday Night Raw, thus becoming The 1–2–3 Kid. Razor challenged him to a rematch, wagering $10,000 of his own money. Kid accepted the challenge, but grabbed the money and ran from the arena during the match. Ted DiBiase, who was feuding with Razor, taunted him over losing to a nobody. This angered Kid, and led to a match in which he upset DiBiase as well. Razor turned face shortly after and took Kid under his wing. The 1–2–3 Kid made his pay-per-view debut at SummerSlam, losing to DiBiase's tag partner Irwin R. Schyster after Razor had defeated DiBiase. At the 1993 Survivor Series, Kid was on Razor's team in a four-on-four elimination match. He and Marty Jannetty were the sole survivors, which led to them forming a tag team and holding the WWF Tag Team Championship for a week in January 1994 after beating The Quebecers.  For the next two years, The 1–2–3 Kid was a natural underdog and fan favorite. He wrestled Bret Hart in an unusually long (for the time) and highly acclaimed match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship in July 1994 on RawBret Hart vs The 1–2–3 Kid, from WWE.com and had another brief (one-day) tag title reign in January 1995, with Bob Holly beating Bam Bam Bigelow and Tatanka at Royal Rumble (1995) before losing to The Smoking Gunns on Raw. After he and Razor failed to win back the tag titles from Billy Gunn and Bart Gunn in October 1995, Kid attacked the face Gunns after the match to tease a heel turn. On the Raw before the 1995 Survivor Series in November, he was the guest referee in a match between Razor Ramon and Sycho Sid. As Razor attempted his finisher, The Razor's Edge, Kid pulled Sid down on top of Razor and fast-counted the pinfall, thus turning heel. At Summerslam 1995, he lost to Hakushi but won a rematch in November after Ted Dibiase interfered. He was the sole survivor of his Survivor Series match, besting rival Marty Jannetty. Razor and Marty would team up to beat Kid and Sid at In Your House 5. After Survivor Series, Kid joined Ted DiBiase's Million Dollar Corporation faction. He remained with the group until May 1996 when Waltman left the WWF. He lost a nappy match to Razor Ramon in February 1996's edition of In Your House. The 1–2–3 Kid's final WWF match aired on the May 20 episode of Monday Night Raw; he lost to Savio Vega. On September 16, 1996, Waltman was shown sitting in the front row for a live episode of WCW Monday Nitro. Later that night, he stood and used a remote control to release New World Order (nWo) propaganda from the ceiling, revealing himself as the newest member of the recently formed faction. He was called Syxx, because he was the sixth member of the nWo, and six is the sum of numbers in "1–2–3 Kid". In his first major angle, Syxx stole Eddy Guerrero's WCW United States Heavyweight Championship belt, leading to a ladder match for the title at Souled Out in January 1997, which Syxx lost. The next month, at SuperBrawl VII, Syxx pinned Dean Malenko for the WCW Cruiserweight Championship, after hitting him with the title belt, which he had grabbed from Guerrero at ringside. In June 1997, he lost the championship to Chris Jericho at a webcast house show in Los Angeles, California, minutes after successfully defending against Rey Mysterio, Jr. During a feud with Ric Flair, and a loss to him at Road Wild in August, Syxx disparagingly portrayed Flair as part of an nWo segment parodying his Four Horsemen group. This segment led to a WarGames match at Fall Brawl, where Syxx, Kevin Nash, Buff Bagwell and Konnan defeated The Four Horsemen (Flair, Steve McMichael, Chris Benoit and Curt Hennig) after Hennig betrayed the Horsemen and joined the nWo. In mid-1997, the nWo invoked "Wolfpac Rules", allowing Syxx to replace the injured Kevin Nash in defending the WCW World Tag Team Championship with Scott Hall.Freebird Rule – WWE.com On October 13, 1997, Hall and Syxx lost the title to The Steiner Brothers (Rick and Scott). In October, a neck injury sidelined Waltman from wrestling, but he continued to appear on TV for several weeks after. While later recuperating at home, he was fired via Federal Express by WCW President Eric Bischoff. Waltman claims this was a power play aimed at his friends Hall and Nash, whose backstage influence was felt as a threat. Bischoff later said Waltman was a competent performer when sober, but sober periods were "few and far between", and "in many ways, Sean was lucky to even have a job."Bischoff, Eric Controversy Creates Cash, WWE Books, 2007 (p.276)   Waltman returned to WWF TV on the March 30, 1998 episode of Monday Night Raw, the night after WrestleMania XIV and days after his firing from WCW. With Shawn Michaels beginning a four-year retirement after a WWF World Heavyweight Championship loss and back injury, Triple H was now the leader of D-Generation X (DX). He said he was forming a DX army and "when you start an army, you look to your blood... you look to your buddies... you look to your friends... you look to The Kliq." Waltman appeared on the stage, commented on Bischoff and Hogan, and said if they weren't contracted to WCW, Hall and Nash would have also returned to the WWF. Bischoff responded on Nitro the next week by telling Waltman to "bite me." Initially called "The Kid" on the WWF website, he became known as "X-Pac" by the next Raw. X-Pac feuded with Jeff Jarrett, ultimately defeating him in a hair-vs-hair match at SummerSlam, then with WWF European Champion D'Lo Brown, whom he dethroned on September 21, 1998. Two weeks later, he lost the title back to Brown, then won it again at Judgment Day: In Your House in October. Waltman lost the title to Shane McMahon on February 15, 1999. At WrestleMania XV, he lost a championship rematch when Triple H betrayed him, and hit him with his Pedigree finisher. X-Pac then sided with Road Dogg against Triple H, Chyna and Billy Gunn, after the temporary demise of DX. X-Pac and Road Dogg wanted a reformed DX to be about rebellion, while the others wanted it to be about making money. X-Pac became a face and befriended Kane, a mute, angry loner whom he partially socialized and encouraged to speak, through an electrolarynx. They won the WWF Tag Team Championship twice together. After DX reunited in late 1999 as a heel group, X-Pac led Kane to believe he would be inducted into DX, but instead betrayed him and eventually stole his new girlfriend, Tori. In 2000, X-Pac feuded with fellow DX member Road Dogg, and Chris Jericho, whose botched powerbomb sidelined Waltman for three months with another neck injury.   After returning from his neck injury in early 2001, X-Pac briefly feuded with Chris Jericho over the WWF Intercontinental Championship, culminating in a fatal four-way match with Chris Benoit and Eddie Guerrero at No Way Out in February, which Jericho won. In February, X-Pac formed a new stable called X-Factor with Justin Credible and Albert. During this time, he usually teamed with Credible, but also appeared in singles matches. He won the WWF Light Heavyweight Championship from Jeff Hardy on June 25, then won the WCW Cruiserweight Championship for the second time in his career when he defeated Billy Kidman on July 30. Despite this occurring during the WCW Invasion, where the WWF side was mostly portrayed as the good guys, the fans were vocal in their disapproval of Waltman during his reign. This was acknowledged on-screen by both Alliance member Billy Kidman and, later by WWF member Edge. When Credible joined the ECW/WCW Alliance X-Factor broke up. At Summerslam 2001 X-Pac defeated Tajiri to win the WWF Light Heavyweight Championship for the second time and was WCW Cruiserweight Champion at the same time. X-Pac then feuded with Kidman and Tajiri. After losing the WCW Cruiserweight title to Kidman, he took time off for another injury. The WWF Light Heavyweight Championship was abandoned upon his return to TV, though he defended it at several house shows shortly prior. Hall, Nash and Hogan returned to the WWF in 2002 as the New World Order, brought in by Vince McMahon. Hogan was kicked from the group after losing to The Rock at Wrestlemania. X-Pac, who had been out with an injury, returned on the March 21 episode of SmackDown!, rejoined the nWo and attacked Hogan. He said he had been waiting four years to do so, because Hogan shot on WCW Thunder after Waltman's firing, saying he could not "cut the mustard". The storyline was dropped after the first WWE Draft, when the nWo went to RAW and Hogan to SmackDown. During the nWo's feud with Booker T and Goldust a botched spinebuster injured him and kept him from participating in the feud. At SummerSlam, Raw commentator Jim Ross announced WWE and Waltman had parted ways. Waltman, as Syxx-Pac, debuted for TNA Wrestling on September 18, 2002, losing a gauntlet match. Rejoining his WWF tag partners Scott Hall and B.G. James, he feuded with Jeff Jarrett and Brian Lawler. On October 9, 2002, Syxx-Pac made his X Division debut, defeating eight other wrestlers in a ladder match to win the vacant TNA X Division Championship. He held the title for two weeks before losing to A.J. Styles in a No Disqualification match. He abrubtly left TNA after defeating Lawler in the first round of an NWA World Heavyweight Championship number one contender tournament on November 6.NWA-TNA PPV #19 results, from WrestlingData.com Waltman, as X, debuted in Xtreme Pro Wrestling on February 28, 2003, winning the XPW Television Championship from Kaos. He retained the title in a bout with Juventud Guerrera on March 1, and held it until the promotion closed in April. Waltman, as Syxx-Pac, returned to TNA for a single night on June 18, 2003, at their first anniversary pay-per-view, as A.J. Styles's mystery partner in a loss to Jeff Jarrett and Sting. Under his real name, Waltman returned on February 13, 2005 at Against All Odds, attacking Jeff Jarrett during his NWA World Heavyweight Championship match with Kevin Nash. Nash, Waltman and Diamond Dallas Page formed an alliance and feuded with Planet Jarrett (Jarrett, The Outlaw and Monty Brown), until Nash and Page left TNA to focus on acting. At Hard Justice in 2005, Waltman replaced Jeff Hardy, who no-showed, and lost to Raven in a Clockwork Orange House of Fun match after being back body dropped through the steel cage. On June 19, at Slammiversary, Waltman wrestled a five-man King of the Mountain match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. He lost, but cost defending champion A.J. Styles the title by delivering an X-Factor off a ladder. This turned him heel and led to a grudge match at No Surrender, which Styles won after guest referee Jerry Lynn prevented Waltman from cheating. Waltman challenged Lynn to a match at Sacrifice. After losing by victory roll, Waltman attacked Lynn and tried to reinjure his shoulder. Waltman then partnered with Alex Shelley to win the Chris Candido Cup. This earned them a shot at the NWA World Tag Team Championship at Unbreakable. Waltman, however, no-showed the event. He wasn't seen again until a one-night return at Final Resolution on January 15, 2006, brought in by Larry Zbyszko to defeat his rival, Raven.  In February 2006, Waltman joined MTV's newly formed Wrestling Society X (WSX) promotion, as 6-Pac. At their inaugural tapings on February 9, 6-Pac had a ten-man hardcore battle royal ladder match, which both he and Vampiro won by climbing the ladder to retrieve WSX contracts. 6-Pac lost a WSX Championship title match to Vampiro the following week. He challenged Vampiro in episode four, as a ruse to introduce Ricky Banderas, who attacked Vampiro from behind. He later defeated Human Tornado and Scorpio Sky in singles matches, and teased an affair with Lizzy Valentine (the valet and girlfriend of Matt Sydal), though WSX folded before the angle could go on any further. Waltman, under his real name, defeated Adam Pearce for the NWA Heritage Championship in El Paso, Texas on April 21, 2007. He defended it against El Sicodelico, Jr. on April 27, and lost it back to Pearce two days later.Waltman's April 2007 matches, from WrestlingData.com On July 8, 2007, Waltman teamed with Billy Kidman in a three-way tag match in McAllen, Texas for the NWA World Tag Team Championship, which had been vacated by Team 3D after the NWA stopped working with TNA. They lost the match to Karl Anderson and Joey Ryan. On the May 14, 2008, episode of NWA Wrestling Showcase, Waltman challenged Pearce for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. The match ended prematurely after Waltman legitimately injured his knee five minutes in. He was attacked by The Real American Heroes and Pearce, so won by disqualification. As wrestling titles can generally only change hands by pinfall or submission, Pearce retained the belt. In June 2007, Waltman, as X-Pac, began working regularly for Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (AAA), initially a member of Konnan's La Legión Extranjera (Foreign Legion) and managed by girlfriend Alicia Webb. He usually used the D-Generation X entrance music. After leaving for rehab in mid-2008, he returned at Verano de Escándalo (Summer of Scandal) that September, turning on the Foreign Legion and forming D-Generation Mex, a parody of D-Generation X, with Rocky Romero and Alex Koslov. He later feuded with one of AAA's top stars, El Zorro.  On August 8, 2009, at GLCW Slamfest, X-Pac became the new GLCW Heavyweight Champion by defeating Skull Crusher, who had replaced champion Al Snow when he no-showed. On February 26, 2011, Waltman was inducted into the Legends Pro Wrestling Hall of Fame in Wheeling, West Virginia by Jack Blaze at their "LPW X-Factor 2011" event. On March 5, 2011, Waltman reunited with former D-Generation X members Road Dogg and Billy Gunn for a six-man tag match at a Pro Wrestling Syndicate show in Long Island, New York. He landed on the guardrail and punctured his chest, going to an emergency room when the wound reopened in an airport after the show. A week later, X-Pac defeated UIW lightweight champion Stupid in a non-title match.Stupid vs X-Pac, Part 2, from YouTube.com On October 8 and 9, 2012, he wrestled in a Bad Boys of Wrestling Federation tournament to crown the BBWF Caribbean Champion. He defeated Krimson in the semi-final and Daivari in the final, winning the title. On November 9, 2013, X-Pac and Lance Storm lost to Tommy Dreamer and Terry Funk in the main event of House of Hardcore 3.House of Hardcore #3 results, from WrestlingData.com On a special live, three-hour Monday night episode of Impact! on January 4, 2010, Waltman (as Syxx-Pac) and Scott Hall returned to TNA. That night, fellow former nWo member Hulk Hogan debuted in TNA. Kevin Nash, Hall and Waltman quickly reformed an alliance called The Band, but Hogan stayed away, saying times had changed. At Genesis on January 17, Syxx-Pac replaced Hall and teamed with Nash to lose to Beer Money, Inc. (Robert Roode and James Storm). On the next Impact! Hogan, disgusted by The Band's actions, had security eject Syxx-Pac and Hall, saying they weren't contracted to TNA. They appeared the next week anyway, attacking Kurt Angle from behind. They returned a week later, betraying Nash and beating him down. At Destination X on March 21, Syxx-Pac and Hall wagered their TNA jobs in a tag match against Nash and Eric Young. In the end, Nash turned on Young and helped The Band win the match and full TNA contracts. On the March 29 Impact!, The Band lost a six-man steel cage tag match to Eric Young, Jeff Hardy and Rob Van Dam. Syxx-Pac was scheduled for a tag match at Lockdown, but was replaced by Nash after the Missouri Athletic Commission barred Waltman from wrestling, due to his hepatitis C. On the April 26 Impact!, Waltman was written off of TV when Team 3D found Syxx-Pac on a backstage floor in a pool of blood; Eric Young took his place in The Band. In early June, TNA released Waltman and Hall.  On April 15, 2011, Waltman, as The 1–2–3 Kid, debuted for Chikara by entering their King of Trios tournament, teaming with Arik Cannon and Darin Corbin (Team Minnesota). They were eliminated in the first round by Team Michinoku Pro (Dick Togo, Great Sasuke and Jinsei Shinzaki). The day after, Waltman defeated Amazing Red, Frightmare and Obariyon in a four–way elimination match to make it to the next day's Rey de Voladores tournament final. There, he lost to El Generico. After the match, Waltman said he believed 2011 would be his last year in professional wrestling, praising Chikara as the "future of wrestling" and thanking them for a memorable weekend. The 1–2–3 Kid returned to Chikara for the 2012 King of Trios tournament, this time teaming with Aldo Montoya and Tatanka as Team WWF. On September 14, they lost their first-round match to The Extreme Trio (Jerry Lynn, Tommy Dreamer and Too Cold Scorpio). The next day, The 1–2–3 Kid was low-blowed and pinned by Mark Angelosetti. On the final day of the tournament weekend, The 1–2–3 Kid and Marty Jannetty won the annual tag team gauntlet match. On November 18, The 1–2–3 Kid returned to Chikara, when he and Marty Jannetty defeated The Heart Throbs (Antonio Thomas and Romeo Roselli) to earn their third point (for three consecutive wins) and a shot at the Chikara Campeonatos de Parejas. They lost the title match on December 2, at the Under the Hood internet pay-per-view, to defending champions The Young Bucks (Matt and Nick Jackson). Waltman, under his real name, returned to Chikara on March 8, 2013, losing to Hallowicked. In September 2014, Waltman returned to Chikara to do commentary during the first round of 2014 King of Trios. On April 2, 2011, Waltman returned to WWE television to celebrate, with Kevin Nash and Triple H, their longtime friend Shawn Michaels' induction into the 2011 WWE Hall of Fame. He later worked backstage, as a Scout and Evaluator in Florida Championship Wrestling, the WWE developmental territory. In 2012, Waltman attended the Hall of Fame again, with The Kliq. On July 23, he, Billy Gunn and Road Dogg returned to join Shawn Michaels and Triple H for a D-Generation X reunion on the 1000th episode of Raw. In early 2013, The Kliq/DX reunited for an episode of WWE NXT. In early March 2013, Waltman signed a WWE Legends contract (a long-term contract which gives WWE merchandising rights to a wrestler's name and likeness, requires occasional appearances and prevents them from working for competing major promotions, but allows for independent appearances)."Sean "X-Pac" Waltman signs WWE Legends contract", by Jason Namako, WrestleView On April 5, 2014 the night before WrestleMania XXX, Waltman joined Shawn Michaels, Triple H, and Kevin Nash at Scott Hall's WWE Hall of Fame induction, reuniting The Kliq. On the January 19, 2015 episode of Raw, labelled Raw Reunion, Damien Mizdow appeared with Kevin Nash, Shawn Michaels, Scott Hall and Triple H dressed as X-Pac, only for X-Pac to confront him (finding the impersonation funny), until The Miz interrupted them to tell them that Mizdow was only his stunt double, and that the party was over. He appeared again with Hall and Nash, being interrupted by The Ascension, who were attempting to attack them, only to be joined by The APA and The New Age Outlaws in fending off The Ascension. At WrestleMania 31, X-Pac along with The New Age Outlaws and Shawn Michaels helped Triple H win his match against Sting. They were backstage at NXT Takeover in Brooklyn in August 2015 http://www.wrestlinginc.com/wi/news/2015/0822/599784/wwe-legends-ringside-at-nxt-takeover/ In 2004 Waltman co-starred with then-girlfriend Joanie Laurer a.k.a. Chyna in the amateur porn film 1 Night in China, named the Top Selling Release of 2006 by the Adult Video News Awards and its sequel Another Night in China In 2009. Waltman appeared on ESPN's E:60 that featured a documentary detailing Scott Hall's experience with drugs and alcohol. It included interviews with several of Hall's family members (including his ex-wife and his son, Cody), as well as several prominent figures and close friends from the wrestling industry (including Hulk Hogan, Kevin Nash, Sean Waltman, Eric Bischoff, and Stephanie McMahon). Currently, starting mid-2014, Sean Waltman hosts a "weekly" podcast with friend and wrestling colleague Johnny Fairplay regarding uncensored life topics as well as deep wrestling insight. The podcast is currently hosted on blogtalkradio.com by Jason Powell's prowrestling.net. Waltman has appeared in many video games, including WCW vs. NWO: World Tour, WCW Nitro, WWF Attitude, WWF Smackdown!,WWF WrestleMania 2000, WWF No Mercy, WWF SmackDown! 2: Know Your Role, WWF With Authority!, WWF Road To WrestleMania, WWE SmackDown! Shut Your Mouth, WWF Raw, WWE '13, downloadable content in WWE 2K14 as Syxx (announced in-game as Syxx-Pac) and WWE 2K16. Waltman had a self-described troubled childhood. He was raised by a single mother, and called himself "unsupervised from age five". He was molested several times, and dropped out of school in ninth grade. A love of wrestling and limited career opportunities led to his working for free, setting up rings and other odd jobs for local promotions, before eventually wrestling himself. At 19, Waltman married a woman named Terry. They have two children: a son named Jesse (born 1992) and a daughter, Kaitlyn (born January 25, 1995). They divorced in 2002, which Waltman attributed to incompatibilities in their newfound crystal meth habits ("She ran with it, I kept it under control").IMDB bio Immediately before his high-profile TNA X Division Championship match against AJ Styles in October 2002, he injected meth in the bathroom, which led to him forgetting the finish to the match. He was soon after gone from TNA. He kicked the habit after Paul Levesque tracked him down and paid to send him to rehab. Vince McMahon later paid half the cost, calling Waltman a friend. Waltman was also in a relationship with and eventually engaged to Joanie Laurer, who formerly competed as Chyna in the WWF. Later on Laurer and Waltman split. In March 2005, Waltman appeared on the VH1 reality TV show The Surreal Life when he visited Laurer in an attempt to reconcile with her. After Laurer refused to reconcile, Waltman was eventually ejected from the house by the other guests. In an early 2008 interview, Juventud Guerrera, who had been working with Waltman in AAA, claimed Waltman had recently tried to commit suicide due to depression. The Wrestling Observer reported Waltman's then-girlfriend Alicia Webb had found him hanging by his neck in his Mexico City apartment, on the verge of death. In a 2013 interview with Steve Austin, Waltman explained that, due to a pro-cocaine, anti-marijuana locker room attitude in AAA, he was pressured by Webb to give up the habit for the sake of his job, and turned instead to drinking. Never having been a heavy drinker and claiming to hate the taste, he nonetheless began drinking a fifth or more of Oso Negro a day, and often argued with Webb. In this argument, he said, she hit him several times and broke a picture of his son, successfully attempting to goad him into hitting her. Her son saw Waltman land a straight right that "knocked her across the room". Drunk and overcome with shame and guilt, he chased about 40 Valium pills with Bacardi rum, wrote a suicide note and hanged himself with a hose from a beam in his rooftop garden before blacking out and waking in a hospital with a catheter and pure-red bloodshot eyes. Following the incident, long-time friend Kevin Nash flew to Mexico City and brought Waltman to a high-end Houston, Texas psychiatric rehabilitation facility. He shared some of his four months there with Matt Borne, his WWF debut opponent fifteen years prior. Waltman praised the facility for its effectiveness and hospitality. At 1:02&nbsp;p.m. on December 21, 2011, Waltman turned himself in for arrest in St. Petersburg, Florida on two outstanding charges of possession of a controlled substance (hydrocodone) and one charge of possession of drug paraphernalia. He was not jailed, and released from the sheriff's office at 2:24&nbsp;p.m. after posting a $2,150 bond. 1 – Following an injury to Nash, the nWo invoked "Wolfpac Rules" and named Syxx as co-champion   Winner (wager) Loser (wager) Location Event Date Notes X-Pac (hair) Jeff Jarrett (hair) New York, New York SummerSlam (1998) Finishing moves 1–2–3 Kick (Two shoot kicks and jumping back kick combination to a cornered opponent) Syxx Kick (Superkick) – WWF / WCW Buzzkiller (Crossface chickenwing) – WCW X-Factor (WWF/E / Independent circuit / TNA) / Syxx-Factor (WCW) / 6-Factor (WSX) (Sitout facebuster, sometimes from the top rope) Signature moves Bronco buster Moonsault Roundhouse kick Running leg drop Single leg Boston crab Spinning heel kick Stables The Million Dollar Corporation D-Generation X The McMahon-Helmsley Faction X-Factor New World Order Managers Chyna Ted DiBiase Tori Alicia Webb Entrance themes "Don't Cry" by Asia (UWF; 1991–1992) "1–2–3" by Jim Johnston (WWF; 1993–1996) "Break it Down" by The DX Band (WWF/E / AAA; 1998–2000, 2007–2008, 2011–present; Used while a part of D-Generation X) "Break it Down (V2)" performed by Chris Warren and composed by Jim Johnston (WWF; used while a part of D-Generation X; 2000) "Make Some Noise" performed by Chris Warren and composed by Jim Johnston (WWF; 1998–2001) "The Kings" by Run–D.M.C. (WWF; 2000; Used while a part of D-Generation X) "Rockhouse" by Frank Shelley (WCW / WWF/E; 1996–1997, 2002, 2015; Used while a part of the New World Order) "Tear It Up" by PowerHouse Music Library (WCW; 1996–1997; Used while part of the New World Order) "What 'Chu Lookin' At?" by Uncle Kracker (WWF; 2001; Used while a part of X-Factor) "The Band Theme" by Dale Oliver (TNA; 2010) "Wolfpac Theme (Instrumental)" by Dale Oliver (TNA; 2010) "We're Going To Chesterfield (Instrumental)" by The Sean Waltman Neo-Soul Experience (independent circuit; 2005–2009) "One Last Time" by The Deadites (Chikara) Bad Boys of Wrestling Federation BBFW Caribbean Championship (1 time)http://www.cagematch.net/?id=5&nr=2197 Great Lakes Championship Wrestling GLCW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Global Wrestling Federation GWF Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times) Jersey Championship Wrestling JCW Tag Team Championship (1 time, current) – with Joey Janelahttps://twitter.com/JCWprowrestling/status/596873949151174656 Legends Pro Wrestling LPW Hall of Fame (2011) Mid-Eastern Wrestling Federation MEWF Light Heavyweight Championship (1 time) NWA Pro Wrestling NWA Heritage Championship (1 time) Pro Wrestling America PWA Iron Horse Television Championship (1 time) PWA Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times) PWA Tag Team Championship (1 time)  – with Jerry Lynn Pro Wrestling Illustrated Comeback of the Year (1998) Tag Team of the Year (1999) – with Kane Ranked #21 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1997 Ranked #177 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003 South Eastern Wrestling Alliance SEWA Light Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Total Nonstop Action Wrestling TNA X Division Championship (1 time) Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament – with Alex Shelley World Championship Wrestling WCW Cruiserweight Championship (2 times) WCW World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kevin Nash and Scott Hall1 World Wrestling Federation WWF European Championship (2 times) WWF Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times) WWF Tag Team Championship (4 times) – with Marty Jannetty (1), Bob Holly (1), and Kane (2) Slammy Award for Biggest Heart (1994) Xtreme Pro Wrestling XPW Television Championship (1 time) Wrestling Society X WSX Championship contract (won 1/2 of the inaugural #1 contender's contract alongside Vampiro) Professional wrestling record for Sean Waltman from The Internet Wrestling Database Online World of Wrestling profile Sean Waltman at the Internet Movie Database Chikara profile
