 The Semitic languages are a branch of the Afroasiatic language family originating in the Middle East. Semitic languages are spoken by more than 330 million people across much of Western Asia, North Africa and the Horn of Africa, as well as in large expatriate communities in North America and Europe. The terminology was first used in the 1780s by German orientalists von Schlözer and Eichhorn, who derived the name from Shem, one of the three sons of Noah in the Book of Genesis. The most widely spoken Semitic languages today are (numbers given are for native speakers only) Arabic (300 million), Amharic (22 million), Tigrinya (7 million), and Hebrew (unknown; 5 million native and non-native L1 speakers). Semitic languages are attested in written form from a very early date, with Akkadian and Eblaite texts (written in a script adapted from Sumerian cuneiform) appearing from around the middle of the third millennium BC in Mesopotamia and the northern Levant respectively. However, most scripts used to write Semitic languages are abjads—a type of alphabetic script that omits some or all of the vowels, which is feasible for these languages because the consonants in the Semitic languages are the primary carriers of meaning. Among them are the Ugaritic, Phoenician, Aramaic, Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic, and South Arabian alphabets. The Ge'ez alphabet, used for writing the Semitic languages of Ethiopia and Eritrea, is technically an abugida—a modified abjad in which vowels are notated using diacritic marks added to the consonants at all times, in contrast with other Semitic languages which indicate diacritics based on need or for introductory purposes. Maltese is the only Semitic language written in the Latin script and the only official Semitic language of the European Union. The Semitic languages are notable for their nonconcatenative morphology. That is, word roots are not themselves syllables or words, but instead are isolated sets of consonants (usually three, making a so-called triliteral root). Words are composed out of roots not so much by adding prefixes or suffixes, but rather by filling in the vowels between the root consonants (although prefixes and suffixes are often added as well). For example, in Arabic, the root meaning "write" has the form k-t-b. From this root, words are formed by filling in the vowels and sometimes adding additional consonants, e.g. kitāb "book", kutub "books", kātib "writer", kuttāb "writers", kataba "he wrote", yaktubu "he writes", etc.  The similarity of the Hebrew language, Arabic language and Aramaic language has been accepted by Jewish and Islamic scholars since medieval times. The languages were familiar to Western European scholars due to historical contact with neighbouring Islamic countries and through Biblical studies, and a comparative analysis of Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic was published in Latin in 1538 by Guillaume Postel. Almost two centuries later, Hiob Ludolf described the similarities between these three languages and the Ethiopic languages. However, neither scholar named this grouping as "Semitic". The German orientalists  (1781) and  (1787) first coined the name "Semitic" in the late 18th century to designate the languages closely related to Arabic, Aramaic, and Hebrew. The choice of name was derived from Shem, one of the three sons of Noah in the genealogical accounts of the biblical , or more precisely from the Greek rendering of the name, . Eichhorn is credited with popularising the term, particularly via a 1795 article "Semitische Sprachen" (Semitic languages) in which he justified the terminology against criticism that Hebrew and Canaanite were the same language despite Canaan being "Hamitic" in the Table of Nations:  Previously these languages had been commonly known as the  in European literature. In the 19th century, Semitic became the conventional name; however, an alternative name:  was later introduced and used by some writers.    Semitic languages, in ancient historic times (between the 30th and 20th centuries BC), covered a broad area which encompassed what are today the modern states and regions of Iraq, Syria, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, Yemen, Bahrain, Qatar, United Arab Emirates and the Sinai Peninsula and Malta. The earliest historic (written) evidences of them are found in the Fertile Crescent (Mesopotamia) c. the 30th century BC, an area encompassing the Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian civilizations along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers (modern Iraq), followed by historical written evidence from the Levant, Canaan, Sinai Peninsula southern Asia Minor and the Arabian peninsula. The Semitic family is a member of the larger Afroasiatic family, all of whose other five or more branches have their origin in East Africa. Largely for this reason, the ancestors of Proto-Semitic speakers were originally believed by some to have first arrived in the Middle East from Africa, possibly as part of the operation of the Saharan pump, around the late Neolithic.. Diakonoff sees Semitic originating between the Nile Delta and Canaan as the northernmost branch of Afroasiatic. Blench even wonders whether the highly divergent Gurage languages indicate an origin in Ethiopia (with the rest of Ethiopic Semitic a later back migration). A recent Bayesian analysis of alternative Semitic histories supports the former possibility and identifies an origin of Semitic languages in the Levant around 3,750 BC with a single introduction from southern Arabia into Africa around 800 BC. In one interpretation, Proto-Semitic itself is assumed to have reached the Arabian Peninsula by approximately the 4th millennium BC, from which Semitic daughter languages continued to spread outwards. When written records began in the late 4th millennium BC, the Semitic-speaking Akkadians (Assyrians/Babylonians) were entering Mesopotamia from the deserts to the west, and were probably already present in places such as Ebla in Syria. Akkadian personal names began appearing in written record in Mesopotamia from the late 29th Century BC.[1] Andrew George, "Babylonian and Assyrian: A History of Akkadian", In: Postgate, J. N., (ed.), Languages of Iraq, Ancient and Modern. London: British School of Archaeology in Iraq, pp. 31–71 By the late 3rd millennium BC, East Semitic languages, such as Akkadian and Eblaite, were dominant in Mesopotamia and north east Syria, while West Semitic languages, such as Amorite, Canaanite and Ugaritic, were probably spoken from Syria to the Arabian Peninsula, although Old South Arabian is considered by most people to be South Semitic despite the sparsity of data. The Akkadian language of Akkad, Assyria and Babylonia had become the dominant literary language of the Fertile Crescent, using the cuneiform script that was adapted from the Sumerians. The Middle Assyrian Empire, which originated in the 14th century BC, facilitated the use of Akkadian as a 'lingua franca' in many regions outside its homeland. The related, but more sparsely attested, Eblaite disappeared with the city, and Amorite is attested only from proper names in Mesopotamian records. For the 2nd millennium, somewhat more data are available, thanks to the Egyptian Hieroglyphics derived Proto-Sinaitic alphabet. Proto-Canaanite texts from around 1500 BC yield the first undisputed attestations of a West Semitic language (although earlier testimonies are possibly preserved in Middle Bronze Age alphabets), followed by the much more extensive Ugaritic tablets of northern Syria from around 1300 BC. Incursions of nomadic Semitic Aramaeans, and later still Chaldeans and Suteans, from the Syrian desert begin around this time. Akkadian continued to flourish, splitting into Babylonian and Assyrian dialects.   In the 1st millennium BC, the alphabet spread much further, giving us a picture not just of Canaanite, but also of Aramaic, Old South Arabian, and early Ge'ez. During this period, the case system, once vigorous in Ugaritic, seems to have started decaying in Northwest Semitic. Phoenician colonies (such as Carthage) spread their Canaanite language throughout much of the Mediterranean, while its close relative, Hebrew, became the vehicle of a religious literature, the Torah and Tanakh, which would have global ramifications. However, as an ironic result of the Assyrian Empire's vast conquests, Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Fertile Crescent and much of the Near East and parts of Asia Minor, gradually pushing Akkadian, Hebrew, Phoenician-Canaanite, and several other languages to extinction, although Hebrew and Akkadian remained in use as liturgical languages, Hebrew in particular developing a substantial literature. Ethiopian Semitic is attested by the 9th century BC, with the earliest proto-Ge'ez inscriptions of the kingdom of D'mt using the South Arabian alphabet.Fattovich, Rodolfo, "Akkälä Guzay" in Uhlig, Siegbert, ed. Encyclopaedia Aethiopica: A-C. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz KG, 2003, p. 169.   Syriac, an Assyrian Mesopotamian descendant of Aramaic used in North Eastern Syria, Assyria (Assuristan) and Mesopotamia, rose to importance as a literary language of early Christianity in the 3rd to 5th centuries and continued into the early Arab Islamic era. With the emergence of Islam in the 7th century, the ascendancy of Aramaic was seriously undermined by the Arab conquests, which made another Semitic language — Arabic — the official language of an empire stretching from Spain to Central Asia.  With the patronage of the caliphs and the prestige of its liturgical status, it rapidly became one of the world's main literary languages. Its spread among the masses took much longer, however, as many (although not all) of the native populations outside the Arabian Peninsula only gradually abandoned their languages in favour of Arabic. As Bedouin tribes settled in conquered areas, it became the main language of not only central Arabia, but also Yemen,Nebes, Norbert, "Epigraphic South Arabian," in von Uhlig, Siegbert, Encyclopaedia Aethiopica (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2005), pps.335. the Fertile Crescent, and Egypt. Most of the Maghreb (Northwest Africa) followed, particularly in the wake of the Banu Hilal's incursion in the 11th century, and Arabic became the native language of many inhabitants of Spain. After the collapse of the Nubian kingdom of Dongola in the 14th century, Arabic began to spread south of Egypt; soon after, the Beni Ḥassān brought Arabization to Mauritania. Meanwhile, Semitic languages were diversifying in Ethiopia and Eritrea, where, under heavy Cushitic influence, they split into a number of languages, including Amharic and Tigrinya. With the expansion of Ethiopia under the Solomonic dynasty, Amharic, previously a minor local language, spread throughout much of the country, replacing both Semitic (such as Gafat) and non-Semitic (such as Weyto) languages, and replacing Ge'ez as the principal literary language (though Ge'ez remains the liturgical language for Christians in the region); this spread continues to this day, with Qimant set to disappear in another generation.  Arabic languages are the native languages of majorities from Mauritania to Oman, and from Iraq to the Sudan. Classical Arabic is the language of the Qur'an, it is also studied widely in the non-Arabic-speaking Muslim world. The Maltese language is genetically a descendant of the extinct Sicilian Arabic dialect. The Maltese alphabet is based on the Latin script with the addition of some letters with diacritic marks and digraphs. Maltese is the only Semitic official language of a nation state within the European Union. Wildly successful as second languages far beyond their numbers of contemporary first-language speakers, a few Semitic languages today are the base of the sacred literature of some of the world's great religions, including Islam (Arabic), Judaism (Hebrew and Aramaic), and Syriac and Ethiopian Christianity (Aramaic/Syriac and Ge'ez).  Millions learn these as a second language (or an archaic version of their modern tongues):  many Muslims learn to read and recite Classical Arabic, the language of the Qur'an, and many Jews all over the world outside of Israel with other first languages speak and study Hebrew, the language of the Torah, Midrash, and other Jewish scriptures. Ethnic Assyrian followers of The Assyrian Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church, Ancient Church of the East and some Syriac Orthodox Christians, both speak Mesopotamian eastern Aramaic and use it also as a liturgical tongue. The language is also used liturgically by the primarily Arabic-speaking followers of the Maronite, Syriac Catholic Church and some Melkite Christians. Arabic itself is the main liturgical language of Byzantine-rite Orthodox Christians in the Middle East, who compose the patriarchates of Antioch, Jerusalem and Alexandria. Mandaic&nbsp;— another dialect of Aramaic&nbsp;— is both spoken and used as a liturgical language by followers of the Mandaean faith. Despite the ascendancy of Arabic in the Middle East, other Semitic languages still exist. Hebrew, long extinct as a colloquial language and in use only in Jewish literary, intellectual, and liturgical activity, was revived in spoken form at the end of the 19th century. It has become the main language of Israel, while remaining the language of liturgy and religious scholarship of Jews worldwide. Several smaller ethnic groups, in particular the ethnic Assyrians, Kurdish Jews, and Gnostic Mandeans, continue to speak and write Mesopotamian Aramaic dialects (especially Neo-Aramaic, descended from Syriac) in those areas roughly corresponding to Kurdistan (northern Iraq, northeast Syria, south eastern Turkey and northwestern Iran) and the Caucasus. These dialects still contain a number of Akkadian loan words and have more structural commonality with the Akkadian language than Western Aramaic. Syriac language itself, a descendant of Eastern Aramaic languages (Mesopotamian Old Aramaic), is used also liturgically by the Syriac Christians throughout the area. In Arab-dominated Yemen and Oman, on the southern rim of the Arabian Peninsula, a few tribes continue to speak Modern South Arabian languages such as Mahri and Soqotri. These languages differ greatly from both the surrounding Arabic dialects and from the (unrelated but previously thought to be related) languages of the Old South Arabian inscriptions. Historically linked to the peninsular homeland of the Old South Arabian languages, Ethiopia and Eritrea contain a substantial number of Semitic languages; the most widely spoken are Amharic in Ethiopia, Tigre in Eritrea, and Tigrinya in both.  Amharic is the official language of Ethiopia. Tigrinya is a working language in Eritrea. Tigre is spoken by over one million people in the northern and central Eritrean lowlands and parts of eastern Sudan. A number of Gurage languages are spoken by populations in the semi-mountainous region of southwest Ethiopia, while Harari is restricted to the city of Harar. Ge'ez remains the liturgical language for certain groups of Christians in Ethiopia and in Eritrea. The phonologies of the attested Semitic languages are presented here from a comparative point of view. See Proto-Semitic language#Phonology for details on the phonological reconstruction of Proto-Semitic used in this article. This comparative approach is natural for the consonants, as sound correspondences among the consonants of the Semitic languages are very straightforward for a family of its time depth; for the vowels there are more subtleties. Each Proto-Semitic phoneme was reconstructed to explain a certain regular sound correspondence between various Semitic languages. Note that Latin letter values (italicized) for extinct languages are a question of transcription; the exact pronunciation is not recorded. Most of the attested languages have merged a number of the reconstructed original fricatives, though South Arabian retains all fourteen (and has added a fifteenth from *p > f). In Aramaic and Hebrew, all non-emphatic stops occurring singly after a vowel were softened to fricatives, leading to an alternation that was often later phonemicized as a result of the loss of gemination. In languages exhibiting pharyngealization of emphatics, the original velar emphatic has rather developed to a uvular stop . Notes: In addition to those in the table, Modern Hebrew has introduced the new phonemes  through borrowings. The following table shows the development of the various fricatives in Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic through cognate words: Proto-Semitic vowels are, in general, harder to deduce due to the templatic nature of Semitic languages. The history of vowel changes in the languages makes drawing up a complete table of correspondences impossible, so only the most common reflexes can be given: See table at Proto-Afroasiatic language#Consonant correspondences. The Semitic languages share a number of grammatical features, although variation – both between separate languages, and within the languages themselves – has naturally occurred over time. The reconstructed default word order in Proto-Semitic is verb–subject–object (VSO), possessed–possessor (NG), and noun–adjective (NA). This was still the case in Classical Arabic and Biblical Hebrew, e.g. Classical Arabic ra'ā muħammadun farīdan. (literally "saw Muhammad Farid", Muhammad saw Farid). In the modern Arabic vernaculars, however, as well as sometimes in Modern Standard Arabic (the modern literary language based on Classical Arabic) and Modern Hebrew, the classical VSO order has given way to SVO. Modern Ethiopian Semitic languages follow a different word order: SOV, possessor–possessed, and adjective–noun; however, the oldest attested Ethiopian Semitic language, Ge'ez, was VSO, possessed–possessor, and noun–adjective.Approaches to Language Typology by Masayoshi Shibatani and Theodora Bynon, page 157 Akkadian was also predominantly SOV. The proto-Semitic three-case system (nominative, accusative and genitive) with differing vowel endings (-u, -a -i), fully preserved in Qur'anic Arabic (see ʾIʿrab), Akkadian and Ugaritic, has disappeared everywhere in the many colloquial forms of Semitic languages. Modern Standard Arabic maintains such case distinctions, although they are often lost in free speech (due to colloquial influence). An accusative ending -n is preserved in Ethiopian Semitic. "In the historically attested Semitic languages, the endings of the singular noun-flexions survive, as is well known, only partially: in Akkadian and Arabic and Ugaritic and, limited to the accusative, in Ethiopic. The archaic Samalian dialect of Old Aramaic reflects a case distinction in the plural between nominative -ū and oblique -ī (compare the same distinction in Classical Arabic). Additionally, Semitic nouns and adjectives had a category of state, the indefinite state being expressed by nunation. Semitic languages originally had three grammatical numbers: singular, dual, and plural. Classical Arabic still has a mandatory dual (i.e. it must be used in all circumstances when referring to two entities), marked on nouns, verbs, adjectives and pronouns. Many contemporary dialects of Arabic still have a dual, as in the name for the nation of Bahrain (baħr "sea" + -ayn "two"), although it is marked only on nouns. It also occurs in Hebrew in a few nouns (šana means "one year", šnatayim means "two years", and šanim means "years"), but for those it is obligatory. The curious phenomenon of broken plurals – e.g. in Arabic, sadd "one dam" vs. sudūd "dams" – found most profusely in the languages of Arabia and Ethiopia, may be partly of proto-Semitic origin, and partly elaborated from simpler origins. All Semitic languages show two quite distinct styles of morphology used for conjugating verbs. Suffix conjugations take suffixes indicating the person, number and gender of the subject, which bear some resemblance to the pronominal suffixes used to indicate direct objects on verbs ("I saw him") and possession on nouns ("his dog"). So-called prefix conjugations actually takes both prefixes and suffixes, with the prefixes primarily indicating person (and sometimes number and/or gender), while the suffixes (which are completely different from those used in the suffix conjugation) indicate number and gender whenever the prefix does not mark this. The prefix conjugation is noted for a particular pattern of  prefixes where (1) a t- prefix is used in the singular to mark the second person and third-person feminine, while a y- prefix marks the third-person masculine; and (2) identical words are used for second-person masculine and third-person feminine singular. The prefix conjugation is extremely old, with clear analogues in nearly all the families of Afroasiatic languages (i.e. at least 10,000 years old). The table on the right shows examples of the prefix and suffix conjugations in Classical Arabic, which has forms that are close to Proto-Semitic. In Proto-Semitic, as still largely reflected in East Semitic, prefix conjugations are used both for the past and the non-past, with different vocalizations. Cf. Akkadian niprus "we decided" (preterite), niptaras "we have decided" (perfect), niparras "we decide" (non-past or imperfect), vs. suffix-conjugated parsānu "we are/were/will be deciding" (stative). Some of these features, e.g. gemination indicating the non-past/imperfect, are generally attributed to Afroasiatic. According to Hetzron,Robert Hetzron. "Biblical Hebrew" in The World's Major Languages. Proto-Semitic had an additional form, the jussive, which was distinguished from the preterite only by the position of stress: the jussive had final stress while the preterite had non-final (retracted) stress. The West Semitic languages significantly reshaped the system. The most substantial changes occurred in the Central Semitic languages (the ancestors of modern Hebrew, Arabic and Aramaic). Essentially, the old prefix-conjugated jussive and/or preterite became a new non-past (or imperfect), while the stative became a new past (or perfect), and the old prefix-conjugated non-past (or imperfect) with gemination was discarded. New suffixes were used to mark different moods in the non-past, e.g. Classical Arabic -u (indicative), -a (subjunctive), vs no suffix (jussive). (It is not generally agreed whether the systems of the various Semitic languages are better interpreted in terms of tense, i.e. past vs. non-past, or aspect, i.e. perfect vs. imperfect.) However, in Hebrew, elements of the old system survived alongside the new system for a while, in forms known as the waw-consecutive and marked with a prefixed w-. The South Semitic languages show a system somewhere between the East and Central Semitic languages. Later languages show further developments. In the modern varieties of Arabic, for example, the old mood suffixes were dropped, and new mood prefixes developed (e.g. bi- for indicative vs. no prefix for subjunctive in many varieties). In the extreme case of Neo-Aramaic, the verb conjugations have been entirely reworked under Iranian influence.  All Semitic languages exhibit a unique pattern of stems consisting typically of "triliteral", or 3-consonant consonantal roots (2- and 4-consonant roots also exist), from which nouns, adjectives, and verbs are formed in various ways: e.g. by inserting vowels, doubling consonants, lengthening vowels, and/or adding prefixes, suffixes, or infixes. For instance, the root k-t-b, (dealing with "writing" generally) yields in Arabic: kataba كَتَبَ or كتب "he wrote" (masculine) katabat كَتَبَت or كتبت "she wrote" (feminine) katabtu كَتَبْتُ or كتبت "I wrote" (f and m) kutiba كُتِبَ or كتب "it was written" (masculine) kutibat كُتِبَت or كتبت "it was written" (feminine) katabū كَتَبُوا or كتبوا "they wrote" (masculine) katabna كَتَبْنَ or كتبن "they wrote" (feminine) katabnā كَتَبْنَا or كتبنا "we wrote" (f and m) yaktub(u) يَكْتُب or يكتب "he writes" (masculine) taktub(u) تَكْتُب or تكتب "she writes" (feminine) naktub(u) نَكْتُب or نكتب "we write" (f and m) aktub(u) أَكْتُب or أكتب "I write" (f and m) yuktab(u) يُكْتَب or يكتب "being written" (masculine) tuktab(u) تُكتَب or تكتب "being written" (feminine) yaktubūn(a) يَكْتُبُونَ or يكتبون "they write" (masculine) yaktubna يَكْتُبْنَ or يكتبن "they write" (feminine) taktubna تَكْتُبْنَ or تكتبن "you write" (feminine) yaktubān(i) يَكْتُبَانِ or يكتبان "they both write" (masculine) (for 2 males) taktubān(i) تَكْتُبَانِ or تكتبان "they both write" (feminine) (for 2 females) kātaba كاتَبَ or كاتب "he exchanged letters (with sb.)" yukātib(u) ##### or يكاتب "he exchanges (with sb.)" yatakātabūn(a) يَتَكَاتَبُونَ or يتكاتبون "they write to each other" (masculine) iktataba اِكْتَتَبَ or اكتتب "he is registered" (intransitive) or "he contributed (a money quantity to sth.)" (ditransitive) (the first t is part of a particular verbal transfix, not part of the root) istaktaba اِسْتَكْتَبَ or استكتب "to cause to write (sth.)" kitāb كِتَاب or كتاب "book" (the hyphen shows end of stem before various case endings) kutub كُتُب or كتب "books" (plural) kutayyib كُتَيِّب or كتيب "booklet" (diminutive) kitābat كِتَابَة or كتابة "writing" kātib كاتِب or كاتب "writer" (masculine) kātibat كاتِبة or كاتبة "writer" (feminine) kātibūn(a) كاتِبونَ or كاتبون "writers" (masculine) kātibāt كاتِبات or كاتبات "writers" (feminine) kuttāb كُتاب or كتاب "writers" (broken plural) katabat كَتَبَة or كتبة "clerks" (broken plural) maktab مَكتَب or مكتب "desk" or "office" makātib مَكاتِب or مكاتب "desks" or "offices" maktabat مَكتَبة or مكتبة "library" or "bookshop" maktūb مَكتوب or مكتوب "written" (participle) or "postal letter" (noun) katībat كَتيبة or كتيبة "squadron" or "document" katā’ib كَتائِب or كتائب "squadrons" or "documents" iktitāb اِكتِتاب or اكتتاب "registration" or "contribution of funds" muktatib مُكتَتِب or مكتتب "subscription" istiktāb اِستِكتاب or استكتاب "causing to write" and the same root in Hebrew:  כתבתי "I wrote"  כתבת "you (m) wrote"  כתב "he wrote"  כתב "reporter" (m)  כתבת "reporter" (f)  כתבה "article" (plural  כתבות)  מכתב "postal letter" (plural  מכתבים)  מכתבה "writing desk" (plural  מכתבות)  כתובת "address" (plural  כתובות)  כתב "handwriting"  כתוב "written" (f  כתובה)  הכתיב "he dictated" (f  הכתיבה)  התכתב "he corresponded (f  התכתבה)  נכתב "it was written" (m)  נכתבה "it was written" (f)  כתיב "spelling" (m)  תכתיב "prescript" (m)  מכתב "addressee" ( מכתבת f)  כתובה "ketubah (a Jewish marriage contract)" (f) In Tigrinya and Amharic, this root survives only in the noun kitab, meaning "amulet", and the verb "to vaccinate". Ethiopic-derived languages use different roots for things that have to do with writing (and in some cases counting)  are used.  This roots also exists in other Semitic  languages like (Hebrew: sep̄er "book", sōp̄er "scribe", mispār "number" and sippūr "story"). (this root also exists in Arabic and is used to form words with a close meaning to "writing", such as ṣaḥāfa "journalism", and ṣaḥīfa "newspaper" or "parchment"). Verbs in other non-Semitic Afroasiatic languages show similar radical patterns, but more usually with biconsonantal roots; e.g. Kabyle afeg means "fly!", while affug means "flight", and yufeg means "he flew" (compare with Hebrew, where hap̄lēḡ means "set sail!", hap̄lāḡā means "a sailing trip", and hip̄līḡ means "he sailed", while the unrelated ʕūp̄, təʕūp̄ā and ʕāp̄ pertain to flight). These are the basic numeral stems without feminine suffixes. Note that in most older Semitic languages, the forms of the numerals from 3 to 10 exhibit gender polarity (also called "chiastic concord" or reverse agreement), i.e. if the counted noun is masculine, the numeral would be feminine and vice versa. Some early Semitic languages are speculated to have had weak ergative features.. Due to the Semitic languages' common origin, they share many words and roots. Others differ. For example: Sometimes, certain roots differ in meaning from one Semitic language to another. For example, the root  in Arabic has the meaning of "white" as well as "egg", whereas in Hebrew it only means "egg". The root  means "milk" in Arabic, but the color "white" in Hebrew. The root  means "meat" in Arabic, but "bread" in Hebrew and "cow" in Ethiopian Semitic; the original meaning was most probably "food". The word medina (root: m-d-n) has the meaning of "metropolis" in Amharic and "city" in Arabic and Hebrew, but in Modern Hebrew it is usually used as "state". Of course, there is sometimes no relation between the roots. For example, "knowledge" is represented in Hebrew by the root , but in Arabic by the roots  and  and in Ethiosemitic by the roots  and . For more comparative vocabulary lists, see Wiktionary appendices: There are six fairly uncontroversial nodes within the Semitic languages: East Semitic, Northwest Semitic, North Arabian, Old South Arabian (also known as Sayhadic), Modern South Arabian, and Ethiopic. These are generally grouped further, but there is ongoing debate as to which belong together. The classification based on shared innovations given below, established by Robert Hetzron in 1976 and with later emendations by John Huehnergard and Rodgers as summarized in Hetzron 1997, is the most widely accepted today. In particular, several Semiticists still argue for the traditional (partially nonlinguistic) view of Arabic as part of South Semitic, and a few (e.g. Alexander Militarev or the German-Egyptian professor Arafa Hussein Mustafa) see the South Arabian languages as a third branch of Semitic alongside East and West Semitic, rather than as a subgroup of South Semitic. Roger Blench notes that the Gurage languages are highly divergent and wonders whether they might not be a primary branch, reflecting an origin of Afroasiatic in or near Ethiopia. At a lower level, there is still no general agreement on where to draw the line between "languages" and "dialects" – an issue particularly relevant in Arabic, Aramaic, and Gurage – and the strong mutual influences between Arabic dialects render a genetic subclassification of them particularly difficult. The Himyaritic language appears to have been Semitic, but is unclassified due to insufficient data. The following is a list of ancient and modern Semitic-speaking peoples:   Proto-Semitic IPA Akkadian Ugaritic Phoenician Hebrew ModernHebrew Aramaic Arabic1 Ge'ez ModernSouth Arabian ב /6 ב /6 ب በ ד /6 ד /6 د ደ ג /6 ג /6 ج  1 ገ פ /6 פ /6 ف ፈ ת /6 ת /6 ت ተ כ /6 כ /6 ك ከ ט ט ط   ጠ ק ק ق ቀ  >  ז 4/ ذ   ዘ  /  ז ز שׁ 4/ ث   ሰ שׁ س  /  שׂ2 2 4/ ش   ሠ  /  ס ס س ሰ  /   >  צ 4/ ظ   ጸ  /  צ ص    /  4/ ض  1 ፀ – , ע3 3 4/ غ   ዐ -5 ע ع   – א א ء   አ ח3 3 4/ خ   ኀ -5 ח ح   ሐ – ה ה ه ሀ מ מ م መ נ נר ن ነ ר ר ر ረ ל ל ل ለ 7 7 וי 7 וי 7 و ወ י י ي   የ Proto-Semitic IPA Akkadian Ugaritic Phoenician Hebrew Modern Hebrew Aramaic Arabic Ge'ez ModernSouth Arabian Proto-Semitic Hebrew Aramaic Arabic Examples Hebrew Aramaic Arabic meaning  *ḏ  ז  ד  ذ זהב  זָכָר דהב  דכרא ذهب  ذَكَر 'gold'  'male' 1 *z  ז  ز מאזנים  זמן מאזנין  זמן موازين  زمن 'scale'  'time'  *š  שׁ  שׁ  س שׁנה  שלום שׁנה  שלם سنة  سلام 'year'  'peace'  *ṯ  ת  ث שלוש  שתים תלת  תרין ثلاثة  اثنان 'three'  'two' 1 *ṱ 1 צ  ט  ظ צל  צהרים טלה  טהרא ظل  ظهر 'shadow'  'noon' 1 *ṣ́  ض ארץ  צחק ארע  עחק أرض  ضحك 'land'  'laughed' 1 *ṣ  צ  ص צרח  צבר צרח  צבר صرخ  صبر 'shout'  'water melon like plant'  *ḫ  ח  ח  خ חֲמִשָּׁה  צרח חַמְשָׁה  צרח خمسة  صرخ 'five'  'shout'  *ḥ  ح מלח  חלום מלח  חלם ملح  حلم 'salt'  'dream'  *ġ  ע  ע  غ עורב  מערב ערב  מערב غراب  غرب 'raven'  'west'  *ʻ  ع עבד  שבע עבד  שבע عبد  سبعة 'slave'  'seven'  *ś  שׂ  שׂ  ش עשׂר עשׂר عشر 'ten' pS Arabic Aramaic Hebrew Ge'ez Akkadian Classical Modern usually4 /_C.ˈV /ˈ_.1 /ˈ_Cː2 /ˈ_C.C3 a a a ə ā a ɛ a a, e, ē5 i i e, i,WSyr. ɛ ə ē e ɛ, e ə i u u u, o ə ō o o ə, ʷə6 u ā ā ā ōsee Canaanite shift ā ā, ē ī ī ī ī ī ī ū ū ū ū ū ū ay ē, ay BA, JA ay(i), ē,WSyr. ay/ī & ay/ē ayi, ay ay, ē ī aw ō, aw ō,WSyr. aw/ū ō,pausal ˈāwɛ ō ū Past PresentIndicative Singular 1st katab ktub 2nd masculine katab ktub feminine katab ktub 3rd masculine katab ktub feminine katab ktub Dual 2nd masculine & feminine katab ktub 3rd masculine katab ktub feminine katab ktub Plural 1st katab ktub 2nd masculine katab ktub feminine katab ktub 3rd masculine katab ktub feminine katab ktub English Proto-Semitic Akkadian Arabic Ge'ez Hebrew Aramaic standard vernaculars I You (sg., masc.) , int, (i)nta You (sg., fem.)  (i)nti,intch He She We Ye (dual) They (dual) Ye (pl., masc.) , (i)ntūma Ye (pl., fem.) They (masc.) , hūma They (fem.) English Proto-SemiticWeninger, Stefan (2011). "Reconstructive Morphology". In Semitic languages: an international handbook, Stefan Weninger, ed. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. P. 166. IPA Arabic Hebrew Tigrinya Sabaean One Two  (nom.),  (obl.),   (nom.),  (obj.), fem.  , fem.  Three  > . This root underwent regressive assimilation. This parallels the non-adjacent assimilation of *ś... > *š...š in proto-Canaanite or proto-North-West-Semitic in the roots *śam?š > *šamš 'sun' and *śur?š > *šurš 'root'.(Dolgopolsky pp.61–62.) The form  appears in most languages (e.g. Aramaic, Arabic, Ugaritic), but the original form  appears in the South Arabian languages, and a form with s  fem.   (Ge'ez śälas) Four fem.  Five fem.  Six . This root was also assimilated in various ways. For example, Hebrew reflects , with total assimilation; Arabic reflects  in cardinal numerals, but less assimilated  in ordinal numerals. Epigraphic South Arabian reflects original ; Ugaritic has a form , in which the  has been assimilated throughout the root.  (ordinal ) fem.  Seven fem.  Eight fem.  Nine fem.  Ten fem.  English Proto-Semitic Akkadian Arabic Aramaic Hebrew Ge'ez Mehri Maltese father heart house peace tongue water Arabic pronunciation is largely based on Modern Standard Arabic which differes from that of reconstructed Qur'anic Arabic of the 7th and 8th centuries CE. Proto-Semitic  was still pronounced as  in Biblical Hebrew, but no letter was available in the Phoenician alphabet, so the letter ש did double duty, representing both  and . Later on, however,  merged with , but the old spelling was largely retained, and the two pronunciations of ש were distinguished graphically in Tiberian Hebrew as שׁ  vs. שׂ    (Also note that due to begadkefat spirantization, which occurred after this merger, OAm. t > ṯ and d > ḏ in some positions, so that PS *t,ṯ and *d, ḏ may be realized as either of t, ṯ and d, ḏ respectively.) The sounds  and  were always represented using the pharyngeal letters  , but they are distinguished from the pharyngeals in the Demotic-script papyrus Amherst 63, written about 200 BC.. This suggests that these sounds, too, were distinguished in Old Aramaic language, but written using the same letters as they later merged with. The earlier pharyngeals can be distinguished in Akkadian from the zero reflexes of *h, *ʔ by e-coloring adjacent *a, e.g. pS *ˈbaʕal-um 'owner, lord' > Akk. bēlu(m).Dolgopolsky 1999, p. 35. Hebrew and Aramaic underwent begadkefat spirantization at a certain point, whereby the stop sounds  were softened to the corresponding fricatives  (written ḇ ḡ ḏ ḵ p̄ ṯ) when occurring after a vowel and not geminated. This change probably happened after the original Old Aramaic phonemes  disappeared in the 7th century&nbsp;BC, and most likely occurred after the loss of Hebrew  c. 200&nbsp;BC.According to the generally accepted view, it is unlikely that begadkefat spirantization occurred before the merger of  and , or else  and  would have to be contrastive, which is cross-linguistically rare. However, Blau argues that it is possible that lenited  and  could coexist even if pronounced identically, since one would be recognized as an alternating allophone (as apparently is the case in Nestorian Syriac). See . It is known to have occurred in Hebrew by the 2nd century. After a certain point this alternation became contrastive in word-medial and final position (though bearing low functional load), but in word-initial position they remained allophonic. In Modern Hebrew, the distinction has a higher functional load due to the loss of gemination, although only the three fricatives  are still preserved (the fricative  is pronounced  in modern Hebrew). (The others are pronounced like the corresponding stops, apparently under the influence of later non-native speakers whose native European tongues lacked the sounds  as phonemes.) In the Northwest Semitic languages,  became  at the beginning of a word, e.g. Hebrew yeled "boy"  In Assyrian Neo-Aramaic,  is nonexistent. In general cases, the language would lack pharyngeal fricative  (as heard in Ayin). However though, /ʕ/ is retained in educational speech, especially among Assyrian priests.Brock, Sebastian (2006). An Introduction to Syriac Studies. Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press. ISBN 1-59333-349-8. possibly affricated (/dz/ /tɬʼ/ /ʦʼ/ /tθʼ/ /tɬ/) in a stressed open syllable in a stressed closed syllable before a geminate in a stressed closed syllable before a consonant cluster when the proto-Semitic stressed vowel remained stressed pS *a,*ā > Akk. e,ē in the neighborhood of pS  and before r. I.e. pS  > Ge'ez  / _u List of Proto-Semitic stems Swadesh lists for Afro-Asiatic languages East Semitic Central Semitic Northwest Semitic Arabic South Semitic Western: Ethiopic and Old South Arabian Eastern: Modern South Arabian Mandaeans Akkadians (Assyrians/Babylonians)&nbsp;— migrated into Mesopotamia in the 4th millennium BC and amalgamate with non-Semitic Mesopotamian (Sumerian) populations into the Assyrians and Babylonians of the Late Bronze Age. The remnants of these people became the modern Assyrians (also known as Chaldo-Assyrians) of Iraq, Iran, south eastern Turkey and northeast Syria. Eblaites&nbsp;— 23rd century BC Chaldeans&nbsp;— appeared in southern Mesopotamia c. 1000 BC and eventually disappeared into the general Babylonian population. Aramaeans&nbsp;— 16th to 8th centuries BC / Akhlames (Ahlamu) 14th century BC. Mhallami&nbsp;– Tiny minority of Syriac-Arameans who converted to secular Islam but retained Syriac identity Ugarites, 14th to 12th centuries BC Suteans&nbsp;– 14th century BC Canaanite-speaking nations of the early Iron Age: Amorites&nbsp;— 20th century BC Ammonites Edomites Amalekites Hebrews/Israelites&nbsp;— founded the nation of Israel which later split into the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The remnants of these people became the Jews and the Samaritans. Moabites Phoenicians/Carthaginians&nbsp;— founded Mediterranean colonies including Tyre, Sidon and Carthage. The remnants of these people became the modern inhabitants of Lebanon. Old South Arabian-speaking peoples Sabaeans of Yemen&nbsp;— 9th to 1st centuries BC Shebans Ubarites Maganites Ethio-Semitic-speaking peoples Aksumites&nbsp;— 4th century BC to 7th century AD Arabs, Old North Arabian-speaking Bedouins Gindibu's Arabs 9th century BC Qedarites tribe 7th-century BC descendants of the Ismaelites and descendant of the Patriarch Ismaels son Kedar Lihyanites&nbsp;— 6th to 1st centuries BC Thamud people&nbsp;— 2nd to 5th centuries AD Ghassanids&nbsp;— 3rd to 7th centuries AD Nabataeans&nbsp;— Mix of Aramaiac and Arabic speakers Maltese Proto-Semitic language Middle Bronze Age alphabets Bennett, Patrick R. 1998. Comparative Semitic Linguistics: A Manual. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 1-57506-021-3. Bergsträsser, Gotthelf. 1995. Introduction to the Semitic Languages: Text Specimens and Grammatical Sketches. Translated by Peter T. Daniels. Winona Lake, Ind. : Eisenbrauns. ISBN 0-931464-10-2. Garbini, Giovanni. 1984. Le lingue semitiche: studi di storia linguistica. Naples: Istituto Orientale. Garbini, Giovanni; Durand, Olivier. 1995. Introduzione alle lingue semitiche. Paideia: Brescia 1995. Goldenberg, Gideon. 2013. Semitic Languages: Features, Structures, Relations, Processes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-964491-9. Hetzron, Robert (ed.). 1997. The Semitic Languages. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-05767-1. (For family tree, see p.&nbsp;7). Lipinski, Edward. 2001. Semitic Languages: Outlines of a Comparative Grammar. 2nd ed. Leuven: Orientalia Lovanensia Analecta. ISBN 90-429-0815-7 Mustafa, Arafa Hussein. 1974. Analytical study of phrases and sentences in epic texts of Ugarit. (German title: Untersuchungen zu Satztypen in den epischen Texten von Ugarit). Dissertation. Halle-Wittenberg: Martin-Luther-University. Moscati, Sabatino. 1969. An introduction to the comparative grammar of the Semitic languages: phonology and morphology. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. Ullendorff, Edward. 1955. The Semitic languages of Ethiopia: a comparative phonology. London: Taylor's (Foreign) Press. Wright, William; Smith, William Robertson. 1890. Lectures on the comparative grammar of the Semitic languages. Cambridge University Press 1890. [2002 edition: ISBN 1-931956-12-X] Semitic genealogical tree (as well as the Afroasiatic one), presented by Alexander Militarev at his talk "Genealogical classification of Afro-Asiatic languages according to the latest data" (at the conference on the 70th anniversary of Vladislav Illich-Svitych, Moscow, 2004; short annotations of the talks given there  Pattern-and-root inflectional morphology: the Arabic broken plural Ancient snake spell in Egyptian pyramid may be oldest Semitic inscription Swadesh vocabulary lists of Semitic languages (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix)
