     Shandong (), is a coastal province of the People's Republic of China, and is part of the East China region. Shandong has played a major role in Chinese history from the beginning of Chinese civilization along the lower reaches of the Yellow River and served as a pivotal cultural and religious site for Taoism, Chinese Buddhism, and Confucianism. Shandong's Mount Tai is the most revered mountain of Taoism and one of the world's sites with the longest history of continuous religious worship. The Buddhist temples in the mountains to the south of the provincial capital of Jinan were once among the foremost Buddhist sites in China. The city of Qufu is the birthplace of Confucius, and was later established as the center of Confucianism. Shandong's location at the intersection of ancient as well as modern north–south and east–west trading routes have helped to establish it as an economic center. After a period of political instability and economic hardship that began in the late 19th century, Shandong has emerged as one of the most populous (95,793,065 inhabitants at the 2010 Census) and most affluent provinces in the People's Republic of China with a GDP of  in 2014, or USD$967 billion, making it China's third wealthiest province. Individually, the two Chinese characters in the name "Shandong" mean "mountain" (山) and "east" (东). Shandong could hence be translated literally as "east of the mountains" and refers to the province's location to the east of the Taihang Mountains. Origin of the Names of China's Provinces, People's Daily Online. A common nickname for Shandong is Qílǔ (), after the States of Qi and Lu that existed in the area during the Spring and Autumn Period. Whereas the State of Qi was a major power of its era, the State of Lu played only a minor role in the politics of its time. Lu, however, became renowned for being the home of Confucius and hence its cultural influence came to eclipse that of the State of Qi. The cultural dominance of the State of Lu heritage is reflected in the official abbreviation for Shandong which is "鲁" (). English speakers in the 19th century called the province Shan-tung. The province is located on the eastern edge of the North China Plain and in the lower reaches of the Yellow River (Huang He) and extends out to sea in the form of the Shandong Peninsula. Shandong borders the Bohai Sea to the north, Hebei to the northwest, Henan to the west, Jiangsu to the south, and the Yellow Sea to the southeast; it also shares a very short border with Anhui, between Henan and Jiangsu.   With its location on the eastern edge of the North China Plain, Shandong was home to a succession of Neolithic cultures for millennia, including the Houli culture (6500–5500 BCE), the Beixin culture (5300–4100 BCE), the Dawenkou culture (4100–2600 BCE), the Longshan culture (3000–2000 BCE), and the Yueshi culture (1900–1500 BCE). The earliest dynasties (the Shang dynasty and Zhou dynasty) exerted varying degrees of control over western Shandong, while eastern Shandong was inhabited by the Dongyi peoples who were considered "barbarians". Over subsequent centuries, the Dongyi were eventually sinicized. During the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period, regional states became increasingly powerful. At this time, Shandong was home to two major states: the state of Qi at Linzi and the state of Lu at Qufu. Lu is noted for being the home of Confucius. The state was, however, comparatively small, and eventually succumbed to the larger state of Chu from the south. The state of Qi was, on the other hand, was a major power throughout the period. Cities it ruled included Linzi, Jimo (north of modern Qingdao) and Ju. The Qin dynasty conquered Qi and founded the first centralized Chinese state in 221 BCE. The Han dynasty that followed created a number of commanderies supervised by two regions (刺史部) in what is now modern Shandong: Qingzhou () in the north and Yanzhou () in the south. During the division of the Three Kingdoms, Shandong belonged to the Cao Wei, which ruled over northern China. After the Three Kingdoms period, a brief period of unity under the Western Jin dynasty gave way to invasions by nomadic peoples from the north. Northern China, including Shandong, was overrun. Over the next century or so Shandong changed hands several times, falling to the Later Zhao, then Former Yan, then Former Qin, then Later Yan, then Southern Yan, then the Liu Song Dynasty, and finally the Northern Wei Dynasty, the first of the Northern Dynasties during the Northern and Southern Dynasties Period. Shandong stayed with the Northern Dynasties for the rest of this period. In 412 BCE, the Chinese Buddhist monk Faxian landed at Laoshan, on the southern edge of the Shandong peninsula, and proceeded to Qingzhou to edit and translate the scriptures he had brought back from India. The Sui dynasty reestablished unity in 589, and the Tang dynasty (618-907) presided over the next golden age of China. For the earlier part of this period Shandong was ruled as part of Henan Circuit, one of the circuits (a political division). Later on China splintered into warlord factions, resulting in the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. Shandong was part of the Five Dynasties, all based in the north. The Song dynasty reunified China in the late tenth century. In 1996, the discovery of over two hundred buried Buddhist statues at Qingzhou was hailed as a major archaeological find. The statues included early examples of painted figures, and are thought to have been buried due to Emperor Huizong's repression of Buddhism (he favored Taoism). The Song dynasty was forced to cede northern China to the Jurchen Jin dynasty in 1142. Shandong was administered by the Jin as Shandong East Circuit and Shandong West Circuit&nbsp;– the first use of its current name. The modern province of Shandong was created by the Ming dynasty, where it had a more expansive territory including the agricultural part of Liaoning. After the Ming-Qing Transition in 1644, Shandong acquired (more or less) its current borders.  During the nineteenth century, China became increasingly exposed to Western influence, and Shandong, a coastal province, was especially affected. Qingdao was leased to Germany in 1897 and Weihai to Britain in 1898. The rest of Shandong was generally considered to be part of the German sphere of influence. As a result of foreign pressure from the Russian Empire, which had annexed Outer Manchuria by 1860, the Qing dynasty encouraged settlement of Shandong people to what remained of northeast China. Shandong was one of the first places in which the Boxer Rebellion started and became one of the centers of the uprising. In 1899, the Qing general Yuan Shikai was appointed as governor of the province to suppress the uprising. He held the post for 3 years. As a consequence of the First World War, Germany lost Qingdao and its sphere of influence in Shandong. The Treaty of Versailles transferred the German concessions in Shandong to Japan instead of restoring Chinese sovereignty over the area. Popular dissatisfaction with this outcome, referred to as the Shandong Problem, led to the May Fourth Movement. Finally, Shandong reverted to Chinese control in 1922 after mediation by the United States during the Washington Naval Conference. Weihai followed in 1930. The return of control over Shandong fell into the Warlord era of the Republic of China. Shandong was handed over to the Zhili clique of warlords, but after the Second Zhili-Fengtian War of 1924, the northeast China-based Fengtian clique took over. In April 1925, the Fengtian clique installed the warlord Zhang Zongchang, nicknamed the "Dogmeat General", as military governor of Shandong Province. Time dubbed him China's "basest warlord"."CHINA: Basest War Lord" He ruled over the province until 1928, when he was ousted in the wake of the Northern Expedition. He was succeeded by Han Fuju, who was loyal to the warlord Feng Yuxiang but later switched his allegiance to the Nanjing government headed by Chiang Kai-Shek. Han Fuju also ousted the warlord Liu Zhennian, nicknamed the "King of Shandong East", who ruled eastern Shandong Province, hence unifying the province under his rule. In 1937 Japan began its invasion of China proper in the Second Sino-Japanese War, which would eventually become part of the Pacific theatre of the Second World War. Han Fuju was made Deputy Commander in Chief of the 5th War Area and put in charge defending the lower Yellow River valley. However, he abandoned his base in Jinan when the Japanese crossed the Yellow River. He was executed for not following orders shortly thereafter. Shandong was occupied in its entirety by Japan, with resistance continuing in the countryside, and was one of the provinces where a scorched earth policy ("Three Alls Policy": "kill all", "burn all", "loot all") was implemented by general Yasuji Okamura. This lasted until the surrender of Japan in 1945. By 1945, communist forces already held some parts of Shandong. Over the next four years of the Chinese Civil War, they expanded their holdings, eventually driving the Kuomintang (government of the Republic of China) out of Shandong by June 1949. The People's Republic of China was founded in October of the same year. Under the new government, parts of western Shandong were initially given to the short-lived Pingyuan Province, but this did not last. Shandong also acquired the Xuzhou and Lianyungang areas from Jiangsu province, but this did not last either. For the most part Shandong has kept the same borders that it has today. In recent years Shandong, especially eastern Shandong, has enjoyed significant economic development, becoming one of the richest provinces of the People's Republic of China.  Shandong is mostly flat in terrain. The northwestern, western, and southwestern parts of the province are all part of the vast North China Plain. The center of the province is more mountainous, with Mount Tai being the most prominent. The east of the province is the hilly Shandong Peninsula extending into the sea; it separates Bohai Sea in the northwest from the Yellow Sea to the east and south. The highest peak of Shandong is the highest peak in the Taishan area: Jade Emperor Peak, with a height of . The Yellow River passes through Shandong's western areas, entering the sea along Shandong's northern coast; in its traversal of Shandong it flows on a levee, higher than the surrounding land, and dividing western Shandong into the Hai He watershed in the north and the Huai He watershed in the south. The Grand Canal of China enters Shandong from the northwest and leaves on the southwest. Weishan Lake is the largest lake of the province. Shandong's coastline is  long. Shandong Peninsula has a rocky coastline with cliffs, bays, and islands; the large Laizhou Bay, the southernmost of the three bays of Bohai Sea, is found to the north, between Dongying and Penglai; Jiaozhou Bay, which is much smaller, is found to the south, next to Qingdao. The Miaodao Islands extend northwards from the northern coast of the peninsula. Shandong has a temperate climate, lying in the transition between the humid subtropical (Cwa under the Köppen climate classification) and humid continental (Köppen Dwa) zones with four distinct seasons. Summers are hot and rainy (except for a few coastal areas), while winters are cold and dry. Average temperatures are  in January and  in July. Annual precipitation is , the vast majority of which occurs during summer, due to monsoonal influences. With Jinan serving as the province's economic and cultural centre, the province's economic prowess has led to the development of modern coastal cities located at Qingdao, Weihai, and Yantai. In addition, Weifang and Zaozhuang are also upstart cities. Shandong is part of the Eastern Block of the North China craton. Beginning in the Mesozoic, Shandong has undergone a crustal thinning that is unusual for a craton and that has reduced the thickness of the crust from  to as little as . Shandong has hence experienced extensive volcanism in the Tertiary. Some geological formations in Shandong are rich in fossils. For example, Zhucheng, which is located in southeastern Shandong, has been the site of many discoveries of dinosaur fossils. A major find of 7,600 dinosaur bones that including tyrannosaurus and ankylosaurus remains was announced in 2008, and is believed to be the largest collection ever found.China finds major dinosaur site    The politics of Shandong is structured in a dual party-government system like all other governing institutions in mainland China. The Governor of Shandong is the highest-ranking official in the People's Government of Shandong. However, in the province's dual party-government governing system, the Governor has less power than the Shandong Communist Party of China Provincial Committee Secretary, colloquially termed the "Shandong CPC Party Chief". This province is third richest in China and maintained close relationship with Japan and South Korea . As of 1832, Shandong was exporting fruits, vegetables, wine, drugs, and deer skin, often heading to Guangzhou in exchange for clothing and fabrics. Shandong ranks first among the provinces in the production of a variety of products, including cotton and wheat as well as precious metals such as gold and diamonds. It also has one of the biggest sapphire deposits in the world.http://www.china-sapphire.com/about1.asp Other important crops include sorghum and maize. Shandong has extensive petroleum deposits as well, especially in the Dongying area in the Yellow River delta, where the Shengli Oil Field (lit. Victory Oilfield) is one of the major oilfields of China. Shandong also produces bromine from underground wells and salt from sea water. It is the largest agricultural exporter in China. Shandong is one of the richer provinces of China, and its economic development focuses on large enterprises with well-known brand names. Shandong is the biggest industrial producer and one of the top manufacturing provinces in China.  Shandong has also benefited from South Korean and Japanese investment and tourism, due to its geographical proximity to those countries.http://www.thechinaperspective.com/topics/province/shandong-province/ The richest part of the province is the Shandong Peninsula, where the city of Qingdao is home to three of the most well-known brand names of China: Tsingtao Beer, Haier and Hisense. In addition, Dongying's oil fields and petroleum industries form an important component of Shandong's economy. Despite the primacy of Shandong's energy sector, the province has also been plagued with problems of inefficiency and ranks as the largest consumer of fossil fuels in all of China. In 2011, the nominal GDP for Shandong was ¥4.50 trillion (US$711 billion), ranking third in the country (behind Guangdong and Jiangsu). Its GDP per capita was ¥42,014 (US$6,365), ranking eighth.  The production of wine is the second largest industry in the Shandong Province, second only to agriculture. Geographically, the southern hills average an elevation of , while the coastal areas remain relatively flat. Most of the soil is loose, well-ventilated, and rich in minerals and organic matter that enable full development of the root systems. Presently, there are more than 140 wineries in the region, mainly distributed in the Nanwang Grape Valley and along the Yan-Peng Sightseeing Highway. The region produced more than 40% of China's grape wine production.http://www.wines-info.com/Newshtml/200812/2282008123011241759.html Main varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Gernischt, Merlot, Riesling and Chardonnay are all at 20 years of age, considered to be the golden stage for these grapes. Most of them maintain an average saccharinity of above 20%. Major producers Founded in 1991, the Jinan High-tech Industrial Development zone was one of the first of its kind approved by the State Council. The zone is located to the east of the city and covers a total planning area of  that is divided into a central area covering , an export processing district of , and an eastern extension area of . Since its foundation, the Jinan High-tech Industrial Development Zone has attracted enterprises as LG, Panasonic, Volvo, and Sanyo. In 2000, it joined the world science and technology association and set up a China-Ukraine High-tech Cooperation Park. The Qilu Software Park became the sister park of Bangalore park of India.RightSite.asia | Jinan High-tech Industrial Development Zone The export processing zone is located in the eastern suburbs of Jinan, to the east of the Jinan High-tech Industrial Development Zone and to  the north of the Jiwang highway. The distances to the Jiqing Highway and the Jinan Airport are  respectively.RightSite.asia | Jinan Export Processing Zone Approved by the State Council in October 1984, Qingdao Economic and Technical Development Zone has a planned of . In 2004 the local GDP is ¥27.51 billion, increased by 28.9%; the total industrial output value is ¥60.6 billion, increased by 31%. There have been 48 projects invested by companies listed among the Global Fortune 500 in the zone. With the fast development of reform and opening-up, Haier, Hisense, Aucma, Sinopec, CSIC, CNOOC, CIMC etc. all locate in the zone.RightSite.asia | Qingdao Economic & Technological Development Area Qingdao Free Trade Zone was established by the State Council in 1992. The zone is  away from Qingdao Liuting Airport. It is also close to Qingdao Qianwan Harbor. At present, more than 40 foreign-invested enterprises have moved in and 2000 projects have been approved. It is one of the special economic areas which enjoys the most favorable investment policies on customs, foreign exchange, foreign trade and taxation in China.RightSite.asia | Qingdao Free Trade Zone Qingdao High-Tech Industrial Development Zone was approved the State Council in 1992. The zone is located close to Qingdao Liuting Airport and Qingdao Harbor. Encouraged industries include electronic information, biotechnology, medicine, new materials, new energy, advanced equipment manufacturing, marine science & technology, national defense technology.RightSite.asia | Qingdao High-tech Industrial Zone Established in August 1995, Weifang Binhai Economic & Technological Development Area (BEDA) is a national economic and technological development area approved by the State Council. Covering an area of , BEDA has a population of 100,000. BEDA possesses a large state-owned industrial land for use with an area of . The land can be transacted conveniently which would guarantee the demand of any project construction and provide broad development space for the enterprises in the area. Continuously, BEDA has been accredited as National Demonstration Zone invigorating the Sea by Science and Technology, National Innovation Base for Rejuvenating Trade through Science and Technology and National Demonstration Eco-Industry Park. Weihai Economic and Technological Development Zone is a state-level development zone approved by the State Council on Oct 21, 1992. The administrative area has an area of , including the programmed area of  and an initial area of . Its nearest port is Weihai Port, and the airport closest to the zone is Wuhai Airport.RightSite.asia | Weihai Economic & Technological Development Zone Weihai Export & Processing Zone (EPZ) was set up by the approval of the State Council on April 27, 2000. Weihai EPZ is located in Weihai Economic & Technological Development Zone with programmed area of . Weihai EPZ belongs to comprehensive export & processing zone. The EPZ is located  to Weihai Airport,  to Weihai Railway Station and  to Weihai Harbor.RightSite.asia | Weihai Export Processing Zone Weihai Torch Hi-Tech Science Park is a state-level development zone approved by the State Council on March 1991. Located in Weihai's northwest zone of culture, education and science, the Park has the total area of , the coastal line of   and 150,000 residents. It is  away from the city center,   away from Weihai Port,  away from Weihai Railway Station,  away from Weihai Airport and  away from Yantai Airport.RightSite.asia | Weihai Torch Hi-Tech Science Park Yantai Economic and Technological Development Area is one of the earliest approved state level economic development zones in China. It now has planned area of  and a population of 115,000. It lies on the tip of the Shandong Peninsula facing the Huanghai Sea. It adjoins to downtown Yantai, merely  away from Yantai Port,  away from Yantai Railway Station, and a 30-minute drive to Yantai International Airport.RightSite.asia | Yantai Economic and Technological Development Area Yantai Export Processing Zone (YTEPZ) is one of the first 15 export processing zones approved by the State Council. The total construction area of YTEPZ is , in which the initial zone covers . After developing for several years, YTEPZ is completely constructed. At present, the infrastructure has been completed, standard workshops of  and bonded warehouses of  have been built up. Up to now, owning perfect investment environment and conditions, YTEPZ has attracted investors both from foreign countries and regions such as Japan, Korea, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Sweden, the United States, Canada, etc. and from the domestic to invest and operate in the zone.RightSite.asia | Yantai Export Processing Zone Shandong is the second most populous province of China, after Guangdong, just slightly ahead of Henan, with a population of more than 95,793,000 at the 2010 Census. Over 99% of Shandong's population is Han Chinese. Minority groups include the Hui and the Manchus. Shandong citizens are also known to have the highest average height of any Chinese province.  The predominant religions in Shandong are Chinese folk religions, Taoist traditions and Chinese Buddhism. According to surveys conducted in 2007 and 2009, 25,28% of the population believes and is involved in cults of ancestors, while 1.21% of the population identifies as Christian, decreasing from 1.30% in 2004. The Christians were 1.89% of the province's population in 1949, the largest proportion in China at that time. According to a survey of the year 2010, Muslims constitute 0.55% of the population of Shandong.Min Junqing. The Present Situation and Characteristics of Contemporary Islam in China. JISMOR, 8. 2010 Islam by province, page 29. Data from: Yang Zongde, Study on Current Muslim Population in China, Jinan Muslim, 2, 2010. The reports didn't give figures for other types of religion; 80.05% of the population may be either irreligious or involved in worship of nature deities, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism and folk religious sects. Shandong is the province where Confucius was born in the year 55 Seven Star Northern Shaolin Praying Mantis Style of Kung fu is also taught in this province.  It is also said that Northern Mantis had originated here and not in the shaolin Temple in the Henan Province which is always stated in books.    Shandong is divided into seventeen prefecture-level divisions: all prefecture-level cities (including two sub-provincial cities): The seventeen prefecture-level divisions of Shandong are subdivided into 137 county-level divisions (51 districts, 28 county-level cities, and 58 counties). Those are in turn divided into 1941 township-level divisions (1223 towns, 293 townships, two ethnic townships, and 423 subdistricts). Mandarin dialects are spoken in Shandong. Linguists classify these dialects into three broad categories: Ji Lu Mandarin spoken in the northwest (as well as in neighbouring Hebei), such as the Jinan dialect; Zhongyuan Mandarin spoken in the southwest (as well as in neighbouring Henan); and Jiao Liao Mandarin spoken in the Shandong Peninsula (as well as the Liaodong Peninsula across the sea), such as the Qingdao dialect. When people speak of the "Shandong dialect" (山東話), it is generally the first or the second that is meant; the Jiao Liao dialects of Shandong are commonly called the "Jiaodong dialect" (膠東話). Shandong cuisine (鲁菜) is one of the eight great traditions of Chinese cuisine. It can be more finely divided into inland Shandong cuisine (e.g. Jinan cuisine); the seafood-centered Jiaodong cuisine in the peninsula; and Confucius's Mansion cuisine, an elaborate tradition originally intended for imperial and other important feasts. Shandong Bangzi and Lüju are popular types of Chinese opera in Shandong; both originated from southwestern Shandong. The Jingjiu Railway (Beijing-Kowloon) and Jinghu Railway (Beijing-Shanghai) are both major arterial railways that pass through the western part of Shandong. The Jingjiu passes through Liaocheng and Heze; the Jinghu passes through Dezhou, Jinan, Tai'an, Yanzhou(the Jinghu high-speed railway will through Qufu). and Tengzhou. The Jiaoji Railway is an important railway of Shandong, linking its two largest cities of Qingdao and Jinan, with the longest history of all. Shandong has one of the densest and highest quality expressway networks among all Chinese provinces. At over , the total length of Shandong's expressways is the highest among the provinces. These National Trunk Highway System (NTHS) expressways pass through or begin in Shandong. Expressways that begin in Shandong are in Bold: In addition there are also many shorter regional expressways within Shandong. The Shandong Peninsula, with its bays and harbours, has many important ports, including Qingdao, Yantai, Weihai, Rizhao,Dongying and Longkou. Many of these ports have historical significance as well, as the sites of former foreign naval bases or historical battles. Ferries link the cities on the north coast of the peninsula with the Liaodong Peninsula, further north across the sea. Important airports include Jinan Yaoqiang Airport and Qingdao Liuting International Airport. Other airports are Dongying Shengli Airport, Jining Qufu Airport, Linyi Shubuling Airport, Weifang Airport, Weihai Dashuibo Airport and Yantai Laishan International Airport. Tourist attractions in Shandong include:   Professional sports teams based in Shandong include: http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2012-12/19/content_16031295.htm    Administrative divisions of Shandong № Division code English name Chinese Pinyin Area in km2 Population 2010 Seat Divisions Districts Counties CL cities &nbsp; 370000 !! Shandong Shāndōng Shěng 157100.00 95,793,065 Jinan 51 58 28 1 !! 370100 !! Jinan 济南市 Jǐnán Shì 8000.80 6,814,000 Shizhong District 6 3 1 2 !! 370200 !! Qingdao 青岛市 Qīngdǎo Shì 11175.30 8,715,100 Shinan District 6 4 17 !! 370300 !! Zibo 淄博市 Zībó Shì 5965.17 4,530,600 Zhangdian District 5 3 16 !! 370400 !! Zaozhuang 枣庄市 Zǎozhuāng Shì 4563.22 3,729,300 Xuecheng District 5 1 5 !! 370500 !! Dongying 东营市 Dōngyíng Shì 7923.26 2,035,300 Dongying District 2 3 15 !! 370600 !! Yantai 烟台市 Yāntái Shì 13746.47 6,968,200 Laishan District 4 1 7 13 !! 370700 !! Weifang 潍坊市 Wéifāng Shì 16143.14 9,086,200 Kuiwen District 4 2 6 7 !! 370800 !! Jining 济宁市 Jǐníng Shì 11186.98 8,081,900 Rencheng District 2 7 2 12 !! 370900 !! Tai'an 泰安市 Tài'ān Shì 7761.83 5,494,200 Taishan District 2 2 2 14 !! 371000 !! Weihai 威海市 Wēihǎi Shì 5796.98 2,804,800 Huancui District 2 2 11 !! 371100 !! Rizhao 日照市 Rìzhào Shì 5347.99 2,801,100 Donggang District 2 2 8 !! 371200 !! Laiwu 莱芜市 Láiwú Shì 2246.21 1,298,500 Laicheng District 2 10 !! 371300 !! Linyi 临沂市 Línyí Shì 17191.21 10,039,400 Lanshan District 3 9 4 !! 371400 !! Dezhou 德州市 Dézhōu Shì 10356.32 5,568,200 Decheng District 2 7 2 9 !! 371500 !! Liaocheng 聊城市 Liáochéng Shì 8714.57 5,789,900 Dongchangfu District 1 6 1 3 !! 371600 !! Binzhou 滨州市 Bīnzhōu Shì 9444.65 3,748,500 Bincheng District 2 5 6 !! 371700 !! Heze 菏泽市 Hézé Shì 12193.85 8,287,800 Mudan District 1 8 Changyu Pioneer Wine Co. China Great Wall Wine Co. Ltd. Jinan High-tech Industrial Development Zone Jinan Export Processing Zone Qingdao Economic & Technological Development Area Qingdao Free Trade Zone Qingdao High-tech Industrial Zone Weifang Binhai Economic & Technological Development Area (BEDA) Weihai Economic & Technological Development Zone Weihai Export Processing Zone Weihai Torch Hi-Tech Science Park Yantai Economic and Technological Development Area Yantai Export Processing Zone Zibo National New & Hi-Tech Industrial Development Zone G2 Jinghu Expressway (Beijing–Shanghai) G3 Jingtai Expressway (Beijing–Taipei, Taiwan) G15 Shenhai Expressway (Shenyang, Liaoning–Haikou, Hainan) G18 Rongwu Expressway (Rongcheng–Wuhai, Inner Mongolia) G20 Qingyin Expressway (Qingdao–Yinchuan, Ningxia) G22 Qinglan Expressway (Qingdao–Lanzhou, Gansu) G25 Changshen Expressway (Changchun, Jilin–Shenzhen, Guangdong) Jinan, the capital city of Shandong since Ming dynasty, renowned for its 72 Famous Springs. Baotu Spring, a culturally significant artesian karst spring, declared as "Number One Spring under the Heaven" (天下第一泉) by the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty. Daming Lake, the largest lake in Jinan, whose water is from the springs of the area. Marco Polo described its beauty in his works. Thousand Buddha Mountain, renowned for its numerous Buddha images which have been carved out of the hill's rock faces or free-standing structures erect since the times of the Sui Dynasty and its Xingguochan Temple. Lingyan Temple, one of the 4 most famous temples (四大名刹) in Tang dynasty, in which there are 11th century Pizhi Pagoda and the Thousand Buddha Hall which houses a Ming Dynasty bronze Buddha statue as well as 40 painted clay statues of life-size luohan from the Song Dynasty. remant of Great Wall of Qi, the oldest existing Great Wall in China, which is built in 685 BCE and stretches from Jinan to Qingdao. Penglai, a town on the north of the Shandong peninsula famed in Taoism. Qingdao (a former German port city), is a beach resort city on the south of the peninsula that has German-era architecture and is also famous for its Tsingtao beer. Ba Da Guan, made up of eight streets named after the eight great military forts of the ancient times. Zhan Qiao, a long strip pier stretches into the sea and was the first wharf at Qingdao. Laoshan, a scenic area and Daoist centre to the east of Qingdao. Qingzhou, an ancient trading and administrative centre with some famous archaeological discoveries. Weihai, a former British port city important in the second Sino-Japanese War has British-era architecture. World Heritage Sites: Temple and Cemetery of Confucius, and the Kong Family Mansion in Qufu Tai Shan, sacred mountain, in Tai'an Shandong Experimental High School (山东省实验中学) Jinan Foreign Language School(济南外国语学校) Senior High School Attached to Shandong Normal University (山东师范大学附属中学) ShengLi NO.1 Senior High school of Dongying (东营市胜利第一中学（原胜利油田第一中学）) Shandong Tai'an No.1 Senior High School (山东省泰安第一中学) 2009 National Games of China Chinese Basketball Association Shandong Lions Qingdao DoubleStar Chinese Football Association Super League Shandong Luneng Chinese Football Association Jia League Qingdao Zhongneng Qingdao Hainiu Major national historical and cultural sites in Shandong Shantung Problem East Asian snowstorms of 2009-2010 East Asian snowstorms of late 2009 Economic profile for Shandong at HKTDC  Shandong Government website   Complete Map of the Seven Coastal Provinces from 1821-1850 Shandong Article Encyclopædia Britannica]
