      Sharia, Islamic sharia or Islamic law ( () for law) is the basic Islamic legal system derived from the religious precepts of Islam, particularly the Quran and the Hadith. The term sharia comes from the Arabic language term sharīʿah, which means a body of moral and religious law derived from religious prophecy, as opposed to human legislation.Rehman, J. (2007), The Sharia, Islamic Family Laws and International Human Rights Law: Examining the Theory and Practice of Polygamy and Talaq, International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family, 21(1), pp 108-127. Sharia deals with many topics, including crime, politics, marriage contracts, trade regulations, religious prescriptions, and economics, as well as personal matters such as sexual intercourse, hygiene, diet, prayer, everyday etiquette and fasting. Adherence to sharia has served as one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Muslim faith historically. In its strictest definition, sharia is considered in Islam as the infallible law of God.Coulson, N. J. (2011), A history of Islamic law, Aldine, ISBN 978-1412818551 There are two primary sources of sharia: the Quran, and the Hadiths (opinions and life example of Muhammad).John L. Esposito, Natana J. DeLong-Bas (2001), Women in Muslim family law, p. 2. Syracuse University Press, ISBN 978-0815629085. Quote: "[...], by the ninth century, the classical theory of law fixed the sources of Islamic law at four: the Quran, the Sunnah of the Prophet, qiyas (analogical reasoning), and ijma (consensus)." For topics and issues not directly addressed in these primary sources, sharia is derived. The derivation differs between the various sects of Islam (Sunni and Shia are the majority), and various jurisprudence schools such as Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i, Hanbali and Jafari. The sharia in these schools is derived hierarchically using one or more of the following guidelines: Ijma (usually the consensus of Muhammad's companions), Qiyas (analogy derived from the primary sources), Istihsan (ruling that serves the interest of Islam in the discretion of Islamic jurists) and Urf (customs). Sharia is a significant source of legislation in many Muslim countries where some countries apply a majority or some of the sharia code, and these include Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Brunei, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Yemen and Mauritania. In these countries, sharia-prescribed punishments such as beheading, flogging and stoning continue to be practiced judicially or extra-judicially. There has been controversy over what some perceive as a movement by various Islamist groups to introduce and implement sharia throughout the world, including in Western countries, but attempts to impose sharia have been accompanied by controversy,Hamann, Katie (December 29, 2009). "Aceh's Sharia Law Still Controversial in Indonesia". Voice of America. Retrieved September 19, 2011. The concept of crime, judicial process, justice and punishment embodied in shari'a is different from that of secular law.Encyclopædia Britannica, see article on Shari'ah (Islamic law), 2006 Scholars describe the word sharia (/ʃɑːˈriːɑː/, also shari'a, šarīʿah) as an archaic Arabic word denoting "pathway to be followed" (analogous to the Hebrew term Halakhah ["The Way to Go"]),Abdal-Haqq, Irshad (2006). Understanding Islamic Law&nbsp;– From Classical to Contemporary (edited by Aminah Beverly McCloud). Chapter 1 Islamic Law&nbsp;– An Overview of its Origin and Elements. AltaMira Press. p. 4. or "path to the water hole". The latter definition comes from the fact that the path to water is the whole way of life in an arid desert environment.Weiss, Bernard G. (1998). The Spirit of Islamic Law. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-8203-1977-3. The etymology of sharia as a "path" or "way" comes from the Quranic verse 45:18: "Then we put thee on the (right) Way of religion so follow thou that (Way), and follow not the desires of those who know not." Malik Ghulam Farid in his Dictionary of the Holy Quran, believes the "Way" in 45:18 (quoted above) derives from shara'a (as prf. 3rd. p.m. sing.), meaning "He ordained". Other forms also appear: shara'u as (prf. 3rd. p.m. plu.), "they decreed (a law)"; and shir'atun (n.) meaning "spiritual law". The Arabic word sharīʿa has origins in the concept of ‘religious law’; the word is commonly used by Arabic-speaking peoples of the Middle East and designates a prophetic religion in its totality. Thus, sharīʿat Mūsā means religious law of Moses (Judaism), sharīʿat al-Masīḥ means religious law of Christianity, sharīʿat al-Madjūs means religious law of Zoroastrianism. The Arabic expression شريعة الله (God’s Law) is a common translation for תורת אלוהים (‘God’s Law’ in Hebrew) and νόμος τοῦ θεοῦ (‘God’s Law’ in Greek in the New Testament [Rom. 7: 22]).Ullmann, M. (2002), Wörterbuch der griechisch-arabischen Übersetzungen des neunten Jahrhunderts, Wiesbaden, p. 437. Rom. 7: 22: ‘συνήδομαι γὰρ τῷ νόμῳ τοῦ θεοῦ’ is translated as ‘أني أفرح بشريعة الله’ In contemporary Islamic literature, sharia refers to divine law of Islam as revealed by prophet Muhammad, as well as in his function as model and exemplar of the law. Sharia in the Islamic world is also known as  (). In Islam, the origin of sharia is the Qu'ran, and traditions gathered from the life of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad (born ca. 570 CE in Mecca).Hodgson, Marshall (1958). The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 1. University of Chicago. pp. 155–156.  The formative period of fiqh stretches back to the time of the early Muslim communities. In this period, jurists were more concerned with pragmatic issues of authority and teaching than with theory.Weiss (2002), pp. 3, 161. Sharia underwent fundamental development, beginning with the reigns of caliphs Abu Bakr (632–34) and Umar (634–44) for Sunni Muslims, and Imam Ali for Shia Muslims, during which time many questions were brought to the attention of Muhammad's closest comrades for consultation.Dien, Mawil Izzi. Islamic Law: From Historical Foundations To Contemporary Practice. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 2004. During the reign of Muawiya b. Abu Sufyan ibn Harb, ca. 662 CE, Islam undertook an urban transformation, raising questions not originally covered by Islamic law. The Umayyads initiated the office of appointing qadis, or Islamic judges. The jurisdiction of the qadi extended only to Muslims, while non-Muslim populations retained their own legal institutions.Khadduri and Liebesny (1955), p. 37 Under the Umayyads Islamic scholars were "sidelined" from administration of justice and attempts to systematically uphold and develop Islamic law would wait for Abbasid rule. Al-Mansur (the first Abbasid caliph) felt a "pressing obligation -- to make good on the promise to govern according to the sharia" and in 771 found "a respected member of the ulama" to serve as the head of the Egyptian judiciary, and to swear "to uphold the shari'a alone". The qadis were usually pious specialists in Islam. As these grew in number, they began to theorize and systemize Islamic jurisprudence.Khadduri and Liebesny (1955), p. 40-1 The Abbasid made the institution of qadi independent from the government, but this separation wasn't always respected.Khadduri and Liebesny (1955), p. 58 Since then, changes in Islamic society have played an ongoing role in developing sharia, which branches out into fiqh and Qanun respectively. Progress in theory was started by 8th and 9th century Islamic scholars Abu Hanifa, Malik bin Anas, Al-Shafi'i, Ahmad ibn Hanbal and others.Weiss (2002). p. 162. Al-Shafi‘i is credited with deriving the theory of valid norms for sharia (uṣūl al-fiqh), arguing for a traditionalist, literal interpretation of Quran, Hadiths and methodology for law as revealed therein, to formulate sharia.Wael B. Hallaq (1993), Was al-Shafii the Master Architect of Islamic Jurisprudence?, International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 587-605 A number of legal concepts and institutions were developed by Islamic jurists during the classical period of Islam, known as the Islamic Golden Age, dated from the 7th to 13th centuries. These shaped different versions of sharia in different schools of Islamic jurisprudence, called fiqhs.Badr, Gamal Moursi; Mayer, Ann Elizabeth (Winter 1984), "Islamic Criminal Justice", American Journal of Comparative Law (American Journal of Comparative Law, Vol. 32, No. 1) 32 (1): 167–169,  Both the Umayyad caliph Umar II and the Abbasids had agreed that the caliph could not legislate contrary to the Quran or the sunnah. Imam Shafi'i declared: "a tradition from the Prophet must be accepted as soon as it become known...If there has been an action on the part of a caliph, and a tradition from the Prophet to the contrary becomes known later, that action must be discarded in favor of the tradition from the Prophet." Thus, under the Abbasids the main features of sharia were definitively established and sharia was recognized as the law of behavior for Muslims.Khadduri and Liebesny (1955), p. 60-1 In modern times, the Muslim community has divided points of view: secularists believe that the law of the state should be based on secular principles, not on Islamic legal doctrines; traditionalists believe that the law of the state should be based on the traditional legal schools;http://www.averroes-foundation.org/articles/sex_slavery.html reformers believe that new Islamic legal theories can produce modernized Islamic lawhttp://www.averroes-foundation.org/articles/islamic_law_evolving.html and lead to acceptable opinions in areas such as women's rights.http://www.averroes-foundation.org/articles/free_and_equal.html This division persists until the present day (Brown 1996, Hallaq 2001, Ramadan 2005, Aslan 2006, Safi 2003, Nenezich 2006). There has been a growing religious revival in Islam, beginning in the eighteenth century and continuing today. This movement has expressed itself in various forms ranging from wars to efforts towards improving education.Lapidus, Ira (edited by Francis Robinson) (1996). The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World. Cambridge University Press. p. 292. see Bibliography for Conclusion.Hamoud, Hassan R. "Illiteracy in the Arab World". Background paper prepared for the Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2006, Literacy for Life UNESCO. Sharia, in its strictest definition, is a divine law, as expressed in the Quran and Muhammad's example (often called the sunnah). As such, it is related to but different from fiqh, which is emphasized as the human interpretation of the law.Esposito (2004), "Shariah", pg. 288Calder, N. "Sharīa." Encyclopaedia of Islam. "Within Muslim discourse, sharia designates the rules and regulations governing the lives of Muslims, derived in principle from the Kuran and hadith. In this sense, the word is closely associated with fiḳh [q.v.], which signifies academic discussion of divine law." Many scholars have pointed out that the sharia is not formally a code, nor a well-defined set of rules.Hunt Janin and Andre Kahlmeyer in Islamic Law: the Sharia from Muhammad's Time to the Present by Hunt Janin and Andre Kahlmeyer, McFarland and Co. Publishers, 2007, p. 3. ISBN 0786429216 The sharia is characterized as a discussion on the duties of Muslims based on both the opinion of the Muslim community and extensive literature.The Sharia and The Nation State: Who Can Codify the Divine Law? p.2. Accessed 20 September 2005. Hunt Janin and Andre Kahlmeyer thus conclude that the sharia is "long, diverse, and complicated." From the 9th century onward, the power to interpret law in traditional Islamic societies was in the hands of the scholars (ulema). This separation of powers served to limit the range of actions available to the ruler, who could not easily decree or reinterpret law independently and expect the continued support of the community.Basim Musallam, The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World edited by Francis Robinson. Cambridge University Press, 1996, p. 176. Through succeeding centuries and empires, the balance between the ulema and the rulers shifted and reformed, but the balance of power was never decisively changed.Marshall Hodgson, The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 3. University of Chicago, 1958, pp. 105–108. Over the course of many centuries, imperial, political and technological change, including the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution, ushered in an era of European world hegemony that gradually included the domination of many of the lands which had previously been ruled by Islamic empires.Marshall Hodgson, The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 3. University of Chicago, 1958, pp. 176–177.Sarah Ansari, The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World edited by Francis Robinson. Cambridge University Press, 1996, p. 90. At the end of the Second World War, the European powers found themselves too weakened to maintain their empires as before.Marshall Hodgson, The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 3. University of Chicago, 1958, pp. 366–367. The wide variety of forms of government, systems of law, attitudes toward modernity and interpretations of sharia are a result of the ensuing drives for independence and modernity in the Muslim world.Ansari, Sarah. The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World edited by Francis Robinson. Cambridge University Press, 1996, pp. 103– 111.Hodgson, Marshall. The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 3. University of Chicago, 1958, pp. 384–386. According to Jan Michiel Otto, Professor of Law and Governance in Developing Countries at Leiden University, "Anthropological research shows that people in local communities often do not distinguish clearly whether and to what extent their norms and practices are based on local tradition, tribal custom, or religion. Those who adhere to a confrontational view of sharia tend to ascribe many undesirable practices to sharia and religion overlooking custom and culture, even if high-ranking religious authorities have stated the opposite." Otto's analysis appears in a paper commissioned by the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs.Otto, Jan Michiel (2008). p. 30.  There are two sources of sharia (understood as the divine law): the Quran and the Sunnah. The Quran is viewed as the unalterable word of God. It is considered in Islam to be an infallible part of sharia. The Quran covers a host of topics including God, personal laws for Muslim men and Muslim women, laws on community life, laws on expected interaction of Muslims with non-Muslims, apostates and ex-Muslims, laws on finance, morals, eschatology, and others.Fazlur Rahman (2009), The major themes of Quran, 2nd Edition, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0226702865Shabbir Akhtar (2008), The Quran and the Secular Mind: A Philosophy of Islam, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415437837 The Sunnah is the life and example of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The Sunnah's importance as a source of sharia, is confirmed by several verses of the Quran (e.g. ).Ramadan (2006), p.4 The Sunnah is primarily contained in the hadith or reports of Muhammad's sayings, his actions, his tacit approval of actions and his demeanor. While there is only one Quran, there are many compilations of hadith, with the most authentic ones forming during the sahih period (850 to 915 CE). The six acclaimed Sunni collections were compiled by (in order of decreasing importance) Muhammad al-Bukhari, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, Abu Dawood, Tirmidhi, Al-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah. The collections by al-Bukhari and Muslim, regarded the most authentic, contain about 7,000 and 12,000 hadiths respectively (although the majority of entries are repetitions). The hadiths have been evaluated on authenticity, usually by determining the reliability of the narrators that transmitted them.Ramadan (2006), p.12-13 For Shias, the Sunnah include life and sayings of The Twelve Imams.Glenn, H. Patrick (2014). p. 199. Muslims who reject the Hadith as a source of law, sometimes referred to as Quranists, suggest that only laws derived exclusively from the Quran are valid.Edip Yuksel, Layth Saleh al-Shaiban, Martha Schulte-Nafeh, Quran: A Reformist Translation, Brainbow Press, 2007 They state that the hadiths in modern use are not explicitly mentioned in the Quran as a source of Islamic theology and practice, they were not recorded in written form until more than two centuries after the death of the prophet Muhammed.Aisha Y. Musa, The Qur’anists, Florida International University, accessed May 22, 2013. They also state that the authenticity of the hadiths remains a question.Al-Shibli, Sirat al-Numan, Lahore, n. d. Trans. Muhammad Tayyab Bakhsh Badauni as Method of Sifting Prophetic Tradition, Karachi, 1966. 179Iqbal, Muhammad, The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam, edited by M. Saeed Sheikh, Adam Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 1997 (also published earlier (in 1934) by the Oxford University Press), p. 137 The vast majority of Muslims, however, consider hadiths, which describe the words, conduct and example set by Muhammad during his life, as a source of law and religious authority second only to the Qur'an.Aisha Y. Musa, The Qur’anists, Florida International University, accessed May 22, 2013; Quote - "Stories relating the words and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad, known as Hadith in Arabic, have long been esteemed by the vast majority of Muslims as a source of law and guidance second only to the Qur’an in authority." Similarly, most Islamic scholars believe both Quran and sahih hadiths to be a valid source of sharia, with Quranic verse 33.21, among others,, , , , Muhammad Qasim Zaman (2012), Modern Islamic Thought in a Radical Age, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1107096455, pp. 30-31 as justification for this belief.Neal Robinson (2013), Islam: A Concise Introduction, Routledge, ISBN 978-0878402243, Chapter 7, pp. 85-89 For vast majority of Muslims, sharia has historically been, and continues to be derived from both the Quran and the Hadiths. The Sahih Hadiths of Sunni Muslims contain isnad, or a chain of guarantors reaching back to a companion of Muhammad who directly observed the words, conduct and example he set – thus providing the theological ground to consider the hadith to be a sound basis for sharia. For Sunni Muslims, the musannaf in Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim is most trusted and relied upon as source for Sunni Sharia.Jonathan A.C. Brown (2009), Hadith: Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World, Oneworld Publications, ISBN 978-1851686636, Chapter 2 Shia Muslims, however, do not consider the chain of transmitters of Sunni hadiths as reliable, given these transmitters belonged to Sunni side in Sunni-Shia civil wars that followed after Muhammad's death. Shia rely on their own chain of reliable guarantors, trusting compilations such as Kitab al-Kafi and Tahdhib al-Ahkam instead, and later hadiths (usually called akhbār by Shi'i).Joseph Lowry (2010), in The Cambridge Companion to Muhammad (Editor: Jonathan E. Brockopp), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521713726, pp. 92-94 The Shia version of hadiths contain the words, conduct and example set by Muhammad and Imams, which they consider as sinless, infallible and an essential source of sharia for Shi'ite Muslims.Moojan Momen (1987), An Introduction to Shiʻi Islam: The History and Doctrines of Twelver Shiʻism, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0300035315, pp. 173-175Farrukh B. Hakeem et al (2012), Policing Muslim Communities: Comparative International Context, Springer, ISBN 978-1493901753, pp. 55 However, in substance, the Shi'ite hadiths resemble the Sunni hadiths, with one difference – the Shia hadiths additionally include words and actions of its Imams (al-hadith al-walawi), the biological descendants of Muhammad, and these too are considered an important source for sharia by Shi'ites.William C. Chittick (1981), A Shi'ite Anthology, SUNY Press, ISBN 978-0873955102, pp. 5-12Jonathan A.C. Brown (2009), Hadith: Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World, Oneworld Publications, ISBN 978-1851686636, Chapter 4 Some scholars such as John Wansbrough have challenged the authenticity of the Quran and whether it was written in the time of Muhammad. In contrast, Estelle Whelan has refuted Wansbrough presenting evidence such as the inscriptions on the Dome of the Rock. John Burton states that medieval era Islamic texts claiming the Quran was compiled after the death of the Prophet were forged to preserve the status-quo. The final version of the Quran, states Burton, was compiled while the Prophet was still alive. Most scholars accept that the Quran as is used for Sharia, was compiled into the final current form during the caliphate of Uthman. From the founding of Islam, the Muslim community has also debated the authenticity of compiled verses and the consistency within the Quran.Harald Motzki (2006), in The Cambridge Companion to the Qur'ān, Editor: Jane Dammen McAuliffe, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521539340, pp. 59-67A Rippin (1984), Al-Zuhrī Naskh al-Qur'ān and the problem of early Tafsīr texts, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, Volume 47, Issue 01, pp. 22-43 The inconsistencies in deriving sharia from the Quran, were recognized and formally complicated by verses 2.106 and 16.101 of the Quran, which are known as the "verses of abrogation (Naskh)". The principle of abrogation has been historically accepted and applied by Islamic jurists on both the Quran and the Sunnah.Wael B. Hallaq (2009), Sharī'a: Theory, Practice, Transformations, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521861472, pp. 96-97 Sharia is thus determined through a chronological study of the primary sources, where older revelations are considered overruled by later revelations.Yvonne Yazbeck Haddad and John L. Esposito (1997), Islam, Gender, & Social Change, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195113570, p. 41 While an overwhelming majority of historical and modern Islamic scholars have accepted the principle of abrogation for the Quran and the Sunnah, some modern scholars disagree that the principle of abrogation necessarily applies to the Quran.Louay Fatoohi (2012), Abrogation in the Qurʼan and Islamic Law, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415631983, pp. 3-6, Ch. 3 and 4  Fiqh (school of Islamic jurisprudence) represents the process of deducing and applying sharia principles, as well as the collective body of specific laws deduced from sharia using the fiqh methodology.Hisham M. Ramadan (2006), Understanding Islamic Law: From Classical to Contemporary, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0759109919, pp. 6-21 While Quran and Hadith sources are regarded as infallible, the fiqh standards may change in different contexts. Fiqh covers all aspects of law, including religious, civil, political, constitutional and procedural law.Ramadan (2006), p.5-7 Fiqh deploys the following to create Islamic laws: If the above two sources do not provide guidance for an issue, then different fiqhs deploy the following in a hierarchical way:   A Madhhab is a Muslim school of law that follows a fiqh (school of religious jurisprudence).  In the first 150 years of Islam, there were many madhhab. Several of the Sahābah, or contemporary "companions" of Muhammad, are credited with founding their own. In the Sunni sect of Islam, the Islamic jurisprudence schools of Medina (Al-Hijaz, now in Saudi Arabia) created the Maliki madhhab, while those in Kufa (now in Iraq) created the Hanafi madhhab.Ian Netton (2007), Encyclopaedia of Islam, ISBN 978-0700715886, pp. 230, 358-359 Abu al-Shafi'i, who started as a student of Maliki school of Islamic law, and later was influenced by Hanafi school of Islamic law, disagreed with some of the discretion these schools gave to jurists, and founded the more conservative Shafi'i madhhab, which spread from jurisprudence schools in Baghdad (Iraq) and Cairo (Egypt).Hisham M. Ramadan (2006), Understanding Islamic Law: From Classical to Contemporary, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0759109919, pp. 27-28 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, a student of al-Shafi'i, went further in his criticism of Maliki and Hanafi fiqhs, criticizing the abuse and corruption of sharia from jurist discretion and consensus of later generation Muslims, and he founded the more strict, traditionalist Hanbali school of Islamic law.Chiragh Ali (2002), Modernist Islam 1840-1940: A Sourcebook, Edited by Charles Kurzman, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195154689, pp. 281-282 Other schools such as the Jariri were established later, which eventually died out. Sunni sect of Islam has four major surviving schools of sharia: Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i, Hanbali; one minor school is named Ẓāhirī. Shii sect of Islam has three: Ja'fari (major), Zaydi and Ismaili.John Esposito, The History of Islam, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195107999Hallaq 1997, Brown 1996, Aslan 2006.Mohamed Keshavjee, Islam, Sharia and Alternative Dispute Resolution, Taurus, ISBN 978-1848857322 There are other minority fiqhs as well, such as the Ibadi school of Khawarij sect, and those of Sufi and Ahmadi sects.Abdulaziz Abdulhussein Sachedina, The Just Ruler in Shi'ite Islam, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195119152 All Sunni and Shia schools of sharia rely first on the Quran and the sayings/practices of Muhammad in the Sunnah. Their differences lie in the procedure each uses to create Islam-compliant laws when those two sources do not provide guidance on a topic.Hisham M. Ramadan (2006), Understanding Islamic Law: From Classical to Contemporary, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0759109919, pp. 24-30 The Salafi movement creates sharia based on the Quran, Sunnah and the actions and sayings of the first three generations of Muslims.Esposito, John L. (2010). The Future of Islam. Oxford University Press. p. 74–77. Hanafi-based sharia spread with the patronage and military expansions led by Turkic Sultans and Ottoman Empire in West Asia, Southeast Europe, Central Asia and South Asia.Nazeer Ahmed (2001), Islam in Global History, (Xlibris) ISBN 978-0738859620. It is currently the largest madhhab of Sunni Muslims.Jurisprudence and Law - Islam Reorienting the Veil, University of North Carolina (2009) Maliki-based sharia is predominantly found in West Africa, North Africa and parts of Arabia. Shafii-based sharia spread with patronage and military expansions led by maritime Sultans, and is mostly found in coastal regions of East Africa, Arabia, South Asia, Southeast Asia and islands in the Indian ocean.MN Pearson (2000), The Indian Ocean and the Red Sea, in The History of Islam in Africa (Ed: Nehemia Levtzion, Randall Pouwels), Ohio University Press, ISBN 978-0821412978, Chapter 2 The Hanbali-based sharia prevails in the smallest Sunni madhhab, predominantly found in the Arabian peninsula. The Shia Jafari-based sharia is mostly found in Persian region and parts of West Asia and South Asia. Along with interpretation, each fiqh classifies its interpretation of sharia into one of the following five categories: fard (obligatory), mustahabb (recommended), mubah (neutral), makruh (discouraged), and haraam (forbidden). A Muslim is expected to adhere to that tenet of sharia accordingly.Horrie, Chris; Chippindale, Peter (1991). p. 46. The recommended, neutral and discouraged categories are drawn largely from accounts of the life of Muhammad. To say a behaviour is sunnah is to say it is recommended as an example of the life and sayings of Muhammad. These categories form the basis for proper behaviour in matters such as courtesy and manners, interpersonal relations, generosity, personal habits and hygiene.   The areas of Islamic law include: Shari'ah law has been grouped in different ways, such as:Doi ARI. Shariah: The Islamic Law, AS Noordeen Publishers, Kuala Lumpur, ISBN 9679963330 Family relations, Crime and punishment, Inheritance and disposal of property, The economic system, External and other relations. "Reliance of the Traveller", an English translation of a fourteenth-century CE reference on the Shafi'i school of fiqh written by Ahmad ibn Naqib al-Misri, organizes sharia law into the following topics: Purification, prayer, funeral prayer, taxes, fasting, pilgrimage, trade, inheritance, marriage, divorce and justice. In some areas, there are substantial differences in the law between different schools of fiqh, countries, cultures and schools of thought.  A number of scholars have advanced "objectives" (مقاصد maqaṣid al-Shariah also "goals" or "purposes") they believe the Sharia is intended to achieve. Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali argued that they were the preservation of Islamic religion, and in the temporal world the protection of life, progeny, intellect and wealth of Muslims.Chapra, Muhammad Umer (2000), The Future of Economics: An Islamic Perspective, Leicester: The Islamic Foundation, p.118, ISBN 978-0-86037-2752 Yazid et al summarize sharia's objective to be recognize the limitations of reason, and complement the role of reason with revelation. They state that objective of sharia in Islamic finance is to provide rules and regulations from the Quran and Sunnah. Jan Otto writes that moderate Muslims and puritan Muslims differ in their interpretation of the objectives of sharia. The moderate Muslims consider sharia to be a flexible code of law, where technicalities of its wording cannot subvert sharia's objectives to "help Muslims in their quest for submission, humility, gratitude before God, and a quest for Godliness". In contrast, according to Otto, puritan Muslims believe that sharia is a strict, complete and exact set of rules that one must submit to, by strict compliance, because it is only "through meticulous obedience, Muslims will avoid punishment of God in after-life and will enter heaven" which is the ultimate objective, and it does not matter if some sharia "law is harsh or that its application results in social suffering, this perception is considered delusional".   Most Muslim-majority countries incorporate sharia at some level in their legal framework, with many calling it the highest law or the source of law of the land in their constitution.Islam: Governing under Sharia Toni Johnson and Mohammed Aly Sergie, Council on Foreign Relations (2013)Amanat & Griffel (2007), SHARI’A: ISLAMIC LAW IN THE CONTEMPORARY CONTEXT, Stanford University Press, ISBN 978-0804756396 Most use sharia for personal law (marriage, divorce, domestic violence, child support, family law, inheritance and such matters).J Schenker (2000), Women’s reproductive health: monotheistic religious perspectives. International journal of gynecology & obstetrics, 70(1): 77-86Khadduri, Majid & Herbert J. Leibesny (2010), LAW IN THE MIDDLE EAST, The Lawbook Exchange, Clark, NJ, ISBN 978-1616191177 Elements of sharia are present, to varying extents, in the criminal justice system of many Muslim-majority countries. Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Brunei, Qatar, Pakistan, United Arab Emirates, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Sudan and Mauritania apply the code predominantly or entirely while it applies in some parts of Indonesia.Nisrine Abiad (2008), Sharia, Muslim States and International Human Rights Treaty Obligations, British Institute of International and Comparative Law, ISBN 978-1905221417 Most Muslim-majority countries with sharia-prescribed hudud punishments in their legal code, do not prescribe it routinely and use other punishments instead. The harshest sharia penalties such as stoning, beheading and the death penalty are enforced with varying levels of consistency. Since 1970s, most Muslim-majority countries have faced vociferous demands from their religious groups and political parties for immediate adoption of sharia as the sole, or at least primary legal framework.Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im, Human Rights in the Muslim World: Socio-Political Conditions and Scriptural Imperatives, Harvard Human Rights Journal, Vol. 3, pp. 13-29 Some moderates and liberal scholars within these Muslim countries have argued for limited expansion of sharia. With the growing Muslim immigrant communities in Europe, there have been reports in some media of "no-go zones" being established where sharia law reigns supreme. However, there is no evidence of the existence of "no-go zones", and these allegations are sourced from anti-immigrant groups falsely equating low-income neighborhoods predominantly inhabited by immigrants as "no-go zones."  Sharia is enforced in Islamic nations in a number of ways, including mutaween and hisbah. The mutaween ( )muṭawiʿin; variant English spellings: mutawwain, muttawa, mutawallees, mutawa’ah, mutawi’, mutawwa' most literally means "volunteers" in the Arabic language, Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic by Hans Wehr, edited by J. M. Cowan, 4th edition (1994, ISBN 0-87950-003-4), p. 670. are the government-authorized or government-recognized religious police (or clerical police) of Saudi Arabia. Elsewhere, enforcement of Islamic values in accordance with sharia is the responsibility of Polisi Perda Syariah Islam in Aceh province of Indonesia,Fealy & White (2008), REGIONAL SHARIA REGULATIONS IN INDONESIA: ANOMALY OR SYMPTOM?, Chapter: Expressing Islam: Religious life and politics in Indonesia, ISBN 978-9812308511 Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (Gaza Strip) in parts of Palestine, and Basiji Force in Iran.  Hisbah ( ḥisb(ah), or hisba) is a historic Islamic doctrine which means "accountability".Sami Zubaida (2005), Law and Power in the Islamic World, ISBN 978-1850439349, pages 58-60 Hisbah doctrine holds that it is a religious obligation of every Muslim that he or she report to the ruler (Sultan, government authorities) any wrong behavior of a neighbor or relative that violates sharia or insults Islam. The doctrine states that it is the divinely sanctioned duty of the ruler to intervene when such charges are made, and coercively "command right and forbid wrong" in order to keep everything in order according to sharia.Lorenzo Vidino (2013), Hisba in Europe?, European Foundation for Democracy, SwitzerlandMichael Cook: Commanding right and forbidding wrong in Islamic thought. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge 2000. ISBN 0-521-66174-9, ,  Some Salafist suggest that enforcement of sharia under the Hisbah doctrine is the sacred duty of all Muslims, not just rulers. The doctrine of Hisbah in Islam has traditionally allowed any Muslim to accuse another Muslim, ex-Muslim or non-Muslim for beliefs or behavior that may harm Islamic society. This principle has been used in countries such as Egypt, Pakistan and others to bring blasphemy charges against apostates.Nancy Gallagher (2005), Apostasy, Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures: Family, Law and Politics, Editors: Suad Joseph and Afsāna Naǧmābād, ISBN 978-9004128187, pages 7-9 For example, in Egypt, sharia was enforced on the Muslim scholar Nasr Abu Zayd, through the doctrine of Hasbah, when he committed apostasy.M. Berger, Apostasy and Public Policy in Contemporary Egypt: An Evaluation of Recent Cases from Egypt's Highest Courts, Human Rights Quarterly, Volume 25, Number 3, August 2003, pages 720-740Olsson, S. (2008), Apostasy in Egypt: Contemporary Cases of Ḥisbah. The Muslim World, 98(1): 95-115 Similarly, in Nigeria, after twelve northern Muslim-majority states such as Kano adopted sharia-based penal code between 1999 and 2000, hisbah became the allowed method of sharia enforcement, where all Muslim citizens could police compliance of moral order based on sharia.Rasheed Oyewole Olaniyi (2011), Hisbah and Sharia Law Enforcement in Metropolitan Kano, Africa Today, Volume 57, Number 4, Summer 2011, pp. 70-96 In Aceh province of Indonesia, Islamic vigilante activists have invoked Hasbah doctrine to enforce sharia on fellow Muslims as well as demanding non-Muslims to respect sharia.Asma Uddin, Religious Freedom Implications of Sharia Implementation in Aceh, Indonesia, University of St. Thomas Law Journal, 7(3): 603-648 Hisbah has been used in many Muslim majority countries, from Morocco to Egypt and in West Asia to enforce sharia restrictions on blasphemy and criticism of Islam over internet and social media.Helmi Noman (2013), In the name of God - Faith based internet censorship in majority Muslim countries, in Routledge Handbook of Media Law (Editors: Monroe E. Price et al.), Routledge, ISBN 978-0415683166, Chapter 14SK Moore (2012), Military Chaplains as Agents of Peace, Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0739149102, p. 169Taliban from department of Amro bil mahroof (Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, Taliban religious police) RAWA, Afghanistan (2001)   Sharia judicial proceedings have significant differences from other legal traditions, including those in both common law and civil law. Sharia courts traditionally do not rely on lawyers; plaintiffs and defendants represent themselves. Trials are conducted solely by the judge, and there is no jury system. There is no pre-trial discovery process, and no cross-examination of witnesses. Unlike common law, judges' verdicts do not set binding precedentsIslamic Law&nbsp;– Legal Literature And Institutions, Jurisprudence: The "Sources" of the Law, The Modern Period. under the principle of stare decisis,Saudi Arabia Basic Industries Corp. v. Mobil Yanbu Petrochemical Co., Supreme Court of Delaware, January 14, 2005 p. 52. "The Saudi law system differs in critically important respects from the system of legal thought employed by the common law countries, including the United States. Perhaps most significant is that Islamic law does not embrace the common law system of binding precedent and stare decisis. In Saudi Arabia, judicial decisions are not in themselves a source of law, and with minor exceptions, court decisions in Saudi Arabia are not published or even open to public inspection." and unlike civil law, sharia is left to the interpretation in each case and has no formally codified universal statutes.Tetley (1999), Mixed Jurisdictions: Common Law v. Civil Law (Codified and Uncodified), La. Law Review, 60, 677 The rules of evidence in sharia courts also maintain a distinctive custom of prioritizing oral testimony.Fortna, Benjamin C. (March 2011). "Education and Autobiography at the End of the Ottoman Empire". Die Welt des Islams. New Series, Vol. 41, Issue 1. pp. 1–31. "the literacy rate in the Ottoman Empire in 1900 was between five and ten percent". Witnesses, in a sharia court system, must be faithful, that is Muslim.Antoinette Vlieger (2012), Domestic Workers in Saudi Arabia and the Emirates, ISBN 978-1610271288, Chapter 4 Male Muslim witnesses are deemed more reliable than female Muslim witnesses, and non-Muslim witnesses considered unreliable and receive no priority in a sharia court.Tahir Wasti (2009), The Application of Islamic Criminal Law in Pakistan, Brill Academic, ISBN 978-9004172258, pp. 126-127Etannibi E. O. Alemika (2005), Human Rights and Shariah Penal Code in Northern Nigeria, UN Human Rights Monitor, pp. 110-127 In civil cases in some countries, a Muslim woman witness is considered half the worth and reliability than a Muslim man witness. In criminal cases, women witnesses are unacceptable in stricter, traditional interpretations of sharia, such as those found in Hanbali madhhab. A confession, an oath, or the oral testimony of Muslim witnesses are the main evidence admissible, in sharia courts, for hudud crimes, that is the religious crimes of adultery, fornication, rape, accusing someone of illicit sex but failing to prove it, apostasy, drinking intoxicants and theft.Mohamed S. El-Awa (1993), Punishment In Islamic Law, American Trust Publications, ISBN 978-0892591428, pp. 1-68Philip Reichel and Jay Albanese (2013), Handbook of Transnational Crime and Justice, SAGE publications, ISBN 978-1452240350, pp. 36-37 Testimony must be from at least two free Muslim male witnesses, or one Muslim male and two Muslim females, who are not related parties and who are of sound mind and reliable character. Testimony to establish the crime of adultery, fornication or rape must be from four Muslim male witnesses, with some fiqhs allowing substitution of up to three male with six female witnesses; however, at least one must be a Muslim male.Ajijola, Alhaji A.D. (1989). Introduction to Islamic Law. Karachi: International Islamic Publishers. p. 133. Forensic evidence (i.e., fingerprints, ballistics, blood samples, DNA etc.) and other circumstantial evidence is likewise rejected in hudud cases in favor of eyewitnesses, a practice which can cause severe difficulties for women plaintiffs in rape cases.A. bin Mohd Noor, & A.B. bin Ibrahim (2012), The Rights of a Rape Victim in Islamic Law, IIUM Law Journal, 16(1), pp. 65-83 Muslim jurists have debated whether and when coerced confession and coerced witnesses are acceptable. The majority opinion of jurists in the Hanafi madhhab, for example, ruled that torture to get evidence is acceptable and such evidence is valid, but a 17th-century text by Hanafi jurist Muhammad Shaykhzade argued that coerced confession should be invalid; Shaykhzade acknowledged that beating to get confession has been authorized in fatwas by many Islamic jurists. Quran recommends written contracts in the case of debt-related transactions, and oral contracts for commercial and other civil contracts.M Fadel (1997), Two women, one man: knowledge, power, and gender in medieval Sunni legal thought, International Journal of Middle East Studies, 29(02), pp. 185-204 Marriage is solemnized as a written financial contract, in the presence of two Muslim male witnesses, and it includes a brideprice (Mahr) payable from a Muslim man to a Muslim woman. The brideprice is considered by a sharia court as a form of debt. Written contracts are paramount, in sharia courts, in the matters of dispute that are debt-related, which includes marriage contracts. Written contracts in debt-related cases, when notarized by a judge, is deemed more reliable. In commercial and civil contracts, such as those relating to exchange of merchandise, agreement to supply or purchase goods or property, and others, oral contracts and the testimony of Muslim witnesses triumph over written contracts. Sharia system has held that written commercial contracts may be forged.Reem Meshal (2014), Sharia and the Making of the Modern Egyptian, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-9774166174, pp. 96-101 and Chapter 4Timur Kuran (2012), The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691156415, pp. 246-249 and Chapter 12 Timur Kuran states that the treatment of written evidence in religious courts in Islamic regions created an incentive for opaque transactions, and the avoidance of written contracts in economic relations. This led to a continuation of a "largely oral contracting culture" in Muslim nations and communities."Explaining the Economic Trajectories of Civilizations&nbsp;– Musings on the Systemic Approach". pp. 7, 10. In lieu of written evidence, oaths are accorded much greater weight; rather than being used simply to guarantee the truth of ensuing testimony, they are themselves used as evidence. Plaintiffs lacking other evidence to support their claims may demand that defendants take an oath swearing their innocence, refusal thereof can result in a verdict for the plaintiff.Lippman, Matthew Ross; McConville, Seán; Yerushalmi, Mordechai (1988). Islamic Criminal Law and Procedure&nbsp;– An Introduction. New York City: Praeger Publishers. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-275-93009-7. Taking an oath for Muslims can be a grave act; one study of courts in Morocco found that lying litigants would often "maintain their testimony 'right up to the moment of oath-taking and then to stop, refuse the oath, and surrender the case."Frank, Michael J. (April 2006). "Trying Times&nbsp;– The Prosecution of Terrorists in the Central Criminal Court of Iraq". Florida Journal of International Law. Accordingly, defendants are not routinely required to swear before testifying, which would risk casually profaning the Quran should the defendant commit perjury; instead oaths are a solemn procedure performed as a final part of the evidence process.  Sharia courts treat women and men as unequal, with Muslim woman's life and blood-money compensation sentence (Diyya) as half as that of a Muslim man's life.Arsani William, An Unjust Doctrine of Civil Arbitration: Sharia Courts in Canada and England, Stanford Journal of International Relations, Spring 2010, 11(2), pp. 40-47M Kar (2005), Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures: Family, Law and Politics (Ed: Suad Joseph, Afsāna Naǧmābādī), Brill, ISBN 978-9004128187, pp. 406-407 Sharia also treats Muslims and non-Muslims as unequal in the sentencing process. Human Rights Watch and United States' Religious Freedom Report note that in sharia courts of Saudi Arabia, "The calculation of accidental death or injury compensation is discriminatory. In the event a court renders a judgment in favor of a plaintiff who is a Jewish or Christian male, the plaintiff is only entitled to receive 50 percent of the compensation a Muslim male would receive; all other non-Muslims [Buddhists, Hindus, Jains, Atheists] are only entitled to receive one-sixteenth of the amount a male Muslim would receive".State Department of the U.S. Government (2012), SAUDI ARABIA 2012 INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT, p. 4Human Rights Watch (2004), Migrant Communities in Saudi ArabiaSaudi Arabia BUREAU OF DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND LABOR, US State Department, 2011 Report on International Religious Freedom Report (2011) Saudi Arabia follows Hanbali sharia, whose historic jurisprudence texts considered a Christian or Jew life as half the worth of a Muslim. Jurists of other schools of law in Islam have ruled differently. For example, Shafi'i sharia considers a Christian or Jew life as a third the worth of a Muslim, and Maliki's sharia considers it worth half. The legal schools of Hanafi, Maliki and Shafi'i Sunni Islam as well as those of twelver Shia Islam have considered the life of polytheists and atheists as one-fifteenth the value of a Muslim during sentencing.Anver M. Emon (2012), Religious Pluralism and Islamic Law: Dhimmis and Others in the Empire of Law, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199661633, pp. 234-235  A 2013 survey based on interviews of 38,000 Muslims, randomly selected from urban and rural parts in 39 countries using area probability designs, by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that support for making sharia the official law of the land is very high in many countries with a high proportion of Muslims: Afghanistan (99%), Iraq (91%), Niger (86%), Malaysia (86%), Pakistan (84%), Morocco (83%), Bangladesh (82%), Egypt (74%), Indonesia (72%), Jordan (71%), Uganda (66%), Ethiopia (65%), Mali (63%), Ghana (58%), and Tunisia (56%). In Muslim regions of Southern-Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the support is less than 50%: Russia (42%), Kyrgyzstan (35%), Tajikistan (27%), Kosovo (20%), Albania (12%), Turkey (12%), Azerbaijan (8%). However, fewer supported harsh punishments, interpretations of some aspects differed widely, and mostly found Sharia only should be applied to the Muslim populations. In Muslim-majority countries and among Muslims who say sharia should be the law of the land, a percentage between 74% (Egypt) and 19% (Kazakhstan) want sharia law to apply to non-Muslims as well. A 2008 YouGov poll in the United Kingdom found 40% of Muslim students interviewed wanted sharia in British law.Killing for religion is justified, say third of Muslim students The Telegraph (July 26, 2008) Since the 1970s, the Islamist movements have become prominent; their goals are the establishment of Islamic states and sharia not just within their own borders; their means are political in nature. The Islamist power base is the millions of poor, particularly urban poor moving into the cities from the countryside. They are not international in nature (one exception being the Muslim Brotherhood). Their rhetoric opposes western culture and western power.Lapidus, Ira (1996). The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World edited by Francis Robinson. Cambridge University Press p. 296. see Bibliography for Conclusion. Political groups wishing to return to more traditional Islamic values are the source of threat to Turkey's secular government. These movements can be considered neo-Sharism.Hodgson, Marshall (1958). The Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 3. University of Chicago.p. 386–392. Fundamentalists, wishing to return to basic Islamic religious values and law, have in some instances imposed harsh sharia punishments for crimes, curtailed civil rights and violated human rights. Extremists have used the Quran and their own particular version of sharia to justify acts of war and terror against Muslim as well as non-Muslim individuals and governments, using alternate, conflicting interpretations of sharia and their notions of jihad.Horrie, Chris; Chippindale, Peter (1991). p. 4, 100. The sharia basis of arguments of those advocating terrorism, however, remain controversial. Some scholars state that Islamic law prohibits the killing of civilian non-combatants; in contrast, others interpret Islamic law differently, concluding that all means are legitimate to reach their aims, including targeting Muslim non-combatants and the mass killing of non-Muslim civilians, in order to universalize Islam. Islam, in these interpretations, "does not make target differences between militaries and civilians but between Muslims and unbelievers. Therefore it is legitimated (sic) to spill civilians’ blood". Other scholars of Islam, interpret sharia differently, stating, according to Engeland-Nourai, "attacking innocent people is not courageous; it is stupid and will be punished on the Day of Judgment [...]. It’s not courageous to attack innocent children, women and civilians. It is courageous to protect freedom; it is courageous to defend one and not to attack".Anisseh Engeland-Nourai, THE CHALLENGE OF FRAGMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW REGARDING THE PROTECTION OF CIVILIANS - AN ISLAMIC PERSPECTIVE School of Law, University of Bedfordshire, pp. 18-25Ira Lapidus, The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World edited by Francis Robinson. Cambridge University Press, 1996, pp. 297-298 see Bibliography for Conclusion.  In the post-9/11 non-Muslim Western world, Sharia has been called a source of "hysteria", "more controversial than ever", the one aspect of Islam that inspires "particular dread".  On the internet, "dozens of self-styled `counter-jihadis`" emerged to campaign against Sharia law, describing it in strict interpretations resembling those of Salafi Muslims. Several years after 9/11 fear of Sharia law and of "the ideology of extremism" among Muslims, reportedly spread to mainstream conservative Republicans in the United States.  As of 2014 seven states in the US have "banned Sharia law", or passed some kind of ballot measure that "prohibits the states courts from considering foreign, international or religious law."Google trends Sharia| 2005-2015 (graph)  Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, won ovations calling for a federal ban on Sharia law. In 2015, the governor of Louisiana ( Bobby Jindal) warned of the danger of purported "no-go zones" in European cities allegedly operating under Sharia Law and where local laws are not applicable.  The issue of "liberty versus Sharia" was called a "momentous civilizational debate" in at least one conservative editorial page.  In 2008 in Britain, the future Prime Minister (David Cameron) declared his opposition to "any expansion of Sharia law in the UK." In Germany, in 2014, the Interior Minister (Thomas de Maizière) told a newspaper (Bild), "Sharia law is not tolerated on German soil."  Ali Khan states that "constitutional orders founded on the principles of sharia are fully compatible with democracy, provided that religious minorities are protected and the incumbent Islamic leadership remains committed to the right to recall".Khan, Ali. "Will The European Court of Human Rights Push Turkey Toward Islamic Revolution?".Khan, L. Ali. A Theory of Universal Democracy: Beyond the End of History, The Hague, Kluwer Law International, 2003, ISBN 90-411-2003-3. Other scholars say sharia is not compatible with democracy, particularly where the country's constitution demands separation of religion and the democratic state.Grant & Tessler (2002), Palestinian attitudes toward democracy and its compatibility with Islam: Evidence from public opinion research in the West Bank and Gaza, Arab Studies Quarterly, Vol. 24, No. 4 (Fall 2002), pp. 1-20D Jung (2004), Globalization, State Formation and Religion in the Middle East: "Is Islam Incompatible with Democracy?", Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 61-78 Courts in non-Muslim majority nations have generally ruled against the implementation of sharia, both in jurisprudence and within a community context, based on sharia's religious background. In Muslim nations, sharia has wide support with some exceptions.Mogahed, D. (2006), Islam and democracy, Washington: The Gallup Center for Muslim Studies For example, in 1998 the Constitutional Court of Turkey banned and dissolved Turkey's Refah Party on the grounds that "Democracy is the antithesis of Sharia", the latter of which Refah sought to introduce.Toprak (2005), Islam and democracy in Turkey, Turkish Studies, 6(2), 167-186M. Hakan Yavuz (1997), Political Islam and the Welfare (Refah) Party in Turkey, Comparative Politics, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 63-82 On appeal by Refah the European Court of Human Rights determined that "sharia is incompatible with the fundamental principles of democracy".Hearing of the European Court of Human Rights, January 22, 2004 (PDF) Refah's sharia-based notion of a "plurality of legal systems, grounded on religion" was ruled to contravene the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It was determined that it would "do away with the State's role as the guarantor of individual rights and freedoms" and "infringe the principle of non-discrimination between individuals as regards their enjoyment of public freedoms, which is one of the fundamental principles of democracy".Christian Moe (2012), Refah Revisited: Strasbourg's Construction of Islam, in Islam, Europe and emerging legal issues (editors: W. Cole Durham Jr. et al.), ISBN 978-1409434443, pp. 235-271 Several major, predominantly Muslim countries have criticized the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) for its perceived failure to take into account the cultural and religious context of non-Western countries. Iran declared in the UN assembly that UDHR was "a secular understanding of the Judeo-Christian tradition", which could not be implemented by Muslims without trespassing the Islamic law.David P. Forsythe (2009), Encyclopedia of Human Rights: Vol. 1, Oxford University Press, pp 239-245 Islamic scholars and Islamist political parties consider 'universal human rights' arguments as imposition of a non-Muslim culture on Muslim people, a disrespect of customary cultural practices and of Islam.A. SAJOO (1999), Islam and Human Rights: Congruence or Dichotomy, Temple International and Comparative Law Journal, vol. 4, pp. 23-34K. ALI (2003), Progressive Muslims and Islamic Jurisprudence, In: SAFI, O. (Ed.). Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism, Oxford, pp. 164-187 In 1990, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, a group representing all Muslim majority nations, met in Cairo to respond to the UDHR, then adopted the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam.Heiner Bielefeldt (2000), "Western" versus "Islamic" Human Rights Conceptions?: A Critique of Cultural Essentialism in the Discussion on Human Rights, Political Theory, 90-121Anver M. Emon, Mark Ellis, Benjamin Glahn (2012), Islamic Law and International Human Rights Law, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199641444 Ann Elizabeth Mayer points to notable absences from the Cairo Declaration: provisions for democratic principles, protection for religious freedom, freedom of association and freedom of the press, as well as equality in rights and equal protection under the law. Article 24 of the Cairo declaration states that "all the rights and freedoms stipulated in this Declaration are subject to the Islamic shari'a".Ann Elizabeth Mayer, Islamic Law and Human Rights: Conundrums and Equivocations, chapter 14 in Carrie Gustafson, Peter H. Juviler (eds.), Religion and human rights: competing claims?, Columbia University seminar series, M.E. Sharpe, 1999, ISBN 0-7656-0261-X. In 2009, the journal Free Inquiry summarized the criticism of the Cairo Declaration in an editorial: "We are deeply concerned with the changes to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by a coalition of Islamic states within the United Nations that wishes to prohibit any criticism of religion and would thus protect Islam's limited view of human rights. In view of the conditions inside the Islamic Republic of Iran, Egypt, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Syria, Bangdalesh, Iraq, and Afghanistan, we should expect that at the top of their human rights agenda would be to rectify the legal inequality of women, the suppression of political dissent, the curtailment of free expression, the persecution of ethnic minorities and religious dissenters&nbsp;— in short, protecting their citizens from egregious human rights violations. Instead, they are worrying about protecting Islam."Paul Kurtz, Austin Dacey, and Tom Flynn. "Defaming Human Rights". Free Inquiry. February/March 2009, Vol. 29, No. 2. H. Patrick Glenn states that sharia is structured around the concept of mutual obligations of a collective, and it considers individual human rights as potentially disruptive and unnecessary to its revealed code of mutual obligations. In giving priority to this religious collective rather than individual liberty, the Islamic law justifies the formal inequality of individuals (women, non-Islamic people).Glenn, H. Patrick (2014), pp. 199-205 Bassam Tibi states that sharia framework and human rights are incompatible.Bassam Tibi (2008), The return of the sacred to politics as constitutional law: the case of the Shari'atization of politics in Islamic civilization, Theoria, Vol. 55, pp. 92-119 Abdel al-Hakeem Carney, in contrast, states that sharia is misunderstood from a failure to distinguish sharia from siyasah (politics).Abdel al-Hakeem Carney (2003), The desacralization of power in Islam, Religion State and Society, Vol. 31, pp. 203-219  Blasphemy in Islam is any form of cursing, questioning or annoying God, Muhammad or anything considered sacred in Islam. Blasphemy, as interpreted under sharia, is controversial.Harun Omer, "The Invented Islam - "Punishment for Blasphemy", TheSharia.com, 2015 Muslim nations have petitioned the United Nations to limit "freedom of speech" because "unrestricted and disrespectful opinion against Islam creates hatred".An Anti-Blasphemy Measure Laid to Rest Nina Shea, National Review (MARCH 31, 2011) Other nations, in contrast, consider blasphemy laws as violation of "freedom of speech",Brian Winston (2014), The Rushdie Fatwa and After: A Lesson to the Circumspect, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1137388599, pp. 74, Quote - "(In the case of blasphemy and Salman Rushdie) the death sentence it pronounced was grounded in a jurisprudential gloss on the Surah al-Ahzab (33:57)" stating that freedom of expression is essential to empowering both Muslims and non-Muslims, and point to the abuse of blasphemy laws, where hundreds, often members of religious minorities, are being lynched, killed and incarcerated in Muslim nations, on flimsy accusations of insulting Islam.Bad-mouthing: Pakistan’s blasphemy laws legitimise intolerance The Economist (November 29, 2014)Blasphemy: Dangerous words The Economist (January 7, 2015) According to the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights, every human has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change their religion or belief. Sharia has been criticized for not recognizing this human right. According to scholarsAbdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im, Islamic Foundations of Religious Human Rights, in RELIGIOUS HUMAN RIGHTS IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE : RELIGIOUS PERSPECTIVES, pp 351-356 (John Witte Jr. & Johan D. van der Vyver eds., 1996).Noah Feldman (2008), The Fall and Rise of the Islamic State, Princeton University Press, ISBN 9780691120454 of Islamic law, the applicable rules for religious conversion under sharia are as follows: According to sharia theory, conversion of disbelievers and non-Muslims to Islam is encouraged as a religious duty for all Muslims, and leaving Islam (apostasy), expressing contempt for Islam (blasphemy), and religious conversion of Muslims is prohibited.Stahnke, Tad, Proselytism and the Freedom to Change Religion in International Human Rights Law, Brigham Young University Law Review, Issue:1, (January 1999), pages 251- 350ABDULLAHI AHMED AN-NA’IM, ISLAM AND THE SECULAR STATE: NEGOTIATING THE FUTURE OF SHARI’A 14 (2008) Not all Islamic scholars agree with this interpretation of sharia theory. In practice, as of 2011, 20 Islamic nations had laws declaring apostasy from Islam as illegal and a criminal offense. Such laws are incompatible with the UDHR's requirement of freedom of thought, conscience and religion.Freedom of Religion, Apostasy and Islam by Abdullah Saeed and Hassan Saeed (Mar 30, 2004), ISBN 978-0754630838http://iheu.org/content/fate-infidels-and-apostates-under-islam-0 In another 2013 report based on international survey of religious attitudes, more than 50% of Muslim population in 6 out of 49 Islamic countries supported death penalty for any Muslim who leaves Islam (apostasy).The World’s Muslims: Religion, Politics and Society, April 30 2013 However it is also shown that the majority of Muslims in the 43 nations surveyed did not agree with this interpretation of sharia. Some scholars claim sharia allows religious freedom because a Shari'a verse teaches, "there is no compulsion in religion."Arzi, Donna E. "Role of Compulsion in Islamic Conversion: Jihad, Dhimma and Ridda, The." Buff. Hum. Rts. L. Rev. 8 (2002): 15 Other scholars claim sharia recognizes only one proper religion, considers apostasy as sin punishable with death, and members of other religions as kafir (infidel);Shafi'i: Rawda al-talibin, 10.7, Hanafi: Ibn 'Abidin: Radd al-muhtar 3.287, Maliki: al-Dardir: al-Sharh al-saghir, 4.435, and Hanbali: al-Bahuti: Kashshaf al-qina', 6.170 (see The Struggle to Constitute and Sustain Productive Orders: Vincent Ostrom's Quest to Understand Human Affairs), Mark Sproule-Jones et al (2008), Lexington Books, ISBN 978-0739126288) or hold that Shari'a demands that all apostates and kafir must be put to death, enslaved or be ransomed.SIDDIQI, MUHAMMAD IQBAL (1979), The Penal Law of Islam. Tahore: Kazi Publications, pages 40-59RAHIM, ABDUR. The Principles of Muhammadan Jurisprudence According to the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i, and Hanbali Schools (1911), Westport CT, Hyperion Press, see 1981 ReprintKhadduri, Majid (1955), War and Peace in the Law of lslam, The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, USAal-Zuhayli, Wahbah Al-Fiqh, al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 8 vols., 3rd edition, Dar al-Fikr, Damascus (1989) Yet other scholars suggest that Shari'a has become a product of human interpretation and inevitably leads to disagreements about the “precise contents of the Shari'a." In the end, then, what is being applied is not sharia, but what a particular group of clerics and government decide is sharia. It is these differing interpretations of Shari'a that explain why many Islamic countries have laws that restrict and criminalize apostasy, proselytism and their citizens' freedom of conscience and religion.Asma Uddin (2010), Religious Freedom Implications of Sharia Implementation in Aceh, Indonesia, Volume 7, Issue 3, Article 8, University of St Thomas Law Journal; see pages 640-647Saeed, Abdullah, and Hassan Saeed, eds. Freedom of religion, apostasy and Islam. Ashgate Publishing, 2004.  Homosexual intercourse is illegal under sharia law, though the prescribed penalties differ from one school of jurisprudence to another. For example, some Muslim-majority countries impose the death penalty for acts perceived as sodomy and homosexual activities: Iran, Saudi Arabia, and In other Muslim-majority countries such as Egypt, Iraq, and the Indonesian province of Aceh, same-sex sexual acts are illegal, and LGBT people regularly face violence and discrimination. Many claim Shari'a law encourages domestic violence against women, when a husband suspects nushuz (disobedience, disloyalty, rebellion, ill conduct) in his wife.John C. Raines & Daniel C. Maguire (Ed), Farid Esack,  What Men Owe to Women: Men's Voices from World Religions , State University of New York (2001), see pages 201-203 Other scholars claim wife beating, for nashizah, is not consistent with modern perspectives of the Quran.Jackson, Nicky Ali, ed. Encyclopedia of domestic violence. CRC Press, 2007. (see chapter on Quranic perspectives on wife abuse) One of the verses of the Quran relating to permissibility of domestic violence is Surah 4:34.Salhi and Grami (2011), Gender and Violence in the Middle East and North Africa, Florence (Italy), European University Institute In deference to Surah 4:34, many nations with Shari'a law have refused to consider or prosecute cases of domestic abuse.Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn, and Lois Bardsley-Sirois. "Obedience (Ta'a) in Muslim Marriage: Religious Interpretation and Applied Law in Egypt." Journal of Comparative Family Studies 21.1 (1990): 39-53.Maghraoui, Abdeslam. "Political authority in crisis: Mohammed VI's Morocco."Middle East Report 218 (2001): 12-17.Critelli, Filomena M. "Women's rights= Human rights: Pakistani women against gender violence." J. Soc. & Soc. Welfare 37 (2010), pages 135-142Oweis, Arwa, et al. "Violence Against Women Unveiling the Suffering of Women with a Low Income in Jordan." Journal of Transcultural Nursing 20.1 (2009): 69-76. Shari'a has been criticized for ignoring women's rights in domestic abuse cases.Rohe, Mathias. "Shari’a in a European context" Legal practice and cultural diversity, Farnham: Ashgate (2009); see pages 93-114.Funder, Anna. "De Minimis Non Curat Lex: The Clitoris, Culture and the Law."Transnat'l L. & Contemp. Probs. 3 (1993): 417.Anwar, Zainah. "Law-making in the name of Islam: implications for democratic governance." Islam in Southeast Asia: Political, Social and Strategic Challenges for the 21 (2005); see pages 121-134Natasha Bakht, Law, Family Arbitration Using Sharia. Muslim World Journal of Human Right, Issue 1 (2004). Musawah, CEDAW, KAFA and other organizations have proposed ways to modify Shari'a-inspired laws to improve women's rights in Islamic nations, including women's rights in domestic abuse cases.CEDAW and Muslim Family Laws, Sisters in Islam, Malaysia (2011)Brandt, Michele, and Jeffrey A. Kaplan. "The Tension between Women's Rights and Religious Rights: Reservations to Cedaw by Egypt, Bangladesh and Tunisia." Journal of Law and Religion 12.1 (1995): 105-142. Shari'a is the basis for personal status laws in most Islamic majority nations. These personal status laws determine rights of women in matters of marriage, divorce and child custody. A 2011 UNICEF report concludes that Shari'a law provisions are discriminatory against women from a human rights perspective. In legal proceedings under Shari'a law, a woman’s testimony is worth half of a man’s before a court.MENA Gender Equality Profile - Status of Girls and Women in the Middle East and North Africa, UNICEF (October 2011) Except for Iran, Lebanon and Bahrain which allow child marriages, the civil code in Islamic majority countries do not allow child marriage of girls. However, with Shari'a personal status laws, Shari'a courts in all these nations have the power to override the civil code. The religious courts permit girls less than 18 years old to marry. As of 2011, child marriages are common in a few Middle Eastern countries, accounting for 1 in 6 all marriages in Egypt and 1 in 3 marriages in Yemen. UNICEF and other studies state that the top five nations in the world with highest observed child marriage rates — Niger (75%), Chad (72%), Mali (71%), Bangladesh (64%), Guinea (63%) — are Islamic-majority countries where the personal laws for Muslims are sharia-based. Rape is considered a crime in all countries, but Shari'a courts in Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Libya, Morocco, Syria and Tunisia in some cases allow a rapist to escape punishment by marrying his victim, while in other cases the victim who complains is often prosecuted with the crime of Zina (adultery).Kendra Heideman and Mona Youssef, Challenges to Women’s Security in the MENA Region, Wilson Center (March, 2013) Sharia grants women the right to inherit property from other family members, and these rights are detailed in the Quran.Horrie, Chris; Chippindale, Peter (1991). p. 49. A woman's inheritance is unequal and less than a man's, and dependent on many factors. For instance, a daughter's inheritance is usually half that of her brother's.David Powers (1993), Islamic Inheritance System: A Socio-Historical Approach, The Arab Law Quarterly, 8, p 13 Until the 20th century, Islamic law granted Muslim women certain legal rights, such as the right to own property received as Mahr (brideprice) at her marriage. However, Islamic law does not grant non-Muslim women the same legal rights as the few it did grant Muslim women. Sharia recognizes the basic inequality between master and women slave, between free women and slave women, between Believers and non-Believers, as well as their unequal rights. Slave women under sharia did not have a right to own property, to move freely, or to consent.Sikainga, Ahmad A. (1996). Slaves Into Workers: Emancipation and Labor in Colonial Sudan. University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-77694-2.Tucker, Judith E.; Nashat, Guity (1999). Women in the Middle East and North Africa. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-21264-2. Sharia, in Islam's history, provided a religious foundation for enslaving non-Muslim women (and men), but nevertheless encouraged the manumission of slaves. However, manumission required that the non-Muslim slave first convert to Islam. A non-Muslim slave woman who bore children to her Muslim master became legally free upon her master's death, and her children were presumed to be Muslims like their father, in Africa and elsewhere. Starting with the 20th century, Western legal systems evolved to expand women's rights, but women's rights under Islamic law have remained tied to the Quran, hadiths and their fundamentalist interpretation as sharia by Islamic jurists. Elements of Islamic law have influenced western legal systems. As example, the influence of Islam on the development of an international law of the sea can be discerned alongside that of the Roman influence. Makdisi states Islamic law also influenced the legal scholastic system of the West. The study of legal text and degrees have parallels between Islamic studies of sharia and the Western system of legal studies; for example, the status of faqih (meaning "master of law"), mufti (meaning "professor of legal opinions") and mudarris (meaning "teacher") were later translated into Latin as magister, professor and doctor, respectively. There are differences between Islamic and Western legal systems. For example, sharia classically recognizes only natural persons, and never developed the concept of a legal person, or corporation, i.e., a legal entity that limits the liabilities of its managers, shareholders, and employees; exists beyond the lifetimes of its founders; and that can own assets, sign contracts, and appear in court through representatives.Kuran, Timur. The Absence of the Corporation in Islamic Law&nbsp;– Origins and Persistence. Interest prohibitions imposed secondary costs by discouraging record keeping and delaying the introduction of modern accounting. Such factors, according to Timur Kuran, have played a significant role in retarding economic development in the Middle East."Why the Middle East Is Economically Underdeveloped&nbsp;– Historical Mechanisms of Institutional Stagnation".         Iijima, Masako (January 13, 2010). "Islamic Police Tighten Grip on Indonesia's Aceh". Reuters. Retrieved September 18, 2011. "Aceh Sharia Police Loved and Hated". The Jakarta Post. violence,Staff (January 3, 2003). "Analysis: Nigeria's Sharia Split". BBC News. Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Thousands of people have been killed in fighting between Christians and Muslims following the introduction of sharia punishments in northern Nigerian states over the past three years". Harnischfeger, Johannes (2008).p. 16. "When the Governor of Kaduna announced the introduction of Sharia, although non-Muslims form almost half of the population, violence erupted, leaving more than 1,000 people dead." p. 189. "When a violent confrontation loomed in February 200, because the strong Christian minority in Kaduna was unwilling to accept the proposed sharia law, the sultan and his delegation of 18 emirs went to see the governor and insisted on the passage of the bill." Mshelizza, Ibrahim (July 28, 2009). "Fight for Sharia Leaves Dozens Dead in Nigeria&nbsp;– Islamic Militants Resisting Western Education Extend Their Campaign of Violence". The Independent. Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Nigeria in Transition: Recent Religious Tensions and Violence". PBS. Staff (December 28, 2010). "Timeline: Tensions in Nigeria&nbsp;– A Look at the Country's Bouts of Inter-Religious and Ethnic Clashes and Terror Attacks". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Thousands of people are killed in northern Nigeria as non-Muslims opposed to the introduction of sharia, or Islamic law, fight Muslims who demand its implementation in the northern state of Kaduna.". Ibrahimova, Roza (July 27, 2009). "Dozens Killed in Violence in Northern Nigeria" (video (requires Adobe Flash; 00:01:49)). Al Jazeera English. Retrieved September 19, 2011. "The group Boko Haram, which wants to impose sharia (Islamic law) across the country, has attacked police stations and churches." and even warfare.[ ]. Library of Congress Country Studies: Sudan:. "The factors that provoked the military coup, primarily the closely intertwined issues of Islamic law and of the civil war in the south, remained unresolved in 1991. The September 1983 implementation of the sharia throughout the country had been controversial and provoked widespread resistance in the predominantly non-Muslim south ... Opposition to the sharia, especially to the application of hudud (sing., hadd), or Islamic penalties, such as the public amputation of hands for theft, was not confined to the south and had been a principal factor leading to the popular uprising of April 1985 that overthrew the government of Jaafar an Nimeiri". Marchal, R. (2013), Islamic political dynamics in the Somali civil war. Islam in Africa South of the Sahara: Essays in Gender Relations and Political Reform, pp 331-352 Tibi, Bassam (2008). Political Islam, World Politics and Europe. Routledge. p. 33. "The shari'a was imposed on non-Muslim Sudanese peoples in September 1983, and since that time Muslims in the north have been fighting a jihad against the non-Muslims in the south." Most countries do not recognize sharia; however, some countries in Asia, Africa and Europe recognize parts of sharia and accept it as the law on divorce, inheritance and other personal affairs of their Islamic population. Stahnke, Tad and Robert C. Blitt (2005), "The Religion-State Relationship and the Right to Freedom of Religion or Belief: A Comparative Textual Analysis of the Constitutions of Predominantly Muslim Countries." Georgetown Journal of International Law, volume 36, issue 4; also see Sharia Law profile by Country, Emory University (2011) In Britain, the Muslim Arbitration Tribunal makes use of sharia family law to settle disputes, and this limited adoption of sharia is controversial.Taher, Abul (September 14, 2008). Revealed: UK’s first official sharia courts. The Sunday Times Inside Britain's Sharia courts Jane Corbin, The Telegraph (April 7, 2013) Bowen, J. R. (2009). How could English courts recognize Shariah?, U. St. Thomas Law Journal, 7, 411 Otto, J. M. (2008). Sharia and National Law in Muslim Countries (Vol. 3), Amsterdam University Press The differences between sharia and secular law have led to an ongoing controversy as to whether sharia is compatible with secular forms of government, human rights, freedom of thought, and women's rights.Hajjar, Lisa. "Religion, state power, and domestic violence in Muslim societies: A framework for comparative analysis." Law & Social Inquiry 29.1 (2004); see pages 1-38Al-Suwaidi, J. (1995). Arab and western conceptions of democracy; in Democracy, war, and peace in the Middle East (Editors: David Garnham, Mark A. Tessler), Indiana University Press, see Chapters 5 and 6; ISBN 978-0253209399 Injunctions, revealed principles and interpretations of the Quran (Used by all schools and sects of Islam) Interpretation of the Sunnah (Muhammad's practices, opinions and traditions) and principles therein, after establishing the degree of reliability of hadith's chain of reporters (Used by all schools and sects of Islam) Ijma, collective reasoning and consensus amongst authoritative Muslims of a particular generation, and its interpretation by Islamic scholars. This fiqh principle for sharia is derived from Quranic verse 4:59.; Hisham M. Ramadan (2006), Understanding Islamic Law: From Classical to Contemporary, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0759109919, p. 17 Typically, the recorded consensus of Sahabah (Muhammad's companions) is considered authoritative and most trusted. If this is unavailable, then the recorded individual reasoning (Ijtihad) of Muhammad companions is sought. In Islam's history, some Muslim scholars have argued that Ijtihad allows individual reasoning of both the earliest generations of Muslims and later generation Muslims, while others have argued that Ijtihad allows individual reasoning of only the earliest generations of Muslims. (Used by all schools of Islam, Jafari fiqh accepts only Ijtihad of Shia Imams)Javaid Rehman et al (Editors), Religion, Human Rights and International Law, Brill Academic, ISBN 978-9004158269, p. 82 (notes 2-6) Qiyas, analogy is deployed if Ijma or historic collective reasoning on the issue is not available. Qiyas represents analogical deduction, the support for using it in fiqh is based on Quranic verse 2:59, and this methodology was started by Abu Hanifa.; Hisham M. Ramadan (2006), Understanding Islamic Law: From Classical to Contemporary, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0759109919, p. 18 This principle is considered weak by Hanbali fiqh, and it usually avoids Qiyas for sharia. (Used by all Sunni schools of Islam, but rejected by Shia Jafari) Istihsan, which is the principle of serving the interest of Islam and public as determined by Islamic jurists. This method is deployed if Ijtihad and Qiyas fail to provide guidance. It was started by Hanafi fiqh as a form of Ijtihad (individual reasoning). Maliki fiqh called it Masalih Al-Mursalah, or departure from strict adherence to the Texts for public welfare. The Hanbali fiqh called it Istislah and rejected it, as did Shafi'i fiqh. (Used by Hanafi, Maliki, but rejected by Shafii, Hanbali and Shia Jafari fiqhs)Baber Johansen (1998), Contingency in a Sacred Law: Legal and Ethical Norms in the Muslim Fiqh, Brill Academic, ISBN 978-9004106031, pp. 23-32 Istihab and Urf which mean continuity of pre-Islamic customs and customary law. This is considered as the weakest principle, accepted by just two fiqhs, and even in them recognized only when the custom does not violate or contradict any Quran, Hadiths or other fiqh source. (Used by Hanafi, Maliki, but rejected by Shafii, Hanbali and Shia Jafari fiqhs)Muḥammad K̲ālid Masud et al, Dispensing Justice in Islam: Qadis And Their Judgements, Brill Academic, ISBN 978-9004140677, p. 221 Actions in the fard category are those mandatory on all Muslims. They include the five daily prayers, fasting, articles of faith, obligatory giving of zakat (charity, tax) to zakat collectors,Heck, Paul L. (2006), "Taxation", In Encyclopaedia of the Qur'an, vol. 5, (McAuliffe, Jane Dammen editor), Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 90-04-14743-8Medani Ahmed and Sebastian Gianci, Zakat, Encyclopedia of Taxation and Tax Policy (Cordes et al. editors), ISBN 978-0877666820, p. 479-481 and the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. The mustahabb category includes proper behaviour in matters such as marriage, funeral rites and family life. As such, it covers many of the same areas as civil law in the West. Sharia courts attempt to reconcile parties to disputes in this area using the recommended behaviour as their guide. A person whose behaviour is not mustahabb can be ruled against by the judge.Horrie, Chris; Chippindale, Peter (1991). pp. 46–47. Mubah category of behaviour is neither discouraged nor recommended, neither forbidden nor required; it is permissible. Makruh behaviour, while it is not sinful of itself, is considered undesirable among Muslims. It may also make a Muslim liable to criminal penalties under certain circumstances. Haraam behaviour is explicitly forbidden. It is both sinful and criminal. It includes all actions expressly forbidden in the Quran. Certain Muslim dietary and clothing restrictions also fall into this category. Hygiene and purification laws, including the manner of cleansing, either wudhu or ghusl. Economic laws, including Zakāt, the annual almsgiving; Waqf, the religious endowment; the prohibition on interest or Riba; as well as inheritance laws. Dietary laws including Dhabihah, or ritual slaughter. Theological obligations, including the Hajj or pilgrimage, with its rituals such as Tawaf, Sa'yee and the Stoning of the Devil; salat, formal worship; Salat al-Janazah, the funeral prayer; and celebrating Eid al-Adha. Marital jurisprudence, including Nikah, the marriage contract; and divorce, known as Khula if initiated by a woman. Criminal jurisprudence, including Hudud, fixed punishments; Tazir, discretionary punishment; Qisas or retaliation; Diyya or blood money; and apostasy. Military jurisprudence, including Jihad, offensive and defensive; Hudna or truce; and rules regarding prisoners of war. Dress code, including hijab. Other topics include customs and behaviour, slavery and the status of non-Muslims. Siraj Khan, Blasphemy against the Prophet, in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture (Editors: Coeli Fitzpatrick and Adam Hani Walker), ISBN 978-1610691772, pp. 59-67 R Ibrahim (2013), Crucified Again, ISBN 978-1621570257, pp. 100-101Wiederhold, Lutz. "Blasphemy against the Prophet Muhammad and his companions (sabb al-rasul, sabb al-sahabah): The introduction of the topic into shafi'i legal literature and its relevance for legal practice under Mamluk rule."Journal of semitic studies 42.1 (1997): 39-70. The sharia of various Islamic schools of jurisprudence specify different punishment for blasphemy against Islam, by Muslims and non-Muslims, ranging from imprisonment, fines, flogging, amputation, hanging, or beheading. Ibn Taymiyyah (a Salafi, related to Hanbali school), al-Sārim al-Maslūl ‘ala Shātim al-Rasūl (or, A ready sword against those who insult the Messenger), Published in 1297 AD in Arabic, Reprinted in 1975 and 2003 by Dar-ibn Hazm (Beirut), the book is on blasphemy/insulting Muhammad and the punishment per sharia; Jerusha Lamptey (2014), Never Wholly Other: A Muslima Theology of Religious Pluralism, Oxford University Press, Chapter 1 with footnotes 28, 29 pp. 258 In some cases, sharia allows non-Muslims to escape death by converting and becoming a devout follower of Islam.Carl Ernst (2005), "Blasphemy: Islamic Concept", Encyclopedia of Religion (Editor: Lindsay Jones), Vol 2, Macmillan Reference, ISBN 0-02-865735-7 If a person converts to Islam, or is born and raised as a Muslim, then he or she will have full rights of citizenship in an Islamic state. Leaving Islam is a sin and a religious crime. Once any man or woman is officially classified as Muslim, because of birth or religious conversion, he or she will be subject to the death penalty if he or she becomes an apostate, that is, abandons his or her faith in Islam in order to become an atheist, agnostic or to convert to another religion. Before executing the death penalty, sharia demands that the individual be offered one chance to return to Islam. If a person has never been a Muslim, and is not a kafir (infidel, unbeliever), he or she can live in an Islamic state by accepting to be a dhimmi, or under a special permission called aman. As a dhimmi or under aman, he or she will suffer certain limitations of rights as a subject of an Islamic state, and will not enjoy complete legal equality with Muslims. If a person has never been a Muslim, and is a kafir (infidel, unbeliever), sharia demands that he or she should be offered the choice to convert to Islam and become a Muslim; if he or she rejects the offer, he or she may become a dhimmi. Failure  to pay the tax may lead the non-muslim to either be enslaved, killed or ransomed if captured.Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na’im (1996): pp. 352-353 Bernard Lewis (2002), What Went Wrong?, ISBN 0-19-514420-1, pp. 82–83; Brunschvig. 'Abd; Encyclopedia of Islam, Brill, 2nd Edition, Vol 1, pp. 13-40.(, ,) Sharia authorized the institution of slavery, using the words abd (slave) and the phrase ma malakat aymanukum ("that which your right hand owns") to refer to women slaves, seized as captives of war.Slavery in Islam BBC Religions Archives Under Islamic law, Muslim men could have sexual relations with female captives and slaves without her consent.Mazrui, A. A. (1997). Islamic and Western values. Foreign Affairs, pp 118-132.Ali, K. (2010). Marriage and slavery in early Islam. Harvard University Press. Arabization Topics in sharia law Ban on sharia law Dīn Glossary of Islam Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists Imam Nawawi's Forty Hadith, a brief collection of forty hadith by the founder of the Shāfiʿī school, each used to illustrate a fundamental of shariah. Islam and the arts Islamic Sharia Council, a court in the United Kingdom with no legal authority. Islamic theology Ma'ruf More danico a law system that is applied according to group rather than territoriality. Rayani Air a Malaysian airline that's following sharia. Religious law Theonomy Hudud al-Misri, Ahmad ibn Naqib (edited and translated from Arabic (with commentary) by Nuh Ha Mim Keller). Reliance of the Traveller&nbsp;– A Classic Manual of Islamic Sacred Law (1994 revised edition). Amana Publications ISBN 978-0-915957-72-9. An-Na'im, Abdullahi Ahmed. "Islamic Foundations of Religious Human Rights" in Religious Human Rights in Global Perspective: Religious Perspectives. John Witte Jr. & Johan D. van der Vyver eds. (1996). Springer Publishing ISBN 978-9041101778. ash-Shafi'i, Muhammad ibn Idris (1993). Risala: Treatise on the Foundations of Islamic Jurisprudence. Islamic Texts Society. ISBN 0-946621-15-2. Bakhtiar, Laleh; Reinhart, Kevin (1996). Encyclopedia of Islamic Law: A Compendium of the Major Schools. Kazi Publications, ISBN 1-56744-498-9. Berg, Herbert (2005). "Islamic Law." Berkshire Encyclopedia of World History 3. p.&nbsp;1,030. In History Reference Center [database online]. Available from Snowden Library (accessed February 11, 2008). Brown, Daniel W. (1996). Rethinking Traditions in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65394-0. Coulson, Noel James (1964). A History of Islamic Law (Islamic Surveys). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Darwish, Nonie (2008). Cruel and Usual Punishment: The Terrifying Global Implications of Islamic Law. Thomas Nelson. ISBN 978-1-59555-161-0. Dien, Mawil Izzi (2004). Islamic Law: From Historical Foundations to Contemporary Practice. Notre Dame, Illinois: University of Notre Dame Press. Doi, Abd ar-Rahman I.; Clarke, Abdassamad (2008). Shari'ah: Islamic Law. Ta-Ha Publishers Ltd. ISBN 184200-085-3 (paperback); ISBN 978-1-84200-087-8 (hardback). El-Fadl, Khaled Abou (2003). Reasoning with God: Rationality and Thought in Islam. Oneworld. ISBN 1-85168-306-2. Glenn, H. Patrick (2014). Legal Traditions of the World&nbsp;– Sustainable Diversity in Law (5th edition), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199669837. Harnischfeger, Johannes (2008). Democratization and Islamic Law&nbsp;– The Sharia Conflict in Nigeria. Frankfurt; New York City: Campus Verlag and Chicago: University of Chicago Press (distributor). ISBN 978-3-593-38256-2. Horrie, Chris; Chippindale, Peter (1991). What Is Islam? A Comprehensive Introduction. Virgin Books. ISBN 0-7535-0827-3. Kafadar, Cemal (1996). Between Two Worlds: The Construction of the Ottoman State. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-20600-2. Khadduri, Majid and Liebesny, Herbert J. (Editors). Law in the Middle East: Volume I: Origin and Development of Islamic Law. Washington D.C.: The Middle East Institute, 1955. Liebesny, Majid &, and Herbert J. (editors) (1955). Khadduri. Law in the Middle East: Volume I: Origin and Development of Islamic Law. Washington D.C.: Middle East Institute. Mumisa, Michael (2002). Islamic Law: Theory & Interpretation. Amana Publications. ISBN 1-59008-010-6. Musa, A. Y. (2008). Hadith as Scripture: Discussions on The Authority Of Prophetic Traditions in Islam, New York: Palgrave. Otto, Jan Michiel (2008). Sharia and National Law in Muslim Countries&nbsp;– Tensions and Opportunities for Dutch and EU Foreign Policy&nbsp;– Law, Governance, and Development, Amsterdam University Press, ISBN 978-9087280482. Safi, Omid (2003). Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism. Oneworld Publications. ISBN 1-85168-316-X. Shahin, Omar (2007). The Muslim Family in Western Society: A Study in Islamic Law. Cloverdale Corporation. ISBN 978-1-929569-30-4. Standke, Corinna (2008). Sharia&nbsp;— The Islamic Law, GRIN Verlag Encyclopaedia of Islam. Ed. P. Bearman et al., Leiden: Brill, 1960-2005. Ali, Abdullah Yusuf (2000). The Holy Qur'an (Translated by Abdullah Yusuf Ali). Ware, Hertfordshire, England: Wordsworth Editions. ISBN 978-1-85326-782-6. A popular translation of the Quran. Coulson, Noel J. (1964). A History of Islamic Law. Edinburgh: Edinburgh U.P. Elliesie, Hatem (2014): Binnenpluralität des Islamischen Rechts: Diversität religiöser Normativität rechtsdogmatisch- und methodisch betrachtet, SFB Governance Working Paper Series, Collaborative Research Center 700 „Governance in Areas of Limited Statehood", No. 54, ISSN 1863-6896. Hallaq, Wael B. (2009). An Introduction to Islamic Law. Cambridge: Cambridge U.P. ISBN 978-0-52167-873-5 Hussain, Jamila (2011). Islam: Its Law and Society (3rd edition). Annandale, N.S.W., Australia: The Federation Press. ISBN 1-86287-499-9. . A modern discourse on Sharia law. Khan, Muhammad Muhsin (1996). The English Translation of Ṣaḥīḥ Al Bukhārī with the Arabic Text. Alexandria, Va.: Al-Saadawi Publications. ISBN 978-1-881963-59-2. . The complete translation (in nine volumes) of a popular Sunni collection of hadith. Mahmassani, Sobhi (1961). The Philosophy of Jurisprudence in Islam, translated by Farhat J. Ziadeh. Leiden: Brill. Mahmassani, Sobhi (1966). The Principles of International Law in the Light of Islamic Doctrine, publications of The Hague Academy of International Law, Leiden. Potz, Richard (2011). Islamic Law and the Transfer of European Law. Mainz: European History Online, Institute of European History. Retrieved: November 28, 2011. Nuh Ha Mim Keller (ed., trans.), Reliance of the Traveller: Classic Manual of Islamic Sacred Law,  Amana Publications, revised edition  1997,  ISBN 9780-915957-72-9 Schacht, Joseph (1964). An Introduction to Islamic Law.  Oxford: Clarendon Schacht, Joseph (1950). The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. Oxford: Clarendon UNAA site on sharia in Muslim Countries – United Nations Sharia Law in the International Legal Sphere – Yale University 'Sharia' from Oxford Islamic Studies Online – Bridging Cultures, National Endowment for the Humanities & George Mason University Private Arrangements: 'Recognizing Sharia' in Britain – anthropologist John R. Bowen explains the working of Britain's sharia courts in a Boston Review article Division of Inheritance According to Qur'an "Explanation of "The Reward of the Omnipotent" is a manuscript, in Arabic, from the late 19th or early 20th century about Sharia
