          Shiva (; Sanskrit: , meaning "The Auspicious One", also known as Mahadeva ("Great God"), is one of the three major deities of Hinduism. Shiva is distinct from Vishnu and Brahma yet one with them. He is Anant, one who is neither found born nor found dead. He is the Greatest of the Gods within Shaivism, one of the three most influential denominations in contemporary Hinduism.Tattwananda, p. 45. He is one of the five primary forms of God in the Smarta Tradition,Flood (1996), p. 17. and "the Transformer".Zimmer (1972) p. 124. At the highest level, Shiva is regarded as limitless, transcendent, unchanging and formless.See Parmeshvaranand, Volume 3.See Kramrisch, The presence of Siva, page 186.See Abhayananda, page 95.See Davis, pp 113-114.Chatterji, Kashmir Shaivism. Shiva also has many benevolent and fearsome forms.Sharma, Iconography of Sadasiva In benevolent aspects, he is depicted as an omniscient Yogi who lives an ascetic life on Mount Kailash, as well as a householder with wife Parvati and his two children, Ganesha and Kartikeya, and in fierce aspects, he is often depicted slaying demons. Shiva is also regarded as the patron god of yoga and arts.See Shiva Samhita, e.g. translation by Mallinson.See Varenne, page 82.See Marchand for Jnana Yoga. The main iconographical attributes of Shiva are the third eye on his forehead, the snake Vasuki around his neck, the adorning crescent moon, the holy river Ganga flowing from his matted hair, the trishula as his weapon and the damaru as his musical instrument. Shiva is usually worshiped in the aniconic form of Lingam.Davis writes on page 122: "The Saiva worshipper does not worship the object itself as Siva or as representing Siva; he directs his worship toward it as the physical support for Siva's special presence."Hinduism: Beliefs and Practices, by Jeanne Fowler, pgs. 42–43, In traditional Indian society, the linga is rather seen as a symbol of the energy and potentiality of the god.See Fuller, The Camphor Flame, pp 58. The worship of Shiva is a pan-Hindu tradition, practiced widely across all of India, Nepal and Sri Lanka.Keay, p.xxvii.  The Sanskrit word "Shiva" (Devanagari: , ) comes from the Shri Rudram Chamakam of the Taittiriya Shakha (TS 4.5, 4.7) of the Krishna Yajurveda. The root word  means auspicious. In simple English transliteration it is written either as Shiva or Siva. The adjective , is used as an attributive epithet for several Rigvedic deities, including Rudra.For use of the term  as an epithet for other Vedic deities, see: Chakravarti, p. 28. Other popular names associated with Shiva are Mahadeva, Mahesha, Maheshvara, Shankara, Shambhu, Rudra, Hara, Trilochan, Devendra (meaning Chief of the gods) and Trilokinatha (meaning Lord of the three realms).See translation by Manmatha Nath Dutt, Chapter 17 of Volume 13.See translation by Kisari Mohan Ganguli, Chapter 17 of Volume 13.See Chidbhavananda, "Siva Sahasranama Stotram". The Sanskrit word  means "relating to the god Shiva", and this term is the Sanskrit name both for one of the principal sects of Hinduism and for a member of that sect.Apte, p. 927 It is used as an adjective to characterize certain beliefs and practices, such as Shaivism.For the definition "Śaivism refers to the traditions which follow the teachings of  () and which focus on the deity ... " see: Flood (1996), p. 149. Some authors associate the name with the Tamil word  meaning "red", noting that Shiva is linked to the Sun (, "the Red one", in Tamil) and that Rudra is also called Babhru (brown, or red) in the Rigveda. Adi Shankara, in his interpretation of the name Shiva, the 27th and 600th name of Vishnu sahasranama, the thousand names of Vishnu interprets Shiva to have multiple meanings: "The Pure One", or "the One who is not affected by three Guṇas of Prakṛti (Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas)" or "the One who purifies everyone by the very utterance of His name."Sri Vishnu Sahasranama, Ramakrishna Math edition, pg.47 and pg. 122. Chinmayananda Saraswati, in his translation of the Vishnu sahasranama, further elaborates on that verse: Shiva means "the One who is eternally pure" or "the One who can never have any contamination of the imperfection of Rajas and Tamas".Swami Chinmayananda's translation of Vishnu sahasranama, pg. 24, Central Chinmaya Mission Trust. Shiva's role as the primary deity of Shaivism is reflected in his epithets  ("Great god";  "Great" and deva "god"),Kramrisch, p. 476.For appearance of the name  in the Shiva Sahasranama see:   ("Great Lord";  "great" and  "lord"),Kramrisch, p. 477.For appearance of the name in the Shiva Sahasranama see: and  ("Supreme Lord").For  as "Supreme Lord" see: Kramrisch, p. 479. There are at least eight different versions of the Shiva Sahasranama, devotional hymns (stotras) listing many names of Shiva. The version appearing in Book 13 () of the Mahabharata is considered the kernel of this tradition.This is the source for the version presented in Chidbhavananda, who refers to it being from the Mahabharata but does not explicitly clairify which of the two Mahabharata versions he is using. See Chidbhavananda, p.5. Shiva also has Dasha-Sahasranamas (10,000 names) that are found in the Mahanyasa. The Shri Rudram Chamakam, also known as the Śatarudriya, is a devotional hymn to Shiva hailing him by many names.For an overview of the Śatarudriya see: Kramrisch, pp. 71-74.For complete Sanskrit text, translations, and commentary see: Sivaramamurti (1976).   The worship of Shiva is a pan-Hindu tradition, practiced widely across all of India, Nepal and Sri Lanka. The figure of Shiva as we know him today was built up over time, with the ideas of many regional sects being amalgamated into a single figure. How the persona of Shiva converged as a composite deity is not well documented.For Shiva as a composite deity whose history is not well documented, see: Keay, p. 147. According to Vijay Nath:   An example of assimilation took place in Maharashtra, where a regional deity named Khandoba is a patron deity of farming and herding castes.Courtright, p. 205. The foremost center of worship of Khandoba in Maharashtra is in Jejuri.For Jejuri as the foremost center of worship see: Mate, p. 162. Khandoba has been assimilated as a form of Shiva himself,Biroba, Mhaskoba und Khandoba: Ursprung, Geschichte und Umwelt von pastoralen Gottheiten in Maharastra, Wiesbaden 1976 (German with English Synopsis) pp. 180-98, "Khandoba is a local deity in Maharashtra and been Sanskritised as an incarnation of Shiva." in which case he is worshipped in the form of a lingam.For worship of Khandoba in the form of a lingam and possible identification with Shiva based on that, see: Mate, p. 176. Khandoba's varied associations also include an identification with Surya and Karttikeya.For use of the name Khandoba as a name for Karttikeya in Maharashtra, see: Gupta, Preface, and p. 40.   Many Indus valley seals show animals but one seal that has attracted attention shows a figure, either horned or wearing a horned headdress and possibly ithyphallicFor a drawing of the seal see Figure 1 in: Flood (1996), p. 29.Singh, S.P., Rgvedic Base of the Pasupati Seal of Mohenjo-Daro(Approx 2500-3000 BC), Puratattva 19: 19-26. 1989Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1998. figure seated in a posture reminiscent of the Lotus position and surrounded by animals was named by early excavators of Mohenjo-daro Pashupati (lord of cattle), an epithet of the later Hindu gods Shiva and Rudra. Sir John Marshall and others have claimed that this figure is a prototype of Shiva and have described the figure as having three faces seated in a "yoga posture" with the knees out and feet joined. Some academics like Gavin Flood and John Keay have expressed doubts about this claim. John Keay writes that "He may indeed be an early manifestation of Lord Shiva as Pashu- pati", but a couple of his specialties of this figure does not match with Rudra. Writing in 1997 Doris Meth Srinivasan rejected Marshall's package of proto-Shiva features, including that of three heads. She interprets what John Marshall interpreted as facial as not human but more bovine, possibly a divine buffalo-man. Writing in 2002, Gregory L. Possehl concluded that while it would be appropriate to recognize the figure as a deity, its association with the water buffalo, and its posture as one of ritual discipline, regarding it as a proto-Shiva would "go too far." Shiva's rise to a major position in the pantheon was facilitated by his identification with a host of Vedic deities, including Purusha, Rudra, Agni, Indra, , , and others.For Shiva being identified with Agni, Indra, Prajāpati, Vāyu, and others see: Chakravarti, p. 70.   Shiva as we know him today shares many features with the Vedic god Rudra,Michaels, p. 316. and both Shiva and Rudra are viewed as the same personality in Hindu scriptures. The two names are used synonymously. Rudra, the god of the roaring storm, is usually portrayed in accordance with the element he represents as a fierce, destructive deity. The oldest surviving text of Hinduism is the Rig Veda, which is dated to between 1700 and 1100 BC based on linguistic and philological evidence.For dating based on "cumulative evidence" see: Oberlies, p. 158. A god named Rudra is mentioned in the Rig Veda. The name Rudra is still used as a name for Shiva. In RV 2.33, he is described as the "Father of the Rudras", a group of storm gods.Doniger, pp. 221-223. Furthermore, the Rudram, one of the most sacred hymns of Hinduism found both in the Rig and the Yajur Vedas and addressed to Rudra, invokes him as Shiva in several instances, but the term Shiva is used as an epithet for the gods Indra, Mitra and Agni many times. Since Shiva means pure, the epithet is possibly used to describe a quality of these gods rather than to identify any of them with the God Shiva. The identification of Shiva with the older god Rudhra is not universally accepted, as Axel Michaels explains:  The word is derived from the Sanskrit root -, which means "to injure" or "to kill",For root - see: Apte, p. 910. and Sharma uses that general sense in his interpretive translation of the name  as "One who can kill the forces of darkness". The names  ("Bowman")Chidbhavananda, p. 33. and  ("Archer", literally "Armed with arrows in his hands")For translation of  as "Armed with arrows in his hands", see: . also refer to archery. Rudra and Agni have a close relationship.For general statement of the close relationship, and example shared epithets, see: Sivaramamurti, p. 11.For an overview of the Rudra-Fire complex of ideas, see: Kramrisch, pp. 15-19. The identification between Agni and Rudra in the Vedic literature was an important factor in the process of Rudra's gradual development into the later character as Rudra-Shiva.For quotation "An important factor in the process of Rudra's growth is his identification with Agni in the Vedic literature and this identification contributed much to the transformation of his character as ." see: Chakravarti, p. 17. The identification of Agni with Rudra is explicitly noted in the Nirukta, an important early text on etymology, which says, "Agni is also called Rudra."For translation from Nirukta 10.7, see: Sarup (1927), p. 155.  The interconnections between the two deities are complex, and according to Stella Kramrisch:  In the Śatarudrīya, some epithets of Rudra, such as  ("Of golden red hue as of flame") and  ("Flaming bright"), suggest a fusing of the two deities.For "Note Agni-Rudra concept fused" in epithets  and  see: Sivaramamurti, p. 45. Agni is said to be a bull, and Lord Shiva possesses a bull as his vehicle, Nandi. The horns of Agni, who is sometimes characterized as a bull, are mentioned.For the parallel between the horns of Agni as bull, and Rudra, see: Chakravarti, p. 89.RV 8.49; 10.155. In medieval sculpture, both Agni and the form of Shiva known as Bhairava have flaming hair as a special feature.For flaming hair of Agni and Bhairava see: Sivaramamurti, p. 11.  According to Wendy Doniger, the Puranic Shiva is a continuation of the Vedic Indra. Doniger gives several reasons for her hypothesis. Both are associated with mountains, rivers, male fertility, fierceness, fearlessness, warfare, transgression of established mores, the Aum sound, the Supreme Self. In the Rig Veda the term  is used to refer to Indra. (2.20.3,For text of RV 2.20.3a as  and translation as "May that young adorable Indra, ever be the friend, the benefactor, and protector of us, his worshipper" see: Arya & Joshi (2001), p. 48, volume 2. 6.45.17,For text of RV 6.45.17 as  and translation as "Indra, who has ever been the friend of those who praise you, and the insurer of their happiness by your protection, grant us felicity" see: Arya & Joshi (2001), p. 91, volume 3.For translation of RV 6.45.17 as "Thou who hast been the singers' Friend, a Friend auspicious with thine aid, As such, O Indra, favour us" see: . and 8.93.3.For text of RV 8.93.3 as  and translation as "May Indra, our auspicious friend, milk for us, like a richly-streaming (cow), wealth of horses, kine, and barley" see: Arya & Joshi (2001), p. 48, volume 2.) Indra, like Shiva, is likened to a bull.For the bull parallel between Indra and Rudra see: Chakravarti, p. 89.RV 7.19. In the Rig Veda, Rudra is the father of the Maruts, but he is never associated with their warlike exploits as is Indra.For the lack of warlike connections and difference between Indra and Rudra, see: Chakravarti, p. 8. The Vedic beliefs and practices of the pre-classical era were closely related to the hypothesised Proto-Indo-European religion, and the Indo-Iranian religion. According to Anthony, the Old Indic religion probably emerged among Indo-European immigrants in the contact zone between the Zeravshan River (present-day Uzbekistan) and (present-day) Iran. It was "a syncretic mixture of old Central Asian and new Indo-European elements", which borrowed "distinctive religious beliefs and practices" from the Bactria–Margiana Culture. At least 383 non-Indo-European words were borrowed from this culture, including the god Indra and the ritual drink Soma. According to Anthony,  Rudra's transformation from an ambiguously characterized deity to a supreme being began in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad (400-200 BC), which founded the tradition of Rudra-Shiva worship. Here they are identified as the creators of the cosmos and liberators of souls from the birth-rebirth cycle. The period of 200 BC to 100 AD also marks the beginning of the Shaiva tradition focused on the worship of Shiva, with references to Shaiva ascetics in Patanjali's Mahābhāṣya and in the Mahabharata. Early historical paintings at the Bhimbetka rock shelters, depict Shiva dancing, Shiva's trident, and his mount Nandi but no other Vedic gods. The Shiva Puranas, particularly the Shiva Purana and the Linga Purana, discuss the various forms of Shiva and the cosmology associated with him. The Tantras, composed between the 8th and 11th centuries, regard themselves as Sruti. Among these the Shaiva Agamas, are said to have been revealed by Shiva himself and are foundational texts for Shaiva Siddhanta. Shaivism is one of the oldest of the four major sects of Hinduism, the others being Vaishnavism, Shaktism and the Smarta Tradition. Followers of Shaivism, called "Shaivas", revere Shiva as the Supreme Being. Shaivas believe that Shiva is All and in all, the creator, preserver, destroyer, revealer and concealer of all that is. The tantric Shaiva tradition consists of the Kapalikas, Kashmir Shaivism and Shaiva Siddhanta. The Shiva Purana is one of the puranas, a genre of Hindu religious texts, dedicated to Shiva. Shaivism is widespread throughout India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, mostly. Areas notable for the practice of Shaivism include parts of Southeast Asia, especially Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia. Indologist Axel Michaels suggests that Shaivism, like Vaishnavism, implies a unity which cannot be clearly found either in religious practice or in philosophical and esoteric doctrine. Furthermore, practice and doctrine must be kept separate.Michaels, p. 215. Panchayatana puja is the system of puja (worship) in the Smarta Tradition. It is said to have been introduced by Adi Shankara, the 8th century Hindu philosopher. It consists of the worship of five deities: Shiva, Vishnu, Devi, Surya and Ganesha. Depending on the tradition followed by Smarta households, one of these deities is kept in the center and the other four surround it. Worship is offered to all the deities. The five are represented by small murtis, or by five kinds of stones, or by five marks drawn on the floor.Himalaya Academy, Panchayatana puja The Trimurti is a concept in Hinduism in which the cosmic functions of creation, maintenance, and destruction are personified by the forms of Brahmā the creator, Vishnu the maintainer or preserver and Śhiva the destroyer or transformer.For quotation defining the trimurti see Matchett, Freda. "The ", in: Flood (2003), p. 139.For the Trimurti system having Brahma as the creator, Vishnu as the maintainer or preserver, and Shiva as the transformer or destroyer see: Zimmer (1972) p. 124. These three deities have been called "the Hindu triad"For definition of trimurti as "the unified form" of Brahmā,  and Śiva and use of the phrase "the Hindu triad" see: Apte, p. 485. or the "Great Trinity",For the term "Great Trinity" in relation to the Trimurti see: Jansen, p. 83. often addressed as "Brahma-Vishnu-Maheshwara."   Apart from anthropomorphic images of Shiva, the worship of Shiva in the form of a lingam, is also important.Michaels, p. 216.Flood (1996), p. 29.Tattwanandaz, pp. 49-52.  These are depicted in various forms. One common form is the shape of a vertical rounded column. Shiva means auspiciousness, and lingam means a sign or a symbol, so the Shivalinga is regarded as a "symbol of the great God of the universe who is all-auspiciousness". Shiva also means "one in whom the whole creation sleeps after dissolution". Since, according to Hinduism, it is the same god that creates, sustains and withdraws the universe, the Shivalinga represents symbolically God Himself. Some scholars, such as Monier Monier-Williams and Wendy Doniger, also view linga as a phallic symbol,See Monier William's Sanskrit to english Dictionary although this interpretation is disputed by others, including Swami Vivekananda, Sivananda Saraswati,  and S. N. Balagangadhara.  The worship of the lingam originated from the famous hymn in the Atharva-Veda Samhitâ sung in praise of the Yupa-Stambha, the sacrificial post. In that hymn, a description is found of the beginningless and endless Stambha or Skambha, and it is shown that the said Skambha is put in place of the eternal Brahman. Just as the Yajna (sacrificial) fire, its smoke, ashes, and flames, the Soma plant, and the ox that used to carry on its back the wood for the Vedic sacrifice gave place to the conceptions of the brightness of Shiva's body, his tawny matted hair, his blue throat, and the riding on the bull of the Shiva, the Yupa-Skambha gave place in time to the Shiva-Linga. In the text Linga Purana, the same hymn is expanded in the shape of stories, meant to establish the glory of the great Stambha and the superiority of Shiva as Mahadeva. Jyotirlinga means "The Radiant sign of The Almighty". The Jyotirlingas are mentioned in the Shiva Purana.   Shiva forms a Tantric couple with Shakti, the embodiment of energy, dynamism, and the motivating force behind all action and existence in the material universe. Shakti is her transcendent masculine aspect, providing the divine ground of all being. Shakti manifests in several female deities. Sati and Parvati are the main consorts of Shiva. She is also referred to as Uma, Durga (Parvati), Kali and Chandika. Kali is the manifestation of Shakti in her dreadful aspect. The name Kali comes from kāla, which means black, time, death, lord of death, Shiva. Since Shiva is called Kāla,  the eternal time,  Kālī, his consort, also means "Time" or "Death" (as in "time has come"). Various Shakta Hindu cosmologies, as well as Shākta Tantric beliefs, worship her as the ultimate reality or Brahman. She is also revered as Bhavatārini (literally "redeemer of the universe"). Kālī is represented as the consort of Lord Shiva, on whose body she is often seen standing or dancing. Shiva is the masculine force, the power of peace, while Shakti translates to power, and is considered as the feminine force. In the Vaishnava tradition, these realities are portrayed as Vishnu and Laxmi, or Radha and Krishna. These are differences in formulation rather than a fundamental difference in the principles. Both Shiva and Shakti have various forms. Shiva has forms like Yogi Raj (the common image of Himself meditating in the Himalayas), Rudra (a wrathful form) and Nataraj (Shiva's dance are the Lasya - the gentle form of dance, associated with the creation of the world, and the Tandava - the violent and dangerous dance, associated with the destruction of weary world views – weary perspectives and lifestyles). Five is a sacred number for Shiva.For five as a sacred number, see: Kramrisch, p. 182.  One of his most important mantras has five syllables ().It is first encountered in an almost identical form in the Rudram. For the five syllable mantra see: Kramrisch, p. 182. Shiva's body is said to consist of five mantras, called the .For discussion of these five forms and a table summarizing the associations of these five mantras see: Kramrisch, pp. 182-189.  As forms of God, each of these have their own names and distinct iconography:For distinct iconography, see Kramrisch, p. 185. These are represented as the five faces of Shiva and are associated in various texts with the five elements, the five senses, the five organs of perception, and the five organs of action.For association with the five faces and other groups of five, see: Kramrisch, p. 182.For the epithets  and , both of which mean "five faces", as epithets of , see: Apte, p. 578, middle column.  Doctrinal differences and, possibly, errors in transmission, have resulted in some differences between texts in details of how these five forms are linked with various attributes.For variation in attributions among texts, see: Kramrisch, p. 187. The overall meaning of these associations is summarized by Stella Kramrisch:  According to the Pañcabrahma Upanishad:  According to Gavin Flood, "Shiva is a god of ambiguity and paradox," whose attributes include opposing themes.For quotation "Shiva is a god of ambiguity and paradox" and overview of conflicting attributes see: Flood (1996), p. 150.  The ambivalent nature of this deity is apparent in some of his names and the stories told about him.  In the Yajurveda, two contrary sets of attributes for both malignant or terrific (Sanskrit: ) and benign or auspicious (Sanskrit: ) forms can be found, leading Chakravarti to conclude that "all the basic elements which created the complex Rudra-Śiva sect of later ages are to be found here".For quotation regarding Yajur Veda as containing contrary sets of attributes, and marking point for emergence of all basic elements of later sect forms, see: Chakravarti, p. 7. In the Mahabharata, Shiva is depicted as "the standard of invincibility, might, and terror", as well as a figure of honor, delight, and brilliance.For summary of Shiva's contrasting depictions in the Mahabharata, see: . The duality of Shiva's fearful and auspicious attributes appears in contrasted names.  The name Rudra reflects Shiva's fearsome aspects. According to traditional etymologies, the Sanskrit name Rudra is derived from the root rud-, which means "to cry, howl".For rud- meaning "cry, howl" as a traditional etymology see: Kramrisch, p. 5. Stella Kramrisch notes a different etymology connected with the adjectival form raudra, which means "wild, of rudra nature", and translates the name Rudra as "the wild one" or "the fierce god".Citation to M. Mayrhofer, Concise Etymological Sanskrit Dictionary, s.v. "rudra", is provided in: Kramrisch, p. 5. R. K. Sharma follows this alternate etymology and translates the name as "terrible". Hara is an important name that occurs three times in the Anushasanaparvan version of the Shiva sahasranama, where it is translated in different ways each time it occurs, following a commentorial tradition of not repeating an interpretation. Sharma translates the three as "one who captivates", "one who consolidates", and "one who destroys". Kramrisch translates it as "the ravisher".  Another of Shiva's fearsome forms is as  "time" and  "great time", which ultimately destroys all things.Kramrisch, p. 474. The name  appears in the Shiva Sahasranama, where it is translated by Ram Karan Sharma as "(the Supreme Lord of) Time." Bhairava "terrible" or "frightful"Apte, p. 727, left column. is a fierce form associated with annihilation.Kramrisch, p. 471. In contrast, the name , "beneficent" or "conferring happiness"Kramrisch, p. 481. reflects his benign form. This name was adopted by the great Vedanta philosopher Adi Shankara (c. 788-820), Flood (1996), p. 92. who is also known as Shankaracharya. The name  (Sanskrit: ), "causing happiness",Chakravarti, pp. 28 (note 7), and p. 177. also reflects this benign aspect.  He is depicted as both an ascetic yogi and as a householder, roles which have been traditionally mutually exclusive in Hindu society.For the contrast between ascetic and householder depictions, see: Flood (1996), pp. 150-151. When depicted as a yogi, he may be shown sitting and meditating.For Shiva's representation as a yogi, see: Chakravarti, p. 32.  His epithet Mahāyogi ("the great Yogi:  = "great", Yogi = "one who practices Yoga") refers to his association with yoga.For name Mahāyogi and associations with yoga, see, Chakravarti, pp. 23, 32, 150. While Vedic religion was conceived mainly in terms of sacrifice, it was during the Epic period that the concepts of tapas, yoga, and asceticism became more important, and the depiction of Shiva as an ascetic sitting in philosophical isolation reflects these later concepts.For the ascetic yogin form as reflecting Epic period influences, see: Chakravarti, p. 32. Shiva is also depicted as a corpse below Goddess Kali, it represents that Shiva is a corpse without Shakti. He remains inert. While Shiva is the static form, Mahakali or Shakti is the dynamic aspect without whom Shiva is powerless. As a family man and householder, he has a wife, Parvati and two sons, Ganesha and Kartikeya. His epithet  ("The husband of ") refers to this idea, and Sharma notes that two other variants of this name that mean the same thing,  and , also appear in the sahasranama.For ,  and  as names in the Shiva Sahasranama literature, see: .  in epic literature is known by many names, including the benign .For  as the oldest name, and variants including , see: Chakravarti, p. 40.For  identified as the wife of Shiva, see: Kramrisch, p. 479. She is identified with Devi, the Divine Mother; Shakti (divine energy) as well as goddesses like Tripura Sundari, Durga, Kamakshi and Minakshi. The consorts of Shiva are the source of his creative energy. They represent the dynamic extension of Shiva onto this universe.Search for Meaning By Antonio R. Gualtieri His son Ganesha is worshipped throughout India and Nepal as the Remover of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings and Lord of Obstacles. Kartikeya is worshipped in South India (especially in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka) by the names Subrahmanya, Subrahmanyan, Shanmughan, Swaminathan and Murugan, and in Northern India by the names Skanda, Kumara, or Karttikeya.For regional name variants of Karttikeya see: Gupta, Preface. Some regional deities are also identified as Shiva's children. As one story goes, Shiva is enticed by the beauty and charm of Mohini, Vishnu's female avatar, and procreates with her. As a result of this union, Shasta - identified with regional deities Ayyappan and Aiyanar - is born.See Mohini#Relationship with Shiva for details Shiva is also mentioned in some scriptures to have had daughters like the serpent-goddess Manasa and Ashokasundari. The demons Andhaka and Jalandhara and the god Mangala are considered children of Shiva.   The depiction of Shiva as Nataraja (Sanskrit: , "Lord of Dance") is popular.For description of the nataraja form see: Jansen, pp. 110-111.For interpretation of the  form see: Zimmer, pp. 151-157.  The names Nartaka ("dancer") and Nityanarta ("eternal dancer") appear in the Shiva Sahasranama.For names Nartaka (Sanskrit नर्तक) and Nityanarta (Sanskrit नित्यनर्त) as names of Shiva, see: . His association with dance and also with music is prominent in the Puranic period.For prominence of these associations in puranic times, see: Chakravarti, p. 62. In addition to the specific iconographic form known as Nataraja, various other types of dancing forms (Sanskrit: ) are found in all parts of India, with many well-defined varieties in Tamil Nadu in particular.For popularity of the  and prevalence in South India, see: Chakravarti, p. 63. The two most common forms of the dance are the Tandava, which later came to denote the powerful and masculine dance as Kala-Mahakala associated with the destruction of the world. When it requires the world or universe to be destroyed, Lord Śiva does it by the tāṇḍavanṛtya. and Lasya, which is graceful and delicate and expresses emotions on a gentle level and is considered the feminine dance attributed to the goddess Parvati. Lasya is regarded as the female counterpart of Tandava. The Tandava-Lasya dances are associated with the destruction-creation of the world.when it requires to be destroyed, Lord Śiva does it by the tāṇḍavanṛtya  )For iconographic description of the  form, see: Sivaramamurti (1976), p. 47. literally describes a form () of Shiva facing south (). This form represents Shiva in his aspect as a teacher of yoga, music, and wisdom and giving exposition on the shastras.For description of the form as representing teaching functions, see: Kramrisch, p. 472.  This iconographic form for depicting Shiva in Indian art is mostly from Tamil Nadu.For characterization of  as a mostly south Indian form, see: Chakravarti, p. 62.  Elements of this motif can include Shiva seated upon a deer-throne and surrounded by sages who are receiving his instruction.For the deer-throne and the audience of sages as , see: Chakravarti, p. 155.   An iconographic representation of Shiva called  shows him with one half of the body as male and the other half as female. According to Ellen Goldberg, the traditional Sanskrit name for this form is best translated as "the lord who is half woman", not as "half-man, half-woman".Goldberg specifically rejects the translation by Frederique Marglin (1989) as "half-man, half-woman", and instead adopts the translation by Marglin as "the lord who is half woman" as given in Marglin (1989, 216). Goldberg, p. 1. According to legend, Lord Shiva is pleased by the difficult austerites performed by the goddess Parvati, grants her the left half of his body. This form of Shiva is quite similar to the Yin-Yang philosophy of Eastern Asia, though  appears to be more ancient.    Shiva is often depicted as an archer in the act of destroying the triple fortresses, Tripura, of the Asuras.For evolution of this story from early sources to the epic period, when it was used to enhance Shiva's increasing influence, see: Chakravarti, p.46.  Shiva's name , "ender of Tripura", refers to this important story.For the  form, see: Sivaramamurti (1976), pp. 34, 49. In this aspect, Shiva is depicted with four arms wielding a bow and arrow, but different from the Pinakapani murti. He holds an axe and a deer on the upper pair of his arms. In the lower pair of the arms, he holds a bow and an arrow respectively. After destroying Tripura, Tripurantaka Shiva smeared his forehead with three strokes of Ashes. This has become a prominent symbol of Shiva and is practiced even today by Shaivites. Shiva, like some other Hindu deities, is said to have several incarnations, known as Avatars. Although Puranic scriptures contain occasional references to "ansh" avatars of Shiva, the idea is not universally accepted in Saivism. The Linga Purana speaks of twenty-eight forms of Shiva which are sometimes seen as avatars. According to the Svetasvatara Upanishad, he has four avatars.P. 184 Cultural History from the Vāyu Purāna By Devendrakumar Rajaram Patil In the Hanuman Chalisa, Hanuman is identified as the eleventh avatar of Shiva and this belief is universal. Hanuman is popularly known as “Rudraavtaar” “Rudra” being a name of “Shiva”.Sri Ramakrishna Math (1985) "Hanuman Chalisa" p. 5 Rama– the Vishnu avatar is considered by some to be the eleventh avatar of Rudra (Shiva). Other traditions regard the sage Durvasa, the sage Agastya, the philosopher Adi Shankara and Ashwatthama as avatars of Shiva. Other forms of Shiva include Virabhadra and Sharabha.   Maha Shivratri is a festival celebrated every year on the 13th day in the Krishna Paksha of the month of Phalguna in the Hindu calendar. This festival is of utmost importance to the devotees of Lord Shiva. Mahashivaratri marks the night when Lord Shiva performed the 'Tandava' and it is the day that Lord Shiva was married to Parvati.  The holiday is often celebrated with special prayers and rituals offered up to Shiva, notably the Abhishek. This ritual, practiced throughout the night, is often performed every three hours with water, milk, yogurt, and honey. Bel (aegle marmelos) leaves are often offered up to the Hindu god, as it is considered necessary for a successful life. The offering of the leaves are considered so important that it is believed that someone who offers them without any intentions will be rewarded greatly. Kumbh Mela is a mass Hindu pilgrimage of faith in which Hindus gather to bathe in a sacred river. It is considered to be the largest peaceful gathering in the world where around 100 million (10 crore) people were expected to visit during the Maha Kumbh Mela in 2013 in Allahabad. It is held every third year at one of the four places by rotation: Haridwar, Allahabad (Prayaga), Nashik and Ujjain. Thus the Kumbh Mela is held at each of these four places every twelfth year. Ardha ("Half") Kumbh Mela is held at only two places, Haridwar and Allahabad, every sixth year. The rivers at these four places are: the Ganges (Ganga) at Haridwar, the confluence (Sangam) of the Ganges and the Yamuna and the mythical Saraswati at Allahabad, the Godawari at Nashik, and the Shipra at Ujjain. The name Kumbh Mela comes from Hindi, and in the original Sanskrit and other Indian languages it is more often known as Kumbha Mela. Kumbha means a pitcher and Mela means fair in Sanskrit. Shiva is mentioned in Buddhist Tantra. Shiva as Upaya and Shakti as Prajna. In cosmologies of Buddhist tantra, Shiva is depicted as passive, with Shakti being his active counterpart. The Japuji Sahib of the Guru Granth Sahib says, "The Guru is Shiva, the Guru is Vishnu and Brahma; the Guru is Paarvati and Lakhshmi." In the same chapter, it also says, "Shiva speaks, and the Siddhas listen." In Dasam Granth, Guru Gobind Singh has mentioned two avtars of Rudra: Dattatreya Avtar and Parasnath Avtar.  The worship of Shiva became popular in Central Asia through the Hephthalite Empire,Puri, P. 132 Buddhism in Central Asia and Kushan Empire. Shaivism was also popular in Sogdia and the Kingdom of Yutian as found from the wall painting from Penjikent on the river Zervashan.Puri, P. 133 Buddhism in Central Asia In this depiction, Shiva is portrayed with a sacred halo and a sacred thread ("Yajnopavita"). He is clad in tiger skin while his attendants are wearing Sogdian dress. A panel from Dandanwulike shows Shiva in His Trimurti form with Shakti kneeling on her right thigh.Religions and Religious Movements – II, p. 427 Another site in the Taklamakan Desert depicts him with four legs, seated cross-legged on a cushioned seat supported by two bulls.  It is also noted that Zoroastrian wind god Vayu-Vata took on the iconographic appearance of Shiva. The Kirati people worship a form of Shiva as one of their major deity, identifying him as the lord of animals. It is also said that the physical form of Shiva as a yogi is derived from Kirants as it is mentioned in Mundhum that Shiva took human form as a child of Kirant. He is also said to give Kirants visions in form of a male deer. In Indonesia, Shiva is also worshiped as Batara Guru. In the ancient times, all kingdoms were located on top of mountains. When he was young, before receiving his authority of power, his name was Sang Hyang Manikmaya. He is first of the children who hatched from the eggs laid by Manuk Patiaraja, wife of god Mulajadi na Bolon. This avatar is also worshiped in Malaysia. Shiva's other form in Indonesian Hinduism is "Mahadewa" (Mahadeva). Daikokuten, one of the Seven Lucky Gods in Japan, is considered to be evolved from Shiva. The god enjoys an exalted position as a household deity in Japan and is worshipped as the god of wealth and fortune. The name is the Japanese equivalent of Mahākāla, the Buddhist name for Shiva.       Shiva's form: Shiva has a trident in the right lower arm, and a crescent moon on his head. He is said to be fair like camphor or like an ice clad mountain. He wears five serpents and a garland of skulls as ornaments. Shiva is usually depicted facing the south. His trident, like almost all other forms in Hinduism, can be understood as the symbolism of the unity of three worlds that a human faces - his inside world, his immediate world, and the broader overall world. At the base of the trident, all three forks unite. It is often not shown but Shiva has 6 heads, of which only five (Isana, Tatpurusha, Vamadeva, Aghora, Sadyojata) are visible while the 6th (Adhomukh) can only be seen by the enlightened. Third eye: (Trilochana) Shiva is often depicted with a third eye, with which he burned Desire () to ashes,For Shiva as depicted with a third eye, and mention of the story of the destruction of Kama with it, see: Flood (1996), p. 151. called "Tryambakam" (Sanskrit: त्र्यम्बकम् ), which occurs in many scriptural sources.For a review of 4 theories about the meaning of tryambaka, see: Chakravarti, pp. 37-39. In classical Sanskrit, the word ambaka denotes "an eye", and in the Mahabharata, Shiva is depicted as three-eyed, so this name is sometimes translated as "having three eyes".For usage of the word ambaka in classical Sanskrit and connection to the Mahabharata depiction, see: Chakravarti, pp. 38-39. However, in Vedic Sanskrit, the word  or  means "mother", and this early meaning of the word is the basis for the translation "three mothers".For translation of Tryambakam as "having three mother eyes" and as an epithet of Rudra, see: Kramrisch, p. 483.For vedic Sanskrit meaning Lord has three mother eyes which symbolize eyes are the Sun, Moon and Fire. These three mother-goddesses who are collectively called the .For discussion of the problems in translation of this name, and the hypothesis regarding the  see: Hopkins (1968), p. 220. Other related translations have been based on the idea that the name actually refers to the oblations given to Rudra, which according to some traditions were shared with the goddess .For the  variant, see: Chakravarti, pp. 17, 37. It has been mentioned that when Shiva loses his temper, his third eye opens which can reduce most things to ashes. Crescent moon: (The epithets "Chandrasekhara/Chandramouli")- Shiva bears on his head the crescent moon.For the moon on the forehead see: Chakravarti, p. 109. The epithet  (Sanskrit:  "Having the moon as his crest" -  = "moon";  = "crest, crown")For  as crest or crown, see: Apte, p. 926.For  as an iconographic form, see: Sivaramamurti (1976), p. 56.For translation "Having the moon as his crest" see: Kramrisch, p. 472. refers to this feature. The placement of the moon on his head as a standard iconographic feature dates to the period when Rudra rose to prominence and became the major deity Rudra-Shiva.For the moon iconography as marking the rise of Rudra-Shiva, see: Chakravarti, p. 58. The origin of this linkage may be due to the identification of the moon with Soma, and there is a hymn in the Rig Veda where Soma and Rudra are jointly implored, and in later literature, Soma and Rudra came to be identified with one another, as were Soma and the moon.For discussion of the linkages between Soma, Moon, and Rudra, and citation to RV 7.74, see: Chakravarti, pp. 57-58. The crescent moon is shown on the side of the Lord's head as an ornament. The waxing and waning phenomenon of the moon symbolizes the time cycle through which creation evolves from the beginning to the end. Ashes: (The epithet "Bhasmaanga Raaga") - Shiva smears his body with ashes (bhasma). The ashes are said to represent the end of all material existence.Flood (1996), p. 151. Some forms of Shiva, such as Bhairava, are associated with a very old Indian tradition of cremation-ground asceticism that was practiced by some groups who were outside the fold of brahmanic orthodoxy.Flood (1996), pp. 92, 161. These practices associated with cremation grounds are also mentioned in the Pali canon of Theravada Buddhism.Flood (1996), p. 161. One epithet for Shiva is "inhabitant of the cremation ground" (Sanskrit: , also spelled Shmashanavasin), referring to this connection.Chidbhavananda, p. 23. Matted hair: (The epithet "Jataajoota Dhari/Kapardina") - Shiva's distinctive hair style is noted in the epithets , "the one with matted hair",Chidbhavananda, p. 22. and Kapardin, "endowed with matted hair"For translation of Kapardin as "Endowed with matted hair" see: . or "wearing his hair wound in a braid in a shell-like (kaparda) fashion".Kramrisch, p. 475.  A kaparda is a cowrie shell, or a braid of hair in the form of a shell, or, more generally, hair that is shaggy or curly.For Kapardin as a name of Shiva, and description of the kaparda hair style, see, Macdonell, p. 62. His hair is said to be like molten gold in color or being yellowish-white. Blue throat: The epithet  (Sanskrit ; nīla = "blue",  = "throat").See: name #93 in Chidbhavananda, p. 31. Since Shiva drank the Halahala poison churned up from the Samudra Manthan to eliminate its destructive capacity. Shocked by his act, Goddess Parvati strangled his neck and hence managed to stop it in his neck itself and prevent it from spreading all over the universe, supposed to be in Shiva's stomach. However the poison was so potent that it changed the color of his neck to blue.For Shiva drinking the poison churned from the world ocean see: Flood (1996), p. 78.Kramrisch, p. 473. (See Maha Shivaratri.) Sacred Ganga: (The epithet "Gangadhara") Bearer of Ganga. The goddess Ganga flows from the matted hair of Shiva.For alternate stories about this feature, and use of the name  see: Chakravarti, pp. 59 and 109.For description of the  form, see: Sivaramamurti (1976), p. 8. The  (Ganga), one of the major rivers of the country, is said to have made her abode in Shiva's hair.For Shiva supporting  upon his head, see: Kramrisch, p. 473. The flow of the Ganga also represents the nectar of immortality. Tiger skin: (The epithet "Krittivasana") He is often shown seated upon a tiger skin, an honour reserved for the most accomplished of Hindu ascetics, the Brahmarishis. Serpents: (The epithet "Nagendra Haara" or 'Vasuki"). Shiva is often shown garlanded with a snake.Flood (1996), p. 151 Deer: His holding deer on one hand indicates that He has removed the "Chanchalata" of the mind (i.e., attained maturity and firmness in thought process). A deer jumps from one place to another swiftly, similar to the mind moving from one thought to another. Trident: (Trishula): Shiva's particular weapon is the trident. His Trishula that is held in His right hand represents the three Gunas— Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. That is the emblem of sovereignty. He rules the world through these three Gunas. The Damaru in His left hand represents the Shabda Brahman. It represents OM from which all languages are formed. It is He who formed the Sanskrit language out of the Damaru sound. Drum: A small drum shaped like an hourglass is known as a damaru.Michaels, p. 218.For definition and shape, see: Apte, p. 461. This is one of the attributes of Shiva in his famous dancing representationJansen, p. 44. known as Nataraja. A specific hand gesture (mudra) called  (Sanskrit for "-hand") is used to hold the drum.Jansen, p. 25. This drum is particularly used as an emblem by members of the  sect.For use by , see: Apte, p. 461. Axe: (Parashu):The "Parashu" is the weapon of Lord Shiva who gave it to Parashurama, sixth Avatar of Vishnu, whose name means "Rama with the axe" and also taught him its mastery. : (The epithet "Nandi Vaahana" ) Nandī, also known as "Nandin", is the name of the bull that serves as Shiva's mount (Sanskrit: ).For a review of issues related to the evolution of the bull (Nandin) as Shiva's mount, see: Chakravarti, pp. 99-105.For spelling of alternate proper names  and Nandin see: Stutley, p. 98. Shiva's association with cattle is reflected in his name , or Pashupati (Sanskrit: पशुपति), translated by Sharma as "lord of cattle" and by Kramrisch as "lord of animals", who notes that it is particularly used as an epithet of Rudra.Kramrisch, p. 479. "Rishabha" or the bull represents Dharma Devata (lord). Lord Siva rides on the bull. This denotes that Lord Siva is the protector of Dharma, is an embodiment of Dharma or righteousness. : The s (Devanagari: ) are attendants of Shiva and live in Kailash. They are often referred to as the bhutaganas, or ghostly hosts, on account of their nature. Generally benign, except when their lord is transgressed against, they are often invoked to intercede with the lord on behalf of the devotee. Ganesha was chosen as their leader by Shiva, hence Ganesha's title  or , "lord of the ".Dictionary of Hindu Lore and Legend (ISBN 0-500-51088-1) by Anna L. Dallapiccola Ganesha is created by Gauri not as gana but her beloved obedient child. 5 heads: Shiva is known as "panchavactra" means 5 heads which indicates 5 elements. Arms: Shiva has 4 arms which resembles 4 vedas Mount : Mount Kailash in the Himalayas is his traditional abode. In Hindu mythology, Mount  is conceived as resembling a Linga, representing the center of the universe.For identification of Mount  as the central linga, see: Stutley (1985), p. 62. Varanasi: Varanasi (Benares) is considered to be the city specially loved by Shiva, and is one of the holiest places of pilgrimage in India. It is referred to, in religious contexts, as Kashi.Keay, p. 33. Aghora Arya, Ravi Prakash & K. L. Joshi. : Sanskrit Text, English Translation. Parimal Publications, Delhi, 2001,  (Set of four volumes). Parimal Sanskrit Series No. 45; 2003 reprint: 81-7020-070-9.  (Third edition). The version provided by Chidbhavananda is from chapter 17 of the Anuśāsana Parva of the Mahābharata.  Originally published in 1915.  This work compares eight versions of the Śivasahasranāmāstotra with comparative analysis and Śivasahasranāmākoṣa (A Dictionary of Names). The text of the eight versions is given in Sanskrit.  First Indian Edition: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2003, ISBN 81-215-1087-2.  First revised edition.  First Princeton-Bollingen printing, 1972. "Lectures on Saiva" (Oxford Center for Hindu Studies) "Shiva Legends in Sacred Tradition of Indian Tribes" by Kailash Kr. Mishra (Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts)
