   Sorsogon City (Bikol: Ciudad nin Sorsogon, Filipino: Lungsod ng Sorsogon), is a third class city in and the provincial seat of Sorsogon, Philippines. It is the capital city of the province of Sorsogon, located on the Bicol Peninsula at southern tip of Luzon.  This city was formed by merging the Bacon and Sorsogon towns. The  put the city's population at  people, spread across 64 barangays. It is the third most populous city in the Bicol Region behind Legazpi City (182,201) and Naga City (174,931). Sorsogon City covers a land area of 31,292 hectares (120.82 sq mi) making it Bicol's largest city in terms of land area. The city is bounded by the municipality of Casiguran and Sorsogon Bay, on the west by the municipality of Castilla, on the northeast by the municipality of Manito in Albay, and on the north by Albay Gulf. The city serves a trans-shipment point from the Visayas and Mindanao provinces. It is also dubbed as "Gateway to Southern Philippines". Sorsogon City is one of the region’s leading cities in urbanization. Sorsogon City is divided into three districts: The West District, East District where the central business area is located and Bacon district which is a former town of the province and was merged with the town of Sorsogon upon the creation of the city in 2000. The name of the city is derived from the word "sosogon"  meaning "trace the river by going upstream". Sorsogon comes from a word "Sosogon". When the Spaniards had settled in Gibalong, they set out to further explore the inner lands. Upon reaching a small river emptying into what is now Sorsogon Bay, they asked a native they met for the name of the place. The native, not understanding Spanish and thinking they were asking for directions, answered, "Sosogon" meaning "trace the river by going upstream". Through constant use, Sosogon became Sorsogon. With the coming of the Spanish colonizers in the 1600s, Bacon was organized into a visita of the town of Casiguran, one of the oldest settlements in Luzon. The municipality of Sorsogon, whose original Site was in Sitio Pocdol in Capuy, was in turn, a visita of Bacon. As its population increased, however, Sorsogon was declared an independent, full-fledged parish in 1628. The Pueblo Civil de Bacon was established in 1754, with Juan Elias as its first gobernadorcillo. Sorsogon on the other hand, became an independent political unit in 1864. From their organization as visitas and eventually as independent pueblos, both Bacon and Sorsogon remained under the territorial jurisdiction of the province of Albay. On October 17, 1894, the Spanish authorities organized a geographical unit independent from Albay, with the town of Sorsogon as its seat of government. The new province adopted the name of the town and has since been known as the Province of Sorsogon. Sorsogon City was created by virtue of Republic Act 8806 which was enacted on August 16, 2000, and ratified in December 2000. Prominent politicians of the locality behind its creation were former Sorsogon 1st District Representative and now Senator Francis Escudero and former Bacon Municipal Mayor Leovic R. Dioneda. Former Bacon Vice-Mayor Aurelio Destacamento, joined by former Sorsogon councilors Antonio C. Detera, Azel Diesta and Telo Mella fought before the two local legislative chambers, for the approval of appropriation ordinances providing budget for the holding of its plebiscite. Prior to its ratification, a petition to declare RA 8806 null and void was filed by lawyer Atty. Gil Gojol. Because Bacon municipality was enjoined as one of the respondents in said petition, a young practicing lawyer from Buenavista, Bacon District, in the name of Atty. Glenn Olbes, defended its constitutionality. The legal battle for its constitutionality was upheld later on by a majority decision of the Sorsoguenos who desire for the development of the newly created local government unit. Opponents for its ratification were incumbent Governor Raul R. Lee and his wife, Sally Ante Lee who became its first contested City Mayor. The merged municipalities of Bacon and Sorsogon which created the city have their own long histories from Pre-Hispanic Era to present.  Sorsogon City covers a land area of . It is located at the southernmost tip of the Bicol Peninsula and of Luzon Island. The city is bounded by the municipality of Casiguran and Sorsogon Bay, on the west by the municipality of Castilla, on the northeast by the municipality of Manito in Albay, and on the north by Albay Gulf. Sorsogon is characterized by an irregular topography; mountain ranges on the northwest, sloping uplands on the central part of the city, plain areas south western and central north and southeast portion, and marshlands on the southeast deltas. It is also surrounded by water, with Sorsogon Bay to the west Albay Gulf to the north east, and Pacific Ocean in the east. Sorsogon City is located  southeast of Manila and  south of Legazpi City, Albay  The 2007 Census puts the city's population at 155,144 with an annual growth rate of 1.69%. Sorsogon City ranked as the 3rd largest city in terms of population in the Bicol region. largest city The only city in the province of Sorsogon, Sorsogon City is the largest in terms of land area in the Bicol region. The Pan-Philippine Highway which runs From Northwest to Southeast through the city, connects Sorsogon City to the municipalities of Castilla, Pilar, in the Northwest towards Daraga, Legazpi City, Naga City and the rest of Luzon. It also connects to the municipalities of Gubat, Casiguran and the rest of the second district municipalities of the province of Sorsogon in the South-east.  Upon its creation through the merging of Sorsogon and Bacon municipalities, Sorsogon City is divided in three districts. Sorsogon City is composed of 64 barangays, with 23 barangays in West district, 14 barangays in East District and 27 barangays in Bacon district. Sorsogon City features a tropical rainforest climate with copious amount of rainfall throughout the course of the year.. there is no pronounced dry season but it has very pronounced maximum rain from November to January with December as the wettest month of the year; it experience 23 days of rain. Temperature is constant throughout the year. Sorsogon City's average yearly rainfall is just over . April is the driest month of the year which only sees  12 rain days and  of rainfall. Average High temperature is at  and its Average Low temperature is at . The coolest month is January with a daily mean of  and the hottest months are jointly April and May with a daily mean of .  Sorsogon City is situated in the country’s geographical Zone 6 where 3 typhoons/cyclones pass in two years. The city is also prone to storm surge as revealed by data gathered from the Natural Disaster Reduction Branch of the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (NRDB-PAGASA). Stronger typhoons and storm surges caused by the changing global climate are foreseen to create further stress to the city’s settlements especially in terms of housing and basic infrastructure. Strengthening these structures is crucial to increase the city’s resilience to projected climate change impact. Not only would infrastructure strengthening initiatives help ensure the people’s safety in the event of strong typhoons but also save the family assets and lessen household and government costs for recovery and reconstruction. In 2006, more than 10,000 houses in the city were totally damaged while damages to public infrastructure were estimated at P208 million pesos.   Demographic statistics:Comprehensive Land Use Plan 2003–2012, Summary (Briefing Material), Sectoral Consultation, Vicanta Hall, Sorsogon City, November 27, 2003 The city is the ecclesiastical seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Sorsogon. it is lso the dominant religion in the city with 95% of the population, a Roman Catholic. This dominant faith is supported by the presence of different institutions and churches; The Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral is located in the center of the city perhaps the most distinguishable landmark in the city. It is the seat of the Parish of Sts. Peter and Paul and of the Diocese of Sorsogon. and its towers dominate the city's skyline. Other churches include the Our Lady of Fatima Church and the Bacon Church in the Bacon district.  The Our Lady of Penafrancia Seminary school for clergy is also located in Barangay Bibincahan, East district. Monasteries and retreat houses are also located in the city like the Poor Claire Monastery and the El Retiro Retreat House. Other religious institute like St. Louise de Marillac College of Sorsogon- the first catholic school in the province of Sorsogon built in 1937 is located in Barangay Talisay. It is a sister school of Universidad de Sta. Isabel in Naga City and is run by the Daughters of Charity Other Christian organizations are represented by Iglesia ni Cristo (INC) whose imposing church is a landmark along Barangay Balogo. Also having considerable number of members  of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints whose church is located also along Barangay Balogo.Biblical Christianity is also present in this city represented by the Sorsogon First Baptist Church in Piot.   The City of Sorsogon was created by virtue of Republic Act 8806, which was signed into law on August 16, 2000 and ratified during a plebiscite on December 16, 2000. RA 8806, also known as the Cityhood Law, called for the merger of the municipalities of Sorsogon and Bacon into a component city of the Province of Sorsogon.   The First Mayoralty Elections were held in 2001 and Sally A. Lee became the first Mayor of Sorsogon City. Sorsogon City supported Fernando Poe Jr. in the 2004 Philippine Presidential Election. Benigno Simeon Aquino III won in the city during the 2010 Philippine Presidential Election, with 40% (25,756) of the total votes as opposed to the 35% (22,759) of the votes garnered by former president Joseph Ejercito Estrada In general, Sorsogon City does not support a specific political party during presidential and congressional elections as opposed to other cities and municipalities. The city's local government is headed by a mayor elected by popular vote. The vice-mayor serves as the presiding officer of the Sangguniang Panlungsod (city council), with 12 Councilors elected by popular vote as its members. The Sangguniang Panlungsod serves as the city's legislative body and its role is to enact ordinances, approve resolutions, appropriate funds for the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. Both the council members and the mayor serve three-year terms; and eligible for re-election for two more three-year terms. Since the city's creation in 2000, only two serve as Mayor of the City namely Sally A. Lee who is the incumbent Mayor and also served as the first elected mayor of the city, and Leovic R. Dioneda who served from 2007 to 2014. Sorsogon City, like other municipalities, is composed of barangays and is headed by a Barangay Chairman and Kagawads composed the barangay's legislative body- the Sangguniang barangay. The list of mayors and vice-mayors of Sorsogon City Sorsogon City, as the capital town of the province of Sorsogon, is a hub of trade and commerce. Its strategic location has given rise to a busy commercial district composed of local businesses and franchises of national and regional business chain. Business is concentrated in the downtown area near the public market and major commercial establishments primarily geared towards retail and wholesale and the Bacon District is the secondary business district of the City. As of 2012, Sorsogon City ranked third among the cities with most revenue in the Bicol region with an estimated annual income of P432,978,837,http://iskor.blgf.gov.ph/pages/luzon/region5/pdfFiles/SorsogonCity.pdf only behind Naga City and Legazpi City. Despite being a city and its increasing annual income, agriculture and fisheries sector is still the driving force of its economy. The main agricultural products include rice, coconut, abaca, pili nuts, root crops and vegetables.  Peter Paul Philippine Corporation a company produces different Coconut products has set up a factory in the city. Sorsogon City, as the capital town of the province of Sorsogon, is a hub of trade and commerce. Its strategic location has given rise to a busy commercial district composed of local businesses and franchises of national and regional business chain. Business is concentrated in the downtown area near the public market and major commercial establishments primarily geared towards retail and wholesale and the Bacon District is the secondary business district of the City.  An Economic Zone has been identified in the northeast part of the City.  It covers the barangays of Buhatan, Cabid-an and Bibincahan. Within the Economic Zone and along the diversion road, a 50-hectare agro-industrial zone is being proposed and targeted. The area can accommodate the food terminal, warehouses, storage facilities and light industries. The Bay City Sorsogon, that is currently being built at the coast of Barangay Balogo will definitely have a huge impact on the economic growth of the city. It is a priority project of LKY Development Corporation, a privately owned real estate company. The Bay City Sorsogon includes a Commercial Complex, Five Star Hotel, Coliseum, Outdoor Dining Area, a Central Bus Terminal and a lot more. The excavation of this 16-hectare property just started during the last quarter of 2010 and the completion is expected by the 3rd quarter of 2011.http://ecmparchitects.com/ECMP%20company%20profile.pdf Centro Department Store referred to locally "Centro Mall" by residents. A 3 floor mall located in Magsaysay and Rizal Streets, It is one of 2 business unit owned by CITIStores Incorporated, the other, UNO Factory Outlet. A retail department store that provides excellent merchandising, store fundamentals and quality services. It is located in 8 different outlets in the Philippines. Penshoppe, Jag, Wrangler, Tribal, Bench, Adidas, Lee, Levis are some of its anchor.http://www.citistores.com/store/centro-department-store Primark Community Malls a Community Shopping Mall and Town Plaza that provides the provinces, towns and small communities with all their basic everyday needs, as well as a shopping experience that is more convenient and closer to home. It aims to be the primary market people will think of for their needs. Primark Sorsogon 1, also known as Sorsogon Shopping Center, It is home to numerous stores such as the first SM Savemore in Sorsogon, Watsons, Bigg's Diner, a local favorite; CD-R King, Baker's Plaza; Globe Store; Sun Cellular Store; All World Communications; South Star Drug; PS Bank; and other food stalls and retail stores while the basement houses the Central Terminal for the tricycles of Sorsogon. It is situated in Barangay Sulucan.http://primark.com.ph/store-locator/sorsogon-1-sorsogon-city Primark Sorsogon 2, situated in Barangay Sampaloc, it houses the first Jollibee in Sorsogon as well as an LCC Supermarket and LCC Store Plus. Aficionado, Zagu, Image Digital, Unisilver are also available here. It is strategically located at the heart of Sorsogon City. Having such familiar and well-loved stores in place combined with a strong location, PRIMARK SORSOGON 2 will surely not be missed out by the people of Sorsogon and would be their go-to place all the time to give in to their dining & shopping pleasure.http://primark.com.ph/store-locator/sorsogon-2-sorsogon-city Primark Sorsogon 3 The newly opened Primark in Sorsogon City, This mall will be the extension of the previous Primark malls in the area, with another SM Savemore 2 for added convenience as well as more food stalls, and finally an incoming fast food chain for the pleasure of the locals. The economic activity of the province is growing and getting stronger and PRIMARK SORSOGON 3 shall establish very well its contribution in the community. A solid set of business & pleasure is what this mall speaks of.http://primark.com.ph/store-locator/sorsogon-3-sorsogon-city The Gaisano Capital Mall is slated to open one of its branches in Sorsogon City downtown along Magsaysay Street in 2016, Gaisano Capital Group is a shopping mall chain in the Philippines, owned by Cebu-based Gaisano family. During the opening of City Soho Mall in Cebu City, Corporate Mall administrator  Hermosilla Irizari said that "The group will also open Gaisano Capital branches in Butuan and Sorsogon next year. Two other stores, in Tandag City and Bislig City in Surigao del Sur, are slated to open by the end of 2015.http://cebudailynews.inquirer.net/67645/gaisano-opens-cebu-mall-bares-projects-in-vismin Meanwhile, SM Supermalls bares plan to put up branch in Sorsogon City, the country's biggest mall network. During the SM Partner's Summit Gala Night held last October 2015 when it celebrated its 30th Anniversary in a two-day event dubbed “Bricks Click, Creating the New Marketplace” that began with a retail forum and culminated in a gala night at the SMX Convention Center where top partners were given recognition. SM Prime Holdings plans to open 75 malls in 2018. Also included is SM Legazpi in Albay.https://www.facebook.com/510888042351492/photos/a.553160814790881.1073741972.510888042351492/917169651723327/?type=3&permPage=1 The proposed Sorsogon Business and Leisure Park is a 20 hectare reclamation area linking the 3-hectare Pinaculan Island to the Sorsogon Pier in Sorsogon Bay, forming part of the expansion area of the Sorsogon City's central business district. The area shall have a rock causeway and seawall, complete with wide and well-paved roads, underground electrical and telephone systems and water supply. Low, medium and high density zones shall be identified for business establishments, plants and factories, including a central park. Pepita Park is located in Barangay Bucal-Bucalan along the national highway, about 15–20 minutes away by car from the center of the City. Already in place is a small rest area for travelers, complete with a mini-park and a small canteen with a view deck. The proposed development of the area involves the construction of a seafood trading and rest facility, complete with seafood stalls, bayside restaurants and cafes, and adequate parking space. The food stalls and restaurants will specialize in fresh blue crabs which Sorsogon is known for. Customers can have their pick of crabs and other seafood from the stalls and have them cooked at the adjacent restaurants or open air grill shops. Sorsogon City has 17 banks namely (1) Banco de Oro; (2)Development Bank of the Philippines; (3)China Banking Corporation; (4)Land Bank of the Philippines; (5) Metrobank; (6)Postal Bank; (7)Bank of the Philippine Islands; (8) Legaspi Savings Bank; (9) Allied Bank; (10) Green Bank; (11)United Coconut Planters Bank; (12) Philippine National Bank; (13) Agri Bank; (14) Producers Rural Banking Corporation; (15) Camalig Rural Bank, (16) Card Bank, (17) PS Bank. There are also five (5) insurance companies and twenty-eight (28) lending/financing /pawnshop. Local lending investors are also available that caters to the local businessmen. The Pili Festival celebrates the pili, which supports the livelihood of many Sorsoganons. Although the growing of pili is popular in the other provinces of Bicol, it is Sorsogon which has the largest land area devoted to pili farming. The Feast day of the Patron Saints of Sorsogon City- Sts. Peter and Paul coincides with the celebration of Pili Festival. Their feast day is on the 29th of June. Catholic Mass and Processions happen during this day. Sosogon Festival is a month-long celebration during December giving significance on the birth of Sorsogon City. This event highlights the history, culture and ethnicity of the City of Sorsogon and their good harvest pili. The festival, celebrated in the whole province in the last week of October, commemorates the founding of Sorsogon as a province. Festivities include a series of cultural, historical, religious, agro-industrial and economic activities, showcasing the province’s abundant agricultural products, particularly food and decorative items. Though a provincial event, most of the festivities during the Kasanggayahan Festival including the "Pantomina sa Tinampo", street dances and others are conducted in the city since this is the provincial capital of Sorsogon and the seat of the province is located in the city. Holy week celebrations commemorate the suffering, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Catholicism as a predominant religion in the city celebrates holy week either the months of March or April. During this time many different cultural traditions like Pabasa and Way of the Cross were held. The City Procession was organized by the Parish of Sts. Peter and Paul and is participated by hundreds and thousands of people. It was held at sundown on Holy Wednesday and Good Friday and many religious icons are paraded around the city. Sorsoganons are very religious and fun-loving. Being mostly Roman Catholics, they are active in every festivity celebrated throughout the year. Like any other Filipino ethnolinguistic groups, each barangay honors their patron saint with a celebration on its feast day.  Sorsogon is a town famous for coconut based Bicol cuisine. Laing or Gulay Na Gabi in its dialect, is a famous dish that have delighted Filipinos and foreigners to the extent of their Bicol dining experience. It is a kind of vegetable called Taro leaves cooked in coconut-cream and mixed with variety of chillies. Another popular dish immensely flavored with chilli and cooked in coconut milk is called Bicol express. It is present in most restaurants of Bicol but for Sorsogenos, it is just a daily energizing food. Other dishes are Langka or jackfruit, a local fruit called Santol, or even the banana blossoms are simple ingredients usually prepared in coconut cream but when cooked the Bicolano way, turns out an exciting tasteful cuisine. Sorsogon City has a community airport located at Bacon district. Only small commuter planes can only land there. There were several attempts to revive the airport but it is rarely used due to the presence of the Legazpi Domestic Airport (soon to be South Luzon International Airport) which is located just 50 kilometers away from the city. The city has modern and efficient communication facilities which include landline telephones and cellular mobile phone. Digitel and Bayantel makes long-distance and domestic landline telephone communication possible while Smart Communications, Globe Telecommunications and Sun Cellular Network provide mobile phone services. There are also Five (5) internet service providers offering dial-up connections and 3G services. Connecting through these five (5) providers are thirteen internet cafes that cater to the public. For the broadcast media the city have three (3) AM Radio stations, seven (7) FM Radio Stations, two (2) local broadcast television stations. Cable TV is also available with DCTV cable and ESTV cable providing the services. For mail services, the Philippine Postal Corporation (Sorsogon City Post Office) provides domestic, international and other mail services and four (4) private messengerial and courier service companies which include JRS express, LBC, Mail and More Business Services, Incorporated, and Air21 express. Pawnshops also make use for local and international money transfer. For newspaper and periodicals, Two (2) national and five (5) local newspapers both in English and Filipino circulate in the city along with local newsletters and magazine printed in the City by the City Government and other entities. There are two highways in the area. The Pan-Philippine Highway, also known as the Maharlika Highway runs north from Legazpi City passing the towns of Pilar, and Castilla.  It also traverses through the central business district of the town all the way to the rest of the towns of the Second Congressional District of Sorsogon province. Sorsogon City Diversion Road leaves the Pan-Philippine Highway at Barangay Pang-pang at the western side of the city and heads north passing barangays Pang-pang, Bibincahan, San Juan, and reconnecting with the Pan-Philippine Highway at Barangay Cabid-an.  The diversion road was created to prevent public utility vehicles from entering the center of the town during rush hours to prevent traffic congestion in the central business district.  It also serves as an alternative road network for other vehicles coming from Legazpi City to the Second Congressional district and vice versa. As of now no rail links connect Sorsogon city to the rest of Luzon but plans are underway to extend the Philippine National Railways to Matnog, Sorsogon in a 171 Billion PHP ($3.8 Billion) South Line Project. Sorsogon City’s electrical power source comes from the Luzon Grid; transmitting electricity to the whole island of Luzon and is managed by the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines. The City’s electricity is managed however by the Sorsogon Electric Cooperative II with its substation situated within the city limits on barangay Cabid-an, East district. Secondary electrical power source is a 600 Kilowatt hydroelectric power-plant located on barangay Guinlajon, West district. It is expected to generate 2.786-gigawatt per hour (GWH) annually, would be a significant contribution to the province’s peak demand of 12.406 MW. Sorsogon City Water District (SCWD) is a Government-Owned & Controlled Corporation created under Presidential Decree No. 198 (Provincial Water Utilities Act of 1978). SCWD was established in February 14, 1975 after it was issued a Conditional Certificate of Conformance by the Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA) and has since then provided for the water supply of the Municipality of Sorsogon and later City of Sorsogon with the merging of the municipalities of Sorsogon and Bacon in 2001. In 2014, SCWD partnered with Abejo Waters Inc. to set-up a bulk water supply facility tapping the Cawayan River as its source because of its enormous volume of water seepage on it. The plan of the water district is to tap fifty liters per second (LPS) out of the seepage of water in the river to supply adequately the needs of new concessionaires in the western part of the city. Abejo Waters promised that the water treatment facility will not only supply the Barangays of Guinlajon, Basud, Ticol, Pamurayan, Penafrancia, Pangpang and Tugos but will continuously flow even to the consumers of the water district in the city proper. Sorsogon City currently draws water from 13 deepwells and 4 springs which has to serve 64 barangays from the districts of Bacon and Sorsogon. At present, there are 13,402 existing service connections and a total of 10,619 active service connections as of December 2014 which are 100 percent metered. Of this total, 9,701 are residential/government connections while 918 are commercial establishments.  The proposed Sorsogon Business and Leisure Park is a 20 hectare reclamation area linking the 3-hectare Pinaculan Island to the Sorsogon Pier in Sorsogon Bay, forming part of the expansion area of the Sorsogon City's central business district. The area shall have a rock causeway and seawall, complete with wide and well-paved roads, underground electrical and telephone systems and water supply. Low, medium and high density zones shall be identified for business establishments, plants and factories, including a central park. Four projects are identified to cost forty million pesos each; the Construction of Sorsogon City Rompeolas Park and Recreation Center as a forerunner of Sorsogon Tourism Estate and the flagship of the city tourism industry. It will be affiliated with the Tourism Infrastructure Economic Zone Authority (TIEZA). Three other projects, the locations are still to be identified will cost forty million pesos each, for the improvement and concreting of various streets, for shore protection and river control. It was justified for convenience and environmental protection to arrest the inundation and possible conditions of rivers and shorelines as part of climate change adaptation programs and policies in anticipation of the effects of the same. Estimated to cost thirty million pesos are the construction of an infirmary hospital aimed to decongest the Dr. Fernando B. Duran Memorial Hospital often congested with city residents patients, and the construction, upgrading, rehabilitation of drainage system and irrigation canals to minimize flooding in times of calamity and heavy rains.It was also conceived to address health related problems such as dengue fever and leptospirosis. In Bacon District, the Bacia Auditorium and Youth Training Center/Multi-purpose Center will receive twenty five million pesos as fund not solely for the purpose, but will augment evacuation center of the district.The district poblacion is 50-60 centimeters below sea level as indicated in the topographic survey of the city. A Sorsogon City Coastal Road is already underway. The construction of the coastal highway was pledged by Senator Francis Escudero and Sorsogon 1st District Representative Evelina Escudero.  The 22-hectare coastal highway will help decongest the city traffic once completed and provide an additional space for a walkway. http://news.pia.gov.ph/article/view/801429309855/sorsogon-city-inaugurates-rompeolas-food-court-other-developments-soon-to-rise The Medium Term Economic/Infrastructure Development Plan (2015-2022) is seen as a support facility with an assured development for the city. There are three options to get to Sorsogon City, they are via plane and via land. If it is coming from the southern part of the Philippines though, an option is to ride a ferry.  Sorsogon City can be reached by land transport from Manila by bus or by private vehicle, taking about 12 hours. Air transport going to the City is available via 45-minute Philippine Airlines, Cebu Pacific, and Zest Air flights which lands at Legazpi City Airport. From the airport, 1 to  hours travel time to Sorsogon City by land via private utility vehicles and UV Express vans or buses. the port of Sorsogon, has a 664m causeway and reinforced concrete pier. Incoming cargoes like cement, plywood and beer comes from Manila and Cebu. The port is also used by motorized bancas ferrying passengers and goods to and from neighboring towns. Bacon District on the other hand, has two (2) ports, the Poblacion Port and Banao Port. Tricycle and jeepneys are the primary modes of transportation within the city while outlying coastal barangays (Osiao and Sto. Niño) can be reached via motorized banca. Jeepneys are the mode of transportation when going to Bacon district and for those who need to go outside of Sorsogon’s perimeter such as going to the second district municipalities or even Legazpi City. Buses bound for Legazpi or Manila and Jeepneys bound for other municipalities in the second district are located in the Central business district and in the Sorsogon City Grand Terminal. For the past 5 years, red tide is recurrently occurring at the Sorsogon Bay thus minimizing the income and displaces the fisherfolks. The old City Public Market and the illegal dumping of waste at the river banks and shorelines were identified as a contributory factor to this phenomenon. To combat its effect, coastal and river clean-up and mangrove reforestation are being conducted. A waste water treatment facility has been constructed at the newly renovated Sorsogon City Public Market. Wastewater is treated before going out to the bay. Solid Waste Management Act is now institutionalized. All offices at the City Government are required to practice segregation and the City Material Recovery Facility or MRF is now under construction. Climate change adaptation and mitigation and disaster risk reduction is integrated in the plans, programs and activities of the City Government with the support from the UN – Habitat together with the active participation of the non-government organizations and people’s organizations. The primary medical care of the city is provided by the City Health Office, which focuses on providing quality, cost effective, preventive, promotive and curative health care services to the people of Sorsogon City. To ensure that the health programs and activities filter down to the barangays the CHO branched out into three District Health Offices manned by physicians with adequate but non-complementing manpower. Each district health office has several barangay health stations to supervise administratively and technically. These three district health offices are “Sentrong Sigla,” OPB and TB DOTS certified. Of the three DHOs, only Bacon district is MCP certified. The two districts are in the process of meeting requirements for the package. The city has some health initiatives such as the Reproductive Tract Health Clinic (RTHC), which ensures public safety on sexually transmitted infections; Animal Bite Treatment Center (ABTC), which provides anti-rabies vaccination; Teen Center, which provides counselling and area for teen agers; Birthing Facility, which provides supplementary health service to mothers including attendance to normal deliveries, referrals of complicated cases, promotion of breastfeeding and family planning counselling. For the year 2010, the City Health Budget amounted to 55,479,680.80, which took up 11.90% of the overall city budget. Curative health services are provided mainly by two tertiary hospitals (private & government owned), two secondary private hospitals and several private medical and dental clinics. These facilities cater not only to people from the city but also from other municipalities of Sorsogon Province. The main hospitals located in the city are the following: Public safety statistics: All barangays are served by public elementary schools (some private elementary schools are located in poblacion). 11 private, 9 public high schools Online News Service: Local Television: National Television: AM Stations: FM Stations: packed Interior View of Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral Sorsogon City Baywalk at night. Bacon Beach, facing North. The mountains in the background divide Sorsogon and Albay provinces Bacon Church, located on the former poblacion of the old Bacon town (now Bacon district of Sorsogon City) Sorsogon City is hosts to different national agencies, like Social Security Service. Pepita Park, Brgy. Bucalbucalan. A government owned motorist stop. It's well known for its crab-like structure, reflecting the bounties of the province. Rice field and coconut trees in Brgy. Capuy, Sorsogon City. Both are major produce of the city. Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral Rompeolas, where people enjoy the morning sun Sorsogon City Shopping Center Sorsogon City Rompeolas at night   Mayor !! Term !! Political party Sally A. Lee June 30, 2001 – June 30, 2007 (two three-year terms) Leovic R. Dioneda June 30, 2007 – June 30, 2013 (two three-year terms) Sally A. Lee June 30, 2013 – present (Incumbent- for re-election on Philippine general election, 2016) Vice-Mayor !! Term !! Political party Edmundo Atutubo June 30, 2001 – June 30, 2010 (three three-year terms) Bobet Lee Rodrigueza June 30, 2010 – June 30, 2013 (two three-year terms) Charo Dichoso- Logronio June 30, 2013 – present (Incumbent) Annual Growth Rate   1.69% for the period 2000 – 2007 Population Growth Rate – 2.15% (1995–2000) Population Density - 627 persons per square kilometer Total Number of Households  30,290 Male Population - 77,117 Female Population - 74,337 Religion – 95% Roman Catholic Labor Force – 56% of the total population, 1/4 of the over-15 years old is, at least, high-school graduate, 15% of the total workforce have college-level education Student Population - 15,323 Voting Age Population - 83, 123 Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral Our Lady of Fatima Church Poor Claire Monastery El Retiro Church and Retreat House Our Lady of Peñafrancia Seminary Paroja Hill and Grotto – across Pepita Park Bato Limestone Cavehttp://gotosorsogoncity.com Bucalbucalan Spring – Natural cold spring located in Brgy. Bucalbucalan, a coastal barangay near Pepita Park and Rest Area. Danao Lake Paguriran Island and Lagoon- Located in Bacon district. PNOC/EDC EcoPark- Sorsogon City Tolongapo Beach – located in Bacon district Danao Lake – this is located in Bacon District, near Brgy. San Juan. Sorsogon Lawn Tennis Club- The Tennis Court is located in the Sorsogon Provincial Capitol Complex Sorsogon Provincial Gymnasium- also located in the Sorsogon Provincial Capitol Complex Xtrim Badminton Court Sorsogon Sports Complex (Balogo Sports Complex) Dr. Fernando B. Duran Sr. Memorial Hospital Sts. Peter and Paul Hospital Sorsogon Medical Mission Group Hospital & Health Services Cooperative St. Therese of The Child Jesus Hospital Incorporated 123 PNP personnel 20 traffic aides and barangay traffic aides Minimum 8 inmates a month 19 firefighters 4 fire trucks and equipment 2 Fil-Chi fire trucks and 20 fire volunteers Disaster preparedness – CDCC, BDCC, Sorsogon Emergency Rescue Team School Year 2002–2003 enrollment was 23,823 Number of schools – 72 School Year 2002–2003 enrollment was 11,570 Sorsogon National High School The Lewis College St. Louise de Marillac College Sorsogon State College BICOL TODAY - Bicolandia's Leading Online News Network and Travel Magazine BicolTV Sorsogon Channel 9 Serbisyo TV Sorsogon Channel 3 Aemilianum TV (AITV): Channel 5 GMA TV Channel 2 (Via Legazpi) PTV Channel 5 DWCB-TV: Channel 11 DZSC-TV ABS-CBN : Channel 7 (Via Legazpi) ABC (TV5): Channel 47 DWFA - 801 Sorsogon (Hypersonic Broadcasting Center) DZRS - 1179 Sorsogon (Radio Sorsogon Network) DZMS – 1251 Sorsogon (PBN Broadcasting Network) DZZH – 1287 Sorsogon (Manila Broadcasting Company) DWSG – 91.9 "Radyo Natin" FM Sorsogon DWAM – 94.3 Aemilianum Broadcasting Network DWSQ - 104.7 Energy FM Sorsogon DW      – 95.1 Radyo Kasanggayahan Community Radio DZBN - 107.9 Radyo5 FM Sorsogon DWLH – 101.5 Hypersonic Broadcasting Center "Wave 101.5" DZGN – 102.3 Spirit FM Sorsogon DWOL – 103.9 Our Lady's Foundation "Padaba FM" Eddie Garcia – Film actor and director Eugenia Apostol (sister of former Sorsogon Mayor Duran) – one of the founders of Philippine Daily Inquirer Francis "Chiz" G. Escudero – former congressman, and now senator of the 15th Congress15th Congress http://www.senate.gov.ph/senators/sen15th.asp Jorge Barlin – First Filipino and Bikolano Bishop and was assigned parish priest and Vicar Forane of Sorsogon from 1887 to 1906page 32, Tracing from Solsogon to Sorsogon, 2nd Edition (2007), ISBN 978-971-814-099-4 Loida Nicolas-Lewis – Born and raised in Sorsogon. Lewis is the Chairwoman and Chief Executive Officer of TLC Beatrice, LLC, the Lewis Family investment firm and is also Chairman and CEO of TLC Beatrice (China), Limited, a Cayman company which operates retail convenience stores in five major cities in China and TLC Beatrice Foods (Philippines) which operates a fresh meat processing plant. Mary Walter – actress, whose career spanned through several decades. She was born in Bacon.Mary Walter from Bacon Salvador Escudero Sr. – former Provincial Governor of Sorsogon and was a guerilla leader during the Japanese occupation. He was fondly called Gurang (old man in Bikol) by the local folks.page 85, Tracing – from Solsogon to Sorsogon 2nd Ed., Reynaldo T. Jamoralin, Sorsogon City 2007 Sorsogon's PNP Provincial Office along Magsaysay St., Sorsogon City, is named after him. Vicente L. Peralta – late congressman of Sorsogon City. A hospital in Castillahttp://sorsogoncity.wordpress.com/2011/07/02/who-is-vicente-peralta/ was named after him. Gerphil Geraldine Flores - A Filipino-German Classical Singer and Asia's Got Talent Season 1 (2nd runner up). Aldin Ayo - Sorsogon City West District Councilor, and Coach of Letran Knights.  Ceuta, Spain  Sterling Heights, Michigan, United States of America  Legazpi City, Philippines  Iloilo City, Iloilo  Pasay City,Metro Manila Bicolano People Bicol Region Bicol Languages List of Bicol Region Cities and Municipalities Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Local Governance Performance Management System
