     Southport () is a large seaside town in the Metropolitan Borough of Sefton, Merseyside, England. During the 2001 census Southport was recorded as having a population of 90,336, making it the eleventh most populous settlement in North West England. The statistics for the 2011 Census were maintained on a ward basis. Southport lies on the Irish Sea coast of North West England and is fringed to the north by the Ribble estuary. The town is situated   to the north of the city of Liverpool and  southwest of the city of Preston. Historically a part of Lancashire, the town in its present form was founded in 1792 when William Sutton, an innkeeper from Churchtown, built a bathing house at what now is the south end of Lord Street, the town's main thoroughfare.North Meols and Southport&nbsp;– a History, Chapter 9, Peter Aughton (1988) At that time the area, known as South Hawes, was sparsely populated and was dominated by sand dunes. At the turn of the 19th century the area became popular with tourists due to the easy access from the nearby Leeds and Liverpool Canal and the town quickly grew. The rapid growth of Southport largely coincided with the Industrial Revolution and the Victorian era. Town attractions include Southport Pier with its Southport Pier Tramway, the second longest seaside pleasure pier in the British Isles and Lord Street, an elegant tree-lined shopping street, once home of Napoleon III of France. Extensive sand dunes stretch for several miles between Birkdale and Woodvale to the south of the town. The Ainsdale sand dunes have been designated as a national nature reserve and a Ramsar site. Local fauna include the Natterjack toad and the Sand lizard. The town contains examples of Victorian architecture and town planning, on Lord Street and elsewhere. A particular feature of the town is the extensive tree planting. This was one of the conditions required by the Hesketh family when they made land available for development in the 19th century. Hesketh Park at the northern end of the town is named after the Hesketh family, having been built on land donated by Rev. Charles Hesketh. Southport today is still one of the most popular seaside resorts in the UK. It hosts varied events including an annual air show on and over the beach, and the largest independent flower show in the UK in Victoria Park. The town is at the centre of England's Golf Coast and has hosted The Open Championship at the Royal Birkdale Golf Club.  There have been settlements in the area now comprising Southport since the Domesday Book, and some parts of the town have names of Viking origin. The earliest recorded human activity in the region was during the Middle Stone Age, when mesolithic hunter gatherers were attracted by the abundant red deer and elk population, as well as the availability of fish, shellfish and woodland. Roman coins have been found at Halsall Moss and Crossens, although the Romans never settled southwest Lancashire. The first real evidence of an early settlement here is in the Domesday Book, in which the area is called Otergimele. The name is derived from Oddrgrimir meaning the son of Grimm and is linked to the Old Norse word melr meaning sandbank. The Domesday Book states that there were 50 huts in Otergimele, housing a population of 200. The population was scattered thinly across the region and it was at the northeast end of Otergimele (present day Crossens), where blown sand gave way to alluvial deposits from the River Ribble estuary, that a small concentration of people occurred. The alluvium provided fertile agricultural land and the river itself stocks of fish. It was here, it seems, that a primitive church was built, which gave the emerging village its name of Churchtown, the parish being North Meols (pronounced "meals", not "mells"). A church called St Cuthbert's is still at the centre of Churchtown. With a booming fishing industry the area grew slowly and hamlets became part of the parish of North Meols. From south to north these villages were South Hawes, Haweside, Little London, Higher Blowick, Lower Blowick, Rowe-Lane, Churchtown, Marshside, Crossens, and Banks. As well as Churchtown, there were vicarages in Crossens and Banks. Parts of the parish were almost completely surrounded by water until 1692 when Thomas Fleetwood of Bank Hall cut a channel to drain Martin Mere to the sea. From this point on attempts at large-scale drainage of Martin Mere and other marshland continued until the 19th century, since when the water has been pumped away. This left behind a legacy of fine agricultural soil and created a booming farming industry.  In the late 18th century it was becoming fashionable for the well-to-do to relinquish inland spa towns and visit the seaside to bathe in the salt sea waters. At that time doctors recommended bathing in the sea to help cure aches and pains. In 1792 William Sutton, the landlord of the Black Bull Inn in Churchtown (now the Hesketh Arms) and known to locals as "The Old Duke", realised the importance of the newly created canal systems across the UK and set up a bathing house in the virtually uninhabited dunes at South Hawes by the seaside just four miles (6&nbsp;km) away from the newly constructed Leeds and Liverpool Canal and two miles south-west of Churchtown. When a widow from Wigan built a cottage nearby in 1797 for seasonal lodgers, Sutton quickly built a new inn on the site of the bathing house which he called the South Port Hotel, moving to live there the following season. The locals thought him mad and referred to the building as the Duke's Folly, but Sutton arranged transport links from the canal that ran through Scarisbrick, four miles from the hotel and trade was remarkably good. The hotel survived until 1854 when it was demolished to make way for traffic at the end of Lord Street, but its presence and the impact of its founder is marked by a plaque in the vicinity, by the name of one street at the intersection, namely Duke Street, and by a hotel on Dukes Street which bears the legacy name of Dukes Folly Hotel. Southport grew quickly in the 19th century as it gained a reputation for being a more refined seaside resort than its neighbour-up-the-coast Blackpool. In fact Southport had a head start compared to all the other places on the Lancashire coast because it had easy access to the canal system. Other seaside bathing areas couldn't really get going until the railways were built some years later. The Leeds and Liverpool canal brought people from Liverpool, Manchester, Bolton and Wigan amongst others. By 1820 Southport had over 20,000 visitors per year.  Southport Pier is referred to as the first true "pleasure pier", being one of the earliest pier structures to be erected using iron. A design from James Brunlees was approved at a cost of £8,700 and on 4 August 1859 a large crowd witnessed the driving home of the first support pile. The opening of the pier was celebrated on 2 August 1860. Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte lived in exile on Lord Street, the main thoroughfare of Southport, between 1846 and 1848, before returning to France to become President and subsequently Emperor of the French. During his reign, he caused much of the medieval centre of Paris to be replaced with broad tree-lined boulevards, covered walkways and arcades, just like Lord Street. On the strength of this coincidence, it has been suggested that the redevelopment may have been inspired by memories of Southport's town centre.  On the night of 9 December 1886, the worst lifeboat disaster in the history of the UK occurred off the shores of Southport. A cargo ship called the MexicoNewspaper report of the wreck of the Mexico was on its way to South America when it found itself in difficulty. Lifeboats from Lytham, St. Annes and Southport set off to try to rescue those aboard the vessel. The crews battled against storm-force winds as they rowed towards the casualty. The entire crew from the St. Anne's boat was lost and all but two of the Southport crew were too. In all, 28 lifeboatmen lost their lives on that night, leaving many widows and fatherless children. A memorial was erected in Duke Street Cemetery and a permanent exhibition used to be on display in the Museum of the Botanic Gardens (now closed) in Churchtown. There is also a memorial inside the Lifeboat house, now operated by the Southport Offshore Rescue Trust. Mexico was just one of many shipwrecks in the Southport area. From 1894 to 1912 Birkdale and the adjoining village of Ainsdale were separate from Southport and administered by Birkdale Urban District Council before becoming part of the county borough of Southport in 1912. This was a huge expansion of the town. In 1925, the RNLI abandoned the station at Southport and left the town with no lifeboat. In the late 1980s, after a series of tragedies, local families from Southport started to raise funds and bought a new lifeboat for the town stationed at the old RNLI lifeboat house. The lifeboat, operated by the Southport Offshore Rescue Trust, is completely independent from the RNLI and receives no money from them. Instead it relies entirely on donations from the general public. On 21 March 1926, Henry Seagrave set the land speed record in his 4-litre Sunbeam Tiger Ladybird on the sands at Southport at 152.33&nbsp;mph (245.149&nbsp;km/h). This record lasted for just over a month, until broken by J.G. Parry-Thomas. Southport Offshore Rescue Trust Politically, Southport is a stronghold of the Liberal Democrats with the current Member of Parliament, John Pugh, having a majority of 6024 over the Conservative Party at the 2010 General Election. In the election of 2015, Pugh was able to hold onto his seat, beating his closest opponent, Conservative Damien Moore, by 1339 votes. Southport lies within the historic county boundaries of Lancashire, and was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1866. It became a county borough independent of the administrative county of Lancashire in 1915, having reached the minimum 50,000 population (the 1911 census gave a figure of 51,643). The Birkdale Urban District, including the parishes of Birkdale and Ainsdale was added to Southport in 1912. Under the 1971 Local Government White Paper, presented in February 1971, Southport would have lost its county borough status, becoming a non-metropolitan district within Lancashire. Rather than accept this fate and lose its separate education and social services departments, Southport Corporation lobbied for inclusion in the nearby planned metropolitan county of Merseyside, to join with Bootle and other units to form a district with the 250,000 required population. It was duly included in the Metropolitan Borough of Sefton. This decision has been regretted by some of the population.  A recurring local political issue has been the cross-party movement campaigning for Southport to leave Sefton and form its own unitary authority, perhaps adjoined to the neighbouring West Lancashire authority.  Support for this has been seen amongst Liberal Democrat councillors, and also within the Southport Conservative Party. The issue of Southport having little in common with the Labour heartland of Bootle and the evidence that Southport infrastructure was progressively being allowed to wither&nbsp;– in favour of sustained investment in Bootle re-emerged in the early 1980s.  A Southport born man Kevin Laroux Wood stood in the parliamentary election for the Southport Constituency on 9 June 1983. He was supported by a team of like minded people who raised the funds needed and formed the "Southport Back in Lancashire Party". Posters were distributed and articles published in the Visiter newspaper. Although he was not elected as MP, it put the issue firmly on the local agenda which continues to this day. In the same period in 1980, a Private Member's Bill proposed restoring Southport to Lancashire, and renaming the residue of Sefton to the Metropolitan Borough of Bootle. The Local Government Boundary Commission for England conducted a review of the area in 1987, which attracted 10,000 messages, of which "70% were pro forma". In 1990 the LGBC made suggestions that Southport, Ainsdale and Birkdale should be made a district of Lancashire: the final recommendations in 1991 "concluded that public opinion was more evenly divided than initially thought", and also that eastward transport links with Lancashire were poor compared to those southward to the Liverpool area. The government again directed the Local Government Commission for England to make a review in December 1996 (after it had finished the work on the creation of unitary authorities), commencing in January 1997. This review was constrained by the legal inability of the commission to recommend that the current Sefton-West Lancashire border be altered. In a MORI poll conducted at the behest of the LGCE, 65% of Southport residents supported the campaign, compared to 37% in the borough as a whole. Local MPs Matthew Banks and Ronnie Fearn (MPs for Southport at various times) supported making Southport a unitary authority, with Banks wishing to see it tied to Lancashire ceremonially, but Fearn wishing to see it remain, as a separate borough, in Merseyside. The commission noted that Southport would have a relatively low population for a unitary authority, even including Formby (89,300 or 114,700), and that it was worried about the viability of a south Sefton authority without Southport, and therefore recommended the status quo be kept. The commission suggested the use of area committees for the various parts of the borough and also that Southport could become a civil parish.Final Recommendations on the Future Local Government of Sefton, Local Government Commission for England, November 1997 Another request made in 2004 was turned down, the Electoral Commission must request such a review. In 2002, a local independent party calling themselves the Southport Party was established, with many members supporting a policy of "Southport out of Sefton."  Three council seats were won in the 2002 local elections, including that of the leader of Sefton Council, Liberal Democrat Councillor, David Bamber.  At the following election there were no gains and a drop in the number of votes for the party. At the all out election in 2004, one of their councillors stood down, whilst the other two lost their seats. They have not regained any seats, although the group retains a campaigning presence in the town. To date, there have been no further moves to change Sefton's boundaries, but the Boundary Commission indicated in 2004 that a future review is possible.__E__.pdf Boundary Committee Website At  the town is situated in North West England. The closest cities are Preston approximately  to the north east and Liverpool approximately  to the south. Existing on the West Lancashire Coastal Plain, most of the town is only slightly above sea-level and thus parts of Southport used to be susceptible to flooding. This would be most frequently noticed on Southport's Marine Drive, which was regularly closed due to flooding from high tides. But in February 1997, new sea defences started being constructed and in 2002 the whole project was completed. Southport has a maritime climate like most of the UK. Due to its position by the coast, Southport rarely sees substantial snowfall and temperatures rarely fall below  so it doesn't have frequent frosts. Southport generally has moderate precipitation, unlike the rest of western UK. The United Kingdom Census 2001 showed a total resident population for Southport of 90,336. Approximately 19,000 were aged 16 or under, 60,000 were aged 16–74, and 10,000 aged 75 and over. According to the 2001 census, 96% of Southport's population claim they have been born in the UK. Historically the population of Southport began to rapidly increase during the Industrial Revolution and the Victorian era. From then the population has been stable with minor decline in some areas of the town. Southport is quite affluent compared with other parts of the north west. People from Southport are known as "Sandgrounders", although there is debate about what is sufficient to qualify for that name. As a seaside town Southport has a long history of leisure and recreation and is still heavily dependent on tourism. The town went into decline when cheap air travel arrived in the 1960s and people chose to holiday abroad due to competitive prices and more reliable weather. However, the town kept afloat with people coming to spend the day by the seaside on bank holidays and weekends. The town has diversified with annual events, shopping and conferences. In 2011 Southport was named the 14th most popular coastal resort in the country, benefiting from a 23% rise in money spent in the resort in that year. Part of the resort's progress is a result of the money invested in Southport over recent years. Research also shows the town is fourth in the country for the most notable investments over the past decade, with £9.7&nbsp;million being invested. While Southport has a dependence on tourism the town is also home to many businesses both in the private and public sector. Some manufacturing facilities were situated in the town, most notably Chewits were manufactured in the town from 1965 to 2006, only closing to move production to Slovakia. Manufacturing has diminished in the last few decades and only a few sites are still in production in the town today. Lord Street is the main shopping street of Southport. It is one of the great shopping streets of Northern England and is said to be the inspiration for the tree-lined boulevards of Paris. In the 2000s Chapel Street was pedestrianised and is home to some of the UK's most famous brands. Southport also has a newly renovated indoor market situated on King Street and Market Street as well as a farmers' market held on the last Thursday of every month on Chapel Street. Southport is now a premier destination for conferences in the north west following the multi million pound investment programme for the Southport Theatre & Convention Centre. Recently it has hosted the United Kingdom Independence Party national conference as well as the regional Labour Party conferences for the past few years. Southport is often called England's Golfing Capital because it is at the centre of England's Golf Coast and has the UK's highest concentration of championship links courses. Royal Birkdale Golf Club is one of the clubs in the Open Championship rotation for both men and women. The club has hosted the men's championship nine times since 1954, most recently in July 2008, and has hosted the women's tournament five times, including 2010. Southport's other courses include the 9-hole Southport Old Links in High Park, the Hesketh Golf Club, Hillside Golf Club and Southport and Ainsdale Golf Club. See also Listed buildings in Southport  One of Southport's main attractions for many years was Pleasureland, a fairground established in 1912. It was owned by the Thompson Family, and was closed in September 2006. A replacement fairground on the same site, provisionally named New Pleasureland, opened in July 2007. An earlier permanent funfair, Peter Pan's Playground, closed in the 1980s and is now the site of part of the Ocean Plaza shopping development. A former landmark of Pleasureland was the Looping Star roller coaster, which was on site from 1985 to 1987. It featured in the video for the pop single Wonderful Life, by Liverpool band Black, which was also shot at other parts of the Sefton and North West coastline. On 24 April 2009 a serious fire occurred at the oldest attraction within New Pleasureland. Called The River Caves, it was completely destroyed in this arson attack, and a 16-year-old boy was arrested in connection with the fire. Southport Model Railway Village is situated in Kings Gardens opposite the Royal Clifton Hotel and near the Marine Lake Bridge. The Model Railway Village opened in May 1996 and was created by Ray and Jean Jones. The Jones family still run the attraction today. The Model Railway Village season extends from April to the end of October. The season has extended into weekend openings during November, February and March, weather permitting. An earlier model village, the Land of the Little People, was demolished in the late 1980s to make way for the aborted Winter Gardens/SIBEC shopping development. Its site is now occupied by a Morrison's supermarket. Other major attractions in Southport include Splash World, an indoor water park situated on the back of the Dunes swimming pool which opened in June 2007. Meols Hall,The Meols Hall Website. a manor house, home of the Hesketh family is open to the public for a limited period each year. Set in its own expansive grounds, it boasts a history back to the Domesday Book and is full of interesting pictures and furniture. Southport also boasts one of the few lawnmower museums. The Power Station, that was the base of the town's former radio station Dune FM, on the edge of Victoria Park, which itself is home to the Southport Flower Show.http://www.southportflowershow.co.uk/ SFS Website Southport has many unique buildings and features, many of which are privately owned Victorian villas and houses and the town centre shops are of architectural interest. The most notable buildings, gardens and places of architectural interest are:   Also of architectural interest, but not extant, are: Due to its position by the coast, Southport is a linear settlement and as such can only be approached in a limited number of directions by road. The main roads entering Southport are:- There is no direct connection to the motorway from Southport; the nearest connections are:  An east-west bypass for the A570 at Ormskirk is planned to relieve congestion on Southport's main access route to the motorway network, although the effectiveness of the proposals are still under debate. Several areas within Southport town centre have recently undergone major road redevelopment; the largest scheme was the construction of the Marine Way Bridge (opened May 2004), which connects the Lord Street shopping district with the new seafront developments. The  high structure is thought to have cost in the region of £5&nbsp;million.Local newspaper report Also one of the main shopping areas in the town, Chapel Street, has undergone a pedestrianisation scheme to be similar to parts of Liverpool city centre.  Due to the limited number of directions by road, many of the services operated in Southport are from one place South to one place North or East of Southport. The main operator is Arriva North West, that operates many services to Liverpool, Ormskirk and other places to and through Southport as well as some local services. Stagecoach in Preston operates two services in Southport, the citi 2 (Preston – Southport) and the X2 (Preston – Liverpool)  Southport has a railway station with a frequent service of trains to Liverpool and a regular service to Wigan, Bolton, Manchester and Manchester Airport. The Liverpool line was originally built by the Liverpool, Crosby and Southport Railway in 1848 and is now included into the Merseyrail network. It was followed on 9 April 1855 by the Manchester and Southport Railway with a line to Manchester via Wigan. Formerly, Southport was also served by two further railway lines:- In July 1897, both the West Lancashire and the Liverpool, Southport and Preston Junction Railways were absorbed into the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (L&Y). The L&Y had a large terminus at Southport Chapel Street and could see no sense in operating two termini at very close proximity. In 1901, the L&Y completed a remodelling of the approach lines to Central to allow trains to divert onto the Manchester to Southport line and into Southport Chapel Street Station. Southport Central was closed to passengers and it became a goods depot eventually amalgamating with Chapel Street depot. It survived intact well into the 1970s. On Southport Pier can be found the Southport Pier Tramway which transports passengers from the Promenade to the pier head over  on a  gauge. The town possesses a variety of academic institutions. The all-girls Greenbank High School is situated next to the Royal Birkdale Golf Club, and is a certified Specialist Language College, teaching Spanish, French, German, Russian, Italian and Mandarin Chinese GCSE's. World famous actress Miranda Richardson was educated at the school. The male equivalent (also situated in Birkdale) is the all-boys Birkdale High School, a school specialising in Mathematics. Meols Cop High School is situated in the Blowick area of Southport and is one of the six schools in the country chosen to be written about in OfSTED's School Inspections handbook of 2012. Meols Cop High School has recently become one of the highest achieving schools in Sefton, with 96% of the students obtaining at least 5 GCSE's at A*-C grades. The school is oversubscribed and is currently building an additional 2 new classrooms to make way for new year groups with the amount of students increasing every year. There are several other high schools prominent in the town, including Stanley High School, which is a specialist Sports College and Christ the King which is the highest achieving high school in Southport. The town's last remaining independent preparatory school, Sunnymede School, which was in Westcliffe Road, Birkdale closed in 2010 due to a lack of pupils. In the past the town had more independent schools which included Tower Dene, which was situated on Cambridge Road. This school closed in 2002 due to a similar fate. One of the Victorian houses that housed the school has since been turned into apartments, the other is now a nursery. Kingswood College (originally St Wyburn's) is now housed outside Southport at Scarisbrick Hall, but it takes many pupils from the town. Brighthelmston School (girls) and University School (boys) are long closed. The town has two Further education colleges: Southport College that is situated near to the town centre and King George V College which is on Scarisbrick New Road in the Blowick area of the town. Southport College offers a wide range of subjects and courses that are available to meet a range of students with different abilities.  The college does not offer a wide range of A-Level courses as they used to when they first opened as Southport Technical College. Courses at the college include Diplomas, NVQs, BTECs and Access courses. In addition, Southport College offers some higher education courses in conjunction with the University of Central Lancashire, Edge Hill University and Liverpool John Moores University. King George V College (KGV) offers both A-Level and Business And Technology Education Council courses and the college requires higher GCSE grades to be accepted onto the course desired. Currently, the college is the best performing state funded college in an 18-mile radius of KGV. For the fourth year running, KGV achieved the highest point score per student for state education in Sefton for A levels and their equivalent advanced level courses. The college has also been described by OFSTED as "outstanding" (grade 1). It originally opened as King George V Sixth Form College in 1979, and replaced the former King George V Grammar School for Boys, which occupied the same site from 1926 until its demolition in stages during the 1980s as the College was fully opened.  Southport is home to Southport F.C. who play in the National League, the fifth tier of English football, after winning the Conference North title in the 2009–10 season. The club entered The Football League in 1921 and became a founder member of the Third Division North. In 1978 the club were voted out of the Football League following three consecutive 23rd (out of 24) placed finishes, and was replaced by Wigan Athletic. The voting couldn't have been tighter, as the clubs drew on the first ballot (when many had expected Rochdale to be voted out), but Wigan's superior canvassing ensured that they won the second ballot. Southport were the last club to leave the Football League through the re-election process. Automatic relegation from the Fourth Division was introduced in 1986–87. They have played at the Haig Avenue ground since 1905. Since 2011, a senior female team – Southport Birkdale Ladies, who play in the North West Women's Regional League – have also played their home fixtures at the ground. Southport is also home to Birkdale United. This was the first FA Charter Standard Community Club in Sefton. Southport is also home to a rugby union team, Southport Rugby Football Club, who play at the Recreational Ground on Waterloo Road, Hillside. The junior section of Southport RFC is known as the Southport Sharks, which has sides that range from 6 years old upwards. They also play on the same grounds, and train every Sunday 10am-12noon. The town is probably best known for golf; the Royal Birkdale Golf Club situated in the dunes to the south of the town is one of the venues on The Open Championship rotation and has hosted two Ryder Cups. Nearby Southport and Ainsdale Golf Club is also a two time Ryder Cup venue and both Hillside Golf Club and Hesketh Golf Club host many major events as well as being final open qualifying courses. Many smaller links courses also surround the town.  Southport's location by the coast also lends itself to some more specialised sporting activities – Ainsdale Beach, south of the town, is popular for kite sports, including kite-surfing. In 1925, Henry Segrave set a world land speed record of  on the beach, driving a Sunbeam Tiger. His association is largely forgotten locally, but is commemorated by the name of a public house on Lord Street. Marine Lake lies nestled between the town centre and the sea and is used for a variety of water-sports including water-skiing, sailing and rowing. The lake is home to the West Lancashire Yacht Club and Southport Sailing Club, both of which organise dinghy racing. The annual Southport 24 Hour Race, organised by the West Lancashire Yacht Club, is an endurance race of national standing, with an average turnout of 60 to 80 boats. In 2006, the event marked its 40th anniversary.24-hour yacht race (video) The flat and scenic route alongside the beach is very popular with cyclists, and is the start of the Trans Pennine Trail, a cycle route running across the north of the country to Selby in North Yorkshire, through Hull and on to Hornsea on the east coast. In June 2008, Cycling England announced Southport as one of the 11 new cycling towns. These 11 towns shared £47&nbsp;million from the government to be spent solely on cycling schemes in the towns. Southport's Cycling Towns programme aims to encourage tourism and leisure cycling, create regeneration opportunities and significantly increase cycling to school. There are now many cycle lanes in Southport and more are planned, to encourage cycling in the town.   The town's media consists of two rival newspaper groups, and two radio stations. The independently owned 'Champion' newspaper is a free weekly paper and Trinity Mirror's 'Sefton & West Lancs Media Mix' titles The Mid-week Visiter and The Southport Visiter (now out on a Thursday) are free and paid-for respectively. The town also falls within the circulation areas of three regional hard copy newspapers; The Liverpool Echo, The Liverpool Daily Post and The Lancashire Evening Post. Southport is also covered by several local and regional magazines, like Lancashire Life. The local Ranger Service, which is part of Sefton MBC, runs a quarterly free magazine called Coastlines. Old Southport newspapers now out of print are as follows: Independent 1861–1920s; Liverpool & Southport News 1861–1872; Southport News (West Lancs) 1881–1885; Southport Standard 1885–1899; Southport Guardian 1882–1953; – "Published from" date only Southport Journal 1904–1932; Southport Star; Southport Advertiser. The area also has many online media sites, including the UK's first online newspaper,Published in UK as the "UK's only web-based newspaper" in January 2005 in hard copy magazine called "Web Pages Made Easy." and on the Trade Mark Register as a newspaper patent.gov.uk No. 2292469 the Southport Reporter,Hollis PR & Media Guide 2006. – ISBN 1-904193-25-0 UK ISSN 1364-9000 as well as Internet forums and blog sites. The town's commercial radio station Dune FM closed during August 2012. On a regional level Southport is covered by several local and regional radio stations, including Radio City 96.7, City Talk 105.9, Magic 1548, 97.4 Rock FM, Magic 999 and BBC Radio Merseyside. Southport is situated within the television regions of BBC North West and ITV's Granada Television.       Population growth in Southport between 1901–2001 Year 1901 1911 1921 1931 1939 1951 1961 2001 Population 48,083 51,643 76,621 78,925 91,240 84,039 82,004 90,336  North Meols CP/AP Southport Airshow The north west's biggest airshow held in the summer. Southport Flower Show The UK's largest independent flowershow. British Musical Fireworks Championships Scooter Rally at Pontins Southport Southport International Jazz Festival Southport Food and Drink Festival Southport Weekender Southport Rocks Tidy Boys IDEAL Weekender Lakeside Miniature Railway Southport Pier with its Southport Pier Tramway Marine Way Bridge Lord Street Southport Model Railway Village Southport Town Gardens Kings Gardens Wellington Terrace, Lord Street Promenade Hospital (Renovated as luxury apartments and renamed Marine Gate Mansions) The Ribble Building, built as a railway station then adapted for use as a bus station, part of the site was redeveloped as a supermarket and the remainder converted to a hotel and restaurant) Scarisbrick Hotel Smedley Hydro (A former Victorian Hydropathic Health Spa, now under ownership of the Home Office for the UK's Birth, Deaths and Marriages) Botanic Gardens (was home of only local history museum in southport – that was closed by Sefton Council in 2011) Hesketh Park Kew Gardens (Southport District General Hospital now occupies most of the site) Meols Hall The Round House Wayfarers Arcade Atkinson Art Gallery & Library The Arts Centre & Town Hall St Cuthbert's Church St George's United Reformed Church, Lord Street Emmanuel Parish Church, Cambridge Road, which has an organ, installed in 1914, built by Harrisons of Durham Holy Trinity Church. The church was founded before 1898. Queen Victoria Statue&nbsp;– originally moved from the town hall gardens to Neville Street junction to the Promenade and again to the pedestrianised side of Neville Street.  Cannon Cinema (Lord Street)-(demolished and replaced with the Vincent Hotel that opened in 2008) Kingsway Night Club (demolished in 2010 following an arson attack) Open Air Baths (demolished 1990s, The South Ocean Plaza complex now occupies the site) Steamport Museum (housed inside the former 27C locomotive shed, demolished in late 2000) site now occupied by Central 12 shopping complex. Palace Hotel, Birkdale (a large Victorian hotel, demolished in 1969) Southport General Infirmary (demolished in 2008–09 with only a wing of the infirmary remaining as it is being used for mental health services) A565 (from Preston to the north east, from the A59 Liverpool – Preston – York), A570 (from Ormskirk and St Helens to the south east), A565 (from Liverpool and Formby to the south). from the east – junction 3 of the M58 (on the A570, twelve miles) from the south – junction 7 of the M57 (on the A565, fourteen miles) from the north – junction 1 of the M65 /  junction 29 of the M6 (on the A582/A59, nineteen miles) From 1882, the West Lancashire Railway operated from Southport Derby Road station (also known as Southport Central) to Preston Fishergate Hill. This line was shut in 1964, and nowadays, Southport and Preston are linked only by the (largely dual-carriageway) A565 and A59 roads. In 1884, another line from Southport to Liverpool was opened:- the Cheshire Lines Committee's Southport & Cheshire Lines Extension Railway extended the CLC's North Liverpool Extension Line from Liverpool Central to Southport Lord Street. The West Lancashire Railway sponsored the Liverpool, Southport and Preston Junction Railway to provide a connection to the CLC line, joining it at Altcar and Hillhouse.Southport Past Website These lines ultimately proved uncompetitive, and the Southport services were withdrawn in 1952. Sophie Abelson, actress Harold Ackroyd VC MC, recipient of the Victoria Cross in World War I Jean Alexander, actress Marc Almond, lead singer of Soft Cell Michael Arlen, author and playwright Robin Askwith, actor Matthew Baylis, novelist, journalist and ex- EastEnders storyliner Gavin Blyth, journalist and ex-Emmerdale producer Dora Bryan, actress Jon Burton, founder of Traveller's Tales Richard Corbett, MEP Peter Doig, artist John Culshaw, record producer Lord Fearn, politician Tommy Fleetwood, professional golfer. Paul Gardner Alan Groves, footballer Fran Halsall, swimmer Ollie Halsall, guitarist Frank Hampson, artist, creator of Dan Dare Alan Hansen, footballer, television pundit Tim Hetherington, British photojournalist and film-maker killed in Libya in during the 2011 Libyan Civil War Anthony Holden, writer Jan Holden, actress David Lonsdale, actor Lee Mack, comedian Ginger McCain, racehorse trainer Neil McDermott, actor David Mitchell, author Keith Pring, footballer Anthony Quayle, actor Arthur Richardson, VC Miranda Richardson, actress Jimmy Rimmer, footballer Michael Rimmer, 800m athlete Stuart Rimmer, footballer William Rimmer, composer and conductor Jack Rodwell, footballer Tony Rodwell, footballer Adrian Scott Stokes, painter Leonard Stokes, architect A. J. P. Taylor, historian Tony Waiters, footballer and coach of Canada's national team at the 1986 World Cup Marcus Wareing, chef Edmund Whittaker, mathematician Red Rum, record breaking racehorse and 3 time winner of the Aintree Grand National. Eagle, a comic for boys, was started in Southport. Corgi Motorcycle Co Ltd. Fletchers Solicitors Southport (UK Parliament constituency) Southport Corporation Tramways Local Newspapers, holds newspaper title names from 1750 to 1920. ISBN 0-907099-46-7 Official Southport Tourism site Southport Offshore Rescue Trust
