    Spartanburg is the largest city in and the county seat of Spartanburg County, South Carolina, United States, and the twelfth largest city by population in the state. Spartanburg has a municipal population of 37,013 and an urban population of 180,786 at the 2010 census.USA. EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT. OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET. February 28, 2013. Comp. Jeffrey D. Zients. 01st ed. Vol. 13. Washington, DC: US GOV, 2013. OMB Bulletin. EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND ESTABLISHMENTS. Web. January 19, 2013. . Lists of Metropolitan Statistical Areas, Metropolitan Divisions, Micropolitan Statistical Areas, Combined Statistical Areas, and New England City and Town Area Delineations: This bulletin and its appendix that provides the nine lists of statistical areas are available electronically from the OMB web site at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb – under "Bulletins;" of note, this update, historical delineations, and other information about population statistics is available on the Census Bureau's web site at: http://www.census.gov/populationimetro. The Spartanburg Metropolitan Statistical Area, corresponding to Spartanburg County and Union County had a population of 316,997 as of the 2012 census estimate and Revised Delineations of Metropolitan Statistical Areas. Spartanburg is the second-largest city in the greater Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson Combined Statistical Area which had a population of 1,266,995 at the 2010 census. It is part of a 10-county region of northwestern South Carolina known as "The Upstate," and is located  northwest of Columbia,  west of Charlotte, North Carolina, and about  northeast of Atlanta, Georgia. This region of the Carolina Piedmont was for centuries a cherished hunting ground of the Catawba and Cherokee tribes, which occupied land east and west of this area, respectively.  This distant heritage can be glimpsed in some of the natural features. Early European settlers to this area included French fur trappers, English woodsmen, and Scots-Irish farmers.  Few remnants survive from these early pioneering days, but traces can be found in the more rural areas of the county. First established in the 1780s as a courthouse village, Spartanburg may have been named for the Spartan regiment of the South Carolina militia.  The city was incorporated in 1831, at the time of the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Cowpens, a pivotal fight of the American Revolution that took place only a few miles away.  The city’s streets and architectural record reflect the changes of the 19th and 20th centuries. Cotton mills have abounded in the Spartanburg area since 1816, earning Spartanburg the reputation as the "Lowell of the South." Although there were few mills in the area before the Civil War, technological advances, northern capital, and out-migration from the poor farms that made white labor available, created a wave of postbellum mill development here and in much of the Piedmont South. Additionally, the abundant streams and rivers in the area are just beginning their descent towards the lower-lying Midlands region.  In many places, these waterways descend abruptly, providing a source for plentiful waterpower.  Cotton mills were built along these rivers to harness this power, and so began the region’s servitude to King Cotton.  These mills, their owners and their laborers dominated the politics and economy of the region for nearly a century.  Although nearly all abandoned, many mills remain along the riverbanks, the Piedmont equivalent of Gothic ruins. When the United States entered World War I in 1917, one of the sixteen divisional cantonments for the training of National Guard troops was Camp Wadsworth, which is located in the vicinity of Westgate Mall. Large numbers of New York National Guardsmen trained there in addition to many southern troops.  During World War II, Camp Croft south of the city trained Army recruits. This is now a South Carolina state park with the same name. Some portions of the park contain the original quonset huts (1/2 metal tube structures). According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which  is land and , or 0.47%, is water. The city of Spartanburg has a humid subtropical climate with long hot and humid summers, and modestly cool to semi mild winters. The average annual temperature is . In the summer season from June through September average highs are in the 80's to low 90's F, while in the winter months average highs are in the mid 50's F. Annual rainfall is spread fairly evenly throughout the whole year. Spartanburg sees very little snowfall, with the annual average being only 1.4 inches. Average precipitation is  and the average growing season is 231 days.  The current mayor, Junie White, was elected in 2009. Spartanburg operates under a City manager form of government in which the mayor and six city council members have equal votes.  Council members represent districts within the city and the mayor is elected at large. The council appoints a city manager, who is responsible for the daily administration of city governmental affairs.City Council. City of Spartanburg. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. City Hall is located at 145 West Broad Street. The Spartanburg County Administration Building (this is the old Sears building which was vacated in the mid-1970s when Sears moved to Westgate Mall and renovated in the late 1980s or early 1990s) is located at 366 North Church Street. It is across the street from the Spartanburg Memorial Auditorium.   Within the past decade, developers and community leaders have spearheaded an effort to revitalize Spartanburg's downtown commercial district. This has resulted in a remodeling of Morgan Square, the restoration of a number of historic structures and the relocation of several businesses and company headquarters to the downtown vicinity. Some of these new developments include a nine-floor, 240-room Marriott, the headquarters of Advance America, and the headquarters of QS/1 Data Systems. The world headquarters of Denny's restaurants is also located in downtown Spartanburg.  Numerous other smaller businesses such as RJ Rockers Brewing Company have also moved downtown as a result of this community-wide effort. The economy of Spartanburg benefits from the BMW manufacturing facility located in the western end of Spartanburg County. Manufacturing began in 1996 with certain types of the 3 Series (from the E36 platform) and with the Z3 roadster. However, a year later when the newer 3 Series (E46) platform emerged, BMW decided not to build it at the Spartanburg plant, but instead exclusively manufacture variants of the popular Z3. The plant currently manufactures the X5 SAV and X6 SAC for the world market. As part of an expansion project announced in March 2008, the plant will add about  of assembly space, and it will become the home of the next-generation X3 SAV. Spartanburg is also home to the world headquarters and research facility for Milliken & Company, a textile and chemical manufacturer. According to Spartanburg's 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the principal employers in the city are:    Spartanburg is a college town, with eight institutions of higher learning: Most of the City of Spartanburg's public schools are run by Spartanburg County School District 7, one of seven loosely affiliated districts located in Spartanburg County.  However, the westernmost part of the city is served by Spartanburg County School District 6, which has two elementary schools within city limits.  Spartanburg is home to the main campus of the South Carolina School for the Deaf and Blind. It has five Regional Outreach Centers throughout the state.South Carolina School for the Deaf and the Blind. Scsdb.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. The city is also home to Spartanburg Preparatory School, a K-8 public charter school that is the only "brick and mortar" charter school in the Upstate. Spartanburg is also home to Spartanburg Christian Academy, a K-12 private school in North Spartanburg,Spartanburg Christian Academy. Scawarriors.org (December 6, 2010). Retrieved on 2010-12-12. the Spartanburg Day School, a K-12 private school offering the International Baccalaureate in grades K-4, and to Oakbrook Preparatory and Westgate Christian schools, both K-12 private schools.Oakbrook Preparatory School. Oakbrookprep.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Located in Hampton Heights, the Montessori Academy of Spartanburg is a PreK-8 private school providing a Montessori educational approach.Montessori Academy of Spartanburg. montessorispartanburg.com. Retrieved on June 7, 2014. The Meeting Street Academy in downtown Spartanburg is a branch of a Charleston-based private school and currently offers PreK and Kindergarten.Meeting Street Academy – Spartanburg. meetingstreetacademy.com. Retrieved on June 7, 2014. St. Paul the Apostle Catholic School is located in downtown Spartanburg. It is affiliated with the Diocese of Charleston and is K-8.St Paul the Apostle Catholic School Spartanburg SC. Stpaulschoolsc.com. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Spartanburg County’s healthcare is mainly provided by the Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System. Spartanburg Regional is a public, not-for-profit, integrated health care delivery system based in the Spartanburg Regional Medical Center, a 588-bed teaching and research hospital. SRHS provides healthcare services to a five-county area in North and South Carolina, serving an Upstate medical population of more than 300,000 people. In 1925, Dr. Hugh Ratchford Black opened a 35-bed facility named in honor of his wife, Mary Black.  The current Skylyn Drive facility opened in 1968, and today, the campus features a  modern medical facility. The medical staff consists of more than 350 physicians representing all specialties. Mary Black Physician Group has over 100 employed physicians in more than 30 locations. Other attractions include:  Spartanburg is host to the NFL's Carolina Panthers training camp each year on the campus of Wofford College. Historic Duncan Park Stadium was once home to the Spartanburg Stingers in the Coastal Plain LeagueCoastal Plain League  and the Spartanburg Crickets in the Southern Collegiate Baseball LeagueCollegiate Baseball League and is the oldest minor league baseball stadium in the country. It was also once home to the Spartanburg Phillies, a minor league team of the Philadelphia Phillies. It now is the home stadium for the baseball teams of Spartanburg High School. The Shrine Bowl of the Carolinas is held each year at Wofford's Gibbs Stadium. It is a high school football all-star game played between the top players from South Carolina and the top players from North Carolina. The BMW Charity Pro-Am is a golf tournament on the Nationwide Tour held each year in May at three courses in the Upstate, including the Carolina Country Club in Spartanburg. The USC Upstate Spartans, Spartanburg Methodist College Pioneers, and the Wofford College Terriers offer a variety of sports for both men and women. Converse College also offers NCAA Division II women's sports teams.Athletics | Converse College. Converse.edu. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. The Southern Conference of the NCAA is headquartered in Spartanburg. Spartanburg is located an hour away from the Clemson Tigers and about an hour and a half away from the University of South Carolina Gamecocks. The Spartanburg Parks Commission hosts several travel baseball and softball tournaments each year, helping brand the city as one of the Southeast's most reputable tournament locations. Tyger River Park, a 13-field mega baseball/softball complex, opened in 2012. Upward Sports, a Christian-based sports organization for kids, is headquartered in Spartanburg.Upward Sports – Providing the best sports experience for every child. Upward.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Spartanburg has, throughout its history, been a fruitful home to a creative community.  Cultural events and institutions abound in the city and county and consistently draw large crowds. Spartanburg is part of the much greater Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson-Asheville DMA which is the nation's 35th largest and is served by the following major television affiliates:    Spartanburg is served by the Spartanburg Area Regional Transit Agency (SPARTA), covering the city of Spartanburg and the surrounding urbanized area with 8 routes leading to a wide variety of destinations.Spartanburg Area Regional Transit Agency All SPARTA buses are equipped with bicycle racks. Two hybrid-electric buses were added to the fleet in 2012.[ ] GoUpstate.com. Retrieved June 6, 2013. The SPARTA Passenger Center is located at 100 North Liberty Street and also serves Greyhound buses. Mass Transit is provided to all citizens of Spartanburg County through Spartanburg County Dial-A-Ride.  It is a door to door service that operates 6 days a week. Amtrak's Crescent train connects Spartanburg with the cities of New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Greensboro, Charlotte, Atlanta, Birmingham and New Orleans. The Amtrak station is situated at 290 Magnolia Street.  As of the census of 2000, there were 39,673 people, 15,989 households, and 9,721 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,066.3 people per square mile (799.9/km²). There were 17,696 housing units at an average density of 923.9 per square mile (356.8/km²). The racial makeup was 49.55% African American, 47.15% White,  0.18% Native American, 1.33% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.76% from other races, and 0.96% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.78% of the population. There were 15,989 households out of which 28.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.0% were married couples living together, 23.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.2% were non-families. 34.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 3.00. In the city the population was spread out with 25.2% under the age of 18, 12.2% from 18 to 24, 26.6% from 25 to 44, 20.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 79.6 males. The median income for a household in the city was $28,735, and the median income for a family was $36,108. Males had a median income of $30,587 versus $23,256 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,136. About 19.4% of families and 23.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.6% of those under age 18 and 15.4% of those age 65 or over.    center Clocktower City Hall Closeup of Morgan Square fountain Part of downtown Spartanburg Citizens and Southern National Bank First Baptist Church High steeple of First Baptist Church First Presbyterian Church St. Paul the Apostle Catholic Church     Employer 1 Spartanburg Regional 6,400 2 Spartanburg County 1,437 3 Spartanburg County School District 7 1,243 4 Walmart 925 5 American Credit Acceptance 582 6 QS/1 Headquarters 520 7 Wofford College 450 8 City of Spartanburg 438 9 Advance America 411 10 Denny's Corporation 285 Lawson’s Fork Creek, a tributary of the Pacolet River, was once known for its plentiful wildlife and crystal clear waters.  Parks and woodlands line much of its banks (which lie entirely within Spartanburg County), and rocky shoals and natural waterfalls can be found throughout its course.  It stretches from the northern end of the county to the eastern end, where it empties into the Pacolet. The Cottonwood Trail is a walking trail that runs along part of Lawson’s Fork located on the Edwin M. Griffin Nature Preserve.  The trail includes picnic areas, a raised path over an extensive wetlands area and access to sporadic sandbars. It is used frequently by cyclists, joggers and walkers and is located just east of downtown. Since the Lawson's Fork floodplain is not suitable for development, wildlife populate the area. Larger animals that can be found here include white-tailed deer, raccoons, wild turkeys, pileated woodpeckers and snapping turtles.Spartanburg Area Conservancy – Edwin M. Griffin Nature Preserve. Spartanburgconservation.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Hatcher Garden and Woodland Preserve, located in the midst of an urban environment, is a welcome oasis of natural beauty.  The project of a retired social activist, Hatcher Garden has transformed an eroding gully into a thick woods and flower garden and provides a haven for birds and other wildlife. Walnut Grove Plantation, an 18th-century farmhouse, has been preserved by the Spartanburg County Historical Association. The site of a locally famous skirmish during the American Revolutionary War, it was the home of the Moore family.  The plantation lies south of Spartanburg near the town of Roebuck and is open to the public for tours and during annual festivals. The Seay House, another 18th-century home, is a more typical representative of a pioneer home.  Its single stone fireplace and simple construction were common traits associated with farmsteads from this period. The Price House, the third 18th-century home maintained by the Historical Association, is unique.  Its sturdy Flemish-bond brick construction and three stories are less widespread for this area.  By carefully examining the original inventory lists of the house, the Historical Association has been able to retrieve period pieces that approximate the original contents of the house. Morgan Square, the city’s primary downtown hub, is the original courthouse village.  It was founded adjacent to a small spring (now underground) on the western slope of a ridge, which forms the border of the Tyger and Pacolet River watersheds.  The square's name derives from Daniel Morgan, the general who commanded the American forces at Cowpens.  A statue of Morgan was placed in the square in 1881.  The oldest existing buildings on Morgan Square date to the 1880s. The Magnolia Street Train Depot is one of the older buildings in Spartanburg and stands as a reminder of Spartanburg’s old nickname “the Hub City,” referring to the many transportation routes that connected Spartanburg with cities throughout the region.  It is now the home of the Amtrak station, the Hub City Railroad Museum, and the Hub City Farmers' Market. Hampton Heights Historic District is the city's oldest intact downtown neighborhood, located a couple of blocks south of Morgan Square.  Architectural styles in this neighborhood range from large Queen Anne and Neoclassical homes to cozy early 20th-century bungalows. Glendale Mill is located off Lawson’s Fork Creek southeast of the city.  Although gutted by fire several years ago, a few towers and smokestacks remain, providing a dramatic backdrop to the dam, shoals and waterfalls of the creek below.  The former company store now serves as the home of the Wofford College Environmental Studies Center. Beaumont Mill, north of the downtown, has recently been renovated to house the NCAA Southern Conference headquarters. The adjacent mill village has been designated as a local historic district.Beaumont Village Local Historic District. cityofspartanburg.org. Retrieved on January 29, 2012. Converse Mill is located east of the city along the Pacolet River. It has recently been purchased by a developer. The mill was reconstructed in 1903 after a huge flood washed away the original mill. The University of South Carolina Upstate (formerly known as University of South Carolina Spartanburg, or USCS). Converse College – Founded in 1889, Converse is a comprehensive masters institution with a co-ed graduate school and an undergraduate women's liberal arts college. Sherman College of Chiropractic – South Carolina's only chiropractic college Spartanburg Community College Spartanburg Methodist College – The only 2-year, private, residential college in the state. Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine (VCOM) – Carolinas Campus. First classes began in Fall 2011. Virginia College – Private career college opened in January 2011 Wofford College – Founded in 1854, Wofford is a Phi Beta Kappa liberal arts college with an enrollment of approximately 1,500 students. The Hub City Farmers' Market, an outdoor market held Saturday mornings from 6:00am – 12:00pm during the summer and fall on the grounds of the historic Magnolia Street Train Station, showcasing local (often organic) produce and goods. Retrofest, the Southeast's largest disco festival held at Spartanburg Memorial Auditorium on the first Saturday in February. Spring Fling, a weekend festival typically held the first Saturday of May, has many live artists, rides, and other assorted attractions. The SouthEast LinuxFest – annual, well attended Linux and open source software conference for the southeast – held in Spartanburg in 2010 and 2011. Red, White and Boom, a Fourth of July event held at Barnet Park featuring patriotic music and a fireworks display. The Annual Sidewalk Arts Show, an open, juried art exhibition held concurrently with The International Festival on the first Saturday in October. The International Festival, an event showcasing culture and cuisine from countries around the globe held at Barnet Park on the first Saturday in October. Music on Main, a street concert event held every Thursday (April through August) downtown. The Greek Festival, a major street festival that is held in September by the local Greek community at St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church. It offers Greek food and cultural activities, and is the sister festival to the Greek Festival held every spring in Greenville. Dickens of a Christmas, a Victorian holiday event held annually in downtown Spartanburg on the Tuesday after Thanksgiving. Festifall, an historical celebration held on the grounds of the 18th-century Walnut Grove Plantation in October, featuring demonstrations and reenactments. Taste of the Backcountry, a historical celebration held on the grounds of the 18th-century Price House in April, featuring food samples and demonstrations. The Spartanburg Museum of Art The Spartanburg Regional Museum of History The Spartanburg Science Center Ballet Spartanburg which has hosted over 22 national and international ballet companies. Hub City Railroad Museum Spartanburg Music Trail which is a series of signs throughout downtown recognizing famous local musicians. Several golf courses, including two private 18-hole courses at the Country Club of Spartanburg and the Carolina Country Club. Cowpens National Battlefield The Hotspot Skatepark Ground Zero historic live music venue. The Chapman Cultural Center,Welcome to the Chapman Cultural Center. Chapmanculturalcenter.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Spartanburg's cultural anchor for history, art, theatre, dance, music, and science, is located in a three-building complex on the northern edge of downtown.  Opened in October 2007, the Center was designed by David M. Schwarz Architects of Washington, D.C.  It houses the Spartanburg Art Museum, Spartanburg County Regional History Museum, Science Center, Little Theatre, Ballet, Music Foundation, and other groups that were formerly located in The Arts CenterWelcome to the Chapman Cultural Center. Spartanarts.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. on South Spring Street. It is owned and operated by The Arts Partnership of Greater Spartanburg, a non-profit organization dedicated to supporting arts and cultural agencies in Spartanburg County. The Showroom, the home of Hub-Bub,Hub-Bub.com. Hub-Bub.com. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. is a new center for progressive arts in the community.  It houses a gallery, film screen, stage, and concert venue and is home to a nationally recognized artist residency program.  Hub-Bub is the creative effort responsible for the founding of The Showroom and, as a project goal, seeks to attract and retain creative talent in the community.  It was launched in March 2005 by the Hub City Writers ProjectWelcome to. Hubcity.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. with assistance from private donors and the city of Spartanburg. The Hub City Writers Project, located a block away, serves the community as a local publishing company and independent bookstore. The Showroom also housed the first TEDx Spartanburg event on September 10, 2011.TEDxSpartanburg – Together: Creating A New Vision. TEDxSpartanburg.com. Retrieved on February 4, 2012. Converse CollegeConverse College. Converse.edu. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. is a nationally known four-year liberal arts institution recognized for its strong music and visual art programs.  It hosts events open to the community throughout the year.  Twitchell Auditorium is located on the campus of Converse College.  Home of the Greater Spartanburg Philharmonic Orchestra, Twitchell Auditorium has served as hosts to other groups such as the Spartanburg All-County High School Band and Boston Brass. Twitchell Auditorium was built in 1899 and renovated for the school's centennial celebration in 1989. Famous for its acoustics, the 1500-seat auditorium is home to a 57-rank Casavant organ with 2,600+ pipes. Theatre Converse puts on several plays a year, and Converse puts on an opera annually, as well as opera scenes.  The college has had major concerts in recent years with such artists as Caedmon's Call, Jason Mraz, Corey Smith, and Colbie Caillat. Wofford CollegeWofford College. Wofford.edu (October 22, 2007). Retrieved on 2010-12-12. is a prestigious liberal arts college. Not traditionally known for its arts and cultural strength, Wofford has made notable strides to develop arts programs in recent years. Poet and environmental writer John E. Lane, theater artist Mark Ferguson, and visual artist Kris Neely are all graduates of Wofford. Each returned to their alma mater to develop curricular and co-curricular opportunities in the Arts, including a Creative Writing program, a Theatre Major, and a minor in Studio Art. John Lane was also a critical visionary in the creation of the Goodall Environmental Studies Center in Glendale, SC. The Spartanburg County Public Library headquarters,Spartanburg County Public Libraries. Infodepot.org. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. housed in an innovative building on South Church Street, is home to a voluminous collection of fiction, nonfiction, children’s literature, A/V materials and items relating to local history and genealogy. The library hosts many meetings, concerts and presentations. The Spartanburg Memorial Auditorium is located on N. Church Street, across from the municipal building in the northwest end of the city of Spartanburg. The "SMA" has hosted various famous acts such as Bob Dylan, Crosby Stills and Nash, B.B. King, Billy Joel, David Copperfield, Lewis Grizzard, Harry Connick, Jr., Gerald Levert, Dave Chappelle, Jerry Seinfeld, Phish, A Prairie Home Companion, and many others. Originally built in an Art Deco style and was renovated c. 2002 including a new facade and backstage with loading area. Families Advocating for Campus Equality, an organization that fights accusations of sexual misconduct on college campuseshttp://www.facecampusequality.org/about.html is based in Spartanburg.http://www.facecampusequality.org/contact.html Spartanburg's primary newspaper is the Spartanburg Herald-Journal, a member of the Halifax Media Group. The Spartanburg Journal is a weekly newspaper that is part of a Community Journal group that also has editions in Greenville and Anderson. The Spartan Weekly News is a weekly newspaper with offices located in downtown Spartanburg. The paper covers all of Spartanburg County with an emphasis on the city of Spartanburg, and its coverage focuses on items of community interest and well as news from around the upstate of South Carolina. The award-winning Hometown News Group has several newspapers throughout the county and upstate region: The Boiling Springs Sentry, The Blacksburg Times, The Inman Times, Spartanburg County News, The Chesnee Tribune, The Middle Tyger Times, The Whitmire News, The Woodruff News, and The Greer Citizen. Aside from local news and sports coverage, the newspapers offer free wedding and social announcements.  All of these papers, save "The Greer Citizen" ceased publication at the end of 2012.Do you think the TSA has gone too far with security checks?. Hometown News. Retrieved on December 12, 2010. Upstate Link magazine is a young reader (20s–30s) newsweekly in the Upstate of South Carolina, which includes Greenville, Spartanburg and Anderson. The weekly publication began in January 2004. Link continues to be a print publication, but its website ceased operation in 2008. Its new website is run by Chicago-based Metromix. WYFF 4 (NBC) – Broadcasting from Greenville, SC WSPA 7 (CBS)- broadcasting from Spartanburg WLOS 13 (ABC) Broadcasting from Ashville, NC but also from Anderson, SC on WMYA DT-2 (a digital subchannel) WGGS 16 independent/Christian Television Station WHNS 21 (Fox) Broadcasting from Greenville, SC WMYA 40 (My Network TV) Transmitting from Anderson, SC but also on WLOS DT-2 a digital subchannel of Channel 13 out of Ashville, NC WYCW 62 (The CW Network)- Licensed to Ashville but broadcasting and transmitting from Spartanburg  Interstate 85  Business Loop 85  Interstate 26  Interstate 585  U.S. Route 176  U.S. Route 29  U.S. Route 221  South Carolina 9  South Carolina 295  South Carolina 56  South Carolina 296  South Carolina 215  South Carolina 129 The Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport (GSP) lies mostly in Spartanburg County in suburban Greer, and it serves Greenville as well as Spartanburg. It has become one of the busiest airports in South Carolina. The Spartanburg Downtown Memorial Airport (SPA) is a general aviation airport owned and operated by the City, which lies southwest of town.Spartanburg Downtown Memorial Airport Andrews Farm Arkwright Beaumont Mills Ben Avon Boiling Springs Camelot Carolina Country Club Cedar Springs Cleveland Heights Cleveland Park Converse Heights Creekside Cypress Creek Drayton Duncan Park East Spartanburg Fernwood Forest Hills Hampton Heights (National Register of Historic Places district) Highland Hillbrook Hillcrest Hilltop Park Hills Rock Spring Saxon Summerhill The Oaks The Towns Westgate Whites Mill Woodburn Hills Woodland Heights Woodridge Ted Alexander (1912–1999), baseball pitcher in Negro Leagues Pink Anderson (1900–1974), blues musician; inspiration for the "Pink" in Pink Floyd David Ball (born 1953), country musician Joe Bennett, lead singer and guitarist from the 1950s rock 'n roll band "Joe Bennett and the Sparkletones" Mike Bullman, bandleader, lead singer and guitarist with Jesters IIISpartanburg Herald Journal Thursday, August 2, 2012 Music Q&A: Mike Bullman's heart hasn't left stage By Dan Armonaitis James Francis Byrnes (1882–1972), lawyer, congressman, senator, Supreme Court Justice (only person to step down off the bench for another federal post—head the wartime Office of Economic Stabilization), advisor to FDR, Secretary of State to Truman, Governor of South Carolina Wilson Casey (born 1954), syndicated newspaper columnist, speaking entertainer, and Guinness World Record holder Marshall Chapman (born 1949), singer-songwriter Landon Cohen (b 1986), football player, community-builder Landon Cohen Fieldin Culbreth (Born 1963), Major League Baseball umpire, Olympian David Daniels (born 1966), counter-tenor Stephen Davis (born 1974), football running back Marion Kirkland Fort (1921–1964), mathematician Art Fowler (1922–2007), pitcher and pitching coach in Major League Baseball Grace Beacham Freeman (1916–2002), poet, columnist, short story writer; South Carolina Poet Laureate 1985–86 Hank Garland (1930–2004), legendary Nashville guitarist who accompanied Patsy Cline and Elvis, among others George Gray (aka One Man Gang) (born 1960), Pro wrestler Fred Griffith (born 1964), American actor and film producer Mark Hammond (born 1963), South Carolina Secretary of State Lee Haney (born 1951), eight-time Mr. Olympia record holder Dennis Hayes (born 1950), inventor of the Hayes modem Walter Hyatt (1950–1996), country musician and songwriter Mark R. Johnsen (born 1962), founder and owner of Spartanburg's first and only brewery, RJ Rockers Brewing Company Joseph T. Johnson (1858–1919), United States Representative from South Carolina Marcus Lattimore, football player Donald Lawrence (born 1961), Gospel artist Fred L. Lowery (born 1943), Southern Baptist clergyman, televangelist, and Christian author; former pastor of First Baptist Church of North Spartanburg Marshall Tucker Band, Southern rock band featuring George McCorkle, Doug Gray, Jerry Eubanks, Toy Caldwell, Tommy Caldwell, Paul Riddle, et al. Marcus McBeth (born 1980), baseball player Roger Milliken (1915–2010), billionaire owner of the largest privately held textile manufacturing firm in the world (Milliken & Company) Bud Moore (born 1925), NASCAR team owner/crew chief D. J. Moore (born 1987), football player Kris Neely (born 1978), artist and educator Samuel J. Nicholls (1885–1937), United States Representative from South Carolina Angela Nikodinov (born 1980), U.S. figure skater Cotton Owens (1924–2012), NASCAR team owner/crew chief David Pearson (born 1934), race car driver Betsy Rawls (born 1928), pro golfer, member of World Golf Hall of Fame, born in Spartanburg Mike Reid (born 1970), NFL player Gianna Rolandi (born 1952), operatic soprano Al "Flip" Rosen (born 1924), MLB 4-time All-Star third baseman and first baseman, MVP, 2-time home run champion, 2-time RBI leader Donald S. Russell (1906–1998), former South Carolina governor, president of the University of South Carolina, US Senator, and member of the US 4th Circuit Court of Appeals Archibald Rutledge (1883–1973), South Carolina poet laureate, resided in Spartanburg for about 20 years Jack Smith (1924–2001), NASCAR driver Gina Tolleson - Miss South Carolina USA 1990, Miss USA World 1990, Miss World 1990 Wayne Tolleson (born 1955), baseball player Buck Trent (born 1938), country music instrumentalist who accompanied Porter Wagoner & Dolly Parton, among others Ira Tucker (1925–2008), lead singer of the influential gospel group the Dixie Hummingbirds William "Singing Billy" Walker (1809–1875), compiler of shape note tunebooks, including The Southern Harmony, and Musical Companion. Celia Weston (born 1951), actress William Westmoreland (1914–2005), Commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive, later Chief of Staff of the United States Army, pushed heavily for investigation of My Lai Massacre against President Nixon's wishes Cooper, Peter (1997).  Hub City Music Makers.  Spartanburg, S.C.:  Holocene Publishing.  ISBN 0-9638731-9-9. Landrum, J.B.O. (1900). History of Spartanburg County. Racine, Philip N. (1999).  Seeing Spartanburg.  Spartanburg, S.C.: Hub City Writers Project.  ISBN 1-891885-10-3. Teter, Betsy Wakefield (Ed.) (2002). Textile Town: Spartanburg, South Carolina.  Spartanburg, S.C.: Hub City Writers Project. ISBN 1-891885-28-6. Pp.&nbsp;346. 40 authors provide a detailed community study, using oral histories, letters, and 200 illustrations and photographs. Central themes include labor strikes, family life in the mill villages, Depression-era hardships, race and desegregation, the boom of WW2 production, and late-twentieth-century deindustrialization. WPA (1939). History of Spartanburg County. Spartanburg Tourism Commission
