 Several European Union member states have special territories which, for historical, geographical, or political reasons, enjoy special status within or outside the European Union. These statuses have a wide range of derogation from EU policies. Most of the territories which are outside the EU nonetheless have a special relationship with the EU. The outermost regions (OMR) are geographic areas which are part of a European Union Member State, are situated outside of Europe and are fully part of the EU. According to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, both primary and secondary European Union law applies automatically to these territories, with possible derogations to take account of their "structural social and economic situation&nbsp;... which is compounded by their remoteness, insularity, small size, difficult topography and climate, economic dependence on a few products, the permanence and combination of which severely restrain their development&nbsp;...".Article 349 (ex Article 299(2)) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. There were seven outermost regions as of the signing of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. The Treaty of Lisbon included two additional territories (Saint-Barthélemy and Saint-Martin) in 2007, both of which seceded from one of the original outermost regions (Guadeloupe). Saint-Barthélemy changed its status from OMR to OCT with effect from 1 January 2012, while Mayotte joined as a new French OMR with effect from 1 January 2014. As of April 2014, a total of nine territories (six French, two Portuguese and one Spanish) were registered to have OMR status. Azores and Madeira are two groups of Portuguese islands in the Atlantic. Their territory is an integral part of the Portuguese Republic, but both the Azores and Madeira have the special status of Autonomous Regions within the otherwise unitary Portuguese State. While derogations from the application of EU law could apply, none do. Their VAT is lower than the rest of Portugal, but they are not outside the European Union Value Added Tax Area. The Canary Islands are a Spanish archipelago off the African coast which forms one of the Spanish Autonomous Communities, thus having the status of being part of Spanish territory. They are outside the European Union Value Added Tax Area.Article 6 of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 (as amended) on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1) Eur-lex.europa.eu. The Canary Islands are the most populated and economically strongest territory of all the outermost regions in the European Union. The outermost regions office for support and information is located in these islands, in the city of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (Gran Canaria). French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Réunion are five French overseas regions which under French law are, for the most part, treated as integral parts of the Republic. The euro is legal tender and they are part of the European Union Customs Union.Article 3(1) of Council Regulation 2913/92/EEC of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code (as amended) (OJ L 302, 19.10.1992, p. 1-50) Eur-lex.europa.eu. However they are outside the Schengen Area and the VAT area. Mayotte is the newest of the five overseas departments having changed from an overseas collectivity, with OCT status, on 31 March 2011. It became an outermost region and thus part of the EU on 1 January 2014. On 22 February 2007, Saint Martin was broken away from the French overseas department of Guadeloupe to be formed into a new overseas collectivity. As a consequence its EU status was unclear for a time. While a report issued by the French parliament suggested that the island remained within the EU as an outermost region,Rapport d'information n° 329 (2004–2005) de MM. Jean-Jacques Hyest, Christian Cointat et Simon Sutour, fait au nom de la commission des lois, déposé le 10 mai 2005.  European Commission documents listed it as being outside the European Community. The legal status of the island was clarified on the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty which lists it as an outermost region.See Articles 349 and 355 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The overseas countries and territories (OCT) are dependent territories that have a special relationship with one of the member states of the EU, and have been explicitly invited by the EU treaty to join the EU-OCT Association (OCTA).Council Decision of 27 November 2001 on the association of the overseas countries and territories with the European Community ("Overseas Association Decision") (2001/822/EC). They were listed in Annex II acc. to Article 198 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which aside from inviting them to join OCTA, also provided them the opportunity to opt into EU provisions on the freedom of movement for workersArticle 202 [ex Article 186)] and freedom of establishment.Article 199(5) [ex Article 183(5)] They are not subject to the EU's common external customs tariffsArticle 200(1) [ex Article 184(1)] but may claim customs on goods imported from the EU on a non-discriminatory basis.Article 200(3) and 200(5) [ex Article 184(3) and (5)] They are not part of the EU and the EU acquis does not apply to them, though those joining OCTA are required to respect the detailed rules and procedures outlined by this association agreement (Council Decision 2013/755/EU). OCTA members are entitled to ask for EU financial support. When the Rome Treaty was signed in March 1957, a total of 15 OCTs existed: French West Africa, French Equatorial Africa, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Comoros Archipelago, French Madagascar, French Somaliland, New Caledonia, French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, French Togoland, French Cameroons, Belgian Congo, Ruanda-Urundi, Trust Territory of Somalia, Netherlands New Guinea. The list was since then revised multiple times, and comprised&mdash;as noted by the Lisbon Treaty&mdash;25 OCTs in 2007. One of the French territories subsequently switched status from OMR to OCT (Saint Barthélemy), while another French territory switched from OCT to OMR (Mayotte). As of July 2014, there are still 25 OCTs (twelve with the United Kingdom, six with France, six with the Netherlands and one with Denmark) of which 22 have joined OCTA. The three OCTs which are not part of OCTA (British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory and South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands) do not have a permanent population. Twelve overseas territories of the United Kingdom (all but Gibraltar, which, unlike the other territories, is part of the European Union (see below), and the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia on Cyprus), namely: Bermuda did not—despite having OCT status as defined by the Rome Treaty—join the EU-OCT Association (OCTA) together with the other overseas territories in November 2001,Recital 22, Council Decision 2001/822/EC of 27 November 2001 on the association of the overseas countries and territories with the European Community (OJ L 314, 30.11.2001, p. 1&ndash;77). but instead only joined OCTA on 2 July 2014. As of July 2014, it is only the three remote areas without any permanent population (British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory and "South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands"), that are not members of OCTA. All citizens of the British overseas territories, except those residing at Britain's sovereign bases in Cyprus, were granted full British citizenship by the British Overseas Territories Act 2002, and are consequently citizens of the European Union. A total of six French overseas territories currently have OCT status within EU. The French Southern and Antarctic Lands (which include the French Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean) is a French Overseas Territory but has no permanent population. Both have sui generis statuses within France.Art. 9, Loi n° 55-1052 du 6 août 1955 modifiée portant statut des Terres australes et antarctiques françaises et de l'île de Clipperton.Décret du 31 janvier 2008 relatif à l'administration de l'île de Clipperton. Saint-Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Barthélemy, French Polynesia and Wallis and Futuna are overseas collectivities (formerly referred to as overseas territories) of France, while New Caledonia is a "sui generis collectivity". Saint Barthélemy and Saint-Pierre and Miquelon use the Euro,Council Decision 1999/95/EC of 31 December 1998 concerning the monetary arrangements in the French territorial communities of Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon and Mayotte (OJ L 30, 4.2.1999, p. 29-30). while New Caledonia, French Polynesia and Wallis and Futuna use the CFP Franc, a currency which is tied to the euro and guaranteed by France. Natives of the collectivities are European citizens owing to their French citizenship and elections to the European Parliament are held in the collectivities. On 22 February 2007, Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin were separated from the French overseas department of Guadeloupe to form new overseas collectivities. As a consequence, their EU status was unclear for a time. While a report issued by the French parliament suggested that the islands remained within the EU as outermost regions, European Commission documents listed them as being outside the European Community. The legal status of the islands was clarified on the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty which listed them as outermost regions. However, Saint Barthélemy ceased being an outermost region and left the EU, to become an OCT, on 1 January 2012. The change was made to facilitate trade with countries outside the EU, notably the United States, and was made possible by a provision of the Lisbon Treaty which allows the European Council to change the EU status of a Danish, Dutch, or French territory on the initiative of the member state concerned.See Article 355(6) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The relevant decision of the European Council was made on the 29 October 2010 [ ]. Six territories of the Netherlands—all of which are Caribbean islands—have OCT status. The inhabitants of the islands are EU citizens owing to their Dutch citizenship, but few of them had, until recently, the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament. Their exclusion from the franchise was ruled to be contrary to EU law by the European Court of Justice as Dutch citizens resident outside the EU, other than those resident in the six islands, did have the right to vote. Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten are classified as "countries" under Dutch law and have considerable internal autonomy. In June 2008, the Dutch government published a report on the effect on the islands were they to join the EU as outermost regions. It concluded that it would be for the islands themselves to weigh up the advantages and disadvantages of becoming part of the EU as outermost regions and that nothing would be done absent the islands specifically requesting it. Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (collectively called Caribbean Netherlands) are "special municipalities" of the Netherlands proper. In June 2008, the Dutch government published a report on the effect on the islands were they to join the EU as outermost regions. Their current OCT status, and the prospect of advancing their status to become part of the EU as new OMRs (outermost regions), has been scheduled to be reviewed by the Dutch parliament in 2015, as part of the planned review of the Dutch law (WOLBES and FINBES) concerning the quality of their recently implemented new public administration bodies. The islands inherited their OCT status from the Netherlands Antilles which was dissolved in 2010. The Netherlands Antilles were initially specifically excluded from all association with the EEC by reason of a protocol attached to the Treaty of Rome, allowing the Netherlands to ratify on behalf of the Netherlands in Europe and Netherlands New Guinea only, which it subsequently did.Treaty Establishing the EEC - Protocol on the Application of the Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community to the non-European parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, at the time of signature of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, to define the scope of the provisions of Article 227 of this Treaty in respect of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, upon the following provisions, which shall be annexed to this Treaty:The Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, by reason of the constitutional structure of the Kingdom resulting from the Statute of 29 December 1954, shall, by way of derogation from Article 227, be entitled to ratify the Treaty on behalf of the Kingdom in Europe and Netherlands New Guinea only.Done at Rome this twenty-fifth day of March in the year one thousand nine hundred and fifty-seven.Treaty establishing the EEC Following the entry into force of the Convention on the association of the Netherlands Antilles with the European Economic Community on 1 October 1964, however, the Netherlands Antilles became OCTs.  Greenland joined the then European Community in 1973 along with Denmark, but voted to leave the EC in 1982 and left in 1985, to become an OCT. Greenlanders are, nonetheless, European Union citizens owing to their Danish citizenship. The EU-Greenland relationship is a comprehensive partnership, which is complementary to the OCT association arrangements under "Council Decision 2013/755/EU"; based specifically on "Council Decision 2014/137 of 14 March 2014" (outlining the relations) and the Fisheries Partnership Agreement of 30 July 2006. While the outermost regions and the overseas countries and territories fall into structured categories to which common mechanisms apply, this is not true of all the special territories. Some territories enjoy ad-hoc arrangements in their relationship with the EU. Some of these could be called "protocol territories" as their status is governed by protocols attached to their respective countries' accession treaties. The rest owe their status to European Union legislative provisions which exclude the territories from the application of the legislation concerned. Many were opted out from either the VAT area or the customs union or both. Åland, a group of islands belonging to Finland, but with partial autonomy, located between Sweden and Finland, with a Swedish-speaking population, joined the EU along with Finland in 1995. The islands had a separate referendum on accession and like the Finnish mainland voted in favour. EU law, including the fundamental four freedoms, applies to Åland.http://www.naringsliv.ax/en/Doing%20business/live_and_work_on_aland However, there are some derogations due to the islands' special status. Åland is outside the VAT area and is exempt from common rules in relation to turnover taxes, excise duties and indirect taxation.Article 2 of Protocol 2 (on the Åland Islands) of the Finnish accession treaty (OJ C 241, 29.08.1994) [ ] In addition, to protect the local economy, the treaty of accession allows for a concept of hembygdsrätt/kotiseutuoikeus (regional citizenship). Consequently, there are restrictions on the holding of property and real estate, the right of establishment for business purposes and limitations on who can provide services in Åland, for people not holding this status.Article 1 of Protocol 2 (on the Åland Islands) of the Finnish accession treaty (OJ C 241, 29.08.1994) [ ] The status may be obtained by any Finnish citizen legally resident in Åland for 5 years that can demonstrate an adequate knowledge of the Swedish language.http://www.naringsliv.ax/en/facts/aland_and_eu The German exclave town of Büsingen am Hochrhein, fully surrounded by Switzerland, is in customs union with the latter non-EU country.Treaty of 23 November 1964 between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Swiss Confederation on the inclusion of the commune of Büsingen am Hochrhein in the customs territory of the Swiss Confederation, as referred to in Article 3(1) of Council Regulation 2913/92/EEC of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code (as amended) (OJ L 302, 19.10.1992, p. 1-50) [ ]. The euro is legal tender, although the Swiss franc is preferred.From http://www.buesingen.de click Touristik and Hotel + Gasthäuser and find that every hotel and restaurant quote prices in SFr only. Büsingen is excluded from the EU customs union and VAT area. Swiss VAT and sales taxes are paid. The Italian exclave village of Campione d'Italia is totally surrounded by Switzerland's Ticino canton as well as Lake Lugano (or Ceresio), and is a comune in the Province of Como, whilst Livigno, a small and remote mountain resort town, is a comune in the Province of Sondrio. Both comuni are part of the Lombardy region. Although part of the EU, they are excluded from the customs union and VAT area, with Livigno's tax status dating back to Napoleonic times. Moreover, the only legal tender in Campione d'Italia is the Swiss franc,  "... pur essendo territorio italiano Campione è doganalmente ed economicamente svizzero. Così pure la moneta e la rete telefonica. ("... although essentially Italian territory, Campione is customs-wise and economically Swiss.  Also the currency and the telephone network.") although in practice shops and restaurants accept payments also in euro - and their bills present dual price display in both Euros and Francs. Ceuta and Melilla are two Spanish cities on the North African coast. They are part of the EU but they are excluded from the common agricultural and fisheries policies. They are also outside the customs union and VAT area, but no customs are levied on goods exported from the Union into either Ceuta and Melilla, and certain goods originating in Ceuta and Melilla are exempt from customs charges. While nominally part of the Schengen Area, Spain performs identity checks on all sea and air passengers leaving the enclaves for elsewhere in the Schengen Area.Declaration No. 1. on Ceuta and Melilla attached to the Final Act of the Accession Treaty of the Kingdom of Spain to the Schengen Agreement (OJ L 239, 22.9.2000, p. 69) Jersey and Guernsey are Crown dependencies. The islands take part in the EU freedom of movement of goods but not people, services or capital. The Channel Islands (as they were defined in 1972, when the UK joined the European Communities, now Jersey and Guernsey) are outside the VAT area (and have no VAT), however inside the customs union. Channel Islanders are British citizens and hence European citizens.s 1 of the British Nationality Act 1981 grants citizenship to (most) people born in the 'United Kingdom'. S50 of the Act defines the 'United Kingdom' to include the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man However, they are not entitled to participate in the freedom of movement of people or services unless they are directly connected (through birth, or descent from a parent or grandparent) with the United Kingdom. However, after five years continuous residence in the United Kingdom, islanders are entitled to participate in the freedom of movement of people or services throughout the EU.Protocol 3 of the United Kingdom's succession treaty to the EU (OJ L 73, 27.03.1972). The Isle of Man is a Crown dependency. The island takes part in the EU freedom of movement of goods but not people, services or capital. The Isle of Man is inside the VAT area and the customs union. Manx people are British citizens and hence European citizens. However, they are not entitled to participate in the freedom of movement of people or services unless they are directly connected (through birth, or descent from a parent or grandparent) with the United Kingdom. However, after five years continuous residence in the United Kingdom, Manx people are entitled to participate in the freedom of movement of people or services throughout the EU. When the Republic of Cyprus became part of the European Union on 1 May 2004, the northern third of the island was outside of the effective control of its government, a United Nations buffer zone of varying width separated the two parts, and a further 3% of the island was taken up by UK sovereign bases (under British sovereignty since the Treaty of Establishment in 1960). Two protocols to the Treaty of Accession 2003 – numbers 3 and 10, known as the "Sovereign Base Areas Protocol" and the "Cyprus Protocol" respectively – reflect this complex situation. EU law only applies fully to the part of the island that is effectively controlled by the government of the Republic of Cyprus. EU law is suspended in the northern third of the island (the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, whose independence is recognised only by Turkey) by article&nbsp;1(1) of the Cyprus Protocol.Protocol 10 to the Treaty of Accession 2003 (OJ L 236, 23.9.2003, p. 955). Cypriot nationality law applies to the entire island and is accordingly available to the inhabitants of Northern Cyprus and the British sovereign base areas on the same basis as to those born in the area controlled by the Republic of Cyprus.law of the Republic of Cyprus, Source: Cyprus Ministry of Justice compilation and translation (updated to June 2000). Citizens of the Republic of Cyprus living in Northern Cyprus are EU citizens and are entitled to vote in elections to the European Parliament; however, elections to that Parliament are not organised in Northern Cyprus. The United Kingdom has two sovereign bases on Cyprus, namely Akrotiri and Dhekelia. Unlike other British overseas territories, they are not listed as Overseas Countries and Territories under the Treaty of Rome and their inhabitants (who are entitled to British Overseas Territories Citizenship) have never been entitled to British citizenship. Prior to Cypriot accession to the EU in 2004, EU law did not apply to the sovereign bases.See Article 299(6)(b) of the Consolidated Treaty establishing the European Community as amended by the Nice Treaty. [ ] This position was changed by the Cypriot accession treaty and EU law, while still not applying in principle, applies to the extent necessary to implement a protocol attached to that treaty.Protocol 3 to the Treaty of Accession 2003 (OJ L 236, 23.9.2003, p. 955). This protocol applies EU law relating to the Common Agricultural Policy, customs, indirect taxation, social policy and justice and home affairs to the sovereign base areas. The sovereign base authorities have also made provision for the unilateral application of directly applicable EU law.  The UK also agreed in the Protocol to keep enough control of the external (i.e. off-island and northern Cyprus) borders of the sovereign bases to ensure that the border between the sovereign bases and the Republic of Cyprus can remain fully open and will not have to be policed as an external EU border. Consequently, the sovereign bases will become a de facto part of the Schengen Area if and when Cyprus implements it. The bases are already de facto members of the eurozone due to their previous use of the Cypriot pound before it was replaced by the euro in 2008.EURO ORDINANCE 2007 An Ordinance to provide for the adoption of the euro as legal tender in the Sovereign Base Areas and for related matters As pointed out above, inhabitants of the sovereign bases have never been entitled to British citizenship or to the European Union citizenship that would go with it.British Overseas Territories Act 2002. Just under half of the population of the sovereign base areas are Cypriots, the rest are British military personnel, support staff and their dependants. In a declaration attached to the Treaty of Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus of 1960 the British government undertook not to allow new settlement of people in the sovereign base areas other than for temporary purposes. The United Nations buffer zone between north and south Cyprus ranges in width from a few metres in central Nicosia to several kilometres in the countryside. While it is nominally under the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus, it is effectively administered by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). The population of the zone is 8,686 (as of October 2007), and one of the mandates of UNFICYP is "to encourage the fullest possible resumption of normal civilian activity in the buffer zone". Article&nbsp;2.1 of the Cyprus Protocol allows the European Council to determine to what extent the provisions of EU law apply in the buffer zone.Council Regulation (EC) No 866/2004 of 29 April 2004 on a regime under Article 2 of Protocol No 10 of the Act of Accession. Council Regulation (EC) No 293/2005 of 17 February 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 866/2004 on a regime under Article 2 of Protocol 10 to the Act of Accession as regards agriculture and facilities for persons crossing the line.  The Faroe Islands are not part of the EU, and they have not been part of the EU since Denmark joined the community in 1973. Danish citizens residing on the islands are not considered citizens of a member state within the meaning of the treaties or, consequently, citizens of the European Union.See Article 4 of the Faroe Islands Protocol, 355(5)(a) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and Article of the Treaty on European Union (as amended). However, Faroese may become EU citizens by changing their residence to the Danish mainland. The Faroe Islands are not part of the Schengen Area, and Schengen visas are not valid. However, the islands are part of the Nordic Passport Union and the Schengen Agreement provides that travellers passing between the islands and the Schengen Area are not to be treated as passing the external frontier of the Area. This means that there is an identity check at air or boat travel to the islands where Nordic citizens on intra-Nordic travel need no passport, only showing the ticket plus identity card. Gibraltar is a British overseas territory located near the southernmost tip of the Iberian Peninsula and overlooking the Strait of Gibraltar, sharing a border with Spain to the north. It is part of the EU, having joined the European Economic Community under the United Kingdom in 1973. Article 355(3) (ex Article 299(4)) applies the treaty to "the European territories for whose external relations a Member State is responsible", a provision which in practice only applies to Gibraltar. Although it is part of the EU, Gibraltar is outside the customs union and VAT area and is exempted from the Common Agricultural Policy; it does not form part of the Schengen Area.Act concerning the conditions of accession of the UK, Ireland and Denmark to the European Communities, Art. 28 As a separate jurisdiction to the UK, Gibraltar's government and parliament are responsible for the transposition of EU law into local law. There is no option for Gibraltar to cancel their EU membership separately from the UK, as it is bound to the same destiny as the UK chooses. If the UK at some point of time decides to adopt the euro, it is unclear if Gibraltar along the way would also be forced to adopt the euro. Owing to a declaration lodged by the United Kingdom with the EEC in 1982, Gibraltarians were to be counted as British nationals for the purposes of Community law. This was notwithstanding that they were not all, at the time, British citizens but many were British Overseas Territories citizens. As such Gibraltarians have enjoyed European Union citizenship from its creation by the Maastricht Treaty. Since 21 May 2002, all Gibraltarians have been granted the right to register a full British citizenship, while those who previously held a British Overseas Territory citizenship automatically were converted now to have a full British citizenship. Any child born in Gibraltar after 21 May 2002 will automatically become a British citizen, if just one of its parents is a British citizen or a Gibraltarian resident. Despite their status as EU citizens resident in the EU, elections to the European Parliament were not held in Gibraltar until 2004. The inclusion resulted from the European Court of Human Rights' 1999 ruling in Matthews v. United Kingdom which deemed that Gibraltar's exclusion violated Article 3 of Protocol 1 to the European Convention on Human Rights. In the 2004 European Parliament election the territory formed part of the South West England constituency of the United Kingdom. The inclusion was unsuccessfully challenged by Spain before the European Court of Justice.Judgments of the Court in Cases C-145/04 and C-300/04: Kingdom of Spain v United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and M.G. Eman and O.B. Sevinger v College van burgemeester en wethouders van Den Haag [ ] Like the UK, Gibraltar does not form part of the Schengen Area and, as a result, the border between Spain and Gibraltar is an external Schengen border through which Spain is legally obliged to perform full entrance and exit controls. However Gibraltar does participate in certain police and judicial cooperation aspects of the Schengen acquis in line with the UK's request to participate in the same measures.See Article 5(2) of 2000/365/EC: Council Decision of 29 May 2000 concerning the request of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take part in some of the provisions of the Schengen acquis With respect to the application of EU law to Gibraltar, the governments of Spain and the United Kingdom made the following Declaration which is appended (as Declaration 55) to the Treaty on European Union: "The Treaties apply to Gibraltar as a European territory for whose external relations a Member State is responsible. This shall not imply changes in the respective positions of the Member States concerned."Declaration 55 appended to the Treaty on European Union Heligoland is an island of Germany situated  off the German north-western coast. It is part of the EU, but is excluded from the customs union and the VAT area. Mount Athos is an autonomous monastic region of Greece. Greece's EU accession treaty provides that Mount Athos maintains its centuries-old special legal status, guaranteed by article&nbsp;105 of the Greek Constitution. It is part of the customs union but outside the VAT area. Notwithstanding that a special permit is required to enter the peninsula and that there is a prohibition on the admittance of women, it is part of the Schengen Area.The Greek accession treaty does not specifically exclude Mount Athos from the Convention's territorial scope. The monastery has certain rights to house monks from countries outside the EU. A declaration attached to Greece's accession treaty to the Schengen Agreement states that Mount Athos's "special status" should be taken into account in the application of the Schengen rules.Joint Declaration No. 5 attached to the Final Act of the accession treaty. Finland leases the 19.6&nbsp;km long Russian part of the Saimaa Canal from Russia and is granted extraterritoriality rights. The area is not part of the EU, it is a special part of Russia.  Under the treaty signed by Finnish and Russian governments, Russian law is in force with a few exceptions concerning maritime rules and the employment of canal staff which fall under Finnish jurisdiction. There are also special rules concerning vessels travelling to Finland via the canal. Russian visas are not required for just passing through the canal, but a passport is needed and it is checked at the border. Euros are accepted for the canal fees. Prior to the 50-year lease renewal coming into effect in February 2012, the Maly Vysotsky Island had also been leased and managed by Finland. Since then it has been fully managed by Russian authorities, and is no longer part of the concession territory. The road from Värska to Ulitina in Estonia, traditionally the only road to the Ulitina area, goes through Russian territory for one kilometre (0.6&nbsp;mi) of its length, an area called Saatse Boot. This road has no border control, but there is no connection to any other road in Russia. It is not permitted to stop or walk along the road. This area is a part of Russia but is also a de facto part of the Schengen area. The Saimaa Canal and Värska–Ulitina road are two of several odd travel arrangements that exist or existed because of changes in borders over the course of the 20th century, where transport routes and installations ended up on the wrong side of the border. Some have become superfluous thanks to the Schengen Agreement. Many currently independent states or parts of such were previously territories of the following EU members since the latter joined the EU or, previously the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC): Most of these territories seceded before the implementation of the Maastricht treaty in 1993 and the following years, meaning that cooperation like the EU citizenship, the VAT union or the Eurozone did not exist, so it made less difference to be a special territory then. These were: Additionally in Europe there were special territories in the past that had different status than their "mainland", because of various reasons, but now are part of a member state. Some of these territories were as follows: The following areas are still special member state territories, but have changed their status. See their entries in the article for details. Some European countries are strongly connected to the European Union, through the European Economic Area or similar agreements. These countries are Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland, the member states of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). They are inside the single market (with exceptions) and the Schengen area, but outside the Eurozone, customs territory, and VAT area. Norway and Switzerland have special areas. :Outside the Schengen area. Special rules on work permit.Norway and Iceland Schengen association agreement Article 14 :Outside Norwegian VAT areaSvalbard treaty :Outside Swiss VAT area This table summarises the various components of EU laws applied in the EU member states and their sovereign territories. Member states that do not have special-status territories are not included (as there the EU law applies fully with the exception of the opt-outs in the European Union and states under a safeguard clause or transitional period). Some territories of EFTA member states also have a special status in regard to EU laws applied as is the case with some European microstates.   Areas that are part of the EU Areas that are not part of the EU  and&nbsp;territories Application  Enforceable&nbsp;in local&nbsp;courts? EURATOM Schengen area? EU&nbsp;VAT area? EU&nbsp;customs territory? EU&nbsp;single market? Eurozone? European Economic Area agreement , ISK ,  VAT&nbsp;area ,  customs&nbsp;territory , CHF , except: , NOK  Svalbard , VAT free Agreement on the European Economic Area - Protocol 40 on Svalbard and Declaration for activation of Protocol40 exclusion. , NOK , except: ,  VAT&nbsp;area ,  customs&nbsp;territory Through multiple sectoral agreements , CHF  Samnaun , VAT free ,  customs&nbsp;territory , CHF Member&nbsp;states and&nbsp;territories Application  EURATOM EU citizenship EU elections Schengen area EU&nbsp;VAT area EU&nbsp;customs territory EU&nbsp;single market Eurozone , except: &nbsp; &nbsp;UN Buffer Zone Exceptions may be in place for Turkish goods and services destined for Pyla. Due to the military nature of zone, the UN requires permits for some economic activity to ensure that the fundamental nature of the area as a buffer zone is not compromised. See - UNFICYP Buffer Zone permits for more information. Information for Businesses/01 Customs and fiscal territories/index.jsp The customs and fiscal territories of the European Community 0466en01.pdf Direct Trade Regulation proposal, not yet implemented , TRY , except: Opt-outs in force for some treaty provisions and legislations &nbsp;  (OCT)http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/where/octs and greenland/index en.htm Application only between 1973 and 1985 2002325EN.003301.html Treaty Establishing the European Community, part four  (FTA)List of free trade agreementsAgreement between the European Community, of the one part, and the Government of Denmark and the Home Government of the Faroe Islands , except: &nbsp;  (Metropolitan), except: &nbsp;  (OMR) Part of the Outre-Mer electoral constituency. Schengen Borders Code Article (21) , VAT free  (OMR) , low rate VAT  (OMR) , low rate VAT  (OMR) , low rate VAT  (OMR) , VAT free  (OMR) , low rate VAT summaries/economic and monetary affairs/institutional and economic framework/l25042 en.htm Agreements concerning the French territorial communities  (OCT)  (OCT)  (OCT)  (OCT)  (OCT)  (OCT) Not part of any of the eight European Parliament electoral constituencies in the French Republic. Art. 1-1-6°, Loi n°55-1052 du 6 août 1955 portant statut des Terres australes et antarctiques françaises et de l'île de Clipperton. Article 108 of the Euratom Treaty , except: &nbsp; &nbsp;Büsingen am Hochrhein &nbsp;Heligoland , except: &nbsp; &nbsp;Mount Athos , VAT free , except: &nbsp; &nbsp;Livigno &nbsp;Campione d'Italia Together with Switzerland , CHF , except: &nbsp;  (OCT) Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius: Inherited status as non-member from the Netherlands Antilles. customs/common/glossary/customs/index en.htm Customs territory of the Community , USDArticle 16 of the law on the monetary system BES  stipulates the use of the Netherlands Antillean guilder as official tender until the official introduction of the US Dollar, probably on 1-1-2011.  (OCT) , USD  (OCT) , USD  (OCT) , ANGThe Netherlands Antillean guilder will be replaced by the Caribbean guilder, possibly on 1-1-2012  (OCT) , ANG  (OCT) See the PRO PRI.htm Protocol on the application of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community to the non European parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Act ratifying the EAEC Treaty in the Netherlands. The protocol on non-application of EURATOM by derogation was abrogated by Article 8 (III) of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which entered into force in 1999, but there is no evidence that the EURATOM treaty was ever extended to other countries within the Kingdom (now: Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten, formerly: the Netherlands Antilles and Suriname). , AWG , except: &nbsp;  (OMR)  (OMR) , except: &nbsp;  (OMR) , VAT free  (FTA)Protocol 2 concerning Ceuta and Melilla to the Treaty of Accession of Spain and Portugal  (FTA) , except: , GBP &nbsp; Consolidated version of the European Communities Act (1972–18) (Gib.), as amended up to September 2009 contains detailed list of exemptions. For the enforceability of EU law in local courts see s. 3. Denise Matthews Case 1999 Part of the South West England electoral constituency. , GIP &nbsp;Akrotiri and Dhekelia Treaty of Accession 2003, protocol 3 European Communities (Protocol Measures) Ordinance 2004 (11/2004) (SBAs), s.3. [ ] There were reports that it was possible for all Cypriots from Northern Cyprus, or UN Buffer Zone or Akrotiri and Dekhelia to vote, but they had to travel to a voting station in the South. Council directive on the common system of value added tax In a declaration attached to the Treaty of Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus of 1960 the British government undertook not to allow new settlement of people in the sovereign base areas other than for temporary purposes, meaning at present, free movement of people is limited. By the third protocol to the Cyprus adhesion Treaty to EU and British local ordinance (see [ ]).  (OCT) European Communities Act 1972 (UK), s.2 - applied to Saint Helena and Dependencies by local ordinance. , SHP  (OCT) , FKP  (OCT) , GBP  (OCT) , GBPSince several countries have bases, the currency of the home country of each base is probably used.  (OCT) , BMD  (OCT) , KYD  (OCT) 2002325EN.015901.html EEC Treaty - OCT Annex , XCD  (OCT) , XCD  (OCT) , USD  (OCT) , USD  (OCT) , GBP, USDBoth USD and GBP are accepted in the British Indian Ocean Territory; see the CIA's World Factbook.  (OCT) European Communities Act 1972 (UK), s.2 - applied to Pitcairn by Judicature (Courts) Ordinance 1999 (c.2) (Pitcairn). , NZD Protocol No 3 on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man to the Act of Accession 1972 European Communities Act 1972 (I.O.M.) See Guernsey passport, Jersey passport, Manx passport and above.  (FTA)Crown dependencies' Relationship with the European Union , GBP , with dependencies of ,  and  European Communities (Guernsey) Law 1972 EURATOM Treaty Art.198d , VAT free  (FTA) , GBP EuropeanCommunitiesLaw1973 RevisedEdition 31August2004.htm European Communities (Jersey) Law 1973 , VAT free  (FTA) , GBP Member states and territories Application of EU law Enforceable in local courts EURATOM EU citizenship EU elections Schengen area EU&nbsp;VAT area EU&nbsp;customs territory EU single market Eurozone Legend for the "Application of EU law" column: &nbsp; Full or with exemptions.Part of the EU — Minimal or none. Not part of the EU territory. Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands Belgium (with multiple territories, from ECSC formation until 1962) France (with multiple territories, from ECSC formation) Italy (with Italian Somaliland, from ECSC formation until 1960) The Netherlands (with multiple territories, from ECSC formation) Portugal (with multiple territories, from 1986 enlargement until 2002) United Kingdom (with multiple territories, from 1973 enlargement) Cambodia (gained independence from France in 1953), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferencesEuropean Coal and Steel Community Treaty, Art.79: Each High Contracting Party binds itself to extend to the other Member States the preferential measures which it enjoys with respect to coal and steel in the non-European territories subject to its jurisdiction Laos (gained independence from France in 1954), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences Vietnam (gained independence from France in 1954), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences Tunisia (gained independence from France in 1956), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences Morocco (gained independence from France in 1956), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences Guinea (gained independence from France in 1958), had OCT statusAnnex IV: Overseas countries and territories Cameroon (French-administered part gained independence from France in 1960 along with some of UK-administered parts); had OCT status for the French part Togo (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Mali (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Senegal (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Madagascar (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status DR Congo (gained independence from Belgium in 1960), had OCT status Somalia (Italian-administered part gained independence from Italy in 1960 along with UK-administered part); had OCT status for the Italian part Benin (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Niger (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Burkina Faso (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Ivory Coast (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Chad (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Central African Republic (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Congo (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Gabon (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Mauritania (gained independence from France in 1960), had OCT status Burundi (gained independence from Belgium in 1962), had OCT status Rwanda (gained independence from Belgium in 1962), had OCT status Netherlands New Guinea (transferred from the Netherlands to UN in 1962, later merged with Indonesia), had OCT status Suriname (gained independence from the Netherlands in 1975), had OCT status,Up to 1 September 1962 no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences. Between that date and 16 July 1976 Suriname had OCT status."The provisions of Part Four of the Treaty were applied to Surinam, by virtue of a Supplementary Act of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (page29) to complete its instrument of ratification, from 1 September 1962 to 16 July 1976.", in: eur-lex.europa.eu - Treaty establishing the European Community (consolidated version) - Text of the Treaty EURATOM application unsure.See the Protocol on the application of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community to the non European parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Act ratifying the EAEC Treaty in the Netherlands. The protocol on non-application of EURATOM by derogation was abrogated by Article 8 (III) of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which entered into force in 1999, but there is no evidence that the EURATOM treaty was ever extended to other countries within the Kingdom (now: Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten, formerly: the Netherlands Antilles and Suriname). Algeria (gained independence from France in 1962), had a status similar to OMREuropean Economic Community Treaty, Art 227 Bahamas (gained independence from the UK in 1973), had OCT status1973 revision of ANNEX IV Grenada (gained independence from the UK in 1973), had OCT status Comoros (gained independence from France in 1975), had OCT status Seychelles (gained independence from the UK in 1976), had OCT status French Somaliland (gained independence from France as Djibouti in 1977), had OCT status Solomon Islands (gained independence from the UK in 1976), had OCT status Tuvalu (gained independence from the UK in 1978), had OCT status Dominica (gained independence from the UK in 1978), had OCT status Saint Lucia (gained independence from the UK in 1979), had OCT status Kiribati (gained independence from the UK in 1979), had OCT status Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (gained independence from the UK in 1979), had OCT status Zimbabwe (gained de jure independence from the UK in 1980), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferencesAccording to Art.227 (EEC) and Art.198 (EURATOM) these Treaties shall not apply to those overseas countries and territories having special relations with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland which are not listed in Annex IV to the EEC Treaty. Zimbabwe and Hong Kong are not listed in the annex. Vanuatu (gained independence from the UK and France in 1980), generally had OCT status New Hebrides had ECSC preferences and EURATOM application 1952–1973 stemming from the French administration in the territory, from 1973 to 1980 from both the French and British administrations, no EEC law applied 1958–1973, EEC OCT status 1973–1980 Belize (gained independence from the UK in 1981), had OCT status Antigua and Barbuda (gained independence from the UK in 1981), had OCT status Saint Kitts and Nevis (gained independence from the UK in 1983), had OCT status Brunei (gained independence from UK in 1984), had OCT status Hong Kong (sovereignty transferred from the UK to China in 1997), no Community treaty applied there, besides ECSC preferences Macao (sovereignty transferred from Portugal to China in 1999), EURATOM was applicable,Art.198 of the EURATOM Treaty states that the treaty applies to non European territories under jurisdiction of Member States. So far there is no reference for Macau exclusion, thus considering it included between 1986 and 1999. besides the ECSC preferences Timor-Leste (East Timor) (gained independence from Indonesia in 2002), no Community treaty applied there When Portugal became a Community member in 1986 East Timor was considered a non-self-governing-territory under Portuguese administration by the United Nations despite Indonesian occupation of East Timor between 1975 and 1999. None of the EC laws were ever in force, but EURATOM and ECSC preferences were to apply if not for the Indonesian occupation. The de jure Portuguese administration formally ceased on 20 May 2002 when Portugal recognised East Timor's independence. The Austrian areas of Kleinwalsertal and Jungholz formerly enjoyed a special legal status. The 2 areas have road access only to Germany, and not directly to other parts of Austria. They were in customs and currency union with Germany and there were no border controls between Kleinwalsertal and Jungholz, respectively, and Germany. When Austria entered the EU (and its customs union) in 1995, the customs union became defunct. The entry into force of the Schengen Agreement for Austria (1997) and the introduction of the euro (2002) caused Kleinwalsertal and Jungholz to lose their remaining legal privileges. It is now legally treated in the same manner as the rest of Austria. Saar (merged with West Germany on 1 January 1957), was fully part of the Community as French-administered European territory European Coal and Steel Community Treaty, Art.79 West Berlin (merged with West Germany on 3 October 1990), was subject to the full application of the treatiesUntil the unification of Germany in 1990 the de jure status of West Berlin was that of French, UK and US occupied zones with West German civilian administration. The treaties applied fully during 1952–1990 given the Federal German and French treaty responsibilities European Coal and Steel Community Treaty, Art.79, and during 1973–1990 given the British treaty responsibilities.[ ] For the 1979, 1984 and 1989 European Parliaments, three MEPs were appointed on the nomination of the Berlin House of Representatives rather than being directly elected. From 3 October 1990 West Berlin was fully integrated in Berlin in the Federal Republic of Germany, along with the former East Germany. East Germany was until 1972 on paper a part of one Germany and the European Community, since West Germany, the NATO countries and the European Community did not recognize East Germany until 1972. East Germany did not recognize any membership of the EC.  The West German government treated trade with East Germany as inter-German trade and not subject to the EC trade tariffs. Greenland Saint Barthélemy Bermuda Mayotte Norway Svalbard Switzerland Samnaun Dependent territory Elections in the European Union Enlargement of the European Union European Union Association Agreement European Union law Eurozone Foreign relations of the European Union Freedom of movement for workers Future enlargement of the European Union History of the European Union Member state of the European Union Microstates and the European Union Opt-outs in the European Union Outline of the European Union Withdrawal from the European Union Information on the "Overseas countries and territories" from the European Commission Review of CARIFORUM-EU EPA - and Implications for the British and Dutch Caribbean Octs - What the CARIFORUM-EU trade deal means for current EU territories Regional policy & outermost regions
