    St. Mary's College of Maryland, established in 1840, is an American public,Middle States Commission on Higher Education, "St. Mary's College of Maryland", https://www.msche.org/institutions_view.asp?idinstitution=450Maryland Higher Education Commission, "College 411: A Student Guide to Higher Education and Financial Aid in Maryland-- St. Mary's College of Maryland", Page 11, http://www.mhec.state.md.us/publications/StudentOutreachKit/411Guide10-11.pdf secular (non-religious) and co-educational four-year liberal arts college located in St. Mary's City, Maryland. It is a public honors college, a state-supported college that offers an experience similar to that of an elite liberal arts college. With about 1800 enrolled students, the institution offers bachelor's degrees in 24 disciplines. as well as a master's in teaching.College Navigator Report, National Center for Educational Statistics, Institute for Educational Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, “St. Mary's College of Maryland”, http://nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/?s=MD&pg=5&id=163912 The college is located in St. Mary's City, Maryland and shares much of its campus with Historic St. Mary's City, the site of Maryland's first colony and first capital. It is also the site of the fourth colony in British North America. St. Mary's City is also considered to be the birthplace of religious freedom in America"Religious Freedom Byway Would Recognize Maryland's Historic Role", Megan Greenwell, Washington Post, Thursday, August 21, 2008 http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/08/15/AR2008081504104.htmlCecilius Calvert, "Instructions to the Colonists by Lord Baltimore, (1633)" in Clayton Coleman Hall, ed., Narratives of Early Maryland, 1633-1684 (NY: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1910), 11-23."Reconstructing the Brick Chapel of 1667" Page 1, See section entitled "The Birthplace of Religious Freedom" [ ] because of the unique mandates establishing and governing the British colony that once stood there, requiring religious tolerance. The internationally recognized Historical Archaeology Field School"Historic St. Mary's City Wins Archaeology Award", Baynet, Baltimore, MD - 1/23/2012, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/25944Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, August 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1 is jointly operated by St. Mary's College of Maryland and Historic St. Mary's City."Historic St. Mary's City Wins Archaeology Award", Baynet, Baltimore, MD - 1/23/2012, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/25944Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, August 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1 The campus and the rest of St. Mary's City combined are considered to be one of the premier archaeological sites in the United States."Historic St. Mary's City Wins Archaeology Award", Baynet, Baltimore, MD - 1/23/2012, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/25944  St. Mary's College of Maryland is located on the original site of Maryland's first colony, St. Mary's City,Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, August 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1  which was also the first capital of Maryland"ST. MARY'S COUNTY, MARYLAND: HISTORICAL CHRONOLOGY", Maryland Manual Online, Maryland State Archives, Government of the State of Maryland, http://msa.maryland.gov/msa/mdmanual/36loc/sm/chron/html/smchron.html and is considered to be the birthplace of religious freedom in America. Colonial St. Mary's City was actually only a town and at its peak had between 500 and 600 residents. However, as the colony quickly expanded and settlements spread throughout the Eastern part of what is now Maryland, the town remained the capital and representatives would travel from all over the colony to participate in the Maryland General Assembly, the colony's first legislative body. The Colony was founded under a mandate by the colonial proprietor, Cecil Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore of England, that the new settlers engage in religious tolerance of each other.Dr. Lois Green Carr, "Margaret Brent (ca. 1601-1671)", MSA SC 3520-2177, Archives of Maryland (Biographical Series), http://msa.maryland.gov/megafile/msa/speccol/sc3500/sc3520/002100/002177/html/bio.html The first settlers were both Protestant and Catholic during a time of persecution of Catholics. This mandate was unprecedented at the time, as England had been wracked by religious conflict for centuries. The following history passed through times of new ideas, times of setbacks, long periods of oppression and times of hope, liberation and renewal; beginning in the 1600s and running through the Civil War period through the 20th Century and up to present days. The school evolved in response to many milestone events, and in some cases the school contributed to history as well as being influenced by it. St. Mary's College of Maryland offers over 31 different undergraduate degrees and minors, and it has a masters program in education. St. Mary's College is a public honors college."When the Answer to 'Access or Excellence?' Has to Be 'Both': St. Mary's of Maryland, a public honors college, wants to be affordable while offering a private liberal arts-style experience" Beckie Supiano, Chronicle of Higher Education, October 16, 2011, https://chronicle.com/article/When-the-Answer-to-Access-or/129423/?sid=wb&utm_source=wb&utm_medium=en It is one of only two such Public Honors Colleges in the United States. As a part of this, it maintains a core honors-level curriculum that all of its students, regardless of major, must complete. The school is non-religious (secular) and has been since it was started in 1840 (The name St. Mary's commemorates Maryland's first colony, "St. Mary's City", which once stood where the college stands now). The school has been coeducational (both male and female students) since 1949. The college community is guided by a set of principles called "The St. Mary's Way"."The St. Mary's Way", St. Mary's College of Maryland, Office of Student Affairs, http://www.smcm.edu/studentaffairs/"The St. Mary's Way", St. Mary's College of Maryland, Staff Senate, http://www.smcm.edu/staffsenate/stmarysway.html These principles set a tone for a supportive, caring environment where a passion for curiosity, knowledge and discovery can occur. It also talks about the importance of making a difference in the world, informed by the natural beauty and historic meaning of the St. Mary's City area. The St. Mary's Way also sets a tone for integrity and tolerance of differences in viewpoint, background and experience. The text of the St. Mary's Way is as follows: The college has 31 undergraduate programs that allow a choice of 24 majors, leading to a Bachelor of Arts (BA), and 26 minors. 69% of St. Mary’s students major or minor in a second academic discipline. Popular degree programs: biology, economics, English, history, political science, psychology. The college offers a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT). including teacher certification 81% overall graduation rate (including longer than four years) 70% four-year graduation rate, highest of any public institution in Maryland and third highest in the United States among public colleges."State Legislature Approves Tuition Reduction Measure for St. Mary’s College of Maryland", April 11, 2014, Southern Maryland Online http://somd.com/news/headlines/2014/18073.shtml  (69% of students pursue dual concurrent degrees or dual minors, which may take longer than four years, in some cases). 10% transfer out rate (students who transfer out of St. Mary's to other undergrad schools) 87% of students enroll for a second year 79% of students are receiving financial aid 66% of students are receiving grants or scholarships. The school is a member of the Phi Beta Kappa Society. According to the Maryland Higher Education Commission, St. Mary's College of Maryland, despite being a public institution, competes mostly with elite private colleges."R14D00, St. Mary’s College of Maryland: Analysis of the FY 2015 Maryland Executive Budget -- 2014 Operating Budget Data Analysis in Brief / Major Trends", Garret T. Halbach, Analysis of the FY 2015 Maryland Executive Budget, 2014; Page 2, Maryland Higher Education Commission, http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/Pubs/BudgetFiscal/2015fy-budget-docs-operating-R14D00-St-Marys-College-of-Maryland.pdf The commission reported in 2014 that the cost of obtaining a degree at St. Mary's College is $30,000 less when compared to the average costs of the elite private colleges that it competes with. The school is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. St. Mary's, although a state-operated institution, is independent of the University System of Maryland; it opted out of the system in 1992. However, in early 2006, St. Mary's joined the University of Maryland Academic Telecommunications System (UMATS), which interconnects the University System of Maryland with several other networks, including the Internet and Internet2 networks.Net Services.  St. Mary's College's new President, Tuajuanda Jordan, was appointed in 2014. She is the former dean of two other colleges and holds a PhD in biochemistry. The school has 150 full-time faculty, 14 are current Fulbright scholars (the college faculty has earned 30 Fulbright research awards in the past 20 years). There is a 10:1 student-to-faculty ratio, one of the lowest in the nation. St. Mary's College of Maryland, which is public, is unusual in that it competes mostly with elite private colleges. The state of Maryland reported this year that St. Mary's College of Maryland costs $30,000 less as compared to the average cost of elite private colleges in obtaining a college degree. Looking at tuition in March 2014, Kiplinger ranked St. Mary's College of Maryland as one of the "Best Values in Colleges"."SPECIAL REPORT: College Rankings, 2014: Best Values in Colleges / St. Mary's College of Maryland (St. Mary's City, MD), http://www.kiplinger.com/tool/college/T014-S001-find-best-colleges-value-rankings/end_page.php?school=8467 The school provides millions of dollars in financial aid and extensive help to students in securing financial assistance. In 2014, U.S. News and World Report, in its annual "Best College and Universities" report, ranked St. Marys College as "6th" in the nation under the category "Top Liberal Arts Public Schools" in the "Colleges" ranking (6th in the nation for Public Liberal Arts Colleges)."National Liberal Arts Colleges Summary: St. Mary's College of Maryland" U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges and Universities Ranking, 2014 http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/st-mary-s-college-of-maryland-163912/overall-rankings In the same report, St. Marys College of Maryland was ranked 4th in the nation"National Liberal Arts Colleges Summary: St. Mary's College of Maryland" U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges and Universities Ranking, 2014 http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-liberal-arts-colleges/veterans under the category "Best Colleges for Veterans". In 2014, U.S. News and World Report, in its annual "Best College and Universities" report, ranked St. Marys College 4th in the nation under the category "Best Colleges for Veterans" in the "Colleges" ranking The Institute of International Education has recognized St. Mary's College of Maryland as being 17th in the nation (public and private schools combined) for the percentage of its undergraduate students who study abroad for at least one semester."U.S. Study Abroad: Leading Institutions by Undergraduate Participation and Institutional Type" Open Doors Data, Institute of International Education, 2011/2012, http://www.iie.org/Research-and-Publications/Open-Doors/Data/US-Study-Abroad/Leading-Institutions-by-Undergraduate-Participation/2011-12 Approximately 60% of St. Mary's students study abroad, half of them for a full semester or more. St. Mary's College has had many students and faculty win Fulbright awards.  In the 2009-2010 academic year, the college had the second highest number of student Fulbright winners of any public liberal arts college in the nation. In the 2011-2012 academic year, it had the 3rd highest number of faculty Fulbright winners in the United States among nation among public and private baccalaureate colleges (undergraduate colleges). Since 2003, the Fiske Guide to Colleges has ranked St. Mary's College of Maryland as one of the best small universities/colleges in the U.S. for music study. St. Mary's College of Maryland is the only public liberal arts college listed. There are many opportunities for leadership development on campus, including positions as a resident assistant (RA), as an orientation leader (OL), on the school's student Judicial Board, as a Multicultural Academic Peer Program (MAPP) mentor, within the active Student Government Association (SGA), and among the various programs boards. The school also has an office of disability services. African-American student enrollment at St. Mary's College dropped in recent years. Rising tuition and need for more state funding for first generation to college students has been cited as a key reason. This includes a drop from 14% African American student enrollment in 1992"Autonomy Woes", http://www.nacubo.org/Business_Officer_Magazine/Magazine_Archives/April_2004/Trading_Dollars_for_Independence.html to just 7% African-American student enrollment in 2013"College Navigator Report", St. Mary's College of Maryland,  http://nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/?s=MD&pg=5&id=163912 The school has been working in many areas to improve enrollment and has numerous financial aid programs for minorities, and is reaching out to African-American communities across the state. The schools goal is to greatly increase African-American student enrollment. In the spring of 2014 a report shows the African-American student population having increased to 8%. At one point in the early 1980s, there were no African-American faculty at the school. The school's new President, Doctor Tuajuanda Jordan, is also a person of African-American heritage. Research has shown that, due to the relatively recent history of segregation in the United States, available funding for "first generation to college" students affects African-American populations disproportionally—Many news sources mention that adequate funding for first generation college students is actually one of the very biggest issues behind lagging African-American enrollment—elite liberal arts college's which are viewed by the state of Maryland as St. Mary's College's competitors, have been described in the news media as having traditionally had bigger endowments and could offer more scholarships. In response to this concern, the school has been doing considerable work to increase African-American enrollment at St. Mary's College: However, in addition to this, since 1840, the school has been charged by the state in various capacities in researching,"Center for the Study of Democracy: Purpose and Inspiration for Our Work", St. Mary's College of Maryland, CFSOD, http://www.smcm.edu/democracy/about/index.html interpreting and memorializing Maryland history at the site of Maryland's first colony and capitol, St. Mary's City, Maryland, which is also where the college is located. In this capacity St. Mary's College of Maryland, in partnership with Historic St. Mary's City,Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, Aug 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1"Anthropology Department: Historic St. Mary's City", St. Mary's College of Maryland 'describes close and multi-leveled relationship between Historic St. Mary's City and St. Mary's College of Marylandhttp://www.smcm.edu/anthropology/historic_smc.html"Archaeology, Narrative, and the Politics of the Past: The View from Southern Maryland", Page 41, Julia King, University of Tennessee Press; July 30, 2012, ISBN 1572338512, ISBN 978-1572338517 also runs the Historical Archaeology Field SchoolKenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, Aug 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1 which is an internationally recognized institution.Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, Aug 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1  The field school has worked on over 300 archaeological dig sites in the St. Mary's City area over the last 40 years.Kenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, Aug 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1 The school has a deep and multilayered relationship to the St. Mary's City area and its historic landscape. In its special role as a historical and archaeological research institution charged with studying the founding history of Maryland, and charged by the State of Maryland with researching the history of the emergence of democracy in Maryland, St. Mary's College of Maryland studies the following historic events that occurred in the area of St. Mary's City, Maryland and the periods in which they occurred. This also includes premier museums on and near campus, highlighting archaeology and area history related to all of the above. This research also includes a special focus and draws inspiration from local milestone historical events related to the struggle for establishment of democracy in Maryland, in many of its aspects, including: The Center for the Study of Democracy is an interdisciplinary joint initiative of St. Mary's College of Maryland and Historic St. Mary's City."Pax Defense Forum to Focus on China Seas" Lexington Leader, Thursday, April 11, 2013 · http://lexleader.net/pax-defense-forum-focus-china-seas/  It explores historical and contemporary issues related to democracy and also provides presentations by government officials and other leaders from both developed and developing countries"Archaeology, Narrative, and the Politics of the Past: The View from Southern Maryland", Page 68, Julia King, University of Tennessee Press; July 30, 2012, ISBN 1572338512, ISBN 978-1572338517 and notable scholars. The Center also offers a Democracy Studies minor through St. Mary's College of Maryland. Colonial St. Mary's City, which was on the site where St. Mary's College of Maryland is located today, was a place where struggles over 'Liberty of conscience' in religion, representative political practices,Dr. Lois Green Carr, "Margaret Brent (ca. 1601-1671)", MSA SC 3520-2177, Archives of Maryland (Biographical Series), http://msa.maryland.gov/megafile/msa/speccol/sc3500/sc3520/002100/002177/html/bio.htmlJo-Ann Pilardi, Baltimore Sun, "Margaret Brent: a Md. founding mother", March 05, 1998 http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1998-03-05/news/1998064114_1_margaret-brent-lord-baltimore-calvert freedom of the press, and minority rights all came to the fore at various times. Utilizing early Maryland as a case study in "emerging democracy," the foundation works to apply the lessons of the region's history to a domestic and international discussion of democracy's role in the modern world. The National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) We the People initiative awarded the Center a $500,000 challenge grant in September 2004.Center for the Study of Democracy at St. Mary's College of Maryland Notable advisory board members include: The James P. Muldoon River Center is a biological research center located along the Saint Mary's River. The center administers the Saint Mary's River Project and the university's geothermal operations. The Slackwater Center studies the current events, culture and history of St. Mary's County and other rural Chesapeake bay and Southern Maryland communities."SlackWater takes St. Mary’s oral histories, essays online: Project continues, but future of printed journals uncertain", Jason Babcock, Wednesday, March 27, 2013, http://m.somdnews.com/article/20130327/NEWS/130329127/1044/news&source=RSS&template=gazette"More Than Oral History: The Slackwater Center Investigates the Meaning of "Rural", J. A. King, 10/21/2005, Bay Net, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/399  Its focus is interdisciplinary and it studies the region from both an historical and contemporary point of view."More Than Oral History: The Slackwater Center Investigates the Meaning of "Rural",  J. A. King, 10/21/2005, Bay Net, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/399 The center studies, records and documents as well as interprets and reports on current and historical life in Chesapeake Bay communities.  The center also has a public education mission. Students engage in historical research and historical interpretation as well as documenting oral histories"Archaeology, Narrative, and the Politics of the Past: The View from Southern Maryland", Pages 68 and 41, Julia King, University of Tennessee Press; July 30, 2012, ISBN 1572338512, ISBN 978-1572338517 of living residents. The center utilizes interdisciplinary collaboration and also fosters public education and debate. It also publishes the Slackwater Journal  and maintains an extensive archive. The center's mission statement says: "We aim to offer a closer look at the rich and complicated legacies of the past, at the social and environmental challenges facing the present, and at our collective visions for the future."The Slackwater Center of St. Mary College of Maryland Preservational and curatorial roles are also played by the Slackwater Center, primarily through the Slackwater Archives and the Slackwater Southern Maryland Documentation Project. The mission of the archives includes preserving, transcribing, analyzing and interpreting: The project includes:    Historic St. Mary's City, which sits next to the college, is a State-run archaeological research, historical research, preservation and interpretation center and an indoor and outdoor museum complex.  The area managed by the commission also includes a reconstructed colonial town and sailing ship, located on the historic site of Maryland's first colony. St. Mary's College and Historic St. Mary's City jointly coordinate programs of study  in archaeology, history, museum studies, African American studies, political science and theater.  This includes both classroom and also hands-on opportunities in archaeological excavations, museums, and historic interpretation work."Interpreters help visitors bring Historic St. Mary’s City back to life", Bay Journal, Lara Lutz on October 01, 2006, http://www.bayjournal.com/article/interpreters_help_visitors_bring_historic_st_marys_city_back_to_life including museums, The commission and its grounds are considered to be is a major center for colonial archaeological research and historical research in the United States."Historic St. Mary's City Wins Archaeology Award", Baynet, Baltimore, MD - 1/23/2012, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewstory/story_ID/25944 There have been over 200 archaeological digs in St. Marys city worked on by the school over the last 30 years. All St. Mary's Students may also attend St. Mary's City's public access historical sites and all of its museums for free, year round.Virtual Campus Tour. The Maryland Heritage Project is also a collaboration between St. Mary's College of Maryland and Historic St. Mary's City. It focuses on the reconstruction of colonial buildings in the Historic St. Mary's City living history area, ongoing development of St. Mary's museum exhibits and also indoor and outdoor historic interpretation. This involves ongoing projects in archaeological research (including working on active archaeological excavations), historical research as well as management, preservation and analysis and interpretation of period artifacts and documents. The project also provides hands-on as well as classroom studies in archaeology, anthropology, democracy studies, history, international languages and cultures, and museum studies. St. Mary's College of Maryland and Historic St. Mary's Commission also jointly run the Historical Archaeology Field School every summerKenneth K. Lam, "Unearthing early American life in St. Mary’s City: St. Mary’s City is an archaeological jewel on Maryland’s Western Shore", Baltimore Sun, August 30, 2013, http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2013/08/unearthing-early-american-life-in-st-marys-city/#1"Anthropology Department: Historic St. Mary's City", St. Mary's College of Maryland describes close and multi-leveled relationship between Historic St. Mary's City and St. Mary's College of Maryland, http://www.smcm.edu/anthropology/historic_smc.html  It hosts collection-based courses, beginner to advanced level archaeological field training and also summer institutes.Maryland Heritage Project.  The school is attended by students from all over the United States and other countries as well. Many of its graduates now hold prominent positions in the field. The students not only study, but also work in many of the active archaeological dig sites in St. Mary's City.  Providing extensive hands-on experience, the school teaches all aspects of professional archaeological work, including working in real archaeological digs, analyzing and conserving artifacts, as well as cataloging, archiving and related historical research. The school has been in existence for more than 40 years. St. Mary's Baltimore Hall Library subscribes to 1,000 periodicals in print and has access to around 20,000 in electronic format. Furthermore, the school participates in the consortium of Maryland public colleges and universities (USMAI), through which library materials from 15 other institutes in the University of Maryland System are accessible.St. Mary's College Library The New Leadership for the Chesapeake program trains student's in environmental leadership and advocacy as it relates to the Chesapeake Bay. In addition to leadership and advocacy training, classes and field work also focus on the biological and resource management issues affecting the Bay. The program leads to a certificate.  A summer program that brings together notable authors, writers and educators to foster writers of novels, poetry and other venues.Ted Pugh, Southern Maryland Newspapers Online, "Chesapeake Writers’ Conference held in St. Mary’s County St. Mary’s College of Maryland hosts workshops on the ‘meaningful art’", July 10, 2013 http://www.somdnews.com/article/20130710/NEWS/130719825/1115/chesapeake-writers-x2019-conference-held-in-st-mary-x2019-s-county&template=southernMaryland Workshops in writing, classes, lectures, mentoring by notable authors and faculty; creative nonfiction, fiction and poetry are offered. Journal of educational studies written by student interns and faculty of the Master of Education program at St. Mary's College of Maryland. Named after the adage "A rising tide lifts all boats." The Boyden Collection is a 2,000 piece art collection on the campus. The Boyden Gallery sponsors a series of year-round shows and exhibits showcasing student, visiting art and artist, faculty and also community works featuring a diverse range of themes and media. Some notable items in the collection include works of art by: Alexander Calder, Louise Nevelson, William Merritt Chase, Buckminster Fuller, Marc Chagall, Thomas Hart Benton, Salvador Dali, Pablo Picasso, Alberto Giacometti, and Ad Reinhardt. The Boyden Gallery rotates between in-house, visiting and community art shows. St. Mary's College art students receive training and assist in curatorial management, planning and design of gallery shows and special programs.Chelsea Bradcovich, The Point News, February 9, 2010 "Students Gain Valuable Experience Designing Boyden Gallery Exhibit" http://thepointnews.com/2010/02/students-gain-valuable-experience-designing-boyden-gallery-exhibit The gallery also hosts all-student shows. Starting in 2014 the Boyden Gallery and the St. Mary's College of Maryland Masters in Teaching program entered into a partnership with St. Mary's County schools to foster and display works by promising local students."SMCM Offers Young Artists Venue to Display Work", Southern Maryland Online, May 19, 2014, http://somd.com/news/headlines/2014/18218.shtml The program involves St. Mary's College of Maryland faculty and students in working with talented local young artists. The program also sponsors a professionally juried competition and a special yearly exhibitions. Funds grants for faculty and guest artists during the year, gives annual cash award to students in the arts, furthers outreach on the college campus and within the outstanding community, and works on the development of the college's art collection.Arts Alliance of St. Mary's College of Maryland  The Arts Alliance of St. Mary's College of Maryland is also sponsors of the summer River Concert Series.   St. Mary's College teams participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III. The Seahawks are a member of the Capital Athletic Conference (CAC). St. Mary's College of Maryland has the highest percentage of student-athletes on Capital Athletic Conference's All-Academic team for 6 years in a row. St. Mary's mascot is the Seahawk, which is a nickname for the osprey. These birds are native to St. Mary's City and sometimes they can be seen diving from great heights into St. Johns Pond, in order to catch fish. The school has 1,901 undergraduate students and 32 graduate students More than 1,600 students live on campus and in traditional-style residence halls and about 300 students commute On campus living includes dorms. suites, apartments, and townhouses. Within the residences there are four living-learning centers on campus: an International Languages & Cultures (ILC) House; a Women In Science House (WISH); a Women, Gender and Sexuality Studies (WGSX) House and an Eco-House. Furthermore, there are Substance and Alcohol Free Environment (SAFE) suites and apartments on campus, as well as part of a residence hall. Other students join the IBA.  St. Mary's College of Maryland has an active Student Government Association (SGA). The SGA charters clubs, promotes campus events and activities, works closely with the administration to help guide student-related policy, and works to promote student engagement in campus life through representation and programming. Senators, elected by the student body, represent constituents divided by housing (or commuters). The executive board (President, Vice President, Treasurer, etc.) are also elected by the student body. The Student Trustee, a voting member of the Board of Trustees, and an ex officio member of the SGA, is chosen from among the students to act as a direct link between the Student Body and the Board of Trustees.Student Trustee Information Aside from the Student Trustee position, students also participate in numerous other committees with faculty and other members of the administration. As of fall 2013 As of fall 2012 (the following data runs on a different reporting cycle than the data above)-- St. Mary's College hosts more than 100 student-run, SGA-sponsored clubs.St. Mary's 2013 - 2014 SGA Club Information The majority of the on-campus student population lives in traditional college dormitories, group suite apartments and townhouses; 85% of students live on campus. St. Mary's does not have any social sororities or fraternities. Instead, part of its student residences run on a house system. Each house has its own educational theme, so residents may form community around shared interests. Campus residence houses include:  Seven Wonders The Seven Wonders are seven notable campus landmarks.  New students are inducted into the traditions of SMCM by orientation leaders in a tour of the Seven Wonders during orientation and it is a graduation tradition for the departing class to tour the seven wonders and recount stories the evening before graduation. Thus a student's time at SMCM begins and ends with tours of the Seven Wonders. The seven "wonders" are: Goodpaster Hall, an academic building devoted to chemistry, psychology, and educational studies that opened in January 2008, was built to a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating of Silver.State of Maryland Higher Education Commission, "St. Mary’s College of Maryland – Green Initiatives" http://mhec.maryland.gov/highered/green/smcmgreen.asp It is one of few "green" buildings in the state of Maryland.Goodpaster Hall: Office of Development.  By upgrading fixtures, adjusting campus facilities operations and raising the campus community awareness about wasteful energy usage, St. Mary’s College is making progress in using energy more efficiently, containing energy expenditures and reducing its impact on the environment. St. Mary’s College students voted to create a Green Energy Fund by raising student fees $25 per year. The purpose of the Green Energy Fund is to purchase Renewable Energy Credits to offset 100% of the College’s electricity use and fund renewable energy projects on campus. St. Mary’s College received the 2008 EPA Green Power Leadership Club award for their efforts. St. Mary’s College is expanding its recycling and composting programs. Student volunteers have been collecting recyclable and compostable material from the residences. Compostable bins will soon be available all across campus. The College is looking into partnering up with local farms to develop a larger scale composting facility that can accommodate the significant quantities of compostable food waste from the cafeteria. St. Mary’s College is transitioning to 100% environmentally responsible Green Seal certified cleaning products. St. Mary’s College’s groundskeeping crews are at the forefront of environmental stewardship by implementing sustainable practices. Their efforts include protecting the St. Mary’s River by developing green buffer areas, creating green spaces and wildlife habitat, using integrated past management and minimizing the usage of synthetic fertilizers. SMCM has applied to the Audubon Cooperative Sanctuary Program. The college runs a composting system to handle the majority of its biodegradable waste.      Academic counseling service Career counseling service Employment search services for students Navigator programs,"St. Mary's College Receives Grant From National Science Foundation," Baynet, 10/1/2012, http://www.thebaynet.com/news/index.cfm/fa/viewStory/story_ID/29675/d/10012012  in all departments (guidance, support and advocacy in staying on track academically) Emerging Scholars Programs (ESP)s in science, technology, engineering, math and computer science Psychological counseling and life counseling (confidential, available through health center) Support groups (confidential, sponsored by health center) St. Mary's College Office of Financial Aid, assistance in accessing financial assistance for tuition and living expenses Office of Student Development2011 College Access and Opportunity Guide", Center for Student Opportunity, 2011, ISBN 1402244045, ISBN 978-1402244049 provides support and advocacy for minority and economically disadvantaged students. Multicultural Achievement Peer Program (MAPP) peer support for minority and other multicultural students H. Thomas Waring Scholarship FundJesse Yeatman, Southern Maryland News, "St. Mary’s College celebrates Waring’s birthday: Entrepreneur has given hundreds of thousands in scholarships", September 12, 2012, http://www.somdnews.com/article/20120912/NEWS/709129720/1075/st-mary-s-college-celebrates-waring-s-birthday&template=southernMaryland DeSousa-Brent Scholars Program, for any of the following: economically disadvantaged students, minority students, or first generation-in-family attending college (by generation, not just individuals: siblings may apply)Jesse Yeatman, Southern Maryland News, Freshmen get sneak peek at St. Mary’s College, Friday, July 19, 2013 http://www.somdnews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20130719/NEWS/130718979/1056/freshmen-get-sneak-peek-at-st-mary-x2019-s-college&&template=PrinterFriendlysomd"St. Mary’s College of Maryland might freeze tuition", Washington Post, Jesse Yeatman, February 27, 2013 http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/st-marys-college-of-maryland-might-freeze-tuition/2013/02/27/0fbc0bde-8036-11e2-8074-b26a871b165a_story.html Access Student Ambassadors outreach to top minority students in Maryland high schools St. Mary's College Office of Financial Aid, assistance in accessing many minority and need-based scholarships and grants College Bound Foundation (assists disadvantaged students from the city of Baltimore) Many scholarships for minority students, first generation to college students and students with disabilities. As of 2010 there were 69 African-American faculty at the school,"St. Mary's College of Maryland: Full Time Faculty Minorities at St. Mary's College of Maryland", Career Index: Your Free Online Education Database, http://www.educationnews.org/career-index/st-mary-s-college-of-maryland/ including 57 full-time and 12 part-time professors and instructors. The school has worked to improve its outreach to minority students throughout the state. Numerous financial aid programs are available through the financial aid office regardless of student background as well as information on accessing minority scholarships and grants."Financing Your Undergraduate and Graduate Education", St. Mary's College of Maryland, http://www.smcm.edu/financialaid/ First generation students of all backgrounds have numerous funding options available through the college. The college also has information on additional sources. The school just received a top national ranking for on-campus race and class relations. It has been ranked 12th in the Nation for positive race and class relations on campus. This is based on student reporting that shows their feelings about relationships between student on campus of different races and economic classes (family of origin income). News articles report that African-American students on campus have a strong, active and supportive community. The school has several programs that can assist minority students seeking support. To be generally more competitive, the school secured a lowering of its tuition from the state in 2014. The early development of representative legislature in Maryland. The historic struggle for the establishment of religious freedom in America. The historic beginnings of the quest for Women's suffrage in America The historic struggle for minority rights in America The beginnings of freedom of the press in the Southern colonies Steny Hoyer, U.S. Representative and House Majority Leader, United States Congress"Center for the Study of Democracy: Purpose and Inspiration for Our Work", St. Mary's College of Maryland, CFSOD, http://www.smcm.edu/democracy/about/advisory.html Benjamin C. Bradlee vice president at large, The Washington Post Thomas Penfield JacksonSimone Levine, Elena Napolitano, The Point News, "The Thomas Penfield Jackson Award for Civic Responsibility and Democratic Citizenship Award", March 6, 2014 http://thepointnews.com/2014/03/the-thomas-penfield-jackson-award-for-civic-responsibility-and-democratic-citizenship-award-waiting-for-quote  presiding judge in the United States v. Microsoft case, former Judge, United States District Court for the District of Columbia. Ben Cardin  U.S. Senator from Maryland (2007–present); Former speaker of the Maryland House of Delegates, (1979–1986); U.S. House of Representatives 1987–2007 Michael Steele, Former Lieutenant Governor of Maryland Martin E. Sullivan, Director, Smithsonian National Portrait Gallery; former director of Historic St. Mary’s City Southern Maryland Documentation Project (The only work and collection of its kind in the region that includes extensive oral history's of the region, preserving local history and documenting community issues still unfolding as current events in Southern Maryland). Oral folk life (folk culture) and oral history interviews of the people of St. Mary's County, Maryland and other Southern Maryland communities."Archaeology, Narrative, and the Politics of the Past: The View from Southern Maryland", Pages 41 and 68, Julia King, University of Tennessee Press; July 30, 2012, ISBN 1572338512, ISBN 978-1572338517  Includes an oral history collection of more than 2,000 folk life and oral life history taped & transcribed interviews, documenting the traditional Chesapeake Bay Tidewater cultures of Southern Maryland. Oral histories documenting the transition to modern St. Mary's County.  Uses oral histories of key historical witnesses and participants to document St. Mary's County's transition to its modern era. The Slackwater Journal.  The archive is also a repository for issues of the Slackwater Journal, which has articles and interviews about the history, culture and people of Southern Maryland, past and present. St. Mary's College of Maryland oral histories. Documents the growth and history of St. Mary's College of Maryland. Southern Maryland Collection: The St. Mary's archives maintains the largest photographic print and audiovisual collection on the history and folk life of the Southern Maryland region. History of St. Mary's City Collection: It also maintains an extensive collection on the history of St. Mary's City, Maryland, the first colony of Maryland, and the birthplace of religious freedom. Includes materials on St. Mary's City's precolonial (Native American), colonial, antebellum (slavery era), American Civil War and 20th century history. the college had 1,901 undergraduate students. There were 32 graduate students 59% of students were female, 41% male. 12% of students were from out of state. 97% of undergraduate students attended full-time. 76% of students were Caucasian, 7% were African-American, 4% were biracial or multiracial, 5% were Hispanic, 2% were Asian, 3% were of undetermined ethnicity, 0% were American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 2% were nonresident international students. 19% of students were of minority heritage from any group, not including the percentage of nonresident international students who may also be minorities in the United States. Thirty-seven countries are represented among the students. The student:faculty ratio was 10 to 1 one of the lowest student faculty ratios for a public college in the United States. It is also among the lowest when compared to private colleges. Academic clubs Asian Studies Club, Economics Club, History Club, Math Club, Philosophy Club, Physics Club, Sign Language Club, Sociology/Anthropology Club Activity clubs Academic Team, Billiards Club, Cheerleading Club, aka Hawkettes, Dance Club, Heroscape Club, Take One Improv, Whitewater Club Advisory clubs Pre-Law Advisory Network (PLAN), Student Education Association, St. Mary's Advising Students in Health Interest clubs Anime Club, Camera Club, Community Garden Club, Computer/Linux Club, Fine Arts Club, Gaming Club, Global Justice League, International Club, Magic: The Gathering, Meditation Club, Outdoor Adventure Club, Out of State Club, Parking Club, SafeRide, Student Environmental Action Coalition, St. Mary's American Chemical Society, Tolkien Society, We Love the Co-Op, World of Warcraft, Women in Science House Club, Youth Alliance for the Revival of Needlework Musical clubs Crazy Pianos, Gospel Choir, Interchorus (co-ed a cappella), SMC-men (men's a cappella), The Nightingales - "TNA" (women's a cappella), Sextets (women's a cappella) Political clubs College Democrats, College Republicans Publications Avatar (literary magazine), The Dove (yearbook) Religious clubs Hillel, InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, Newman Society, Quaker Society Service clubs Circle K, For Goodness Sake, Habitat for Humanity, Relay For Life, Rotaract, Sister to Sister, Global Justice League, Amnesty International club Sports clubs Club Soccer, Crew Club, Cross Country & Track, Dodgeball Club, Equestrian Club, Fencing Club, Longboarding Club, Men's Rugby, Rockclimbing Club, Sailing Club, Softball Club, Water Polo Club, Windsurfing Club, Women's Rugby, Women's St. Mary's Ultimate (Frisbee) Team Social Engagement Clubs Black Student Union, FUSE, National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), Raices Hispanas, St. Mary's Triangle and Rainbow Society (S.T.A.R.S.) Media Board The HAWK Radio [ ](radio) and Point News (college newspaper) Alpha Kappa Delta (sociology)Alpha Kappa Delta  Beta Beta Beta (biology)Beta, Beta, Beta, National Biological Honors Society, Local Chapters, "Saint Mary's College of MD", http://www.tri-beta.org/localchapters.html Omicron Delta Epsilon (economics)Omicron Delta Epsilon Omicron Delta KappaOmicron Delta Kappa: The National Leadership Honors Society, "Circle Page: St. Mary's College of Maryland" http://odk.org/circles/circle?circ=smcm Phi Alpha Theta (history)Phi Alpha Theta Phi Beta Kappa (national)"Chapter Directory", section "S", The Phi Beta Kappa Society, http://www.pbk.org/home/chapterdirectory.aspx?z=S Pi Sigma Alpha (political science)Pi Sigma Alpha Psi Chi (psychology)Psi Chi Sigma Pi Sigma (physics) Sigma Tau Delta (English)Sigma Tau Delta International Honors Society, "Maryland (list): St. Mary's College of Maryland", http://www.niu.edu/sigmatd/chapterdirectory/Default.aspx?state=Maryland International Languages & Cultures (ILC) House Women In Science House (WISH) Women, Gender and Sexuality Studies (WGSX) House Eco-House Furthermore, there are Substance and Alcohol-Free Environment (SAFE) suites and apartments on campus, as well as part of a residence hall. The Shoe Tree (see above) The Bell Tower A clearing on St. John's Pond on the Side of Queen Ann (see above) Maryland Freedom of Conscience Statue on Route 5 (a.k.a. The Naked Man) Garden of Remembrance Fountain 'Hidden' Grave Church Point
