     St John's College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge. (The full formal name of the college is "The Master, Fellows and Scholars of the College of St John the Evangelist in the University of Cambridge".'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 1) The college was founded by Lady Margaret Beaufort. In constitutional terms, the college is a charitable corporation established by Charter dated 9 April 1511. The aims of the college, as specified by its Statutes, are the promotion of education, religion, learning and research. The college's alumni include the winners of nine Nobel Prizes, six prime ministers and eleven archbishops of various countries, at least two princes, and three Saints. St John's College is well known for its choir, for its members' participation in a wide variety of inter-collegiate sporting competitions, and for its annual May Ball. In 2011 the college celebrated its quincentenary, an event marked by a visit of HM Queen Elizabeth II and HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. HRH Prince William was affiliated with the college while undertaking a university-run course in 2014.http://www.joh.cam.ac.uk/prince-william-opens-st-john’s-college-archive-centre The college was founded on the site of the 13th century Hospital of St John in Cambridge at the suggestion of Saint John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester and chaplain to Lady Margaret. However, Lady Margaret died without having mentioned the foundation of St John's in her will, and it was largely the work of Fisher that ensured that the college was founded. He had to obtain the approval of King Henry VIII of England, the Pope through the intermediary Polydore Vergil, and the Bishop of Ely to suppress the religious hospital and convert it to a college. The college received its charter on 9 April 1511. Further complications arose in obtaining money from the estate of Lady Margaret to pay for the foundation and it was not until 22 October 1512 that a codicil was obtained in the court of the Archbishop of Canterbury. In November 1512 the Court of Chancery allowed Lady Margaret's executors to pay for the foundation of the college from her estates. When Lady Margaret's executors took over they found most of the old Hospital buildings beyond repair, but repaired and incorporated the Chapel into the new college. A kitchen and hall were added, and an imposing gate tower was constructed for the College Treasury. The doors were to be closed each day at dusk, sealing the monastic community from the outside world. Over the course of the following five hundred years, the college expanded westwards towards the River Cam, and now has eleven courts, the most of any Oxford or Cambridge College. The first three courts are arranged in enfilade. St John's College first admitted women in October 1981, when K. M. Wheeler was admitted to the fellowship, along with nine female graduate students. The first women undergraduates arrived a year later. St John's distinctive Great Gate follows the standard contemporary pattern employed previously at Christ's College and Queens' College. The gatehouse is crenelated and adorned with the arms of the foundress Lady Margaret Beaufort. Above these are displayed her ensigns, the Red Rose of Lancaster and Portcullis. The college arms are flanked by curious creatures known as yales, mythical beasts with elephants' tails, antelopes' bodies, goats' heads, and swivelling horns. Above them is a tabernacle containing a socle figure of St John the Evangelist, an Eagle at his feet and symbolic, poisoned chalice in his hands. The fan vaulting above is contemporary with tower, and may have been designed by William Swayne, a master mason of King's College Chapel.'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 10 First Court is entered via the Great Gate, and is highly architecturally varied. First Court was converted from the hospital on the foundation of the college, and constructed between 1511 and 1520. Though it has since been gradually changed, the front (east) range is still much as it appeared when first erected in the 16th-century.'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 3 The south range was refaced between 1772–6 in the Georgian style by the local architect James Essex, as part of an abortive attempt to modernise the entire court in the same fashion. The most dramatic alteration to the original, Tudor court however remains the Victorian amendment of the north range, which involved the demolition of the original mediaeval chapel and the construction of a new, far larger set of buildings in the 1860s. These included the Chapel, designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott, which includes in its interior some pieces saved from the original chapel. It is the tallest building in Cambridge. The alteration of the north range necessitated the restructuring of the connective sections of First Court; another bay window was added to enlarge the college's hall, and a new building constructed to the north of Great Gate. Parts of First Court were used as a prison in 1643 during the English Civil War. In April 2011, Queen Elizabeth II visited St John's college to inaugurate a new pathway in First Court, which passes close to the ruins of the Old Chapel. The college's Hall has a fine hammerbeam-roof, painted in black and gold and decorated with the armorial devices of its benefactors. The hall is lined to cill-level with linenfold panelling which dates from 1528–9, and has a five-bay screen, surmounted by the Royal Arms. Above is a hexagonal louvre, dating to 1703. The room was extended from five to eight bays according to designs by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1863. It has two bay windows, containing heraldic glass dating from the fifteenth to nineteenth centuries. In 1564, Queen Elizabeth rode into the college's Hall on horseback, during a state visit to Cambridge. Second Court, built from 1598 to 1602, has been described as 'the finest Tudor court in England'. Built atop the demolished foundations of an earlier, far smaller court, Second Court was begun in 1598 to the plans of Ralph Symons of Westminster, and Gilbert Wigge of Cambridge. Their original architectural drawings are housed in the college's library, and are the oldest surviving plans for an Oxford or Cambridge college building.'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 13 It was financed by the Countess of Shrewsbury, whose arms and statue stand above the court's western gatehouse. The court's Oriel windows are perhaps its most striking feature, though the dominating Shrewsbury Tower to the west is undoubtedly the most imposing. This gatehouse, built as a mirror image of the college's Great Gate, contains a statue of the benefactress Mary Talbot, Countess of Shrewsbury, added in 1671. Behind the Oriel window of the north range lies the Long Gallery, a promenading room that was, prior to its segmentation, 148 feet long. In this room, the treaty between England and France was signed that established the marriage of King Charles I of England to Queen Henrietta Maria. In the 1940s, parts of the D-day landings were planned there. Second Court is also home to the college's famous 'triple set', K6.   The Old Library was built in 1624, largely with funds donated by John Williams, Bishop of Lincoln. Hearing of the college's urgent need for greater library space, Williams donated £1,200 anonymously, later revealing his identity and donating a total of £2,011 towards the library's total cost of £3,000.'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 20 The Library's fine bay window overlooks the River Cam, and bears the letters ILCS on it, standing for Iohannes Lincolniensis Custos Sigilli, or John of Lincoln, Keeper of the Seal. The original intention of the college had been to construct an elegant, classical building supported by pillared porticos, but Bishop William insisted on a more traditional design. Thus, though the college lays claim to few examples of neo-classical design, the college Library stands as one of the earliest examples of English neo-Gothic architecture. Third Court is entered through Shrewsbury Tower, which from 1765 to 1859 housed an observatory. Each of its ranges was built in a different style. Following the completion of the college library in 1624, the final sides of Third Court were added between 1669 and 1672, after the college had recovered from the trauma of the English Civil War. The additions included a fine set of Dutch-gabled buildings backing onto the River Cam, and a 'window-with-nothing-behind-it' that was designed to solve the problem of connecting the windowed library with the remainder of the court.   This was the first stone bridge erected at St John's college, continuing on from Kitchen lane. The crossing's chief distinction is the use of illusory intaglio; Wren's bridge is carved from a limestone monolith incised to give the appearance of masonry.'An Architectural History of the University of Cambridge', Willis p. 224 The crossing lies south of the Bridge of Sighs, and was a replacement for a wooden bridge that had stood on the site since the foundation's early days as a hospital. Though Sir Christopher Wren submitted designs for the bridge, it was eventually built on a different site by a local mason, Robert Grumbold, who also built Trinity College Library. As with the Library, Grumbold's work was based on Wren's designs, and the bridge has become known more famously as 'the Wren Bridge'. This tiny court, formed within the walls of the old Kitchen Lane, is used as an outdoor dining area. Though it bears little resemblance to its namesake in Venice, the bridge connecting Third Court to New Court, originally known as New Bridge, is now commonly known as the Bridge of Sighs. It is one of the most photographed buildings in Cambridge, and was described by the visiting Queen Victoria as "so pretty and picturesque".A History of St John's College, produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 24 It is a single-span bridge of stone with highly decorative Neo-Gothic covered footwalk over with traceried openings. There is a three bay arcade at the East end of the bridge. The architect was Henry Hutchinson. The 19th century neo-Gothic New Court, probably one of the best known buildings in Cambridge, was the first major building built by any of the colleges on the west side of the river. Designed by Thomas Rickman and Henry Hutchinson, New Court was built between 1826 and 1831 to accommodate the college's rapidly increasing numbers of students. Despite the college's original intention to get the architects to build another copy of Second Court, plans were eventually accepted for a fashionably romantic building in the 'Gothic' style. It is a three-sided court of tall Gothic Revival buildings, closed on the fourth side by an open, seven-bayed cross-vaulted cloister and gateway. It is four storeys high, has battlements and is pinnacled. The main portal has a fan vault with a large octagonal pendant, and the interior of the main building retains many of its original features including ribbed plaster ceilings in the mock-Gothic style. Its prominent location (especially when seen from the river) and flamboyant design have led it to be nicknamed "The Wedding Cake". Hutchinson was suitably proud of his creation, and it is said that he once dashed up a staircase to reprimand an undergraduate for spoiling its symmetry by sitting too near one of its windows.  The Chapel of St John's College is entered by the north west-corner of First Court, and was constructed between 1866 and 1869 to replace the smaller, mediaeval chapel which dated back to the 13th century. When in 1861 the college's administration decided that a new building was needed, Sir George Gilbert Scott was selected as architect. He had recently finished work on the chapel at Exeter College, Oxford, and went about constructing the chapel of St John's College along similar lines, drawing inspiration from the Church of Saint Chapelle in Paris. The benefactor Henry Hoare offered a downpayment of £3000 to finance the chapel's construction, in addition to which he promised to pay £1000 a year if a tower were added to Scott's original plans, which had included only a small fleche. Work began, but Mr Hoare's death in a railway accident left the college £3000 short of his expected benefaction. The tower was completed, replete with louvres but left without bells. It is based on Pershore Abbey.'A History of St John's College', produced by Tim Rawle Associates, Cloister Press, p. 11 The tower is 50 metres high, and is the tallest structure in Cambridge (followed by the Cambridge University Library and King's College Chapel). The Chapel's antechamber contains statues of Margaret Beaufort and John Fisher. Inside the building is a stone-vaulted antechapel, at the end of which hangs a 'Deposition of the Cross' by Anton Rafael Mengs, completed around 1777. The misericordes and panelling date from 1516, and were salvaged from the old chapel. The chapel contains some fifteenth-century glass, but most was cast by Clayton and Bell, Hardman, and Wailes, in around 1869. Freestanding statues and plaques commemorate college benefactors such as James Wood, Master 1815–39, as well as alumni including William Wilberforce, Thomas Clarkson and William Gilbert. The college tower can be climbed, and is accessed via a small door on First Court. The Chapel is surrounded on three sides by large tabernacles which form part of the external buttresses. Each contains a statue of a prominent college alumnus, alumna or benefactor. The persons commemorated are, beginning with the buttress next to the transept on the south side: St John's Master's lodge is located in a grassy clearing to the north of Third Court. It was built at the same time as the new Chapel was being constructed, and has Tudor fittings, wainscot, portraits and other relics from the demolished north wing of First Court. It has a large garden, and in the winter its westmost rooms have excellent views of the college's old library, the River Cam, and the Bridge of Sighs. The architect was Sir George Gilbert Scott. Located to the west of the Chapel tower lies Chapel Court, which was constructed together with North Court and Forecourt in the 1930s to account for an increase in student numbers. North Court is located just north of Chapel Court and Forecourt is situated to the east, facing St John's Street. The latter is used partly as a car park for fellows and night entrance to the college. All three courts were designed by the architect Edward Maufe. Further increases in student numbers following WWII prompted the college to again increase the number of accommodation buildings. Cripps Court was built in the late 1960s to satisfy this demand. It is located just behind New Court and forms two courts (Upper & Lower River Court). Designed by architects Philip Powell and Hidalgo Moya, the building is Grade II* listed having received an award from the British Architectural Institution. It is considered an exemplar of late 20th-century architectural style and is named after its main benefactor, Humphrey Cripps.[ ]  To the west of Cripps Court lies the School of Pythagoras. Built around 1200, it predates the college with 300 years and is  both the oldest secular building in Cambridge and the oldest building continuously in use by a university in Britain. The building now serves as the location for the College Archives. Next to the School of Pythagoras lies Merton Hall. From 1266 until 1959 both the School of Pythagoras and Merton Hall were property of Merton College, Oxford. Merton Court is the college's eleventh and westernmost court. In 1987 the construction of the Fisher Building was completed. Named after cardinal John Fisher, the building contains teaching rooms, conference facilities, and the student-run college cinema. It was designed by the architect Peter Boston. Located directly opposite the college's Great Gate is All Saints' Yard. The complex is formed from the buildings of the so-called 'Triangle Site', a collection of structures owned by the college. An extensive renovation project finished in Michaelmas Term 2012 had a budget of approximately £9.75 million. The centrepiece of the Yard is Corfield Court, named after the project's chief benefactor, Charles Corfield. The site can be entered through one of two card-activated gates, or through the School of Divinity. The School of Divinity is the largest building on the site, and was built between 1878–1879 by Basil Champneys for the University of Cambridge's Divinity Faculty on land leased by St John's College. Control of the building reverted to St John's when the Faculty of Divinity moved to a new building on the Sidgwick site in 2000.   St John's College Choir has a tradition of religious music and has sung the daily services in the College Chapel since the 1670s. The services follow the cathedral tradition of the Church of England, Evensong being sung during Term six days a week and Sung Eucharist on Sunday mornings. The Choir is currently directed by Mr Andrew Nethsingha, who has previously been Director of Music at Gloucester and Truro Cathedrals. The boys of the choir are all educated at the St John's College School. During university vacations the choir carries out engagements elsewhere. Recent tours have taken it to places including the Netherlands, the USA and France. The choir has made a large number of recordings. The Choir has an extensive discography dating back to the 1950s, when it was signed to the Decca/Argo label under George Guest. More recently, the Choir has completed a sequence of recordings of English 20th century choral for Naxos, which sold over 200,000 copies.[ ]  The Choir now records with Hyperion Records, and has released four discs to date with the label: one of the music of Mendelssohn, a collection of music for Advent, Christmas and Epiphany, Christmas at St John's, a recording of the choral and vocal music of Jongen and Peeters and most recently, a collection of the music of Bairstow. The Choir has received invitations to perform throughout the world, recently touring in France, Austria, the Netherlands, Estonia, Hungary and America. The men of the choir, or choral scholars, also form their own close harmony group, The Gentlemen of St John's. Their repertoire spans the 15th century through to the modern day, and concert tours have taken them to Europe, the USA and Japan. They provide a mixture of classical a capella music and folksongs, as well as covers of recently chart hits and light-hearted entertainment. Fellows of St John's College are the only people outside the Royal Family legally allowed to eat unmarked mute swans. Swan traps were originally built into the walls of the college alongside the river, but these are no longer used. The Crown (the British monarch) retains the right to ownership of all unmarked mute swans in open water, but the Queen only exercises her ownership on certain stretches of the Thames and its surrounding tributaries. This ownership is shared with the Vintners' and Dyers' Companies, who were granted rights of ownership by the Crown in the fifteenth century, and was extended to the college via ancient Royalist ties. According to popular legend, St John's College is inhabited by a number of ghosts. In 1706, four fellows exorcised some ghosts from a house opposite the college by the simple method of threatening to fire their pistols at the positions the moans and groans were coming from. Second court is apparently still haunted by the ghost of the former undergraduate, James Wood. Wood was so poor that he could not afford to light his room, and would often do his work in the well-lit stairway.  New Court's central cupola has four blank clock-faces. These are subject to various apocryphal explanations. One legend maintains that a statute limiting the number of chiming clocks in Cambridge rendered the addition of a mechanism illegal. No such limitation is known to exist. More likely explanations include Hutchinson's fear that the installation of a clockface would spoil the building's symmetry, and that the college's financial situation in the early nineteenth century made completion impossible. Other legends explaining the absence of clockfaces claim that St John's College and its neighbour, Trinity College, were engaged in a race to build the final (or tallest) clocktower in Cambridge. Supposedly, whichever was finished first (or was tallest) would be permitted to house the 'final' chiming clock in Cambridge. Trinity's Tower was finished first (or, in another version of the same story, was made taller overnight by the addition of a wooden cupola), and its clock was allowed to remain. In truth, the completion of New Court and Trinity's Clock (which is in King Edward's Tower) was separated by nearly two centuries. Trinity's famous double-striking was installed in the seventeenth century by its then-Master, Richard Bentley, a former student of St John's, who dictated that the clock chime once for Trinity, and once for his alma mater, St John's. The college remains a great rival of Trinity which is its main competitor in sports and academia (Trinity is situated next to John's). This has given rise to a number of anecdotes and myths. It is often cited as the reason why the older courts of Trinity generally have no J staircases, despite including other letters in alphabetical order. A far more likely reason remains the absence of the letter J in the Latin alphabet, and it should be noted that St John's College's older courts also lack J staircases. There are also two small muzzle-loading cannons on Trinity's bowling green pointing in the direction of John's, though this orientation may be coincidental. Generally the colleges maintain a cordial relationship with one other; compatriotism led famously to the splitting of the atomic nucleus in 1932 by Ernest Walton and John Cockcroft, of Trinity and St John's respectively. St John's College and Christ's College, Cambridge both bear the arms of the Lady Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby, mother of Henry VII. These arms are recorded in the College of Arms as being borne by right, and are described as: Quarterly: 1 and 4 azure three fleurs-de-lis gold (France, Modern); 2 and 3 gules three lions passant gardant or (England); all within a border compony silver and azure. In addition, both foundations use the Beaufort crest, an eagle displayed arising out of a coronet of roses and fleurs-de-lis all gold, but their title to this is more doubtful. When displayed in their full achievement, the arms are flanked by mythical yales. The college motto is souvent me souvient, supplied by Lady Margaret Beaufort, and written in Mediaeval French. It is inscribed over gates, lintels and within tympana throughout the college, functioning as a triple pun. It means 'often I remember', 'think of me often' and, when spoken (exploiting the homonym souvent me sous vient), 'I often pass beneath it' (referring to the inscriptions). The college shares its motto with Christ's College, Cambridge and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. The College Grace is customarily said before and after dinner in Hall. The reading of Grace before dinner (ante prandium) is usually the duty of a Scholar of the College; Grace after dinner (post prandium) is said by the President or the Senior Fellow dining. The Graces used in St John's have been in continuous use for some centuries and it is known that the Ante Prandium is based upon mediaeval monastic models. The Grace is said shortly after the fellows enter the Hall, signalled by the sounding of a Gong, and accompanied by the ringing of the college's Grace Bell. The Ante Prandium is read after the Fellows have entered, the Post Prandium after they have finished dining: The buildings of St John's College include the Chapel, the Hall, two libraries, a bar, and common rooms for fellows, graduates and undergraduates. There are also extensive gardens, lawns, a neighbouring sportsground, College School and boat-house. On-site accommodation is provided for all undergraduate and most graduate students. This is generally spacious, and some undergraduate rooms comprise 'sets' of living and sleeping rooms. Members of the college can choose to dine either in the Hall, where silver service three-course meals are served, or in the buttery, where food can be purchased from a cafeteria-style buffet. College catering is organised by Michelin Star Chef Bill Brogan, overseer of the intercollegiate Stewards' Cup. The college maintains an extensive library, which supplements the university libraries. Most undergraduate supervisions are carried out in the college, though for some specialist subjects undergraduates may be sent to tutors in other colleges. The college has two official combination rooms for junior members, which represent the interests of students in college and are responsible for social aspects of college life. Undergraduates are members of the Junior Combination Room (JCR). Graduate students have membership to the JCR, but also belong to the Samuel Butler Room, which is the name of the Middle Combination Room (MCR) of St John's College. The fleet of punts is kept in a purpose-built punt pool behind the Cripps Building. St John's tends to be ranked near the middle of the Tompkins Table of undergraduate degree results, with an average position of 12.8 since 1997.    The college has a rich sporting history, enjoying much success in most of the major sports on offer in Cambridge. The Red Boys, St John's College Rugby Club, won the Division One League title for nine years in a row, before finally losing to Jesus in 2010–11, and the cuppers trophy for 6 years in a row from 2006-2011, making it one of the most successful collegiate sports teams in Cambridge's history. The rugby club has produced several notable alumni including RFU executive Francis Baron, former Newcastle and England fly-half and current RFU Director of Elite Rugby Rob Andrew, and Battlestar Galactica actor Jamie Bamber. The college rowing club, the Lady Margaret Boat Club (LMBC), is the oldest in the University, and was founded in 1825. Despite many gruesome rumours concerning the name of the club, it was merely the most successful of the many boat clubs established in the college in the 19th century. In a similar fashion the traditional rival of the LMBC, the Boat Club of Trinity College, is known as 'First and Third' in a reference to its formation from two original clubs. Every year the college awards scholarships to a handful of graduate students under the Benefactors' and Scholarships Scheme.[ ]  The most generous of all the early benefactors of St John's College was Dr Roger Lupton (d. 1540), Provost of Eton and chaplain to Henry VIII. Lupton had amassed immense wealth through a lifetime of royal service and ecclesiastical pluralism and his scholarships exist today as  the Lupton and Hebblethwaite Exhibitions. Other scholarships include the Craik Scholarship, the J.C. Hall Scholarship, the Luisa Aldobrandini Studentship Competition, the Paskin Scholarship and the Pelling Scholarship. Competition for these scholarships is very fierce as students from any country reading for any graduate degree—not only members of the college—can apply. There is also the famous Adams Prize in mathematics, named after the mathematician (and alumnus of St John's) John Couch Adams for his discovery of Neptune – it is an annual competition and can be awarded to any mathematician resident in the UK, with an age limit of under 40. The college is also associated with the Dr Manmohan Singh Scholarship, first awarded in 2008. St John's hosts a large and typically spectacular May Ball, which is traditionally held on the Tuesday of May Week. In recent years, tickets have only been available to Johnians and their guests. Highlights include an extravagant fireworks display and a variety of musical acts.  See also , . Notable Johnian's include former Heads of State, politicians, academics, Nobel laureates, poets and writers. Over 1000 former members of St John's College appear in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.[ ] In politics and law, alumni include; the heads of government F. J. Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1827–28, George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1852–55, Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1855–58 & 1859–65, Alfred Domett, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1862–63, Sir Francis Bell, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1925, Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, 2004–2014. Other alumni in politics and law include Roger Ascham, tutor of Elizabeth I and advisor to Edward VI and Mary I, William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, Lord High Treasurer, 1572–98, and chief advisor to Elizabeth I, Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, Lord High Treasurer, 1608–12, and spymaster for James I, John Williams, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, 1621–1625, and Archbishop of York, 1641–1650, Thomas Fairfax, 3rd Lord Fairfax of Cameron, parliamentary general and commander-in-chief in the English Civil War, Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland and leading advisor to Charles I, William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Newcastle, general and major supporter of Charles I in the English Civil War, Thomas Clarkson, abolitionist and a leading campaigner against the slave trade in the British Empire, Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1804-5, William Wilberforce, Member of Parliament and a leader of the movement to abolish the slave trade, Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1812–22, George Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1853-8, Suematsu Kenchō, historian and Japanese Minister of Home Affairs, 1900-1, Kikuchi Dairoku, President of Tokyo Imperial University and Japanese Minister of Education, 1901-3, Wee Chong Jin, Chief Justice of Singapore, 1963–90, Nigel Dodds, Democratic Unionist Party MP, Sarah Teather, Liberal Democrat MP for Brent East.  File:Wilberforce john rising.jpg|William Wilberforce File:Edward-de-Vere-1575.jpg|Edward de Vere File:Abdus Salam 1987.jpg|Abdus Salam File:William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley from NPG (2).jpg|Lord Burghley File:John Dee.jpeg| John Dee File:Lord Palmerston 1855.jpg|Lord Palmerston File:Cecil Beaton Photographs- General; Beaton, Cecil IB4287C cropped.jpg|Cecil Beaton File:William Wordsworth by Sir William Boxall.jpg|William Wordsworth File:Dirac 3.jpg|Paul Dirac File:Thomas Clarkson by Carl Frederik von Breda.jpg|Thomas Clarkson File:IBSA-leaders Manmohan Singh.jpg|Manmohan Singh File:Frederick Sanger.jpg|Frederick Sanger File:Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh.PNG|Lord Castlereagh File:Charles Algernon Parsons.jpg|Charles Algernon Parsons File:Roger Penrose 9672.JPG|Roger Penrose File:Douglas adams portrait (cropped 2).jpg|Douglas Adams File:Alfred Marshall.jpg|Alfred Marshall File:Maurice Wilkins nobel.jpg|Maurice Wilkins  Nobel Prize winners from the college include Sir Edward Appleton, for discovering the Appleton layer, Sir John Cockcroft KCB, physicist who first split the atom, Allan Cormack, for the invention of the CAT scan, Paul Dirac, one of the founders of quantum mechanics, Sir Nevill Francis Mott, for work on the behaviour of electrons in magnetic solids, Abdus Salam, for unifying the electromagnetic force and the weak force, Frederick Sanger, molecular biologist and Maurice Wilkins, awarded Nobel prize for Medicine or Physiology with Watson and Crick for discovering the structure of DNA. Several of St John's graduates were deeply involved in the efforts to abolish the British Slave Trade which culminated in the Act of 1807. In particular, Thomas Clarkson, William Wilberforce, Thomas Gisborne and Thomas Babington were active in the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade and other abolitionist efforts.[ ]  As part of the commemoration of the bicentenary of the 1807 Act, and as a representative of one of the Ivy League universities offering American historical perspective on the Triangular Trade, President Ruth J. Simmons of Brown University (herself a direct descendant of American slaves) gave a public lecture at St John's College entitled "Hidden in Plain Sight: Slavery and Justice in Rhode Island" on 16 February 2007. St John's College hosted some of the key events relating to the commemoration,[ ]  including an academic conference and a Gospel Mass in the College Chapel with the London Adventist Chorale. Three Royal Medals, known also as the Queen's Medals, are awarded annually by the Sovereign upon the recommendation of the Council of the Royal Society, “two for the most important contributions to the advancement of Natural Knowledge (one in the physical and one in the biological sciences) and the other for distinguished contributions in the applied sciences”. The first Royal Medal was awarded in 1826 and previous recipients include thirty-eight Johnians. The current Master of St John's is Chris Dobson, John Humphrey Plummer Professor of Chemical and Structural Biology at the university.   Grace !! Latin !! English Ante&nbsp;Prandium(Before&nbsp;Dinner) Oculi omnium in te sperant, Domine, et tu das illis cibum in tempore, aperis manum tuam, et imples omne animal benedictione. Benedic, Domine, nos et dona tua, quae de tua largitate sumus sumpturi, et concede ut illis salubriter nutriti, tibi debitum obsequium praestare valeamus, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou givest them their meat in due season.  Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousness. Bless us, O Lord, and these thy gifts which out of thine abundance we are about to receive, and grant that by their saving nourishment we may have power to fulfill the obedience due to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Post&nbsp;Prandium(After&nbsp;Dinner) Infunde, quaesumus, Domine Deus, gratiam tuam in mentes nostras, ut his donis datis a Margareta Fundatrice nostra aliisque Benefactoribus ad tuam gloriam utamur; et cum omnibus qui in fide Christi decesserunt ad caelestem vitam resurgamus, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Deus pro sua infinita clementia Ecclesiae suae pacem et unitatem concedat, augustissimam Reginam nostram Elizabetham conservet, et pacem universo Regno et omnibus Christianis largiatur. Pour forth, we beseech thee, Lord God, thy grace into our minds, that we may use these gifts, given by Margaret our Foundress and other Benefactors, to thy glory, and together with all who have died in the faith of Christ rise again to life in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. May God, of his infinite mercy, grant his Church unity and peace, preserve our most august queen, Queen Elizabeth, and grant peace to the whole Realm and to all Christians. Name Year Rationale John Herschel 1836 For his paper on nebulae and clusters of stars, published in the Philosophical Transactions for 1833 James Sylvester 1861 For his various memoirs and researches in mathematical science John Newport Langley 1892 For his work on secreting glands, and on the nervous system Charles Pritchard 1892 For his work on photometry and stellar parallax Arthur Schuster 1893 For his spectroscopic inquiries, and his researches on disruptive discharge through gases and on terrestrial magnetism Percy MacMahon 1900 For the number and range of his contributions to mathematical science William Burnside 1904 For his researches in mathematics, particularly in the theory of groups Augustus Love 1909 On the ground of his researches in the theory of elasticity and cognate subjects William Mitchinson Hicks 1912 On the ground of his researches in mathematical physics Grafton Elliot Smith 1912 No citation. William Johnson Sollas 1914 For researches in palaeontology Joseph Larmor 1915 On the ground of his numerous and important contributions to mathematical and physical science William Rivers 1915 On the ground of his important contributions to ethnography and ethnology William Bateson 1920 On the ground of his contributions to biological science, and especially his studies in genetics Frederick Blackman 1921 For his researches on the gaseous exchange in plants & on the operation of limiting factors Albert Seward 1925 For his researches on the palaeobotany of Gondwanaland John Edward Marr 1930 For his pioneer work in the accurate zoning of the palaeozoic rocks Patrick Laidlaw 1933 For his work on diseases due to viruses, including that on the cause and prevention of distemper in dogs. Alfred Harker 1935 In recognition of his distinguished work and influence as a petrologist Paul Dirac 1939 For the leading part he had taken in the development of the new quantum mechanics William Topley 1942 For his outstanding work on experimental epidemiology and immunology Harold Jeffreys 1948 For his distinguished work in geophysics and his important contributions to the astronomy of the solar system Edward Appleton 1950 For his work on the ele  transmission of electromagnetic waves round the earth and for his investigations of the ionic state of the upper atmosphere Frederic Bartlett 1952 In recognition of his creation of an experimental school of psychology which has established under his leadership an outstanding position recognised internationally as without superior Nevill Mott 1953 In recognition of his eminent work in the field of quantum theory and particularly in the theory of metals John Cockcroft 1954 In recognition of his distinguished work on nuclear and atomic physics W. V. D. Hodge 1957 In recognition of his distinguished work on algebraic geometry Rudolf Peierls 1959 In recognition of his distinguished work on the theoretical foundations of high energy and nuclear physics Raymond Lyttleton 1965 In recognition of his distinguished contributions to astronomy, particularly for his work on the dynamical stability of galaxies Frank Yates 1966 In recognition of his profound and far-reaching contributions to the statistical methods of experimental biology Joseph Hutchinson 1967 In recognition of his distinguished work on the genetics and evolution of crop-plants with particular reference to cotton Charles Oatley 1969 In recognition of his distinguished work in the wartime development of radar and latterly for the design and development of a highly successful scanning electron microscope Frederick Sanger 1969 In recognition of his pioneer work on the sequence of amino acids in proteins and of nucleotides of ribonucleic acids Fred Hoyle 1974 In recognition of his distinguished contributions to theoretical physics and cosmology Abdus Salam 1978 In recognition of his outstanding contributions to the physics of elementary particles with special reference to the unification of the electromagnetic and weak interactions Roger Penrose 1985 For his fundamental contributions to the theory of gravitational collapse and to other geometric aspects of theoretical physics Eric Denton 1987 In recognition of his outstanding contributions to the physiology of marine animals, to marine biology generally, and his leadership of UK marine science Robert Hinde 1996 In recognition of his contributions to the field of animal behaviour and the dominant influence it achieved on the emerging field of ethology Christopher Dobson 2009 For his outstanding contributions to the understanding of the mechanisms of protein folding and mis-folding, and the implications for disease Sir William Cecil, Lord Burleigh Lucius, Viscount Falkland John Williams, Archbishop of York Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford William Gilbert, natural philosopher Roger Ascham, instructor to Elizabeth I Mary Cavendish, Countess of Shrewsbury Richard Bentley, classicist Edward Stillingfleet, bishop of Worcester John Overall, Bishop of Coventry, Lichfield and Norwich Peter Gunning, Bishop of Chichester and Ely Sarah Alston, Duchess of Somerset Thomas Clarkson, abolitionist Brook Taylor, natural philosopher and mathematician Thomas Linacre, founder of the Royal College of Physicians Two plinths left vacant Thomas Baker, historian Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Baker, Thomas, History of the College of St. John the Evangelist, Cambridge, edited by John E.B. Mayor, 2 vols.; Cambridge University Press, 1869 (reissued by the publisher, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00375-9) Crook, Alec C., From the foundation to Gilbert Scott. A history of the buildings of St John's College, Cambridge 1511 to 1885; Cambridge, 1980. Crook, Alec C., Penrose to Cripps. A century of building in the College of St John the Evangelist, Cambridge; Cambridge, 1978. Henry, N.F.M. & Crook, A.C. (eds), Use and Occupany of Rooms in St John's College. Part I: Use from Early Times to 1983; Cambridge, 1984. James, M. R., A Descriptive Catalogue of the Manuscripts in the Library of St John's College, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1913 (reissued by the publisher, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00310-0) Miller, Edward, Portrait of a College. A history of the College of Saint John the Evangelist in Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1961 (reissued by the publisher, 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00354-4) Mullinger, James Bass, St. John's College; (University of Cambridge College Histories) London, 1901. Pevsner, Nikolaus, The Buildings of England. Cambridgeshire; 2nd ed.; Harmondsworth, 1970; pp.&nbsp;148–149. Roach, J. P. C., A History of the County of Cambridge and the Isle of Ely, Volume 3, 1959 Scott, Robert Forsyth, St. John's College, Cambridge , Dent, London, 1907. Willis, Robert & John Willis Clark, The Architectural History of the University of Cambridge. And of the Colleges of Cambridge and Eton; Vol. II; Cambridge, 1886. pp.&nbsp;263–271. St John's College St John's College JCR St John's College SBR (equivalent to the MCR of other colleges) Boat Club
