    Star Trek: Enterprise (titled simply Enterprise for the first two seasons; sometimes abbreviated to ST: ENT) is an American science fiction TV series  and a prequel to the original Star Trek series. The series premiered on September 26, 2001, on the UPN television network and the final episode aired on May 13, 2005. The show is set in regions of the Milky Way galaxy near Earth, aboard the Enterprise NX-01, Earth's first starship designed for long-range exploration of the galaxy and the first to be Warp 5-capable. The series begins in 2151 (115 years before the original series) when Jonathan Archer becomes the captain of the Enterprise, and ends in 2161 with the formation of the United Federation of Planets. In May 2000, Rick Berman, executive producer of Star Trek: Voyager, revealed that a new series would premiere following the final season of Voyager. Little news was forthcoming for months as Berman and Brannon Braga developed the untitled series, known only as "Series V", until February 2001, when Paramount signed Herman Zimmerman and John Eaves to production design Series V. Within a month, scenic designer Michael Okuda, another long-time Trek veteran, was also signed. Michael Westmore, make-up designer for Trek since Star Trek: The Next Generation (TNG), was announced as working on Series V by the end of April. Returning as director of photography would be Marvin V. Rush, who had been working on various Treks since the third season of TNG. For visual effects, Ronald B. Moore, who had previously worked on TNG and Voyager, was brought in. On May 11, 2001, it was announced that Series V would be called Enterprise and that Scott Bakula of Quantum Leap was to play the lead role of Captain Jonathan Archer. The character's first name was originally Jackson, then changed to Jeffrey and finally Jonathan due to fan feedback. Four days later, the rest of the main cast was announced, though the character names were not announced until the next day. Berman explained the decision to initially exclude the words "Star Trek" from the show's title:   On May 14, 2001, shooting began for the pilot episode, "Broken Bow", on stages 8, 9, and 18 at Paramount Studios. Three days later, Tom Nunan, entertainment producer at UPN, held a press conference formally announcing Enterprise to the world at large. Featuring a video on the history of the Star Trek franchise, Nunan held up previous installments of the franchise as proof-of-concept that Enterprise would succeed. On September 26, 2001, the premiere episode of Enterprise, "Broken Bow", aired on UPN with an estimated 12.54 million viewers.The End of A Space Odyssey - Washington Post Article by Frank Ahrens. Published May 8, 2005. Retrieved June 2, 2013.  Star Trek: Enterprise marked several milestones for Star Trek television production during its run: it was the first Trek series to be produced in high-definition; the first to be broadcast in HDTV, beginning on October 15, 2003, midway into the third season; and the first to be recorded on digital video (season 4). A number of episodes of Enterprise were directed by Star Trek alumni:    The first two seasons of Star Trek: Enterprise depict the exploration of interstellar space by the crew of an Earth ship able to go farther and faster into outer space than any humans had previously gone, due to the breaking of the Warp 5 barrier that made interstellar travel feasible, analogous to the Bell X-1 breaking the sound barrier. The NX designation indicates that this Enterprise is an experimental prototype.http://www.startrek.com, CBS Studios, n.d., , (accessed July 2, 2013). The crew faces situations that are familiar to Star Trek fans and shows the origins of some concepts which have become taken for granted in Star Trek canon, such as Lt. Reed's development of force fields and Captain Archer's questions about cultural interference eventually being answered by applications of the prime directive in later series. A recurring plot device is the Temporal Cold War, in which a mysterious entity from the 27th century uses the Cabal, a group of genetically upgraded Suliban, to manipulate the timeline and change past events. Sometimes sabotaging Enterprise's mission and sometimes saving the ship from destruction, the entity's motives are unknown. Agent Daniels, a temporal agent from the 31st century, visits Captain Archer occasionally to assist him in fighting the Suliban and undo damage to the timeline. In the nine decades since Star Trek: First Contact, the Vulcans have been mentoring humanity to what they see as an appropriate level of civilization, in the meantime routinely holding back scientific knowledge to keep humans stranded close to home, believing them to be too irrational and emotionally dominated to function properly in an interstellar community. When Enterprise finally sets out, the Vulcans are often conspicuously close by. This generates some friction as, in several early episodes, Archer and others complain bitterly of the Vulcans' overt methods of checking up on them. The third season sees the change of the series' name from Enterprise to Star Trek: Enterprise as well as an updated main title theme.  More than any other, season three was a product of its time, as it introduces the Xindi, a terrorist enemy bent on annihilating humanity via a planet-destroying super weapon, in a parallel to the events of 9/11. The third season follows a single story arc, beginning in the second season finale "The Expanse", in which a mysterious probe cuts a wide, deep trench from central Florida to Venezuela, killing seven million people. Enterprise is recalled and retrofitted as a warship, with more powerful weapons and a group of elite Military Assault Command Operations (MACOs). Enterprise travels through an area known as the Delphic Expanse to find the Xindi homeworld and prevent another attack against Earth. The crew learns in "Azati Prime"  that the Sphere-Builders, a transdimensional species, have technology that allows them to examine alternate timelines.  The Sphere-Builders know that in the 26th century, the "Federation" fleet, led by Enterprises distant descendant, the Enterprise-J, will lead an attack against them that will defeat them.  They want the Xindi, who revere them as "the Guardians", to destroy Earth in the hope that this will deter the formation and existence of the Federation.  However, in the season finale, "Zero Hour", Enterprise manages to defeat the Sphere-Builders and destroy the Xindi weapon.  They also succeed in returning the Expanse to normal space.  The season's storytelling is heavily rooted in the country's then-dominant post-9/11 morality, the actions of the crew frequently guided by the quest for security at all costs.  This philosophy of the ends justifying the means is starkly at odds with the moral landscape of every other incarnation of Star Trek.  The season ends with the Enterprise being mysteriously transported into the middle of World War II. This plot was resolved in "Storm Front", Parts I & II. On May 20, 2004, the show was renewed for a fourth season. The renewal moved the show from Wednesday night to Friday night, a move that seemed to replicate the third season renewal of the original Star Trek, when it was moved from Thursday night to the Friday night "death slot". Many cast and crew members supported it, saying that The X-Files gained more viewership during its first three years on Friday nights. As a sequel to "Zero Hour", "Storm Front" and "Storm Front, Part II", opened up the fourth season on October 8 and 15, 2004. The episodes ended the ongoing Temporal Cold War arc, which proved unpopular among the show's viewers during the first three seasons. According to executive producer Manny Coto, "everything that had been said about the Temporal Cold War had already been said. I felt a heavy reliance on time travel at the beginning of Enterprise."[ ] Nevertheless, he says "I was secretly hoping for a season five to address the time travel." The Xindi arc, started over a year ago in "The Expanse", ended with the third episode, "Home", which mostly dealt with Captain Archer's ethically and morally questionable actions during the yearlong mission in the Expanse.  The general theme of the season was a refocus on the prequel concept of the series, with many episodes making reference to themes, concepts, and characters from past series. The fourth season saw Brent Spiner (Data from Star Trek: The Next Generation) as the imprisoned scientist Dr. Arik Soong, an ancestor of Data's creator (Dr. Noonien Soong, also played by Spiner in at least two episodes of Star Trek: The Next Generation), in a three-episode arc at the end of which Soong abandons the concept of improving mankind in favor of creating artificial intelligence -- an allusion to what will eventually become Data. The Soong episodes later gave rise to a story arc where the Klingons attempt to improve their species through the continuation of Soong's work. This allowed for an explanation of why the Klingons on The Original Series lacked brow ridges and were much more human-looking than Klingons in any of the other series; they were mutants created by faulty genetic engineering. Season 4 also addressed some discrepancies between the Vulcans of The Original Series and those depicted in Star Trek: Enterprise. In the Vulcan Civil War arc, Romulan subversion of the Vulcan High Command leads to a splinter group of Vulcans opposed to the High Command's actions, believing those actions to be against the teachings of Surak, the mytho-historical leader who brought logic to Vulcan. After this storyline, Vulcans began a cultural transformation that was presumably a turn toward the more enlightened Vulcans of Trek series set further in the future. For example, before the ancient teachings were recovered mind-melding was considered immoral; afterward it was embraced as the legacy of all Vulcans. A two-part return to the Mirror Universe, made popular by The Original Series and Deep Space Nine, titled "In a Mirror, Darkly", was made late in the fourth season, which took place in the parallel dimension.  These episodes use the Enterprise crew as the most barbaric members of the Terran Empire. As a sequel to the original Star Trek's "Mirror, Mirror", the episode proved popular while "Part II" ended with a cliffhanger. Had the series gone on for a fifth season, the story would have continued. The story was "continued" by the first "Mirror Universe" anthology published in 2007 by Pocket Books. The story, "Age of the Empress", was crafted by Mike Sussman, the writer of "In a Mirror, Darkly". Romulans also stir up trouble midway through the season. While a diplomatic conference is hosted by Earth on the planet Babel, the Romulans, using drone ships with holographic emitters (mimicking any ship), stir up trouble with the Andorians and Tellarites. This places the two races at each other's throats, and when the drone ships are revealed to be Romulan, Archer devises an alliance similar to the Federation with the Vulcans. This three-part arc, which presaged the inevitable Romulan-Earth War of 2156, received the lowest Nielsen ratings of the entire series, leading UPN to cancel it on February 2, 2005. In the final story arc of the season, a human terrorist group called Terra Prime is bent on removing all non-humans from human planets and genetically engineering a child from DNA samples of Commander Tucker and Commander T'Pol. They use the baby (named Elizabeth by T'Pol in honor of Trip's sister, killed by the Xindi probe in Season 3) as a means to anger humans who have become afraid of aliens since the Xindi conflict and launch a campaign from Mars to drive the alien outsiders from human space. This storyline has been said by producers to represent how humanity must overcome its own bigotry and hatred to become the human race seen in later incarnations of Star Trek. The series cancellation was announced before the writing of the final episode of the fourth season, allowing the writers to craft a series finale. This final episode, titled "These Are the Voyages...", aired May 13, 2005 in the United States and was one of the most heavily criticized episodes of the Star Trek franchise. Much of the criticism focused on the premise, which essentially reduced the finale to a holodeck adventure from the Star Trek: The Next Generation series.  The episode featured guest appearances by Jonathan Frakes and Marina Sirtis as their Star Trek: The Next Generation characters William Riker and Deanna Troi. Disregarding their eleven years of aging, the episode is based during the TNG episode "The Pegasus". Brent Spiner lent his voice to the finale and is briefly heard as Data. The last episode held the most views, but was the lowest rated episode of the series. Members of the cast, including Jolene Blalock who played T'Pol, also voiced their negative opinions about the finale, especially the decision to bring the two Next Generation actors to Enterprise. By the third season, ratings were continually declining, and the threat of cancellation loomed over Star Trek: Enterprise. This, along with the poor box office performance in 2002 of the film Star Trek Nemesis, cast an uncertain light upon the future of the Star Trek franchise in general. After the last episode of the last season aired on May 13, 2005, Star Trek was left in limbo until the release of the 2009 J.J Abrams film Star Trek. TrekUnited, headed by Tim Brazeal, rallied fans from across the globe and launched a letter writing campaign similar to the one that saved the third season of the Original Series. On May 20, 2004, it was announced that Enterprise had been renewed for a fourth season, but that the show would move from Wednesday to Friday nights. This move echoed the rescheduling of the original Star Trek to a Friday night time slot for its third season before its ultimate cancellation, as Friday nights have traditionally been considered "death row" for a major TV production. Manny Coto, hired as a writer during the third season, was promoted to co-executive producer, becoming the series showrunner for the fourth season. Coto decided to retain the "arc" concept of season 3 but reduce it from one season-long arc to several "mini-arcs" of two or three episodes, with few standalones. The producers attempted to attract viewers by terminating a long-running story arc (the Temporal Cold War) and scheduling numerous episodes that served as prequels to storylines from The Original Series and The Next Generation. Beginning in the summer of 2004 and continuing throughout the fourth season, there were reports that William Shatner would reprise the role of James T. Kirk or perhaps an ancestor in the series, but an agreement could not be reached. The fourth season got off to a slow start in the ratings on October 8, 2004, due to the Friday time-slot, preemptions by local sports in some markets, and coverage of the second presidential debate between George W. Bush and John Kerry in others. As well, Enterprise fans continued to indicate they chose to watch the weekend showing rather than the Friday broadcast, or chose to "time-shift" the program using their VCR or DVR equipment. In October 2004, it was announced that Enterprise was the 25th most popular Season Pass on the TiVo television recording system in the United States. Speculation as to the future of the series came to an end on February 2, 2005, when UPN announced the series had been cancelled and its final episode would air on Friday, May 13, 2005. Fan groups such as "Save Enterprise" and TrekUnited joined forces and announced a drive to raise money to finance a further season of Enterprise. The campaign attempted to raise $30 million, based upon estimates of the cost for a full season cited by John Billingsley and others. In addition, Washington, D.C. lobbyist Dan Jensen circulated a letter on Capitol Hill in an effort to appeal to the sentiments of legislators. As a result, then Florida Congressman Mark Foley (R) agreed to sign the letter. The Washington "lobbying" effort garnered considerable press, and had a feature article on the front page of Roll Call. Production of the fourth season concluded on March 8, 2005, and by the end of the month, Startrek.com was reporting the Enterprise sets had been taken down, marking the first time that Stage 9 at Paramount Studios had been without Star Trek sets since the late 1970s. The website did not indicate whether the sets had been preserved in storage (the industry term being 'fold-and-hold') or if they were destroyed. As of April 13, 2005, Paramount and UPN remained adamant that the cancellation of the series was final and that the studio was not interested in continuing the current incarnation of Star Trek. TrekUnited officials, however, still claimed to be in talks with Paramount over the future of the series at the time. The website IGN Filmforce, reporting on rumors that Paramount had actually decided to cancel Enterprise after its fourth season as early as midway through the second year, quoted an unidentified "executive involved with Enterprise" as saying this scenario was "very likely". Although widely reported as the death knell of the Star Trek franchise, the cancellation of Enterprise was followed within months by the announcement that Paramount was in pre-production on an 11th Star Trek feature film. After a false start involving Berman which would have set the film in a time period after the events of Enterprise but before TOS, Paramount recruited a new producing and writing team, which ultimately led to the release of a new Star Trek film in May 2009. Like Enterprise, the new film (which contained an indirect reference to the series when Scotty referenced losing Admiral Archer's "prized beagle" in a transporter mishap, while in its 2013 follow-up, Star Trek Into Darkness, a model of an NX class ship, possibly the NX-01, is visible on a Starfleet admiral's desk) also adopted a prequel concept, with a different approach based primarily on being an alternate reality reboot of the original Star Trek series that featured Spock travelling back in time and inadvertently changing the future for his younger self.  Enterprise used the most composers of any Star Trek series (Dennis McCarthy, Jay Chattaway, David Bell, Paul Baillargeon, Velton Ray Bunch, Brian Tyler, Mark McKenzie, John Frizzell and Kevin Kiner). In 2014, a four-disc soundtrack album was released.  The series' theme song, "Where My Heart Will Take Me", written by Diane Warren and sung by Russell Watson, was a marked contrast to the sweeping instrumental themes used in all other Star Trek series.  It was also the first theme song in Star Trek history not originally written for Star Trek, and only the second not expressly written for the show in which it was used (Star Trek: The Next Generation used a combination of Alexander Courage's original Star Trek theme and Jerry Goldsmith's theme from Star Trek: The Motion Picture).  It was originally written for the movie Patch Adams, where it was sung by Rod Stewart and titled "Faith of the Heart". Like other aspects of the series, the theme song polarized fans. Online petitions were signed demanding its removal from the titles. A new arrangement of the song, with more percussion and orchestral backing, was introduced for the third season, this time eliciting criticism from fans who preferred the original version. The theme song, as well as the opening credits, were altered for a two-part episode in season 4 entitled "In a Mirror, Darkly", which take place in an alternate mirror universe. Throughout the show's run, there was speculation as to whether the theme song and opening credits would be changed. This speculation was fueled in October 2004 when the official website startrek.com posted an opening credits sequence in which Scott Bakula recites a modified version of the monologue which opened the original series and The Next Generation, accompanied by the instrumental theme used as the closing credits music for the series: Space... the Final Frontier. These are the voyages of the starship Enterprise. Her continuing mission: to explore strange new worlds; to seek out new life and new civilizations; to boldly go where no human has gone before. However, this was never used for the opening credits of a broadcast episode. Like the Star Trek series that preceded it, a series of original novels based on Enterprise was launched by Pocket Books soon after the program debuted. During the run of the series, only five books were published (not counting episode novelizations), a low number compared to the other series. No Enterprise-specific novels appeared at all in 2005 and the first post-cancellation novel, Rosetta by Dave Stern, did not appear until February 2006. As explained by Pocket Books editor Margaret Clark, it was decided to scale back the number of books published not due to low sales or lack of interest in the prequel series, but because the televised series often conflicted with planned literary plot lines, or ended up employing certain plotlines before the books did entirely. The novel Surak's Soul by J.M. Dillard, for example, includes as a major plot point the aftermath of T'Pol killing a person during a mission. Before it was published, however, the TV series aired "The Seventh", an episode with a similar core plot point, which forced last-minute revisions to Dillard's book. Later, the novel Daedalus, by Dave Stern, included flashbacks to the early days of the NX Program which needed to be revised to avoid conflicting with the already-broadcast episode "First Flight", which also featured a look at the early days of the NX Program. Apparently, things were not expected to change during the fourth season; in a May 2005 posting at the TrekBBS, Clark explained that the lack of Enterprise novels was intended to avoid any further potential storytelling "land mines" since "Season Four kept doing stuff we wanted/planned to do".  With the series concluded, novelists were free to compose continuation novels without fear of being preempted or contradicted by the show, save for restrictions put in place by the finale episode. In May 2005, Clark announced plans for a new series of Enterprise novels that will constitute a "relaunch" similar to that of the literary continuation of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. Clark indicated that the books will cover events in the six years between "Terra Prime" and "These Are the Voyages...". An original novel, Last Full Measure, was released in April 2006. It takes place during the third season Xindi Arc and therefore is not considered part of the relaunch (Rosetta takes place during the fourth season and likewise is not considered a relaunch volume, either). However, Last Full Measure does contain a "framing sequence" that serves as a preview for the Relaunch. This framing sequence, which has proven controversial, suggests Trip Tucker did not die in the events of "These Are the Voyages..." and is alive in the early 23rd century, though the reason for this is not explained. According to Clark, again posting on the TrekBBS, dissatisfaction over the finale episode was the driving factor behind the continuation novels/relaunch including a story arc that suggests that Trip's death in the finale was not as it seemed. The first official relaunch novel, The Good That Men Do by Andy Mangels and Michael A. Martin, was published by Pocket Books on February 28, 2007, and gives a different perspective on the events shown in the final episode. This book also provides a lead-in to a series of books that will document the Earth-Romulan War referenced in the other Star Trek materials, but never developed during the television production of Enterprise. The relaunch novels' concept of Trip not actually dying in the final episode is based on an enigmatic moment in which Trip is supposedly near death and is being loaded into a medical chamber. He looks up at Archer, smiles and winks; Archer smiles back and also winks. The novels take this to mean the death of Trip was actually an elaborate ruse. The book reveals the events of the holo-program from "These Are the Voyages" were a deliberate lie, noting the inconsistencies in the episode as proof it is a fabrication; namely, that the pirates' warp 2 ship is somehow able catch up with Enterprise, and that there is a complete lack of MACOs and security teams when the pirates board the ship. It should be noted that the established criteria of Star Trek canon disqualifies novels from being official continuity; the decision to undo Trip's death in "These Are the Voyages" in the novels marks one of the rare occasions in which a licensed, expanded universe spin-off openly contradicted a major part of Trek continuity. Kobayashi Maru continues the story, with the Romulans maintaining their attacks against the newly formed Coalition of Planets, with Archer forced to maintain the charade of Trip's death- with only T'Pol, Reed and Phlox aware of his survival, as Trip's discovery that the Romulans were an offshoot of the Vulcans could have damaged the fledgling Coalition of Planets. Archer and crew appear to be the only ones who believe the Romulans are truly behind the attacks. The book culminates in Archer facing the reality and origin of the infamous Kobayashi Maru no-win scenario and the beginning of the Earth-Romulan War. The third installment of this series, The Romulan War: Beneath the Raptor's Wing, was released in October 2009. The novel explains the beginning of the Earth-Romulan war and the desperation of the Coalition of Planets. The fourth installment of the novel series is titled The Romulan War: To Brave the Storm, by Michael A. Martin and was announced in Star Trek Magazine issue 154, released in trade paperback format on October 25, 2011, and is the final novel in the Romulan War series, taking the story to the end of the Romulan War and the decommission of the Enterprise. In June 2013 a new novel series, Rise of the Federation, has begun, with the first book being A Choice of Futures, the second being Tower of Babel, and the final entry Uncertain Logic. In October 2004, coinciding with the start of the show's fourth season and months before the cancellation announcement, Paramount revealed plans to release the four seasons of Enterprise to DVD in North America during 2005. It has yet to be revealed whether this had any bearing on the decision to cancel the program since Voyager was offered to syndication midway through its run with no impact on its network status, and TNG, DS9, and Voyager all saw episodes released to home video during their runs, long before those series ended. It had also become commonplace for current series to have past seasons released to DVD. The first season DVD was released on May 3, 2005, ten days before the broadcast of the final episode. This release marked a couple of firsts for Star Trek TV series DVD releases. It was the first to include extensive deleted scenes (although footage cut from the premiere of Voyager had been included in a featurette previously), and it was the first to include an outtakes or blooper reel. The remaining seasons were released on July 26, September 27, and November 1. All the remaining sets also included deleted scenes and outtakes of varying length. The show was produced with HDTV in mind, and often aired in HD. All four seasons of the show are available in HD from the iTunes Store, and Season 1 was released on Blu-ray on March 26, 2013.  Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of Star Trek: Enterprise on UPN: UPN continued to air reruns of Enterprise for only a month after the series finale, with the last network-broadcast episode, "In a Mirror, Darkly" (Part II), airing on June 11, 2005this despite initial announcements that reruns would continue throughout the summer. With disruptions from local sports programming, many areas never had the opportunity to see all the episodes, which had been aired elsewhere. Syndicated rebroadcasts of the series began in North American markets on September 17, 2005. Broadcasts in high definition began on HDNet in late 2006 and continued through 2010. NBC Universal's Syfy ran the series from January 8, 2007, until July 2008 in four-episode blocks every Monday night. Since Sci Fi does not own HD airing rights to the series, it was shown in a 4:3 letterbox 16:9 format on both the SD & HD feeds. Syfy played reruns on weekdays at 5pm, though not in their original broadcast order. Enterprise was replaced by Stargate Atlantis in June 2009. In Canada it was aired on Space in 2010. It is aired on Star World on weekdays at 4:30&nbsp;p.m. in India. It is aired on MTV3 Scifi on weekdays starting from April 1, 2009 at 7:00&nbsp;p.m. in Finland and repeats on Saturdays. In October 2007, Virgin 1 in the UK announced it is "The new home of Star Trek" and aired Seasons 1 through 3. Season 4 was broadcast beginning April 30, 2010 at 9&nbsp;pm BST. It aired on Channel One (formerly Virgin 1) until the channel's demise. Episodes have been aired on the Sky Atlantic channel as of its February 2011 launch. From the end of June 2013 the entire run has been broadcast every week day, morning and evening, on Pick TV (Freeview channel 11). In Belgium and the Netherlands it is aired on the SciFi Channel (Benelux). In Australia it was aired on the local SciFi Channel in 16:9 on weekends. In Portugal it is aired on MOV every weekday at 19:10 and on Wednesdays at 21:40. In Japan it is aired on cable/satellite channel Super! Drama TV at various times. In July 2011, Netflix added the entire Star Trek: Enterprise series to its list of streaming shows, and in August 2011, Amazon added it to their Instant Video service. CBS has also made full episodes available for free streaming at cbs.com.      Season Ep # DVD Release Date Blu-ray Release Date Season 1 26 May 3, 2005 March 26, 2013 Season 2 26 July 26, 2005 August 20, 2013 Season 3 24 September 27, 2005 January 7, 2014 Season 4 22 November 1, 2005 April 29, 2014 Season Timeslot Season Premiere Season Finale TV Season Rank Viewers(in millions) 1st Wednesday 8:00&nbsp;p.m. September 26, 2001 May 22, 2002 2001–2002 5.9 2nd Wednesday 8:00&nbsp;p.m. September 18, 2002 May 21, 2003 2002–2003 3.94 3rd Wednesday 8:00&nbsp;p.m. September 10, 2003 May 26, 2004 2003–2004 3.3 4th Friday 9:00&nbsp;p.m. October 8, 2004 May 13, 2005 2004–2005 2.81 Star Trek: The Next Generation star LeVar Burton directed nine episodes TNG and Star Trek: Deep Space Nine star Michael Dorn directed one episode Star Trek: Voyager star Roxann Dawson directed ten episodes Voyager star Robert Duncan McNeill directed four episodes Jonathan Archer (Scott Bakula), captain of Earth's first Warp 5 starship, Enterprise. His father designed its engine, giving Archer a personal connection to his ship. Archer feels an immense amount of pressure concerning his mission, especially when hunting the Xindi to save Earth from destruction. Subsequently he is assigned Earth-local or diplomatic missions, and is later instrumental in founding the United Federation of Planets in 2161. After retiring as an Admiral with Starfleet, Archer serves as Ambassador to Andoria from 2169-2175, a Federation Councilman from 2175-2183, and then as the President of the United Federation of Planets from 2184-2192.  In the future historians would regard him as "the greatest explorer of the 22nd century." T'Pol (Jolene Blalock), science officer of the Enterprise, originally attached to the Enterprise by the Vulcan High Command to keep the humans out of trouble. She becomes loyal to Archer, leaving her position in the High Command to accompany him to find the Xindi, and later joins Starfleet. A version of T'Pol who was flung into the past gives birth to the first human/Vulcan hybrid. In later seasons, she forms a romantic relationship with Trip. She also has her DNA stolen, along with Trip's, to clone the first Vulcan/Human hybrid in the "normal" timeline, who died from complications arising from improper cloning techniques by the scientist who created her. Charles "Trip" Tucker III (Connor Trinneer), chief engineer of the Enterprise and long-time friend of Captain Archer. Started off conservatively modest, but becomes more seasoned as the series runs, losing a sister in the Xindi attack. In later seasons, forms a romantic relationship with T'Pol. He also has his DNA stolen, along with T'Pol's, to make the first Vulcan/Human hybrid in the "normal" timeline, but the hybrid dies from complications. Trip was killed in the series finale based 10 years in the future, saving the ship while it was under attack. Malcolm Reed (Dominic Keating), tactical officer of the Enterprise, also in charge of ship security. Reed comes from a long line of Royal Navy men, but joined Starfleet due to a fear of drowning. An extremely taciturn man; his own family, when asked, could not name his favorite food (pineapple). Hoshi Sato (Linda Park), communications officer of the Enterprise and a linguistic genius. Capable of learning alien languages extremely quickly through her ability to instantly recognize common patterns, Hoshi serves as the interpreter between the Enterprise crew and new alien species, even after the universal translator is on-line. She suffers anxiety about her place on board originally, but exposure to frequent danger combined with her abilities to get her shipmates out of danger with her linguistic abilities helps her realize her value to the ship.  In her late 30s, Hoshi developed the lingua code translation matrix that served as the basis for all Federation universal translators for centuries. Travis Mayweather (Anthony Montgomery), helmsman. A "space boomer", Travis is unique on Enterprise, having been born in space. Son of a freighter captain, Travis knows many of the alien species as well as locations that Earth traders frequent. As Enterprise moves farther and farther from Earth, his value in this area lessens, but his skill at the helm is constantly appreciated, making him the pilot of choice for many missions. Dr. Phlox (John Billingsley), chief medical officer of the Enterprise. A Denobulan member of the Inter-Species Medical Exchange, Phlox is brought aboard the Enterprise to care for the Klingon passenger during the ship's first mission. Afterward he volunteers to stay on, delighting in the experience of humanity taking its first steps onto the larger galactic stage. An exceedingly cheerful alien, Dr. Phlox uses many animals and various naturalistic cures in practicing medicine, in addition to the usual technological implements. Dr. Phlox also devised a method of eradicating Borg nanoprobes, but because the method is fatal to humans and nearly so to Denobulans, it has little use.  at Memory Beta  at CBS.com  on Hulu.com
