 The State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY-ESF, or ESF) is an American, specialized, doctoral-granting institution based in Syracuse, New York. It is immediately adjacent to Syracuse University, within which it was founded, and with whom it maintains a special relationship. ESF is a part of the State University of New York (SUNY) system. ESF also operates facilities in the Adirondack Park (including the Ranger School in Wanakena), the Thousand Islands, elsewhere in central New York, and Costa Rica. The College's curricula focus on the understanding, management and sustainability of the environment and natural resources. ESF is considered by Peterson's to be the premier college in the U.S. for the study of environmental and natural sciences, design, engineering, policy and management of natural resources and the environment. The college has expanded its initial emphasis on forestry to include professional education in environmental science, landscape architecture, environmental studies, and engineering in addition to distinguished programs in the biological and physical sciences. ESF is ranked at 37th in the 2016 US News & World Report rankings of the top public national universities.USN&WR website. It commemorated its centennial in 2011. The New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University was established in 1911 through a bill signed by New York Governor John Alden Dix. The previous year, Governor Hughes had vetoed a bill authorizing such a college.Rodgers, A.D. Liberty Hyde Bailey: A Story of American Plant Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1949. Both bills followed the state's defunding, in 1903, of the New York State College of Forestry at Cornell.http://foresthistory.org/Publications/FHT/FHT1998/cornell.pdf  Originally a unit of Syracuse University, in 1913, the College was made a separate, legal entity. Syracuse native and constitutional lawyer Louis Marshall, with a summer residence at Knollwood Club on Saranac Lake and a prime mover for the establishment of the Adirondack and Catskill Forest Preserve (New York), became a Syracuse University Trustee in 1910. He confided in Chancellor James R. Day his desire to have an agricultural and forestry school at the University, and by 1911 his efforts resulted in a New York State bill to fund the project: the aforementioned appropriation bill signed by Governor Dix. Marshall was elected president of the college's Board of Trustees at its first meeting, in 1911; at the time of his death, eighteen years later, he was still president of the Board.Louis Marshall,"Champion of Liberty", selected papers and addresses(in 2 volumes), edited by Charles Reznikoff,1957. Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia,PA. The first dean of the College was William L. Bray, a Ph.D., graduate from the University of Chicago, botanist, plant ecologist, biogeographer and Professor of Botany at Syracuse University. In 1907 he was made head of the botany department at Syracuse, and in 1908 he started teaching a forestry course in the basement of Lyman Hall. Bray was an associate of Gifford Pinchot, who was the first Chief of the United States Forest Service."The Knothole: Student Life and Government". April 4, 2008. Volume 61 Issue 9. Retrieved on October 23, 2009. In 1911, in addition to assuming the deanship of forestry, Bray organized the Agricultural Division at Syracuse University. He remained at Syracuse until 1943 as chair of botany and Dean of the Syracuse Graduate School."Chrono-Biographical Sketch: William Bray". A Biographical History of Biogeography by Charles H. Smith, Ph.D., Joshua Woleben, and Carubie Rodgers/ Retrieved on October 23, 2009. In 1915, the same year that Dr. Bray published The Development of the Vegetation of New York State, he became one of the founding members, along with Raphael Zon and Yale School of Forestry's second dean, James W. Toumey, of the Ecological Society of America.http://esa.org/history/ In 1950, the 1917 "activist wing" of that Society formed today's The Nature Conservancy. Most of the professors, in the early years of the College of Forestry at Syracuse and the Department of Forestry at Cornell's New York State College of Agriculture were educated in forestry at the Yale School of Forestry. The forestry students at Syracuse but not at Cornell were referred to as "stumpies" by their classmates. Fifty-two students were enrolled in the school's first year, the first 11 graduating two years later, in 1913.SUNY-ESF. 2008. Alumni Directory. 100th Anniversary Edition. Syracuse, NY, p. 455. One of the hallmarks of the College, its research, dates back to 1912, beginning with a study on what firms were using lumber in the state of New York as well as the wood species and quantities. In 1912, the College opened its Ranger School in Wanakena, New York, in the Adirondacks. The College began enrolling women as early as 1915, but the first women to complete their degrees—one majoring in landscape engineering and two in pulp and paper—graduated in the late 1940s."A History of ESF". SUNY-ESF website. Retrieved on October 26, 2009. In January 1930, Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt, recommending an allocation of $600,000 towards construction of the college's second building, in honor of Louis Marshall, recently deceased, noted that: "under [Marshall's] leadership and the leadership of its late dean, Franklin Moon, the School of Forestry made giant strides until it became recognized as the premier institution of its kind in the United States".Adler, Cyrus, "Louis Marshall: A Biographical Sketch", American Jewish Year Book, 1930-31, pp. 54-55 The cornerstone of Louis Marshall Memorial Hall was laid in 1931 by former Governor and presidential candidate Alfred E. Smith who was elected to assume the presidency of the college's Board of Trustees. With the formation of the State University of New York (SUNY) in 1948, the College became recognized as a specialized college within the SUNY system, and its name was changed to State University College of Forestry at Syracuse University. In 1972, the College's name was changed yet again to State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry. Unlike other state-supported degree-granting institutions which had been created at private institutions in New York State, the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University was an autonomous institution not administratively part of Syracuse University. In 2000, SUNY System Administration established ESF's "primacy" among the 64 SUNY campuses and contract colleges for development of new undergraduate degree programs in Environmental Science and Environmental Studies. ESF's main campus, located in Syracuse, New York, is where most academic and administrative activity takes place. The campus is made up of nine main buildings:  Bray Hall, Marshall Hall, Illick Hall, and Moon Library border the quad. Other buildings on the Syracuse campus include one for maintenance and operations, a garage, and a greenhouse converted to office space. Among planned new buildings is a research support facility. The historic Robin Hood Oak (photo below) is located behind Bray Hall. The tree is said to have grown from an acorn brought back by a faculty member from the Sherwood Forest in England. It was the first tree listed on the National Registrar of Historic Trees in the United States. Baker Laboratory Jahn Laboratory Marshall Hall Moon Library Illick Hall Gateway Center Students in the forest and natural resources management curriculum may spend an academic year (48 credits) or summer at the Ranger School, in Wanakena, New York, earning an Associate of Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree in forest technology, surveying, or environmental and natural resources conservation.http://www.esf.edu/fnrm/brochures/AASbrochure.pdf The campus, established in 1912,"Ranger School Celebrates Its 100th," SUNY-ESF, August 6, 2012. Accessed: August 6, 2012. is situated on the east branch of the Oswegatchie River that flows into Cranberry Lake, in the northwestern part of the Adirondack Park. It includes the  James F. Dubuar Memorial Forest, named after a former director of the Ranger School."James F. Dubuar Forest," Adirondack North Country Association, 2011. Accessed: June 24, 2012. The ESF mission statement is "to advance knowledge and skills and to promote the leadership necessary for the stewardship of both the natural and designed environments.""ESF Mission & Vision". SUNY-ESF website. Retrieved on October 23, 2009. ESF is a "specialized institution" of the State University of New York, meaning that curricula focus primarily on one field, the College's being environmental management and stewardship. Students may supplement their education with courses taken at Syracuse University. ESF has academic departments in the fields of chemistry; environmental and forest biology; environmental resources engineering; environmental studies; forest and natural resources management; landscape architecture; and paper and bioprocess engineering. Environmental science programs offer students integrative degrees across the natural sciences. ESF is considered a very competitive school. Admission is selective; however, a 39.7 percent acceptance for fall 2011 increased to 50.5 percent in fall 2014 as reported by U.S. News & World Report.Herrigan, Matt, "Syracuse University, SUNY ESF rank among best schools for B students," Syracuse.com, September 18, 2012. Accessed: September 21, 2012. ESF is ranked at 37th in the 2016 US News & World Report rankings of the top public national universities.USN&WR website. Accessed: September 11, 2014. Furthermore, ESF is ranked 89th in the 2016 US News & World Report list of the best National Universities (both public and private).No. 30 on U.S. News List of Top Public Universities," SUNY-ESF, September 10, 2013. Accessed: September 11, 2014.USN&WR website. Accessed: September 11, 2013. The Washington Monthly College Guide ranked ESF No. 49 among the nation's top service-oriented colleges and universities for 2012 (and 6th in "community service participation and hours served")."National University Service Rankings (2012)," Washington Monthly. Accessed: September 22, 2012.   Forbes Magazine ranked SUNY-ESF #54 in its listing of “America’s Best College Buys” for 2012."The Forbes Top 100 Best Buy Colleges 2012". Accessed: September 10, 2012 Forbes.com has also ranked SUNY-ESF at No. 3 on its 2010 list of the 20 best colleges for women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). SUNY-ESF is listed at No. 2, ahead of top programs like Duke, Cornell and Yale, among the best college environmental programs in the nation by Treehugger.com, a website devoted to sustainability and environmental news."Rankings and Ratings," SUNY-ESF. Accessed: September 10, 2012. In 2007, DesignIntelligence magazine ranked ESF's undergraduate and graduate programs in "Landscape Architecture", respectively at No. 12 and No. 9 in the United States. The Online College Database ranked SUNY-ESF at No. 6 on its list of "50 Colleges Committed to Saving the Planet" for 2013. The ranking relates in part to one of the school's newest programs, Sustainable Energy Management. Launched in 2013, the program focuses on energy markets, management, and resources. Global issues such as responsible energy use and development of sustainable energy sources are critical focal points in the STEM major. The first research report published in 1913 by the College of Forestry was the result of the above noted USDA Forest Service supported study of the wood-using industries of New York State. Since that time, the research initiatives of the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY-ESF) have expanded greatly as both faculty and students conduct pioneering studies, many with a global reach. SUNY-ESF researchers delve into topics well beyond the boundaries of central New York. Recent foreign sites of research interest included Madagascar, the Amazon floodplains, Mongolia and the Galapagos Islands just to name a few. Vermont and the Sierra Nevada’s are other locales within the US where recent research has focused. Current research efforts include the Willow Biomass Project and the American Chestnut Research and Restoration Project. Many students identify themselves as a "Stumpy" (or "Stumpie"). The nickname was given to students by their neighbors at Syracuse University, probably in the 1920s, and most-likely refers to forestry "stump jumpers". Although originally used as an insult, today, most students embrace the nickname with pride. Students at the Syracuse campus enjoy many activities on and off campus. There are a number of student clubs and organizations at ESF, including the Undergraduate Student Association, Graduate Student Association, Woodsmen Team, Bob Marshall Club, Alpha Xi Sigma Honor Society,"Alpha Xi Sigma Honor Society," SUNY-ESF website. Accessed: August 18, 2013. Soccer Club, Sigma Lambda Alpha honor society, The Knothole (weekly newspaper), Papyrus Club, The Empire Forester (yearbook), Landscape Architecture Club (formally the Mollet Club), Forest Engineers Club, Environmental Studies Student Organization, Habitat for Humanity, Ecologue (yearly journal), the Bioethics Society, Green Campus Initiative, Baobab Society, and the Sustainable Energy Club. Wanakena students have their own woodsmen and ice hockey teams. A number of professional organizations are also open to student membership, including the Society of American Foresters, The Wildlife Society, Conservation Biology club, American Fisheries Association, and the (currently defunct) American Water Resources Association. ESF has an agreement with adjacent Syracuse University that allows ESF students to enjoy many amenities offered by SU. ESF students take courses at their sister institution, can apply for admission to concurrent degree and joint certificate programs, and may join any SU organization except for NCAA sports teams. SU students are also welcome to enroll in ESF classes. Because of this, students feel a certain degree of integration with the Syracuse University community. Every May, ESF holds a joint commencement ceremony with Syracuse University in the Carrier Dome. ESF's baccalaureate diplomas bear the seals of both the State University of New York and Syracuse University. Students also enjoy a variety of shops, restaurants, museums, and theaters in Syracuse, and nearby Marshall Street and Westcott Street. ESF has launched several programs, both within the confines of campus and other locations to reduce its carbon emissions. The Gateway Center utilizes sustainable energy resources to generate power and heat utilized across the campus. The building includes a state-of-the-art, combined heat-and-power (CHP) system, producing 65% of campus heating needs along with 20% of its electrical needs. The CHP system uses biomass to drive a steam turbine and produce electricity, while natural gas is used for steam heating along with additional electricity. It has been estimated this building alone is responsible for reducing ESF's carbon footprint by 22%.  Increased global awareness of global warming and reduced nonrenewable resources has driven ESF to invest in biomass.  Biomass is a renewable resource that draws light energy, carbon dioxide, and water from the environment; in return oxygen is released. It can be harvested without negatively affecting the environment.  For this reason, SUNY-ESF has launched a program to grow its own biomass, known as the Willow Biomass Project. Benefits of woody willow include, high yields and fast growth times, quick re-sprouting,and high heat energy is produced when burned. Woody willow also increases habitat diversity significantly contributes to carbon neutrality. The Gateway Center was one of the final stages in the school's Climate Action Plan, that encompasses the vision of carbon neutrality and reduced fossil fuel dependence by 2015. Currently, the school rests in Phase III of the program and is on track to reach its goal. Included in Phase III is the opening of The Gateway Center, retrofits to Illick Hall, and rooftop greenhouse replacement. One other advancement towards carbon neutrality can be seen on top of the campus's buildings. Rooftop gardens provide reduced energy consumption and water runoff. Shrubbery, soil thickness, and moisture content all can contribute to increased energy savings. Gateway and other buildings on campus utilize rooftop gardens to reduce energy consumption and water runoff. SUNY-ESF is affiliated with the United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA), fielding six teams in four sports: As of Fall 2015, ESF athletics is a member of the Hudson Valley Intercollegiate Athletic Conference."HVIAC Members," HVIAC website. Accessed: October 1, 2015. The school's men's cross-country team are three-time USCAA national champions 2011-2013. The women's cross-country team came in second or third in the same tournaments, respectively.SUNY-ESF, "Mighty Oaks Men Win National Cross-Country Championship," November 11, 2011. Accessed: May 18, 2012."Mighty Oaks Men Run to Second National Championship," November 9, 2012. Accessed: November 13, 2012."Mighty Oaks Men’s Cross Country Team Are Third-time National Champs," ESF website. Accessed: December 14, 2013. The men's soccer team was invited to the 2012 USCAA National Championship Tournament in Asheville, North Carolina, making it to the semifinals."Mighty Oaks Fall in Soccer Semifinal," November 2, 2012. Accessed: November 13, 2012. ESF has a long tradition of competing in intercollegiate woodsman competitions in the northeastern US and eastern Canada. The team came in first in both the men's and women's divisions of the northeastern US and Canadian 2012 spring meet.SUNY-ESF, "Men’s, Women’s Teams Win Timber Sports Spring Meet". Accessed: May 18, 2012. Students at the SUNY-ESF Ranger School, in Wanakena, compete as the Blue Ox Woodsmen team."Blue Ox News," Newsletter, Ranger School Alumni Association, Winter 2011-12. Accessed August 18, 2013. In addition to the intercollegiate USCAA and woodsman teams, ESF students participate on club sports teams at both ESF and Syracuse University, including ESF's competitive bass fishing team,Alwis, Anjali. (2014, September 30). "SUNY-ESF fishing team founded by student attains success in first year," Daily Orange. Accessed: October 1, 2014. and SU's quidditch team."ESF Students Score with SU Quidditch Team," ESF website. Accessed: December 11, 2013."Quidditch Tournament Benefits Local Charities," SUNY-ESF website. Accessed: April 18, 2015. Students at the Ranger School participate in the Ranger School Hockey Club."The Ranger School Hockey Club," SUNY-ESF website. Accessed: August 18, 2013. In one notable part of the College's history, Laurie D. Cox, professor of Landscape Architecture, was responsible for establishing Syracuse University's renowned lacrosse program in 1916, including players from the New York State College of Forestry. ESF was founded in 1911 as the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University, under the leadership of Syracuse University Trustee Louis Marshall, with the active support of Syracuse University Chancellor Day. Its founding followed several years after the cessation of state funding to the earlier New York State College of Forestry at Cornell.Education & Agriculture, A History of the NYS College of Agriculture at Cornell University, 1963, by Gould P. Colman, page 161, Cornell University Press ESF is an autonomous institution, administratively separate from Syracuse University, while some resources, facilities and infrastructure are shared. The two schools share a common Schedule of Classes; students may take courses at both institutions, and baccalaureate diplomas from ESF bear the Syracuse University seal along with that of the State University of New York. A number of concurrent degree programs and certificates are offered between the schools. ESF receives an annual appropriation as part of the SUNY budget and the state builds and maintains all of the college's educational facilities. The state has somewhat similar financial and working relationships with five statutory colleges that are at Alfred University and Cornell University, although unlike ESF, these statutory institutions are legally and technically part of their respective host institutions and are administered by them as well. ESF faculty, students, and students' families join those from Syracuse University (SU) in a joint convocation ceremony at the beginning of the academic year in August and combined commencement exercises in May. ESF and SU students share access to library resources, recreational facilities, student clubs, and activities at both institutions, except for the schools' intercollegiate athletics teams, affiliated with the USCAA and NCAA, respectively. The best known tradition among ESF students is that walking across the quad is shunned. The tradition, which dates back to at least the early 1960s, is intended to inhibit tracks from being worn into the lawn. Hecklers have been known to yell and even tackle people walking across the quad. However, other activities such as frisbee and soccer playing are encouraged on the Quad. Eustace B. Nifkin, ESF's previous mascot, is an unofficial student. He first appeared in the 1940s after a group of students summering in the Adirondacks thought him up. Ever since, he has appeared on class rosters, written articles for The Knothole, and sent mail to the College from around the world. He has a girlfriend, the lesser-known Elsa S. Freeborn. SUNY granted him a bachelor's degree in 1972. The Alumni Lounge in Marshall Hall is dedicated to Nifkin. Another well known legend is that of Chainer or Chainsaw who supposedly graduated in 1993. Traditional events include: More than 18,000 have graduated from ESF since its founding in 1911. The college's Alumni Association was founded fourteen years later, in 1925."Alumni". SUNY-ESF Alumni website. Retrieved on October 23, 2009. Notable alumni include: The accomplishments of additional outstanding ESF alumni are documented at: http://www.esf.edu/success/alumni/default.htm. From soon after its founding, ESF affiliated individuals have been responsible for establishing and leading prominent scientific and advocacy organizations around the world focused on the environment. Others have provided leadership to governmental environmental agencies.      Baker Laboratory: Named after Hugh P. Baker, Dean of the College from 1912–1920 and again 1930-33. The building is the location of several computer clusters and auditorium-style classrooms. It is home to the Department of Environmental Resources Engineering and the Division of Environmental Science. The building underwent a $37 million overhaul in the early 2000s, providing updated space for the Tropical Timber Information Center and the Nelson C. Brown Center for Ultrastructure Studies. Baker Lab is the site of ESF's NASA-affiliated Research Center. Baker Laboratory houses two multimedia lecture halls, a "smart" classroom outfitted for computer use and distance learning, and two construction management and planning studios. It also has a full-scale laboratory for materials science testing, including a modern dry kiln, a wood identification laboratory, shop facilities (including portable sawmill) and wood preservation laboratory."ESF's Baker Laboratory Revamped for Engineering". ESF Office of Communications. Retrieved on October 23, 2009. Bray Hall: The building is the oldest on campus, completed in 1917, the largest building devoted to Forestry at the time. It is named after William L. Bray, a founder of the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University and its first Dean, 1911-12. It is the location of most administrative offices and the Department of Forest and Natural Resources Management. The State University Police department is located in the basement. Gateway Center: The campus' newest building, opened in March 2013, "sets a new standard for LEED buildings, producing more renewable energy than it consumes," according to Cornelius B. Murphy, Jr. The building is "designed to achieve LEED Platinum Certification"."Gateway Building" (with webcam), SUNY-ESF. Accessed: June 24, 2012. The ESF College Bookstore, Trailhead Cafe, and Office of Admissions are located in the Gateway Center."The Gateway Center", ESF website. Accessed: October 3, 2015. Illick Hall: The building was completed in 1968, and is home to the Department of Environmental and Forest Biology. It is named after Joseph S. Illick, a dean of the State University College of Forestry at Syracuse University. There is a large lecture hall (Illick 5) on the ground floor. Several greenhouses are located on the fifth floor. The Roosevelt Wildlife Museum is also located in the building. Jahn Laboratory: Named after Edwin C. Jahn, former head of the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University. The building was completed in 1997. Home to the Department of Chemistry. Marshall Hall: Named after Louis Marshall, one of the founders of the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University. Home to the Landscape Architecture and Environmental Studies departments. The Alumni (Nifkin) Lounge, Tree House (snack bar) and Marshall Auditorium are located within. Twin brass plaques in the entryway commemorate the contributions of Marshall and his son, alumnus Bob Marshall. Moon Library: Dedicated to F. Franklin Moon, an early dean of the College. Completed in 1968, along with Illick Hall. A computer cluster and student lounge are located in the basement. Walters Hall: Named after J. Henry Walters, who served on the College's Board of Trustees. Completed in 1969. Home to the Department of Paper and Bioprocess Engineering. The pilot plant in the building includes two paper machines and wood-to-ethanol processing equipment. Centennial Hall: Named in commemoration of ESF's 100th anniversary, Centennial Hall is the college's on-campus student dormitory. It is presently capable of accommodating 280-300 freshman (in double or triple studio rooms with private bath), 116 upperclassmen (in single bedroom suits with private bath), and an additional 56 upperclassmen (in 4-bedroom, 2-bath apartments). A $31 million project, Centennial Hall opened in fall 2011. Cranberry Lake: The College's environmental and forest biology summer field program is located at the Cranberry Lake Biological Station, on Cranberry Lake in the Adirondack Park. Newcomb: The Adirondack Ecological Center and Huntington Wildlife Forest, a  field station in the central Adirondack Mountains, are located near Newcomb, New York."Adirondack Ecological Center". SUNY-ESF website. Retrieved on October 23, 2009. The site includes the Arbutus Great Camp, bunkhouses, and a dining center, among other facilities. Syracuse: The Forest Experimental Station is located in the City of Syracuse. Thousand Islands: The Thousand Islands Biological Station and Ellis International Laboratory are situated in the Thousand Islands, New York. Tully: The Svend O. Heiberg Memorial Forest and Genetic Field Station are located near Tully, New York. Warrensburg: The Charles Lathrop Pack Demonstration Forest and NYS Department of Environmental Conservation's Environmental Education Camp, are located near Warrensburg, New York. The Arturo and Maria Sundt Field Station, ESF's first international field station, is being used for both research and teaching. A former farm, it is located near the town of Coyolito, in the province of Guanacaste, Costa Rica, "about a mile from the Gulf of Nicoya on [the country's] west coast." Cross-country, men's & women's Golf, men's Soccer, men's and women's Basketball, men's Earth Week events Spring Banquet December Soiree Friends and Family BBQ Coffee Haus Festival of Places Paper run Donut Hours Waste Audit Free Movies Nights Insomniacs Woodsmen Team (Forestry Club) SUNY ESF Day of Service Reginald E. Balch, MS '28, Canadian photographer and scientist Bruce C. Bongarten, BS '73, former Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, SUNY-ESF Joseph Buongiorno, MS '69, Class of 1933 Bascom Professor of Forest Economics, University of Wisconsin-Madison Roger H.C. Donlon, first man to receive the Medal of Honor in Vietnam Christopher Dunn, BS '76, Director of Cornell Plantationshttp://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/2014/02/plantations-appoints-botanist-hawaii-director Ronald J. Eby, BS '69, PhD '74, National Medal of Technology award, 2007 for his work in pediatric medicine. A polysaccharide / carbohydrate chemist whose career was devoted to vaccine development. Frank Edwin Egler, plant ecologist and pioneer in the study of vegetation science Patrick Flood, BS '74, Maine state legislator Sol Feinstone, '15, historian, businessman, conservationist Jean Fréchet, MS '69, PhD'71, Henry Rapoport Chair of Organic Chemistry and Professor of Chemical Engineering, UC Berkeley - Dendritic Polymers: Dendrimers; 2013 Japan Prize LaureateTobin, Dave. (2013, January 30). "SUNY ESF alumnus Jean Fréchet wins Japan Prize," Syracuse.com. Accessed: January 31, 2013.His PhD student, Will Dichtel professor of chemistry at Cornell, earns MacArthur 'Genius Award' 9/2015http://news.cornell.edu/stories/2015/09/chemist-will-dichtel-earns-macarthur-genius-award  Delfin Ganapin, Jr., PhD '87, Global Manager, Global Environmental Facility Small Grants Program, United Nations Development Program"Delfin Ganapin Jr.", SUNY-ESF. Accessed: August 3, 2012. Stephen Kay, BLA '73, golf course architect Edwin Ketchledge, BS '49, Distinguished Teaching Professor of Botany and Dendrology, SUNY-ESF Robin W. Kimmerer, BS '75, author of Gathering Moss: A Natural and Cultural History of Mosses; Professor of Biology and Director, Center for Native Peoples, SUNY-ESF Michael Kudish, PhD '71, author, historian, forester and professor Raymond (Ray) Leonard, Ph.D., skipper of the ill fated sailboat S. V. Satori  made famous in the book and movie, The Perfect Storm; a pioneering forest ecologist at Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in W. Thornton, NH.http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/news-press/obituary.aspx?n=raymond-leonard&pid=174087523 Moshe Levy, PhD '55, professor of chemistry, discoverer of living polymerization, and solar energy researcher Bob Marshall, BS '24, forester, writer and wilderness activist Joe Martens, MS '81, Commissioner, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation"Joe Martens: Commissioner of the New York Department of Environmental Conservation," SUNY-ESF, n.d. Accessed: January 15, 2013. Donald E. Moore III, BS, PhD, animal behaviorist, zoo-based wildlife biologist, Associate Director of Animal Care Sciences, Smithsonian National Zoo, Washington, DC"Don Moore," Smithsonian National Zoological Park. Accessed: March 11, 2013. James D. Morrissey, BS '58, "first American to climb the east face of Mt. Everest"SUNY-ESF, "ESF Facts and Stats." Accessed: May 18, 2012. Clarence Petty, BS '30, forest ranger, conservationist and outdoorsman Harry Frederick Recher, ornithologist Bruce Shelley, BS '70, computer game designer Sgt. William Shemin, Ranger School 1914, BS after the war, Medal of Honor recipient for bravery in World War Ihttp://www.cnn.com/2015/05/15/politics/medal-of-honor/http://www.syracuse.com/sports/index.ssf/2015/06/almost_100_years_after_world_war_i_william_shemins_medal_of_honor_reunites_two_families.html#incart_river Earl Lewis Stone, Jr., BS '38, In 1948, he became the first endowed Charles Lathrop Pack Professor of forest soils at Cornell University. Retired 1979 Lissa Widdoff, BS '79, Executive Director, Robert and Patricia Switzer Foundation[ ]  Adirondack Council – Clarence Petty, '30, co-founder, 1975, director Adirondack Park Agency – Ross S. Whaley, former ESF President, chair, 2003–07 Association for the Protection of the Adirondacks – Louis Marshall, President, ESF Board of Trustees, trustee;Graham, Frank Jr. 1978. The Adirondack Park: A Political History. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, p. 147 Paul Schaefer, Trustee and V.P. for 50 years Ecological Society of America – Dean William L. Bray, and Professor Charles C. Adams, co-founders, 1915 Finger Lakes Land Trust – Summer 2011: Cornelius B. Murphy, Jr. named to Advisory Council along with Lynn Leopold, widow of A. Carl Leopold, Founding Presidenthttp://fllt.org/getres.php?id=377 National Parks Association – Bob Marshall, '24, board member, 1930sSutter, Paul S. 2002. Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern Wilderness Movement. Seattle: University of Washington Press, p. 231 The Nature Conservancy – Dean William L. Bray, co-founder, 1950 Onondaga Environmental Institute — Ed Michalenko, PhD '91, Presidenthttp://www.onondagaenvironmentalinstitute.org/ Society of American Foresters – Ross S. Whaley, former ESF President, president, 1991"SAF Presidents", 5/14/2009. Available: http://www.safnet.org/about/presidents.pdf. Accessed November 15, 2009. Taiwan Environmental Action Network – Wen-ling Tu, MS '96, co-founder Union of Concerned Scientists – Howard "Bud" Ris, Jr., MLA '75, executive director, president, 1984-2003SUNY-ESF, "Howard (Bud) Ris", n.d. Available: http://www.esf.edu/success/ris.htm. Accessed November 15, 2009.The Catalyst, "Howard's End", 2(2), Fall 2003, pp. 2-4, 19. Available: http://www.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/catalyst/catalyst-spring04.pdf. United States Society for Ecological Economics – Dr. Karin Limburg, ESF faculty member, president, 2006–07; Dr. Valerie Luzadis, ESF faculty member, president, 2012-14"USSEE Board of Directors," ussee.org. Accessed: July 15, 2013. The Wilderness Society – Bob Marshall, '24, co-founder, 1935Shabecoff, Philip. 2003. A Fierce Green Fire: The American Environmental Movement. Washington: Island Press, p. 81 Adirondack Park Agency visitor interpretive centers History of the New York State College of Forestry List of heads of the New York State College of Forestry State University of New York Syracuse University François André Michaux laid the foundation for American forestry with his work, The North American Sylva { akin to John James Audubon "The Birds of America"}NYPL Digital Gallery | Results starting in 1811. Adirondack Ecological Center Cranberry Lake Biological Station ESF Annual Report ESF Athletics ESF Centennial Celebration Svend O. Heiberg Memorial Forest and Tully Field Station Thousand Islands Biological Station
