   A state religion (also called an established religion, state church, established church, or official religion) is a religious body or creed officially endorsed by the state. A state with an official religion, while not secular, is not necessarily a theocracy – a country whose rulers have in their hands both secular and spiritual authority. Official religions have been known throughout human history in almost all types of cultures. They were adopted by most ancient states, both monoethnic and polyethnic, and observing them was a requirement made to all citizens, and especially public officials. Official religions justified and reinforced the type of government existing in a society. Sanctifying it as the most, or the only, correct (divine) one, they often put forward and/or supported ideas of its expansion to other lands, whether the latter already follow the same religion or, sometimes. not. As the term church is typically applied to a Christian place of worship and organizations incorporating such ones, the term state church is associated with Christianity, historically the state church of the Roman Empire in the last centuries of the Empire's existence, and is sometimes used to denote a specific modern national branch of Christianity. Closely related to state churches are what sociologists call ecclesiae, though the two are slightly different. State religions are official or government-sanctioned establishments of a religion, but neither does the state need be under the control of the church (as in a theocracy), nor is the state-sanctioned church necessarily under the control of the state. The institution of state-sponsored religious cults is ancient, reaching into the Ancient Near East and prehistory. The relation of religious cult and the state was discussed by Varro, under the term of theologia civilis ("civic theology"). The first state-sponsored Christian church was the Armenian Apostolic Church, established in 301 AD. The Journal of Ecclesiastical History&nbsp;– Page 268 by Cambridge University Press, Gale Group, C.W. Dugmore In the Near East and Middle East, many states with mostly Islamic population have Islam as their state religion in its Shiite or Sunnite variety, though the degree of religious restrictions on the citizen's everyday life varies. On the one hand, rulers of Saudi Arabia join secular and religious power in their hands, and Iran's secular presidents since the revolution of 1979 are supposed to follow decisions of religious authorities. Turkey, which also has mostly Muslim population, after its 1920s revolution became a secular country, though unlike Russian revolution of the same decade, it did not made the country atheistic. The degree of strictness of official religions in modern world may vary considerably. Thus, while the monarch of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is still officially the head of the state church (in England only, because Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are legally disestablished Anglican provinces and appoint their own bishops), everyday life of ordinary British citizens is not in total strict religious subordination and dependence on the state church, while in typical theocratical states it usually is. Israel is the only modern state officially defining itself as a Jewish state, yet it has a republican form of government. The degree and nature of state backing for denomination or creed designated as a state religion can vary. It can range from mere endorsement (with or without financial support) with freedom for other faiths to practice, to prohibiting any competing religious body from operating and to persecuting the followers of other sects. In Europe, competition between Catholic and Protestant denominations for state sponsorship in the 16th century evolved the principle cuius regio eius religio ("states follow the religion of the ruler") embodied in the text of the treaty that marked the Peace of Augsburg, 1555. In England, Henry VIII broke with Rome in 1534, being declared the "Supreme Head on earth of the Church of England",The headship was administrative and jurisdictional but did not include the potestas ordinis (the right to preach, ordain, administer the sacraments and rites of the Church which were reserved to the clergy) &ndash;Bray, Gerald. Documents of the English Reformation James Clarke & Cº(1994), p.114 the official religion of England continued to be "Catholicism without the Pope" until after his death in 1547,Neill, Stephen. Anglicanism Penguin (1960), p.61 while in Scotland the Church of Scotland opposed the religion of the ruler. In some cases, an administrative region may sponsor and fund a set of religious denominations; such is the case in Alsace-Moselle in France under its local law, following the pre-1905 French concordatry legal system and patterns in Germany.The concerned religious communities are the dioceses of Metz and of Strasbourg, the Lutheran EPCAAL and the Reformed EPRAL and the three Israelite consistories in Colmar, Metz and Strasbourg. In some communist states, notably in North Korea and Cuba, the state sponsors religious organizations, and activities outside those state-sponsored religious organizations are met with various degrees of official disapproval. In these cases, state religions are widely seen as efforts by the state to prevent alternate sources of authority. There is also a difference between a "state church" and the broader term of "state religion". A "state church" is a state religion created by a state for use exclusively by that state. An example of a "state religion" that's not also a "state church", is Roman Catholicism in Costa Rica which was accepted as the state religion in the 1949 Constitution, despite the lack of a national church. In the case of a "state church", the state has absolute control over the church, but in the case of a "state religion", the church is ruled by an exterior body (in the case of Catholicism, the Vatican has control over the church). In either case, the official state religion has some influence over the ruling of the state. As of 2012, there are only seven state churches left, as most countries which once featured state churches have separated the church from their government. Disestablishment is the process of repealing a church's status as an organ of the state. Opponents of disestablishment are known as antidisestablishmentarians. Currently, the following religions have been established as state religions in some countries. All are versions of Christianity, Islam or Buddhism. The following states recognize some form of Christianity as their state or official religion (by denomination): Jurisdictions where Roman Catholicism has been established as a state or official religion: Jurisdictions that give constitutional privileges to Roman Catholicism without establishing it as the state religion: In the 19th century, there was a campaign by Liberals, dissenters and nonconformists to disestablish the Church of England. The campaign for disestablishment was revived in the 20th century when Parliament rejected the 1928 revision of the Book of Common Prayer, leading to calls for separation of church and state to prevent political interference in matters of worship. Nevertheless, the Church of England remained the state church. Jurisdictions where a Lutheran church has been established as a state religion include the Nordic countries. In 1928, Queen Salote Tupou III, who was a member of the church, established the Free Wesleyan Church as the state religion of Tonga. The chief pastor of the Free Wesleyan Church serves as the representative of the people of Tonga and of the Church at the coronation of a King or Queen of Tonga where he anoints and crowns the Monarch. In Opposition to the establishment of the Free Wesleyan Church as a state religion, the Church of Tonga separated from the Free Wesleyan Church in 1928.   Many Muslim-majority countries have constitutionally established Islam, or a specific form of it, as a state religion. Proselytism (converting people to another religion) is often illegal. States which define Islam as the state religion, but do not specify either Sunni or Shia. Governments where Buddhism, either a specific form of, or the whole, has been established as an official religion: Article 3, Spiritual Heritage # Buddhism is the spiritual heritage of Bhutan, which promotes the principles and values of peace, non-violence, compassion and tolerance. # The Druk Gyalpo is the protector of all religions in Bhutan. # It shall be the responsibility of religious institutions and personalities to promote the spiritual heritage of the country while also ensuring that religion remains separate from politics in Bhutan. Religious institutions and personalities shall remain above politics. # The Druk Gyalpo shall, on the recommendation of the Five Lopons, appoint a learned and respected monk ordained in accordance with the Druk-lu, blessed with the nine qualities of a spiritual master and accomplished in ked-dzog, as the Je Khenpo. # His Holiness the Je Khenpo shall, on the recommendation of the Dratshang Lhentshog, appoint monks blessed with the nine qualities of a spiritual master and accomplished in ked-dzog as the Five Lopons. # The members of the Dratshang Lhentshog shall comprise:(a) The Je Khenpo as Chairman;(b) The Five Lopons of the Zhung Dratshang; and(c) The Secretary of the Dratshang Lhentshog who is a civil servant. # The Zhung Dratshang and Rabdeys shall continue to receive adequate funds and other facilities from the State.  Israel is defined in several of its laws as a "Jewish and democratic state" (medina yehudit ve-demokratit). However, the term "Jewish" is a polyseme that can describe the Jewish people as both an ethnic or a religious group. The debate about the meaning of the term "Jewish" and its legal and social applications is one of the most profound issues with which Israeli society deals. The problem of the status of religion in Israel, even though it is relevant to all religions, usually refers to the status of Judaism in Israeli society. Thus, even though from a constitutional point of view Judaism is not the state religion in Israel, its status nevertheless determines relations between religion and state and the extent to which religion influences the political center.Trouble in Utopia: The Overburdened Polity of Israel, by Dan Horowitz and Moshe Lissak, p51-52 The State of Israel supports religious institutions, particularly Orthodox Jewish ones, and recognizes the "religious communities" as carried over from those recognized under the British Mandate. These are: Jewish and Christian (Eastern Orthodox, Latin [Catholic], Gregorian-Armenian, Armenian-Catholic, Syrian [Catholic], Chaldean [Uniate], Greek Catholic Melkite, Maronite, and Syrian Orthodox). The fact that the Muslim population was not defined as a religious community is a vestige of the Ottoman period during which Islam was the dominant religion and does not affect the rights of the Muslim community to practice their faith. At the end of the period covered by the 2009 U.S. International Religious Freedom Report, several of these denominations were pending official government recognition; however, the Government has allowed adherents of not officially recognized groups freedom to practice. In 1961, legislation gave Muslim Shari'a courts exclusive jurisdiction in matters of personal status. Three additional religious communities have subsequently been recognized by Israeli law: the Druze (prior under Islamic jurisdiction), the Evangelical Episcopal Church, and the Bahá'í.International Religious Freedom Report 2009 : Israel and the occupied territories, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. These groups have their own religious courts as official state courts for personal status matters (see millet system). The structure and goals of the Chief Rabbinate of Israel are governed by Israeli law, but the law does not say explicitly that it is a state Rabbinate. However, outspoken Israeli secularists such as Shulamit Aloni and Uri Avnery have long maintained that it is that in practice. Non-recognition of other streams of Judaism such as Reform Judaism and Conservative Judaism is the cause of some controversy; rabbis belonging to these currents are not recognized as such by state institutions and marriages performed by them are not recognized as valid.  marriage in Israel provides no provision for civil marriage, marriage between people of different religions, marriages by people who do not belong to one of nine recognised religious communities, or same-sex marriages, although there is recognition of marriages performed abroad. In some countries, there is a political ideology sponsored by the government that may be called political religion. The concept of state religions was known as long ago as the empires of Egypt and Sumer, when every city state or people had its own god or gods. Many of the early Sumerian rulers were priests of their patron city god. Some of the earliest semi-mythological kings may have passed into the pantheon, like Dumuzid, and some later kings came to be viewed as divine soon after their reigns, like Sargon the Great of Akkad. One of the first rulers to be proclaimed a god during his actual reign was Gudea of Lagash, followed by some later kings of Ur, such as Shulgi. Often, the state religion was integral to the power base of the reigning government, such as in Egypt, where Pharaohs were often thought of as embodiments of the god Horus. Zoroastrianism was the state religion of the Sassanid dynasty which lasted until 651, when Persia was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate. However, it persisted as the state religion of the independent state of Hyrcania until the 15th century. The tiny kingdom of Adiabene in northern Mesopotamia converted to Judaism around 34&nbsp;CE. Many of the Greek city-states also had a god or goddess associated with that city. This would not be its only god/dess, but the one that received special honors. In ancient Greece, the city of Athens had Athena, Sparta had Ares, Delphi had Apollo and Artemis, Olympia had Zeus, Corinth had Poseidon and Thebes had Demeter. In Rome, the office of Pontifex Maximus came to be reserved for the Emperor, who was often declared a god posthumously, or sometimes during his reign. Failure to worship the Emperor as a god was at times punishable by death, as the Roman government sought to link emperor worship with loyalty to the Empire. Many Christians and Jews were subject to persecution, torture and death in the Roman Empire, because it was against their beliefs to worship the Emperor. In 311, Emperor Galerius, on his deathbed, declared a religious indulgence to Christians throughout the Roman Empire, focusing on the ending of anti-Christian persecution. Constantine I and Licinius, the two Augusti, by the Edict of Milan of 313, enacted a law allowing religious freedom to everyone within the Roman Empire. Furthermore, the Edict of Milan cited that Christians may openly practice their religion unmolested and unrestricted, and provided that properties taken from Christians be returned to them unconditionally. Although the Edict of Milan allowed religious freedom throughout the Empire, it did not abolish nor disestablish the Roman state cult (Roman polytheistic paganism). The Edict of Milan was written in such a way as to implore the blessings of the deity. Constantine called up the First Council of Nicaea in 325, although he was not a baptised Christian until years later. Despite enjoying considerable popular support, Christianity was still not the official state religion in Rome, although it was in some neighboring states such as Armenia and Aksum. Roman Religion (Neoplatonic Hellenism) was restored for a time by Julian the Apostate from 361 to 363. Julian does not appear to have reinstated the persecutions of the earlier Roman emperors. Catholic Christianity, as opposed to Arianism and other ideologies deemed heretical, was declared to be the state religion of the Roman Empire on 27 February 380 by the decree De Fide Catolica of Emperor Theodosius I. In China, the Han dynasty (206 BC – 220 AD) advocated Confucianism as the de facto state religion, establishing tests based on Confucian texts as an entrance requirement into government service—although, in fact, the "Confucianism" advocated by the Han emperors may be more properly termed a sort of Confucian Legalism or "State Confucianism". This sort of Confucianism continued to be regarded by the emperors, with a few notable exceptions, as a form of state religion from this time until the overthrow of the imperial system of government in 1911.  Note however, there is a debate over whether Confucianism (including Neo-confucianism) is a religion or purely a philosophical system. During the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271 – 1368 AD), Tibetan Buddhism was established as the de facto state religion by the Mongol ruler Kublai Khan, the founder of the Yuan dynasty. The top-level department and government agency known as the Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs (Xuanzheng Yuan) was set up in Khanbaliq (modern Beijing) to supervise Buddhist monks throughout the empire. Since Kublai Khan only esteemed the Sakya sect of Tibetan Buddhism, other religions became less important. Before the end of the Yuan dynasty, 14 leader of the Sakya sect had held the post of Imperial Preceptor (Dishi), thereby enjoy special power.History of civilizations of Central Asia.: A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century. Part two : The achievements, p59 Shamanism and Buddhism were once the dominant religions among the ruling class of the Mongol khanates of Golden Horde and Ilkhanate, the two western khanates of the Mongol Empire. In the early days, the rulers of both khanates increasingly adopted Tibetan Buddhism, similar to the Yuan dynasty at that time. However, the Mongol rulers Ghazan of Ilkhanate and Uzbeg of Golden Horde converted to Islam in 1295 AD because of the Muslim Mongol emir Nawruz and in 1313 AD because of Sufi Bukharan sayyid and sheikh Ibn Abdul Hamid respectively. Their official favoring of Islam as the state religion coincided with a marked attempt to bring the regime closer to the non-Mongol majority of the regions they ruled. In Ilkhanate, Christian and Jewish subjects lost their equal status with Muslims and again had to pay the poll tax; Buddhists had the starker choice of conversion or expulsion.Medieval Persia 1040–1797, David Morgan p.72 In Golden Horde, Buddhism and Shamanism among the Mongols were proscribed, and by 1315, Uzbeg had successfully Islamicized the Horde, killing Jochid princes and Buddhist lamas who opposed his religious policy and succession of the throne. These areas were disestablished and dissolved, yet their presences were tolerated by the English and later British colonial governments, as Foreign Protestants, whose communities were expected to observe their own ways without causing controversy or conflict for the prevalent colonists. After the Revolution, their ethno-religious backgrounds were chiefly sought as the most compatible non-British Isles immigrants. The State of Deseret was a provisional state of the United States, proposed in 1849, by Mormon settlers in Salt Lake City. The provisional state existed for slightly over two years, but attempts to gain recognition by the United States government foundered for various reasons. The Utah Territory which was then founded was under Mormon control, and repeated attempts to gain statehood met resistance, in part due to concerns over the principle of separation of church and state conflicting with the practice of members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints of placing their highest value on "following counsel" in virtually all matters relating to their church-centered lives. The state of Utah was eventually admitted to the union on 4 January 1896, after the various issues had been resolved.Struggle For Statehood Edward Leo Lyman, Utah History Encyclopedia A state that does not profess a state religion is known as a secular state.    Colony Denomination Disestablished Connecticut Congregational 1818See History of the Connecticut Constitution. Georgia Church of England 1789In 1789 the Georgia Constitution was amended as follows: "Article IV. Section 10. No person within this state shall, upon any pretense, be deprived of the inestimable privilege of worshipping God in any manner agreeable to his own conscience, nor be compelled to attend any place of worship contrary to his own faith and judgment; nor shall he ever be obliged to pay tithes, taxes, or any other rate, for the building or repairing any place of worship, or for the maintenance of any minister or ministry, contrary to what he believes to be right, or hath voluntarily engaged. To do. No one religious society shall ever be established in this state, in preference to another; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of any civil right merely on account of his religious principles." Maryland Church of England 1776 Massachusetts Congregational 1834 (parish church system)From 1780 to 1824, Massachusetts residents were all required to attend a parish church, the denomination of which was chosen by majority vote of town residents, but in effect this de facto established Congregationalism as the state religion. For details see Constitution of Massachusetts. New Brunswick Church of England New Hampshire Congregational 1790Until 1877 the New Hampshire Constitution required members of the State legislature to be of the Protestant religion. Until 1968 the Constitution allowed for state funding of Protestant classrooms but not Catholic classrooms. Newfoundland Church of England North Carolina Church of England 1776The North Carolina Constitution of 1776 disestablished the Anglican church, but until 1835 the NC Constitution allowed only Protestants to hold public office. From 1835–1876 it allowed only Christians (including Catholics) to hold public office. Article VI, Section 8 of the current NC Constitution forbids "any person who shall deny the being of Almighty God" from holding public office. Such clauses were held by the United States Supreme Court to be unenforceable in the 1961 case of Torcaso v. Watkins, when the court ruled unanimously that the First and Fourteenth Amendment protections prohibiting federal religious tests also applied to the states under the doctrine of incorporation. Nova Scotia Church of England 1850 Prince Edward Island Church of England South Carolina Church of England 1790 Canada West Church of England 1854 West Florida Church of England Religious tolerance for Catholics with an established Church of England was policy in the former Spanish Colonies of East and West Florida while under British rule. || 1783In 1783 Peace of Paris, which ended the American Revolutionary War, the British ceded both East and West Florida back to Spain (see Spanish Florida). East Florida Church of England 1783 Virginia Church of England 1786Tithes for the support of the Anglican Church in Virginia were suspended in 1776, and never restored. 1786 is the date of the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom, which prohibited any coercion to support any religious body. West Indies Church of England 1868 (Barbados, not until 1969) Country Church Denomination Disestablished Anhalt Evangelical State Church of Anhalt united Protestant 1918 Armenia Armenian Apostolic Church Oriental Orthodox 1921 Austria Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1918 Baden Roman Catholic Church and the United Evangelical Protestant State Church of Baden Catholic and united Protestant 1918 Bavaria Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1918 Bolivia Roman Catholic Church Catholic 2009 Brazil Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1890 Brunswick Evangelical Lutheran State Church in Brunswick Lutheran 1918 Bulgaria Bulgarian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1946 Chile Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1925 Colombia Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1936John Gunter, Inside Latin America (1941), p. 166 Cuba Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1902 Cyprus Cypriot Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1977 with the death of the Ethnarch Makarios III Czechoslovakia Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1920 Denmark Church of Denmark Lutheran no England Church of England Anglican no Ethiopia Ethiopian Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox 1974 Faroe Islands Church of the Faroe Islands Lutheran no, elevated from a diocese of the Church of Denmark in 2007 (the two remain in close cooperation) Finland Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland Lutheran no Finnish Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox no France Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1905 Georgia Georgian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1921 Greece Greek Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox no Greenland Church of Denmark Lutheran no, under discussion to be elevated from The Diocese of Greenland in the Church of Denmark to a state church for Greenland, along‐the‐lines the Faroese Church took in 2007 Guatemala Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1871 Haiti Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1987 Hesse Evangelical Church in Hesse uniting Lutheran, Reformed and united Protestants 1918 Hungary Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1946 Iceland Lutheran Evangelical Church Lutheran no Ireland Church of Ireland Anglican 1871 Italy Roman Catholic Church Catholic 18 February 1984 (into force 25 April 1985) Liechtenstein Roman Catholic Church Catholic no Lippe Church of Lippe Reformed 1918 Lithuania Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1940 Lübeck Evangelical Lutheran Church in the State of Lübeck Lutheran 1918 Luxembourg Roman Catholic Church Catholic ? (no official state church)Luxembourg Republic of Macedonia Macedonian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1921 Malta Roman Catholic Church Catholic no Mecklenburg-Schwerin Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Mecklenburg-Schwerin Lutheran 1918 Mecklenburg-Strelitz Mecklenburg-Strelitz State Church Lutheran 1918 Mexico Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1857 (reestablished between 1864 and 1867) Monaco Roman Catholic Church Catholic no Mongolia Tibetan Buddhism n/a 1926 Netherlands Dutch Reformed Church Reformed 1795 Norway Church of Norway Lutheran no Oldenburg Evangelical Lutheran Church of Oldenburg Lutheran 1918 Panama Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1904 Paraguay Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1992Under the 1967 Constitution, Roman Catholicism was the state religion as stated in Article 6: "The Roman Catholic Apostolic religion is the state religion, without prejudice to religious freedom, which is guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Official relations of the republic with the Holy See shall be governed by concordats or other bilateral agreements." The 1992 Constitution, which replaced the 1967 one, establishes Paraguay as a secular state, as mentioned in section (1) of Article 24: "Freedom of religion, worship, and ideology is recognized without any restrictions other than those established in this Constitution and the law. The State has no official religion." Philippines Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1898 Poland Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1947 Portugal Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1910, 1976 (Reestablished between 1933 and 1974). Prussiapre 1866 provinces Evangelical State Church of Prussia's older Provinces with nine ecclesiastical provinces uniting Lutheran, Reformed and united Protestants 1918 PrussiaProvince of Hanover Evangelical Reformed State Church of the Province of Hanover Reformed 1918 PrussiaProvince of Hanover Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Hanover Lutheran 1918 PrussiaProvince of Hesse-Nassau (partially) Evangelical State Church of Frankfurt upon Main uniting Lutheran, Reformed and united Protestants 1918 PrussiaProvince of Hesse-Nassau (partially) Evangelical Church of Electoral Hesse uniting Lutheran, Reformed and united Protestants 1918 PrussiaProvince of Hesse-Nassau (partially) Evangelical State Church in Nassau united Protestant 1918 PrussiaProv. of Schleswig-Holstein Evangelical Lutheran Church of Schleswig-Holstein Lutheran 1918 Quebec Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1960 Romania Romanian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1947 Russia Russian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1917 Thuringia church bodies in principalities which merged in Thuringia in 1920 Lutheran 1918 Saxony Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Saxony Lutheran 1918 Schaumburg-Lippe Evangelical State Church of Schaumburg-Lippe Lutheran 1918 Scotland Church of Scotland Presbyterian State control disclaimed since 1638. Formally recognised as not an established church in 1921 Serbia Serbian Orthodox Church Eastern 1921 Spain Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1978 Sweden Church of Sweden Lutheran 2000 Switzerland none since the adoption of the Federal Constitution (1848) n/a n/a Turkey Islam Islam 1928 Tuvalu Church of Tuvalu Reformed Church no Uruguay Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1918 (into effect in 1919) United States none since 1776, which was made explicit in the Bill of Rights in 1792 none n/a; some state legislatures required all citizens in those states to be members of a church, and some had official churches, such as Congregationalism in some New England states such as Massachusetts. This eventually ended in 1833 when Massachusetts was the last state to disestablish its church. Waldeck Evangelical State Church of Waldeck and Pyrmont uniting Lutheran and Reformed Protestants 1918 Wales Church of England Anglican 1920 Württemberg Evangelical State Church in Württemberg Lutheran 1918 : article 75 of the constitution of Costa Rica confirms that "The Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion is the religion of the State, which contributes to its maintenance, without preventing the free exercise in the Republic of other forms of worship that are not opposed to universal morality or good customs." : the constitution of Liechtenstein describes the Catholic Church as the state religion and enjoying "the full protection of the State". The constitution does however ensure that people of other faiths "shall be entitled to practise their creeds and to hold religious services to the extent consistent with morality and public order." (archived from the original on 2009-03-26). : Article 2 of the Constitution of Malta declares that "the religion of Malta is the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion" : article 9 of the constitution of Monaco describes "La religion catholique, apostolique et romaine" [the catholic, apostolic and Roman religion]" as the religion of the state. (French): Art. 9., Principaute De Monaco: Ministère d'Etat (archived from the original on 2011-09-27). : the Vatican is an Elective, Theocratic, or sacerdotal Absolute Monarchy state ruled by the Pope, who is also the Vicar of the Catholic Church. The highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various national origins. It is the sovereign territory of the Holy See () and the location of the Pope's official residence, referred to as the Apostolic Palace.  – article 2 of the Constitution explicitly states that the government supports the Catholic Church, but the constitution does not establish a state religion.  – the Constitution recognizes Catholicism as "the religion of the majority" of citizens but does not designate it as the official state religion.Executive Summary - Panama, 2013 Report on International Religious Freedom, United States Department of State. : Church of GreeceTHE CONSTITUTION OF GREECE : SECTION II RELATIONS OF CHURCH AND STATE, Hellenic Resources network. : Georgian Orthodox Church is not the state church of Georgia but has a special constitutional agreement with the state, with the constitution recognising "the special role of the Apostle Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia in the history of Georgia and its independence from the state."Constitution of Georgia Article 9(1&2) and 73(1a) (See also Concordat of 2002) : in the Bulgarian Constitution, the Bulgarian Orthodox Church is recognized as "the traditional religion" of the Bulgarian people, but the state itself remains secular. : the Church of England is the officially established religious institution in England, and also the Mother Church of the worldwide Anglican Communion. It is the only established Anglican church - the Anglican Church in Wales, the Episcopal Church of Scotland and the Church of Ireland are not established but are autonomous Provinces. The British monarch is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England. The 26 most senior bishops in the Church of England are Lords Spiritual and have seats in the House of Lords of the UK Parliament. Scottish, Welsh and Irish bishops do not sit in the House of Lords. : section 4 of the Danish constitution confirms the Church of Denmark as the state church.Denmark – Constitution: Section 4 State Church, International Constitutional Law. : the Church of the Faroe Islands is the state church of the Faroe Islands, a territory of Denmark. : the Icelandic constitution confirms the Church of Iceland as the state church of Iceland.Constitution of the Republic of Iceland: Article 62, Government of Iceland. (73.8% of population members at 1 January 2015)  : the Constitution of Norway stipulates that "The Church of Norway, an Evangelical-Lutheran church, will remain the Established Church of Norway and will as such be supported by the State."The Constitution of Norway, Article 16 (English translation, published by the Norwegian Parliament) This was amended in 2012, from "Evangelical-Lutheran religion remains the public religion of the State". The church is granted autonomy in doctrine and appointment of bishops.Løsere bånd, men fortsatt statskirke, ABC NyheterStaten skal ikke lenger ansette biskoper, NRK : the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland has a special relationship with the Finnish state, its internal structure being described in a special law, the Church Act.Finland – Constitution, Section 76 The Church Act, http://servat.unibe.ch/icl/fi00000_.html. The Church Act can be amended only by a decision of the synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church and subsequent ratification by the Parliament of Finland. The Church Act is protected by the Finnish Constitution and the state can not change the Church Act without changing the constitution. The church has a power to tax its members and all corporations unless a majority of shareholders are members of the Finnish Orthodox Church. The state collects these taxes for the church, for a fee. On the other hand, the church is required to give a burial place for everyone in its graveyards. (77.2% of population members at the end of 2011).77.2 percent of Finns belong to the Lutheran church evl.fi 10.2.2012 The President of the Republic of Finland also decides the themes for intercession days. The church does not consider itself a state church, as the Finnish state does not have the power to influence its internal workings or its theology, although it has a veto in those changes of the internal structure which require changing the Church Act. Neither does the Finnish state accord any precedence to Lutherans or the Lutheran faith in its own acts. : the Church of Sweden was until year 2000 the official state church of Sweden and Lutheran Christianity was therefore the state religion of Sweden. In spite of the separation between the state and the church in 2000, the Church of Sweden still has a special status in Sweden. Sweden is therefore often seen as a midway between having a state religion and not. The church has its own legal regulation in the Church of Sweden Act, which regulates the church's basic structure, creeds and right to tax members of the church (ca 70% of the population). According to the Act, the Church of Sweden must be a democratic, Lutheran people's church. Only the Swedish Riksdag can change this fact.  The connections to the Swedish royal family are complicated. For example, the Swedish constitution stipulates that the Monarch of Sweden must be a true Lutheran, accepting the doctrine of the Church of Sweden. All members of the royal house must accept the same doctrine to be able to inherit the Throne of Sweden. The parishes of the Church of Sweden are still the smallest administrative entities in Sweden and are used as civil registration and taxation units. : The Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga : The Church of Tuvalu is the state religion, although in practice this merely entitles it to "the privilege of performing special services on major national events"."2010 Report on International Religious Freedom - Tuvalu", United States Department of State The Constitution of Tuvalu guarantees freedom of religion, including the freedom to practice, the freedom to change religion, the right not to receive religious instruction at school or to attend religious ceremonies at school, and the right not to "take an oath or make an affirmation that is contrary to his religion or belief".Constitution of Tuvalu, article 23. : The Church of Scotland is recognized as the national church of Scotland, but is not a state church and thus differs from the Church of England. Its constitution, which is recognised by acts of the British Parliament, gives it complete independence from the state in spiritual matters. : The local law in Alsace-Moselle relates to the official status accorded to certain religions in this region of France. The law is a remnant of the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801.  The 1801 Concordat was abrogated in the rest of France by the law of 1905 on the separation of church and state.  However, at the time, Alsace-Moselle had been annexed by Germany, so the Concordat remained in force in these areas. The Concordat recognises four religious traditions in Alsace-Moselle: the Jewish religion and three branches of Christianity: Catholic, Lutheran and Reformed. Therefore, the separation of church and state, part of the French concept of Laïcité, does not apply in this region.  : section 2A of the 1972 constitution specifies "The state religion of the Republic is Islam, but other religions may be practiced in peace and harmony in the Republic.". As part of a series of rulings, on 4 October 2010 the High Court ruled that Bangladesh is a secular state.Secularism is back in Bangladesh, rules High Court http://www.deccanherald.com/content/102192/secularism-back-bangladesh-rules-high.html Section 12 of part II of the constitution identifies Secularism and freedom of religion as fundamental principles of state policyFUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY http://bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/sections_detail.php?id=367&sections_id=24560  : Article 2 of the Constitution of Iraq confirms the Islam as the official religion of the State.  : article 2 of the Constitution of Pakistan confirms Islam as the state religion. : the Palestinian Constitution defines Islam as the state religion, but ensures "'respect and sanctity of all other heavenly religions shall be maintained'". : Art. 1, Constitution of Tunisia : Article 1 & 2, Constitution of Afghanistan : Art. 2, Constitution of Algeria : Art. 3, Constitution of Brunei : Article 2, Egyptian Constitution of 2014 : Article 2, Constitution of Jordan : Article 3, Constitution of Malaysia : Article 5, Constitution of Mauritania : Article 1, Constitution of Qatar : Article 1, Basic Law of Saudi Arabia : Article 2, Constitution of Somalia  (theocracy)  (Zaydi fiqh among Zaydi Shias)  (Article 43). : the constitution of Sri Lanka accords Buddhism the "foremost place", although it does not identify it as a state religion.fv : the 2007 Thai constitution, recognises Buddhism as "the religion of Thai tradition with the most adherents", however, it is not formally identified as a state religion. It requires the government to "patronize and protect Buddhism and other religions". : Section 361 of the constitution states that "The Union recognizes special position of Buddhism as the faith professed by the great majority of the citizens of the Union.". : (Drukpa Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism) : the North Korean government has promulgated Juche as a political alternative to traditional religion. The doctrine advocates a strong nationalist propaganda basis and is fundamentally opposed to Christianity and Buddhism, the two largest religions on the Korean peninsula. Juche theoreticians have, however, incorporated religious ideas into the state ideology.  According to government figures, Juche is the largest political religion in North Korea. The public practice of all other religions is overseen and subject to heavy surveillance by the state.  does not declare or designate a state religion. However, the government does only recognize 6 religions: Islam, Protestantism, Catholicism, Buddhism, Hinduism and Confucianism. The Constitution of Indonesia guarantees the freedom of religion and the practice of other religions and beliefs, including the animistic indigenous ones, is not prohibited by any laws. Indonesians practicing traditional polytheistic and animistic beliefs are often counted as "Hindu" for government purposes. Atheism or agnosticism, although not prosecuted, is discouraged by the state ideology of Pancasila. In addition, the province of Aceh receives a special status and a higher degree of autonomy, in which it may enact laws (qanuns) based on the Sharia and enforce it, especially to its Muslim residents.  was once the world's only Hindu state, but has ceased to be so following a declaration by the Parliament in 2006. Many countries indirectly fund the activities of different religious denominations by granting tax-exempt status to churches and religious institutions which qualify as charitable organizations. However, these religions are not established as state religions. The colonies of Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, New Haven, and New Hampshire were founded by Puritan Calvinist Protestants. The colonies of New York, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia were officially established under the auspices of the Church of England. The Colony of Maryland was founded by a charter granted in 1632 to George Calvert, secretary of state to Charles I, and his son Cecil, both recent converts to Roman Catholicism. Under their leadership many English Catholic gentry families settled in Maryland. However, the colonial government was officially neutral in religious affairs, granting toleration to all Christian groups and enjoining them to avoid actions which antagonized the others. On several occasions, low-church dissenters led insurrections which temporarily overthrew the Calvert rule. In 1689, when William and Mary came to the English throne, they acceded to demands to revoke the original royal charter. In 1701, the Church of England was proclaimed, and in the course of the 18th century Maryland Catholics were first barred from public office, then disenfranchised, although not all of the laws passed against them (notably laws restricting property rights and imposing penalties for sending children to be educated in foreign Catholic institutions) were enforced, and some Catholics even continued to hold public office. When New France was transferred to Great Britain in 1763, the Roman Catholic Church remained under toleration, but Huguenots were allowed entrance where they had formerly been banned from settlement by Parisian authorities. When Spanish Florida was ceded to Great Britain in 1763, the British divided Florida into two colonies, East and West Florida, which both continued a policy of toleration for the Catholic residents. The Province of Pennsylvania was founded by Quakers, but the colony never had an established church. The Province of New Jersey, without official religion, had a significant Quaker lobby, but Calvinists of all types also had a presence. Delaware Colony had no established church, but was contested between Catholics and Quakers. The Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, founded by religious dissenters forced to flee the Massachusetts Bay colony, is widely regarded as the first polity to grant religious freedom to all its citizens, although Catholics were barred intermittently. Baptists, Seekers/Quakers and Jews made this colony their home.  The King Charles Charter of 1663 guaranteed "full liberty in religious concernments". New Netherland was founded by Dutch Reformed Calvinists. New Sweden was founded by Church of Sweden Lutherans. List of state-established religions Confessional state Civil religion Political religion Separation of church and state Major religious groups Freedom of religion Status of religious freedom by country Religious toleration Secular state Secular religion Elite religion Cuius regio, eius religio Divine rule Rowlands, John Henry Lewis (1989). Church, State, and Society, 1827-1845: the Attitudes of John Keble, Richard Hurrell Froude, and John Henry Newman. Worthing, Eng.: P. Smith [of] Churchman Publishing; Folkestone, Eng.: distr. ... by Bailey Book Distribution. ISBN 1-85093-132-1
