    The Suicide Squad, also known as Task Force X (the name of a closely related but independent supervisory organization), is a name for two fictional organizations appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. The first version debuted in The Brave and the Bold #25 (1959), and the second version, created by John Ostrander, debuted in Legends #3 (1987). The modern Suicide Squad is an antihero "strike team" of incarcerated, death row supervillains. Acting as deniable, covert assets of the United States government, it undertakes high-risk, black-ops missions in exchange for commuted prison sentences. The group operates out of Belle Reve Penitentiary under the directorship of Amanda Waller. The Suicide Squad functions as an unorthodox, work-release program, which explains why many of the DC Universe's supervillains remain perpetually on the loose – regardless how many occasions they're apprehended and incarcerated for their latest crimes. Various incarnations of the Suicide Squad have existed throughout DC Universe canon, as depicted in several self-titled comic book series, from its origins in the Silver Age, to its modern-day post-Crisis reimagining, to the current version that was introduced in the wake of DC's 2011 New 52 continuity reboot. The group has appeared in various media adaptations, including television series and an upcoming Suicide Squad 2016 feature film, set to star Jared Leto, Margot Robbie, Joel Kinnaman, Will Smith, Jai Courtney, Viola Davis, Scott Eastwood, Jay Hernandez, Karen Fukuhara and Cara Delevingne. Featured in The Brave and the Bold, the original Suicide Squad team included Rick Flag, Jr., his girlfriend Karin Grace, Dr. Hugh Evans and Jess Bright. This team was created by writer Robert Kanigher and artist Ross Andru. Later continuitySecret Origins vol. 2 #14 established that the team's earliest incarnation was formed to fight monstrous menaces as a replacement for the Justice Society of America, whose members had mostly retired in the wake of unjust accusations during the McCarthy Era. The Suicide Squad was revived in the Legends miniseries with writer John Ostrander at the helm.Manning, Matthew K. "1980s" in Dolan, p. 228: "Writer John Ostrander gave the new Suicide Squad its own series, having brought the team to life in 1986's  Legends miniseries...With the team's own title, Ostrander was helped by artist Luke McDonnell." The renewed concept involved the government employing a group of supervillains to perform missions that were suicide runs, a concept popular enough for an ongoing series titled simply Suicide Squad. The squad was often paired together with DC's other government agency, Checkmate — culminating in the Janus DirectiveThe 11-part Janus Directive crossover consisted of Suicide Squad #27-30, Checkmate (#15-18, Manhunter (vol. 2) #14, Firestorm vol. 2 #86, and Captain Atom #30 crossover. The team's concept self-consciously emulated the World War II film The Dirty Dozen and the television series Mission: Impossible.Flashback: The Suicide Squad (Back Issue #26, February 2008) In addition, the Squad's existence was top-secret, creating much tension within the group, and leading the Squad to be targeted (unsuccessfully) by the likes of Lois Lane and Batman (the latter was forced to back off from his investigation when Squad leader Amanda Waller threatened to use her considerable government resources to expose Batman's secret identitySuicide Squad (vol. 1) #10). While some Squad members—such as Bronze Tiger, Captain Boomerang, Ryan Scott, and Deadshot—were permanent fixtures, the balance of membership comprised a rotating cast of often very minor-league villains. These villains would agree to tackle missions in exchange for commuted prison sentences; thus, the Squad served as a partial explanation for what sometimes appeared to be a revolving-door justice system in the DC Universe. While the Squad succeeded on most of their missions, failure occasionally resulted (most notably the capture of Nemesis by Russian forces after a botched missionSuicide Squad (vol. 1) #7), as well as the death of one or more members. The use of minor characters added to the jeopardy, as it was not clear whether any given character would survive a mission. Writer John Ostrander did not shy away from killing off some of the Squad's principal characters, most notably Rick Flag, Jr.—who was eliminated at the end of the book's second year.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #26 At the time, the series was also notable for examining the lives, motivations, and psychological makeup of its characters, with one issue per year featuring the group's psychologist interviewing various team members.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #8, 19, and 31 Suicide Squad (vol. 1) lasted 66 issues, along with one Annual and one special (Doom Patrol and Suicide Squad Special #1). After the series' cancellation in 1992, the Squad went on to make several guest appearances in titles such as SuperboySuperboy (vol. 3) #13-15 (this Squad incorporated many of Superboy's enemies, as well as Superboy himself), Hawk & Dove,Hawk & Dove (vol. 4) #3-5 Chase,Chase (vol. 1) #2-3 and Adventures of Superman.Adventures of Superman (vol. 1) #593-594 Suicide Squad (vol. 2) was published in 2001, written by Keith Giffen, with art by Paco Medina. Though the series' first issue featured a Squad composed entirely of Giffen's Injustice LeagueJustice League (vol. 1) Annual #1 members, the roster was promptly slaughtered, save for Major Disaster and Multi-Man (whose powers make him unkillable). This prompted Squad leader Sgt. Rock to recruit new members—most of whom died during the missions they undertook. Suicide Squad (vol. 3) (initially subtitled Raise the Flag in DC's solicitations) was an eight-issue miniseries published in 2007. It featured the return of writer John Ostrander, with art by Javier Pina. The story focused on the return of Rick Flag, Jr., and the formation of a new Squad for the purpose of attacking a corporation responsible for the development of a deadly bio-weapon. Along the way, the group had to deal with the treachery of involuntary Squad member General Wade Eiling, and—true to the series' form—several fourth-string villains died in the line of duty. Suicide Squad (vol. 4) debuted as part of DC Comics' line-wide New 52 continuity reboot in 2011. The relaunched book was written by Adam Glass, with art by Federico Dallocchio and Ransom Getty. Amanda Waller once again directs the group from behind-the-scenes; Deadshot, Harley Quinn, and King Shark feature prominently on this version of the Squad. This series concluded in 2014, with issue #30. New Suicide Squad, was launched in July 2014. Written by Sean Ryan with art by Jeremy Roberts, the new series continues to feature Deadshot and Harley Quinn, with Deathstroke, Black Manta, and Joker's Daughter added to the mix. The original Suicide Squad appeared in six issues of The Brave and the Bold (vol. 1)The Brave and the Bold (vol. 1) #25-27, 37-39 as well as Action Comics (vol. 1) #552.Action Comics (vol. 1) #552 Although this early incarnation of the team (created by writer Robert Kanigher and artist Ross Andru) did not have the espionage trappings of later Squads, it laid much of the groundwork for squad field leader Rick Flag, Jr.'s personal history. In the wake of DC's line-wide Crisis on Infinite Earths event, several new book launches were conceptualized, with writer John Ostrander assigned the task of resurrecting the Suicide Squad for an ongoing monthly series. While Ostrander initially found the concept absurd, he soon hit upon the government black ops hook. The team and its administrator Amanda Waller were introduced in the Legends miniseries,Legends #1-6 with the original Silver Age Squad's backstory fleshed out further in Secret Origins (vol. 2) #14, and modern Suicide Squad member Nightshade getting her own origin story (involving the Squad) in Secret Origins (vol. 2) #28.Secret Origins (vol. 2) #28 The original Suicide Squad stories revolved around a quartet of non-powered adventurers fighting super-powered opponents. Their adventures often involved conflict with dinosaurs, giants, and other monstrous creatures. In the team's final mission, Dr. Evans dies, and Jess Bright is captured by forces of the Soviet Union and transformed into the monstrous Koshchei.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #50 Rick Flag, Jr. and Karin Grace split up, and Flag eventually joins the Forgotten Heroes. In the midst of Darkseid's attempt to turn humanity against Earth's superheroes via his minion Glorious Godfrey, Amanda Waller assigns Rick Flag, Jr. leadership of a reformed Task Force X.Legends #1 Blockbuster, Bronze Tiger, Captain Boomerang, Deadshot, and Enchantress comprise Task Force X. The squad's first mission is to eliminate Darkseid's rampaging fire elemental Brimstone; Blockbuster dies during the conflict, and Deadshot takes the creature down with an experimental laser rifle.Legends #3 Waller dismisses the group,Legends #4 though they soon reconvene to rescue Captain Boomerang after Godfrey captures him.Legends #5 During World War II, a number of Army riffraff are assembled into a unit that is highly expendable, and therefore nicknamed the Suicide Squadron (shortened to Suicide Squad). Several such teams existed, but their history in comics is only scarcely recorded before Rick Flag, Sr. becomes the leader of the team (and even then, only a few adventures of this Squad are shown). After the war ends, the team (together with the Argent group) is put under the umbrella organization of Task Force X. After his father's death, Rick Flag, Jr. goes on to lead the group that is featured in The Brave and the Bold (vol. 1). A deadly encounter with a Yeti during a mission in Cambodia sends Flag back to the U.S. with a wounded Karin Grace, and after a stint with the Forgotten Heroes, Flag is drafted into the Squad that Waller assembles in Legends. "A Princess' Story" from Secret Origins (vol. 2) #28 sheds light on Nightshade's origin, revealing that her mother hailed from the Land of the Nightshades. An ill-fated trip to this world ends with Nightshade's mother dead and her brother abducted, and Nightshade spends the following years honing her shadowy powers and building a reputation as a crimefighter. She falls in with King Faraday at the C.B.I.; Faraday eventually introduces her to Amanda Waller, who agrees to help her rescue her brother, in exchange for Nightshade's participation in the Squad. The World War II Squad of Secret Origins (vol. 2) #14 was a means of tying the Silver Age Suicide Squad to the war-era Suicide Squad (also called the Suicide Squadron) created by Robert Kanigher for his "The War that Time Forgot" tales in the pages of Star Spangled War Stories.Star Spangled War Stories #110-111, 116-121, 125, and 127-128 This Suicide Squadron is described as a "top-secret Ranger outfit" whose members were trained to tackle missions from which ordinary volunteers were not expected to return alive. It is unclear whether this team is part of the modern Suicide Squad canon or if the Squad introduced in Secret Origins was intended as a replacement for them in DC continuity. Another classic version of the Squad (Rick Flag, Karin Grace, Jess Bright, and Dr. Hugh Evans) appears in the non-canon 2004 miniseries DC: The New Frontier by Darwyn Cooke. The group is briefly shown undertaking the sorts of dangerous missions the Squad is known for, and Flag eventually drafts Hal Jordan onto the team to assist in preparing a manned space flight to Mars. The experimental rocket's test run quickly goes south and the group (sans Jordan) dies in the explosion.DC: The New Frontier #1-4 The first volume of Suicide Squad, written by modern Squad creator John Ostrander, launched in May 1987, shortly after the team was introduced in the Legends crossover event. It lasted for 66 monthly issues, along with one annual and one special (Doom Patrol and Suicide Squad Special #1), both published in 1988. This series details the covert operations of the modern, post-Crisis Squad, created (in-universe) and directed by Amanda Waller. It is notable for bringing obscure characters such as Captain Boomerang and Deadshot to prominence; the latter received his own tie-in miniseries in 1988, co-written by Ostrander and Kim Yale.Deadshot (vol. 1) #1-4 The Suicide Squad also presents a modern context for field team leader Rick Flag, Jr.'s modern-day activities, and his involvement in the Silver-Age Suicide Squad. Former Batgirl Barbara Gordon makes her first appearance as the wheelchair using information-broker Oracle,Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #23 and serves as the Squad's remote radio support, after being shot by the Joker.Batman: The Killing Joke Suicide Squad (vol. 1) takes pains to humanize its relatively obscure ensemble cast, partly via an in-house chaplain and psychiatric staff at the Squad's Belle Reve headquarters. These staff members are frequently seen interviewing various Squad operativesSuicide Squad (vol. 1) #5 or providing evaluations of their mental states;Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #1 several full issues are dedicated to examining the personal lives and motivations of prominent characters. Several Suicide Squad story arcs reference or deconstruct the real-world political climate of the times, including hostility from Middle East terrorist organizations,Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #1-2 the Cold War,Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #5-7 and covert American responses to international dictatorships.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #63-66 Real-world political figures such as Ronald ReaganDoom Patrol and Suicide Squad Special #1 and Mikhail Gorbachev make occasional appearances. Ostrander claims that one friend, before making vacation arrangements, used to ask him where he planned to send the Squad next, so as to avoid potential political hotspots. Over the course of 66 issues, this incarnation of the Suicide Squad undertook numerous high-risk missions for the U.S. government. The team's first mission in the Suicide Squad title set them up against their recurring enemies, the Jihad. They infiltrate their headquarters (the fortress known as Jotunheim, situated in Qurac) and proceed to defeat and kill most of the Onslaught members. Elements from this first story arc return over the series, such as: the death of Mindboggler, Captain Boomerang's cowardly and treacherous nature, Nightshade's attraction to Rick Flag, Jr., a rivalry between Rustam and Rick Flag, Jr., and Ravan's defeat at the hands of the Bronze Tiger. On orders of Derek Tolliver (the team's liaison with the NSC) the Suicide Squad is sent to Moscow in order to free the captive Zoya Trigorin, a revolutionary writer. Although the mission is largely successful in its first half, the team finds that Zoya does not want to be freed at all, causing friction amongst the team as they must plan their escape. In the end, the mission ends with the Squad having to travel across a tundra to reach safety, but come face to face with the People's Heroes, the Russian's own group of metahumans. In the conflict, Trigorin dies and Nemesis (Tom Tresser) is captured. It turns out Tolliver never even considered the possibility of Trigorin wishing to become a martyr, automatically leaping at the conclusion she would be eager to leave the Soviet Union, and thus risked Waller's wrath upon the mission's end. Nemesis eventually escapes thanks to a collaboration between the Suicide Squad and the Justice League International, although the two teams fight one another first.Justice League International (vol. 1) #13 and Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #13 This conflict is primarily the result of Batman's investigation into the Suicide Squad, and his confrontation with Waller, and his being forced to drop the investigation when she reveals that she can easily figure out his secret identity if need be. In this story arc,Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #21-22 building on subplots from previous issues,Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #8, 11, 14, 17, 19 Rick Flag goes after Senator Cray in order to assassinate him. Previously, Senator Cray had been blackmailing Amanda Waller in order for her to ensure Cray's reelection, threatening her with the exposure of the Suicide Squad to the public, something potentially very dangerous for the existence of the Squad and Waller's career. At first, there is also the threat of Waller being usurped by Derek Tolliver, the now former liaison between the Squad and NSC, who conspires with Cray against Waller. Waller deals with the situation by counter-blackmail (with help of Checkmate), but refrains from informing Flag,Flag finds out in Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #19 who, thinking that the existence of the Squad is in danger, decides to deal with the problem himself. In order to stop him, the Squad is sent after Flag, and it is eventually Deadshot who confronts Flag shortly before he can shoot Cray, but too late to prevent Tolliver's murder in Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #21. Instead of disarming or killing Flag, Deadshot opts to kill Cray, nonetheless keeping to the mission statement: preventing Cray's murder at the hands of Flag. Against Flag's intentions, the Suicide Squad is exposed to the public, thanks to a note for a press release (exposing the Suicide Squad) left in Tolliver's office, which the police discover thanks to his murder and which a corrupt officer reveals to the staff of the Daily Planet. Flag flees the scene, while Deadshot is shot by the arriving police officers. Unfortunately for Deadshot, who has a deathwish, he does not die from the injuries. As the result of being exposed, Amanda Waller is replaced by a man called Jack Kale, in fact an actor, working as a cover so that Waller can continue to run the Squad. The team then goes on a public relations offensive, becoming for a time, a prominent heroing team by saving a renowned nun from a repressive regime.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #23-25 Rick Flag travels to Jotunheim, where the Onslaught are still headquartered, and finishes the mission his father could not, blowing up Jotunheim with a prototype nuclear Nazi weapon but gives up his life to do so.  "The Janus Directive" is a crossover storyline that involves an interagency war between Checkmate, the Suicide Squad, and Project Atom, who are manipulated by Kobra in order to distract the United States intelligence community from his activities. During the crossover, the headquarters of Checkmate and the Suicide Squad are destroyed as the war between the agencies worsens, as well as costing the lives of all members of the Force of July but Major Victory. In the end, with the defeat of Kobra, the various government agencies are made autonomous, to be overseen by Sarge Steel. With the Suicide Squad on the verge of being disbanded by her superiors after Waller's lone wolf tactics during "The Janus Directive", Waller gathers Ravan, Poison Ivy, and Deadshot in an assassination mission of the LOA, a group that are planning to create a zombie army. The deal for the villains is simple: the three will be set free after helping Waller kill the LOA. While the villains run after the assassination, Waller allows herself to be put into custody.Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #37-39 The storyline running through Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #40-43 reassembles a scattered Suicide Squad after a year of imprisonment for Amanda Waller. She receives a presidential pardon, courtesy of Sarge Steel, as well as money in the bank and her old privileges concerning the use of imprisoned villains. This is done so that Waller can reassemble her Squad and prevent a confrontation between American and Soviet forces in the war-torn country of Vlatava. As the Suicide Squad succeeds and finishes their mission, they go in a new direction, free from the government, as freelance operatives, per the terms negotiated by Waller. Under the leadership of Waller, who now also goes into the field as an operative, they are a mercenary squad open to the highest bidder. This storyline ran through Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #45-47, Amanda Waller and the Squad covertly sneak into Jerusalem seeking to capture or kill Kobra. However, the squad's arrival is detected by the Hayoth, and their Mossad liaison Colonel Hacohen takes Waller and Vixen into custody in order to show them that the Hayoth has already captured Kobra. Amanda figures out that Kobra allowed the Hayoth to capture him but is unsure of why. Judith follows Vixen to a meeting with the Bronze Tiger and Ravan, critically wounds Vixen, and is nearly killed by the Bronze Tiger. Meanwhile, the Atom discovers Kobra's true plan all along was to corrupt Dybbuk the Hayoth's AI team member. Kobra "corrupted" Dybbuk through a series of philosophical conversations about the nature of good and evil; he then attempts to use Dybbuk to start World War III. The day is saved by Ramban the team's kabbalistic magician who has a lengthy conversation with Dybbuk about the true nature of good and evil, choice, and morality. Meanwhile, Ravan and Kobra have their final battle which results in Ravan's supposed death via poisoning. This storyline ran through Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #59-62, the Hayoth mistakenly believe they would be allowed to take Qurac's former President Marlo into custody. This misunderstanding caused the Hayoth to become embroiled in a four way conflict with the Justice League (Superman, Batman, and Aquaman) who were there searching for Ray Palmer (the Atom) as well as the Suicide Squad, and the Jihad. After a series of skirmishes Superman ends the free for all with a shockwave caused by clapping both his hands together. The League confront Ray Palmer and he tells them about Micro Force and their murder of Adam Cray, the man who had been impersonating him as a member of the Suicide Squad. The series concludes in issues #63-66, in which the Suicide Squad travels to Diabloverde (an island near the Bermuda Triangle) to depose a seemingly invulnerable and invincible dictator calling himself Guedhe, who has his own personal bodyguards, a group of villains calling themselves the Suicide Squad. Insulted by the rival team usurping the Suicide Squad name, Waller accepts the mission to liberate Diabloverde at the price of one peso, paid by an exiled resident, Maria, with the addendum of exterminating the island's dictator. During that mission they face the other Suicide Squad, who the actual Suicide Squad beats. At the end of the storyline Amanda Waller tricks the despot, actually Maria's husband, into a form of suicide (the despot believes himself to be immortal, when in actuality he was a formidable psychic whose consciousness kept animating his remains; Waller convinced him her touch brought death, and thus he died). Before that each of the Squad members travel through the mystic jungle to Guedhe's fortress and in that jungle face their personal demons (except for Deadshot. The creative team makes a point of showing he is seemingly unaffected or simply does not have any fears. Also note-worthy, the other Bat-villain, Poison Ivy, is not shown facing her fears and shows more concern for her nylons). Afterward, Waller disbands the Suicide Squad and the series ends. Notable team members from Suicide Squad (vol. 1) include: Though John Ostrander's Suicide Squad (vol. 1) series was canceled in 1992 with issue #66, the concept lived on in various DC storylines throughout the years. What follows is a breakdown of the Squad's various odd appearances over the years. The Squad resurfaces in a three-issue Superboy (vol. 3) arc, with a lineup consisting of Captain Boomerang, Deadshot, King Shark, Knockout, Sam Makoa, and Sidearm (who meets his death in the following issue). Superboy himself joins the Squad, to assist in taking out a Pacific Rim crime cartel called the Silicon Dragons. Writer Karl Kesel claims to have come very close to killing Captain Boomerang during this arc. In the Hawk & Dove (vol. 4) miniseries, superheroes Hawk and Dove (Sasha Martens and Wiley Wolverman) are targeted by the government, who assemble a new Suicide Squad to subdue the pair. Squad members at the time include Bronze Tiger, Count Vertigo, Deadshot, Flex, Quartzite, Shrapnel, and Thermal. Amanda Waller reforms the Squad once again in Chase (vol. 1) #2. D.E.O. agent Cameron Chase joins Bolt, Copperhead, Killer Frost, and Sledge on a mission to take out a South American military base, only to be betrayed by the villains. The brief story "Resources" (one of several in the issue) depicts Amanda Waller assembling the Squad that is seen in the Adventures of Superman arc.Superman: Our Worlds at War Secret Files & Origins #1 Lex Luthor organizes another Suicide Squad during his term as President of the United States, so that they can recruit Doomsday to battle the alien Imperiex. This version of the Squad consists of Chemo, Mongul, Plasmus, and Shrapnel; it is led by Manchester Black, under the supervision of Steel. Doomsday seemingly kills most of the Squad upon his release, but all of the characters turn up alive in later comics. Keith Giffen's short-lived Suicide Squad run (which began in November 2001 and lasted 12 issues) is something of a darkly humorous analog to the writer's former work on Justice League International, and follows a new version of the Squad, designated Task Force Omega, and run by Sgt. Frank Rock. Together with his right-hand (and wheelchair-bound) man Bulldozer, Rock taps new characters Havana and Modem to round out the team's mobile HQ. President Lex Luthor and Secretary of Metahuman Affairs Amanda Waller are shown to be supplying the Squad's assignments.Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #6 Rock is thought by several other characters to have been deceased since the end of World War II, and they are surprised to see him alive and well.Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #1Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #2 Two flashback storiesSuicide Squad (vol. 2) #4Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #10 provide some context for Rock's current-day activities, but the series' final issue strongly implies that Rock is an (as-yet-unidentified) impostor.Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #12 The first issue details the former Injustice League's terminally botched attempt to extract a kidnapped scientist from an Icelandic facility. With all but one team member (Major Disaster) presumed dead by issue's end, Sgt. Rock forms a new Suicide Squad for the missions ahead. Major Disaster, Deadshot, and Killer Frost are mainstays of the field team. For his part, Rock is every bit as ruthless as Amanda Waller was (though far more affable), remorselessly sending his agents to die for the good of their country. The Squad's missions involve eliminating an out-of-control colony of bio-engineered army ants,Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #3 and investigating the mysterious island of Kooey Kooey Kooey to discourage its telepathic inhabitants from declaring war on Earth.Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #7Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #8 Havana is revealed to be Amanda Waller's daughter,Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #9 and the final story arc revolves around an all-out attack on the Squad by the members of Onslaught, led by the son of longtime Squad enemy Rustam. Onslaught kills Modem and captures Rock, Havana, and Waller.Suicide Squad (vol. 2) #11 Upon learning that the Squad has been compromised, Waller's office drafts the Justice Society of America to counterattack Onslaught alongside the Squad, but they arrive too late to save Havana from Rustam's wrath. Deadshot discovers a discarded Sgt. Rock mask inside an empty holding cell, which prompts Bulldozer (who is monitoring the situation remotely via Deadshot's video camera) to stand from his wheelchair and announce "Oh, boy!" before leaving. Back in her office, Amanda Waller reviews Bulldozer's file, and states that he and Sgt. Rock died in 1945. Notable team members from Suicide Squad (vol. 2) include: Amanda Waller and the Suicide Squad were heavily involved in the events and fallout of 52. During much of this time, Waller ran the Squad covertly, because of her station as the White Queen of Checkmate. This inter-faction tension is a recurring theme throughout many Squad stories of this era. A Squad composed of Deadshot, Killer Frost, and Solomon Grundy goes after Lois Lane in order to silence her investigation into Lex Luthor's presidency.Superman (vol. 2) #182 A mystery agent sends Captain Boomerang, Double Down, Killer Frost, and Killer Shark to (unsuccessfully) assassinate an imprisoned Amanda Waller as she awaits trial. Nemesis also appears.Superman Secret Files & Origins 2004 Amanda Waller assembles a short-lived Suicide Squad, led by Atom Smasher,52 #2452 #33 to take on an out-of-control Black Adam. Atom Smasher's team ambushes the Black Marvel Family, getting Waller the evidence that she needs to expose their threat to the world.52 #34 As Waller reviews future potential Squad members, Atom Smasher quits the team, threatening to inform Checkmate of Waller's unauthorized field ops unless she grants him a full pardon.52 #45 Later, as World War III rages, Waller informs Bronze Tiger that Rick Flag, Jr. is alive.World War III, Book Three: Hell Is for Heroes As part of DC's One Year Later event, Greg Rucka penned the two-part "Rogue Squad" arc for Checkmate (vol. 2). After Bronze Tiger finds Rick Flag, Jr. alive, Amanda Waller (now the White Queen of Checkmate) taps the pair to track down a rogue Squad that is out to expose her off-the-books activities. The Squad is led by Mirror Master, and includes Icicle, Javelin, Plastique, Tattooed Man, Punch, and Jewelee.Checkmate (vol. 2) #6-7 Beginning in the pages of Countdown, the Squad makes various one-off appearances, where they are seen rounding up the world's villains for an unknown purpose. This culminates in the seven-issue Salvation Run miniseries (written by Bill Willingham), where the Squad sends the apprehended villains to a remote prison world via boom tube. Squad members seen rounding up villains include Rick Flag, Jr., Bronze Tiger, Captain Boomerang, Count Vertigo, the General, King Faraday, Multiplex, Nightshade, Plastique, Bane, Chemo, and Deadshot (the latter three are betrayed by the Squad and sent to the prison planet with the other villains).Countdown (vol. 1) #43-42, 39, 28, 25, 22All Flash (vol. 1) #1Checkmate (vol. 2) #18-20Green Arrow and Black Canary Wedding Special (vol. 1) #1Outsiders (vol. 2) #50Gotham Underground (vol. 1) #1, 3, 6Justice League of America (vol. 2) #15, 17-18Salvation Run (vol. 1) #1-2Catwoman (vol. 3) #74-75, 78 John Ostrander returned to the Suicide Squad for an eight-issue miniseries, starting in November 2007. The series takes place roughly between the Squad's appearance in Checkmate (vol. 2) #6-7 and the events of Salvation Run (as Amanda Waller has already been ousted from her position at Checkmate, but Deadshot and Chemo are still with the Squad and not exiled). It is functionally a sequel to the Checkmate arc, detailing how Rick Flag, Jr. survived his apparent death before returning to Waller's Suicide Squad. DC Comics' official solicitations consistently referred to the miniseries as Suicide Squad: Raise the Flag, though this nomenclature is never used within any individual issue or collected edition of the miniseries. Rick Flag, Jr. is revealed to be alive, having been transported to the dinosaur-infested island of Skartaris by his enemy Rustam after Flag's apparent death beneath Jotunheim.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #1 The pair works together for mutual survival,Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #2 though Flag is forced to kill Rustam once the pair discovers a way home. Flag winds up as a prisoner of war in Qurac for the next four years; after being rescued by Bronze Tiger, Flag rejoins the Suicide Squad, which includes his now-superhuman former commanding officer, General Wade Eiling.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #3 After reviewing several new recruits,Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #4 Amanda Waller briefs the Squad on the latest target: a Dubai-based global conglomerate called Haake-Bruton, whose deadly and fast-acting new viral weapon is to be destroyed, and its board of directors eliminated.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #5 The Squad airdrops onto Haake-Bruton's island stronghold, where Flag encounters Rustam's revenge-seeking father. Eiling compromises the mission, conspiring with Thinker to betray the Squad to Haake-Bruton's board in exchange for asylum.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #6 The Squad suffers heavy casualties in the sudden internal conflict.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #7 Despite numerous setbacks, Deadshot manages to carry out the assassination, while Waller confronts the General personally. Eiling demonstrates control over Flag via psychological conditioning; Flag subdues him after revealing the cooperation as a ruse, and the Squad returns to Belle Reve. Flag is unfazed by Waller's revelation that his own identity and memories are implanted, asserting to Nightshade that—no matter what anyone else says—he is still Rick Flag, Jr.Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #8 Notable team members from Suicide Squad (vol. 3) include: The Squad made prominent appearances in a four-issue Manhunter (vol. 4) arcManhunter (vol. 4) #33-36 and during the Blackest Night crossover event.Blackest Night: Suicide Squad #67 and Secret Six (vol. 3) #17-18 In his multiverse-spanning adventures, Booster Gold briefly cooperated with a version of the Silver Age Squad.Booster Gold (vol. 2) #20 These issues mark the Squad's final appearances prior to DC Comics' New 52 continuity reboot in 2011. The Suicide Squad has a run-in with Manhunter, after she unknowingly compromises their months-long undercover investigation into the Crime Doctor's metahuman genetic experiments in collaboration with Vestech Industries. Manhunter backs off of the trail at the insistence of the Squad and the Birds of Prey, but goes rogue in an effort to bring down the Crime Doctor—who futilely attempts to restrain the Squad after becoming aware of their deep-cover duplicity. The operation is dismantled, and Manhunter goes public with the takedown. On one of his adventures throughout the DC multiverse, Booster Gold winds up in an alternate 1952, where Karin Grace drafts him into a Squad led by Frank Rock. The team infiltrates a U.S. military compound to root out a Soviet double-agent, who ultimately turns out to be the creator of the Rocket Reds' combat armor. In the three-issue Blackest Night tie-in arc "Danse Macabre" (written by Gail Simone and John Ostrander), several deceased Suicide Squad members are reanimated as Black Lanterns, led by Fiddler (this group is unofficially known as the "Homicide Squad"). They attack the Squad and the Secret Six, who are engaged in simultaneous conflicts at their respective headquarters, owing to Amanda Waller's plans to shut down the Six. The two teams join forces to wipe out the Homicide Squad; with the immediate threat resolved, the Six assert their independence, and Deadshot places a bullet mere centimeters from Waller's heart to punctuate the point. As she recovers at Belle Reve, she reveals that she is secretly Mockingbird, the Secret Six's mysterious benefactor. A new Suicide Squad title, written by Adam Glass with art by Federico Dallocchio and Ransom Getty, launched in September 2011 as part of The New 52 (a reboot of the DC Comics universe). Amanda Waller once again directs a crew of black ops agents on covert government missions, with Deadshot serving as the field team's leader. The ongoing series is notable as serving as something of a showpiece for Batman villain Harley Quinn, and it has crossed over with other New 52 titles, including Resurrection Man,Resurrection Man (vol. 2) #8-9 Grifter,Grifter (vol. 3) #14-15 and Justice League of America's Vibe.Justice League of America's Vibe (vol. 1) #4-5 After a botched government mission forces her to execute an injured teammate, Amanda Waller sets out to assemble an expendable field team, prompting the formation of a new Suicide Squad (the first and only Squad in the New 52 continuity).Suicide Squad vol. 4 #0 Waller forces dozens of Belle Reve's death row inmates into a series of rigorous tests and torture scenarios to evaluate their loyalty and value as potential Squad members. The finalists—notably including Deadshot, King Shark, and Harley Quinn—are outfitted with micro-bomb implants, and inducted into the Squad.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #1 The Suicide Squad's missions typically involve the elimination or retrieval of high-value targets, such as the recovery of a newborn baby who carries the cure to a deadly viral outbreak.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #2-5 At one point, the team must track down an AWOL Harley Quinn;Suicide Squad vol. 4 #6-7 in another mission, the Squad goes after Resurrection Man.Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #9 The Basilisk terrorist group serves as a recurring villainSuicide Squad (vol. 4) #8, 10-13Suicide Squad vol. 4 #17-19 (echoing the Jihad organization from John Ostrander's original Suicide Squad series), and several issues delve into the twisted relationship between Harley Quinn and the Joker.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #14-15 Eventually, Waller recruits serial killer James Gordon, Jr. to act as Belle Reve's in-house psychiatric adviser—but unbeknownst to her, Gordon quickly develops a twisted infatuation with Waller.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #20 One ongoing and unresolved plot point involves the Samsara serum—a medical treatment that Belle Reve's doctors use to resurrect dead Squad members (including Deadshot and VoltaicSuicide Squad (vol. 4) #16). It is eventually discovered that the serum will permanently kill anyone that it's administered to; Waller is implied to be one such subject.Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #22 During the Forever Evil crossover event, Waller approaches Black Manta with an offer to join the Squad, just before the Crime Syndicate of America raids Belle Reve.Aquaman vol. 7 #23.1 Waller later convinces Deadshot to help her assemble a team to stop the Crime Syndicate.Justice League of America vol. 3 #7.1 Amanda Waller gets to a secret area in Belle Reve, where she instructs Deadshot and Harley to take the team to the Rocky Mountains to intercept a weapon. Before doing so, Deadshot and Harley are able to recruit Captain Boomerang back to the team. Back at Belle Reve, James Gordon, Jr learns that the Thinker is building a satellite to control something and it is seen that King Shark is working with him. In a flashback, it is shown that Amanda Waller has recruited Warrant, Steel and Unknown Soldier, on the basis that the former Suicide Squad betrayed her by joining the Crime Syndicate and are using her intel to get the weapon in the Rockies for the Syndicate. In the Rockies, Power Girl arrives to assist the new recruits. When the new recruits arrive at the weapon, which turns out to be OMAC, they see that Deadshot, Harley and Captain Boomerang are already there. Unknown Soldier contacts Amanda Waller, letting her know there is a problem, and she instructs him and the rest of the new recruits, to kill the reformed Suicide Squad. However, it is revealed that Unknown Soldier is actually talking to the Thinker, while the actual Amanda Waller is attempting to contact Deadshot to not bring OMAC back to Belle Reve, as the Thinker has placed an explosive collar around her neck.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #24 The two teams continue to fight until Unknown Soldier realizes that his team was approached by a holographic Waller and were tricked. Meanwhile, Harley Quinn (who is working for the Thinker) takes OMAC and activates him causing him to fire a laser on the mountain which collapses on the two teams inside it. At Belle Reve, James Gordon, Jr. finds Amanda Waller who proceeds to bring him to a secret sub-level in the prison. On the way, she tells him the history of the Task Force program and all the failed attempts that lead up to Task Force Team X before being found by King Shark. James Gordon Jr. holds him off telling him that if he kills Waller, he will never know who his real father is. Waller arrives at a vault labeled "Project Y" and opens it to reveal Kamo.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #25 King Shark begins to attack Kamo until Amanda Waller is able to lie to both to get them to help her defeat OMAC. Harley Quinn arrives at Belle Reve and drops OMAC near James Gordon, Jr. James Gordon Jr. confronts her and puts a knife in her back and an explosive collar around her neck. James Gordon Jr. learns that she betrayed the team in the Rockies, and learns that the Thinker is planning to use OMAC. While James is talking to Harley, the Thinker has taken OMAC and begins transferring his mind to it. Now activated, OMAC proceeds to attack Amanda Waller, James Gordon Jr., Harley Quinn, King Shark, and Kamo. Elsewhere, Deadshot is seen alive underneath the fallen mountain.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #26 Power Girl is able to lift the fallen mountain, allowing the two teams to get free. They split up to find a way out of the mountain and while searching, Warrant falls into running water and is swept away when Deadshot fails to help him. The teams are able to make it out and attempt to contact Waller for an extraction. At Belle Reve, OMAC is fighting King Shark and Kamo, while Amanda Waller attempts to activate Belle Reve's fail safe through the Thinker's computer. Before she is able to do so, Kevin Kho reaches out to her telling her that he is trapped within OMAC.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #27 As Waller works with Kho, the team returns from the mountains, only to be dragged into the fight with OMAC. Having killed Kamo, OMAC is able to defeat Power Girl, Steel, Unknown Soldier, and King Shark and heads further into Belle Reve. Deadshot and Harley find "magic bullets" that will allow them to gain temporary super human powers. Deadshot fires them into Harley, Waller, himself, and Unknown Soldier and the Squad begins to attack OMAC.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #28 Kho is able to regain control of OMAC before Waller has to enact her last resort. But without knowing, Captain Boomerang knocks OMAC into a porthole, sending him to another dimension. Waller later tells the Squad that the "magic bullet" was actually a strand of a nano-bomb and they are once again tagged with the explosive collars.Suicide Squad vol. 4 #29 Notable team members from Suicide Squad (vol. 4) include: This 2014 relaunch, from writer Sean Ryan and artist Jeremy Roberts, sees Deadshot and Harley Quinn teaming up with new Squad members Black Manta, Joker's Daughter and the Reverse Flash. Deathstroke was an initial member of the revamped roster in issue #1, but quickly turned on his "teammates" in the following issue. Notable team members from New Suicide Squad include: Suicide Squad trade paperbacks include:     In February 2014, Warner Bros. hired Justin Marks to adapt Suicide Squad with Dan Lin producing. It will be the third installment of the DC Extended Universe. David Ayer was announced as director in September 2014. The following month, The Hollywood Reporter reported actors Will Smith and Tom Hardy were in talks with DC. On November 10, it was revealed that Margot Robbie was cast as Harley Quinn. Jared Leto was being looked at for The Joker and Jai Courtney was being eyed for Deadshot. The film will be shot in Toronto from mid-April to September and is due for release August 5, 2016. Ayer confirmed that he would write the script as well as direct, consulting popular Suicide Squad comics as a reference, saying "the DC universe is too rich to go very far astray." In December 2014, the cast of the film was announced. In addition to confirming Will Smith as Deadshot, Jared Leto as the Joker, Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn, Joel Kinnaman as Rick Flag, Jai Courtney as Captain Boomerang and Cara Delevingne as Enchantress. Oprah Winfrey, Viola Davis, and Octavia Spencer were considered for the role of Amanda Waller, while Jesse Eisenberg may reprise his role as Lex Luthor from Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. It was rumored on December 16, 2014 that Viola Davis has been cast as Waller. This was confirmed in the film's first trailer. On January 15, 2015, it was reported that Hardy had been forced to drop out of the film because of scheduling issues with his current film, The Revenant, and that Jake Gyllenhaal was being looked at to replace him in the Rick Flag role, but has since declined. Jon Bernthal and Joel Edgerton were considered for Rick Flag, with rumors circulating that Gary Sinise was in talks to play General Wade Eiling and Joe Manganiello was in talks to play Deathstroke. In February 2015, Joel Kinnaman was announced as Rick Flag and Jay Hernandez wass in talks for a role. In March 2015, actor Scott Eastwood was cast and boxer turned actor Raymond Olubowale was cast in an unnamed role. That same month, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje was cast as Killer Croc, while Karen Fukuhara is also cast as Katana. On April 8, 2015, Ike Barinholtz, Adam Beach, and Jim Parrack were announced to join the cast. Ayer tweeted that filming has begun. On July 13, 2015, Warner Bros released the official Suicide Squad Comic-Con first look teaser via YouTube.http://www.hhkmag.com/suicide-squad-comic-con-trailer/    Amanda Waller Rick Flag, Jr. Bronze Tiger Captain Boomerang (George Harkness) Count Vertigo Deadshot Doctor Light (Arthur Light) Duchess (Lashina) Enchantress Jewelee Nemesis (Tom Tresser) Nightshade Oracle (Barbara Gordon) Poison Ivy Punch Ravan Shade, the Changing Man Thinker (Cliff Carmichael) Vixen Harley Quinn Amanda Waller Sgt. Frank Rock (implied to be an impostor) Big Sir Bulldozer Clock King (William Tockman) Cluemaster Deadshot Havana Killer Frost (Louise Lincoln) Major Disaster Modem Multi-Man Amanda Waller Rick Flag, Jr. Blackguard Bronze Tiger Captain Boomerang (Owen Mercer) Chemo Count Vertigo Deadshot Harley Quinn King Faraday The General Marauder Multiplex Plastique Thinker (Cliff Carmichael) Twister White Dragon (William Heller) Windfall Amanda Waller Black Spider (Eric Needham) Captain Boomerang (George Harkness) Deadshot El Diablo (Chato Santana) James Gordon, Jr. King Shark Harley Quinn The Unknown Soldier Yo-Yo (Chang Jie-Ru) Black Manta Captain Boomerang Deadshot Joker's Daughter Harley Quinn Reverse-Flash Suicide Squad: The Silver Age (collects Brave and the Bold #25-27, Pages TBA July 2016  Suicide Squad: From the Ashes (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 3) #1-8, 192 pages, softcover, August 2008, ) Secret Six: Danse Macabre (collects Secret Six (vol. 3) #15-18 and Blackest Night: Suicide Squad #67, 128 pages, softcover, October 2010, ) Suicide Squad (1987): Suicide Squad, Vol. 1: Trial by Fire (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #1-8 and Secret Origins (vol. 2) #14, 232 pages, softcover, February 2011, ) Suicide Squad, Vol. 2: The Nightshade Odyssey (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #9-16, Justice League International #13, and Doom Patrol/Suicide Squad Special #1, 264 pages, softcover, December 2015, ) Suicide Squad Vol. 3 (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #17-26, 280 Pages, April 2016  Suicide Squad Vol. 4 (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 1) #27-30, Checkmate #15-18, Manhunter #14, Firestorm Vol. 2 #86, Captain Atom #30 Pages TBA ) Suicide Squad (2011): Vol. 1: Kicked in the Teeth (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #1-7, 160 pages, softcover, July 2012, ) Vol. 2: Basilisk Rising (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #8-13, #0 and Resurrection Man (vol. 2) #9, 192 pages, softcover, February 2013, ) Vol. 3: Death Is for Suckers (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #14-19, 144 pages, softcover, October 2013, ) Vol. 4: Discipline and Punish (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #20-23, Detective Comics (vol. 2) #23.2, and Justice League of America (vol. 3) #7.1, 144 pages, softcover, April 2014, ) Vol. 5: Walled In (collects Suicide Squad (vol. 4) #24-30, 208 pages, softcover, October 2014, ) New Suicide Squad (2014): Vol. 1: Pure Insanity (collects New Suicide Squad #1-8, 192 Pages, softcover, July 2015, ) Vol. 2 (collects New Suicide Squad #9-12, Annual #1, 144 Pages, softcover, February 2016, ) Vol. 3 (collects New Suicide Squad #13-16, TBA pages, softcover, August 2016, ) At the height of Suicide Squad (vol. 1), DC had meetings with writers and producers to discuss the possibility of a Suicide Squad television series. According to John Ostrander, the ideas were pretty bad, and nothing ultimately came of it.Hutchison, Michael. "John Ostrander: The Interview". Fanzing. August 1999. The Suicide Squad appears in the animated Justice League Unlimited series, in the episode "Task Force X". Field commander Rick Flag, Jr. recruits Captain Boomerang, Deadshot, Plastique, and Clock King (who fulfills Oracle's radio support role here) for a mission to appropriate the Annihilator automaton from the Justice League Watchtower on behalf of Project Cadmus.  The team attacks the Watchtower during its weakest point when there is a minimal number of super humans on duty.  They defeat Atom Smasher, Vigilante and Shining Knight with ease only running into problems when they encounter Martian Manhunter and Captain Atom. The team succeeds, but Plastique is critically wounded in the process. According to the series' producers, this episode resulted from the realization that the Project Cadmus organization needed a solid victory to cement itself as a credible threat. The Squad was referred to throughout the episode as "Task Force X", because of concerns with using the word "suicide" for children's television."Cadmus Exposed", Justice League Unlimited Season Two, DC Classics Collection, Warner Bros In Smallville's season 9 episode "Absolute Justice", the Suicide Squad is referenced directly by Checkmate's Amanda Waller. At the end of the episode, Waller shoots Icicle, who attempted to quit working for her. The end of the episode also reveals that Tess Mercer is a Checkmate agent. The Suicide Squad itself is featured in Smallville's 10th and final season; members who appear include Rick Flag, Deadshot (Floyd Lawton), Plastique (Bette Sans Souci), and Warp (Emil LaSalle). Halfway through the 10th season, it is revealed that the Squad has begun working for Chloe Sullivan. In Arrow season 2 episode "Suicide Squad", the team appears under the direction of Amanda Waller and consists of Deadshot, Shrapnel, Bronze Tiger, and Lyla Michaels. John Diggle was also a temporary member of the team, but left at the end of the episode, Harley Quinn was locked in her room and not called for duty, but is a member. Shrapnel is apparently killed by Waller as a result of him abandoning the mission. Diggle releases the team again in the season 2 finale "Unthinkable" to help him save Starling City from being bombed to stop Slade Wilson's army. In "Draw Back Your Bow" Oliver hands over Carrie Cutter / Cupid to Waller for the Suicide Squad to put her skills to a useful case, having taken pity on her. In "The Brave and the Bold" it is revealed that Digger Harkness was once a member of the Suicide Squad but his last mission became a failure and Michaels ordered the mission and him to be terminated, which proved to be unsuccessful. The team appears in the episode "Suicidal Tendencies" with Deadshot and Cupid, when the two of them are sent with Diggle and Lyla to rescue a senator from a hostage situation, only for Deadshot to sacrifice himself to save the other three when it is revealed that the senator had set up the attack to try and stage his own rescue with the goal of using the reputation he'd gain to mount a presidential campaign. In July 2014, David Ramsey, who portrays Diggle on Arrow, indicated that the producers were looking into spinning off the Suicide Squad into their own TV series, saying, "They're talking about spinning Suicide Squad off. I don't know if they're going to really do it, but they've been talking about it", due to the positive fan reception. Ramsey also said a spin-off could potentially occur during Arrows mid-season hiatus, or during a two to three episode period during the third season of Arrow, as a "kind of connecting the tissue of the last season [two] to the beginning of the [third] season." Rick Flag appears in the direct-to-video animated film Justice League: The New Frontier, an adaptation of Darwyn Cooke's DC: The New Frontier comic series. The Squad itself is cut from the story for brevity; only Flag and Hal Jordan remain. The Suicide Squad appears in Batman: Assault on Arkham as the main focus of the film. The line up consists of Deadshot, Harley Quinn, King Shark, Killer Frost, Captain Boomerang, Black Spider and KGBeast while Amanda Waller monitors their activities and controls their every move with bombs surgically implanted in all of their spines. KGBeast was killed as an example of Amanda Waller's claim when he thought she was bluffing. It is eventually revealed that Riddler was once also a part of the Squad. Riddler's knowledge of how to defuse Waller's bombs caused him to become a target of Waller, who sends the squad after him. Through the course of the film, Black Spider and King Shark are killed via the bombs before they can be defused, Harley Quinn is eventually locked back in Arkham (as seen in Batman: Arkham Asylum), Captain Boomerang is left on Arkham grounds and re-captured by the GCPD, while Killer Frost's fate remains unknown (although she is most likely deceased). Deathstroke in an interview was inducted into the Suicide Squad at the end of Batman: Arkham Origins, and was revealed to having escaped by the mission. DC writer and editor Geoff Johns confirmed in February 2012 that a video game based on the Suicide Squad is in development. Since the 14th update of DC Universe Online (June 2012) Hero and Villain characters could work together in PVP matches as the Player Character had been recruited into various Task Force X teams. This does not affect gameplay whatsoever apart from a brief message from Amanda Waller. This message is only given if there are not enough Heroes and Villains to occupy different teams. A downloadable content pack in Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham features the New 52 versions of the Suicide Squad as characters. Named "The Squad" considering the implications of the word "Suicide" to the game's target audience, the pack's minifigures includes Amanda Waller, Deadshot, Harley Quinn, Captain Boomerang, El Diablo, King Shark, Deathstroke, and Katana. In the DLC map, the Squad are ordered by Amanda Waller to find the person who infiltrated Belle Reve. By the end of the mission, it was discovered that Killer Moth had infiltrated Belle Reve as part of a plan to expose the existence of the Squad and was defeated by the Squad. In the post-credits of Batman: Arkham Origins, Amanda Waller recruits Deathstroke into the Suicide Squad, hinting at a possible Squad appearance in future Batman: Arkham games, or the aforementioned Suicide Squad game. In this same game, if the player looks up the character trophy of Harley Quinn, she can be seen holding the same (or at least a similar) dossier Waller gives to Wilson. Several cut-scenes in Batman: Arkham Origins Blackgate implicate Amanda Waller and the Suicide Squad in the game's prison riot plot. Waller and Rick Flag, Jr. are shown recruiting Bronze Tiger and Deadshot in the post-credits scene. List of government agencies in DC Comics Checkmate (comics) Janus Directive Secret Six (comics)
