   Super Friends is an American animated television series about a team of superheroes, which ran from 1973 to 1986 on ABC as part of its Saturday morning cartoon lineup. It was produced by Hanna-Barbera and was based on the Justice League of America (JLA) and associated comic book characters published by DC Comics. The name of the program (and the JLA members featured with the Super Friends) have been variously represented (as Super Friends and Challenge of the Super Friends, for example) at different points in its broadcast history. There were a total of 109 episodes and two backdoor-pilot episodes of The New Scooby-Doo Movies, with Batman and Robin appearing in "The Dynamic Scooby Doo Affair" and "The Caped Crusader Caper." Over the years, the show existed under several titles: Plot lines for the later series involved many of the familiar DC Comics super-villains but the first incarnation of the Super Friends did not. Instead, like the comic books, they focused on the far-fetched schemes of mad scientists and aliens, who were invariably revealed as being well-intentioned, and simply pursuing their goals through unlawful or disreputable means. Typically, at the end of each story, a peaceful and reasonable discussion would be performed by the heroes to convince the antagonists to adopt more reasonable methods. The All-New Super Friends Hour departed somewhat from the previous series' formula by featuring villains using more elaborate methods to further their goals; as a rule they could not be reasoned with, requiring the heroes to use direct force to stop them. Beginning with Challenge of the Super Friends, several of the heroes' arch-villains from the comic books (such as Lex Luthor and The Riddler) began to feature prominently in comic-style stories. Throughout the series, plots often wrapped themselves up neatly in the final minutes of an episode in the fashion of the typical comic books and deus ex machina. When animation company Hanna-Barbera acquired rights to the DC Comics characters and adapted the Justice League of America comic book for television it made several changes in the transition, including the change of name to Super Friends. Nevertheless, team members sometimes referred to themselves as the Justice League on the show. The violence common in superhero comics was toned down for a younger audience and to adhere to broadcast standards governing violence in 1970s children's television. As a DC Comics-based show, the Super Friends franchise was owned by DC's parent company Warner Bros., who later put the series into syndication. Thus, Cartoon Network, which had the rights to air most of the rest of the Hanna-Barbera library from its inception in 1992, was not able to air Super Friends until after the merger of Warner Bros. parent company Time Warner and Cartoon Network parent company Turner Broadcasting System was completed in 1996. This merger also led to Warner Bros. taking control of Hanna-Barbera and all of its other assets as well.  Super Friends first aired on ABC on September 8, 1973, featuring well-known DC characters Superman, Batman and Robin, Wonder Woman, and Aquaman. Superman, Batman and Robin and Aquaman had each previously appeared in their own animated series produced by Filmation, and voice talent from these prior programs was brought in to work on the new show. Shortly before the Super Friends series was developed, Superman and Wonder Woman also guest-starred in two episodes of The Brady Kids, while Batman and Robin appeared in two episodes of The New Scooby-Doo Movies. In addition to the superheroes, a trio of sidekicks was introduced, each of whom were new characters not drawn from the comic books: Wendy and Marvin (voiced by Sherri Alberoni and Frank Welker) and Wonder Dog (also voiced by Frank Welker), none of whom had any special abilities (save the dog's unexplained ability to reason and "talk"). Inspired by the Scooby-Doo gang, the trio—or at least its human members—were depicted as detectives and/or superheroes-in-training. Each episode began with the heroes responding to an emergency detected by the massive TroubAlert computer in the Hall of Justice, which served as the headquarters of the team. Colonel Wilcox, a U.S. Army official, was a recurring character who would act as a government liaison with the Super Friends during emergencies. Colonel Wilcox was voiced by John Stephenson. Conflicts were usually resolved with the antagonists persuaded to adapt more reasonable methods to achieve their aims (with the assistance of the heroes). Natural disasters triggered by human (or alien) activity were often shown, and environmental themes featured strongly in the program. Three other DC Comics superheroes were featured as guest stars during this season: the Flash, Plastic Man, and Green Arrow. This first run of Super Friends, consisting of 16 one-hour episodes which were rerun several times, concluded on August 24, 1974. At this point, the series was cancelled. However, interest in superheroes among ABC's prime-time viewers (with the success of The Six Million Dollar Man and the live-action Wonder Woman series) caused the network to revive Super Friends. The original 16 episodes of the series were rebroadcast as a mid-season replacement, running from February 7, 1976, to September 3, 1977. These episodes were edited into half-hour versions. At the same time DC Comics published a Super Friends comic, which used Wendy and Marvin from issue #1 (Nov 1976) to #6 (Aug. 1977).  In the meantime, Hanna-Barbera began production on a revamped version of the show.  The All-New Super Friends Hour featured four animated shorts per program. Wendy, Marvin and Wonder Dog were dropped from this and all future TV iterations of Super Friends, and were replaced by Wonder Twins Zan and Jayna, and their pet monkey, Gleek. Unlike Wendy and Marvin, Zan and Jayna had actual super powers. Darrell McNeil of the Hanna-Barbara animation studios later explained the change in cast:  The show followed a basic format each week. The first segment of every show featured two of the heroes (for the purposes of the team-ups in the first and fourth segments, Batman and Robin were considered "one hero") teaming up in a separate mini-story. The second segment featured a story with the Wonder Twins. The third segment was considered the "primary" adventure of the week, featuring the entire Super Friends roster (including the Wonder Twins) in a longer adventure. The fourth and final segment featured a story with one of the primary lineup and a "special guest star". This segment typically featured a problem that was solved using the guest star's unique abilities. Between segments there were short spots with members of the Super Friends giving basic safety lessons, providing first-aid advice, demonstrating magic tricks, creating crafts, and presenting a two-part riddle featuring the week's primary plot line. This was the first season to feature two villains appearing in the comic books, Black Manta and Gentleman Ghost. Black Manta's costume was not black, and he was only referred to as "Manta"; both he and Gentleman Ghost only appeared in one episode this season, referred to as "Gentleman Jim Craddock".  The next season of Super Friends featured two segments: The first segment of the program featured the established group of heroes: Superman, Batman and Robin, Aquaman, Wonder Woman, the Wonder Twins and Gleek.  They were rerun with intro from the All-New Super Friends Hour when in syndication in the early 1980s, but they are seldom seen in syndication since then. The second half-hour of the show introduced the Legion of Doom, a team of 13 recurring foes who are the Super Friends' worst enemies. They used a swamp-based mechanical flying headquarters, the Hall of Doom (resembling the helmet of Darth Vader), as a contrast to the Super Friends' gleaming Hall of Justice. Additional heroes who had previously appeared as guest stars were added to the roster as well, to make a total of 11. These included the Flash (Barry Allen), Green Lantern (Hal Jordan) and Thanagarian lawman Hawkman (Katar Hol) from DC Comics and three Hanna-Barbera creations: Black Vulcan, Apache Chief, and Samurai. Despite the Riddler showing a set of playing cards with (from left to right) Gleek, Zan, Aquaman, Wonder Woman, Robin, Batman, and Superman (which he then burns to ashes in his introduction in "Wanted: The Super Friends"), the Wonder Twins and Gleek did not appear in Challenge. Enthusiasts have expressed the view that the storylines for the Challenge episodes were the Super Friends era's best portrayal of the DC heroes. The Challenge of the Super Friends segment was expanded to 90 minutes mid-season, with reruns of earlier episodes filling out the last half-hour. In the fall of 1979, the Super Friends returned to their prior format, bringing back the original set of five DC superheroes and Zan, Jayna and Gleek. Eight half-hour episodes were created for this run, with the majority of the season consisting of repeats of The All-New Super Friends Hour from 1977 to 1978 and The Super Friends segments from Challenge of the Super Friends from 1978 to 1979. Renamed The World's Greatest Super Friends, this series began on September 22, 1979, and ran until September 27, 1980.  Renamed Super Friends in 1980, the series changed formats again, abandoning the production of half-hour episodes and producing seven-minute shorts. Each episode of Super Friends would feature a rerun from one of the previous six years and three new shorts. These new adventures featured appearances by the core group of five Super Friends and  Zan, Jayna & Gleek. There were also guest appearances from members previously depicted in Challenge of the Super Friends and the Hanna-Barbera-created hero El Dorado, who was added to the show in 1981 to provide cultural diversity. This would prove to be one of the longer-lived incarnations of the series (three years). For the 1982–1983 television season ABC ran half-hour reruns of shows from the previous seven seasons, with none of the seven-minute shorts rebroadcast. ABC called the rerun package The Best of the Super Friends. Hanna-Barbera and Warner Bros. had created a syndication package of the earlier Super Friends series (co-distributed by LBS Communications); these were picked up by stations across the United States and typically broadcast on weekday afternoons. Not wishing to compete with the syndication programming, ABC dropped the series from the 1983–1984 Saturday morning television line-up. For the second time, Super Friends was cancelled. However, during this time Hanna-Barbera continued to produce new episodes with the Super Friends, with ABC's approval and funding. In total, 24 "lost episodes" were produced, but not aired in the United States that season; the series appeared in Australia. Three of these episodes were aired when Super Friends returned to Saturday-morning ABC television the following year. The remainder aired on the USA network in 1995, as part of the Superman/Batman Adventures show. Super Friends returned to ABC Saturday, September 8, 1984, with a new 30-minute program typically featuring two 11-minute stories per episode. This incarnation featured Superman, Batman, Robin, Wonder Woman, the Wonder Twins and Gleek, this time teamed up with Firestorm. In addition to this core group, episodes during this season also featured cameos by old (and new) Super Friends. The series ended August 31, 1985, and featured comic-book villains such as Brainiac, Lex Luthor, Mirror Master, Mr. Mxyzptlk, Darkseid and his henchmen from Apokolips. This season and the next featured the "Super Powers" tagline, which was part of a marketing tie-in with a toy line of the same name produced by Kenner. In fall 1985 the next version of Hanna-Barbera's depiction of the DC Comics heroes began, although it no longer carried the Super Friends name. This series returned to a conventional lineup for the team, with a focus on teen members Cyborg and Firestorm. Once again headquartered at the Hall of Justice in Metropolis, the heroes battled such familiar foes as Lex Luthor, Brainiac, the Scarecrow and recurring villain Darkseid. It also contained the only appearances by The Joker, The Penguin, the Royal Flush Gang and Felix Faust. The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians lasted one season before being canceled. The final new episode aired was "The Death of Superman" on November 6, 1985. This third cancellation would be the final one, and Galactic Guardians marked the end of Hanna-Barbera's 13-year run of the series on September 30, 1986. The core group of five heroes made up the "Super Friends": Additional Justice League members included: DC Comics characters who were not Justice League members in comics (at the time), only on the series: Justice League members created for the series: One-shot Justice League appearances were made by: The teen sidekicks and their pets: Other DC comic characters that appeared in the series: Thirteen villains composed the Legion of Doom during the Challenge of the Super Friends season. They were: Villains appearing independently from the Legion of Doom: Villains appearing not adapted from the comic books: In the animated series Justice League Unlimited, Gorilla Grodd reforms his Secret Society this time an even larger group of villains. While not called "The Legion of Doom", their headquarters is a craft similar to the Hall of Doom, located in a swamp. Beginning with the original Super Friends season, the opening narration describes the team's headquarters as "the great hall of the Justice League." The opening credits of Challenge of the Super Friends names the Super Friends as the Justice League of America. In addition to the appearance of a JLA emblem on a communicator and a reference to a mission to repair the Justice League satellite, the Super Friends are often linked with the JLA. The Justice League satellite under repair is clearly the same design as the Justice League Satellite that appeared in the comics at the time, but was shown to be substantially smaller than its comic book counterpart. The voice of the Narrator was provided by actor Ted Knight during the early hour-long episodes.  Bill Woodson took over with the revival of the series in 1977.  His signature line was "Meanwhile, at the Hall of Justice...". The voices of Marvin and Wonder Dog as well as Mr. Mxyzptlk, Toyman, The Dollmaker, Darkseid, Kalibak and The Joker were performed by Frank Welker. Adam West provided the voice of Batman in Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show and The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians. Casey Kasem provided the voice of Robin (and many others in the show). Rene Auberjonois lends his voice as Desaad. In January 2009, IGN listed Super Friends as the 50th best animated television series.  On January 18 and 25, 1979, Hanna-Barbera ran two, one-hour live-action specials under the umbrella title Legends of the Superheroes. The first special, subtitled "The Challenge", was loosely based on the Super Friends and the 1960s Batman series (played for laughs, but this time, including a laugh track) and included several other DC characters who replaced Samurai, Black Vulcan, and Apache Chief: Black Canary, the E-2 Huntress Helena Wayne (a new DC character, gathering her own following in All-Star and Adventure Comics JSA runs as a JSA member), and Captain Marvel (who had previously had his own live action series through Filmation studios). The second special, entitled "The Roast", featured Ed McMahon as emcee of the roast, along the lines of The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast specials. Due to Warner Bros.' contracts on Wonder Woman (already being used in her own live action series; Lynda Carter) and Superman (in his own live-action theatrical movie at the time; Christopher Reeve), they were unable to be featured on the specials.  Plastic Man first appeared in the first season of Super Friends, in one episode. Later, Ruby-Spears Productions released a series starring the character in his own solo adventures. A Batman animated series was also considered in the mid-1980s, presumably with Adam West reprising his role as the voice of Batman. "The Fear" was written as a pilot episode for the series, but it was instead adapted in to an episode of The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians. In 1983, a cartoon based upon The New Teen Titans comics began development. It was created as a companion for the Super Friends, to be set in the same continuity. Robin wasn't going to be featured in the cartoon though, at least not as a regular, since in the Super Friends universe, he was a member of the Justice League. Like Super Friends, the show was to be developed by Hanna-Barbera for ABC, but since shows like The Smurfs (airing on NBC) were so popular at the time, this show was never picked up by the network. The show would have featured Wonder Girl as the leader, along with Cyborg, Kid Flash, Changeling, Raven and Starfire. Although the show failed to get picked up, a television commercial with a substance abuse theme did feature the Titans, as they would have appeared in the animated series, along with a new superhero named "The Protector" who would have been the replacement character for Robin. A Teen Titans animated TV program was eventually produced, adding Robin and removing Wonder Girl, Kid Flash, and The Protector.  In 1988, just two years after the final season of Super Friends, a new series created by Ruby-Spears Productions that featured a solo Superman aired on CBS. In the episode called "Superman and Wonder Woman vs. The Sorceress of Time", Wonder Woman guest stars, and Mary McDonald-Lewis voices her.  Fisher-Price developed a toy line named DC Super Friends featuring DC Comics characters as toys for young children. A comic book series and direct-to-video original animation called The Joker's Playhouse (2010) was developed to tie-in. The video features the World's Greatest Super Friends theme, allusions to the Legion of Doom, and the Super Friends and their Hall of Justice.  To watch a full array of clips, visit http://www.batterypop.com/shows/dc-super-friends. The first use of the Super Friends name on a DC Comics publication was in Limited Collectors' Edition #C-41 (December 1975-January 1976) which reprinted stories from Justice League of America #36 and 61 and featured a new framing sequence by writer E. Nelson Bridwell and artist Alex Toth.Limited Collectors' Edition #C-41 at the Grand Comics Database DC published a comic book version of the Super Friends from November 1976 to August 1981. The comic book series was launched by E. Nelson Bridwell and artist Ric Estrada. Zan and Jayna were given back stories and secret identities as a pair of blond-haired high school kids; they were more competent heroes than their cartoon counterparts. While the television cartoons were not part of the same fictional universe as the DC comic books, writer E. Nelson Bridwell made the comic book accord with the other DC titles via footnotes. An example of trying to fit Super Friends into the DC Universe: The argument for the comic being part of the Earth-One continuity also included the fact that certain elements of the series impacted other books in the DC line (such as TNT's appearance in Kandor in an issue of Superman Family that references events exclusively from Super Friends, Sinestro's lack of a power ring in an issue of The Brave and The Bold after the ring was destroyed in a Super Friends issue, and Superman already being familiar with Dr. Mist and the international heroes in DC Comics Presents after meeting them in Super Friends). Because the Super Friends stories were referenced in and the events in them remembered by the characters in the core DC superhero titles - for example, in Justice League of America no. 155 (June 1978) - they have to be considered part of the pre-Crisis Earth 1 ensemble of stories. In 2008, DC began publishing a new Super Friends comic book starring Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, Aquaman, Flash and Green Lantern (John Stewart). Based on the eponymous Imaginext toyline, it is aimed at children, with an art style reminiscent to that of Marvel's Super Hero Squad. Collected Editions In the comics, the Wonder Twins were members of the short-lived JLI offshoot, Extreme Justice. Young Justice was a comic series that followed the adventures of a group composed of the latest teen superheroes of the late 1990s and early 2000s, including Robin, Superboy, Impulse and Wonder Girl.  Towards the end of the run, Young Justice was involved in a mission which required them to invade an island whose population was made up of super-villains.  In order to conduct a successful attack, the core team assembled all the then-known teen heroes (including the Wonder Twins).  As in Extreme Justice, neither spoke English and both seemed to enjoy eating CDs.  Unlike their cartoon counterparts, the Wonder Twins were rude and sarcastic.  The lighthearted nature of the show was spoofed in the 2000s with two DC miniseries, Formerly Known as the Justice League and I Can't Believe It's Not the Justice League! (although these series were more direct take-offs on the 1980s Blue Beetle/Booster Gold-era Justice League). In these miniseries the group is known as the "Super Buddies", and consists of a team of ex-Justice League members. A television advertisement for the team shows them posing in the postures of the original Super Friends title card. As of issue #34 (2006), Wendy and Marvin were part of the DC continuity. They are now fraternal twins (a nod to their Super Friends successors, the Wonder Twins), engineering geniuses (having graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at age 16), and are employed at Titans Tower as maintenance crew and mechanical troubleshooters. They were responsible for restoring Titans member Cyborg to full functionality after he sustained damage to his artificial body parts during the events of the Infinite Crisis mini-series.  Wonder Dog was also introduced into the series, although (unlike the cartoon) he was not a lovable sidekick but a murderous, shape-shifting demon dog who was sent to Titans Tower to kill the team. Wonder Dog killed Marvin and attacked Wendy, leaving her crippled from the waist down.  Wendy is a supporting character in the Batgirl series, where she receives help accepting her disabilities from former Batgirl Barbara Gordon. During the events of the 2005 company-wide Infinite Crisis crossover the Justice League Watchtower was destroyed by Superboy-Prime, leaving the JLA without a base of operations. To that end, the team established the Hall of Justice in Washington, D.C. to act as an embassy for the team and an emergency base of operations if needed. In the continuity of the comics, the Hall was designed by Green Lantern and Wonder Woman. In Justice League of America #46 (2010) Samurai made his first appearance in the DC Universe, where he was shown as one of the heroes driven temporarily insane by Alan Scott. Issue #77 of Wizard magazine parodied the Super Friends; the JLA was sent through a dimensional rift and met some of the Super Friends. After Martian Manhunter used his Martian vision to melt the villain and his machine (much to Green Lantern's dismay: "You have to trick him into leaving, or shutting off his machine, NOT direct physical violence!"), the Super Friends decided to send the Justice Leaguers back to their own dimension. As a jest, the magazine also ran an April Fool's promotion for a Wonder Twins special by painter Alex Ross. The book, entitled Wonder Twins: Form of Water, was to be one of Alex Ross' oversized books chronicling the Justice League. The plot would see Zan and Jayna using their powers to help the Earth's famine- and drought-stricken nations after their monkey, Gleek, contracted super-rabies from severe dehydration. In the Elseworlds one-shot Superman and Batman: World's Funnest, Bat-Mite and Mr. Mxyzptlk travel to different worlds within the DC Universe. On one of them, they encounter the Super Friends. Cartoon Network produced three bumpers lampooning the Super Friends: Adult Swim has also produced bumpers parodying the Super Friends.  The first was a clip from the episode "The Time Trap", with bleeping edited in to give the appearance of profanity. They produced similar clips using other Hanna-Barbera cartoons. In another bumper, they lampooned the manner in which the Super Friends described every action before completing it (e.g., "I need to reach my utility belt so that I may free myself!") In this commercial, the heroes went to a movie and struggled to find money for popcorn.  Several bumpers consist of little more than Aquaman walking into a realistic photograph and then proceeding to dance to some rump-shaking music. At the end of "Secret Origins," the premiere three-episode arc of Justice League, Superman proposes the formation of a superhero coalition including himself, Batman, Wonder Woman, the Flash (Wally West), the Green Lantern (John Stewart), the Martian Manhunter, and Hawkgirl. In a direct reference (and perhaps a criticism of the somewhat silly name), the Flash jokingly asks if such a team would be called "Super Friends." Superman relabels the guild as the "Justice League." The Legion of Doom appeared as the primary antagonists of the final season of Justice League Unlimited, complete with the group's trademark skull-shaped lair from Super Friends. Additionally, the Justice League's Metro Tower headquarters in Metropolis strongly resembled the Hall of Justice. The Ultimen, loosely based on characters created for the Super Friends, were briefly allies and later antagonists to the JLU. The Ultimen consisted of Long Shadow, Juice, Wind Dragon, Downpour and Shifter. The group appeared in the episode "Ultimatum", where it is revealed that they are clones created by Project Cadmus. The animated series The Batman featured a modified version of the JLA Watchtower which closely resembled the Hall of Justice. The Hall of Justice appeared in the Batman: The Brave and the Bold episode "Sidekicks Assemble!", with a pastiche of the music played when the Hall appeared in Super Friends. The Wonder Twins appeared in the Smallville episode "Idol", with Zan played by David Gallagher and Jayna played by Allison Scagliotti. Gleek did not appear physically, but a cartoonish image of him was shown on each of the twins' cellphones. The Hall of Justice was featured in Young Justice as the Justice League's decoy base of operations. Additionally, Wendy and Marvin appear as classmates of Conner Kent and Megan Morse. The members of the Injustice League operate out of a base resembling the Legion's Hall of Doom. In the second season, approximations of the minority members created for Super Friends (similar to the Ultimen example above) are introduced as teenagers given powers by the Reach. The group consists of Tye Longshadow (Apache Chief), Asami "Sam" Koizumi (Samurai), and Eduardo "Ed" Dorado Jr. (El Dorado). The exception is Black Vulcan, whose place is taken by Milestone Media hero Static (Black Lightning also appears in the series). The title of the Super Best Friends Forever DC Nation Shorts is a play on the title Super Friends. Additionally, Black Vulcan's costume can be seen in the background of the first Black Lightning short. The Farm League carries several homages to the Super Friends including its narrator, characters used, and graphics. In the pilot episode of Supergirl, Winn thought of calling the group with Kara "The Super Friends". The Hall of Justice is a playable stage in Injustice: Gods Among Us.  The Super Powers toy line (and associated tie-in merchandise) was based on the final two seasons of Super Friends. Samurai, an original character from the show, and the Hall of Justice were both released. Plans for future waves from Super Powers would have also included El Dorado, Black Vulcan, and the Wonder Twins.  The toy line based on Justice League Unlimited released a three pack of figures from characters created for Super Friends, namely Black Vulcan, Apache Chief, and Samurai. They were chosen over the Ultimen characters that actually appeared in the JLU animated series: Juice, Long Shadow, and Wind Dragon. Fisher-Price began to produce DC Comics characters in a kid-friendly toyline named after the Super Friends.  Paying homage to Super Powers, DC Universe Classics produced original Super Friends characters such as Apache Chief, Black Vulcan, El Dorado, Samurai, and the Wonder Twins. Super Friends was mentioned at the end of the StarKid Productions musical Holy Musical B@man!. At the end of the musical, Batman, Robin, Superman, and the Green Lantern combine to form a "league of justice" they call the Super Friends. This group consists of some of the members of the original Super Friends as well as some new additions. Super Friends was spoofed in an episode of That '70s Show with a dream sequence where the "Super Pals" made fun of Eric's Superman because Donna's Wonder Woman had given him a ring as a gift. "I got it at the mall!" she exclaims. The episode featured Eric Forman as Superman, Donna as Wonder Woman, Kelso as Batman, Fez as Aquaman and Hyde and Jackie as the Wonder Twins. Red was also featured as their nemesis "Dr. Bald", wearing Lex Luthor's green-and-purple costume. In The Fairly OddParents episode "Power Pals", Timmy wished for better super-friends. As a result, he got a team of superheroes—the Power Pals—as "friends." The four characters parodied famous characters including Superman, Wonder Woman, Batman, and Aquaman, and came with their own narrator. Aspects of Super Friends were parodied such as randomly pressing beeping buttons (that flash in an equally random pattern) on any computer module, invisible vehicles (somehow the Power Pals could see a dent in the invisible rocket and could be seen from the outside, since only the rocket is invisible), the perceived uselessness of Aquaman parody Wet Willy's ability to talk to fish and powerlessness outside of water and near-instantaneous travel to distant galaxies. During a transition between two other skits on MTV's The State, there was a brief scene with members of the State dressed as Super Friends. The Flash ran in, informing them of an impending disaster. Superman then began assigning serious tasks to all of the members, finishing by saying "and Aquaman... go talk to some fish". The Super Friends then began laughing hysterically, while a visibly embarrassed Aquaman just stood there. The South Park episode "Super Best Friends" was a spoof of the series, depicting religious figures as a team of superheroes. The only member of the "Super Best Friends" who was not a religious figure is "Seaman", a spoof of Aquaman whose power was to talk to fish. In "200" the parody was revisited. The opening sequence for the Super Best Friends took its cues from the Super Friends cartoon; each of the religious figures (except for Muhammad, who was portrayed as a censor bar walking down a street) and Seaman's introductions resembled the Super Friends opening: Jesus was Superman, Buddha was Wonder Woman, Krishna was Batman and Seaman was Aquaman. Joseph Smith and Lao Tzu acted as Wendy and Marvin White. In "201", Tom Cruise's house was described as "The Legion of Doom Headquarters! (initially it is described as "The Legion of Doom Headquarters [awkward pause] which is Tom Cruise's house"). The episode "Krazy Kripples" features a Legion of Doom with Christopher Reeve as the leader. The episode "Spookyfish" featured a Super Friends-style scene transition, with images of Barbra Streisand's head superimposed over the trademark lens-flares. In the Family Guy episode "A Hero Sits Next Door", there was a cutaway joke involving Peter playing a game of strip poker with Wonder Woman. Super Friends-style scene transitions appear twice in the episode. In "Fast Times at Buddy Cianci Jr. High", Peter flashed back to the time he was a Wonder Twin, taking the form of Jayna's tampon. In "Perfect Castaway", when Lois told Peter how well the family had been doing ever since she married Brian she mentioned that Meg went on a date with the Super Friends' announcer. Then a scene shows Meg and the announcer in a car on a hill where the announcer says, "Meanwhile, underneath Meg Griffin's bra...". In "PTV" Apache Chief helps Peter install a satellite dish for his unauthorized TV station. In "No Meals on Wheels", Peter made a reference to the Mexican Super Friends; a non sequitur showed Mexican versions of superheroes, including "Mexican Superman" and "Mexican Batman". In "It Takes a Village Idiot, and I Married One", when Lois ran for mayor she attempted to gain the "stupid vote" by claiming Adolf Hitler was working with the Legion of Doom to plot the assassination of Jesus. Shortly after this, the Legion of Doom's base rose from the lake and Lex Luthor asked the other Legion members how she knew their plans. Solomon Grundy admitted he "kinda dropped the ball on that one". The opening of "Family Goy" parodied the opening sequence of Super Friends with Peter as Superman, Brian and Stewie as Batman and Robin respectively, Lois as Wonder Woman, Chris as Aquaman and Meg as....Meg. In Something, Something, Something Dark Side, shortly after Chris/Luke and Cleveland/R2-D2 landed on Dagobah, the Legion of Doom fortress rose from the swamp with the same narration and music. Chris/Luke yelled, "Not now!" and the fortress quickly sank. One of the backup segments in Dexter's Laboratory was called Justice Friends.  The title was derived from the Justice League and Super Friends, and the series made references to the superficial plot lines of the Super Friends shows.  However, the characters were parodies of Marvel Comics' Avengers team (the Marvel equivalent of the Justice League/Super Friends). An ongoing animated series, featuring controversial celebrities Paris Hilton, Nicole Richie, Lindsay Lohan, and the Olsen twins in the roles of tasteless superheroes, was created in 2006 by Heavy.com. Both the setting and some of the girls' superpowers were plays on elements from Super Friends. In early episodes of the animated series Mad, a few of the PSAs were remade which it was called "Super Villains". There have currently been two of these, one about health and the other about safety. In one sketch, Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman are convinced to change the name from the Super Friends to the Justice League after a musical appeal by fellow heroes.       &nbsp; &nbsp; Season !! rowspan="2"|Episodes !! rowspan="2"|Season premiere !! rowspan="2"|Season finale !! rowspan="2"|DVD title/volume !! colspan="4"|DVD release date and ASIN Region 1 !! Region 2 !! ASIN Number 1 16 September 8, 1973 August 24, 1974 Super Friends - Season 1: Volume 1Super Friends - Season 1: Volume 2 January 5, 2010July 20, 2010 B002S3Y1LQB003F3NE4S 2 15 September 10, 1977 September 2, 1978 Super Friends - Season 2: The All-New Super Friends Hour, Volume 1Super Friends - Season 2: The All-New Super Friends Hour, Volume 2 January 8, 2008January 27, 2009 B000W2C28YB001HRS8HW 3 16 September 9, 1978 September 3, 1979 Super Friends - Season 3: Challenge of the Super Friends, The First SeasonSuper Friends - Season 3, Volume 2 July 6, 2004May 24, 2005 B00023E88UB0007XFZMS 4 8 September 22, 1979 September 27, 1980 Super Friends - Season 4: The World's Greatest Super Friends, The Complete Series April 23, 2013 B00CREAO9O 5 24 September 13, 1980 September 1, 1981 Super Friends - Season 5: A Dangerous Fate, The Complete Series July 23, 2013 B00CM0DIT6 6 18 September 26, 1981 October 31, 1982 Super Friends - Season 6: Super Friends! Legacy Of Super Powers, The Complete Season Six (6 on DVD label) October 8, 2013 B00DVKKWFE 7 8 September 10, 1983 September 8, 1984 Super Friends - Season 7: Super Friends The Lost Episodes August 11, 2009 B0027WNRV8 8 16 September 8, 1984 August 31, 1985 Super Friends - Season 8:  The Legendary Super Powers Show, The Complete Series August 7, 2007 B000PC8AKK 9 10 September 11, 1985 November 6, 1986 Super Friends - Season 9: The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians, The Complete Series October 23, 2007 B000TSTEJG Super Friends (1973–1974) The All-New Super Friends Hour (1977–1978) Challenge of the Super Friends (1978–1979) The World's Greatest Super Friends (1979–1980) Super Friends (1980–1983) Super Friends: The Legendary Super Powers Show (1984–1985) The Super Powers Team: Galactic Guardians (1985–1986) The Atom (1977; 1980–1983) Firestorm (1984–1985) The Flash (1973; 1977–1985) Green Lantern (1977–1985) Hawkgirl (1977; 1980; 1983) Hawkman (1977–1978; 1980–1985) Cyborg (1985) Rima the Jungle Girl (1977; 1980) Apache Chief (1977–1978; 1980–1984) Black Vulcan (1977–1978; 1980–1984) El Dorado (1982–1985) Samurai (1977–1978; 1980–1985) Abin Sur (1978) Green Arrow (1973–1974) Plastic Man (1973–1974) Superboy (1978; 1983) Pets: Gleek (1977–1984) Wonder Dog (1973–1975) Wendy and Marvin: Wendy Harris (1973–1975) Marvin White (1973–1975) Wonder Twins: Jayna (1977–1984) Zan (1977–1984) Commissioner James Gordon Hippolyta Lois Lane Jimmy Olsen Alfred Pennyworth Solovar (ruler of Gorilla City) Steve Trevor The Alien Mummy The Anti-Matter Monster Barko Bigfoot creatures Black Beard Bulgor the Behemoth The Brain Creatures The Capricorn Kid Captain Shark The Collector The Incredible Crude Oil Monster Darkon Dictor and the mysterious Time Creatures The Dollmaker Dracula Dr. Cranium Dr. Droid Dr. Frankenstein Dr. Fright Dr. Gulliver The Earthors The Enforcer Giant Snow Creature The Highway Angels The Hydronoids The Ice Demon Insecta and the Arthropods The Iron Cyclops John Palette The Junk Creature from the Dump Kareem Azaar Keelhaul Kelly King Arthur The Lion Men The Make Up Monster Mal Havok The Man Beasts Of Xra The Marsh Monster Medula and her Mind Maidens Mongor The Mummy Of Nazca The Mysterious Mutants of the Space Sphere Nartan Ocina and the Ancient Atlantean Warriors Old Man Holmes Orville Gump (see Otis (Superman)) The Outlaws of Orion (Pack and Stardust) The Phantom Zone Villains (Hul, Logar, Rom-Lok) The Plant Creatures Professor Amy Zhan Professor Fearo Professor Korloff The Power Pirate The Robber Baron and Sleeves Rock and Roll Space Bandits Rokan R.O.M.A.C. The Secret Four Scorpio Sculpin Sinbad and the Space Pirates Solderath and the Lava Men The Space Dolls The evil Space Genie The Space Racers Star Energy Creature Super Enemies Termites from Venus Torhana Tyrannic Vampiress, the Voodoo Vampire Yuna the Terrible Zarnum The Zoons Zycree (see General Zod) Batgirl Black Canary Black Orchid Cyclotron Elongated Man Green Fury Global Guardians: Doctor Mist, Icemaiden, Little Mermaid, Seraph, Tasmanian Devil Golden Pharaoh Huntress Captain Marvel Mary Marvel Mr. Miracle Orion Red Tornado Supergirl Wendy, Marvin and Wonder Dog were the only ones active at the Hall of Justice, because the Justice League are in the 30th Century with the Justice Society (as shown in Justice League of America #147–148). Robin was busy helping the Titans in Teen Titans #50-52. Bridwell also gave them last names and ties to the other characters' histories; Wendy Harris was the niece of detective Harvey Harris (who helped trained Batman) and Marvin White was the son of Diana Prince (the woman who helped provide Wonder Woman with a secret identity upon her arrival in America). While the show never explained the departure of Wendy, Marvin and Wonder Dog, the story was found in Super Friends #6–9. Super Friends: For Justice! (Collects #1-7) Super Friends: Calling All Super Friends (Collects #8-14) Super Friends: Head of the Class (Collects #15-21) Super Friends: Mystery In Space (Collects #22-28) One dealt with the idiosyncratic nature of the Legion of Doom and Brainiac's odd manner of dress (Brainiac: "Look, I just want some pants...a decent pair of pants!" Solomon Grundy: "Solomon Grundy want pants, too!"). The second dealt with the Wonder Twins' uselessness in battle (Zan: "I could get beaten by a sponge! It doesn't even have to be an evil sponge!") The third, co-starring The Powerpuff Girls, dealt with Aquaman's useless powers (Aquaman: "My ability to talk to fish is of no use to us, Wonder Woman!") and the level of violence compared with recent cartoons. Wonder Woman and Aquaman look away while the Powerpuff Girls beat up the Legion of Doom, setting the Scarecrow on fire. Notable was Bubbles' double-entendre reply to Wonder Woman's compliment on how they were developing as superheroes: "One day we'll be as developed as you are". Lex Luthor (a villain with a salacious mind) began laughing; his underlings understood the joke and laughed as well. When a piece of the Hall of Doom's ceiling fell on Luthor's head, everyone laughed. When the Powerpuff Girls came crashing in, Luthor mispronounced their collective name as "The POWDERpuff Girls", annoying the Powerpuff Girls and causing them to angrily correct him: "It's POWERpuff!" "No D!!" The forth, co-starring Ben 10, Superman, Aquaman, Wonder Woman and Batman are drinking coffee and discussing about the 'new kid' Ben  Tennyson. Wonder Woman tells Batman he's envious of Ben, and she wonder "Maybe because he has Super powers?" Batman just torment, however Superman agrees Wonder Woman's point, then explains that Aquaman can talk to fish, and that he can fly; "But you're just a loaded guy with a rubber mask, an expensive car and a funny belt." Just then, Ben walks into the break room and getting his lunch. Batman greets him not quite friendly at first, however after Ben asks Batman for his autograph, Batman feels pleased. He then asked the other superhero if they want half of his sandwich and Aquaman takes it. Ben then tells Superman that he has Superman pajamas, let Superman makes him a day. Ben then leaves the break room, all heroes are feel happy to Ben's nice side for them. And Aquaman chimes in, saying it was cool that he gave him half of his tuna sandwich. Suddenly their mood turns very awkward. Will's Ultimate Super Friends Episode Guide! Super Friends @ BatmanYTB.com Super Friends at Pazsaz.com Super Friends at Legions of Gotham
