     Swindon () is a large town within the Borough of Swindon  and ceremonial county of Wiltshire, in South West England. It is midway between Bristol,  to the west and Reading,  to the east. London is  to the east. In the 2011 census, the population of the built-up area of Swindon was 185,609. The larger borough had a population of 209,000, including the small town of Highworth and the large village of Wroughton, an increase of 16.2% since 2001. Swindon was named an Expanded Town under the Town Development Act 1952 and this led to a major increase in its population. Swindon railway station is on the line from London Paddington to Bristol. Swindon Borough Council is a unitary authority, independent of Wiltshire Council since 1997. Residents of Swindon are known as Swindonians. Swindon is home to the Bodleian Library's book depository, which contains  of bookshelves.   The original Anglo-Saxon settlement of Swindon sat in a defensible position atop a limestone hill. It is referred to in the Domesday Book as Suindune, believed to be derived from the Old English words "swine" and "dun" meaning "pig hill" or possibly Sweyn's hill, where Sweyn is a personal name. Swindon was a small market town, mainly for barter trade, until roughly 1848. This original market area is on top of the hill in central Swindon, now known as Old Town.John Chandler, Swindon Decoded, The Hobnob Press 2005, ISBN 0-946418-37-3. The Industrial Revolution was responsible for an acceleration of Swindon's growth. It started with the construction of the Wilts and Berks Canal in 1810 and the North Wilts Canal in 1819. The canals brought trade to the area and Swindon's population started to grow.  Between 1841 and 1842, Isambard Kingdom Brunel's Swindon Works was built for the repair and maintenance of locomotives on the Great Western Railway (GWR).  The GWR built a small railway village to house some of its workers. The Steam Railway Museum and English Heritage, including the English Heritage Archive, now occupy part of the old works. In the village were the GWR Medical Fund Clinic at Park House and its hospital, both on Faringdon Road, and the 1892 health centre in Milton Road – which housed clinics, a pharmacy, laundries, baths, Turkish baths and swimming pools – was almost opposite. From 1871, GWR workers had a small amount deducted from their weekly pay and put into a healthcare fund – its doctors could prescribe them or their family members free medicines or send them for medical treatment. In 1878 the fund began providing artificial limbs made by craftsmen from the carriage and wagon works, and nine years later opened its first dental surgery. In his first few months in post the dentist extracted more than 2000 teeth. From the opening in 1892 of the Health Centre, a doctor could also prescribe a haircut or even a bath. The cradle-to-grave extent of this service was later used as a blueprint for the NHS.‘’Background’’ – The Mechanics Institution Trust, Swindon. Retrieved on 23 July 2007. Reference updated 12 December 2013 The Mechanics' Institute, formed in 1844, moved into a building looking rather like a church and included a covered market, on 1 May 1855. The New Swindon Improvement Company, a co-operative, raised the funds for this path self-improvement and paid the GWR £40 a year for its new home on a site at the heart of the railway village. It was a groundbreaking organisation that transformed the railway's workforce into some of the country's best-educated manual workers.1850-1870 – The Mechanics Institution Trust, Swindon. Retrieved on 23 July 2007. Reference updated 12 December 2013 It had the UK's first lending library,Background – The Mechanics Institution Trust, Swindon. Retrieved on 23 July 2007. Reference updated 12 December 2013 and a range of improving lectures, access to a theatre and a range of activities from ambulance classes to xylophone lessons. A former Institute secretary formed the New Swindon Co-operative Society in 1853 which, after a schism in the society's membership, spawned the New Swindon Industrial Society that ran a retail business from a stall in the market at the Institute. The Institute also nurtured pioneering trades unionists and encouraged local democracy.This is Our Heritage — 1996 lecture by Swindon labour movement historian Trevor Cockbill. Retrieved on 23 July 2007. Reference updated 12 December 2013 When tuberculosis hit the new town, the Mechanics' Institute persuaded the industrial pioneers of North Wiltshire to agree that the railway's former employees should continue to receive medical attention from the doctors of GWR Medical Society Fund, which the Institute had played a role in establishing and funding.Background – The Mechanics Institution Trust, Swindon. Retrieved 23 July 2007. Reference updated 12 December 2013  Swindon's 'other' railway, the Swindon, Marlborough and Andover Railway, merged with the Swindon and Cheltenham Extension Railway to form the Midland & South Western Junction Railway, which set out to join the London & South Western Railway with the Midland Railway at Cheltenham. The Swindon, Marlborough & Andover had planned to tunnel under the hill on which Swindon's Old Town stands but the money ran out and the railway ran into Swindon Town railway station, off Devizes Road in the Old Town, skirting the new town to the west, intersecting with the GWR at Rushey Platt and heading north for Cirencester, Cheltenham and the LMS, whose 'Midland Red' livery the M&SWJR adopted. During the second half of the 19th century, Swindon New Town grew around the main line between London and Bristol. In 1900, the original market town, Old Swindon, merged with its new neighbour at the bottom of the hill to become a single town. On 1 July 1923, the GWR took over the largely single-track M&SWJR and the line northwards from Swindon Town was diverted to Swindon Junction station, leaving the Town station with only the line south to Andover and Salisbury.Swindon's Other Railway — the Swindon, Marlborough & Andover Railway. Retrieved on 23 July 2007.The Midland & South Western Junction Railway, Railspot Reloaded.Retrieved on 23 July 2007.GWR Museum picture gallery. Retrieved on 23 July 2007 The last passenger trains on what had been the SM&A ran on 10 September 1961, 80 years after the railway's first stretch opened. During the first half of the 20th century, the railway works was the town's largest employer and one of the biggest in the country, employing more than 14,500 workers. Alfred WilliamsLeonard Clark, Alfred Williams – His Life and Work, David and Charles 1969 (1877–1930) wrote about his life as a hammerman at the works.Alfred Williams, Life in a railway factory, first published 1915, 2007 edition published by Sutton Publishing ISBN 978-0-7509-4660-5 The works' decline started in 1960, when it rolled out Evening Star, the last steam engine to be built in the UK.Evening Star — Steam Locomotive, BBC, 29 November 2006. Retrieved on 21 July 2007. The works lost its locomotive building role and took on rolling stock maintenance for British Rail. In the late 1970s, much of the works closed and the rest followed in 1986. The Community Centre in the Railway Village was originally the Barrack accommodation for Railway Employees of the GWR. The building became the Railway Museum in the 1960s, until the opening of the STEAM Museum in the 2000s.   David Murray John, Swindon's town clerk from 1938 to 1974, is seen as a pioneering figure in Swindon's post-war regeneration; his last act before retirement was to sign the contract for Swindon's tallest building, which is now named after him. His successor was David Maxwell Kent, appointed by the Swindon/Highworth Joint Committee in 1973. He had worked closely with David Murray John and continued similar policies for a further twenty years. The Greater London Council withdrew from the Town Development Agreement and the local council continued the development on its own. There was the problem of the Western Development and of Lydiard Park being in the new North Wiltshire district, but this was resolved by a boundary change to take in part of North Wiltshire. Another factor limiting local decision-taking was the continuing role of Wiltshire County Council in the administration of Swindon. Together with like-minded councils, a campaign was launched to bring an updated form of county borough status to Swindon. This was successful in 1997, and Wiltshire is now divided into two Unitary Councils, both of equal status. One is Wiltshire Council, succeeding the former Wiltshire County Council and the Wiltshire district councils other than Thamesdown, while the other is Swindon Borough Council, covering the area of the former Thamesdown and the former Highworth Rural District Council. The closure of the railway works (which had been in decline for many years) was a major blow to Swindon. Because of this and the major growth in population diversification was continued at a rapid pace and theTown now has all the features of a successful urban/rural Council in the Outer South East Zone. In February 2008 The Times named Swindon as one of "The 20 best places to buy a property in Britain".The 20 best places to buy a property in Britain, The Times, Property pages, February 2008 Only Warrington had a lower ratio of house prices to household income in 2007, with the average household income in Swindon among the highest in the country. In October 2008 Swindon made a controversial move to ban fixed point speed cameras. The move was branded as reckless by someMore councils expected to ban speed cameras, The Times, October 2008. but by November 2008 Portsmouth, Walsall, and Birmingham councils[ ]  were also considering the move. In 2001 construction began on Priory Vale, the third and final instalment in Swindon's 'Northern Expansion' project, which began with Abbey Meads and continued at St Andrew's Ridge. In 2002 the New Swindon Company was formed with the remit of regenerating the town centre, to improve Swindon's regional status.New Swindon. The main areas targeted are Union Square, The Promenade, The Hub, Swindon Central, North Star Village, The Campus and the Public Realm. Swindon hosted Radio 1's Big Weekend in May 2009 at Lydiard Park. Building on the work of Radio 1, Swindon Borough Council organised the Big Arts Day in 2010. Aiming to be an annual event celebrating the arts it was held at Lydiard Park in July for three consecutive years before being cancelled due to lack of funding.  The local council was created in 1974 as the Borough of Thamesdown, out of the areas of Swindon Borough and Highworth Rural District. It was not initially called Swindon, because the borough covers a larger area than the town. It was renamed as the Borough of Swindon in 1997. The borough became a unitary authority on 1 April 1997, following a review by the Local Government Commission for England. The town is therefore no longer under the auspices of Wiltshire Council. The borough consists of parished and non-parished areas. The non-parished areas include the former pre-1974 municipal borough of Swindon, and West Swindon which is a large town expansion area developed from the 1970s to the 1990s with land ceded from North Wiltshire district in the parishes of Lydiard Tregoze and Lydiard Millicent. Parished areas include Bishopstone (with Hinton Parva), Blunsdon St Andrew, Castle Eaton, Chiseldon, Covingham, Hannington, Haydon Wick, Highworth, Inglesham, Liddington, South Marston, Stanton Fitzwarren, Stratton St Margaret, Wanborough and Wroughton. In 2014 Nythe obtained independence from Stratton St Margaret, becoming a new parish in its own right with effect from 1 April 2015. The executive comprises a leader and a cabinet, currently made up from the Conservative Group. The council as of the 2011 election has a majority of Conservative councillors. Swindon is represented in the national parliament by two MPs. Robert Buckland (Conservative) was elected for the South Swindon seat in May 2010 with a 5.5% swing from Labour and Justin Tomlinson, also Conservative, represents North Swindon after a 10.1% swing at the same election. Both increased their majorities at the May 2015 election. Prior to 1997 there was a single seat for Swindon, although much of what is now in Swindon was then part of the Devizes seat.  The town has an area of about . The landscape is dominated by the chalk hills of the Wiltshire Downs to the south and east. The Old Town stands on a hill of Purbeck and Portland stone; this was quarried from Roman times until the 1950s. The area that was known as New Swindon is made up of mostly Kimmeridge clay with outcrops of Corrallian clay in the areas of Penhill and Pinehurst. Oxford clay makes up the rest of the borough. The River Ray forms the town's western boundary, including its tributary, the River Cole. Swindon has a maritime climate type, like all of the British Isles, with comparatively mild winters and comparatively cool summers considering its latitude. The nearest official weather station is RAF Lyneham, about  west south west of Swindon town centre. The weather station's elevation is 145 metres, compared to the typical 100 metres encountered around Swindon town centre, so is likely to be marginally cooler throughout the year. The absolute maximum is 34.9C (94.8F) recorded during August 1990. In an average year the warmest day should reach 28.7C (83.7F) and 10.3 days should register a temperature of 25.1C (77.2F) or above The absolute minimum is −16.0C (3.0F), recorded in January 1982, and in an average year 45.2 nights of air frost can be expected. Sunshine, at 1565 hours a year, is typical for inland parts of Southern England, although significantly higher than most areas further north. Annual rainfall averages slightly under  per year, with 123 days reporting over 1&nbsp;mm of rain.  The 2001 census shows there were 180,061 people and 75,154 occupied houses in the Swindon Unitary Authority. The average household size was 2.38 people. The population density was 780/km² (2020.19/mi²). 20.96% of the population were 0–15 years old, 72.80% 16–74 and the remaining 6.24% were 75 years old or over. For every 100 females there were 98.97 males. Approximately 300,000 people live within 20 minutes of Swindon town centre. It is forecast that there will be a 70,000 (38.9%) increase in Swindon's population by 2026 from the current 180,000, to 250,000. The ethnic make-up of the town was 95.2% white, 1.3% Indian and 3.5% other. 92.4% were born in the UK, 2.7% in the EU and 4.9% elsewhere. The majority of Swindonians (70.3%) identify themselves as Christians. This is followed by those of no religion (19.2%), Muslims (1.0%), Sikhs (0.6%), Hindus (0.6%), other (0.2%) and Jews (0.1%). In addition, 8.0% of people chose not to answer this question in the 2001 census. In May 2007, 65.3% of households in Swindon had broadband Internet access, the highest in the UK, up 5.5% from June 2006.Swindon and Milton Keynes top the UK broadband league – Computer Weekly, London, 23 May 2007. Accessed:2007-08-21. In 2015, Public Health England found that 70.4% of the population was either overweight or obese with a BMI greater than 25. There are numerous places of worship in Swindon, some of which are listed buildings.Swindon from British Listed Buildings, retrieved 9 January 2016 Until 1845, the only church in Swindon was the Holy Rood Church, a Grade II listed building.Swindon: Churches in A History of the County of Wiltshire: Volume 9 from British History Online (London: Victoria County History, 1970), 144-159. That year, St Mark's Church was built. In 1851, Christ Church was built. Later in the year, the first Roman Catholic chapel was opened in the city and was also named Holy Rood. In 1866, Cambria Baptist Chapel was built. In the 1880s, Bath Road Methodist Chapel was built. In 1885, St Barnabas Church was built. In 1907, St Augustine's Church in Even Swindon was built. Various churches and places of worship were built in the town by other denominations and faiths.Places of Worship from Total Swindon, retrieved 9 January 2016 After the end of World War II, Polish refugees were temporarily housed in barracks at Fairford RAF base about  north. Around 1950, some settled in Scotland and others in SwindonCommunity celebrates its golden anniversary, Swindon Advertiser, 31 May 2000.Retrieved on 23 July 2007. rather than stay in the barracks or hostels they were offered.Polish club closes doors for last time – Swindon Advertiser, 1 April 2007. Retrieved on 24 July 2007 The 2001 UK Census found that most of the Polish-born people had stayed or returned after serving with British forces during World War II. Swindon and Nottingham were parts of this settlement.Born Abroad, BBC News.Retrieved on 23 July 2007. Data from that census showed that 566 Swindonians were Poland-born.– Polish Community Focus Multicultural Matters.Retrieved on 23 July 2007 Notes to those data read: ‘The Polish Resettlement Act of 1947, which was designed to provide help and support to people who wished to settle here, covered about 190,000 people ... at the time Britain did not recognise many of the professional [qualifications] gained overseas ... [but] many did find work after the war; some went down the mines, some worked on the land or in steel works. Housing was more of a problem and many Poles were forced to live in barracks previously used for POWs ... The first generation took pains to ensure that their children grew up with a strong sense of Polish identity.' In 2004, NHS planners devising services for senior citizens estimated that 5 percent of Swindon's population were not 'ethnically British'Modernising Services for Older People in Swindon– Avon & Wiltshire Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust, Swindon Primary Care Trust and Swindon Borough Council.Retrieved on 24 July 2007. and most of those were culturally Polish. The town's Polish ex-servicemen's club, which had run a football team for 45 years, closed in 2012. Barman Jerzy Trojan blamed the decline of both club and team on the children and grandchildren of the original refugees losing their Polish identity.Polish club closes doors for last time – Swindon Advertiser, 1 April 2007. Retrieved on 2007-27-24.   Major employers include the Honda car production plant at an old Vickers factory site on the former World War II RAF base of South Marston, BMW/Mini (formerly Pressed Steel Fisher) in Stratton, mobile phone company Nokia Networks, Dolby Labs, international engineering consultancy firm Halcrow, and retailer W H Smith's distribution centre and headquarters. The electronics company, Intel, has its European head office on the south side of the town. Insurance and financial services companies such as Nationwide Building Society and Zurich Financial Services, the energy company RWE (which includes the well known retail brand npower), the fuel card and fleet management company Arval, pharmaceutical companies such as Canada's Patheon and the United States-based Catalent Pharma Solutions and French medical supplies manufacturer Vygon (UK) Ltd have their UK divisions headquartered in the town.  Swindon also has the head office of the National Trust. Swindon businesses include banks such as Barclays, Natwest, HSBC, Lloyds TSB and Handelsbanken, all having a commercial presence. The town also has a number of professional legal firms such as Clark Holt, Thring Townsend, and Withy King, together with accountants such as Dennis & Turnbull. Other employers include all of the national Research Councils, the British Computer Society, eCommerce provider Shopatron, divisions of Tyco International, consumer goods supplier Reckitt Benckiser and a branch of Becton Dickinson.   At the junction of two Roman roads, the town has developed into a transport hub over the centuries. It is on the historical GWR and on canals. It also has two junctions (15 and 16) on the M4 motorway. Swindon railway station opened in 1842 as Swindon Junction, and until 1895 every train stopped for at least 10 minutes to change locomotives. As a result, the station hosted the first recorded railway refreshment rooms.LTC Rolt, Isambard Kingdom Brumel, Penguin 1957. Swindon bus operators are Thamesdown and Stagecoach. The local council acknowledges the need for more car parking as part of its vision for 2010. Swindon is one of the locations for an innovative scheme called Car share. It was set up as a joint venture between Wiltshire County Council and a private organisation, and now has over 300,000 members registered. It is a car pool or ride-sharing rather than a car share scheme, seeking to link people willing to share transport. The town contains a large roundabout called Magic Roundabout. There are five mini-roundabouts within this roundabout and at its centre is a contra-rotational hub.Aerial view from Google maps It is the junction of five roads: (clockwise from South) Drove Road, Fleming Way, County Road, Shrivenham Road and Queens Drive. It is built on the site of Swindon wharf on the abandoned Wilts & Berks Canal, near the County Ground. The official name used to be County Islands, although it was colloquially known as the Magic Roundabout and the official name was changed in the late 1990s to match its nickname.  Swindon has a daily newspaper, the Swindon Advertiser, with daily sales of about 21,000. Other newspapers covering the area include Bristol's daily Western Daily Press and the Swindon Advertisers weekly, the Gazette and Herald; the Wiltshire Ocelot (a free listings magazine), Swindon Star, Hungry Monkeys (a comic), Stratton Outlook, Frequency (an arts and cultural magazine), Great Swindon Magazine, Swindon Business News, Swindon Link and Highworth Link. Local radio stations include Sam FM and Heart Wiltshire in the commercial sector, with BBC Radio Wiltshire as a publicly funded alternative. A new community radio station was launched in March 2008, SWINDON 105.5, which is the only station in Swindon to broadcast totally locally all week. Brunel FM ceased broadcasting on 24 March 2010 as it was one of five stations owned by YMC Ltd closed by administrators. Although a new radio station has since opened on the same frequency, 107.7 Total Star FM which in June 2011 rebranded to become More FM, and changed again in 2012 to become Jack FM. On 1 April 2015 it re-launched as Sam FM, replacing Jack FM. Between 1973 and 1982 Swindon had its own cable television channel. It was called Swindon Viewpoint, a community television project run mainly by enthusiasts from studios in Victoria Hill and then Media Arts at the Town Hall Studios. It was followed by the more commercial Swindon's Local Channel, which included pay-per-view films.Swindon Cable — Swindon View Point — The Local Channel, Swindoncable.co.uk. Retrieved on 21 July 2007. NTL (later Virgin Media) took over the channel's parent company, ComTel, and closed the station. Regional news programmes covering Swindon include Thames Valley Tonight replaced by Meridian Tonight for the second time in February 2009 and The West Tonight from regional ITV1 stations and South Today (Oxford) and Points West from BBC One's regional variants. The borough of Swindon has many primary schools, 12 secondary schools and two purpose built sixth-form colleges. Two secondary schools also have sixth forms. There is one independent school, Maranatha Christian School at Sevenhampton. New College and Swindon College cater for the town's further education and higher education requirements, mainly for 16- to 21-year-olds. Swindon College is one of the largest FE-HE colleges in southwestern England, situated at a purpose-built campus in North Star, Swindon. Swindon also has a foundation learning programme called Include, which is situated in the Gorse Hill area. This is for 16- to 19-year-olds who are currently not in education or work. Swindon is the UK's largest centre of population without its own university (by comparison, there are two universities in nearby Bath, which is half Swindon's size). In March 2008, a proposal was put forward by former Swindon MP, Anne Snelgrove, for a university-level institution to be established in the town within a decade, culminating in a future 'University of Swindon' (with some touting the future institution to be entitled 'The Murray John University, Swindon', after the town's most distinguished post-war civic leader). In October 2008, plans were announced for a possible University of Swindon campus to be built in east Swindon to the south of the town's Great Western Hospital, close to the M4-A419 interchange. However, these plans are currently mothballed. Since 1999 Oxford Brookes University has had its Ferndale Campus in north-central Swindon, offering degrees and diplomas in Adult Nursing. The main OBU campus is 35 miles (56&nbsp;km) northeast of Swindon. The university also sponsors UTC Swindon, which opened in 2014. Between 2000 and 2008 the University of Bath had a campus in Walcot, east Swindon. Swindon Town F.C. play at the County Ground near the town centre. They have been Football League members since joining the then new Third Division (southern section) in 1920, and won promotion to the Second Division for the first time in 1963. They won their only major trophy to date, the Football League Cup, in 1969 beating Arsenal 3-1, at Wembley Stadium, and won the Anglo-Italian Cup the following year as the Football Association forbade Swindon from competing in the European Cup because they were in Division 3. They won promotion to the First Division in 1990, but stayed in the Second Division due to financial irregularities, only to reach the top flight (by then the Premier League) three years later. Their spell in the top flight lasted just one season, and then came a second successive relegation. A brief spite saw them promoted at the first attempt as champions of the new Division Two, but they were relegated again four years later and in 2006 fell back into the fourth tier for the first time since 1986, although promotion was gained at the first attempt. They were relegated again four years later. Notable former players of the club include John Trollope, Don Rogers, John Moncur, Fraser Digby, Duncan Shearer, Paul Bodin, Alan McLoughlin, Paul Rideout, Mike Summerbee, Shaun Taylor, Neil Ruddock, Jan Åge Fjørtoft and Phil King. Notable former managers include Lou Macari, Ossie Ardiles, Glenn Hoddle, John Gorman, Steve McMahon, Jimmy Quinn (a former player of the club), Colin Todd, Roy Evans, Andy King, Dennis Wise and Paul Sturrock. Under the charismatic reign of manager Paolo Di Canio, Swindon became League Two champions in 2011–12 and currently play in League One, the third-highest tier. The town also has two non-league clubs: Swindon Supermarine F.C., playing in Southern League Division One South and West, and Highworth Town F.C., based in Highworth and playing in the Hellenic Football League. The Swindon Wildcats play in the second-tier English Premier Ice Hockey League (EPIHL). Since their inception, the Wildcats have played their home games at the 2800 capacity Link Centre. The club was founded in 1986. Books set in Swindon include The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time by Mark Haddon, and the Thursday Next novels by Jasper Fforde. Fforde's Thursday Next novels feature an alternative-universe Swindon that includes a parodic "Seven Wonders of Swindon". Robert Goddard's Into the Blue, Out of the Sun and "Never Go Back" feature the central character of Harry Barnett from Swindon, and all three novels start in the town. Terry Jones, the former Monty Python member gave Swindon a backhanded reference in one of the short stories in his 2011 collection, "Evil Machines".  The story "The Lift that Took People to Places They Didn't Want to Go" ends with the section "...But actually... the evil elevator hadn't changed at all.  In fact it went on secretly taking people to places they didn't want to go.  For every time the lift took the inhabitants of Swindon back down to the ground floor, they stepped out of the department store and onto the streets of Swindon, and so found themselves somewhere they didn't want to be." Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson lunched in Swindon in The Boscombe Valley Mystery "We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twenty minutes." Swindon is home to the punk/pop band XTC. The band charted in both the UK and the US, their most notable hits including "Making Plans for Nigel", "Senses Working Overtime", "Ballad of Peter Pumpkinhead" and "The Mayor of Simpleton" amongst others.     Nearby towns and cities: Chippenham, Royal Wootton Bassett, Cirencester, Cricklade, Highworth, Marlborough, Malmesbury and Calne Nearby villages: Aldbourne, Badbury, Blunsdon, Broad Hinton, Chiseldon, Hook, Lambourn, Liddington, Lydiard Millicent, Purton, Ramsbury, South Marston, Wanborough, Washpool and Wroughton Nearby places of interest: Avebury, Barbury Castle, Crofton Pumping Station, Silbury Hill, Stonehenge and Uffington White Horse Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Swindon include — Coate Water, Great Quarry, Haydon Meadow, Okus Quarry, Old Town Railway Cutting and Lydiard Country Park Swindon hosts a number of festivals such as the Swindon Festival of Literature, the annual Swindon Mela (an all-day celebration of South Indian arts and culture) in the Town Gardens – an event which attracts up to 10,000 visitors each year.Swindon Mela. The Summer Breeze Festival has been held annually in the town since 2007 with headliners ranging from Toploader to KT Tunstall. The family-friendly music event is run by volunteers on a non-profit basis with any funds raised going to charity. An annual Gay Pride Parade called Swindon And Wiltshire Pride is held in the town. The parade has been held in the Town Gardens since 2007. Popular Swedish DJ Basshunter performed in the 2012 celebrations which c.8,000 people attended. The town has a live music scene, venues such as The Beehive, Riffs Bar and The Victoria attract local acts as well as touring national acts. Collectively they host an annual music festival the Swindon Shuffle. The Oasis Leisure Centre and the County Ground are used for some major events. MECA is a 2,000-capacity music venue in the former Mecca bingo hall. The Arts Centre is a theatre in Old Town which seats 200 and has music, professional and amateur theatre, comedians, films, children's events, and one-man shows. The Wyvern Theatre has film, comedy, and music. In 2012 Swindon: The Opera was performed at the STEAM Museum in Swindon by the Janice Thompson Performance Trust,jtptrust.org after a successful 2011 Jubilee People's Millions Lottery bid. It charted Swindon's history since 1952 until the present day. Over twenty songs were written by Matt Fox, with music by internationally acclaimed composer Betty Roe MBE. The Brunel Centre and the Parade are shopping areas in the town centre, built along the line of the filled-in Wilts and Berks Canal (where a canal milepost can still be seen). Swindon Tented Market located in the Town Centre, close to the Brunel Centre, was built in 1994. It reopened in October 2009, having been closed for several years. Retail parks include Greenbridge, West Swindon Shopping Centre, Stratton and the Orbital Shopping Park with shops ranging from Marks & Spencer to Comet and Mothercare. Food outlets include KFC and Pizza Hut, as well as Frankie and Bennies and Starbucks Coffee. McArthur Glen Designer Outlet is an indoor shopping mall for reduced price goods (mainly clothing), using the buildings of the disused railway engine works. The outlet is adjacent to the Steam Museum and the National Trust headquarters. The Swindon Designer Outlet has around 100 shops and is the biggest covered designer outlet centre in Europe. Craft shops within Studley Grange Craft Village, inside Blooms Garden Centre, just off junction 16 of the M4 motorway. Small specialist shops within BSS House in Cheney Manor Industrial Park and Basepoint Business Centre. Public parks include Lydiard Country Park, The Lawns, Stanton Park, Barbury Castle, Queens Park, Town Gardens and Coate Water. Shaw Country Park currently being developed in West Swindon. The English Heritage Archive is based in Swindon. The Science Museum has its large objects stored on the disused airfield at Wroughton as well as housing the Museum's Library and Archives. Churchfields Academy Commonweal School The Dorcan Academy Highworth Warneford School Isambard Community School Kingsdown School Lydiard Park Academy Nova Hreod Academy The Ridgeway School & Sixth Form College St. Joseph's Catholic College Swindon Academy UTC Swindon (from age 14) National Museum of Science & Industry, Wroughton. Railway Village Museum. Richard Jefferies Museum, dedicated to the memory of one of England's most individual writers on nature and the countryside. Steam Railway Museum. Swindon Collection, Central Library. Extensive local studies and family history archive. Swindon Arts Centre, a 212-seat entertainment venue located in the Old Town of Swindon. Wyvern Theatre, the town's principal stage venue. Swindon Museum and Swindon Art Gallery, next to each other. The Museum of Computing the first computer museum in the UK. Swindon Robins — a speedway team competing in and the current champion of the Elite League. The team has operated at the Abbey Stadium, Blunsdon since the mid-1949. There are proposals to redevelop the stadium. Speedway operated at a track in the Gorse Hill area of Swindon in the early days of the late 1920s and early 1930s. Swindon Robins ended a 45-year wait for a league title by winning the Elite League in 2012 following a 95–89 aggregate victory over Poole. Foxhill motocross circuit is  south east of the town and has staged Grand Prix events. Swindon Civic Trust List of twin towns in the United Kingdom List of people from Swindon Healthcare in Wiltshire Swindon, Mark Child, Breedon Books, 2002, hardcover, 159 pages, ISBN 1-85983-322-5 Francis Frith's Swindon Living Memories (Photographic Memories S.), Francis Frith and Brian Bridgeman, The Frith Book Company Ltd, 2003, Paperback, 96 pages, ISBN 1-85937-656-8 Swindon.gov.uk Borough Council website
