 The Syriac Orthodox Church (), also known as the Syrian Orthodox Church of Antioch, is an autocephalous Oriental Orthodox church based in the Eastern Mediterranean, with diaspora spread throughout the world, notably in Sweden, Germany and the United Kingdom. It claims to employ the oldest surviving liturgy in Christianity, the Liturgy of St. James the Apostle, with Syriac as its official and liturgical language. The church is led by the Syriac Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch Ignatius Aphrem II since 2014. The Syriac Orthodox Church belongs to the Oriental Orthodoxy, which has been a distinct church body since the schism following the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, although it claims its roots to back one of the first Christian communities in Antioch in AD 37, described in the Acts of the Apostles (New Testament, ) and established by the Apostle St. Peter. The second schism occurred in 1781 when Syriac Orthodox Patriarch George IV died. Five bishops, clergy and laity met in the Dayr al-Zafaran monastery to elect Catholic convert Ignatius Michael III Jarweh as Patriarch, reinitiating the Eastern Catholic Syriac Catholic Church. Yet, two Syriac Orthodox bishops opposed his election. Two days after Michael's enthronement, they took the money of the monastery and paid a group of Kurds to attack Mardin,Michael Jarweh autobiography: French translation in: Revue de l'Orient chrétien, VI (1901), pag 379–401 making fatalities. Michael survived but took time to recover. In the meantime, one of the two Syriac Orthodox bishops, Bishop Matta ben Abdel-Ahad Saalab of Mosul, consecrated four of his monks to bishops, in order to hold a second election. He was thus elected Syriac Orthodox patriarch. The Syriac Orthodox party arrived at Istanbul before Michael's envoy, and received formal approval of the Ottoman authorities, thus continuing a parallell Syriac Orthodox tradition until present day. The Syriac Orthodox Church participates in ecumenical discussions, being a member of the World Council of Churches since 1960, where Patriarch Mor Ignatius Zakka I Iwas served as a president, and is a member of the Middle East Council of Churches since 1974. The precise differences in theology that caused the schism in AD 451 is said to have arosed "only because of differences in terminology and culture and in the various formulae adopted by different theological schools to express the same matter", according to a joint declaration in 1984 by the head of the Syriac Orthodox Church, Patriarch Ignatius Zakka I Iwas, and the Roman Catholic Pope John Paul II. However, this view is not universally held by the Eastern Orthodox Church, one of the participants in the Council of Chalcedon. For more information, see: History of Oriental Orthodoxy. The church presently has about 1,5 million members divided in 26 archdioceses and 11 patriarchal vicariates. Most of its followers have origins from either present-day Turkey, Syria or Iraq. In 1959 the seat of the Patriarchate of the church was moved to Damascus, modern-day Syria.The Syriac Orthodox Church Today The Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch claims the status as the most ancient Christian church in the world. According to Saint Luke, "The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch" (New Testament, ). St. Peter and St. Paul the Apostle are regarded as the cofounders of the Patriarchate of Antioch in AD 37, with the former serving as its first bishop and he is considered as the first patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church. As Jewish Christianity originated at Jerusalem, so Gentile Christianity started at Antioch, then the leading center of the Hellenistic East, with Peter and Paul as its apostles. From Antioch it spread to the various cities and provinces of Syria, among the Hellenistic population as well as among the Hellenistic Jews who, as a result of the great rebellions against the Romans in A.D. 70 and 130, were driven out from Jerusalem and Palestine into Syria." History of Christianity in Syria ", Catholic Encyclopedia When St. Peter left Antioch, Evodios and Ignatius presided over the Patriarchate. Because of the prominence of St. Ignatius in the church's history, almost all of the Syriac Orthodox Patriarchs since 1293 were named Ignatius.Chaillot, Christine. The Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch and All the East. Geneva: Inter-Orthodox Dialogue, 1988. The spiritual care of the Church was vested in the Bishop of Antioch from the earliest years of Christianity. Given the antiquity of the bishopric of Antioch and the importance of the Church in the city of Antioch which was a commercially significant city in the eastern parts of the Roman Empire, the First Council of Nicaea (325) recognized the bishopric as a Patriarchate along with the bishoprics of Rome, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, bestowing authority for the Church of Antioch and All of the East on the Patriarch. Even though the Synod of Nicaea was convened by the Roman Emperor Constantine, the authority of the ecumenical synod was also accepted by the Church in the Persian Empire which was politically isolated from the Churches in the Roman Empire. Until 498, this Church accepted the spiritual authority of the Patriarch of Antioch. The Church also maintained a smaller non-Chalcedonian church under a Catholicos (Katholikos), known by the title Maphryono, until the 1860s. This Catholicate was canonically transferred to India in 1964 and continues today as an integral part of the Syriac Orthodox Church with the Syriac Orthodox Patriarch as its head. The Christological controversies that followed the Council of Chalcedon in 451 resulted in a long struggle for the Patriarchate between those who accepted and those who rejected the Council. In 518, Patriarch Mar Severius was exiled from the city of Antioch and took refuge in Alexandria. On account of many historical upheavals and consequent hardships which the church had to undergo, the Patriarchate was transferred to different monasteries in Mesopotamia for centuries. In the 13th century its seat was transferred in the Mor Hananyo Monastery (Deir al-Za`faran), in southeastern Turkey near Mardin, where it remained until 1933. Due to an adverse political situation, it was transferred to Homs, Syria and in 1959 was transferred again to Damascus. On July 21, 1781, Syriac Orthodox Patriarch George IV died, and the bishops (five bishops were present), clergy and laity met in the Dayr al-Zafaran monastery and elected Catholic convert Ignatius Michael III Jarweh as Patriarch; he accepted only after the reading and the approval of a Catholic declaration of faith in the church of the Forty Martyrs. He was enthroned in Dayr al-Zafaran monastery on January 22, 1783 and took the traditional name of Ignatius III. His election was confirmed by the Pope on September 14, 1783, and he received the Pallium, the sign of patriarchal authority, on December 15 of the same year. The Syrian Catholic Church once again had a Patriarch. Two Syriac bishops opposed his election: two days after Michael's enthronement they took the money of the monastery and paid a group of Kurds who attacked Mardin, making fatalities: Michael survived, but lost many days. In the meantime one of these two Syirac Orthodox bishops, Mar Matta ben Abdel-Ahad Saalab, bishop of Mosul, consecrated to bishop four of his monks in order to hold a second election and thus he was elected Syriac Orthodox patriarch. This party arrived at Istanbul before Michael's envoy, and received the formal approval of the Ottoman authorities, and could thus continue a parallell Syriac Orthodox tradition. The Patriarchate office is now in Bab Tuma, in Damascus, capital of Syria; but the Patriarch resides at the Mar Aphrem Monastery in Ma`arat Sayyidnaya located about twenty five kilometers north of Damascus. The Church of Antioch played a prominent role in the first three synods held at Nicaea (325), Constantinople (381), and Ephesus (431), shaping the formulation and early interpretation of Christian doctrines. In terms of Christology, the Oriental Orthodox (Non-Chalcedonian) understanding is that Christ is "One Nature—the Logos Incarnate, of the full humanity and full divinity". Just as humans are of their mothers and fathers and not in their mothers and fathers, so too is the nature of Christ according to Oriental Orthodoxy. The Chalcedonian understanding is that Christ is "in two natures, full humanity and full divinity". This is the doctrinal difference which separated the Oriental Orthodox from the rest of Christendom.  By the 20th century the Chalcedonian schism was not seen with the same relevance, and from several meetings between the authorities of Roman Catholicism and the Oriental Orthodoxy, reconciling declarations emerged in the common statement of the Oriental Patriarch (Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas) and the Pope (John Paul II) in 1984. The Syriac Orthodox Church is very active in ecumenical dialogues. It has been a member church of World Council of Churches since 1960 and the Patriarch, Mor Ignatius Zakka I Iwas is one of the presidents of World Council of Churches. The Syriac Orthodox Church is also actively involved in ecumenical dialogues with the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox churches. There are common Christological and pastoral agreements with the Catholic Church. It has also been involved in the Middle East Council of Churches since 1974. Since 1998, the heads of the three Oriental Churches in the Eastern Mediterranean i.e. the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Coptic Orthodox Church and the Armenian Apostolic Church (Catholicate of Cilicia, Antelias, Lebanon) meet regularly each year. Syriac Orthodox clergy and some devout laity follow a regimen of seven prayers a day, in accordance with Psalm 119. According to the Syriac Tradition, an ecclesiastical day starts at sunset: The liturgical service, which is called Holy Qurbono in Syriac Aramaic and means 'Eucharist', is celebrated on Sundays and special occasions. The Holy Eucharist consists of Gospel Reading, Bible Readings, Prayers, and Songs. During the celebration of the Eucharist, priests and deacons put on elaborate vestments which are unique to the Syriac Orthodox Church. Whether in the Eastern Mediterranean, India, Europe, the Americas or Australia, the same vestments are worn by all clergy. Apart from certain readings, all prayers are sung in the form of chants and melodies. Hundreds of melodies remain and these are preserved in the book known as Beth Gazo. It is the key reference to Syriac Orthodox church music.Beth Gazo D-ne`motho http://sor.cua.edu/bethgazo Syriac Orthodox Churches use the Peshitta (Syriac: simple, common) as its Bible. The New Testament books of this Bible were translated from Greek to Syriac between the late 1st century to the early 3rd century AD.Brock, Sebastian P. The Bible in Syriac Bible. Kottayam: SEERI. The Old Testament of the Peshitta was translated from the Hebrew, probably in the 2nd century. The New Testament of the Peshitta, which originally excluded certain disputed books, had become the standard by the early 5th century, replacing two early Syriac versions of the gospels.  In the Syriac Orthodox tradition, different ranks among the deacons are specifically assigned with particular duties. The six ranks of diaconate are: Only a full deacon or Masamsono can take the censer during the Divine Liturgy to assist the priest. However, in Malankara Church, because of the lack of deacons, altar assistants who do not have any rank of deaconhood assist the priest. The deacons in Malankara Church are allowed to wear a phiro, or a cap. The priest is the seventh rank and is the duly one appointed to administer the sacraments. Unlike in the Roman Catholic church, Syriac deacons can marry before ordained as a full priest; however he cannot marry after ordained as priest.There is another honorary rank among the priests that is Corepiscopos who has the privileges of "first among the priests" and are give a chain with cross and specific vestment decorations. Corepiscopos is the highest rank a married man can be elevated in the Syriac Orthodox Church. Any ranks above the Corepiscopos are unmarried. Episcopos is a word that means "the one who oversees". In the Syriac Orthodox Church, an episcopos is a spiritual ruler of the church. In episcopos too there are different ranks. The highest and the supreme is the patriarch, who is the "father of fathers". Next to him is the Maphriyono or Catholicos of India who is the head of a division of the Church. Then there are Metropolitans or Archbishops and under them there are Episcopos or Bishops.Corepiscopos, Kuriakose M. A Guide to the Altar Assistants. Changanacherry: Mor Adai Study Center, 2005.  The clergy of the Syriac Orthodox Church have unique vestments that are quite different from other Christian denominations. The vestments worn by the clergy vary with their order in the priesthood. The deacons, the priests, the bishops, and the patriarch each have different vestments. The priest's usual dress is a black robe, but in India, due to the harsh weather, priests usually wear white robes. However, during prayers in the church, they wear a black robe over the white one. Bishops usually wear a black or a red robe with a red belt. They do not, however, wear a red robe in the presence of the patriarch, who wears a red robe. Bishops visiting a diocese outside their jurisdiction also wear black robes in deference to the bishop of the diocese, who alone wears red robes. A priest also wears phiro, or a cap, which he must wear for all the public prayers. Monks also wear eskimo, a hood. Priests also have ceremonial shoes which are called msone. Without wearing msone, a priest cannot distribute holy Eucharist to the faithful. Then there is a white robe called kutino symbolizing purity. Hamniko or stole is worn over this white robe. Then he wears a girdle called zenoro and zende meaning sleeves. If the celebrant is a bishop, he wears a masnapto, or turban (very different from turbans worn by Sikh men). A cope called phayno is worn over these vestments. Batrashil, or pallium, is worn over the phayno by bishops (very similar to hamnikho worn by priests).Detailed explanation of vestments of Syriac Orthodox Church http://sor.cua.edu/Vestments/index.html An important aspect is that bishops and Cor-Episcopas have hand-held crosses while ordinary priests have none.   The fathers of the Syriac Orthodox Church tried to give a theological interpretation to the primacy of Saint Peter. They were fully convinced of the unique office of Peter in the primitive Christian community. Ephrem, Aphrahat and Maruthas who were supposed to be the best exponents of the early Syriac tradition unequivocally acknowledge the office of Peter. The Syriac Fathers following the rabbinic tradition call Jesus “Kepha” for they see “rock” in the Old Testament as a messianic Symbol. When Christ gave his own name “Kephas” to Simon he was giving him participation in the person and office of Christ. Christ who is the Kepha and shepherd made Simon the chief shepherd in his place and gave him the very name Kephas and said that on Kephas he would build the Church. Aphrahat shared the common Syriac tradition. For him Kepha is in fact another name of Jesus, and Simon was given the right to share the name. The person who receives somebody else’s name also obtains the rights of the person who bestows the name. Aphrahat makes the stone taken from Jordan a type of Peter. He says Jesus son of Nun set up the stones for a witness in Israel; Jesus our Saviour called Simon Kepha Sarirto and set him as the faithful witness among nations. Again he says in his commentary on Deuteronomy that Moses brought forth water from “rock” (Kepha) for the people and Jesus sent Simon Kepha to carry his teachings among nations. Our Lord accepted him and made him the foundation of the Church and called him Kepha. When he speaks about transfiguration of Christ he calls him Simon Peter, the foundation of the Church. Ephrem also shared the same view. The Armenian version of De Virginitate records that Peter the rock shunned honour Who was the head of the Apostles. In a mimro of Efrem found in Holy Week Liturgy points to the importance of Peter. Both Aphrahat and Ephrem the Syrian represent the authentic tradition of the Syrian Church. The different orders of liturgies used for sanctification of Church building, marriage, ordination etc. reveal that the primacy of Peter is a part of living faith of the Church.Primacy of St. Peter by Mor Athanasius of Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, Malankara Syriac Christian Resources However, it should be noted that Syriac Orthodox don't believe that St. Peter is indicative of the Papal Primacy, but only Petrine Primacy.  It is estimated that the church has over 1,500,000 members globally. This includes 1,000,000 members in India and Indian diaspora. The majority of the remaining are ethnic Assyrians/Syriacs who comprise the indigenous pre-Arab populations of modern Syria, Iraq and south eastern Turkey.Gall, Timothy L. (ed). Worldmark Encyclopedia of Culture & Daily Life: Vol. 3 – Asia & Oceania. Cleveland, OH: Eastword Publications Development (1998); pg. 720–721. According to 2001 estimates, around 260,000 live in the Middle East, a similar number lives in Western Europe and North America, most notably in Sweden and Germany (100,000), and the Americas (40,000). There is another orthodox faction in India "Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church", this church is independent and has its own Catholicos in India. There are 170,000 Syriac Orthodox members in Syria and 15,000 in Turkey, 1,750 in Palestine (500 in Jerusalem and 1,250 Bethlehem) (numbers among the Assyrians in Iraq and north eastern Syria are unknown after the recent resurgence of Islamist groups such as ISIS, Al Qaeda and the Nusra Front). In Lebanon they number up to 50,000. In the diaspora/Assyrian diaspora, there are approximately 80,000 members in the United States, 80,000 in Sweden, 100,000 in Germany, 15,000 in the Netherlands, 200,000 members in Brazil, Switzerland, and Austria and around 2,000,000 in Central America, including a large number of indigenous Mayan converts in Guatemala.In the Assyrian cultural triangle there are 3 areas, and each area is the traditional area of a certain denomination. The three different areas in the triangle are Hakkari, Nineveh and Tur Abdin. Of the 3 areas, The Syriacs traditional area is in Tur Abdin.  Since the church has never been the officially adopted religion of a modern-day country, a unique name had long been used to distinguish the church from the polity of Syria in most languages besides English. This includes Arabic (the official language of Syria), where the Church has always been known as the "Syriani" church; the term "Syriani" being the same word used to identify the Syriac language in Arabic. The meaning of this term is entirely unique from the term for "Syrian" in Arabic, which is translated as, literally, "Syrian". Being the lone exception up until the year 2000, English identified the church as the "Syrian Orthodox Church"; with "Syrian" being derived from the term "Syrian church" used by English-speaking historians to describe the community in ancient Syria prior to the ecumenical divisions (see: Christianity in Syria). The confusion between "Syrian" and "Syriac" in English led to some nationalists favoring the term "Syrian Orthodox" and some ethnic Assyrians favoring the term "Assyrian Orthodox", as the names Syria and Syriac are now generally accepted as having been originally derived from Assyria (see Name of Syria). However, the term "Syrian Orthodox" failed to distinguish the church as in other languages and the term Assyrian Orthodox Church led to confusion with the Assyrian Church of the East. Hence, in 2000, a Holy Synod ruled that the church should be named after its official liturgical language of Syriac (i.e. Syriac Orthodox Church), as it is in most other languages.  The official name of the church in Syriac is pronounced ; this name has not changed, nor has it changed in any language other than English.The Holy Synod approves the name "Syriac Orthodox Church" in English , The Catholic University of America The church is often referred to as Jacobite (after Jacob Baradaeus), but it rejects this name. The church today has two seminaries, and numerous colleges and other institutions. Among those there are several religious institutions which are noteworthy. Patriarch Aphrem I Barsoum (†1957) established St. Aphrem's Clerical School in 1934 in Zahlé, Lebanon. In 1946 it was moved to Mosul, Iraq, where it provided the Church with a good selection of graduates, the first among them being Patriarch Mor Ignatius Zakka I Iwas and many other church leaders. Also the church has an international Christian education centre which is a centre for religious education. In 1990 he established the Order of St. Jacob Baradaeus for nuns and renovated St. Aphrem's Clerical building in Atshanneh, Lebanon for the new order.Patriarchate of the Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch The Syrian Orthodox Church in Asia has several Archdioceses and Patriarchate Vicariates in Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Turkey, Jordan, Palestine, Israel, United Arab Emirates and the Arab States of the Persian Gulf.  Syria  The Patriarch of Antioch and All the East, the Supreme Head of the Universal Syrian Orthodox Church His Holiness Ignatius Aphrem II. # Patriarchal Office Director in Damascus Archbishop H.E. Mor Dionysius Jean Kawak. # Patriarchal Secretary in Damascus Archbishop H.E. Mor Timothius Matta AlKhori. # Archbishopric of Jazirah and Euphrates under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Eustathius Matta Roham. # Archbishopric of Aleppo under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Gregorios Yohanna Ibrahim. # Archbishopric of Homs & Hama under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Selwanos Petros AL-nemeh. # Patriarchate Vicariate for the Archdiocese of Damascus under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Ivanius Paulose Al-Souky.  Lebanon  # Archbishopric of Mount Lebanon under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Theophilos George Saliba. # Patriarchate Vicariate of Zahle under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Yostinos Boulos Safar. # Archbishopric of Beirut & Benevolent institutions in Lebanon under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Clemis Daniel Malak Kourieh. # The Patriarchal Institutions in Lebanon under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Chrysostoms Michael Shimon.  Iraq  # Archbishopric of Baghdad and Basrah under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Severius Jamil Hawa. # Archbishopric of Mosul, Kirkuk and Kurdistan under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Nicodimus Dawood Sharaf. Served previously by the retired Archbishop but currently Patriarch Advisor H.E. Mor Gregorius Saliba Shamoun. # Archbishopric of St Matthew's "Matta" Monastery under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Timothius Mousa A. Shamani.  Turkey  # Archbishopric of Istanbul and Ankara under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Filüksinos Yusuf Çetin. # Patriarchate Vicariate of Mardin under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Filüksinos Saliba Özmen. # Patriarchate Vicariate of Turabdin under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Timothius Samuel Aktaş. # Archbishopric of Adiyaman under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Gregorius Melki Ürek.  Holy Land  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Israel, Palestine and Jordan under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Severios Malke Mourad.  UAE  # Patriarchate Vicariate of UAE and Arab States of the Persian Gulf under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Bartholomaus Nathanael. India     The Jacobite Syrian Christian Church, one of the various Saint Thomas Christian churches in India, is an integral part of the Syriac Orthodox Church, with the Patriarch of Antioch as its supreme head. The local head of the church in Malankara (Kerala) is Baselios Thomas I, ordained by the Patriarch in 2002 and accountable to the Patriarch of Antioch. The headquarters of the church in India is at Puthencruz near Ernakulam in the state of Kerala in South India.  The Knanaya Syrian Orthodox Church is an archdiocese under the same patriarchate. The Indian or Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, is not affiliated with the Universal Syrian Orthodox Church. Unlike most other patriarchal churches abroad, the language of the Syriac Orthodox Divine Liturgy in India is mostly in Malayalam along with Syriac. This is because almost all Syrian Christians in India hail from the State of Kerala, where Malayalam is the mother tongue of the people. Simhasana Churches and Evangelistic Association Of The East(E.A.E) the first missionary association of Syriac Orthodox Church, is under direct control of H.H Ignatius Aphrem II   The Syriac Orthodox Church in Europe has eight Archdioceses and Patriarchate Vicariates.  Belgium  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Belgium, France and Luxembourg under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Severius Hazail Soumi.  Germany  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Germany under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Philoxenus Mattias Nayis. # Ecumenical Movement in Germany under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Julius Hanna Aydın.  Netherlands  # Patriarchate Vicariate of the Netherlands under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Polycarpus Augin (Eugene) Aydın.  Sweden  # Archbishopric of Sweden and Scandinavia under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Julius Abdulahad Gallo Shabo. # Patriarchate Vicariate of Sweden under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Dioskoros Benyamen Atas.  Switzerland  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Switzerland and Austria under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Dionysius Isa Gürbüz.  United Kingdom  # Patriarchate Vicariate of the United Kingdom under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Athanasius Toma Dawod.  Spain  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Spain under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Nicolaos Matti Abd Alahad. The Syriac Orthodox Church has four Archdioceses and Patriarchate Vicariates in Northern America, one Archdiocese in Central America and the Caribbean Islands.  United States  # Patriarchate Vicariate of the Eastern USA under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Cyril Aphrem Karim now the Patriarch His Holiness Ignatius Aphrem II. # Patriarchate Vicariate of the Western USA under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Clemis Eugene Kaplan. # Malankara Archdiocese of North America under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Titus Yeldho Pathickal.  Canada  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Canada under the spiritual guidance and direction Archbishop H.E. Mor Athanasius Elia Bahi.  Guatemala  # Archdiocese of Central America, the Caribbean Islands and Venezuela under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Yaqub Eduardo Aguirre Oestmann.  Australia  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Australia and New Zealand under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Malatius Malki Malki. The Syriac Orthodox Church has two Patriarchate Vicariates in South America.  Argentina  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Argentina under the spiritual guidance and direction of Archbishop H.E. Mor Chrysostomos John Ghassali.  Brazil  # Patriarchate Vicariate of Brazil under the spiritual guidance and direction of the Apostolic Nuncio H.E. Mor Theethose Bolous Toza.   Evening or Ramsho prayer (Vespers) Night prayer or Sootoro prayer (Compline) Midnight or Lilyo prayer (Matins) Morning or Saphro prayer (Prime or Lauds, 6 a.m.) Third Hour or tloth sho`in prayer (Terce, 9 a.m.) Sixth Hour or sheth sho`in prayer (Sext, noon) Ninth Hour or tsha` sho'in prayer (None, 3 p.m.) ‘Ulmoyo (Faithful) Mawdyono (Confessor of Faith) Mzamrono (Singer) Quroyo (Reader) Afudyaqno (Sub-deacon) Mshamshono (Full Deacon) Dioceses of the Syriac Orthodox Church List of Orthodox Churches List of Patriarchs of Antioch — to 546 List of Syriac Patriarchs of Antioch from 512 to 1783 List of Syriac Patriarchs of Antioch from 1783 to the present List of Syriac Orthodox Patriarchs of Antioch — list from 518 Malankara Jacobite Syriac Orthodox Church (Church in India) Saint Thomas Christians (Syrian Malabar Nasrani) St. Mark’s Monastery, Jerusalem St Peter St Ignatius Jacob Baradaeus Ignatius Aphrem II Ignatius Zakka I Iwas Ignatius Afram I Barsoum Ignatius Jacob III Ignatius Elias III Baselios Thomas I Website of Syriac Orthodox Church In India Jacobite Syrian Church Syriac Orthodox Church in Canada Mor Aphrem Monastery  Malankara Archdiocese of the Syrian Orthodox Church in North America Syriac Orthodox Church in Ireland – Dublin The First Parish Church of Syrian Orthodox Church in Ireland Syriac Orthodox Church in Ireland – Waterford Margonitho: Syriac Orthodox Resources Article on Syrian Orthodox Church by Ronald Roberson on CNEWA website Jacobite Online: Online Community of Jacobite Syrian Church Malankara Syriac Christian Resources News Site Of Jacobite Syrian Orthodox Church Malankara Vision: TV Of Jacobite Syrian Church Malankarese Giacobita siriano Chiesa Radio Malankara: Radio of Jacobite Syrian Church Pope Benedict XIV, Allatae Sunt (On the observance of Oriental Rites), Encyclical, 1755 Addresses of Pope Paul VI and His Holiness Mar Ignatius Jacob III, 1971 Common Declaration of Pope John Paul II and His Holiness Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas, 1984 Address of John Paul II on Occasion of the Visit to the Catholicos of the Malankarese Syrian Orthodox Church, 1986 Shroro: The Syriac Christian Digest Syriac Music Online Noohro "The Light" Weekly Bulletin Syrian Liturgy description and photos
