  Tagalog According to the OED and Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary () is an Austronesian language spoken as a first language by a quarter of the population of the Philippines and as a second language by the majority. Its standardized form, officially named Filipino, is the national language and one of two official languages of the Philippines, the other being English. It is related to other Philippine languages, such as the Bikol languages, Ilokano, the Visayan languages, and Kapampangan, and more distantly to other Austronesian languages, such as the Formosan languages, Indonesian, Hawaiian, and Malagasy.   The word Tagalog is derived from the endonym taga-ilog ("river dweller"), composed of tagá- ("native of" or "from") and ílog ("river"). Very little is known about the ancient history of the language. Linguists such as Dr. David Zorc and Dr. Robert Blust speculate that the Tagalogs and other Central Philippine ethno-linguistic groups originated in Northeastern Mindanao or the Eastern Visayas.Zorc, David. 1977. "The Bisayan Dialects of the Philippines: Subgrouping and Reconstruction". Pacific Linguistics C.44. Canberra: The Australian National UniversityBlust, Robert. 1991. "The Greater Central Philippines hypothesis". Oceanic Linguistics 30:73–129 The first written record of Tagalog is the Laguna Copperplate Inscription, which dates to 900 CE and exhibits fragments of the language along with Sanskrit, Malay, Javanese, and Old Tagalog. The first known complete book to be written in Tagalog is the Doctrina Christiana (Christian Doctrine), printed in 1593. The Doctrina was written in Spanish and two transcriptions of Tagalog; one in the ancient, then-current Baybayin script and the other in an early Spanish attempt at a Latin orthography for the language. Throughout the 333 years of Spanish occupation, grammars and dictionaries were written by Spanish clergymen, including Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala by Pedro de San Buenaventura (Pila, Laguna, 1613), the Czech Paul Klein Vocabulario de la lengua tagala (beginning of the 18th century), Vocabulario de la lengua tagala (1835), and Arte de la lengua tagala y manual tagalog para la administración de los Santos Sacramentos (1850) in addition to early studieshttp://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/arch_0044-8613_1992_num_44_1_2861 of the language; however, the indigenous poet Francisco Baltazar (1788–1862) is regarded as the foremost Tagalog writer, his most notable work being the early 19th-century epic Florante at Laura. Tagalog differs from its Central Philippine counterparts with its treatment of the Proto-Philippine schwa vowel . In Bikol and Visayan, this sound merged with  and . In Tagalog, it has merged with . For example, Proto-Philippine  (adhere, stick) is Tagalog dikít and Visayan & Bikol dukot. Proto-Philippine , , and  merged with  but is  between vowels. Proto-Philippine  (name) and  (kiss) became Tagalog ngalan and halík. Proto-Philippine  merged with .  (water) and  (blood) became Tagalog tubig and dugô.  The first substantial dictionary of Tagalog language was written by the Czech Jesuit missionary Paul Klein in the beginning of the 18th century. Klein spoke Tagalog and used it actively in several of his books. He wrote the first dictionary, which he later passed over to Francisco Jansens and José Hernandez.Juan José de Noceda, Pedro de Sanlucar, Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala, Manila 2013, pg iv, Komision sa Wikang Filipino Further  compilation of his substantial work was prepared by P. Juan de Noceda and P. Pedro de Sanlucar and published as Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala in Manila in 1754 and then repeatedly reedited, with the last edition being in 2013 in Manila.Juan José de Noceda, Pedro de Sanlucar, Vocabulario de la lengua tagala, Manila 2013, Komision sa Wikang Filipino. Tagalog was declared the official language by the first constitution in the Philippines, the Constitution of Biak-na-Bato in 1897. In 1935, the Philippine constitution designated English and Spanish as official languages, but mandated the development and adoption of a common national language based on one of the existing native languages. After study and deliberation, the National Language Institute, a committee composed of seven members who represented various regions in the Philippines, chose Tagalog as the basis for the evolution and adoption of the national language of the Philippines. President Manuel L. Quezon then, on December 30, 1937, proclaimed the selection of the Tagalog language to be used as the basis for the evolution and adoption of the national language of the Philippines. In 1939, President Quezon renamed the proposed Tagalog-based national language as wikang pambansâ (national language). In 1959, the language was further renamed as "Pilipino". The 1973 constitution designated the Tagalog-based "Pilipino", along with English, as an official language and mandated the development and formal adoption of a common national language to be known as Filipino. The 1987 constitution designated Filipino as the national language mandating that as it evolves, it shall be further developed and enriched on the basis of existing Philippine and other languages.Gonzales, A. (1998). Language planning situation in the Philippines. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 19(5), 487-525. Article XIV, Section 7 of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines specifies, in part: In 2009, the Department of Education promulgated an order institutionalizing a system of mother-tongue based multilingual education ("MLE"), wherein instruction is conducted primarily in a student's mother tongue until at least grade three, with additional languages such as Filipino and English being introduced as separate subjects no earlier than grade two. In secondary school, Filipino and English become the primary languages of instruction, with the learner's first language taking on an auxiliary role.Order No. 74 (2009). Department of Education. It is the first language by a quarter of the population of the Philippines and a second language by the majority.Philippine Census, 2000. Table 11. Household Population by Ethnicity, Sex and Region: 2000 Tagalog is a Central Philippine language within the Austronesian language family. Being Malayo-Polynesian, it is related to other Austronesian languages, such as Malagasy, Javanese, Indonesian, Malay, Tetum (of Timor), and Tao language (of Taiwan).Lewis, M.P., Simons, G.F., & Fennig, C.D. (2014). Tagalog. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved from http://www.ethnologue.com/language/tgl  It is closely related to the languages spoken in the Bicol and Visayas regions, such as Bikol and the Visayan group, including Hiligaynon and Cebuano. At present, no comprehensive dialectology has been done in the Tagalog-speaking regions, though there have been descriptions in the form of dictionaries and grammars of various Tagalog dialects. Ethnologue lists Lubang, Manila, Marinduque, Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Tanay-Paete, and Tayabas as dialects of Tagalog; however, there appear to be four main dialects, of which the aforementioned are a part: Northern (exemplified by the Bulacan dialect), Central (including Manila), Southern (exemplified by Batangas), and Marinduque. Some example of dialectal differences are: Perhaps the most divergent Tagalog dialects are those spoken in Marinduque. Linguist Rosa Soberano identifies two dialects, western and eastern, with the former being closer to the Tagalog dialects spoken in the provinces of Batangas and Quezon. One example is the verb conjugation paradigms. While some of the affixes are different, Marinduque also preserves the imperative affixes, also found in Visayan and Bikol languages, that have mostly disappeared from most Tagalog early 20th century; they have since merged with the infinitive. Northern and central dialects form the basis for the national language. The Tagalog homeland, Katagalugan, covers roughly much of the central to southern parts of the island of Luzon—particularly in Aurora, Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Camarines Norte, Cavite, Laguna, Metro Manila, Nueva Ecija, Quezon, Rizal, and large parts of Zambales. Tagalog is also spoken natively by inhabitants living on the islands, Marinduque, Mindoro, and large areas of Palawan. It is spoken by approximately 64 million Filipinos, 96% of the household population. 22 million, or 28% of the total Philippine population, speak it as a native language. Tagalog speakers are found in other parts of the Philippines as well as throughout the world, though its use is usually limited to communication between Filipino ethnic groups.  2010, the US Census bureau reported (based on data collected in 2007) that in the United States it was the fourth most-spoken language at home with almost 1.5 million speakers, behind Spanish or Spanish Creole, French (including Patois, Cajun, Creole), and Chinese. Tagalog ranked as the third most spoken language in metropolitan statistical areas, behind Spanish and Chinese but ahead of French. The Tagalog language also boasts accentations unique to some parts of Tagalog-speaking regions. For example, in some parts of Manila, a strong pronunciation of i exists and vowel-switching of o and u exists so words like "gising" (to wake) is pronounced as "giseng" with a strong 'e' and the word "tagu-taguan" (hide-and-go-seek) is pronounced as "tago-tagoan" with a mild 'o'. Batangas Tagalog boasts the most distinctive accent in Tagalog compared to the more Hispanized northern accents of the language. The Batangas accent has been featured in film and television and Filipino actor Leo Martinez speaks this accent. Martinez's accent, however, will quickly be recognized by native Batangueños as representative of the accent in western Batangas which is milder  compared to that used in the eastern part of the province. Taglish and Englog are names given to a mix of English and Tagalog. The amount of English vs. Tagalog varies from the occasional use of English loan words to outright code-switching, where the language changes in mid-sentence. Such code-switching is prevalent throughout the Philippines and in various languages of the Philippines other than Tagalog. Code Mixing also entails the use of foreign words that are Filipinized by reforming them using Filipino rules, such as verb conjugations. Users typically use Filipino or English words, whichever comes to mind first or whichever is easier to use. "Magshoshopping kami sa mall. Sino ba ang magdadrive sa shopping center?" "We will go shopping at the mall. Who will drive to the shopping center?" City-dwellers, the highly educated, and people born around and after World War II are more likely to do this. The practice is common in television, radio, and print media as well. Advertisements from companies like Wells Fargo, Wal-Mart, Albertsons, McDonald's, and Western Union have contained Taglish.   Tagalog has 33 phonemes: 19 of them are consonants and 14 are vowels. Syllable structure is relatively simple, being maximally consonant-ar-vowel-consonant, where consonant-ar only occurs in borrowed words such as trak "truck" or sombréro "hat". Tagalog has ten simple vowels, five long and five short, and four diphthongs. Before appearing in the area north of Pasig river, Tagalog had three vowel qualities: , , and . This was later expanded to five with the introduction of words from Northern Philippine languages like Kapampangan and Ilocano and Spanish words. They are: Nevertheless, simplification of pairs  and  is likely to take place, especially in some Tagalog as second language, remote location and worker class registers. The four diphthongs are , , , and . Long vowels are not written apart from pedagogical texts, where an acute accent is used: á é í ó ú. Below is a chart of Tagalog consonants. All the stops are unaspirated. The velar nasal occurs in all positions including at the beginning of a word.  are written ts, dy, sy. Glottal stop is not indicated. Glottal stops are most likely to occur when: Tagalog was written in an abugida, or alphasyllabary, called Baybayin prior to the Spanish colonial period in the Philippines, in the 16th century. This particular writing system was composed of symbols representing three vowels and 14 consonants. Belonging to the Brahmic family of scripts, it shares similarities with the Old Kawi script of Java and is believed to be descended from the script used by the Bugis in Sulawesi. Although it enjoyed a relatively high level of literacy, Baybayin gradually fell into disuse in favor of the Latin alphabet taught by the Spaniards during their rule. There has been confusion of how to use Baybayin, which is actually an abugida, or an alphasyllabary, rather than an alphabet. Not every letter in the Latin alphabet is represented with one of those in the Baybayin alphasyllabary. Rather than letters being put together to make sounds as in Western languages, Baybayin uses symbols to represent syllables. A "kudlit" resembling an apostrophe is used above or below a symbol to change the vowel sound after its consonant. If the kudlit is used above, the vowel is an "E" or "I" sound. If the kudlit is used below, the vowel is an "O" or "U" sound. A special kudlit was later added by Spanish missionaries in which a cross placed below the symbol to get rid of the vowel sound all together, leaving a consonant. Previously, the consonant without a following vowel was simply left out (for example, bundok being rendered as budo), forcing the reader to use context when reading such words. Example:  Baybayin is encoded in Unicode version 3.2 in the range 1700-171F under the name "Tagalog". Until the first half of the 20th century, Tagalog was widely written in a variety of ways based on Spanish orthography consisting of 32 letters called 'ABECEDARIO':  When the national language was based on Tagalog, grammarian Lope K. Santos introduced a new alphabet consisting of 20 letters called ABAKADA in school grammar books called balarilà:  In 1987 the department of Education, Culture and Sports issued a memo stating that the Philippine alphabet had changed from the Pilipino-Tagalog Abakada version to a new 28-letter alphabet to make room for loans, especially family names from Spanish and English:  The genitive marker ng and the plural marker mga are abbreviations that are pronounced nang  and mangá . Ng, in most cases, roughly translates to "of" (ex. Siya ay kapatid ng nanay ko. She is the sibling of my mother) while nang usually means "when" or can describe how something is done or to what extent (equivalent to the suffix -ly in English adverbs), among other uses. Mga (pronounced as "muh-NGA") denotes plurality as adding an s, es, or ies does in English (ex. Iyan ang mga damit ko. (Those are my clothes)). In the first example, nang is used in lieu of the word noong (when; Noong si Hudas ay madulas). In the second, nang describes that the person woke up (gumising) early (maaga); gumising nang maaga. In the third, nang described up to what extent that Juan improved (gumaling), which is "greatly" (nang ). In the latter two examples, the ligature na and its variants -ng and -g may also be used (Gumising na maaga/Maagang gumising; Gumaling na /Todong gumaling). The longer nang may also have other uses, such as a ligature that joins a repeated word: The words po/ho and opo/oho are traditionally used as polite iterations of the affirmative "oo" ("yes"). It is generally used when addressing elders or superiors such as bosses or teachers. "Po" and "opo" are specifically used to denote a high level of respect when addressing older persons of close affinity like parents, relatives, teachers and family friends. "Ho" and "oho" are generally used to politely address older neighbours, strangers, public officials, bosses and nannies, and may suggest a distance in societal relationship and respect determined by the addressee's social rank and not their age. However, "po" and "opo" can be used in any case in order to express an elevation of respect. Used in the affirmative: Po/Ho may also be used in negation. Tagalog vocabulary is composed mostly of words of native Austronesian origin - most of the words that end with the diphthongs -iw, (e.g. saliw) and those words that exhibit reduplication (e.g. halo-halo, patpat, etc.). However it has a significant number of Spanish loanwords. Spanish is the language that has bequeathed the most loanwords to Tagalog. According to linguists, Spanish has even surpassed Malay in terms of loanwords borrowed. About 40% of everyday (informal) Tagalog conversation is practically made up of Spanish loanwords. Tagalog also includes many loanwords (including some False Cognates in other languages) from English, Indian (Vedic Sanskrit, Sanskrit and Tamil), Chinese (Hokkien, Yue Chinese (Cantonese), Mandarin), Japanese, Arabic, Persian. Due to trade with Mexico via the Manila galleons from the 16th to the 19th centuries, many words from Nahuatl were introduced to Tagalog, but some of them were replaced by Spanish loanwords in the latter part of the Spanish colonization in the islands. The Philippines has long been a melting pot of nations. The islands have been subject to different influences and a meeting point of numerous migrations since the early prehistoric origins of trading activities, especially from the time of the Neolithic Period, Silk Road, Tang Dynasty, Ming Dynasty, Ryukyu Kingdom and Manila Galleon trading periods. This means that the evolution of the language is difficult to reconstruct (although many theories exist). In pre-Hispanic times, Trade Malay was widely known and spoken throughout Maritime Southeast Asia. English has borrowed some words from Tagalog, such as abaca, barong, balisong, boondocks, jeepney, Manila hemp, pancit, ylang-ylang, and yaya, although the vast majority of these borrowed words are only used in the Philippines as part of the vocabularies of Philippine English. Tagalog has contributed several words to Philippine Spanish, like barangay (from , meaning barrio), the abacá, cogon, palay, dalaga etc. Below is a chart of Tagalog and twenty other Austronesian languages comparing thirteen words. Religious literature remains one of the most dynamic contributors to Tagalog literature. The first Bible in Tagalog, then called Ang BibliaWorth, Roland H. Biblical Studies On The Internet: A Resource Guide, 2008 (p. 43) ("the Bible") and now called Ang Dating Biblia ("the Old Bible"), was published in 1905. In 1970, the Philippine Bible Society translated the Bible into modern Tagalog. Even before the Second Vatican Council, devotional materials in Tagalog had been in circulation. There are at least four circulating Tagalog translations of the Bible When the Second Vatican Council, (specifically the Sacrosanctum Concilium) permitted the universal prayers to be translated into vernacular languages, the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines was one of the first to translate the Roman Missal into Tagalog. The Roman Missal in Tagalog was published as early as 1982. Jehovah's Witnesses were printing Tagalog literature at least as early as 1941 and The Watchtower (the primary magazine of Jehovah's Witnesses) has been published in Tagalog since at least the 1950s. New releases are now regularly released simultaneously in a number of languages, including Tagalog. The official website of Jehovah's Witnesses also has some publications available online in Tagalog. Tagalog is quite a stable language, and very few revisions have been made to Catholic Bible translations. Also, as Protestantism in the Philippines is relatively young, liturgical prayers tend to be more ecumenical. In Tagalog, the Lord's Prayer is exclusively known by its incipit, Amá Namin (literally, "Our Father"). This is Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Pángkalahatáng Pagpapahayag ng Karapatáng Pantao) Bawat tao'y isinilang na may layà at magkakapantáy ang tagláy na dangál at karapatán. Silá'y pinagkalooban ng pangangatwiran at budhî na kailangang gamitin nilá sa pagtuturingan nilá sa diwà ng pagkakapatiran. All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, The United Nations. The numbers (mga bilang) in Tagalog language are of two sets. The first set consists of native Tagalog words and the other set are Spanish loanwords. For example, when a person refers to the number "seven", it can be translated into Tagalog as "pito" or "syete" (Spanish: siete). Months and days in Tagalog are also localised forms of Spanish months and days. "Month" in Tagalog is buwán (also the word for moon) and "day" is araw (the word also means sun). Unlike Spanish, however, months and days in Tagalog are always capitalised. Time in Tagalog language are also Tagalized form of Spanish time. "Time" in Tagalog is panahon or more commonly, oras. Unlike Spanish, time in Tagalog are capitalized whenever they appear in a sentence. *Pronouns such as niyo (2nd person plural) and nila (3rd person plural) are used on a single 2nd person in polite or formal language. See Tagalog grammar. Ang hindî marunong lumingón sa pinánggalingan ay hindî makaráratíng sa paroroonan. (José Rizal)One who knows not how to look back from whence he came, will never get to where he is going. " Tao ka nang humarap, Bilang Tao kitang haharapin" A proverb in Southern Tagalog that made people aware the significance of sincerity in Tagalog communities. It says " as a human you reach me, i treat you as a human and never act as  a traitor. Hulí man daw at magalíng, nakákahábol pa rin. (Hulí man raw at magalíng, nakákahabol pa rin.)If one is behind but capable, one will still be able to catch up. Magbirô ka na sa lasíng, huwág lang sa bagong gising.Make fun of someone drunk, if you must, but never one who has just awakened. Aanhín pa ang damó kung patáy na ang kabayo?What use is the grass if the horse is already dead? Ang sakít ng kalingkingan, ramdám ng buóng katawán.The pain in the pinkie is felt by the whole body. (In a group, if one goes down, the rest follow.) Nasa hulí ang pagsisisi.Regret is always in the end. Pagkáhabà-habà man ng prusisyón, sa simbahan pa rin ang tulóy.The procession may stretch on and on, but it still ends up at the church. (In romance: refers to how certain people are destined to be married. In general: refers to how some things are inevitable, no matter how long you try and postpone it.) Kung 'dî mádaán sa santóng dasalan, daanin sa santóng paspasan.If it cannot be got through holy prayer, get it through blessed force. (In romance and courting: santóng paspasan literally means 'holy speeding' and is a euphemism for sexual intercourse. It refers to the two styles of courting by Filipino boys: one is the traditional, protracted, restrained manner favoured by older generations, which often featured serenades and manual labour for the girl's parents; the other is upfront seduction, which may lead to a slap on the face or a pregnancy out of wedlock. The second conclusion is known as pikot or what Western cultures would call a 'shotgun marriage'. This proverb is also applied in terms of diplomacy and negotiation.)       Manila Tagalog Marinduqueño Tagalog English Susulat siná María at Esperanza kay Juan. Másúlat da María at Esperanza kay Juan. "María and Esperanza will write to Juan." Mag-aaral siya sa Maynilà. Gaaral siya sa Maynilà. "[He/She] will study in Manila." Maglutò ka na! Paglutò! "You cook now!" Kainin mo iyán. Kaina yaan. "Eat that." Tinatawag tayo ni Tatay. Inatawag nganì kitá ni Tatay. "Daddy is calling us." Tútulungan ba kayó ni Hilario? Atulungan ga kamo ni Hilario? "Is Hilario going to help you?" Bilabial Alveolar/Dental Post-al./Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal Stop Fricative Approximant Rhotic  a  e/i  o/u  ka  ga  nga  ta  da/ra  na  pa  ba  ma  ya  la  wa  sa  ha vowels b k d/r g h l m n ng p s t w y Majuscule !! Minuscule !! Majuscule !! Minuscule A a Ng ng B b Ñ ñ C c  / Ñg  / ñg Ch ch O o D d P p E e Q q F f R r G g Rr rr H h S s I i T t J j U u K k V v L l W w Ll ll X x M m Y y N n Z z Majuscule !! Minuscule !! Majuscule !! Minuscule A a N n B b Ng ng K k O o D d P p E e R r G g S s H h T t I i U u L l W w M m Y y Majuscule !! Minuscule !! Majuscule !! Minuscule A a Ñ ñ B b Ng ng C c O o D d P p E e Q q F f R r G g S s H h T t I i U u J j V v K k W w L l X x M m Y y N n Z z Example Definition boondocks meaning "rural" or "back country," was imported by American soldiers stationed in the Philippines following the Spanish–American War as a mispronounced version of the Tagalog bundok, which means "mountain." cogon a type of grass, used for thatching. This word came from the Tagalog word kugon (a species of tall grass). ylang-ylang a tree whose fragrant flowers are used in perfumes. Abaca a type of hemp fiber made from a plant in the banana family, from abaká. Manila hemp a light brown cardboard material used for folders and paper usually made from abaca hemp. Capiz also known as window oyster, is used to make windows. Tagalog word meaning language of origin original spelling bakit why Kapampangan obakit akyat climb/step up Kapampangan ukyát/mukyat at and Kapampangan at bundok mountain Kapampangan bunduk huwag don't Pangasinan ag aso dog South Cordilleran or Ilocano (also Ilokano) aso tayo we (inc.) South Cordilleran or Ilocano tayo ito, nito this, its South Cordilleran or Ilocano to ng of CebuanoHiligaynonWarayKapampanganPangasinanIlocano sasg (pronounced as /sang/)hanningnanga araw sun; day Visayan languages adlaw ang definite article Visayan languagesCentral Bikol angan English one two three four person house dog coconut day new we (inclusive) what fire Tagalog isa dalawa tatlo apat tao bahay aso niyog araw bago tayo ano apoy Tombulu (Minahasa) esa zua (rua) telu epat tou walé asu po'po' endo weru kai, kita apa api Coastal Bikol saro duwa tulo apat tawo harong ayam niyog aldaw ba-go kita ano kalayo Rinconada Bikol əsad darwā tolō əpat tawō baləy ayam noyog aldəw bāgo kitā onō kalayō Cebuano usa/isa duha tulo upat tawo balay iro lubi adlaw bag-o kita unsa kalayo Waray usa duha tulo upat tawo balay ayam/ido lubi adlaw bag-o kita anu kalayo Hiligaynon isa duha tatlo apat tawo balay ido lubi adlaw bag-o kita ano kalayo Aklanon isaea, sambilog, uno daywa, dos tatlo, tres ap-at, kwatro tawo baeay ayam niyog adlaw bag-o kita ano kaeayo Kinaray-a sara darwa tatlo apat tawo balay ayam niyog adlaw bag-o kita ano kalayo Tausug hambuuk duwa tu upat tau bay iru' niyug adlaw ba-gu kitaniyu unu kayu Maranao isa dowa t'lo phat taw walay aso neyog gawi'e bago tano tonaa apoy Kapampangan metung adwa atlu apat tau bale asu ngungut aldo bayu ikatamu nanu api Pangasinan sakey dua, duara talo, talora apat, apatira too abong aso niyog ageo balo sikatayo anto pool Ilokano maysa dua tallo uppat tao balay aso niog aldaw baro datayo ania apoy Ivatan asa dadowa tatdo apat tao vahay chito niyoy araw va-yo yaten ango apoy Ibanag tadday dua tallu appa' tolay balay kitu niuk aggaw bagu sittam anni afi Yogad tata addu tallu appat tolay binalay atu iyyog agaw bagu sikitam gani afuy Gaddang antet addwa tallo appat tolay balay atu ayog aw bawu ikkanetam sanenay afuy Tboli sotu lewu tlu fat tau gunu ohu lefo kdaw lomi tekuy tedu ofih Malaysian satu dua tiga empat orang rumah anjing kelapa/ nyior hari baru/ baharu kita apa api Indonesian satu dua tiga empat orang rumah/balai anjing kelapa/nyiur hari baru kita apa/anu api Javanese siji loro telu papat uwong omah asu klapa/kambil hari anyar/enggal kita apa/anu geni Acehnese sa duwa lhèë peuët ureuëng rumoh/balèë asèë u uroë barô (geu)tanyoë peuë apuy Lampungese sai khua telu pak jelema lamban asu nyiwi khani baru kham api apui Buginese sedi dua tellu eppa tau bola asu kaluku esso baru idi' aga api Bataknese sada dua tolu opat halak jabu biang harambiri ari baru hita aha api Tetum ida rua tolu haat ema uma asu nuu loron foun ita saida ahi Maori tahi rua toru wha tangata whare kuri kokonati ra hou taua aha ahi Tuvaluan tasi lua tolu fá toko fale kuri moku aso fou tāua ā afi Hawaiian kahi lua kolu hā kanaka hale 'īlio niu ao hou kākou aha ahi Banjarese asa duwa talu ampat urang rūmah hadupan kǎlapa hǎri hanyar kita apa api Malagasy isa roa telo efatra olona trano alika voanio andro vaovao isika inona afo Dusun iso duo tolu apat tulun walai tasu piasau tadau wagu tokou onu/nu tapui Iban satu dua tiga empat orang rumah asu nyur ari baru kitai nama api Number Cardinal Spanish loanword(Original Spanish) Ordinal 0 sero / walâ (lit. "null") / bokyà sero (cero) - 1 isá uno (uno) una 2 dalawá [dalaua] dos (dos) pangalawá / ikalawá (informally, ikadalawá) 3 tatló tres (tres) pangatló / ikatló 4 apat kuwatro (cuatro) pang-apat / ikaapat ("ika" and the number-word are never hyphenated. For numbers, however, they always are.) 5 limá singko (cinco) panlimá / ikalimá 6 anim sais (seis) pang-anim / ikaanim 7 pitó siyete (siete) pampitó / ikapitó 8 waló otso (ocho) pangwaló / ikawaló 9 siyám nuwebe (nueve) pansiyám / ikasiyám 10 sampû [sang puo] diyés (diez) pansampû / ikasampû (or ikapû in some literary compositions) 11 labíng-isá onse (once) panlabíng-isá / pang-onse / ikalabíng-isá 12 labíndalawá dose (doce) panlabíndalawá / pandose / ikalabíndalawá 13 labíntatló trese (trece) panlabíntatló / pantrese / ikalabíntatló 14 labíng-apat katorse (catorce) panlabíng-apat / pangkatorse / ikalabíng-apat 15 labínlimá kinse (quince) panlabínlimá / pangkinse / ikalabínlimá 16 labíng-anim disisaís (dieciséis) panlabíng-anim / pandyes-sais / ikalabíng-anim 17 labímpitó dissisyete (diecisiete) panlabímpitó / pandyes-syete / ikalabímpitó 18 labíngwaló dissiotso (dieciocho) panlabíngwaló / pandyes-otso / ikalabíngwaló 19 labinsiyám disinuwebe (diecinueve) panlabinsiyám / pandyes-nwebe / ikalabinsiyám 20 dalawampû bente / beinte (veinte) pandalawampû / ikadalawampû (rare literary variant: ikalawampû) 21 dalawampú't isá kuwarenta'y uno (cuarenta y uno) pang-dalawampú't isá / ikalawamapú't isá 30 tatlumpû trenta / treinta (treinta) pantatlumpû / ikatatlumpû (rare literary variant: ikatlumpû) 40 apatnapû kuwarenta (cuarenta) pang-apatnapû / ikaapatnapû 50 limampû singkuwenta (cincuenta) panlimampû / ikalimampû 60 animnapû sesenta (sesenta) pang-animnapû / ikaanimnapû 70 pitumpû setenta (setenta) pampitumpû / ikapitumpû 80 walumpû otsenta / utsenta (ochenta) pangwalumpû / ikawalumpû 90 siyamnapû nobenta (noventa) pansiyamnapû / ikasiyamnapû 100 sándaán siyento (cien) pan(g)-(i)sándaán / ikasándaán (rare literary variant: ika-isándaan) 200 dalawandaan dos siyentos (doscientos) pandalawándaán / ikadalawandaan (rare literary variant: ikalawándaán) 300 tatlóndaán tres siyentos (trescientos) pantatlóndaán / ikatatlondaan (rare literary variant: ikatlóndaán) 400 apat na raán kuwatro siyentos (cuatrocientos) pang-apat na raán / ikaapat na raán 500 limándaán kinyentos (quinientos) panlimándaán / ikalimándaán 600 anim na raán sais siyentos (seiscientos) pang-anim na raán / ikaanim na raán 700 pitondaán siyete siyentos (sietecientos) pampitóndaán / ikapitóndaán (or ikapitóng raán) 800 walóndaán otso siyentos (ochocientos) pangwalóndaán / ikawalóndaán (or ikawalóng raán) 900 siyám na raán nuwebe siyentos (novecientos) pansiyám na raán / ikasiyám na raán 1,000 sánlibo mil (mil) pan(g)-(i)sánlibo / ikasánlibo 2,000 dalawánlibo dos mil (dos mil) pangalawáng libo / ikalawánlibo 10,000 sánlaksâ / sampúng libo diyes mil (diez mil) pansampúng libo / ikasampúng libo 20,000 dalawanlaksâ / dalawampúng libo bente mil (veinte mil) pangalawampúng libo / ikalawampúng libo 100,000 sangyutá / sandaáng libo siyento mil (cien mil) &nbsp; 200,000 dalawangyutá / dalawandaáng libo dos siyento mil (dos cientos mil) &nbsp; 1,000,000 sang-angaw / sangmilyón milyón (un millón) &nbsp; 2,000,000 dalawang-angaw / dalawang milyón dos milyón (dos millones) &nbsp; 10,000,000 sangkatì / sampung milyón dyes milyón (diez millones) &nbsp; 100,000,000 sampúngkatì / sandaáng milyón syento milyón (cien millones) &nbsp; 1,000,000,000 sang-atos / sambilyón bilyón (un billón) &nbsp; 1,000,000,000,000 sang-ipaw / santrilyón trilyón (un trillón) &nbsp; Number English Ordinal Spanish Cardinal 1st first primero/a una / ika-isá 2nd second segundo/a ikalawá 3rd third tercero/a ikatló 4th fourth cuarto/a ika-apat 5th fifth quinto/a ikalimá 6th sixth sexto/a ika-anim 7th seventh séptimo/a ikapitó 8th eighth octavo/a ikawaló 9th ninth noveno/a ikasiyám 10th tenth décimo/a ikasampû 1/2 half media kalahatì 1/4 quarter cuarta kapat 3/5 three-fifths tres quintas partes tatlóng-kalimá 2/3 two-thirds dos tercios dalawáng-katló 1 1/2 one half un medio isá't kalahatì 2 2/3 two two-thirds dos de dos tercios dalawá't dalawáng-katló 0.5 salapî / limá hinatì sa sampû 0.005 bagól / limá hinatì sa sanlibo 1.25 isá't dalawampú't limá hinatì sa sampû 2.025 dalawá't dalawampú't limá hinatì sa sanlibo 25% twenty-five percent veinticinco por ciento dalawampú't-limáng bahagdán 50% fifty percent cincuenta por ciento limampúng bahagdán 75% seventy-five percent setenta y cinco por ciento pitumpú't-limáng bahagdán Month Original Spanish Tagalog (abbreviation) January enero Enero (Ene.) February febrero Pebrero (Peb.) March marzo Marso (Mar.) April abril Abríl (Abr.) May mayo Mayo (Mayo) June junio Hunyo (Hun.) July julio Hulyo (Hul.) August agosto Agosto (Ago.) September septiembre Setyembre (Set.) October octubre Oktubre (Okt.) November noviembre Nobyembre (Nob.) December diciembre Disyembre (Dis.) Day Original Spanish Tagalog Monday lunes Lunes Tuesday martes Martes Wednesday miércoles Miyérkules / Myérkules Thursday jueves Huwebes / Hwebes Friday viernes Biyernes / Byernes Saturday sábado Sábado Sunday domingo Linggó Time English Original Spanish Tagalog 1 hour One hour Una hora Isang oras 2 min Two minutes Dos minutos Dalawang sandali/minuto 3 sec Three seconds Tres segundos Tatlong saglit/segundo Morning Mañana Umaga Afternoon Tarde Hapon Evening/Night Noche Gabi Noon Medio dia Tanghali Midnight Media noche Hatinggabi 01.00 am One o'clock morning Una de la mañana Ika-isa ng umaga 07.00 pm Seven o'clock night Siete de la noche Ikapito ng gabi 01.15 Quarter past one  Fifteen past one  Forty-five to two Una y cuarto Kapat makalipas ikaisa  Labinlima makalipas ikaisa  Apatnapu't-lima bago mag-ikaisa 02.30 Half past two  Thirty past two Dos y media Kalahati makalipas ikalawa  Tatlumpu makalipas ikalawa 03.45 Three-quarter past three  Forty-five past three  Fifteen to four Tres y cuarenta y cinco Tatlong-kapat makalipas ikatlo  Apatnapu't-lima makalipas ikatlo  Labinlima bago mag-ikaapat 04.25 Twenty-five past four  Thirty-five to five Cuatro y veinticinco Dalawampu't-lima makalipas ikaapat  Tatlumpu't-lima bago mag-ikaapat 05.35 Thirty-five past five  Twenty-five to six Cinco y treinta y cinco Tatlumpu't-lima makalipas ikalima  Dalawampu't-lima bago mag-ikaanim English !! Tagalog (with Pronunciation) Filipino Pilipino  English Inglés  Tagalog Tagalog  What is your name? Anó ang pangalan ninyo/nila*? (plural or polite) , Anó ang pangalan mo? (singular)  How are you? kumustá  (modern), Anó po áng lagáy ninyo/nila?(old use) Good morning! Magandáng umaga!  Good noontime! (from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.) Magandáng tanghali!  Good afternoon! (from 1 p.m. to 6:00&nbsp;p.m.) Magandáng hapon!  Good evening! Magandáng gabí!  Good-bye paálam  Please Depending on the nature of the verb, either pakí-  or makí-  is attached as a prefix to a verb. ngâ  is optionally added after the verb to increase politeness. (e.g. Pakipasa ngâ ang tinapay. ("Can you pass the bread, please?")) Thank you salamat  This one ito , sometimes pronounced  (literally—"it", "this") That one iyan , When pointing to something at greater distances: iyun  or iyon  Here dito , heto  ("Here it is") There doon , hayan  ("There it is") How much? Magkano?  Yes oo  opô  or ohô  (formal/polite form) No hindî , often shortened to dî  hindî pô (formal/polite form) I don't know hindî ko álam  Very informal: ewan , archaic aywan  (closest English equivalent: colloquial dismissive 'Whatever') Sorry pasensya pô (literally from the word "patience") or paumanhin po  patawad po  (literally—"asking your forgiveness") Because kasí  or dahil  Hurry! dalí! , bilís!  Again mulí , ulít  I don't understand Hindî ko naiintindihan  or Hindi ko nauunawaan  What? Anó?  Where? Saán? , Nasaán?  (literally - "Where at?") Why? Bakít?  When? Kailan? , , or  (literally—"In what order?/"At what count?"") How? Paánó?  (literally—"By what?") Where's the bathroom? Nasaán ang banyo?  Generic toast Mabuhay!  [literally—"long live"] Do you speak English? Marunong ka bang magsalitâ ng Ingglés? , "Marunong po ba kayong magsailitâ ng Ingglés?" (polite version for elders and strangers) Marunong ka bang mag-Ingglés? (short form), "Marunong po ba kayong mag-Ingglés? (short form, polite version for elders and strangers) It is fun to live. Masaya ang mabuhay!  or Masaya'ng mabuhay (contracted version) Many Tagalog dialects, particularly those in the south, preserve the glottal stop found after consonants and before vowels. This has been lost in Standard Tagalog. For example, standard Tagalog ngayón (now, today), sinigáng (broth stew), gabí (night), matamís (sweet), are pronounced and written ngay-on, sinig-ang, gab-i, and matam-is in other dialects. In Teresian-Morong Tagalog,  is usually preferred over . For example, bundók, dagat, dingdíng, and isdâ become bunrók, ragat, ringríng, and isrâ, e.g. "sandók sa dingdíng" becoming "sanrók sa ringríng". In many southern dialects, the progressive aspect infix of -um- verbs is na-. For example, standard Tagalog kumakain (eating) is nákáin in Quezon and Batangas Tagalog. This is the butt of some jokes by other Tagalog speakers, for should a Southern Tagalog ask nákáin ka ba ng patíng? ("Do you eat shark?"), he would be understood as saying "Has a shark eaten you?" by speakers of the Manila Dialect. Some dialects have interjections which are considered a regional trademark. For example, the interjection ala e! usually identifies someone from Batangas as does hane?! in Rizal and Quezon provinces.  an open central unrounded vowel roughly similar to English "father"; in the middle of a word, a near-open central vowel similar to Received Pronunciation English "cup"  an open-mid front unrounded vowel similar to General American English "bed"  a close front unrounded vowel similar to English "machine"  a close-mid back rounded vowel similar to General American English "sole" or Philippine English "forty"  a close back rounded vowel similar to English "flute"  between vowels has a tendency to become  as in Spanish "José", whereas in the initial position it has a tendency to become , especially in the Manila dialect. Intervocalic  and  tend to become , as in Spanish "agua", especially in the Manila dialect.  and  were once allophones, and they still vary grammatically, with initial  becoming intervocalic  in many words. A glottal stop that occurs in pausa (before a pause) is omitted when it is in the middle of a phrase, especially in the Metro Manila area. The vowel it follows is then lengthened. However, it is preserved in many other dialects.  can be pronounced  on stressed syllables, or  pronounced by some speakers in the urban areas. the word starts with a vowel, like "aso" (dog) the word includes a dash followed by a vowel, like "mag-aral" (study) the word has two vowels next to each other, like "paano" (how) the word starts with a prefix followed by a verb that starts with a vowel, like "mag-aayos" ([will] fix) Nang si Hudas ay nadulás.—When Judas slipped. Gumising siya nang maaga.—He woke up early. Gumalíng nang  si Juan dahil nag-ensayo siya.—Juan greatly improved because he practiced. Naghintáy sila nang naghintáy.—They kept on waiting" (a closer calque: "They were waiting and waiting.") Example: "Pakitapon naman po/ho yung basura". ("Please throw away the trash.") Ex: "Gutóm ka na ba?" "Opo/Oho". ("Are you hungry yet?" "Yes"). Ex: "Hindi ko po/ho alam 'yan."("I don't know that.") the Magandang Balita Biblia (a parallel translation of the Good News Bible), which is the ecumenical version the Bibliya ng Sambayanang Pilipino the 1905 Ang Biblia is a more Protestant version the Bagong Sanlibutang Salin ng Banal na Kasulatan, one of about ninety parallel translations of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures published by Jehovah's Witnesses. The latter was released in 2000. Jehovah's Witnesses previously published a hybrid translation: Ang Biblia was used for the Old Testament, while the Bagong Sanlibutang Salin ng Griegong Kasulatan was used for the New Testament. Abakada alphabet Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino Filipino alphabet Old Tagalog Filipino orthography Tagalog Wikipedia Tagalog Dictionary Tagalog verbs with conjugation
