   Taja Kramberger (born 11 September 1970) is a Slovenian poet, translator, essayist and historical anthropologist. Kramberger was born in Ljubljana, Slovenia. She completed undergraduate studies in history at the University of Ljubljana, where she also studied archaeology, abandoning this subject when she became engaged in the literary field (1995) and postgraduate history studies. She obtained her PhD in 2009 from history/historical anthropology at the University of Primorska with a thesis entitled Memory and Remembrance. Historical Anthropology of the Canonized Reception. She was an initiator and still is editor-in-chief of Monitor ISH-Review of Humanities and Social Sciences (2001–2003), in 2004 renamed to Monitor ZSA-Review for Historical, Social and Other Anthropologies(2004–2010). Between 2004 and 2007 she was a president of the TROPOS-Association for Historical, Social and Other Anthropologies and for Cultural Activities (Ljubljana, Slovenia). She publishes monographs in the areas of epistemology of social sciences and historiography, history and historical anthropology of various subjects for the period between 18th to mid-20th Centuries. She is also a writer, she writes literary books, literary studies and essays. She translates texts from all fields mentioned from English, French, Italian and Spanish to Slovenian language. She lives in Koper, where she is employed as university teacher at the University of Primorska. She earned some scientific and literary fellowships abroad at the École des hautes études en sciences sociales and Maison des sciences de l'homme in Paris, Collegium Budapest in Budapest, Edition Thanhaeuser in Ottensheim, Austria. She also publishes scientific and literary articles, essays and translations. She participates at international scientific and literary conferences and also collaborates in the organizations of them, as for example in the case of international conferences Territorial and Imaginary Frontiers and Identities from Antiquity until Today, accent on Balkans (2002 in Ljubljana) or international scientific conference of the Francophonie (AUF) titled Histoire de l’oubli/History of Oblivion (2008 in Koper). Fields of her work and research are:  epistemology of historiography and social sciences, historical anthropology, contemporary history from Enlightenment to mid-20th century, transmission and politics of memory/oblivion, intellectual history and cultural transfers in Europe, anti-intellectualism, dimensions of the Dreyfus Affair in Slovenian social Space and in Trieste, mechanisms of social exclusion, anthropology of sex and gender, constitution of (national and transnational) literary fields[ ] in Europe in 19th and 20th Centuries, studies of province and provincialism as a specific socio-historical phenomenon. Born in Ljubljana, but lived in her childhood (between age 4 and 11) at the seaside – in the bilingual town of Koper-Capodistria near Trieste. She has finished there 4 years of primary school (Pinko Tomažič), and then moved with a family to Ljubljana, where she has finished primary and secondary school Gimnazija Bežigrad.  She obtained BA from history at the University of Ljubljana (1997), and took the position of a postgraduate young researcher at the Institutum Studiorum Humanitatis (abr. ISH) in Ljubljana.  After the transition changes, when lucrative and socially applicable science was placed in the first plan at the ISH, she has left the institution (2004), and moved to Koper-Capodistria, where a new University of Primorska has started its route. She still lives and works in Koper. She is married to Drago Braco Rotar, Slovenian sociologist, historical anthropologist and translator.[ ] Beside in literature and historical anthropology she was/is engaged in civil actions and confrontations against clientelism and corruption in the scientific domain in the frames of Slovenia (in May 2000 she co-directed together with Sabina Mihelj a big public manifestation in Ljubljana against corrupted politics of the Ministry of Science and Technology; in 2004 she fought against illegal takeover of the institution ISH; in 2010 she again was a militant contra the total neoliberalization, venalization and degradation of the university as an autonomous institution and against the decomoposition of its fundamental scientific disciplines at the Faculty of Human Sciences Koper, University of Primorska.for the later see web:-site Save the University The same changes occurred also in the literary field in Slovenia. In 2004 when a writer and translator Iztok Osojnik as a director of the Vilenica International Literary Festival[ ] was ousted from the position of Vilenica's director at the Slovenian Writers' Union (SWU),[ ] she was among the minority who supported him against mostly State maintained elite and regime supported writers and authors, meanwhile majority of writers remained quiet – also around two ardently debated subjects of growing nationalism and humiliation of women writers and translators in the frames of the SWU. (Polemics, which lasted the whole summer and autumn of 2004, was published in the review Apokalipsa, no. 84/85, 2004.) After that she distanced herself from the SWU’s network and writes literature by her own vocation and ethical standards. Taja Kramberger introduced studies of collective memory, based on Halbwachsian instrumentariumfor his work see and numerous later improvements, in its theoretic aspect and epistemic conceptualization into Slovenian public, mostly composed of linear descriptive social sciences and humanities, in 2000/2001 (a course of lectures Conceptualization of the collective memory on Maurice Halbwachs, Frances Amelia Yates  and Pierre Nora at the Institutum Studiorum Humanitatis in Ljubljana) and 2001 (she wrote an extensive introduction to the Maurice Halbwachs' Slovenian translation of La mémoire collective). Not many scholars followed the utterly important distinction between memory (mémoire) and remembrance (souvenir)&mdash;still some are (Drago Braco Rotar, Marija Jurič Pahor, Samuel Friškič)&mdash;,  and were able to grasp the crucial categorical differences between memory and history, but her works expose her incontestably broad knowledge, highly pertinent argumentation and subtle discursive skills, which are not easy to contest. Kramberger has also started with the extensive categorical critical reflexivity in the field of history in Slovenia, and has released many angry reactions in the history field, but mostly she left the historians - unable to confront its own shadows from the past - silenced. Although polemic, which would definitely clarify the discipline’s past erratic wanderings and amnesias and an almost total theoretic oblivion in the field of history in Slovenia, is not a usual tool of scientific communication in these regions, it is nevertheless clear that Taja Kramberger has opened (among some other researchers, such as Drago Braco Rotar, Rastko Močnik, Maja Breznik, Lev Centrih, Primož Krašovec, in a small, theoretically much less pertinent part also Marta Verginella and Oto Luthar) an important segment of future debates, which are needed to elucidate some of the neglected and spontaneously transmitted chapters of the Slovenian (distinctly ethnocentric and Sonderweg) history. Taja Kramberger was also the first Slovenian historian who had written with a great perspicacity about various dimensions of the Dreyfus Affair in the Slovenian social space . She has opened up a complex theme strangely neglected and connected to the categories and imaginary  structure of anti-Semitism in the country with not many Jewish people, but nonetheless with strong mechanisms of social exclusion. In the frames of this theme she directed – together with her students in 2007/2008 – an ample exhibition on the Dreyfus Affair (1894–1906), showing its entangled European context, its highly important civic extensions, and its specific reception in the continental Slovenian space and in Trieste, mostly based on spontaneous anti-Semitism. The exhibitions was set up and shown to the public in Koper (2008), Trieste (2009) and Maribor (2010). Apart from many fresh intellectual ideas and innovations (for the Slovenian circumstances and intellectual coordinates, but very likely also in a wider sense) Taja Kramberger has written many critical articles on various aspects of Slovenian history, cultural life, but also on broader European History and culture, e. g. on Spanish Civil War, different models of Enlightenment in Europe and the recurrent Enlightenment features in the works of Anton Tomaž Linhart, on epistemic divergence between Enlightenment's and Historismus's paradigms of historiography, on anthropology of translation, history of university and the formation of university habitus , on literary and cultural fields  in the 1930s in Slovenia (by then partially covered by the administrative unit of Dravska banovina) and on the role of women in the constitution of these fields etc. Her intellectual trajectory is partly connected to the Bourdieuian perspective  and apparatus in social sciences. She has written about Pierre Bourdieu and Loïc Wacquant, translated some of their texts (as a guest editor of the journal Družboslovne razprave, no. 43, 2003), and in 2006 edited a monograph titled Principles of Reflexive Social Science and for a Critical Investigation of Symbolic Dominations (Načela za refleksivno družbeno znanost in kritično preučevanje simbolnih dominacij) (in Slovenian, together with Drago Braco Rotar). She held lectures – among other subjects – on Bourdieuian approach, instrumentarium and methodology at the University of Primorska in Koper. She has published eight books of poetry. Her poems have been translated in more than twenty-five languages and published in different literary journals, anthologies in Slovenia and abroad. Book selections of her poetry came out in Hungarian (Ezernyi csend : válogatott versek, Pannónia könyvek, Pécs, Pro Pannonia Kiadói Alapítvány, 2008, ISBN 978-963-9893-07-8) [ ] [ ] and Croatian language (Mobilizacije, Naklada Lara, Zagreb, 2008, tr. Ksenija Premur, ISBN 978-953-7289-31-7) [ ]. She has been an invited guest of around 100 international literary meetings and festivals in Europe (Belgium, England, Lithuania, Portugal, Croatia, Latvia, France, Hungary, Italy, Austria, Germany, Croatia, Macedonia, France, Lithuania, Finland, Ireland etc.) and Canada (Quebec and Ontario). Taja Kramberger, as the committee of Veronika Award (2007) [ ] for the best poetry collection of the year 2006 wrote, is one of the strongest and most accomplished poetic voices in the contemporary Slovenian poetry; a voice which introduces many innovations "so in the poetic proceedings as in the audacity of the of chosen subjects, but also in the courage to tell things in an intelligent and a deeply moving way, which does not follow the predominant poetry models, but supplies itself outside of them, in a everyday situations&nbsp;...". Simple words, entangled with highly elaborated intellectual comprehensions - another benefit of Kramberger's poetic language, in Taja Kramberger’s poems change themselves into "multilayered compositions" and subtle messages. These are "able to reach out to the world, and are surely not here for the intimacy of the poet" and neither for sentimental grounds of the reader. And still this poetry is deeply moving, at the same moment emotionally charged and brightly intelligible, light-coloured in spite of breathtaking "gestuary of crime" denuded by the Kramberger's verses, as Osojnik observed in her later poetry book in which the poet is narrating the Dreyfuss Affair through the cycle of poems (Opus quinque dierum, 2009). These features, together with poet’s precious "poetically analytical mind", which is able to convert a "stale literary canon and criticism into an inspiration for the highest level of poetry", so says the "Veronika Award" committee, are innovations, which "give her poetry a seal of world importance and actuality" (Explanation for the Veronika Award 2007) [ ]. Jad Hatem, a French poet himself and a professor of philosophy and literature , in an original way also noticed that a privileged topos in Taja Krambeger’s poetry is her outstanding ability of a simultaneous theoretic reflection, inscribed along with the poetic thought of her poems (La Poésie slovène contemporaine : l’écriture de la pierre, 2010) [ ]. From a very different angle Slovenian poet Iztok Osojnik sees this rare privilege, that is the poet’s critical ability to transform ideologically contaminated and narrow representations of reality in a poetic way into more bearable representations of reality, which bring us much closer to the core of events, as a tool of the political poetry [ ] in its best and noble sense (Apokalipsa, no. 134/135)[ ]. Next to numerous translated poems and some prose texts of other writers published in journals, she translated into Slovene language a book of poetry of Italian poet Michele Obit (Leta na oknu, ZTT EST, Trieste, 2001, ISBN 88-7174-054-8), a selection of poetry of Argentinian poet Roberto Juarroz for a book Vertikalna poezija (Vertical Poetry - with her introduction, ŠZ, Ljubljana, 2006, ISBN 961-242-035-1), a book of Gao Xingjian (Ribiška palica za starega očeta/Buying a Fishing Rod for My Grandfather, 1986–1990, from French together with Drago Braco Rotar) (Didakta, Radovljica, 2001, ISBN 961-6363-62-X), a book of poetry written by Lithuanian poet Neringa Abrutyte (Izpoved, CSK, Aleph, Ljubljana, 2004, ISBN 961-6036-50-5) and a book of fairy tales for kids by Lucy Coats (100 grških mitov za otroke/Atticus the Storyteller, 2004; MK, Ljubljana, 2004, reprinted in 2009, ISBN 978-86-11-16964-4.). At the ISH – Graduate School of Humanities in Ljubljana, Taja Kramberger arranged exhibition place for fine arts and between 2000 and 2003 organized five exhibitions of Slovenian and of foreign figurative artists (painters, photographic artists, designers, installation artists). In 2002, Taja Kramberger directed and coordinated international project of poets’ and translators’ (22 from 10 countries) "Linguaggi di-versi / Different Languages / Različni jeziki / Langages di-vers" in a seaside town of Ankaran near Koper in Slovenia. Project established a series of translation workshops between 1999 and 2004 in Central-European States (Bulgaria, Hungary, Slovenia, Italy and Austria). In 2004 the publication Različni jeziki / Linguaggi di-versi / Different Languages / Langages di-vers[ ] in 10 languages came out of the project (published by the Edition Libris Koper) and it was edited by T. Kramberger and Gašper Malej. Anne Talvaz [ ] [ ], a French writer and translator, and Bulgarian translator Stefka Hrusanova have broadened the scope of the workshop and organized in 2008 and 2010 its presentations in Spain (Barcelona) and Italy (Milan). Another bigger international project Taja Kramberger conducted in 2006 was a Slovenian segment of the international project "Sealines / Morske linije / Linee di mare" which through one-month’s literary residences in 6 European bilingual ports (Cardiff, Galway, Helsinki, Koper, Riga, Valletta) connected writers from 6 European states [ ]. Project was supported by the program Culture 2000 of the European Union [ ], and was led by the LAF – Literature Across Frontiers office in UK, Manchester [ ]. In Slovenia it was executed by the Association Tropos and its then president Taja Kramberger. From 2007 to 2009, Kramberger was a president of the Collegium artium (abr. CA) – an association of teachers and students at the Faculty of Human Sciences Koper, University of Primorska, aimed at organizing different cultural and social events at the faculty (literary readings, music concerts, theater and film performances, round tables, conferences, commemorations, exhibitions of figurative arts, other specialized exhibitions etc.). In the frames of the institution CA more than 150 cultural events took place in less than two years. Her essays and introductory studies to the other poets (Roberto Juarroz, Michele Obit, Gašper Malej) mark quite different approach from other Slovenian literary critics. They are attentive analyses of poetic language and imaginary constellation behind it. With the essay titled Similis simili gaudet. Ali o kerkopski literarni kritiki v slovenskem literarnem polju (Similis simili gaudet. On the Kercopian Literary Criticism in the Slovenian Literary Field)[ ], written with a rare combination of fine irony and piercing analytical style, on drastically unrefexive criticism in Slovenian literature she has shown how important it is for a critic to be disposable and open to the artistic work and at the same time able to produce analytical distances in relation to the work read and evaluated, and in the next step to compound both experiences into a certain perspective, which can come out as his/her own distinctive approach and a singular way of seeing things and works of art. Without that (minimal) cognitive engagement, so Taja Kramberger, there can be no artistic criticism, but only an unconscious and ritualized activity - she calls it a Kercopian literary criticism - that is a (grinning) mimesis of common sense and stereotypes about literature and authors. In her interviews she talks about cognitive dimensions of literature and their transformational potential in a society. Transformational discourses and discursive practices, which are open to changes and interventions, as the opposite of the transfirmational discourses with closed semantic structure and clear signs of mental immobility are original analytical categories of her conceptualization and apparatus. In scholary texts (cf. her article Doxa et fama, 2003, her dissertation, or her interview for the journal Literatura in 2006) Taja Kramberger further identifies transfirmational discourses as the systemic feature of the longue durée provincial mental structure, unable to subdue itself to changes and open to the external/outer world. Taja Kramberger is without any doubt among those few Slovenian writers (Iztok Osojnik, Miklavž Komelj, in a way also Barbara Korun) which are studiously oriented, and do not recognize (pure) inspiration as a sufficient cause for creative artistic work. In their artistic work there’s a strong component of social sensitivity and a constant ethical reference to attain the equilibrium of social justice. September 1997: final circle nomination for the Book Fair Award for the First Literary Book November 1998: final circle nomination for the Jenko Award Spring 2001: Literary Fellowship of the Bibliophilic Edition Thanhäuser in Ottensheim & KulturKontakt Austria 2005: State Fellowship (Ministry of Culture, Republic of Slovenia) for the topmost artistic achievements in Slovenia 2007: Veronika Award, Celje (for the poetry book Everyday Conversations, 2006) 1998: Paris (École d’Automne: L’État et le Politique. Histoire et nouveaux modèles) 1999: Paris (fellowship of the Ambassade de France en Slovénie[ ], EHESS[ ]) 2001: Budapest (in April: 4th International Winter School at Collegium Budapest[ ]: Multiple Antiquities–Multiple Modernities) 2001/2002: Paris (MSH [ ]) 2003: Budapest (5 months junior fellow at the Collegium Budapest[ ]-Institute for Advanced Study) 2005/2006: Paris (MSH [ ], EHESS[ ]) Marcipan (Marzipan), 1997 (in Slovene) Spregovori morje (The Sea Says), 1999 (in Slovene) Gegenstroemung/Protitok (Contra-Courant), 2001 (in German, Edition Thanhaeuser, Ottensheim Žametni indigo (Velure Indigo), 2004 (in Slovene) Mobilizacije/Mobilizations/Mobilisations/Mobilitazioni in 2004/2005 (in Slovene, French, Italian and English) Vsakdanji pogovori (Everyday Conversations) in 2006 (in Slovene) [ ] Opus quinque dierum in 2009 (poetic echos to the Deyfus Affair, in Slovene) ♣stava ♣♣publike ♣♣♣♣♣ni♣♣ in 2010 (blackout poetry from a Constitution of RS and some other legal texts, in Slovene). "Aberaciji v slovenski poeziji: ženska in vednost : ali Nekaj tez o reakcionarni kulturni revoluciji, ki smo ji priča" ("Aberrations in Slovenian Poetry: Woman and Knowledge. Some theses on reactionary revolution to which we bear witness"), Literatura, July/August 2003, vol. 15, no. 145/146, 1-9. "Pesmi, ki (si) jih deliš z dežjem" ("Poems, that you share with rain"), an introductory study to the poetry book of Gašper Malej, in: Gašper Malej, Otok, slutnje, poljub, (Zbirka Lambda, 39). Ljubljana, Škuc, 2004, 110-133. "Kjer ni spoznavne realnosti, ne more biti zgodovine (žensk) in ne samozavedajoče se družbe" ("Where there's no cognitive reality, there can be neither history [of women] nor selfconscious society"), Apokalipsa, 2005, no. 90/91/92, 103-119. "Kjer pisava okuži pokrajino: spremna študija", ("Where the writing infects the landscape") an introductory study to the Slovenian translation of the selected poems of the Argentinian poet Roberto Juarroz, in: Robeto Juarroz, Vertikalna poezija, (Knjižna zbirka Beletrina). Ljubljana, Študentska založba, 2006, 181-222. "Strangoliert!", Apokalipsa, September–November 2007, no. 113/115, 1-23. "Similis simili gaudet. Ali o kerkopski literarni kritiki v slovenskem literarnem polju" ("Similis simili gaudet. On the Kercopian Literary Criticism in the Slovenian Literary Field"), Poetikon, no. 19/20, 2008, 150-193. 2004: Co-editor with Gašper Malej of the collection Različni jeziki / Linguaggi di-versi, publication of the Poets’ and Translators’ Workshop Različni jeziki / Linguaggi di-versi, held in Ankaran, Slovenia, in 2002, project Linguagi di-versi has been going on with a some pauses from 1998 until 2009), Knjigarna Libris, Koper, 221 p. 2004:  Editor of the public documentation and texts in connection to the literary polemics in summer 2004, concerning many issues, including an Open letter to the Minister of Culture Mrs. Andreja Rihter written by the literary creators on 6 July 2004: Dosjeji I, Apokalipsa, 2004, no. 84/85, 139-182. 2006: Editor and Translator of selected poems by the Argentinian poet Roberto Juarroz, Vertikalna poezija, (Knjižna zbirka Beletrina). Ljubljana, Študentska založba, 2006. 224 p.&nbsp;ISBN 961-242-035-1. 2008: Literary Editor of the portraits and presentations of a poet Joël Pourbaix, a short-story writer Hiromi Goto and a novelist Dionne Brand, Monitor ZSA, 2008, vol. 10, no. 3/4, 141-151, 153-159, 160-166. Taja Kramberger and Drago Braco Rotar (dir. and co-tr.), Načela za refleksivno družbeno znanost in kritično preučevanje simbolnih dominacij [Principles for a Reflexive Social Science and for a Critical Investigation of Symbolic Dominations], (translations of Pierre Bourdieu’s and Loïc Wacquant’s selected texts), Library Annales Majora, Koper, University of Primorska, Publishing House Annales, 2006, 262 p., ISBN 961-6033-87-5. Taja Kramberger, Historiografska divergenca : razsvetljenska in historistična paradigma : o odprti in zaprti epistemični strukturi in njunih elaboracijah (Historiographical Divergence: the Enlightenment and Historismus Paradigm: On an Opened and a Closed Epistemic Structure and Their Elaborations), Library Annales Majora, Koper, University of Primorska, Publishing House Annales, 2007, 384 p., ISBN 978-961-6033-93-0 http://www.zrs.upr.si/sl/annales_majora.htm  http://www.buca.si/index.php?nav1=knjigarna&nav2=izdelek&id=1576 Taja Kramberger, Zgodovinskoantropološko oblikovanje univerzitetnih habitusov (Historico-anthropological Formation of the University Habiti/La formation historico-anthropologique des habiti universitaires), Pedagoški institut, Ljubljana, 2009, 131 p. http://www.pei.si/UserFilesUpload/file/zalozba/ZnanstvenaPorocila/26_09_zgodovinsko_antropoloski_oris_oblikovanja_univerzitetnih_habitusov.pdf Taja Kramberger and Drago Braco Rotar, Univerza: kolegij ali dresura. O univerzitetni avtonomiji in njenih nasprotjih (University: Collegium or Training? On the University Autonomy and its Contraries), Univerza v Ljubljani, Ljubljana, 2010. In preparation for print. Taja Kramberger and Drago Braco Rotar, Misliti družbo, ki (se) sama ne misli (Think the Society, which does not think (by) itself), Založba Sophia, Ljubljana, 2010. In preparation for print. Taja Kramberger and Drago Rotar, "Pravice vs toleranca. Mentalitetna inkongruentnost: zgodovinskoantropološke marginalije k slovenskemu prevodu Deklaracije o pravicah človeka in državljana z dne 26. 8. 1789" (Rights vs Tolerance. Incongruity of Mentalities: Historico-anthropological Marginalia on Slovenian Translation of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen from 26 August 1789), Šolsko polje / School Field, vol. XXI, no. 3-4, 2010, 36 p. Taja Kramberger and Drago Rotar, "Evropa gre v Šanghaj. Vdor neoliberalizma in cerkva v akademski svet" (Europe Goes to Shanghai. Invasion of neoliberalism and churches in the academic world), Sodobna pedagogika, vol. XVI, no. 4, 2010, 31 p. Taja Kramberger and Drago Rotar, "Merilska blaznost ali o sprevrženi rabi znanstvenega orodja" (Insanity of Measurement. On the Deteriorated Use of Scientific Tools), Šolsko polje/School Field, vol. XXI, no.  1-2, 2010, 42 p. Taja Kramberger, "Naporni itinerarij španske državljanske vojne: kraji memorije na poti slovenskih republikancev v Španijo in vloga Pariza pri mednarodni rekrutaciji španskih borcev" (I faticosi itinerari della guerra civile spagnola: i luoghi della memoria lungo i tragitti dei repubblicani sloveni verso la Spagna e il ruolo di Parigi nel reclutamento di volontari per la Spagna / El estenuante itinerario de la Guerra Civil Española. Lugares de la memoria en el camino a España de los republicanes sloveno y el papel de Paris en el reclutamento internacional de Combatientes Españoles). Zbornik referatov s simpozija 12. februarja 2010, Koper: Zveza borcev Koper-Capodistria, 2010, 100–140. Program of the conference: http://www.cnj.it/INIZIATIVE/volantini/sp-borci-kp.pdf Taja Kramberger, "Les lieux d'oubli : repères pour la recherche sur l'affaire Dreyfus dans l'historiographie slovène", in: VAUDAY, Patrick (ur.), MOČNIK, Rastko (ur.), ZUPANC EĆIMOVIĆ, Paula (ur.), ROTAR, Drago B. (ur.). Histoire de l'oubli en contextes postsocialiste et postcolonial, (Knjižnica Annales Majora). Koper: Université de Primorska, Centre de recherches scientifiques, Maison d'édition Annales: Société d'historie de Primorska Sud, 2009, 189–213. [COBISS.SI-ID 1752275] Program of the conference: http://www.dcam.auf.org/IMG/pdf/Z_Glasnik_ZRS_2008_7_koncna.pdf Taja Kramberger, "Iz zgodovine intelektualcev : afera Dreyfus in francoski zgodovinarji" (From the History of Intellectuals : the Dreyfus Affair and French Historians), Monitor ZSA, 2008, vol. 10, no. 1/2, pp.&nbsp;25–81, ilustr. [COBISS.SI-ID 1592275] Taja Kramberger, "Afera Dreyfus in tiskani mediji" (The Dreyfus Affair and Printed Media), Media Watch, 2008. http://mediawatch.mirovni-institut.si/bilten/seznam/33/jezik/ Taja Kramberger and Drago Rotar, "Prehodi, prevodi, transferji : nekaj refrakcij skozi tekste in kontekste ob prevodih Pierra Bourdieuja in Loïca Wacquanta" (Passages, traductions, transferts : quelques réfractions à travers les textes et contextes à propos des traductions de Pierre Bourdieu et Loïc Wacquant). In: KRAMBERGER, Taja & ROTAR, Drago B. (dir.), BOURDIEU, Pierre, WACQUANT, Loïc, Načela za refleksivno družbeno znanost in kritično preučevanje simbolnih dominacij, (Knjižnica Annales Majora). Koper: Univerza na Primorskem, Znanstveno-raziskovalno središče, Založba Annales: Zgodovinsko društvo za južno Primorsko, 2006, 9–34. [COBISS.SI-ID 1213651] Taja Kramberger, Sabina Mihelj and Drago Rotar, "Representations of the Nation and of the Other in the Slovenian Periodical Press before and after 1991: Engagements and Implications", In: SPASSOV, Orlin (ur.), Quality press in Southeast Europe, (The media in Southeast Europe), 1st ed. Sofia: Südosteuropäisches Medienzentrum, 2004, 276–305. [COBISS.SI-ID 216577280] Taja Kramberger, "Možnost in nujnost kritičnega intelektualca : k prevodoma Bourdieuja in Wacquanta" (Possibilité et nécessité de l’intellectuel critique : à propos des traductions de Bourdieu et Wacquant), Družboslovne razprave, August 2003, vol. 19, no. 43, 49–55. [COBISS.SI-ID 595667] Accessible on web-site: http://dk.fdv.uni-lj.si/dr/dr43KrambergerTaja2.PDF. Taja Kramberger, "Od Joining the Club h grotesknosti slovenske adaptacije na neoliberalizem" / " From Joining the Club to the Grotesque Slovenian Adaptation to Neoliberalisme " / " De L’adhésion au club à la grotesque adaptation slovène au néolibéralisme", Družboslovne razprave, vol. 19, no. 43, August 2003, 77–95. Accessible on web-site: http://dk.fdv.uni-lj.si/dr/dr43KrambergerTaja1.PDF [COBISS.SI-ID 595923] Taja Kramberger, "L'inversion dans l'objectivation. : le mouvement régressif d'une culture provinciale faisant office de la culture nationale" / Inverzija v objektivizaciji : regresivno gibanje provincialne kulture, ki nastopa v vlogi nacionalne kulture - povzetek, Monitor ISH, vol. IV, no. 1–4, 2002, 53–70. [COBISS.SI-ID 21359202] Taja Kramberger, "Doxa et fama. O produkciji "javnega mnenja" in strategijah pozabe - elementi za mikroštudijo" / "Doxa et fama. On production of "Public opinion" and Strategies of Oblivion"  / " Doxa et fama. Sur la production de "l’opinion publique" et sur les stratégies de l’oubli ", Družboslovne razprave, vol. XVIII, no. 41, December 2002, 63–100. [COBISS.SI-ID 20786018] Accessible on web-site: http://dk.fdv.uni-lj.si/dr/dr41KrambergerTaja.PDF Taja Kramberger, "Maurice Halbwachs in družbeni okviri kolektivne memorije" (=Maurice Halbwachs and the social frames of collective memory/ Maurice Halbwachs et les cadres sociaux de la mémoire collective); introduction à la traduction slovène de La mémoire collective de Maurice Halbwachs. In: HALBWACHS, Maurice. Kolektivni spomin [v rokopisu prevoda Draga Braca Rotarja pravilno oddano kot Kolektivna memorija, za poznejši neavtorizirani uredniški poseg prevajalec in avtorica spremne besede ne odgovarjata]. Ljubljana: Studia humanitatis, 2001, 211–258. [COBISS.SI-ID 694925] 2001–2010: Editor-In-Chef of Monitor ISH (2001–2003), in 2004 renamed to Monitor ZSA – Revue of Historical, Social and Other Anthropologies (34 numbers) 2003: Guest-editor for the theme "Deconstruction of neoliberalism" / "Dekonstrukcija neoliberalizma", Družboslovne razprave [Dissertations in Social Sciences], vol. XIX, no. 43, 2003, pp.&nbsp;47–95. 2006: Co-editor (with Drago braco Rotar) and co-translator in the Slovenian collection of articles by Pierre Bourdieu and Loïc Wacquant, Načela za refleksivno družbeno znanost in kritično preučevanje simbolnih dominacij [Principles for a Reflexive Social Science and for a Critical Investigation of Symbolic Dominations], (translations of Pierre Bourdieu’s and Loïc Wacquant’s texts), Library Annales Majora, Koper, University of Primorska, Publishing House Annales, 2006, 262 p., ISBN 961-6033-87-5. 2009: Member of the Scientific Committee in publication: Patrick Vauday, Rastko Močnik, Paula Zupanc Ećimović, Drago Rotar (dir.), Histoire de l'oubli en contextes postsocialiste et postcolonial, Library Annales Majora, Koper, University of Primorska, Publishing House Annales, 2009, 456 p. Jean Boase-Beier, Alexandra Bűchler, Fiona Sampson, A  Line: New Poetry from Eastern and Central Europe (anthology with a preface by Václav Havel), Arc Publications, UK, 2004, ISBN 1-900072-97-1. URL: http://www.arcpublications.co.uk/biography.htm?writer_id=228 Vid Sagadin, "Iskanje nezasičenih prostorov", Literatura, vol. 17, no. 169-170, July/August 2005, 224-229. Peter Semolič, "Sensibility and sharp intellect", Introductory essay of the Poetry International Web, 2005.URL: http://slovenia.poetryinternationalweb.org/piw_cms/cms/cms_module/index.php?obj_id=5026 Irena Novak Popov, Antologija slovenskih pesnic 3, 1981 – 2000 [Anthology of Slovenian Women Poets 3, 1981 – 2000], Založba Tuma, Ljubljana, 2007, 318–329. Jad Hatem, " La pierre de l'invisibilité ", La Poésie slovène contemporaine : l'écriture de la pierre (Portraites littéraires), Éditions du Cygne, Paris, 2010, 11–24. Iztok Osojnik, "Pet dni na ladji norcev" [Five days at the Ship of Fools], Apokalipsa, no. 134/135, 2009, 285–295. Colleen Mc Carthy, "Storm in Words: Contemporary Slovenian Poetry in Translation", Talisman. A Journal of Contemporary Poetry and Poetics, no. 38/39/40, Summer-Autumn 2010, 350–355. Slovenian literature List of Slovenian historians Slovene Writers' Association Personal web-site in the form of blog: http://tajakramberger.wordpress.com/ CV of Taja Kramberger at the Faculty of Human Sciences University of Primorska [Littoral]: http://www.fhs.upr.si/sl/organiziranost-fakultete/pedagoski-sodelavci/taja.kramberger Poetry International Web: http://slovenia.poetryinternationalweb.org/piw_cms/cms/cms_module/index.php?obj_id=5044 Interview for the web Journal Transcript (in French & German): http://www.transcript-review.org/fr/issue/transcript-19--la-slovenie-/sept-voix-urbaines/taja-kramberger (French) http://www.transcript-review.org/de/issue/transcript-19--slowenien-/umgangsdichtung-in-ljubljana/taja-kramberger (German) Interview: Brezmejna neumnost province (Infinite stupidity of province), Večer, 19 June 2004, 42 [ ]
