 Tallaght ( ; , ) is the largest town, and county seat, of South Dublin, Ireland. The village area, dating from at least the 17th century, held one of the earliest settlements known in the southern part of the island, and one of medieval Ireland's more important monastic centres.History and Antiquities of Tallaght in the County of Dublin, 2nd edition, 1889; Handcock, William Domville Up to the 1960s Tallaght was little more than a small village in County Dublin, linked to several nearby rural areas which were part of the large civil parish of the same name - the local council estimates the then population at 2,500.Tallaght, Dublin, Ireland: County Development Plan 2004-2010, p. 78 Suburban development began in the 1970s and a town centre area has been developing since the late 1980s. There is no legal definition of the boundaries of Tallaght, but the electoral divisions known as "Tallaght" followed by the name of a locality have, according to the 2011 census, a population of 69,454.Tallaght is made up of sixteen electoral areas in South Dublin http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/el/2014/si/65/made/en/printhttp://www.cso.ie/en/search/index.html?q=tallaght There have been calls in recent years for Tallaght to be declared a city.Tallaght City | South Dublin County Council The village core of the district is located north of, and near to, the River Dodder, and parts of the broader area within South Dublin are close to the borders of Dublin City, Kildare, Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown and County Wicklow. Several streams flow in the area, notably the Jobstown or Tallaght Stream (a tributary of the Dodder River), and the Fettercairn Stream (a tributary of the River Camac), while the Tymon River, the main component of the River Poddle (Liffey tributary), rises in Cookstown, near Fettercairn. The place name Tallaght is derived from the words támh leacht, which is Middle Irish for 'plague pit', being made up of the Gaelic words "tamh", meaning plague and "leacht", meaning grave. The words, “Tamhlacht Muintir Partholón” suggest a mass grave, and the earliest mention of a Tallaght is in Lebor Gabála Érenn (the Book Of Invasions), where such a place is said to be the burial place of thousands of Partholonians who died from a plague very much like the Black Death (Parthalo(i)n the Greek was said to be one of the early invaders of Ireland).  Thus the place came to be named Taimhleacht Muintere Parthalain. However, the burials that have been found in the Tallaght area are all normal pre-historic interments, mainly from the Bronze Age, and nothing suggesting a mass grave has so far been recorded here. The name in Irish, Tamhlacht, is found at other places, such as Tamlaght in Magherafelt District, Northern Ireland,Tamlaght, County Londonderry though the mention of Eadoir, probably Binn Éadair (Howth) in the passage below, suggests that Tallaght is the more likely location for this tale: "M2820.1 Naoi mile do ecc fri h-aoin-sechtmain do muinter Parthaloin for Shenmhaigh Ealta Eadoir .i. cúig míle d'feroibh, & ceithre míle do mnáibh. Conadh de sin ata Taimhleacht Muintere Parthalain. Trí ced bliadhain ro caithsiot i n-Erinn."Annals of the Four Masters Approximates to: "Nine thousand of them died there, the people of Parthaloin, within weeks on the plain of the flocks near Eadoir. I. Five thousand men, & four thousand women. So swollen was Taimhleacht a Muintere Parthalain. Three hundred died too elsewhere that year in Erinn." Upon Mount Seskin (the tallest of the Tallaght Hills) can be seen numerous stone structures. The one that lies a top this mountain is commonly referred to as "The Hell Fire Club" and was built by a man called Speaker Conolly. It was built upon a passage tomb; this one known locally as a "fairy ring", an ancient monument similar to Newgrange. Thus was created the perfect location for very many myths and legends, as the destruction of these structures, for any reason, is said to bring bad luck. Today all across the countryside of Ireland can be found random mounds of earth. Such "fairy rings" are avoided by farmers, as they would rather leave them than risk the wrath of the "good people", the "Sidhe". Places near Tallaght featured in the ancient legends of the Fianna, a band of warriors that roamed the country and fought for the High King at Tara. In Lady Gregory's 'Gods and Fighting Men', mention is made of, in particular, Gleann na Smól: in Chapter 12 "The Red Woman", on a misty morning, Fionn says to his Fians, "Make yourselves ready, and we will go hunting to Gleann-na-Smol."And we will go hunting to Gleann na Smol There they meet Niamh of the Golden Hair, who chose Oisín from among all the Fianna to be her husband, told him to come with her on her fairy horse, after which they rode over the land to the sea and across the waves to the land of Tír na nÓg.  Taimhleacht Muintire Parthaloin (ar Sean Mhagh Ealta Edair) – AM2820? The documented history of Tallaght dates back to early Christendom in Ireland but the many archaeological sites in the area suggest the presence of Bronze Age and perhaps even earlier settlers in the area. With the foundation of the monastery of Tallaght by St. Maelruain in 769 A.D. we have a more reliable record of the area's early history. The monastery was a centre of learning and piety, particularly associated with the Céli Dé spiritual reform movement. It was such an important institution that it and the monastery at Finglas were known as the "two eyes of Ireland".Feastdays of the Saints, 2006; Ó Riain,Pádraig St. Aengus, an Ulsterman, was one of the most illustrious of the Céli Dé and devoted himself to the religious life. Wherever he went he was accompanied by a band of followers who distracted him from his devotions. He secretly travelled to the monastery at Tallaght where he was not known and enrolled as a lay brother. He remained unknown for many years until his identity was discovered by Maeilruain. They may have written the Martyrology of Tallaght together, and St Aengus also wrote a calendar of saints known as the Féilire of Aengus. St. Maelruain died in 792 and was buried in Tallaght. The influence of the monastery continued after his death, as can be judged by the fact that, in 806, the monks of Tallaght were able to prevent the holding of the Tailteann Games, because of some infringement of their rights. In 811 the monastery was devastated by the Vikings but the destruction was not permanent and the annals of the monastery continued to be recorded for several following centuries. After the Anglo-Norman invasion in 1179, Tallaght and its appurtenances were confirmed to the Diocese of Dublin and became the property of the Archbishop. The complete disappearance of every trace of what must have been an extensive and well organised monastic settlement can only be accounted for by the subsequent history of the place, the erection and demolition of defensive walls and castles, and the incessant warfare and destruction that lasted for hundreds of years. Throughout the greater part of the 13th century a state of comparative peace existed at Tallaght, but subsequently the O'Byrnes and O'Tooles, in what would become County Wicklow, took offensive action and were joined by many of the Archbishop's tenants. As a result of this the land was not tilled, the pastures were not stocked and the holdings were deserted. In 1310 the bailiffs of Tallaght got a royal grant to enclose the town. No trace of these defensive walls survive and there is no evidence of their exact location, except, perhaps, for the name of the Watergate Bridge which spans the Dodder on the Oldbawn Road. The continuation of such raids prompted the construction, in 1324, of Tallaght Castle, and it was finished some time before 1349. Tallaght had become an important defensive site on the edge of the Pale. A century later it was reported to be in need of repair. The 17th and 18th centuries brought many changes to Tallaght. Many mills were built along the Dodder and this brought new prosperity to the broad area, which saw the building of many houses. When Archbishop Hoadley replaced Archbishop King in 1729 he found the castle in ruins, and had it demolished, building himself a palace at a cost of £2,500. By 1821 the palace too had fallen into ruin and an Act of Parliament was passed which stated that it was unfit for habitation. The following year it was sold to Major Palmer, Inspector General of Prisons, who pulled the palace down and used the materials to build his mansion, Tallaght House, as well as a schoolhouse and several cottages. Tallaght House is now incorporated in St Joseph's Retreat House, situated in the grounds of St Mary's Priory. An ancient tower was spared in the demolition of the palace and was later incorporated into the buildings of St. Mary's Priory, where it still stands today. It contains a spiral staircase and was originally four storeys high but is now reduced internally to two. Attached to the castle was a long building which was used in the archbishop's time as a brewery and later as a granary and stables. When the Dominicans came, it was converted into a chapel and was used as such until 1883 when the new church dedicated to Fr Tom Burke (now the older part of the parish church)was built. The Dominicans came to Tallaght in 1855/6 and soon established a thriving priory that was also a seminary for the formation of Dominicans in Ireland and on missions in Trinidad and Tobago, South America, Australia, India, and elsewhere. The cramped accommodation of Tallaght house was replaced by the austere priory in phases of 1864, 1903 and again in 1957.  All are bleak, and remain so, but the work that goes on in these buildings is various and dedicated:  St Joseph's retreat house, the Tallaght parish, St Catherine's counselling centre, at least two publishing enterprises, individual writing and international research in several domains. Most recently Tallaght Priory has seen the birth of an institute for distance learning, started in 2000 but adapting well to new challenges and the possibility of outreach to a generation awake to the possibilities offered by the internet. This is validated through the Institute for Technology, Tallaght, the priory's closest neighbours. The grounds of the Priory, the old palace gardens, still retain many features from the historic past such as the Archbishop's bathhouse, the Friar's Walk and "St. Maelruain's Tree", a Persian walnut of the eighteenth century.  They are an essential part of the retreat experience for those who come to St Joseph's Retreat House, and also for the life of the community that is otherwise so busy. The old constabulary barracks on the main street was the scene of the engagement known as the Battle of Tallaght, which occurred during the Fenian rising on 5 March 1867. On that night the Fenians moved out to assemble at the appointed place on Tallaght Hill. The large number of armed men alarmed the police in Tallaght who sent warning to the nearest barracks. There were fourteen constables and a head constable under Sub-inspector Burke at Tallaght, and they took up a position outside the barracks where they commanded the roads from both Greenhills and Templeogue. The first body of armed men came from Greenhills and, when they came under police fire, retreated. Next a party came from Templeogue, and were also dispersed. In 1936 a skeleton, sword-bayonet and water bottle were found in a hollow tree stump near Terenure. It is thought that these were the remains of one of the Fenians who had taken refuge there after the Battle of Tallaght and either died of his wounds or was frozen to death. In 1888 the Dublin & Blessington Steam Tramway opened and it passed through Tallaght Village. This provided a new means of transporting goods and also brought day-trippers from the city.  While no plan was formally adopted, Tallaght was laid out as a new town, as set out in the 1967 Myles Wright masterplan for Greater Dublin (this proposed four self-contained "new towns" - at Tallaght, Clondalkin, Lucan and Blanchardstown - all of which were at that time villages surrounded by extensive open lands, with some small settlements). Many of the social and cultural proposals in this plan were ignored by the Dublin local authorities, and contrary to planners' suggestions, Tallaght and the other "new towns" were not provided with adequate facilities. Characterised by the same problems associated with poorly planned fringe areas of many European cities, during the 1970s and 1980s Tallaght became synonymous with suburban mismanagement. While it was absorbed into the larger suburban area of Dublin (including becoming the postal district Dublin 24 in the 1980s), Tallaght has developed a distinctive identity, arising largely from its rapid growth during recent decades, and now has a thriving local arts, cultural, sports, and economic outlook. Tallaght's Civic Square contains the seat of the local authority, County Hall, a newly renovated and well-equipped library facility, a theatre building and a "cutting edge" 4-storey arts centre named RUA RED (which opened on 5 February 2009). Along with other local libraries and arts groups, it also has another theatre building, and a homegrown youth theatre company. It is also the home to the Tallaght Swim Team, Tallaght Rugby Club,  the National Basketball Arena, Shamrock Rovers F.C., and several notable martial arts schools and Gaelic Athletic Association clubs. In October 2008 "An Bratach Fulaingt",South Dublin County, Ireland or "The Endurance Flag" was designed for Tallaght during The D'No Project, run by Tallaght Youth Theatre in partnership with Tallaght Community Arts, and funded by Léargas - and was intended to be flown at the new county arts centre, Rua Red, on April 17 and 18th 2009. However, the flag was ultimately not flown and instead its colours were utilised within aspects of the performance.South Dublin County, Ireland Tallaght is centred 13&nbsp;km southwest of Dublin city, in the foothills of the Wicklow Mountains. While there is no formal definition as such, it can be described as beginning southwest of Templeogue, running west towards Saggart, towards Bohernabreena and Glenasmole in the south, Firhouse to the southeast, Knocklyon to the east, and to the southern edges of Clondalkin in the northwest and Walkinstown in the northeast.  It lies outside the M50 Dublin orbital motorway, and in effect forms an irregular circle either side of the N81 Dublin-Blessington road. The rural villages of Saggart and of Rathcoole lie west of Tallaght, along with the air force aerodrome at Baldonnell. There is also still considerable open land, some still farmed, in this direction.  Tallaght is connected to Dublin city by Dublin Bus services, and by the Red Line of the Luas light rail system, which opened in September 2004. Though the first stop (Tallaght Cross) of the Red Line is called 'Tallaght', the entire 'Red 4' zone (with the exception of the terminus at Saggart) lies within the broader Tallaght area. The current price (2013) for a single ticket From Red 4 to Central 1 is €2.70. Tallaght is not well connected to Dublin's other towns and suburbs, as public transport predominantly runs through Dublin city centre; this has led to high levels of car dependence, however the 75 links Tallaght to Rathfarnham, Nutgrove, Ballinteer, Dundrum, Stillorgan and Dun Laoghaire, while the 76 links Tallaght to Clondalkin, Liffey Valley and Ballyfermot. Routes to the city centre include the 27 (via Jobstown and Tymon Park), 49 (The Square, Aylesbury, Old Bawn, Ballycullen and Firhouse), 54a (Kiltipper, Killinarden Heights, The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village, Balrothery), 56a (The Square, Springfield, Fettercairn and Kingswood), 65 (The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village and Balrothery), 65b (Killinarden Heights, Kiltipper Road, Aylesbury, Old Bawn, Firhouse and Ballycullen) and 77a (Blessington, Killinarden Heights, The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village, Old Bawn, Balrothery and Tymon Park). A metro rail system is potentially planned for Dublin but on hold following the global financial crisis. Two lines have been proposed: Metro North, running from Dublin city to the airport, and Metro West, which, taking a circuitous route, is proposed to link Tallaght with the major satellite towns west of Dublin, of Clondalkin, Lucan, and Blanchardstown. This metro line will join up with Metro North and continue out to Dublin Airport in Fingal. The first 4 stops of Metro West would be in Tallaght, with the first stop, 'Tallaght East' being situated near Tallaght IT on the Belgard Road.      A Luas extension from Tallaght to Citywest and Saggart has now opened. This is a 4.2&nbsp;km (2.5&nbsp;mi) extension, funded by a Public Private Partnership with property developers. Identified as Line A1, this €150 million spur off the Red Line at Belgard runs to Saggart. Originally intended to be a spur off the proposed Red Line to Fortunestown, it was later decided to extend it to Saggart. Construction started on 9 February 2009, with the line completed by early 2011. Passenger services on the 4.2&nbsp;km light rail link started in early 2011. It serves communities such as Cairnwood, Ambervale, Belgard Green, Fettercairn, Kilmartin, Brookview and Ardmore. The county council stated in 2003 that the population of Tallaght and environs is just under 73,000.  While Tallaght is the seat of South Dublin County, it has no specific local administration in the form of its own local authority. In addition, while there exist two distinct local electoral areas in the form of "Tallaght Central" (based around the historic village core and key modern developments) and "Tallaght South" (the outlying "suburbs" and some rural areas), Tallaght possesses no legal boundary and as a result, it is very difficult to define an official population figure for the area. The population of the village remains modest but the broader area is now one of Ireland's largest population agglomerations. In fact, if the entirety of Tallaght and its broadly defined environs were taken into account, then the population would be greater than that of Galway city (75,414), rendering Tallaght the fourth largest area of population in the state. Irish population statistics are calculated from District Electoral Divisions, and these are often combined to estimate "area populations".  Several localities "historically associated with" Tallaght, have been differently assigned since 1986. The total population from the 2011 census is 69,454, while including all of the remaining electoral divisions redesignated in 1986, gives a figure of 103,301. "Greater Tallaght" comprises Tallaght village and a range of areas that were formerly small settlements (Jobstown, Old Bawn,  Kilnamanagh) and rural townlands, all developed in recent decades. The original village of Tallaght lies west of the Tallaght Bypass (N81). It stretches east-west from Main Road and Main Street to the Abberley Court Hotel at the end of High Street, and encompasses the Village Green shopping plaza, Tallaght Courthouse, Westpark, and many shops, restaurants and banks. It also houses Tallaght Youth Service, Tallaght's first newspaper printing house (the Tallaght Echo), and (formally) Tallaght Community Arts Centre. The area's Institute of Technology, Saint Mary's Priory, and Saint Maelruain's Church are located in the historic quarter of Tallaght village. The newer "town centre" lies immediately to the south across the Belgard Road, encompassing Belgard Square, the main shopping complex (known as The Square also known as the Pyramid), the Luas Red Line terminus, Tallaght Hospital (including the National Children's Hospital), County Hall, the Civic Theatre, South Dublin County Library, Rua Red Arts Centre, and several bars, restaurants and hotels. To the northeast of the village lies the Tymon North / Balrothery area, which comprised rural townlands until the 1970s. This district includes estates such as Bancroft, Balrothery, Glenview, Castle Park, Saint Aongus, Tymon, Bolbrook and Avonbeg. These parts are home to several sporting facilities, including the National Basketball Arena, a fitness centre, two swimming pools, an athletics track, and an astroturf soccer facility. Tymon Park is watered by the River Poddle, and is Ireland's second largest city park. It borders Greenhills and Templeogue, and it contains extensive sporting grounds, ponds, Coláiste De Hide and one of Ireland's largest playgrounds at the Tymon North entrance. Old Bawn, formerly a small village in its own right, is immediately south of the village, bordered by Sean Walsh Memorial (also locally called Watergate) Park. To the east of Old Bawn, estates include Home Lawns, Mountain Park, Millbrook Lawns and Seskin View. To the south and southwest of the village lie Ellensborough, Aylesbury, and Killinarden (the latter comprising the residential areas of Deer Park, Cushlawn, Donomore, Killinarden Estate and Knockmore). Beyond these are rural lands, running towards the Wicklow Mountains. In the northwest is Belgard Green, with Belgard Heights and Kingswood to the north, which are adjacent to Clondalkin, while Kilnamanagh is situated beside Greenhills and south west of Walkinstown and Crumlin. Tallaght Theatre is situated along the Greenhills Road. Virginia Heights and Springfield are close to the area's centre, and further west of the town centre are the former hamlet of Jobstown, now with dense housing estates, and also the recently rural areas of Kiltalown, Brookfield and Fettercairn. To the far west, are newer estates such as Deselby, Mountain View, The Belfry, Ardmore, Westbrook Glen, Saggart Abbey, Verschoyle and Carrigmore. Tallaght is home to The Square (abbreviated to "sq."), one of Ireland's largest shopping centres, with three retail levels and accessible by the Luas and extensive bus services. Anchor tenants at the centre include Tesco, Debenhams, Easons, and Dunnes Stores. Tallaght lost its multiplex 12-screen cinema operated by United Cinemas International on 8 March 2010 due to required modernisation being deemed unviable. However, in April 2012, a new, modernised 13-screen cinema operated by I.M.C. opened in place of the old one. Many new retail outlets such as Marks and Spencers have been built in the new town centre. Three hotels are located in the town centre: the Plaza Hotel near The Square, the Abberley Court Hotel at High Street, the Maldron Hotel at Whitestown Way, near Seán Walshe Park.  The Glashus Hotel and Tallaght Cross Hotel were at "Tallaght Cross" but closed during the financial crisis.Irish Independent, Jan. 9th The "town centre" area holds offices of local and central government entities, including South Dublin County Council, the Revenue Commissioners, the Department of Social and Family Affairs, the Health Service Executive (Eastern Region), County Dublin V.E.C., as well as local FÁS offices. It is also the location of the County Library, Rua Red - the County Arts Centre, the Civic Theatre, and many shops, bars, and restaurants. The Adelaide and Meath Hospital, incorporating the National Children's Hospital (commonly known as Tallaght Hospital) is located nearby. Across the N81 dual carriageway, south of the town centre, is the 6,000 seat soccer ground called Tallaght Stadium. Initially construction was undertaken by Shamrock Rovers F.C. on lands belonging to South Dublin County Council, but the project was marred by financial problems, and the site reverted to council ownership. Work on the site recommenced on 6 May 2008,Tallaght Stadium - Building Recommences May 2008 Shamrock Rovers F.C. Published on 07-05-08. Retrieved on 14-05-08. after a judicial review taken by a local GAA club had been thrown out of court the preceding January.Shamrock Rovers F.C South of this is Sean Walsh Memorial Park. The "town centre" area has witnessed much construction in recent years, predominantly of new apartment buildings, including Virginia Hall, a twelve storey building on the site of the farmhouse previously known as 'Virginia House' (the base of operations for many years of the Tallaght Community Arts Centre). This new building is currently the tallest in Tallaght. A new arts centre for South Dublin County called Rua Red was recently opened at a site near to County Hall, just south of the new library extension. Intensive work has been promised in the near future to further integrate Watergate Park with the new town centre. Part of this development will either include transforming a section of the current dual carriageway into a boulevard to better integrate the two areas, or the construction of a pedestrian land-bridge between them. The original Tallaght village area has recently received a long awaited face-lift in the form of landscaping, works on statues, and new paving. However, several new developments have not yet been completed, giving the unfinished village a ghost town appearance. ITT is in the process of redeveloping land donated by Saint Mary's Priory for use as sports pitches. Tallaght is represented in the Dublin South–West constituency in Dáil Éireann with four TDs. It is divided into two electoral areas on South Dublin County Council - Tallaght Central and Tallaght South. Altogether 11 councillors are elected. It is regarded as being very left-leaning with the Labour Party and Sinn Féin being the larger parties in the area. Schools in Tallaght include: St. Mark's National School, St. Mark's Community School, Scoil Maelruain, St. Martin de Porres, St. Dominic's NS, St. Aidan's, St. Thomas', Holy Rosary NS, Scoil Treasa, Old Bawn Community School, Tallaght Community School, Killinarden Community School, Coláiste de hÍde gaelscoil,Coláiste de hÍde St. Aidan's Community School, Firhouse Community College and Mount Seskin Community School. Tallaght is the home of the Institute of Technology Tallaght (ITT), a third-level college offering undergraduate degrees as well as Higher Certificates and post-graduate professional qualifications. The college was founded in 1992 as the Regional Technical College, Tallaght. It has had a number of name changes since, briefly becoming Tallaght Institute of Technology before being renamed Institute of Technology, Tallaght. It was recently branded Institute of Technology, Tallaght, Dublin (ITT Dublin). On 12 July 1998, Tallaght welcomed the Tour de France. Tallaght always held an annual Saint Patrick's Day parade, but for the past three years this once proud tradition has unfortunately been abandoned. It has also been home to 'Tallafest' and 'NOISE Festivals': youth arts festivals in film, dance and music organised by South Dublin County Council every year. There is a farmers' market held every Friday from 10:00 to 16:00 in High Street. Notable people from Tallaght include:      Tallaght Ethnic groups 2011 White Irish Irish Traveller Other White Black Asian Other Not Stated Tallaght Population 69,454 58,596 787 3934 2001 1271 856 2009 Tamlactense (Monasterium) – 769? 769: Saint Maelruain's monastery founded. 792: AI792.1 Kl. Mael Rúain, bishop of Tamlachta, [rested]. 811: Saint Maelruain's monastery devastated by the Vikings. AI824.2 Tamlachta of Mael Ruain plundered by the community of Cell Dara. 1179: Tallaght and its hinterland, previously within the Diocese of Glendalough, confirmed as holdings of the Archdiocese of Dublin. 1310: bailiffs of Tallaght given royal grant to enclose the town. 1324: Building of Tallaght Castle commences. 1331-1332; Tallaght Castle plundered by O'Toole of Imaile. 1378: Mathew, son of Redmond de Bermingham, takes up station at Tallaght Castle to resist the O'Byrnes. 1540: O'Tooles invade, and devastate Tallaght Castle and surrounding manors. 1635: Old Bawn House built. 1729: Tallaght Castle demolished; Archbishop's Palace built by Archbishop Hoadley. 1822: Archbishop's Palace demolished by Major Palmer, who then builds Tallaght House. 1829: Modern Church of Ireland parish created. 1856: Tallaght House is sold to the Dominicans. 1864: Saint Mary's Priory built. 1867: Battle of Tallaght fought in March.Multitext - Flag captured from the Fenians at Tallaght, March 1867 1883: New Priory Church built. 1888: The Dublin and Blessington Steam Tramway commences operation, passing through Tallaght village. 1955: New retreat house built at the Priory, enclosing Tallaght House. 1984: Tallaght’s first public library, at Castletymon, opened in June. 1987: Alan Dukes outlines the Tallaght Strategy to the Tallaght Chamber of Commerce. 1990: The Square shopping centre opens. 1992: Institute of Technology, Tallaght opens. 1994: South Dublin County Council comes into existence, with new headquarters at Tallaght; Tallaght Youth Theatre is founded; Tallaght’s second public library, situated beside the South Dublin County Council offices, opened in December. 1995: Tallaght Theatre built in Kilnamanagh. 1997: Tallaght Theatre is officially opened, on the Greenhill's Rd, Behind the Cuckoo's Nest Pub. 1998: Tallaght Hospital opens. 1999: Civic Theatre opens adjacent to County Council headquarters in Tallaght centre. 2004: The Red Line of the Luas light rail system opens, connecting central Tallaght to Heuston Station and Connolly Station in Dublin City. 2008: Extensive rebuilding of Tallaght's main library is completed. An Bratach Fulaingt (The Endurance Flag) of Tallaght is designed. 2009: The County Arts Centre, Rua Red, is opened; completion of Tallaght Stadium. 2010: On March 1, the RPA held a special meeting in Belgard Heights Community Centre to reveal the Metro West schematic; the first 4 stops of which will be in Tallaght (Tallaght East, Colberts Fort, Kilnamanagh, Newlands) 2011: On September 15, Shamrock Rovers hosted Rubin Kazan in what was the first UEFA Europa League group stage game to contain an Irish team. This game took place in the Tallaght Stadium which would host 2 more games in the group stage. 2012: Formation of the Tallaght Ecology Club in Autumn. Shamrock Rovers F.C. are based in Tallaght started playing in Tallaght Stadium in 2009. The club finished its first season in Tallaght runners-up in the league. The club won their first League title in 2010 ending a 16-year drought by narrowly beating Bohemians to the title on goal difference. Rovers followed this up by winning the 2011 League of Ireland. Rovers hosted their first game in European competition in Tallaght in the second qualifying round of the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League against Bnei Yehuda from Israel, the game in Tallaght finished 1-1 and Rovers advanced 2-1 on aggregate after winning the second leg in Israel 1-0. Rovers faced former Champions League and UEFA Cup winners Juventus, Rovers were beaten 2-0 in Tallaght and 3-0 on aggregate. In 2011 the club played its first ever Champions League game and its first game in the highest level of European Cup Competition's since the 1987–88 European Cup, beating Estonian Champions Flora Tallinn in the 2011–12 Champions League Second qualifying round. They accomplished this feat by triumphing 1-0 in the first leg at Tallaght Stadium and drawing 0-0 in the second leg in Estonia to advance 1-0 on aggregate. Rovers were then beaten 3-0 on aggregate in the next round by Danish Champions Copenhagen but advanced to the 2011-12 Europa League Play-off round. There they were drawn against Serbian Champions FK Partizan, whom they defeated 3-2 on aggregate (2-1 on the night after extra time) to reach the group stages of the Europa League. This marked a famous victory for Irish football, as it is the first time an Irish club has reached the group stages of a major European competition. Rovers also won the All Ireland Setanta Sports Cup in 2011 by defeating Dundalk in the final at Tallaght Stadium. Rovers wrapped up a second league title in a row with a last-minute victory over UCD at Belfield on 25 October 2011. Saint Anne's GAA, Saint Marks GAA and Thomas Davis GAA Club are local Gaelic Athletic Association clubs. The National Basketball Arena lies east of the village. Tallaght Swim Team is located at the Tallaght Sports Complex, Balrothery, beside Tallaght Community School. Brookfield Celtic, one of Dublin's largest underage football clubs, were founded in Tallaght in 1999. Glenanne Sports Club, one of the most successful Irish field hockey teams of recent years, are based in Tallght, playing their home games on the astroturf pitch located in St. Marks Community School The trailhead of the Dublin Mountains Way a long-distance walking route across the Dublin side of the Wicklow Mountains between Tallaght and Shankill begins at Sean Walsh Park near Tallaght Stadium.Dublin Mountains Way | Dublin Mountains Way | Dublin Mountains Partnership South Dublin Taekwondo are the only WTF (Olympic Style) Taekwondo club in Tallaght. They were founded in 2008 by head coach Master Robert Taaffe and are residents in the Tallaght Leisure Centre. There are several I.T.F style Taekwon-do clubs in the area. Tallaght Rugby Football Club is located in Ballymana Lane but play out of Tymon park whilst development of the Ballymana grounds begins in 2013. They were founded as a youth team in 2002 with financial support from the IRFU before setting up a senior team in 2006. Tallaght Theatre, Tallaght's first Theatre, launched in 1975 as a non profit amateur dramatic group. Now one of Ireland's leading am dram theatre's, Tallaght Theatre remains in the heart of the community, situated on the Greenhills Road, Tallaght.tallaghttheatre.com - Tallaght's first theatre - Online The Civic Theatre became Tallaght's second theatre, built in 1999 beside the civic offices, Tallaght.Civic Theatre Rua Red is one of the major buildings for the hosting of arts/entertainment events and groups.Rua Red Tallaght Young Filmmakers are a youth film making group initiated by South Dublin County Council's Arts Office in partnership with local young people.Tallaght Young Filmmakers - YouTube IMC at Tallaght is a cinema situated in the Square shopping centre. Rob King., Television Series Producer / Director Patrick Holohan, Mixed Martial Artist Patrick Hyland, professional boxer Paul Hyland, professional boxer Eddie Hyland, professional Boxer Dessie Baker football player Richie Baker football player Graham Barrett football player Ciaran Bourke, Former member of The Dubliners Stephen Bradley football player Jason Byrne football player Richard Dunne (1979-), football player Keith Fahey (1983-), football player Evie Hone (1894–1955), artist, buried here Robbie Keane (1980-), football player Graham Gartland football player Jason Gavin football player David O'Connor (footballer) football player Ger O'Brien football player Eric McGill football player Mark Yeates (1985-), football player Oisín Kelly (1915–1981), artist and sculptor Kojii Helnwein (née Wyatt), model and musician William Howard Russell (1820–1907), journalist, and possibly the world's first modern war correspondent George Otto Simms (1910–1991), Church of Ireland Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of All Ireland Katharine Tynan (1861–1931), writer Alan Joyce (executive) (1966-), CEO Qantas Airlines Aidan Turner (1983-), actor (Mitchell in Being Human) Shane O'Connor (1985), dart player Nucentz, rapper, born here in 1987 Dean Gibbons, one sixth of boyband HomeTown (band) List of towns and villages in Ireland List of abbeys and priories in County Dublin Tallaght Strategy National Basketball Arena Dublin, Hodges Figgis, 1889; Handcock, William Domville, "The History and Antiquities of Tallaght in the County of Dublin", 2nd edition, revised and enlarged Editing Tallaght SEA Tallaght Youth Theatre Tallaght Express Local Newspaper Tallaght Directory Online for Business and Services
