       Tantra, also called Tantrism and Tantric religion, is an ancient Hindu tradition of beliefs and meditation and ritual practices that seeks to channel the divine energy of the macrocosm or godhead into the human microcosm, to attain siddhis and moksha. It arose in India no later than the 5th century CE, and it had a strong influence on both Hinduism and Buddhism. The term "tantrism" or "tantricism" is an anglicism derived from "tantra", used since the 19th century to refer to a complex and broad body of non-Vedic teachings. According to André Padoux, "Tantrism" is a Western term and notion, not a category that is used by the so-called "Tantrists" themselves. The term was introduced by 19th-century Indologists who thought that the Tantras were only a very limited aspect of Indian culture. Yet, according to Padoux, "[Tantra was] so pervasive that it was not regarded as being a distinct system." Robert Brown also notes that the term "tantrism" is a construct of Western scholarship, not a concept of the religious system itself. s (practitioners of Tantra) did not attempt to define Tantra as a whole; instead, the Tantric dimension of each South Asian religion had its own name: According to Padoux, the term "tantrika" is based on a comment by Kulluka Bhatta, who made a distinction between vaidika and tantrika forms of revelation. These coincide with two different approaches to ultimate reality, namely a Vedic-Brahmanical approach, and approaches based on other texts. Tantra  often simply means "treatise" or "exposition". Literally it can be said to mean "loom, warp, weave"; hence "principle, continuum, system, doctrine, theory", from the verbal root  "stretch, extend, expand", and the suffix  "instrument". The  gives the following explanation of the term tantra:  The 10th-century Tantric scholar Rāmakaṇṭha, who belonged to the dualist school Śaiva Siddhānta, gives another definition:  A survey of the literature yields a variety of uses for the term "tantra", as given in the table. According to David N. Lorenzen, two different kind of definitions of Tantra exist, a "narrow definition" and a "broad definition." According to the narrow definition, Tantrism, or "Tantric religion," refers only to the traditions which are based on the Tantras, Samhitas and Agamas. This definition refers primarily to a tradition which is primarily based in the higher social classes, which were literate, and lived in or close by urban centers. According to the broad definition, Tantra refers to a broad range of religious traditions with a "magical" orientation. This includes the upper class texts and traditions, but also practices and rituals from lower social classes, which were less educated, and lived more in the rural areas. According to David Gordon White,  David N. Lorenzen gives the following components of the broadly defined Tantric religion which can be documented: André Padoux notes that there is no consensus among scholars which elements are characteristic for Tantra, nor is there any text which contains all those elements. And most of those elements can also be found in non-Tantric traditions. According to Anthony Tribe, a scholar of Buddhist Tantra, Tantra has the following defining features: According to Brian K. Smith "all [...] attempts at locating the temporal and cultural origins of Tantrism remain theoretical and speculative." According to Andre Padoux, "the history of Tantrism is impossible to write." Although some elements of Tantra may be quite ancient, Hindu Tantrism as a related complex of religious rituals and practices probably originated c.&nbsp;500–600 CE. Some elements of Tantra may be quite ancient. Some scholars postulate pre-Vedic origins of Tantra. According to Bhattacharya, Tantric elements can be discerned in the Indus Valley Civilization at the 4th millennium BCE. Terracotta figurines may be the earliest tokens of the Mother Goddess. These cultures, in their late phase, overlapped with the Harappan culture of the Indus Valley, which may have preserved these proto-Tantric elements. In contrast, the early Vedic religion did not support this kind of Mother Goddess worship, and likewise did not support the Yogic elements of the pre-Vedic north-Indian culture. Nevertheless, a synthesis emerged in which proto-Tantric elements found a place in the Vedic culture. Likewise, Manoranjan Basu postulates pre-Vedic origins of Tantra in the pre-Vedic culture of north-India, including the Indus Valley Civilisation. The confrontation between the two cultures resulted in a synthesis in which proto-Tantric elements survived. The earliest documented use of the word "Tantra" is in the Rigveda (X.71.9),Banerjee, S.C., 1988. but does not refer to Tantric texts or practices. Shamanic and yogic beliefs have been documented already in Vedic times, and became abundant during the second urbanisation (500–200 BCE, with the rise of the shramanic movement. A famous passage in the Rig&nbsp;Veda (10.136), which probably dates from the early first millennium BCE, describes the "wild muni" (seer) hymn of the Rig&nbsp;Veda. It describes the munis as experiencing "ecstatic, altered states of consciousness" and gaining the ability "to fly on the wind". Several Upanishads, from the middle and early first millennium BCE, describe yogic beliefs and practices, which were fully codified by the emerging Buddhist tradition in the 5th century BCE. The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali (comp. c.&nbsp;400 CE) are an early codification of Yogic practices, which prelude the shift in emphasis of Hatha Yoga, which fully develops the "mystical anatomy" of nadis and chakras. According to Lorenzen, in the 7th century CE the shamanic-yogic component of Tantrism appears clearly in Tantric form in Bāṇabhaṭṭa's Harshacharita and Daṇḍin's Dashakumaracharita. According to Lorenzen, the worship of female deities has a long history in India. Despite its patriarchal character, some Vedic hymns are dedicated to female deities. Other Vedic texts, such as the Mahabharata, also contain references to the cruel manifestations of the Mother Goddess, especially Mahishamardini, who is identified with Durga-Parvati. The earliest depictions of Mahishamardini date from the 6th century CE, indicating the development of the Shakti-worship. Goddess-worship became more tantric with the rise of the seven Matrikas, which are mentioned in the Mahabharata and the early Puranic literature. They are also mentioned in the stone inscription of Visvavarman, which is dated at 423 CE, and often regarded oldest written evidence of Tantrism. Another important mention of the Matrikas is in the Markandeya Purana, an early text of the Shakti worship. Hindu Tantrism as a related complex of religious rituals and practices probably originated ca. 500-600 CE. Stone inscriptions make clear that Tantric deities were already worshipped in the 5th century, and Tantra may have been well established by the 6th or 7th century, by the end of the Gupta period. The earliest reliable references to the Kapalikas are in Hāla’s Gatha-saptasati (3rd-5th century CE) and in two texts written by Varāhamihira (c. 500–575 CE). In the 7th century CE more references to the Kapalikas appear. Epigraphic references to the Kaulas are rare. Reference is made in the early 9th century to vama (left-hand) Tantras of the Kaulas. The Hindu Tantras cannot be attested before 800 CE. According to Flood, the earliest date for the Tantras is 600 CE, though most of them were composed from the 8th century onward. By the 10th century an extensive corpus existed. According to Flood, the main areas for the composition of the tantras were Kashmir and Nepal. The Tantric traditions regard the Tantras, also called agamas, to be superior to the Vedas. While the vedic orthodoxy rejected the Tantras, the Tantric followers incorporated the Vedic revelations within their own systems, as revelations of a lower level. According to Flood, the Tantras probably arose among non-Brahmanical ascetics who lived at the cremation grounds. They were representants of an ascetic ideal which lived among people of lower social classes. By the early medieval  times, their practices included the imitation of the gods they worshipped, which they appeased with various gifts such as non-vegetarian food, alcohol and sexual substances. They invited their deities to possess them, meanwhile keeping control and thereby gaining power. These ascetics were supported by low castes living at the cremation places. Tantrism flourished between the 8th or 9th century and the 14th century. This was a period of great social and economical change in India, which saw the rise of feudalism, and the start of the Muslim era. After the end of the Gupta Empire and the collapse of the Harsha Empire, power was decentralised in India. Several larger kingdoms emerged, with "countless vassal states". The kingdoms were ruled by a feudal system, with smaller kingdoms dependent on protection from larger ones. "The great king was remote, was exalted and deified." This was reflected in the Tantric mandala, which could depict the king at its centre. The disintegration of central power led to religious regionalism and rivalry. Local cults and languages developed, and the influence of "Brahmanic ritualistic Hinduism" diminished. Rural devotional movements arose with Shaivism, Vaisnavism, Bhakti and Tantra, although "sectarian groupings were only at the beginning of their development." Religious movements competed for recognition from local lords. Buddhism lost its stature, and began to disappear from India. By the tenth or eleventh century Tantra had spread all over India. Tantric movements led to the formation of a number of Hindu and Buddhist esoteric schools, also infuencing the Jain religious tradition. According to Flood,  Tantrism further spread with the silk road transmission of Buddhism to East and Southeast Asia, and also influenced the Bön tradition of Tibet.      Tantric ritual seeks to access the supra-mundane through the mundane, identifying the microcosm with the macrocosm. The Tantric aim is to sublimate (rather than negate) reality. The Tantric practitioner seeks to use prana (energy flowing through the universe, including one's body) to attain goals which may be spiritual, material or both. Tantric teachings are passed on orally in a teacher-student relationship. Initiation by a teacher is necessary for the practice to be successful. Rituals are the main focus of the Tantras. Rather than one coherent system, Tantra is an accumulation of practices and ideas. Because of the wide range of communities covered by the term, it is problematic to describe tantric practices definitively. A number of techniques (sadhana) are used as aids for meditation and achieving spiritual power: According to David Gordon White, mandalas are a key element of Tantra. They represent the constant flow and interaction of both divine, demonic, human and animal energy or impulses (kleshas, cetanā, taṇhā) in the universe. The mandala is a mesocosm, which mediates between the "transcendent-yet-immanent" macrocosm and the microcosm of mundane human experience. The godhead is at the center of the mandala, while all other beings, including the practitioner, are located at various distances from this center. Mandalas also reflected the medieaval feudal system, with the king at its centre. The godhead is both transcendent and immanent, and the world is regarded as real, and not as an illusion. The goal is not to transcend the world, but to realize that the world is the manifestation of the godhead, while the "I" is "the supreme egoity of the godhead." The world is to be seen with the eyes of the godhead, realizing that it is a manifestation as oneself. The totality of all that is a "realm of Dharma" which shares a common principle. The supreme is manifest in everyone, which is to be realized through Tantric practice.  The words mantram, tantram and yantram are rooted linguistically and phonologically in ancient Indian traditions. Mantram denotes the chant, or "knowledge." Tantram denotes philosophy, or ritual actions. Yantram denotes the means by which a person is expected to lead their life. The mantra and yantra are instruments to invoke higher qualities, often associated with specific Hindu deities such as Shiva, Shakti, or Kali. Similarly, puja may involve focusing on a yantra or mandala associated with a deity.Magee, Michael. The Kali Yantra Each mantra is associated with a specific Nyasa. Nyasa involves touching various parts of the body at specific parts of the mantra, thought to invoke the deity in the body. There are several types of Nyasas; the most important are Kara Nyasa and Anga Nyasa. The deities are internalised as attributes of Ishta devata meditations, with practitioners visualizing themselves as the deity or experiencing the darshan (vision) of the deity. During meditation the initiate identifies with any of the Hindu gods and goddesses, visualising and internalising them in a process similar to sexual courtship and consummation.Cavendish, Richard. The Great Religions. New York: Arco Publishing, 1980. The Tantrika practitioner may use visualizations of deities, identifying with a deity to the degree that the aspirant "becomes" the Ishta-deva (or meditational deity).Harper (2002), pp.&nbsp;3–5. In Hindu Tantra, uniting the deity and the devotee uses meditation and ritual practices. These practices are divided among three classes of devotees: the animal, heroic, and the divine. In the divine devotee, the rituals are internal. The divine devotee is the only one who can attain the object of the rituals (awakening energy). Defined as a technique-rich style of spiritual practice, Tantra has no single coherent doctrine; instead, it developed a variety of teachings in connection with the religions adopting the Tantric method. These practices are oriented to the married householder rather than the monastic or solitary renunciant, exhibiting a world-embracing (as opposed to a world-denying) character. Tantra, particularly its nondual forms, rejected the values of Patañjalian yoga; instead, it offered a vision of reality as self-expression of a single, free and blissful divine consciousness under Śiva. Since the world was seen as real (not illusory), this doctrine was an innovation on previous Indian philosophies (which saw the divine as transcendent and the world as illusion). The consequence of this view was that householders could aspire to spiritual liberation, where the lay practitioner addressed this goal by consulting Tantric manuals and undertaking various Tantric rituals. Since Tantra dissolved the dichotomy between spiritual and mundane, practitioners could integrate their daily lives into their spiritual growth, seeking to realize the divine which is transcendent and immanent. Tantric practices and rituals aim to bring about a realization of the truth that "nothing exists that is not divine" (), bringing freedom from ignorance and the cycle of suffering (). Tantric visualizations are said to bring the meditator to the core of their humanity and unity with transcendence. Tantric meditations do not serve as training, extraneous beliefs or unnatural practices. On the contrary, the transcendence reached by such meditative work does not construct anything in the mind of the practitioner; instead, it deconstructs all preconceived notions of the human condition. The limits on thought (cultural and linguistic frameworks) are removed. This allows the person to experience liberation, followed by unity with reality.Timalsina, S. (2012) According to Nikhilananda, "being-consciousness-bliss" (or Satchidananda) entails self-evolution and self-involution. Prakriti (reality) evolves into a multiplicity of things but also remains consciousness, being and bliss. Maya (illusion) veils reality, separating it into opposites (conscious and unconscious, pleasant and unpleasant). If not recognized as illusion, these opposing conditions limit (pashu) the individual (jiva). Shiva and Shakti are generally seen as distinct. Tantra affirms that the world and the individual jiva are real, distinguishing itself from dualism and the qualified non-dualism of Vedanta. Evolution, or the "outgoing current," is only half of Maya. Involution (the "return current") takes the jiva back towards the source of reality, revealing the infinite. Tantra teaches the changing of the "outgoing current" into the "return current," removing the fetters of Maya. This view underscores two maxims of Tantra: "One must rise by that by which one falls," and "the very poison that kills becomes the elixir of life when used by the wise."  The primary sources of written Hindu Tantric lore are the agama, generally consisting of four parts: metaphysical knowledge (jnana), contemplative procedures (yoga), ritual regulations (kriya) and religious injunctions (charya). Tantric schools affiliate themselves with specific agamic traditions. Hindu tantra exists in Shaiva, Vaisnava,Bhattacharyya, pp.&nbsp;182–88. Ganapatya,Bühnemann. SauraSwami Niranjananda, The Tantric Tradition. Yoga Magazine, March 1998 and Shakta forms, and individual tantric texts may be classified as Shaiva , Vaishnava ,For  as representing tantric Vaishnavism, see: Flood (1996), p.&nbsp;122. and Shakta Tantras. The word Tantra includes all such works.For terminology of , , and , see: Winternitz, p.&nbsp;587. The religious culture of the Tantras is essentially Hindu, and Buddhist Tantric material can be shown to have been derived from Hindu sources.Flood, Gavin. D. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. P. 158 Important texts in Tibetan Buddhism are the Kalachakra tantra and the Guhyasamāja tantra, both belonging to the Anuttarayoga Tantra or Highest Yoga Tantra. Tantras use twilight language (sandhyā-bhāshā), which makes them inaccessible for those who are not initiated. The term refers to the twilight, a "mysterious time of the day [which is] charged with power". It is a symbolic language, which both informs and illumines the practitioner by creating a rich symbolic context, and conceals the true meaning for those who are not initiated. It uses similes and paradoxes to describe the Tantric experiences and insights, for example vajra ("thunderbolt") = linga ("phallus") = sunyata ("empty" of an inherent essence).  The Tantric method affected every major Indian religion during the early medieval period (c. 500–1200 CE); the Hindu sects of Shaivism, Shaktism, Vaishnavism and also Buddhism and Jainism developed a well-documented body of Tantric practices and doctrines, and Islam in India was also influenced by Tantra. Tantric ideas and practices spread from India to Tibet, Nepal, China, Japan, Cambodia, Vietnam and Indonesia. Tibetan Buddhism and some forms of Hinduism show the strongest Tantric influence, as do the postural yoga movement and most forms of American New Age spirituality.  The tantric Shaiva tradition consists of the Kapalikas, Kashmir Shaivism and Shaiva Siddhanta. The word "Tāntrika" is used for followers of the Tantras in Shaivism.  Shaiva tantra produced the Hatha Yoga manuals, such as the 15th-century Hathayoga Pradīpikā and the 16th-century Gheranda Samhitā, from which modern yoga derives. The earlier (pre-Tantric) form of yoga, dating back to the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, became known as Raja Yoga:  Orthodox Brahmanas incorporate Tantric rituals into their daily activities (ahnikas). Gayatri-avahanam is a common element of Sandhyavandanam in southern India. Orthodox temple archakas of several sects follow rules laid out in Tantric texts; for example, priests of the Iyengar sect follow Pañcaratra agamas. However, it has been claimed that orthodox Vedic traditions were inimical to Tantra. André Padoux notes that, in India, tantra rejects orthodox Vedic tenets.Padoux, André, What do we mean by Tantrism? in: Harper (2002), p.&nbsp;23. In his review of Tantric literature, Moriz Winternitz points out that while Indian Tantric texts are not hostile to the Vedas they see them as too difficult for the modern age.Winternitz, volume 1, p.&nbsp;587. Many orthodox Brahmans who accept the authority of the Vedas reject the Tantras.Flood (1996), p.&nbsp;122. Although later Tantric writers wanted to base their doctrines on the Vedas, some orthodox followers of the Vedic tradition denigrated Tantra as anti-Vedic.Bhattacharyya, p.&nbsp;20.   Various classes of Vajrayana literature developed as a result of royal courts sponsoring both Buddhism and Saivism.Sanderson, Alexis. "The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period." In: Genesis and Development of Tantrism,edited by Shingo Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23, pp. 124. The Mañjusrimulakalpa, which later came to classified under Kriyatantra, states that mantras taught in the Saiva, Garuda and Vaisnava tantras will be effective if applied by Buddhists since they were all taught originally by Manjushri.Sanderson, Alexis. "The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period." In: Genesis and Development of Tantrism,edited by Shingo Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23, pp. 129-131. The Guhyasiddhi of Padmavajra, a work associated with the Guhyasamaja tradition, prescribes acting as a Saiva guru and initiating members into Saiva Siddhanta scriptures and mandalas.Sanderson, Alexis. "The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period." In: Genesis and Development of Tantrism,edited by Shingo Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23, pp. 144-145. The Samvara tantra texts adopted the pitha list from the Saiva text Tantrasadbhava, introducing a copying error where a deity was mistaken for a place. The first Western scholar to seriously study Tantra was John Woodroffe (1865–1936), who wrote about Tantra under the pen name Arthur Avalon and is known as the "founding father of Tantric studies".Urban (2003), p. 22 Unlike previous Western scholars Woodroffe advocated for Tantra, defending and presenting it as an ethical and philosophical system in accord with the Vedas and Vedanta.Urban (2003), p. 135 Woodroffe practised Tantra and, while trying to maintain scholastic objectivity, was a student of Hindu Tantra (the Shiva-Shakta tradition).: See Arthur Avalon, trans. Tantra of the Great Liberation: Mahanirvana Tantra (London: Luzac & Co., 1913); Avalon, ed. Principles of Tantra: the Tantratattva of Shriyukta Shiva Chandra Vidyarnava Bhattacharyya Mahodaya (London:  Luzac & Co., 1914–16); Woodroffe, Shakti and Shakta: Essays and Addresses on the Shakta Tantrashastra (London : Luzac & Co., 1918) Following Woodroffe a number of scholars began investigating Tantric teachings, including scholars of comparative religion and Indology such as Agehananda Bharati, Mircea Eliade, Julius Evola, Carl Jung, Giuseppe Tucci and Heinrich Zimmer.Urban (2003), pp. 165–166 According to Hugh Urban, Zimmer, Evola and Eliade viewed Tantra as "the culmination of all Indian thought: the most radical form of spirituality and the archaic heart of aboriginal India", regarding it as the ideal religion for the modern era. All three saw Tantra as "the most transgressive and violent path to the sacred".Urban (2003), pp. 166–167 A distinction can be made between Dakshinachara (right-hand path) practices and schools, and Vamachara (left-hand path). Dakṣiṇācāra, "Right-Hand Path", refers not only to "orthodox" (Āstika) sects, but also to modes of spirituality that engage in spiritual practices that accord with Vedic injunction, and are generally agreeable to the status quo. Vāmācāra, "left-handed attainment" or "Left-path",Bhattacharya, N. N. History of the Tantric Religion pp. 81, 447. (1999) ISBN 81-7304-025-7Kaal Ugranand Saraswati differentiating “traditional Vamamarga” from conceptions of the word “vamamarga” Tantra, Vamamarga (The Left Handed Path: Kaula sadhana) refers to practices or sadhana that are not only "heterodox" (Sanskrit: nāstika) to standard Vedic injunction, but extreme in comparison to the status quo. It is regarded by some as synonymous with the esoteric "Left-Hand Path". Left-handed and right-handed modes of practice may be evident in both orthodox and heterodox schools of Indian religions such as Hinduism, Jainism, Sikhism and Buddhism and is a matter of taste, culture, proclivity, initiation, sadhana and dharmic "lineage" (parampara).   Although equated with Tantra in the West, sexual rites were historically practiced by a minority of sects. For practicing groups, maithuna progressed into psychological symbolism. According to White, the sexual rites of Vamamarga may have emerged from early Hindu Tantra as a means of catalyzing biochemical transformations in the body to facilitate heightened states of awareness. These constitute an offering to Tantric deities. Later developments in the rite emphasize the primacy of bliss and divine union, which replace the bodily connotations of earlier forms. This is clearly seen in Japanese tantra in Shingonshu of Tachikawa-ryu. According to David Gordon White, the first western accounts of Tantra, written by colonial missionaries and administrators, presented Tantric practices as "particularly abominable excrescences of South Asian superstition." In response to these mischaracterisations, three sorts of responses arose: Following the first Tantric presentations, popular authors (such as Joseph Campbell) brought Tantra to the attention of  Westerners. Although Neotantra uses some concepts and terminology of Indian Tantra, it often omits one (or more) of the following: reliance on guruparampara (the guidance of a guru), meditation and moral and ritual rules of conduct. As the interest in Tantra has grown in the West, its perception deviates remarkably from the Tantric traditions. It was seen as a "cult of ecstasy", combining sexuality and spirituality to correct Western repressive attitudes towards sex.For "cult of ecstasy" see: Urban (2003), pp. 204–205. Hence for many modern readers Tantra is now synonymous with "spiritual sex" or "sacred sexuality," a belief that sex should be recognized as a sacred act capable of elevating its participants to a higher spiritual plane.For "Tantra" as a synonym for "spiritual sex" or "sacred sexuality," see: Urban (2003), pp. 204–205 Responding to criticism of modern Western Tantra, Geoffrey Samuel, a historian of Indian and Tibetan Tantra writes:  According to author and critic of religion and politics Hugh Urban:  Urban says he does not consider this "wrong" or "false", but "simply a different interpretation for a specific historical situation."Urban (2003), pp. 204–205       Appearance of the term "Tantra" in scriptures Period Scripture or author Meaning Before ca. 500 CE (textual reference, different from present usage) 1700–1100 BC Ṛgveda X, 71.9 Loom (or weaving device)Banerjee, S.C., 1988. 1700-? Sāmaveda, Tandya Brahmana Essence (or "main part", perhaps denoting the quintessence of the Sastras)Banerjee, S.C., 1988. 1200-900 Atharvaveda X, 7.42 Loom (or weaving device)Banerjee, S.C., 1988. 1400-1000 Yajurveda, Taittiriya Brahmana 11.5.5.3 Loom (or weaving device)Banerjee, S.C., 1988. 600-500 Pāṇini on Aṣṭādhyāyī Tissue obtained from the frame (tantraka, derived from tantra) 600-300 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa Essence (or main part; see above)Banerjee, S.C., 1988. 350-283 BC Chanakya on Arthaśāstra Strategy 300 CE Īśvarakṛṣṇa author of Sānkhya Kārikā (kārikā 70) Doctrine (identifies Sankhya as a tantra)Bagchi, P.C., 1989. p.6. 320 Viṣṇu Purāṇa Practices and rituals (śakti, Viṣṇu and Durgā cults with the use of wine and meat)Banerjee, S.C., 1988, p.8 320-400 Poet Kālidāsa on Abhijñānaśākuntalam Deep understanding or mastery of a topic Ca. 5th century CE and later (reference to Tantric movements) 423 Gangdhar stone inscription in Rajasthan Daily practices and rituals of Tantric cult (Tantrobhuta)Joshi, M.C. in Harper, K. & Brown, R., 2002, p.48 500-600 Chinese Buddhist canon (Vol. 18–21: Tantra (Vajrayāna) or Tantric Buddhism Set of doctrines or practices for obtaining spiritual enlightenment (including iconography of the body with cakras, nāḍīs and mantras) 600 Kāmikāgama or Kāmikā-tantra Extensive knowledge of principles of reality (tattva and mantra)Wallis, C. 2012, p.26 and bearer of liberation 606–647 Sanskrit scholar and poet Bāṇabhaṭṭa (in Harṣacarita and in Kādambari), in Bhāsa's Cārudatta  and in Śūdraka's Mṛcchakatika Set of practices and rituals, with mandalas and yantras for propitiation of goddesses or Matrikas Banerjee, S.C., 2002, p.34 788–820 philosopher Śankara System of thought, or set of doctrines and practices 950–1000 Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha (philosopher) Divinely-revealed set of doctrines or practices concerning spiritual worshipWallis, C. 2012, p.27 975–1025 Philosopher Abhinavagupta in his Tantrāloka Set of doctrines or practices, teachings or Śaiva doctrine 1150–1200 Jayaratha, Abhinavagupta's commentator on Tantrāloka Set of doctrines or practices, teachings or Śaiva doctrine (as in Tantrāloka) 1690–1785 Bhāskararāya (philiosopher) System of thought or set of doctrines or practices' Tantric Shaivism was known to its practitioners as the . Shaktism is practically synonymous and parallel with Tantra, known to its native practitioners as "Kula marga" or "Kaula". Tantric Buddhism has the indigenous name of the Vajrayana. Tantric Vaishnavism was known as the Pancharatra. "Shamanic and yogic beliefs and practices;" "Sakta worship, especially worship of the Matrkas and demon-killing forms of Hindu and Buddhist goddesses;" "Specific schools of Tantric religion such as the Kapalikas and Kaulas;" "The Tantric texts themselves." Centrality of ritual, especially the worship of deities Centrality of mantras Visualisation of and identification with a deity Need for initiation, esotericism and secrecy Importance of a teacher (guru, ācārya) Ritual use of mandalas (maṇḍala) Transgressive or antinomian acts Revaluation of the body Revaluation of the status and role of women Analogical thinking (including microcosmic or macrocosmic correlation) Revaluation of negative mental states Dakshina: Donation or gift to one's teacher Diksha: Initiation ritual in which one receives shaktipat Yoga, including breathing techniques (pranayama) and postures (asana), is employed to balance the energies in the body/mind. Mudras, or hand gestures Mantras: reciting syllables, words, and phrases Singing of hymns of praise (stava) Mandalas Yantras: symbolic diagrams of forces at work in the universe Visualization of deities and Identification with deities Puja (worship ritual) Animal sacrifice Use of taboo substances such as alcohol, cannabis, meat and other entheogens. Prayashcitta - an expiation ritual performed if a puja has been performed wrongly Nyasa Ritual purification (of idols, of one's body, etc.) Guru bhakti (devotion) and puja Yatra: pilgrimage, processions Vrata: vows, sometimes to do ascetic practices like fasting The acquisition and use of siddhis or supernomal powers. Associated with the left hand path tantra. Ganachakra: A ritual feast during which a sacramental meal is offered. Ritual Music and Dance. Maithuna: ritual sexual union (visualized or with an actual physical consort). Dream yoga Denial that such practices exist, or are part of Hinduism; Emphasis on "the refined ("right-handed") philosophical speculation that grew out of preexisting ("left-handed") Tantric practices;" Using this misinterpretation for commercial profits, presenting Tantra as a sexual exercise. Kaśmir Śaivism Sri Chakra Vasugupta Swami Rama Anuttarayoga Tantra Dakini Shingon Buddhism Tantra techniques (Vajrayana) Yab-Yum Ananda Marga Ganachakra Great Rite Kalavati tantra Karezza Sex magic Taoist sexual practices History of Shaktism  Second Revised Edition  reprint of the first edition  Second Revised Edition  First Indian Edition, Kant Publications, 2003.  Second revised reprint edition. Two volumes. First published 1927 by the University of Calcutta.
