    The Practice  is an American legal comedy-drama created by David E. Kelley centering on the partners and associates at a Boston law firm. Running for eight seasons on ABC from 1997 to 2004, the show won the Emmy in 1998 and 1999 for Best Drama Series, and spawned the successful and lighter spin-off series Boston Legal, which ran for five more seasons, from 2004 to 2008. The Practice focused on the law firm of Robert Donnell and Associates (later becoming Donnell, Young, Dole, & Frutt, and ultimately Young, Frutt, & Berluti). Plots typically featured the firm's involvement in various high-profile criminal and civil cases that often mirror current events. Conflict between legal ethics and personal morality was a recurring theme. Some episodes contained light comedy. Kelley claimed that he conceived the show as something of a rebuttal to L.A. Law (for which he wrote) and its romanticized treatment of the American legal system and legal proceedings. At the start of the series, attorney Bobby Donnell employs associate attorneys Ellenor Frutt, Eugene Young (who joined Bobby's practice seven years earlier), Lindsay Dole, and receptionist/paralegal Rebecca Washington (with whom Bobby started his practice). By the fourth episode, Bobby's friend Jimmy Berluti is hired as an associate. Before that, Jimmy is an attorney working as a loan officer. When he falsifies loan documents to help Bobby's struggling practice, he loses his job, and Bobby hires him. Bobby originally opens his practice with idealistic dreams of protecting the innocent; but, during the firm's early days of financial struggle, Bobby quickly learns that drug dealers and other undeniably guilty clients tend to be the ones who provide the business that keep the firm running. Bobby maintains sole control over the firm until an ultimatum by Lindsay motivates him to name Ellenor, Eugene, Lindsay, and Rebecca as junior partners. To maintain control over the firm, Bobby writes into the charter that each partner received one vote in partnership meetings, while Bobby would get two. While this decision prevents Lindsay's power play from becoming ugly, it temporarily causes some tension when Bobby and Lindsay later become romantically involved, potentially creating a voting bloc. The partnership agreement also initially alienates Jimmy who feels insulted that he was the only one on staff not named a partner. This is exacerbated by the fact that Rebecca is made partner despite her being the receptionist and not an attorney. Rebecca earns her law degree in Season 3, and Jimmy is eventually made partner at the end of Season 7. Bobby and his associates all share a friendship with A.D.A. Helen Gamble, who even shares a brief romance with Bobbyall highly unusual, considering how often Helen's job places her in opposition to the firm. A recurring strategy used by the practice – especially Eugene – is informally known as the "United States of America defense", an appeal to patriotism that emphasizes the rights of their client as Constitutional priorities that must be upheld by the jury. However, the firm is far more notorious for employing a strategy they refer to as "Plan B", which involves creating doubt with the jury as to their client's guilt by accusing a third, usually innocent party of the crime in order to plant the seed of reasonable doubt. While the strategy is often effective, it would occasionally backfire once the D.A.'s office grew familiar with the strategy, and it once resulted in a defamation lawsuit against them. This tactic invariably causes great emotional distress for the attorney employing the plan when they know that the target is most likely innocent. Thus, in such cases, Plan B is used only as a last resort. Despite the firm's friendship with Helen Gamble, the practice's use of Plan B, combined with the firm's high win/loss ratio, attracts ire and scrutiny from the D.A.'s office, particularly in the case of senior A.D.A. Kenneth Walsh. In 2003, Bobby Donnell leaves the firm, fearing he had become the "blue-chip" lawyer he had long resented. He names Eugene as senior partner. Along with Ellenor, Eugene decides to make Jimmy a full partner and extends an offer to Lindsay (who had left to start her own practice), and her associate Claire Wyatt to return to the firm. This occurred at the end of season seven, at the end of which most of the cast was fired for budgetary reasons as ABC agreed to renew the show only if the budget per episode was drastically cut. Season eight began with nearly half the original cast missing. It was never explained what became of Lindsay, Claire, Lucy, Rebecca, or Helen. Many of the recurring characters, such as judges Zoey Hiller, were also completely written off, though several, such as Roberta Kittleson did return for several episodes during the eighth season. During the final year of the firm's existence, the remaining attorneys are senior partners Ellenor, Eugene, Jimmy, and associate Jamie Stringer. Lucy Hatcher, the firm's longtime receptionist/paralegal, has been replaced by Tara Wilson, a third year law student and paralegal. Ellenor hires an old friend, Alan Shore, the top anti-trust attorney in Massachusetts after he is fired from his firm Carruthers-Abbot for embezzling. Alan's joining the firm is a mixed blessing; he attracts lots of business and generates enough revenue to make up for the three departed lawyers, but his unorthodox out-of and in-court antics, perceived ethical short-comings and near illegal methods often clash with Eugene, Jimmy and, occasionally, Ellenor. Near the series end, Eugene and Jimmy fire Alan without consulting Ellenor, creating a phenomenon known as a law firm divorce. It begins when, despite Alan's bringing in over $9,000,000 in revenue, he is offered just $15,000 severance. For warning Shore of his impending dismissal, paralegal Tara is also fired by Eugene for betraying their trust, and Lucy is brought back as a temporary receptionist. Alan sues for wrongful termination and hires Matthew Billings and Denny Crane of the blue-chip firm Crane, Poole & Schmidt to represent him. The jury decides that Young, Frutt & Berluti are to pay Shore $2.3 million. Alan and Tara are hired by Crane, Poole & Schmidt as an associate and paralegal respectively. After this case the tensions caused between the partners' loyalties during the Shore months leads to the dissolution of the firm. Shore offers to forfeit his winnings, but the offer is declined. A soul searching discussion between Jimmy and Jamie about being true to his original reasons for wishing to become a lawyer leads Jimmy to decide to start practicing in his own neighborhood. Eugene is appointed a superior court judge, and Ellenor takes time out from law to spend time with her daughter. Jamie later joins Jimmy and his childhood friend to start a new law firm.  The series holds the Emmy Award record for most wins in the Guest Actor and Actress categories for a single series, as well as most nominations in those categories. Emmys went to John Larroquette, Edward Herrmann, James Whitmore, Beah Richards, Michael Emerson, Charles S. Dutton, Alfre Woodard, Sharon Stone, and William Shatner. In addition, Tony Danza, Paul Dooley, Henry Winkler, Marlee Matlin, Rene Auberjonois, and Betty White were nominated but did not win. Larroquette, who won for his guest appearance during the second season, was nominated again for an episode from the sixth season, but did not win. The series won the Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for five consecutive years (from 1998–2002). By the end of the seventh season, faced with sagging ratings, ABC conditioned the show's renewal on a drastic budget reduction. As a result, six cast members were fired: Dylan McDermott, Kelli Williams, Lara Flynn Boyle, Chyler Leigh, Marla Sokoloff, and Lisa Gay Hamilton. The addition of James Spader and Rhona Mitra to the cast for the eighth season somewhat revived the ratings; Spader went on to win an Emmy for his appearance. However, on March 11, 2004, ABC announced that The Practice would not return for a ninth season; rather, Kelley would create a new spin-off series Boston Legal, starring Spader, Mitra, Lake Bell and William Shatner.  The Practice had 8 seasons and a total of 168 episodes. Additionally, Bobby Donnell (Dylan McDermott) appears in the Ally McBeal season 1 finale "These Are the Days", while Lara Flynn Boyle and Michael Badalucco each make cameos in "Making Spirits Bright" and "I Know him by Heart". The Practice, Volume 1, was released as a Four-Disc DVD Set in North America on June 12, 2007. The set includes all six episodes of season 1 and the first seven episodes of season 2. It also includes a featurette, "Setting Up The Practice". The set was also released in Region 4 on June 6, 2007 and in Region 2 on June 29, 2008.http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B000RGUN8Q On January 3, 2014, it was announced that Shout! Factory had acquired the rights to the series in Region 1 and would release the final season on DVD on April 15, 2014.When Does Last Become First? When Shout! Releases 'The Final Season'! In 2012, Medium Rare Entertainment acquired the rights to the series in Region 2 and released "The Practice: The Complete First and Second Seasons" on DVD in the United Kingdom on February 27, 2012. On July 1, 2007, Volume 1 was released in Italy and Greece. Viewer numbers per season of The Practice on ABC. Note: Each U.S. network television season starts in late September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps. The first two seasons include the household rating. Seasons 4 and 5 reached the top 10 rankings. The exposure from its January 30, 2000, post-Super Bowl episode (attracting 23.8 million viewers) plus their weekly lead-in from early 2000 to mid-2001, the then mega-hit Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, helped the series reach its ratings peak.     Name !! rowspan="2" |Portrayed by !! rowspan="2" |Occupation !! colspan="8" |Season !! rowspan="2" | Episodes 1 !! width="5%" | 2 !! width="5%" | 3 !! width="5%" | 4 !! width="5%" | 5 !! width="5%" | 6 !! width="5%" | 7 !! width="5%"| 8 Bobby Donnell Dylan McDermott Lawyer Main Guest 147 Rebecca Washington Lisa Gay Hamilton Lawyer  formerly Receptionist Main 145 Jimmy Berluti Michael Badalucco Lawyer Main 166 Eugene Young Steve Harris Lawyer Main 167 Helen Gamble Lara Flynn Boyle Assistant District Attorney Main 132 Lindsay Dole Kelli Williams Lawyer Main 145 Lucy Hatcher Marla Sokoloff Receptionist Main Guest 114 Ellenor Frutt Camryn Manheim Lawyer Main 167 Richard Bay Jason Kravits Assistant District Attorney Recurring Main 31 Alan Lowe Ron Livingston Assistant District Attorney Main 12 Claire Wyatt Chyler Leigh Lawyer Main 10 Jamie Stringer Jessica Capshaw Lawyer Main 42 Tara Wilson Rhona Mitra Lawyer Main 22 Alan Shore James Spader Lawyer Main 22 Michael McGuire Ray Abruzzo Detective Recurring Guest 45 DVD Name Ep# Region 1 Region 2 Region 4 The Practice: Volume 1 13 June 12, 2007 June 29, 2008 June 6, 2007 The Practice: The Complete First and Second Seasons 34 February 27, 2012 The Practice: The Final Season 22 April 15, 2014 Season Timeslot(Eastern & Pacific Time) Season Premiere Season Finale TV Season Viewers(in millions) ViewerRank 1st Tuesday 10:00PM March 4, 1997 April 8, 1997 1996–1997 9.2 #43 2nd Saturday 10:00PM(September 20, 1997 toJanuary 3, 1998)Monday 10:00PM(from January 5, 1998) September 20, 1997 May 11, 1998 1997–1998 10.0 #82 3rd Sunday 10:00PM September 27, 1998 May 9, 1999 1998–1999 12.7 #34 4th September 26, 1999 May 21, 2000 1999–2000 17.9 #8 5th October 8, 2000 May 13, 2001 2000–2001 18.3 #9 6th September 23, 2001 May 19, 2002 2001–2002 12.9 #26 7th Sunday 10:00PM(September 29, 2002 toDecember 15, 2002)Monday 9:00PM(from January 27, 2003) September 29, 2002 May 5, 2003 2002–2003 9.8 #55 8th Sunday 10:00PM September 28, 2003 May 16, 2004 2003–2004 9.1 #63 Year Award Category Recipient Result 2001 American Society of Cinematographers Award Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Regular Series Dennis Smith (For episode "The Deal") ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards Top TV Series Marco Beltrami and Jon Hassell 2002 2003 2000 BMI Film & TV Awards BMI TV Music Award Peter Scaturro 2001 Tom Hiel and Peter Scaturro 2002 2001 Casting Society of America's Artios Award Best Casting for TV, Dramatic Episodic Janet Gilmore and Megan McConnell 1998 Edgar Allan Poe Award Best Episode in a TV Series Michael R. Perry, Stephen Gaghan and David E. Kelley (For episode "First Degree") 2002 Jonathan Shapiro, Lukas Reiter, Peter Blake and David E. Kelley (For episode "Killing Time") 2004 Peter Blake and David E. Kelley (For episode "Goodbye") 1999 Genesis Award Television - Dramatic Series "The Food Chain" 2003 "Small Sacrifices" 1998 GLAAD Media Award Outstanding TV - Individual Episode "Civil Rights" 1999 Golden Globe Award Best Television Series – Drama Best Actor – Television Series Drama Dylan McDermott Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film Camryn Manheim 2000 Best Television Series – Drama Best Actor – Television Series Drama Dylan McDermott 2001 Best Television Series – Drama Best Actor – Television Series Drama Dylan McDermott 2002 Humanitas Prize 60 Minute Category Lukas Reiter and David E. Kelley (For episode "Honor Code") 2003 David E. Kelley (For episode "Final Judgment") 1998 Motion Picture Sound Editors' Golden Reel Award Best Sound Editing - Television Episodic - Dialogue & ADR 2000 T.W. Davis, Donna Beltz, Ken Gladden, H. Jay Levine and Debby Ruby-Winsberg 1999 NAACP Image Award Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series Steve Harris 2000 Outstanding Drama Series Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series Steve Harris Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series LisaGay Hamilton 2001 Outstanding Drama Series Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series Steve Harris Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series Beah Richards 2002 Outstanding Drama Series Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series Steve Harris 2004 2005 1999 Peabody Award ABC and David E. Kelley Productions 58th Annual Peabody Awards, May 1999. PGA Award Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television David E. Kelley, Robert Breech, Jeffrey Kramer, Christina Musrey, Gary M. Strangis and Pamela J. Wisne 2001 Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television, Drama 1998 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Drama Series David E. Kelley, Jeffrey Kramer, Robert Breech, Ed Redlich, Gary M. Strangis, Alice West, Jonathan Pontell, Christina Musrey and Pamela J. Wisne Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series Camryn Manheim Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series David E. Kelley (For episode "Betrayal") Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series John Larroquette 1999 Outstanding Drama Series David E. Kelley, Jeffrey Kramer, Robert Breech, Gary M. Strangis, Christina Musrey and Pamela J. Wisne Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series Dylan McDermott Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series Michael Badalucco Steve Harris Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series Lara Flynn Boyle Camryn Manheim Holland Taylor Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Tony Danza Edward Herrmann Outstanding Casting for a Series Janet Gilmore and Megan McConnell Outstanding Cinematography for a Series Dennis Smith (For episode "Happily Ever After") Outstanding Costuming for a Series Shelly Levine and Loree Parral (For episode "Of Human Bondage") Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series Clark King, Harry Andronis, David John West and Kurt Kassulke (For episode "Happily Ever After") 2000 Outstanding Drama Series David E. Kelley, Jeffrey Kramer, Robert Breech, Gary M. Strangis, Christina Musrey and Pamela J. Wisne Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series Michael Badalucco Steve Harris Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series Holland Taylor Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Paul Dooley James Whitmore Henry Winkler Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series Marlee Matlin Beah Richards Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series Janet Gilmore and Megan McConnell 2001 Outstanding Drama Series David E. Kelley, Robert Breech, Christina Musrey, Gary M. Strangis, Pamela J. Wisne, Joseph Berger-Davis and Todd Ellis Kessler Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Rene Auberjonois Michael Emerson Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series Janet Gilmore and Megan McConnell Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series Dennis Smith (For episode "The Deal") Outstanding Single Camera Picture Editing for a Series Susanne Malles (For episode "The Day After") Outstanding Single Camera Sound Mixing for a Series Clark King, David John West, Eric Clopein and David Dondorf  (For episode "The Day After") 2002 Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Charles S. Dutton John Larroquette 2003 Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series Alfre Woodard 2004 Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series James Spader Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series William Shatner Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series Sharon Stone Betty White Prism Award Performance in a Drama Series Episode Steve Harris 1999 Satellite Award Best Actor – Television Series Drama Dylan McDermott 2000 Best Television Series – Drama Best Actor – Television Series Drama Dylan McDermott Best Actress – Television Series Drama Camryn Manheim Kelli Williams 2001 Best Television Series – Drama 1999 Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series 2000 2001 1998 Television Critics Association Award Outstanding Achievement in Drama 1999 Program of the Year Outstanding Achievement in Drama Individual Achievement in Drama David E. Kelley Camryn Manheim Dylan McDermott 2000 Outstanding Achievement in Drama TV Guide Award Favorite Drama Series 1998 Viewers for Quality Television Award Best Quality Drama Series Best Actor in a Quality Drama Series Dylan McDermott Best Supporting Actor in a Quality Drama Series Michael Badalucco Steve Harris Best Supporting Actress in a Quality Drama Series Camryn Manheim Kelli Williams Best Recurring Player Linda Hunt John Larroquette 1999 Best Quality Drama Series Best Actor in a Quality Drama Series Dylan McDermott Best Supporting Actor in a Quality Drama Series Michael Badalucco Steve Harris Best Supporting Actress in a Quality Drama Series Camryn Manheim Kelli Williams 2000 Best Quality Drama Series Best Actor in a Quality Drama Series Dylan McDermott Best Supporting Actor in a Quality Drama Series Michael Badalucco Steve Harris Best Supporting Actress in a Quality Drama Series Camryn Manheim 1999 Writers Guild of America Award Episodic Drama David E. Kelley (For episode "Betrayal") Young Artist Award Best Performance in a TV Drama Series - Guest Starring Young Actor Billie Thomas 2002 Best Performance in a TV Drama Series - Guest Starring Young Actor Marc John Jefferies Best Performance in a TV Drama Series - Guest Starring Young Actress Jamie Lauren 2003 Best Performance in a TV Drama Series - Guest Starring Young Actress Dylan McDermott as Bobby Donnell (1997–2004), senior partner of the firm. A deeply sensitive and compassionate man, Bobby often struggled with his conscience and the idea of being a lawyer.  McDermott was fired after the show's seventh season as part of the budget cuts demanded by the network, but his character returned for the final episodes of the show. Michael Badalucco as Jimmy Berluti (1997–2004), an associate, and later, partner at the firm. An Italian-American from a working-class background, Jimmy often struggled with his conscience, loneliness and feelings of inadequacy, as well as a brief story arc involving his problems with gambling addiction. Jimmy, like Bobby, was raised as a Catholic, and his strict upbringing often played a part in his various ethical dilemmas. Lisa Gay Hamilton as Rebecca Washington (1997–2003). At the beginning of the series, Rebecca was the firm's receptionist and paralegal. She passed the bar exam after attending law school at night for several years without the knowledge of anyone at the firm. She has worked for Bobby since he opened his first practice as a solo practitioner, and the two were very close. Rebecca left the firm for unknown reasons between the seventh and eighth seasons of the show. In reality, like a number of other cast members, Hamilton had been fired because of budget cuts. Steve Harris as Eugene Young (1997–2004), was the second highest-ranking partner at the firm, and senior partner for the show's final season. Eugene also struggled with his conscience, but was more strongly devoted to the letter of the law and legal ethics than either Bobby or Jimmy. This was largely due to the influence of his older brother, who died in prison after a coerced confession led to his conviction for a crime he did not commit. The first season made several references to the fact that Eugene was formerly a private investigator before becoming an attorney. Camryn Manheim as Ellenor Frutt (1997–2004), another partner at the firm. Ellenor, a single mother, had a child via artificial insemination, and often struggled with issues related to her weight and appearance. A running joke on the show was that nearly all of Ellenor's friends were murderers. This was because many episodes would open with Ellenor visiting or being visited by her previously unseen friends who would almost always reveal that they were being charged with murder, or that there was a body in their presence that they knew nothing about. Another recurring joke was Ellenor's tendency to knock across the room those who annoyed her past a certain point. Kelli Williams as Lindsay Dole (1997–2003), a partner at the firm who went to Harvard Law School. She was Bobby's girlfriend and later, his wife. Lindsay was stalked and terrorized by four mentally unbalanced clients over the series, one of whom she was convicted of murdering (the verdict was later reversed due to prosecutorial misconduct by A.D.A. Walsh). She and Bobby have a child together, but separated when Lindsey left to start her own firm, and eventually decided to divorce after she caught Bobby beginning an affair with a former girlfriend. At the end of the seventh season, Lindsay was invited by Eugene to rejoin the practice, but vanished without explanation before the eighth season.  Williams, like other cast members, was fired due to budget cuts. Lara Flynn Boyle as Helen Gamble (1997–2003), an Assistant District Attorney who often prosecuted cases in which the firm was involved. Helen, a personal friend of many of the firm's partners, is nevertheless relentless in her attempts to prosecute those who do wrong, sometimes crossing the line of legal ethics; after her friend Richard Bay was murdered on the orders of a drug lord he had helped to prosecute, Helen orchestrated the gunman's death by giving false information to the police about his willingness to surrender. During the series, Helen was a roommate to both Lindsay and Ellenor. She went to Harvard Law School with Lindsay.  Helen also vanishes without explanation after the seventh season, as Boyle was fired from the show due to budget cuts. Marla Sokoloff as Lucy Hatcher (1998–2003, 2004), the firm's wise-cracking, nosy receptionist. Lucy was hired after Rebecca became an attorney. Lucy later became a part-time counselor for rape victims. Lucy initially vanished without explanation after the seventh season (like the other cast members, Sokoloff was fired due to budget cuts), but she returned as a guest star for the final episodes of the show. Jason Kravits as Richard Bay (1999–2001), a diminutive, hard-nosed Assistant District Attorney and frequent nemesis of the firm. In contrast to Bobby's numerous moral dilemmas, Richard always saw himself as being a "white knight of justice" and truly believed in the guilt of all those he prosecuted. He was close friends with Helen Gamble, and on several occasions tried to initiate a romantic relationship with her. He was machine-gunned to death in the courthouse parking garage after successfully prosecuting a drug lord; Helen later orchestrated the killer's murder by obtaining his identity and falsely telling the police that the man was prepared for an armed standoff should they attempt to apprehend him. Although Bay's killer attempted to surrender peacefully, his manner of holding his cell-phone, combined with Helen's statement, led the police to believe he was holding a gun, and he was shot to death. Ron Livingston as Alan Lowe (2001–2002), who replaced Richard Bay as the firm's recurring adversary for a while. His character vanished without explanation after 13 episodes. Jessica Capshaw as Jamie Stringer (2002–2004), a high-strung, promiscuous Harvard Law School graduate and associate at the firm. Jamie joined the practice after Lindsay was convicted of murder, and eventually became involved in a brief romantic relationship with Eugene. When the firm dissolved, she joined Jimmy in his own practice. Chyler Leigh as Claire Wyatt (2003), Lindsay's associate at her new practice. In the seventh season finale, she was invited to join the firm, but vanished without explanation before the eighth season due to Leigh being one of those fired due to budget cuts. James Spader as Alan Shore (2003–2004), a highly unethical friend of Ellenor's who was hired by the firm at the beginning of the show's final season. In the last few episodes of the show's run, he was fired from the firm and went to work at Crane, Poole & Schmidt. This transitioned his character into the spin-off series Boston Legal. Rhona Mitra as Tara Wilson (2003–2004), paralegal and third-year law student. Tara was fired after informing Alan Shore of his impending dismissal from the firm, and helping him steal client files. Along with James Spader, Mitra also joined the cast of Boston Legal after The Practice ended, and her character became an attorney. Bill Smitrovich as Assistant District Attorney Kenneth Walsh, was Helen Gamble's mentor and a chief prosecutor for the DA's office. Walsh despises criminal defense attorneys, especially those at Bobby Donnell's firm. Walsh once coerced a man charged with murder in order to obtain a confession. Bobby Donnell, who was a young and inexperienced lawyer at the time, believed his client was guilty and did not appeal the sentence. Walsh is also the D.A. who prosecuted and convicted Lindsay Dole for murder. It was later discovered that he had withheld a forensics report which might have supported a self-defense plea. This contributed to grounds which allowed Lindsay's conviction to be overturned. He once told Helen Gamble there was a time when he befriended criminal defense attorneys, but that time had long since passed. Holland Taylor as Judge Roberta Kittleson. Kittleson is an older woman with a notorious sex life, but is considered an excellent judge. She has a relationship with Jimmy during a few seasons of the show. Later, when Lindsay is being threatened by a stalker, Jimmy wrongly believes that Judge Kittleson may be the culprit, which leads to tensions between them. They eventually break up. Linda Hunt as Judge Zoey Hiller, a senior Judge that many of the firm's lawyers frequently appear before in trial. Hiller is known for being an excellent judge that always goes by the letter of the law. She has a close friendship with Bobby. Though they frequently quarrel on application of the law, they both maintain a strong respect for each other. Herb Mitchell as Judge Rodney White. Kate Burton as A.D.A. Susan Alexander. She appears regularly in episodes from the pilot through the series finale. Anna Gunn as A.D.A. Jean Ward. She is a friend to many of the firm's lawyers. Ray Abruzzo as Detective Mike McGuire. Mike is regularly the detective who interacts with the firm's attorneys and their clients. James Pickens, Jr. as Detective Mike McKrew. Mike is a detective who regularly interacts with the firm's attorneys and their clients. Lynn Hamilton as Judge P. Fulton Lake Bell as Sally Heep (precursor to Boston Legal) William Shatner as Denny Crane (precursor to Boston Legal) Andre Braugher as Ben Gideon ("Gideon's Crossover", Season 5 – crossover with Gideon's Crossing) Chi McBride as Steven Harper ("The Day After", Season 5 – crossover with Boston Public) Calista Flockhart as Ally McBeal ("Axe Murderer", Season 2 – crossover with Ally McBeal) Paul McCrane as Martin Parks John C. McGinley as Leonard Good Tony Danza as Tommy Silva Bruce Davison as Scott Wallace Patrick Dempsey as Paul Stewart Charles Durning as Stephen Donnell Charles S. Dutton as Leonard Marshall Alfre Woodard as Denise Freeman Anthony Heald as Wallace Cooper John Larroquette as Joey Heric Marlee Matlin as Sally Berg Chris O'Donnell as Brad Stanfield Vincent Pastore as Lenny Pescatore C.C.H. Pounder as Helene Washington Doug Hutchison as Jackie Cahill Kim Raver as Victoria Keenan Gabrielle Anwar as Katie Defoe Ernie Sabella as Harland Bassett Christopher Shyer as Lawrence O'Malley Sharon Stone as Sheila Carlisle Betty White as Catherine Piper James Whitmore as Raymond Oz D.B. Woodside as Aaron Wilton Aunjanue Ellis as Sharon Young Michael Emerson as William Hinks Gina Gershon as Glenn Hall Christopher Reeve as Kevin Bealy Jon Cryer as Terry Pender Teri Polo as Sarah Barker Dylan Baker as Sen. Keith Ellison Leslie Moonves as Himself Viola Davis as Aisha Crenshaw "Axe Murderer" (S02E26) — The lawyers of Robert Donnell and Associates work with the lawyers of Cage & Fish on a case in which a woman accused of killing a wealthy client may have been Lizzie Borden in a past life - a case that begins on Ally McBeal: "The Inmates" (S01E20). "The Day After" (S05E14) — Ellenor Frutt and Jimmy Berlutti are hired to represent Coach Riley, who's been fired from Winslow High for withholding information about Milton Buttle's affair. The hearing happens on Boston Public: "Chapter Thirteen" (S01E13). "Gideon's Crossover" (S05E16) — When Ellenor Frutt has trouble with her pregnancy, Dr. Ben Gideon helps out in Gideon's Crossing: "Flashpoint" (S01E17). Series High: 15.4 rating/23.8 million viewers lead in: Super Bowl: Post Game -  25.6 rating Series Low:  4.9 rating/7.3 million Series Debut: 11.3 rating/16.1 million viewers Series Finale: 7.5 rating/10.9 million viewers USA Today Photo Gallery
