   The View is an Emmy Award winning American talk show that has aired on ABC since August 11, 1997, as part of its daytime programming block. The show's concept was conceived by Barbara Walters and Bill Geddie, and is executive produced by Candi Carter and Brian Teta. The View is the fourth-longest-running national daytime talk show in history, behind Live! with Kelly and Michael (30), The Phil Donahue Show (26), and The Oprah Winfrey Show (25). The View focuses on a panel of female co-hosts who discuss a variety of social and political issues. The original panel consisted of Walters, moderator Meredith Vieira, Joy Behar, Star Jones, and Debbie Matenopoulos. In addition to Behar, the current panel consists of moderator Whoopi Goldberg, Raven-Symoné, Michelle Collins, Candace Cameron Bure, and Paula Faris. The show airs live from New York City weekdays at 11 a.m. Eastern (10 a.m. Central), and is tape-delayed for the rest of the country. International versions of the program are aired in several countries. Mostly five women discuss current issues and news items ranging from social and political issues to tabloid headlines and celebrity news. The original opening credits for the show, featuring voice-over from Walters, explain the show's premise: I've always wanted to do a show with women of different generations, backgrounds and views: a working mother [Vieira]; a professional in her 30s [Jones]; a young woman just starting out [Matenopoulos]; and then somebody who's done almost everything and will say almost anything [Behar]. And in a perfect world, I'd get to join the group whenever I wanted.... Every show is ended by one of the co-hosts, primarily the person moderating, simply saying "Have a great day everyone and take a little time to enjoy The View!" Or if short on time simply, "Enjoy The View!" Since season 10, politics and taboo subjects have been readily explored. This has moved the show into a newsworthy spectrum from traditional daytime talk fare. The format of full-hour Hot Topics was introduced in season 11, allowing more in-depth conversations and debates. The twelfth season of The View was heavily focused on the events related to the 2008 United States presidential election with attention towards the issues affecting women in particular and more broadly, the United States. They closely followed Senator Hillary Clinton's campaign in the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination race. Likewise, attention was focused when Senator John McCain chose Sarah Palin as his Republican vice-presidential running mate in August 2008. Several of the discussions on The View became heated and many were also subsequently reported in other major media outlets. Season 13 was the first season in which men served as guest co-hosts. They included Joe Scarborough, Bryant Gumbel, Tom Bergeron, and D. L. Hughley. Beginning in season 15, every Friday when Walters took off, The View has "Guy Day Friday", in which a male co-host moderated in place of Walters. Walters, "a co-owner (with ABC) and co-executive producer" of the show,Whoopi Goldberg Joins 'The View' likely has final decisions as to the casting of the co-hosts. Rosie O'Donnell has stated that Walters and other show hosts wear earpieces through which backstage producers instruct them what to say.Rosie O'Donnell: Barbara Walters fired me from 'The View' from New York Daily News. Retrieved May 2009. On , The View talk show was transferred into Lincoln Square Productions, a ABC News subsidiary, from ABC Entertainment after struggling in ratings and a change in hosts. Bill Geddie, who originally served as co-executive producer, was the lone recurring male persona, sometimes shown as stepping out from behind camera to interact with the hosts. In an interview with Broadcasting & Cable he stated: "I'm not an on-air personality and I think anybody who's seen me realizes that. But early on, the network thought it would be kind of fun to see there's this guy here in charge, but if you watch the show, you see that generally speaking I'm a side player and I'm basically there to get a laugh." The original set for the first four seasons was a leftover set from a cancelled soap opera, The City. The show received a new set for its fifth season, located within the ABC Television Center in New York City. Season 10 saw a simple new set design in blue and new glass table, a change from their signature wooden hot topics table. For season 11 and 12, the show's set changed colors from blue to yellow and brought back the signature wooden table. Season 13 and 14 premiered with new set colors of teal with green and light blue, keeping their wooden hot topics table. Season 15 premiered with a completely redesigned retractable set, having the walls all predominantly as screen monitors in order to showcase different things but primarily the New York City skyline. The hot topics table changed to a new lit up, white glass table; this set stayed through season 17. The Views 18th season brought significant on-air and behind-the-scenes changes in what has been termed by at least one reporter as a "reinvention" of the show."'The View' Prepares Its Reinvention," from Broadcasting & Cable, 8/21/2014  Longtime executive producer and co-creator Bill Geddie, who was with The View from its launch, departed the show in Summer 2014,"MSNBC's Wolff Replacing Longtime EP Bill Geddie at 'The View'," from Broadcasting & Cable, 8/6/2014 with ABC announcing on August 28 that Bill Wolff would replace him. Wolff comes to the show from MSNBC, where he had served as vice-president of primetime programming and also as executive producer of The Rachel Maddow Show.The Views new production team also includes Brian Balthazar as co-executive producer, Ashley S. Gorman as director, and Kathleen Rajsp as senior supervising producer. Season 18 also saw a new home for The View, as the show relocated to the former studios of canceled talk show Katie at the ABC Broadcast Center on West 67th St. in New York."'View' undergoes creative changes," from NewscastStudio.com, 9/4/2014  A new theme song was composed by Erik Blicker and Glenn Schloss and premiered on November 24, 2014. Unveiled during its season premiere on September 15, 2014, the new studio featured at the outset teal-and-orange accents, a coffee table-style desk with low-arm chairs, a large video wall, in-the-round audience seating, and an on-camera social media station."ABC Reveals New Logo For 'The View', Teases In-The-Round Set," from Deadline, 8/21/2014The View studio photos from NewscastStudio.com, posted 9/2014  Tweaks in subsequent weeks have included an upgraded desk and seating at center stage, as well as color adjustments in backgrounds and graphics."'The View' desk 'grow up,'" from NewscastStudio.com, 10/6/2014"'View' changes the view... again," from NewscastStudio.com, posted 10/22/2014 On October 30, 2014, ABC announced that responsibilities for production oversight on The View would shift from ABC's daytime entertainment division to ABC News, where the show will be grouped under the division's non-fiction programming umbrella, which produces NY Med for the network as well as content for other networks including National Geographic Channel and Discovery Networks.  The move in oversight will likely not generate any noticeable changes in The View's content (in recent years, the remainder of ABC's news content has become similarly slanted towards soft news, entertainment, and popular culture); it will, however, allow the show to leverage ABC News's resources more frequently than before, as well as create the possibility of making deals to land big-name guests (something generally forbidden on the newsgathering side)."ABC News Takes Over 'The View' As ratings Dwindle," from Variety, 10/30/2014 Starting with this season, Walters retired from serving as co-executive producer of the show. The show premiered with four co-hosts: Meredith Vieira, Star Jones, Debbie Matenopoulos, and Barbara Walters. Walters and Joy Behar initially took turns as the fourth co-host but Behar soon became a full-time co-host. Debbie Matenopoulos was fired at the end of 1998, when her contract was not renewed. Following Matenopoulos' departure, Lisa Ling was announced as the new co-host beating out Rachel Campos-Duffy and Lauren Sánchez who competed in an on-air try-out to fill the vacated seat. Lisa Ling departed in 2002 to host National Geographic Explorer. Former Survivor contestant Elisabeth Hasselbeck replaced Ling in 2003 after Hasselbeck, Rachel Campos-Duffy and Erin Hershey Presley were the finalists in a competition that ended with each of the three getting a week-long on-air tryout.The View Eyes Elisabeth, a November 2003 story about Hasselbeck's selection from E! Online. Meredith Vieira announced on April 6, 2006, that she was leaving the show to become co-host of the long-running NBC News program Today, replacing Katie Couric.Vieira Selected as Couric's Successor at Today, an April 2006 Los Angeles Times article Her final show was on June 9, 2006. In June 2006, Star Jones announced her departure on air, surprising Walters and ABC. Jones said she would remain on the show through July, but the next day Walters announced that Jones would no longer be a part of The View except for previously recorded segments. Walters has publicly commented about feeling "betrayed" by Jones, since Jones unexpectedly made the announcement two days ahead of schedule. In an interview with People, Jones claimed the decision to leave was not hers, and that in April, producers told her that her contract would not be renewed. According to an interview with Associated Press, Walters stated that ABC executives had apparently decided not to renew Jones' contract as early as the previous fall due to diminished approval for the co-host which was showing up in their market research. On April 28, 2006, an announcement was made at the 33rd Daytime Emmy Awards that former talk show host Rosie O'Donnell would be joining the show at the start of the tenth season. In September 2006, O'Donnell made her debut as the new co-host and moderator of the show. On April 25, 2007, O'Donnell announced she would be leaving the show as a co-host when her contract expired because the network could not come to terms on the length of a new contract. She did, however, say that she planned to return as an occasional correspondent.Rosie O'Donnell Says She Will Say Goodbye to 'The View' in June. New York Times website. Accessed on April 25, 2007. On May 25, 2007, ABC announced that O'Donnell had asked to be let out of her contract nearly a month before its expiration and was given permission to leave immediately.  On August 1, 2007, Walters announced that Whoopi Goldberg would be replacing O'Donnell as moderator for the eleventh season.  Other names reportedly considered for replacing O'Donnell were Gayle King, Sherri Shepherd, Kathy Griffin, Roseanne Barr and Mario Cantone. Walters announced on September 10, 2007, that Sherri Shepherd would be joining the show as a permanent co-host. Her arrival marked the first time since Meredith Vieira left in 2006 that the show featured a complete panel of five co-hosts. It also marked the first time in the show's history that two African-American co-hosts were part of the same panel. Elisabeth Hasselbeck went on maternity leave from October 2007 to January 2008; rotating guest co-hosts substituted for her while she was away. Hasselbeck was on maternity leave for the first month and a half of season 13. Following the show on May 10, 2010, Walters took a hiatus from the show for heart surgery. The premiere of season 14 marked Barbara Walters's return. On March 7, 2013, it was announced that Joy Behar would be leaving the show at the end of season 16. She told Deadline, "It seemed like the right time...You reach a point when you say to yourself, 'Do I want to keep doing this?' There are other things on my plate I want to do — I've been writing a play, I've been neglecting my standup". Behar's final show, a This is Your Life style tribute to her, aired on August 9, 2013. In March 2013, there were widespread media reports that Elisabeth Hasselbeck was going to be fired from the show, effective at the end of the season, allegedly because of market research polling that showed viewers thought her views were too conservative. Hasselbeck left the show on July 10, 2013 in order to join Fox News Channel. On July 15, 2013, Walters announced that Jenny McCarthy would become a permanent co-host. ABC News confirmed that Jenny McCarthy would replace Elisabeth Hasselbeck. McCarthy made her debut as co-host on September 9, 2013, the premiere date of season 17. On the May 13, 2013, episode of The View, Walters confirmed that she will be retiring in May 2014 as a co-host of the show and from ABC News, but will continue as an executive producer of The View for as long as it airs. Walters' final day was May 16, 2014. On June 26, 2014, it was confirmed that Sherri Shepherd and Jenny McCarthy will not be returning to The View, leaving Goldberg the sole remaining panelist to return for season 18. With the departures of Barbara Walters, Sherri Shepherd, and Jenny McCarthy from the show, season 18 has one lone incumbent in Whoopi Goldberg. Rosie O'Donnell's return to The View was announced on July 10, 2014.  During that summer, The View conducted "chemistry testing" of various prospective hosts to join Goldberg and O'Donnell.  On September 3, The View announced that Rosie Perez and Nicolle Wallace would join the host panel for its September 15 season premiere. Both Perez, an actress and choreographer, and Wallace, an MSNBC political analyst and former Bush White House communications chief, previously made guest host appearances on The View during season 17.Source: ABC press release (9/3/2014) In December 2014, Perez left for a brief hiatus to begin rehearsals for a new Broadway play by Larry David. On February 6, 2015, representatives for O'Donnell confirmed she would once again exit the panel, citing her reasons as a "personal decision" and last aired on February 12. On July 7, 2015, it was announced that Perez would exit the series following the completion of its eighteenth season, in order to pursue her acting full-time. On July 15, 2015 it was announced that Wallace was being let go after the 18th season wraps. On June 10, 2015, recurring guest panelist Raven-Symoné joined the series as a permanent co-host. On July 8, 2015, it was confirmed that Michelle Collins would join the series as a permanent co-host. On August 25, 2015 it was announced that former co-host Joy Behar would return as a co-host for Season 19. Additionally, it was announced that actress Candace Cameron Bure and Good Morning America Weekend anchor Paula Faris would also be joining the panel. This marks the first time in the show's history that it has six permanent co-hosts. It will also be the first time the show has had a full panel of at least five co-hosts in over two years. Cameron Bure will be absent for most of the first two months of the new season as she films the upcoming Full House spin-off Fuller House.  On July 29, 2010, President Barack Obama appeared on the show. It was the first time a sitting U.S. president had appeared on a talk show. Walters returned for the episode before resuming her hiatus. The View's 3000th show aired on September 23, 2010, and celebrated the show's history. Former co-host Star Jones was a guest on the February 22, 2012, episode and discussed her contentious 2006 exit from the show; it was her first appearance since her departure. On February 7, 2014, Rosie O'Donnell returned to The View as a guest for the first time since she quit the show in May 2007.Bacle, Ariana (February 7, 2014). "Rosie O'Donnell returns to 'The View' for first time since 2007: Here's what you missed". Entertainment Weekly. On May 15, 2014, the day before Walters's retirement, all eleven co-hosts of The View, past and present, appeared to celebrate Walters. The View's 4,000th show aired on March 27, 2015. Former co-hosts Barbara Walters and Joy Behar returned to the show for the celebration. O'Donnell consistently brought up recent news about the war in Iraq, and criticized the US media for its lack of coverage on the Bush administration's actions and policies. On May 17, 2007, O'Donnell rhetorically asked, "655,000 Iraqi civilians dead. Who are the terrorists? If you were in Iraq and another country, the United States, the richest in the world, invaded your country and killed 655,000 of your citizens, what would you call us?" (Transcript) On May 23, 2007, a heated discussion ensued because of what O'Donnell perceived as a lack of willingness of Hasselbeck to defend O'Donnell's right to disagree with invading Iraq and the resulting military occupation. O'Donnell also stated that the media would portray her as a bully attacking "innocent pure Christian Elisabeth" whenever they disagreed and she believed Republican pundits were mischaracterizing her statements. Hasselbeck then told O'Donnell to "defend your own insinuations". The debate unfortunately became more heated when Behar and Shepherd made joking attempts to end the discussion because actress Alicia Silverstone was waiting in the wings to appear as a guest after the commercial break. The incident was widely covered in mainstream media including a split-screen shot of O'Donnell and Hasselbeck arguing. O'Donnell did not return after this episode. In an interview with Oprah Winfrey, O'Donnell said that she knew it was time to leave the show when she saw the split screen image of her and Hasselbeck on either side. She stated that it fed on the idea that the producers wanted the two to be confrontational and that the show's producers had to preset a split screen effect.ABC Eyewitness News; May 28, 2007. On the September 14, 2015, episode of The View, the panel was discussing the talent segment from the previous night's Miss America competition when Collins and Behar started poking fun at Miss Colorado Kelley Johnson's talent being a monologue on her occupation as a Registered Nurse. During her monologue, Johnson was wearing nursing scrubs and a stethoscope. Collins called Johnson's monologue "hilarious" and that "she was reading her emails out loud," while Behar questioned why Johnson had "a doctor's stethoscope on?" These and other comments resulted in an immediate social media backlash from the nursing profession, including the hashtag #NursesUnite.#NursesUnite after 'The View' mocks Miss Colorado USA Today (09/16/2015)The View Co-Hosts Facing Backlash After Mocking Miss America Nurse Monologue: Why Does She Have a Doctor's Stethoscope? E! (09/15/2015) On the September 16 episode, Collins and Behar appeared to publicly apologize, although some critics questioned the sincerity of the apologies.After #NursesUnite, 'View' hosts says comments about nurse misconstrued CNN (09/16/2015)Joy Behar Pisses Off Nurses, Offers Non-Apology The Daily Beast (09/16/2015) Despite the public apologies, Johnson & Johnson and Eggland's Best pulled their sponsorships from The View,Advertisers pull ads from 'The View' following nurse comments USA Today (09/18/2015) and were later followed by McCormick & Company, Snuggle, and Party City.Advertisers drop 'The View' after #NursesUnite controversy WPXI (09/20/2015) A New York Times review, published ten days after the show premiered, describes what critic Caryn James thought was distinctive about the show, "The idea of women talking to one another on daytime television is not exactly radical. The idea that those women should be smart and accomplished is still odd enough to make The View seem wildly different. It actively defies the bubbleheads-'R'-us approach to women's talk shows."Feet on the Ground, Heads Without Bubbles, The New York Times. August 21, 1997 After a year on the air, a review of the show from Salon.com attempted to summarize what had made it a "(very guilty) pleasure" for its mostly female audience. "The View has caught on with viewers because it gives expression to feelings more complicated, and real, than its detractors realize. Like the Rat Pack, it's all about freedom in an uptight world. Vieira, Walters, et al., have confessed to a lot of things on the show that women are supposed to feel guilty about: forgetting to vote, being too lazy to exercise, hating skinny models, letting the kids watch too much TV, admiring Hollywood's latest hunk."August 1998 review of the show from Salon.com Rosie O'Donnell was sometimes criticized for not acting as much as a moderator for discussion as much as a spokesperson for various, often liberal, viewpoints. As a big-name talent she drew criticism for her opinions while keeping the show's "buzz factor" up."The Future of The View" TV Guide, June 3, 2006. Retrieved on June 5, 2007. The downside of being spontaneous and putting her views in front of a national audience was that such remarks were often the subject of controversy and criticism, especially by conservative commentators and other media outlets, who recirculated comments and clips from the show. Entertainment Weekly magazine in March 2007 cited The View as doing for daytime TV what the Daily Show has done for nighttime TV in that it offers viewers a show that deals in genuine opinion and not mere fluff. The appointment of McCarthy as a co-host created a media backlash, largely due to her anti-vaccination views. David Freeman, senior science editor for The Huffington Post, wrote about the concerns of Bill Nye, who stated: "I believe Ms. McCarthy's views will be discredited." Alex Pareene protested and published a letter to ABC in Salon Magazine titled "Anti-vaccine conspiracist and "View" co-host Jenny McCarthy isn't just quirky—she spreads lies that hurt people." September 2006 brought in record ratings with the addition of Rosie O'Donnell to the panel. A total of 3.1 million viewers watched that month, the highest total viewership the program has ever seen. The talk show also surged 34% in the advertiser-friendly "women aged 18–49" demographic, and sustained its early season success with its best ever November sweeps period. In the month following O'Donnell's departure, viewership was down by an average of 232,000, but the number of viewers was still higher than the year before she joined the show. Preliminary ratings for season 11 show that 3.4 million people watched the debut episode, roughly 1 million less than the prior season's premiere with O'Donnell, but still ranking as the show's second highest season premiere. After two weeks, The View garnered its highest ratings yet, averaging 3.5 million total viewers, a 7% increase from 3.3 million under the previous season. The show hit a milestone in season 12 during November Sweeps 2008, as the show's post-election day telecast ranked as its most-watched ever in Total Viewers (6.17 million) For the week ending February 2, 2009, Nielsen Media Research reported the key demographic of women ages 18–34 and ages 18–49 favored the show. The View was tied with General Hospital for the top spot for both groups. For the fourth week running, The View was the daytime's third highest rated show with 4.42 million total viewers for the 18–34 group. ABC Daytime shows, four soap operas and The View, were the top five shows for 18–49 women television watchers.NTI, Live + Same Day: Week of 2/2/09. On July 29, 2010, the day President Barack Obama first appeared on the show in season 13, was the show's most-viewed episode up to that point, with 6.6 million viewers, and the most watched telecast of any daytime show on ABC, CBS Daytime, and NBC Daytime in viewers and demos. Season 17 debuted with an average of 3.01 million total viewers over its premiere week, with new co-host Jenny McCarthy. This is down slightly from Goldberg's season 11 premiere episodes in 2007. The View's Farewell to Barbara Walters garnered high ratings for the show. The May 16, 2014 telecast, featuring Walters' final appearance, garnered 5.2 million total viewers, ranking as the show's #4 broadcast of all time. Further the May 15, 2014 telecast, featuring a reunion of all 11 co-hosts, drew 4.2 million total viewers. Season 18 debuted on Monday September 15, 2014 with 3.902 million viewers. The return of Rosie O'Donnell and the addition of new co-hosts Rosie Perez and Nicolle Wallace drew in the show's second largest season premiere audience to date—and its best since 2006, the year O'Donnell first joined the cast. The View also posted solid double-digit increases over its year-ago launch to hit three-year highs among both women 18–49 (+15%, 683,000 vs. 596,000) and women 25–54 (+20%, 911,000 vs. 761,000). The rotating stable of co-hosts during season 18 saw a steady decline in overall viewers for the talker. While season 17 averaged 3.078 million total viewers (with 690,000 fitting into the key 25–54 demographic, 520,000 coming from the smaller 18–49 demo), as of July 2015, season 18 is down to an average of 2.810 million total audience members (601,000 from the main demo and 452,000 women 18–49). The departure of Rosie O'Donnell is credited with a significant decline in viewership. From the time O'Donnell left until the addition of Raven-Symoné (Feb. 13 through June 28), the show was down 15.2 and 17.7 percent, respectively, and minus 13.5 percent in total viewers from the same time period last season. The Wrap reported that while the addition of Raven-Symoné has slowed the decrease in viewership, the losses remain in double digits. Season 19 premiered on Tuesday September 8, 2015 with 22% fewer total viewers than the previous season's debut (which hit an eight-year high due to the return of Rosie O'Donnell). The revamped show, featuring new co-hosts Paula Faris, Candace Cameron Bure, and the return of veteran co-host Joy Behar, earned a 2.5 rating among households and a 1.0 rating among its targeted demographic of women aged 25–54 — a 47% drop in the key demo from a year ago. With the series' nineteenth season underway, the ratings have taken a turn for the better. Overall, the premiere week of season 19 averaged 2.506 million Total Viewers, 551,000 Women 25–54 and 413,000 Women 18–49. The View turned in its largest Total Viewer and Women 25–54 leads in over 8 months and the biggest advantage in Women 18–49 in 5 months (since the weeks of 11/24/14, 12/1/14 and 4/13/15, respectively). The Thursday September 10, 2015 telecast, featuring Republican frontrunner Donald Trump calling in live, scored the talker's most-watched telecast (2.698 million) and top Women 25–54 performance (587,000) since June.     Co-host !!  colspan=21 style=text-align:center; | Seasons 1 !! width="80" | 2 !! width="80" | 3 !! width="80" | 4 !! width="80" | 5 !! width="80" | 6 !! width="80" | 7 !! width="80" | 8 !! width="80" | 9 !! width="80" | 10 !! width="80" | 11 !! width="80" | 12 !! width="80" | 13 !! width="80" | 14 !! width="80" | 15 !! width="80" | 16 !! width="80" | 17 !! width="80" | 18 !! width="80" | 19 !! width="80"|20 colspan="17"  colspan="3"  Joy Behar colspan="16"  colspan="2"  colspan="2"  colspan="9"  colspan="11"  Star Jones colspan="9"  colspan="11"  colspan="2"  colspan="18"  Lisa Ling colspan="2"  colspan="3"  colspan="15"  colspan="5"  colspan="11"  colspan="4"  colspan="9"  colspan="1"  colspan="7"  colspan="1"  colspan="2"  colspan="10"  colspan="10"  colspan="10"  colspan="7"  colspan="3"  colspan="16"  colspan="1"  colspan="3"  Rosie Perez colspan="17"  colspan="1"  colspan="2"  colspan="17"  colspan="1"  colspan="2"  colspan="17"  colspan="3"  colspan="17"  colspan="3"  colspan="18"  colspan="2"  colspan="18"  colspan="2"  Year Award Category Honorees Result 1998 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Matenopoulos, Walters 1999 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Matenopoulos, Walters 2000 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Ling, Walters 2001 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Ling, Walters 2002 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Ling, Walters 2003 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Ling, Walters 2004 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Hasselbeck, Walters 2005 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Hasselbeck, Walters 2006 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Vieira, Jones, Behar, Hasselbeck, Walters 2007 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host O'Donnell, Behar, Hasselbeck, Walters Outstanding Special Class Writing Rosie O'Donnell, Janette Barber, Christian McKiernan and Andrew Smith 2008 Outstanding Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Goldberg, Behar, Shepherd, Hasselbeck, Walters 2009 Outstanding Talk Show Host Goldberg, Behar, Shepherd, Hasselbeck, Walters NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie 2010 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show Host Goldberg, Behar, Shepherd, Hasselbeck, Walters NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie 2011 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show/ Entertainment Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Goldberg, Behar, Shepherd, Hasselbeck, Walters NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie 2012 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show/ Entertainment Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie People's Choice Awards Favorite Daytime TV Host Goldberg, Behar, Shepherd, Hasselbeck, Walters NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Critics' Choice Television Award Best Talk Show Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie 2013 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show/ Entertainment Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie People's Choice Awards Favorite New Talk Show Host Jenny McCarthy NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie 2014 Daytime Emmy Award Outstanding Talk Show/ Entertainment Barbara Walters, Bill Geddie Outstanding Talk Show Host Goldberg, McCarthy, Shepherd, Walters 2015 NAACP Image Award Outstanding Talk Series Barbara Walters, Bill Wolff GLAAD Media Awards Outstanding Talk Show Episode Laverne Cox discusses 'The T Word' 2016 People's Choice Awards Favorite Daytime TV Hosting Team Goldberg, Collins, Behar, Bure, Symoné, Faris In Australia, The View was shown on the Nine Network at 1:00pm weekdays, usually airing the most recent episode broadcast in the U.S. It also aired on Foxtel but the show was later removed from the schedule before the shows season 16 premiered  and on WIN (rural counterpart of Nine). As of 2014, Nine Network is no-longer airing The View. In Canada, The View is available on the CTV broadcast network in simulcast with ABC (subject to Canada's simsub rules). In New Zealand, The View was screened on the Vibe channel on Sky satellite television. Episodes are delayed by one week. In the Philippines, the show was simulcast live on Velvet until the channel went off air in 2014. In South Africa, The View was broadcast on SABC3, but was replaced with The Tyra Banks Show as it was felt it was more relevant to that time slots audience. In the Netherlands, The View began broadcasting in late 2009 on RTL 8. Loose Women broadcasts on ITV in the United Kingdom  (The Big 8/The coaster) on D8 in France (Monday to Friday) Así Somos (The way we are) on Ecuavisa in Ecuador  (The Table of Five) on Net 5 and Vrouw & Paard, (Woman & Horse) on Nederland 2 in the Netherlands Kalam Nawaem (Sweet Talk) on MBC in the Arab world Midday on TV3 in Ireland Studio 10 and formerlyThe Circle on Network Ten in Australia as well as the cancelled The Catch-Up on rival Nine Network in 2007.  in Norway ' (Talk to them) on Telecinco and ' (Friends and acquaintances/Friends and well-knowns) on La 1 in Spain Netas Divinas (Divine Truths) on Televisa in Mexico Evas (Eves) on Televisa Monterrey in Mexico Ellas Arriba (They go up) on Azteca 13 in Mexico Official website
