  Samuel Timothy "Tim" McGraw (born May 1, 1967) is an American singer, songwriter and actor. He has been married to fellow singer Faith Hill since 1996, and is the son of the late baseball player Tug McGraw. McGraw has released thirteen studio albums (eleven for Curb Records and three for Big Machine Records). 10 of those albums have reached number 1 on the Top Country Albums charts, with his 1994 breakthrough album Not a Moment Too Soon being the top country album of 1994. All of these albums have produced 65 singles, 25 of which have reached number 1 on the Hot Country Songs or Country Airplay charts. Three of these singles — "It's Your Love", "Just to See You Smile", and "Live Like You Were Dying" — were the top country songs of 1997, 1998, and 2004 according to Billboard Year-End. He has also won three Grammy Awards, 14 Academy of Country Music awards, 11 Country Music Association (CMA) awards, 10 American Music Awards, and three People's Choice Awards. His Soul2Soul II Tour with Faith Hill is the highest grossing tour in country music history, and one of the top 5 among all genres of music. McGraw has ventured into acting, with supporting roles in The Blind Side (with Sandra Bullock), Friday Night Lights, The Kingdom, and Four Christmases (with Vince Vaughn and Reese Witherspoon), and lead roles in Flicka (2006) and Country Strong (2010). He was a minority owner of the Arena Football League's Nashville Kats. Taylor Swift's debut single, "Tim McGraw", refers to him and his song "Can't Tell Me Nothin."20 Questions With Taylor Swift", CMT News, November 12, 2007, Retrieved March 18, 2010 In acknowledgement of his grandfather's Italian heritage, McGraw was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF) in 2004, receiving the NIAF Special Achievement Award in Music during the Foundation's 29th Anniversary Gala. Samuel Timothy McGraw was born in Delhi, Louisiana, the only child of Elizabeth "Betty" Ann D'Agostino (b. 1950), a waitress, and Frank Edwin "Tug" McGraw Jr. (1944-2004), a star pitcher for the New York Mets and the Philadelphia Phillies. McGraw is of Italian and Irish descent on his mother's side, and of Scots-Irish, English, Scottish, French, Dutch, Czech, and German descent on his father's side. In 1966, Tug was a pitcher for the Jacksonville Suns, and he lived in an apartment above Betty D'Agostino, who attended Terry Parker High School. The pair had a relationship, and when Betty became pregnant, her parents sent her to Louisiana to live with relatives and to have the baby. Raised by his mother in Start, also in Richland Parish, east of Monroe, McGraw grew up believing his stepfather, Horace Smith, was his father. From the time of his mother's marriage until the time he met his biological father, his last name was Smith.  At age 11, McGraw discovered his birth certificate while searching his mother's closet to look for Christmas presents. After his discovery, his mother revealed that his biological father was Tug McGraw, and took Tim to meet him for the first time. For seven years, Tug denied being Tim's father. Tim was 18 years old when Tug first realized how much Tim looked like him at that age, and he acknowledged paternity. They remained close until Tug's death in 2004. As a child, McGraw loved to play competitive sports, including baseball, even though he did not know his biological father was a professional athlete. He was also a member of the FFA. He attended Northeast Louisiana University, now the University of Louisiana at Monroe, on a baseball scholarship,  although he never earned a varsity letter; he also became a member of the Pi Kappa Alpha Fraternity.  During his college period, he learned to play guitar, and would frequently perform and sing for tips, although he claims that his roommates often hid the guitar because he was so bad. His mother, Betty, returned to Jacksonville, Florida in 1987, and McGraw followed. He attended Florida Community College at Jacksonville for one term, and occasionally sat in with local bands. In 1989, on the day his hero Keith Whitley died,  McGraw dropped out of college to head to Nashville and pursue a musical career.  McGraw came to the attention of Curb Records in 1990. After cutting a demo single, McGraw gave a copy to his father. A man who was friends with Curb Records executives heard the demo while driving with Tug one day and recommended that Curb contact the young singer. Several weeks later, he was able to play his tape for Curb executives, after which they signed him to a recording contract. McGraw's first single, "What Room Was the Holiday In", did not enter the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts upon its release. In a 2001 retrospective on McGraw's career in Billboard, a former program director for Nashville station WSM-FM said that he added the song to the station's playlist because it showed "undeniable promise", while another former program director at WXTU in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania recalled that McGraw's debut single was "terrible" but that he booked the singer to make an appearance at the station due to his father's fame. Three more singles were released from Tim McGraw: "Welcome to the Club", "Memory Lane", and "Two Steppin' Mind", although none of these made top 40, and the album itself did not chart. Both "Memory Lane" and "Tears in the Rain", another cut from the album, were co-written by Joe Diffie, and the former originally appeared on Keith Palmer's self-titled 1991 debut album. His second album, Not a Moment Too Soon, was much more successful, becoming the best-selling country album in 1994. The first single, "Indian Outlaw", caused considerable controversy, as critics argued that it presented Native Americans in a patronizing way. Some radio stations refused to play it, but the controversy helped spur sales, and the song became McGraw's first top 10 country single (getting as high as No.&nbsp;8), and reaching No.&nbsp;15 on the Billboard Hot 100. The second single from the album, "Don't Take the Girl", became McGraw's first No.&nbsp;1 country hit, in addition to reaching number 17 on the Hot 100, and "helped cement his image as a ruggedly good-looking guy with a sensitive side". By year's end, "Down on the Farm" had peaked at number 2 on the country charts; after it, the album's title track became his second number 1 single in early 1995, and "Refried Dreams" reached number 5 afterward. The album sold over 6 million copies, topping the Billboard 200 as well as the country album charts.  On the strength of this success, McGraw won Academy of Country Music awards for Album of the Year and Top New Male Vocalist in 1994. Billboard named Not a Moment Too Soon as the top country album of 1994 on Billboard Year-End. Tim McGraw and his wife, Faith Hill, traveled to several different place with truckloads of relief items after Hurricane Katrina struck through. They also performed a charity tour, giving all the proceeds to the Neighbor's Keeper Foundation, a group to help people of the disaster. Tim designed a charity T-shirt sold through Angelwear to benefit MusiCares. MusiCares supports musicians in times of need. His charity focus particularly on health issues. The Tim McGraw Foundation raises funds to enhance the quality of life of children and adults with brain tumors. McGraw supports the Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center, the David Foster Foundation, which helps families of children in need of organ transplants, and Musicians on Call, which brings music to hospital patients’ bedsides. He also performs during dinners and auctions to benefit children with disabilities. Tim had played in a charity concert with Kid Rock to raise money for the Red Cross. Hill and McGraw gave the Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society $375,000. The entire gate receipts from one of their concerts to assist 17 Sailors’ families following the terrorist attack on USS COLE, the guided missile destroyer that suffered significant damage in the Gulf of Aden, Yemen on October 12, 2000.   All I Want, released in 1995, also debuted at No.&nbsp;1 on the country charts. The album sold over 2 million copies and reached the top 5 on the Billboard 200. "I Like It, I Love It" reached No.&nbsp;1 on the country charts as the lead-off single, also crossing over to the Hot 100 at number 25. The album's next two singles, "Can't Be Really Gone" and "All I Want Is a Life" both made top 5, with "She Never Lets It Go to Her Heart" becoming his fourth number 1 in 1996. Finishing off the single releases was "Maybe We Should Just Sleep on It". In 1996, McGraw headlined the most successful country tour of the year, The Spontaneous Combustion Tour, with Faith Hill as his supporting act. Hill broke off her engagement to her former producer Scott Hendricks so that she and McGraw could start dating each other; they then married on October 6, 1996. The couple have since had three daughters: Gracie Katherine (born May 1997), Maggie Elizabeth (born August 1998), and Audrey Caroline (born December 2001). McGraw's next album, 1997's Everywhere, again topped the country charts and reached No.&nbsp;2 on the album charts, selling 4 million copies.  Four singles—"It's Your Love", "Everywhere", "Where the Green Grass Grows", and "Just to See You Smile"—reached the top of the country charts from the album. The Country Music Association awarded Everywhere its Album of the Year award for 1997. At the 40th Grammy Awards, "It's Your Love" received two Grammy Award nominations for Best Country Collaboration With Vocals and Best Country Song. "It's Your Love" and "Just to See You Smile" were the Top country songs of 1997 and 1998 according to Billboard Year-End; "Just to See You Smile" also set a record for the longest run on the country charts at the time, at 42 weeks. A Place in the Sun continued McGraw's streak in 1999, debuting atop both the US country and pop album charts and selling 3 million copies. 251,000 copies were sold in the first week, making it his first number 1 opener on the Billboard 200. It featured another four chart-topping singles on the country charts including "Please Remember Me", "Something Like That", "My Best Friend", and "My Next Thirty Years". "Some Things Never Change" reached No.&nbsp;7 on the country chart. He also contributed a song for the Grammy-winning tribute album to Bob Willsentiled Ride With Bob. A cover of "Milk Cow Blues", this song was recorded as a duet with Asleep at the Wheel, whom he had met while performing together at the George Strait Country Music Festival. McGraw recorded two more duets with his wife in the late-1990s, both of which appeared on her albums. "Just to Hear You Say That You Love Me", from her multi-platinum album Faith (1998), reached the top 5 of the US country charts, while her follow-up album Breathe (1999) featured "Let's Make Love", which won a Grammy Award for Best Country Vocal Collaboration in 2000. In 2000, McGraw released his Greatest Hits album, which topped the charts for nine weeks and sold almost 6 million copies, making it one of the biggest-selling albums in the modern country market.  In the latter half of the year, he and Hill went out on the Soul2Soul Tour, playing to sellout crowds in 64 venues, including Madison Square Garden. It was one of the top tours of any genre in the US, and the leading country tour during 2000. While in Buffalo, New York, McGraw and Kenny Chesney became involved in a scuffle with police officers after Chesney attempted to ride a police horse. McGraw came to Chesney's aid after police officers nearby believed the horse was being stolen and tried to arrest him. The two were arrested and charged with assault, but were later cleared. During a concert with the George Strait Country Music Festival several weeks later, Hill, dressed as a police officer, made an unscheduled appearance at the end of McGraw's set and led him off the stage. McGraw's next album, Set This Circus Down, was released in April 2001, and spawned four number one country hits: "Grown Men Don't Cry", "Angry All the Time" (with Faith Hill), "The Cowboy in Me", and "Unbroken". He provided harmony vocals for the Jo Dee Messina song "Bring On the Rain", which he also produced. The song topped the country charts. Hungry for more of his music, fans downloaded a version of his performance of the song "Things Change" from his appearance at the Country Music Association Awards Show.  The song was played extensively on radio, becoming the first country song to appear on the charts from a fully downloaded version. In 2002, McGraw bucked country music traditions by recording his album Tim McGraw and the Dancehall Doctors with his tour band The Dancehall Doctors. Unlike rock music, where it is commonplace for touring bands to provide the music on albums recorded by the artist they support, country albums are typically recorded with session musicians.  McGraw chose to use his own touring band, in order to recognize their part in  his success, and to capture some of the feel of a real band. All of the Dancehall Doctors have worked with McGraw since at least 1996. They include: The album debuted at No.&nbsp;2 on the country albums charts, with the single "Real Good Man" reaching No.&nbsp;1 on the Hot Country Songs chart. "She's My Kind of Rain" reached No.&nbsp;2 in 2003, and "Red Ragtop" reached the top 5. The album also featured a cover version of Elton John's early 1970s classic "Tiny Dancer", as well as appearances by Kim Carnes on "Comfort Me" (a response to the September 11, 2001 attacks) and Don Henley and Timothy B. Schmit of the Eagles on "Illegal". "She's My Kind of Rain"  received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Country Vocal Performance-Male at the 46th Grammy Awards. 2004's Live Like You Were Dying continued McGraw's record of commercial success. The title track, dedicated to his father Tug McGraw, who died of a brain tumor earlier in the year, was an ode to living life fully and in the moment, while the second single "Back When" was a paean to an easy nostalgia. Live Like You Were Dying spent seven non-consecutive weeks at No.&nbsp;1 on Billboard and went on to become the top country song of 2004 on the Billboard Year-End charts. It also became one of the most awarded records by winning ACM Single and Song of the Year, CMA Single and Song of the Year, and a Grammy. The album included three more singles: "Drugs or Jesus", his first single since 1993 not to reach top 10 on the country charts; "Do You Want Fries with That", and "My Old Friend". In late 2004, his unlikely duet with hip hop artist Nelly on "Over and Over became a crossover hit,  spending 10 weeks atop the top 40 chart. "Over and Over" brought McGraw a success he had never previously experienced on contemporary hit radio or R&B radio, and brought both artists success neither had previously experienced in the hot adult contemporary market. The song also spent a week at the top of the charts in the United Kingdom, becoming McGraw's first hit single in Britain and Nelly's third number one hit in the country after "Dilemma" and "My Place". "Over and Over" also reached the top of the charts in Australia, New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland, and the top 10 in Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Romania and Switzerland. Throughout the 2005 NFL season, McGraw sang an alternate version of "I Like It, I Love It" every week during the season. The alternate lyrics, which changed each week, would make reference to plays during Sunday's games, and the song would be played alongside video highlights during halftime on Monday Night Football.  Later in the year, McGraw became a minority owner of the Arena Football League's Nashville Kats when majority owner Bud Adams (owner of the NFL's Tennessee Titans) was awarded the expansion franchise.  In April 2006, McGraw and Hill began their 73-concert 55-city Soul2Soul II Tour, again to strong commercial acceptance.  The tour grossed nearly $89 million and sold almost 1.1 million tickets, making it the top grossing tour in the history of country music.  It was named "Major Tour of the Year" by the prestigious Pollstar Magazine, beating out such heavyweights as Madonna and the Rolling Stones. In a special gesture, the couple donated all of the profits from their performance in New Orleans to Hurricane Katrina relief. McGraw, along with Kenny Chesney, contributed to a version of Tracy Lawrence's song "Find Out Who Your Friends Are", which can be found on Lawrence's album For the Love. Although the official single version features only Lawrence's vocals, many stations have opted to play the version with McGraw and Chesney instead. McGraw released his eleventh album, Let It Go, on March 27, 2007. The album's debut single, "Last Dollar (Fly Away)", reached No.&nbsp;1 on the Hot Country Songs chart, marking McGraw's first No.&nbsp;1 single since "Back When" in late 2004. The album debuted at No.&nbsp;1 on the Billboard Top 200 Album Chart and No.&nbsp;1 on the Billboard Country Album chart, marking his fourth No.&nbsp;1 top 200 album and ninth No.&nbsp;1 country album.  His daughters can be heard singing the chorus during the last few seconds of the song on the video. During the Academy of Country Music awards show on May 21, 2007, McGraw performed a song titled "If You're Reading This", which he co-wrote with The Warren Brothers. Several radio stations began to play the live recording of the song; as a result, it entered the Hot Country Songs chart at No.&nbsp;35. McGraw also produced the debut album of country music duo Halfway to Hazard. The duo's first single, "Daisy", peaked at No.&nbsp;39 on the country charts in the summer of 2007. In the summer of 2007, McGraw and Hill toured together once again in the Soul2Soul 2007 tour. In the January 18, 2008 edition of the USA Today newspaper, McGraw was stated to be featured on the Def Leppard album Songs from the Sparkle Lounge, having also co-written the first single, "Nine Lives", with Def Leppard band members Joe Elliott, Phil Collen, and Rick Savage. The unusual pairing goes back to 2006 when McGraw joined Def Leppard onstage for the song "Pour Some Sugar On Me", and then collaborated on the song "Nine Lives" afterward. The album was released on April 25, 2008. At the 2007 50th Annual Grammy Awards, McGraw received 5 nominations including Best Country Album Let It Go, Best Country Song ("If You're Reading This" and "I Need You"), Best Country Collaboration with Vocals ("I Need You)"), and Best Male Country Vocal Performance ("If You're Reading This"). In May 2008, he hit the road with the Live Your Voice tour. The mainly-outdoor arena concert tour was his first solo outing in nearly three years. Also in May 2008, he debuted a new song off of his follow-up to Let It Go at the Stagecoach Music Festival in Indio, California. In July 2008, McGraw's sixth single, and the title track of his album, "Let It Go", was released to country radio. Following that, a seventh single, "Nothin' to Die For", entered the Country charts at No.&nbsp;57 in late December. McGraw released his third greatest-hits package, Greatest Hits 3 on October 7, 2008. The album features 12 tracks. McGraw was set to debut a new song on the 2009 ACM Awards, but then cancelled his performance; he was replaced by Blake Shelton, who sang "She Wouldn't Be Gone".  McGraw's twelfth studio album, Southern Voice, was released October 20, 2009, and led by the single "It's A Business Doing Pleasure With You", which was shipped to radio outlets in late June 2009. Southern Voice was argued to be McGraw's last album for Curb Records, following the dispute over releasing his third Greatest Hits collection back in October 2008 without his permission.Waddell, Ray. "Touring Over a New Leaf: With New Managers and Ambitious Concert Plans, Tim McGraw Isn't Resting on His Laurels." Billboard - The International Newsweekly of Music, Video and Home Entertainment Sep 19 2009: 20-3. ProQuest. Web. 19 July 2015 . McGraw did not approve of the release. On November 30, 2010, Curb Records released his fourth greatest hits compilation, Number One Hits. On January 2, 2011, McGraw announced plans for his Emotional Traffic Tour featuring opening acts Luke Bryan and The Band Perry. Sirius XM announced on March 30, 2011 that they would be launching Tim McGraw radio, a commercial-free music channel devoted to McGraw's music, and featuring an in depth interview with McGraw as well. As of fall 2010, McGraw had finished work on the album Emotional Traffic, his last album with Curb Records. On May 13, 2011, Curb Records filed a breach-of-contract suit against McGraw. The label alleged that McGraw recorded tracks for his Emotional Traffic album too early prior to its delivery to the label. Several days later, McGraw filed a counter suit against the label seeking advance payment and recording-fund reimbursement, unspecified damages, and a jury trial. A trial was scheduled to begin in July 2012. In November 2011, a judge granted McGraw permission to record music for another label, ending his relationship with Curb Records that began in 1990. A few hours after the ruling, Curb released "Better Than I Used to Be", the second single from  Emotional Traffic. The album was released on January 24, 2012. In December 2011, McGraw released his first Christmas single, "Christmas All Over the World", on his own label StyleSonic Records. On May 21, 2012, however, he signed with Big Machine Records. McGraw's debut album for Big Machine, entitled Two Lanes of Freedom, was released on February 5, 2013. It debuted at number 2 on the charts by selling 108,000 copies. The album includes the singles "Truck Yeah", "One of Those Nights", "Highway Don't Care" (a duet with Taylor Swift which also features Keith Urban on lead guitar), and "Southern Girl". McGraw performed at the C2C: Country to Country festival in London on March 16, 2013. McGraw released a single titled "Lookin' for That Girl" in January 2014 as the lead-off single to his second album for Big Machine. It was followed immediately by the announcement of the Sundown Heaven Town Tour. The album, titled Sundown Heaven Town, was released on September 16, 2014. Four months into its run, "Lookin' for That Girl" was withdrawn as a single and replaced with "Meanwhile Back at Mama's", which features backing vocals from Hill. "Shotgun Rider" became the album's third single and a number 1 Country Airplay hit by the end of 2014. Following it was "Diamond Rings and Old Barstools", a duet with Catherine Dunn. McGraw's eighth greatest hits album, Love Story, is a compilation of his twelve biggest love songs and two previously unreleased recordings. It was released exclusively through Walmart on February 4, 2014, by Curb Records. On August 10, 2015, McGraw released a new single to digital retailers, titled "Top of the World", which was later released to radio on August 17, 2015 as the lead single to his third studio album for Big Machine Records. On September 17, McGraw announced that the album was titled Damn Country Music, with a release date scheduled for November 6. The album's second single, "Humble and Kind", released to country radio on February 1, 2016. McGraw has occasionally served as a record producer in collaboration with Byron Gallimore, who has co-produced all of his albums. The two co-produced Jo Dee Messina's self-titled debut, as well as her next two albums, I'm Alright and Burn. McGraw and Gallimore also produced the only album released by The Clark Family Experience in 2000, and Halfway to Hazard's 2007 self-titled debut album. McGraw's first acting appearance came in a 1997 episode of The Jeff Foxworthy Show, where he played Foxworthy's rival. In 2004, McGraw played a sheriff in Rick Schroder's independent release Black Cloud. Later in the same year, McGraw received critical acclaim as the overbearing father of a running back in the major studio Texas high school football drama Friday Night Lights. The Dallas Observer said the role was "played with unexpected ferocity by country singer Tim McGraw".  The movie went on to gross over $60 million worldwide at the box office, and sold millions in the DVD market. Most recently, it was named one of the Top 50 High School Movies of All Time (No.&nbsp;37) by Entertainment Weekly. McGraw's first lead role was in the 2006 film Flicka, which was released in theaters October 20, 2006.  In the remake of the classic book My Friend Flicka, McGraw played the father, Rob, costarring with Alison Lohman and Maria Bello.  The family-friendly movie debuted in the top 10 list and has grossed over $25 million at the box office.  McGraw again achieved critical acclaim for his acting. Shortly before Flicka opened, McGraw received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. His star is located at 6901 Hollywood Blvd. Near stars in the sidewalk honoring Julie Andrews, William Shatner, and the late Greta Garbo. One of his Flicka co-stars, Alison Lohman, attended the ceremony that included comments from Billy Bob Thornton, McGraw's co-star in the film Friday Night Lights. In addition to acting in Flicka, McGraw served as executive producer of the soundtrack album, which was released by his record label, StyleSonic Records, in association with Curb Records and Fox 2000 films. It featured the closing credit song "My Little Girl",  one of the first two songs that McGraw recorded that he also co-wrote (the other being "I've Got Friends That Do", both of which were included on Greatest Hits Vol. 2). The song was nominated by the Broadcast Film Critics for "Best Song" in a film, and the movie was nominated in the category "Best Family Film (Live Action)". The movie proved to be another success in the DVD market, and has sold over a million copies, debuting at No.&nbsp;3 on the DVD sales chart. McGraw also had a small part in the Michael Mann–produced 2007 film The Kingdom, reuniting him with Friday Night Lights director Peter Berg. McGraw played a bitter, angered widower whose wife was killed in the terrorist attack that is the centerpiece of the movie. On November 22, 2008, McGraw made his first appearance on Saturday Night Live. He also played "Dallas McVie" in Four Christmases. McGraw appeared in the 2009 film The Blind Side as Sean Tuohy, husband of Sandra Bullock’s character, Leigh Anne Tuohy. The Blind Side is based on the true story of Michael Oher, a homeless African-American youngster from a broken home, taken in and adopted by the Tuohys, a well-to-do white family who help him fulfill his potential. For her performance Bullock won the Oscar for Best Actress in a Leading Role. He is among the stars of Dirty Girl, a film that premiered on September 12, 2010, at the Toronto Film Festival, along with Juno Temple, Milla Jovovich, William H. Macy and Dwight Yoakam. Also in 2010, McGraw starred in Country Strong as James Canter, the husband and manager of the fictional country singer Kelly Canter (portrayed by Gwyneth Paltrow). In addition to his appearance in the film, McGraw's song "Me and Tennessee", a duet with Paltrow, was played during the closing credits. As his success has grown, McGraw has increasingly given back to the community.  When McGraw first reached fame in 1994, he established his annual Swampstock event.  It began as a charity softball game to raise money for hometown little league programs; the event now includes a celebrity softball game and a multi-artist concert that attracts over 11,000 fans per year.  The combined events have funded new Little League parks and equipment, and have established college scholarship funds for students in the northeast Louisiana area. From 1996 to 1999, McGraw hosted an annual New Year's Eve concert in Nashville with special guests including Jeff Foxworthy, the Dixie Chicks, and Martina McBride.  The 1997 show raised over $100,000 for the Country Music Foundation Hall of Fame and Museum.  Beginning in 1999, McGraw would pick select cities on each tour, and the night before he was scheduled to perform, would choose a local club and host a quickly-organized show. This tour-within-a-tour became known as "The Bread and Water Tour", and all proceeds from the show would go to a charity from that community. In the days immediately following Hurricane Katrina, McGraw and his wife, who was raised in Mississippi, joined groups taking supplies to Gulfport, Mississippi.  The two also hosted several charity concerts to benefit those who were displaced by the storm.  Later in the year, the couple established the Neighbor's Keeper Foundation, which provides funding for community charities to assist with basic humanitarian services, in the event of a natural disaster, or for desperate personal circumstances. McGraw is also a member of the American Red Cross National Celebrity Cabinet, to which various celebrities donate their time, skills, and fame, to help the Red Cross highlight important initiatives and response efforts. McGraw has helped out with charity events held by Minnesota Vikings quarterback Brett Favre. The Brett Favre Fourward Foundation has featured McGraw (and at other times Faith Hill) performing concerts during dinners and auctions that benefit children with disabilities in Wisconsin and Mississippi. One instance is recorded on Favre's official website. On July 12, 2007, it was made public that McGraw and his wife Faith Hill, while in Grand Rapids, Michigan for a performance, donated $5000 to Kailey Kozminski, 3-year-old daughter of Officer Robert Kozminski, a Grand Rapids police officer who was killed on July 8, 2007 while responding to a domestic disturbance. In June 2010, McGraw and his wife Faith Hill organized Nashville Rising, a benefit concert aimed to raise $2 million for The Community Foundation of Middle Tennessee in response to the flood in early May that killed 22 people and caused $2 billion in damage.  McGraw, a Democrat, has stated that he would like to run for public office in the future, possibly for Senate or Governor of Tennessee, his home state. In the same interview, he praised former President Bill Clinton.  He has referred to himself as a "Blue Dog Democrat" and stated that he supported presidential candidate Barack Obama in 2008. McGraw is married to fellow country singer Faith Hill. Together, they have three daughters: Gracie Katherine (b. 1997), Maggie Elizabeth (b. 1998) and Audrey Caroline (b. 2001). McGraw holds a private pilot license and owns a single-engine Cirrus SR22.     Film Year Title Role Notes 2004 Black Cloud Sheriff Cliff Powers Friday Night Lights Charles Billingsley Nominated – MTV Movie Award – Best Male Breakthrough Performance 2006 Flicka Rob McLaughlin Nominated – Critics Choice Award for Best Song: "My Little Girl" 2007 The Kingdom Aaron Jackson 2008 Four Christmases Dallas 2009 The Blind Side Sean Tuohy 2010 Dirty Girl Danny 2010 Country Strong James Canter 2015 Tomorrowland Eddie Newton 2016 The Shack Willie Filming Television Year Title Role Notes 1997 The Jeff Foxworthy Show Lionel one episode; "Feud for Thought" 2000 Sesame Street Himself one episode; appeared with Faith Hill 2008 Saturday Night Live Host Hosted November 22, 2008 2011 Who Do You Think You Are? (U.S. TV series) Himself Season 2, Episode 2 2013 Cake Boss Himself, appeared with his mother. A Cowboy In Hoboken 2015 Repeat After Me Himself 1 episode Year !! Awards !! Award 1994 Country Music Television Male Video Artist of the Year American Music Awards Album of the Year – Not a Moment Too Soon American Music Awards Top New Male Vocalist Billboard Awards Top New Country Artist Billboard Magazine Top New Country Album – Not a Moment Too Soon 1995 American Music Awards Favorite Country New Artist 1997 Billboard Magazine Single of the Year – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) Country Music Television Video of the Year – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) Country Music Television Male Artist of the Year Playgirl Magazine Top Ten, Sexiest Men of the Year CMA Vocal Event – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) 1998 Billboard Awards Country Single of the Year – "Just to See You Smile" CMA Album of the Year – Everywhere Academy of Country Music Single of the Year – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) Academy of Country Music Song of the Year – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) Academy of Country Music Video of the Year – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) Academy of Country Music Top Vocal Event – "It's Your Love" (with Faith Hill) 1999 Academy of Country Music Male Vocalist Academy of Country Music Vocal Collaboration – "Just to Hear You Say That You Love Me" (with Faith Hill) CMA Male Vocalist CMA Album of the Year – A Place in the Sun 2000 CMA Male Vocalist National Fatherhood Initiative Father of the Year Academy of Country Music Male Vocalist Billboard Awards Male Artist of the Year 2001 American Music Awards Favorite Male Country Artist Grammy Awards Vocal Collaboration – "Let's Make Love" (with Faith Hill) CMA Entertainer of the Year Billboard Awards Country Artist Billboard Awards Male Country Artist Billboard Awards Country Albums Artist Billboard Awards Country Single Artist Billboard Awards Country Album – Greatest Hits 2002 American Music Awards Best Country Album – Set This Circus Down American Music Awards Favorite Male Country Artist 2003 American Music Awards (January) Favorite Country Male Artist Radio Music Awards (January) Country Male Artist American Music Awards (November) Favorite Country Male Artist 2004 People's Choice Awards Favorite Country Male Artist Radio Music Awards Country Male Artist CMA Single of the Year – "Live Like You Were Dying" 2005 American Music Awards Album of the Year &ndash; Live Like You Were Dying American Music Awards Best Male Country Artist Academy of Country Music Song of the Year &ndash; "Live Like You Were Dying" Academy of Country Music Single of the Year &ndash; "Live Like You Were Dying" People's Choice Awards Favorite Country Male Artist Grammy Award Best Male Country Vocal Performance – "Live Like You Were Dying" Country Music Television Most Inspiring Video – "Live Like You Were Dying" 2006 People's Choice Awards Top Male Performer Grammy Award Country Vocal Collaboration – "Like We Never Loved At All" (with Faith Hill) 2012 CMA Musical Event of the Year &ndash; "Feel Like a Rock Star" (with Kenny Chesney) 2014 People's Choice Awards Country Music Icon Darran Smith – lead guitar, acoustic guitar Bob Minner – rhythm guitar, acoustic guitar, banjo, mandolin Denny Hemingson – steel guitar, electric, baritone, and slide guitars, dobro John Marcus – bass guitar Dean Brown – fiddle, mandolin Jeff McMahon – piano, organ, synthesizer, keyboards Billy Mason – drums David Dunkley – percussion Tim McGraw (1993) Not a Moment Too Soon (1994) All I Want (1995) Everywhere (1997) A Place in the Sun (1999) Set This Circus Down (2001) Tim McGraw and the Dancehall Doctors (2002) Live Like You Were Dying (2004) Let It Go (2007) Southern Voice (2009) Emotional Traffic (2012) Two Lanes of Freedom (2013) Sundown Heaven Town (2014) Damn Country Music (2015) Greatest Hits (2000) Reflected: Greatest Hits Vol. 2 (2006) Greatest Hits: Limited Edition (2008) Collector's Edition (2008) Greatest Hits 3 (2008) Limited Edition: Greatest Hits: Volumes 1, 2 & 3 (2008) Number One Hits (2010) Tim McGraw & Friends (2013) Love Story (2014) 35 Biggest Hits (2015) Brown, Jim; Sparrow, Susan. Faith Hill & Tim McGraw: Soul 2 Soul. Quarry Music Books, 2002. ISBN 1-55082-293-4 Gray, Scott. Perfect Harmony: the Faith Hill & Tim McGraw Story. 1st ed. Ballantine Books, 1999.  ISBN 0-345-43412-9 McGraw, Tim. Tim McGraw and the Dancehall Doctors: This is Ours. Atria Books, 2002.  ISBN 0-7434-6706-X Nichols, Tim, and Craig Wiseman. Live Like You Were Dying. Rutledge Hill P, 2004.  ISBN 1-4016-0212-6 Trimble, Betty "McMom". A Mother's Story. D'Agostino/Dahlhauser/Ditmore Pub, 1996.  ISBN 1-886371-32-6 Tim McGraw at Country Music Television
