 Nathalie Kay "Tippi" Hedren (born January 19, 1930) is an American actress, animal rights activist, and former fashion model. She made her film debut in The Birds in 1963, followed by the title role in Marnie in 1964. In her later years, she has been involved with animal rescue at Shambala Preserve, an  wildlife habitat which she founded in 1983. Hedren was also instrumental in the development of Vietnamese-American nail salons in the United States. For much of her career, Hedren's year of birth was misreported as 1935.Tippi Hedren biography, msn.com; retrieved October 20, 2012.Tippi Hedren profile, filmreference.com; retrieved October 20, 2012.Tippi Hedren profile, nytimes.com; retrieved January 22, 2014.Tippi Hedren films, blockbuster.com; retrieved January 22, 2014. In 2004, however, she acknowledged that she was actually born on January 19, 1930 (which is confirmed by her birth registration information at the Minnesota Historical Society) in New Ulm, Minnesota, to Bernard Carl and Dorothea Henrietta (née Eckhardt) Hedren. Her paternal grandparents were Swedish immigrants, while her maternal ancestry is German and Norwegian. Her father ran a small general store in the town of Lafayette, Minnesota, and gave her the nickname "Tippi". When she was four, she moved with her parents to Minneapolis, Minnesota. As a teenager, Hedren took part in department store fashion shows. Her parents relocated to California while she was a high school student. On reaching her 20th birthday, she bought a ticket to New York City where she joined the Eileen Ford Agency. Within the year she made her unofficial film debut as an uncredited extra in the musical comedy The Petty Girl. In interviews she refers to The Birds, her first credited role, as her first film.Vroman, Lavender. Tippi Hedren airs out her early acting days, wildlife preservation, Antelope Valley Press, p. A6, September 30, 2004. Although she received several film offers during that time, Hedren had no interest in acting as she knew it was very difficult to succeed.Moral ("The Birds"), p. 16 She had a highly successful modeling career during the 1950s and early 1960s, appearing on the covers of Life, The Saturday Evening Post, McCall's and Glamour among others. In 1961, after seven years of marriage to the actor Peter Griffith, Hedren divorced and returned to California with her daughter, Melanie Griffith, and rented an expensive home in Sherman Oaks. "I thought I could continue my career as it had been in New York. I thought everything would be just fine, and it wasn’t. So I thought, well, I don’t type, what shall I do?" On Friday, October 13, 1961, she received a call from an agent who told her a producer was interested in working with her. When she was told it was Alfred Hitchcock who, while he was watching The Today Show, saw her in a commercial for a diet drink called Sego, she agreed to sign a seven-year contract. During their first meeting, the two talked about everything except the role he was considering her for. Hedren was convinced for several weeks it was for his television series, Alfred Hitchcock Presents.Moral ("Marnie"), p. 16McGilligan, pp. 614-15 Hitchcock later said, "I was not primarily concerned with how she looked in person. Most important was her appearance on the screen, and I liked that immediately. She has a touch of that high-style, lady-like quality which was once well-represented in films by actresses like Irene Dunne, Grace Kelly, Claudette Colbert, and others but which is now quite rare." Hitchcock put Hedren through an extensive colour screen test that lasted two days and cost $25,000 screen test, doing scenes from his previous films, such as Rebecca, Notorious and To Catch a Thief with actor Martin Balsam. According to Balsam, Hedren was very nervous but studied every line, did every move she was asked to, and tried to do everything right.Spoto (2009), p. 170 Hitchcock asked costume designer Edith Head to design clothes for Hedren's private life and he personally advised her about wine and food. He also insisted for publicity purposes that her name should be printed only in single quotes, 'Tippi'. The press mostly ignored this directive from the director, who felt that the single quotes added distinction and mystery to her name.Moral ("The Birds"), p. 166 Hitchcock was impressed with Hedren. As production designer Robert F. Boyle explained, "Hitch always liked women who behaved like well-bred ladies. Tippi generated that quality."McGilligan, p. 615 Afterwards, Hedren was invited to lunch with Hitchcock, his wife, Alma, and Lew Wasserman, head of Universal, at one of Hitchcock's favorite restaurants, Chasen's. There she was presented with a golden pin of three birds in flight, adorned by three tiny seed pearls, and was asked by Hitchcock to play the leading role in his upcoming film, The Birds. "I was so stunned. It never occurred to me that I would be given a leading role in a major motion picture. I had great big tears in my eyes,” Hedren later recalled.  The Birds (1963) was Hedren's screen debut. Hitchcock became her drama coach, and gave her an education in film-making as she attended many of the production meetings such as script, music or photography conferences.Taylor, p. 266 Hedren said, "I probably learned in three years what it would have taken me 15 years to learn otherwise." She learned how to break down a script, to become another character, and to study the relationship of different characters. Hedren portrayed her role of Melanie Daniels as Hitchcock requested. She said, "He gives his actors very little leeway. He'll listen, but he has a very definite plan in mind as to how he wants his characters to act. With me, it was understandable, because I was not an actress of stature. I welcomed his guidance."McGilligan, p. 621 During the six months of principal photography, Hedren's schedule was tight, as she was only given one afternoon off a week. At first, she found the shooting "wonderful". Hitchcock told a reporter, after a few weeks of filming, that she was remarkable, and said, "She's already reaching the lows and highs of terror."Spoto (2009), p. 172 Nonetheless, Hedren recalled the week she did the final bird attack scene in a second-floor bedroom as the worst of her life. Before filming it, she asked Hitchcock about her character's motivations to go upstairs, and his response was, "Because I tell you to." She was then assured that the crew would use mechanical birds. Instead, Hedren endured five solid days of prop men, protected by thick leather gloves, flinging dozens of live gulls, ravens and crows at her (their beaks clamped shut with elastic bands). In a state of exhaustion, when one of the birds gouged her cheek and narrowly missed her eye, Hedren sat down on the set and began crying.McGilligan, pp. 627-28Spoto (2009), pp. 176-77 A physician ordered a week's rest. Hitchcock protested, according to Hedren, saying there was nobody but her to film. The doctor's reply was, "Are you trying to kill her?" She said the week also appeared to be an ordeal for the director.McGilligan, p. 628  Universal's executives, who did not back Hitchcock's decision to hire Hedren in the first place, were impressed with her performance and Wasserman described it as "remarkable".McGilligan, p. 664 While promoting The Birds, Hitchcock was full of praise for his new protégé, and compared her to Grace Kelly. "Tippi has a faster tempo, city glibness, more humor [than Grace Kelly]. She displayed jaunty assuredness, pertness, an attractive throw of the head. And she memorized and read lines extraordinarily well and is sharper in expression." The film was screened out of competition in May at a prestigious invitational showing at the 1963 Cannes Film Festival. Hedren's performance was positively received with Variety's review stating that, "Aside from the birds, the film belongs to Hedren, who makes an auspicious screen bow.", and she received the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year, tied with Elke Sommer and Ursula Andress. Her role as Melanie Daniels was named by Premiere to be one of the greatest movie characters of all time.  Hitchcock was so impressed with Hedren's acting abilities he decided to offer her the leading role of his next film,  Marnie (1964), a romantic drama and psychological thriller from the novel by Winston Graham, during the filming of The Birds.Moral ("Marnie"), p. 19 Hedren was stunned and felt extremely fortunate to be offered to play "such a complicated, sad, tragic woman", and later said, "I consider my acting, while not necessarily being method acting, but one that draws upon my own feelings. I thought Marnie was an extremely interesting role to play and a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity". She voiced doubts about her ability to play that demanding role, but was assured by Hitchcock she could do it.McGilligan, p. 635 Contrary to The Birds where she had received little acting guidance, Hedren studied every scene with the director.McGilligan, p. 643 Hedren recalled Marnie as her favorite of the two films she did with Hitchcock for the challenge of playing an emotionally battered young woman who travels from city to city assuming various guises in order to rob her employers. During the filming, Hitchcock was quoted as saying about Hedren, "an Academy Award performance is in the making".McGilligan, p. 644 On release, the film was greeted by mixed reviews and indifferent box-office returns, and received no Oscar nominations. Hedren later said that Marnie was "ahead of its time" because "people didn't talk about childhood and its effects on adult life. It was taboo to discuss sexuality and psychology and to put all that into a film was shocking". Despite its original lukewarm reception, the film was later acclaimed and described as a "masterpiece" and Hedren's performance is now highly regarded as one of the finest female portrayals in any Hitchcock film.  Marnie was the second and last collaboration between Hedren and Hitchcock. In 1973, she admitted that a major life-style difference caused a split in their relationship. "He was too possessive and too demanding. I cannot be possessed by anyone. But, then, that's my own hangup." In 1983, author Donald Spoto published his second book about Hitchcock, The Dark Side of a Genius, in which Hedren agreed to talk about her relationship with the director in detail for the first time. The book was controversial as several of Hitchcock's friends claimed the Hitchcock portrayed in the book was not the man they knew.McGilligan, p 747 For years after its release, Hedren was not keen to talk about it in interviews but thought the chapter devoted to her story was "accurate as to just what he was." Hedren later explained her long silence before telling her story, "It was embarrassing and insulting — there were a lot of reasons why I didn't want to tell the story. I didn't want it to be taken advantage of, twisted, turned and made into an even uglier situation than it was." According to Spoto's book, Hitchcock brought in two members of his crew during the filming of The Birds and asked them to keep careful watch on the activities of Hedren, "when she left the set - where whe went, who she visited, how she spent her free time".Spoto (1983), p. 456 He then advised her on what she should eat, whom she should see, and how she should live. He told the cast and crew they were not allowed to talk to her. Hedren's co-star in The Birds, Rod Taylor, later remembered, "Hitch was becoming very domineering and covetous of 'Tippi,' and it was very difficult for her. No one was permitted to come physically close to her during the production. "Don't touch the girl after I call "Cut!" he said to me repeatedly." Hitchcock also attempted, on one occasion, to grab and violently kiss Hedren in the back of a car as they drove on to the set.Spoto (2009), pp. 174-75 Hedren told his assistant, Peggy Robertson, and the studio chief, Lew Wasserman, that she was becoming very unhappy about the whole situation. "But he was Alfred Hitchcock, the great and famous director, and I was Tippi Hedren, an inexperienced actress who had no clout." She decided she could not quit her contract because she was afraid to be blacklisted and unable to find work.Spoto (2009), p 174 Hedren's own daughter, Melanie Griffith, remembered that while Hedren was doing The Birds, she thought Hitchcock was taking her mother away from her. "Suddenly, I wasn't allowed even to visit my mom at the studio."Spoto (2009), p. 173  During the filming of Marnie, Hedren found Hitchcock's behavior toward her increasingly difficult to bear as filming progressed. "Everyone - I mean everyone - knew he was obsessed with me. He always wanted a glass of wine or champagne, with me alone, at the end of the day. He was really isolating me from everyone."Spoto (2009), p. 183 He revealed to Hedren one day he had a recurring dream where she came up to him and said, "Hitch, I love you - I'll always love you." When she heard this, Hedren replied "But it was a dream. Just a dream," and excused herself from his presence.Spoto (1983), p. 472 She believed Hitchcock had no consideration for her feelings and remembered she was humiliated after he asked her to touch him, just before shooting a scene. "He made sure no one else could hear, and his tone and glance made it clear exactly what he meant." Hedren asked Hitchcock's permission one day to travel to New York to appear on The Tonight Show where she was supposed to be presented an award as the Most Promising New Star. Hitchcock refused, according to his biographer, because he claimed the break would affect her performance.McGilligan, p. 646 It was during that meeting that he apparently "made an overt sexual proposition" that Hedren "could neither ignore nor answer casually, as she could his previous gestures".Spoto (1983), p. 475 In Spoto's third book about Hitchcock, Spellbound by Beauty (2008), Hedren revealed that Hitchcock actually made offensive demands on her. "He stared at me and simply said, as if it was the most natural thing in the world, that from this time on, he expected me to make myself sexually available and accessible to him – however and whenever and wherever he wanted."Spoto (2009), p. 187 Hitchcock's demands leaded to a "horrible, horrible fight," according to Hedren. "He made these demands on me, and no way could I acquiesce to them."  Hedren then told him Marnie would be their last film together and later recalled how Hitchcock told her he would destroy her career. "I said I wanted to get out of my contract. He said: "You can’t. You have your daughter to support, and your parents are getting older." I said: "Nobody would want me to be in this situation, I want to get out." And he said: "I’ll ruin your career." I said: "Do what you have to do." And he did ruin my career. He kept me under contract, paid me to do nothing for close on two years." Hedren felt so humiliated she called the director a "fat pig" in front of people on the set. Hitchcock made only a comment about it to his biographer, John Russell Taylor, "She did what no one is permitted to do. She referred to my weight." The two communicated only through a third party for the rest of the film.Taylor, p. 272 According to Marnie's screenwriter, Jay Presson Allen, Hitchcock was "mad" for Hedren.Spoto (2009), p. 180 She felt unhappy for both and described the situation as "an old man's cri de coeur", adding that Hitchcock had a "Pygmalion complex about Tippi".Moral ("Marnie"), p. 100 She advised Hedren to finish the film and then get on with her life and be happy. Hedren's hairdresser, Virginia Darcy, even told Hitchcock he should not be possessive with Hedren. "Tippi felt rightly that she was not his property, but he'd say, 'You are, I have a contract.'" Although Hitchcock thought he might mend fences with Hedren and make another film with her, she refused to reconsider her decision.McGilligan, p. 685 Hedren's contract terms gave Hitchcock the final say as to any work she could take on and he used that power to turn down several film roles on her behalf.  She was particularly disappointed when French director François Truffaut told her he had wanted her for one of them. In 1966, Hitchcock finally sold her contract to Universal Studios after Hedren appeared in two of their TV shows, Kraft Suspense Theatre (1965) and Run for Your Life (id.).Moral ("Marnie"), p. 265 The studio ultimately released her from her contract after she refused to appear on a television Western for them. In 2012, The Girl, an HBO/BBC film about Hedren and Hitchcock's relationship, based on Donald Spoto's 2009 book, Spellbound by Beauty: Alfred Hitchcock and His Leading Ladies, was released. When she was first told about the project, Hedren said she had mixed feelings about it, "To be still alive and have a film made about you is an awesome and incredibly frightening experience." Hedren and Hitchcock were respectively portrayed by Sienna Miller and Toby Jones. Although she was thrilled with the choice of Miller, Hedren was worried she would not be portrayed me as "as strong a character as I was – and still am. I had to be extremely strong to fight off Mr. Hitchcock." She described the moment she saw the film as "probably one of the most involved, emotionally tense 90 minutes that I have ever lived." Upon the film's release, Hedren said although she believed the film accurately portrays Hitchcock's negative behaviour towards her, the time constraints of a 90-minute film prevented telling the entire story of her career with him. "It wasn't a constant barrage of harassment. If it had been constantly the way we have had to do it in this film, I would have been long gone". She recalled there were times she described as "absolutely delightful and wonderful”, and insisted that “Hitchcock had a charm about him. He was very funny at times. He was incredibly brilliant in his field." The film was controversial as others who knew and worked with Hitchcock responded to it negatively. Kim Novak, who worked on Hitchcock's Vertigo (1958), disputed Hitchcock's portrayal as a sexual predator in The Girl, "I never saw him make a pass at anybody or act strange to anybody. And wouldn't you think if he was that way, I would've seen it or at least seen him with somebody? I think it's unfortunate when someone's no longer around and can't defend themselves." Novak previously described Hitchcock as a gentleman and, when asked about reports of his behaviour, she said, "Maybe I just wasn't his type." Hedren herself was asked why her account of sexual harrasment contrasted with the many interviews she gave about her time with Hitchcock, her warm tribute to him when he was honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award by the AFI in 1979, and her presence at his funeral. She explained that, "He ruined my career, but he didn't ruin my life. That time of my life was over. I still admire the man for who he was." She also said, "I've been able to separate the two. The man who was the artist. I mean, what he gave to the motion picture industry can never be taken away from him and I certainly wouldn't be want to try. But on the other side, there is that dark side that was really awful."  Hedren has appeared in over eighty films and TV shows. Hedren's first feature film appearance after Marnie was in A Countess from Hong Kong (1967), starring Marlon Brando and Sophia Loren. She was told by writer/director Charlie Chaplin that she was offered a major supporting role as Brando's estranged wife and had to accept the role  without reading the script.Paul, p. 85 However, when she arrived in England where the filming took place, she finally received the script and realized that her part was little more than a cameo. Hedren was "a little bit bit upset about the whole thing" and asked Chaplin why he lied to her. "Every actor in the world was asking if they could do this film, to just do a walk-on, without even being paid for it. When I said, "Why didn't you just tell me that it was a cameo? I would have done this film anyway." he said, "I didn't think you would come," which was very sweet. He was a very clever man." Hedren asked Chaplin to expand the role and, although he tried to accommodate her, he could not, as the story mostly takes place on a ship, which Hedren's character boards near the end of the film.Epstein, Jerry. Remembering Charlie, Doubleday, 1989; ISBN 0385262825, p. 257. In the end, she remained in the film and later said that it was both amusing and strange to work with Chaplin. She found him to be a very serious man and loved his approach to directing. She later said, "I wish someone would have been allowed to do a documentary. The way he directed was unlike anyone I ever saw. He acted out all the parts himself. He did Sophia's part, then Marlon's part, then mine, and then he'd say, "Okay, now you can do it." Which would be impossible, to mimic the master. It was incredible. None of us believed it. Marlon hated it."Milton, Joyce. Tramp: The Life of Charlie Chaplin, Da Capo Press Inc, 1998; ISBN 978-0306808319, p. 529.  In 1970, Hedren returned to film as a socialite who helps her boyfriend (played by George Armstrong) catch a killer, in Tiger by the Tail. That same year, she guest-starred on The Courtship of Eddie's Father. She agreed to take part in Satan's Harvest (1970) and Mister Kingstreet's War (1973) -- which were actually shot back-to-back despite the discrepancy in their release dates—for the sole reason that they were being filmed in Africa. In 1973, Hedren played a teacher of an experimental sex school in The Harrad Experiment, which starred James Whitmore and Don Johnson. Hedren felt that the film "deals with vital themes - themes like the decline in importance of ideas like possession and jealousy and, by inference, marriage. I have four teenage children and I think this picture says some valuable things to them." She confessed at the time she was occasionally depressed over the fact she wasn't doing any major films. Hedren starred alongside her then-husband, the agent and occasional producer Noel Marshall in the 1981 film Roar (directed by Marshall), about a family's misadventures in a research park filled with lions, tigers, and other wild cats. The film cost $17 million to make but grossed only $2 million worldwide. As with many of the cast and crew, Hedren was injured in the filming of the movie. She received a fractured leg and scalp wounds.Profile, drafthousefilms.com; accessed July 11, 2015. In 1982, she co-starred with Leslie Nielsen in Foxfire Light. During the 1980s, she appeared in several television series, including Hart to Hart in 1983 and the late-night horror series Tales from the Darkside in 1984. In the 1985 pilot episode of The New Alfred Hitchcock Presents, she made a brief appearance as a waitress in a bar who berates a customer, played by her daughter Melanie Griffith. In 1990, Hedren had a role on the daytime soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful. That same year, she had a non-speaking, minor part as a wealthy widow romanced by Michael Keaton in the film Pacific Heights (1990), which starred her daughter, Melanie Griffith. In the early 1990s, Hedren appeared in many television movies such as Return to Green Acres (1990), Through the Eyes of a Killer (1992), and Treacherous Beauties (1994). In 1994, she appeared in the made-for-cable sequel, The Birds II: Land's End, in a role different from the one she had played in the original. Before its release, she admitted she was unhappy that she didn't get a starring role and, when asked about what could have been Hitchcock's opinion, she answered: "I'd hate to think what he would say!" In a 2007 interview, Hedren said of the film, "It's absolutely horrible, it embarrasses me horribly."Paul, p. 84  In 1996, Hedren played an abortion rights activist in Alexander Payne's political satire Citizen Ruth with Laura Dern. In 1998, she co-starred alongside Billy Zane, Christina Ricci, Eartha Kitt, Andrew McCarthy and Ron Perlman in I Woke Up Early the Day I Died, a film she particularly liked due to the fact that it had no dialogue in it. After appearing in a number of little-exposed films between 1999 and 2003, Hedren had a small but showy role in the 2004 David O. Russell comedy, I Heart Huckabees, as a foul-mouthed attractive older woman who slaps Jude Law in an elevator.  Hedren continued to guest-star on television series throughout the 1990s and 2000s, in series such as Chicago Hope (1998), The 4400 (2006) and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2008). She was a cast member of the short-lived primetime soap opera Fashion House in 2006 with Bo Derek and Morgan Fairchild. While filming an episode on June 22, 2006, a gallon of water fell from the ceiling and hit Hedren "at about 25 mph" leading to a return of crippling headaches she had suffered earlier in life. Later in 2006 the actress retained lawyer Joseph Allen to file a personal injury claim against the owner of the sound stage; after a seven-year litigation, she was awarded $1.5 million in damages in December 2013. In 2009, Hedren appeared in the Lifetime movie Tribute, which starred actress Brittany Murphy in one of Murphy's last roles. She provided the voice for the character of Queen Hippolyta on the animated series Batman: The Brave and the Bold in 2011. In 2012, Hedren and her daughter Griffith guest-starred together on an episode of Raising Hope. Hedren also had a role in Jayne Mansfield's Car, directed by Billy Bob Thornton and starring Thornton, Robert Duvall and Kevin Bacon, but her scenes were left on the cutting room floor.Jayne Mansfield's Car, collider.com; accessed July 11, 2015. That same year, she appeared in Free Samples. She guest-starred in the fourth season finale of Cougar Town as herself; the episode ("Have Love Will Travel") aired on April 9, 2013. In 2013, exactly fifty years after The Birds, Hedren returned to Bodega to shoot a film called The Ghost and the Whale. A Louis Vuitton ad campaign in 2006 paid tribute to Hedren and Hitchcock with a modern-day interpretation of the deserted railway station opening sequence of Marnie. Her look from The Birds (1963) inspired designer Bill Gaytten to design for John Galliano Pre-Fall 2012 collection.Galliano pre-fall 2012, style.com; accessed March 10, 2015. Naomi Watts stated that her character interpretation in Mulholland Drive (2001) was influenced by the look and performances of Hedren in Hitchcock films. Watts and Hedren both appeared in I ♥ Huckabees (2004) but didn't share any scenes together.  Off-screen, the film's director David O. Russell introduced them both, and Watts said of Hedren: "I was pretty fascinated by her then, because people have often said we're alike." Watts dressed up as Hedren's title character from Marnie for a photo shoot for March 2008 issue of Vanity Fair. In the same issue, Jodie Foster dressed up as Hedren's character, Melanie Daniels, from The Birds.   In 1981, Hedren produced Roar, an 11-year project that ended up costing $17 million and starring dozens of African lions. "This was probably one of the most dangerous films that Hollywood has ever seen", remarked the actress. "It's amazing no one was killed." During the production of Roar, Hedren, her husband at the time, Noel Marshall, and daughter Melanie were attacked  by lions; Jan de Bont, the director of photography, was scalped. Hedren later co-wrote Cats of Shambala (1985) about the experience. Roar made only $2 million worldwide. Hedren ended her marriage to Marshall a year later in 1982. The film directly led to the 1983 establishment of the non-profit Roar Foundation and Hedren's Shambala Preserve, located at the edge of the Mojave Desert in Acton, California between the Antelope Valley and the Santa Clarita Valley  northeast of Los Angeles. Shambala currently houses some 70 animals. Hedren lives on the Shambala site and conducts monthly tours of the preserve for the public. In a 2015 interview with ABILITY Magazine, Hedren emphasized that there is no human contact with the animals and that all of the cats are spayed and neutered, since they are being raised in captivity. She took in and cared for Togar, a lion that belonged to Anton LaVey, after he was told by San Francisco officials that he couldn't keep a fully grown lion as a house pet. Shambala became the new home for Michael Jackson's two Bengal tigers, Sabu and Thriller, after he decided to close his zoo at his Neverland Valley Ranch in Los Olivos. Thriller died in June 2012 of lung cancer.  On December 3, 2007, Shambala Preserve made headlines when Chris Orr, a caretaker for the animals, was mauled by a tiger named Alexander. Several documentaries have focused on Shambala Preserve, including the 30-minute Lions: Kings of the Serengeti (1995), narrated by Melanie Griffith, and Animal Planet's Life with Big Cats (1998), which won the Genesis Award for best documentary in 1999. The animals at the preserve served as the initial inspiration for the life's work of artist A.E. London, who started her career working for Hedren.   In 1952, Hedren met and married 18-year-old future advertising executive Peter Griffith. Their daughter, actress Melanie Griffith, was born on August 9, 1957. They were divorced in 1961. On September 22, 1964, Hedren married her then-agent Noel Marshall, who later produced three of her films; they divorced in 1982. In 1985, she married steel manufacturer Luis Barrenechea, but they divorced in 1995. Hedren was engaged to veterinarian Martin Dinnes from 2002 until their breakup in mid-2008. In September 2008, Hedren told The Sunday Times "I’m waiting for someone to sweep me off my feet.” Hedren played a role in the development of Vietnamese-American nail salons in the United States. In 1975, while an international relief coordinator with Food for the Hungry, she began visiting with refugees at Hope Village outside Sacramento, California. When she learned the women were interested in her manicured nails, she employed her manicurist to teach them the skills of the trade and worked with a local beauty school to help them find jobs. Hedren's work with the Vietnamese-Americans was the subject of Happy Hands, directed by Honey Lauren, which won Best Documentary Short at the Sonoma International Film Festival in 2014.Sonoma International Film Festival website, sonomaportal.com; accessed March 10, 2015. CND and Beauty Changes Lives Foundation (BCL) have announced the BCL CND Tippi Hedren Nail Scholarship Fund to support professional nail education and will be administered starting January 1, 2014.Tippi Hendren Nail Scholarship Fund, modernsalon.com; accessed March 10, 2015. Hedren suffered from severe and persistent headaches for a long time and therefore was unable to accept several projects, including a television series produced by and starring Betty White. After she got a titanium plate put in her neck, she improved and then agreed, with the blessing of her doctor, to take the part of a dying woman in the soap opera Fashion House. While she was rehearsing a scene, a gallon of water fell from the ceiling onto her head. The headaches returned after the incident and persisted. Hedren filed a suit to receive recompense following her inability to work. Hedren's lawyer, Joseph Allen, made a mistake in his discussions with the defendants that allowed them to block him from filing suit. Hedren sued Allen for malpractice. In 2013, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Hedren had been awarded a $1.5 million settlement, including $213,400 for past lost earnings and $440,308 for future lost earnings, against her former lawyer. Hedren was hurt by the report as she had not collected the award. She gave an interview to explain that her former lawyer does not have the money to pay her, and discussed how the report put her in a difficult situation as her Foundation is in dire need of funds. She explained that she has to raise $75,000 monthly just to keep it going. "Chances are I won't ever even see the money, and that what hurts so badly, that in all of this pain and suffering that publication ran with a swift and not researched story, which told people around the world who have been so gracious and thoughtful about sending donations, that I no longer needed them."    Year Title Role Notes 1950 Ice Box Pretty Girl 1963 Melanie Daniels 1964 Marnie Marnie Edgar 1967 Martha Mears 1969 Sonia 1970 Tiger by the Tail Rita Armstrong 1970 Satan's Harvest Marla Oaks 1971 Mister Kingstreet's War Mary Kingstreet 1973 Margaret Tenhausen 1981 Roar Madelaine 1982 Foxfire Light Elizabeth Morgan 1989 Deadly Spygames Chastity 1990 In the Cold of the Night Clara 1990 Pacific Heights Florence Peters 1994 Teresa's Tattoo Evelyn Hill 1994 Inevitable Grace Dr. Marcia Stevens 1996 Citizen Ruth Jessica Weiss 1997 Mulligans! Dottie Short film 1998 Break Up Mom 1998 I Woke Up Early The Day I Died Maylinda Austed 1999 Lillian Glosner 2001 Tea with Grandma Rae Short film 2001 Ice Cream Sundae Lady Short film 2003 Searching for Haizmann Dr. Michelle Labner 2003 Dark Wolf Mary Video 2003 Rose's Garden Rose 2003 Julie and Jack Julie McNeal 2004 Raising Genius Babe 2004 Mind Rage Dr. Wilma Randolph 2004 I Heart Huckabees Mary Jane Hutchinson 2005 Mrs. Adams 2005 Diamond Zero Eleanor Kelly 2007 Dead Write Minnie 2008 Her Morbid Desires Gloria Video 2012 Jayne Mansfield's Car Naomi Caldwell 2012 Free Samples Betty 2013 Return to Babylon Mrs. Peabody 2015 Tippi Lizzie's World: The Secret of the Magic Trunk Elizabeth Filming Year Title Role Notes 1965 Kraft Suspense Theatre Lee Anne Wickheimer "The Trains of Silence" 1965 Run for Your Life Jessica Braden "Someone Who Makes Me Feel Beautiful" 1970 Cissy Drummond-Randolph "Free Is a Four Letter Word" 1971 Cissy Drummond-Randolph "A Little Get Together for Cissy" 1976 Susan Victor "Claws" 1983 Hart to Hart Liza Atterton "Hunted Harts" 1984 Tales from the Darkside Ruth Anderson "Mookie and Pookie" 1985 Alfred Hitchcock Presents Waitress "Man from the South" 1988 Hotel Barbara Lyman "Double Take" 1988 Baby Boom Laura Curtis "Christmas '88" 1990 Return to Green Acres Arleen TV film 1990-1991 Helen Maclaine TV series 1991 Shadow of a Doubt Mrs. Mathewson TV film 1991 In the Heat of the Night Annabelle Van Buren "Liar's Poker" 1992 Through the Eyes of a Killer Mrs. Bellano TV film 1993 Perry Mason: The Case of the Skin-Deep Scandal Beverly Courtney TV film 1993 Murder, She Wrote Catherine Noble "Bloodlines" 1994 Helen TV film 1994 Treacherous Beauties Lettie Hollister TV film 1994-1996 Dream On Di Recurring role 1997 Adventures from the Book of Virtues Madame Sofroni / Molly Mouse (voice) "Generosity" 1997 Wynn TV film 1998 Chicago Hope Alfreda Perkins "Psychodrama" 1998 Donna Day (voice) "Mean Seasons" 1998 Invasion America Mrs. McAllister (voice) "Allies", "Charade" 1999 Martha Jackson TV film 1999 Replacing Dad Dixie TV film 2000 Bull Caitlin Coyle "A Beautiful Lie" 2000 Providence Constance Hemming "The Unsinkable Sydney Hansen", "The Thanksgiving Story: Parts 1 & 2" 2003 111 Gramercy Park Mrs. Granville TV film 2006 Fashion House Doris Thompson Recurring role 2006 Lily Tyler "The New World" 2008 CSI: Crime Scene Investigation Karen Rosenthal "Young Man with a Horn" 2009 Tribute Mrs. Hennessey TV film 2011 Batman: The Brave and the Bold Queen Hippolyta (voice) "Triumvirate of Terror!" 2012 Raising Hope Nana "Not Indecent, But Not Quite Decent Enough Proposal" 2013 Cougar Town Herself "Have Love Will Travel" 1964: Most Promising Newcomer Award by Photoplay 1964: Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year - Actress (shared with Ursula Andress and Elke Sommer) 1994: Life Achievement Award in France at The Beauvais Film Festival Cinemalia 1995: Life Achievement Award in Spain, La Fundación Municipal de Cine 1995: The Helen Woodward Animal Center's Annual Humane Award 1996: Founder's Award from the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 1997: Lion and Lamb Award from Wildhaven  1999: Woman of Vision Award from Women of Film and Video in Washington, D.C.  1999: Presidential Medal for her work in film from Hofstra University  1999: Humanitarian Award at the Las Vegas International Film Festival 2000: Best Actress in a Comedy Short Award in the short film Mulligans! at the Method Fest, Independent Film Festival 2002: Best Actress Award for the short film Tea with Grandma from the New York International Independent Film Festival 2003: Received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 2003: Women of Los Angeles Annual Hope is a Woman Honor 2004: PAWS Companion for Life Award 2004: Best Actress Award for the short film Rose's Garden from the Los Angeles TV Short Film Festival 2004: Animal Rights Advocacy Award at Artivist Film Festival 2005: Living Legacy Award 2006: Conservationist of the Year—Dino Award from the Las Vegas Natural History Museum 2007: Lifetime Achievement Award—Riverside Film Festival[ ]  2007: Jules Verne "Nature" Award — the 1st Annual Jules Verne Adventure Film Festival of Los Angeles 2008:  Academy of Art University's 2nd Epidemic Film Festival Award 2008: Jules Verne Legendaire Award 2008: Thespian Award-La Femme Film Festival 2009: "When a Woman Wills She Will!" Award by the Woman's Club of Hollywood 2009: Workhouse's first Lifetime Achievement in the Arts Award 2009: Received the First Star on the Orinda Theater Walk of Fame 2010: Received the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 24th Annual Genesis Awards show from the Humane Society 2010: BraveHeart Award 2010: Who-Manitarian Award 2011: Lifetime Achievement Award from the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce at its 90th Annual Installation & Awards Luncheon 2011: "The Women Together Award" from the United Nations 2011: Vietnamese-American Marton Saint Award from the Boat People SOS Organization 2011: Omni Youth Humanitarian/Career Achievement Award 2012: Honorary Masters of Fine Arts Degree from the New York Film Academy 2012: Mayor Career Achievement Award from Starz Denver Film Festival 2013: Legacy of Style Award  2013: "People Helping People" Award by the Touching Live TV Award Show, broadwayworld.com; accessed November 14, 2015. 2014: Lifetime Achievement Award from Bel-Air Film Festival 2014: Special Recognition Award from Acton Women's Club 2014:The Women's International Film & Television Showcase Foundation International Visionary Award, thewifts.org; accessed November 14, 2015. 2015: Choreography of Desire (A Tribute to Tippi Hedren) by the Vienna International Film Festival, viennale.at; accessed November 14, 2015. 2015: Believe, Achieve, Empower Award McGilligan, Patrick. Alfred Hitchcock: A Life in Darkness and Light, It Books, 2004 (Reprint), 864 p. ISBN 978-0060988272 Moral, Tony Lee. Hitchcock and the Making of Marnie, Scarecrow Pres, 2013 (Revised Edition), 340 p. ISBN 978-0810891074 Moral, Tony Lee. The Making of Hitchcock's The Birds, Scarecrow Pres, 2013 (Revised Edition), 224 p. ISBN 978-1842439548 Taylor, John Russell. Hitch: The Life and Times of Alfred Hitchcock, Bloomsbury Reader, 2013, 318 p. ASIN B00BWL8L0C Spoto, Donald. Spellbound by Beauty, Three Rivers Press, 2009, 368 p. ISBN 0307351319 Paul, Louis. Tales from the Cult Film Trenches: Interviews with 36 Actors from Horror, Science Fiction and Exploitation Cinema, McFarland, 2007, 336 p. ISBN 0786429941 TV Interview with Tippi Hedren, March 6, 2005 (free online viewing) TV Interview with Tippi Hedren on location at Shambala, 2008 (free online viewing) Interview June, 2014 in the Ft. Wayne News-Sentinel
