    Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six is a media franchise created by American author Tom Clancy about a fictional international counter-terrorist unit called "Rainbow." The franchise began with Clancy's novel Rainbow Six, which was adapted into a successful series of tactical first-person shooter video games. Rainbow Six describes Rainbow as an international counter-terrorism operation hosted by NATO and funded by money funneled through the U.S. Department of the Interior. The base of operations for Rainbow is located in Hereford, England (at the time, home to the SAS), due to the United Kingdom being one of the most accessible countries in the world and having one of the world's foremost special forces units. Most of the characters in Rainbow are American or British, though the NATO countries of France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Canada, and the NATO ally of Israel have at least one representative each. Clancy describes the structure of Rainbow as having one Director, who oversees the entire operation, and one Deputy Director, who is second in command. Rainbow is portrayed as the "blacker than black" operations, and it works off of its very own intelligence service which has intelligence contacts all over the world. In the book, when Rainbow is called upon for help from another country's government to deal with a terrorist situation, usually only one of the two teams will be sent, but in some situations both will be sent. Both teams have an officer (O-4 or equivalent) as team leader and a senior NCO (E-9 or equivalent) as second in command. Not including the team leader, each team is made up of ten men. Rainbow also has a standard-issue weapons kit. It consists of a Beretta 8045 Cougar semi-automatic pistol (referred to as a "Beretta .45 automatic") and a suppressed Heckler & Koch MP5/10 submachine gun (mislabeled as MP-10) for each soldier, with an M60 general purpose machine gun for each team's support gunner. Each team also has two snipers, each with a custom rifle of their own choosing. In Dead or Alive, Rainbow uses the more conventional Heckler & Koch MP5SD3 submachine gun and Heckler & Koch MK23 semi-automatic pistol, with the Knight's Armanent Company M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System having replaced Remington M24 Sniper Weapon System. When not using the local police's camouflage they utilize a light blue and/or black pattern, leading to their nickname "Men of Black". In the video games, Rainbow is portrayed differently. John Clark is still the leader for most of the series, but he is supported by a set of other key staff and advisers who vary from game to game. As of Rogue Spear, there are around 30 Rainbow operatives. This includes members from NATO countries and from non-NATO countries, along with six female operatives. For each mission, a maximum eight operatives can be deployed and can be split into a maximum of four teams. Weapons, uniforms, and equipment are less standardized, and are instead chosen to suit the operative and the mission, so it is more common to see assault rifles and large-caliber handguns. The following is a list of all the members of Rainbow: In The Bear and the Dragon, Rainbow makes a return. While their part in the novel at first seems small, they become more involved as the novel progresses. It is noted that since the events of Rainbow Six, the public has become more aware of the existence of Rainbow, and are often referred to as the "Men of Black", in regards to their uniforms. It is also said that the teams' roster is constantly changing. Many of the original members of Rainbow left the team, some later returned, and then a few left again, with new members always being added. Ettore Falcone from the Italian Carabinieri was added to Team Two (still under Ding's command) just before the events of The Bear and the Dragon. Lieutenant Colonel Malloy has been promoted to full Colonel and appointed to command Marine One, piloting the President of the United States. The following is a list of characters that make up Team Rainbow's roster within the universe of the video and computer games, as of 2010.  The novel, Rainbow Six, was written by Tom Clancy and published in 1998. The novel focuses on John Clark, Ding Chavez, and a fictional multinational counter-terrorist organization named Rainbow. The first game was developed by Red Storm Entertainment, while the novel was being written. The game later spawned a number of sequels and expansion packs. Red Storm was later acquired by Ubisoft, who currently develops and publishes the games. Mobile phone versions of the game are developed and published by Gameloft. Rainbow Six and its sequels defined the tactical shooter genre, forcing players to focus more time and effort on stealth, teamwork, and tactics rather than on sheer firepower. With some of the more recent releases however, the game has taken on more of a "mainstream" first-person shooter approach in an attempt to appeal to a wider audience. The latest game has changed the series title back to Rainbow Six. Rainbow 6: Patriots (now cancelled) changed the word Six to 6. A Korean-only PC game called Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Take-Down – Missions in Korea was created for the South Korean market by KAMA Digital Entertainment. The game boasted South Korean Rainbow operatives and weapons with a different story and interface. As of 2015, it is not available for purchase outside South Korea. The Rainbow Six games take place in the same universe as all of the other Tom Clancy games. In addition to Ghost Recon and Third Echelon, former members of Rainbow made an appearance in Tom Clancy's EndWar, comprising some of the European Federation's and Russian Spetznaz troops and commanders.     Title Windowsrelease Consoleversions Mobileversions Comments Rainbow Six 1998 ; DC (2000) Rainbow Six Mission Pack: Eagle Watch 1999 expansion pack Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear 1999 ; PS1 (2001) Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear Mission Pack: Urban Operations 2000 expansion pack Rainbow Six: Covert Ops Essentials 2000 expansion pack (stand-alone) Rainbow Six: Take-Down – Missions in Korea 2001 Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear: Black Thorn 2001 expansion pack (stand-alone) Rainbow Six: Lone Wolf Rainbow Six 3: Raven Shield 2003 ; PS2, NGC (2004) Rainbow Six 3: Athena Sword 2004 expansion pack Rainbow Six 3: Black Arrow Rainbow Six 3: Iron Wrath 2005 expansion pack (DLC) Rainbow Six: Lockdown 2005 Rainbow Six: Critical Hour Rainbow Six: Vegas 2006 ; PS3 (2007) , Mobile game Rainbow Six: Vegas 2 2008 Rainbow Six: Shadow Vanguard Based on the original Rainbow 6: Patriots Cancelled Rainbow Six Siege 2015  Simulated Major General John Terrence Clark a.k.a. Rainbow Six (CIA Special Activities Division, ex-MACV-SOG, Navy SEALs)  Simulated Colonel Alistair Stanley a.k.a. Rainbow Five (ex-SAS)  Mrs. Alice Foorgate  Mrs. Helen Montgomery  Team Leader - Major Peter Covington (SAS)  Master Chief Miguel 'Mike' Chin (SEALs)  Sniper - Sergeant First Class Fred Franklin (Delta)  Sergeant Mortimer "Sam" Houston (Army Ranger)  Sergeant Geoff Bates (SAS)  Team Leader - Simulated Major Domingo "Ding" Chavez (CIA Special Activities Division, ex-Army)  Company Sergeant Major Eddie Price (SAS)  First Sergeant Julio Vega (Delta, ex-Army Ranger)  Sniper - Sergeant First Class Homer Johnston (Delta, ex-Army Special Forces)  Sniper - Feldwebel Dieter Weber (GSG 9)  Staff Sergeant George Tomlinson (Delta, ex-Green Beret)  Staff Sergeant Steve Lincoln (SAS)  Sergeant Paddy Connolly (SAS)  Sergeant Scott McTyler (SAS)  Sergeant Louis Loiselle (DGSE Action Division)  Sergeant Mike Pierce (Delta)  Sniper - Sergeant Hank Patterson (Delta)  Katherine Moony  Doctor Paul Bellow (Independent Negotiator and Psychologist)  Bill Tawney (ex-MI6)  Major Sam Bennett (Air Force)  David Peled (Mossad)  Tim Noonan (FBI; former HRT tech support)  Lieutenant Colonel Daniel "Bear" Malloy (Marine Corps)  Lieutenant Harrison (Special Operations Aviation Regiment)  Sergeant Jack Nance (Special Operations Aviation Regiment)  Sergeant Major Dave Woods (British Army)  Major Domingo Chavez a.k.a., Rainbow Six (U.S.; ex-Army Ranger, CIA, former leader of Rainbow Team 2). Chavez was promoted to Director in Rainbow Six: Critical Hour.  Kan Akahashi (Japan).  Timothy Hanley (Australia; ex-SAS, TAG). Recruited between 1999 and 2003. A veteran from the Australian Tactical Assault Group (TAG), he approaches every combat situation, even high risk ones, with trademark easy going humour.  Kazimiera "Kamikazi" Rakuzanka (Poland; ex-GROM). Rakuzanka was born in Gdańsk, Poland. She joined Solidarity underground movement at an early age, and worked as a resistance operative until the 1989 founding of the Third Polish Republic. Joined the Gdańsk police force in 1989, worked as an undercover operative in the growing criminal underworld. Joined GROM in 1993, initially as an intel officer, then worked her way up to Counter Terror operative in 1995. Joined Rainbow between 1998 and 2003. Described as a "survivor".  Annika Löfquist (Sweden; ex-Nationella Insatsstyrkan ). Born in 1966. Löfquist is an electronic genius, with her name on fourteen different patents of electronic eavesdropping equipment. Attended Stockholm University, graduated with a B.S. in physics. Served as an engineer in Microelektronik from 1988 to 1992, and still consults them from time to time. Recruited into Stockholm Police Department as an electronic specialist. Joined Rainbow between 2000 and 2003. Courageous and intelligent, but lack of military training makes her a little overconfident in some situations.  Alexandre Noronha (Brazil; ex-regular army, former CTD). A former career soldier from Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Graduated from a military academy, served in the regular army corps. (1982-1987) and the Counter Terrorist Detachment, 1st Special Operations Battalion (1988-1997). Well known CT operator in North and South America, specialises in jungle operations and long range intel gathering, and has a reputation as a no nonsense soldier. Considered stern and humourless by his fellow Rainbow operatives, his only tastes are opera and classical music.  Karl Haider (Austria; ex-Austrian Army/EKO Cobra). One of the younger Rainbow operators, former career soldier from Graz, Austria. Joined Austrian Army in 1992, transferred to EKO Cobra four years later. Participated in a raid against a terror cell's headquarters in '1998, and single handedly saved seven hostages. Joined Rainbow between 2000 and 2002. Unstoppable in combat situations, and is extremely aggressive and iron willed. He also reappears in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a European Federation Armored Battlegroup commander.  Pak Suo-Won (South Korea; ex-Special Mission Battalion, 707th). Fifth son of a Kangnung fisherman, Pak joined the SK army at a very early age. Slight in build, but has astonishing physical endurance and excelled at all physical training exercises in basic. Specialises in long range recon operations, often going months undercover in infiltration. Cheerful and optimistic. Has a strange phobia with boats.  Kevin Sweeney (UK; MI5 'T' Branch). Joined Birmingham Police as patrol officer, finally becoming a detective and joining Special Branch.  Coordinated a series of operations which led to the fall of a right wing domestic terrorist group in the British Isles. Recruited by MI5 as an agent as a result of these successful operations and provided a posting in MI5's counter-terrorism branch ('T' Branch) in London.  An excellent burglar and good actor who can maintain his composure even under the most stressful situations.  Kure Galanos (Greece; ELDYK). Born in Nicosia, Cyprus during the ethnic crisis between Greeks and Turks. Daughter of an ex-LOK sharpshooter, who taught her his specialty during prolonged hunting trips. Attempted to join the Greek MYK force, but was denied due to her gender. Joined ELDYK, and forged a reputation as an outstanding marksman in adverse conditions. Described as a "force of nature".  Homer Johnston (U.S.; 101st Airborne, Green Beret, Delta Force). Born in Boise, Idaho on August 23, 1972. Former Green Beret and Delta member. Part of 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, he found his way into Black Ops by 1989. Definitive distance runner, relies on stealth and speed to set up his sniper locations. Expert with all forms of rifles.  Jamal Murad (Egypt; Unit 777). Murad joined the Egyptian armed forces rather than continue his scholarship. Privately upset by the reputation of Egypt's Unit 777, Murad set out to change the organization from within. His contacts with US, British and German training units convinced him there was a better way, but that Egypt would not be taking that path soon enough for him. His exceptional skills, both linguistic and military, landed him a frequent cross training position with the SAS, where he came to the attention of Rainbow.  Arkadi Novikov (Russia). Born in Minsk, in what is now Belarus. Novikov is the son of a career army officer; his family is politically very well connected, and has made the transition from the USSR to the CIS very well indeed. Novikov enjoyed the finest education and living standard available, including an engineering degree from the University of Moscow. He spurned the regular army to take a prized field position in the enforcement arm of the KGB, only to find it disintegrating beneath him. When his co-workers joined the forming Russian Mafias, Novikov left the city to return to Minsk where the newly independent Belarus army offered him a chance to lead a CT team of his own creation. A series of low profile but well-planned and executed missions brought him to the attention of RAINBOW, which Novikov gladly joined. He also reappears in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a Russian Airborne Battalion commander.  Alain DuBarry (France; Gendarmerie Nationale, GIGN). Joined the Gendarmerie Nationale in 1990 as an officer in their computer crime division. Instrumental in thwarting a 1994 attempt by a group of Algerian nationals to bring down the French Minitel computer network using a virus spread by telephone switching software. In 1996 he was recruited by the Groupe d'Intervention Gendarmerie Nationale (GIGN), France's elite counter-terrorist unit, as a specialist in telephony and electronic surveillance. DuBarry is an expert on computers and computer nets as well as more conventional forms of surveillance. Although his role in CT actions is usually intelligence gathering and communications, as a veteran of GIGN's extensive combat training he is fully qualified to participate in armed operations. He makes a reappearance in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a European Federation Tactical Battlegroup commander.  Genedy Filatov (Russia). Served in army of former Soviet Union, 1981–85, including tour of duty in Afghanistan. Recruited by "Alfa" counter-terrorist group in 1987. Operated in all major territories of the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe. Resigned from "Alfa" in 1991 in response to that organization's ambiguous response to the failed Soviet coup. Director of operations for private security firm, 1991-96. Returned to "Alfa" during its 1997 restructuring under the Russian Federal Security Service. Filatov is a solid counter-terrorism operative. Although his training and background are unorthodox by western standards, he has a wealth of real-world experience from his years in the security forces of the former Soviet Union, and numerous contacts across eastern Europe and Asia. He also reappears in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a Russian Mechanized Battalion commander.  Louis Loiselle (France; Parachute Division, DGSE). Former member of the French Parachute Division, he was detailed to DGSE. Part of action group Service 7. Involved in tactical espionage and counter-espionage throughout Europe. Began training DGSE recruits in 1985. On assignments he is a utility player, and doesn't get shaken easily. He is a marksman with pistols and rifles, although he is experienced in all forms of counterterrorism.  Andrew Burke (UK; Royal Marines Commandos, SAS). Joined Royal Marines in 1986. Two tours of duty with British Special Air Service (SAS), 1989–91 and 1996-1999. Awarded Military Cross, 1998. Has taken part in SAS actions in twenty-two countries on four continents. Burke is a seasoned veteran of numerous covert operations. While not reckless, he has a strong can-do attitude and unlimited confidence in his abilities. As a leader he is decisive and demanding.  Emilio Narino (Colombia). Narino's early activities are shrouded in mystery, a situation he enhances with conflicting stories regarding his training and upbringing. At various times, Narino has claimed to be the nephew of a Colombian drug lord, a failed university professor, an ex-police officer, and a freedom fighter. Most team members believe that he learned his trade as a CIA assassin, a belief that Narino alternately encourages with outrageous stories or flatly denies with cold stares. Regardless, everyone agrees that Narino is a cool and composed marksman with a disquieting ability to sneak into exposed positions without being seen. Narino is a study in unpredictable mood swings. One minute joking and talkative, the next tight-lipped and silent. This never interferes with his professionalism on the job.  Einar Petersen (Norway; Emergency Response Unit). Joined the Emergency Response Unit in 1990, after his sister, while travelling in the Middle East, was wounded in a terrorist attack. Petersen is a nearly unstoppable sniper if allowed the proper setup time. He projects an air of icy calm at all times, prompting teammates to devise various pranks and embarrassing situations to disturb that calm.  Lars Beckenbauer (Germany). Drafted into the East Germany Army, 1970. Specialized in bomb disposal and demolitions. Assigned to East German Border Patrol, 1971-76. Arrested by the GDR State Security Service (Stasi) in 1976 under suspicion of involvement in several high-profile defections. Released for lack of evidence and discharged from army in 1977. Movements and activities from 1977 to 1984 are unknown. The current German government will neither confirm nor deny rumors that he was a member of the "Libellen", an underground group held responsible for several bombings of East German governmental offices in and around Berlin in the summer of 1981. Resurfaced in 1985 when he was granted asylum by West Germany after a risky crossing of the Baltic Sea in a small sailboat. Opened Pyrotechno GmbH, a security consulting firm, in 1989. Since then he has built his reputation as Germany's leading expert on explosives and demolitions. He makes a reappearance in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a European Federation Armored Battlegroup commander.  Antonio Maldini (Italy; Carabinieri, Gruppo di Intervento Speciale). Joined L'Arma dei Carabinieri in 1989 and after completing training was assigned to the Comando Carabinieri Antidroga, the Carabinieri's anti-narcotics agency. Transferred in 1995 to the Gruppo Intervento Speciale (GIS), Italy's elite counter-terrorist team. At GIS his ability to occupy positions undetected by the enemy resulted in the nickname "The Invisible Man". He is in excellent physical condition and is exceptionally quick on his feet. His demeanor is calm and somewhat aloof. Although a solid team member, he is too introspective to be a truly effective commander. He too reappears in Tom Clancy's EndWar as European Federation Airborne Battlegroup 4 commander.  Santiago Arnavisca (Spain; Guardia Civil, WEU, Unidad Especial de Intervención). Attended University of Seville, 1983-88. Joined the Guardia Civil upon graduation. Served as a brigade commander 1994-96 in the Western European Union (WEU) administration of Mostar in Bosnia where he was instrumental in rebuilding the local police force. In 1997 recruited by the Guardia Civil's counter-terrorism unit, the Unidad Especial de Intervención (UEI) as part of their focus on the growing threat of terrorist action within the European Union by former citizens of Yugoslavia. Arnavisca has competed in shooting competitions since he was a child and is an expert marksman. He speaks English, German and Italian fluently, as well as his native Spanish, and can make himself understood in most other European languages. Despite his aristocratic bearing, he is more comfortable acting as a lieutenant and advisor than a team lead. Again, he too reappears in Tom Clancy's EndWar as a European Federation Tactical Battlegroup commander.  Roger McAllen (Canada; 8 FER, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Special Emergency Response Team, JTF-2). Joined the Canadian Army as a Field Engineer, 1981. Served one tour of duty, 1981–85. Received advanced training in both combat diving and explosive ordnance disposal. Upon discharge joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and in 1988 became a member of the Special Emergency Response Team (SERT), the RCMP's elite counter-terrorism unit. When SERT was disbanded in 1993, he helped coordinate the transition of counter-terrorist responsibilities to the Canadian Armed Forces' newly formed Joint Task Force Two (JTF-2). McAllen re-enlisted in 1994 and became a full member of JTF-2 the same year. He has participated in counter-terrorist actions on three continents, including the JTF-2 extended operations in 1996-97 against war criminals in Bosnia. McAllen is a specialist in multiple areas. He is an excellent shot and is extremely aggressive in combat situations, making him a good choice as a member of an assault team, but he also has extensive experience with bomb disposal and demolitions. He is an amateur power-lifter and his strength and stamina make him a formidable opponent.  Daniel Bogart (U.S.; Keokuk Police Department, FBI). Graduated with honors with a degree in law enforcement. Worked for three years as a patrolman in the Keokuk Police Department. Hired in 1980 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Member of FBI Hostage Rescue Team 1987-97. Bogart is an excellent team lead. He has exceptional tactical skills and situational awareness from his years with HRT. Extremely cool under fire, he is also a crack shot, having won several marksmanship awards during his tenure at the FBI. His low-key demeanor and laconic sense of humor have made him a well-liked member of the Rainbow team.  Gerald Morris (U.S.; BATF, 868 Unit). Joined the American Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (BATF) in 1988 as an agent in their Explosives Division. Earned an MS in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of New Orleans during a leave of absence from BATF, 1992-1994. His thesis "Applications of Micro-stress Analysis in Accelerant Identification" is considered to be a landmark in the forensic analysis of bomb debris. Upon return to active duty in 1995 he was assigned to the BATF's International Response Team (IRT). Since 1998 he has been on extended assignment in South Korea with the South Korean counter-terrorism task force, the National Police 868 Unit, training them in techniques of bomb detection, bomb disposal, and post-bombing investigation. Morris is a team player who likes his operations to run strictly by the book. His primary specialty is forensics, but he is also an expert at the setting and disarming of all types of explosive devices. Although he knows a fair amount about conducting counter-terrorist assaults from his years working with the 868 Unit, in hostage situations he prefers an indirect approach.  Renee Raymond (U.S.; ROTC, PSYOP, Delta Force). Attended the University of Oklahoma, 1986-89 under Reserve Officers Training Corp (ROTC) program, majoring in Political Science. Entered regular U.S. Army upon graduation. Served in Kuwait, 1991. Recruited into U.S. Special Operations Psychological Operations (PSYOPS), 1992. Served in Bosnia, 1996-97. In 1998 was selected to take part in U.S. Army trial introduction of women into special operations ground combat forces. Trained with 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta (1st SFOD-D, "Delta Force"). Raymond is extremely self-reliant and resourceful. An excellent combat soldier, she is also well-versed in a variety of types of psychological warfare, and understand how both soldiers and civilians react under the stress of combat.  Tracy Woo (U.S.; Los Angeles Police Department SWAT). Joined the Los Angeles Police Department in 1992, transferred to Metro Division S.W.A.T Team in 1994, where she specialized in surveillance and negotiation. Awarded commendation for bravery for role in ending the New Millennia occupation of L.A. city hall in 1999. She can move quickly and quietly through terrorist-controlled areas and is well-versed in the installation and removal of a wide variety of electronic intelligence-gathering devices. She handles command well, but she has an independent nature and has been known to argue with her superiors. Her combat skills are average. Outspoken and self-reliant.  Jorg Walther (Germany; Bundesgrenzschutz, GSG-9). In 1990, Walther entered the German Federal Border Police Force (Bundesgrenzschutz) in 1994 at the top of his cadet class. Stationed at Saarbrücken, 1994-98. Recruited into Germany's elite counter-terrorist force, Grenzschutzgruppe 9 (GSG-9) in 1998. Completed GSG-9 training in record time, again at the top of his class. Temporarily attached to GSG-9/1, the group's primary CT strike unit, before reassignment to Rainbow. His lack of experience in the field is balanced by his extraordinary drive and determination. He is a quick learner and an exceptional team member, following every order without hesitation or question. Although his primary training was as member of an assault team, he is also well-versed in wire-tapping and electronic surveillance. He is clearly being groomed for advancement by the Bundesgrenzschutz command and his assignment to Rainbow reflects the German government's long-term commitment to international CT collaboration.  Ayana Yacoby (Israel; Israeli Army, Mossad). Joined the regular Israeli army, 1992. Transferred to Sayeret Mat'kal in 1995, where she served in the general staff reconnaissance unit. Recruited in 1997 by the Mossad. Specialization in infiltration and intelligence gathering. Speaks fluent English and Arabic. Unmarried. Ayana is a master of the silent kill. Her training has prepared her for moving stealthily into hostile territory and neutralizing whatever threats may confront her. She is extremely intelligent with little tolerance for fools. The quintessential professional, she has been known to complain about the "cowboy attitude" of some of the other members of the team  Bishop a.k.a., Rainbow Five (U.S.; former Rainbow Academy Recruit Instructor). Bishop, the main protagonist of Vegas 2, was offered the position of Deputy Director at the end of the aforementioned game, implying that either Colonel Stanley or Colonel Copeland has left Rainbow or a third deputy director position was created. Prior to this, Bishop was a Drill Instructor and has trained many Rainbow Operatives, including Logan Keller and Gabriel Nowak. His experience and knowledge in the field is invaluable and with it, he had overcome impossible odds. It is also implied by his former student, Gabriel Nowak that he is unmarried and it is due to this that his students tend to know him personally. In one of his customized head, there is a tattoo of the Eagle, Globe, and Anchor on his right neck.  Joanna Torres (Canada; ex-Canadian Security Intelligence Service). Joanna Torres is Alpha Team's on-site intelligence officer, and is the one who briefed Logan Keller before each operation. It is believed that she was recruited somewhere between 2000 and 2008. Torres was transferred along with Logan to Bravo Team, and took over as their intelligence officer, (Bravo's original intel officer, Sharon Judd, had been wounded by a sniper during the Bravo's concurrent operation) briefing them on the situation in Vegas strip and the Nevada Dam. When the traitor Gabriel Nowak revealed himself, he took Torres and Bravo team's chopper pilot hostage, then kicked them out of the helicopter to be executed by a small group of terrorists. However, Logan and Bravo Team arrived and saved the two. Torres was heard during the last stage of Vegas 2, landing with Bravo Team to secure the villa where Nowak was hiding. Using a radio, she coordinated a SAM missile to strike the combat helicopter that was attacking Bishop, saving his life. Afterwards, she wishes Bishop good luck when he goes to confront Nowak. She is not heard of afterwards, although it is believed she is still Bravo's intel officer.  Sharon Judd (Israel; ex-Mossad) Sharon Judd was Bravo Team's former intel officer. She remains in the helicopter briefing the team prior to and during missions. She was wounded by a sniper during Bravo Team's insertion on the roof of the Elements Casino. After fast roping down from the chopper Bravo Team eliminates the sniper. After she is extracted from Elements, Bishop is informed by Chavez that she is in critical condition but alive. Prior to their insertion at the hacienda to search for Gabriel Nowak, Gary Kenyon informs the team that Sharon is alive and in stable condition. It is unknown if Sharon remains with the organization.  Brody Lukin (Russia). A pilot for Alpha Team during the terrorist attack on Las Vegas in July 2010.  Gary Kenyon (New Zealand; ex-Royal New Zealand Air Force and British Royal Air Force). He pilots the helicopter carrying Bravo Team during the events of Rainbow Six Vegas 2. He possesses excellent flying skills and is capable of putting Rainbow operatives on the ground in perilous hot spots.  Captain Logan Keller (U.S.; ex-4th Marine Regiment, Marine Force Recon, Delta Force). Keller is the main protagonist of Rainbow Six: Vegas. He was recruited in 2005, and was trained by Bishop, the future Deputy Director of Rainbow. At the beginning of the game, he was the leader of Team Alpha, a three-man fireteam consisting of himself, Gabriel Nowak, and Kan Akahashi. However, his team was captured while attempting to arrest Irena Morales, and he was transferred to Bravo Team, leading Michael Walters and Jung Park during an op in Vegas. Later, after Gabriel Nowak was revealed to be Rainbow's mole, Keller defied orders and went to aid Bishop and Bravo Team, who were raiding the villa where Nowak was holed up. He led Delta Team during this operation. It is assumed that he still holds the position of Bravo Team leader.  Michael Walters (UK; Royal Marines, Special Boat Service). Michael Walters is a British national who joined Rainbow in 2008. He was a member of the Special Boat Service and Royal Marine Commando before joining Rainbow. He was trained by Bishop and graduated as a full-fledged operative, specialising in Explosive Ordnance Disposal and heavy weapons. He is proficient in dismantling most kinds of bombs, including chemical, standard explosive and in one case a Micro-Pulse Bomb during the events of Rainbow Six Vegas. He served in a field detachment for many years. In July 2010, Walters and his teammate Jung Park were called to a situation in Las Vegas. Under command of his former mentor Bishop, Walters tracked down and attempted to secure a chemical explosive in a sports arena. However, he was too late, and was forced to hear the screams of the civilians in the arena as the explosive detonated. He blamed himself for being unable to reach them in time, but Bishop took full responsibility, stating that there were confirmed hostages in another area, and "he (Bishop) made the call". Later in the evening, the team successfully dismantled a conventional explosive bomb and saved multiple hostages in a penthouse casino, until Walters, along with Jung, was called back to regroup with Logan Keller in another part of the city. After a full day of fighting, and a subsequent operation in the Nevada Dam, Walters again regrouped with Bishop, this time to hunt down the Rainbow mole, Gabriel Nowak. Walters helped storm the villa were the traitor was holed up, and was almost killed when attempting to dismantle a proximity bomb that detonated in his face. Bishop managed to save him, and afterwards, commented that "I (Bishop) didn't think I would get to you in time". Walters responded by saying "I knew you had my back." Michael Walters is last seen at the end of Vegas 2, congratulating Bishop on his/her promotion to Deputy Director.  Jung Park (South Korea; ex-ROK Army, 707th Special Mission Unit). Jung Park is a Rainbow operative who joined in 2009. He is an IT expert and reconnaissance/sniper specialist. He was trained by Bishop at the Academy.  Must have a Pro account at IMDB to view these details Rainbow 6 Official Website Rainbow Six Retreat Planet Rainbow Six ClancyFAQ.com Woody2000 Rainbow Six (PC) Mod Downloads Warfighters Combat Simulation Days
