   Sir Anthony Joseph Francis "Tony" O'Reilly (born 7 May 1936, Dublin, Ireland), is a former Irish businessman and international rugby union player. He is known for his involvement in the Independent News & Media Group, which he led from 1973 to 2009,Dublin, Ireland, The Irish Times, Friday 13 May (quoted at eircom.net also), and Saturday 14 May 2009  and as former CEO and Chairman of the H.J. Heinz Company. He was the leading shareholder of Waterford Wedgwood. Perhaps Ireland's first billionaire, as of 26 May 2014 O'Reilly is being pursued in the Irish courts for debts amounting to €22 million by AIB, following losses amounting to hundreds of millions of euro in his unsuccessful attempt to stop Denis O'Brien from assuming control of Independent News & Media. As a rugby player, he represented Ireland, the British and Irish Lions and the Barbarians and is enshrined as a member of the International Rugby Board's Hall of Fame. O'Reilly has six children and 19 grandchildren and is married to a Greek shipping heiress and horse breeder. He lives primarily in Lyford Cay in the Bahamas and Kilcullen in Ireland, with frequent stays at Glandore, County Cork, Ireland. O'Reilly was born in Dublin, the only child of a civil servant, John O'Reilly (1906–1976), and Aileen O'Connor (1914–1989).  O'Reilly's Drogheda-born father, eventually an inspector-general of customs, was born "Reilly" and added the O' when he applied to join the Irish Civil Service. Previously married with four older children, but estranged from his first wife, John O'Reilly married Aileen O'Connor in 1973, after the death of his first wife and only a little time after he had told his son of his other family.The Daily Telegraph, London, U.K.: "The Real O'Reilly", 9 August 2004, Martin BakerThe Irish Times, Dublin, Ireland, 12 February 1994: Weekend section, page 3, "Paperchaser", Jim Dunne  O'Reilly had been told about the situation by a Jesuit when he was 15, but kept it secret.  He arranged for the John and Aileen O'Reilly Library at Dublin City University to be named after his parents, and the O'Reilly Institute at Trinity College Dublin to be named for his father, who had studied there. O'Reilly, named "Tony" after his mother's favourite brother, grew up on Griffith Avenue, a broad middle-class street in the Drumcondra/Glasnevin area of Dublin. He had prominent red hair. He holidayed with family, including an aunt in Balbriggan, cousins in Sligo and others in Drogheda. In 1951, the family moved to a bungalow in Santry. Educated at Belvedere College from the age of six, O'Reilly was known for sporting proficiency in football, cricket and tennis and rugby union. As a youth he played soccer for Home Farm. In cricket he was a member of the Junior Cup-winning team in 1950; in tennis, he was in a Leinster Schools Cup-winning team, and reached the under-15 national semi-finals.  He was also noted for his acting skills (notably in Gilbert and Sullivan operettas such as Iolanthe, and Dunsany's A Night at an Inn).  He was an altar boy, and a regular attender at chapel, and during his time there spent a summer in the Gaeltacht to improve his Irish language skills.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 32-33 He passed the Leaving Certificate at 17, and with four school mates, studied philosophy, still at Belvedere, for a year after this, while developing his rugby.  He was a prefect for his last two years at the school, and a senior member of a key sodality. O'Reilly went on to study law simultaneously with University College, Dublin and the then Incorporated Law Society of Ireland, in practice with Gerry Quinn.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 58-59  He came fifth in Ireland in intermediate exams in 1956, and first and third in the country in final examinations in 1958, and was enrolled as a solicitor in November 1958.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 86 He never practised after training, but later became chairman of the major Dublin solicitors' firm now known as Matheson. O'Reilly earned a PhD in agricultural marketing from the University of Bradford, and in addition holds at least one honorary doctorate. Between 1955 and 1970 O'Reilly won 29 caps for Ireland. His Five Nations career of 15 years, 23 days is the longest in history, a record shared with fellow Ireland great Mike Gibson. He made his senior international debut, aged just 18, against France on 22 January 1955. He scored his four tries for Ireland against France on 28 January 1956; against Scotland on 25 February 1956; against Wales in 1959; and against France in 1963. He made his final appearance for Ireland on 14 February 1970, after a six-year absence from the national team, against England.Tony O'Reilly Irish Rugby: Player search This final appearance was an 11th-hour replacement, denying Frank O'Driscoll—father of Brian, Ireland's most-capped player—what would prove to be his only chance at a Test cap. O'Reilly toured twice with the British Lions, on their 1955 tour to South Africa and their 1959 tour to Australia and New Zealand. He made his debut for the Lions on 26 June 1955, scoring two tries against a Northern Universities XV. He played 15 games during the 1955 tour, scoring 16 tries. This included hat-tricks against a North Eastern Districts XV on 20 July and Transvaal on 23 July. He also played in all four Tests against South Africa, making his Test debut on the right wing before a crowd of 95,000 at Ellis Park on 6 August. He scored a try in the Lions 23-22 victory. He scored another try in the fourth Test on 24 September. On the 1959 tour he played a further 21 games and scored 21 tries. This included a hat-trick against King Country/Counties on 19 August. He played in all six tests, two against Australia and four against New Zealand. He scored tries in the two test wins against Australia and in the first and fourth tests against New Zealand. His total of 37 tries for the Lions on two tours remains a record.Tony O'Reilly The British & Irish Lions Between 1955 and 1963 O’Reilly also made 30 appearances and scored 38 tries for the Barbarians. He made his debut on 9 April 1955 in a 6-3 win against Cardiff, and his final appearance against Swansea on 15 April 1963. On the Barbarians' 1958 tour of South Africa, O'Reilly scored 12 tries, seven of them in the game against East Africa.Starmer-Smith,Nigel; The Barbarians (1977) Macdonald & Jane's Publisher, pp 234-240 isbn=0-86007-552-4 He remains the Barbarians record holder for both appearances Most Appearances Barbarians RFC and tries.Most Tries Barbarians RFC O'Reilly was a member of the IRFU Commercial Committee. He was in the first class of inductees into the International Rugby Hall of Fame in 1997, and was inducted into the IRB Hall of Fame in 2009. O'Reilly went from college to work as a management consultant for Weston-Evans in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, he earned £200 annually, which was a very good salary by the then Irish standards.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 89-91 While there, he continued his rugby career, with Leicester. His work included cost accounting and time-and-motion studies, in industries ranging from shoe-making to pottery. He then moved to Sutton's of Cork, selling agricultural products, coal and oil. He joined An Bord Bainne, the Irish Dairy Board, in 1962, as General Manager, and developed the successful Kerrygold "umbrella brand" for Irish export butter. In 1966 he became Managing Director of the Irish Sugar Company. He soon developed a joint venture for freeze-drying food with the H. J. Heinz Co. In February 1963, O'Reilly was involved in an accident between Urlingford and Johnstown, when his car struck a cyclist, who was injured. Locals testified that the injured man was careless, and he had no lights or reflector, and had been on the wrong side of the road. O'Reilly was convicted of driving with undue care, and fined 4 pounds, and since then he has rarely driven, especially at night.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 140-142 In 1969, after discussion with the Taoiseach Jack Lynch, who offered him a post such as Minister for Agriculture if he would stay, O'Reilly joined Heinz. There he made his name in international business, becoming MD of the Heinz subsidiary in the UK, its largest non-US holding and the source of half of the group profit. He moved to the company HQ in Pittsburgh in 1971 when he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the North America and Pacific region. In 1973, R. Burt Gookin and Jack Heinz made him COO and President.  He became CEO in 1979 when Mr. Gookin then Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer retired. O'Reilly earned his Ph.D. in 1980, with a thesis on agricultural incomes and marketing in Ireland.  Though he was proud of his work with Bord Bainne, Irish Sugar and the Erin - Heinz JV, he concluded that Irish farmers were benefiting much more from price-boosting subsidies than from commercial development. He became Chairman of Heinz in 1987, succeeding HJ Heinz II, and becoming the first non-Heinz family member to hold that post. His guidance was seen as having helped transform the company into a major international competitor, its value increasing twelvefold (from $908 million to $11 billion). O'Reilly left Heinz in 1998 after several years during which analysts questioned the company's performance, and after challenges from corporate governance groups and major pension funds including CalPERS and Business Week magazine;Business Week, 15 September 1997, Lead cover story: "The CEO and the Board" he was succeeded by his deputy, William R. Johnson. During his time at Heinz, O'Reilly held roles as a major shareholder and chairman of several companies, including Waterford Wedgwood (1995–2009) and Independent News & Media, and of a major partnership of solicitors, Matheson, in Dublin. Provision for him to do this was written into his contract before he went to the United States. After he left Heinz, he focused on three of these: Independent News & Media; Waterford Wedgwood; and Fitzwilton; and later, for a brief time, eircom. He was the main shareholder in Arcon, the Irish base-metal mining company that developed the Galmoy lead-zinc deposit, the company being co-founded with Richard Conroy, and later sold to Lundin Mining in 2005. He also retained a 40% stake in Providence Resources Plc, the Irish-based oil and gas exploration and development company. O'Reilly bought into Independent News & Media (INM), a Dublin-based print media company, in 1973, and having held over 28%, with leverage over more than 29.5% with family and other connected parties, had his shareholding diluted sharply since 2009. He pushed the company to expand into other national markets and to increase its reach in Ireland. In the 1990s INM bought into South Africa (from 1994),Dublin, Ireland: The Irish Times, p.1 and p.14, "O'Reilly buys SA papers" Australia (from 1988) and New Zealand (from 1995), acquiring 38 newspaper titles, over 70 radio stations, cable and telecoms interests at a cost of around €1.3 billion. In the United Kingdom, INM  took control of the national broadsheet The Independent in 1995, edging out MGN and Prisa. The company has over 200 national and regional newspaper and magazine titles in total, revenues of €1.7 billion and profits of €110.7 million. The group has assets of around €4.7 billion and debts in the region of €1.3 billion.Dublin, Ireland: INM Preliminary Results, 2007 On Friday 13 March 2009, it was announced that on O'Reilly's 73rd birthday, 7 May, he would resign as both CEO and a member of the Board of INM, to be succeeded by his son, Gavin.  Further, the often-criticised large size of the board would be reduced from 17 to 10, and would include three nominees of Denis O'Brien. These announcements were actioned, and O'Reilly became President Emeritus of the group. The markets reacted positively to the news, especially to the explicit truce between the O'Reilly and O'Brien shareholder blocs, with Denis O'Brien voicing public support for Gavin O'Reilly as CEO-designate. Among other investments, O'Reilly has or had until recently interests in: In conjunction with his brother in law, in 1996, he backed a management team that created Lockwood Financial Partners (and its sister company E-mat). Lockwood, based in Malvern Pennsylvania, specialised in providing independent financial investment advice services to brokers of high-net-worth individuals, and went on to become one of the largest independent advisory companies in the United States before being sold to Bank of New York in 2001. At the time, assets under management were estimated to be in excess of $11 billion. He was part of the Valentia consortium that bought into Eircom, the former Irish state phone company, in November 2001, for €2.8 billion, beating a rival offer of €3 billion.  In 2004 the company was partly refloated, and in 2005 sold at a profit to Babcock and Brown of Australia. O'Reilly drew salaries, share options and benefits from many companies, in addition to making capital gains on shareholdings. An article in The Village Magazine suggested that he earned €110 million since 2000 just from Independent News and Media.  However, it is important to note that he and his families sustained the historic Waterford Glass operations at a huge loss for many years - they would certainly have closed much earlier without their funding. Sir Anthony O’Reilly was honoured with the Media Person of the Year Award at the 55th Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival in May 2008. O'Reilly has sponsored and supported a wide range of charitable activities, and continues to do so. Many of these, such as the many-year support of a Professorship in Australian Studies at UCD, were arranged together with his first wife, and likewise today, he and his current wife will often jointly support an activity, such as sponsorship of a gallery at the National Science Historical Museum adjacent to Birr Castle. He has shown a particular interest in naming rights, where a contribution to a project, generally of 5% to 20%, allows a donor to add a name to the project, and has received at least one such "name" as a gift. O'Reilly has supported many local initiatives, from floral street displays and signage for local nature walks in Kilcullen to commissioning, with his wife, a piece of music for the launch of the Dun Ailinne Interpretative Park.  A presentation in recognition of this was made mid-2009.  O'Reilly is also the Patron of the Kilcullen GAA club. The O'Reilly Foundation is a charity set up by O'Reilly with a Board of Trustees composed of family members, chaired by his wife, and a Scholarship Board headed by Professor Emeritus John Kelly of UCD, succeeding Ken Whitaker. With an office address at a family home in Dublin, and Amanda Hopkins as Executive Secretary, it contributes to various projects, with an emphasis on the education sector, primarily running an annual scholarship programme, awarding 2-3 advanced, usually multi-year, third-level scholarships, each for over €20,000 per annum. Both through the Foundation and before its inception, O'Reilly has contributed to a range of University projects in Ireland, with notable examples at Dublin City University, University College Dublin, Trinity College Dublin and Queen's University Belfast. O'Reilly also paid for the construction of the state-of-the-art 600 seat O'Reilly Theatre in Belvedere College, and has regularly funded projects in the college. The family also contributed to the construction of the O'Reilly Theatre in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and the 181 seat O'Reilly Theatre at Keble College, Oxford. O'Reilly has contributed towards the O’Reilly Institute, backed the development of Jewish Studies, and supported the Chair in Neuroscience. He was a Pro-Chancellor of the University of Dublin from 1994 until retiring on age grounds at the end of the 2010/2011 academic year, and was also a member of the board of the Trinity Foundation. O'Reilly supported his Alma Mater, UCD, by funding the O'Reilly Hall, named in honour of his parents. This building is a major focal point of the UCD campus and in addition to its use for exams, the hall is now a leading venue for large events in Dublin. The John and Aileen O`Reilly Library at Dublin City University was named in honour of his parents, as the O`Reilly Foundation contributed a substantial sum to the library's capital costs in 2000. The new library currently((when)) under construction at Queen's University of Belfast was to be named the Sir Anthony O'Reilly Library,Queen's University Belfast | The Sir Anthony O'Reilly Library in recognition of support for the University, including a pledge of £4 million (of a £44 Million cost for the library), £2 Million from his personal charity, The O'Reilly Foundation and £2 Million from Independent News and Media / The Belfast Telegraph and the Ireland Funds. The new library will now be known as either "The New Library" or "The Library at Queen's" after a request by O'Reilly in April 2009.O'Reilly removes his name from new Queen's University Library - Sunday Business Post, Sunday 26 April 2009, Nicola Cooke The American Ireland Fund, now the central entity in The Ireland Funds, was established in Boston by O'Reilly and his friend, Pittsburgh businessman Dan Rooney, in 1976, and for many years this and later similar initiatives in other countries, took up a considerable amount of his time. The funds, now a network with more than ten national entities, have raised over $450 million to date.  O'Reilly is the Chairman. Rooney became US Ambassador to Ireland in July 2009. O'Reilly was first engaged in 1958, to Dorothy Collins, whom he met in 1954, with the marriage planned for 1959.London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1994; Fallon, Ivan "The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; the authorised biography; in paperback, Coronet Books, pages 91-92 O'Reilly met his first wife, Australian secretary and pianist Susan M. Cameron, the daughter of a wealthy Australian mining figure in whose name he endowed a professorship at UCD for at least a decade, in 1959 in Australia, after she was suggested as a social contact when he was touring for rugby. After courting her when she moved to London, they married in 1962.  He had six children by her, born 1963-66: Susan Wildman, Anthony Cameron O'Reilly (generally "Cameron"), Justine O'Reilly, Gavin O'Reilly, Caroline Dempsey, and St John Anthony ("Tony Junior"); the last three are triplets. All three boys are involved in family business interests, while the daughters are not known to be, the eldest being a qualified pilot, the second a lawyer and the third a full-time mother.  The eldest daughter took a bachelor's degree at Yale, and a Master's in History at Oxford.New York, New York, US: The New York Times, 15 August 1993, Weddings: "Susan O'Reilly and Tarik Wildman" All the O'Reilly children married and O'Reilly has 19 grandchildren. Youngest daughter Caroline was married at the restored Church of St. Mary at Castlemartin Estate on 1 June 1991, while eldest child Susan O'Reilly married investment banker Tarik C. Wildman (1959-) on 14 August 1993 before an Episcopal dean at the same church. Gavin O'Reilly married Alison Doody there some years later. The O'Reillys separated in the late 1980s, having remained together through years of many rumours of O'Reilly affairs but apparently going their separate ways over O'Reilly's hectic social life, and Susan O'Reilly settled in London, where she remains, in a house bought for her by O'Reilly.  They divorced very discreetly in 1989 or 1990 but remained in contact, attending family events, and with more than one public occasion where the current and former wives sat either side of O'Reilly. O'Reilly shortly after married Chryss Goulandris (sometimes "Chryssanthi(n)e" or Christina), a Greek shipping heiress some years his junior, who breeds and races thoroughbred horses, and whom he first met in New York, when she accompanied her brother to a business meeting.  Their acquaintance developed at horse races, and in further meetings in the Bahamas and in Ireland. The wedding took place in the Bahamas on 4 September 1991. Chryss O'Reilly, who breeds and races as "Skymarc Farms" and under other names, and who owns stud farms in Normandy and other locations, is well-known on the racecourses of Ireland, Britain and France as Lady O'Reilly and is very knowledgeable on all aspects of the equine industry. She was reputedly worth more than O'Reilly when they met, as the tabloids and even some mainstream news media pointed out. Chryss made a naming gift in her husband's honour in 1999 with the O'Reilly Theater in Pittsburgh, and he bought her a famous Jackie Onassis diamond ring for over $US2 million.Forbes Magazine: Forbes, Power Couples, retrieved April 2008  The second Mrs O'Reilly's brother has been a close business ally of O'Reilly for many years since around the time of the marriage. A number of homes are associated with O'Reilly, including his current official main residence, Lissadell, with a beach within private gated community Lyford CayPittsburgh, 22 July 2001: Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, "Living large; Anthony O'Reilly rules a global business empire, enchants all those in his sphere and is now addressed as "Sir", Cristina Rouvalis near Nassau in the Bahamas.  Still a major base, and for many years his principal residence, is Castlemartin, a "big house" dating in current form from the 18th century, at Kilcullen, County Kildare (which has associated stud farm and cattle breeding premises on the large estate lands). O'Reilly purchased Castlemartin in 1972 from the Earl of Gowrie, and spent millions on improvements to the house and on restoration of the 15th century Church of St Mary in the grounds. On 15 February 2008 permission was granted for developments of two ancillary houses on a remote part of the estate, adjoining Kilcullen (Bridge) village's main street, incorporating residential, restaurant and retail space.  In October 2007, O'Reilly paid a record €125,000 per acre for  Hollyhill Stud in Carnalway near Brannockstown,Leinster Leader, 17 October 2007: Auction Watch under 3 kilometres from Kilcullen.  The stud farm on the banks of the Liffey, with a 10-room house and a cottage, was thought to have been intended for one of his daughters.The Irish Times, 11 October 2007, Property: Sales Results In late 1995, he and his wife purchased a former solicitor's office, a four-storey Georgian house on Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, with a courtyard and coachhouse with separate entrance. The 1 million Irish pound house, formerly owned by railway pioneer William Dargan, was a base when travel to Castlemartin was not feasible, and a place for meetings and his private office.Dublin, Ireland / The Irish Times / Siobhan Creaton / 8 March 1996 / p29, Business This Week / "Fitzwilliam Square", "O'Reilly buys period home in Dublin Square" O'Reilly also has a holiday compound, Shorecliffe, comprising several houses, garden areas and two swimming pools, by the sea in Glandore, County Cork. The O'Reillys also own a chateau "built on the ruins of the castle where William the Conqueror plotted his 1066 invasion of England" at Deauville in France. For many years a key O'Reilly residence was a 34-room mock Tudor house of  at Fox Chapel, Pittsburgh, with  of grounds.  This property, his second home in that area, with eight bedrooms and bathrooms, an "Irish bar" in the basement, tennis courts, Japanese and English themed gardens and swimming and tennis facilities, was sold for around $US2.4 million in 2000The Irish Times, Dublin, Ireland: Property, 8 August 2000, from the Wall Street Journal As of May 2014, it is reported that the residential complex in Glandore, the house on Fitzwilliam Square and the Castlemartin Estate have been or will be placed on the market. O'Reilly's sons have noted that he is still a keen player of tennis. For a period in the 1990s O'Reilly chaired a committee set up by the then Lord Mayor of Dublin, Gay Mitchell, aiming to bring the Olympic Games to Dublin in 2004. The O'Reillys have been significant art collectors for many years, with the biggest known acquisition being Monet's Le Portail (Soleil), bought in 2000, at Sotheby's of London, for $US24 million,London, UK: The Evening Standard, 3 March 2004, William Cash, "The Luck of the Irish" and others including works by William Orpen and Jack Yeats, and bronzes and statues. In June 2008 it was reported that O'Reilly had commissioned a bound catalogue of his art collection, 15&nbsp;cm thick, at a cost of €125,000 for 500 copies, edited by Suzanne Macdougald and with notes by, among others, Bruce Arnold.  Copies were said to have been given to the President of Ireland and the Queen of the United Kingdom. O'Reilly is an enthusiastic networker, and from early developed a wide range of acquaintances and friends. Among the closest were Kevin McGoran and Jim McCarthy. He made contacts at high levels, which sometimes included becoming friendly with controversial figures such as Henry Kissinger and Robert Mugabe. He hosted Nelson Mandela more than once, and knows a range of Irish and American politicians. For over 47 years, from his time at Suttons of Cork, O'Reilly had a strong executive secretary, Olive Deasy (1932–2007), who managed aspects of his work and personal lives, living with his family for much of this timeDublin, Ireland: The Irish Independent, 19 April 2007, Ralph Riegel: "Sir Anthony O'Reilly pays tribute", incl. "Sir Anthony said that Ms Deasy was renowned for her loyalty, dedication, organisational skills, calmness under pressure and, above all, her discretion and confidentiality. 'I moved to Cork in 1960 and I first met Olive through Suttons. I chose Olive as my secretary and so began a 47-year partnership. It is amazing to think how the years have gone behind us,' he said. 'from Suttons, UCC, to Bord Bainne, the Irish Sugar Company, the HJ Heinz Company, The Independent, the Ireland Fund, Waterford Wedgwood and, most important of all, my family.'"  Also important was his driver, Arthur Whelan. O'Reilly's executive secretary in Dublin is Mandy Scott, while from 2000 to 2009, O'Reilly also had a personal nurse and assistant, Sabina Vidunas, who travelled with him."...personal assistant Sabina Vidunas a sign to show he's flagging, but then the adrenalin kicks in and he's off again. Over the years he has put together a formula that smooths the kinks from everyday life: the delightful Sabina at his elbow from dawn until bedtime, gently removing empty teacups, waking him and Chryss with a cheery rendition of Oh What A Beautiful Morning, videoing his speeches for the family record, keeping the VIP cars waiting, lining up the Diet Cokes, attempting the impossible - to keep him on time." In 1978, O'Reilly was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Laws (LLD) by Trinity College Dublin. In 1988, he was appointed an Honorary Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) for services to Irish-Australian relationships. O'Reilly was knighted, as a Knight Bachelor, by Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain in the 2001 New Year's Honours, "for services to Northern Ireland" - including in recognition for his work as head of The Ireland Funds charity. O'Reilly, who describes himself as a constitutional nationalist, sought the approval of the Irish Government in relation to the award, because it is a requirement of the Constitution of Ireland that "No title of nobility or of honour may be accepted by any citizen except with the prior approval of the Government".  As O'Reilly is also a British subject, in part due to his pre-1949 Irish birth,As a result of the British Nationality Act 1948, Irish citizens (citizens of the Republic of Ireland) no longer had British subject status from 1 January 1949 if they did not acquire citizenship of the UK & Colonies or that of another Commonwealth country, notwithstanding that the Irish Free State did not cease to be one of His Majesty's dominions until 18 April 1949. However, section 2 of the Act allowed certain Irish citizens who were British subjects before 1949 to apply at any time to the Secretary of State to remain British subjects. Applications had to be based on: previous Crown service under the United Kingdom government; possession of a British passport; or associations by way of descent, residence or otherwise with the United Kingdom or any Crown colony, protectorate, UK mandated territory or UK trust territory. he holds a substantive and not just an honorary knighthood, and can validly style himself Sir, as he has done; see British honours system. In May 2014 the Sunday Times reported that O'Reilly and his wife had a net worth of around 545 million USD, down sharply from March 2012, then the Sunday Independent reported that O'Reilly had a net worth of €1 billion, excluding his wife's estimated €300 Million from her shipping family inheritances. O’Reilly is now locked in a legal case with the State-controlled bank, AIB, in relation to his multimillion-euro debts. AIB are seeking a summary judgment against him at the High Court. The commercial court in Dublin has refused a six-month stay or delay in a judgement against O'Reilly. In June 2014, the court entered a judgement of nearly 46 million euro against him. Judge Peter Kelly said he believed there was force in the argument that O’Reilly and his investment companies are insolvent. During the hearing, lawyers for O'Reilly admitted that he also owed large amounts to other banks and financial institutions. This means that he will have to sell properties in Ireland to meet his debts to AIB bank. An authorised biography, The Player: The Life of Tony O'Reilly, was produced by Ivan Fallon, a journalist and biographer in the early 1990s, now a senior executive at one of O'Reilly's companies,London, UK, 1994: Hodder & Staughton; Fallon, Ivan: "The Player, The Life of Tony O'Reilly"; 23 cm, 360 pp, ill. and is the only study of any length.  O'Reilly facilitated the project, and the author was given access to family members, including past and current wives, and to staff and business colleagues. Fallon insisted in the foreword that he had complete discretion on what to include and how to tell it, excluding only some private family matters. While giving great detail on some business matters, the book says almost nothing about O'Reilly's children and little of his second wife. It gives considerable detail on business matters, and does question some of O'Reilly's assertions, notably about his Irish business interests. It also gives much detail on O'Reilly's parents' situations and especially his father's family, detail which the author notes even O'Reilly did not have until the book gathered it, and includes some fine detail about his residences. In 2015, another biography of O'Reilly was published by Gill and Macmillan. Written by Matt Cooper, and titled "The Maximalist: The Rise and Fall of Tony O’Reilly", the book is said to offer an "overview of a man described by the publishers as “one of Ireland’s most remarkable public figures”".http://bizplus.ie/new-biography-of-tony-oreilly/     Fitzwilton, an industrial holding and investment company established with friends (Ferguson and Leonard) in the early 1970s. Over the years, the Company has been involved in numerous business activities ranging from textiles, to house construction, to fertilser manufacturing, to bottling, to oil and gas investments, to supermarkets to light manufacturing. Taken private in the late 1990s in conjunction with his brother-in-law, the company is now involved in light manufacturing, property investments, financial services and architectural signage Waterford Wedgwood Plc, the majority of which was placed in administration on 5 January 2009, and of which he was chairman until that date Providence Resources Plc, an Irish-based oil and gas exploration and production company, in which he holds a stake of at least 40%. The company has interests in Ireland, the UK, the US and Nigeria Landis+Gyr, one of the world's largest smart metering companies, in which he held a 7% stake prior to its sale to Toshiba List of billionaires London, UK, 1994: Hodder & Staughton; Fallon, Ivan: "The Player, The Life of Tony O'Reilly" (HB, 1995, Coronet Books paperback edition) - The authorised biography The O`Reilly Foundation Forbes.com: Forbes World's Richest People Sir Anthony O'Reilly speech at The Ireland Funds Gala Evening 2007 (video)
