    Anthony Wayne "Tony" Stewart (born May 20, 1971) is an American professional stock car racing driver and NASCAR team owner.Associated Press "SPORTS BRIEFING | AUTO RACING; Stewart Joins Haas Team", The New York Times, July 11, 2008. Retrieved June 22, 2009.  He is a three-time Sprint Cup Series champion as a driver. Throughout his racing career, Stewart has won racing titles in Indy, midget, sprint and USAC Silver Crown cars.Craggs, Tommy. "Quick in His Seat", The New York Times, March 2, 2008. Retrieved June 22, 2009. He is the only driver in history to win a championship in both IndyCar and NASCAR. Stewart owns and drives the No. 14 Chevrolet SS in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series for his own team, Stewart-Haas Racing under crew chief Chad Johnston. From 1999 to 2008, he drove the No. 20 Joe Gibbs Racing car, under crew chief Greg Zipadelli with The Home Depot as the primary sponsor. While driving for car owner Joe Gibbs, Stewart won two Cup Series championships in 2002 and 2005. In 2011, Stewart became the first owner-driver since Alan Kulwicki to win the Cup Series championship, which ended Jimmie Johnson's streak of consecutive championships at five. Stewart is the only driver to win the Cup Series championship under the old points system and the chase playoff format, and is the only driver to win the title under three different sponsorships (Winston in 2002, Nextel in 2005, and Sprint in 2011). He is also the first driver in the Cup Series to win the championship by virtue of a tie breaker (number of wins during the season is the first level tie breaker; Stewart had five while eventual runner-up Carl Edwards had one). Stewart also has a Sprint Cup Championship as an owner, as the Stewart-Haas owned No. 4 car driven by Kevin Harvick won the Cup in 2014.  This gives Stewart four Sprint Cup Championships total for his career (two as a driver, one as an owner/driver, and one as an owner). Stewart was born in Columbus, Indiana, on May 20, 1971, and attended Columbus North High School, where he played the Trombone in the Columbus North Marching Band and graduated in 1989. He grew up racing go karts and was successful very early, winning a World Karting Association championship in 1987. He moved up to the United Midget Racing Association (UMRA) where he raced TQ (three quarter) midgets until 1991, when he again moved up this time to the United States Auto Club (USAC) series with help from one of his karting sponsors and friend Mark Dismore. Stewart was the USAC Rookie of the Year in 1991, USAC National Midget Series Champion in 1994 and 1995 and USAC Silver Crown Series champion in 1995. In 1995, Stewart became the first driver to win USAC's version of the Triple Crown, earning championships in all three of USAC's major divisions, National Midget, Sprint, and Silver Crown. His winning the Hut Hundred and 4-Crown Nationals were the highlights of the year. When he was not racing IndyCars, he raced stock cars. In 1996, Stewart made his NASCAR Busch Series debut, driving for car owner Harry Rainer. In nine races, he had a best finish of 16th place. He had more success in a one-time ride in the Craftsman Truck Series with Mueller Brothers racing, where he finished 10th. Stewart was poised to improve his Indy Racing League (IRL) standing in 1997 but at times he struggled to finish. He failed to finish the first three races of a ten race schedule, but recovered to come in second at Phoenix. At that year's Indy 500, Stewart's car was good enough to enable him to win his first IRL race, leading 64 laps. However, he trailed off near the end of the race and settled for 5th place. He finally got his first career win at Pikes Peak, where he led all but seven laps of a 200 lap race. He became the leading contender for the series' championship after a bad slump knocked points leader Davey Hamilton out of first place. Despite an average end to his season, finishing 7th, 14th, and 11th, and five DNFs, Stewart did just enough to beat Hamilton for the IRL title. He also raced in a few midget events, finishing thirteenth and eleventh in the 1997 and 1998 USAC national points, and winning the Copper Classic both years. Between his time in USAC and the IRL, Stewart earned the nickname of "Smoke", first for slipping the right rear tire during dirt races and then for blowing his engine often during his 1997 championship run.[ ]   As he had done the previous year, he raced a handful of Busch Series races in 1998. This time, he was racing for Joe Gibbs, NFL Hall of Fame head coach of the Washington Redskins, who was having major success with Bobby Labonte in the Winston Cup Series. When Stewart was able to finish races, he finished in the top 10, and had a 3rd-place finish at Charlotte. Stewart so impressed Gibbs that he was signed to drive the majority of the Busch schedule in 1998 to go along with a full-time IRL schedule. The double duty did not affect his performance in either series. In the IRL, he won twice and finished 3rd in the championship. His season was a disappointment as he finished last in the Indy 500 because of an engine failure. On the Busch side, he finished in the top-five five times in 22 starts. He came close to winning his first Busch Series race at Rockingham, but was beaten on a last lap pass by Matt Kenseth. Stewart finished a solid 2nd place in 2 (of 31) starts, ahead of six drivers with more starts, and had an average finish that was comparable to some of the series' top 10 finishers. Gibbs had enough confidence in Stewart that he was moved up to a Sprint Cup ride for the 1999 season. With that move, Stewart ended his three-year career as a full-time IRL driver. After competing part-time during the 1996 NASCAR Busch Series season with the team, Stewart had planned to move up to the Winston Cup Series in 1997 driving for Ranier-Walsh Racing; however the deal fell through when Stewart decided he wasn't ready for the move. Stewart started his Sprint Cup career in 1999 with a bang, as he qualified his No. 20 The Home Depot-sponsored Pontiac on the outside pole for the Daytona 500. He showed courage in one of the Gatorade Twin 125's, when he was involved in a battle with Dale Earnhardt for the lead in the last laps. Though Earnhardt came out on top, Stewart had nonetheless impressed quite a few people with his performance. In the 500, Stewart ran near the front until problems with the car relegated him to a 28th-place finish. Stewart spent most of his rookie season wowing people, as his car was often in the Top 5. He won a pair of pole positions at short tracks, and set a series record for wins by a rookie with three—Richmond, Phoenix and Homestead—surpassing Davey Allison's record set in 1987 (Stewart's record would hold until 2002, when Jimmie Johnson tied the feat by winning three times; it should be noted that although Carl Edwards won four times in 2005, his first full Cup season, he was not regarded as a rookie by NASCAR standards because he had run more than ten Nextel Cup races in 2004). He finished his first Cup season with a 4th-place finish in the points, making it the highest points finish by a rookie in the modern era (which held until 2006 when his future teammate Denny Hamlin finished 3rd) and only bested by James Hylton, who finished 2nd as a first-timer in 1966. Not surprisingly, he ran away with the Winston Cup Rookie of the Year award. Stewart also attempted to race  on Memorial Day weekend, as he competed in both the Indy 500 during the day and the Coca-Cola 600 in Charlotte, N.C., at night. He finished in the Top 10 at both races; 9th in the 1999 Indianapolis 500 and 4th at Charlotte. However, he only completed  of the scheduled 1,100, as he finished 4 laps down at Indianapolis.  Stewart showed no signs of a sophomore slump in the 2000 NASCAR Winston Cup Series, winning a series-high six races (Martinsville, New Hampshire, Michigan, Homestead, and both Dover races). However, he fell to 6th place in the standings because of a handful of DNF's and an increase in the number of competitive drivers, among them his teammate Labonte, who won the Cup championship. Stewart also began to get some bad press for his on-track incidents. The best known of these came at Watkins Glen, when he and Jeff Gordon tangled and crashed. Stewart made his displeasure toward Gordon known in an obscenity-laden tirade. Stewart won the Turkey Night Grand Prix midget car event at Irwindale, California, which he called, “one of his greatest wins ever." Stewart got off to a scary start for the 2001 season: during the Daytona 500, he was involved in an 18-car crash on lap 173. The crash began on the back straightaway and also collected Bobby Labonte and his brother Terry, Rusty Wallace, Steve Park, Jason Leffler, Jerry Nadeau, Buckshot Jones, Andy Houston, Ward Burton, Mark Martin, Kenny Wallace, Jeff Gordon, Elliot Sadler, Dale Jarrett, Jeff Burton, John Andretti, and Robby Gordon. Stewart took the worst of it, as his car turned backwards after being hit by W. Burton, pushed over R. Gordon, then flipped twice in midair, hooked B. Labonte's hood, and came to a stop in the infield. Stewart was transported to Halifax Medical Center after complaints of discomfort in his shoulder. Stewart's crash was greatly overshadowed by Dale Earnhardt's fatal crash on the last lap. Stewart recovered to win three more races at Richmond, Infineon, and Bristol and as he had done before, he ran near the front most of the season. Statistically, he had a worse season than 2000, but he finished 2nd to Gordon in the final points standings. For the second time, Stewart ran the "Memorial Day Double", in spite of a 17-minute rain delay at Indianapolis. He finished sixth in the Indianapolis 500 and third in the Coca-Cola 600, running all  of the two races. The 2001 season was not without controversy. Jeff Gordon pulled a "bump and run" on Stewart to gain a better finishing position at Bristol and it led to where Stewart retaliated in a post-race incident by spinning Gordon out on pit road. Stewart was fined and placed on NASCAR probation. He got into much bigger trouble in the Pepsi 400 at Daytona, where he confronted a Winston Cup official after ignoring a black flag. In the same race, he had an incident with a reporter, in which away he kicked a tape recorder. He confronted that same official during the Talladega race after he refused to wear a mandated head-and-neck restraint. Stewart was not allowed to practice until he wore one and only managed to do so after his crew chief Greg Zipadelli intervened. Stewart's fines and periods of probation resulting from these incidents have earned him a reputation of having a hot-temper, and he became known as NASCAR's "bad boy". Stewart started the 2002 season even more inauspiciously than last year's, as the Daytona 500 lasted just two laps for him due to a blown engine. He went on to win twice early in the season at Atlanta and Richmond, but he was only seventh in the points standings at the season's halfway point. He had a horrific crash at Darlington and was seriously injured. The second half of his season was plagued by an altercation with a photographer after the Brickyard 400. He was fined $50,000 by NASCAR and penalized with a 25-point deduction. However, despite the controversy, he went on to win the very next week at Watkins Glen. Strangely enough, this race ended in also controversy, when it was revealed that he had jumped the restart, and despite the infraction officials upheld Stewart's win. Stewart went on a hot streak in the final races, consistently finishing in the Top 5. At the end of the season, Stewart held off a charging Mark Martin to win his first Winston Cup championship. This was Stewart's last season driving in a Pontiac. As the defending champion, Stewart managed to have a relatively incident-free 2003 season. Joe Gibbs Racing changed manufacturers, so he and Labonte were now driving Chevrolets instead of Pontiacs. Stewart actually had his worst Cup season this year (until 2006), but it was still good enough for seven in the points standings. He only won two races that season at Pocono and Charlotte but he led more laps than he did last year and was highly competitive in the final races of the season. In January 2004, Stewart teamed with Andy Wallace and Dale Earnhardt, Jr. in a Boss Motorsports Chevrolet to take fourth in the 24 Hours of Daytona sports car endurance race. The result does not show the trio's performance, however. They had dominated the race until the last two hours, when the suspension cracked. With 15 minutes left in the race and Stewart driving, one of the rear wheels came off, finally ending their run. In addition to placing fourth overall, the trio placed third in the Daytona Prototype class. Stewart started off on a higher note in the 2004 season as he finished second in the Gatorade 125. In the Daytona 500, he and Dale Earnhardt, Jr. both dominated the race, leading 156 laps overall (98 for Stewart). Stewart was in contention to win it, only to lost the lead to Earnhardt, Jr. with 20 laps to go. So far, as of 2015, this had been Stewart's best finish in the Daytona 500. The season was highlighted with Stewart's first win coming at Chicagoland. This win was not without controversy as on a mid-race restart, he turned Kasey Kahne into the wall, which eventually led to an altercation between his and Kahne's pit crews. Stewart felt very sick during the race at Watkins Glen International and nearly withdrew from it due to food poisoning, stomach cramps, a headache, and a sinus infection. He ultimately relented and ran the race, dominating and holding off Canadian road ringer Ron Fellows for the win. He qualified fourth for the first ever Chase for the NASCAR NEXTEL Cup. However, an incident at the first race of The Chase at Loudon ended his hopes of a second Cup championship. Stewart got collected in a multi-car crash, which started when Robby Gordon repaid Greg Biffle some retaliation, and Stewart t-boned Biffle. Stewart had to make repairs and lost three laps. He finished two laps down, causing him to lose his shot at his second championship. Gordon did not get off the hook however and was penalized with a $15,000 fine and a 50-point deduction for his actions. After losing his bid for the championship title, Stewart went on and finished sixth in the Nextel Cup point standings. In November 2004, Stewart became the owner of one of the most legendary short tracks in America, Eldora Speedway. Located in New Weston, Ohio, Eldora is a half-mile dirt track known to many as "Auto Racing's Showcase Since 1954." Stewart began racing there in 1991 and continues racing in special events alongside other Sprint Cup drivers and dirt track legends.  2005 was one of Stewart's most successful years in the Nextel Cup, as he won his second Cup title. He won five races at Infineon, Daytona, New Hampshire, Watkins Glen (which gave him a sweep of the road course races for the year) and Indianapolis, his hometown track (in a race that Stewart said he would give up his championship to win, and took with it the No. 1 seed heading into NASCAR's Chase for the Nextel Cup 10-race playoff). On August 16, Stewart was fined $5,000 for hitting Brian Vickers after the completion of the Busch Series Zippo 200 at Watkins Glen. Stewart was driving a Busch series car owned by Kevin Harvick Incorporated at the time. Stewart also was placed on probation until December 31.  Following his win in the Pepsi 400, Stewart began climbing the fence separating the fans from the race track after each victory, borrowing IndyCar Series driver Hélio Castroneves' trademark move. After winning the 2009 All-Star race, Stewart was quoted as saying "I'm too damn fat to be climbing fences," and recently purchased $17,000 worth of exercise equipment to remedy the problem. It also led to sponsor The Home Depot cashing in on Stewart's success with some promotions reminiscent of Stewart's Eldora Speedway drivers. After his second full climb of the fence in Loudon, N.H., they ran a discount on ladders and fencing at the stores with a campaign named, "Hey Tony, we've got ladders", where anyone who presented the advertisement in national newspapers in their stores earned the discount. After his victory in Indianapolis, The Home Depot presented fans who presented the advertisement of his Allstate 400 win with a discount on purchasing bricks. He mentioned in a press release from his sponsor, "I plan to keep winning races and helping to drive down the cost of home improvement for The Home Depot customers." On November 20, Stewart won his second Cup Championship, joining Jeff Gordon as the only active, full-time drivers at the time to have won multiple championships. Jimmie Johnson afterward did so from 2006 to 2010. In victory circle, Stewart had said that he loved winning his 2005 championship better than his 2002 one because his 2005 season was more well-behaved than 2002. At an age of 34, this made Stewart one of the youngest drivers to win multiple championships (with Johnson joining this category as he won his five straight titles while in his early 30s) and to date, he is still the only driver to have won championships under both the Chase and non-Chase formats. During the 2005 season, Stewart won a total of $13,578,168, including $6,173,633 for winning the championship, the largest season total in NASCAR history. Stewart's 2006 season had up and down notes. He had competitive cars and scored early wins at Daytona and Martinsville. However he also had strings of bad luck. He also suffered a shoulder injury due to two heavy crashes in both the Busch and Cup races at Charlotte during the Memorial Day Weekend races (Stewart's Busch car hit the Turn 4 wall so hard it even knocked the rear end off the car). During the Dover race, he was substituted by Ricky Rudd, and in later weeks had to drive in pain. Additionally he has once again been involved in several on track controversies. Following a rough Bud Shootout on February 12, Stewart expressed concern to the media about the possibility of aggressive driving resulting in the serious injury or death of a driver. It came during a week in which the racing world remembered the fifth anniversary of Dale Earnhardt's death. Just a few days later, during the Daytona 500, Stewart was involved in a number of incidents with Jeff Gordon, Kyle Busch and Matt Kenseth, whom he chased halfway across the track to run into the grass. "He has no room to complain," Stewart said of his brush with Kenseth. "He started it, and I finished it". On May 20 during NASCAR's All Star Race, Stewart and Kenseth wrecked again. Each driver claimed it was the other one's fault with Stewart saying, "if (Kenseth) thinks it's my fault and I (caused the wreck) he's screwed up in his head." Following the wreck, several media outlets proclaimed the new Stewart-Kenseth rivalry as must-see TV. The so-called rivalry was short-lived as Kenseth and Stewart participated as friends in a joint promotional tour for DeWalt and The Home Depot; Kenseth also appeared in September at Stewart's Eldora Speedway in the NEXTEL PRELUDE with NASCAR drivers, as well as the ARCA Truck Series event there. In July 2006 Stewart dominated the Pepsi 400 but after a pit stop seemed like an unlikely contender for the win. However Stewart amazed the audience when in the final 10 laps he drove from 14th up to second place, and passed Boris Said to take the lead and win. After the race Stewart said he no longer wanted to climb the catch-fencing at Daytona because of the fans crowding him but he later changed his mind on that thought. On July 23, Stewart once again was at the center of a media storm. On lap 31 of the Pennsylvania 500, Stewart was accidentally squeezed against the wall by Clint Bowyer. Stewart responded by waving his hand in anger, then purposely hitting Bowyer's car. This contact sent Bowyer spinning down the front stretch where he collided with Carl Edwards. Stewart was promptly held one lap by NASCAR for rough driving. He did however pass leader Ryan Newman to get back on the lead lap and eventually rallied to finish 7th and get back in the top 10 in the point standings. After initially refusing to take responsibility for the incident he apologized the next day. Stewart missed the cut to qualify for the 2006 Chase for the Nextel Cup by 16 points, becoming the first defending champion to miss the Chase the following year.[ ]   He finished poorly at Richmond after wrecking his primary car in practice, and was displaced in the top ten by Kasey Kahne. As a result, he finished the 2006 season 11th in points, his worst thus far in his career, as he had completed each of his seven previous seasons in the top ten in points. Commenting on not being in the 2006 Chase, he says: "It lets us have the ability to take chances and try things ... that we've been wanting to try but just haven't had the luxury to do it. If we were in the Chase we wouldn't have that ability". Stewart won three races in the 2006 Chase (Kansas, Atlanta, and Texas). The season wasn't totally unkind to Stewart, however. He was a participant in the 30th season of IROC and won 2 of the 4 races (Texas, and the Daytona road course) on his way to capturing the series championship. He won a million dollars for the effort, but made an offer to return his prize money if IROC would hold one of its events at his Eldora Speedway. This offer was not entertained as IROC folded in 2007. In addition, Stewart's three wins in the Chase races gave him five total for the season, tying him with Jimmie Johnson and Kevin Harvick for second most in Nextel Cup behind Kasey Kahne's six.  Stewart started the 2007 season by winning his second Chili Bowl Nationals midget car feature. Stewart started off the Daytona Speedweeks with a win in the 2007 Budweiser Shootout. It was his third win in the race. "Tony Stewart Snares 21st Annual Chili Bowl Nationals Finale", January 13, 2007, Hawkeye Racing News. Retrieved January 25, 2007. He also won his qualifying race for the Daytona 500. On lap 152 of the Daytona 500, the rear of Stewart's car slid up the track, and when he tried to cut down the track, he smacked the front of Kurt Busch's car knocking both of them out of the race. Stewart and the Busch brothers (Kurt and Kyle) were the three leaders for the majority of the race. On March 22, it was announced that Stewart would be on the cover of the official NASCAR video game NASCAR 08, published by Electronic Arts. This would be the third time this honor was given to Stewart (2001, 2004, 2008). In his first Car of Tomorrow race with the Impala SS, Stewart was dominant at Bristol, leading 257 of 504 laps (green-white-checker finish), before he experienced a fuel pump problem. In his third Car of Tomorrow race at Phoenix, Stewart lead a race high 154 laps, but a late race caution moved Stewart to 2nd, where he finished behind Jeff Gordon. In the following week, Stewart implied the cautions were "bogus" and that NASCAR is "rigged like professional wrestling". On June 4, 2007, Stewart and Ku. Busch had another altercation on pit road in the Autism Speaks 400 at Dover. Ku. Busch passed Stewart on the inside and then slid up, which caused contact, sending him into the wall, knocking out Ku. Busch, but with Stewart staying in the race. Initially it was thought that Stewart intentionally crashed Ku. Busch since they were bitter rivals over the year and that Stewart and Ku. Busch had contact early in the race. Under the caution, Stewart was on pit road and his crew was surveying the massive damage he received from the crash; when an enraged Ku. Busch pulled alongside and gave Stewart a profane gesture to express his feelings over the incident. One of Stewart's pitcrew members jumped out of the way of Ku. Busch's car to avoid being hit and Ku. Busch was disqualified. Stewart was put on temporary probation for his part in the feud but was cleared from any further penalties. At the All-Star Race at Charlotte, he finished 5th behind Kevin Harvick, Jimmie Johnson, Mark Martin, and Jeff Burton. At the Coca-Cola 600, Stewart finished sixth, after having to come in to pit for fuel. On July 15, 2007, Stewart led a race high 108 laps and recorded his 30th career NEXTEL Cup win at the USG Sheetrock 400 at Joliet. On July 29, 2007, after leading a race high 66 of 160 laps, Stewart won the Brickyard 400 again, just 45 minutes from where he grew up. This was his second win in the race at his favorite track. It was not without controversy though; Stewart made the winning pass by accidentally bending the rear of Kevin Harvick's car, causing Harvick to fall back quickly to seventh place by the time the checkers waved. Stewart apologized for the contact in victory lane and during the victory lane interview, Stewart was penalized 25 points and fined $25,000 for violating NASCAR's policy on the use of obscene language during interviews during the race. This was similar to 2004, when Dale Earnhardt, Jr. used an obscenity in a post-race interview at Talladega and was knocked out of the points lead as a result of the penalty. On August 12, 2007, he won the Centurion Boats at the Glen at Watkins Glen after Jeff Gordon spun his car around after wheel hopping in turn 1 with two laps to go. Carl Edwards briefly challenged Stewart on the final lap, but spun out into a pullover site sealing Stewart's win.  Stewart began the 2008 season with a 6th-place start in the Daytona 500. During this race, he was only able to come up with a 3rd-place finish after being passed by Ryan Newman and Kurt Busch on the last lap. The finish of this race was somewhat like a repeat of the previous year's Daytona 500, in which Stewart's close friend Kevin Harvick passed Mark Martin to win it. On lap 109 of the UAW-Dodge 400, Stewart's car cut a tire and slammed hard into the turn 3 retaining wall. Although he climbed out under his own power, Stewart was transported by ambulance to the infield care center. Stewart had complained about a sore foot from a wreck that occurred the day before the Nationwide Series race at Las Vegas. Stewart was later announced that he was okay and ripped on Goodyear for not bringing any quality tires. With 3 laps to go in the 2008 Coca-Cola 600, Stewart cut a tire and saved it from contact with the wall. However, Stewart had to give up the lead to future race winner Kasey Kahne in order to make pit stops. In the Best Buy 400, Stewart was involved in another crash with Elliott Sadler, in which Sadler got turned by David Gilliland and car collected Stewart and 11 other cars; those included Dale Earnhardt, Jr. and Denny Hamlin. Stewart, who was frustrated over his misfortune, sarcastically said, "I take 100 percent responsibility&nbsp;– it's my fault for being anywhere close to Elliott. If I'm within half a lap of him, I expect that to happen. It's my fault&nbsp;– I'm the one that hit him. When I hit him, it caused all the guys behind us to wreck, so it's my fault." In July 2008, Stewart made a deal with car owner Gene Haas into a co-owning partnership in a racing organization called Stewart-Haas Racing for 2009 when he left Joe Gibbs Racing. Ryan Newman came to the meeting to make his deal with SHR officially signed earlier in the year. On July 5, during the Coke Zero 400 at Daytona, Stewart started feeling ill and turned his car over to former Joe Gibbs Racing teammate J. J. Yeley, who took the car to a 20th-place finish after getting involved in two wrecks in the last 5 laps.  Stewart earned his first and only win of the season in the AMP Energy 500 at Talladega on October 5 driving for Subway as his sponsor, making it his last win with Joe Gibbs Racing. On the final lap, Stewart was passed by Regan Smith (the rookie of Dale Earnhardt, Inc.) who beat Stewart to the line. NASCAR declared that Smith had made an illegal pass under the yellow line, and awarded the victory to Stewart. After the Ford 400, Stewart attended a tearful farewell meeting with Joe Gibbs Racing and gave his car and team to rookie Joey Logano, who replaced him for JGR. On July 8, 2008, it was reported that Stewart was released from the last year of his contract with Joe Gibbs Racing, primarily because JGR had switched from Chevrolet to Toyota, and Stewart was vocal about his loyalty to Chevrolet (which sponsors his USAC Midget, Sprint Car, and Silver Crown teams). Stewart announced he would move to Haas CNC Racing to drive a Haas Chevrolet, with sponsorships from Office Depot (relocating from the No. 99 Roush Fenway team) and Old Spice. Stewart took half ownership of the team which was renamed Stewart-Haas Racing, and Stewart became the highest paid NASCAR driver. Stewart's car at Haas has the number 14 as homage to his hero A.J. Foyt. To date, he is the most successful driver for Joe Gibbs Racing with 33 wins and 2 championships (2002 and 2005). On August 15, 2008, fellow Indiana native Ryan Newman signed a multi-year contract to drive the second car for Stewart-Haas Racing, originally to be designated No. 4 but changed to his USAC No. 39, with sponsorship from the U.S. Army (relocating from Earnhardt Ganassi Racing). As the most recent series champion not among the Top 35 in owners' points, Stewart was first in line for past champions' provisionals for the first five races of 2009. He completed those races without needing to use the provisional, ending up well inside the Top 10 in points. Stewart won his first race as a driver/owner in the non-championship NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race XXV, winning more than $1,000,000, his first win in the event in 10 attempts.  He followed that victory with his first points race win as a driver/owner at Pocono in the Pocono 500 on June 7, 2009, the first owner-driver in the Cup series to win a race since Ricky Rudd in 1998.Associated Press "Tony Stewart wins the Pocono 500", Los Angeles Times, June 8, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009.  Stewart also won the Coke Zero 400 at Daytona after a controversial finish when he wrecked Kyle Busch to do so. In a similar fashion to the spring race at Talladega that year, Busch passed Stewart on the final lap but in the final turn Stewart went underneath Busch who tried to block but with 100 feet left from the checkers the two made contact resulting in Stewart sending Busch into the wall, and Busch wrecked across the line in the final lead position while Kasey Kahne submarined under his car. Stewart's season overall was his best showing since his rookie year, with another win coming at Watkins Glen International. Stewart qualified for the 2009 Chase for the Sprint Cup as he finished the first 26 races as points leader. He fell to second in points following reseeding when Mark Martin, who won more races than Stewart, moved ahead of him. On October 5, 2009, Stewart won the Price Chopper 400 and moved to fourth in the standings, ending the season in sixth place.  On April 16, 2010, Stewart won his first Sprint Cup pole position in five years at Texas Motor Speedway, with a lap speed of 191.327&nbsp;mph. The race was the 400th in the Sprint Cup for Stewart, and was his first starting from the pole since October 2005 at Martinsville Speedway. On May 9, it was reported that Stewart would lose Old Spice as a sponsor after 11 years with them. Stewart won two races in 2010, the Emory Healthcare 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway on September 5 and the Pepsi Max 400 at Auto Club Speedway on October 10. In September at Loudon, Stewart lead part of the final stages trying to hold off Clint Bowyer for RCR who dominated the race; when the white flag waved the fans saw that Stewart was out of gas; Bowyer passed him and won both the white flag and the checkers. Stewart finished 24th, and waved to Bowyer to congratulate him as he slowly crossed the line to finish. After the race Stewart said when interviewed "My feelings are not happy that's for sure but we had a strong race; I thank Office Depot, Coca-Cola, and my sponsors... congratulations to Clint Bowyer and the helping hands, they deserved that one. I think I ran myself out of fuel; my team apologized and said "sorry for running you out of fuel", I think I ran myself out of fuel." On October 12, Mobil 1 announced a sponsorship deal with Stewart-Haas Racing to sponsor Stewart's car, starting in 2011. It would be the primary sponsor for 11 races, while Office Depot would be the primary sponsor for the rest of the season. Mobil 1 would also sponsor Stewart in the Budweiser Shootout and the All-Star Race. In 2011, Stewart returned in the No. 14 Office Depot-sponsored Chevrolet. Following a crash intentionally caused by Stewart on Brian Vickers at Infineon Raceway in June 2011, Vickers intentionally wrecked Stewart as payback. In an interview when asked about the crashes, Stewart said, "It was payback, but, you know, I dumped him first, and I dumped him because he was blocking..." Stewart and his teammate, Newman, started the Lenox Industrial Tools 301 first and second, and they finished it where they started as Newman won that race. By the Heluva Good! Sour Cream Dips 400, Stewart said in a post-race interview that his team was running so poorly that he was "wasting one of those top 12 spots." Entering the Chase for the NASCAR Sprint Cup portion of the schedule winless, Stewart won the opening race of the Chase at the Chicagoland Speedway and jumped up seven spots in the points, securing second place and extending his streak of consecutive years with a win to 13. Stewart made it two for two in the Chase after Clint Bowyer ran out of fuel in the closing laps of the Sylvania 300 at the New Hampshire Motor Speedway. Stewart took the win and the points lead after New Hampshire. At Talladega, Stewart struggled to lead a lap, and eventually did so; with assistance from Ryan Newman, Paul Menard, and Joey Logano, he led an additional 29 laps and captured the two-point bonus for leading the most laps. On October 30, at Martinsville Speedway, Stewart won the Tums Fast Relief 500, leading three times for 14 laps and moving into championship contention in second place in the points standings.  The next week, Stewart led 173 laps en route to winning the AAA Texas 500 at Texas Motor Speedway, bringing him to within three points of championship points leader Carl Edwards with two races to go in the 2011 season. On November 20, 2011, Stewart won the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series championship by winning the final race at Homestead-Miami Speedway while Edwards finished second. Stewart and Edwards were tied on total points, but Stewart claimed the tiebreaker by having five race wins to Edwards's one. In the process, Stewart became the first driver/owner to win the championship since Alan Kulwicki in 1992. Before the season Stewart welcomed new drivers retired Indycar driver Danica Patrick and driver David Reutimann to drive partly for Stewart-Haas Racing as part of a partnership with Tommy Baldwin Racing who provided parts of the cars. On February 11, Stewart led the final stages of the Budweiser Shootout by passing Marcos Ambrose on the final lap, but was passed in a desperate charge to the finish line by Kyle Busch who beat him to the line in what was said the closest finish in Budweiser Shootout history (It would have been 2011 with Kurt Busch and Denny Hamlin but Hamlin was black-flagged for being below the yellow line). Stewart won the 1st duel of the Gatorade Duels at Daytona, when his new driver Danica Patrick hit the wall hard on the backstretch on the final lap, which brought out the caution. Stewart started 3rd in the Daytona 500 and ran well throughout the race, but was caught up in a late race crash on lap 196 Ricky Stenhouse Jr. On March 11, Stewart won the Kobalt Tools 400 at Las Vegas Motor Speedway beating Jimmie Johnson. It was his 45th career win, and brought his streak of consecutive Cup seasons with a win to 14. On March 25, Stewart won the rain-shortened Auto Club 400 at Auto Club Speedway. On June 3, Stewart was caught in a 13 car crash on the back leg at Dover and finished the race in 25th place. Tony Stewart led 18 laps at the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 and finished second behind Dale Earnhardt Jr.. Stewart however caused controversy and got ripped by the fans and medias for saying in a media conference that Earnhardt winning "Is not a national holiday." and taunting the Earnhardt nation for celebrating the 4th anniversary of Earnhardt's last win in 2008. At Sonoma, Stewart moved quickly from the top 20, to third in the final laps of the Toyota Save Mart 350, and ended up second to Clint Bowyer by passing Kurt Busch on the final turn on the final lap. On July 7, Stewart was able to hold off Matt Kenseth to win his fourth Coke Zero 400 as a wreck ensued behind him. The win was a surprise one, as Stewart had been forced to start 42nd due to his car failing pre-qualifying inspection. In August at Bristol in the 2012 Irwin Tools Night Race, when battling for the lead on lap 333, Stewart and Matt Kenseth tangled and brought out a caution. This was soon after Ryan Newman was wrecked by Juan Pablo Montoya in an accident which collected Jeff Burton. When a furious Stewart climbed out of his wrecked car he waited for Kenseth to exit pit road. When Kenseth was leaving the pits, in Stewart fashion, he tossed his helmet at Kenseth's hood and then gestured applause at the fans. This was followed shortly thereafter by his student driver Danica Patrick wagging a finger at Regan Smith after he turned her into the inside wall many laps later. In September at Atlanta, team spokesman Mike Arning announced that Office Depot will not be Stewart's sponsor in 2013.[ ]  On October 2, Bass Pro Shops announced they would be a co-primary sponsor for Stewart in a selected number of races for the 2013 season. At the Talladega race in the fall, Stewart was leading on the final lap but underestimated the speed of a closing Michael Waltrip. On turn 4, Waltrip got a run, and tapped Stewart from behind, causing Stewart to spin and Waltrip to spin into the pack, causing a Big One that involved 23 cars, the largest crash of the season to date. Stewart flipped over, hitting the roofs of several other cars, including Kasey Kahne, Paul Menard and Clint Bowyer, before landing upright. On November 9, it was announced that Kevin Harvick would be joining Stewart's team starting in 2014. Stewart would finish ninth in points, with two top fives and four top tens in the Chase, for a final season total of three wins, 12 top five and 16 top ten finishes overall.  In early 2013, reports said that Stewart was offered a chance by Roger Penske to race in the 2013 Indianapolis 500 in a Penske car. Stewart declined and said he was not ready to try the big race yet, due to his focus in stock cars. In the Nationwide Series, Stewart renewed his RCR deal to drive the No. 33 Oreos/Ritz Chevrolet. He won the opening Nationwide Series event at Daytona, overtaking Regan Smith on the last lap, but his win was overshadowed by worry because Smith had been turned and in the resulting crash, Kyle Larson had flown into the catchfence, completely slicing off the front part of his car and injuring 28 spectators in the grandstands (2 critically). The next day in the Daytona 500, Stewart's day ended on lap 35, when he was caught up an early crash with Kevin Harvick and Kasey Kahne; this would allow him finish 41st. He rebounded slightly with an 8th-place finish at Phoenix and an 11th-place finish in Las Vegas. At Bristol, Stewart blew his tire on lap 3 and cut a brake line; he came back out over 20 laps down, unable to contend for victory. At Fontana, Stewart ran well for most of the day, leading laps and running on an alternate pit cycle, and nearly contended for the win. However, due to a late-race incident when Joey Logano blocked him on the last restart, Stewart ended up in 22nd place at the bottom of the lead lap. After the race, Stewart, angered, confronted Logano, who had just wrecked his car after battling with Denny Hamlin hard into the last turn, on pit road in a scuffle involving both teams' crews. At Richmond, Stewart looked to be in contention for the win as he was 5th on a green-white-checkered finish, but in a fashion similar to his confrontation with Logano at Fontana; after a poor restart he lost a few positions. On the last lap, Kurt Busch tapped his bumper, moving Stewart out of the 2nd groove all the way up to the top of the race track subsequently losing about 5 positions coming home 18th while Busch took a 9th-place finish. Stewart showed his displeasure with Busch after the race had finished, rubbing with him on the race track leading to a shoving match between the two when slowing down after the race ended. Down near the haulers the two turned the attention given to race winner Harvick; to them when they had a verbal confrontation, again Stewart showing Busch his displeasure with his aggressive move. It was the first time since 2008 that the two got together in a feud. At Talladega, Stewart was caught up in a 15 car wreck on lap 43 and ended up finishing 27th, 5 laps down. His teammates Danica Patrick and Ryan Newman were caught up in a later wreck on lap 182, in which Newman's car got crushed when Kurt Busch flipped over and landed on top of it. Stewart's 2013 season start was considered his worst start to a Sprint Cup season yet. As of Richmond, he had only one Top 10 finish, which was at Phoenix. The rest of his finishing positions had been in the upper 10's or lower 20's. After Richmond, Stewart was 22nd in the points standings with 207 points, 136 behind Jimmie Johnson. However, he showed signs of a rebound in the following weeks, scoring a solid 7th-place finish at the Coca-Cola 600 while avoiding several wrecks. The following week at Dover, Stewart went a lap down early but got back on the lead lap with a beneficiary. In the last 20 laps, after Johnson was penalized for jumping the last restart, Stewart overtook Juan Pablo Montoya and held him off over the last three laps to score his sole Sprint Cup win of 2013. The win propelled him up 4 positions to 16th, into a Wildcard spot. This also gave Stewart a streak of 15 straight seasons with at least one race win. He followed this up with a fourth-place finish at Pocono and a fifth place at Michigan. His momentum was killed briefly by a 28th-place run at Sonoma and a 20th-place finish at Kentucky, but Stewart then rebounded to a second-place finish at the Coke Zero 400. At New Hampshire, Stewart led 84 laps and was overtaken by Brian Vickers with 14 laps to go. A caution that led to a green-white-checkered finish ultimately ruined Stewart's chances of winning, as he ran out of fuel after the restart while Vickers took the win. Stewart then rebounded with a 4th-place run at Indianapolis and a 9th-place run at Pocono. The day after the Pocono race, on August 5, while leading a sprint car race at Southern Iowa Speedway in Oskaloosa, Iowa, Stewart was involved in a multi-car crash when a lapped car spun in front of him. The hit was hard enough that Stewart broke both the tibia and fibula bones in his lower right leg. He was taken by ambulance to a local hospital where surgery was performed on his broken leg. A second surgery was performed on August 8, in which a metal rod was inserted into the tibia. The injuries were bad enough that Stewart's streak of 521 consecutive Sprint Cup starts, dating back to the 1999 Daytona 500, ended. A replacement driver for the August 11 race at Watkins Glen International was not immediately named, though it was eventually announced that road veteran Max Papis would fill in for Watkins Glen. Stewart was eventually released from the hospital on August 11. Prior to August 11, speculation arose regarding who would replace Stewart on the oval courses, with speculation that the replacement would either be Regan Smith, who drove two races in Dale Earnhardt, Jr.'s car after Earnhardt was sidelined with a concussion in 2012, or Austin Dillon. It was announced after Watkins Glen that Dillon would drive Stewart's car for Michigan. On August 19, Stewart was ruled out for the remainder of the season. Mark Martin was released from his contract with Michael Waltrip Racing and signed on to drive Stewart's car for the remaining thirteen races of the year, with the exception of Talladega, where Dillon drove the car. Brian Vickers and Elliott Sadler would drive the No. 55 for races Martin was originally intended to drive for MWR in. Before the season it was announced that Stewart had been medically cleared to race. Stewart mentioned during Pre-Season Thunder that his leg would be about 65% healed going into Daytona. Stewart ran the Sprint Unlimited, but was collected in a nine-car crash. This was something that Stewart had dreaded, but exited his race car under his own power, and without any pain. Stewart entered the Daytona 500 in his backup car, starting from the rear of the field. After the 6 hour and 22 minute rain delay, the race resumed, but just shy of half way, Stewart's fuel pickup began to fail. He and his crew took his race car behind the wall, got the problem fixed, and finished the race 27 laps down. The next week at Phoenix went particularly well for Stewart. After running in the top 10 most of the day, a late string of cautions set up restart after restart. Stewart opted to come down to pit road to be serviced each time the caution was thrown, subsequently losing track position. On the last and final restart, Stewart had 4 fresh tires and was starting 19th. He gained 3 positions, from 19th to 16th, where he finished.  Stewart gained 12 spots in the standings, from 32nd to 20th. At Las Vegas, Stewart struggled with the handling of his car and finished 33rd, four laps down. At Bristol, Stewart missed the second round of knockout qualifying and started 37th. However, with a fast racecar, he was able to make his way up the field and finish fourth, his first top five finish since the previous year's Brickyard 400. Stewart was the highest finishing Chevrolet in the race. Stewart qualified 10th at Auto Club. After a spin early in the race, Stewart was running 12th at the last caution, coming off of pit road 2nd and lining up 4th for the green-white-checkered finish behind Paul Menard, his own driver Kurt Busch, and Landon Cassill. On the final restart, Stewart and Busch battled for the win, only to be passed up by Kyle Busch and Kyle Larson. Stewart finished third not being passed by Matt Kenseth, his fith top 5 in a row. Stewart had a strong run at Pocono. He qualified in the top five and ran in there nearly the whole race, before a speeding penalty on pit road left him with a 13th-place finish. When Stewart was asked about what happened he said "It was a 100% driver error. Last week I cried over a 6th place finish and I just threw this one away. 100% driver error. My fault." At Michigan, Stewart ran in the top five. Late in the race Stewart tangled with rookie Kyle Larson when Larson threw a block, leaving Stewart with an 11th-place finish. Stewart replied by bumping Larson under yellow and side-swiping him. The next week Stewart said "He'll learn not to block me. One way or another he'll learn like I did at his age." After the Kevin Ward Jr. tragedy in mid-August, Stewart skipped Watkins Glen, Michigan and Bristol. He was subbed by Regan Smith and Jeff Burton for those races. Despite having missed three races and thus losing too many points to recover lost points in the final 2 races, NASCAR granted him a waiver allowing him to still be eligible for the Chase if he won in the final two 'regular season' events, which he failed to do, causing him to miss the Chase for the third time in his career. At the end of the October Charlotte race, Stewart was hit on pit road by Brad Keselowski, and retaliated by reversing into him. Stewart was fined $25,000 and placed on probation until November 12. At Martinsville, Stewart almost won. On the final restart, he pulled out in front of Dale Earnhardt Jr. but having older tires, got over-taken by Earnhardt with four laps to go. Stewart finished 4th but stated that after what he went through from August to then, finishing 4th felt like a win to him. Stewart finished the year with a last-place finish at Homestead-Miami, ending his 15-year winning streak. As a driver, 2014 was Stewart's worst year statistically. The season wasn't a total loss for Stewart, as he did win the Owner's Championship with Kevin Harvick. In an interview the day before the race, Stewart blamed his subpar year on the new rules package, saying it did not complement his driving style. He also dismissed countless claims that his poor showing had anything to do with his 2013 leg injury. In July 2014, Stewart returned to sprint car racing in his No. 14 sprint car; the very car that broke his leg in 2013. When asked why he returned, Stewart said he loved racing sprint cars too much to leave. Stewart silenced his critics by dominating and winning a sprint car race at Tri-City Motor Speedway in a huge comeback story. After the race Stewart said:   Stewart did not start the 2015 season as hoped, as he had a bunch of poor finishes. He showed signs of a comeback after qualifying runs of 4th at Indianapolis, 5th at Pocono, and 3rd at Watkins Glen, and 5th at Michigan. On September 27, 2015, Bob Pockrass reported that Stewart announced plans to retire from racing at the conclusion of the 2016 season. Stewart formally made an announcement on September 30 confirming this and announcing that Clint Bowyer would replace him in the No. 14 in 2017. On February 2, Stewart injured his back while riding a dune buggy outside of San Diego with fellow driver Greg Biffle. Stewart has raced in a few sports car races, including the Rolex 24 at Daytona.  Stewart frequently makes appearances on dirt tracks, appearing regularly at an ARCA race on dirt and at many prominent midget car events, USAC's Turkey Night Grand Prix, and the indoor Chili Bowl Midget Nationals. Along with Matt Kenseth, he has appeared at Madison International Speedway, a non-NASCAR half-mile track located in Wisconsin on Highway 138 between the cities of Oregon, WI and Stoughton, WI. Stewart races 410 and 360 Dirt Sprint Cars about 50 times a year throughout the United States and Canada. On July 27, 2011, Stewart won his first ever World of Outlaws race at Ohsweken Speedway.  As of October 7, 2014, Stewart has three career World of Outlaws main event victories. Stewart competes with the World of Outlaws, All-Stars, and IRA Sprint Car series when traveling between NASCAR races and on off weekends. On August 9, 2014, Stewart competed in a sprint car race (not a NASCAR sanctioned event) at Canandaigua Motorsports Park in Canandaigua, New York. About halfway through the race, Kevin Ward Jr.'s car hit the wall and spun out, and a yellow caution flag was displayed. Instead of waiting for race officials, Ward got out of his car and walked onto the track, as Stewart continued around the half-mile course. As Stewart's car approached on the next lap, Ward began pointing and gesturing at him. The back right tire of Stewart's car struck Ward as Stewart passed him. Ward was thrown  across the track. Ward was transported by paramedics to Thompson Hospital but was pronounced dead a short time later due to "massive blunt trauma". Ward would go on to receive a Darwin Award for his actions. The incident took place the night before Stewart was scheduled to compete in the Cup Series' Cheez-It 355 at Watkins Glen International. However, Stewart decided not to, so Regan Smith was chosen to temporarily replace him in that race. Stewart later released a statement: "There aren't words to describe the sadness I feel about the accident that took the life of Kevin Ward Jr. It's a very emotional time for all involved, and it is the reason I've decided not to participate in today's race at Watkins Glen. My thoughts and prayers are with his family, friends, and everyone affected by this tragedy." The day after the incident, Philip Povero, sheriff of Ontario County, New York, told reporters "At this very moment, there are no facts in hand that would substantiate or support a criminal charge, or indicate criminal intent on the part of any individual." On August 15, NASCAR announced a rule change that requires that drivers who are involved in an accident and are unable to drive their cars back to pit road or the garage are to remain in their cars until emergency crews arrive, except in an emergency situation (such as a fire or smoke from a blown engine). For the August 17 race at Michigan and the following race at Bristol, Stewart was replaced by Jeff Burton. He returned at Atlanta, and was granted a waiver to maintain Chase eligibility despite missing three races (current Chase rules state that a driver must attempt to qualify for every race in order to be eligible). However, he failed to win at Atlanta or Richmond and thus was unable to qualify for the Chase. Stewart gave a tearful interview when he returned to race in Atlanta, stating: This is been one of the toughest tragedies I've ever had to deal with, both professionally and personally. This is something that will definitely affect my life forever. This is a sadness and a pain I hope no one ever has to experience in their life. That being said, I know that the pain and the mourning that Kevin Ward's family and friends are experiencing is something that I can't possibly imagine. I want Kevin's father, Kevin Sr., his mother Pam, and his sisters Christi, Kayla, and Katelyn to know that every day I'm thinking about and praying for them. The racing community is a large family. As you guys know and everyone's saddened with this tragedy. I want to thank all my friends and family for their support through this tough, emotional time. And the support from the NASCAR community, my partners, all of our employees has been overwhelming. I've taken the last couple weeks off out of respect for Kevin and his family and also to cope with the accident in my own way. It's given me the time to think about life and how easy it is to take it for granted. I miss my team, my teammates, and the other drivers very much and I miss being back in the race car. I think that being back in the car this week with my racing family will help me get through this difficult time. On September 24, a grand jury declined to indict Stewart on charges of manslaughter in the second degree and criminally negligent homicide. Following the decision, District Attorney Michael Tantillo stated that videos of Stewart's driving did not demonstrate any aberrational driving and that Ward was under the influence of cannabis with levels high enough to impair judgment. Despite Stewart's repeated apologies, Ward's father, Kevin Ward Sr., wrote a letter vowing to "pursue to make all remedies for Kevin," implying a possible civil lawsuit. When Ward's family was informed that he had been high on cannabis, Ward Sr. blew off the information and stated in a letter that has made viral in the internet saying: Tell me how a man the size of Kevin can make a sprint car turn to the right on impact. Tell me how a lap before (the incident) everything was fine, but the following lap was poor lighting. Tell me how a NASCAR star totally forgot what caution means. Maybe he should get a different headset so he is able to hear on the radio that the car in caution is up high, so go low. Or was he low until he rounded the corner and saw Kevin, Jr. standing up for himself? Five days after the tragedy itself, Ward's aunt, Wendi Ward, wrote a letter of reply to the turn of events: I feel numb, I look into the eyes of family and see a deep hurt that should not be there, my heart has pounded out of my chest for hours, thanks for thinking of our family Tony Stewart when you decided to be a dick. My nephew was one of a kind, a true race car driver, a piss head and a sweetie all in one, a young man who will be truly missed by many! Aunt Wendi loves you budster, forever in our hearts.(68)  A couple days after the announcement of his exoneration by Ontario County (N.Y.) District Attorney Michael Tantillo, Stewart told The Associated Press, that I know 100 percent in my heart and in my mind that I did not do anything wrong. This was 100 percent an accident. Stewart is the owner of various open-wheel short track racing cars, most of them being sponsored by Chevrolet since 2007. He also owns and drives dirt super late models. In the end of the 2008 season, Stewart was given a 50% stake in Haas CNC Racing, which became Stewart-Haas Racing in 2009. Haas CNC Racing, previously fielded the No. 66 and 70 cars, now fields the No. 4, 14, 10, and 41 as Stewart-Haas Racing. This decision involved parting ways with long-time crew chief Greg Zipadelli, sponsor The Home Depot, car No. 20, and car owner Joe Gibbs, all of which he had spent 10 years with. Stewart drives the No. 14 Chevrolet SS owned by Gene and Margaret Haas. He is the owner of the No. 10 GoDaddy.com-sponsored Chevrolet SS, driven by Danica Patrick. Additionally, the No. 4 and 41 cars of Kevin Harvick and Kurt Busch were newly added by Stewart-Haas Racing in 2014. Harvick, in his first year with Stewart-Haas, won the Sprint Cup Championship in 2014. Stewart has won USAC car owner titles in the Silver Crown division in 2002 and 2003 with J. J. Yeley,in 2004 with Dave Steele and 2010 and 2011 with Levi Jones of Olney, Il. He also collected owner titles in USAC's National Sprint Car Series with Yeley in 2003 and Jay Drake in 2004. He also won an owner title in the USAC National Sprint Car Series in 2006 with Josh Wise and in 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011 with Levi Jones of Olney, IL Stewart's USAC midget and sprint cars carry No. 20 and No. 21, while his Silver Crown car carries No. 22. Stewart purchased Eldora Speedway located near Rossburg, Ohio in late 2004 from Earl Baltes.Eldora Speedway Stewart is currently a co-owner of Paducah International Raceway near Paducah, Kentucky. He also co-owns Macon Speedway in Macon, Illinois along with Kenny Schrader, Kenny Wallace and Bob Sargent. Stewart owns a dirt late model Chevrolet Impala that carries No. 14 which he races frequently. Stewart has also won a World of Outlaws Sprint Car Championship as an owner with Donny Schatz in 2008. The team is now a 2 car operation with Schatz and Steve Kinser. He is also the owner of Custom Works, a company that manufactures radio controlled oval track cars, and has had a degree of success as a r/c racer himself. Stewart is also the driving force behind the Sprint-sponsored "Prelude to the Dream" which features drivers from various sports driving late model dirt cars at Eldora Speedway. Since 2005 the "Dream" has showcased a who's who in NASCAR and NHRA, featuring such drivers as Kyle Busch, Jeff Gordon, Matt Kenseth, Jimmie Johnson, Tony Pedregon and others. The inaugural race was won by Kenny Wallace, followed by Carl Edwards in 2006. As of late the race has been nicknamed "The Smoke Show" due to Stewart winning back to back to back since 2007. The events have raised over 4 million dollars for various NASCAR and driver charities including The Victory Junction Gang Camp. On January 28, 2015, Stewart announced that he had purchased the All Star Circuit of Champions Sprint Car Series from Guy Webb. The purchase is Stewart's first foray into owning an entire racing series. In a separate agreement, Stewart announced that he had reached an agreement with the owners of the Renegade Sprint Series to merge with the All Star Circuit of Champions for the 2015 season under the All Star name. Founded in 2003 by Stewart, the principal purposes of the Tony Stewart Foundation are to raise and donate funds to help care for chronically ill children, drivers injured in motorsports activities, and to support other charitable organizations in the protection of various animal species. The Tony Stewart Foundation will raise and donate funds to charitable interests, specifically those that support the aforementioned groups.[ ]  Stewart hosted a two-hour weekly radio show, titled Tony Stewart Live, broadcast on Sirius Satellite Radio.  Stewart co-hosted the show with Matt Yocum, and took listener calls. The show ran from 2007 to 2008. (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics&nbsp;– Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.)  Season still in progress  Ineligible for series points (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics&nbsp;– Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.) (key) (Bold&nbsp;– Pole position. *&nbsp;– Most laps led.) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position, Results are overall/class)                  IndyCar Series results Year Team Chassis Engine 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rank Points 1996 Team Menard Lola Menard-Buick WDW2 PHO11 INDY24 8th 68 1996–97 NHA12 LVS21 1st 278 G-Force Oldsmobile WDW10 PHO2 INDY5 TEX5 PPIR1 CLT7 NHA14 LVS11 1998 WDW1 PHO2 DOV8 CLT21 ATL5 3rd 289 Dallara INDY33 TEX14 NHA1 PPIR3 TEX20 LVS14 1999 Tri-Star Racing WDW PHO CLTC INDY9 TEX PPIR ATL DOV PPIR LVS TEX 33rd 22 2001 Chip Ganassi Racing G-Force Oldsmobile PHO HOM ATL INDY6 TEX PPIR RCH KAN NSH KEN GTW CHI TEX 39th 28 Year Chassis Engine Start Finish Team 1996 Lola Menard-Buick 1 24 Menard 1997 G-Force Oldsmobile 2 5 Menard 1998 Dallara Oldsmobile 4 33 Menard 1999 Dallara Oldsmobile 24 9 Tri-Star 2001 G-Force Oldsmobile 7 6 Ganassi NASCAR Sprint Cup Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 Pts 1999 Joe Gibbs Racing 20 Pontiac DAY28 CAR12 LVS36 ATL11 DAR6 TEX6 BRI15 MAR20 TAL5 CAL4 RCH15 CLT4 DOV4 MCH9 POC6 SON15 DAY6 NHA10 POC4 IND7 GLN6 MCH3 BRI5 DAR12 RCH1 NHA2 DOV2 MAR41 CLT19 TAL6 CAR12 PHO1 HOM1 ATL15 4th 4774 2000 DAY17 CAR4 LVS2 ATL34 DAR4 BRI42 TEX9 MAR6 TAL34 CAL10 RCH8 CLT14 DOV1 MCH1 POC6 SON10 DAY6 NHA1 POC26 IND5 GLN6 MCH41 BRI2 DAR9 RCH6 NHA23 DOV1 MAR1 CLT4 TAL27 CAR7 PHO14 HOM1 ATL38 6th 4570 2001 DAY36 CAR4 LVS12 ATL27 DAR16 BRI25 TEX23 MAR7 TAL2 CAL4 RCH1 CLT3 DOV7 MCH25 POC7 SON1 DAY26 CHI33 NHA5 POC3 IND17 GLN26 MCH27 BRI1 DAR4 RCH7 DOV5 KAN8 CLT2 MAR41 TAL2 PHO5 CAR7 HOM19 ATL9 NHA5 2nd 4763 2002 DAY43 CAR4 LVS5 ATL1 DAR36 BRI15 TEX5 MAR3 TAL29 CAL29 RCH1 CLT6 DOV11 POC7 MCH16 SON2 DAY39 CHI3 NHA39 POC7 IND12 GLN1 MCH2 BRI24 DAR8 RCH30 NHA3 DOV5 KAN8 TAL2 CLT3 MAR11 ATL4 CAR14 PHO8 HOM18 1st 4800 2003 Chevy DAY7 CAR20 LVS5 ATL5 DAR10 BRI26 TEX34 TAL25 MAR6 CAL41 RCH41 CLT40 DOV4 POC1 MCH8 SON12 DAY21 CHI2 NHA22 POC37 IND12 GLN11 MCH3 BRI23 DAR12 RCH37 NHA20 DOV3 TAL3 KAN4 CLT1 MAR3 ATL2 PHO18 CAR9 HOM7 7th 4549 2004 DAY2 CAR26 LVS3 ATL7 DAR17 BRI24 TEX8 MAR14 TAL22 CAL16 RCH4 CLT9 DOV2 POC27 MCH24 SON15 DAY5 CHI1 NHA5 POC35 IND5 GLN1 MCH9 BRI19 CAL18 RCH19 NHA39 DOV6 TAL6 KAN14 CLT10 MAR15 ATL9 PHO8 DAR17 HOM4 6th 6326 2005 DAY7 CAL17 LVS10 ATL17 BRI3 MAR26 TEX31 PHO33 TAL2 DAR10 RCH2 CLT24 DOV15 POC29 MCH2 SON1 DAY1 CHI5 NHA1 POC7 IND1 GLN1 MCH5 BRI8 CAL5 RCH7 NHA2 DOV18 TAL2 KAN4 CLT25 MAR2 ATL9 TEX6 PHO4 HOM15 1st 6533 2006 DAY5 CAL43 LVS21 ATL5 BRI12 MAR1 TEX3 PHO2 TAL2 RCH6 DAR12 CLT42 DOV25 POC3 MCH41 SON28 DAY1 CHI32 NHA37 POC7 IND8 GLN2 MCH3 BRI22 CAL9 RCH18 NHA2 DOV33 KAN1 TAL22 CLT13 MAR4 ATL1 TEX1 PHO14 HOM15 11th 4727 2007 DAY43 CAL8 LVS7 ATL2 BRI3 MAR35 TEX7 PHO25 TAL28 RCH8 DAR6 CLT6 DOV40 POC5 MCH3 SON6 NHA12 DAY38 CHI1 IND1 POC6 GLN1 MCH10 BRI4 CAL13 RCH2 NHA3 DOV9 KAN39 TAL8 CLT7 MAR13 ATL30 TEX11 PHO4 HOM30 6th 6242 2008 Toyota DAY3 CAL7 LVS43 ATL2 BRI14 MAR5 TEX7 PHO14 TAL38 RCH4 DAR21 CLT18 DOV41 POC35 MCH5 SON10 NHA13 DAY20 CHI5 IND23 POC2 GLN2 MCH12 BRI8 CAL22 RCH2 NHA8 DOV11 KAN40 TAL1 CLT11 MAR26 ATL17 TEX16 PHO22 HOM9 9th 6202 2009 Stewart-Haas Racing 14 Chevy DAY8 CAL8 LVS26 ATL8 BRI17 MAR3 TEX4 PHO2 TAL23 RCH2 DAR3 CLT19 DOV2 POC1 MCH7 SON2 NHA5 DAY1 CHI4 IND3 POC10 GLN1 MCH17 BRI33 ATL11 RCH17 NHA14 DOV9 KAN1 CAL5 CLT13 MAR9 TAL35 TEX6 PHO25 HOM22 6th 6309 2010 DAY22 CAL9 LVS7 ATL13 BRI2 MAR26 PHO23 TEX32 TAL16 RCH23 DAR23 DOV9 CLT15 POC3 MCH5 SON9 NHA2 DAY25 CHI9 IND5 POC2 GLN7 MCH6 BRI27 ATL1 RCH16 NHA24 DOV21 KAN4 CAL1 CLT21 MAR24 TAL31 TEX11 PHO17 HOM8 7th 6221 2011 DAY13 PHO7 LVS2 BRI19 CAL13 MAR34 TEX12 TAL17 RCH9 DAR7 DOV29 CLT17 KAN8 POC21 MCH7 SON39 DAY11 KEN12 NHA2 IND6 POC11 GLN27 MCH9 BRI28 ATL3 RCH7 CHI1 NHA1 DOV25 KAN15 CLT8 TAL7 MAR1 TEX1 PHO3 HOM1 1st 2403 2012 DAY16 PHO22 LVS1 BRI14 CAL1 MAR7 TEX24 KAN13 RCH3 TAL24 DAR3 CLT25 DOV25 POC3 MCH2 SON2 KEN32 DAY1 NHA12 IND10 POC5 GLN19 MCH32 BRI27 ATL22 RCH4 CHI6 NHA7 DOV20 TAL22 CLT13 KAN5 MAR27 TEX5 PHO19 HOM17 9th 2311 2013 DAY41 PHO8 LVS11 BRI31 CAL22 MAR17 TEX21 KAN21 RCH18 TAL27 DAR15 CLT7 DOV1 POC4 MCH5 SON28 KEN20 DAY2 NHA26 IND4 POC9 GLNINJ MCHINJ BRIINJ ATLINJ RCHINJ CHIINJ NHAINJ DOVINJ KANINJ CLTINJ TALINJ MARINJ TEXINJ PHOINJ HOMINJ 29th 594 2014 DAY35 PHO16 LVS33 BRI4 CAL5 MAR17 TEX10 DAR9 RCH26 TAL43 KAN20 CLT13 DOV7 POC13 MCH11 SON19 KEN11 DAY40 NHA7 IND17 POC36 GLNINQ† MCH BRI ATL41 RCH15 CHI18 NHA30 DOV14 KAN17 CLT21 TAL34 MAR4 TEX11 PHO20 HOM43 25th 799 2015 DAY42 ATL30 LVS33 PHO39 CAL14 MAR20 TEX24 BRI6 RCH41 TAL19 KAN39 CLT21 DOV16 POC21 MCH28 SON12 DAY14 KEN33 NHA20 IND28 POC9 GLN43 MCH21 BRI19 DAR15 RCH29 CHI25 NHA11 DOV26 CLT26 KAN35 TAL25 MAR10 TEX42 PHO27 HOM29 28th 695 2016 DAY ATL LVS PHO CAL MAR TEX BRI RCH TAL KAN DOV CLT POC MCH SON DAY KEN NHA IND POC GLN BRI MCH DAR RCH CHI NHA DOV CLT KAN TAL MAR TEX PHO HOM † - Qualified but replaced by Regan Smith Year Team Manufacturer Start Finish 1999 Joe Gibbs Racing Pontiac 2 28 2000 7 17 2001 24 36 2002 6 43 2003 Chevrolet 8 7 2004 5 2 2005 4 7 2006 15 5 2007 3 43 2008 Toyota 6 3 2009 Stewart-Haas Racing Chevrolet 5 8 2010 6 22 2011 25 13 2012 3 16 2013 13 41 2014 21 35 2015 7 42 2016 NASCAR Nationwide Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 Pts 1995 Racing Fan Clubs 31 Chevy DAY CAR RCH ATL NSV DAR BRI HCY NHA NZH CLT DOV MYB GLN MLW TAL SBO IRP MCH BRI DAR RCH DOV CLT CAR HOMDNQ N/A 0 1996 Ranier-Walsh Racing 15 Pontiac DAY21 CARDNQ RCH ATL39 NSV DAR BRI16 HCY NZH CLT DOV17 SBO MYB GLN MLW22 NHA TAL26 IRPDNQ MCH BRI37 DAR20 RCH40 DOV CLT CAR HOM 49th 753 1997 Labonte Motorsports 44 Pontiac DAY CAR RCH ATL LVS DAR HCY TEX BRI NSV TAL NHA NZH CLT DOV SBO GLN MLW MYB GTY IRP34 MCH BRI DAR RCH40 DOV CLT3 CAL CAR9 HOM37 57th 459 1998 Joe Gibbs Racing DAY31 CAR2 LVS34 NSV17 DAR BRI26 TEX15 HCY13 TAL28 NHA2 NZH CLT DOV3 RCH PPR14 GLN MLW12 MYB35 CAL SBO IRP12 MCH BRI21 DAR16 RCH29 DOV CLT32 GTY5 CAR18 ATL3 HOM39 21st 2455 2003 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 8 Chevy DAY CAR LVS DAR BRI TEX TAL NSH CAL RCH GTY NZH CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY CHI NHA PPR IRP MCH11* BRI DAR RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM ATL PHO CAR HOM 109th 140 2004 Richard Childress Racing 29 Chevy DAY CAR LVS DAR BRI TEX NSH TAL CAL2 GTY RCH NZH 58th 563 Kevin Harvick Incorporated CLT5 DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY CHI NHA PPR IRP Chance 2 Motorsports 81 Chevy MCHDNQ BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN25 CLT MEM Kevin Harvick Incorporated 92 Chevy ATL11 PHO DAR HOM 2005 33 DAY1* CAL29 MXC LVS ATL2 NSH BRI TEX42 PHO5 TAL20 DAR RCH15 CLT39 DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY CHI NHA PPR GTY IRP23 GLN4 MCH BRI CAL 39th 1317 83 RCH40 DOV KAN Joe Gibbs Racing 19 Chevy CLT21 MEM TEX PHO HOM 2006 Kevin Harvick Incorporated 33 Chevy DAY1 CAL MXC LVS12 ATL BRI TEX NSH PHO TAL39 RCH DAR29 CLT42 DOV NSH KEN MLW DAY12 CHI9 NHA MAR GTY IRP GLN MCH11 BRI CAL6 RCH DOV KAN4 37th 1461 Dale Earnhardt, Inc. 8 Chevy CLT16 MEM Joe Gibbs Racing 19 Chevy TEX2 PHO HOM 2007 Kevin Harvick Incorporated 33 Chevy DAY8 LVS3 TAL2 RCH DAR7 CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA4 CHI8 GTY IRP CGV GLN MCH30 BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN11 CLT MEM 35th 1723 Joe Gibbs Racing 18 Chevy CAL11 MXC DAY4 TEX7* PHO HOM 20 ATL10 BRI NSH TEX PHO 2008 Toyota DAY1 CAL1* LVS27 ATL BRI NSH TEX10 PHO MXC TAL1* RCH DAR1* CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA1* DAY CHI9 GTY IRP CGV GLN MCH3 BRI CAL RCH DOV KAN CLT MEM TEX PHO HOM 39th 1354 2009 Hendrick Motorsports 80 Chevy DAY1 CAL LVS BRI 72nd 500 Kevin Harvick, Inc. 33 Chevy TEX2 NSH PHO TAL RCH DAR CLT DOV NSH KEN MLW NHA DAY CHI GTY IRP IOW GLN MCH BRI CGV ATL RCH DOV KAN CAL JR Motorsports 5 Chevy CLT11 MEM TEX PHO HOM 2010 Kevin Harvick Incorporated 4 Chevy DAY1* CAL LVS BRI NSH PHO TEX TAL RCH DAR DOV CLT NSH KEN ROA NHA DAY CHI GTY IRP IOW GLN MCH BRI CGV ATL RCH DOV KAN CAL CLT GTY TEX PHO HOM 93rd 195 2011 DAY1 PHO LVS BRI CAL TEX TAL NSH RCH DAR DOV IOW CLT CHI MCH ROA 95th 01 9 DAY13 KEN NHA NSH IRP IOW GLN CGV BRI ATL RCH CHI DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 2012 Richard Childress Racing 33 Chevy DAY8 PHO LVS BRI CAL TEX RCH TAL DAR IOW CLT DOV MCH ROA KEN DAY NHA CHI IND IOW GLN CGV BRI ATL RCH CHI KEN DOV CLT KAN TEX PHO HOM 121st 01 2013 DAY1 PHO LVS BRI CAL TEX RCH TAL DAR CLT DOV IOW MCH ROA KEN DAY NHA CHI IND IOW GLN MOH BRI ATL RCH CHI KEN DOV KAN CLT TEX PHO HOM 96th 01 NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Pts 1996 Mueller Brothers Racing 4 Chevy HOM PHO POR EVG TUS CNS HPT BRI NZH MLW LVL I70 IRP10 FLM GLN NSV RCH NHA MAR NWS SON MMR PHO LVS 94th 134 2002 Andy Petree Racing 33 Chevy DAY DAR MAR GTY PPR DOV TEX MEM MLW KAN KEN NHA MCH IRP NSH RCH1 TEX SBO LVS CAL PHO HOM 69th 180 2003 DAY DAR MMR MAR CLT DOV TEX MEM MLW KAN KEN GTW MCH IRP NSH BRI RCH1 NHA CAL LVS SBO TEX MAR PHO HOM 85th 180 2004 Morgan-Dollar Motorsports 47 Chevy DAY ATL MAR MFD CLT DOV TEX MEM MLW KAN KEN GTW MCH IRP NSH BRI RCH3 NHA LVS CAL TEX MAR PHO DAR HOM 69th 165 2005 DAY CAL ATL MAR GTY MFD CLT33 DOV2 TEX MCH MLW KAN KEN MEM IRP NSH BRI 61st 234 Kevin Harvick Inc. 92 Chevy RCHDNQ NHA LVS MAR ATL TEX PHO HOM ARCA Re/Max Series results Year Team No. Make 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Pts 2001 Larry Clement 40 Ford DAY NSH WIN SLM GTY KEN CLT KAN MCH POC MEM GLN KEN MCH POC NSH ISF CHI DSF2 SLM TOL BLN CLT TAL ATL 104th 250 2002 Andy Petree Racing 55 Chevy DAY ATL NSH SLM KEN CLT KAN POC MCH TOL SBO KEN BLN POC NSH ISF WIN DSF2 CHI SLM TAL CLT 103rd 250 2003 Tony Stewart 18 Chevy DAY ATL NSH SLM TOL KEN CLT BLN KAN MCH LER POC POC NSH ISF WIN DSF1 CHI SLM TAL CLT SBO 113th 225 International Race of Champions results Year Make 1 2 3 4 Pos. Points 1998 Pontiac DAY9 CAL7 MCH3 IND6 6th 37 2000 Pontiac DAY2 TAL6 MCH2 IND3 3rd 57 2001 DAY9 TAL10 MCH1* IND2 2nd 58 2002 DAY1 CAL6 CHI12 IND11 6th 42 2006 Pontiac DAY8 TEX1 DAY1* ATL3 1st 72 Rolex Sports Car Series results Year Team Make Engine Class 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Rank Points 2002 Crawford Racing Crawford Judd SR DAY(46/11) HOM FTR PHO WGL DAY(5/5) WGL VIR CMT DAY 28th 46 2004 Howard Boss Motorsports Crawford Chevrolet DP DAY(5/3) HOM PHO MON WGL 37th 83 Pontiac DAY(3/3) MOH WGL(8/8) HOM VIR BAR CAL 2005 DAY(3/3) HOM CAL LAG CMT WAT1 BAR WAT2 DAY2(22/18) MDO PHX WAT3(37/21) VIR MEX 56th 53 2006 DAY(30/15) MEX HOM LBH VIR LAG PHX LRP WAT1 DAY2 BAR WAT2 INF MIL 117th 16 2007 Howard Motorsports Porsche DAY(48/24) MEX HOM VIR LAG LRP WAT1 MDO DAY2 IOW CGV BAR WAT2 INF MIL 122nd 7 2002: Competed in the Rolex 24 on 2/2-2/3 for the Crawford factory team with co-drivers Jan Lammers and Johnny Mowlem. 2004: Competed for the second time in the Rolex 24 on 1/31-2/1 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Dale Earnhardt Jr., and Andy Wallace. Team led 355 of 526 laps and had a commanding five-lap advantage before mechanical problems less than 20 minutes short of the finish ended their shot at victory and placed them a disappointing fourth. 2005: Competed for the third time in the Rolex 24 on 2/5-2/6 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Jan Lammars and Andy Wallace. Team was leading with less than two hours remaining when a broken gearbox dropped them off the lead lap. Crew was able to make repairs so that the trio could rejoin the race, whereupon they finished third. It was Stewart's first podium finish in the Rolex 24 Hours At Daytona. 2006: Competed for the fourth time in the Rolex 24 on 1/28-1/29 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Butch Leitzinger and Andy Wallace. Team finished 30th after suffering mechanical problems throughout the event. 2007: Competed for the fifth time in the Rolex 24 on 1/27-1/28 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Butch Leitzinger and Andy Wallace. Team finished 48th after mechanical trouble hampered the trio throughout the event. In 2007, Stewart appeared in commercials for Subway with their spokesman, Jared Fogle. Appeared in a 2008 Toyota commercial where the cars of Toyota Sprint Cup drivers, including Stewart's, are driven by kids with remote controls. When his kid driver spins his car out of control, he crawls out, yelling to his crew chief, "Zippy, run for your life!" Stewart then throws his helmet at his car, a homage to his habit of throwing helmets and other racing gear in anger. Stewart appears in commercials as a member of the Coca-Cola Racing Family of drivers. In 2010, Stewart appeared in a commercial for the Burger King Steak House XT, which he endorsed. This video entered the Top 10 of the Ad Age / Visible Measures Top Viral Ad Chart on August 12, 2010. On February 14, 2012, Stewart guest-starred on the ABC series Last Man Standing. In 2013 and 2014, Stewart appeared as himself in a special series of McLaren's cartoon, Tooned, in partnership with Mobil 1. Electronic Arts announced that Stewart would appear in person for the first time on the cover of NASCAR Thunder 2004 in late 2003, his Home Depot Winston Cup car appeared on NASCAR 2001's cover. Stewart also appears on the North American cover of NASCAR 08. Stewart is later included in NASCAR 2011: The Game and NASCAR The Game: Inside Line. On December 3, 2013, it was announced that Stewart would appear on the cover of NASCAR '14. Appeared with Dale Earnhardt, Jr. in the music video for 3 Doors Down's song "The Road I'm On". Tony Stewart Foundation Tony Stewart at The Coca-Cola Racing Family
