     The Transcendental Meditation movement (also referred to as Transcendental Meditation or TM) is a term or phrase that refers to the programs and organizations connected with the Transcendental Meditation technique founded by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India in the 1950s.  The organization was estimated to have 900,000 participants in 1977,Stark, Rodney and Bainbridge, William Sims (1985) University of California Press, The Future Of Religion, page 287 "Time magazine in 1975 estimated that the U.S. total had risen to 600,000 augmented by half that number elsewhere" =[900,000 world wide]  "Annual Growth in TM Initiations in the U.S.  [chart]  Cumulative total at the End of Each Year: 1977, 919,300" a million by the 1980s, claims "more than a million" in the USA and Europe.Occhiogrosso, Peter. The Joy of Sects: A Spirited Guide to the World's Religious Traditions. New York: Doubleday (1996); p 66, citing "close to a million" in the USA.Bainbridge, William Sims (1997) Routledge, The Sociology of Religious Movements, page 189 "the million people [Americans] who had been initiated" and 5 million in more recent years.Analysis: Practice of requiring probationers to take lessons in transcendental meditation sparks religious controversy, NPR All Things Considered, February 1, 2002 | ROBERT SIEGEL “TM's five million adherents claim that it eliminates chronic health problems and reduces stress.”Martin Hodgson, The Guardian  (5 February 2008) "He [Maharishi]  transformed his interpretations of ancient scripture into a multimillion-dollar global empire with more than 5m followers worldwide”Stephanie van den Berg, Sydney Morning Herald, Beatles guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi dies, (February 7, 2008)  “the TM movement, which has some five million followers worldwide”Meditation a magic bullet for high blood pressure – study, Sunday Tribune (South Africa), (January 27, 2008)  “More than five million people have learned the technique worldwide, including 60,000 in South Africa."Maharishi Mahesh Yogi - Transcendental Meditation founder's grand plan for peace, The Columbian (Vancouver, WA), February 19, 2006 | ARTHUR MAX Associated Press writer "transcendental meditation, a movement that claims 6 million practitioners since it was introduced." the movement claims to have five million followers,Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Spiritual Leader Dies, New York Times, By LILY KOPPEL, Published: February 6, 2008 "Since the technique’s inception in 1955, the organization says, it has been used to train more than 40,000 teachers, taught more than five million people." Programs include the Transcendental Meditation technique, an advanced meditation practice called the TM-Sidhi program ("Yogic Flying"), an alternative health care program called Maharishi Ayurveda, and a system of building and architecture called Maharishi Sthapatya Ved.  The TM movement's past and present media endeavors include a publishing company (MUM Press), a television station (KSCI), a radio station (KHOE), and a satellite television channel (Maharishi Channel). Its products and services have been offered through primarily through nonprofit and educational, such as the Global Country of World Peace, and the David Lynch Foundation. The TM movement also operates a worldwide network of Transcendental Mediation teaching centers, schools, universities, health centers, and herbal supplement, solar panel, and home financing companies, plus several TM-centered communities. The global organization is reported to have an estimated net worth of USD 3.5 billion. The TM movement has been characterized in a variety of ways and has been called a spiritual movement, a new religious movement,For new religious movement see:   For neo-Hindu, see:   a millenarian movement, a world affirming movement,Dawson, Lorne L. (2003) Blackwell Publishing, Cults and New Religious Movements, Chapter 3: Three Types of New Religious Movement by Roy Wallis (1984), page 44-48 a new social movement,Christian Blatter, Donald McCown, Diane Reibel, Marc S. Micozzi, (2010) Springer Science+Business Media, Teaching Mindfulness, Page 47 a guru-centered movement,Olson, Carl (2007) Rutgers University Press, The Many Colors of Hinduism, page 345 a personal growth movement, a religion, and a cult.  Additional sources contend that TM and its movement are not a cult.Harrison, Shirley (1990). Cults: The Battle for God. Kent: Christopher Helm. pp. 93–103  "none of the other 'cultic qualities' defined by cult watchers can be fairly attributed to TM."Rowson, Jonathan (April 23, 2007) Meditation: for old hippies or a better way of life? Sunday Herald (Scotland) " the TM movement is not a cult", accessed Feb 2, 2013Hannaford, Alex (December 27, 2010). "Mantra with a mission; Feature Om or ominous? The maverick film director David Lynch wants to bring Transcendental Meditation to our classrooms, and believes in 'yogic flying'. Can he get it off the ground?". The Sunday Times (London).Lyster, Samantha (October 21, 2000) Samantha Lyster finds herself in holistic heaven with new-found happiness and tranquillity after learning the art of transcendental meditation, The Birmingham Post (England), “TM is not a religion, a cult or a philosophy” Participation in TM programs does not require a belief system and is practiced by people from a diverse group of religious affiliations.["the TM technique does not require adherence to any belief system—there is no dogma or philosophy attached to it, and it does not demand any lifestyle changes other than the practice of it."]  [ ]"Its proponents say it is not a religion or a philosophy."The Guardian March 28, 2009 [ ]"It's used in prisons, large corporations and schools, and it is not considered a religion.” [ ] Concord Monitor Maharishi Mahesh Yogi began teaching Transcendental Meditation in India in the late 1950s. The Maharishi began a series of world  tours in 1958 to promote his meditation technique. The resulting publicity generated by the Maharishi, the celebrities who learned the technique and the scientific research into its effect, helped popularize the technique in the 1960s and 1970s. In the 1970s the Maharishi introduced advanced meditative techniques and his movement grew to encompass TM programs for schools, universities and prisons. In the 1980s additional programs aimed at improved health and well-being were developed based on the Maharishi's interpretation of the Vedic traditions. By the late 2000s, TM had been taught to millions of individuals and the Maharishi oversaw a large multinational movement which has continued since his death in 2008. The Maharishi's obituary in the New York Times credited the TM movement as being "a founding influence on what has grown into a multibillion-dollar self-help industry". The TM movement has been described as a "global movement" that utilizes its own international policies and transports its "core members" from country to country. It is said to be a "world affirming" and "accommodating" movement that does not seek to interfere with its member's involvement in their various religions. In 2008, The New York Times, reported that TM's "public interest" had continued to grow in the 1970s" however, some practitioners were discouraged "by the organization’s promotion of ....Yogic Flying." The organization was estimated to have  900,000 participants worldwide in 1977 according to new religious movement scholars Stark, Bainbridge and Sims. That year the  TM movement said there were 394 TM centers in the U.S., that about half of the 8,000 trained TM teachers were still active, and that one million Americans had been taught the technique. The movement was reported to have a million participants by the 1980s, and modern day estimates range between four and ten million practitioners worldwide.Analysis: Practice of requiring probationers to take lessons in transcendental meditation sparks religious controversy, NPR All Things Considered, February 1, 2002 | ROBERT SIEGEL "TM's five million adherents claim that it eliminates chronic health problems and reduces stress."Martin Hodgson, The Guardian  (5 February 2008) "He [Maharishi]  transformed his interpretations of ancient scripture into a multimillion-dollar global empire with more than 5m followers worldwide"Stephanie van den Berg, Sydney Morning Herald, Beatles guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi dies, (February 7, 2008) "the TM movement, which has some five million followers worldwide"Meditation a magic bullet for high blood pressure – study, Sunday Tribune (South Africa), (January 27, 2008) "More than five million people have learned the technique worldwide, including 60,000 in South Africa.”Financial Times (2003), 5 million, ; Asian News International (2009), 4 million  As of 1998, the country with the largest percentage of TM practitioners was Israel, where 50,000 people had learned the technique since its introduction in the 1960s, according members of the TM movement. In 2008, the Belfast Telegraph reported that an estimated 200,000 Britons practiced TM. The TM movement is said to have a flexible structure that allows varying degrees of commitment.  Many are satisfied with their "independent practice of TM" and don't seek any further involvement with the organization.  For many TM practitioners their meditation is "one of many New Age products that they consume." Other practitioners are "dedicated" but are also critical of the organization. Still others, are "highly devoted" and participate in "mass meditations" at Maharishi University of Management, perform administrative activities or engage in a monastic lifestyle.  Likewise the organization has a "loose organisational heirarchy [sic] ". Transcendental Meditators who participate in group meditations at Maharishi University of Management are referred to as "Citizens of the Age of Enlightenment". Regional leaders  and  "leading Transcendental Meditators" trained as TM teachers and graduates of the TM-Sidhi program are called "Governors of the Age of Enlightenment". There are also "national leaders" and "top officials" of the "World Peace Government" that are called Rajas.  Notable practitioners include: politicians  John Hagelin and Joaquim Chissano, musicians Donovan, The Beatles, Sky Ferreira, Mike Love and celebrities David Lynch,  Clint Eastwood, Mia Farrow, Howard Stern and  Doug Henning. Practitioners who became spiritual teachers or self-help authors include  Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, Deepak Chopra, John Gray and Barbara De Angelis.   The Transcendental Meditation technique is a specific form of mantra meditation developed by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. It is often referred to as Transcendental Meditation or simply, TM. The meditation practice involves the use of a mantra, and is practiced for 15–20 minutes twice per day, while sitting with closed eyes. It is reported to be one of the most widely practiced,"transcendental meditation (TM) is the most widely practiced and investigated" and among the most widely researched, meditation techniques, with hundreds of studies published. The technique is made available worldwide by certified TM teachers in a seven step courseTM Program Official web site (Australia), retrieved Nov 2, 2012 and fees vary from country to country.TM Course Tuition TM official web site, retrieved May 30, 2012TM fees and course details Official web site in the UK, retrieved Nov 2, 2012 Beginning in 1965, the Transcendental Meditation technique has been incorporated into selected schools, universities, corporations and prison programs in the U.S.A., Latin America, Europe, and India. In 1977, the TM technique and the Science of Creative Intelligence were deemed religious activities as taught in two New Jersey public schools. Subsequently the TM technique has received some governmental support."This lawsuit was the most significant setback for TM in the United States"...."Since then TM has made a comeback of sorts with some governmental sponsorship" The Transcendental Meditation technique has been described as both religious and non religious. The technique has been described in various ways including as an aspect of a New Religious Movement, as rooted in Hinduism, and as a non-religious practice for self development."Although one can identify the Maharishi’s philosophical tradition, its teachings are in no way binding on TM practitioners. There is no public worship, no code of ethics, no scriptures to be studied, and no rites of passage that are observed, such as dietary laws, giving to the poor, or pilgrimages. In particular, there is no real TM community: practitioners do not characteristically meet together for public worship, but simply recite the mantra, as they have been taught it, not as religious obligation, but simply as a technique to benefit themselves, their surroundings and the wider world." The public presentation of the TM technique over its 50-year history has been praised for its high visibility in the mass media and effective global propagation, and criticized for using celebrity and scientific endorsements as a marketing tool.  Advanced courses supplement the TM technique and include an advanced meditation called the TM-Sidhi program. In 1970, the Science of Creative Intelligence (SCI) became the theoretical basis for the Transcendental Meditation technique, although skeptics questioned its scientific nature.Science of Creative Intelligence Reserve Collection MUM web site, retrieved May 30, 2012 According to proponents, when 1 percent of a population (such as a city or country) practices the TM technique daily, their practice influences the quality of life for that population. This has been termed the Maharishi Effect.   Transcendental Meditation in education (also known as Consciousness Based Education) is the application of the Transcendental Meditation technique in an educational setting or institution. These educational programs and institutions have been founded in the USA, United Kingdom, Australia, India, Africa and Japan. The Transcendental Meditation technique became popular with students in the 1960s and by the early 1970s centers for the Students International Mediation Society were established at a thousand campuses in the USA with similar growth occurring in Germany, Canada and Britain.Bainbridge, William Sims (1997 Routledge, The Sociology of Religious Movements, page 188 The Maharishi International University was established in 1973 in the USA and began offering accredited, degree programs. In 1977 courses in Transcendental Meditation and the Science of Creative Intelligence (SCI) were legally prohibited from New Jersey (USA) public high schools on religious grounds by virtue of the Establishment Clause  of the First Amendment. This "dismantled" the TM program's use of government funding in U.S. public schools but did not render "a negative evaluation of the program itself". Since 1979, schools that incorporate the Transcendental Meditation technique using private, non-governmental funding have been reported in the USA, South America, Southeast Asia, Northern Ireland, South Africa and Israel.Ehud Zion Waldoks, "School crisis? Send the kids to the corner – to count to 10 cross their legs and hum..."  The Jerusalem Post November 22, 2007  A number of educational institutions have been founded by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the Transcendental Meditation movement and its supporters. These institutions include several schools offering public and private secondary education in the USA (Maharishi School of the Age of Enlightenment),Buckley, Stephen (March 19, 1993) Meditating Students, This School Offers Readin', 'Ritin' and Mantras, The Washington Post  England (Maharishi School), Australia,Official web site, Maharishi School, Retrieved July 2011Smith, Birdie (Jan 28, 2008) School Year to Start on a Meditative Note The Age, Retrieved July 2011 South Africa (Maharishi Invincibility School of Management),MSIM official web site MISM Web Site and India (Maharishi Vidya Mandir Schools). Likewise, Maharishi colleges and universities have been established including Maharishi European Research University (Netherlands), Maharishi Institute of Management (India), Maharishi Institute of Management (India), Maharishi University of Management and Technology (India),  Maharishi Institute (South Africa)[ ] Educating Africa, Retrieved 10/10/10[ ] Official Web Site and Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vedic University (India). In the USA, critics have called Transcendental Meditation a revised form of Eastern, religious philosophy and opposed its use in public schoolsWilliamson (2010) p. 89 while a member of the Pacific Justice Institute says practicing Transcendental Meditation in public schools with private funding is constitutional.  The TM-Sidhi program is a form of meditation introduced by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in 1975. It is based on, and described as a natural extension of the Transcendental Meditation technique (TM). The goal of the TM-Sidhi program is to enhance mind-body coordination"The TM-Sidhi techniques enhance the effect of Transcendental Meditation in improving coordination between the mind and body." and to support the "holistic development of consciousness"Goldberg, Phillip (2011) Harmony Books, American Veda, page 170 by training the mind to think from what the Maharishi called a fourth state of consciousness.Russell, Peter, The TM Technique: A Skeptics Guide to the TM program. Rutlidge, Boston.1977. p.91–93  "Yogic Flying", a mental-physical exercise of hopping while cross-legged, is a central aspect of the TM-Sidhi program. The TM website says that "research has shown a dramatic and immediate reduction in societal stress, crime, violence, and conflict—and an increase in coherence, positivity, and peace in society as a whole" when the TM-Sidhi program is practiced in groups. This is termed the Maharishi Effect. While empirical studies have been published in peer-reviewed academic journals they have been met with both skepticism and criticism. Skeptics have called TM's associated theories of the Science of Creative Intelligence and the Maharishi Effect,  "pseudoscience".  Maharishi Ayurveda,  also known as Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health and Maharishi Vedic Medicine is considered an alternative medicine designed as a complementary system to modern western medicine. The approach was founded internationally in the mid 1980s by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. The Maharishi's revised system of Ayurveda was endorsed by the "All India Ayurvedic Congress" in 1997. The Transcendental Meditation technique is part of the Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health (MVAH). According to the movement's Global Good News website, there are 23 Maharishi Vedic Health Centres in 16 countries, including Austria, France, Denmark, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States. The Maharishi Ayurvedic Centre in Skelmersdale, UK also offers panchakarma detoxification.  Maharishi Sthapatya Veda (MSV) is a set of architectural and planning principles assembled by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  based on "ancient Sanskrit texts"Welvaert, Brandy, Vedic homes seek better living through architecture", Rock Island Argus, (August 5, 2005)   as well as Vastu Shastra, the Hindu science of architecture. Maharishi Sthapatya Veda architecture is also called "Maharishi Vastu" architecture,  "Fortune-Creating" buildings and homes,Official Web site, Fortune Creating Homes and "Maharishi Vedic architecture".Maharishi Vedic Architecture  According to its self-description, the system consists of "precise mathematical formulas, equations, and proportions" for architectural design and construction. MSV has strict rules governing the orientation and proportions of a building. The most important factor is the entrance, which must be either due east or due north. The MSV architect also considers the slope and shape of the lot, exposure to the rising sun, location of nearby bodies of water and the other buildings or activities in the nearby environment.Egenes, Linda "Spotlight: Maharishi Vedic City", AAA Magazine (July 2005) MSV emphasizes the use of natural or "green" building materials. The TM movement's aspiration is to have global reconstruction to create east-facing entrances, at an estimated cost of $300 trillion.  About 3,000 TM practitioners are estimated to live near MUM and the Golden Domes in Fairfield, Iowa, US, an area dubbed "Silicorn Valley" by locals. By 2001, Fairfield's mayor and some city council members were TM practitioners. Just outside the city limits is Maharishi Vedic City. The city's 2010 population of 1,294 includes about 1,000 pandits from India who live on a special campus.Roberts, Sam NY Says Census Undercounted in Brooklyn New York Times, August 10, 2011 The city plan and buildings are based on Maharishi Sthapatya Veda, an ancient system of architecture and design revived by the Maharishi. Housing developments outside of city limits are also seeking to combine Maharishi Vedic precepts of design with the latest sustainability technologies. A community called Sidhadorp was established in the Netherlands in 1979 and reached its completion in 1985. Around the same time Sidhaland, in  Skelmersdale UK was established with about 400 TM practitioners, a meditation dome, and a TM school. There is also a 30-home settlement in Rendlesham, Suffolk and a housing project in Lelystad, the Netherlands.Sidha Village website (English version) Hararit () is a settlement in Galilee, Israel founded in 1980, as part of a "government-sponsored project" by a group of Jewish practitioners of the Transcendental Meditation program. It is the home for about 60 families. There are several residential facilities in India, including a  compound in "Maharishi Nagar", near Noida.  There is a 70-unit development, Ideal Village Co-Op Inc, in Orleans, Ontario, a suburb of Ottawa, where 75 percent of the residents have been TM meditators. Purusha and Mother Divine are the names of gender specific communities who lead a lifestyle of celibacy and meditation."still others choose a life of celibacy and meditation for at least a short time, belonging to either Mother Divine (women) or Purusha (men)." "Maharishi's elite unit of celibate monks" Some residents have been part of the community for 20 years or more. In 1990 the Purusha community consisted of 200 men who conducted "administrative and promotional details" for the Maharishi's worldwide organization.(Dec 3, 1990) On the front line for peace Yogi assembling 7,000 meditators, Albany Times Union (Albany, NY) The Purusha group was originally located at the Spiritual Center of America in Boone, North Carolina, USA. As of 2002 there were 300 male residents whose daily routine consisted of meditation from 7 am to 11:30 am and another group meditation in the evening. The rest of the day was taken up by lunch, educational presentations, fundraising and work for "non-profit entities associated with the Spiritual Center". The residents also read Vedic literature, studied Sanskrit, received monthly instruction from the Maharishi via teleconference and engaged in discourse with faculty of Maharishi University of Management. As of 2007, there was also a Purusha community of 59 men in Uttarkashi, India. In 2012 the USA Purusha group moved to a newly constructed campus called the West Virginia Retreat Center, located in Three Churches, West Virginia, USA. The campus consists of 10 buildings and 90 males residents plus staff.Pisciotta, Marla, (Sept 12,  2012) Three buildings added to retreat, Hampshire Review, As of 2002 the 100 resident Mother Divine community for women was also located at the Spiritual Center in Boone, North Carolina as part of an organization called Maharishi Global Administration Through Natural Law. Their daily routine was similar to the Purusha community and in addition they operated The Heavenly Mountain Ideal Girls' School, a fully accredited North Carolina non-public school for grades 9 through 12. Maharishi International University (MIU) Press was founded in the 1970s and operated a full scale printing operation to publish the organization's brochures and literature for the USA.   The Press employed four printing presses and 55 employees  and was located at the Academy for the Science of Creative Intelligence in Livingston Manor, New York.Jefferson, William (1976) Pocket Books, The Story Of The Maharishi, page 117  MIU Press later became Maharishi University of Management (MUM) Press. MUM Press published books, academic papers, audio and video recordings and other educational materials. These materials include the Modern Science and Vedic Science journal and books by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, John Hagelin, Tony Nader, Robert Roth, Craig Pearson, Robert Oates, Ashley Deans, and Robert Keith Wallace as well as ancient Sanskrit works by Bādarāyaṇa, Kapila, and Jaimini. In addition their World Plan Television Productions contained a film library and audio and TV production studios, with $2 million worth of equipment, which distributed 1,000 videos each month to their TM teaching centers. In 1975, the television station called channel 18 became KSCI  and began production from a studio in West Los Angeles, while still licensed in San Bernardino. The station became a non-profit owned by the Transcendental Meditation movement and the call letters stood for Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's theoretical "Science of Creative Intelligence". The station broadcast began with 56 hours per week of "uplifting" news stories, prerecorded lectures by the Maharishi and variety shows featuring celebrities who practiced the Transcendental Meditation technique. KSCI's goal was to report "only good news" and seven sister stations were planned including San Francisco, Washington DC and Buffalo, NY.Meyer, EugeneL. (Sept 22, 1975) TM Takes on Corporate Look in U.S., Washington Post, page A1 The station manager was Mark Fleischer, the son of Richard Fleischer, a Hollywood director. The Los Angeles location leased $95,000 worth of equipment and its highest paid staff member earned $6,000 according to tax documents. In 1980 the station switched to for-profit status and earned $1 million on revenues of $8 million in 1985. In November, owners of the KSCI TV station loaned $350,000 to Maharishi International University in Iowa."Private support also came in the form of a $350,000 loan from independent UHF station KSCI in San Bernardino, Calif., which is owned by a TM organization."  As of June 1986 the station's content consisted of "a hodgepodge of programming in 14 languages"  that was broadcast on both cable and UHF in Southern California.[ ] retrieved Sept 20, 2012 In October, the station was purchased by its general manager and an investor for $40.5 million.  KHOE, is a low-power, non-profit radio station belonging to Maharishi University of Management (MUM), which began broadcasting in 1994. The station features music and educational entertainment from around the globe including American music and cultural and ethnic programming. MUM's international students present music, poetry and literature from their native countries. KHOE also broadcasts classical Indian (Maharishi Ghandarva Veda) music 24 hours per day on a special sideband. Maharishi Veda Vision is a satellite broadcast that began in 1998 with three hours of evening programming. Programing expanded to 24 hours a day by 1999. Maharishi Veda Vision was described as India's first religious television channel. The Maharishi Channel Cable Network, owned by Maharishi Satellite Network, was reported to have moved to Ku band digital satellites in 2001. While providing Vedic wisdom in 19 languages, most of the channel's programming was in Hindi and was intended for the worldwide non-resident Indian population. By 2002 the channel was carried on eight satellites serving 26 countries. The channel had no advertisements, depending on a "huge network of organisations, products and services" for support. In 2005, the channel was among several religious channels vying to get space on DD Direct+. Additional channels are broadcast over satellite as part of the Maharishi Open University's distance learning program, which also has studio facilities at Maharishi Vedic City in Iowa. The Maharishi Channel, which originates in the Netherlands, had a pending request for a downlink to India as of July 2009. According to its website, Ramraj TV is being established in India to introduce Vedic principles and practical programmes to the "World Family". As of August 2010, it is only available on the Internet. On a webpage last updated August 2009, the channel says it is in the process of obtaining a license from the Indian Government for a satellite uplink and downlink.Ramraj TV web site The International Foundation for the Science of Creative Intelligence (IFSCI).Chryssides, George D. (2000) Scarecrow Press, The A to Z of New Religious Movements, page 327Cotton, Dorothy (1990) Psychology Press, Stress Management: An Integrated Approach to Therapy, page 104 American versions and additions to these organizations included the Spiritual Regeneration Movement Foundation (SRMF), the World Plan Executive Council which was established to serve as a guide for the movement there  and the American Foundation for the Science of Creative Intelligence, for people in business and education. Active international organizations include the International Meditation Society, Maharishi Foundation, Global Country of World Peace and the David Lynch Foundation. In 2007, the organization's "worldwide network" was reported to be primarily financed through courses in the Transcendental Meditation technique with additional income from donations and real estate assets.[ ] New York Times, Maharishi's Minions Come to Wall Street, Maria Aspan,July 2, 2007  Valuations for the organization are USD $300 million in the U.S.AKoppel, Lily (Feb 7, 2008) Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Beatles' spiritual guru Founder of , transcendental meditation, International Herald Tribune "In the United States, the organization values its assets at about $300 million"Unknown author(Feb 9, 2008) Beatles Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Dies NPR, retrieved Oct 10, 2012 and $3.5 billion world wide.Sullivan, Patricia (Feb 7, 2008)  Maharishi Mahesh Yogi; Was Meditation Guru to the Beatles, The Washington Post, "His organization's $3.5 billion in assets " The Spiritual Regeneration Movement was established in India in 1958Partridge, Christopher (2004) Oxford University Press, New Religions: A guide to New Religious Movements, Sects and Alternative Spiritualities, pp 182-187 and the Spiritual Regeneration Movement Foundation (SRMF) was incorporated in California, USA in July 1959 as a non-profit organization, with its headquarters in Los Angeles. SRMF's articles of incorporation describe the corporate purpose as educational and spiritual. Article 11 of the articles of incorporation read: "this corporation is a religious one. The educational purpose shall be to give instruction in a simple system of meditation".Malnak v Yogi, 440 F.Supp 1284(D.N.J. 1977) The SRMF corporation was later  dissolved. SRM offered TM courses to individuals "specifically interested in personal development in the context of a spiritual, holistic approach to knowledge". SRM addressed a smaller and older segment of the population as compared with subsequent organizations such as the International Mediation Society and the Students International Meditation Society.Lippy, Charles H., M>E> Sharpe Inc. (2000) Pluralism Comes of Age: American Religious Culture in the Twentieth Century, page 112 According to British author Una Kroll, SRM was not a community and in the early 1970s the organization "cast off its semi-religious clothing and pursued science in a big way".Kroll, Una (1974) John Knox Press, The Healing Potential of Transcendental Meditation, chapter 1: The Guru, page 135 In January 2012 the Pioneer News Service, New Delhi, reported that several trusts, including the SRM Foundation of India, had become "non-functional" after the death of the Maharishi in 2008 and were immersed in controversy after trust members alleged that parcels of land had been “illegally sold off” by other trust members without proper authorization.Author unknown (23 January 2012)  Members breach Yogi trusts with land deal, Pioneer News Service | New Delhi In June the dispute was reported to be specifically between members of the SRM Foundation India, board of directors, over control of the foundation's assets, including 12,000 acres of land spread around India.  The two factions had accused each other of forging documents and selling land for "personal gains" without the sanction of the entire 12-member board. The two parties petitioned the Indian courts for a stay of all land sales until the Department and the Ministry of Home Affairs could conduct an investigation of the alleged improprieties. The newspaper went on to report that only four years after the Maharishi's death, his Indian legacy was "in tatters". Ray, Shantanu Guha  (June 23, 2012) Yogi's disciples contort his legacy, India Today In 1959 the Maharishi went to England and established the British arm of the International Meditation Society with an additional office in San Francisco California, USA.Jones, David (2002) The Beatles and Wales, Publisher: St. David's, Cardiff, WalesSpencer, Leigh (February 7, 2008) MAHARISHI MAHESH YOGI,  The Independent  (London, England) The International Meditation Society was founded in the U.S. in 1961 to offer both beginning and advanced courses in Transcendental Meditation to the general public. As of 2007 it was still an active organization in Israel.Halkin, Talya (Feb 14, 2006) Group touts TM as cure for ills of Israeli society, Jerusalem PostEhud Zion Waldoks, (November 2007) School crisis? Send the kids to the corner - to count to 10, cross their legs, and hum...Jerusalem Post The Students International Meditation Society (SIMS) was first established in Germany in 1964.Olson, Carl (Jan 1, 2005) Transcendental Meditation, Encyclopedia of Religion A USA chapter was created in 1965 and offered courses to students and the youth of society. The UCLA (University of California, Los Angeles) chapter of SIMS, which had 1,000 members, was founded by Peter Wallace and his brother Robert Keith Wallace, the first president of Maharishi International University. In the 1970s, SIMS centers were established at "over one thousand campuses" in the USA and similar growth occurred in Germany, Canada and Britain. Transcendental Meditation has been utilized in corporations, both in the U.S.A and in India, under the auspices of the International Foundation for the Science of Creative Intelligence and the Maharishi Development Corporation.    In India a number of companies provide the TM technique to their managers. These companies include AirTel, Siemens, American Express, SRF Limited, Wipro, Hero Honda, Ranbaxy, Hewlett Packard, BHEL, BPL Group, ESPN Star Sports, Tisco, Eveready, Maruti, Godrej Group and Marico. The employees at Marico practice Transcendental Meditation in groups as part of their standard workday. The USA branch of the organization is called the American Foundation for the Science of Creative Intelligence (AFSCI) and as of 1975 it had conducted TM courses at General Foods, AT&T Corporation Connecticut General Life Insurance Company and Blue Cross/Blue Shield.  As of 2001, USA companies such as General Motors and IBM were subsidizing the TM course fee for their employees.  The organization has been described as one of several "holistic health groups" that attempted to incorporate elements of psychology and spirituality into healthcare.Harold George Koenig; Mona Smiley et al., (1988) Religion, Health, and Aging: A Review and Theoretical Integration , Greenwood Press, New York, page 159 The Maharishi Corporate Development Program is another international non-profit organization that offers the TM program to people in industry and business.Allison, Nancy (1999) Rosen Publishing Group, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Body-Mind Disciplines, Volume 57, page XXIVClarke, Peter (2006) Routledge, Encyclopedia of New Religious Movements,page 634 According to religious scholar Christopher Partridge, "hundreds" of Japanese business' have incorporated the meditation programs offered by Maharishi Corporate Development InternationalPartridge, Christopher (2004) Oxford University Press,  New religions : a guide : new religious movements, sects, and alternative spiritualities, page 402 including Sumitomo Heavy Industries Ltd. In 1995 the Fortune Motor Co. of Taiwan reportedly had a 100% increase in sales after participating in the program. The Washington Post reported in 2005, that USA real estate developer, The Tower Companies,  had added classes in Transcendental Meditation to their employee benefit program with 70% participation.  The World Plan Executive Council's (WPEC) international headquarters were located in Seelisberg, Switzerland and its American headquarters in Washington DC.Lewis, James R. (2001) Prometheus Books, Odd Gods, pages 230-223 The organization name was taken from the Maharishi's "world plan", which aimed to develop the full potential of the individual; improve governmental achievements; realize the highest ideal of education; eliminate the problems of crime and all behavior that brings unhappiness to the family of man; maximize the intelligent use of the environment; bring fulfillment to the economic aspirations of individuals and society; and achieve the spiritual goals of mankind in this generation. It provided courses in the Transcendental Meditation technique and other related programs. It was founded in Italy in 1972 and by 1992 had organized twenty-five TM centers with thirty-five thousand participants in that country.James R. Lewis, J. Gordon Melton (1992) Perspectives on the New Age, State University of New York Press, Albany NY, page 279 In 1998 the World Plan Executive Council Australia (WPECA) sought the approval of the New South Wales Labor Council (NSWLC) to allow a resort on property owned by NSWLC.Macken, Julie (November 5, 1998) Labor Council to Decide on TM Lease, The Australian Financial Review, page 2 The World Plan Executive Council (WPEC) was established in the U.S. as a non-profit educational corporation to guide its Transcendental Meditation movement."World Plan Executive Council, the organization that guides the Transcendental Meditation movement".  Its president was an American and former news reporter named Jerry Jarvis and the Maharishi is reported to have had "no legal, official or paid relationship with WPEC".Braverman, Marcy (Jan 1, 1999) Transcendental Meditation, Contemporary American Religion WPEC was an umbrella organization and operated almost exclusively on revenues generated from TM course fees. It featured corporate trappings such as "computerized mailings, high-speed communications, links, even a well-turned medical and life insurance plan for its employees". WPEC supervised the 375 urban TM centers as well as several failed resorts that were purchased or leased as "forest academies" for in-residence meditation classes and courses. It had $40 million in tax exempt revenues from 1970 to 1974 and in 1975 it had $12 million in annual revenues but  did not employ any outside public relations firm.  In 1985, a civil suit were filed against the World Plan Executive Council, in the U.S.A. by Robert Kropinski, Jane Greene, Patrick Ryan and Diane HendelUnited States District Court for the District of Columbia. Civil Suit #85-2848, 1986 claiming fraud and psychological, physical, and emotional harm as a result of the Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi programs. The district court dismissed Kropinski's claims concerning intentional tort and negligent infliction of emotional distress, and referred the claims of fraud and negligent infliction of physical and psychological injuries to a jury trial. The jury awarded Kropinski $137,890 in the fraud and negligence claims. The appellate court overturned the award and dismissed Kropinski's claim alleging psychological damage. The claim of fraud and the claim of a physical injury related to his practice of the TM-Sidhi program were remanded to the lower court for retrial.[ ] Kropinski v. WPEC, 853 F.2d 948 (CADC 1988) Kropinski, Green, Ryan and the defendants settled the remaining claims out of court on undisclosed terms."Meditation groups settle fraud cases", Associated Press, reprinted The Tuscaloosa News (April 21, 1991) The remaining suit by Hendel, not included in the settlement, was later dismissed because the claims were barred by the statute of limitations. In affirming the dismissal, the Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit held that Hendel's claims were time-barred under the discovery rule because "...the defendants made representations which any reasonable person would recognize as being contrary to common human experience and, indeed, to the laws of physics. If, as Ms. Hendel alleges, she was told that meditators would slowly rise in the air, and that some of them were 'flying over Lake Lucern' or 'walking through walls, hovering, and becoming invisible,' and that her failure to go to bed on time could bring about World War III, then a reasonable person would surely have noticed, at some time prior to September 1, 1986, that some of these representations might not be true."Hendel v World Plan Executive Council, 124 WLR 957 (January 2, 1996); affd 705 A.2d 656, 667 (DC, 1997) In the 1990s WPEC in the USA became the parent company to an American, for-profit, hotel subsidiary called Heaven on Earth Inns Corp. with Thomas M. Headley as its president. The Heaven on Earth Inns Corp. was reported to have purchased nine USA hotels at cut-rate prices that year, including two in Ohio, one in OklahomaDees, Cynthia (Dec 26, 1229) Oklahoma Hotel, Home, Apartment Sales Enjoyed a Good Year. (Originated from The Tulsa World, Okla.), Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News and one in Omaha, Nebraska.Shim, Grace (June 6, 2002) Old Buildings in Downtown Omaha, Neb., Slow to Change Hands, Omaha World-Herald (Omaha, NE) The hotels were bought as facilities for TM classes and as income-producing operations for health-conscious travelers who preferred vegetarian meals, alcohol free environments and non-smoking accommodations.Lubinger, Bill (October 8, 1993) Transcendental Group Buys N. Randall Hotel, Plain Dealer, page E2 The following year WPEC purchased a hotel in Asbury Park, New Jersey and a "shuttered" hotel in St. Louis, Missouri.Berger, Jerry (March 13, 1994) A Buyer Is Found for Old Forest Park Hotel, St Louis Post-Dispatch (MO) WPEC also "took over" Chicago's Blackstone Hotel via foreclosure in 1995.Kupcinet, Irv (Aug 4, 1995) KUP'S COLUMN, Chicago Sun-Times The Maharishi Global Development Fund (MGDF) purchased the Clarion Hotel in Hartford, Connecticut USA in 1995 for $1.5 million and sold it to Wonder Works Construction in 2011.  In 2006 MGDF's assets were listed as $192.3 million with $51.4 million in income. Maharishi Foundation is an educational and charitable organization  active in at least four countries.  The Maharishi Foundation's headquarters resided at Mentmore Towers in Buckinghamshire beginning in 1978 and later moved to Skelmersdale, West Lancashire, England. According to its website, Maharishi Foundation is a "registered, educational charity" that was established in Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom in 1975.Unknown author Maharishi Foundation-the UK Charity Official web site Its purpose is to advance public education by offering courses and services for human development including Transcendental Meditation.  The foundation is said to promote Consciousness-Based Education and research on Transcendental Meditation by "independent academic institutions" and reported $7 million in revenues in 2010. Similar corporations include the Maharishi Foundation Incorporated in New ZealandCopyright The Transcendental Meditation Programme of New Zealand, "Transcendental Meditation is the registered trademark of Maharishi Foundation Incorporated. © Copyright 2011" and Maharishi Foundation U.S.A.  Maharishi Foundation purchased the Kolleg St. Ludwig campus in 1984 for USD 900,000  and it  became the Maharishi European Research University (MERU) campus as well as the Maharishi's movement headquarters and residence. The buildings were old, inefficient, in disrepair and did not meet the Maharishi Sthapatya Veda requirements of an east facing entrance. A 2006 report in the LA Times said the Maharishi's organization has been involved in a two year "courtroom battle" with preservationist who wanted to block the demolition of the Kollege St. Ludwig building which "was abandoned in 1978" by its previous owners. A three-story, canvas illustration of the intended replacement building was put up on the front side of the building but local government ordered its removal. According to a 2008 report, the MERU Foundation indicated it would consider leaving the site if permission to demolish the old building was not granted. In 2015, the old buildings were removed completely.Der Abriss des Klosters St. Ludwig in Vlodrop (April 17, 2015) [ ] RP Online   By 1996, it was referred to as the "Maharishi Continental Capital of the Age of Enlightenment for Europe". In 1998, the overall redevelopment plan for the location was budgeted at USD 50 million. Aerial photographs show the development of the site. Floodlights illuminated the new building constructed in 1997 and 164 flagpoles carried the flags of the world nations "like a meditation-based United Nations." Local authorities later limited the use of floodlights and required removal of the flagpoles.  Tony Nader was crowned Maharaja Raja Raam there in 2001, and it became a "capital" of the Global Country of World Peace. By 2006, the campus had 50 residents and had been visited by John Hagelin and Doug Henning in prior years. In November 2011 Maharishi Foundation USA filed a lawsuit in Federal court against The Meditation House LLC for infringement of the foundation’s Transcendental Meditation trademark which are licensed to select organizations.Eckhoff, Jeff (Nov 29, 2011) Maharishi Foundation to competitor: Meditate on this lawsuit Des Moines Register The foundation alleges that its "credibility and positive image" are being used  to "mislead customers" while the defendant asserts the foundation has an unfair monopoly on an ancient technique. This self described non-political, non-religious, global organization was formed in 1976 by the MaharishiYogi, Maharishi Mahesh (1995) Meridian Group, the Science of Being and Art of Living pp 324-366 As of 1985 the World Government of the Age of Enlightenment was administrated by its President, Thomas A. Headly. Its purpose was to teach the Science of Creative Intelligence and the Transcendental Mediation and TM-Sidhi programs and to accomplish the seven goals of the World Plan. In addition, the organization gave Maharishi Awards to several outstanding members of the community each year.Jarrell, Howard R.,(1985) Scarecrow Press, International Meditation Bibliography 1950-1982, page 322  Maharishi Heaven on Earth Development Corp. (MHOED) is a for-profit real estate developer associated with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and his Transcendental Meditation movement. First founded in Malibu California in 1988, it has sought to build utopian projects in the U.S., Canada, and Africa with a long-term goal to "reconstruct the entire world", at an estimated cost of $100 trillion. The US arm planned to work with developers to build 50 "Maharishi Cities of Immortals" in the US and Canada. The Canadian arm bought and renovated the Fleck/Paterson House in Ottawa in 2002, earning the "adaptive use award of excellence" from the City. A subsidiary purchased land to build Maharishi Veda Land theme parks in Orlando, Florida and Niagara Falls, New York. The Dutch arm negotiated with the presidents of Zambia and Mozambique to acquire a quarter of the land in those countries in exchange for solving their problems.  Founded in 1992, the Natural Law Party (NLP) was a transnational party based on the teachings of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. The party was founded on the concept that Natural Law is the organizing principle that governs the universe and that the problems of humanity are caused by people violating Natural Law. The NLP supported using scientifically verifiable procedures such as the Transcendental Meditation technique and TM-Sidhi program to reduce or eliminate the problems in society. The party was active in up to 74 countries and ran candidates in many countries including the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Israel, and Taiwan. Two of the most prominent candidates were John Hagelin, who campaigned for U.S. president in 1992, 1996 and 2004, and magician Doug Henning who ran for office in England.  Electoral successes were achieved by the Ajeya Bharat Party in India, which elected a legislator to a state assembly, and by the Croatian NLP, which elected a member of a regional assembly in 1993. The party was disbanded in some countries beginning in 2004 but continues in India and in a few U.S. states. Maharishi Vedic Education Development Corporation (MVEDC) is a non-profit, American organization, incorporated in 1993 and headquartered in Fairfield, Iowa. Bevan G. Morris is the acting and founding president of the corporation and Richard Quinn is the director of project finance. MVED's primary purpose is the administration of Transcendental Meditation courses and training TM instructors in the United States.Butler v. MUM/MVED Case #4:06cv 00072 JEG-TJS, September 24, 2008 page 23, summary judgment two: negligent representation. Courses in Transcendental Meditation are led by TM teachers trained by MVED. MVED also provides promotional literature to its teachers and TM centers.Meditation Program Sessions at Osterhout, Wilkes Barre Times Leader, September 26, 1998 In 1975 the USA non-profit oversaw five owned properties and hundreds of rented facilities that offered meditation lectures and seminars. One facility located in Livingston Manor, New York housed a 350-room hotel, a printing press and a professional quality video and sound-recording studio. MVED is the sublicensee for many trademarks owned by the U.K. non-profit Maharishi Foundation Ltd. These trademarks include: Transcendental Meditation, TM-Sidhi, Yogic Flying and  Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health. In 2004, the lawsuit Butler vs. MUM alleged that MVED was guilty of negligent representation and had direct liability for the death of a Maharishi University of Management student. In 2008, all charges against MVED were dismissed and the law suit was dropped.Butler v. Maharishi University of Management, US District Court, Southern District of Iowa, Central Div., Case No. 06-cv-00072Kilian v. Maharishi University of Management, US District Court, Southern District of IowaButler v. MUM/MVED Case #4:06cv 00072 JEG-TJS, January 17, 2008 page 15, summary judgment one: direct liablity. Butler v. MUM/MVED Case #4:06cv 00072 JEG-TJS, Sept 24, 2008 page 23, summary judgment two: negligent representation. According to journalist Anthony Barnett, the attacks led critics to question the movement's claims that group practice of advanced meditation techniques could end violence. Maharishi said of the incident that "this is an aspect of the violence we see throughout society", including the violence that the U.S. perpetrates in other countries. MVED has created educational enterprises, such as Maharishi Vedic University and Maharishi Medical Center, and has overseen the construction and development of Maharishi Peace Palaces owned by the Global Country of World Peace (GCWP) in 30 locations in the USA.Philosophers and Religious Leaders, Christian D. Von Dehsen, Scott L. Harris, Chapter Maharishi Mahesh Yogi p. 120, [ ]The PDR family guide to natural medicines and healing therapies, By Physicians Desk Reference, p. 188 [ ] Maharishi Peace Palaces, Transcendental Meditation Centers, Maharishi Enlightenment Centers, and Maharishi Invincibility Centers provide training and Maharishi Ayurveda treatments as well as serving as local centers for TM and TM-Sidhi practitioners. The Maharishi Housing Development Finance Corporation (MHDFC) was established in India in 1997 and as of 2003 had 15 branch offices. In 2000 MHDFC began offering seven and 15-year loans and proposed a plan to offer 40-year mortgages. By 2003 the finance company had 15 branches across India, a loan portfolio of Rs104 crore, and the Maharishi University of Management of UK was listed as its majority owner."The Maharishi group is promoted by the UK-based Maharishi University of Management."....."The company, (MHDFC) with its head office in New Delhi....which is almost owned by the Maharishi University of Management."[ ] In 2009 Religare Enterprises Limited acquired an 87.5 percent stake in MHDFC and on that basis MHDFC received the highest quality credit rating from the ICRA in 2010.(Sept 7, 2010) ICRA gives A1+ to Maharishi Housing Development Finance Corp short-term debt programme, ADP Debt News, "ICRA said today it has assigned an A1+ rating to the INR 1.0 billion (USD 21m/EUR 17m) short-term debt programme of Maharishi Housing Development Finance Corporation Limited (MHDFC)."...."based on the company's strong parentage in form of Religare Enterprises Limited (BOM:532915), which holds 87.5% stake in the company Maharishi Solar Technology (MST) is an Indian solar producer that makes modules, solar lanterns and pumps founded in 1999.Unknown author, Home page  Maharishi Solar Technology, accessed Jan 7, 2013 (March 16, 2012) Budget 2012: Concession on equipment for solar-thermal is senseless, says domestic solar PV industry Economic Times, accessed Jan 7, 2013 MST has a vertically integrated facility for producing photovoltaic panels at Kalahasti in Andhra Pradesh, and is a core producer of the multicrystalline silicon wafers used to make them. MST is reported to be a "venture of Maharishi group" and has contracted with the US-based  Abengoa Solar Inc to produce solar thermal collectors.Doe, Paula, (April 24, 2008) Chindia Rushes Into Solar Solid State Technology, retrieved April 21, 2012 "Established local solar producer Maharishi Solar Technology, which makes 2.5MW of modules, as well as basic gear like solar lanterns and pumps for areas without electricity, now plans to expand to 40MW -- and ramp its new 100T capacity polysilicon plant by the end of this year."" Maharishi Solar Technology, a venture of Maharishi group, has tied up with the US-based Abengoa Solar Inc (ASI) for production of solar, which would be used for industrial applications of steam generation and other needs. The company is launching the project within next three months. The company would be in a position to supply equipment to industries for tapping solar energy, which would be used for air-conditioning, hot water needs and other thermal applications" MST's president, Prakash Shrivastava Malachandar, G. (March 16, 2012) 'Renewable energy sector left unhappy,Financial Chronicle, accessed Jan 7, 2013 is a member of the Solar Energy Society of India's Governing Council. According to a press release published in Reuters, MST was included in the  "2011-2015 Deep Research Report on Chinese Solar Grade Polysilicon Industry".Unknown author (Jan 6, 2012) Research and Markets: 2011-2015 Deep Research Report on Chinese Solar Grade Polysilicon Industry Reuters, accessed Jan 7, 2013   The Global Country of World Peace (GCWP) was declared by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the founder of Transcendental Meditation,  on Vijayadashami (Victory Day), October 7, 2000. He described it as "a country without borders for peace loving people everywhere".Maharishi Open University web site  GCWP is structured as a kingdom, with Tony Nader as its current Maharaja or Sovereign Ruler. It became incorporated in the state of Iowa, USA on October 15, 2002 as a non-profit organization with Bevan Morris as its president.Iowa, Secretary of State, Official Web Site The corporation has its headquarters in Maharishi Vedic City, Iowa.Other members of the board, as of 2009, are John Hagelin,  Benjamin Feldman, Larry Chroman, Robert G. Wynne, Steve Rubin, Prakash Shrivastava, and Peter Beach. Bloomberg.com December 28, 2009, [ ]   It has, or is building, capitals in the Netherlands, Iowa, Kansas, West Virginia, Manhattan, and India. The GCWP has made various unsuccessful attempts at attaining sovereignty as a micronation during the years 2000 to 2002, offering sums in excess of $1 billion to small and impoverished countries in exchange for the sovereignty over part of their territory. It has a global reconstruction program which seeks to rebuild all of the cities and buildings in the world following Maharishi Sthapatya Veda principles.  The David Lynch Foundation For Consciousness-Based Education and World Peace is a charitable foundation based in Fairfield, Iowa, founded in 2005 and operating worldwide. The Foundation primarily funds at-risk students learning to meditate using the Transcendental Meditation program. Its other activities include funding research on Transcendental Meditation and fundraising with the long-term goal of raising $7 billion to establish seven affiliated "Universities of World Peace", to train students in seven different countries to become "professional peacemakers". The Academic Meditation Society was launched in Germany in 1965 after 18 teaching centers had been established.  In 1966-1967 the number of teaching centers increased to 35 and the society opened an "academy" in Bremen-Blumenthal. In 2000, the Maharishi group launched the IT company Cosmic InfoTech solutions.[sic]"Maharishi group today announced its entry in the IT segment through launch of Cosmic InfoTech solutions" The Maharishi Group Venture was reported in 2006 to be "a non-profit, benevolent society based in India that aids students". According to his bio at the Human Dimensions web site, Anand Shrivastava is the "chairmen and managing director of the Maharishi Group of Companies". According to the web sites of Picasso Animation College and Maharishi Ayurveda Products Ltd. the "Maharishi Group is a multinational and multidimensional conglomerate with presence in over 120 countries".[sic]"In India, Maharishi organization is engaged in multifarious activities including education, health, technology development and social welfare. Maharishi Group is a multinational and multidimensional conglomerate with presence in over 120 countries." According to a report in Global Solar Technology, the Maharishi Group is "India’s leading International group with diversified interests"."Maharishi Solar Technology’, a venture of Maharishi Group – India’s leading International group with diversified interests, today announced its strategic tie–up with the Industrial (IST) Division of Abengoa Solar Inc., (ASI) a World leader in delivering solar technology solutions." A company called Maharishi Renewable Energy Ltd (MREL) was reported in 2009 to be "part of $700 million Maharishi group"."Maharishi Renewable Energy Ltd (MREL) is part of $700 million Maharishi group" In 2008, a resident of Maharishi Vedic City, Iowa filed a lawsuit against the India based company, Maharishi Ayurveda Products Pvt Ltd. (MAPPL), alleging that she had received lead poisoning from one of their products which she had purchased on a trip to India.Ellin, Abby (September 18, 2008) SKIN DEEP; Ancient, but How Safe? New York Times "a woman named Frances Gaskell experienced some of these symptoms after taking Garbhapal Ras, an herbal supplement geared toward pregnant women, and filed a lawsuit in the Federal District Court for the Southern District of Iowa against the manufacturer, Maharishi Ayurveda Products, which is based in India"Associated Press (March 11, 2008) Woman claims poisoning by herbal product, Telegraph - Herald (Dubuque)"A woman has filed a lawsuit claiming she contracted lead poisoning from a Maharishi herbal product." The Institute for Fitness and Athletic Excellence is the American organization that offers the TM program to amateur and professional athletes. The Global Mother Divine Organization describes itself as "an international non-profit organization that offers women"  the "Transcendental Mediation technique and its advanced programs." The World Center for Ayurveda was founded in India in 1985. Other active organizations include the Institute For Social Rehabilitation and the International Center for Scientific Research. Maharishi Information Technology Pvt. Ltd. (MITPL) was founded in 1999. The public presentation of the TM technique has varied over its 50 year history. Some authors have praised its methods and success while others have criticized its marketing techniques. For example author G. Francis Xavier writes, the Maharishi is "one of the best salesman" and has made full use of the mass media to propagate TM around the worldXavier, G. Francis, (2006)  Pustak Mahal Publishers,Yoga For Health & Personality, page 100 while authors Bainbridge and Stark criticize the TM movement for using endorsements from the scientific establishment as "propaganda", reprinting favorable articles and using positive statements by government officials in conjunction with their publicity efforts. On the other hand, cardiologist Stephen Sinatra and professor of medicine Marc Houston have said of the Maharishi: “His emphasis on scientific research proved that the timeless practice of meditation was not just an arcane mystical activity for Himalayan recluses, but rather a mind-body method hugely relevant to and beneficial for modern society". According to one account, the Maharishi beginning in 1959, began "building an infrastructure" using a "mass marketing model" for teaching the TM technique to Westerners. First, the Maharishi visited the U.S. because he felt that its people were ready to try something new, and the rest of the world would then "take notice". By the same token, author Philip Goldberg says the Maharishi's insistence that TM was easy to do was not a "marketing ploy," but rather "a statement about the nature of the mind."  In 1963 the Maharishi published his first book on Transcendental Meditation called The Science of Being and Art of Living.  In the mid-1960s, the TM organization began presenting its meditation to students via a campaign led by a man named Jerry Jarvis who had taken the TM course in 1961. By 1966, the Students Meditation Society (SIMS) had begun programs in U.S. colleges such as University of California, Berkeley, Harvard, Yale and others, and was a "phenomenal success".Woo, Elaine (February 6, 2006) "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi", Los Angeles Times In the late 1960s, the TM technique received "major publicity" through its associations with The Beatles, and by identifying itself with various aspects of modern day counterculture.Bajpai, R.S. (2002) Atlantic Publishers, The Splendours And Dimensions Of Yoga 2 Vols. Set, page 554Barrett, Stephen and  Cornacchia, Harold J. (1980) Consumer health: a guide to intelligent decisions, page 106 However, Goldberg and others say that during the first decade of the TM organization, the Maharishi’s main students in the West were not rock stars and their fans, but ordinary, middle-aged citizens. In the late 60’s, young people coming to learn TM at the center in London, England, were surprised  "to be greeted not by fellow hippies but by the proper, middle-aged men and women who were Maharishi's earliest followers."Goldberg, Phillip (2011) Harmony Books, American Veda, page 153 Another author notes that, “By the time the Beatles first met the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in London in 1966, Mahesh had already made seven trips around the globe, established 38 centres, and amassed more than 100,000 followers.”  While Lennon and Harrison were in India in 1968 there were tensions with the Maharishi over business negotiations for a proposed documentary film and television show. The Beatles were surprised to find the Maharishi was a sophisticated negotiatorBrown & Gaines (1984) p. 195 with an interest in publicity, business and finances. TM is said to have taken full advantage of all available publicity, and began to market to specific populations, such as spiritual people, political people and "pragmatic" self-help people. The latter approach is said to have been "given impetus" by the scientific research on the technique.Christian Blatter, Donald McCown, Diane Reibel, Marc S. Micozzi, (2010) Springer Science+Business Media, Teaching Mindfulness, Page 47 In The Future of Religion, sociologists Bainbridge and Stark write that, while the movement attracted many people through endorsements from celebrities such as The Beatles, another marketing approach was "getting articles published in scientific journals, apparently proving TM's claims or at least giving them scientific status". In the 1970s, according to Philip Goldberg, the Maharishi began encouraging research on the TM technique because he felt that hard scientific data would be a useful marketing tool and a way to re-brand meditation as a scientific form of deep rest, rather than a mystical "samadhi"; one of his first steps in secularizing the technique. The Maharishi's "appropriation of science was clearly part of his agenda from the beginning" says Goldberg, and so his "organization was incorporated as an educational non-profit, not a religious one". The Maharishi asked people with marketing expertise, like SIMS president, Jarvis, to present TM as a method for inner peace and relaxation based on scientific proof  and, because the TM technique was the first type of mediation to undergo scientific testing, it "has always received the most publicity". The first peer-reviewed research on TM, conducted by physiologist Robert K. Wallace at UCLA, appeared in the journal Science in 1970. It attracted significant public and scientific attention. The study’s findings were also published in the American Journal of Physiology in 1971, in Scientific American in 1972, and reported in Time magazine in 1971. Between mid-1970 and 1974, the number of research insititutions conducting research on TM grew from four to over 100. Several researchers have said that Maharishi’s encouragement of research on TM resulted in a beneficial increase in the scientific understanding of not only TM but of meditation in general, resulting in the increased use of meditation to alleviate health problems and to improve mind and body.  Neuroscientists Ronald Jevning and James O’Halloran wrote in 1984 that “The proposal of the existence of a unique or fourth state of consciousness with a basis in physiology” by the Maharishi in 1968 was “a major contribution to the study of human behavior" resulting in "a myriad of scientific studies both basic and applied in an area heretofore reserved for ‘mysticism'.”  Research reviews of the effects of the Transcendental Meditation technique have yielded results ranging from inconclusive to clinically significant.John Vogel, Rebecca Costello, and Mitchell Krucoff, Chapter 47 in Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, Peter Libbie, et al, eds, Saunders Elsevier, 2007, p. 1157. Quotation: "TM has been shown not only to improve blood pressure but also the insulin resistance components of the metabolic syndrome and cardiac autonomic nervous system tone." Newsweek science writer Sharon Begley said that “the Maharishi deserves credit for introducing the study of meditation to biology. Hospitals from Stanford to Duke have instituted meditation programs to help patients cope with chronic pain and other ailments.”  According to Bainbridge and Stark, TM had engaged in several mass media campaigns prior to 1973, and had received a great amount of publicity, but the main source of new TM students was word of mouth, or the "advice of friends", because "TM was a relatively cheap, short-term service, requiring no deep commitment".page 313 Author Jack Forem agrees, and writes: "the main source of publicity for the movement has been satisfied practitioners spreading the news by word of mouth".Forem, Jack (1984) Unwin Paperbacks, Transcendental meditation: Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and the science of creative intelligence, page 9-10 In 1973,  Maharishi International University (MIU) faculty member, Michael Peter Cain co-wrote a book with Harold Bloomfield and Dennis T. Jaffe called TM: Discovering Inner Energy and Overcoming Stress.  The TM movement's area coordinator, Jack Forem, published his book Transcendental Meditation, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and the Science of Creative Intelligence in 1976.  That year, TM teacher,  Peter Russell, released his book An Introduction to Transcendental Meditation and the Teachings of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi  as did MIU board of trustees member, Nat Goldhaber  who wrote TM: An alphabetical guide to the transcendental meditation program. The Maharishi made appearances on the Merv Griffin Show in 1975 and again in 1977.Merv: making the good life last, Merv Griffin, David Bender, page 177  TM teacher, George Ellis published a book called Inside Folsom Prison: Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi Program in 1983. Movement spokesman, Robert Roth, published his book, TM: Transcendental Meditation : A New Introduction to Maharishi's Easy, Effective and Scientifically Proven Technique in 1988. As of 1993 the organization was utilizing its own public relations office called the Age of Enlightenment News Service. In a scene in the 1999 film, Man on the Moon, TM meditator Andy Kaufman was asked to leave a TM teacher training course because his performances were incompatible with the behavior expected of a TM teacher. The Maharishi gave his first interview in 25 years on the Larry King Show in May 2002. Additional books were published by Maharishi University of Management (MUM) faculty and researchers such as David Orme-Johnson's Transcendental Meditation in Criminal Rehabilitation and Crime Prevention in 2003 and Robert Scheider's Total Heart Health: How to Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease with the Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health in 2006.  The  Wikileaks web site published the alleged notes of 35 meetings conducted by the Domain of Atlanta Directors with the January 10, 2007 meeting notes saying they were "making a strategy to get rid of the negative sites on the Internet". According to the New York Times, since 2008 there has been an increased number of celebrity endorsements for Transcendental Meditation. Those who have appeared at promotional events to raise funds to teach TM to students, veterans, prisoners and others include comedian/actor Russell Brand, TV host/physician Mehmet Oz, and singer Moby. A benefit performance in New York City in 2009 included a reunion performance by musicians Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr, Donovan, Sheryl Crow, Eddie Vedder, Bettye LaVette, Ben Harper, Paul Horn, and Mike Love. Others appearances included comedian Jerry Seinfeld, actress Laura Dern, and radio talk show host Howard Stern.  The book Transcendence: Healing and Transformation Through Transcendental Meditation was published by psychiatrist  Norman Rosenthal in 2011 and MUM faculty member Fred Travis  published Your Brain is a River, Not a Rock in 2012.  A jazz concert to benefit the David Lynch Foundation was held in New York City in 2013. The events included remarks by TV hosts Mehmet Oz, George Stephanopoulos and actress Liv Tyler with musical performances by Herbie Hancock, Corrine Bailey Rae and Wynton Marsalis. In 1988, author J. Isamu Yamamoto wrote that "TM was called the McDonald’s of meditation because of its extravagantly successful packaging of Eastern Meditation for the American mass market".Yamamoto, J. Isamu, Hinduism, TM, and Hare Krishna ( 1998) Zondervan Publishing, page 16 According to the 1980 book, TM and Cult Mania, scientists associated with TM have attempted to prove the Maharishi's concepts by uniting scientific data and mystical philosophy. The 2010 book, Teaching Mindfulness, says that TM's eventual success as a new social movement was based on the "translation in Western language and settings, popular recognition, adoption within scientific research in powerful institutions." The book goes on to say that TM's "use of sophisticated marketing and public relations techniques, represents a model for success in the building of new social movements". Sociologist Hank Johnston, who analyzed TM as a "marketed social movement" in a 1980 paper, says that TM has used sophisticated techniques, such as tailored promotional messages for different audiences, and pragmatically adapted them to different cultures and changing times. Johnston says that TM's "calculated strategies" have led to its "rapid growth". In particular, it has objectified the rank-and-file membership, marketed the movement as a product, and created a perception of grievances for which it offers a panacea. In her book, The Field, author Lynne McTaggart notes that the "organization has been ridiculed, largely because of the promotion of the Maharishi's own personal interests", but suggests that "the sheer weight of data...[on the Maharishi Effect]...is compelling". According to an article in The Independent, despite early criticism, the TM technique has moved from margin to mainstream, due mostly to its "burgeoning body of scientific research". Its recent appeal seems due to the possibility of relaxation with no chemical assistance. "TM, as its followers call it, is rapidly moving from kooky margin to respectable mainstream thanks largely to a burgeoning body of scientific research.".."While the research on the health benefits of TM is fascinating, there's another, more compelling, reason why meditation is in the air just now. Done consistently, it seems to offer some sort of corrective to modernity, a respite from anxiety and the ability to really, truly relax, without chemical assistance"  Jerrold Greenberg in his book Comprehensive Stress Management writes that the Maharishi was a "major exporter of meditation to the Western world" who "developed a large, worldwide, and highly effective organization to teach Transcendental Meditation". Greenberg goes on to say that "the simplicity of this technique, coupled with the effectiveness of its marketing by TM organizations quickly led to its popularity."Greenberg, Jerrold S. (2006) McGraw-Hill, Comprehensive Stress Management, page 170 According to Goldberg, research and meditation in general are likely to be the Maharishi's "lasting legacy". Maharishi wanted to maintain the purity of his teachings. He said that the "purity of the system of meditation" must be  maintained "at any cost because the effect lies in the purity of the teaching". TM practitioners that are suspected of interacting with other gurus can be banned from meditations and lose other privileges. In the 1990s, Maharishi prohibited his students from interacting with Deepak Chopra As a result, Lowe writes, the number of sufficiently orthodox practitioners was significantly reduced by 2007.  In 1983, Robin Wadsworth Carlson began teaching his meditation program via a "World Teacher Seminar." Many students at Maharishi International University (MIU) were suspended after describing the literature promoting the seminar. In response Carlson filed a lawsuit against MIU alleging interference in conducting his seminars. The Maharishi believed that in order to maintain the continuity of Transcendental Meditation it had to be taught by trained teachers in dedicated centers.Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. The Science of Being and Art of Living. Plume, New York, 2001. p298-307 Maharishi recorded his lectures; systematized the teaching of the technique, insisted the technique not be mixed with other techniques and separated the technique from other points of view and practices that might confuse its understanding.Russel, Peter. The TM Technique:A Skeptic’s Guide To The TM Program. Routledge, Boston, 1977. pg15-18. George Chryssides identifies the TM movement as one of the  new religious movements “which lacks overtly religious features as traditionally understood” and whose focus is on human potential. He also describes the TM movement in terms of Roy Wallis’s tryptological terms as a world affirming rather than world renouncing or world accommodating new religious movement.(Roy Wallis, 1985, page 5) According to religious studies scholar, Tamar Gablinger, the "complex structure" of the TM organization falls somewhere  between being a commercial entity and a religious and social movement. Gablinger says this allows sociologists to categorize it in a variety of ways. Both Gablinger and sociologist Hank Johnston describe the TM organization as a "marketed social movement."   Author Noretta Koertge asserts that the TM movement introduced to the West the "scientistic version of Hinduism"; the idea that "the Vedas are simply another name for science".Noretta Koertge, Scientific values and civic virtues, Oxford University Press US, 2005, ISBN 978-0-19-517225-6, p. 226. The TM movement has been described by Neusner as being a neo-Hindu adaptation of classical Vedantic Hinduism,Marie-Christine Rhally, The teaching of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi as a Neo-Hindu version of Sankara's Vedanta: a modern stage in the development of Vedantic ideas (1983)in Jacob Neusner, World Religions in America: An Introduction, Westminster John Knox Press, 2009 ISBN 978-0-664-23320-4. while  author Gerald James Larson says it retains "only shallow connections" to Hinduism.Cited as a "Neo-Hindu revisionist and internationalist movement" with "only shallow connections" to Hinduism in Gerald James Larson, India's agony over religion, SUNY series in religious studies, 1995, ISBN 978-0-7914-2412-4, p. 139. Critics charge that the TM movement is a bastardized form of Hinduism which denies its religious roots and claims a scientific basis for the purpose of securing government funding for its programs. In their book, Millennium, Messiahs and Mayhem: Contemporary Apocalyptic Movements, Robbins and Palmer refer to the Maharishi's teaching that the practice of Transcendental Meditation will bring Ram Rajya (the rule of God) on earth as a form of progressive millennialism from the Hindu tradition. Along with other movements that developed as part of the hippie subculture in the 1960s, there has been debate on "cult"-like aspects of the Transcendental Meditation movement. Camille Paglia wrote that TM was the "major Asian cult" of the 1960s. The Israeli Center for Cult Victims also considers the movement to be a cult. Maharishi University says that it is not a religious institution but people who have left the movement refer to it as a cult. In 1987, the Cult Awareness Network (CAN) held a press conference and demonstration in Washington, D.C., saying that the organization that teaches the Transcendental Meditation technique "seeks to strip individuals of their ability to think and choose freely." Steven Hassan, an author on the topic of cults, and at one time a CAN deprogrammer, said at the press conference that members display cult-like behaviors, such as the use of certain language and particular ways of dressing. TM teacher and spokesperson, Dean Draznin, "discounted CAN's claims" saying that Transcendental Meditation "doesn't involve beliefs or lifestyle" or "mind control" and "We don't force people to take courses". Another spokesperson, Mark Haviland of the related College of Natural Law said that TM is "not a philosophy, a life style or a religion. Author Shirley Harrison says that the method of recruitment is one  sign that helps to identify cult, and that TM's only method is advertising. She also says that "none of the other 'cultic qualities' defined by cultwatchers can be fairly attributed to TM." Harrison writes that the Maharishi's teaching does not require conversion and that Transcendental Meditation does not have a religious creed. In the book Cults and New Religions, Cowan and Bromley write that TM is presented to the public as a meditation practice that has been validated by science but is not a religious practice nor is it affiliated with any religious tradition. They say that "although there are some dedicated followers of TM who devote most or all of their time to furthering the practice of Transcendental Meditation in late modern society, the vast majority of those who practice do so on their own, often as part of what has been loosely described as the New Age Movement. " They say that most scholars view Transcendental Meditation as having elements of both therapy and religion, but that on the other hand, "Transcendental Meditation has no designated scripture, no set of doctrinal requirements, no ongoing worship activity, and no discernible community of believers."  They also say that Maharishi didn't claim to have special divine revelation or supernatural personal qualities. Marc Galanter, writes in his book Cults: Faith, Healing and Coercion that TM "evolved into something of a charismatic movement, with a belief system that transcended the domain of its practice". He notes how a variety of unreasonable beliefs came to be seen as literally true by its "more committed members". He cites an "unlikely set of beliefs" that includes the ability to levitate and reduce traffic accidents and conflicts in the Middle East through the practice of meditation. In his book Soul snatchers: the mechanics of cults, Jean-Marie Abgrall describes how Altered States Of Consciousness (ASCs) are used in many cults to make the initiate more susceptible to the group will and world view. He cites research by Barmark and Gautnitz which showed the similarities between the states obtained by Transcendental Meditation and ASCs. In this way, not only does the subject become more reliant on the ASC, but it allows for a weakening of criticism of the cult and increase in faith therein. Abgrall goes on to note that the use of mantras is one of the most widespread techniques in cults, noting in TM this mantra is produced mentally.Abgrall p.174 He says that a guru is usually central to a cult and that its success will rely on how effective that guru is. Among the common characteristics of a guru he notes paraphrenia, a mental illness that completely cuts the individual from reality. In regard to this he notes for example, that the Maharishi recommended the TM-Sidhi program including 'yogic flying' as a way to reduce crime.Abgrall p.71 In his book The Elementary Forms of The New Religious Life, Roy Wallis writes in the chapter called "Three Types of New Religious Movements" that TM is a "world affirming new religion" which does not reject the world and its organisation" [sic]. Wallis goes on to say that "no rigorous discipline is normally involved" and "no extensive doctrinal commitment is entailed, at least not at the outset". Likewise, he writes, "No one is required to declare a belief in TM, in the Maharishi or even in the possible effects of the technique".Wallis, Roy (1984) Routledge and Kegan Paul, The Elementary Forms of the New Religious Lifepp 20-35 In a later chapter called "The Precariousness of the Market", he  writes that TM meditators are "expected to employ the movement's rhetoric and conceptual vocabulary" and shift from an empirical product [the Transcendental Meditation technique] to a "system of belief and practice" [such as the TM Sidhi program] and in this way "the movement shifts from cult towards sect". Sociologist Alan E. Aldridge writes that Transcendental Meditation fits Roy Wallis' definition of a "world-affirming religion". According to Aldridge, TM has an ethos of "individual self-realization" and "an inner core of committed members" who practice more advanced techniques (the TM-Sidhi program) that may not even be known to the "ordinary consumer of TM". Reporter Michael D’Antonio wrote in his book, Heaven on Earth – Dispatches from America’s Spiritual Frontier that, as practiced at Maharishi International University, Transcendental Meditation is "a cult, not a culture". D'Antonio wrote that Transcendental Meditation was like the worst of religion: rigid, unreasonable, repressive, and authoritarian, characterized by overt manipulation, a disregard for serious scholarship, and an unwillingness to question authority. For the first time in his travels he found people he believed to be truly deluded, and a physics department teaching theories that were dead wrong. D'Antonio charges that they have taken Transcendental Meditiation and transformed it "into a grandiose narcissistic dream, a form of intellectual bondage, that they call enlightenment". Clarke and Linzey argue that for the ordinary membership of TM their lives and daily concerns are little&nbsp;— if at all&nbsp;— affected by its cult nature. Instead, as is the case for Scientology, it is only the core membership who must give total dedication to the movement. A former TM teacher, who operates an online site critical of TM, says that 90 percent of participants take an introductory course and "leave with only a nice memory of incense, flowers, and smiling gurus" while "the 10 percent who become more involved". He says those participants encounter "environments where adherents often weren't allowed to read the news or talk to family members". Another former TM Movement member, says there were "times when devotees had their mail screened and were monitored by a Vigilance Committee".  Another follower described these TM critics as a "microscopic group of troubled people" whose "mission in life is to be unhappy". A reporter for The Sunday Times wrote in 2010 that he did not think the movement was a cult due to the lack of a cult leader and its well-meaning participants.  While religious scholar Tamar Gablinger notes that some of the reports from "apostates and adversaries" who have written about their involvement with the TM movement are "rather biased."    It is difficult to determine definitive effects of meditation practices in healthcare as the quality of research has design limitations and a lack of methodological rigor.
