   The  is an active subordinate unified command of the United States Pacific Command (USPACOM). It was activated at Fuchu Air Station, Tokyo, Japan on 1 July 1957 to replace the Far East Command (FEC). USFJ is commanded by the Commander, U.S. Forces, Japan (COMUSJAPAN). COMUSJAPAN is also the Commander, Fifth Air Force. At present, USFJ is headquartered at Yokota Air Base, Tokyo, Japan. COMUSJAPAN, plans, directs and supervises the execution of missions and responsibilities assigned to him by the U.S. Commander in Chief, Pacific (USCINCPAC). He establishes and implements policies to accomplish the mission of the United States Armed Forces in Japan. He is responsible for developing plans for the defense of Japan, and he must be prepared if contingencies arise, to assume operational control of assigned and attached U.S. forces for the execution of those plans. As USCINCPAC's resident representative, COMUSJAPAN supports the Security Treaty and administers the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) between the United States and Japan. He is responsible for coordinating various matters of interest with the service commanders in Japan. These include matters affecting US-Japan relationships among and between Department of Defense (DOD) agencies; DOD agencies and the U.S. Ambassador to Japan; and DOD agencies and the Government of Japan (GOJ). Under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan, the United States is obliged to protect Japan in close cooperation with the Japan Self-Defense Forces for maritime defense, ballistic missile defense, domestic air control, communications security (COMSEC) and disaster response operations.   After the Japanese surrender in World War II, the United States Armed Forces assumed administrative authority in Japan. The Japanese Imperial Army and Navy were decommissioned, and the U.S. Armed Forces took control of their military bases until the new government could be formed and positioned to reestablish authority. Allied forces planned to demilitarize Japan, and new government adopted the Constitution of Japan with a no-armed-force clause in 1947. After the Korean War began in 1950, Douglas MacArthur, the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers in Japan and the Japanese government established the paramilitary "National Police Reserve," which was later developed into the Japan Self-Defense Forces. In 1951 the Treaty of San Francisco was signed by the allied countries and Japan, which restored its formal sovereignty. At the same time, the U.S. and Japan signed the Japan-America Security Alliance. By this treaty, USFJ is responsible for the defense of Japan. As part of this agreement, the Japanese government requested that the U.S. military bases remain in Japan, and agreed to provide funds and various interests specified in the Status of Forces Agreement. At the expiration of the treaty, the United States and Japan signed the new Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan. The status of the United States Forces Japan was defined in the U.S.-Japan Status of Forces Agreement. This treaty is still in effect, and it forms the basis of Japan's foreign policy.  According to academics and experts, the U.S. provision of Japan's defense allowed Japan to focus domestic spending on their own economy, thereby assisting Japan with becoming one of the most powerful countries economically in the world.[ ], Japan Times, 10 Aug 2013 In the Vietnam War, the US military bases in Japan, especially those in Okinawa, were used as important strategic and logistic bases. In 1970, Koza riot occurred against the US military presence in Okinawa. The USAF strategic bombers were deployed in the bases in Okinawa, which was still administered by the U.S. government. Before the 1972 reversion of the island to Japanese administration, it has been speculated but never confirmed that up to 1,200 nuclear weapons may have been stored at Kadena Air Base, Okinawa in the 1960s.疑惑が晴れるのはいつか, Okinawa Times, 16 May 1999 , there are approximately 50,000 U.S. military personnel stationed in Japan, along with approximately 40,000 dependents of military personnel and another 5,500 American civilians employed there by the United States Department of Defense. The United States Seventh Fleet is based in Yokosuka.  The 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force (III MEF) is based in Okinawa. 130 USAF fighters are stationed in the Misawa Air Base and Kadena Air Base.Yoshida, Reiji, "Basics of the U.S. military presence", Japan Times, 25 March 2008, p. 3. The Japanese government paid ¥217 billion (US$ 2.0 billion) in 2007思いやり予算８億円減で日米合意、光熱水料を３年間で, Yomiuri Shinbun, December 12, 2007 as annual host-nation support called .PRESS RELEASE U.S. and Japan Sign Alliance Support Agreement, The embassy of the United States in Japan The U.S. government employs over 8,000 Master Labor Contract (MLC)/Indirect Hire Agreement (IHA) workers on Okinawa (per the Labor Management Organization) not including Okinawan contract workers. Immediately after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, 9,720 dependents of United States military and government civilian employees in Japan evacuated the country, mainly to the United States.Tritten, Travis J., "Evacuation from Japan a vacation? Not so much", Stars and Stripes, 31 May 2011. The relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps Air Station Futenma to Henoko was resolved as of December 2013 with the signing of the landfill agreement by the governor of Okinawa. Under the terms of the new U.S.-Japan agreement 5.000 U.S. Marines will be relocated to Guam and 4.000 U.S. Marines to other Pacific locations such as Hawaii or Australia, while some 10.000 Marines will remain on Okinawa. No timetable for the Marines redeployment has been announced, but the Washington Post reported that U.S. Marines would leave Okinawa as soon as suitable facilities on Guam and elsewhere are ready. The relocation move is expected to cost 8.6 billion US Dollars and includes a $3.1bn cash commitment from Japan for the move to Guam as well as for developing joint training ranges on Guam and on Tinian and Pagan in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Certain parcels of land on Okinawa which have been leased for use by the American military are being turned back to Japanese control via a long-term phased return process according to the agreement. These returns have been ongoing since 1972. In May 2014, in a strategic shift by the United States to Asia and the Pacific, it was revealed the US was deploying two unarmed Global Hawk long-distance surveillance drones to Japan for surveillance missions over China and North Korea. The scope and frequency of U.S. Forces Japan participation in major exercises has been rising in recent years. This is largely attributable to the refocus of the U.S. to the Asia-Pacific region, although certain forces, especially the Marine Corps, have never left the region and continue to be heavily involved in theater security and regional stability. United States Pacific Command (USPACOM), the parent command of U.S. Forces Japan, has also taken on larger and broader roles during exercises in Japan, particularly in those exercises on mainland Japan. U.S. Forces Japan has no control or authority over subordinate command exercises beyond manipulation of Force Protection Condition levels, which is the only area of tactical control residing with U.S. Forces Japan. Okinawa makes up only 0.6 percent of the nation’s land area; yet, approximately 62% of U.S. bases in Japan (exclusive use only) are in Okinawa.[ ], Okinawa Prefectural Government While 73.4% of Japanese citizens appreciate the mutual security treaty with the U.S. and the presence of the USFJ,自衛隊・防衛問題に関する世論調査, The Cabinet Office of Japan a small but very vocal portion of the population demand a reduction in the number of U.S. military bases presence. In May 2010, a survey of the Okinawan people conducted by Mainichi Shimbun and Ryukyu shimpo, found that 71% of Okinawans surveyed thought that the presence of Marines on Okinawa was not necessary. 15% said it was necessary. Asked what they thought about 62% of United States Forces Japan bases (exclusive use) being concentrated in Okinawa, 50% said that the number should be reduced, 41% said that the bases should be removed. Asked about the US-Japan security treaty, 55% said it should be changed to a peace treaty, 14% said it should be abolished and 7% said it should be maintained. Many of the bases, such as Yokota Air Base, Naval Air Facility Atsugi and Kadena Air Base, are located in the vicinity of residential districts, and local citizens have complained about excessive aircraft noise.基地騒音の問題, Yamato City横田基地における騒音防止対策の徹底について（要請）, Tokyo Metropolitan Government嘉手納町の概要, Kadena Town There is also debate over the Status of Forces Agreement which covers a variety of administrative technicalities blending the systems which control how certain situations are handled between the U.S.'s and Japan's legal framework. SOFA was created to allow both nations the best way to administer legalities, and has worked well over the years. Per Okinawa Prefectural Police data, U.S. service members commit far fewer crimes than local Okinawans.[ ], Ethos Data  According to the U.S.-Japan Status of Forces Agreement, U.S. personnel who commit crimes off-duty and off-base, are always prosecuted under the Japanese law.[ ], SOFA Agreement On February 12, 2008, the National Police Agency (of Japan) or NPA, released its annual criminal statistics that included activity within the Okinawan prefecture. These findings held American soldiers responsible for 53 crimes per 10,000 U.S. male servicemen, while Okinawan males held a crime rate of 366 crimes per 10,000. The crime rate found a U.S. serviceman in Okinawa to be 86% less likely to commit a crime than an Okinawan male.   At the commencement of the occupation of Japan, many U.S. soldiers participated in the Special Comfort Facility Association. Japanese government recruited 55,000 women to work providing sexual services to US military personnel. The Association was closed by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers. However, John W. Dower, Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, alleged that many U.S. troops committed multiple rapes of Japanese women during the occupation and that press censorship led to under-reporting of these crimes. In 1995, the abduction and rape of a 12-year-old Okinawan schoolgirl by two U.S. marines and one U.S. sailor led to demands for the removal of all U.S. military bases in Japan. Other controversial incidents include helicopter crashes, the Girard incident, the Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident, the death of Kinjo family and the death of Yuki Uema. In February 2008, a 38-year-old U.S. Marine based on Okinawa was arrested in connection with the reported rape of a 14-year-old Okinawan girl. This triggered waves of protest against American military presence in Okinawa and led to tight restrictions on off-base activities. Although the accuser withdrew her charges the U.S. military court-martialed the suspect and sentenced him to 4 years in prison under the stricter rules of the military justice system.http://www.newser.com/story/27674/okinawa-marine-gets-4-years-for-teen-sex-abuse.html U.S. Forces Japan designated 22 February as a Day of Reflection for all U.S. military facilities in Japan, and established the Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Task Force in an effort to prevent similar incidents.U.S. imposes curfew on Okinawa  forces, The Japan Times, February 21, 2008 In November 2009, Staff Sgt. Clyde "Drew" Gunn, a U.S. Army soldier stationed at Torii Station was involved in a hit-and-run accident of a pedestrian in Yomitan Village on Okinawa. Later, in April 2010, the soldier was charged with failing to render aid and vehicular manslaughter.[ ] Staff Sgt. Gunn, of Ocean Springs, Mississippi, was eventually sentenced to 2 years and 8 months in jail on October 15, 2010. In 2013, two U.S. military personnel, Seaman Christopher Browning, of Athens, Texas, and Petty Officer 3rd Class Skyler Dozierwalker, of Muskogee, Oklahoma, were found guilty by the Naha District Court of raping and robbing a woman in her 20s in a parking lot in October. Both admitted committing the crime. The case outraged many Okinawans, a number of whom have long complained of military-related crime on their island, which hosts thousands of U.S. troops. It also sparked tougher restrictions for all 50,000 U.S. military personnel in Japan, including a curfew and drinking restrictions. On 13 May 2013, Toru Hashimoto, co-leader of the Japan Restoration Association said to a senior American military official at the Marine Corps base in Okinawa “We can’t control the sexual energy of these brave marines.” and told United States soldiers should make more use of the local adult entertainment industry to reduce sexual crimes against local women. Hashimoto also told the necessity of former Japanese Army comfort women and other countries military prostitute existence. In October 2012, twelve MV-22 Ospreys were transferred to the US Marine Corps Air Station Futenma to replace aging Vietnam-era Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight helicopters in Okinawa, greatly increasing the safety, capability and range of the Marines who are charged with Japan's defense as well as regional security.  Then in October 2013, an additional 12 Ospreys arrived, again to replace CH-46 Sea Knights, increasing the number of Ospreys to 24.  Japanese Defence Minister Satoshi Morimoto explained the Osprey aircraft is safe adding that two recent accidents were 'caused by human factors'. Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda also stated that the Japanese government was convinced of the MV-22's safety.http://www.japantimes.co.jp/text/nn20121002a3.html   The USFJ headquarters is at Yokota Air Base, about 30&nbsp;km west of central Tokyo. The U.S. military installations in Japan and their managing branches are as follows: JSDF-USFJ Joint Use Facilities and Areas Temporary use facilities and areas are as follows: In Okinawa, U.S. military installations occupy about 10.4 percent of the total land usage.  Approximately 74.7 percent of all the U.S. military facilities in Japan are located on the island of Okinawa. The United States has returned some facilities to Japanese control. Some are used as military bases of the JSDF; others have become civilian airports or government offices; many are factories, office buildings or residential developments in the private sector. Due to the Special Actions Committee on Okinawa, more land in Okinawa is in the process of being returned.  These areas include—Camp Kuwae [also known as Camp Lester], MCAS Futenma, areas within Camp Zukeran [also known as Camp Foster], about  of the Northern Training Area, Aha Training Area, Gimbaru Training Area (also known as Camp Gonsalves), small portion of the Makiminato Service Area (also known as Camp Kinser), and Naha Port. Army: Navy: Air Force: Marines: Branch(MilDep) USFJ FacilitiesAdmin Code Name of Installation Primary Purpose(Actual) Location Air Force FAC 1054 Camp Chitose(Chitose III, Chitose Administration Annex) Communications Chitose, Hokkaido FAC 2001 Misawa Air Base Air Base Misawa, Aomori FAC 3013 Yokota Air Base Air Base Fussa, Tokyo FAC 3016 Fuchu Communications Station Communications Fuchu, Tokyo FAC 3019 Tama Service Annex(Tama Hills Recreation Center) Recreation Inagi, Tokyo FAC 3048 Camp Asaka (South Camp Drake AFN Transmitter Site) Barracks(Broadcasting) Wako, Saitama FAC 3049 Tokorozawa Communications Station(Tokorozawa Transmitter Site) Communications Tokorozawa, Saitama FAC 3056 Owada Communication Site Communications Niiza, Saitama FAC 3162 Yugi Communication Site Communications Hachioji, Tokyo FAC 4100 Sofu Communication Site Communications Iwakuni, Yamaguchi FAC 5001 Itazuke Auxiliary Airfield Air Cargo Terminal Hakata-ku, Fukuoka FAC 5073 Sefurisan Liaison Annex (Seburiyama Communications Station) Communications Kanzaki, Saga FAC 5091 Tsushima Communication Site Communications Tsushima, Nagasaki FAC 6004 Okuma Rest Center Recreation Kunigami, Okinawa FAC 6006 Yaedake Communication Site Communications Motobu, Okinawa FAC 6022 Kadena Ammunition Storage Area Storage Onna, Okinawa FAC 6037 Kadena Air Base Air Base Kadena, Okinawa FAC 6077 Tori Shima Range Training Kumejima, Okinawa FAC 6078 Idesuna Jima Range Training Tonaki, Okinawa FAC 6080 Kume Jima Range Training Kumejima, Okinawa Army FAC 2070 Shariki Communication Site Communications Tsugaru, Aomori FAC 3004 Akasaka Press Center (Hardy Barracks) Office Minato, Tokyo FAC 3067 Yokohama North Dock Port Facility Yokohama, Kanagawa FAC 3079 Camp Zama Office Zama, Kanagawa FAC 3084 Sagami General Depot Logistics Sagamihara, Kanagawa FAC 3102 Sagamihara Housing Area Housing Sagamihara, Kanagawa FAC 4078 Akizuki Ammunition Depot Storage Etajima, Hiroshima FAC 4083 Kawakami Ammunition Depot Storage Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima FAC 4084 Hiro Ammunition Depot Storage Kure, Hiroshima FAC 4152 Kure Pier No.6 Port Facility Kure, Hiroshima FAC 4611 Haigamine Communication Site Communications Kure, Hiroshima FAC 6007 Gesaji Communication Site Communications Higashi, Okinawa FAC 6036 Torii Communications Station(Torii Station) Communications Yomitan, Okinawa FAC 6064 Naha Port Port Facility Naha, Okinawa FAC 6076 Army POL Depots Storage Uruma, Okinawa Navy FAC 2006 Hachinohe POL Depot Storage Hachinohe, Aomori FAC 2012 Misawa ATG Range (R130, Draughon Range) Training Misawa, Aomori FAC 3033 Kisarazu Auxiliary Landing Field Air Facility Kisarazu, Chiba FAC 3066 Negishi Dependent Housing Area(Naval Housing Annex Negishi) Housing Yokohama, Kanagawa FAC 3083 Naval Air Facility Atsugi Air Facility Ayase, Kanagawa FAC 3087 Ikego Housing Area and Navy Annex Housing Zushi, Kanagawa FAC 3090 Azuma Storage Area Storage Yokosuka, Kanagawa FAC 3096 Kamiseya Communications Station - returned to Japanese Gov 2015(Naval Support Facility Kamiseya - returned to Japanese Gov 2015) Communications(Housing) Yokohama, Kanagawa FAC 3097 Fukaya Communication Site(Naval Transmitter Station Totsuka) Communications Yokohama, Kanagawa FAC 3099 United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka Port Facility Yokosuka, Kanagawa FAC 3117 Urago Ammunition Depot Storage Yokosuka, Kanagawa FAC 3144 Tsurumi POL Depot Storage Yokohama, Kanagawa FAC 3181 Iwo Jima Communication Site Communications(Training) Ogasawara, Tokyo FAC 3185 New Sanno U.S. Forces Center Recreation Minato, Tokyo FAC 5029 United States Fleet Activities Sasebo Port Facility Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5030 Sasebo Dry Dock Area Port Facility Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5032 Akasaki POL Depot Storage Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5033 Sasebo Ammunition Supply Point Storage Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5036 Iorizaki POL Depot Storage Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5039 Yokose POL Depot Storage Saikai, Nagasaki FAC 5050 Harioshima Ammunition Storage Area Storage Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5086 Tategami Basin Port Area Port Facility Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5118 Sakibe Navy Annex Hangar Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5119 Hario Dependent Housing Area(Hario Family Housing Area) Housing Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 6028 Tengan Pier Port Facility Uruma, Okinawa FAC 6032 Camp Shields Barracks Okinawa, Okinawa FAC 6046 Awase Communications Station Communications Okinawa, Okinawa FAC 6048 White Beach Area Port Facility Uruma, Okinawa FAC 6084 Kobi Sho Range Training Ishigaki, Okinawa FAC 6085 Sekibi Sho Range Training Ishigaki, Okinawa FAC 6088 Oki Daito Jima Range Training Kitadaito, Okinawa MarineCorps FAC 3127 Camp Fuji Barracks Gotenba, Shizuoka FAC 3154 Numazu Training Area Training Numazu, Shizuoka FAC 4092 Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni Air Station Iwakuni, Yamaguchi FAC 6001 Northern Training Area(Incl. Camp Gonsalves) Training Kunigami, Okinawa FAC 6005 Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield Training Ie, Okinawa FAC 6009 Camp Schwab Training Nago, Okinawa FAC 6010 Henoko Ordnance Ammunition Depot Storage Nago, Okinawa FAC 6011 Camp Hansen Training Kin, Okinawa FAC 6019 Kin Red Beach Training Area Training Kin, Okinawa FAC 6020 Kin Blue Beach Training Area Training Kin, Okinawa FAC 6029 Camp Courtney Barracks Uruma, Okinawa FAC 6031 Camp McTureous Barracks Uruma, Okinawa FAC 6043 Camp Kuwae (Camp Lester) Medical Facility Chatan, Okinawa FAC 6044 Camp Zukeran (Camp Foster) Barracks Chatan, Okinawa FAC 6051 Marine Corps Air Station Futenma Air Station Ginowan, Okinawa FAC 6056 Makiminato Service Area (Camp Kinser) Logistics Urasoe, Okinawa FAC 6082 Tsuken Jima Training Area Training Uruma, Okinawa USFJ FacilitiesAdmin Code Name of Installation PrimaryPurpose Location FAC 1066 Camp Higashi Chitose (JGSDF) Training Chitose, Hokkaido FAC 1067 Hokkaido Chitose Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Chitose, Hokkaido FAC 1068 Chitose Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Chitose, Hokkaido FAC 1069 Betsukai Yausubetsu Large Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Betsukai, Hokkaido FAC 1070 Camp Kushiro (JGSDF) Barracks Kushiro, Hokkaido FAC 1071 Camp Shikaoi (JGSDF) Training Shikaoi, Hokkaido FAC 1072 Kamifurano Medium Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Kamifurano, Hokkaido FAC 1073 Camp Sapporo (JGSDF) Training Sapporo, Hokkaido FAC 1074 Shikaoi Shikaribetsu Medium Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Shikaoi, Hokkaido FAC 1075 Camp Obihiro (JGSDF) Training Obihiro, Hokkaido FAC 1076 Asahikawa Chikabumidai Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Asahikawa, Hokkaido FAC 1077 Camp Okadama (JGSDF) Recreation Sapporo, Hokkaido FAC 1078 Nayoro Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Nayoro, Hokkaido FAC 1079 Takikawa Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Takikawa, Hokkaido FAC 1080 Bihoro Training Area (JGSDF) Training Bihoro, Hokkaido FAC 1081 Kutchan Takamine Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Kutchan, Hokkaido FAC 1082 Engaru Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Engaru, Hokkaido FAC 2062 Camp Sendai (JGSDF) Training Sendai, Miyagi FAC 2063 Camp Hachinohe (JGSDF) Barracks Hachinohe, Aomori FAC 2064 Iwate Iwatesan Medium Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Takizawa, Iwate FAC 2065 Taiwa Ojojihara Large Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Taiwa, Miyagi FAC 2066 Kasuminome Airfield (JGSDF) Airfield Sendai, Miyagi FAC 2067 Aomori Kotani Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Aomori, Aomori FAC 2068 Hirosaki Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Hirosaki, Aomori FAC 2069 Jinmachi Otakane Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Murayama, Yamagata FAC 3104 Nagasaka Rifle Range (JGSDF) Training Yokosuka, Kanagawa FAC 3183 Fuji Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Fujiyoshida, YamanashiGotenba, Shizuoka FAC 3184 Camp Takigahara (JGSDF) Training Gotenba, Shizuoka FAC 3186 Takada Sekiyama Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Joetsu, Niigata FAC 3187 Hyakuri Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Omitama, Ibaraki FAC 3188 Soumagahara Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Shinto, Gunma FAC 3189 Camp Asaka (JGSDF) Training Asaka, Saitama FAC 4161 Komatsu Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Komatsu, Ishikawa FAC 4162 1st Service School (JMSDF) Training Etajima, Hiroshima FAC 4163 Haramura Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima FAC 4164 Imazu Aibano Medium Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Takashima, Shiga FAC 4165 Gifu Air Base (JASDF) Recreation Kakamigahara, Gifu FAC 4166 Camp Itami (JGSDF) Training Itami, Hyogo FAC 4167 Nihonbara Medium Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Nagi, Okayama FAC 4168 Miho Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Sakaiminato, Tottori FAC 5115 Nyutabaru Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Shintomi, Miyazaki FAC 5117 Sakibe Rifle Range (JMSDF) Training Sasebo, Nagasaki FAC 5120 Hijudai-Jumonjibaru Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Yufu, OitaBeppu, Oita FAC 5121 Tsuiki Air Base (JASDF) Air Base Chikujo, Fukuoka FAC 5122 Omura Air Base (JMSDF) Recreation Omura, Nagasaki FAC 5123 Oyanohara-Kirishima Maneuver Area (JGSDF) Training Yamato, KumamotoEbino, Miyazaki FAC 5124 Camp Kita Kumamoto (JGSDF) Training Kumamoto, Kumamoto FAC 5125 Camp Kengun (JGSDF) Training Kumamoto, Kumamoto FAC 6181 Ukibaru Jima Training Area Training Uruma, Okinawa Camp Smedley D. Butler, Okinawa Prefecture, Yamaguchi Prefectures. (Although these camps are dispersed throughout Okinawa and the rest of Japan they are all under the heading of Camp Smedley D. Butler): Camp McTureous, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Courtney, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Foster, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Kinser, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Hansen, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Schwab, Okinawa Prefecture Camp Gonsalves (Jungle Warfare Training Center), Okinawa Prefecture Kin Blue Beach Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture Kin Red Beach Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture Higashionna Ammunition Storage Point II Henoko Ordnance Ammunition Depot Marine Corps Air Station Futenma, Okinawa Prefecture (return after the MCAS Futenma relocates to Camp Schwab) Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni Camp Fuji, Shizuoka Prefecture Numazu Training Area, Shizuoka Prefecture Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield, Okinawa Prefecture Tsuken Jima Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture Army Composite Service Group Area (later, Chinen Service Area), Nanjo, Okinawa Army STRATCOM Warehouse (later, Urasoe Warehouse), Urasoe, Okinawa Bluff Area (later, Yamate Dependent Housing Area), Yokohama, Kanagawa Bolo Point Auxiliary Airfield (later, Trainfire Range), Yomitan, Okinawa Bolo Point Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa Camp Bender, Ota, Gunma Camp Boone, Ginowan, Okinawa Camp Burness, Chuo, Tokyo Camp Chickamauga, 19th Infantry, Beppu, OitaA Soldier in Kyushu, By Capt. William B. Koons, October 1, 1947 Camp Chigasaki, Chigasaki, Kanagawa Camp Chitose Annex (Chitose I, II), Chitose, Hokkaido Camp Coe, Yokohama, Kanagawa Camp Crawford, Sapporo, Hokkaido Camp Drake, Asaka, Saitama Camp Drew, Oizumi, Gunma Camp Eta Jima, Etajima, Hiroshima , Sendai, Miyagi Camp Fuchinobe (Office Japan, NSAPACREP), Sagamihara, Kanagawa Camp Hakata, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Camp Hardy, Ginoza, Okinawa Camp Haugen, Hachinohe, Aomori Camp Katakai, Kujukuri, Chiba Camp King (later, Omiya Ordnance Sub Depot), Omiya, Saitama Camp Kokura, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka Camp Kubasaki (later, Kubasaki School Area), [Nakagusuku, Okinawa] , Tagajo, Miyagi Camp McGill, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Camp McNair, Fujiyoshida, Yamanashi Camp Mercy, Ginowan, Okinawa Camp Moore, Kawasaki, Kanagawa Camp Mower 34th Infantry, Sasebo, Nagasaki Camp Nara, Nara, Nara Camp Ojima, Ota, Gunma Camp Otsu, Otsu, Shiga Camp Palmer, Funabashi, Chiba , Sendai, Miyagi Camp Stilwell, Maebashi, Gunma Camp Weir, Shinto, Gunma Camp Whittington, Kumagaya, Saitama Camp Wood, 21st Infantry, Kumamoto Camp Younghans, Higashine, Yamagata Chibana Army Annex (later, Chibana Site), Okinawa, Okinawa Chinen Army Annex (later, Chinen Site), Chinen, Okinawa Chuo Kogyo (later, Niikura Warehouse Area), Wako, Saitama Deputy Division Engineer Office, Urasoe, Okinawa Division School Center, Kokura Etchujima Warehouse, Koto, Tokyo , Shibata, Miyagi Hachinohe LST Barge Landing Area, Hachinohe, Aomori Hakata Transportation Office, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka Hamby Auxiliary Airfield, Chatan, Okinawa Hosono Ammunition Depot, Seika, Kyoto Iribaru (Nishihara) Army Annex, Uruma, Okinawa Ishikawa Army Annex, Uruma, Okinawa Japan Logistical Command (Yokohama Customs House), Yokohama, Kanagawa Jefferson Heights, Chiyoda, Tokyo Kanagawa Milk Plant, Yokohama, Kanagawa Kashiji Army Annex, Chatan, Okinawa Kishine Barracks, Yokohama, Kanagawa Kobe Pier No. 6, Kobe, Hyogo Kobe Port Building, Kobe, Hyogo Koza Radio Relay Annex (later, Koza Communication Site), Okinawa, Okinawa Kure Barge Landing Area, Kure, Hiroshima Lincoln Center, Chiyoda, Tokyo Moji Port, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka Nagoya Procurement (Purchasing and Contracting) Office, Nagoya, Aichi Naha Army Annex (later, Naha Site), Naha, Okinawa Naha Service Center, Naha, Okinawa Namihira Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa Negishi Racetrack Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa Okinawa Regional Exchange Cold Storage (later, Naha Cold Storage), Naha, Okinawa Okinawa Regional Exchange Dry Storage Warehouse (later, Makiminato Warehouse), Urasoe, Okinawa Onna Point Army Annex (later, Onna Site), Onna, Okinawa Oppama Ordnance Depot, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Ota Koizumi Airfield (Patton Field Air Drop Range), Oizumi, Gunma Palace Heights, Chiyoda, Tokyo Pershing Heights (Headquarters, U.S. Far East Command/United Nations Command), Shinjuku, Tokyo Sakuradani Rifle Range, Chikushino, Fukuoka Sanno Hotel Officer's Quarter, Chiyoda, Tokyo Shikotsuko Training Area, Chitose, Hokkaido Shinzato Communication Site, Nanjo, Okinawa South Ammunition Storage Annex (later, South Ammunition Storage Area), Yaese, Okinawa Sunabe Army Annex, Chatan, Okinawa Tana Ammunition Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa Tairagawa (Deragawa) Communication Site, Uruma, Okinawa Tengan Communication Site, Uruma, Okinawa Tokyo Army Hospital, Chuo, Tokyo Tokyo Quartermaster Depot, Minato, Tokyo Tokyo Ordnance Depot (later, Camp Oji), Kita, Tokyo U.S. Army Medical Center, Sagamihara, Kanagawa U.S. Army Printing and Publication Center, Far East, Kawasaki, Kanagawa U.S. Army Procurement Agency, Japan, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Center Pier (MSTS-FE), Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Engineering Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Motor Command, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Ordnance Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama POL Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Servicemen Club, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Signal Supply Depot, Kawasaki, Kanagawa Yokohama Signal Maintenance Depot (JLC Air Strip), Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama South Pier, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yomitan Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa Zama Rifle Range, Sagamihara, Kanagawa Zukeran Propagation Annex (later, Communication Site), Chatan, Okinawa Haiki (Sasebo) Rifle Range, Sasebo, Nagasaki Inanba Shima Gunnery Firing Range, Mikurajima, Tokyo Kinugasa Ammunition Depot, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Koshiba POL Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa Ominato Communication Site, Ominato, Aomori Omura Rifle Range, Omura, Nagasaki Makiminato Service Area Annex, Urasoe, Okinawa Minamitorishima Communication Site, Ogasawara, Tokyo Nagahama Rifle Range, Kure, Hiroshima Nagai Dependent Housing Area (Admiralty Heights), Yokosuka, Kanagawa Nagiridani Dependent Housing Area, Sasebo, Nagasaki Naval Air Facility Naha, Naha, Okinawa Naval Air Facility Oppama, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Navy EM Club, Yokosuka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Niigata Sekiya Communication Site, Chuo-ku, Niigata Shinyamashita Dependent Housing Area (Bayside Court), Yokohama, Kanagawa Sobe Communication Site (NSGA Hanza), Yomitan, Okinawa Tokachibuto Communication Site, Urahoro, Hokkaido Tomioka Storage Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa Tsujido Maneuver Area, Chigasaki, Kanagawa Yokohama Bakery, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Beach (Honmoku) Dependent Housing Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Chapel Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokohama Cold Storage, Yokohama, Kanagawa Yokosuka Naval Pier, Yokosuka, Kanagawa Yosami Communication Site, Kariya, Aichi Ashiya Air Base (later, ATG Range), Ashiya, Fukuoka Asoiwayama Liaison Annex, Tobetsu, Hokkaido Brady Air Base (later, Gannosu Air Station), Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Chiran Communication Site, Chiran, Kagoshima Chitose Air Base, Chitose, Hokkaido Daikanyama Communication Site, Yugawara, Kanagawa Fuchu Air Station (Headquarters, USFJ/Fifth Air Force, 1957–1974), Fuchu, Tokyo Funabashi Communication Site, Funabashi, Chiba Grant Heights Dependent Housing Area, Nerima, Tokyo Green Park Housing Annex, Musashino, Tokyo Hachinohe Small Arms Range, Hachinohe, Aomori Hamura School Annex, Hamura, Tokyo Haneda Air Base (later, Postal Service Annex), Ota, Tokyo Hanshin Auxiliary Airfield, Yao, Osaka Hirao Communication Site, Chuo-ku, Fukuoka Itami Air Base, Itami, Hyogo Itazuke Administration Annex (Kasugabaru DHA), Kasuga, Fukuoka Itazuke Air Base, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka Johnson Air Base (later, Air Station, Family Housing Annex), Iruma, Saitama Kadena Dependent Housing Area, Yomitan, Okinawa Kanto Mura Dependent Housing Area and Auxiliary Airfield, Chofu, Tokyo Kasatoriyama Radar Site, Tsu, Mie Kashiwa Communication Site (Camp Tomlinson), Kashiwa, Chiba Komaki (Nagoya) Air Base, Komaki, Aichi Kozoji Ammunition Depot, Kasugai, Aichi Kume Jima Air Station, Kumejima, Okinawa Kushimoto Radar Site, Kushimoto, Wakayama Miho Air Base, Sakaiminato, Tottori Mineoka Liaison Annex, Minamiboso, Chiba Mito ATG Range, Hitachinaka, Ibaraki Miyako Jima Air Station, Miyakojima, Okinawa Miyako Jima VORTAC Site, Miyakojima, Okinawa Moriyama Air Station, Nagoya, Aichi Naha Air Base, Naha, Okinawa Naha Air Force/Navy Annex, Naha, Okinawa Najima Warehouse Area, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Niigata Air Base, Niigata, Niigata Ofuna Warehouse, Yokohama, Kanagawa Oshima Communication Center, Oshima, Tokyo Rokko Communication Site, Kobe, Hyogo Senaha Communications Station, Yomitan, Okinawa (returned to the Japanese government in September 2006) Sendai Kunimi Communication Site, Sendai, Miyagi Showa (later, Akishima) Dependent Housing Area, Akishima, Tokyo Shiroi Air Base, Kashiwa, Chiba Sunabe Warehouse, Chatan, Okinawa Tachikawa Air Base, Tachikawa, Tokyo Tokyo Communication Site (NTTPC Central Telephone Exchange), Chuo, Tokyo Wajima Liaison Annex, Wajima, Ishikawa Wajiro Water Supply Site, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka Wakkanai Air Station, Wakkanai, Hokkaido Washington Heights Dependent Housing Area, Shibuya, Tokyo Yamada Ammunition Depot, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka Yokawame Communication Site, Misawa, Aomori Yozadake Air Station, Itoman, Okinawa Aha Training Area, Kunigami, Okinawa Camp Gifu, Kakamigahara, Gifu Camp Hauge, Uruma, Okinawa Camp Okubo, Uji, Kyoto Camp Shinodayama, Izumi, Osaka Gimbaru Training Area, Kin, Okinawa Ihajo Kanko Hotel, Uruma, Okinawa Makiminato Housing Area, Naha, Okinawa Onna Communication Site, Onna, Okinawa Awase Golf Course, Okinawa Prefecture (returned to the Japanese government in April 2010) Yaka Rest Center, Kin, Okinawa Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield, Yomitan, Okinawa (returned to the Japanese government in 2006, parachute drop training ended in March 2001) United States Forces Korea (USFK) United States Military Government of the Ryukyu Islands United States Civil Administration of the Ryukyu Islands Operation Tomodachi Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey United States Forces Japan U.S. Naval Forces Japan U.S. Forces, Japan  (GlobalSecurity.org) Overseas Presence: Issues Involved in Reducing the Impact of the U.S. Military Presence on Okinawa, GAO, March 1998 U.S. Military Issues in Okinawa LMO
