 The University of Rochester (commonly referred to as U of R or UR) is a private, nonsectarian, research university in Rochester, New York.rochester.edu The university grants undergraduate and graduate degrees, including doctoral and professional degrees. The university has six schools and various interdisciplinary programs. The University of Rochester is particularly noted for its Eastman School of Music. The university is also home to the Institute of Optics, founded in 1929, the first educational program in the US devoted exclusively to optics.rochester.edurochester.edu  Rochester's Laboratory for Laser Energetics is home to the second most energetic fusion laser in the world.[ ], World’s Most Powerful Laser has the Energy of a Hydrogen Bomb In its history, five university alumni, two faculty, and one senior research associate at Strong Memorial Hospital have been awarded a Nobel Prize; eight alumni and four faculty members have won a Pulitzer Prize, and 19 faculty members have been awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship.   Faculty and alumni of Rochester make up nearly one-quarter of the scientists on the board advising NASA in the development of the James Webb Space Telescope, which is scheduled to replace the Hubble Space Telescope in 2018. The departments of political science and economics have made a significant and consistent impact on positivist social science since the 1960s; the distinctive, mathematical approach pioneered at Rochester and closely affiliated departments is known as the Rochester school, and Rochester graduates and former affiliates are highly represented at faculties across top economics and political science departments.Political Science Alumni Economics Alumni The Rochester School: The Origins of Positive Political Theory The University of Rochester, across all of its schools and campuses, enrolls approximately 5,600 undergraduates and 4,600 graduate students. Its 158 buildings house over 200 academic majors. Additionally, Rochester (along with its affiliated Strong Health System) is the largest employer in the Greater Rochester area and the sixth largest employer in New York.State.NY.us, New York State Department of Labor: Workforce Industry Data The University of Rochester was founded in 1850 as a Baptist-sponsored institution. The impetus to form the university came primarily from the town of Hamilton, New York, which has been home to Colgate University since 1819.History of the University of Rochester In 1848, the Baptist Education Society planned to move Colgate University (then known as Madison University) to the city of Rochester, but was halted by legal action in Hamilton. Dissenting Colgate trustees, faculty, and students founded the University of Rochester with a charter granted from the Regents of the University of the State of New York on January 31, 1850. Classes began that November, with approximately 60 students enrolling, including 28 transfers from Madison.May, Arthur J. (1977) A History of the University of Rochester, Princeton: Princeton University The University of Rochester's campus was originally in downtown Rochester at the United States Hotel, which was located on Buffalo Street near Elizabeth Street, which today is West Main Street near the I-490 overpass. In 1853, the campus moved east to a then-suburban location on what is now University Avenue. Local businessman and Congressman Azariah Boody donated  of land for the new campus, and the University purchased a further  from him.May, Arthur J. (1977) A History of the university of Rochester, Princeton: Princeton University UR would remain on this campus until the current River Campus was constructed in 1930, and the university continues to own a small part of the University Avenue campus (where the university-owned Memorial Art Gallery is located). The first female students were admitted in 1900, the result of an effort led by Susan B. Anthony and Helen Barrett Montgomery. During the 1890s, a number of women took classes and labs at the university as "visitors" but were not officially enrolled nor were their records included in the college register. President David Jayne Hill allowed the first woman, Helen E. Wilkinson, to enroll as a normal student, although she was not allowed to matriculate or to pursue a degree. Thirty-three women enrolled among the first class in 1900, and Ella S. Wilcoxen was the first to receive a degree, in 1901. When the River Campus was completed in 1930, male students moved there while the female students remained on the University Avenue campus until 1955. Major growth occurred under the leadership of Rush Rhees, during his 1900-1935 tenure. During this time, George Eastman became a major donor, giving more than $50 million to the university. The first Ph.D. was awarded in 1925. In 1955, the separate colleges for men and women were merged into The College. In 1958, three new schools were created in engineering, business administration, and education.University of Rochester: History and Distinctions During World War II, Rochester was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. Between 1946 and 1947, in infamous uranium experiments researchers at the university injected uranium-234 and uranium-235 into six people to study how much uranium their kidneys could tolerate before becoming damaged.Goliszek, 2003: pp. 136–137 In the mid-1980s, the University commissioned a study to determine if the name of the institution should be changed, most likely to "Eastman University."  The study concluded that a name change could be beneficial because the use of a place name in the title led respondents to incorrectly believe that it was a public university, and because the name "Rochester" connoted a "cold and distant outpost."  Reports of the latter conclusion led to controversy and criticism in the Rochester community.  Ultimately, the name "University of Rochester" was retained.[ ], University of Rochester Urged to Change Name[ ] What's in a Name? Plenty, Argue University's Alumni In 1995, university president Thomas H. Jackson announced the launch of a "Renaissance Plan" for The College that, among several changes, reduced enrollment and created a more selective admissions process. The plan also revised the undergraduate curriculum significantly, creating the current system with only one required course and only a few distribution requirements (known as "clusters").Rochester.edu, Press Release: Rochester Renaissance Plan for The College   The university is headed by a board of trustees, with Edmund A. Hajim being the chairman.University of Rochester News Release: University Names New Trustees and New Chairman The board appoints the president of the university, currently Joel Seligman, who replaced Thomas H. Jackson on July 1, 2005. The River Campus is the center of the university's academic and administrative activities. It is located in a bend of the Genesee River about  south of downtown Rochester and covers around . It is bounded by Bausch & Lomb Riverside Park, an  public park along the east bank of the Genesee River, and Mount Hope Cemetery, where the grave sites of Susan B. Anthony and Frederick Douglass can be found. The original buildings of the campus were dedicated in 1930. The main academic buildings, designed in the Greek revival style, are centered around the Eastman Quadrangle (generally referred to as the academic quad) which is formed by Rush Rhees Library and Dewey, Bausch & Lomb, Morey, and Lattimore Halls. The Eastman Quad is widely considered the best landscaped area of the university, and includes the eponymous statue of George Eastman, installed in 2009, and sculpted by noted American sculptor Marc Mellon. Rush Rhees Library, the unofficial symbol of the university, is also home to the Hopeman Memorial Carillon, the largest carillon in New York State, featuring 50 bells that chime on the quarter hour. During the summer, the carillon features a recital series in which various artists perform on the instrument."Hopeman Memorial Carillon: Frequently Asked Questions Over the course of the last several decades, other academic buildings have been built south of the Eastman Quad, including Meliora Hall (1972), Hoyt Hall (1962), Harkness Hall (1946), Gavett Hall (dedicated with the Eastman Quad in 1930), and the Hopeman Engineering Building (1963). The southernmost part of the River Campus contains the new Science and Engineering Quadrangle: Hutchison Hall (1972), Hylan Building (1971), the Computer Studies Building and Carlson Library (1987), Wilmot Building (1961), the Robert B. Goergen Hall for Biomedical Engineering and Optics (2007), and LeChase Hall (2013).Interactive Map of the River Campus The recently constructed LeChase Hall (dedicated in May 2013) houses the Warner School of Education and is the first building to be constructed on the Wilson Quadrangle in 30 years. The building is named after R. Wayne LeChase, a university trustee whose donation helped make construction of the building possible.  A four-story, 65,000-square-foot facility, it provides a unified home for the Warner School and features an expansive suite of 14 classrooms on the first floor that serves the College during the day and the Warner School in the evening. The Warner School is housed on the upper three floors, unified by a dramatic three-story atrium, with additional classrooms, offices and spaces specifically designed to support the preparation and professional development of educators and the conduct of educational research and reform work.   Students often congregate outdoors during the warmer months on the various quads. Other centers of student life include Todd Union, Frederick Douglass Dining Center, various locations inside Rush Rhees Library, and Wilson Commons, a student union designed by the architectural firm of I.M. Pei. Many academic buildings, including Rush Rhees Library, are connected by a series of tunnels,Rochester.edu, tunnels which are used extensively, especially during unfavorable weather. Most academic buildings and common areas, as well as residence halls, have authenticated Wi-Fi internet access.UR Wireless Coverage   The University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC) is the primary campus for the university's medical education and research as well as the main patient care facility. The Medical Center is located adjacent to the River Campus and is dominated by Strong Memorial Hospital, the School of Medicine and Dentistry building and the Arthur Kornberg Medical Research Building. URMC also houses the School of Nursing and a variety of research centers, including the Wilmot Cancer Center, the Aab Institute of Biomedical Sciences, and the Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute. The Eastman School of Music is situated on its own campus in downtown Rochester, which includes a residence for students, classroom and performance facilities, and the Eastman Theatre, a 3,094-seat concert hall which also serves as the primary venue of the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra. The campus also features the Sibley Music Library, which is the largest academic music library in North America, as well as the largest privately owned collection of sheet music. Students are housed at 100 Gibbs Street, a dormitory building constructed in 1991. The South Campus is located in Brighton, immediately south of Rochester proper. The campus includes the Laboratory for Laser Energetics, the Center for Optics Manufacturing, the Center for Optoelectronics and Imaging, and the now defunct Nuclear Structure Research Laboratory (NSRL). Graduate student housing is also provided at the Whipple Park complex. The Memorial Art Gallery is the civic art museum of Rochester, New York. Founded in 1913, it is part of the University of Rochester and occupies the southern half of the University's former Prince Street campus. It is the focal point of fine arts activity in the region and hosts the biennial Rochester-Finger Lakes Exhibition and the annual Clothesline Festival. University of Rochester is also home to a number of student exhibition spaces. The AsIs Gallery in the Sage Art Center showcases rotating exhibitions of student works from studio classes in U of R. As a work-in-progress critique space, this exhibition space provides students the opportunity to develop their work in a semi-professional space. The Gallery at the Art and Music Library that features work from students and local artists in the highly trafficked Rush Rhees Art and Music Library. Hartnett Gallery, located in Wilson Commons, is a student supported gallery that showcases international and professional contemporary artists as well as an annual juried student exhibition. The pasSAGE is annex of Sage Art Center which features long term exhibition selected by a faculty committee. There is also a Senior Thesis Gallery located in the Sage Arts Center that features senior undergraduate works.Campus Galleries : Art & Art History : University of Rochester. Rochester.edu (2012-01-12). Retrieved on 2014-03-25. The University of Rochester's undergraduate enrollment consists of about 5,800 full-time and about 200 part-time students from across the U.S. and over 115 countries.Diversity at Rochester, Office of Admissions Graduate enrollment comprises about 3,900 full-time and about 1,100 part-time graduate students. The university has more than 103,000 living alumni and employs nearly 2,300 tenure-track faculty, with more than 20,000 faculty and staff across the university and the Strong Health System. UR's faculty include fellows of all four National Academies of the U.S., Guggenheim Fellows, and recipients of many other awards and recognitions.Faculty and Students at UR The unique, defining feature of the undergraduate program at the University is the Rochester Curriculum. There are no required subjects outside of a prerequisite writing course, which may be petitioned out of. The Curriculum requires that undergraduates study in all of three areas of knowledge: humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Aside from the area of study which a student's major falls in, undergraduates must complete 3-4 courses of related materials (called "clusters") within each of the remaining areas. For example, a student with a concentration in mathematics, a natural science field, must complete at least one cluster in the humanities and one in social sciences. A second concentration or a minor also satisfies this requirement. The only exceptions are students concentrating in an accredited engineering field (biomedical engineering, chemical engineering, electrical and computer engineering or mechanical engineering), who are only required to have one cluster in either humanities or social sciences.  The University of Rochester is known for its several unique 5th year programs.  Students may apply for the Take Five Scholars program, a tuition free 5th year of study in a field of interest unrelated to their undergraduate major.  The university also offers a Kauffman Entrepreneurial Year (KEY) Scholarship, a tuition-free 5th year of study offered to those with an innovative and unique entrepreneurial project impacting the campus or Rochester community. Both programs are competitive and students may apply during their junior or senior year.Take Five Scholars ProgramKEY Program Various other scholar programs exist for UR students, including the highly selective Rochester Early Medical Scholars (REMS) and Rochester Early Business Scholar (REBS) programs. Students must apply for these prior to entering the university.Combined Admissions Programs   UR was one of the 25 New Ivies in the 2007 Kaplan/Newsweek "How to Get into College Guide." The list names institutions whose caliber of students is considered to rival traditional Ivy League schools. The rankings are based on admissions statistics as well as interviews with administrators, students, faculty, and alumni.America's 25 New Elite 'Ivies' - Kaplan College Guide Admission into the University of Rochester has become increasingly competitive, with an average acceptance rate of 35.7% (20% for transfer students) and average SAT scores falling in the 95th percentile, for the fall of 2011. UR is ranked 33rd among national universities by U.S. News & World Report,USNews.com: America's Best Colleges 2014: National Universities: Top Schools and 144th by Washington Monthly. The school places within the top 10 for the staff-to-student ratio.Times Higher Education Top Tens The doctoral programs for economics and political science are historically ranked among the top five worldwide in career placement and alumni success, despite their small size.http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~gillum/rankings_paper.pdf Political Sciencehttp://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.28.3.205 Economics (table 2) Additionally several other graduate programs are consistently ranked within the top 20 in the United States. The Eastman School of Music ranks first among graduate music programs in the U.S.Rochester.eduuscollegeranking.org Other schools in the university also rank highly, with the School of Medicine and Dentistry at 30th overall among medical schools and its primary-care program ranked 15th among primary-care medical schools, and the Simon School ranked 23rd among graduate business schools. U.S. News & World Report also ranked the Hajim School of Engineering's graduate program 38th nationally. Additionally, the graduate programs of political science, economics, and medical research were ranked 15th, 22nd, and 31st in the nation, respectively.Rochester.eduUSnews.com, U.S. News & World Report College Rankings Rush Rhees Library at The University of Rochester was featured on the cover of the "Princeton Review 373 Best Colleges 2011 Edition".  The High Impact Universities Initiative which measures research performance ranked the University of Rochester 28th[ ]  in the world. Simon Graduate School of Business is ranked among the top 5 Finance, Accounting and Economics business schools in the world by Financial Times MBA ranks. Rochester is a leading private university and a major center for diverse fields of research. The university has eight Nobel Prize winners among its faculty and alumni.April 4, 1999, The New York Times, University of Rochester Eliminating Program in Public Policy, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...university's faculty and alumni have included five Nobel Prize winners and 10 Pulitzer Prize winners...."Nobelprize.org,  Masatoshi Koshiba - Biographical, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...Graduate School, University of Rochester, Rochester, N.Y. -- Received Ph.D in physics: Thesis on Ultra-High- Energy Phenomena in Cosmic Rays...."Jennifer L. O'Shea Dec. 30, 2008, US News, 10 Things You Didn't Know About Steven Chu: Steven Chu is President-elect Obama's pick for energy secretary, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...Chu was part of a team that won the Nobel Prize in 1997...."Laurence Arnold, June 11, 2013, Bloomberg News, Robert Fogel, Nobel Laureate for Economic History, Dies at 86, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...Robert Fogel, ... awarded a Nobel Prize...Fogel held professorships at the University of Rochester "Nobelprize.org, D. Carleton Gajdusek - Biographical, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "... 1940 to 1943 I studied at the University of Rochester..."Nobelprize.org, Arthur Kornberg - Biographical, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...and the M.D. degree from the University of Rochester in 1941...."Nobelprize.org, Vincent du Vigneaud - Biographical, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...submitted a thesis to the School of Medicine of Rochester University which earned him the Ph.D...."Nobelprize.org, Henrik Dam - Biographical, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...at the University of Rochester..."Nobelprize.org, George Whipple, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...Affiliation at the time of the award: University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.."UR - Points of Pride The university consistently ranks among the top 40 colleges and universities nationwide in federally financed science, engineering, medical, and other research,The Best Schools, The 100 Best Universities in the World Today, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "... Rochester can claim 10 Pulitzer Prize winners, eight Nobel Prize Laureates, one MacArthur Fellow, and 20 Guggenheim Fellows...." with a total research budget of around $395 millionNote: 2009 data spread across many departments and research centers,John V. Lombardi, Elizabeth D. Phillips, Craig W. Abbey, Diane D. Craig, 2011 Annual Report, The Center for Measuring University Performance, The Top American Research Universities, Retrieved January 22, 2015, see page 18 "Top American Research Universities (26-50) ...2009 Total Research x $1000...395,358 National Rank = 30" including the Laboratory for Laser Energetics, a laser-based nuclear fusion facility, and the extensive research facilities at the University of Rochester Medical Center. Recently, the university has also engaged in a series of new initiatives to expand its programs in biomedical engineering and optics, including the construction of the new $37 million Robert B. Goergen Hall for Biomedical Engineering and Optics on the River Campus.Senator Robach Awards $3 Million for Biomedical Optics Research Other new research initiatives include a cancer stem cell program and a Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute.URMC Press Release: Wilmot Launches Cancer Stem Cell Research ProgramURMC: The New Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute UR also has the ninth highest technology revenue among U.S. higher education institutions, with $46 million being paid for commercial rights to university technology and research in 2009.Technology Commercialization Annual Report Fiscal Year 2009 Notable patents include Zoloft and Gardasil. WeBWorK, a web-based system for checking homework and providing immediate feedback for students, was developed by University of Rochester professors Gage and Pizer. The system is now in use at over 800 universities and colleges, as well as several secondary and primary schools.WeBWorK Sites Rochester scientists work in diverse areas; for example, physicists developed a technique for etching metal surfaces, such as platinum, titanium and brass, with powerful lasers, enabling self-cleaning surfaces that repel water droplets and will not rust if tilted at a 4 degree angle;21 January 2015, BBC News, Laser-etched metal 'bounces' water, Retrieved January 21, 2015a, "...the technique could help produce hygienic, easily-maintained devices - from solar panels to toilets - that do no rust or ice up.... The team, from the University of Rochester..." and medical researchers are exploring how brains rid themselves of toxic waste during sleep.Meeri Kim, October 19, 2013, Washington Post, Brains flush toxic waste in sleep, including Alzheimer’s-linked protein, study of mice finds, Retrieved January 22, 2015, "...study author and University of Rochester neurosurgeon Maiken Nedergaard...."   UR's official symbol is the seal of the university, which features a book, representing arts and sciences, a lyre symbolizing music, and a modified symbol of medicine.University of Rochester Seal The official flower of the university is the dandelion, purportedly prolific on the cow pasture that became the university's second campus.University of Rochester: Dandelion The official mascot of the university is a predatory wasp found throughout Rochester, the Yellowjacket. From 1983 to 2008, the yellowjacket mascot was named "URBee." However, when the university re-designed the mascot during the 2007-2008 academic year, a new name was chosen and as of February 1, 2008, the school's mascot is now known as "Rocky".University of Rochester Mascot: The YellowjacketsNew University of Rochester Yellowjacket to debut Feb. 1 The university uses Dandelion Yellow and Rochester Blue as its official colors, which are the prominent colors on the official regalia.University of Rochester Colors The motto of UR is Meliora, which loosely translates to "better" with the connotation of "ever better," the meaning adopted by the university.Meliora Weekend: FAQ The image of Rush Rhees Library's main dome serves as an additional icon for the University of Rochester. UR also has official logos for the university as a whole as well as individual units, including the College of Arts, Sciences, and Engineering, the University of Rochester Medical Center, and the Eastman School of Music. President Seligman, as part of his efforts to improve UR's external appearance, commissioned Bill Murphy, the Vice President of Communications, to start an initiative to develop a new graphic identity, including a new logo, in hopes of improving uniformity and overall usage of official standards.Rochester Review: Interview with Bill Murphy During March 2007, the communications office was soliciting opinions and comments on finalist designs for the new logo, which was unveiled later that fall. The song most often sung at college events, led often by the school's many a cappella groups, is The Genesee,lib.rochester.edu written by former Rochester student Thomas Thackeray Swinburne (Class of 1892). Although less frequently used, the university also has an official Alma Mater, The Dandelion Yellow.Songs of the University of Rochester The student body at the University of Rochester is both ethnically and socioeconomically diverse.  There are over 200 active Students' Association recognized groups on campus, which range from cultural dance groups to U of R's comedy improv troupe In Between the Lines.Student Groups Since 1873, the University has regularly printed its student newspaper, the Campus Times.Campus Times publication Several a cappella groups play a prominent role in campus life. The YellowJacketsThe YellowJackets competed on Season 3 of NBC's "The Sing-Off" during the fall 2011 season, finishing 7th nationwide.Singoff The Midnight Ramblers are the centerpiece of the university's new admissions video, .Rap Video Introduces Prospective Students to Rochester The University of Rochester is also home to its own radio station, WRUR. The majority of undergraduate students at the university live and take classes on the River Campus. Underclassmen are generally required to live on campus while upperclassmen have the option to live off campus. Some graduate housing is provided by the university, but a significant number also live off campus. Housing is provided at multiple locations spread across the several campuses.University of Rochester Residential Life River Campus River Campus residences house primarily undergraduates, with some graduate students serving as Graduate Head Residents (GHRs). Residences include:  Special Interest floors and Fraternity floors also exist within the residence halls. Special Interest Housing groups include Tiernan Project (Burton 2), Delta Upsilon (Wilder 3), Sigma Delta Tau (Wilder 4), Chi Omega (Wilder 5), Kappa Delta (Wilder 6), Inter-Class Living Community (ICLC - Crosby 1), Music Interest Floor (MIF - Wilder 9), Computer Interest Floor (CIF - Anderson 3), Anime Interest Floor (AIF - Anderson 7) and Greenspace (Burton 1). Eastman School of Music Campus Housing is provided at the Eastman School of Music campus at the Eastman Student Living Center at 100 Gibbs Street in downtown Rochester. The new building was opened in 1991 at the northeast corner of Main and Gibbs Streets, replacing the University Avenue dormitories built nearly 70 years earlier. It is a four-story quadrangle and 16-story tower surrounding a landscaped inner courtyard. URMC and Mount Hope Campuses Graduate student housing is provided at several locations near the URMC. It should be noted that these facilities also house select River Campus, non-traditional students who have been deemed too old for traditional housing. South Campus The South Campus has graduate student housing at the Whipple Park (WPK) complex, which features 250 garden apartments and townhouses with ample storage space. WPK also features a park-like setting with large wooded and lawn areas, playgrounds, areas for gardens and low street noise. Some housing is also provided at the River Road complex, which tends to serve as overflow housing for both undergraduate and graduate students. The Students' Association (SA) is the primary student governing body and includes most of the student groups at UR. The SA is governed by the SA Senate, President and Vice President, all of whom are elected by the student body. The SA President may choose to appoint an advisory cabinet made up of a group of volunteer students. There is also a judicial branch, composed of the All Campus Judicial Council (ACJC), the members of whom are nominated by an interview committee and approved by the SA Senate. The SA Senate meets weekly and the longest meeting on record lasted longer than 8 hours.  The offices of the SA are located in the Wilson Commons student union.SA Student Government All student groups are required to have a constitution, elected officers, and approval from senate in order to be recognized by the SA and have access to university funds. These funds are given yearly based on budgets submitted to the Students' Association Appropriation Committee (SAAC)Rochester.edu with supplemental funds available through special forms. All funds are derived from the mandatory Student Activities Fee.  UR's athletics teams are called the Yellowjackets. They participate in the Division III of the NCAA and in the University Athletic Association and Liberty League. One exception to this is the men's squash team, which is consistently ranked top 5 in Division I.UR Athletics  The University fields men's teams in baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, rowing, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, and track and field.  On the women's side, UR sponsors teams in basketball, cross country, field hockey, lacrosse, soccer, rowing, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track and field, and volleyball. Popular club sports include ultimate frisbee, rugby, and soccer, which all have men's and women's teams. The Men's Rugby team has enjoyed recent success, with a New York State Conference Championship in 2011. The team was ranked 9th in the nation out of 151 Division III teams for the 2011-2012 season. In 2009 women's soccer coach Terry Gurnett set records with over 400 lifetime wins.  In March 2010 the women's basketball team made it to the NCAA's Final Four. There are also numerous club and intramural athletics groups. The main athletics facilities of the university are in the Robert B. Goergen Athletic Center and Fauver Stadium on the River Campus, with other facilities located in the Spurrier building (River Campus) and the URMC.UR Athletics FacilitiesURMC Fitness & Wellness Center   The UR campuses have their own University-sponsored system of buses, or shuttles, which provide free transportation from the River Campus to the Medical Center, South Campus, Eastman Campus, and Riverview. There are also lines that run between the River Campus and local shopping and entertainment in Henrietta and Pittsford.  On the weekends, a shuttle loops to the Rochester Public Market, a student favorite.  Most of the University-sponsored buses are named using a color system (i.e. Red Line) that indicates their respective route and allows for easy identification. Several bus lines of the Rochester-Genesee Regional Transportation Authority (RTS) also make stops at the University. The university participates in the Zipcar program, which allows students to rent cars on an hourly or daily basis. The Greater Rochester International Airport is a ten-minute drive to the west of the River Campus. In addition, Amtrak train and Greyhound bus have stations in downtown Rochester to the north of the campus. UR features several traditional events throughout the year with diverse history.UR Traditions, Events and EntertainmentArtAwakeMelaPillow Fight  A great number of notable people have been and are associated with the university. Fields of study particularly well represented are economics, political science, physics, biology, chemistry, and music. Flagpole on the River Campus bearing the seal of the university. Eastman Quad from the balcony of Rush Rhees Library. Meliora statues. Wilson Commons student union. Designed by the architectural firm of I.M. Pei. The old student union, Todd Union (now home to the Music and Theater departments), with its replacement, Wilson Commons, in the background. Inside Wilson Commons at an indoor "outdoor" cafeteria lounge. The university fosters networking opportunities for graduates after college. Pictured: Audra Pinkerton, Associate Director of Development, holding a copy of the Rochester Review. According to one tradition, if an undergraduate steps on the yellow seal at the base of this clock tower, he or she will not graduate in four years, but in five or more. Wilson Commons is to the left. Main academic quadrangle. Walkway between Strong auditorium (left) and Lattimore Hall (right). The Margaret Warner Center building (LeChase Hall) is shown under construction (center-right). The Susan B. Anthony residence hall has four wings and a dining center. Wilson Quad during a snowstorm View of Crosby and Burton halls from Wilson Commons. Inside the atrium at Wilson Commons.    Name Tenure Martin Brewer Anderson 1853–1888 David Jayne Hill 1889–1896 Benjamin Rush Rhees 1900–1935 Alan Valentine 1935–1950 Cornelis de Kiewiet 1951–1961 W. Allen Wallis 1962–1975 Robert Sproull 1975–1984 G. Dennis O'Brien 1984–1994 Thomas H. Jackson 1994–2005 Joel Seligman 2005–present C. E. K. Mees Observatory Mount Hope Campus College of Arts, Sciences, and Engineering - Undergraduate and graduate programs in a large number of fields. This is the largest college of the university by both undergraduate and graduate enrollment. The College is divided into two schools: The School of Arts and Sciences and the Hajim School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. The College is primarily located on the River Campus. The Eastman School of Music is a music conservatory offering both undergraduate and graduate education in a number of music fields, including composition, theory, and performance. The Margaret Warner Graduate School of Education and Human Development is the university's graduate school of education. It is located on the River Campus in LeChase Hall. The School of Medicine and Dentistry is a medical and dental school with both research and clinical programs. It is located in the University of Rochester Medical Center. The School of Nursing is a nursing school. It is also located on the campus of the University of Rochester Medical Center. The William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration is the business school. It is located on the River Campus. Fraternity Quadrangle consists of nine houses, including seven fraternities (Alpha Delta Phi, Delta Kappa Epsilon, Psi Upsilon, Sigma Alpha Mu, Sigma Chi, Sigma Phi Epsilon, and Theta Chi); in addition, two special interest housing groups—the Douglass Leadership House and the Drama House—maintain housing here. Freshman Housing - Consists of Susan B. Anthony Halls (Gannett, Gates, Hollister, and Morgan), located near Rush Rhees Library, Hoeing Hall, Tiernan Hall, Gilbert Hall, and Lovejoy Hall which are located on the Residence Quad.  Freshmen live together in these specially designated residences that feature increased supervision, regulation, and residence-related activities by upperclassmen Dandelions (affectionately known as D'Lions) and Freshman Fellows, along with Residential Advisers in living areas. Hill Court - Upperclass housing consisting of Chambers, Fairchild, Gale, Kendrick, Munro, and Slater houses, which are connected by underground tunnels. This residence area, opened in 1969, is colloquially known as "Phase" and was the newest residential area on the River Campus prior to the construction of the Riverview Complex. Residence Quad (ResQuad) - Consists of Burton, Lovejoy and Crosby Halls for upperclassmen, as well as Hoeing, Gilbert, Tiernan and Lovejoy Halls for freshmen. Burton and Crosby were the original dormitories on the River Campus, constructed in 1930, while the other four were built during the 1950s. All ResQuad buildings were fully renovated in the 1990s. (Lovejoy Hall is mostly upperclassmen but has included a freshman floor due to an increase in enrollment.) River Campus Towers - Consists of O'Brien Hall, and Anderson and Wilder Towers. It houses upperclassmen and several Special Interest Housing groups. The formal name for the area is Jackson Court (formerly known as "Founders Court"), but it is simply called "Towers" by most students. Built in 1962, they are scheduled to undergo extensive renovations in the near future. O'Brien Hall opened up to students in 2012. Southside - Southside consists of Valentine and deKiewiet Towers, as well as several single-story house-style "maisonettes", which offer apartment style living to upperclassmen. The residences are located south of the River Campus near the medical center, but house River Campus undergraduate students. The campus master plan shows that this complex will eventually be razed. Riverview - The only housing complex on the western side of the Genesee River, Riverview opened for the 2008-2009 school year, making it the first addition to the campus's housing in nearly 40 years.  The complex consists of five buildings, which can house up to 400 undergraduates. The complex is made up of fully furnished two-to-four person apartments. George Washington Goler House (GHS) immediately adjacent to the grounds of the URMC. It is a high rise apartment building with 321 apartments. The building also houses university community members, including faculty and staff. University Park (UPK) is a complex of two story buildings that include 40 studio, 86 one-bedroom, and 80 two-bedroom unfurnished apartments. UPK is located near the URMC, directly across from Southside off of Kendrick Road. Graduate students and their families are the primary occupants of these apartments, but some non-traditional undergraduate students are housed here who have been deemed too old for traditional undergraduate housing on the River Campus. Students who live here typically take up residence year round. ArtAwake brings students and community members together for a day of art and music. The Boar's Head Dinner began in 1934 and continues as an annual event. Convocation celebrates the start of the academic year and provides the opportunity for students, faculty, and staff to come together. The ceremony opens with a processional by faculty and administrators in traditional regalia, features presentation of the Goergen Awards for contributions to undergraduate education, and is accompanied by a picnic, activities fair and performances. Dandelion Day, colloquially known as D-Day, is a day late in the spring semester that was established as an annual respite around final exams with extensive celebrations, often accompanied by a carnival and musical guests. Previous years have featured Super Smash Bros, Reel Big Fish, Eve 6, Talib Kweli, and Big Bad Voodoo Daddy. OK Go performed in 2010. Mela is an annual event held late in the spring semester celebrating South Asian culture and dance.  The tradition has been a significant showcase for the University and Rochester Community since 1986. Meliora Weekend is celebrated in early October during a weekend around the University anniversary, combining class reunions, homecoming, and family weekend. Past speakers include Amartya Sen, Anderson Cooper, Stephen Colbert, Colin Powell, United States Secretary of Energy and University of Rochester alumnus Steven Chu. A Pillow Fight occurs annually on the academic quad at the conclusion of the spring semester . Wilson Day is day of community service for all incoming university students which include working on neighborhood picnics, voter registrations, painting, landscaping, meal service, and various other service efforts in the community. Winterfest Weekend takes place early in the second semester and helps celebrate the snowy Rochester winters.  Highlights of the weekend include comedic performances (previous comedians include Demetri Martin, B.J. Novak and Michael Ian Black), sleigh rides and ice skating. Yellowjacket Weekend occurs at the beginning of the fall semester and is a celebration of school spirit; it includes a free concert and carnival among other events.YellowJacket Weekend George Eastman House University of Rochester Arboretum Rochester Athletics website
