    The Virginia Military Institute (VMI) is a state-supported military college in Lexington, Virginia, the oldest such institution in the United States. Unlike any other senior military college in the United States, and in keeping with its founding principles, VMI enrolls only military cadets and awards baccalaureate degrees exclusively. VMI offers cadets strict military discipline combined with a spartan, physically and academically demanding environment.  The Institute grants degrees in 14 disciplines in engineering, the sciences, and the liberal arts. While VMI has been called the "West Point of the South", it differs from the federal service academies in several respects. For example, the living conditions at VMI are far more austere than at the service academies.  Also, while all cadets must participate in the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC), they are afforded the flexibility of pursuing civilian endeavors or accepting a commission in any of the active or reserve components of any of the U.S. military branches upon graduation. The Board of Visitors is the supervisory boardVa. Code § 2.2-2100 of the Virginia Military Institute.Va. Code § 23-92 Although the Governor is ex officio the commander-in-chief of the Institute, and no one may be declared a graduate without his signature, he delegates to the Board the responsibility for developing the Institute's policy. The Board appoints the Superintendent and approves appointment of members of the faculty and staff on the recommendation of the Superintendent. The Board may make bylaws and regulations for their own government and the management of the affairs of the Institute,Va. Code § 23-99 and while the Institute is exempt from the Administrative Process Act in accordance with Va. Code § 2.2-4002(A)(6) (which exempts educational institutions operated by the Commonwealth),VA.R. Doc. No. R12-3076 (19 December 2011) some of its regulations are codified at 8VAC 100. The Executive Committee conducts the business of the Board during recesses.Board of Visitors By-Laws § 6(8) The Board has 17 members, including ex officio the Adjutant General of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Regular members are appointed by the Governor for a four-year term and may be reappointed once. Of the sixteen appointed members, twelve must be alumni of the Institute, eight of whom must be residents of Virginia and four must be non-residents; and the remaining four members must be non-alumni Virginia residents. The Executive Committee consists of the Board's President, three Vice Presidents, and one non-alumnus at large, and is appointed by the Board at each annual meeting. Under the militia bill (the Virginia Code of 1860) officers of the Institute were recognized as part of the military establishment of the state, and the Governor had authority to issue commissions to them in accordance with Institute regulations. Current law makes provision for officers of the Virginia Militia to be subject to orders of the Governor. The cadets are a military corps (the Corps of Cadets) under the command of the Superintendent and under the administration of the Commandant of Cadets, and constitute the guard of the Institute.Va. Code § 23-109 In the years after the War of 1812, the state of Virginia built and maintained several arsenals to store weapons intended for use by the state militia in the event of invasion or insurrection.  In the 1830s Lexington attorney John Thomas Lewis Preston belonged to a debate club known as the Franklin Society.  In 1836 he made the case to the society that the arsenal in Lexington could be put to better use as a normal school for providing education on practical subjects, as well as military training to individuals who could be expected to serve as officers in the militia if needed. After debate and revision of the original proposal, the Franklin Society voted in favor of Preston’s concept.  After a public relations campaign that included Preston meeting in person with influential business, military and political figures, letters to editors of prominent news sources from Preston writing under a pen name, and many other open letters from prominent supporters, in 1836 the Virginia legislature passed a bill authorizing creation of a school at the Lexington arsenal, and the Governor signed the measure into law. The organizers of the planned school formed a board of visitors, which included Preston, and the board selected Claudius Crozet, a prominent officer and engineer formerly under the command of Napoleon Bonaparte, to serve as their President.  Crozet was also the Chief Engineer of Virginia and someone whom Thomas Jefferson referred to as, "the smartest mathematician in the United States."  The board delegated to Preston the task of deciding what to call the new school, and he created the name Virginia Military Institute. Preston was also tasked with hiring VMI’s first Superintendent.  He was persuaded that West Point graduate and Army officer Francis Henney Smith, then on the faculty at Hampden-Sydney College, was the most suitable candidate.  Preston successfully recruited Smith, and convinced him to become the first Superintendent and Professor of Tactics.  In an endeavor unique to the United States, Preston, Crozet, and Smith founded VMI intending to create a hybrid of the best characteristics of the United States Military Academy and French École Polytechnique educational models. After Smith agreed to accept the Superintendent’s position, Preston applied to join the faculty, and was hired as Professor of Languages.  Classes began in 1839, and the first cadet to march a sentinel post was Private John Strange. With few exceptions, there have been sentinels posted at VMI every hour of every day of the school year. The Class of 1842 graduated 16 cadets. Living conditions were poor until 1850 when the cornerstone of the new barracks was laid. In 1851 Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson became a member of the faculty and professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy. Under Jackson, then a major, and Major William Gilham, VMI infantry and artillery units were present at the execution by hanging of John Brown at Charles Town, Virginia (now West Virginia) in 1859. VMI cadets and alumni played instrumental roles in the American Civil War. On 14 occasions, the Confederacy called cadets into active military engagements. VMI is authorized battle streamers for each one of these engagements, but the Institute chose only to carry one: the battle streamer for New Market.  Many VMI Cadets were ordered to Camp Lee, at Richmond, to train recruits under General Stonewall Jackson. VMI alumni were regarded among the best officers of the South and several distinguished themselves in the Union forces as well. Fifteen graduates rose to the rank of general in the Confederate Army, and one rose to this rank in the Union Army., VMI Archives Just before his famous flank attack at the Battle of Chancellorsville, Jackson looked at his division and brigade commanders, noted the high number of VMI graduates and said, "The Institute will be heard from today."Sears,Stephen W., "Chancellorsville". Mariner Books, 1996, p. 242. (link to 1998 edition)  Three of Jackson's four division commanders at Chancellorsville, Generals James Lane, Robert Rodes, and Raleigh Colston, were VMI graduates as were more than twenty of his brigadiers and colonels.  On 15 May 1864, the VMI Corps of Cadets fought as an independent unit at the Battle of New Market.  At New Market, in a matter of minutes, VMI suffered fifty-five casualties with ten cadets killed; the cadets were led into battle by the Commandant of Cadets and future VMI Superintendent Colonel Scott Shipp. Shipp was also wounded during the battle. Six of the ten fallen cadets are buried on VMI grounds behind the statue "Virginia Mourning Her Dead" by sculptor Moses Ezekiel, a VMI graduate who was also wounded in the Battle of New Market. General John C. Breckinridge, the commanding Southern general, held the cadets in reserve and did not use them until Union troops broke through the Confederate lines. Upon seeing the tide of battle turning in favor of the Union forces, Breckinridge stated, "Put the boys in...and may God forgive me for the order."  The VMI cadets held the line and eventually pushed forward, capturing a Union artillery emplacement, securing victory for the Confederates. The Union troops were withdrawn and Confederate troops under General Breckinridge held the Shenandoah Valley. On 12 June 1864 Union forces under the command of General David Hunter shelled and burned the Institute as part of the Valley Campaigns of 1864. The destruction was almost complete and VMI had to temporarily hold classes at the Alms House in Richmond, Virginia. In April 1865 Richmond was evacuated due to the impending fall of Petersburg and the VMI Corps of Cadets was disbanded. The Lexington campus reopened for classes on 17 October 1865. One of the reasons that Confederate General Jubal A. Early burned the town of Chambersburg, Pennsylvania was in retaliation for the shelling of VMI. Following the war, Matthew Fontaine Maury, the pioneering oceanographer known as the "Pathfinder of the Seas", accepted a teaching position at VMI, holding the physics chair.  Following the war, David Hunter Strother, who was chief of staff to General Hunter and had advised the destruction of the Institute, served as Adjutant General of the Virginia Militia and member of the VMI Board of Visitors; in that position he promoted and worked actively for the reconstruction. VMI produced many of America's commanders in World War II. The most important of these was George C. Marshall, the top U.S. Army general during the war. Marshall was the Army's first five-star general and the only career military officer ever to win the Nobel Peace Prize. Winston Churchill dubbed Marshall the "Architect of Victory" and "the greatest Roman of them all". The Deputy Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army during the war was also a VMI graduate as were the Second U.S. Army commander, 15th U.S. Army commander, the commander of Allied Air Forces of the Southwest Pacific and various corps and division commanders in the Army and Marine Corps. China's General Sun Li-jen, known as the "Rommel of the East", was also a graduate of VMI. During the war, VMI participated in the War Department's Army Specialized Training Program (ASTP) from 1943 to 1946. The program provided training in engineering and related subjects to enlisted men at colleges across the United States. Over 2,100 ASTP members studied at VMI during the war. Since 1839, VMI has had fourteen superintendents. Francis H. Smith was the first and the longest serving, filling the position for 50 years. Only three of the fourteen superintendents were not graduates of VMI.  The VMI campus covers , 12 of which are designated as the Virginia Military Institute Historic District, listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The campus is referred to as the "Post," a tradition that reflects the school's military focus and the uniformed service of its alumni. A training area of several hundred additional acres is located near the post. All cadets are housed on campus in a large five-story building, called the "barracks." The Old Barracks, which has been designated a National Historic Landmark, stands on the site of the old arsenal. This is the structure that received most of the damage when Union forces shelled and burned the Institute in June 1864. The new wing of the barracks ("New Barracks") was completed in 1949. The two wings surround two quadrangles connected by a sally port. All rooms open onto porch-like stoops facing one of the quadrangles. A third barracks wing was completed, with cadets moving in officially spring semester 2009. Four of the five arched entries into the barracks are named for George Washington, Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson, George C. Marshall '01 and Jonathan Daniels '61. Next to the Barracks are offices and meeting areas for VMI clubs and organizations, the cadet visitors center and lounge, a snack bar, and a Follett Corporation-operated bookstore. VMI's "Vision 2039" capital campaign raised more than $275 million from alumni and supporters in three years. The money is going to expand The Barracks to house 1,500 cadets, renovate and modernize the academic buildings. VMI is spending another $200 million to build the VMI Center for Leadership and Ethics, to be used by cadets, Washington and Lee University students, and other U.S. and international students. The funding will also support "study abroad" programs, including joint ventures with Oxford and Cambridge Universities in England and many other universities. VMI offers 14 major and 23 minor areas of study, grouped into engineering, liberal arts, humanities, and the sciences. The engineering department has concentrations in three areas: civil and environmental engineering, electrical and computer engineering, and mechanical engineering. Most classes are taught by full-time professors, 99 percent of whom hold terminal degrees. Within four months of graduation, an average of 97 percent of VMI graduates are either serving in the military, employed, or admitted to graduate or professional schools. As of 2010, VMI had graduated 11 Rhodes Scholars since 1921, most recently in 2009 (Gregory Lippiatt of York, Pa.). Per capita, VMI has graduated more Rhodes Scholars than any other state-supported college or university; it has also graduated more than all the other senior military colleges combined. VMI is the only military college in the U.S. which is nationally ranked by U.S. News and World Report in the same category as the federal military academies. In 2015 VMI ranked fourth Nationally, after the United States Military Academy, the United States Naval Academy and the United States Air Force Academy, in the U.S. News and World Report rankings' "Top Public Schools, National Liberal Arts Colleges" category. Forbes' 2012 Special Report on America's Best Colleges ranked VMI in the top 25 public universities in the nation, well ahead of any other senior military college in the country. VMI was ranked 14th in the "Top 25 Publics" section, just behind the United States Military Academy, the Air Force Academy, and the Naval Academy, but ahead of the U.S. Coast Guard Academy and the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. Overall, VMI ranked 115th out of the 650 colleges and universities evaluated. In 2009 U.S. News ranked VMI's Civil Engineering program seventh, its mechanical engineering program 14th,Best Colleges 2009: Premium Online Edition: Best Colleges Specialty Rankings: Undergraduate engineering specialties: Mechanical and its overall engineering program improved from 25th in the United States in 2008 to 21st out of 105 in the 2009 category of "Best Undergraduate Engineering Programs (where doctorate is not offered)." In the newly added 2009 category of "High School Counselor Rankings of Liberal Arts Colleges," VMI is ranked 57th of the 266 best liberal arts colleges. Kiplinger's magazine, in its ranking of the "Best Values in Public Colleges" for 2006, made mention of the Virginia Military Institute as a "great value", although the military nature of its program excluded it from consideration as a traditional four-year college in the rankings. VMI has graduated more Army Generals than any other ROTC program in the United States. VMI alumni include an Army Chief of Staff (George Marshall), an Air Force Chief of Staff (John P. Jumper), and two Marine Corps Commandants (Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr. and Randolph M. Pate), making it the only college in the United States (including the federal service academies) to have graduated service chiefs of three of the four primary armed services. As of 2007, VMI alumni included more than 270 general and flag officers, including the first five-star General of the Army, George Marshall; seven recipients of the highest U.S. military decoration, the Medal of Honor; and more than 80 recipients of the second-highest awards, the Distinguished Service Cross and Navy Cross. VMI offers ROTC programs for four U.S. military branches (Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force) and is one of the few schools that the Coast Guard allows its students to be able to direct commission from, another one being the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. While all cadets are required to take four years of ROTC, accepting a commission in the armed forces is optional.  While over 50% of VMI graduates are commissioned each year, the VMI Board of Visitors has set a goal of having 70 percent of VMI cadets take a commission by 2015. In 2008, 52.8 percent of the graduating class accepted a commission; 63 joined the Army, 11 the Navy, 26 the Marine Corps, and 27 the Air Force. This table lists U.S. four-star generals who graduated from VMI. It does not list alumni who did not graduate from the school, such as General George S. Patton and General Sam S. Walker, and the many VMI graduates who served or still serve as four-star generals in foreign nations such as Thailand, China, and Taiwan. Prospective cadets must be between 16 and 22 years of age. They must be unmarried, and have no legal dependents, physically fit for enrollment in the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC), and be graduates of an accredited secondary school or have completed an approved homeschool curriculum. The Class of 2015 at VMI had an average high school GPA of 3.50 and a mean SAT score of 1151. Eligibility is not restricted to Virginia residents, although it is more difficult to gain an appointment as a non-resident, because VMI has a goal that no more than 45 percent of cadets come from outside Virginia. Virginia residents receive a discount in tuition, as is common at most state-sponsored schools. Total tuition, room & board, and other fees for the 2008–2009 school year was approximately $17,000 for Virginia residents and $34,000 for all others. These fees can be misleading, because VMI's endowment enables VMI to meet a substantial amount of a cadet's financial need before the cadet needs loans. Of the 1251 students enrolled in 2005, 66 were African-American, 39 were Asian, 34 were Hispanic and 71 were women.  Of 509 students that matriculated in August 2012, 46 were women. The first Jewish cadet, Moses Jacob Ezekiel, graduated in 1866. While at VMI, Ezekiel fought with the VMI cadets at the Battle of New Market. He became a sculptor and his works are on display at VMI. One of the first Asian cadets was Sun Li-jen, the Chinese National Revolutionary Army general, who graduated in 1927. The first African-American cadets were admitted in 1968. The first African-American regimental commander was Darren McDew, class of 1982. McDew is currently a U.S. Air Force General and Commander, Air Mobility Command, Scott Air Force Base, IL. It is unknown when the first Muslim cadet graduated from VMI, but before the Iranian Revolution, under Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, several Persian cadets attended and graduated from VMI. Other Muslim graduates have included cadets from Bangladesh, Jordan, Indonesia and other nations. VMI has traditionally enrolled cadets from the armed forces of Thailand and the Republic of China (Taiwan). Graduates have gone on to pursue graduate degrees after VMI at universities throughout the United States before returning to their countries to continue their military service. Several graduates reached general and flag officer ranks. During the 1990s many other nations were represented in the Corps of Cadets, including Great Britain, Bangladesh, Finland, Botswana, Germany, Kenya, South Korea, Indonesia, and Japan.  VMI was the last U.S. military college to admit women, having excluded women from the Corps of Cadets until 1997. In 1990 the U.S. Department of Justice filed a discrimination lawsuit against VMI for its all-male admissions policy. While the court challenge was pending, a state-sponsored Virginia Women's Institute for Leadership (VWIL) was opened at Mary Baldwin College in Staunton, Virginia, as a parallel program for women. The VWIL continued, even after VMI's admission of women.Cabe, Crista (1 March 2005). "MBC Celebrates VWIL's 10th Anniversary March 18, 2004". Mary Baldwin College web site. After VMI won its case in U.S. District Court, the case went through several appeals until 26 June 1996, when the U.S. Supreme Court, in a 7–1 decision in United States v. Virginia, found that it was unconstitutional for a school supported by public funds to exclude women. (Justice Clarence Thomas recused himself, presumably because his son was attending VMI at the time.) Following the ruling, VMI contemplated going private to exempt itself from the 14th Amendment, and thus avoid the ruling. Assistant Secretary of Defense Frederick F.Y. Pang, however, warned the school that the Department of Defense would withdraw ROTC programs from the school if privatization took place. As a result of this action by Pang, Congress passed a resolution on 18 November 1997 prohibiting the Department of Defense from withdrawing or diminishing any ROTC program at one of the six senior military colleges, including VMI. This escape clause provided by Congress came after the VMI Board of Visitors had already voted 9–8 to admit women and the decision was not revisited. In August 1997, VMI enrolled its first female cadets. The first co-ed class consisted of thirty women, and matriculated as part of the class of 2001. In order to accelerate VMI's matriculation process several women were allowed to transfer directly from various junior colleges, such as New Mexico Military Institute (NMMI), and forgo the traditional four-year curriculum that most cadets had been subjected to. The first female cadets "walked the stage" in 1999, although by VMI's definitions they are considered to be members of the class of 2001. Initially, these 30 women who were held to the same strict physical courses and technical training as the male cadets until it became apparent that adjustments to the standards had to be made. VMI resisted following other military colleges in adopting "gender-normed" physical training standards until 2008 when it was listed as a goal in VMI's 2039 Strategic Plan.VMI Operational Plans and Progress Report 2008 Strategy 1–13 On 30 June 2008, gender-normed training standards were implemented for all female cadets. Just as cadets did nearly 200 years ago, today's cadets give up such comforts as beds, instead lying upon cots colloquially referred to as "hays". These hays are little more than foam mats that must be rolled every morning and aired every Monday. Further, cadet uniforms have little changed; the coatee worn in parades dates to the War of 1812.  New cadets, known as "Rats", experience even further deprivations; for example, they are not permitted to watch TV, listen to music, or use the telephone unsupervised. During the first six months at VMI, New Cadets are called "Rats," the accepted term (since the 1850s) for a New Cadet. The VMI ratline is a tough, sometimes brutal, and old-fashioned indoctrination-system which dates back to the Institute's founding.  All "Rats" refer to their classmates, male or female, as "Brother-Rats."  The term "Brother Rat" is a term of endearment which lasts a lifetime amongst VMI graduates.  Legend has it that when Washington College (now Washington and Lee University) students and VMI cadets drilled together in the 1830s, the students called the cadets "Rats" perhaps because of their gray uniforms. The cadets responded in kind calling the neighboring students "Minks" perhaps because many of them were from wealthy backgrounds. The purpose of the Ratline is to teach self-control, self-discipline, time-management, and followership as prerequisites for becoming a VMI cadet. New freshmen, known collectively as the "Rat Mass", walk along a prescribed line in barracks while maintaining an exaggerated form of attention, called "straining".  This experience, called the Rat Line, is intended by the upper classes to instill camaraderie, pride, and discipline into the incoming class.  Under this system, the Rats face numerous mental and physical challenges, starting with "Cadre Week." During Cadre Week, Rats receive basic military instruction from select upper classmen ("Cadre"); they learn to march, to clean their M14 rifle, and to wear their uniforms.  During Hell Week, Rats also meet the members of various cadet-run organizations and learn the functions of each.  Most notable of these is the Honor Court.  By the end of the week, the new Rat Mass has significantly less hair than before and the Rats are on their way to becoming full-fledged cadets. At the end of the first week, it is quite clear that the Rats have just begun. At this point, each Rat is paired with a first classman (senior) who serves as their mentor for the rest of the first year. The first classman is called a "Dyke," reference to an older Southern pronunciation of "to deck out," or to get into a uniform. While the Dyke watches out for the Rat and the Rat works for the Dyke in accordance with Institute policy, Cadre still enforce all rules for the Rats. In combining the softness of the Dykes with the hardness of the system they lead, with countless push-ups, sweat parties, and runs, the Rats are instilled with the virtue of time management and attention to detail. The Ratline experience culminates with Resurrection Week ending in "Breakout," an event where the Rats are formally "welcomed" to the VMI community. After the successful completion of Breakout, Rats are officially fourth class students and no longer have to strain in the barracks or eat "square meals." Many versions of the Breakout ceremony have been conducted. In the 1950s Rats from each company would be packed into a corner room in the barracks and brawl their way out through the upperclassmen. From the late 1960s through the early 1980s the Rats had to fight their way up to the fourth level of the barracks through three other classes of cadets determined not to let them get to the top. The stoops would often be slick with motor oil, packed with snow, glazed with ice, greased, or continuously hosed with water. The barracks stairs and rails were not able to take the abuse, so the Corps moved the breakout to a muddy hill where Rats attempt to climb to the top by crawling on their stomachs while the upper classes block them or drag them back down. The Rats no longer breakout in the mud but instead participate in a grueling day of physical activity testing both physical endurance and teamwork. The entire body of Rats during the Ratline is called a "Rat Mass." Since Rats are not officially fourth classmen until after Breakout, the Rat Mass is also not officially considered a graduating class until that time either. Prior to Breakout, the Rat mass is given a different style of year identifier to emphasize this difference. The year identifier starts with the year of the current graduating class (their dykes' class), followed by a "+3" to indicate the anticipated year of their own class. For example, Rats that make up the Class of 2018 were considered the "Rat Mass of 2015+3" as the members of their dykes' class will graduate in 2015 and they themselves will graduate three years onward from then. In addition to the Ratline, VMI has other traditions that are emblematic of the school and its history including the new cadet oath ceremony, the pageantry of close-order marching, and the nightly playing of "Taps". An event second only to graduation in importance is the "Ring Figure" dance held every November. During their junior year, cadets receive class rings at a ring presentation ceremony followed by a formal dance. Most cadets get two rings, a formal ring and a combat ring; some choose to have the combat ring for everyday wear, and the formal for special occasions. Every year, VMI honors its fallen cadets with a New Market Day parade and ceremony. These events take place on 15 May, the same day as the Battle of New Market in which the VMI cadets fought during the Civil War in 1864. During this ceremony, roll is called for cadets who "died on the Field of Honor" and wreaths are placed on the graves of those who died during the Battle of New Market. The requirement that all cadets wishing to eat dinner in the mess hall must be present for a prayer was the basis for a lawsuit in 2002 when two cadets sued VMI over the prayer said before dinner. The non-denominational prayer had been a daily fixture since the 1950s. In 2002 the Fourth Circuit ruled the prayer, during an event with mandatory attendance, at a state-funded school, violated the U.S. Constitution. When the Supreme Court declined to review the school's appeal in April 2004, the prayer tradition was stopped. The tradition of guarding the Institute is one of the longest standing and is carried out to this day. Cadets have been posted as sentinels guarding the barracks 24 hours a day, seven days a week while school is in session since the first cadet sentinel, Cadet John B. Strange, and others relieved the Virginia Militia guard team tasked with defending the Lexington Arsenal (that later became VMI) in 1839. The guard team wears the traditional school uniform and each sentinel is armed with an M14 rifle and bayonet. VMI is known for its strict honor code, which is as old as the Institute and was formally codified in the early 20th century. Under the VMI Honor Code, "a cadet does not lie, cheat, steal, nor tolerate those who do."  There is only one punishment for violating the VMI Honor Code: immediate expulsion in the form of a drumming out ceremony of dismissal, in which the entire corps is awakened by drums in barracks and the honor court to hear the formal announcement.  Additionally, the cadet's name and picture is marked with a black "X" in the yearbook collection on display in the VMI Library.  VMI is the only military college or academy in the Nation which maintains a single-sanction Honor Code and in recent times, the dismissed cadet is removed from post before the formal announcement is made. VMI currently offers over 50 school-sponsored clubs and organizations, including recreational activities, military organizations, musical and performance groups, religious organizations and service groups. Although VMI prohibited cadet membership in fraternal organizations starting in 1885, VMI cadets were instrumental in starting several fraternities. Alpha Tau Omega fraternity was founded by VMI cadets Otis Allan Glazebrook, Alfred Marshall, and Erskine Mayo Ross at Richmond, Virginia on 11 September 1865 while the school was closed for reconstruction. After the re-opening, Kappa Sigma Kappa fraternity was founded by cadets on 28 September 1867 and Sigma Nu fraternity was founded by cadets on 1 January 1869. VMI cadets formed the second chapter of the Kappa Alpha Order. In a special arrangement, graduating cadets may be nominated by Kappa Alpha Order alumni and inducted into the fraternity, becoming part of Kappa Alpha Order's Beta Commission (a commission as opposed to an active chapter). This occurs following graduation, and the newly initiated VMI alumni are accepted as brothers of the fraternity. The VMI corps maintains and operates an independent student newspaper published as The Cadet. The paper has been published weekly since its first issue from the fall of 1907.   VMI fields 14 teams on the NCAA Division I level (FCS, formerly I-AA, for football). Varsity sports include baseball, basketball, men's and women's cross country, football, lacrosse, men's and women's rifle, men's and women's soccer, men's and women's swimming & diving, men's and women's track & field, and wrestling. VMI is a member of the Southern Conference (SoCon) for almost all sports, the MAAC for women's water polo, and the Mid-Atlantic Rifle Conference for rifle. The VMI team name is the Keydets, a Southern style slang for the word "cadets". VMI has the third-smallest enrollment of any FCS football college, after Presbyterian and Wofford.The State | Homepage  Approximately one-third of the Corps of Cadets plays on at least one of VMI's intercollegiate athletic teams, making it one of the most active athletic programs in the country. Of the VMI varsity athletes who complete their eligibility, 92 percent receive their VMI degrees.VMI Athletic History – A Brief Look (9 August 2002). VMI web site.   VMI played its first football game in 1871. The one-game season was a 2–4 loss to Washington and Lee University. There are no records of a coach or any players for that game. VMI waited another twenty years, until 1891, when head coach Walter Taylor would coach the next football team. The current head football coach at VMI, Scott Wachenheim, was named the 31st head coach on 14 December 2014. The Keydets play their home games out of Alumni Memorial Field at Foster Stadium, built in 1962. VMI's last winning football season was in 1981.  Perhaps the most famous athletic story in VMI history was the two-year run of the 1976 and 1977 basketball teams. The 1976 squad advanced within one game of the Final Four before bowing to undefeated Rutgers in the East Regional Final, and in 1977 VMI finished with 26 wins and just four losses, still a school record, and reached the "Sweet 16" round of the NCAA tournament. The current VMI basketball team is led by head coach Dan Earl and assistant coaches: Jason Slay, Steve Lepore and Chris Kreider. VMI's alumni include a Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, Pulitzer Prize winners, Rhodes Scholars, Medal of Honor recipients, an Academy Award winner, an Emmy Award and Golden Globe winner, Senators and Representatives, a Governor, a Lieutenant Governor, a Supreme Court Justice, college and university presidents, many business leaders and numerous flag officers, including service chiefs for three of the four armed services. Two recent Chiefs of Engineers of the Army Corps of Engineers, Lieutenant Generals Carl A. Strock and Robert B. Flowers, were VMI engineering graduates. During World War II, the U.S. Army used VMI to give technical education and training to soldiers who did not matriculate as cadets, nor live within the VMI cadet system. Among these non-alumni is filmmaker Mel Brooks, who trained at VMI for 12 weeks. A 2007 study by the National Association of College and University Business Officers found that VMI's $343 million endowment was the largest per-student endowment of any U.S. public college in the United States. 35.4 percent of the approximately 12,300 living alumni gave in 2006. Private support covers more than 31 percent of VMI's operating budget; state funds, 26 percent. Notes  Further reading   Name VMI class Branch & date of rank Notes George Marshall 1901 Army, 1 September 1939 Thomas T. Handy 1916 Army, 13 March 1945 Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr. 1917 USMC, 1 January 1952 Leonard T. Gerow 1911 Army, 19 July 1954 Randolph M. Pate 1921 USMC, 1 January 1956 Clark L. Ruffner 1924 Army, 1 March 1960 David M. Maddox 1960 Army, 9 July 1992 J. H. Binford Peay III 1962 Army, 26 March 1993 John P. Jumper 1966 Air Force, 17 November 1997 Darren W. McDew 1982 Air Force, 5 May 2014 Name Year Notes Edward M. Almond 1915 Commander of U.S. Army X Corps during Korean War Thomas Marshall Boyd 1968 Assistant Attorney General under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush James E. Brown III 1976 Fellow and past president of Society of Experimental Test Pilots and Fellow of Royal Aeronautical Society William A. Brown 1980 U.S. Navy vice admiral, Deputy Commander Commander, United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) Josiah Bunting III 1963 Superintendent of VMI, 1995–2002; Rhodes Scholar; Author Withers Burress 1914 Professor of Military Science and Tactics at VMI; Commanding General, U.S. Army 100th Infantry Division Harry F. Byrd, Jr. 1935 Senator from Virginia (1965–83) Dabney Coleman 1949 Movie and television actor Harold Coyle 1974 U.S. Army major; novelist Charles Allen Culberson 1874 U.S. Senator; Governor of Texas Samuel C. Cumming 1917 Decorated USMC Major General during World War II Jonathan Myrick Daniels 1961 American civil rights activist and one of fifteen modern-day Anglican Church martyrs Daniel J. Darnell 1975 U.S. Air Force lieutenant general, Commander of the aerial demonstration team, the Thunderbirds James U. Downs 1963 Senior resident superior court judge in western North Carolina, 1983-2013; lawyer in Hickory and Franklin, North Carolina Richard Thomas Walker Duke 1844 Confederate Colonel; Member of U.S. House of Representatives and Virginia House of Delegates Douglas J. Ewing 1951 U.S. Army brigadier general John D. Ewing 1913 Publisher of Shreveport Times, 1931–52 Benjamin Franklin Ficklin 1849 A founder of the Pony Express Robert Flowers 1969 Lieutenant general and Commander, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Lee S. Gerow 1913 Brigadier General, U.S. Army; Assistant Commanding General of the 85th Infantry Division. A younger brother of General Leonard T. Gerow. Leonard T. Gerow 1911 General, U.S. Army; Commanding General, V Corps (1943–45) and U.S. Fifteenth Army (1945–48). Highly regarded by Eisenhower & Bradley. Led at Omaha Beach and Battle of the Bulge. Ryan Glynn 1995 Professional baseball player in Japan Billy Guin 1949 Pioneer of the Louisiana Republican Party from Shreveport, Louisiana George W. Hardy, Jr. 1920 Mayor of Shreveport, Louisiana, from 1932 to 1934 and state circuit court of appeal judge from 1943 to 1967 James B. Hickey 1982 Colonel and commander Operation Red Dawn, which captured Saddam Hussein Thomas Goode Jones 1863 Withdrew before graduation to join Confederate Army; wounded in battle four times; Governor of Alabama. John P. Jumper 1966 Retired general and Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force Charles E. Kilbourne 1894 Recipient of Medal of Honor and Distinguished Service Cross; lieutenant general, U.S. Army James H. Lane 1854 Confederate brigadier general, fought in Pickett's Charge, civil engineering professor, and founder of Virginia Tech W. Patrick Lang 1962 Retired U.S. Army Special Forces officer, intelligence executive, commentator on Middle East, and author Cary D. Langhorne 1894 Medal of Honor recipient Dan Lyle 1992 Captain of the USA Eagles national rugby team William Mahone 1847 Confederate major general, Member of Virginia House of Delegates, U.S. Senator (1881–87), and railroad executive George Marshall 1901 General of the Army, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army in World War II, Secretary of State (1947–49), Secretary of Defense (1950), and Nobel Peace Prize winner Richard Marshall 1915 General during World War II Robert Q. Marston 1944 President of University of Florida, Director of National Institutes of Health, Rhodes Scholar Frank McCarthy 1933 Brigadier general, U.S. Army Reserve. Producer of the 1970 Academy Award-winning movie Patton. John McCausland 1857 Confederate brigadier-general, served under General Jubal Early Marshall McDonald 1860 U.S. Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries (1888–1895) Shannon Meehan 2005 U.S. Army Captain, Bronze Star Medal recipient, author and veterans activist Darren W. McDew 1982 General, U.S. Air Force, Commander, United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM). 1st African-American Regimental Commander of Corps of Cadets. Giles H. Miller 1924 Banker, President of VMI Alumni Association, Director of The George C. Marshall Foundation John Cherry Monks, Jr. 1932 Playwright, actor, author, screenwriter, producer and World War II U.S. Marine Thomas T. Munford 1854 Confederate brigadier-general Ralph Northam 1981 U.S. Army Medical Corps, Virginia State Senator, and 40th Lieutenant Governor of Virginia Randolph McCall Pate 1921 U.S. Marine Corps general and twenty-first Commandant of the Marine Corps George S. Patton, Sr 1852 Confederate colonel, 22nd Virginia Infantry; died in Battle of Opequon; grandfather of Gen. George Smith Patton Jr. George Patton 1907 His father and grandfather were both VMI graduates. Left VMI in 1904, to attend and graduate from West Point. Lewis F. Payne, Jr. 1967 Member of Congress from Virginia J. H. Binford Peay III 1962 U.S. Army general, commander 101st Airborne, commander United States Central Command, and 14th superintendent of VMI Lewis Burwell "Chesty" Puller 1922 Resigned from VMI after freshman year to enlist as a private in the U.S. Marine Corps in 1918; became lieutenant general and most decorated Marine in U.S. history Robert E. Rodes 1848 Railroad civil engineer and Confederate major general killed at the Battle of Opequon in the Shenandoah Valley Bobby Ross 1959 Football coach of West Point, The Citadel, University of Maryland, Georgia Tech, San Diego Chargers and Detroit Lions Edward R. Schowalter, Jr. 1951 Medal of Honor recipient; colonel, U.S. Army Lemuel C. Shepherd Jr. 1917 U.S. Marine Corps general and 20th Commandant of the Marine Corps Scott Shipp 1856 Superintendent of VMI (1890–1907). Led VMI cadets at New Market under Maj. Gen. John C. Breckinridge. Henry G. Shirley 1896 Commissioner, Virginia Department of Highways Joseph Short 1925 White House Press Secretary under Harry S. Truman C. Bascom Slemp 1891 Representative for the Ninth Congressional District of Virginia; philanthropist Adolphus Staton 1899 Medal of Honor recipient Carl A. Strock 1970 U.S. Army lieutenant general and commander, Army Corps of Engineers Clarence E. Sutton 1890 Medal of Honor recipient Sun Li-jen 1927 Republic of China/Taiwan lieutenant general, Second Sino-Japanese War and Chinese Civil War Walter H. Taylor 1857 Confederate lieutenant colonel, General Robert E. Lee's aide-de-camp, lawyer, banker, author, railroad executive, Virginia state senator Bobby Thomason 1949 NFL Pro Bowl quarterback Ernest O. Thompson 1910 General, Texas National Guard; Texas Railroad Commissioner, mayor of Amarillo, petroleum expert William P. Upshur 1902 Medal of Honor recipient; Marine Corps major general; Commander, Dept. of the Pacific, 1940–42 Reuben Lindsay Walker 1845 Confederate brigadier general and artilleryman. James A. Walker 1852 Expelled in 1852 for "disobedience" in Stonewall Jackson's classroom, after challenging Jackson to a duel over a perceived insult. VMI granted him an honorary degree in 1872 in recognition of his Civil War service, where he rose to the rank of brigadier general and commanded the "Stonewall Brigade". Fred Willard 1955 Comedic actor; U.S. Army officer Reggie Williams 2008 Led NCAA Division 1 scoring in 2006 and 2007, playing for the Miami Heat in the NBA Francis H. Smith (1839–1889) Scott Shipp (1890–1907) Edward W. Nichols (1907–1924) William H. Cocke (1924–1929) John A. Lejeune (1929–1937)Also a Commandant of the Marine Corps Charles E. Kilbourne (1937–1946)Medal of Honor recipient and the first American to earn all three of the United States' highest military decorations. Richard J. Marshall (1946–1952) William H. Milton, Jr. (1952–1960) George R. E. Shell (1960–1971) Richard L. Irby (1971–1981) Sam S. Walker (1981–1988) John W. Knapp (1989–1995) Josiah Bunting III (1995–2002) J. H. Binford Peay III (2003–present) In Ernest Hemingway's novel Across the River and Into the Trees, the protagonist is Army Colonel Richard Cantwell, a fictional graduate of VMI. Some critics have said that Cantwell was a very autobiographical character. Ronald Reagan starred in the films Brother Rat and Brother Rat and a Baby, which were filmed at VMI. Originally a Broadway hit, the play was written by John Monks Jr. and Fred F. Finklehoffe, both 1932 graduates of VMI. Both the novel and film Gods and Generals depict Stonewall Jackson teaching a class at VMI before Virginia secedes. The film also depicts Jackson's funeral at VMI. In 2014, the film Field of Lost Shoes premiered in Richmond to the Corps of Cadets and the cast. The film depicts the battle of New Market in 1864.  VMI now owns and operates this historical battlefield museum and site. Also in 2014, Class of 1983 graduate Lynn Seldon published his novel about VMI, Virginia's Ring. The novel was inspired in part by conversation with famed author and graduate of The Citadel, Pat Conroy. Like Conroy's The Lords of Discipline, Virginia's Ring is significantly based off the writer's own experiences at the subject military college and features a protagonist who graduates around the same year that the author did. Virginia National Guard Virginia Defense Force Pancake, John, Virginia Reveres Civil War Bravery, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/11/25/AR2008112502112.html Official VMI athletics website Map of VMI campus Virginia Military Institute During the Civil War in Encyclopedia Virginia Wikisource:Virginia Military Institute—Building and Rebuilding Virginia Military Institute Building and Rebuilding. Virginia Military Institute, Barracks, Virginia Military Institute Parade Grounds, Lexington, Lexington, VA at the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) Virginia Military Institute, Superintendent's Quarters, Virginia Military Institute Parade Grounds, Lexington, Lexington, VA at HABS
