      A visa (from the Latin charta visa, meaning "paper which has been seen") is a conditional authorization granted by a country (typically to a foreigner) to enter and temporarily remain within, or to leave that country. Visas typically include limits on the duration of the foreigner's stay, territory within the country they may enter, the dates they may enter, or the number of permitted visits. Visas are associated with the request for permission to enter a country and thus are, in some countries, distinct from actual formal permission for an alien to enter and remain in the country. In each instance, a visa is subject to entry permission by an immigration official at the time of actual entry and can be revoked at any time. A visa is commonly a stamp endorsed in the applicant's passport or other travel document. The visa, when required, was historically granted by an immigration official on a visitor's arrival at the frontiers of a country, but increasingly today a traveller wishing to enter another country must apply in advance for a visa, sometimes in person at a consular office, by mail or over the internet. The actual visa may still be an endorsement in the passport or may take the form of a separate document or an electronic record of the authorisation, which the applicant can print before leaving home and produce on entry to the host country. Some countries do not require visas for short visits. Some countries require that their citizens, as well as foreign travelers, obtain an "exit visa" to be allowed to leave the country. The World Tourism Organization announced that the number of tourists who require a visa before traveling was at its lowest level ever in 2015.Visa requirements for tourism eased around the world, says UN agencyVisa Openness Report 2015 January 2016 A visa generally gives non-citizens clearance to enter a country and to remain there within specified constraints, such as a time frame for entry, a limit on the time spent in the country, and a prohibition against employment. Some countries do not require a visa in some situations, such as a result of reciprocal treaty arrangements. The possession of a visa is not in itself a guarantee of entry into the country that issued it, and a visa can be revoked at any time. A visa application in advance of arrival gives the country a chance to consider the applicant's circumstance, such as financial security, reason for applying, and details of previous visits to the country. A visitor may also be required to undergo and pass security and/or health checks upon arrival at the border.  In Western Europe in the late 19th century and early 20th century, passports and visas were not generally necessary for moving from one country to another. The relatively high speed and large movements of people traveling by train (the closest modern analogy would be commercial supersonic flights) would have caused bottlenecks if regular passport controls had been used. Passports and visas became usually necessary travel documents only since World War I. Long before that, in ancient times, passports and visas were usually the same type of travel documents. In the modern world, visas have become separate secondary travel documents, with passports acting as the primary travel documents. Some visas can be granted on arrival or by prior application at the country's embassy or consulate, or through a private visa service specialist who is specialized in the issuance of international travel documents.  These agencies are authorized by the foreign authority, embassy, or consulate to represent international travelers who are unable or unwilling to travel to the embassy and apply in person. Private visa and passport services collect an additional fee for verifying customer applications, supporting documents, and submitting them to the appropriate authority. If there is no embassy or consulate in one's home country, then one would have to travel to a third country (or apply by post) and try to get a visa issued there. Alternatively, in such cases visas may be pre-arranged for pickup on arrival at the border. The need or absence of need of a visa generally depends on the citizenship of the applicant, the intended duration of the stay, and the activities that the applicant may wish to undertake in the country he visits; these may delineate different formal categories of visas, with different issue conditions. The issuing authority, usually a branch of the country's foreign ministry or department (e.g. U.S. State Department), and typically consular affairs officers, may request appropriate documentation from the applicant. This may include proof that the applicant is able to support himself in the host country (lodging, food), proof that the person hosting the applicant in his or her home really exists and has sufficient room for hosting the applicant, proof that the applicant has obtained health and evacuation insurance, etc. Some countries ask for proof of health status, especially for long-term visas; some countries deny such visas to persons with certain illnesses, such as AIDS. The exact conditions depend on the country and category of visa.  Notable examples of countries requiring HIV tests of long-term residents are RussiaTravel Report for Russia and Uzbekistan.Travel Report for Uzbekistan  However, in Uzbekistan, the HIV test requirement is sometimes not strictly enforced. Other countries require a medical test which includes an HIV test even for short term tourism visa. For instance Cuban citizens and international exchange students require such a test approved by a medical authority to enter Chilean territory. The issuing authority may also require applicants to attest that they have had no criminal convictions, or that they do not partake in certain activities (like prostitution or drug trafficking). Some countries will deny visas if the travelers passports show evidence of citizenship or travel to a country which is considered hostile by that country.  For example, some Arabic oriented countries will not issue visas to nationals of Israel and those whose passports bear evidence of visiting Israel. Many countries frequently demand strong evidence of intent to return to the home country, if the visa is for a temporary stay, due to potential unwanted illegal immigration.   Each country typically has a multitude of categories of visas with various names. The most common types and names of visas include: For passing through the country of issue to a destination outside that country. Validity of transit visas are usually limited by short terms such as several hours to 10 days depending on the size of the country and/or the circumstances of a particular transit itinerary. For short visits to the visited country. Many countries differentiate between different reasons for these visits, such as: Visas valid for longer but still finite stays: Granted for those intending to immigrate to the issuing country (obtain the status of a permanent resident with a prospect of possible naturalization in the future): Are granted to officials doing jobs for their governments or otherwise representing their countries in the host country, such as the personnel of diplomatic missions. Normally visa applications are made at and collected from a consulate, embassy or other diplomatic mission. (Also known as Visa On Arrival, VOA), granted at a port of entry. This is distinct from not requiring a visa at all, as the visitor must still obtain the visa before they can even try to pass through immigration. An electronic visa (e-Visa or eVisa) is stored in a computer and is linked to the passport number; no label, sticker or stamp is placed in the passport before travel. The application is done over the internet. Armeniaemb.org These lists are not exhaustive. Some countries may have more detailed classifications of some of these categories reflecting the nuances of their respective geographies, social conditions, economies, international treaties, etc. Others, on the contrary, may combine some types into broader categories. Visas can also be single-entry which means the visa is canceled as soon as the holder leaves the country; double-entry, or multiple-entry which permits double or multiple entries into the country with the same visa. Countries may also issue re-entry permits that allow temporarily leaving the country without invalidating the visa.  Even a business visa will normally not allow the holder to work in the host country without an additional work permit. Once issued, a visa will typically have to be used within a certain period of time. With some countries, the validity of a visa is not the same as the authorized period of stay. The visa validity then indicates the time period when entry is permitted into the country. For example, if a visa has been issued to begin January 1 and to expire March 30, and the typical authorized period of stay in a country is 90 days, then the 90-day authorized stay starts on the day the passenger enters the country (entrance has to be between January 1 and March 30). Thus, the latest day the traveler could conceivably stay in the issuing country is July 1 (if the traveler entered on March 30). This interpretation of visas is common in Americas. With other countries, a person may not stay beyond the period of validity of their visa, which is usually set within the period of validity of their passport. The visa may also limit the total number of days the visitor may spend in the covered territory within the period of validity. This interpretation of visas is common in Europe. Once in the country, the validity period of a visa or authorized stay can often be extended for a fee at the discretion of immigration authorities.  Overstaying a period of authorized stay given by the immigration officers is considered illegal immigration even if the visa validity period isn't over (i.e., for multiple entry visas) and a form of being "out of status" and the offender may be fined, prosecuted, deported, or even blacklisted from entering the country again. Entering a country without a valid visa or visa exemption may result in detention and removal (deportation or exclusion) from the country. Undertaking activities that are not authorized by the status of entry (for example, working while possessing a non-worker tourist status) can result in the individual being deemed deportable—commonly referred to as an illegal alien. Such violation is not a violation of a visa, despite the common misuse of the phrase, but a violation of status hence the term "out of status." Even having a visa does not guarantee entry to the host country. The border crossing authorities make the final determination to allow entry, and may even cancel a visa at the border if the alien cannot demonstrate to their satisfaction that they will abide by the status their visa grants them. Some countries which do not require visas for short stays may require a long stay visa for those who intend to apply for a residence permit. For example, EU does not require a visa for many countries for stays under 90 days, but its members require a long stay visa for longer stays. Many countries have a mechanism to allow the holder of a visa to apply to extend a visa. In Denmark, a visa holder can apply to the Danish Immigration Service for a Residence Permit after they have arrived in the country. In the United Kingdom, applications can be made to UK Visas and Immigration. In certain circumstances, it is not possible for the holder of the visa to do this, either because the country does not have a mechanism to prolong visas or, most likely, because the holder of the visa is using a short stay visa to live in a country. Some foreign visitors sometimes engage in what is known as a "visa run": leaving the country for a short period just before the allowed length of stay runs out to "restart the clock". However, immigration officers might also deny re-entry under these circumstances, especially if done more than once as such acts may signify that the foreigner wishes to permanently reside and might also work in that country. Some countries may have limits as to how long one can spend in the country without a visa, as well as how much time they may have to stay out before "restarting the clock," further creating a barrier to visa runs.  For example, Schengen countries impose a maximum limit for visitors of 90 days in a 180-day window. In other countries, on the other hand, a "visa run" is tolerated, such as the daily commuting between the Malaysian border town of Johor Bahru and Singapore. Despite the name, a "visa run" activity is usually done with a passport that can be used for an entry without a visa. In general, an applicant may be refused a visa if he or she does not meet the requirements for admission or entry under that country's immigration laws.  More specifically, a visa may be denied or refused when the applicant: Even if a traveller does not need a visa, the aforementioned criteria can also be used by border police to refuse the traveller entry into the country in question. The main reasons states impose visa restrictions on foreign nationals are to curb illegal immigration, security concerns, and reciprocity for visa restrictions imposed on their own nationals. Typically, nations impose visa restrictions on citizens of poorer countries, along with politically unstable and undemocratic ones, as it is likelier that people from these countries will seek to illegally immigrate. Visa restrictions may also be imposed when nationals of another country are perceived as likelier to be terrorists or criminals, or by autocratic regimes that perceive foreign influence to be a threat to their rule.http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/715/1/Transactions_of_the_BIG(FINAL).pdfhttps://www.travel-impact-newswire.com/2005/09/study-finds-visa-curbs-increasingly-restrictive-imbalanced/ According to Professor Eric Neumayer of the London School of Economics: "The poorer, the less democratic and the more exposed to armed political conflict the target country is, the more likely that visa restrictions are in place against its passport holders. The same is true for countries whose nationals have been major perpetrators of terrorist acts in the past". Some countries apply the principle of reciprocity in their visa policy. A country's visa policy is called reciprocal if it imposes visa requirement against citizens of all the countries which impose visa requirements against its own citizens. The opposite is rarely true: a country rarely lifts visa requirements against citizens of all the countries which also lift visa requirements against its own citizens, unless a prior bilateral agreement has been made. A fee may be charged for issuing a visa; these are often also reciprocal, so if country A charges country B's citizens US$50 for a visa, country B will often also charge the same amount for country A's visitors. The fee charged may also be at the discretion of each embassy. A similar reciprocity often applies to the duration of the visa (the period in which one is permitted to request entry of the country) and the amount of entries one can attempt with the visa. Other restrictions, such as requiring fingerprints and photographs, may also be reciprocated. Expedited processing of the visa application for some countries will generally incur additional charges. Government authorities usually impose administrative entry restrictions on foreign citizens in three ways - countries whose nationals may enter without a visa, countries whose nationals may obtain a visa on arrival and countries whose nationals require a visa in advance. Nationals who require a visa in advance are usually advised to obtain them at a diplomatic mission of their destination country. Several countries allow nationals of countries that require a visa to obtain them online. The following table lists visa policies of all countries by the number of foreign nationalities that may enter that country for tourism without a visa or by obtaining a visa on arrival with normal passport. It also notes countries that issue electronic visas to certain nationalities. Symbol "+" indicates a country that limits the visa-free regime negatively by only listing nationals who require a visa, thus the number represents the number of UN member states reduced by the number of nationals who require a visa and "+" stands for all possible non-UN member state nationals that might also not require a visa. "N/A" indicates countries that have contradictory information on its official websites and/or information supplied by the Government to IATA. Some countries that allow visa on arrival do so only at a limited number of entry points. Some countries such as the European Union member states have a qualitatively different visa regime between each other as it also includes freedom of movement. Possession of a valid visa is a condition for entry into many countries, and exemption schemes exist. In some cases visa-free entry may be granted to holders of diplomatic passports even as visas are required by normal passport holders (see: Passport). Some countries have reciprocal agreements such that a visa is not needed under certain conditions, e.g., when the visit is for tourism and for a relatively short period. Such reciprocal agreements may stem from common membership in international organizations or a shared heritage: Other countries may unilaterally grant visa-free entry to nationals of certain countries to facilitate tourism, promote business, or even to cut expenses on maintaining consular posts abroad. Some of the considerations for a country to grant visa-free entry to another country include (but are not limited to): To have a smaller worldwide diplomatic staff, some countries rely on other country's (or countries') judgments when issuing visas. For example, Mexico allows citizens of all countries to enter without Mexican visas if they possess a valid visa of the USA (on which an entry has already been granted to the USA). Costa Rica accepts valid visas of Schengen/EU countries, Canada, Japan, South Korea and the USA (if valid for at least 3 months on date of arrival). The ultimate example of such reliance is Andorra which imposes no visa requirements of its own because it has no international airport and is inaccessible by land without passing through the territory of either France or Spain and is thus "protected" by the Schengen visa system. Visa-free travel between countries also occurs in all cases where passports (or passport-replacing documents such as laissez-passer) are not needed for such travel. (For examples of passport-free travel, see International travel without passports.) As of 2015, the Visa Restrictions Index ranks the German and United Kingdom passports as the ones with the most visa exemptions by other nations, allowing holders of these 2 passports to visit 174 countries without obtaining a visa in advance of arrival. Normally visas are valid for entry only into the country which issued the visa. Countries that are members of regional organizations or party to regional agreements may however issue visas valid for entry into some or all of the member states of the organization or agreement: These schemes no longer operate. During the Fascist period in Italy, an exit visa was required from 1922 to 1943. Nazi Germany required exit visas from 1933 to 1945.Encarta.msn.com The Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies required exit visas both for emigration and for those who wanted to leave the USSR for a shorter period. Saudi Arabia and Qatar have an exit visa requirement, particularly for foreign workers. This is part of the kafala system, also present in Lebanon, Jordan, United Arab Emirates, Iraq, Kuwait, and Oman. Consequently, at the end of a foreign worker's employment period, the worker must secure clearance from their employer stating they worker have satisfactorily fulfilled the terms of their employment contract or that the worker's services are no longer needed. The exit visa can also be withheld if there are pending court charges that need to be settled or penalties that have to be meted out. Nepal requires citizens emigrating to the United States on an H-1B visa to present an exit permit issued by the Ministry of Labour. This document is called a work permit and needs to be presented to immigration to leave the country.Nepalese Work Permits Uzbekistan is the last remaining former USSR state that still requires an exit visa, which is valid for a two-year period. There has been explicit UN complaint about this practice. Freedom of Movement (article 12): "Exit visas and propiska violate not only international law such as the ICCPR, but also the Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan" The government of Cuba announced in October 2012 its plans to remove exit visa requirements to be effective January 14, 2013, albeit with some exceptions.Cuba to end exit permits for foreign travel 16 October 2012 The United States of America does not require exit visas. However, the U.S. government has required all foreign and U.S. nationals departing the US by air to hold a valid passport (or certain specific passport replacing documents) since October 1, 2007. Even though travelers might not require a passport to enter a certain country, they will require a valid passport booklet (booklet only, U.S. Passport Card not accepted) to depart the U.S. in order to satisfy the U.S. immigration authorities.Page 7 of IATA document accessed 5 December 2015 at [ ]Exemptions to this requirement to hold a valid passport include: The DPRK (North Korea) requires that its citizens obtain an exit visa stating the traveller's destination country and time to be spent abroad before leaving Pyongyang. Additionally, DPRK authorities also require that their citizens obtain a re-entry visa from a DPRK embassy or mission abroad before being allowed back into the DPRK. The government of the People's Republic of China requires its citizens to obtain a Two-way Permit issued by the PRC authorities prior to their visit to the Chinese dependencies of Hong Kong or Macau. The Two-way Permit is a de facto exit visa for Hong Kong- or Macau-bound trips for PRC citizens. Some countries, such as Russia or the Czech Republic,Act on the status of aliens in Czech Republic, §20 require that an alien who needs a visa on entry be in possession of a valid visa upon exit. To satisfy this formal requirement, exit visas sometimes need to be issued. Russia requires an exit visa if a visitor stays past the expiration date of their visa. They must then extend their visa or apply for an exit visa and are not allowed to leave the country until they show a valid visa or have a permissible excuse for overstaying their visa (e.g., a note from a doctor or a hospital explaining an illness, missed flight, lost or stolen visa). In some cases, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can issue a Return-Home certificate that is valid for ten days from the embassy of the visitor's native country, thus eliminating the need for an exit visa. A foreign citizen granted a temporary residence permit in Russia needs a temporary resident visa to take a trip abroad (valid for both exit and return). It is also colloquially called an exit visa. Some countries such as the Philippines also implement a departure tax for their own citizens. Indonesia previously implemented a departure tax of IDR1,000,000 (around USD100 in 2011) for its citizens exiting the country via air travel; the tax was converted to an additional fee to be paid with every international travel ticket purchased in 2014. Singapore (Enlistment Act (Chapter 93)) requires any male person who is a citizen or permanent resident of Singapore and who is not less than 13 years of age but less than 16 years and 6months of age, not leave or remain outside Singapore (3 months or longer) [ ] Singapore Exit Permit General Information unless he is in possession of a valid Exit Permit (Section 32(1)), and shall return to Singapore before the expiry of the period for which he was allowed to stay outside Singapore (Section 32(2)). If the child remains overseas for more than 2 years or if the child is already older than 16.5 years and remaining overseas for more than 3 months, a bond in the form of a Banker's Guarantee of S$75,000 or 50% of the combined annual gross income of both parents for the preceding year, whichever is higher, is required. Any child within or outside Singapore who contravenes this law shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding SGD2,000 (Section 32(3)). Each parent or guardian within or outside Singapore of the child shall be also be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding SGD2,000 (Section 32(4)).  Any non-compliance of this Act shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding SGD10,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years or both.[ ] Singapore - Enlistment Act (Chapter 93) (see also National service in Singapore). Guatemala requires any person who is a permanent resident to apply for a multiple 5-year exit visa. Henley & Partners annually compiles a Visa Restrictions Index, which ranks countries according to openness of their visa restrictions and visa requirements. The index is based on the International Air Transport Association database. The World Tourism Organization in its Visa Openness Report concluded that the 30 countries whose citizens were least affected by visa restrictions in 2015 were (based on the data compiled by the UNWTO, based on information from national official institutions): The world average score in 2015 was 89, among advanced economies the average score was 154 and among emerging economies, 73 (Russia scored 93, India 50 and China 46).       Country Total(excl. electronic visas) Visa-free Visa on arrival Electronic visas Notes  Afghanistan 0  Albania 78 78  Algeria 10 10  Angola 2 1 1  Antigua and Barbuda 99 99  Argentina 78 78 0 3  Armenia 136 49 87  Australia 1 1 0 36+9+146  Azerbaijan 24 9 15  Bahamas 120 120  Bahrain 69 5 64  Bangladesh 174+ 25 All-20 Limited VOA locations.  Barbados 106 106  Belarus 17 17  Belize 97 97  Benin 18 18  Bhutan 3 3  Bolivia 174+ 50 124+  Bosnia and Herzegovina 78 78  Botswana 96 96  Brazil 74 74  Brunei 57 51 6  Burkina Faso 61 16 45  Burundi 194+ 4 190+ Limited VOA locations.  Cambodia 184+ 8 All-10  Cameroon 5 5  Canada 51 51  Cape Verde 194+ 19 All  Central African Republic 13 13  Chad 13 11 2  Chile 89 87 2  China 9 9  Colombia 95 95  Comoros 194+ 0 All  Republic of the Congo 13 0 13  Democratic Republic of the Congo 6 3 3  Costa Rica 89 89  Côte d'Ivoire 20 20  Cuba 19 19  Djibouti 194+ 0 All  Dominica 192+ All-2  Dominican Republic 76 8 68  Ecuador 185+ All-9  Egypt 9+ 9 N/A  El Salvador 86 86  Equatorial Guinea 1 1  Eritrea 3 2 1  Ethiopia 39 2 37 Limited VOA locations.  Fiji 106 106  Gabon 4 3 1 191  Gambia 129 125 4  Georgia 94 94  Ghana 24 18 6  Grenada 115 109 6  Guatemala 84 84  Guinea 21 21  Guinea-Bissau 194+ 14 180+  Guyana 47 47  Haiti 191+ All-2  Honduras 84 84  Hong Kong 148 148  India 3 3 0 113 Limited e-Tourist Visa locations.  Indonesia 90 90 (75) Limited locations.  Iran 184+ 10 174+  Iraq 3 1 2  Ireland 89 58 +31 EU/EEA/CH citizens.  Israel 95 95  Jamaica 115  Japan 67 67  Jordan 133 10 123 Limited VOA locations.  Kazakhstan 35 35  Kenya 43 43 0 All-16  Kiribati 68 68  North Korea 2 2  South Korea 113 113  Kuwait 58 5 53  Kyrgyzstan 81 61 20  Laos 175+ 11 All-30  Lebanon 86 7 79 Entry is prohibited for holders of any passport regardless of nationality bearing a stamp or visa issued by Israel  Lesotho 49 49  Liberia 16 16  Libya 3 3  Macedonia 84 84  Madagascar 194+ 0 All  Malawi 165 34 131  Malaysia 164 162 2  Maldives 194+ 0 All  Mali 20 20  Marshall Islands 87 3 84  Mauritania 194+ 194+  Mauritius 177 111 66  Mexico 65 65  Micronesia 194+ 194+  Moldova 67 67  Mongolia 23 23  Montenegro 79 79  Morocco 66 66  Mozambique 194+ 8 All Limited VOA locations.  Myanmar 3 3 102  Namibia 52 52  Nauru 16 0 16  Nepal 184+ 1 183+ Limited VOA locations.  New Zealand 60 60  Nicaragua 167 94 73  Niger 19 19  Nigeria 20 19 1  Oman 70 5 65  Pakistan 7 7  Palau 192+ 34 158+  Panama 118 118  Papua New Guinea 70 0 70  Paraguay 62 57 5  Peru 96 96  Philippines 157 157  Qatar 43 6 37 Limited VOA locations.  Russia 38 38  Rwanda 17 4 13 194+  Saint Kitts and Nevis 101 101  Saint Lucia 147 93 54  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 186+ 0 All-8  Samoa 194+ All  São Tomé and Príncipe 45 45 0 149+  Saudi Arabia 5 5  Schengen areaEncompasses Schengen member states - Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland as well as Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania and countries without border controls - Monaco, San Marino, Vatican and a country accessible only via Schengen area - Andorra. 86 54 32 EU/EEA/CH citizens.  Senegal 108 39 69  Serbia 71 71  Seychelles 194+ 1 All  Sierra Leone 15 15  Singapore 161+ 161+  Solomon Islands 78 0 78  Somalia 194+ 0 194+  South Africa 76 76  South Sudan 4 0 4  Sri Lanka 3 3 0 191+  Sudan 7 2 5  Suriname 57 20 37  Swaziland 95 95  Syria 0  Tajikistan 88 9 79  Tanzania 170+ 6 All-24  Thailand 75 56 19  Timor-Leste 194+ 30 All Limited VOA locations.  Togo 194+ 14 164+  Tonga 67 30 37  Trinidad and Tobago 104 102 2  Tunisia 90 90 +11 for organized groups.  Turkey 78 78 0 44 e-Visas can also be obtained on arrival for a higher cost.  Turkmenistan 0  Tuvalu 194+ 0 All  Uganda 194+ 33 161+  Ukraine 68 63 5  United Arab Emirates 52 40 12  United Kingdom 88 57 4 +31 EU/EEA/CH citizens.  United States 4 4 0 38  Uruguay 73 73  Uzbekistan 9 9  Vanuatu 100 100  Venezuela 71 71  Vietnam 23 23  Yemen 12 0 12  Zambia 133 41 92  Zimbabwe 100 41 59 Rank Country Number of countries and territories which can be entered without a visa (or that issue a visa on arrival) by a citizen of the respective country 1 ,   173 2 , ,   172 3 , , , , , , ,  171 4 , , &nbsp;New Zealand, ,  170 5 , , &nbsp;Singapore,   169 6 168 7 ,  167 8 ,  164 9 ,  163 10 162 Rank Country Mobility index (out of 215 with no visa weighted by 1, visa on arrival weighted by 0.7, eVisa by 0.5 and traditional visa weighted by 0) 1 , , , , , ,  160 8 ,  , , ,  159 14 , , , , , ,  158 21 , ,  157 24 ,  156 26 , ,  155 29 ,  154 Airside transit visa, required by some countries for passing through their airports even without going through passport control. Crew member, steward or driver visa, issued to persons employed or trained on aircraft, vessels, trains, trucks, buses and any other means of international transportation, or ships fishing in international waters. Private visa, for private visits by invitation from residents of the visited country. Tourist visa, for a limited period of leisure travel, no business activities allowed. Visa for medical reasons, for undertaking diagnostics or a course of treatment in the visited country's hospitals. Business visa, for engaging in commerce in the country. These visas generally preclude permanent employment, for which a work visa would be required. Working holiday visa, for individuals traveling between nations offering a working holiday program, allowing young people to undertake temporary work while traveling. Athletic or artistic visa, issued to athletes and performing artists (and their supporting staff) performing at competitions, concerts, shows and other events. Cultural exchange visa, usually issued to athletes and performing artists participating in a cultural exchange program. Refugee visa, issued to persons fleeing the dangers of persecution, a war or a natural disaster. Student visa, which allows its holder to study at an institution of higher learning in the issuing country. Temporary worker visa, for approved employment in the host country. These are generally more difficult to obtain but valid for longer periods of time than a business visa. Examples of these are the United States' H-1B and L-1 visas. Depending on a particular country, the status of temporary worker may or may not evolve into the status of permanent resident or to naturalization. Journalist visa, which some countries require of people in that occupation when traveling for their respective news organizations. Countries which insist on this include Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, the United States (I-visa) and Zimbabwe. Residence visa, granted to people obtaining long-term residence in the host country. In some countries, such as New Zealand, long-term residence is a necessary step to obtain the status of a permanent resident. Asylum visa, issued to people who have suffered or reasonably fear persecution in their own country due to their political activities or opinion, or features, or association with a social group; or were exiled from their own country. Spouse visa or partner visa, granted to the spouse, civil partner or de facto partner of a resident or citizen of a given country to enable the couple to settle in that country. Marriage visa, granted for a limited period before intended marriage or civil partnership based on a proven relationship with a citizen of the destination country. For example, a German woman who wishes to marry an American man would obtain a Fiancée Visa (also known as a K-1 visa) to allow her to enter the United States. A K1 Fiancée Visa is valid for four months from the date of its approval.U.S. Department of State, K-1 Fiancée Visa Pensioner visa (also known as retiree visa or retirement visa), issued by a limited number of countries (Australia, Argentina, Thailand, Panama, etc.), to those who can demonstrate a foreign source of income and who do not intend to work in the issuing country. Age limits apply in some cases. Diplomatic visas are normally only available to bearers of diplomatic passports. Courtesy visas are issued to representatives of foreign governments or international organizations who do not qualify for diplomatic status but do merit expedited, courteous treatment - an example of this is Australia's Special purpose visa. Almost all countries will consider issuing a visa (or another document to the same effect) on arrival to a visitor arriving in unforeseen exceptional circumstances, for example: Under provisions of article 35 of the Schengen Visa Code, a visa may be issued at a border in situations such as the diversion of a flight causing air passengers in transit to pass through two or more airports instead of one. In 2010, Iceland's Eyjafjallajökull volcano erupted, causing significant disruption of air travel throughout Europe, and the EU responded by announcing that it would issue visas at land borders to stranded travelers. Under section 212(d)(4) of the Immigration and Naturalization Act, visa waivers can be issued to travelers arriving at USA ports of entry in emergency situations or under other conditions. Certain international airports in Russia have consuls on-duty, who have the power to issue visas on the spot. Some countries issue visas on arrival to special categories of travelers, such as seafarers or air crew. Some countries issue them to regular visitors; however, there often are restrictions, for example: Belarus issues visas on arrival in Minsk international airport only to nationals of countries where there is no consular representation of Belarus. Thailand only issues visas on arrival at certain border checkpoints. The most notable crossing where visas on arrival are not issued is the Padang Besar checkpoint for passenger trains between Malaysia and Thailand. Russia issues visas on arrival for short visits to its Western exclave, Kaliningrad oblast. Australia pioneered electronic visa issuance with the Electronic Travel Authority for tourists, and is also issuing the eVisitor for European tourists and businessmen. Recent changes in immigration law mean that almost all visas (including those for permanent residency) are issued electronically by default unless a label is required (for example to board an aircraft). New Zealand is now also issuing some visas electronically. The United States has a similar internet system called Electronic System for Travel Authorization (or ESTA), but this is a security pre-screening only and does not technically qualify as a visa under US immigration law. Turkey issues electronic visas as of April 2013 (certain African countries are eligible only if using Turkish Airlines) through the Republic of Turkey Electronic Visa Application System.e-Visa is ready to be downloaded!Electronic Visa Application System Cambodia issues electronic visas to most visitors through their eVisa system.eVisa São Tomé and Príncipe issues electronic visas to all passengers through the eVisaST system. Rwanda issues electronic visas. Myanmar issues electronic visas. Sri Lanka is issuing electronic visas through the Electronic Travel Authorization system to certain eligible countries. Armenia is issuing electronic visas to certain eligible countries. Singapore is issuing electronic visas to certain eligible countries.Submission of Application for Visa Electronically (SAVE), Government of Singapore Bahrain issues electronic visas to nationals of certain eligible countries. India issues electronic visas to nationals of certain eligible countries. has committed fraud, deception or misrepresentation in his or her current application as well as in a previous application has obtained a criminal record, has been arrested, or has criminal charges pending is considered to be a threat to national security does not have a good moral character has previous visa/immigration violations (even if the violations didn't happen in the country the applicant is seeking a visa for) had their previous visa application(s) or application for immigration benefits refused and cannot prove that the reasons for the previous refusals no longer exist or are not applicable any more (even if the refusals didn't previously happen in the country the applicant is seeking a visa for) cannot prove to have strong ties to their current country of nationality and/or residence (for those who are applying for temporary or non-immigrant visas) intends to reside or work permanently in the country she/he will visit if not applying for an immigrant or work visa respectively fails to demonstrate intent to return (for non-immigrants) fails to provide sufficient evidence/documents to prove eligibility for the visa sought after does not have a legitimate reason for the journey has no visible means of sustenance does not have travel arrangements (i.e. transport and lodging) in the destination country does not have a health/travel insurance valid for the destination and the duration of stay is applying on excessively short notice without an exceptionally justifiable reason is a citizen of a country to which the destination country is hostile has previously visited, or intends to visit, a country to which the destination country is hostile has a communicable disease, such as tuberculosis has a passport that expires too soon didn't use a previously issued visa at all without a valid reason (e.g., a trip cancellation due to a family emergency) All citizens of European Union and EFTA member countries can travel to and stay in all other EU and EFTA countries without a visa. See Four Freedoms (European Union) and Citizenship of the European Union. The United States Visa Waiver Program allows citizens of 38 countries to travel to the USA without a visa (although a pre-trip entry permission, ESTA, is needed).https://esta.cbp.dhs.gov/esta/WebHelp/ESTA_Screen-Level_Online_Help_1.htm#vwp3 Any Gulf Cooperation Council  (GCC) citizen can enter and stay as long as required in any other GCC member state. All citizens of members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), excluding those defined by law as undesirable aliens, may enter and stay without a visa in any member state for a maximum period of 90 days. The only requirement is a valid travel document and international vaccination certificates.ECOWAS Official Site Nationals of the East African Community member states do not need visas for entry into any of the member states.Tanzanian Embassy in FranceUgandan VisaKenya High Commission Official site Some countries in the Commonwealth do not require tourist visas of citizens of other Commonwealth countries. Citizens of member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations do not require tourist visas to visit another member state, excluding Burma, where its citizens are required to have a visa to enter seven of the ten ASEAN member states: the exceptions to this are Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines.  ASEAN citizens are entitled to use the Burmese visa on arrival facility. Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member states mutually allow their citizens to enter visa-free, at least for short stays. There are exceptions between Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, and between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Nepal and India allow their citizens to enter, live and work in each other's countries due to the Indo-Nepal friendship treaty of 1951. Indians do not require a visa or passport to travel to Bhutan and are only required to obtain passes at the border checkpoints, whilst Bhutan nationals are authorised to enter India without a visa but with a valid passport. being a low security risk for the country potentially granting visa-free entry diplomatic relationship between two countries conditions in the visitor's home country as compared to the host country having a low risk of overstaying or violating visa terms in the country potentially granting visa-free entry the Schengen Visa covers most of the European Economic Area, plus several other adjacent countries. The visa allows a tourist, family or business visitor access to the area covered by the agreement (known as the “Schengen Area” or “Schengenland”, currently consisting of 26 countries) for a maximum period of 90 days within a 180-day period (the issuing embassy will determine the actual length of time permitted to the visitor). Those who require a visa to enter the Schengen area, are simply required to get only the common Schengen Visa from the embassy or consulate of any of the Schengen countries. After that, they may visit any or all of the Schengen countries as tourists or for business. They are not required to get separate visas for all the Schengen countries they wish to visit.  If an alien is visiting multiple countries in the Schengen zone, he typically applies in the embassy/consulate of his main destination country (i.e., in case of tourism, where he plans to stay the longest, or for multiple purposes where the main purpose of the visit will be carried out).  A Schengen visa is typically not valid for long term stays nor for visits to overseas territories of Schengen states. the Central American Single Visa (Visa Única Centroamericana) was implemented by the CA-4 agreement between Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua. It is required for citizens of all other countries, eliminating the need for separate entry visas for each of the countries. Persons entering the region on Type "B" visas can enter the area through any Port of Entry. Persons entering on Type "C" visas (issued through prior consultation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) must enter through a Port of Entry in the country that issued the visa. Once a person has been admitted, they may travel onto any of the other countries and are allowed to stay through the date authorized at the original Port of Entry. An East African Single Tourist Visa is under consideration by the relevant sectoral authorities under the East African Community (EAC) integration program. If approved the visa will be valid for all three partner states in the EAC (Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi). Under the proposal for the visa, any new East African single visa can be issued by any partner state's embassy. The visa proposal followed an appeal by the tourist boards of the partner states for a common visa to accelerate promotion of the region as a single tourist destination and the EAC Secretariat wants it approved before November's World Travel Fair (or World Travel Market) in London.Single East African visa for tourists coming in November When approved by the East African council of ministers, tourists could apply for one country's entry visa which would then be applicable in all regional member states as a single entry requirement initiative.East Africa geared for single tourist entry visa program  This is considered also by COMESA. The SADC UNIVISA (or Univisa) has been in development since Southern African Development Community (SADA) members signed a Protocol on the Development of Tourism in 1998. The Protocol outlined the Univisa as an objective so as to enable the international and regional entry and travel of visitors to occur as smoothly as possible.Southern Africa Tourism News It was expected to become operational by the end of 2002.SADC moves fast to stamp in univisa Its introduction was delayed and a new implementation date, the end of 2006, was announced.Southern African Migration Project (SAMP) - Queen's University However, the SADC now aims to have the univisa system in place by 2008, before the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.countdown Single visa proposed for southern Africa for 2010Peace Parks Foundation SADC univisaSABCnews.com - Single Visa to be launched for Southern AfricaSADC – SpeechesSADC media releases The univisa was originally intended to only be available, initially, to visitors from selected “source markets” such as Australia, the Benelux countries, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Spain, the United Kingdom and the USA. It is now expected that when the Univisa is implemented, that it will apply to non SADC international (long-haul) tourists traveling to and within the region and that it will encourage multi - destination travel within the region. It is also anticipated that the univisa will unlock the tourism potential of trans frontier parks by lowering the boundaries between neighboring countries in the parks. The visa is expected to be valid for all the countries with trans frontier parks (Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe) and some other SADC countries (Angola and Swaziland). The ASEAN common visa scheme is considered when the labor union goes into effect in 2016 (being delayed a year); however, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, and Myanmar are opting in earlier.  After talk about a CLMV common visa, with Thailand being left out, Thailand has initiated and begun implementation of a trial common visa with Cambodia, but cited security risks as the major hurdle; the trial run has been delayed.  Thailand has implemented a single visa scheme with Cambodia beginning December 27, 2012 on a trial basis. A Gulf Cooperation Council single visa has been recommended as a study submitted to the council. The Pacific Alliance, that currently consists of Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, offer a common visa for tourism purposes only in order to make it easier for nationals from countries outside of the alliance to travel through these countries by not having to apply for multiple visas. The CARICOM Visa was introduced in late 2006 and allowed visitors to travel between 10 CARICOM member states (Antigua & Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago). These ten member countries had agreed to form a "Single Domestic Space" in which travelers would only have their passport stamped and have to submit completed, standardized entry and departure forms at the first port and country of entry. The CARICOM Visa was applicable to the nationals of all countries except CARICOM member states (other than Haiti) and associate member states, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the overseas countries, territories or departments of these countries. The CARICOM Visa could be obtained from the Embassies/Consulates of Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago and in countries which have no CARICOM representatives, the applications forms could be obtained from the embassies and consulates of the United Kingdom. The common visa was only intended for the duration of the 2007 Cricket World Cup and was discontinued on May 15, 2007. However, discussions are ongoing into instituting a revised CARICOM visa on a permanent basis in the future. A predecessor of the Schengen common visa was the Benelux visa. Visas issued by Belgium, Netherlands and Luxemburg were valid for all the three countries. U.S. Permanent Resident/Resident Alien Card (Form I-551); U.S. Military ID Cards when traveling on official orders; U.S. Merchant Mariner Card; NEXUS Card; U.S. Travel Document: Refugee Travel Document (Form I-571); or Permit to Re-Enter (Form I-327) Emergency Travel Document (e.g. Consular Letter) issued by a Foreign Embassy or Consulate specifically for the purpose of travel to the bearer's home country. Nationals of Mexico holding one of the following documents: (expired) "Matricula Consular"; or Birth Certificate with consular registration; or Certificate of Nationality issued by a Mexican consulate abroad; or Certificate of Military Duty (Cartilla Militar); or Voter's Certificate (Credencial IFE or Credencial para Votar). Visa fraud Electronic Travel Authority (Australia) Electronic System for Travel Authorization (US) Entry certificate United States Department of State, "Report of the Visa Office", Visa Office, Immigrant Visa Control and Reporting Division United States Department of State, Nonimmigrant Visa Statistics
