     Wah Yan College, Hong Kong (WYHK; demonym: Wahyanite, pl.: Wahyanites) is a grant-in-aid secondary school in Hong Kong. Founded on 16 December 1919 by Tsui Yan Sau Peter (1889–1980), it is now a Roman Catholic secondary school for boys run by the Chinese Province of the Society of Jesus. Fully subsidised by the Government of Hong Kong, it is a grammar school using English as the medium of instruction. It is often revered by the local community, together with its brother school Wah Yan College, Kowloon, as one of the most elite and prestigious boys' schools in Hong Kong. It has an enrolment of approximately 800 students with 60 teachers and Irish Jesuit Fathers.  The Supervisor of the school is Rev. Fr. Stephen Chow, S.J., who is an alumnus of the school, a Roman Catholic Jesuit priest, and an educational psychologist. The current principal of the school is Dr. So Ying Lun, who is an alumnus and a former teacher of the school.  Dr. So has a PhD from The University of Hong Kong and an MBA from The Chinese University of Hong Kong. The school was founded by Tsui Yan Sau Peter on 16 December 1919 on the 3rd and 4th floors of 60 Hollywood Road, which houses the Kung-Lee sugar cane juice store (公利真料竹蔗水) and is listed as a Grade II Historic Building. On the first day of school there were only four students. In subsequent years, the school also used 54A Peel Street and 33 Mosque Junction as campuses. As the number of students rose, the school moved to a new campus at 2 Robinson Road (the present site of Bishop Lei Int'l House and Raimondi College) after Lunar New Year 1921. On 1 October 1922 the school was listed as a Grant-in-aid school. In 1924 a new branch, now known as Wah Yan College, Kowloon, was established. A hostel in Wah Yan opened in 1927. That same year the first Irish Jesuit Fr John Neary came to Wah Yan and taught religious studies. In the early days of Wah Yan, the grades were not named Forms 1–7 but Classes 1–8. The "classes" were numbered in reverse order: Class 1 was equivalent to today's Form 6 (the equivalent for Form 7 did not exist at that time), Class 6 was equivalent to today's Form 1 and Class 8 was equivalent to our Primary 5.   In 1932 the school was transferred to the Society of Jesus, after a long series of negotiations between the original administration and the Jesuit fathers. The transfer was completed on 31 December, and Fr Gallagher, S.J., replaced Lim Hoi Lan as the headmaster. The school was also given a new name: College of Christ the King. In 1933, the College published the first volume of its yearbook, The Star. A house system was introduced in 1934. In 1940 the hostel was closed down. In December 1941, with the invasion of Hong Kong by Japanese troops, classes were suspended. Fr Gallagher and Fr McAsey were interned by the Japanese. During the War, Wah Yan continued operations in Macau for a period of time.Wah Yan History Review 1  There was another Wah Yan set up during the occupation (called "Wah Yan Chung Hok", meaning Wah Yan middle school) but it closed down shortly before the war ended. After the Japanese troops surrendered, the school reopened on 8 September 1945. Later in the year, Wah Yan Middle School was re-established as the Chinese stream of the school. In March 1946, the Wah Yan Dramatic Society, consisting mainly of alumni of the school and Wah Yan College, Kowloon, commenced activities, and was officially founded the following year. Its first production was "The Thrice Promised Bride". A night school was started on 17 February 1948. The next year, an afternoon school opened. In 1950 the Chinese stream of the school was closed down. In 1951, the classes were renamed "forms": Class 1 became Form 6, Class 2 became Form 5, and so on. Class 7 and Class 8 were renamed Primary 6 and 5 respectively. In 1952 the afternoon school was also closed. In 1954, construction for a new campus at Mount Parish, Wan Chai started. On 27 September 1955 the new campus was formally opened by Sir Alexander Grantham, then Governor of Hong Kong. The school newspaper, "Starlet", was established in 1964. In 1971, Wah Yan College, Hong Kong helped to manage the then Pun U Primary School while the Pun U Association remaining the school sponsoring body.  The primary school was renamed Pun U Association Wah Yan Primary School, and was established as the feeder primary school. The night school was closed in 1984.  The streaming to Arts and Science began in Form 4 in 1986. On 12 April 1987, the Gordon Wu Hall to the north of the main building was opened.  In the same year Wah Yan achieved its first "10 A's" in the HKCEE examinations. On 8 May 1992, heavy rainfall caused a severe landslide at the junction of Kennedy Road and Queen's Road East.  It killed the driver of a passing car.  The landslide caused the laboratory block to sink.  Cracks were found in the playground and a crack in the classroom block had to be covered with stainless steel plates.  In the same year three Wah Yan students achieved "10 As" in the HKCEE.  Six classrooms (2H, 2K, 4H, 4K, 6S2, 7A) were demolished in 1993 as a result of the landslide.  They were rebuilt and were reopened in 1998.History of Wah Yan – Timeline  The first version of the school website was set up by Dr Ashley Cheng in 1994. In 1997, the Parent-Teacher Association was established.  In 1998, all classrooms were fitted with air-conditioning. There had been plans to redevelop the school since 1995. However, the initial plans were aborted due to lack of funds and local law restrictions on architecture. In 2001 the Education and Manpower Bureau planned to upgrade all existing schools in Hong Kong to millennium standard, and the College successfully applied for part of the necessary funds for redevelopment. The School Development Project (SDP) was formally launched on 26 January 2003, and works were officially started on 25 May 2003 with the demolition of the old music room block. The original aims of the SDP were to: The total cost of the SDP was estimated to be HK$104m. It was to be carried out in three phases: Funding for Phase 1 is by the Hong Kong Government's Quality Education Fund and the School Improvement Programme. Funding for Phases 2 and 3 are by fund-raising campaigns hosted by the school. Phases 1 and 2 (New Annex) have already been completed and formally opened on 31 January 2006 by Mr Donald Tsang, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong. Phase III consists of a new school hall annex with a much larger hall that can accommodate all the students in the school. The annex will also house five extra classrooms and a lecture theatre. Phase III was originally estimated to be completed by December 2006; however, lack of funds greatly delayed the completion time. In the summer of 2011, works for Phase III finally started while fund-raising is still in progress. Donors are urged to contact the former principal, Mr Tam Siu Ping, George, directly as the college is still sourcing funding. The old school hall has already been demolished.  It is contemplated that the new school hall complex will be completed in early 2014.Wah Yan College, Hong Kong School Development Project According to the school's mission statement, Wah Yan aims to develop each student in each of the following areas: moral, intellectual, physical, social, aesthetic and spiritual, based on Jesuit educational practice and Chinese tradition.School Mission at the home page of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong. Wahyan.edu.hk. The school formally adopted the Vision of Jesuit education in 2008.The College. Web.wahyan.edu.hk (16 December 1919).   The campus at 281 Queens Road East, Wan Chai has an area of about 20,000 m² (220,000 square feet), located on a small hill known as Mount Parish. It was designed by the late Professor Gordon Brown, the founder of the Architecture Faculty of Hong Kong University. Completed in 1955, the school has seven main buildings: The Classroom Block, Laboratory Block and Administration Wing are linked together. Since the campus' completion in 1955, it has undergone three major changes: the addition of Gordon Wu Hall in 1987, the reconstruction of six classrooms from 1992–98, and the School Development Project launched in 2003. The school have rebuilt the hall into a 5-storey complex, with a much larger hall which will be able to hold all the students at the same time (the demolished hall could only accommodate about 500 students). On 20 September 2014, the School Hall Complex Opening Ceremony was held. As at the 2012-2013 school year, Wah Yan College has 25 classes: four each in Form 1 to Form 3, Form 5 and Form 6, named "W", "Y", "H", "K" (for "Wah", "Yan", "Hong" and "Kong" respectively) and - to better care for senior secondary classes - starting from 2012-2013, five classes in Form 4, named "W", "Y", "C", "H", "K" (where "C" is for "College"). In the coming years, all senior secondary are to have five classes. By 2014-2015, there are 27 classes in the college. There is no streaming in Forms 1, 2 and 3. A mixed-ability mode is adopted in learning and teaching. Students with different academic abilities are allotted evenly across the classes. Students of Forms 1 and 2 study English Language, Chinese Language, Mathematics, Chinese History, History, Geography, Computer Literacy, Integrated Science, Music, Physical Education, Putonghua, Visual Arts, Life Education/Religious Formation and Ignatian Value Education. Form 1 and 2 students also study Life and Society. Form 3 students study English Language, Chinese Language, Mathematics, Chinese History, History, Geography, Computer Literacy, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Music, Physical Education, Putonghua, Visual Arts, Liberal Studies, Life Education/Religious Formation and Ignatian Value Education. Students of Forms 4 to 6 are grouped into different classes according to the optional subjects taken. All students will study courses in English Language, Chinese Language, Mathematics, Liberal Studies (the four core compulsory subjects for Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education Examination), Aestheic Education (Music and Visual Arts), Physical Education, Life Education/Religious Formation and Ignatian Value Education. In addition, students are required to take three elective subjects for the HKDSE examination. Students can choose among Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Chinese History, Geography, History, Economics, "Business, Accounting and Financial Studies" (BAFS), Information and Communication Technology, Music and "Ethics and Religious Studies" (ERS). Students can also choose to study either Module 1 (Calculus and Statistics) or Module 2 (Calculus and Algebra) of the Mathematics curriculum. Music (HKDSE), which may be chosen on top of the three elective subjects, is taught outside normal school timetable. Starting from the academic year 2009–2010, the school provides a new curriculum for senior students in conjunction with the planned educational reform by the Hong Kong Government. The HKDSE subjects that are now offering are Chinese Language, English Language, Mathematics, Liberal Studies, Chinese History, Economics, Ethics and Religious Studies, Geography, History, Biology, Chemistry, Physics, 'Business, Accounting & Financial Studies', Music, and 'Information & Communication Technology'. Music, Art, Ignatian Value Education, and also Religious Formation, Life Education or Moral & Civic Education will be offered as non-examination subjects. School statistics show that many of its students participate in overseas exchange programmes organised and subsidised by the school.  Many go on to further their studies overseas on a more permanent basis.  The most popular destinations are the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia and Canada.  To assist such students, teachers of the Careers and Further Studies Committee write reference letters and testimonials.  The chairlady of the Committee is Miss H.W. Ng, also the chairlady of the BAFS panel.  Wah Yan also has a Post-secondary Education Trust Fund.  Six scholarships and grants, each worth more than HK$300,000 per year (or up to HK$1,200,000 per grant), are awarded to suitable Wah Yan students for overseas undergraduate studies every year.  Some of the sponsors are themselves former scholarship beneficiaries.Wah Yan College Scholarship schemes. Wahyan.edu.hk (12 May 2008). Extracurricular activities are divided into groups A and B. Group A contains school organisations and clubs/societies operated by students. Group B contains Catholic organisations, sport teams and other unclassified organisations. Each student may participate in four Group A activities at most. The maximum number of Group B activities that a student may join is left to the discretion of the teacher advisers and parents concerned. The Student Association of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong is empowered by current students, with the approval of the School Authorities (the School Authorities refer to the Principal, Assistant Principals, the teacher advisers and the Board of the Extra-curricular Activities of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong) through yearly Student Association election. The Student Association (SA) is a non-profit making body, which aims to promote the welfare of the students of WYCHK and thus to serve the whole student body. The SA allows the students to participate in the administration of the school in matters concerning their welfare. The primary function of the SA is the organisation and coordination of all students; and arrangement of extra-curricular activities in the school.The Constitution of The Student Association of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong Located on the second floor of the Francis H B Wong Teaching Building, the Wu Jieh Yee Library of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong was opened in 2005 with the opening of this new annex. The Prefects' Board is an independent organisation under direct delegation of the Principal.There is a delegation ceremony in every September during the Assembly, introducing the school year's Committee Members.   http://www.wyavtv.org/video/20090903/september-assembly-junior (Wah Yan Star Studio Archive)  The Prefects' main duties include maintaining discipline at school and promoting harmony among Wahyanites.  Prefects' Board runs a committee system directed under the Head Prefect. The board is also responsible for coordinating all internal and external functions held by the school.  Every year, approximately 70 prefects are divided into five groups, each with their respective group leaders.  Prefects have rights to issue warning slips according to the seriousness of the offence.According to the student handbook Eng. Version, P.8 [Penalties] Five outstanding prefects are elected each year based on their general routine and external duties performances. In the academic year 2015-2016, the number to school prefects has reduced to approximately 50 students since the Board's direction has changed to concern quality over quantity. A Self Recommendation System will also be introduced to recruit more Prefects into the Board. There are 1-2 development workshops each school year, aiming to enhance the readiness and qualities of prefects. Before summer, there is also a Prefect Training Camp, to prepare Probationary Prefects and the new cabinet of Committee Members for the challenges they will face in the upcoming school year. There are four houses in Wah Yan. Each house has their own colour.  Students entering the school are each allocated permanently into one of the four houses, based on which class the student is allocated to.  Students are mixed up into different classes the following year. The school song was composed around 1960 by Sr. Carmela Santos, a Sister of St Paul de Chartres (SPC) originally from the Philippines. The lyrics were written by Fr. Patrick McGovern, S.J., who was a teacher in Wah Yan and then a member of the Legislative Council.School Song Wah Yan College, Hong Kong. Wahyan.edu.hk. [ ] Official link: http://www.wahyan.edu.hk/about/school_song/school_song.html "This is the dear school where we learn how to treasure And keep for a lifetime all that's noble and true, To serve the Lord God in the love of our neighbour, O Wah Yan, we are proud of and grateful to you. In all that we do whether duty or pleasure, we count not the cost, but unselfishly strive, What's mean and unmanly we shun with displeasure, Come praise or come blame, we hold our heads high. Old Boys of Wah Yan cherish fond recollections Of those who here taught us the best things to choose; Home of our friendships, our hopes, and affections, O Wah Yan all our lives we'll be worthy of you." The badge of the school is divided into four quarters by a cross in red, set on a blue background. The cross symbolises the love of Jesus Christ for mankind, and the blue background symbolises the sea which surrounds Hong Kong. Five stars are set on the badge, one in each quarter and the remaining one is at the centre of the cross. According to the school, the stars symbolise either the ideas of virtue, wisdom, sportsmanship, co-operation and elegance (), or the ideas of benevolence, justice, courtesy, wisdom and faith (). Name Period Mr Tsui Yan Sau Peter 1919–1926 Mr Lim Hoy Lam Andrew 1926–1932 Fr Gallagher, S.J. 1932–1940 Fr Bourke, S.J. 1940–1948 Fr Cooney, S.J. 1948–1951 Fr Carroll, S.J. 1951–1956 Fr Barrett S.J. 1956–1962 Fr Foley, S.J. 1962–1968 Fr Alfred J Deignan, S.J. 1968–1970 Fr Barrett, S.J. (2nd time) 1970–1982 Fr Reid, S.J. 1982–1985 Fr Baptista, S.J. 1985–1988 Fr Coghlan, S.J. 1988–1996 Mr Tam Siu Ping George 1996–2013 Dr So Ying Lun 2013- House Named after Representative Colour Berchmans Saint John Berchmans Red Xavier Saint Francis Xavier Green Kostka Saint Stanislaus Kostka Blue Loyola Saint Ignatius of Loyola White Name Chinese Name Description Donald Tsang Yam Kuen GBM JP KBE 曾蔭權 Former Chief Executive of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) Anthony Cheung Bing Leung BBS, JP 張炳良 Current Secretary of the Transport and Housing Bureau, the former president of the Hong Kong Institute of Education; member of the Executive Council of Hong Kong Stephen Lam Sui-lung JP 林瑞麟 Former Chief Secretary for Administration (formerly Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs) of Hong Kong Michael Suen Ming-yeung  GBS, JP 孫明揚 Former Secretary for Education of Hong Kong Joseph Wong Wing Ping 王永平 Former Secretary for Commerce, Industry and Technology of Hong Kong; former Secretary for the Civil Service of Hong Kong Vincent Fang 方剛 Current Hong Kong Legislative Councillor, Member of the Hong Kong Liberal Party, CEO of Toppy (Hong Kong) Limited Charles Mok 莫乃光 Current Hong Kong Legislative Councillor (of the Information Technology Functional Constituency) for the Hong Kong Legislative Council.; Chairperson of Internet Society Hong Kong Chapter Aron Kwok Wai-keung 郭偉強 Current Hong Kong Legislative Councillor for the Labour (constituency) since Hong Kong legislative election, 2012, representing the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Wu King-cheung 胡經昌 Former Legislative Council member Wong Sing-wah 黃星華 Retired Government official, former head of Education Department Wu Wai-yung 鄔維庸 Former representative of Hong Kong in the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China 徐家祥 First Chinese Administrative Officer of Hong Kong Jonathan Choi Chung Hang 蔡宗衡 Founding member of Andrew Wong Wang Fat JP 黃宏發 The last President of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong during British rule Chui Kam 徐淦 Former Minister of Broadcasting Li Fook-shum 李福深(琛) Former Chairman of Hong Kong Jockey Club; Former Chairman of the Board of Kowloon Dairy Ltd. Chau Cham Son, OBE, LLD, JP 周湛燊 Former Deputy Chairman of Hong Kong Jockey Club; former Chief Commissioner of The Scout Association of Hong Kong; Justice of the Peace; Registered Architect; Registered town planner; Authorised Person Leslie Wah-Leung Chung 鍾華亮 Member of the Hong Kong Volunteers Defence Corps (義勇軍), wounded in action at Lei Yue Mun Fort (鯉魚門炮台), during the Japanese invasion in December 1941.  President of the Hong Kong Chinese Civil Servants’ Association 香港政府華員會 (1965–68), with  contribution to the establishment of equal pay for men and women, including the right for married women to be permanent employees.Toronto SUN. M.torontosun.com.Celebrating two lives well lived : Featured OTT : Videos. Ottawasun.com (6 April 2012).Connor, Kevin. (7 April 2012) Life, love and service | Toronto & GTA | News. Toronto Sun.曾參與二戰及香港保衛戰華裔夫婦.加美軍方墓前致最高敬意_星島日報_加拿大多倫多中文新聞網。 Canada Toronto Chinese newspaper. News.singtao.ca.世界日報電子報 – World Journal ePaper. Epapertor.worldjournal.com.明報新聞網海外版 – 加東版(多倫多) – Canada Toronto Chinese Newspaper – 社區新聞. Mingpaotor.com.Rebecca Chan Chung, Deborah Chung and Cecilia Ng Wong, "Piloted to Serve", 2012Piloted to Serve. Facebook (25 August 2012). Ho Sai Chee 何世柱 Former Legislative Council member Name Chinese Name Description Mr Justice Patrick Chan GBM NPJ 陳兆愷 Non-Permanent Judge of the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong; Life Member of the Hong Kong Bar Association; Recipient of the Grand Bauhinia Medal Mr Justice Barnabas Fung 馮驊 Judge of the Court of First Instance of the High Court of Hong Kong Mr Justice Godfrey Lam 林雲浩 Judge of the Court of First Instance of the High Court of Hong Kong; President of the Competition Tribunal of Hong Kong Dr Patrick Yu Shuk Siu 余叔韶 Barrister-at-Law, the first Chinese Crown Counsel and Life Member of the Hong Kong Bar Association Jason Pow, SC 鮑永年 Prominent Senior Counsel, and a Recorder (Part Time Judge) of the Court of First Instance of the High Court of Hong Kong Eugene Fung, SC 馮庭碩 Prominent Senior Counsel, and a Deputy (Temporary) Judge of the Court of First Instance of the High Court of Hong Kong Paul Lam, SC 林定國 Prominent Senior Counsel, and a Deputy (Temporary) Judge of the Court of First Instance of the High Court of Hong Kong Kwan Cheuk Yin 關卓然 Solicitor; Founder and Current Managing Partner of Woo, Kwan, Lee & Lo Solicitors Name Chinese Name Description Wu Ting Yuk JP 胡定旭 Chairman of the Hong Kong Hospital Authority; former Chairman of Ernst & Young Far East and former Chairman of Ernst & Young Hong Kong/China Ho Siu-wai 何兆煒 Former Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Hospital Authority Tam Kwong Hang 譚廣亨 Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University of Hong Kong, Chair Professor of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Jane Wyatt Granville 簡悅威 Former American president of the Chinese Institute of Biological Sciences, Life Sciences, the first Shaw Prize winner Choa Wing Yip 蔡永業 The founding dean of the Faculty of Medicine of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, former Director of Health; former president of the Mental Health Association of Hong Kong Thomas Tsang 曾浩輝 Former Controller of the Centre of Health Protection, Department of Health 梁柏賢 Former Deputy Director of the Department of Health Chung Sheung Chee 鍾尚志 Former dean of the Faculty of Medicine of the Chinese University of Hong Kong; one of the SARS heroes Lee Kin-hung 李健鴻 Member of the Council of the University of Hong Kong; former Chairman of the Hong Kong Medical Council David Fang 方津生 Prominent orthopaedic surgeon, The Chairman of the Trust Fund for SARS, Medical Superintendent of St. Paul's Hospital, Hong Kong Leung Ping Chung 梁秉中 Founding Chairman of Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology and Director of National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong; Chairman of Operation Concern; Deputy to The National People's Congress Ng Man Lun 吳敏倫 Retired Professor of Psychiatry, University of Hong Kong; one of the most outstanding yet most controversial figures in sex education in Hong Kong Name Chinese Name Description Hacken Lee 李克勤 Singer-songwriter-actor Joe Nieh 倪震 Writer, DJ, founder of Yes! magazine, husband of famous actress and singer Vivian Chow Kevin Cheng 鄭嘉穎 Hong Kong singer-actor Julian Cheung Chi Lam 張智霖 Hong Kong singer-actor. Dexter Young 楊天經 Hong Kong singer-actor, son of well-known Hong Kong actress Connie Chan Jaycee Chan 房祖名 Hong Kong singer-actor, son of prominent kung-fu movie star Jackie Chan Terence Yin 尹子維 Hong Kong actor-singer, member of the ALIVE Band. Wah Yan Primary Xiao Liang 蕭亮 Senior broadcaster, actor Zheng Junli Mian 鄭君綿 Singer, actor Paul Chun 秦沛 Senior actor Michael Leung 梁繼璋 Deputy Director of Radio Television Hong Kong, DJ Ben To 杜浚斌 DJ, singer Wayne Kwok 郭偉安 DJ Wai Kee Shun 韋基舜 Prominent sports commentator 李我(李晚景) Senior broadcaster, writer Tam Wai Keun 譚偉權 Actor Hon Chi Fun]] 韓志勳 Painter Tony Sai Kit Woo 胡世傑 Radio chair James Sai-sang Yuen 阮世生 Director and scriptwriter So Yiu-chung 蘇耀宗(細蘇) DJ of 903, MC, dubber David Lo 盧大偉 Presenter Patrick Tam Kar-Ming 譚家明 Film Director; One of the major figures of Hong Kong New Wave; 26th Hong Kong Film Award for Best Director (After This Our Exile (父子)); Associate Professor, The School of Creative Media, City University of Hong Kong Leon Ko 高世章 Composer for musical theatre and films; Winner of 2001 Richard Rodgers Development Award for Heading East, 2003, 2006, 2009 and 2010 Hong Kong Drama Awards for his four Cantonese musicals The Good Person of Szechwan (四川好人), The Legend of the White Snake (白蛇新傳), Field of Dreams (頂頭鎚) and The Passage Beyond (一屋寶貝), and a Golden Horse Award for Best Original Film Song for Perhaps Love (如果·愛) Ricky Lam 林立基 Composer for pop music; Winner of CASH 2010 for 第五季 Name Chinese Name Description Alfred Chuang 莊思浩 CEO of BEA Systems Sir Gordon Wu 胡應湘 Co-founder (the other co-founder was his father, Wu Chung) of Hopewell Holdings Limited (合和實業有限公司) Philip Chen 陳南祿 Former CEO of Cathay Pacific Lawrence Ho 何猷龍 CEO of Melco PBL Entertainment (Macau) Limited. Wah Yan Primary. Yau Mok Shing 邱木城 Businessmen, Regal, the former Chairman of the Tung Wah Group of Hospitals Prescriptions – Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission, the accounting firm Masilun Marseille senior partner, and vice president of the Hong Kong Society of Accountants Fong Hup 方俠 Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing director of the Hong Kong experienced accountants Arthur Shek Kang Chuen 石鏡泉 Executive Director of the Hong Kong Economic Times Holding Limited Kwan Chiu Yin, Robert, MA, JP 關超然 Cheung Kong (Holdings) Independent Non-executive Director, former Chairman of the Ocean Park Corporation, former Chairman of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu – Sociedade de Auditores Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, former Independent Non-executive Directors of CK Life Sciences International (Holdings) Corporation, , Melco International Development Limited and Shun Tak Holdings Limited, all being listed companies, Justice of the Peace Wu Po Kong, Patrick, JP 伍步剛 Former Vice Chairperson of Wing Lung Bank Ltd., Vice Chairman of the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers, Honorary Chairman of the Hong Kong Scout Association, as of February 2009 the 17th richest man in Hong Kong according to Forbes magazine, Justice of the Peace 羅鼎威 JL Capital Pte Ltd, Managing Director 丘銘劍 Parkson Group non-executive director Name Chinese Name Description Yu Kwok-Fan 余國藩 Former Professor at the University of Chicago Wong Chin-wa 黃展華 Teacher, Creator of the Chinese Opera in English 呂大樂 Hong Kong University professor of sociology, columnist Ng Chun-Hung 吳俊雄 Hong Kong University associate professor of sociology Lee Yeuk-Siu 李煜紹 Hong Kong University associate professor of geography Dr. John K Tan 陳岡 Former Chief Curriculum Development Officer (Liberal Studies/ Cross-curricular Studies) of Education Bureau; Former Principal of Valtorta College; Editor of WYHEUR; Former Principal of Wah Yan College, Kowloon; Current Principal of Pun U Association Wah Yan Primary School Rev. Fr. Stephen Chow, S.J. 周守仁 Honorary Assistant Professor at the University of Hong Kong's Faculty of Education; Roman Catholic Jesuit priest; Supervisor of Wah Yan College, Hong Kong as well as Wah Yan College, Kowloon Name Chinese Name Description Dominic Tang Yee-ming, S.J. 鄧以明 Last Roman Catholic Archbishop of Canton, spent twenty-two years in jail for his loyalty to the Roman Catholic Church Name Chinese Name Description Patrick Chan Nim-Tak  JP 陳念德 Former Director of General Grades of Hong Kong Ng Yook Man 吳煜民 Writer Lai Wai Chung 黎偉聰 Writer, university lecturer Johnny Li Khai-kam 李啟淦 Swimmer representing Hong Kong at the 1984 and 1988 Summer Olympics Charles Mok 莫乃光 Current Hong Kong Legislative Councillor (of the Information Technology Functional Constituency) for the Hong Kong Legislative Council.; Chairperson of Internet Society Hong Kong Chapter Eric Wong 黃家賜 Former Program Director of the Public Safety Program for the New York City Police Department Yip Kam-haw Paul 葉金豪 Winner of the HK$250,000 cash prize in ATV's TV game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? Upgrade the school campus to millennium standards Provide extra classrooms required by the "through-train" education mode Construct a new assembly hall that can accommodate all students at the same timeSDP Brochure   Rebuilding the existing music room into a 6-storey multi-use complex. The cost was HK$38.9m. Extension of Phase 1. The cost was HK$4.82m. Rebuilding the hall. This phase has yet to be completed and the cost is estimated to be HK$57m. WYHK counts five winners of the Hong Kong Outstanding Students Awards,Past Winners of the Hong Kong Outstanding Students Awards. Youtharch.org.hk. ranking 16th (tied with La Salle College,   Madam Lau Kam Lung Secondary School of MFBM, and Queen Elizabeth School) among all secondary schools in Hong Kong. The Red Cross cadet group of the College has secured first place in the annual drill competition for 7 years consecutively since 2003. Wah Yan College, Hong Kong's Scout Group (15th Hong Kong Group) won the prestigious Carlton Trophy in 1982, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, 2004 and 2008. In 2007 the student organisation of the College participated in the Lunar New Year Stall Competition co-organised by Shell and the Hong Kong Youth Federation, and won the grand prize of $10,000.Mingpao, 營「宵」有道 華仁生奪獎, 19 March 2007 (From Yahoo! News)  Classroom Block (partly reconstructed after a landslide in 1992) Laboratory Block Administration Wing Chapel Hall Gordon Wu Hall (completed in 1987) SIP Building, or New Annex (completed in 2005 as phases I and II of the School Development Project) Wah Yan College, Kowloon Wah Yan College Cats Wah Yan One Family Foundation Education in Hong Kong List of buildings and structures in Hong Kong List of schools in Hong Kong School homepage Wah Yan College Hong Kong Wu Jieh Yee Library Wah Yan International Network Wah Yan (Hong Kong) Past Students Association Ricci Hall, University of Hong Kong Dr. Rev. Fr. Stephen Chow, S.J., B.A., M.A., M.S.O.D., Ed.D. 
