 The Waldensians (also known variously as Waldenses (), Vallenses, Valdesi or Vaudois) are a Christian movement and religious cultural group which appeared first in Lyon and spread to the Cottian Alps in the late 1170s. Today, the Waldensian movement is centered on Piedmont in northern Italy, while small communities are also found in southern Italy, Argentina, Germany, the United States, and Uruguay. The movement originated in the late twelfth century as the Poor Men of Lyons, a band organized by Peter Waldo, a wealthy merchant who gave away his property around 1173, preaching apostolic poverty as the way to perfection. Waldensian teachings quickly came into conflict with the Roman Catholic Church. By 1215, the Waldensians were declared heretical and subject to intense persecution; the group was nearly annihilated in the seventeenth century and were confronted with organized and generalized discrimination in the centuries that followed. During the sixteenth century, Waldensian leaders embraced the Protestant Reformation and joined various local Protestant regional entities. As early as 1631, Protestant scholars–and Waldensian theologians themselves–began to regard the Waldensians as early forerunners of the Reformation who had maintained the apostolic faith in the face of Catholic oppression. Modern Waldensians share core tenets with Reformed Protestants, for example, including the priesthood of all believers, congregational polity, and a "low" view of certain sacraments such as the Lord's Supper and Baptism. They are members of the Leuenberger Konkordie (Community of Protestant Churches in Europe) and its affiliates worldwide. Congregations continue to be active in Europe, South America, and North America, most of them under the label of the Waldensian Evangelical Church, but also within various German Landeskirchen. Organizations such as the American Waldensian Society maintain the history of this movement and declare they take as their mission "proclaiming the Christian Gospel, serving the marginalized, promoting social justice, fostering inter-religious work, and advocating respect for religious diversity and freedom of conscience." Waldensians held and preached a number of truths as they read from the Bible. These included: They held that temporal offices and dignities were not meant for preachers of the Gospel; that relics were simply rotten bones which had belonged to one knew not whom; that to go on pilgrimage served no end, save to empty one's purse; that flesh might be eaten any day if one's appetite served one;  that holy water was not a whit more efficacious than rain water; and that prayer in a barn was just as effectual as if offered in a church. They were accused, moreover, of having scoffed at the doctrine of transubstantiation, and of having spoken blasphemously of the Roman Catholic Church as the harlot of the Apocalypse.Inquisitor Reyenerious, AD 1250, and extracted by Allix (Chap. 22) They rejected the perceived idolatry of the Roman Catholic Church and considered the Papacy as the Antichrist of Rome.Historical Studies,” Eugene Lawrence, pp. 202-204. The "La nobla leyczon", written in the Occitan language and dated between 1190 and 1240,Bosio, Enrico: La Nobla Leyczon considérée au point de vue de la doctrine, de la morale et de l'histoire, Bulletin de la Société d'Histoire Vaudoise, n° 2 (dic. 1885), pp. 20–36. gives a sample of the medieval Waldensian belief. It is housed at University of Cambridge. According to legend, Waldo renounced his wealth as an encumbrance to preaching.Liber visionum et miraculorum, Anonymous Chronicles of Laon Because of the shunning of the wealth of the Roman Catholic Church clergy, the movement was early known as The Poor of Lyon and The Poor of Lombardy. The Waldensian movement was characterized from the beginning by lay preaching, voluntary poverty, and strict adherence to the Bible. Between 1175 and 1185, Peter Waldo either commissioned a cleric from Lyons to translate the New Testament into the vernacular—the Arpitan (Franco-Provençal) language—or was himself involved in this translation work. In 1179, Waldo and one of his disciples went to Rome, where Pope Alexander III and the Roman Curia welcomed them. They had to explain their faith before a panel of three clergymen, including issues which were then debated within the Church, such as the universal priesthood, the gospel in the vulgar tongue, and the issue of voluntary poverty. The results of the meeting were inconclusive, and the Third Lateran Council in the same year condemned Waldo's ideas, but not the movement itself; the leaders of the movement had not yet been excommunicated. The Waldensians proceeded to disobey the Third Lateran Council and continued to preach according to their own understanding of the Scriptures. By the early 1180s, Waldo and his followers were excommunicated and forced from Lyon. The Roman Catholic Church declared them heretics, stating that the group's principal error was contempt for ecclesiastical power. Rome also accused the Waldensians of teaching innumerable errors.Rosalind B. Brooke (1975) The Coming of the Friars, pp.72–73 (NY: Barnes and Noble) Waldo and his followers developed a system whereby they would go from town to town and meet secretly with small groups of Waldensians. There they would confess sins and hold service. A traveling Waldensian preacher was known as a barba. The group would shelter and house the barba and help make arrangements to move on to the next town in secret.Comba, Emilio (1978) History of the Waldenses of Italy, from their origin to the Reformation, AMS Press, New York ISBN 978-0-4041-6119-4 Waldo possibly died in the early 13th century, possibly in Germany; he was never captured, and his fate remains uncertain. Early Waldensians belonged to one of three groups:Herbermann, Charles George (1913) The Catholic Encyclopedia, p. 250. Universal Knowledge Foundation They were also called Insabbatati, Sabati, Inzabbatati Sabotiers—designations arising from the unusual type of sabot they used as footwear.Herzog, Johann Jakob; Schaff, Philip (1910) The new Schaff-Herzog encyclopedia of religious knowledge, Funk and WagnallsSpini, G (1994) I Valdesi e la non-osservanza del Sabato, Lecture delivered at Waldensian College, RomeGoldastus (German Calvinisitc historian AD 1576–1635) Some historians feel their beliefs came from missionaries from the early church and their history is founded perhaps in the apostolic age.Historical Studies,” Eugene Lawrence, p. 199. The Roman Inquisitor Reinerus Sacho writing c. 1230 held the sect of the Vaudois to be of great antiquity, thus long preceding Waldo by centuries. In the Waldensians, Sabbatati or Insabbatati, there was a more or less continuous tradition of Sabbath-keeping from the early church of the Apostles, throughout southern Europe. There are also account of Paulicians, Petrobusians, Pasaginians along with the Waldenses of the Alps, who kept the Saturday for the Lord's day(General History of the Baptist Denomination, Vol. II, p. 413).  which was in conflict with the change to Sunday held by the Roman Catholic Church. The Sabbatati were known also by the name Pasigini. In reference to the Sabbath-keeping Pasigini, one scholar wrote: "The spread of heresy at this time is almost incredible. From Bulgaria to the Ebro, from Northern France to the Tiber, everywhere we meet them. Whole countries are infested, like Hungary and southern France; they abound in many other countries; in Germany, in Italy, in the Netherlands and even in England they put their efforts." (Gesch. der Ketzer, 1,13,14). Another scholar, Bonacursus, also wrote against them: "Not a few, but many know what are the errors of those who are called Pasigini. ... First, they teach that we should obey the sabbath. Furthermore, to increase their error, they condemn and reject all the church Fathers, and the whole Roman Church".(D'Archery, Spicilegium I, f, 211-214; Muratory Antiq. medævi. 5, f, 152, Hahn 3, 209). In Spain the persecution was directed at the Waldensian Sabbath-keepers.Marianæ, Præfatio in Lucam Tudenæm found in Macima Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum, Vol. 25, p. 90 Unfortunately, "our current knowledge of the history of the Waldensians in the Middle Ages is almost exclusively tributary of the sources coming from the official Roman Church", the body that was condemning them as heretics.p. 66. Pita, Gonzalo. 2014. Waldensian and Catholic Theologies of History in the XII-XIV Centuries: Part I. Journal of the Adventist Theological Society 25.2: 65-87. Because of "the documentary scarcity and unconnectedness from which we must draw the description of of Waldensian beliefs,"p. 87. Pita, Gonzalo. 2014. Waldensian and Catholic Theologies of History in the XII-XIV Centuries: Part I. Journal of the Adventist Theological Society 25.2: 65-87.  much of what is known about the early Waldensians comes from reports like the Profession of faith of Valdo of Lyon (1180);  Durando d'Osca (ca. 1187–1200) Liber antiheresis; and the Rescriptum of Bergamo Conference (1218). Earlier documents that provide information about early Waldensian history include the Will of Stefano d'Anse (1187); the Manifestatio haeresis Albigensium et Lugdunensium (ca 1206–1208); and the Anonymous chronicle of Laon (ca 1220). There are also the two reports written for the Inquisition by Reinerius Saccho (died 1259), a former Cathar who converted to Catholicism, published together in 1254 as Summa de Catharis et Pauperibus de Lugduno ("On the Cathars and the Poor of Lyons"). The Roman Catholic Church viewed the Waldensians as unorthodox, and in 1184 at the Synod of Verona, under the auspices of Pope Lucius III, they were excommunicated. Pope Innocent III went even further during the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, officially denouncing the Waldensians as heretics. In 1211 more than 80 Waldensians were burned as heretics at Strasbourg, launching several centuries of persecution that nearly destroyed the movement.Ellwood, Robert S. and Gregory D. Alles, eds. (2007) The Encyclopedia of World Religions, p. 471. Infobase Publishing, New York In 1487 Pope Innocent VIII issued a bull for the extermination of the Vaudois. Alberto de' Capitanei, archdeacon of Cremona, responded to the bull by organizing a crusade to fulfill its order and launched an offensive in the provinces of Dauphiné and Piedmont. Charles I, Duke of Savoy, eventually interfered to save his territories from further turmoil and promised the Vaudois peace, but not before the offensive had devastated the area and many of the Vaudois had fled to Provence and south to Italy. The noted theologian Angelo Carletti di Chivasso, who was in 1491 appointed Apostolic Nuncio and Commissary by Innocent VIII, conjointly with the Bishop of Mauriana, was involved in reaching the peaceful agreement between Catholics and Waldensians.Donovan, Stephen. "Bl. Angelo Carletti di Chivasso." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 10 Dec. 2014 When the news of the Reformation reached the Waldensian Valleys, the Tavola Valdese decided to seek fellowship with the nascent Protestantism. A meeting held in 1526 in Laus, a town in the Chisone valley, and decided to send envoys to examine the new movement. In 1532 they met with German and Swiss Protestants and ultimately adapted their beliefs to those of the Reformed Church. The Swiss and French Reformed churches sent William Farel and Anthony Saunier to attend the meeting of Chanforan, which convened on 12 October 1532. Farel invited them to join the Reformation and to emerge from secrecy. A Confession of Faith, with Reformed doctrines, was formulated and the Waldensians decided to worship openly in French. The French Bible translated by Pierre Robert Olivétan with the help of Calvin and published at Neuchâtel in 1535 was based in part on a New Testament in the Waldensian vernacular. The churches in Waldensia collected 1500 gold crowns to cover the cost of its publication.Wylie, (p. 62)   Outside the Piedmont, the Waldenses joined the local Protestant churches in Bohemia, France, and Germany. After they came out of seclusion and reports were made of sedition on their part, French King Francis I issued on 1 January 1545 the "Arrêt de Mérindol", and assembled an army against the Waldensians of Provence. The leaders in the 1545 massacres were Jean Maynier d'Oppède, First President of the parlement of Provence, and the military commander Antoine Escalin des Aimars who was returning from the Italian Wars with 2,000 veterans, the Bandes de Piémont. Deaths in the Massacre of Mérindol ranged from hundreds to thousands, depending on the estimates, and several villages were devastated.R.J. Knecht (1984) Francis I, Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-0-5212-4344-5 The treaty of 5 June 1561 granted amnesty to the Protestants of the Valleys, including liberty of conscience and freedom to worship. Prisoners were released and fugitives were permitted to return home. But despite this treaty, the Vaudois, with the other French Protestants, still suffered during the French Wars of Religion during 1562–1598. As early as 1631, Protestant scholars began to regard the Waldensians as early forerunners of the Reformation, in a similar manner to how the followers of John Wycliffe and Jan Hus—who were also persecuted by authorities—were viewed. Although the Waldensian church was granted some rights and freedoms under French King Henry IV, with the Edict of Nantes in 1598, persecution rose again in the 17th century, with an extermination of the Waldensians attempted by the Duke of Savoy in 1655. This led to an exodus and dispersion of the Waldensians to other parts of Europe and even to the Western hemisphere. In January 1655, the Duke of Savoy commanded the Waldensians to attend Mass or remove to the upper valleys of their homeland, giving them twenty days in which to sell their lands. Being in the midst of winter, the order, of course, was intended to persuade the Vaudois to choose the former; however, the bulk of the populace instead chose the latter, abandoning their homes and lands in the lower valleys and removing to the upper valleys. It was written that these targets of persecution, including old men, women, little children and the sick "waded through the icy waters, climbed the frozen peaks, and at length reached the homes of their impoverished brethren of the upper Valleys, where they were warmly received." By mid-April, when it became clear that the Duke's efforts to force the Vaudois to conform to Catholicism had failed, he tried another approach. Under the guise of false reports of Vaudois uprisings, the Duke sent troops into the upper valleys to quell the local populace. He required that the local populace quarter the troops in their homes, which the local populace complied with. But the quartering order was a ruse to allow the troops easy access to the populace. On 24 April 1655, at 4 a.m., the signal was given for a general massacre. The Duke's forces did not simply slaughter the inhabitants. They are reported to have unleashed an unprovoked campaign of looting, rape, torture, and murder. According to one report by a Peter Liegé: This massacre became known as the Piedmont Easter. An estimate of some 1,700 Waldensians were slaughtered; the massacre was so brutal it aroused indignation throughout Europe. Protestant rulers in northern Europe offered sanctuary to the remaining Waldensians. Oliver Cromwell, then ruler in England, began petitioning on behalf of the Waldensians; writing letters, raising contributions, calling a general fast in England and threatening to send military forces to the rescue. (The massacre prompted John Milton's famous poem on the Waldenses, "On the Late Massacre in Piedmont".) Swiss and Dutch Calvinists set up an 'underground railroad' to bring many of the survivors north to Switzerland and even as far as the Dutch Republic, where the councillors of the city of Amsterdam chartered three ships to take some 167 Waldensians to their City Colony in the New World (Delaware) on Christmas Day 1656.Scharf, Thomas J. (1888)  History of Delaware, 1609–1888, L.J. Richards & Co., Philadelphia Vol. 1 Vol. 2 Those that stayed behind in France and the Piedmont formed a guerilla resistance movement led by a farmer, Joshua Janavel, which lasted into the 1660s. In 1685 Louis XIV revoked the 1598 Edict of Nantes, which had guaranteed freedom of religion to his Protestant subjects in France.  French troops sent into the French Waldensian areas of the Chisone and Susa Valleys in the Dauphiné caused the "conversion" of 8,000 Vaudois to accept Catholicism and another 3,000 to leave for Germany. In the Piedmont, the cousin of Louis, the newly ascended Duke of Savoy, Victor Amadeus II, followed his uncle in removing the protection of Protestants in the Piedmont. In the renewed persecution, and in an echo of the Piedmont Easter Massacre of only three decades earlier, the Duke issued an edict on 31 January 1686 that decreed the destruction of all the Vaudois churches and that all inhabitants of the Valleys should publicly announce their error in religion within 15 days under penalty of death and banishment. But the Vaudois remained resistant. After the 15 days, an army of 9,000 French and Piedmontese soldiers invaded the Valleys against the estimated 2,500 Vaudois, but found that every village had organized a defense force that kept the French and Piedmontese soldiers at bay. On 9 April, the Duke of Savoy issued a new edict, enjoining the Waldensians to put down their arms within eight days and go into exile between 21 and 23 April. If able, they were free to sell their land and possessions to the highest bidder. Waldensian pastor Henri Arnaud (1641-1721, who had been driven out of the Piedmont in the earlier purges, returned from Holland. On 18 April he made a stirring appeal before an assembly at Roccapiatta, winning over the majority in favor of armed resistance. When the truce expired on 20 April, the Waldensians were prepared for battle. They put up a brave fight over the next six weeks. But when the Duke retired to Turin on 8 June, the war seemed decided: 2,000 Waldensians had been killed; another 2,000 had "accepted" the Catholic theology of the Council of Trent. Another 8,000 had been imprisoned, of which more than half would die of deliberately imposed starvation, or of sickness within six months. But about two or three hundred Vaudois fled to the hills and began carrying out a guerilla war over the next year against the Catholic settlers that arrived to take over the Vaudois lands.  These "Invincibles" continued their assaults until the Duke finally relented and agreed to negotiate. The "Invincibles" won the right for the imprisoned Vaudois to be released from prison and be provided safe passage to Geneva. But the Duke, granting that permission on 3 January 1687, required that the Vaudois leave immediately or convert to Roman Catholicism.  This edict led to some 2,800 Vaudois leaving the Piedmont for Geneva, of which only 2,490 would survive the journey. From Geneva, Arnaud sought help from William of Orange, who with other European leaders had become fed up with the militarism of French King Louis XIV and formed the League of Augsburg in 1686 to counter the French King's territorial ambitions. William was receptive to his entreaties and decided to include the Waldensian exiles in his war campaign.  In the midst of the wars between the League of Augsburg and France in August 1689, Arnaud led 1,000 Swiss exiles, armed with modern weaponry provided by the Dutch, back to the Piedmont. Over 30% of the force perished during the 130-mile trek. They successfully re-established their presence in the Piedmont and drove out the Catholic settlers, but they continued to be besieged by French and Piedmontese troops. By 2 May 1689, with only 300 Waldensian troops remaining and cornered on a high peak, called the Balsiglia, by 4,000 French troops with cannons, the final assault was delayed by storm and then by cloud cover. The French commander was so confident of completing his job the next morning that he sent a message to Paris that the Waldensian force had already been destroyed. However, when the French awoke the next morning they discovered that the Waldensians, guided by one of their number familiar with the Balsiglia, had already descended from the peak during the night and were now miles away. The French pursued, but only a few days later a sudden change of political alliance by the Duke, from France to the League of Augsburg, ended the French pursuit of the Waldensians. The Duke agreed to defend the Waldensians and called for all other Vaudois exiles to return home to help protect the Piedmont borders against the French, in what came to be known as the "Glorious Return".Stephens, Prescot  (1998) The Waldensian Story: A Study in Faith, Intolerance and Survival, Book Guild, Lewes, Sussex ISBN 978-1-8577-6280-8  After the French Revolution, the Waldenses of Piedmont were assured liberty of conscience and, in 1848, the ruler of Savoy, King Charles Albert of Sardinia granted them civil rights. Enjoying religious freedom, the Waldensians began migrating outside their valleys. By the time of Italian unification, the Waldensian had congregations throughout the peninsula, some originated by preaching, others by migration.Giorgio Spini (1971) L'Evangelo e il berretto frigio (Storia del movimento evangelico in Italia, Vol. I), Claudiana, Turin  However, poverty, societal discrimination, and demographic pressure led the Waldensians to emigrate, first as seasonal workers to the French Riviera and Switzerland, and later to Colonia Valdense in Uruguay and ultimately, to the United States.Watt, George B. (1941) Waldenses in the New World, Duke University Press, Durham, NC Those who remained in Italy have experienced  social ascension. Waldensian companies dominated Turin's chocolate industry for the latter half of the nineteenth century and are generally credited with the invention of gianduja (hazelnut chocolate).Bächstädt-Malan Camusso, Christian (2002) "Per Una Storia dell'Industria Dolciaria Torinese: il Caso Caffarel",  p.63, Doctoral thesis (Economics and Business), Universitá degli Studi di Torino Waldensian scholarship also flourished in the nineteenth century. Copies of the Romaunt version of the Gospel of John were preserved in Paris and Dublin. The manuscripts were used as the basis of a work by Gilly published in 1848, in which he described the history of the New Testament in use by the Waldensians.Gilly, William S. (1848) The Romaunt Version of the Gospel according to St. John, John Murray, London  The Waldensian College began training ministers in 1855, first in Torre Pellice. A few years later, the Waldensian College relocated to Florence and, in 1922, to Rome. Economic and social integration have eased acceptance of ethnic Waldensians into Italian society. Writers like Italo Calvino and politicians like Domenico Maselli and Valdo Spini are of Waldensian background. The church has also attracted intellectuals as new adherents and supporters, like the philosopher Gianni Vattimo and enjoys significant financial support from non-adherent Italians. In 2015 after a historic visit to a Waldensian Temple in Turin, Pope Francis, in the name of Roman Catholic Church, asked Waldensian Christians for forgiveness for their persecution. The Pope apologized for the Church's "un-Christian and even inhumane positions and actions".  The present Waldensian Church considers itself to be a Protestant church of the Reformed tradition originally framed by Huldrych Zwingli and John Calvin. It recognizes as its doctrinal standard the confession of faith published in 1655 and based on the Reformed confession of 1559. It admits only two ceremonies, baptism and the Lord's Supper. Supreme authority in the body is exercised by an annual synod, and the affairs of the individual congregations are administered by a consistory under the presidency of the pastor. Over the centuries, Waldensian churches have been established in countries as far away from France as Uruguay and the United States where the active Waldensian congregations continue the purpose of the Waldensian movement. The contemporary and historic Waldensian spiritual heritage describes itself as proclaiming the Gospel, serving the marginalized, promoting social justice, fostering inter-religious work, and advocating respect for religious diversity and freedom of conscience. Today, the Waldensian Church is member of the World Communion of Reformed Churches, the World Methodist Council, the Federation of Evangelical Churches in Italy, and the World Council of Churches. Some early Protestants felt a spiritual kinship to the Waldensians and wrote positively about them. John Milton, for example, wrote in his sonnet "On the Late Massacre in Piedmont" of the 1655 massacre and persecution of the Waldensians. Some Anabaptist and Baptist authors have pointed to the Waldensians as an example of earlier Christians who were not a part of the Roman Catholic Church, and who held beliefs they interpreted to be similar to their own. In the 17th to the 19th centuries Dutch and German Mennonite writers like van Braght,  Martyrs Mirror (1660) and Steven Blaupot ten Cate, Geschiedkundig onderzoek (1844),Steven Blaupot ten Cate (1844) Geschiedkundig onderzoek naar den Waldenzischen oorsprong van de Nederlandsche Doopsgezinden, Frederik Muller, Amsterdam linked Anabaptist origins to the Waldensians. Baptist authors like John L. Waller also linked their origins to the Waldensians.John L. Waller (Jan 1849) "Were the Waldenses Baptists or Pedo-Baptists?", Western Baptist Review, pp. 30–32Brian Tierney (1970) The Middle Ages, Volume 1, p. 223: Sources of Medieval History, New York, Alfred Knopf, Quoted from S.R. Maitland (1832) History of the Albigenses and WaldensesG.H. Orchard (1987) A Concise History of Baptists, p. 180, Texarkana, Bogard PressThomas Armitage (1988) A History of the Baptists, pp. 302–303, Watertown, Wisconsin, Baptist Heritage PressJames Aitken Wylie (1808–1890) likewise believed the Waldensians preserved the apostolic faith and its practices during the Middle Ages.J. A. Wylie (1882) The History of Protestantism Still later, Seventh-day Adventist Ellen G. White taught that the Waldenses were preservers of biblical truth during the Great Apostasy of the Roman Catholic Church. She showed how the Waldenses kept the seventh-day Sabbath, engaged in widespread missionary activity, and "planted the seeds of the Reformation" in Europe. Scholar Michael W. Homer links the belief in an ancient origin of the Waldensians to three 17th century pastors, Jean-Paul Perrin of the Reformed Church of France and the Waldensian pastors Pierre Gilles and Jean Léger, who posited that the Waldensians were descendents of Primitive Christianity. Some authorsWilliam Jones (1832) The History of the Christian Church, The Ages Digital Library try to date a Reformation-era Waldensian confession of faith back into the Middle Ages in 1120 to assert their claim of doctrinal antiquity."La 'Confesion de fe' de los Valdenses llamada del ano 1120" (Aug 1935) Boletin de la Sociedad Sudamericana de Historia Valdense, p.58 However, in the current historiography from the Waldensians themselves it is asserted that this confession was drafted in 1531."La 'Confesion de fe' de los Valdenses llamada del ano 1120", (August 1935) Boletin de la Sociedad Sudamericana de Historia Valdense, p.57-60Vinay, Valdo (December 1972) "Mémoires de George Morel : l'importanza del codice valdese c-5-18 (Ms. 259) del Trinity College di Dublino per la storia dell'adesione dei Valdesi alla Riforma", Bollettino della Società di Studi Valdesi – Bulletin de la Société d'Histoire Vaudoise pp. 93,132. Protestant theology in Germany was interested in the doctrinal antiquity and apostolic continuity being expressed by the Waldensian faith. The high independence of the communities, lay preaching, voluntary poverty and strict adherence to the Bible and its early translation through Peter Waldo have been credited to prove an ancient origin of Protestantism as true interpretation of the faith. As well mere anticatholic sentiments and controversies, e.g. in the Kulturkampf played a role. Heinrich Gottlieb Kreussler (1830) History of the Reformation e.g. contains a ballade about the fate of the Waldensians and quotes 's History of the Waldenians (1750) (authored with Siegmund Jakob Baumgarten, published by Johann Jacob Korn) as proof of rather early origin of the Waldensians.Jean Léger, Siegmund Jacob Baumgartens, Johann Jacob Korn (1750) Algemeine Geschichte der Waldenser oder der evangelischen Kirchen in den Thälern von PiemontHeinrich Gottlieb Kreussler (1830) Rückblicke auf die Geschichte der Reformation, oder, Luther in Leben und That: zur Erinnerung an die dreihundertjährige Augsburgische Confessionssimilar in: F. Bender (1850) Geschichte der Waldenser (Waldensian History) The strong German Protestant support for the Waldensian diaspora community in Italy – leading staff of the Gustavus Adolphus Union (GAW) praised them as one of the most interesting churches of all  – was not confined to a theological fascination. It led to extensive financial support, loans, exchange of priesters and communities, aid missions and political interventions for the Italian Waldensians and their charitable efforts, starting from the 17th century.Barbro Lovisa (1994) Italienische Waldenser und das protestantische Deutschland 1655 bis 1989 ("Italian Waldensianism and protestant Germany 1655 to  1989"), Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen ISBN 978-3-5255-6539-1Paul R. Tarmann (2010) Der Armutsbegriff der Waldenser: eine sozialphilosophische Annäherung, Lang, Frankfurt am Main ISBN 978-3-6316-0203-4  After World War II, the Evangelical Church in Germany actively contributed to reconciliation efforts with Italy and France based on its relationship with the Waldensian community.  The GAW has ongoing cooperations with the Waldensians in Italy.  In 1848, after many centuries of harsh persecution, the Waldensians acquired legal freedom in the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia as a result of the liberalising reforms which followed Charles Albert of Sardinia's granting a constitution (the Statuto Albertino). Subsequently the Waldensian Evangelical Church, as it became known, developed and spread through the Italian peninsula. The Waldensian church was able to gain converts by building schools in some of the poorer regions of Italy, including Sicily. There is still a Waldensian church in the town of Grotte, Province of Agrigento at the southwest part of the island. German Protestants have been supportive of the Waldesians in Italy since the 17th century. During the Nazi occupation of North Italy in the Second World War, Italian Waldensians were active in saving Jews faced with imminent extermination, hiding many of them in the same mountain valley where their own Waldensian ancestors had found refuge in earlier generations.[ ] After 1945, the Evangelical Church in Germany led by Theophil Wurm (who was also Bishop of Württemberg) issued the Stuttgart Declaration of Guilt and actively contributed to reconciliation efforts with Italy (and France) based on relationships with the diaspora. The 1948 centenary festivities of the Savoy civil rights declaration were used for efforts of EKD leading staff to support German Italian reconciliation after WW-II. A most fruitful cooperation was established at the community level, with Waldensian delegates from both sides pioneering. 1949, Guglielmo Del Pesco (1889 - 1951), moderator of the Tavola Valdese (Waldensian round table), was invited back to Maulbronn, celebrating the 250th anniversary of the Waldensian emigration to Germany.  He was unable to come for reasons of health but sent A. Jalla, a teacher, described as being full of spite and hatred against all things German after 1945, but who joined in the effort for reconciliation 1949. Based on these experiences, the first town-twinning partnership between Germany and France was signed 1950 between Ludwigsburg and the Protestant exclave Montbéliard, again based on a special connection of the Württemberg Landeskirche. The German Gustavus Adolphus Union is supportive of Waldesian projects and charitable efforts in Italy till the present.Gustavus Adolphus Union website Common projects (in German) GAW Waldenser entries In 1975 the Waldensian Church joined the Italian Methodist Church to form the Union of Waldensian and Methodist Churches. It has 50,000 members (45,000 Waldensians, of whom 30,000 in Italy and some 15,000 divided between Argentina and Uruguay, and 5,000 Methodists). The Eight per thousand tax introduced 1985 in Italy greatly helped the Waldensian community. The Eight per thousand (Italian: otto per mille) law allows taxpayers to choose to whom they devolve a compulsory 8 ‰ = 0.8% ('eight per thousand') from their annual income tax return. They may choose an organised religion recognised by Italy or a social assistance scheme run by the Italian State.  While the Waldensians have only about 25,000 enlisted members, about 412,000 Italians are willing to support the Waldensian community and its charitable works.2013 Gemeinsame Projektförderung der Waldenser mit dem GAW Gustavus Adolphus Union website 2013   The ordination of women and since 2010 the blessing of same-sex unionsCoppie gay, storica apertura della Chiesa valdese. Ma si aspetta ancora una legge are allowed. The first Waldensian settlers from Italy arrived in South America in 1856. From that date there were several migrations, especially to Argentina, like the southern part of the province of La Pampa in the town of Jacinto Arauz where they arrived around 1901. Today the Waldensian Church of the Río de La Plata (which forms a united church with the Waldensian Evangelical Church) has approximately 25 congregations and 3,000 members shared between Uruguay and Argentina. The Uruguayan town Colonia Valdense, in the department of Colonia, is the administrative center of the Waldensian Evangelical Church of the River Plate. In 1969, the Church established a mission in Barrio Nuevo, which became a soup kitchen for Saturdays and Sundays, for 500 poor families. Missionary activity has led to conversion  of new people without Waldensian ancestry, which they call "new Waldensian". Since colonial times there have been Waldensians who sailed to America, as marked by the presence of them in New Jersey and Delaware. Many Waldensians, having escaped persecution in their homelands by making their way to the tolerant Dutch Republic, went to start anew in the New Netherland colony. In the late 19th century many Italians, among them Waldensians, emigrated to the United States. They founded communities in New York City, Boston, Chicago, Monett, Galveston, Rochester and Ogden. The Monett congregation was among the first to be established in the United States, in 1875, by some 40 settlers who had formed the original South American settlement in Uruguay in the 1850s. With the outbreak of the Uruguayan Civil War they had fled violence in the Uruguayan countryside, traveling first back to Europe then across the Northern Atlantic to New York and by train to southern Missouri.  Waldensians living in the Cottian Alps region of Northern Italy continued to migrate to Monett until the early 1900s, augmenting the original colony, and founded another, larger settlement in Valdese, North Carolina in 1893.  Both the Monett and Valdese congregations use the name Waldensian Presbyterian Church. In 1853 a group of approximately 70 Waldensians, including men, women, and children left their homes in the Piedmont Valleys and migrated to Ogden, Utah, after being converted to Mormonism by Lorenzo Snow. These Waldensians maintained their cultural heritage, while passing on their mixture of Mormon and Waldensian faiths to their descendants. Their descendants still consider themselves both Mormon and Waldensian, and have met occasionally over the many decades to celebrate both heritages. In 1906, through the initiative of church forces in New York City, Waldensian interest groups were invited to coalesce into a new entity, The American Waldensian Aid Society (AWS), organized "to collect funds and apply the same to the aid of the Waldensian Church in Italy and elsewhere … and to arouse and maintain interest throughout the US in the work of said Church." Today, this organization continues as the American Waldensian Society. The American Waldensian Society recently marked its Centennial with a conference and celebrations in New York City. By the 1920s most of the Waldensian churches and missions merged into the Presbyterian Church due to the cultural assimilation of the second and third generations. The work of the American Waldensian Society continues in the United States today. The American Waldensian Society aims to foster dialogue and partnership among Waldensian Churches in Italy and South America and Christian churches within North America in order to promote a compelling vision of Waldensian Christian witness for North America. Thus, the American Waldensian Society makes public the contemporary and historic heritage to which Waldensian spirituality is committed: Tell the Story; Encourage 'Crossings'; and Provide Financial Support. The best known Waldensian Churches in America were in New York, Monett, Missouri and in Valdese, North Carolina. The church in New York City was disbanded by the mid-1990s. The American Waldensian Society assists churches, organizations and families in the promotion of Waldensian history and culture. The society allies with those who work to preserve their millennial heritage among their descendants. For example, over the course of 45 years, the Old Colony Players in Valdese, North Carolina, have staged From this Day Forward, an outdoor drama telling the story of the Waldenses and the founding of Valdese. The Waldensian Presbyterian churches in the United States and the American Waldensian Society have links with the Italian-based Waldensian Evangelical Church, but, unlike the South American Waldensian communities, today they are independent institutions from the European organization. Several thousand Waldenses fled from Italy and France to Germany. Henri Arnaud (1641-1721), pastor and leader of the Piedmont Waldensians, rescued his co-religionists from their dispersion under the persecution of Victor Amadeus II the Duke of Savoy. Eberhard Louis, Duke of Württemberg invited the Waldensians to his territory. When the Waldensians were exiled a second time, Arnaud accompanied them in their exile to Schönenberg, and continued to act as their pastor until his death. Those who remained in Germany were soon assimilated by the State Churches (Lutheran and Reformed) and they are a part of various Landeskirchen in the Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland. The new settlers were free in their religious services, and kept holding them in French till the 19th century. The Waldensian community is often overlooked, as the Hugenots were larger in count. Henri Arnaud's home in Schönenberg close to Ötisheim is a Museum today. A memorial plate refers to the introduction of potatoes in Württemberg by the Waldensians. Main parts of the Waldensian refugees found a new home in Hessen-Darmstadt, Kassel, Homburg, Nassau-Dillenburg and in the then Grand Duchée  Württemberg. The founded new communities in Rohrbach, Wembach und Hahn (today part of Ober-Ramstadt), Walldorf (today Mörfelden-Walldorf), Bad Homburg-Dornholzhausen, Gottstreu and Gewissenruh (Oberweser), Charlottenberg. Still today, French family names (Gille, Roux, Granget, Conle, Gillardon, Common, Jourdan, Piston, Richardon, Servay, Conte, Baral, Gay, Orcellet or Salen) show the Savoyen background. Stuttgart hosts as well an Italian Waldensian community with about 100 members. Municipality names like Pinache, Serres (both now part of Wiernsheim), Großvillars, Kleinvillars (part of Oberderdingen), Perouse show the French heritage, the latter  communities are close to Maulbronn and its UNESCO world heritage site monastery and school. Maulbronn was place of the festivities for the 250th anniversary of the Waldensian emigration to Germany, which played as well an important role in German Italian reconcialiation after WWII. The Waldensian community is active and has various associations maintaining the specific heritage and keep relationships with their counterparts in Italy and South America.Deutsche Waldenservereinigung e.&nbsp;V. German Waldensian associationDeutsche Waldenserorte German Waldensian communities, Website of PalmbachHistorical association "Waldenserort Nordhausen" Evangelische Waldenser-Kirchengemeinde Dornholzhausen That includes as well a close watch on the ecumene, with the Waldesian-influenced theologians being more doubtful about a stronger cooperation with the Catholic Church than others. Waldensian Church at Bobbio, abt. 1895  Church at Torre Pellice, abt. 1895 Waldensian church at Pra Del Torno, abt. 1895 Church in San Giovanni, abt. 1895 Dr. Pons and church front, abt. 1895 Old Ladies Home, Torre Pellice, D. Gay at end. Waldensian Pastor and family at La Serre, abt. 1895 Waldensian men harvesting in the Waldensian Valleys abt. 1895 Waldensian Pastor in his pulpit, abt. 1895  Waldensian Shrine  Seminary at Torre Pellice Scene of Jeneval's victory above Rorà Wall of the citadel above Torre Pellice Joshua Jeneval's Guns, Museum at Torre Pellice, abt. 1895 Saquet's Whirlpool, near Pra Del Torno. Cromwell's Dike. The "Martyr Tree", abt. 1895 Portrait of Joshua Janavel A mountain cottage in the Waldensian Valleys Waldensian Emblem Map of the Waldensian Valley Map showing the location of the Waldensian Valleys       The atoning death and justifying righteousness of Christ The Godhead The fall of man The incarnation of the Son A denial of purgatory as the "invention of the Antichrist"Samuel Moreland (1658) History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont Valued voluntary poverty Sandaliati (those with sandals) received sacred orders and were to prove the heresiarchs wrong Doctores instructed and trained missionaries Novellani preached to the general population Waldensian Evangelical Church Union of Methodist and Waldensian Churches List of Italian religious minority politicians Henri Arnaud, writer, pastor, and soldier Durand of Huesca, early follower of Peter Waldo (later re-converted to Catholicism) Frederick Henry Snow Pendleton, Anglican protector in South America Petr Chelčický and Jan Hus, Czech reformers Audisio, Gabriel (1999) The Waldensian Dissent: Persecution and Survival, c.1170–c.1570, Cambridge Medieval Textbooks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-55984-7 Cameron, Euan  (2001) The Waldenses: Rejections of Holy Church in Medieval Europe ISBN 0-631-22497-1, ISBN 978-0-631-22497-6 Comba, Emilio (1978) History of the Waldenses of Italy, from their origin to the Reformation ISBN 0-404-16119-7 Muston, Alexis (1978) The Israel of the Alps : a complete history of the Waldenses and their colonies : prepared in great part from unpublished documents ISBN 0-404-16140-5 Wylie, James Aitken (c.1860) History of the Waldenses  ISBN 1-57258-185-9 online ebook Arnold, Eberhard (1984) The Early Anabaptists, Plough Publishing House ISBN 978-0-87486-192-1 Bost, Ami (1848) History of the Bohemian and Moravian Brethren, pp.&nbsp;4–5, Religious Tract Society of London Waldensian Families Research, Resources to research Waldensian family history Chiesa Evangelica Valdese – Unione delle chiese metodiste e valdesi, Italy American Waldensian Society, North America Iglesia Valdense, South America Waldensian Evangelical Church – Río de la Plata, South America Waldenses at Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online Waldenservereinigung, Germany Waldensian History, A Brief Sketch, by Ronald F. Malan, M.A. Waldensians: Medieval Reformers, Waldensian history from a Reformed perspective The Waldensians chapter from the book The Great Controversy by Ellen White The Waldensian Movement From Waldo to the Reformation
