     A traffic warning sign is a type of traffic sign that indicates a hazard ahead on the road that may not be readily apparent to a driver. In most countries, they usually take the shape of an equilateral triangle with a white background and a thick red border. However, both the color of the background and the color and thickness of the border varies from country to country. In the People's Republic of China (except for Macau and Hong Kong), warning signs appear with a black border and a yellow background. In Sweden, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Greece, Finland, Iceland, the Republic of Macedonia and Poland, they have a red border with an amber background. The polar bear warning sign in Svalbard recently changed from displaying a black bear on white background to a white bear on black background (both signs are triangular with a red border). Some countries (like France, Norway, Spain) that normally use a white background have adopted an orange or amber background for road work or construction signs. Warning signs in some countries have a diamond shape in place of the standard triangular shape. In the United States, Canada, Mexico, Thailand, Australia, Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, most of South America, and also Ireland (diverging from the standards of the rest of Europe) use warning signs are black on a yellow background and usually diamond-shaped, while temporary signs (which are typically construction signs) are black on an orange background.  Some other countries also use these standards for some signage. The warning signs usually contain a symbol. In Europe they are based on the UNECE Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals. In the United States they are based on the MUTCD standard and often contain text only.  Some of the first roadside signs &mdash;ancient milestones&mdash; merely gave distance measures. Hazard warnings were rare though occasional specimens appeared, such as the specific warning about horse-drawn vehicles backing up which was carved in stone in Lisbon's Alfama neighborhood in 1686.  The early signs did not have high-contrast lettering and their messages might have been easily overlooked. Signs were written in the local language (example);  symbolic signs, though long used on certain tradesmen's signs (like the pawnbrokers' tri-ball symbol) were to be used for traffic only much later in history. Complex signage systems emerged with the appearance of motorcars. In 1908 the automobile association in West London erected some warning signs. In 1909, nine European governments agreed on the use of four pictorial symbols, indicating bump, curve, intersection, and railroad crossing. The intensive work on international road signs that took place between 1926 and 1949 eventually led to the development of the European road sign system. As the 20th century progressed and also as traffic volume and vehicle speeds increased, sign-visibility and nighttime use capability gained significance.  Earlier flat painted signs gave way to signs with embossed letters.  Circa 1940-50 in countries with many vehicles, wording might be spelled out with so-called "button copy" &mdash;letters dotted with reflective glass spheres for night visibility. Button copy signs with plastic pips rather than glass appeared in the 1970s. Flat metal signs reappeared in the 1980s with the widespread use of surfaces covered with retroflective sheeting materials like Scotchlite. In Europe, the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals (which became effective in 1978) tried, among other things, to standardize important signs.  After the fall of the Iron Curtain and greater ease of country-to-country driving in the Eurozone, European countries moved toward lessening the regional differences in warning signs. In modern regulations, U.S. warning signs are classified as Series W signs, such as: W1 Series (curves and turns), W2 Series (intersections), W22 Series (blasting), et cetera, ending with the W25 Series (concerning extended green traffic lights). Some U.S. warning signs are without category while others like the warning stripes at tunnel portals or plain red End of Roadway signs are classified as Object Markers (OM Series). In the U.S., Stop and speed limit signs fall under the R Series (Regulatory). Modern U.S. signs are widely standardized; unless they are antique holdovers from an earlier era, oddities like a yellow Stop sign or a red Slippery When Wet sign would typically appear only on private property &mdash;perhaps at a hospital campus or in a shopping mall parking lot. Street sign theft by pranksters, souvenir hunters, and scrappers has become problematic: removal of warning signs can contribute to traffic collisions and also costs municipalities money to replace lost signs. Some authorities affix  to the back sides of their signs. Some jurisdictions have criminalized unauthorized possession of road signs or have outlawed their resale to scrap metal dealers. In come cases, thieves whose sign-removal lead to road fatalities have been charged with manslaughter. Artistically inclined vandals sometimes paint additional details onto warning signs: a beer bottle, a handgun, or a boom box added to the outstretched hand of the Pedestrian Crossing person, for example.  Warning signs can indicate any potential hazard, obstacle or condition requiring special attention. Some of the most common warning signs are the following. Most common designs" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Diamond-shaped with yellow background and black border Triangular with red border and white background Triangular with red border and yellow background Less common designs" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Diamond-shaped with orange background and black border Diamond-shaped with fluorescent green background and black border Diamond-shaped with fluorescent pink background and black border Diamond-shaped with black background and yellow border Triangular with black border and yellow background Triangular with red border and blue background Red upward-pointing triangle Pentagon with yellow border and black border Pentagon with fluorescent green background and black border Pentagon with blue background and white border Circular with yellow background (Railroad Crossing) Rectangular shape with yellow background (Curve, reduce speed) World map of typical designs in use" widths="550px" heights="220px" perrow="1 Color indicates prevalent type of warning signs in use (click for large image and detailed info key). General warning signs are used in instances in which the particular hazard, obstacle or condition is not covered by a standard sign. In Europe, they usually comprise an exclamation mark on the standard triangular sign (Unicode #9888: ) with an auxiliary sign below in the local language identifying the hazard, obstacle or condition. In countries using diamond-shaped signs, the explanatory language is often written directly on the diamond-shaped sign, although it may contain only a general warning such as "Caution", and pictograms may also be used. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia Belgium Chile China Finland France Germany Ireland Italy Jamaica Japan New Zealand Panama Poland South Korea Sweden United Kingdom Ukraine Diamond-shaped with reflectors are placed at point of curbs, dividers, or other lane obstacles. Rectangular signs with diagonal stripes indicate solid objects such as barricades, bridge abutments, utility poles or natural obstacles near the roadway. Left side obstacles are marked with stripes running high to low, left to right; right side obstacle signs use stripes running high to low, right to left; in a sense akin to International symbol of arrow pointing down toward side toward roadway. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines dual carriageway ahead sign British, Hong Kong & Singapore "end of dual carriageway" sign Australian Divided road ahead sign Australia end divided road sign U.S. and Canada divided road ahead sign Alternate U.S. divided highway ahead sign U.S. divided road ahead sign United States & New Zealand, road diverges/splits New York State pass left or right of obstacle sign Signs may warn of wild animals (moose, bear, elk, deer, reindeer, polar bears, camels, wallabies, kangaroos, alligators, etc.) or farm animals (cows, horses, ducks, sheep) that may stray onto the road. In the United States, a "share the road" plaque is sometimes placed below these warning signs when used in this manner. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines animal crossing sign Kangaroo crossing sign in Australia Brazil wild animals sign Japan animals crossing Italy, Germany and Latvia wild animal crossing sign UK wild fowl warning sign Russia cattle crossing sign Russia wild animal crossing sign Camel warning sign in the UAE A sheep warning sign in the UK Norway reindeer crossing sign Norway polarbear warning (Only on Svalbard) Wild elephant zone - Surin, Thailand UK horse riders warning sign Moose sign from Sweden Swedish sheep crossing Reindeer crossing sign from Sweden Swedish horse crossing Swedish horse riders warning sign China: farm animals crossing Germany: ducklings New Zealand: kiwi crossing New Zealand: kiwi zone at night U.S. and Canada deer crossing sign U.S. cattle crossing sign Caltrans migrating bears sign Pennsylvania duck crossing sign New Zealand: Equestrians Sheep (New Zealand) U.S. bear zone U.S. bighorn sheep crossing U.S. moose area U.S. sheep crossing Germany: frog area Australia: cassowary crossing Also equipment (tractors, forklifts, snowmobiles, Amish buggies etc.) crossing or traveling along the road. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Taiwan: handcarts crossing. Pennsylvania tank crossing warning sign. Poland accident area ahead U.S. tractor/farm vehicle crossing warning sign. New York State motorcycle crossing warning sign. New York State ATV crossing warning sign. Ohio golf cart crossing warning sign. Ohio horse-drawn vehicle ahead warning sign. Horse-drawn vehicle ahead, Ohio. Canada logging truck crossing warning sign. Canada ATV crossing warning sign. Canada snowmobile crossing sign. These signs are often temporary in nature and used to indicate road works (construction), poor roads, or temporary conditions ahead on the road including: flagmen, survey crew, single-lane, detour, bridge out, utility crew ahead, blasting area, bump, dip, frost heaves, flooding (with signs labeled "High water"), soft shoulder, uneven pavement, freshly oiled road, loose gravel, smoke on road, trucks entering, etc. (Note that some "high water" signs are posted to alert drivers of a flood-prone area and do not actually mean that there is a flooded section of road ahead.) In France, Italy, Spain, Norway etc., warning (and speed limit) signs connected with road works have yellow background, these countries normally have white background on signs. In America and Ireland, signs connected with road work have orange background. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 New Zealand road work sign Brazil road work sign. Ireland road work sign. Taiwan road work.(traditional headgear variant) Austria and Turkey road works sign. Italy construction sign. Norway road work sign. Swedish road work sign. France construction sign. Poland construction sign. Ukraine road work sign. UK road work sign. UK loose chippings warning sign. Netherlands and Turkey loose chippings warning sign. Poland loose chippings sign. New Zealand loose chippings. Canada construction ahead sign. U.S. road work ahead sign. U.S. road work ahead sign, metric version. U.S. and Canada Workers on the road sign. New York State bridge closed ahead sign. Caltrans traffic fines doubled in work zones sign. New York State increased enforcement area work zone sign. Temporary road closure signs in Los Angeles. These signs indicate that ahead are dangerous or unexpected bends in the road, some being continuous, others being sharp-ended. Signs may indicate whether the curves are to the right or to the left and whether the degree to which the curves or bends are sharp. They may also indicate a series of curves or bends ahead.  File:MUTCD W1-1.svg|U.S. and Canada sharp turn ahead sign File:MUTCD W1-2.svg|U.S. and Canada sharp curve ahead sign File:MUTCD W1-3.svg|U.S. and Canada sharp reverse turns ahead sign File:MUTCD W1-4.svg|U.S. and Canada sharp reverse curves ahead sign File:MUTCD W1-5.svg|U.S. and Canada winding road ahead sign File:Curve warning advisory usa.svg|U.S. curve to the right sign, with advisory speed limit File:Philippines road sign W1-1 R.svg|Philippines sharp turn ahead sign File:Philippines road sign W1-3 R.svg|Philippines sharp curve ahead sign File:Philippines road sign W1-4 R.svg|Philippines sharp reserve curves ahead sign File:Philippines road sign W1-5 R.svg|Philippines winding road ahead sign File:Brasil A-1a.svg|Brazil sharp curve to sign File:Brasil A-2a.svg|Brazil curve sign File:Brasil A-5a.svg|Brazil S-curve sign File:Brasil A-3a.svg|Brazil winding road sign File:New Zealand PW-18 (left).svg|New Zealand curve to the left sign File:Australia W1-1 (L).svg|Australia sharp turn ahead sign File:Australia W1-3 (L).svg|Australia sharp curve ahead sign File:Australia W1-4 (L).svg|Australia sharp reverse curves ahead sign File:Australia W1-5 (L).svg|Australia winding road ahead sign File:W050L Sharp Corner Left - Warning Sign Ireland.png|Ireland sharp corner (Advisory speed  45&nbsp;km/h) File:Right hand curve sign (India).svg|India curve to right sign File:Left hand curve sign (India).svg|India curve to left sign File:Gefahrenzeichen 2b.svg|Austria and Turkey left curve sign File:Sweden road sign A1-1.svg|Sweden and Greece curve to the left sign File:Znak A-2.svg|Poland curve to left sign File:UK traffic sign 512.svg|UK right bend ahead File:W052L Series of Sharp Corners Left - Warning Sign Ireland.png|Ireland double bend File:China road sign 警 3a.gif|China double bend File:Znak A-4.svg|Poland double bend File:Italian traffic signs - doppia curva sx.svg|Italy, Turkey, Latvia double bend File:UK traffic sign 513.svg|UK double bend File:W053L Series of Sharp bends Left - Warning Sign Ireland.png|Ireland series of curves (winding road) File:Ireland road sign W 003R.svg|Ireland junction at corner File:Ireland road sign W 005R.svg|Ireland junction at a bend File:W1-10L 2009 MUTCD.svg|U.S. and New Zealand side road junction on a curve sign  Chevron-shaped symbols or arrows on rectangular signs may be placed at the actual location of the bend or curve to further mark the location of the curve and to assist in negotiation of the curve. They may also be used to indicate "merge" with other traffic, as for an on-ramp of a limited-access highway. An unusual occurrence of the rectangular arrow sign appears on the eastbound approach to Dead Man's Curve in Cleveland, Ohio, USA, a curve so sharp that in places an arrow's stem is printed on one sign and the arrow's point is printed on another larger sign further down the road; from the driver's perspective at a distance the two signs visually blend together to form one large arrow image. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 U.S. and Canada curve chevron Philippines curve chevron Sweden curve chevron Russia curve chevrons Singapore chevron signs France curve chevrons Australia curve chevron New Zealand curve chevrons with advisory speed limit France curve chevrons France ring of chevrons in traffic circle hub Switzerland curve chevrons U.S. curve arrow Canada curve arrow Quebec curve arrow U.S. curve arrow (vandalized with gunfire) The signs are used to indicate tunnels, where lights are usually required, and a general change in the light level. May also indicate low ceiling clearance. Truck drivers should also watch for prohibited cargo signs (e.g., hazmat, propane, explosives) upon approach to tunnels. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Czech Republic Norway Russia Singapore South Korea Sweden Taiwan United Kingdom New Zealand United States: California These signs are used where traffic may be constricted to a narrow bridge, or where the bridge may have a movable span closed to vehicles while boats pass (e.g., drawbridge or floating bridge). They may also be used for underpass to indicate low overhead clearance. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines narrow bridge warning sign India narrow bridge warning sign Ireland bridge height sign Singapore height prohibition ahead sign Italy drawbridge ahead sign Russia and Latvia drawbridge ahead sign UK drawbridge ahead sign New Zealand narrow bridge warning sign (one way bridges also have priority signs) New Zealand underpass height sign U.S. narrow bridge warning sign U.S. narrow bridge warning sign (alternative) U.S. one lane bridge warning sign Ontario and Quebec bridge warning sign Canada and Australia narrow bridge warning sign Quebec deer-proof bridge warning sign New York State restricted-weight bridge ahead sign Czech Republic drawbridge ahead sign These warning signs indicate that traffic lights are ahead, and are often used when it is difficult to see that a traffic light may already be showing red, to warn a driver to prepare to slow down. They may be supplemented with flashing light or lighted sign when light is red or turning red. Some countries also have signs warning of signals for ramp meters, fire stations, and airfields. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia Queensland: ramp or roundabout metering ahead Belgium Brazil China Colombia France Germany Ireland Italy: vertical traffic signal ahead Italy: horizontal traffic signal ahead Japan Netherlands New Zealand (includes signals at airfields, fire stations and ramp meters) Norway Philippines Poland South Korea Spain Taiwan United Kingdom, United Arab Emirates, Singapore, South Africa, Botswana United States, Thailand, Canada United States: alternative United States: ramp meter ahead As for traffic signals, above, some "stop" or "yield" signs may require additional warning or reminder, especially in dense areas or where the sign has been added recently. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 U.S. and Canada stop sign ahead U.S. stop sign ahead (alternative) U.S. and Canada yield ahead sign U.S. yield sign ahead (alternative) U.S. speed zone ahead U.S. speed zone ahead (alternative) U.S. school speed zone ahead Australia stop sign ahead Australia "give way" sign ahead New Zealand stop ahead sign New Zealand give way ahead sign New Zealand speed limit ahead sign Philippines stop sign ahead Philippines give way sign ahead Canada speed zone ahead China stop sign ahead These signs warn of road crossings at (crossroads, T-intersection, forks (Y-intersection), rotary/roundabout). They may also indicate "hidden driveway" intersecting the road ahead. (Compare with bridges, overpasses, viaducts). 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia, New Zealand and Ontario crossroads ahead sign Australia, New Zealand and Ontario side road intersection on left sign Philippines crossroads ahead sign Philippines priority crossroads ahead sign Brazil crossroads sign Brazil side road sign Brazil oblique side road sign Brazil successive opposite intersections sign Brazil merging traffic sign UK crossroads ahead sign Japan crossroads sign Italy, Latvia and Iran crossroads with right-of-way from the right sign Italy, Latvia and Iran junction with a minor side-road sign Italy, Latvia and Iran junction with a minor cross road sign Swedish intersection with a minor cross-road sign Swedish intersection with minor side-road sign Ireland crossroads with a major road sign Ireland junction with a minor side-road sign Ireland staggered crossroads with roads of equal importance sign Ireland junction at corner with a minor road sign Ireland junction with dual-carriageway sign U.S. and Canada intersection ahead sign U.S. and Canada intersection ahead sign U.S. and Canada intersection ahead sign U.S. and Canada intersection ahead sign U.S. and Canada intersection ahead sign Hidden intersection, Delaware Roundabouts/rotaries" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australian and New Zealand roundabout sign Philippines roundabout ahead sign Brazil roundabout sign Ireland roundabout ahead sign Finland roundabout sign Roundabout ahead sign in Poland UK large roundabout ahead sign Italy, Latvia and Iran roundabout ahead sign U.S. and Canada roundabout / traffic circle ahead sign U.S. traffic circle ahead sign These signs indicate when a multilane highway is being narrowed, when a passing lane is ending, or where the road is widening or a passing lane starting. Another type of sign is used to indicate central "two-way" left turning lane in center of roadway. Warning signs may also warn of "Highway ends", where the road changes class or type. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines road narrow sign Brazil road narrows on both sides sign Japan lane decrease sign Taiwan: right lane ends ahead Italy, Latvia and Iran road narrows from the right UK road narrows on both sides ahead sign Australia road narrow sign U.S. and Canada right lane ends sign Canada and New York State one lane road ahead sign New York State one lane road ahead sign Massachusetts lane drop ahead In the United States and Canada, there is special signage for lanes that are about to exit, so that drivers who wish to remain on the main road have adequate time to merge. Such lanes are sometimes indicated by special striping ("alligator stripes") and the sign, "Thru Traffic Merge Left" (or right). On freeways, the green directions sign for the exit ramp may have the additional notation, "Exit Only," and should have black letters on a yellow background for emphasis. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines merging traffic sign Japan join sign Italy merge from right sign Australia and New Zealand merging traffic sign U.S. and Canada Added Lane traffic sign Caltrans W74 all traffic merge left sign Roadways that only have one entry/exit point - "dead end", "not a through street" or "no outlet". 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 New Zealand: No exit Australia and Philippines: No through road U.S. "no outlet" sign U.S. dead end sign Pennsylvania No Through Street sign Pennsylvania loop street sign New York City: dead end Canada: cul-de-sac sign Canada: "no exit" sign 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Canada U.S. (New York City): roadway ends. U.S. roadway ends here (aka the "red splat"). The signs are used to warn drivers of people walking in the street. They may also be used to warn of children playing, playgrounds, bicycle area, deaf child, blind pedestrians, and thickly settled zones where pedestrians may enter the road. In California, United States near the Mexican border, there are warning signs showing a running family. This is to warn motorists to look out for illegal immigrants who try to escape authorities by running through freeway traffic. The symbol was created by California Department of Transportation employee John Hood in the late 1980s. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines pedestrian crossing sign Brazil pedestrian sign Children crossing, Ireland UK zebra crossing ahead sign UK pedestrians on road ahead sign Netherlands pedestrian crossing sign Poland pedestrian crossing ahead sign Sweden pedestrian crossing sign (Used to warn ahead) Russia pedestrian crossing sign Australia: crosswalk ahead U.S. and Canada pedestrian crossing sign Blind pedestrian crossing sign, Pennsylvania Special needs child crossing, New York City Blind child, Delaware Hearing impaired child sign Pennsylvania Deaf child area sign, New York State Deaf child, Delaware Deaf children near sign, California Caution (running family), California Autistic child warning, USA The signs mark school zones (in which lower speed limits may be in place), student crossings, crossing guards or signals ahead. In the U.S. and Canada, pentagon-shaped signs are used in place of the usual diamond-shaped signs. The shape of the U.S. school zone resembles a one-room schoolhouse and is the only U.S. sign shaped this way. Some Canadian provinces use an identical sign. Ontario uses a white on blue version of this sign.Driver's Handbook 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 U.S./Canada school zone Australia children sign Australia: School ahead New Zealand children sign Philippines children sign Brazil school zone sign Brazil children sign Ireland children crossing sign Norway children crossing sign Russia children sign India school children crossing sign Poland children crossing sign Poland: kindergarten U.S. school bus stop ahead sign 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia bicycles sign Philippines bicycles only sign Poland bicycle crossing warning sign Russia bicycle crossing warning sign U.S. bicycles ahead sign New York City share the road sign Pennsylvania share the road sign Maryland share the road sign San Francisco bike lane sign U.S. bikeway narrows sign 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Norway skiers crossing sign. Sweden skiers crossing sign. U.S. playground ahead sign. Canada playground ahead sign. These signs warn of approach to where firefighters may be entering the road with fire engines or other emergency apparatus, where other drivers will have to stop and wait until they pass. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 U.S. fire station sign. Canadian fire station sign. Delaware emergency vehicles sign. Wisconsin fire trucks entering when signal flashes sign. Texas emergency vehicles sign. New York State firehouse sign. Maryland "firehouse signal" sign. The signs may be used to warn people of oncoming traffic; shown when a motorway becomes a dual carriageway or a normal road without a central reservation or median. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia and New Zealand two-way traffic sign Brazil two-way traffic sign Ireland two-way traffic sign Italy, Latvia and Iran two-way traffic sign Sweden two-way traffic sign Poland two-way traffic sign U.S. two-way traffic sign These signs are used to warn of level crossings ahead. In most countries, a red triangle warning sign is used, with various pictograms for unguarded crossings, crossings with manual gates, and automatic level crossings. In most of Europe, an old-style gate is used for a crossing with gates, and a steam locomotive for a crossing without gates. Germany uses an electric train. Similar pictograms are also used in Ireland, albeit on an amber diamond sign. In the United States the warning of all types of railway crossings is made using a circular yellow sign. The actual crossing is also marked with crossed "railroad crossing" crossbuck signs (stop, look, listen) and possibly lights, bells, and barriers. Crossing with gate" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Brazil controlled railroad crossing sign UK level crossing with gate or barrier sign Ireland level crossing with gates sign Italy rail crossing with gates sign Sweden crossing with gate sign Russia crossing with gate sign Unguarded crossing" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines uncontrolled railroad crossing sign Brazil uncontrolled railroad crossing sign Railway level crossing without gate or barrier ahead Railway or tramway crossing without gate or barrier (the crossbuck) Taiwan: crossing, no gate, first warning Italy rail crossing without safety arm Sweden unguarded crossing sign German unguarded crossing sign Russia unguarded crossing sign Other crossings" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines railroad crossing with signals ahead Ireland automatic level crossing sign Finland tram crossing sign Greece tram crossing sign UK tramcars crossing ahead sign Russia tram crossing sign Tall vehicle tram wire shock risk (Czech) U.S. railroad crossing sign (general) U.S. rail line in highway median of cross street Canada railroad crossing sign (general) Caltrans light rail crossing ahead sign U.S. skewed crossing (hazard to cyclists) Australia and New Zealand railroad crossing with signals ahead New Zealand cyclists watch for track-ruts Warning at crossing (crossbucks)" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 U. S. railroad crossing sign Philippines railroad crossing sign Caltrans light rail crossing sign Thai RR crossing sign Norway signal track level crossing sign Netherlands track level crossing sign Austrian railway crossing sign Russia single-track railway sign Taiwan: electric tram crossing, multiple tracks U.S. humped-crossing low vehicle scrape risk These signs may be used to indicate the hazards of fallen or falling rocks on the road ahead. They are usually pictographs, but may also include wording, such as "fallen rock", "falling rock", or "rock slide". In Italy the words may be "" or ""; in France ""; in Mexico "s". 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia and New Zealand falling rocks sign Philippines road narrow sign British & Hong Kong "falling rocks" warning sign Norway falling rocks sign Ukraine falling rocks sign Japanese "falling rocks" sign New York State fallen rock sign Pennsylvania falling rocks sign North Carolina falling rock sign Idaho watch for rock sign Caltrans rock slide area sign New York State rock/mud slides warning sign Caltrans "falling rocks" sign Canada "falling rocks" sign For example, a warning sign with the image of an aircraft in the middle of it indicates an airport or airfield, where drivers should be prepared for low-flying aircraft. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines low flying aircraft warning sign Norway low flying aircraft sign Russia low flying aircraft sign UK low flying aircraft sign Ireland low flying aircraft sign New York State low flying planes sign Delaware low flying aircraft Pennsylvania balloon launch area Low flying airplanes cross here sign, Wisconsin Flying socks, as indicated by a windsock on red triangle or yellow diamond signs, indicate locations where a strong side wind may cause the trajectory of the moving vehicle to change drastically, perhaps even "flying" across lanes, causing an accident. 80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Japan cross winds sign UK side winds likely ahead warning sign Sweden side winds warning sign Norway cross winds sign Poland side winds sign Ukraine powerful crosswinds area sign New York State crosswinds sign Pennsylvania high cross winds sign Idaho frequent high winds sign "Slippery when wet", "grooved pavement" (warning to motorcyclists and bicyclists), "Open joints on bridge", "Icy Road", "Bridge freezes before roadway" and variants thereof, and "bump" or "dip" ahead (not related to construction). Truck drivers will need to pay attention to "Steep grade" warnings (or "Down grade, use lower gear"), sometimes posted with the percent grade (e.g., 5 percent). Steep hills may also feature "Runaway truck escape" or "Emergency stop" areas with corresponding signs. The UK has a sign warning of "Adverse camber" on a curve. Also "Loose gravel", "Soft shoulder", "Speed hump", and "Watch for Ice." Slippery pavement" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia and New Zealand slippery when wet Philippines slippery when wet Brazil slippery road sign Japan slippery when wet Swedish slippery pavement sign UK slippery road ahead sign Poland slippery pavement sign Poland icy or snow-covered roads Czech black ice prone area United States slippery when wet Nebraska, may be icy ahead U.S. and Canada bridge ices before road Michigan, bridge may be icy Steep grade" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Australia and New Zealand steep descent sign Philippines steep descent sign Brazil steep descent sign Taiwan: hill 8% grade Austria steep grade sign UK 10% down grade sign Netherlands 10% grade sign France 10% down grade sign Norway steep grade sign Poland steep grade sign Korea steep descent sign Japan steep descent sign U.S. and Canada steep grade/hill sign U.S. steep hill sign U.S. and Canada steep grade/hill percentage sign Delaware hill sign (alternate) Idaho steep grade percentage sign California watch downhill speed Bumpy road" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Philippines hump sign Brazil bump sign Brazil rough road sign Ireland bumpy road sign Japan bumpy road sign Korea bumpy road sign Germany bumpy road sign Ukraine bump sign Australia and New Zealand hump sign U.S. bump sign New Jersey bumps sign U.S. rough road sign Canada bump sign Canada bumps sign Other" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Czech fog area Singapore: dangerous area New York State rumble strips ahead sign Idaho occasional blinding dust storms sign Road floods during high tide, Hawaii Frost heaves, Idaho Severe storm area, Idaho U.S. Dip Ferry crossing, Missouri Fog area, Ohio Unusual warning signs" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 UK: toad zone. UK, Tank Crossing. Lithuania: blind spot. Netherlands (Texel): caution quicksand. New Zealand, Penguin Crossing. Colombia, opossum area. U.S.: robot locomotives. Germany: watch out, the railway crossing is privately owned. No unpermitted crossing. Australia, Assorted Wildlife Crossing. Svalbard, Polar Bear Area (new white bear variant). U.S. (vintage), Avoid Bears. On Laos/ Thailand border: ahead we drive on opposite side of road. Poland: danger, car ferry ahead. New Zealand: exceptional curves/ intersections/ R.R. x-ing situation. U.S.: trolley testing underway. U.S. (Alaska): Warning: No Warnings Ahead. Taiwan, owl crossing. Danger High Voltage, Saudi Arabia. UK, Slow Children & Ducks Crossing sign.  U.S. (California), Hang-Glider Xing (crossing). Germany: look out wide snowcat vehicles. Poland: buildings may collapse, steer clear. South Korea, Beware of White Squirrels. Thailand: go upland during tremors, tsunami zone. U.S. (Alaska) Bison may ram cars (hand-painted). South Africa: baboons. Austria: caution, marmots! Namibia: leopard zone. Australia: fruit bats, virus risk. South Africa: lions, stay in car. UK: badger crossing. Germany: danger of drowning in channel. WWII urban front line: sightseers stay back. Germany: unexploded ordnance. Falkland Islands: slow, landmines. Germany: flash flood area. Italy: flash flood area (hydroelectric activity).  Australia: frill-necked lizard zone. Finland: mosquito swarms. South Africa: beware of hippos. Greenland: musk ox area. Germany: mind the otters. Namibia: warthog zone. Germany: falling ice. Italy: beware of toxic gases from fumaroles. Greenland: dogsled crossing. Germany: danger of collapse due to mine subsidence. Germany: unstable underground. U.S.: underground fire &ndash; road might collapse. Germany: pet and wildlife conflicts, disease-bearing ticks. On barb wire at Auschwitz 1: high voltage. Germany: overhanging vegetation. Ireland: quayside dropoff. Australia, Tasmanian devil area. Japan: Iriomote cat zone. Australia: golf ball zone. Réunion Island: risk of falling palm fronds. Trolle Ljungby, Sweden: pheasant family crossing. Israel: camel zone sign, multilingual. Norway: military exercise underway. Bulgaria: children ("don't have breaks"). Scotland: passing zone (plus hand-painted caution lambs sign on old tire). Bosnia: (1992-95 wartime) hand-painted Alert Snipers! U.S. (Alaska): deadly cold, proceed only at your own risk. U.S. (California): message to undocumented immigrants that crossing the desert can be fatal. Danger of death, a safari park of Italy. U.S. (Oregon): Deadly wave warning. Czech, Alert: traffic accidents with serious consequences. Vandal-modified joke signs" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 Germany: generic caution with added Santa sleigh. Sweden: generic caution symbol with added skvader jackalope. In Finland. a generic caution with vandal-added hedgehog picture. Vandal added skis to an Austrian Cattle Crossing sign. Germany: stork area with added droppings. In France, a vandal added animals. Generic Warning symbol to which a Czech vandal added: "beware of low-flying witches". Australian Cassowary Crossing and Speed Bump signs modified by vandal to be a combined before and after roadkill scene. Pedestrian Crossing with added wings and Red Bull can. In Scotland, Cattle Crossing sign vandal-modified to warn against elephants. Germany: waiter added to caution sign. Germany: Kitesurfer added to bumpy road sign. Some warning signs have flashing lights to alert drivers of conditions ahead or remind drivers to slow down. In Britain, they are called warning light. Flashing lights can be dangerous for people with certain forms of epilepsy and/or sensory processing disorder. Attached lights" widths="80px" heights="80px" perrow="6 School zone traffic warning sign in Denmark. France red traffic signal ahead. Crosswalk alert with solar-powered lit outline. Denmark portable multipurpose traffic warning array. School Zone sign with warning light in U.S. U.S. flood zone sign.  Warning signs are also found on other potential dangerous sites. At the base of electricity pylons or fences of substations or radiotechnical equipment with open parts leading high voltage, there are signs warning of high voltage. Warning signs can be found at the top of inclines. "Beware of Dog" is a typical warning of the presence of a dog, but there is no standard sign design.  Others include wet floor signs.   Hazard symbol
