     Werner Hans Erhard (born John Paul Rosenberg; September 5, 1935) is an American critical thinkerHarvard Business Review On Change, Harvard Business Review Paperback Series, Harvard Business Press; 6 edition (September 1, 1998)Hayek: A Collaborative Biography: Part 1 Influences from Mises to Bartley (May 2013). Chapter 12: "Bill Bartley: An Extraordinary Biographer" by Werner Erhard. Robert Leeson (ed.) Visiting Professor of Economics at Stanford University. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 234–236. and author of transformational models and applications for individuals, groups, and organizations."Distilled Wisdom: Buddy, Can you Paradigm", Fortune Magazine, May 15, 1995. He has written about integrity, performance, leadership and transformation.Werner Erhard on Transformation and Productivity, An Interview with Werner Erhard, by Norman Bodek, ReVision: The Journal of Consciousness and Change, Vol 7, No. 2, Winter 1984 / Spring 1985 Werner Erhard has lectured at (among other institutions) Harvard University, Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine, University of California, Berkeley, University of Chicago, University of Southern California, University of Rochester, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Yale University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Oxford Union at Oxford University,"The Nature of Transformation," Oxford University Union Society, Oxford, England, September 1981 and the US Air Force Academy. Since 2002 Erhard has devoted his time to academia. He was originally known for creating The est Training (1971–1983) and The Forum (1984–1991), which were offered to the public through the companies Erhard Seminars Training Inc. (1971–1975); est, an educational corporation (1975–1981), and Werner Erhard & Associates (WEA, 1981–1991). In 1977 Erhard, along with the support of John Denver, Robert W. Fuller, and others,  founded The Hunger Project (a United Nations NGO)"The Hunger Project". CSO-Net. Economic and Social Council. Retrieved 30 Nov. 2015. in which more than 4 million people participate."The Hunger Project 2014 Annual Report". The Hunger Project. The Hunger Project. Interview with Catherine Parrish About The Hunger Project". Ideas in Conversation. Werner Erhard Video. Retrieved 30 Nov. 2015. In 1991, Erhard retired from business and sold his then-existing intellectual property to a group of his former employees who formed Landmark Education, now known as Landmark Worldwide. He has no ownership or management position in Landmark Worldwide, but at Landmark's request consults with them from time to time. Much of his scholarly writing can be found on his author’s page in the Social Science Research Network (SSRN), and most recently at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), the European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI), and The Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance and Financial Regulation. John Paul Rosenberg was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on September 5, 1935.Steven M. Tipton: Getting saved from the sixties: moral meaning in conversion and cultural change. Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1982, page 176. His father was a small restaurant owner who left Judaism for a Baptist mission before joining his wife in the Episcopal Church where she taught Sunday School. They agreed that their son should choose his religion for himself when he was old enough. He chose to be baptized in the Episcopal Church, served there for eight years as an acolyte and has been an Episcopalian ever since. Erhard attended Norristown High School, Norristown, Pennsylvania, where he was awarded the English award in his senior year.  He graduated in June 1953, along with his future wife Patricia Fry.  From the early mid-1950s until sometime in 1960 Erhard worked in various automobile dealerships (starting with a Ford dealership where he was trained by Lee Iacocca, and then Lincoln Mercury, and finally Chevrolet), with a stint out when he was given the opportunity to manage a nearly defunct medium-duty industrial equipment firm which became successful under his management.Bartley, William Warren III (1978). Werner Erhard: The Transformation of a Man, the Founding of est. New York: Clarkson N. Potter p. 42. ISBN 0-517-53502-5.Iaccoca, Lee (1984). Iacocca: An autobiography. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN 0-553-38497-X  Rosenberg married  Patricia Fry on September 26, 1953 and they had four children together. In 1960, he abandoned Patricia and their children in Philadelphia, traveled to Indianapolis with June Bryde and changed his name to Werner Hans Erhard. Rosenberg chose his new name from Esquire magazine articles he read about then West German economics minister Ludwig Erhard and the physicist Werner Heisenberg. June Bryde changed her name to Ellen Virginia Erhard. The renamed Erhards moved to St. Louis,Werner Erhard The Transformation of a Man: The Founding of EST, Dec 12, 1988 by William Warren Bartley III. Outrageous Betrayal: The Real Story of Werner Erhard from Est to Exile.Aug 1993 by Steven Pressman. where Erhard took a job as a car salesman. His wife Patricia Rosenberg and four children were forced to rely on welfare and help from family and friends, and after five years without contact, Patricia Rosenberg divorced Erhard for desertion and remarried.  In October 1972 Erhard contacted his first wife and the children he had left behind; both his ex-wife Pat and his own younger siblings subsequently took jobs in the est organization. In 1961 Erhard began selling correspondence courses in the Midwest. He then moved to Spokane, Washington, where he was offered and accepted a job with Encyclopædia Britannica's "Great Books" program and was soon promoted to area training manager. In January 1962, Erhard switched to the Parents Magazine Cultural Institute, a division of the then- Fortune 50 W.R. Grace & Co.The Graphic Designer's Guide to Clients, By Ellen M. Shapiro In the summer of 1962, he was promoted to the position of territorial manager for California, Nevada, and Arizona, and moved to San Francisco; and in the spring of 1963 to Los Angeles. In January 1964, Parents promoted Erhard and transferred him to Arlington, Virginia as the southeast division manager. In August 1964, Erhard resigned his position in Arlington over a dispute with the company president and returned to his previous position as west coast division manager for Parents in San Francisco. In 1967, Erhard was promoted to vice president.William Warren Bartley, Werner Erhard The Transformation of a Man: The Founding of EST, Clarkson Potter, 1978. ISBN 0-517-53502-5 During the next few years, Erhard brought on as staff at Parents many people who would later become important in est, including Elaine Cronin, Gonneke Spits and Laurel Scheaf. During his time in St. Louis, Erhard read two books which were to have a marked effect on him: Think and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill (1937) and Psycho-Cybernetics by Maxwell Maltz (1960). When a member of his staff at Parents Magazine introduced him to the ideas of Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers, both key figures in the human potential movement, his interests became more focused on personal fulfillment rather than sales success. After his move to Sausalito, he attended seminars by Alan Watts, a notable Western interpreter of Zen Buddhism, who introduced him to the distinction between mind and self; Erhard subsequently became close friends with Watts. In William Bartley's biography, Werner Erhard: The Transformation of a Man, the Founding of est (1978), Bartley quotes Erhard as acknowledging Zen as an essential contribution that "created the space for" est. Bartley details Erhard's connections with Zen beginning with his extensive studies with Alan Watts in the mid 1960s and quotes Erhard as acknowledging: Erhard attended the Dale Carnegie course in 1967. He was sufficiently impressed with it to make his staff attend the course as well, and began to think about developing a course of his own. Over the following years, Erhard continued to investigate a wide range of movements, including Encounter, Transactional Analysis, Enlightenment Intensive, Subud and even Scientology. Erhard read some works by L. Ron Hubbard. Erhard later said, "I have a lot of respect for L. Ron Hubbard and I consider him to be a genius and perhaps less acknowledged than he ought to be." William Bartley, in his biography of Werner Erhard, recounts that he asked Erhard to describe the differences between est and Scientology; Erhard replied: In another interview discussing the difference between est and Scientology, Erhard offers this: In 1970, Erhard became involved in Mind Dynamics. Founded by Alexander Everett, Mind Dynamics seminars included teachings based on Rosicrucianism and Theosophy, as well as the methods of Edgar Cayce and José Silva, founder of Silva Mind Control. Erhard subsequently trained as a Mind Dynamics instructor with Everett, and took over the teaching of Mind Dynamics classes in San Francisco and soon also Los Angeles. The two directors of Mind Dynamics (William Penn Patrick and Alexander Everett) eventually invited him into their partnership, but Erhard rejected the offer, saying he would rather develop his own seminar program – "est", which he announced on September 13, 1971, at his last Mind Dynamics course in San Francisco.  "est", short for Erhard Seminars Training, also Latin for "It is," offered intensive communications and self-development workshops.The Book of est by Luke Rhinhart Their purpose was "to transform one's ability to experience living so that the situations one had been trying to change or had been putting up with, clear up in the process of life itself."name="Steven M. Tipton 1982, page 176" The point of the est training was to have a transformation in one's natural self-expression rather than living by an inherited set of rules. Between 1971 and 1984, 700,000 people enrolled in the est training. Participants at est workshops adhered to strict rules and were given designated breaks for bathroom visits and one meal break. Smoking, eating or drinking alcohol was not permitted during the workshop sessions  which lasted from 9:00&nbsp;am to midnight and sometimes even to the early hours of the morning. Participants had to hand over wristwatches and were not allowed to take notes, or to speak unless called upon, in which case they had to wait for a microphone to be brought to them. The second day of the workshop featured the "danger process". Groups of participants were brought onto the stage and confronted.  They were asked to "imagine that they were afraid of everyone else and then that everyone else was afraid of them" and to re-examine their reflex patterns of living that kept their lives from working.  This was followed by lectures on the third and fourth days, covering topics such as reality and the nature of the mind, ending with the conclusion that "what is, is and what ain't, ain't," and that "true enlightenment is knowing you are a machine." Participants were told they were perfect the way they were and were asked to indicate by a show of hands if they "had gotten it". While Erhard led all the early est courses himself, by the mid-1970s there were ten trainers trained by him. Further est centers opened in Los Angeles, Aspen, Honolulu and New York, and many other cities, and est was enthusiastically endorsed by celebrities such as John Denver and Valerie Harper. In the early 1970s, the est Foundation became the Werner Erhard Foundation with the aim of "providing financial and organizational support to individuals and groups engaged in charitable and educational pursuits – research, communication, education, and scholarly endeavors in the fields of individual and social transformation and human well-being". Among its activities was an annual conference in physics, a science in which Erhard was especially interested. These conferences attracted leading names in theoretical physics of the era, including Stephen Hawking, Leonard Susskind and Richard Feynman.  Physicist Leonard Susskind who attended some of these conferences writes, "I met Hawking and Gerard 't Hooft in the attic of Werner Erhard’s house in San Francisco.  Erhard was a fan of Sidney Coleman.  Dick Feynman, myself, and David Finkelstein were his gurus.  He was very, very smart."Susskind, Leonard (2014). “The Landscape”. In Brockman, John (Ed.) The Universe: Leading Scientists Explore the Origin, Mysteries, and Future of the Cosmos. New York: Harper Perennial. p. 169.  ISBN 978-0-06-229608-5. In the nearly 20 years of its existence, the Werner Erhard Foundation supported these charitable organizations and projects:  In the 1980s, Erhard created a new program called "the Forum", which began in January 1985.  Also during that period Erhard developed and presented a series of seminars, broadcast via satellite that included interviews with contemporary thinkers in science, economics, sports, and the arts on topics such as creativity, performance, and money. The interviews were designed not to present particular views, but to inquire into the commitments, visions and influences at the source of their work. People interviewed in this diverse series included Mike Wallace, Milton Friedman, Alice Cahana, Robert Reich, Kareem Abdul Jabbar, and Senator Daniel Inouye.Hayek: A Collaborative Biography, edited by Robert Lesson In October 1987, Werner Erhard hosted a televised broadcast with top sports coaches John Wooden, Red Auerbach, Tim Gallwey and George Allen to discuss principles of coaching across all disciplines. They sought to identify distinctions found in coaching, regardless of the subject being coached. Jim Selman moderated the discussion and in 1989 he documented the outcome in an article called "Coaching and the Art of Management."Sourcebook of Coaching History, Vikki G Brock PhD., 2012 On February 1, 1991,"Landmark Education Corporation: Selling a Paradigm Shift", Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA, Karen Hopper and Mikelle Fisher Eastley, 9-898-081, p.1, Rev. April 22, 1998. Availability restricted by Harvard "to faculty and staff of universities" (see Alex Beam, "Church takes to bully pulpit" in the Boston Globe, April 2, 1999, page F01; transcribed at Freedomofmind.com, retrieved October 21, 2007) some of the employees of Werner Erhard and Associates purchased its assets, licensed the right to use its intellectual property and assumed some of its liabilities, paying $3 million and committing to remitting up to $15 million over the following 18 years in licensing fees. Compare Bärbel Schwertfeger, "Foreword" in Martin Lell, Das Forum: Protokoll einer Gehirnwäsche: Der Psycho-Konzern Landmark Education [The Forum: Account of a Brainwashing: The Psycho-Outfit Landmark Education], Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag, Munich, 1997, ISBN 3-423-36021-6, page 8 : "Am 31.1.91 verkaufte Erhard seine Anteile für drei Millionen Dollar an seine Mitarbeiter, die die Organisation in Landmark Education umbenannten. Landmark verpflichtete sich zudem, in den folgenden achtzehn Jahren bis zu fünfzehn Millionen Dollar Lizenzgebühren an Erhard zu zahlen."  Shortly afterwards the new owners established Landmark Education. Presentations that evolved from the "Forum" continue to take place  in major cities in the US and worldwide as the "Landmark Forum" under the auspices of Landmark Worldwide. Throughout his career Erhard has lectured at universities and organizations around the world. The Harvard Business Review On Change states "We are indebted to numerous philosophers, scholars, and thinkers who have inquired into the nature of being, especially Werner Erhard." In their publication the Harvard Review cited, "Transformation and Its Implications for Systems-Oriented Research," lecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge Massachusetts, April 1977 and "The Nature of Transformation," Oxford University Union Society, Oxford, England, September 1981" and stated "Numerous writers have grappled with the relationship of past, present and future in the workplace, especially Werner Erhard," citing "Organizational Vision and Vitality: Forward from the Future," Academy of Management, San Francisco, California, August 1990."Transformation and Its Implications for Systems-Oriented Research," lecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge Massachusetts, April 1977"Organizational Vision and Vitality: Forward from the Future," Academy of Management, San Francisco, California, August 1990 While Erhard did not attend university, he "breached the ‘split’ in American intellectual life between the ideology and the university and the ideology of the American market place."Bartley, William Warren (1978). Werner Erhard The Transformation of a Man: The Founding of EST. Clarkson Potter. ISBN 0-517-53502-5 "Erhard organized and led Harvard seminars and training sessions with Michael Jensen professor of Business Administration Emeritus at Harvard Business School who co-founded the Journal of Financial Economics and was the recipient of the 2009 Morgan Stanley-American Finance Association Award for Excellence in Financial Economics."Hayek: A Collaborative Biography: Part 1 Influences from Mises to Bartley (Archival Insights Into the Evolution of Economics) by Robert Leeson, Editor, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013 After retiring from Werner Erhard & Associates, Erhard continued to make public appearances. One of these was on CNN’s Larry King Live in an episode titled, "Whatever Happened to Werner Erhard?" via satellite from Moscow, Russia on December 8, 1993 where Erhard was working with the All Union Knowledge Society, and some members of the newly formed Russian parliament.  Erhard maintained a residence with Gonneke Spits in Georgetown, Cayman Islands.Pay Money, Be Happy, New York Magazine, Vanessa Grigoriadis, July 9, 2001. During this time he worked in the area of peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, and on some occasions with author Peter Block. Currently Erhard devotes his time to scholarly research and writing and presentations of his ideas. He participated in an event on May 11, 2004 at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University entitled "From Thought to Action: Growing Leaders in a Changing World". The event was in honor of a friend, Warren Bennis, who had taken the est Training and for some time consulted with Werner Erhard and Associates. In 2007, he presented a talk exploring the link between integrity, leadership, and increased performance at the John F. Kennedy Center for Public Leadership, led a course on integrity at the 2007 MIT Sloan School of Management’s SIP (Sloan Innovation Period), and spoke at the Harvard Law School program on Corporate Governance. In 2008, he took part in a presentation on integrity at DePaul University and co-led a course on leadership at the Simon School of Business. In 2009 he presented Being a Leader and the Effective Exercise of Leadership: An Ontological Model at the Gruter Institute Squaw Valley Conference: Law, Behavior & the Brain. Erhard, along with colleagues Michael C. Jensen and Steve Zaffron, authored the paper, "Integrity: A Positive Model that Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics and Legality". Quoting from The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Well-Being, "Erhard, Jensen, and Zaffron (2007) aimed to present a positive model of integrity that provides powerful access to increased performance for individuals, groups, and organizations."  (Positive as used here is as it is used in the sciences – it does not mean integrity as something good or desirable, it means integrity as the way integrity actually works in the world.).The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Well-Being, by Susan Cartwright and Cary L. Cooper He presented his work on "Why We Do What We Do: A New Model Providing Actionable Access to the Source of Performance" at the Kennedy Center For Public Leadership at Harvard University in December 2009. Erhard and his colleagues, Professor Michael C. Jensen and United States Air Force Academy Fellow Kari Granger were asked to contribute to the 2012 Harvard University publication, The Handbook for Teaching Leadership: Knowing, Doing and Being, edited by the Dean of Harvard Business School, Nitin Nohria, HBS leadership professor Scott Snook, and Dean of Harvard College, Rakesh Khurana. In their introduction the editors write, "Erhard, Jensen and Granger anchor this collection by taking dead aim at the BE component. In a highly provocative chapter titled 'Creating Leaders', this eclectic group of scholars argues for adopting a decidedly ontological approach to leadership education...For these authors, integrity, authenticity, and being committed to something bigger than oneself form the base of ‘the context for leadership,’ a context that once mastered, leaves one actually being a leader. It is not enough to know about or simply understand these foundational factors, but rather by following a rigorous, phenomenologically based methodology, students have the opportunity to create for themselves a context that leaves them actually being a leader and exercising leadership effectively as their natural self-expression."The Handbook for Teaching Leadership: Knowing, Doing, and Being, Edited by Snook, Scott A., Nohria, Nitin N., and Khurana, Rakesh, Sage Publications, Inc., 2011. Erhard's ontological work has been a topic for discussion by academics. At the 2013 Philosophy of Communication Division National Communication Association Conference in Washington D.C., Professors Bruce Hyde and Andrew Kopp presented their paper, "Connecting Philosophy and Communication; A Heideggerian Analysis of the Ontological Rhetoric of Werner Erhard," in which they state "We are not suggesting here that Heidegger’s philosophical writings were the source of Erhard’s ideas. We see both men as being at work in the same field, sharing a view toward language and its relationship to Being." Erhard is the author of the final chapter in the book about Nobel Prize winning economist, Friedrich Hayek; Hayek:A Collaborative Biography edited by Dr. Robert Leeson, Visiting Professor of Economics at Stanford University. In 2014 The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI) issued Werner Erhard's and Michael C. Jensen's paper, "Putting Integrity Into Finance: A Purely Positive Approach" in which they summarize their theory of integrity as a purely positive phenomenon (i.e. that integrity does not mean integrity as something good or desirable, rather it means integrity as the way integrity actually works in the world) and that "adding integrity as a positive phenomenon to the paradigm of financial economics provides actionable access (rather than mere explanation with no access) to the source of the behavior that has resulted in damaging effects on value and human welfare, thereby significantly reducing that behavior." Various skeptics have questioned or criticized the validity of Erhard's work and his motivations. Psychiatrist Marc Galanter described Erhard as "a man with no formal experience in mental health, self help, or religious revivalism, but a background in retail sales."Marc Galanter: Cults: faith, healing, and coercion. New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-19-505631-0 , page 80.  Michael Zimmerman, Professor and Chair of the Philosophy Department at Tulane University, described Erhard as "a kind of artist, a thinker, an inventor, who has big debts to others, borrowed from others, but then put the whole thing together in a way that no one else had ever done."  Philosophy professor at Sacramento City College, Robert Todd Carroll referred to est as a "hodge-podge of philosophical bits and pieces culled from the carcasses of existential philosophy, motivational psychology." Social critic John Bassett MacCleary called Erhard "a former used-car salesman" and est "just another moneymaking scam."MacCleary, John Bassett. (2004), The Hippie Dictionary: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the 1960s and 1970s, Page 165., Ten Speed Press, ISBN 1-58008-547-4 NYU psychology professor Paul Vitz noted that est "was primarily a business" and that its "style of operation has been labeled as fascist."Vitz, Paul C. (1994). Psychology As Religion: The Cult of Self-Worship. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. p. 26. ISBN 0-8028-0725-9. In 1991, Erhard "vanished amid reports of tax fraud (which proved false and won him $200,000 from the IRS) and allegations of incest (which were later recanted).") The March 3, 1991 60 Minutes broadcast of these allegations was later removed by CBS due to factual inaccuracies. On March 3, 1992, Erhard sued CBS, San Jose Mercury News reporter John Hubner and approximately twenty other defendants for libel, defamation, slander, and invasion of privacy, as well as conspiracy. On May 20, 1992, Erhard filed for dismissal of his own case and sent checks for $100 to each of the defendants, covering their filing fees in the case.Werner Erhard vs. Columbia Broadcasting System, (Filed: March 3, 1992) Case Number: 1992-L-002687. Division: Law Division. District: First Municipal. Cook County Circuit Court, Chicago, Illinois. Erhard later told Larry King in an interview that he dropped the suit after receiving legal advice telling him that in order to win it, it would not be sufficient to prove that CBS knew the allegations were false, but that he would also need to prove that CBS acted with malice. Erhard stated to King that his family members (as reported in Time magazine) had since retracted their allegations, which had been made under pressure from CBS, and that accusations of tax evasion aired in the program were "misunderstandings" that were in the process of being resolved. Erhard's daughters later retracted the allegations of sexual abuse they had made against their father. Celeste Erhard, one of the daughters featured in the CBS program, subsequently sued journalist John Hubner and the San Jose Mercury News seeking US$2 million. Celeste Erhard accused the newspaper of having "defrauded her and invaded her privacy". She asserted that she had exaggerated information, had been promised a book deal to be co-authored with Hubner for revenue of $2 million, and stated on the record that the articles and her appearance on CBS television's 60 Minutes were to get publicity for the book."Daughter of est founder sues Mercury News over two articles", San Jose Mercury News, July 16, 1992 Celeste Erhard did not dispute the accuracy of the quotes in the newspaper. The case was dismissed in August 1993, the judge ruling that the statute of limitation had expired and that Celeste Erhard "had suffered no monetary damages or physical harm and that she failed to present legal evidence that Hubner had deliberately misled her." The video of the CBS 60 Minutes program was subsequently withdrawn from the market. Suzanne Snider in The Believer, May 2003, reported that it "was filled with so many factual discrepancies that the transcript was made unavailable with this disclaimer: 'This segment has been deleted at the request of CBS News for legal or copyright reasons.'" In 1992 a court ruled that "The Forum" had not caused any "mental injuries" to Stephanie Ney. The court entered a default judgment of $380,000 against Werner Erhard  – in absentia because Erhard had not personally received the notice to appear and was not present.Wikisource:Ney v. Landmark Education Corporation and Werner Erhard In 1993, Erhard filed a wrongful disclosure lawsuit against the IRS, asserting that IRS agents had incorrectly and illegally revealed to the media details of information from his tax returns.  In the first half of April 1991, IRS spokesmen were widely quoted, alleging that "Erhard owed millions of dollars in back taxes, that he was transferring assets out of the country, and that the agency was suing Erhard", branding Erhard a "tax cheat". On April 15, the IRS was reported to have placed a lien of $6.7 million on personal property belonging to Erhard. In his wrongful disclosure lawsuit against the IRS Erhard stated that he had never refused to pay taxes that were lawfully due, and in September 1996 he won the suit. The IRS settled the lawsuit with Erhard, paying him $200,000 in damages. The IRS officials admitted that media reports quoting them on Erhard's tax liabilities had been false; however, they took no action to have the media correct these statements."IRS Settles Lawsuit brought by Werner Erhard," Business Wire, September 11, 1996. A private investigator quoted in the Los Angeles Times stated that by October 1989, Scientology had collected five filing cabinets worth of materials about Erhard, many from ex-members of est who had joined Scientology, and that Scientology was clearly in the process of organizing a "media blitz" aimed at discrediting Erhard. According to Harry Rosenberg, Erhard's brother, "Werner made some very, very powerful enemies. They really got him." In their 1992 book Perspectives on the New Age James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton noted that est used "authoritarian trainers who enforce numerous rules", require applause after participants "share" in front of the group, and deemphasize reason in favor of "feeling and action." The authors also pointed out that graduates of est were "fiercely loyal," and recruited heavily, reducing marketing expenses to virtually zero. A 2012 Financial Times article said that Erhard’s influence "extends far beyond the couple of million people who have done his courses: there is hardly a self-help book or a management training programme that does not borrow some of his principles." Erhard and his programs have been citedPeter Block: Community,the Structure of Belonging, Berrett-Koehler, 2008, pg.14 as having a significant cultural impact on America in the 1970s.Bruce Schulman: The Seventies: The Great Shift in American Culture, Society, and Politics, Da Capo Press, April 16, 2002, pages 96–98 Erhard provided a 'universal story of the search for new identity and for the Self.'Hayek: A Collaborative Biography, Chapter 9, Hayek's Official Biographer: The Lost Insights of William Warren Bartley III, by Robert Leeson, Palgrave MacMillan 2013  Erhard’s teachings have influenced the field of professional coaching. The late Thomas Leonard, who founded or helped found Coach U, the International Coach Federation, Coachville, the International Association of Coaches and the Coaches Training Institute, was an employee of est.Jane Renton, "Coaching and Mentoring: What They Are and How to Make the Most of Them",The Economist Newspaper, Ltd.,2009, pgs 8 & 27About CTI, History, The Coaches Training Institute. Paul Fireman (former CEO of Reebok), Nike vs. Reebok a battle for hearts, minds & feet, Fortune Magazine, by Kenneth Labich & Tim Carvell, September 18, 1995 Peter Block,Peter Block: Community,the Structure of Belonging, Berrett-Koehler, 2008, p. 14 leadership expert Warren Bennis,Warren Bennis: Leaders: Strategies for Taking Charge, Harper Collins, 2003, pg 201 and economist Michael Jensen,Peter Block: Community,the Structure of Belonging, Berrett-Koehler, 2008, pg.198 spoke positively of Erhard. Tiger Woods' father cited est as helping him become a better parent. David Logan, Assoc. Professor of Business, University of Southern California said, "Werner’s thinking – I don’t know any nice way of saying it – is just out there in the world.  You can’t do a Master’s Degree in organizational development or human resources without picking up some of it.  And it’s usually not credited back to him.  His stuff is just out there." Over the years, Werner Erhard’s philosophy has been cited in helping to promote a multibillion-dollar personal growth industry based on Erhard's original concepts.Marianne Williamson, The Age of Miracles: Embracing the New Midlife;Hay House Inc.,January 31, 2008, pgs x, xiCasey Hawley:100+ Tactics for Office Politics (Barron's Business Success Guides); Barrons Educational Series; 2 edition, June 1, 2008, page 173  Social scientist Daniel Yankelovich said of the large scale study he conducted of participants of The Forum that Erhard created: “Several of the study’s findings surprised me quite a bit, especially the large number of participants for whom The Forum proved to be ‘one of the most valued experiences of my life’. This is not a sentiment that people, especially successful, well-educated people, express lightly.” Many scholars have been influenced by Werner Erhard, such as the founder of ACT (Acceptance and Commitment Therapy) and former president of the Association of Cognitive Behavior Therapies Steven C. Hayes, researcher and author Bartley J. Madden, whose current focus is on market-based solutions to public policy, and Dr. Bernard Roth, Rodney H. Adams Professor in the School of Engineering and Academic Director and co-founder of the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design (the d.school) at Stanford University. Dr. Roth says about Erhard's influence on his work: "I learned a lot from Werner and his work.  For me it put an intellectual framework around all the fragments ... I also benefited from coleading several workshops with Werner and his associates.  Three years ago I participated in a leadership workshop colead by Werner, Michael Jensen, and Kari Granger.  It had been twenty-two years since I last worked with Werner.  This experience brought a renewed realization as to how deeply his style and content have influenced my teaching."  In 1977, Erhard along with the support of John Denver, the former Oberlin College president Robert W. Fuller, and others, founded The Hunger Project, a non-profit, United Nations NGO in which more than 4 million people participate. Erhard authored the Hunger Project Source Document, subtitled, "The End of Starvation: Creating an Idea Whose Time Has Come".  By 2014 The Hunger Project had mobilized 20.6 million people in more than 24,000 communities throughout Africa, South Asia and Latin America to become agents of their own development and make sustainable progress in overcoming  hunger and poverty."The Hunger Project 2014 Annual Report". The Hunger Project. The Hunger Project. Retrieved 30 Nov. 2015. In 1991 the group that later formed Landmark Education purchased the intellectual property of Werner Erhard. In 1998, Time magazine published an article about Landmark Education and its historical connection to Werner Erhard. The article stated that: "In 1991, before he left the U.S., Erhard sold the 'technology' behind his seminars to his employees, who formed a new company called the Landmark Education Corp., with Erhard's brother Harry Rosenberg at the helm." Landmark Education states that its programs have as their basis ideas originally developed by Erhard, but that Erhard has no financial interest, ownership, or management role in Landmark Education. In Stephanie Ney v. Landmark Education Corporation (1994),Appendix A. Text of Court Ruling in Ney Case – Source: LEXIS-NEXIS – STEPHANIE NEY, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. LANDMARK EDUCATION CORPORATION; RON ZELLER, Defendants-Appellees, and WERNER ERHARD; WERNER ERHARD AND ASSOCIATES; PETER SIAS, Defendants. – No. 92-1979 – UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT – 1994 U.S. App. LEXIS 2373 the courts determined Landmark Education Corporation did not have successor-liability to Werner Erhard & Associates, the corporation whose assets Landmark Education purchased. According to Pressman in "Outrageous Betrayal": Landmark Education further agreed to pay Erhard a long-term licensing fee for the material used in the Forum and other courses. Erhard stood to earn up to $15 million over the next 18 years." However, Arthur Schreiber's declaration of May 3, 2005 states:  "Landmark Education has never paid Erhard under the license agreements (he assigned his rights to others)." Declaration filed May 5, 2005 at the US District Court of New Jersey, civil action 04-3022 (JCL), pp 3 and 4 In 2001, New York Magazine reported that Landmark Education's CEO Harry Rosenberg said that the company had bought outright Erhard's license and his rights to the business in Japan and Mexico.  From time to time Erhard consults with Landmark Education. The Barbados Group represents a "self-selected group of scholars, consultants and practitioners" which aims to build an ontological paradigm of performance in organizations. The group and its main publication-vehicle SSRN both have at their head Michael Jensen, Emeritus Professor at the Harvard Business School. Werner Erhard's Barbados Group publications can be found at SSRN. Some members of the Barbados Group are affiliated with Landmark Education. The Barbados Group was analyzed by economics journalist and author David Warsh, in an article in Economic Principals. In 2006, Erhard appeared in the documentary Transformation: The Life and Legacy of Werner Erhard. The film was co-produced by Robyn Symon and Walter Maksym, who had earlier served as Erhard's attorney in the lawsuit against CBS. Werner Erhard was featured in the 2002 British documentary by Adam Curtis, The Century of the Self, episode part 3 of 4. This segment of the video discusses the est Training in detail, and includes interviews with est graduates John Denver and Jerry Rubin.    The Annual Theoretical Physics Conferences The Hunger Project: to create awareness of and find solutions to chronic, world-wide hunger. The Mastery Foundation: an inter-faith organization that worked to reconcile divisions created by religious differences. The Breakthrough Foundation created Youth at Risk: a community-based mentor/apprenticeship network aimed at giving troubled youth opportunities to choose productive, responsible lives. The Caregivers Project: a volunteer organization that gave support for caregivers of people with terminal illnesses. The Education Network: a national, grassroots organization aimed at transforming education in the US. The Holiday Project: a national volunteers group who organized gift-giving and visits for people who are confined to hospitals, nursing homes, prisons and other institutions during Christmas, Chanukah and other holidays. Prison Possibilities, Inc.: provided programs in the prisons, including the est training, that significantly lowered the rate of re-arrests among participating prisoners.The est Training in the Prisons: A Basis for the Transformation of Corrections, by Mark Woodard, University of Baltimore Law Journal, 1982 Large-group awareness training Estate of Jack Slee v. Werner Erhard Werner Erhard & Associates v. Christopher Cox for Congress Creating Leaders: An Ontological/Phenomenological Model by Werner Erhard, Michael C. Jensen, and Kari Granger, Chapter 16 in Handbook For Teaching Leadership: Knowing, Doing, and Being, edited by Scott A. Snook, Rakesh Khurana, and Nitin Nohria, Harvard Business School. SAGE Publications. 2012. Hayek: A Collaborative Biography: Part 1 Influences from Mises to Bartley, Chapter 12: "Bill Bartley: An Extraordinary Biographer" by Werner Erhard. Robert Leeson (ed.) Visiting Professor of Economics at Stanford University. Palgrave Macmillan. 2013.Hayek: A Collaborative Biography: Part 1 Influences from Mises to Bartley (May 2013). Chapter 12: "Bill Bartley: An Extraordinary Biographer" by Werner Erhard. Robert Leeson (ed.) Visiting Professor of Economics at Stanford University. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 234–236. Being Well by Werner Erhard et al, Chapter 5 in Beyond Health and Normality: Explorations of Exceptional Psychological Well-Being, edited by Roger Walsh, M.B., PhD and Deane H. Shapiro, Jr. PhD. Van Nostrand. 1983. A Breakthrough in Individual and Social Transformation by Werner Erhard in Eranos Foundation Yearbook 69: 2006/2007/2008. Daimon Verlag. 2010. Putting Integrity Into Finance: A Purely Positive Approach by Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) #19986, March 2014; European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI) Finance Working Paper No. 417/2014; and Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance and Financial Regulation. Introductory Reading for the 'Being a Leader and The Effective Exercise of Leadership: An Ontological / Phenomenological Model' Course by Werner Erhard, Michael C. Jensen, and Steve Zaffron. Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 12-074; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 12-01; European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI) – Finance Working Paper No. 417/2014. Integrity: A Positive Model that Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics and Legality by Werner Erhard, Michael C. Jensen, and Steve Zaffron. Harvard Business School NOM Working Paper No. 06-11; Barbados Group Working Paper No. 06-03; Simon School Working Paper No. FR 08-05. Four Ways of Being that Create the Foundations of A Great Personal Life, Great Leadership and A Great Organization by Werner Erhard and Michael C. Jensen Jesse Isidor Straus Professor of Business Administration, Emeritus Harvard Business School. Werner Erhard on Transformation and Productivity – An Interview with Werner Erhard. Revision: The Journal of Consciousness and Change, Volume 7, Number 3. Winter 1984/Spring 1985. You Don't Alter What You Know, You Alter The Way You Know It − An Interview with Werner Erhard. The Network Review, Volume 1, Number 4. 1983. est: Communication in a Context of Compassion by Werner Erhard and Victor Gioscia, PhD. The Journal of Current Psychiatric Therapies, Volume 18. 1978. The Hunger Project Source Document, The End of Starvation: Creating an Idea Whose Time Has Come by Werner Erhard, 1977. Some Aspects of the est Training and Transpersonal Psychology: A Conversation by Werner Erhard and James Fadiman. The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, Volume 9, Number J. 1977. The est Standard Training by Werner Erhard and Victor Gioscia, PhD. Biosciences Communication 3:104-122. 1977. Epistemological And Contextual Contributions of est to General Systems Theory – Werner Erhard's presentation to the symposium on Evolving Trends in General Systems Theory and the Future of the Family at the Sixth World Congress of Social Psychiatry, Opatija, Yugoslavia, 5 October 1976. The Mind's Dedication to Survival by Werner Erhard et al. The Journal of Individual Psychology Volume 31, Number 1, May. 1975. Ethiopia: 1988 A Remarkable Achievement – An Article by Werner Erhard in The Union Leader, New Hampshire's Daily Newspaper, Manchester, N.H., 12 January 1989. Bartley, III, William Warren:  Werner Erhard The Transformation of a Man: The Founding of est, New York, New York, USA: Clarkson N. Potter, Inc (1978) ISBN 0-517-53502-5. Bry, Adelaide: est: 60 Hours That Transform Your life, Harper Collins (1976) ISBN 978-0-06-010562-4 Fenwick, Sheridan: Getting It: The psychology of est, J. B. Lippincott Company. (1976) ISBN 0-397-01170-9 Hargrove, Robert:  est: Making Life Work, Delacorte (1976) ISBN 978-0-440-19556-6 Kettle, James: The est Experience, Zebra Books (1976) ISBN 978-0-89083-168-7 Marks, Pat R.:  est: The Movement and the Man, Playboy Press (1976) ASIN B004BI5A3E Morantz, Paul and Lancaster, Hal: Escape: My Life Long War Against Cults, Cresta Publications (2013) ISBN 978-0-615-84869-3 Moreno, M.D., Ph.D., Jonathan D."Impromptu Man: J.L. Moreno and the Origins of Psychodrama, Encounter Culture, and the Social Network." Bellevue Literary Press (2014) ISBN 1-934137-84-7 Pressman, Steven:  Outrageous Betrayal: The Dark Journey of Werner Erhard from est to Exile, New York, New York, USA: St. Martin's Press (1993) ISBN 0-312-09296-2 Rhinehart, Luke: The Book of est, Holt, Rinehart and Winston (1976) ISBN 978-0-557-30615-2 Rubin, Jerry: Growing (Up) at Thirty-Seven, M. Evans & Company. (1976) ISBN 978-0-87131-189-4. Self, Jane:  60 Minutes and the Assassination of Werner Erhard: How America's Top Rated Television Show Was Used in an Attempt to Destroy a Man Who Was Making A Difference  Breakthru Publishing (1992) ISBN 0-942540-23-9 Weir, D., Noyes, D.: Raising Hell How the Center for Investigative Reporting Gets the Story, (Chapter on "Let Them Eat est.") Addison-Wesley (1983) ISBN 0-201-10858-5 Werner Erhard's Author Page at SSRN (Social Science Research Network) Erhard biographical website Erhard on transforming performance est and Werner Erhard, The Skeptic's Dictionary Werner Erhard Foundation BEING A LEADER & THE EFFECTIVE EXERCISE OF LEADERSHIP: An Ontological/Phenomenological Model Werner Erhard (60 Minutes), Wikiquote
