     The Western Ghats or Sahyadri is a mountain range that runs parallel to the western coast of the Indian peninsula, located entirely in India. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and is one of the eight "hottest hotspots" of biological diversity in the world. It is sometimes called the Great Escarpment of India. The range runs north to south along the western edge of the Deccan Plateau, and separates the plateau from a narrow coastal plain, called Konkan, along the Arabian Sea. A total of thirty nine properties including national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and reserve forests were designated as world heritage sites - twenty in Kerala, ten in Karnataka, five in Tamil Nadu and four in Maharashtra. The range starts near the border of Gujarat and Maharashtra, south of the Tapti river, and runs approximately  through the states of Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu ending at Kanyakumari, at the southern tip of India. These hills cover  and form the catchment area for complex riverine drainage systems that drain almost 40% of India. The Western Ghats block southwest monsoon winds from reaching the Deccan Plateau. The average elevation is around . The area is one of the world's ten "Hottest biodiversity hotspots" and has over 7,402 species of flowering plants,1814 species of non-flowering plants, 139 mammal species, 508 bird species, 179 amphibian species, 6000 insects species and 290 freshwater fish species; it is likely that many undiscovered species live in the Western Ghats. At least 325 globally threatened species occur in the Western Ghats. The Western Ghats are the mountainous faulted and eroded edge of the Deccan Plateau. Geologic evidence indicates that they were formed during the break-up of the supercontinent of Gondwana some 150 million years ago. Geophysical evidence indicates that the west coast of India came into being somewhere around 100 to 80 mya after it broke away from Madagascar. After the break-up, the western coast of India would have appeared as an abrupt cliff some  in elevation. Basalt is the predominant rock found in the hills reaching a thickness of . Other rock types found are charnockites, granite gneiss, khondalites, leptynites, metamorphic gneisses with detached occurrences of crystalline limestone, iron ore, dolerites and anorthosites. Residual laterite and bauxite ores are also found in the southern hills.    The Western Ghats extend from the Satpura Range in the north, go south past Maharashtra, Goa, through Karnataka and into Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Major gaps in the range are the Goa Gap, between the Maharashtra and Karnataka sections, and the Palghat Gap on the Tamil Nadu and Kerala border between the Nilgiri Hills and the Anaimalai Hills. The mountains intercept the rain-bearing westerly monsoon winds, and are consequently an area of high rainfall, particularly on their western side. The dense forests also contribute to the precipitation of the area by acting as a substrate for condensation of moist rising orographic winds from the sea, and releasing much of the moisture back into the air via transpiration, allowing it to later condense and fall again as rain. The northern portion of the narrow coastal plain between the Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea is known as the Konkan Coast or simply Konkan, the central portion is called Kanara and the southern portion is called Malabar region or the Malabar Coast. The foothill region east of the Ghats in Maharashtra is known as Desh, while the eastern foothills of the central Karnataka state is known as Malenadu. The largest city within the mountains is the city of Pune (Poona), in the Desh region on the eastern edge of the range. The Biligirirangan Hills lie at the confluence of the Western and Eastern Ghats. The major hill range starting from the north is the Sahyadhri (the benevolent mountains) range. This range is home to many hill stations, including Matheran, Lonavala-Khandala, Mahabaleshwar, Panchgani, Amboli Ghat, Kudremukh and Kodagu. The range is known as Sahyadri in Maharashtra and Karnataka and as Sahya Parvatam in Kerala. The Nilgiri mountains are in Northwestern Tamil Nadu and are home to the town of Ooty. The Biligiriranga Hills southeast of Mysore in Karnataka, meet the Shevaroys and Tirumala range farther east, linking the Western Ghats to the Eastern Ghats. South of the Palghat Gap are the Anamala Hills, located in western Tamil Nadu and Kerala. There are smaller ranges further south, including the Cardamom Hills, then Aryankavu pass, Aralvaimozhi pass near Kanyakumari. In the southern part of the range is Anamudi peak  in Kerala the highest peak in Western Ghats. Chembra Peak , Banasura Peak , Vellarimala  and Agasthya mala  are also in Kerala. Doddabetta in the Nilgiri Hills is . Mullayanagiri is the highest peak in Karnataka . The Western Ghats in Kerala and Tamil Nadu is home to many tea and coffee plantations.    Following is a list of some of the highest peaks of the Western Ghats:   The Western Ghats have several manmade lakes and reservoirs. The well known lakes are the Ooty (2500 m altitude, 34.0 ha) in Nilgiris, and the Kodaikanal (2285 m, 26 ha) and the Berijam in the Palani Hills. The Pookode lake of Wayanad in Kerala at Lakkadi is a beautiful scenic one with boating and garden arrangements. Most of the bigger lakes are situated in the state of Tamil Nadu. Two smaller lakes, the Devikulam (6.0 ha) and the Letchmi (2.0 ha) are in the Munnar range. The majority of streams draining the Western Ghats that join the rivers Krishna and Kaveri carry water during monsoon months only and have been dammed for hydroelectric and irrigation purposes. The major reservoirs are: Lonavala and Walwahn in Maharashtra; V.V. Sagar, K.R. Sagar, Bhadra, Lingamakki in Karnataka; Mettur, Upper Bhavani, Lower Bhavani, Mukurthi, Parson's Valley, Porthumund, Avalanche, Emerald, Pykara, Sandynulla, Karaiyar, Servalar, Kodaiyar, Gadananathi River, Manimuthar and Glenmorgan in Tamil Nadu; and Kundallay and Maddupatty in Kerala. Of these the Lonavla, Walwahn, Upper Bhavani, Mukurthi, Parson's Valley, Porthumund, Avalanche, Emerald, Pykara, Sandynulla, Glenmorgan, Kundally and Madupatty are important for their commercial and sport fisheries for rainbow trout (introduced), mahseer (native) and common carp (introduced).  The Western Ghats form one of the four watersheds of India, feeding the perennial rivers of India. Important rivers include the Godavari,Tungabhadra RiverTungabhadra, Krishna, Thamiraparani and Kaveri. These rivers flow to the east and drain out into the Bay of Bengal. The west flowing rivers, that drain into the Arabian Sea and the Laccadive Sea, are fast-moving, owing to the short distance travelled and steeper gradient. Important rivers include the Periyar, Bharathappuzha, Netravati, Sharavathi, Mandovi and Zuari. Many of these rivers feed the backwaters of Kerala and Maharashtra. Rivers that flow eastwards of the Ghats drain into the Bay of Bengal. These are comparatively slower moving and eventually merge into larger rivers such as the Kaveri and Krishna. The larger tributaries include the Tunga River, Bhadra river, Bhima River, Malaprabha River, Ghataprabha River, Hemavathi river, Kabini River. In addition there are several smaller rivers such as the Chittar River, Gadananathi River, Manimuthar River, Kallayi River, Kundali River and the Pachaiyar River.   Fast running rivers and steep slopes have provided sites for many large hydro-electric projects. There are about 50 major dams along the length of the Western Ghats with the earliest project up in 1900 near Khopoli in Maharashtra. Most notable of these projects are the Koyna Hydroelectric Project in Maharashtra, the Parambikulam Dam in Kerala, and the Linganmakki Dam in Karnataka. The reservoir behind the Koyna Dam, the Shivajisagar Lake, has a length of  and depth of . It is the largest hydroelectric project in Maharashtra, generating 1,920 MW of electric power. Another major hydro electric project is Idukki dam in Kerala. During the monsoon season, numerous streams fed by incessant rain drain off the mountain sides leading to numerous and often spectacular waterfalls. Among the most well known is the Jog Falls, Kunchikal Falls, Dudhsagar Falls, Sivasamudram Falls, and Unchalli Falls. The Jog Falls is the highest natural plunge waterfall in South Asia and is listed among the 1001 natural wonders of the world.Michael Bright, 1001 Natural Wonders of the World by Barrons Educational Series Inc., Quinted Inc. Publishing, 2005. Talakaveri wildlife sanctuary is a critical watershed and the source of the river Kaveri. This region has dense evergreen and semi-evergreen vegetation, with shola-grassland in areas of higher elevation. The steep terrain of the area has resulted in scenic waterfalls along its many mountain streams. Sharavathi and Someshvara Wildlife sanctuaries in Shimoga district are the source of the Tungabhadra River system. The Netravathi river has also its origin at Western Ghats of India flowing westwards to join Arabian sea at Mangalore. Climate in the Western Ghats varies with altitudinal gradation and distance from the equator. The climate is humid and tropical in the lower reaches tempered by the proximity to the sea. Elevations of  and above in the north and  and above in the south have a more temperate climate. Average annual temperature is around 15&nbsp;°C (60&nbsp;°F). In some parts frost is common, and temperatures touch the freezing point during the winter months. Mean temperature range from 20&nbsp;°C (68&nbsp;°F) in the south to 24&nbsp;°C (75&nbsp;°F) in the north. It has also been observed that the coldest periods in the South Western Ghats coincide with the wettest. During the monsoon season between June and September, the unbroken Western Ghats chain acts as a barrier to the moisture laden clouds. The heavy, eastward-moving rain-bearing clouds are forced to rise and in the process deposit most of their rain on the windward side. Rainfall in this region averages 3,000–4,000&nbsp;mm (120–160&nbsp;in) with localised extremes touching 9,000&nbsp;mm (350&nbsp;in). The eastern region of the Western Ghats which lie in the rain shadow, receive far less rainfall averaging about 1,000&nbsp;mm (40&nbsp;in) bringing the average rainfall figure to 2,500&nbsp;mm (150&nbsp;in). Data from rainfall figures reveal that there is no relationship between the total amount of rain received and the spread of the area. Some areas to the north in Maharashtra while receiving heavier rainfall are followed by long dry spells, while regions closer to the equator receiving less annual rainfall, have rain spells lasting almost the entire year.      The Western Ghats are home to four tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forest ecoregions – the North Western Ghats moist deciduous forests, North Western Ghats montane rain forests, South Western Ghats moist deciduous forests, and South Western Ghats montane rain forests. The northern portion of the range is generally drier than the southern portion, and at lower elevations makes up the North Western Ghats moist deciduous forests ecoregion, with mostly deciduous forests made up predominantly of teak. Above 1,000 meters elevation are the cooler and wetter North Western Ghats montane rain forests, whose evergreen forests are characterised by trees of family Lauraceae. The evergreen Wayanad forests of Kerala mark the transition zone between the northern and southern ecologic regions of the Western Ghats. The southern ecologic regions are generally wetter and more species-rich. At lower elevations are the South Western Ghats moist deciduous forests, with Cullenia the characteristic tree genus, accompanied by teak, dipterocarps, and other trees. The moist forests transition to the drier South Deccan Plateau dry deciduous forests, which lie in its rain shadow to the east. Above 1,000 meters are the South Western Ghats montane rain forests, also cooler and wetter than the surrounding lowland forests, and dominated by evergreen trees, although some montane grasslands and stunted forests can be found at the highest elevations. The South Western Ghats montane rain forests are the most species-rich ecologic region in peninsular India; eighty percent of the flowering plant species of the entire Western Ghats range are found in this ecologic region.   Historically the Western Ghats were well-covered in dense forests that provided wild foods and natural habitats for native tribal people. Its inaccessibility made it difficult for people from the plains to cultivate the land and build settlements. After the arrival of the British in the area, large swathes of territory were cleared for agricultural plantations and timber. The forest in the Western Ghats has been severely fragmented due to human activities, especially clear felling for tea, coffee, and teak plantations during 1860 to 1950.  Species that are rare, endemic and habitat specialists are more adversely affected and tend to be lost faster than other species. Complex and species rich habitats like the tropical rainforest are much more adversely affected than other habitats. The area is ecologically sensitive to development and was declared an ecological hotspot in 1988 through the efforts of ecologist Norman Myers. Though this area covers barely five percent of India's land, 27% of all species of higher plants in India (4,000 of 15,000 species) are found here. Almost 1,800 of these are endemic to the region. The range is home to at least 84 amphibian species, 16 bird species, seven mammals, and 1,600 flowering plants which are not found elsewhere in the world. The Government of India established many protected areas including 2 biosphere reserves, 13 National parks to restrict human access, several wildlife sanctuaries to protect specific endangered species and many Reserve Forests, which are all managed by the forest departments of their respective state to preserve some of the ecoregions still undeveloped. Many National Parks were initially Wildlife Sanctuaries. The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve comprising 5500&nbsp;km2 of the evergreen forests of Nagarahole, deciduous forests of Bandipur National Park and Nugu in Karnataka and adjoining regions of Wayanad, Mudumalai National Park and Mukurthi National Park in the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu forms the largest contiguous protected area in the Western Ghats. The Western Ghats is home to numerous serene hill stations like Munnar, Ponmudi and Waynad. The Silent Valley National Park in Kerala is among the last tracts of virgin tropical evergreen forest in India.Elamon Suresh (2006) "Kerala's Greatest Heritage", YouTube video, retrieved 29 April 2007 Kerala's Greatest Heritage The Expert Appraisal Committee appointed by Union Government also said that the project should not be taken up. In August 2011, the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP)  designated the entire Western Ghats as an Ecologically Sensitive Area (ESA) and, assigned three levels of Ecological Sensitivity to its different regions.    The Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel, headed by ecologist Madhav Gadgil, was a committee appointed by the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests to assess the biodiversity and environmental issues of the Western Ghats spread across six states: Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra and Gujarat. The panel, which was set up on 14 March 2010, submitted its report to the government on 31 August 2011. Gadgil Committee and its successor Kasturirangan Committee recommended suggestions to protect the Western Ghats. However, both of them ran into controversy and were not implemented. Gadgil report was criticized as being too environment-friendly and not in tune with the ground realities. The Kasturirangan Committee tried to balance development and environment, but was labelled as being anti-environmental. In 2006, India applied to the UNESCO MAB for the Western Ghats to be listed as a protected World Heritage Site. In 2012, the following places are declared as World Heritage Sites:  The Western Ghats are home to thousands of animal species including at least 325 globally threatened species. Many are endemic  species, especially in the amphibian, reptilian and fish classes. Thirty two threatened species of mammals live in the Western Ghats. Of the 16 endemic mammals, 13 are threatened.  These hill ranges serve as important wildlife corridors, allowing seasonal migration of endangered Asian elephants. The Nilgiri Bio-sphere is home to the largest population of Asian elephants and forms an important Project Elephant and Project Tiger reserve. Brahmagiri and Pushpagiri wildlife sanctuaries are important elephant habitats. Karnataka's Ghat areas hold over six thousand elephants (as of 2004) and ten percent of India's critically endangered tiger population. The largest population of India's tigers outside the Sundarbans is in the forests where the boundaries of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala meet. The largest numbers and herds of vulnerable gaur are found here with the Bandipur National Park and Nagarhole together holding over five thousand gaur.Wildlife populations in Karnataka To the west the forests of Kodagu hold sizeable populations of the endangered Nilgiri langur. Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary and project tiger reserve in Lakkavalli of Chikmagalur has large populations of Indian muntjac. Many Asian elephant, gaur, sambar, vulnerable sloth bears, leopard, tiger and wild boars are found in the forests of Karnataka. Bannerghatta National Park and Annekal reserve forest is an important elephant corridor connecting the forests of Tamil Nadu with those of Karnataka. Dandeli and Anshi national parks in Uttara Kannada district are home to leopards and significant populations of the great Indian hornbill. Bhimgad in Belgaum district is a proposed wildlife sanctuary and is home to the endemic critically endangered Wroughton's freetailed bat. The Krishnapur caves close by are one of only three places in the country where the little-known Theobald's tomb bat is found. Large lesser false vampire bats are found in the Talevadi caves. There is a higher fish richness in the southern part of the Western Ghats than in the northern, and the highest is in the Chalakudy River, which alone holds 98 species. Other rivers with high species numbers include the Periyar, Bharatapuzha, Pamba and Chaliyar, as well as upstream tributaries of the Kaveri, Pambar, Bhavani and Krishna rivers. The most species rich families are the Cyprinids (72 species), hillstream loaches (34 species; including stone loaches, now regarded a separate family), Bagrid catfishes (19 species) and Sisorid catfishes (12 species). The region is home to several brilliantly coloured ornamental fishes like Denison's (or red line torpedo) barb, several species of Dawkinsia barbs, zebra loach, Horabagrus catfish, dwarf pufferfish and dwarf Malabar pufferfish. The rivers are also home to Osteobrama bakeri, and larger species such as the Malabar snakehead and Malabar mahseer. According to the IUCN, 97 freshwater fish species from the Western Ghats were considered threatened in 2011, including 12 critically endangered, 54 endangered and 31 vulnerable. All but one (Tor khudree) of these are endemic to the Western Ghats. An additional 26 species from the region are considered data deficient (their status is unclear at present). The primary threats are from habitat loss, but also from overexploitation and introduced species. There are at least 16 species of birds endemic to the Western Ghats including the endangered rufous-breasted laughingthrush, the vulnerable Nilgiri wood-pigeon, white-bellied shortwing and broad-tailed grassbird, the near threatened grey-breasted laughingthrush, black-and-rufous flycatcher, Nilgiri flycatcher, and Nilgiri pipit, and the least concern Malabar (blue-winged) parakeet, Malabar grey hornbill, white-bellied treepie, grey-headed bulbul, rufous babbler, Wynaad laughingthrush, white-bellied blue-flycatcher and the crimson-backed sunbird. 240px heights=200px Nilgiri wood-pigeon Malabar grey hornbill Malabar barbet Malabar (blue-winged) parakeet Nilgiri pipit White-bellied treepie The Western Ghats is home to 174 species of odonates (107 dragonflies and 67 damselflies), including 69 endemics. Most of the endemic odonate are closely associated with rivers and streams, while the non-endemics typically are generalists. A total of 77 species of freshwater molluscs (52 gastropods and 25 bivalves) have been recorded from the Western Ghats, but the actual number is likely higher. This include 28 endemics. Among the threatened freshwater molluscs are the mussels Pseudomulleria dalyi, which is a Gondwanan relict, and the snail Cremnoconchus, which is restricted to the spray zone of waterfalls. According to the IUCN, 4 species of freshwater molluscs are considered endangered and 3 are vulnerable. An additional 19 species are considered data deficients (their status is unclear at present). 240px heights=200px  The endemic land snail Indrella ampulla Phallus indusiatus fungus found in Sahyadri range Snail in Kundadri Hills Of the 7,402 species of flowering plants occur in the Western Ghats, 5,588 species are native or indigenous and 376 are exotics naturalized and 1,438 species are cultivated or planted as ornamentals. Among the indigenous species, 2,253 species are endemic to India and of them, 1,273 species are exclusively confined to the Western Ghats. Apart from 593 confirmed subspecies and varieties; 66 species, 5 subspecies and 14 varieties of doubtful occurrence are also reported and therefore amounting 8,080 taxa of flowering plants.Nayar, T.S., Rasiya Beegam A., and M. Sibi. (2014). Flowering Plants of the Western Ghats, India (2 Volumes), Jawaharlal Nehru Tropical Botanic Garden and Research Institute, Palode, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India. p.1700       Rank !! Name !! Elevation (m) !! Location 01. Anaimudi 2695 Eravikulam National Park, Kerala 02. Mannamalai 2659 Idukki, Kerala 03. Meesapulimala 2640 Idukki, Kerala 04. Doddabetta 2637 Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu 05. Kolaribetta 2629 Mukurthi National Park, Tamil Nadu 06. Mukurthi 2554 Mukurthi National Park, Tamil Nadu 07. Vandaravu 2553 Palani Hills, Tamil Nadu 08. Kattumala 2552 Eravikulam National Park, Munnar, Kerala, India, the home of Nilgiri Tahr. Eravikulam.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-28. Eravikulam National Park, Kerala 09. Anginda peak 2383 Silent Valley National Park, Kerala 10. Vavulmala 2339 Vavul Mala. Peakbagger.com (2004-11-01). Retrieved on 2013-07-28. Vellarimala, Kerala 11. Kodaikanal 2133 Kodaikanal, Tamil Nadu 12. Chembra Peak 2100 Wayanad, Kerala 13. Elivai Mala 2088 Elivai Malai. Peakbagger.com (2004-11-01). Retrieved on 2013-07-28. Palakkad, Kerala 14. Banasura Peak 2073 Wayanad, Kerala 15. Kottamala 2019 Periyar National Park, Kerala 16. Mullayanagiri 1930 Chikmagalur, Karnataka 17. Devarmala 1923 Achenkovil, Kerala 18. Baba Budangiri 1895 Chikmagalur, Karnataka 19. Kudremukh 1894 Chikmagalur, Karnataka 20. Agasthyamala 1868 Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 21. Biligiriranga Hills 1800 Chamarajanagar, Karnataka 22. Velliangiri Mountains 1778 Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 23. Tadiandamol 1748 Kodagu, Karnataka 24. Kumara Parvata 1712 Dakshina Kannada, Karnataka 25. Pushpagiri 1712 Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary, Karnataka 26. Merthi Gudda 1676 Hornadu, Karnataka 27. Kalsubai 1648 Ahmednagar, Maharashtra 28. Brahmagiri 1608 Kodagu, Karnataka 29. Kote Betta 1620 Kodagu, Karnataka 30. Salher 1567 Nashik, Maharashtra 31. Madikeri 1525 Kodagu, Karnataka 32. Dhodap 1472 Nashik, Maharashtra 33. Himavad Gopalaswamy Betta 1450 Chamarajanagar, Karnataka 34. Taramati 1431 Ahmednagar, Maharashtra 35. Torna Fort 1405 Pune, Maharashtra 36. Purandar fort 1387 Pune, Maharashtra 37. Raigad fort 1346 Raigad, Maharashtra 38. Kodachadri 1343 Shimoga, Karnataka 39. Paitalmala 1343 Kudiyanmala, Kerala Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary Neyyar Wildlife Sanctuary Peppara Wildlife Sanctuary Periyar Tiger Reserve Srivilliputtur Wildlife Sanctuary Eravikulam National Park Grass Hills National Park Karian Shola National Park Chinnar Wildlife Sanctuary Silent Valley National Park New Amarambalam Reserved Forest Mukurthi National Park Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary Talakaveri Wildlife Sanctuary Aralam Wildlife Sanctuary Kudremukh National Park Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary Kaas Plateau Koyna Wildlife Sanctuary Chandoli National Park Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary Mammals – There are at least 139 mammal species. A critically endangered mammal of the Western Ghats is the nocturnal Malabar large-spotted civet. The arboreal lion-tailed macaque is endangered. Only 2500 of this species are remaining. Database entry includes justification for why this species is endangered. The largest population of lion tailed macaque is in Silent Valley National Park. Kudremukh National Park also protects a viable population. Reptiles – The snake family Uropeltidae of the reptile class is almost entirely restricted to this region. Amphibians – The amphibians of the Western Ghats are diverse and unique, with more than 80% of the 179 amphibian species being endemic to the region. Most of the endemic species have their distribution in the rainforests of these mountains.Vasudevan Karthikeyan, A Report on the Survey of Rainforest Fragments in the Western Ghats for Amphibian Diversity, retrieved 9/1/2007 (Online version). Introduction  The endangered purple frog was discovered in 2003 to be a living fossil. This species of frog is most closely related to species found in the Seychelles. Four new species of frogs belonging to the genera Rhacophorus, Polypedates, Philautus and Bufo were described from the Western Ghats in 2005.An evaluation of the endemism of the amphibian assemblages from the Western Ghats using molecular techniques Contents & Summary The region is also home to many caecilian species. Fish – , 288 freshwater fish species are listed for the Western Ghats, including 35 also known from brackish or marine water. Several new species have been described from the region since then (e.g., Dario urops, Horabagrus melanosoma and S. sharavathiensis), meaning that the figure is higher today. There are 118 endemic species, including 12 genera entirely restricted to the Western Ghats (Betadevario, Dayella, Horabagrus, Horalabiosa, Hypselobarbus, Indoreonectes, Lepidopygopsis, Longischistura, Mesonoemacheilus, Parapsilorhynchus, Rohtee and Travancoria).Molur, M.; Smith, K.G.; Daniel, B.A.; and Darwall, W.R.T. (2011). The status and distribution of freshwater biodiversity in the Western Ghats, India. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species - Regional Assessment. ISBN 978-2-8317-1381-6. Birds – There are at least 508 bird species. Most of Karnataka's five hundred species of birds are from the Western Ghats region. Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary is located at the northern end of the Malabar ranges and the southern tip of the Sahyadri ranges and bird species from both ranges can be seen here. Insects – There are roughly 6,000 insect species from Kerala alone.Mathew George and Binoy C.F., An Overview of Insect Diversity of Western Ghats with Special Reference to Kerala State, retrieved 24 July 2007. (Online version). Brief summary of work so far carried out on the insect fauna of Western Ghats of Kerala Of 334 Western Ghats butterfly species, 316 species have been reported from the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve.George Mathew and M. Mahesh Kumar, State of the Art Knowledge on the Butterflies of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, INDIA, retrieved 9/1/2007 (Online version). Introduction butterfly fauna Molluscs – Seasonal rainfall patterns of the Western Ghats necessitate a period of dormancy for its land snails, resulting in their high abundance and diversity including at least 258 species of gastropods from 57 genera and 24 families.Madhyastha N. A., Rajendra, Mavinkurve G. and Shanbhag Sandhya P., Land Snails of Western Ghats, retrieved 9/1/2007 (Online version) Introduction Molluscs Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education List of mountains in Kerala List of mountain peaks of Maharashtra A rendezvous with Sahyadri Harshal Mahajan Book - Flowers of Sahyadri, Field Guide  - Corolla Publication, Pune shrikant ingalhalikar Wikramanayake, Eric; Eric Dinerstein; Colby J. Loucks; et al. (2002). Terrestrial Ecoregions of the Indo-Pacific: a Conservation Assessment. Island Press; Washington, DC. Trek the Sahyadris Harish Kapadia Karnataka forest Department- National Parks and WLS Daniels, R.J. Ranjit, Wildlife institute of India, "Biodiversity in the Western Ghats" Ajith Kumar, Sálim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, Coimbatore, India, Ravi Chellam, B.C.Choudhury, Divya Mudappa, Karthikeyan Vasudevan, N.M.Ishwar, Wildlife Institute of India, Dehra Dun, India, Barry Noon, Department of Fish and Wildlife Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, U.S.A. (2002) "Impact of Rainforest Fragmentation on Small Mammals and Herpetofauna in the Western Ghats, South India", Final Report, pp. 146, illus. Full text retrieved 14 March 2007 Verma Desh Deepak  (2002) "Thematic Report on Mountain Ecosystems", Ministry of Environment and Forests,13pp, retrieved 27 March 2007 Thematic Report on Mountain Ecosystems Full text, detailed data, not cited. Abstracts, Edited by Lalitha Vijayan, Saconr. Vasudeva, University of Dharwad, Priyadarsanan, Atree, Renee Borges, CES, ISSC, Jagdish Krishnaswamy, Atree & WCSP. Pramod, Sacon, Jagannatha Rao, R., FRLHTR. J. Ranjit Daniels, Care Earth, Compiled by S. Somasundaram, Sacon (1–2 December 2005) Integrating Science and Management of Biodiversity in the Western Ghats, 2nd National Conference of the Western Ghats Forum, Venue: State Forest Service College Coimbatore, Organized by Sálim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, Anaikatty, Coimbatore – 641108, India. Sponsored by Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. Supported by The Arghyam Foundation, The Ford Foundation & Sir Dorabiji Trust Through Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) Shifting Cultivation, Sacred Groves and Conflicts in Colonial Forest Policy in the Western Ghats. M,D. Subash Chandran; Chapter 22 PDF ernet.in Western Ghats, UNESCO World Heritage site Western Ghats, WWF Mountains of the Monsoons - A Film by SandeshKadur Sahyadri Nisarga Mitra - NGO working on nature conservation
