 West Palm Beach is a city in and the county seat of Palm Beach County, Florida, United States. It is one of the three main cities in South Florida. The population was 99,919 at the 2010 census. The University of Florida Bureau of Economic and Business Research (BEBR) estimates a 2014 population of 104,031, a 4.1% increase from 2010. It is the oldest municipality in the South Florida metropolitan area, having been incorporated as a city two years before Miami in November 1894. West Palm Beach is located approximately 68 miles (109&nbsp;km) north of Downtown Miami.    The beginning of the historic period in south Florida is marked by Juan Ponce de León’s first contact with native people in 1513. Europeans found a thriving native population, which they categorized into separate tribes: the Mayaimi in the Lake Okeechobee Basin and the Jaega and Ais people in the East Okeechobee area and on the east coast north of the Tequesta. When the Spanish arrived, there were perhaps about 20,000 Native Americans in south Florida. By 1763, when the English gained control of Florida, the native peoples had all but been wiped out through war, enslavement, or European diseases.Native Americans. Pbchistoryonline.org. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. Other native peoples from Alabama and Georgia moved into Florida in the early 18th century. They were of varied ancestry, but Europeans called them all “Creeks.” In Florida, they were known as the Seminole and Miccosukee Indians. The Seminoles clashed with American settlers over land and over escaped slaves who found refuge among them. They resisted the government’s efforts to move them to the Indian Territory west of the Mississippi. Between 1818 and 1858, three wars were fought between Seminoles and the United States government. By 1858 there were very few Seminoles remaining in Florida.The Seminole War in Palm Beach County. Pbchistoryonline.org. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. The area that was to become West Palm Beach was settled in the late 1870s and 1880s by a few hundred settlers who called the vicinity "Lake Worth Country." These settlers were a diverse community from different parts of the United States and the world. They included founding families such at the Potters and the Lainharts, who would go on to become leading members of the business community in the fledgling city. The first white settlers in Palm Beach County lived around Lake Worth, then an enclosed freshwater lake, named for Colonel William Jenkins Worth, who had fought in the Second Seminole War in Florida in 1842. Most settlers engaged in the growing of tropical fruits and vegetables for shipment the north via Lake Worth and the Indian River. By 1890, the U.S. Census counted over 200 people settled along Lake Worth in the vicinity of what would become West Palm Beach. The area at this time also boasted a hotel, the "Cocoanut House", a church, and a post office. The city was platted by Henry Flagler as a community to house the servants working in the two grand hotels on the neighboring island of Palm Beach, across Lake Worth in 1893, coinciding with the arrival of the Florida East Coast railroad. Flagler paid two area settlers, Captain Porter and Louie Hillhouse, a combined sum of $45,000 for the original townsite, stretching from Clear Lake to Lake Worth. On November 5, 1894, 78 people met at the "Calaboose" (the first jail and police station located at Clematis St. and Poinsettia, now Dixie Hwy.) and passed the motion to incorporate the Town of West Palm Beach in what was then Dade County (now Miami-Dade County). This made West Palm Beach the first incorporated municipality in Dade County and in South Florida. The town council quickly addressed the building codes and the tents and shanties were replaced by brick, brick veneer, and stone buildings. The city grew steadily during the 1890s and the first two decades of the 20th century, most residents were engaged in the tourist industry and related services or winter vegetable market and tropical fruit trade. In 1909, Palm Beach County was formed by the Florida State Legislature and West Palm Beach became the county seat. In 1916, a new neo-classical courthouse was opened, which has been painstainkingly restored back to its original condition, and is now used as the local history museum. The city grew rapidly in the 1920s as part of the Florida land boom. The population of West Palm Beach quadrupled from 1920 to 1927, and all kinds of businesses and public services grew along with it. Many of the city's landmark structures and preserved neighborhoods were constructed during this period. Originally, Flagler intended for his Florida East Coast Railway to have its terminus in West Palm, but after the area experienced a deep freeze, he chose to extend the railroad to Miami instead. The land boom was already faltering when city was devastated by the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane. The Depression years of the 1930s were a quiet time for the area, which saw slight population growth and property values lower than during the 1920s. The city only recovered with the onset of World War II, which saw the construction of Palm Beach Air Force Base, which brought thousands of military personnel to the city. The base was vital to the allied war effort, as it provided an excellent training facility and had unparalleled access to North Africa for a North American city. Also during World War II, German U-Boats sank dozens of merchant ships and oil tankers just off the coast of West Palm Beach. Nearby Palm Beach was under black out conditions to minimize night visibility to German U-boats. The 1950s saw another boom in population, partly due to the return of many soldiers and airmen who had served in the vicinity during the war. Also, the advent of air conditioning encouraged growth, as year-round living in a tropical climate became more acceptable to northerners. West Palm Beach became the one of the nation's fastest growing metropolitan areas during the 1950s; the city's borders spread west of Military Trail and south to Lake Clarke Shores.  However, many of the city's residents still lived within a narrow six-block wide strip from the south to north end. The neighborhoods were strictly segregated between White and African-American populations, a legacy that the city still struggles with today. The primary shopping district remained downtown, centered around Clematis Street. In the 1960s, Palm Beach County's first enclosed shopping mall, the Palm Beach Mall, and an indoor arena were completed. These projects led to a brief revival for the city, but in the 1970s and 1980s crime continued to be a serious issue and suburban sprawl continued to drain resources and business away from the old downtown area. By the early 1990s there were very high vacancy rates downtown, and serious levels of urban blight. Since the 1990s, developments such as CityPlace and the preservation and renovation of 1920s architecture in the nightlife hub of Clematis Street have seen a downtown resurgence in the entertainment and shopping district. The city has also placed emphasis on neighborhood development and revitalization, in historic districts such as Northwood, Flamingo Park, and El Cid. Some neighborhoods still struggle with blight and crime, as well as lowered property values caused by the Great Recession, which hit the region particularly hard. Since the recovery, multiple new developments have been completed. The Palm Beach Mall, located at the Interstate 95/Palm Beach Lakes Boulevard interchange became abandoned as downtown revitalized - the very mall that initiated the original abandonment of the downtown. The mall was then redeveloped into the Palm Beach Fashion Outlets in February 2014. A station for All Aboard Florida, a high speed passenger rail service serving Miami, Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach, and Orlando, is under construction as of July 2015. According to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the West Palm Beach Canal (C-51)/Stormwater Treatment Area (STA)1 East project was authorized by the U.S. Congress under the Flood Control Acts of 1948, 1954, 1962, 1968, and the Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) of 1996.  The project is located in Palm Beach County and runs east/west from West Palm Beach at Lake Worth to Water Conservation Area (WCA) No. 1 (Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge). The authorized project will provide 30-year flood protection to the urbanized eastern basin and 10-year flood protection to the western basin. All eastern basin features have been completed.  During mediation of the Everglades water quality litigation, a technical plan was developed for resolution of the litigation. The technical plan included a substantially modified C-51 project. The modified plan expands the original 1,600-acre floodwater detention area into a 6,500-acre stormwater detention area. In addition to the flood damage reduction benefits provided by the original project, the modified plan provides water quality treatment, reduction of damaging freshwater discharges to Lake Worth, and increased water supply for the Everglades and other users. According to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the total estimated cost of the West Palm Beach Canal (C51) is $375.47 million, with an estimated $345.04 million as the U.S. Federal Government cost share.  $1.05 million was appropriated for this project by the U.S. Congress in Fiscal Year 2015.  The Fiscal Year 2016 Budget Request from the U.S. President to the U.S. Congress was for $1 million.   According to the United States Census Bureau, this city has a total area of .  of it is land and  of it (5.26%) is water. Due to vast areas of wetland immediately to the west of the city's downtown, growth occurred to the north and south in a linear fashion. Until the 1960s, the city was no more than several blocks wide but over 100 blocks in length. Large scale development finally occurred to the west of the city with improved access and drainage in the 1960s. However, the city boundaries were not expanded much with the exception of the "Water Catchment Area", an uninhabited area in the northwest part of the city. Known as Grassy Waters, it now serves as a reservoir for the city drinking as well as a nature preserve.      Bel Air Historic District: Developed from 1925 to 1935 as a neighborhood for tradesmen and real estate salesmen who helped develop Palm Beach County, some of Belair was originally a pineapple plantation owned by Richard Hone. Hones's frame vernacular house, built around 1895, still stands at 211 Plymouth Road. After Hone was murdered in 1902, his property was sold to George Currie, who created Currie Development Co. But before it was developed, the land was sold to William Ohlhaber, who raised coconut palms and ferns. Eventually, Ohlhaber platted the subdivision and sold off lots. The first house built in the subdivision was Ohlhaber's mission-style home at 205 Pilgrim. Ohlhaber's grandson said Ohlhaber bought the tract to provide dockage for his  yacht, but the yacht ran aground in the Gulf of Mexico and never reached Lake Worth. In 1947 Hone's house was bought by Max Brombacher, Henry Flagler's chief engineer, and it remains in the Brombacher family today. Belair became West Palm Beach's fourth historic district in August 1993. Central Park: Central Park is a collective name for several subdivisions north of Southern Boulevard. It originally was part of the Estates of South Palm Beach (which went from Wenonah Place to Pilgrim Road east of Dixie Highway). Like other West Palm Beach neighborhoods, the Estates of South Palm Beach boomed after Henry Flagler's descent on Palm Beach. In 1884, James W. Copp, a bachelor in the boating business, borrowed $367.20 from Valentine Jones to buy the land. The ownership of what is now known as Central Park changed hands many times before being developed. Around 1919, the tropical wilderness was transformed into an exclusive neighborhood with curbed roads, sidewalks and a pier (at the foot of what is now Southern Boulevard). The neighborhood became part of West Palm Beach in 1926, and was named a city historic district in December 1993. In 1999 the neighborhood was listed in the National Register of Historic Places. El Cid: Noted for its Mediterranean revival and mission-style homes, El Cid developed in the height of Florida's real estate boom. In the late 19th century, most of the land north of Sunset Road was pineapple fields, but the crop dwindled in the early 20th century. Pittsburgh socialite Jay Phipps subdivided the old pineapple fields in the 1920s. He named it El Cid, after the celebrated Spanish hero, Rodrigo Diaz de Bivar, who conquered Valencia in 1094. He was called "Cid", meaning "lord". El Cid became a city historic district in June 1993. In 1995 the neighborhood was listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Flamingo Park: Originally a pineapple plantation, Flamingo Park was established by local contractors and developers, who saw the potential in this area—one of the highest coastal ridge sections from downtown West Palm Beach to Miami. Some ridge houses even had ocean views from upper floors. Houses cost about $10,000 to $18,000 in the boom era, and many buyers were owners of shops and businesses on fashionable Dixie Highway nearby. Recently, residents rallied to have stop signs installed throughout the neighborhood and have banded together to ward off commercial and industrial zoning. Property values are rising as residents renovate and restore Spanish-style houses. Most of the homes in the neighborhood, developed from 1921 to 1930, are mission style, but nearly every style is represented. There are many Mediterranean revival-style houses along the high ridge line. Only two buildings in the historic district are known to have been designed by architects: 701 Flamingo Drive designed by Harvey and Clarke, and the Armory Arts Center designed by William Manly King. The neighborhood became a West Palm Beach historic district in January 1993 and was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 2000. Grandview Heights: One of the city's oldest neighborhoods still intact, Grandview Heights was built as an extension of Palm Beach Heights from around 1910 to 1925. Almost all of Palm Beach Heights and half of Grandview Heights was demolished in 1989 to make way for the proposed Downtown/Uptown project, which became CityPlace. Grandview Heights originally attracted construction workers who helped build the luxury hotels, ministers and store owners. The neighborhood has one of the city's best collection of early craftsman-style bungalows, as well as some modest, Mediterranean revival-style homes. The neighborhood became a West Palm Beach historic district in 1995 and was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1999. Mango Promenade: Mango Promenade became a West Palm Beach historic district in 1995 and was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1999. Lies just south of Palm Beach Atlantic University. Northboro Park: An expansion of Old Northwood, Northboro Park was mostly custom houses for upper-middle-class professionals. Most of the houses are Mediterranean revival, mission and frame vernacular. Developed from 1923 to 1940, the neighborhood became the city's second historic district (November 1992) and the historic designation may soon expand north to 45th Street. The oldest building in the neighborhood is Northboro Elementary School at 36th Street and Spruce, built in 1925 by DaCamara and Chace. The demolition of Northboro Elementary School began in late 2009. The first home in Northboro Park is 418 36th St., built in 1923. Northwest: West Palm Beach's first historic district to be included on the National Register of Historic Places (February 1992), the Northwest neighborhood was first settled in 1894, when the black community was moved from the Styx in Palm Beach to West Palm Beach. It also served as the city's segregated black community from 1929 to 1960 (along with Pleasant City). Northwest remains a predominantly black community but according to the city planning department, most middle- and upper-class blacks moved to other neighborhoods after desegregation. Tamarind and Rosemary Avenues were the commercial centers for blacks by 1915, but most commercial buildings have been demolished or remodeled so the architecture is no longer significant. There are still good examples of late 19th- and early 20th-century American bungalow/craftsman-style homes in this neighborhood, which also has mission, shotgun, Bahamian vernacular and American Foursquare styles. The Alice Frederick Mickens house, at 801 Fourth St., is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Mickens was a philanthropist and humanitarian who promoted education for black youth. Another notable house is the Gwen Cherry house at 625 Division Ave. Cherry, Florida's first black woman legislator and a resident of Miami, inherited the house from relative Mollie Holt, who built the house in 1926. Now it is the Palm Beach County Black Historical Society. The Northwest neighborhood was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1992. The next year the neighborhood became a West Palm Beach historic district in 1993. Old Northwood Historic District: Old Northwood was developed from 1920 to 1927—the height of the city's real estate boom. The Pinewood Development Co., platted and developed the area. Old Northwood became a neighborhood of what was considered extravagant Mediterranean revival, mission and frame vernacular houses, at $30,000 to $36,000. The buyers were professionals, entrepreneurs and tradesmen. Among them was Dunkle, who was mayor of West Palm Beach. There are houses here designed by notable architects John Volk (best known for his Palm Beach houses), William Manly King (who designed Palm Beach High School and the Armory Arts Center) and Henry Steven Harvey (whose Seaboard Railroad Passenger Station on Tamarind Avenue is listed in the National Register of Historic Places). The neighborhood became a West Palm Beach historic district in 1991 and listed in the National Register of Historic Places in June 1994. Northwood Hills Historic District: On August 4, 2003, the City Commission designated the Northwood Hills neighborhood as the 13th Historic District in the City of West Palm Beach. Northwood Hills comprises the area from 29th Street on the South to 39th Court on the North. The east side of Windsor is the Western boundary, and Greenwood Avenue is the Eastern boundary. The Neighborhood Association has worked several years to achieve the distinction of historic designation. This is the first district to be designated since 1996. Northwood Hills has a number of Mission Revival houses, a significant collection of Post-World War II architecture, a unique street layout, and one of the highest elevations in the City. The Northwood Hills neighborhood has also elected to allow the establishment of Bed and Breakfast establishments within the neighborhood. Prospect Park: Promoted as a high-end neighborhood patterned after the prominent Prospect Park district in Brooklyn, this area consisted of mostly smaller estates for prominent businesspeople and northern investors. The neighborhood has a high concentration of Mediterranean revival and Mission revival houses. It was developed from 1920 to 1935 and became a city historic district in November 1993. West Northwood Historic District: Cashing in on the real estate boom, developers of West Northwood built speculative and custom houses for upper-middle-class professionals from 1925 to '27. Dominant architectural styles are Mediterranean revival and mission. Although the area was declining, that has reversed in recent years, as more investors buy and restore the houses. West Northwood became a city historic district in August 1993. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml The estimated 2012 population of West Palm Beach and the immediately adjacent Census Designated Places is 134,795. Much of this urbanized area lies directly west of the city and includes the neighborhoods of Westgate, Belvedere Homes, Lakeside Green, Century Village, Schall Circle, Lake Belvedere Estates, Plantation Mobile Homes, and Golden Lakes. These neighborhoods are not technically within the boundaries of West Palm Beach, being located in unincorporated Palm Beach County. However, residents possess a "West Palm Beach" address and urban services, such as police, fire, parks, water and sewer, are provided by a combination of Palm Beach County and the City of West Palm Beach in these areas. The City of West Palm Beach also provides water and sewer service to the Town of Palm Beach. The contiguous "urbanized" area, of which West Palm Beach is the core city, includes most of eastern Palm Beach County and has an estimated 2008 population of around 1,250,000.http://www.bebr.ufl.edu/population Key incorporated cities and their populations within the West Palm Beach urbanized area include:    200px" heights="200px Downtown skyline at night An aerial view of Downtown West Palm Beach West Palm Beach skyline from Okeechobee Blvd. Flagler Drive Downtown shops on Clematis Street Australian Avenue skyline on Clear Lake Olive Avenue and Datura Street North Bridge Centre View of Palm Beach County Courthouse from Centennial Square Hibiscus Street, downtown West Palm Beach has a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen Af) with mean temperatures in all months above . This tropical climate allows for the West Palm Beach to have many species of tropical plants throughout the city. The wet season of May through October is hot, humid and wet with the average window for  temperatures April 20 thru October 8, but  has only occurred four times since record-keeping began in 1888. During this period, more than half of the summer days bring afternoon thunderstorms and seabreezes that cool the air for the rest of the day. The dry season of November through April is warm and mostly dry with  temperatures remaining rather commonplace even from December thru February. However, the area experiences occasional cold fronts during this period, holding daytime temperatures below  and lows dropping to  or further, lasting only for few days before going back up to the seventies to low  and occasionally mid eighties and low temperature in the mid sixties. During a severe and prolonged cold snap in January 2010, the city recorded 12 consecutive days of low temperatures at or below  and nine of the twelve days below  with several mornings at or near freezing. Annual average precipitation is , making it the fourth wettest city in the country after Mobile, Alabama; Pensacola, Florida; and New Orleans. Most of the precipitation occurs during the wet season of May through October, mainly as short-lived heavy afternoon thunderstorms. Occasionally, stalled cold fronts in the fall and spring can also lead to heavy and prolonged rainfall. The only record of snow was on January 18, 1977 when flurries were reported. West Palm Beach has an average of 133 wet days and 234 sunshine days annually. The hurricane season is officially from June 1 through November 30, with the peak months being August, September and October. The city has received direct or near direct hits from hurricanes in 1928, 1947, 1949, 1964, 1965, 1979, 1992, 1999, 2004, and 2005. As of the census of 2010, there were 54,179 households, out of which 20.8% were vacant. As of 2010, 22.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.3% were married couples living together, 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 47.5% were non-families. 37.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 3.02. As of 2000, the population was spread out with 21.3% under the age of 18, 9.8% from 18 to 24, 31.5% from 25 to 44, 21.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.0% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 37 years.  For every 100 females there were 97.3 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.8 males. In 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $36,774, and the median income for a family was $42,074. Males had a median income of $30,221 versus $26,473 for females. The per capita income for the city was $23,188.  About 14.5% of families and 18.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.2% of those under the age of 18 and 14.8% of those ages 65 and older. As of 2000, those who spoke only English at home accounted for 72.49% of all residents, while those who spoke Spanish made up 17.71%, French Creole (mainly Haitian Creole) 4.46%, 1.27% spoke French, German was spoken by 0.62%, and Italian speakers made up 0.52% of the population. K–12 public education is administrated by the School District of Palm Beach County, which is the eleventh-largest school district in the United States by enrollment. Public schools include: Private schools in the area include:   The original Palm Beach Junior College building was restored and is now adjacent to the campus of the Dreyfoos School of the Arts, a magnet performing and visual arts high school. It is now a satellite building of Palm Beach State College  Palm Beach Atlantic University (PBAU), a four-year private Christian university with approximately 3,200 students, is located in the city on seven blocks within the south end of downtown. The campus includes several historic structures converted to academic use. PBAU has recently added schools of nursing and of pharmacy. Northwood University has a residential campus in West Palm Beach, Florida. Keiser University is a regionally accredited school that offers a variety of degrees at the Associate, Bachelor, Master, and Doctoral levels. One of their 16 Florida campuses is located in West Palm Beach. Various private for-profit institutions are located in the city, including the Lincoln College of Technology (formerly known as New England Institute of Technology) and Florida Culinary Institute, owned by the New Jersey-based Lincoln Group of Schools. The Mandel Public Library of West Palm Beach serves the city."Library Website." Mandel Public Library of West Palm Beach. Retrieved on September 29, 2015. The new city public library opened in April 2009 at 411 Clematis Street, replacing the 1962 building which stood at the intersection of Clematis and Flagler Drive, along the Intracoastal Waterfront. Named for a Mandel Foundation grant received in 2012, the Mandel Public Library provides books, performances, classes, research, entertainment, technology, music and more. The Main Branch of the Palm Beach County Library System is also located in West Palm Beach, as well as the Okeechobee Branch Library. Companies based in West Palm Beach include Florida Public Utilities, ION Media Networks, Ocwen, and The Palm Beach Post. Other major employers are Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne, Sikorsky Aircraft, General Dynamics, Cemex, and CSC.Palm Beach County Top Employers Norton Museum of Art: is the largest art museum in Florida and also organizes traveling exhibits. The permanent collection features 19th and 20th century European and American art, Chinese, contemporary art and photography. Raymond F. Kravis Center for the Performing Arts: Built in 1992, the Kravis Center hosts performances of music, dance, opera and theatre.  Meyer Amphitheater: An abandoned Holiday Inn, demolished on New Year's Eve 1993 and transformed into an outdoor waterfront amphitheater. Richard and Pat Johnson Palm Beach County History Museum: is operated and maintained by the Historical Society of Palm Beach County,[ ] and is in the Historic 1916 Court House in downtown West Palm Beach. The museum provides access to Palm Beach County history through on-site investigation in the Research Library, on-line research on www.pbchistoryonline.org, the Public Programming Series and the Distinguished Lecture Series.  The Museum is free to visitors and offers Docent-led tours for adults and school groups. Palm Beach County Convention Center: A complex with  of exhibit halls and meeting rooms in downtown West Palm Beach. Harriet Himmel Theater: is a multi-use theater and historic church, and is the  cultural centerpiece of CityPlace  The Carefree Theatre: Built in 1940, in the historic Flamingo Park district, it was variously an art house cinema and alternative music performance venue until severely damaged by Hurricane Wilma. The venue has re-opened at a renovated church located nearby and under a new name, The Theater. There is a Jewish community offering learning and cultural activities.     SunFest: an annual music, art, and waterfront festival in Florida, founded in 1982 to draw visitors to the area during the ‘shoulder season’ of April and May. SunFest has an annual attendance of more than 275,000 people. Artists who have performed include Wilco, Carrie Underwood, John Mayer, Ray Charles, James Brown, Ludacris, Nelly, Lenny Kravitz, Dizzy Gillespie, Bob Dylan, Kenny G, Earth Wind and Fire, Cyndi Lauper, Smashing Pumpkins, MGMT, and The Wailers. SunFest is a 501(c)3 non-profit organization. Palm Beach International Film Festival Barrett-Jackson Collector Car Auction: Classic car auction held every March in the South Florida Expo Center. Palm Beach Opera West Palm Beach does not host any professional sports teams, but the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League play at BB&T Center in Sunrise to the south. Major League Baseball's Miami Marlins, the National Football League's Miami Dolphins and the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association all play in nearby Miami-Dade County. In the past West Palm Beach has hosted various professional teams such as Arena Football, minor league hockey and baseball as well as semi-pro football. Spring Training Baseball: The Miami Marlins and St. Louis Cardinals conduct spring training in suburban West Palm Beach in the town of Jupiter, Florida at Roger Dean Stadium. In the past West Palm Beach hosted the Atlanta Braves and Montreal Expos at the former Municipal Stadium and the Philadelphia Athletics and St. Louis Browns at Connie Mack Field, which was demolished in 1992. In the future the Houston Astros and Washington Nationals will be conducting spring training in West Palm Beach. Collegiate Athletics: Palm Beach Atlantic University competes in NCAA Division II basketball, baseball and soccer. PBAU has recently purchased a large tract of land just west of downtown where there will be built a multi-use athletic stadium. Indoor athletics play their home games at the Greene Complex which is an on campus arena. Florida Atlantic University's athletic programs are played in neighboring Boca Raton. FAU competes in the highest level of NCAA athletics including football, basketball, baseball, softball and tennis. Northwood University competes at the NAIA level, where their basketball coach Rollie Massimino, has given the athletic program national exposure. Professional Golf: PGA National Resort & Spa in suburban Palm Beach Gardens hosts the PGA Tour Honda Classic. Polo and Equestrian: Palm Beach Polo and Country Club counts 7 polo fields among its world-class facilities and many high-goal games are played in the area. The equestrian events at the Palm Beach International Equestrian Center are the world-renowned Winter Equestrian Festival, the Global Dressage Festival and over 40 weeks a year of equestrian competitions, hosted in Wellington. Tennis: The Delray Beach International Tennis Championships, a hard court stop on the ATP Tour, takes place annually in Delray Beach, slightly to the south of West Palm Beach. Croquet: The National Croquet Center has 12 full sized croquet lawns, making it the largest dedicated croquet facility in the world. It hosts several national championships and in May 2009 will host the World Championship when representatives of up to 25 countries will be competing for the Wimbledon Cup. BMX Racing: Okeeheelee park contains one of the most celebrated BMX race tracks in the state of Florida. Insured by USA BMX, the Okeeheelee track is host to State Qualifiers and National Races, it is also home to several National Champions. Clematis Street: is West Palm Beach's historic "main street" and shopping venue, home to Clematis by Night, an outdoor event held on the street with live music and food. CityPlace: Opened in 2000 on re-developed land where dilapidated single family homes and apartments once stood, CityPlace houses a multi-plex movie theater, night clubs (comedy, dance), restaurants, clothing and home-decor retail outlets and multi-story town houses and apartments. Antique Row: is a shopping district on the south side of the city along Dixie Highway. Architectural Digest, The New York Times, Art & Antiques, and House Beautiful have all noted Antique Row as one of the east coast's premier antique districts, considered the "antique design center" of Florida. Northwood Village: is an historic commercial district north of downtown. The city invested money in rebuilding the streetscape and promoting the area as an arts district.   Air: The city is served by Palm Beach International Airport, located in unincorporated Palm Beach County. The airport attracts people from all over the county as well as from the Treasure Coast and Space Coast counties to the north. In 2014 there were over 6.5 million passengers who passed through the gates of PBIA making it the 52nd busiest airport in the nation. Bicycle The city's flat terrain, paved streets, and year-round climate soon earned it the designation as the "bicyclingest town in the U.S.A.". The historic core consists of a dense grid of narrower streets, as laid out by Henry Flagler. Clematis Street was one-lane each direction with a speed limit of 12mph, and the middle of the street between lanes was used to park bicycles.  Although the popularity of bicycling declined during the later half of the 20th century, it has recently increased in popularity. In addition, a bike share program, SkyBike, was introduced in 2015. Highways: U.S. 1 passes though the city's downtown, commercial, and industrial districts. Interstate 95 bisects the city from north to south with multiple interchanges serving West Palm Beach, including an entrance to Palm Beach International Airport. Florida's Turnpike passes through West Palm Beach further west, connecting with the western suburbs of Royal Palm Beach and Wellington. State Road 80, running east-west, is a partial expressway, that runs from Interstate 95 to State Road 7. Rail: Tri-Rail commuter rail system serves the city from a historical station located on the west side of Tamarind Avenue, just east of I-95. Tri-Rail provides commuter rides north to Mangonia Park and south to Miami. Amtrak has daily trains arriving and departing to points north. CSX Transportation and the Florida East Coast Railway also serve the city. All Aboard Florida began track upgrades in 2015 in preparation for high-speed passenger service serving Miami, FL through Orlando, FL.  Trolley: There is a free downtown trolley that provides transportation around downtown including Clematis, City Place and Waterfront districts of the city. Bus: Greyhound Lines operates scheduled intercity bus service out of the train station on the west side of Tamarind Avenue. Palm Tran, the Palm Beach County municipal bus service, operates scheduled service throughout the city and the suburban areas of Palm Beach County. Port: The Port of Palm Beach is located on the northern edge of the city limits. It is the fourth busiest container port in Florida and the 18th busiest in the continental United States. In addition to intermodal capacity, the Port is a major modal point for the shipment of various goods as well as being the home to several small passenger cruise lines. Water Taxi: As a waterfront city there is specific need for water transportation between points in the city and surrounding areas. Waterway transportation is available to and from the downtown Clematis Street District, Sailfish Marina Resort, waterfront attractions, Peanut Island and special events. Newspapers: The Palm Beach Post is owned by Atlanta-based Cox Enterprises. Its name notwithstanding, the Post is based in West Palm Beach, not Palm Beach. The Post is the 57th highest daily circulation in the country, according to the 2007 BurrellesLuce survey, and is the city's sole daily newspaper. It serves Palm Beach County and the Treasure Coast, the area north of Palm Beach County that includes Martin and St. Lucie Counties. South Florida Sun-Sentinel: is based in Fort Lauderdale and covers portions of Southern Palm Beach County. Palm Beach Daily News: sister publication of the Palm Beach Post serving the town of Palm Beach, it covers events and social affairs of the celebrities and wealthy residents of Palm Beach. Frequently extends coverage to events taking place in West Palm Beach. New Times Broward-Palm Beach is an alternative weekly publication serving West Palm Beach along with Fort Lauderdale. Radio: West Palm Beach is ranked as the 46th largest radio market in the country by Arbitron. Television: West Palm Beach is ranked as the 38th largest television market in the country by Nielsen Media Research. The market is served by stations affiliated with major American networks including: WPTV-TV/5 (NBC), WPEC/12(CBS), WTCN-CA/15(MYTV), WPBF/25 (ABC), WFLX/29 (FOX), WTVX/34 (CW), WXEL-TV/42 (PBS), WWHB/48 (Azteca), WFGC/61 (Ind.), WPXP/67 (ION), WBWP/57 (MundoFox) The area's official Telemundo affiliate is WSCV in Miami, and WLTV is the area's Univision affiliate, also in Miami. In addition to those, many Miami/Ft. Lauderdale market TV and radio stations are also available and viewed in West Palm Beach. West Palm Beach has three sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International:   Violent crime: According to Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE) statistics, West Palm Beach is experiencing a steep drop in major crimes. In the past decade, crime has dropped more in West Palm Beach than in any other major city (approximately 100,000 residents or more) in the state of Florida. In 1993, West Palm Beach was featured in a 60 Minutes segment on urban decay. At the time, 80% of downtown properties were vacant. Since then, the city has done much to improve its image, at least in the physical sense. Occupancy is high, and housing prices have risen rapidly. FDLE stats show that the total crime rate per 100,000 residents has dropped by more than 50% since 2000, from 13,880 that year to 6,571 in 2008. In 2008 alone, there was a 17.9% drop in crime. Annual crime rates are always more than three times the national average. However, as of 2006, the city's crime average has been gradually decreasing while robbery was up 17 percent. West Palm Beach's northern neighbor, Riviera Beach, has an even higher violent crime rate. The following are the crime rates, per 100,000 people, for West Palm Beach as of 2005. Dunbar Village: In 2007, a resident was gang-raped by Jakaris Taylor and a group of 3 other teenagers in one of the City's public housing developments, Dunbar Village Housing Projects, with her son forced to participate, drawing national outrage.    Name Stories Height Trump Plaza 32 Tower 1515(demolished) 32 Palm Beach House 28 Placido Mar 30 Esperante 20 Northbridge Centre 25 One Clear Lake Center 20 Waterview Tower 25 Phillips Point 20 West Palm Beach Demographics 2010 Census West Palm Beach Palm Beach County Florida Total population 99,919 1,320,134 18,801,310 Population, percent change, 2000 to 2010 Population density 1,807.1/sq&nbsp;mi 670.2/sq&nbsp;mi 350.6/sq&nbsp;mi White or Caucasian (including White Hispanic) 56.7% 73.5% 75.0% (Non-Hispanic White or Caucasian) 41.6% 60.1% 57.9% Black or African-American 32.5% 17.3% 16.0% Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 22.6% 19.0% 22.5% Asian 2.3% 2.4% 2.4% Native American or Native Alaskan 0.5% 0.5% 0.4% Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% Two or more races (Multiracial) 2.7% 2.3% 2.5% Some Other Race 5.2% 3.9% 3.6% 89,407 - Boca Raton 71,097 - Boynton Beach 64,072 - Delray Beach 60,202 - Wellington 58,298 - Jupiter 50,699 - Palm Beach Gardens 38,696 - Greenacres 36,306 - Royal Palm Beach 36,000 - Lake Worth 33,263 - Riviera Beach 20,872 - Palm Springs 12,348 - North Palm Beach 10,867 - Lantana 8,649 - Palm Beach 3,472 - Lake Clarke Shores 3,283 - Loxahatchee 2,057 - Atlantis 1,940 - Haverhill 1,939 - Mangonia Park Everglades Elementary School South Olive Elementary School U.B. Kinsey/Palmview Elementary School - Performing and Visual School of the Arts Magnet School Bak Middle School of the Arts - Performing and Visual School of the Arts Magnet School Roosevelt Middle School Western Pines Community Middle School Conniston Middle School Dreyfoos School of the Arts - Performing and Visual School of the Arts Magnet School Forest Hill Community High School G-Star School Of The Arts Inlet Grove Community High School Palm Beach Lakes Community High School Royal Palm Beach High School Palm Beach Maritime Academy - K-10 moving to K-12 Gardens School Of Technology Arts - K-8 Berean Christian School Cardinal Newman High School The King's Academy American Heritage School Indian Ridge School Palm Beach Day Academy The Benjamin School Oxbridge Academy of the Palm Beaches Rosarian Academy St. Ann's Celebration Cruise Linehttp://www.bahamascelebration.com Palm Beach Zoo at Dreher Park Rapids Water Park South Florida Science Museum Lion Country Safari International Polo Hall of Fame National Croquet Center Palm Beach Polo and Players Club Trump International Golf Club  Mersin, Turkey  Tzahar, Israel  Budva, Montenegro Hank Aaron, Hall of Fame baseball player and home-run king; street is named for him. Andy Abad, MLB first baseman for the Oakland Athletics, Boston Red Sox and Cincinnati Reds Stephanie Abrams, Weather Channel meteorologist Timothy Lincoln Beckwith, relative of former President Abraham Lincoln Tori Amos, singer-songwriter Otis Anderson  NFL New York Giants, Super Bowl MVP Jeff Atwater, State Senator, Florida Legislature, Palm Beach County Bob Barker, entertainer, game show host, The Price Is Right Zinn Beck,  MLB infielder Dickey Betts, Allman Brothers Band member Jason Bonham, drummer and son of Led Zeppelin's legendary drummer John Bonham Don Brewer, Grand Funk Railroad drummer Jimmy Buffett, singer and entertainer Andrés Galarraga, MLB baseball player Virginia Spencer Carr, biographer and literary critic Diana Canova, actress Chris Carrabba, singer-songwriter from Dashboard Confessional Anthony Carter, NFL player Tom Carvel Carvel Ice-cream stores Glenn Close, actress Bob Cousy, basketball Hall of Famer and TV commentator Marshall Criser, president of the University of Florida Vic Damone, singer Dale Dawson, NFL player Phil Dawson, NFL placekicker for San Francisco 49ers Ted DiBiase, Jr., former professional wrestler Alexander W. Dreyfoos, Jr., entrepreneur and philanthropist Watson B. Duncan III, acting coach and mentor to Burt Reynolds Heath Evans, fullback for the New Orleans Saints and graduate of The Kings Academy Mark Foley, U.S. Congressman Kason Gabbard, MLB pitcher with the Texas Rangers Willie E. Gary, attorney and co-founder of the MBC Network Anthony Goldwire, NBA player Ken Green, PGA golfer Deidre Hall, actress, graduate of Lake Worth High School in central Palm Beach County George Hamilton, actor, graduate of Palm Beach High School Arin Hanson, voice actor, animator, internet personality Derek Harper, NBA player for the Knicks and Mavericks William Harris, tennis player Alcee Hastings, U.S. Congressman John Havlicek, basketball Hall of Famer Ryan Hawblitzel, Major League Baseball player Devin Hester, NFL player Bill Hicks, comedian Jay Howard, British professional race car driver in the IZOD IndyCar Series and Indianapolis 500 Dick Howser, Professional baseball player, and manager of the 1985 Kansas City Royals world series champions Hey Monday, alternative rock band Tommy Lee Jones, actor Michael Jordan, basketball Hall of Famer Ron Klein, U.S. Congressman Joey Kramer, Aerosmith drummer Larry the Cable Guy, comedian Debi Laszewski, IFBB professional bodybuilder Theresa LePore, Supervisor of Elections; designer of butterfly ballot, which figured prominently in U.S. presidential election, 2000 David McCampbell, naval aviator during World War II A.J. McLean, of the Backstreet Boys Marta Fernandez Miranda de Batista, First Lady of Cuba (1952–1959) Edgar Mitchell, astronaut who walked on the moon Ruthie Morris, guitarist of Magnapop Jim Palmer, baseball Hall of Famer Barbara Pariente, former Chief Justice and current Justice of the Florida Supreme Court James Patterson, author Cassadee Pope, winner of The Voice season 3 and lead singer of rock band Hey Monday Jamieson Price, actor, voice-over artist Judge Reinhold, actor Burt Reynolds, actor, graduate of Palm Beach High School Randi Rhodes, radio talk show host Adrian Rogers, president Southern Baptist Convention and pastor of Bellevue Baptist Church William J. Ronan, (1912-2014) former chairman of the New York State's MTA and the Port Authority of New York & New Jersey, and former president of New York University (NYU) Jarrod Saltalamacchia, catcher for the Arizona Diamondbacks Ron Sellers, NFL player for Dallas Cowboys Steve Sipek  (Stjepan Sipek), actor, stage name Steve Hawkes, starred in Blood Freak and Tarzan and the Brown Prince Howard Stern, radio talk show host Vinny Sutherland, NFL player, graduate of Palm Beach Lakes High School Joanna Thomas, IFBB professional bodybuilder Robby Thompson, MLB second baseman for the San Francisco Giants 1986-1996, bench coach for the Seattle Mariners, graduated from Forest Hill Community High School Otis Thorpe, NBA player for the Houston Rockets and Detroit Pistons Kyril Vassilev, Bulgarian-American portrait painter Steve Walsh, NFL quarterback, football head coach at Cardinal Newman High School Robert Wexler, U.S. Congressman Serena Williams, top-ranked professional tennis player Venus Williams, top-ranked professional tennis player Tenth Avenue North, contemporary Christian rock band Yanni, composer Surfer Blood, indie rock band Nick Zano, actor Virginia Zeani, opera singer West Palm Beach official website
