   James Joseph "Whitey" Bulger, Jr. (born September 3, 1929) is an American convicted murderer and a former organized crime boss of the Boston Irish Mob crew known as the Winter Hill Gang. United States federal prosecutors indicted Bulger for 19 murders based on grand jury testimony from Kevin Weeks's former associates. Bulger is the brother of William "Billy" Bulger, former President of the Massachusetts Senate. Bulger served as an informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) beginning in 1975, according to the FBI. Bulger denies this. However, as a result, the Bureau largely ignored his organization in exchange for information about the inner workings of the rival of the Winter Hill Gang and the Flanagan Gang, the Italian American Patriarca crime family. Beginning in 1997, the New England media exposed criminal actions by federal, state, and local law enforcement officials tied to Bulger. For the FBI especially, this caused great embarrassment."Capture Of Boston Gangster Could Mean More Scandal" NPR Bulger fled Boston and went into hiding on December 23, 1994, after being tipped off by his former FBI handler about a pending indictment under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). For 16 years, he remained at large. For 12 of those years, Bulger was on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list. On June 22, 2011, Bulger was arrested outside an apartment in Santa Monica, California. Arrested with him was his long-time girlfriend Catherine Greig. Bulger was 81 years old at the time of his arrest."Whitey Bulger is Arrested in California""One of America's Top Fugitives James "Whitey" Bulger: Caught in Santa Monica" International Business Times Soon after, Bulger and Greig were extradited to Massachusetts and taken under heavy guard to the waterfront federal courthouse. This necessitated the closing of part of Boston Harbor. Greig pleaded guilty to conspiracy to harboring a fugitive, identity fraud, and conspiracy to commit identity fraud and was sentenced in June 2012 to eight years in prison. Bulger did not seek bail and remained in custody at the Plymouth County House of Correction in Plymouth, Massachusetts. On November 5, 2012, Bulger was taken to a hospital from his Plymouth prison cell after complaining about chest pains.  On June 12, 2013, Bulger went on trial for 32 counts of racketeering, money laundering, extortion, and weapons charges, including complicity in 19 murders. On August 12, 2013, he was found guilty on 31 counts, including both racketeering charges, and was found to have been involved in 11 murders. On November 14, 2013, Bulger was sentenced to two consecutive life terms plus five years for his crimes by U.S. District Judge Denise Casper.  Bulger is now inmate number 02182-748 currently incarcerated for life at the United States Penitentiary Coleman II in Sumterville, Florida. Bulger was also possibly involved in the murder of an unidentified woman, dubbed "Lady of the Dunes", who was murdered in Provincetown, Massachusetts, in 1974. After one of many facial reconstructions was released, it was reported that he had been seen in the city with a woman who matched her description. Bulger's father, James Joseph Bulger, Sr., was an Irish-Newfoundlander from Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, the son of Irish immigrants. After settling in Everett, Massachusetts, James Sr. married Jane Veronica "Jean" McCarthy, a first-generation Irish American. Their first child, James Joseph Bulger, Jr., was born in 1929. The elder Bulger worked as a union laborer and occasional longshoreman; he lost his arm in an industrial accident and the family was reduced to poverty.Carr 2006, p. 49. In May 1938, the Mary Ellen McCormack Housing Project, now known as the Old Harbor Village public housing project, was opened in South Boston.Vale, Lawrence J., From the Puritans to the projects: public housing and public neighbors, Harvard University Press, 2000. Cf. especially page 175 re Old Harbor Village history. The Bulger family moved in and the children grew up there. The other Bulger children, William Michael and John P. Bulger, excelled at school; James Bulger, Jr. became drawn into street life. Early on, policemen gave Bulger the nickname "Whitey" because of his blond hair.  Bulger himself hated the name; he preferred to be called "Jim" or "Jimmy."  Nonetheless, the nickname stuck. Bulger developed a reputation as a thief and street fighter fiercely loyal to South Boston. This led to his meeting more experienced criminals and finding more lucrative opportunities. In 1943, fourteen-year-old Bulger was arrested and charged with larceny. By then, Bulger had joined a street gang known as the "Shamrocks" and would eventually be arrested for assault, forgery and armed robbery, and was eventually sentenced to a juvenile reformatory for these crimes. Shortly after his release in April 1948, he joined the U.S. Air Force, where his character continued to show. After his basic training, he was stationed as an aircraft mechanic first at the Smoky Hill Air Force Base in Salina, Kansas, then in Idaho. Bulger was sentenced to the stockade for several assaults. He was also arrested in 1950 for going absent without leave. Nevertheless, he received an honorable discharge in 1952, and returned to Massachusetts.  In 1956 he was first sentenced to federal time in Atlanta Penitentiary for armed robbery and truck hijacking. There, according to mobster Kevin Weeks, he was involved in the MK-ULTRA program, the goal of which was to research mind-control drugs for the Central Intelligence Agency, headed by CIA chemist Sidney Gottlieb. For eighteen months, Bulger and eighteen other inmates, all of whom had volunteered in return for lessened sentences, were given LSD and other drugs. Bulger later complained that he and the other inmates had been "recruited by deception", and that they were told that they were helping to find "a cure for schizophrenia"."How Whitey Bulger Bought Boston", The American Conservative, June 23, 2011. He described his experience as "nightmarish" and said it took him "to the depths of insanity." He was transferred from Atlanta to Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary, arriving on November 2, 1959, as prisoner #AZ1428. He became a close friend of fellow inmate Clarence Carnes, alias "The Choctaw Kid". In November 1962, he was transferred to Leavenworth Federal Penitentiary and, in 1963, to Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary. Following his third petition for parole, in 1965, it was granted after Bulger had served nine years in prison.  He would not be arrested again, let alone spend a day in jail, for 46 years. After his release, Bulger worked as a janitor and construction worker before becoming a bookmaker and loanshark with ties to Donald Killeen, the leader of the dominant Irish mob in South Boston. In 1971, Killeen's younger brother allegedly bit off the nose of Michael Dwyer, a member of the rival Mullen Gang. A gangland war soon resulted, leading to a string of killings throughout Boston and the surrounding suburbs. The Killeens quickly found themselves outgunned and outmaneuvered by the younger Mullens. It was during the Killeen–Mullen war that Bulger committed what Kevin Weeks describes as his first homicide. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal: My Life in Whitey Bulger's Irish Mob, HarperCollins, 2006, p. 171. According to former Mullen boss Patrick Nee, Paul McGonagle was enraged by the murder of his twin brother. Certain that William O'Sullivan was responsible, McGonagle ambushed and murdered Bulger's partner. The end of the war has usually been related as follows. Bulger, realizing that he was on the losing side, secretly approached Howie Winter, the leader of the Winter Hill Gang. He allegedly told Winter that he could end the fighting in South Boston by murdering the leaders of the Killeen gang. Shortly thereafter, Donald Killeen was gunned down outside his home in the suburb of Framingham. Nee disputes this claim. According to Nee, the slaying of Donald Killeen on May 13, 1972, was carried out not by Bulger but by Mullen Gang enforcers James Mantville and Tommy King.Patrick Nee, A Criminal and an Irishman, pp. 123–125. Also according to Nee, Bulger and the Killeens fled the city in the aftermath of their boss's murder, fearing that they would be next. Instead of murdering them, however, Patrick Nee arranged for the dispute to be mediated by Howie Winter and Patriarca crime family capo Joseph Russo. In a sit-down at Chandler's nightclub in the South End, the Mullens were represented by Patrick Nee and Tommy King and the Killeens by Bulger. Following the sit-down, the two gangs joined forces, with Winter as overall boss.Nee, A Criminal and an Irishman, Chapter 12. The Truce, pp. 127–134. Nee's claim to have requested the sitdown is contradicted, however, by Howie Winter. In an interview with Kevin Cullen, Winter recalled: "Whitey walked into Chandler's. I never knew him before that. He knew I was friendly with the Mullens gang. He asked if I would intercede. I said, 'Are you serious about this? I don't want to intercede if you're not going to abide by it.' He said he would."Cullen (2013), page 90. Nee stated:Nee, A Criminal and an Irishman, pp. 131–132. According to Nee:Nee, A Criminal and an Irishman, p. 132. Soon after, Donald Killeen's sole surviving brother, Kenneth Killeen, was jogging in the City Point neighborhood of Boston. Bulger's voice called him over to a car and said, "It's over. You're out of business. No more warnings." Kenneth would later testify at the trial of John Connolly that in the car with Bulger were Winter Hill Gang enforcers Stephen Flemmi and John Martorano.   After the 1972 truce, Bulger and the Mullens were in control of South Boston's criminal underworld. FBI Special Agent Condon noted in his log in September 1973 that Bulger and Nee had been heavily shaking down the neighborhood's bookmakers and loansharks. Over the years that followed, Bulger began to remove opposition by persuading Howie Winter to sanction the killings of those who "stepped out of line." In a 2004 interview, Winter recalled that the highly intelligent Bulger "could teach the devil tricks." During this era, Bulger's victims included Mullen Gang veterans Spike O'Toole, Paulie McGonagle and Tommy King. According to Kevin Weeks:Brutal, pages 90–91. Also according to Kevin Weeks:Kevin Weeks, Brutal, page 173. In 1979, Howie Winter was arrested, along with many members of his inner circle, on charges of fixing horse races. Bulger and his then partner Stephen Flemmi were left out of the indictments. They stepped into the vacuum and took over the leadership of the gang. They transferred its headquarters to the Lancaster Street Garage in Boston near the Boston Garden in the North End. In 1971, the FBI, searching for reliable information in their battle against the Patriarca crime family, approached Bulger and attempted to recruit him as an informant. FBI Special Agent Dennis Condon was assigned to make the pitch. However, Condon failed to win Bulger's trust.Lehr; O'Neill 2001, p. 5 In 1974, Bulger became partners with Stephen Flemmi, an Italian-American mobster and FBI informant since 1965. Although it is a documented fact that Bulger soon followed Flemmi's example, exactly how and why continues to be debated. Special Agent John Connolly frequently boasted to his fellow agents about how he had recruited Bulger at a late night meeting at Wollaston Beach inside an FBI issue car. Connolly allegedly said that the Bureau could help in Bulger's feud with Mafia underboss Gennaro Angiulo. After listening to the pitch, Bulger is said to have responded, "Alright, if they want to play checkers, we'll play chess. Fuck 'em."Lehr; O'Neill 2001, p. 14 Weeks considers it more likely that Bulger's partner Stephen Flemmi had betrayed him to the FBI. He writes of his belief that Bulger was caught between a rock and a hard place: supply information to the FBI or return to Federal prison.Weeks, Brutal, pp. xvi–xvii. In 1997, shortly after The Boston Globe disclosed that Bulger and Flemmi had been informants, Weeks met with retired FBI Agent John Connolly, who showed him a photocopy of Bulger's FBI informant file. In order to explain Bulger and Flemmi's status as informants, Connolly said, "The Mafia was going against Jimmy and Stevie, so Jimmy and Stevie went against them."Weeks, Brutal, 2006, p. 247. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, 2006, p. 248. In December 1977, FBI agent John Morris was put in charge of the Boston FBI's Organized Crime Squad.Lehr; O'Neill 2001, p. 54 Morris not only proved himself unable to rein in Connolly's protection of Bulger, but even began assisting Connolly. By 1982 Morris was "thoroughly compromised", having had Bulger buy plane tickets for his then-girlfriend Debbie Noseworthy to visit him in Georgia while he was being trained for drug investigations. Even after 1983, when he was transferred to head up the Boston FBI's drug task force, Morris remained an accomplice to Connolly and Bulger.Lehr; O'Neill 2001, pp. 135-138 In 1996, Bulger and Flemmi were indicted on racketeering charges along with two Boston mafiosi, Frank Salemme and Bobby DeLuca. During the discovery phase, Salemme and DeLuca were listening to tape from a roving bug, which is normally authorized when the FBI has no advance knowledge of where criminal activity will take place.  They overheard two of the agents who were listening in on the bug mention that they should have told one of their informants to give "a list of questions" to the other wiseguys.  When their lawyer, Tony Cardinale, learned about this, he realized that the FBI had lied about the basis for a roving bug in order to protect an informant.  Suspecting that this was not the only occasion that this happened, Cardinale sought to force prosecutors to reveal the identities of any informants used in connection with the case.Lehr; O'Neill 2001, p. 288-289, 291-293. Federal judge Mark L. Wolf granted Cardinale's motion on May 22, 1997.  On June 3, Paul E. Coffey, the head of the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Justice Department, gave a sworn statement admitting that Bulger had been an FBI informant.  Coffey stated that since Bulger was accused of "leading a criminal enterprise" while working as an informant and was also now a fugitive, he had "forfeited any reasonable expectation" that his identity would be protected.Lehr; O'Neill, p. 300-301. On September 5, 2006, federal judge Reginald C. Lindsay ruled that the mishandling of Bulger and Flemmi caused the 1984 murder of informant John McIntyre.  He awarded the McIntyre family $3.1 million in damages. Lindsay stated the FBI failed to properly supervise Connolly (convicted and jailed in 2002) and "stuck its head in the sand" regarding numerous allegations that Bulger and Flemmi were involved in drug trafficking, murder, and other crimes over decades. In a 2011 interview, Stephen Flemmi recalled, "Me and Whitey gave [the Feds] shit, and they gave us gold." In February 1979 federal prosecutors indicted numerous members of the Winter Hill Gang, including boss Howie Winter, for fixing horse races. Bulger and Flemmi were originally going to be part of this indictment, but at the last minute Connolly and Morris were able to persuade prosecutor Jeremiah T. O'Sullivan to drop the charges against the new informants. Bulger and Flemmi were instead named as unindicted co-conspirators.Lehr; O'Neill 2001, pp. 64-68 Bulger and Flemmi then took over the remnants of the Winter Hill Gang and used their status as informants to eliminate competition. The information they supplied to the FBI in subsequent years was responsible for the imprisonment of several of Bulger's associates whom Bulger viewed as threats; however, the main victim of their relationship with the federal government was the Italian-American Patriarca crime family, which was based in Boston's North End, and in Federal Hill, Providence. After the 1986 RICO indictment of underboss Gennaro Angiulo and his associates, the Patriarca family's Boston operations were in a shambles. Bulger and Flemmi stepped into the ensuing vacuum to take control of organized crime in the Boston area. In 1980, Bulger was approached in South Boston's Triple O's saloon by Louis Litif, a neighborhood bookmaker. Kevin Weeks, who was then a bouncer at Triple O's, witnessed the discussion that followed. He has recalled:Kevin Weeks, Brutal, page 57. According to Weeks, Litif had been stealing from his partners in the bookmaking operation and using the money to traffic cocaine. What is more, Litif had not only refused to pay a cut of his drug profits, but had also committed two murders without Bulger's permission.Kevin Week, Brutal, pages57-59. As Weeks listened, Litif told an outraged Bulger that he was also going to kill his partner, "Joe the Barber", whom he falsely accused of stealing money from the bookmaking operation. Bulger refused to sanction this, but Litif vowed to kill him anyway. Seething with anger, Bulger informed Litif, "You've stepped over the line. You're no longer just a bookmaker."Kevin Weeks, Brutal, page 58. Litif responded that, as Bulger was his friend, he had nothing to worry about. Bulger icily responded, "We're not friends anymore, Louie."Kevin Weeks, Brutal, page 53. At the time Kevin Weeks was about to get married to his high school sweetheart, Pamela Caveleri. A short time before the wedding, Weeks informed Bulger that he was having difficulty seating Louis Litif. "Don't worry about it", Bulger responded. "He probably won't show."Brutal, page 55. According to Weeks:Kevin Weeks, Brutal: My Life in Whitey Bulger's Irish Mob, 2006. Page 59. In 1982, a South Boston cocaine dealer named Edward Brian Halloran, known on the streets as "Balloonhead", approached the FBI and stated that he had witnessed Bulger and Flemmi murdering Louis Litif. Meanwhile, FBI agent John Connolly kept Bulger and Flemmi closely briefed on what Halloran was saying to the Bureau. Specifically, Connolly informed Bulger and Flemmi that Halloran knew that they had participated in the murder of Tulsa, Oklahoma businessman Roger Wheeler,Cullen, Kevin, and Murphy, Shelley Whitey Bulger: America's Most Wanted Gangster and the Manhunt That Brought Him to Justice, W. W. Norton & Company, 2013, p. 216. and that Halloran was shopping this information to the FBI for a chance for him and his family to be placed in the Witness Protection Program.Cullen, Kevin, and Murphy, Shelley Whitey Bulger: America's Most Wanted Gangster and the Manhunt That Brought Him to Justice, W. W. Norton & Company, 2013, pp. 221-223. Soon after, on May 11, 1982, Bulger, Flemmi, and Weeks were tipped off that Halloran had returned to South Boston. After arriving at the scene, Kevin Weeks staked out Anthony's Pier 4 Restaurant, where Halloran was dining. Michael Donahue of Dorchester, a construction worker, neighbor, and friend of Halloran, incidentally ran into him at the restaurant. In a decision that would prove costly to him, Donahue offered Halloran a ride home. As Donahue and Halloran drove out of the parking lot, Weeks signaled Bulger by stating, "The balloon is in the air," over a hand-held radio. Bulger drove up with a masked man armed with a silenced Mac 10; Bulger himself carried a .30 caliber carbine. Bulger, wearing a floppy hat and a long-haired wig, and the other shooter opened fire and sprayed Halloran and Donahue's car with bullets. Donahue was shot in the head and killed instantly. Halloran lived long enough to identify his attacker as James Flynn, a Winter Hill associate, who was later tried and acquitted. Flynn remained the prime suspect until 1999, when Weeks agreed to cooperate with investigators and identified Bulger as one of the shooters. Stephen Flemmi has identified the second shooter as Mullen Gang leader Patrick Nee. Nee denies the allegation and no charges have yet been filed. Michael Donahue was survived by his wife and three sons. The Donahue and Halloran families eventually filed a civil lawsuit against the United States Federal Government after learning that FBI Agent John Connolly had informed Bulger of Halloran's informant status. Both families were awarded several million dollars in damages. However, the verdict was overturned on appeal, due to the late filing of the claims. Thomas Donahue, who was eight years old when his father was murdered, has become a spokesman for the families of those allegedly murdered by the Winter Hill Gang. Throughout the 1980s, Bulger, Flemmi and Weeks ran shakedowns throughout eastern Massachusetts, e.g., extortion, loansharking, bookmaking, truck hijackings and arms trafficking. State and federal agencies were repeatedly stymied in their attempts to build cases against Bulger and his inner circle. This was caused by several factors. Among them was the trio's paranoid fear of wiretaps, South Boston's code of silence, and also corruption within the Boston Police Department, the Massachusetts State Police, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Although disgraced FBI agent John Connolly had long been Bulger's most infamous friend in law enforcement, Kevin Weeks has insisted that Lieutenant Richard J. Schneiderhan was valued far more highly. According to Weeks, this was because Schneiderhan was the Winter Hill Gang's only source inside the Massachusetts State Police.Former State Police Lieutenant Convicted Of Obstruction, WCBV-TV , March 19, 2003 During the middle 1980s, Bulger began to summon drug dealers from in and around Boston to his headquarters. Flanked by Kevin Weeks and Stephen Flemmi, Bulger would inform each dealer that he had been offered a substantial sum in return for that dealer's assassination. He would then demand a large cash payment not to do so. Eventually, however, the massive profits of drugs proved irresistible. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, p. 152. In South Boston, most of the neighborhood's cocaine and marijuana trade was managed by John Shea. According to Weeks, Bulger briefly considered murdering Shea, but eventually decided to just shake him down. According to Weeks, Bulger enforced strict rules over the dealers who were paying him protection:Weeks, Brutal, p. 156. Weeks also alleges that Bulger strictly forbade PCP and selling to children,Weeks, Brutal, p. 179. and that those dealers who refused to play by his rules were violently driven out of the neighborhood. In 1990, "Red" Shea and his associates were arrested as part of a joint investigation involving the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Boston Police Department and the Massachusetts State Police. All refused to testify against Bulger, Flemmi, and Weeks. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, p. 167. It would not be until the 1999 cooperation of Weeks that Bulger, by then a fugitive, was conclusively linked to the drug trade by investigators. According to an interview conducted with Boston Globe reporters Kevin Cullen and Shelley Murphy, Kevin Weeks "estimated that Whitey made about thirty million dollars... most of it from shaking down drug dealers to let them do business on his turf." From the start of his involvement with the FBI, Whitey Bulger "insisted... that he would never give up the IRA." Bulger had previously donated to NORAID, and shipped weapons – "guns and a block of C-4 plastic explosives" – in a van to the Provisional IRA in the early 1980s. After meeting with the IRA Chief of Staff Joe Cahill, Bulger and Pat Nee raised $1 million "by shaking down drug dealers in South Boston and Charlestown." This money was used to buy weapons for the IRA, which would be shipped across the Atlantic in the trawler Valhalla. Bulger also personally donated some of his own weapons. Before the use of the Valhalla, Bulger shipped overseas a shipment of guns and C-4 in a van at least once. Bulger was annoyed when he learned that the IRA men he supplied had burned the van that contained the weapons. On September 13, 1984, Bulger and Weeks supervised the loading of the Valhalla. The final cache included "91 rifles, 8 submachine guns, 13 shotguns, 51 handguns, 11 bulletproof vests, 70,000 rounds of ammunition, plus an array of hand grenades and rocket heads." The Valhalla rendezvoused 120 miles off the Irish west coast with the Marita Ann, an IRA ship which had sailed from Tralee. During the Marita Ann's return voyage, the Irish Navy stopped the ship and seized the hidden arsenal, arresting IRA members Martin Ferris, Mike Browne and John Crawley. The operation had been compromised by IRA informant Sean O'Callaghan. When Valhalla crew member John McIntyre was arrested "for trying to visit his estranged wife," he confessed his role in the weapons smuggling to Boston police. McIntyre implicated Bulger in the botched smuggling to FBI agent Roderick Kennedy, but Kennedy "insisted that (Bulger's handler) John Connolly overheard him... talking about someone on the Valhalla cooperating." Connolly confirmed Bulger's suspicions of McIntyre, leading Bulger – and cohort Steve Flemmi – to murder McIntyre for his betrayal."Cullen and Murphy, Whitey Bulger, pgs. 206–268. In the summer of 1991, Bulger and three friends came into possession of the winning Massachusetts Lottery ticket, which had been bought at a store he owned. The four men shared a prize of around US$14 million. Bulger was widely thought to have obtained his share of the jackpot illegitimately.  In April 1994, a joint task force of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Massachusetts State Police, and the Boston Police Department launched a probe of Bulger's gambling operations. The FBI, by this time considered compromised, was not informed. After a number of bookmakers agreed to testify to having paid protection money to Bulger, a Federal case was built against him under the RICO Act. According to Kevin Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, p. 215. He had also set up safe deposit boxes, containing cash, jewelry, and passports, in locations across North America and Europe including Florida, Oklahoma, Montreal, Dublin, London, Birmingham (UK) and Venice. In December 1994, Bulger was informed by retired FBI Agent John Connolly that sealed indictments had come from the Department of Justice and that the FBI were due to make arrests during the Christmas season. In response, Bulger fled Boston on December 23, 1994, accompanied by his common law wife, Theresa Stanley. After fleeing Boston, Bulger and Stanley initially spent four days over Christmas in Selden, New York, before spending New Year's Day in a hotel in New Orleans's French Quarter. On January 5, 1995, Bulger prepared to return to Boston, believing that it had been a false alarm. That night, however, Stephen Flemmi was arrested outside a Boston restaurant by the DEA. Boston police Detective Michael Flemmi, Stephen's brother, informed Weeks of the arrest. Weeks immediately passed the information on to Bulger, who altered his plans. Bulger and Stanley spent the next three weeks traveling between New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco before Stanley decided that she wanted to return to her children. They traveled to Clearwater, Florida, where Bulger retrieved his "Tom Baxter" identification from a safe deposit box. Bulger then drove to Boston and dropped off Theresa Stanley in a parking lot. He met at Malibu Beach in Dorchester with Weeks, who had brought with him Bulger's girlfriend, Catherine Greig. Bulger and Greig then went on the run together. In his memoirs, Weeks describes a clandestine meeting with Bulger and Greig in Chicago, Illinois. Bulger reminisced fondly about his time hiding out with a family in Louisiana. He told Weeks, who had replaced him as head of the Winter Hill Gang, "If anything comes down, put it on me."Weeks, Brutal, pp. 231–232. As they adjourned to a nearby Japanese restaurant, Bulger finally revealed how exhausted he was with life on the run. He told Weeks, "Every day out there is another day I beat them. Every good meal is a meal they can't take away from me."Weeks, Brutal, p. 233.  In mid-November 1995, Weeks and Bulger met for the last time, at the lion statues at the front of the New York Public Library, and adjourned for dinner at a nearby restaurant. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, p. 236. On November 17, 1999, Weeks was arrested by a combined force of the DEA and the Massachusetts State Police. Although by this time he was aware of Bulger's FBI deal, Weeks was determined to remain faithful to the neighborhood code of silence. However, while awaiting trial in Rhode Island's Wyatt Federal prison, Weeks was approached by a fellow inmate, a "made man" in the Patriarca crime family. The inmate told him, "Kid, what are you doing? Are you going to take it up the ass for these guys? Remember, you can't rat on a rat. Those guys have been giving up everyone for thirty years."Weeks, Brutal, p. 261.  In the aftermath, Weeks decided to cut a deal with federal prosecutors, and revealed where almost every penny and body was buried. Writing in 2006, Weeks recalled:Weeks, Brutal, p. 235. The first confirmed sighting of Bulger before his capture was in London in 2002. However, there were unconfirmed sightings elsewhere. FBI agents were sent to Uruguay to investigate a lead. FBI agents were also sent to stake out the 60th memorial of the Battle of Normandy celebrations, as Bulger is reportedly an enthusiastic fan of military history. Later reports of a sighting in Italy in April 2007 proved false. Two persons on video footage shot in Taormina, Sicily, formerly thought to be Bulger and his lover, Catherine Greig, walking in the streets of the city center, were finally identified as a tourist couple from Germany. In 2010, the FBI turned its focus to Victoria, British Columbia, on Vancouver Island. In pursuit of Bulger, a known book lover, the FBI visited bookstores in the area, questioned employees, and distributed wanted posters.Marjorie Kehe. "James 'Whitey' Bulger is captured&nbsp;— but not in a bookstore". Chapter and Verse blog. The Christian Science Monitor. June 23, 2011. Following his arrest, Bulger revealed that he had in fact traveled frequently. Also following his arrest, it was clear that he had not been reclusive, witnesses coming forward to say they had seen him on the Santa Monica Pier and elsewhere in southern California.John Rogers, "People say Bulger liked to visit Santa Monica Pier", Associated Press, The Sacramento Bee, June 23, 2011 A confirmed report by an off-duty Boston police officer after a San Diego screening of The Departed also led to a search in Southern California that lasted "a few weeks".Laurel J. Sweet and Dave Wedge, "Calif. cop: I knew he was here all along!", Boston Herald, June 24, 2011  After 16 years at large and 12 years on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list, Bulger was arrested in Santa Monica, California, on June 22, 2011. Bulger was captured as a result of the work of the Bulger Fugitive Task Force, which consisted of FBI Agents and a Deputy US Marshal. According to retired FBI agent Scott Bakken, "Here you have somebody who is far more sophisticated than some 18-year-old who killed someone in a drive-by. To be a successful fugitive you have to cut all contacts from your previous life. He had the means and kept a low profile." A reward of US$2&nbsp;million had been offered for information leading to his capture. This amount was second only to Osama Bin Laden's capture reward on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list. Bulger has been featured on the television show America's Most Wanted 16 times, first in 1995, and finally on October 2, 2010. According to the authorities, the arrests were a "direct result" of the media campaign launched by the FBI in 14 markets across the country where Bulger and Greig reportedly had ties. The campaign focused on Greig, describing her as an animal lover who frequently goes to beauty salons.  Authorities received a tip from a woman in Iceland that Bulger was living in an apartment near a beach in Santa Monica."Tip That Led To Bulger Arrest Came From Iceland", WBUR Radio News, June 24, 2011 The Boston Globe identified the tipster as Anna Björnsdóttir, a former model, actress, and Miss Iceland 1974, who lived in Bulger's neighborhood. A day later, "using a ruse, agents and other task force members lured Mr. Bulger out of his apartment", "arrested him 'without incident', then went in the house and arrested Greig". Bulger was charged with murder, "conspiracy to commit murder, extortion, narcotics distribution and money-laundering". Agents found "more than $800,000 in cash, 30 firearms, and fake IDs" at the apartment.  Carmen Ortiz, U.S. attorney for the District of Massachusetts, said "she believes the death penalty is not an option in the federal charges Bulger faces in her district, but that he could face the death penalty for two cases outside the district". In Oklahoma, where Bulger is alleged to have ordered the killing of businessman Roger Wheeler, Sr., in 1981, Tulsa County District Attorney Tim Harris said, "It is our intention to bring Bulger to justice and to be held accountable for the murder of Mr. Wheeler". In Florida, Miami-Dade State Attorney Katherine Fernandez Rundle said, "After a 16-year delay, I will be working to ensure that a Miami jury has the opportunity to look (Bulger) in the eyes and determine his fate". Immediately after being brought back to Boston, Bulger began talking to authorities. He said that during his days as a fugitive, he often went back and forth across the border to Mexico to buy medicine for his heart disease. He also visited Alcatraz prison and had a souvenir photograph taken, wearing a striped suit and standing behind mock prison bars. Many anticipate, and some fear, that Bulger, in exchange for favorable treatment in sentencing, will have much to tell authorities about corruption on the local, state, and federal levels, which allowed him to operate his criminal enterprise for so long. Bulger was arraigned in Federal court on July 6, 2011. He pleaded not guilty to 48 charges, including 19 counts of murder, extortion, money laundering, obstruction of justice, perjury, narcotics distribution, and weapons violations. In a 2011 interview, Kevin Weeks expressed surprise at Bulger's decision to cooperate after his arrest. Weeks said, "I don't understand because he's not the same as I remember him. I can't believe he's so chatty right now. So I don't know what he's doing". Weeks added that he is not afraid of Bulger, and that the residents of Boston should not be either: "I don't think he's Pablo Escobar where he can just walk out of his prison cell and come to South Boston or anywhere. No, no one's worried about him." Bulger's companion during his years as a fugitive was his longtime girlfriend Catherine Greig, born April 3, 1951, almost 22 years Bulger's junior. Greig grew up in Boston, and had an identical twin sister, Margaret, and a younger brother, David. Their father was a machinist from Glasgow, Scotland, and their mother was from Canada.  At about age 20, Greig married Robert "Bobby" McGonagle of South Boston, a Boston firefighter. He was from a family that led the Mullen Gang, and was injured during a mob gunfight in 1969. Before his 1987 drug overdose death, Bobby McGonagle reportedly held Bulger responsible for the murders of his brothers. Twins Donald McGonagle and Paul McGonagle were killed during fighting between the Mullen and Killeen Gangs. The body of Paul McGonagle lay hidden and buried for twenty-five years on Tenean Beach in Dorchester. Greig's twin sister Margaret is the widow of Paul McGonagle. Greig's younger brother David Greig was a close associate of Bulger. David was found shot dead on Cape Cod, a death which was characterized as a suicide. Greig met Bulger in her late 20s, after she divorced Bobby McGonagle. She worked as a dental hygienist. Greig has been described as intelligent, hardworking, and educated, although very subservient to, and dominated by, Bulger. She and Bulger lived together for a time at her home in Squantum, a section of Quincy, Massachusetts. While on the run, Greig confided to a neighbor that she feared that Bulger was suffering from senile dementia. Greig had been wanted by the FBI since 1999. The criminal complaint against her alleges that she harbored a fugitive, Whitey Bulger. She was represented in the criminal proceedings by the prominent criminal attorney Kevin Reddington of Brockton, Massachusetts. Reddington stated that Greig would be going to trial and would not be accepting a plea bargain, explaining: "I question that the government can prove the case." According to Reddington, Greig's actions did not constitute "harboring" of a fugitive. Greig sought release on bail and home confinement, a request that was denied. In March 2012, Greig pleaded guilty to conspiracy to harbor a fugitive, identity fraud, and conspiracy to commit identity fraud. On June 12, 2012, she was sentenced to 8 years confinement in a Federal penitentiary. She declined to speak during her sentencing.  She is currently incarcerated at the FCI Waseca, a low security federal correctional institution in Waseca, Minnesota and is registered in the DOC website as inmate number 57820-112 with a "Release Date: 03/24/2019". Bulger has two younger brothers, William Michael Bulger (born 1934) and John P. Bulger (born 1938). Senator William "Billy" Bulger served in the military during the Korean War but was never posted to Korea.  He was formerly an influential leader of the Democratic Party in Massachusetts. In a long political career, Senator Bulger rose to become President of the Massachusetts State Senate. After his retirement he was appointed President of the University of Massachusetts system. In 2002 testimony before the United States Congress, Senator Bulger was grilled by legislators from both parties. When asked what he thought his brother did for a living, Senator Bulger responded: Senator Bulger added that he loved his brother and hoped the most brutal allegations concerning him would be proven false. In addition, he grudgingly admitted to visiting an isolated pay phone in order to speak to Whitey, who was by then a fugitive. In 2003, as a direct result of these comments, Senator Bulger was forced by then-Governor of Massachusetts Mitt Romney to resign from the presidency of the University of Massachusetts. John "Jackie" Bulger, a retired Massachusetts court clerk magistrate, was convicted in April 2003 of perjury to two grand juries regarding sworn statements he gave concerning contacts with his fugitive brother. Bulger fathered one child, Douglas Glenn Cyr (1967–1973), during a 12-year common law marriage with Lindsey Cyr, a waitress and former fashion model living in North Weymouth, Massachusetts."James 'Whitey' Bulger's Family Tree" The Boston Channel June 23, 2011  Bulger and Cyr began living together in 1966, when Cyr was 21 and a waitress at a North Quincy cafe. According to Cyr: At six years of age, Douglas died from Reye's syndrome after having a severe allergic reaction to an aspirin injection."Bulger's ex-girlfriend talks about arrest" WHDH-TV June 27, 2011 According to Cyr: Since Bulger's arrest, Cyr has publicly announced her support of him, stating: After his split from Cyr, Bulger began a relationship with Theresa Stanley, a South Boston divorcée with several children.  Bulger bought her an expensive house in suburban Quincy, Massachusetts, and acted as father to her children while commuting to "work" in South Boston. However, he was repeatedly unfaithful to her with a host of other women, and was often absent while overseeing the running of his organization. In a 2004 interview, Stanley stated that she was planning to publish her memoirs; however, she died of lung cancer in 2012 at the age of 71. According to Weeks:Weeks, Brutal, p. 209. According to Weeks' memoirs, in 1980 Boston Herald reporter Paul Corsetti began researching an article about Louis Litif's murder and Bulger's suspected involvement. After reporting the story for several days, a man approached Corsetti and said, "I'm Jim Bulger and if you continue to write shit about me, I'm going to blow your fucking head off."Weeks, Brutal, p. 207. Corsetti sought help from the Patriarca crime family, but they said that Bulger was outside their control. "The next day, Corsetti reported the meeting to the Boston police. He was issued a pistol permit within twenty-four hours. The cop who gave him the permit told him, 'I'm glad my last name is not Corsetti.' A couple days later, Jimmy told me about the scene with the cop and was glad to hear how uncomfortable he had made Corsetti." In his memoirs, Kevin Weeks related his participation in an attempt to assassinate reporter Howie Carr at his house in suburban Acton. Weeks states that Carr was targeted, because he was "writing nasty stories about people, he was an oxygen thief who didn't deserve to breathe."  Carr has been among the most aggressive critics of the Bulger brothers, Whitey and Billy, for their careers in the Boston area; among his works is the book The Brothers Bulger, detailing the Bulger brothers' 25-year period of controlling Boston politics and the Boston underworld. Weeks stated that, although several plans were considered, all were abandoned, because there was too much risk of injuring Carr's wife and children. The plans climaxed with Weeks' own attempt to shoot Carr with a sniper rifle as he came out of his house. But when Carr came out the front door holding the hand of his pre-pubescent daughter, Weeks could not bring himself to shoot. Weeks desired an opportunity to "finish the job," but Bulger advised him to forget about Howie Carr.Kevin Weeks, Brutal, pp. 205–206. In his 2006 memoirs, Weeks has stated that, although he is fully aware of the public outcry that would have followed, he regrets not murdering Howie Carr. "His murder would have been an attack on the system, like attacking freedom of the press, the fabric of the American way of life, and they would have spared no expense to solve the crime. But in the long run, Jimmy and I got sidetracked and the maggot lived. Still, I wish I'd killed him. No question about it."Weeks, Brutal, p. 206. On June 12, 2013, Bulger went on trial in South Boston's John Joseph Moakley United States Courthouse before Judge Denise J. Casper charged him with 32 counts of racketeering and firearms possession. The racketeering counts included allegations that Bulger was complicit in 19 murders. The trial lasted two months and included the testimony of 72 witnesses; the jury began deliberations August 6. On August 12, the jury convicted Bulger of 31 out of 32 counts in the indictment. As part of the racketeering charges, the jury convicted Bulger of the murders of 11 victims — Paul McGonagle, Edward Connors, Thomas King, Richard Castucci, Roger Wheeler, Brian Halloran, Michael Donahue, John Callahan, Arthur "Bucky" Barrett, John McIntyre, and Deborah Hussey. The jury acquitted Bulger of killing Michael Milano, Al Plummer, William O’Brien, James O’Toole, Al Notorangeli, James Sousa and Francis Leonard. They also reported themselves unable to agree about the murder of Deborah Davis, though Bulger had already been found liable for her death in a civil suit. Following the verdict, Bulger's attorneys J. W. Carney, Jr., and Hank Brennan vowed to appeal, citing Casper's ruling which prevented Bulger from claiming he had been given immunity. On November 14, 2013, Bulger was sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment, plus five years.  Casper told Bulger that such a sentence was necessary given his "unfathomable" crimes, some of which inflicted "agonizing" suffering on his victims.  He was also ordered to forfeit $25.2 million and pay $19.5 million in restitution. Prosecutors in Florida and Oklahoma announced after Bulger's conviction that they would wait until after sentencing concluded before deciding whether or not prosecute Bulger in their states. Bulger has already been indicted in Florida for the murder of Callahan and in Oklahoma for the murder of Roger Wheeler, and could face the death penalty in those states. In September 2014, Bulger entered the Coleman II United States Penitentiary in Sumterville, Florida.  His register number is 02182-748. The character of Frank Costello (played by Jack Nicholson) in the 2006 Martin Scorsese film The Departed is loosely based on Bulger, though the plot of the movie is adapted from the 2002 Hong Kong film Infernal Affairs. The 2006–2008 Showtime TV series Brotherhood, about two Irish-American brothers on opposite sides of the law, was inspired by the relationship between Whitey and Billy Bulger, although the show takes place not in Boston but in nearby Providence, Rhode Island. In the TV series Rizzoli & Isles, which premiered in 2010, the character of Paddy Doyle, an Irish-American mobster who is the biological father of lead character Maura Isles, is based on a romanticized vision of Bulger. In a 2001 episode of Law & Order, an Irish gang leader suspected in the killing of his business partner has his alibi backed up by two FBI agents, one of whom was his best friend from high school, before the detectives discover that the suspect has an identical twin brother who is a college professor. In Homeland season 1, episode 8 "Achilles Heel", Bulger is mentioned as an example of the FBI catching someone through a publicity drive, while in the fifth episode of the first season of Intelligence ("The Rescue"), a Mexican drug lord feeding intel on his competitors to the CIA while operating with impunity, is described as their Whitey Bulger. The 2014 documentary film Whitey: United States of America v. James J. Bulger, made by Joe Berlinger, is based on Bulger's trials. In season two of the hit Showtime series, Ray Donovan, the character of Patrick "Sully" Sullivan, played by James Woods is loosely based on Bulger. The film Black Mass — released September 18, 2015 in the US — stars Johnny Depp as Bulger and was directed by Scott Cooper. The film's screenplay, by Mark Mallouk and Jez Butterworth, is based on the 2001 non-fiction book Black Mass: The True Story of an Unholy Alliance Between the FBI and the Irish Mob, by Dick Lehr and Gerard O'Neill. The film chronicles Bulger's years as an FBI informant, and his manipulation of his FBI handler as a means to eradicate his rivals for control of the Boston underworld, the Italian Mafia. There have also been plans for a Bulger film to be directed by Ben Affleck and star Matt Damon, although these plans have been complicated by the production of Black Mass. The song "Money Dance" written by Rick Ross has a reference to Whitey Bulger. "Hug my attorney and then we do the money dance/ Whitey Bulger or a soldier out in Vietnam." The World's 10 Most Wanted Brutal; My Life Inside Whitey Bulger's Irish Mob by Kevin Weeks and Phyllis Karas, Regan Books, 304 pp., ISBN 0-06-112269-6 The Brothers Bulger: How They Terrorized and Corrupted Boston For a Quarter Century, by Howie Carr, Warner, 352 pp., ISBN 0-446-57651-4 Street Soldier; My Life as an Enforcer for "Whitey" Bulger and the Boston Irish Mob by Edward MacKenzie and Phyllis Karas, Steerforth, 256 pp., ISBN 1-58642-076-3 Rat Bastards: A Memoir of South Boston's Most Honorable Irish Mobster by John "Red" Shea Paddy Whacked; The Untold Story of the Irish-American Gangster by T. J. English, 2005. A Criminal and an Irishman: The Inside Story of the Boston Mob-IRA Connection by Patrick Nee, 2006. Hitman: The Untold Story of Johnny Martorano: Whitey Bulger's Enforcer and the Most Feared Gangster in the Underworld by Howie Carr (April 26, 2011) Whitey Bulger: America's Most Wanted Gangster and the Manhunt That Brought Him to Justice by Kevin Cullen and Shelley Murphy, W. W. Norton & Company, 2013. Whitey Bulger Trial collected news and commentary at The Boston Globe Bulger Court Case Documents Court Ruling Denying Compensation to Victims Families Bulger's FBI Top 10 Most Wanted Fugitive Alert Whitey Bulger on crimelibrary.com Voices of Oklahoma interview with Detective Mike Huff about his investigation into Whitey Bulger's involvement in the murder of Tulsan Roger Wheeler. First person interview conducted on June 13, 2013 with Detective Mike Huff about his investigation into Whitey Bulger's involvement in the murder of Tulsan Roger Wheeler. Original audio and transcript archived with Voices of Oklahoma oral history project. Washingtonpost.com, Retrieved 2015-08-27  Retrieved 2015-08-27
