 Wilmington is a port city and the county seat of New Hanover County in coastal southeastern North Carolina, United States. The population is 112,067; according to the 2010 Census it is the eighth most populous city in the state.  Wilmington is the principal city of the Wilmington Metropolitan Statistical Area, a metropolitan area that includes New Hanover and Pender counties in southeastern North Carolina, which has a population of 263,429 as of the 2012 Census Estimate. Wilmington was settled by European Americans along the Cape Fear River. Its historic downtown has a one-mile-long Riverwalk, originally developed as a tourist attraction, and in 2014 Wilmington's riverfront was named the "Best American Riverfront" by USA Today.http://www.10best.com/awards/travel/best-american-riverfront/ It is minutes away from nearby beaches. The National Trust for Historic Preservation named Wilmington, North Carolina, as one of its 2008 Dozen Distinctive Destinations.[ ]  City residents live between the river and the ocean, with four nearby beach communities: Fort Fisher, Wrightsville Beach, Carolina Beach, and Kure Beach, all within half-hour drives from downtown Wilmington. In 2003 the city was designated by the US Congress as a "Coast Guard City". It is the home port for the , a United States Coast Guard medium endurance cutter. The World War II battleship  is held as a war memorial; located across from the downtown port area, the ship is open to public tours. Other attractions include the Cape Fear Museum, the Wilmington Hammerheads United Soccer Leagues soccer team. The University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) provides a wide variety of programs for undergraduates, graduate students, and adult learners, in addition to cultural and sports events open to the community. Wilmington is the home of EUE Screen Gems Studios, the largest domestic television and movie production facility outside of California. "Dream Stage 10," the facility's newest sound stage, is the third-largest in the US. It houses the largest special-effects water tank in North America. After the studio's opening in 1984, Wilmington became a major center of American film and television production. Numerous movies in a range of genres and several television series, including Iron Man 3, Fox's Sleepy Hollow, One Tree Hill, and NBC's Revolution, were produced there. In recent years, however, the end of state tax credits to the industry has severely impacted filmmaking in the entire area.  The area had long been inhabited by various cultures of indigenous peoples; at the time of European encounter, historic Native Americans were tribes belonging to the Algonquian languages family. The ethnic European and African history of Wilmington spans more than two and a half centuries. Giovanni da Verrazano is reportedly the first European to observe the area, including the city's present site, in the early 16th century. The first permanent European settlement in the area came in the 1720s when English colonists began settling the area.  In September 1732, a community was founded on land owned by John Watson on the Cape Fear River, at the confluence of its northwest and northeast branches.[ ] The settlement, founded by the first royal governor, George Burrington, was called "New Carthage," and then "New Liverpool;" it gradually took on the name "New Town" or "Newton".Alan D. Watson Wilmington, North Carolina, to 1861. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 2003. Governor Gabriel Johnston soon after established his government there for the North Carolina colony. In 1739 or 1740, the town was incorporated with a new name, Wilmington, in honor of Spencer Compton, Earl of Wilmington.[ ] Some early settlers of Wilmington came from the Albemarle and Pamlico regions, as well as from the colonies of Virginia and South Carolina, but most new settlers arrived from the northern colonies, the West Indies, and the British Isles.Donald R. Lennon and Ida B. Kellam, eds. The Wilmington Town Book, 1743-1778. Raleigh, NC: Division of Archives and History, 1973. Many of the settlers were indentured servants, mainly from the British Isles and northern Europe. As the indentured servants gained their freedom, the colonists imported an increasing number of (permanent and much less expensive) African slaves as laborers into the port city. By 1767, slaves accounted for more than 62% of the population of the Lower Cape Fear region.Marvin Michael Kay and Lorin Lee Cary. Slavery in North Carolina, 1748-1775, Chapel Hill: Univ of North Carolina Press, 1995. Many worked in the port as laborers, and some in ship-related trades. Naval stores and lumber fueled the region's economy, both before and after the American Revolution. During the Revolutionary War, the British maintained a garrison at Fort Johnson near Wilmington.   Wilmington's commercial importance as a major port afforded it a critical role in opposition to the British in the years leading up to the Revolution. Additionally, the city was home to outspoken political leaders who influenced and led the resistance movement in North Carolina. The foremost of these was Wilmington resident Cornelius Harnett, who served in the General Assembly at the time, where he rallied opposition to the Sugar Act in 1764. When the British Parliament passed the Stamp Act the following year, designed to raise revenue for the Crown with a kind of tax, Wilmington was the site of an elaborate demonstration against it. On October 19, 1765, several hundred townspeople gathered in protest of the new law, burned an effigy of one town resident who favored the act, and toasted to "Liberty, Property, and No Stamp Duty." On October 31, another crowd gathered in a symbolic funeral of "Liberty". But before the effigy was buried, it was found that Liberty still had a pulse, and celebration ensued.William L. Saunders, ed. The Colonial Records of North Carolina, 10 vols. Raleigh, NC: P.M. Hale, 1886-1980. 7: pp. 124-25, 131, 143.E. Lawrence Lee. The Lower Cape Fear in Colonial Days. Chapel Hill, NC: Univ of North Carolina Press, 1965. p. 245. Dr. William Houston of Duplin County was appointed Stamp Receiver for Cape Fear. When Houston visited Wilmington on business, still unaware of his appointment, he recounted, "The Inhabitants immediately assembled about me & demanded a Categorical Answer whether I intended to put the Act relating [to] the Stamps in force. The Town Bell was rung[,] Drums [were] beating, Colours [were] flying and [a] great concourse of People [were] gathered together." For the sake of his own life, and "to quiet the Minds of the inraged  and furious Mobb...," Houston resigned his position at the courthouse.Donna J. Spindel. "Law and Disorder: The North Carolina Stamp Act Crisis." North Carolina Historical Review, 56: 1981. p. 8. Governor William Tryon made attempts to mitigate the opposition to no avail. On November 18, 1765, he pled his case directly to prominent residents of the area. They said the law restricted their rights. When the stamps arrived on November 28 on the H.M. Sloop Diligence, Tryon ordered them to be kept on board. Shipping on the Cape Fear River was stopped, as were the functions of the courts. Tryon, after having received his official commission as governor (a position he had only assumed after the death of Arthur Dobbs), was brought to Wilmington by Captain Constantine Phipps on a barge from the Diligence, and "was received cordially by the gentlemen of the borough." He was greeted with the firing of seventeen pieces of artillery, and the New Hanover County regiment of militia who had lined the streets. This "warm welcome" was spoiled, however, after a dispute arose between Captain Phipps and captains of ships in the harbor regarding the display of their colors. The townspeople became infuriated with Phipps and threats were made against both sides. After Tryon harangued them for their actions, the townspeople gathered around the barrels of punch and ox he had brought as refreshments. The barrels were broken open, letting the punch spill into the streets; they threw the head of the ox into the pillory, and gave its body to the slaves. Tryon moved his seat of government to New Bern instead of Wilmington.Paul David Nelson. William Tryon and the Course of Empire. Chapel Hill, NC: Univ of North Carolina Press, 1990. pp. 42-43. On February 18, 1766, two merchant ships arrived at Brunswick Town, without stamped papers. Each ship provided signed statements from the collectors at their respective ports of origin that there were no stamps available, but Captain Jacob Lobb of the British cruiser Viper seized the vessels. In response, numerous residents from southern counties met in Wilmington. The group organized as the Sons of Liberty and pledged to block implementation of the Stamp Act. The following day, as many as a thousand men, including the mayor and aldermen of Wilmington, were led by Cornelius Harnett to Brunswick to confront Tryon. The governor was unyielding to their defiance but a mob retrieved the seized ships. They forced royal customs officers and public officials in the region to swear never to issue stamped paper. Parliament repealed the Stamp Act in March 1766. In the 1830s, citizens of Wilmington became eager to take advantage of railroad transportation. Plans were developed to build a railroad line from the capital of Raleigh to Wilmington. This was later changed when the citizens of Raleigh did not care to make the venture of a stock subscription to secure the railroad. The end point was changed to Weldon. When construction of the railroad line was finally completed in 1840, it was the longest single line of railroad track in the world. The railroad also controlled a line of steamboats that ran from Wilmington to Charleston; it was widely used for passenger travel and transportation of freight. Regular boat lines served Fayetteville, and packet lines traveled to northern ports. The city was a main stop-over point, contributing greatly to its commerce. By mid-century, the churchyard of St. James Episcopal Church and other town cemeteries had become filled with graves. On November 16, 1853, a group of citizens, organized as "The Proprietors of the Wilmington Cemetery," was formed to develop a new cemetery. Sixty-five acres of land around Burnt Mill Creek was chosen as the site for what would be called Oakdale Cemetery. It was the first rural cemetery in North Carolina. The cemetery's first interment, on February 6, 1855, was six-year-old Annie deRosset.Janet L. Seapker "History of Oakdale Cemetery". Oakdale Cemetery. Retrieved 13 February 2012. Many remains from St. James churchyard were relocated to the new cemetery. The Wilmington Gas Light Company was established in 1854. Soon after, street lights were powered by gas made from lightwood and rosin, replacing the old street oil lamps. On December 27, 1855, the first cornerstone was laid and construction began on a new City Hall. A grant from the Thalian Association funded the attached opera house, named Thalian Hall. The city opened its first public school, named the "Union Free School", in 1857 on 6th Street between Nun and Church Streets.Andrew J. Howell The Book of Wilmington. Wilmington, NC: Wilmington Printing Company, 1930.    During the Civil War, the port was the major and busiest base for Confederate and privately owned blockade runners delivering badly needed supplies from England. It was captured by Union forces in the Battle of Wilmington in February 1865, approximately one month after the fall of Fort Fisher had closed the port. As nearly all the military action took place some distance from the city, a number of antebellum houses and other buildings survived the war years.  The Wilmington Insurrection of 1898 (formerly called a race riot) occurred as a result of the racially charged political conflict that had occurred in the decades after the Civil War and efforts to establish white supremacy. In the 1870s, the Red Shirts, a white paramilitary organization, used violence and intimidation to suppress black voting, helping Democrats to regain power in the state legislature and end Reconstruction. In 1898, a cadre of white Democrats, professionals and businessmen, planned to overthrow the city government if their candidates were not elected. Two days after the election, more than 1500 white men attacked and burned the only black newspaper in the state and ran off the white Republican mayor and aldermen (both white and black), overthrowing the legitimately elected municipal government. This is the only such coup d'état in United States history."Chapter 5", 1898 Wilmington Race Riot Commission Report, North Carolina Dept. of Cultural Resources On November 10, 1898, nearly 1500 white men, led by the Democrat Alfred M. Waddell, an unsuccessful gubernatorial candidate in 1896, marched to the offices of the Daily Record, as they had been angered by its publisher Alex Manly. The mob broke out of control, shattering windows and setting fire to the building. Violence later broke out across town in Brooklyn, the black neighborhood that was attacked by mobs of whites. Waddell and his men forced the elected Republican city officials to resign at gunpoint and replaced them with men selected by leading white Democrats. Waddell was elected mayor by the newly seated board of aldermen that day. Prominent African Americans and white Republicans were banished from the city in the following days. Whites attacked and killed an estimated 10-100 blacks. No whites died in the violence. As a result of the attacks, more than 2100 blacks permanently left the city, leaving a hole among its professional and middle class. It became majority white, rather than the majority black it was before the white Democrats' coup. Following these events, the North Carolina legislature passed a new constitution with voter registration requirements for poll taxes and literacy tests that effectively disfranchised black voters, following the example of the state of Mississippi. Blacks were essentially disfranchised until after Congressional passage of the civil rights acts of the mid-1960s.   During World War II, Wilmington was the home of the North Carolina Shipbuilding Company. The shipyard was created as part of the U.S. government's Emergency Shipbuilding Program. Workers built 243 ships in Wilmington during the five years the company operated. The city was the site of three prisoner-of-war (POW) camps from February 1944 through April 1946. At their peak, the camps held 550 German prisoners. The first camp was located on the corner of Shipyard Boulevard and Carolina Beach Road; it was moved downtown to Ann Street, between 8th and 10th avenues, when it outgrew the original location. A smaller contingent of prisoners was assigned to a third site, working in the officers’ mess and doing grounds keeping at Bluethenthal Army Air Base, which is now Wilmington International Airport. The Audubon Trolley Station, Brookwood Historic District, Carolina Heights Historic District, Carolina Place Historic District, City Hall/Thalian Hall, Delgrado School, Federal Building and Courthouse, Fort Fisher, Gabriel's Landing, William Hooper School (Former), Market Street Mansion District, Masonboro Sound Historic District, Moores Creek National Battlefield, Sunset Park Historic District, USS NORTH CAROLINA (BB-55) National Historic Landmark, James Walker Nursing School Quarters, Westbrook-Ardmore Historic District, Wilmington Historic District, and Wilmington National Cemetery are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.  Wilmington is located at . It is the Eastern Terminus of a major East-West Interstate 40 which ends at Barstow, California, where it joins I-15, the Gateway to Southern California, some 2,554 miles away, passing through many major cities and state capitals along the way. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of .  of it is land and  of it (1.16%) is water. Wilmington has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cfa), with the following characteristics:    Wilmington boasts a large historic district encompassing nearly 300 blocks. Old abandoned warehouses on downtown's northern end have been recently demolished making room for multi-million dollar projects such as PPD's World Headquarters and a state of the art convention center. Downtown/Old Wilmington Between 2006 and 2008, crime rates, as reported through the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Uniform Crime Reports, decreased in 6 of the 8 reported categories. Wilmington has an increasing problem with gang violencehttp://www.wwaytv3.com/news-tags/gangs and on October 15, 2013 the WPD and NHC Sheriffs department created a joint task force to combat gang violence.http://www.wral.com/new-team-to-battle-gang-violence-in-wilmington/12996724/ Just a day later the city council approved $142,000 in funding for a gang investigative unit.http://www.wwaytv3.com/2013/10/15/city-council-approves-funding-for-wpd-gang-investigative-unit According to 2013 census estimates,http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/37/3774440.html there were 112,067 people and 47,003 households in the city. The population density was 2,067.8 people per square mile (714.2/km²)and there were 53,400 housing units. The racial composition of the city was: 73.5% White, 19.9% Black or African American, 6.1% Hispanic or Latino American, 1.2% Asian American, 0.5% Native American, 0.1% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander. There were 34,359 households out of which 20.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 33.5% were married couples living together, 14.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 49.5% were non-families. 36.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.10 and the average family size was 2.77. In the city the population was spread out with 18.4% under the age of 18, 17.2% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 20.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 87.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.0 males. The median income for a household in the city was $31,099, and the median income for a family was $41,891. Males had a median income of $30,803 versus $23,423 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,503. About 13.3% of families and 19.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.9% of those under age 18 and 12.0% of those age 65 or over.   Less than half of Wilmington's population is religiously affiliated (47.30%), with the majority of practitioners being Christian. The largest Christian denomination in Wilmington is Baptist (14.66%) followed by Methodist (8.29%) and Roman Catholic (7.42%). There is also a significant number of Presbyterians (3.19%), Episcopalians (2.30%), Pentecostals (1.45%), and Lutherans (1.32%). Latter-Day Saints make up 0.90%, and the remaining Christians are affiliated with other Christian denominations (7.02%). The second largest religion in Wilmington after Christianity is Islam (0.46%), followed by Judaism (0.25%). There is also a small percentage of people who practice Eastern religions (0.04%).http://www.bestplaces.net/religion/city/north_carolina/wilmington Wilmington is home to some significant historical religious buildings, such as the Basilica Shrine of St. Mary and the Temple of Israel.  The Wilmington International Airport (ILM) serves the area with commercial air service provided by Delta Air Lines and US Airways. US Airways carries a large share of the airport's traffic, and therefore flies the largest of the aircraft in and out of the airport.  The airport serves over 800,000 travelers per year. The airport is also home to two fixed base operations (FBO's) which currently house over 100 private aircraft. The airport maintains a separate International Terminal providing a full service Federal Inspection Station to clear international flights. This includes U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Dept of Agriculture and the U.S. Dept of Immigration. The airport is 4 miles from downtown. Public transit in the area is provided by the Cape Fear Public Transportation Authority, which operates fixed bus routes, shuttles, and a free downtown trolley under the brand name Wave Transit. A daily intercity bus service to Raleigh is provided by Greyhound Lines. The NC-DOT Cape Fear Run bicycle route connects Apex to Wilmington and closely parallels the RUSA 600&nbsp;km brevet route. The City of Wilmington offers transient docking facilities in the center of Downtown Wilmington along the Cape Fear River approximately 12.5 miles from the Intracoastal Waterway. The river depth in the run up from the ICW is in excess of 40 feet. Taxicab service is available from several vendors, however, as the price of fuel rises, yet the City's Taxi Commission keeps meter rates artificially low, there is a real likelihood that no drivers will continue to work, as their income, before taxes, now averages 30% of what it was in 1998. The Gary Shell Cross City trail is currently under construction. The Gary Shell Cross-City Trail is primarily a multi-use trail which will provide bicycle and pedestrian access to numerous recreational, cultural and educational destinations in Wilmington. The Gary Shell Cross-City Trail will provide a future bicycle and pedestrian connection from Wade Park, Halyburton Park and Empie Park to the Heide-Trask Drawbridge at the Intracoastal Waterway.    Wilmington's industrial base includes electrical, medical, electronic and telecommunications equipment; clothing and apparel; food processing; paper products; nuclear fuel; and pharmaceuticals. Wilmington is part of North Carolina's Research coast, adjacent to the Research Triangle Park in Raleigh, NC. Also important to Wilmington's economy is tourism due to its close proximity to the ocean and vibrant nightlife. Film production has grown to play an important role in the city's economy. Wilmington North Carolina was #2 in the Nation in a national study for 2007 projected job growth.  This list of 25 top cities, compiled by the Milken Institute, an Economic "Think Tank" based in California, also included the NC cities of Charlotte and Raleigh. Wilmington experienced staggering growth in the 1990s, ranking at one point as the second fastest growing city in the country, behind only Las Vegas, Nevada. Economists have forecast growth in the Greater Wilmington area to be the fastest in the state between 2004 and 2010, averaging 7%. Wilmington Ranks #32nd in the nation on Forbes Magazine's "Best Places for Business and Careers" 2010. Wilmington Ranks #14 in the nation on Fortune Small Business Magazine's "Best Places for a Start-Up" Located on the Cape Fear River, which flows into the Atlantic Ocean, Wilmington is a sizable seaport, including private marine terminals and the North Carolina State Ports Authority's Port of Wilmington. Wilmington is home to the Greater Wilmington Chamber of Commerce, the oldest Chamber in North Carolina, organized in 1853. Companies with their headquarters in Wilmington include Live Oak Bank and HomeInsurance.com. According to the City's 2014 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are: Public Schools in Wilmington are operated by the New Hanover County School System. The city supports a very active calendar with its showcase theater, Thalian Hall, hosting about 250 events annually. The complex has been in continuous operation since it opened in 1858 and houses three performance venues, the Main Stage, the Grand Ballroom, and the Studio Theater. The Hannah Block Historic USO/Community Arts Center, 120 S. Second Street in historic downtown Wilmington, is a multiuse facility owned by the City of Wilmington and managed by the Thalian Association, the Official Community Theater of North Carolina.  Here, five studios are available to nonprofit organizations for theatrical performances, rehearsals, musicals, recitals and art classes. For more than half a century, the Hannah Block Historic USO Building has facilitated the coming together of generations, providing children with programs that challenge them creatively, and enhance the quality of life for residents throughout the region. The Hannah Block Second Street Stage is home to the Thalian Association Children's Theater.  It is one of the main attractions at the Hannah Block Community Arts Center.  The theater seats 200 and is a popular performance venue for many community theater groups and other entertainment productions. The University of North Carolina at Wilmington College of Arts and Science Departments of Theatre, Music and Art share a state-of-the-art, $34 million Cultural Arts Building which opened in December 2006. The production area consists of a music recital hall, art gallery, and two theaters. Sponsored events include 4 theater productions a year.[ ]  Wilmington, otherwise knowns as Hollywood East, is home to EUE/Screen Gems Studios.  Popular televisions series' like Sleepy Hollow, Dawson's Creek, One Tree Hill and Under The Domehttp://www.wilmingtonfilm.com/Credits/Television/tabid/88/Default.aspx used the stages, and multiple locations throughout the city, as well as popular movies like Iron Man 3.http://www.wilmingtonfilm.com/Credits/FeatureFilm/tabid/87/Default.aspx Since 1995, Wilmington hosts an annual, nationally recognized, independent film festival, the "Cucalorus". It is the keystone event of The Cucalorus Film Foundation, a non-profit organization. The Foundation also sponsors weekly screenings, several short documentary projects, and the annual Kids Festival, with hands on film-making workshops. The Cape Fear Independent Film Network also hosts a film festival annually. Birthplace of Johnson Jones Hooper (1815-1862), Author of the Simon Suggs Series. Birthplace of Robert Ruark (1915-1965) The Wilmington Symphony Orchestra was established in 1971 and offers throughout the year a series of five classical performances, and a Free Family Concert. Wilmington is also home to numerous music festivals. One of the largest DIY festivals, the Wilmington Exchange Festival, occurs over a period of 5 days around Memorial Day each year. It is currently in its 13th year. Celebrating its 29th year, the North Carolina Jazz Festival is a three-day traditional jazz festival which features world-renowned jazz musicians. The Cape Fear Blues Society is a driving force behind blues music in Wilmington, N.C. The organization manages, staffs and sponsors weekly Cape Fear Blues Jams and the annual Cape Fear Blues Challenge talent competition (winners travel to Memphis TN for the International Blues Challenge). Its largest endeavor is the Cape Fear Blues Festival, an annual celebration that showcases local, regional and national touring blues artists performing at a variety of events and venues, including the Cape Fear Blues Cruise, Blues Workshops, an All-Day Blues Jam, and numerous live club shows. Membership in the CFBS is open to listeners and musicians alike.   The Second and Orange Street USO Club was erected by the Army Corps of Engineers at a cost of $80,000. Along with an identical structure on Nixon Street for African-American servicemen, it opened in December 1941, the same month that the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. From 1941 to 1945, the USO hosted 35,000 uniformed visitors a week. Recently renovated with sensitivity to its historic character, the Hannah Block Historic USO (HBHUSO) lobby serves as a museum where World War II memorabilia and other artifacts are displayed. The building itself was rededicated in Ms. Block’s name in 2006 and restored to its 1943 wartime character in 2008. The building is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. The World War II Wilmington Home Front Heritage Coalition, an all volunteer 501(c)(3) preservation organization, is the de facto preservationist of the building's history and maintains the home front museum. The Star-News is Wilmington's daily newspaper; read widely throughout the Lower Cape Fear region and now owned by the Halifax Media Group.  A daily online newspaper, Port City Daily (portcitydaily.com), is owned by Local Voice Media.  Two historically black newspapers are distributed and published weekly: The Wilmington Journal and The Challenger Newspapers.  Encore Magazine is a weekly arts and entertainment publication. The Wilmington television market is ranked 130 in the United States, and is the smallest DMA in North Carolina.  The broadcast stations are as follows: The region is also served by a cable-only affiliate of The CW, WWAY-DT2 (channel 20 on Time Warner Cable and channel 17 on Charter Communications). Cable news station News 14 Carolina also maintains its coastal bureau in Wilmington. On September 8, 2008, at 12 noon, WWAY, WECT, WSFX, WILM-LP and W51CW all turned off their analog signals, making Wilmington the first market in the nation to go digital-only as part of a test by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to iron out transition and reception concerns before the nationwide shutoff. Wilmington was chosen as the test market because the area's digital channel positions will remain unchanged after the transition. As the area's official conduit of emergency information, WUNJ did not participate in the early analog switchoff, and kept their analog signal on until the national digital switchover date of June 12, 2009.http://www.starnewsonline.com/article/20080507/NEWS/118071900/1004/Wilmington_to_switch_to_digital_TV_signals_before_rest_of_country W47CK did not participate due to its low-power status; FCC rules currently exempt low-powered stations from the 2009 analog shutdown. WILM-LP and W51CW chose to participate, even though they are exempt as LPTV stations. Despite Tropical Storm Hanna making landfall southwest of Wilmington two days before (September 6), the switchover continued as scheduled. The ceremony was marked by governmental and television representatives flipping a large switch (marked with the slogan "First in Flight, First in Digital") from analog to digital. The Wilmington Sharks are a Coastal Plain League (CPL) baseball team in Wilmington that was founded in 1997 and was among the charter organizations when the CPL was formed that same year. The roster is made up of top collegiate baseball players fine-tuning their skills using wood bats to prepare for professional baseball. Their stadium is located at Buck Hardee Field at Legion Stadium in Wilmington. The Wilmington Sea Dawgs are a Tobacco Road Basketball League (TRBL) team in Wilmington that began its inaugural season with the American Basketball Association (ABA) in November 2006 and have also played in the Premier Basketball League, and the Continental Basketball League. The Wilmington Hammerheads are a professional soccer team based in Wilmington. They were founded in 1996 and played in the United Soccer Leagues Second Division. Their stadium was the Legion Stadium. After the 2009 season, the USL discontinued their relationship with the franchise owner Chuck Sullivan. The Hammerheads franchise returned in 2011. The University of North Carolina Wilmington sponsors 19 intercollegiate sports and has held Division 1 membership in the NCAA since 1977. UNCW competes in the Colonial Athletic Association and has been a member since 1984. The University of North Carolina Wilmington is also home to the Seamen Ultimate Frisbee team.  The team won the National Championship in 1993 and most recently qualified for the USA Ultimate College Nationals tournament in 2014 The Cape Fear Rugby Football Club is an amateur rugby club playing in USA Rugby South Division II. They were founded in 1974 and hosts the annual Cape Fear Sevens Tournament held over 4 July weekend; hosting teams from all over the world. They own their own rugby pitch located at 21st and Chestnut St.http://www.fearrugby.com In 1914 the Philadelphia Phillies held spring training in Wilmington. Wilmington is a sister city with the following cities:       Downtown Monuments and Historic Buildings The George Davis Monument The Confederate Memorial The Bellamy Mansion Cotton Exchange of Wilmington The Temple of Israel The Murchison Building Year Murder Rape Robbery Assault Burglary Larceny MVT Arson 2006 7.4 65.4 431.5 398.8 1,787.0 4,078.2 682.5 23.2 2007 10.4 60.3 358.9 424.4 1,703.8 3,761.2 667.8 16.6 2008 12.2 49.8 324.2 404.5 1,489.0 3,511.5 535.6 15.2 Employer 1 New Hanover Health Network 5,991 2 New Hanover County Schools 3,645 3 General Electric 2,195 4 University of North Carolina Wilmington 1,844 5 New Hanover County 1,563 6 Pharmaceutical Product Development 1,464 7 Verizon Wireless 1,216 8 Cape Fear Community College 1,176 9 Corning 1,000 10 City of Wilmington 995 Club League Venue Founded Titles Wilmington Sharks CPL, Baseball Buck Hardee Field at Legion Stadium 1997 2 Wilmington Sea Dawgs TRBL, Basketball Wilmington YMCA 2006 0 Wilmington Hammerheads USL Pro, Soccer Legion Stadium 1996 1 Winters are generally mild with January highs in the mid 50s °F (11–14&nbsp;°C) and lows in the mid 30s °F (1–3&nbsp;°C). Snowfall does not occur in most years, and when it does, is generally light. Spring is reasonably lengthy, beginning in late February and lasting to early May. The presence of abundant dense vegetation in the area causes significant pollen dusting in the springtime that tends to turn rooftops and cars yellow. Summer brings high humidity, with daily high temperatures usually ranging from the upper 80s to lower 90s °F (31–34&nbsp;°C), and daily low temperatures usually from 70 to 75&nbsp;°F. Heat indices can easily break the  mark, though the actual temperature does not in most years. Due to the proximity of warm Atlantic Ocean waters and prevailing tropical-system tracks, the Wilmington area is subject to hurricane or tropical storm activity, mostly from August to early October, with an average frequency of once every seven years. Such tropical systems can bring high winds and very heavy rains, sometimes 4 or more inches in a single tropical system. Precipitation in Wilmington occurs year round, but with April the driest month, with less than 3 inches of rain on average, and July to September the wettest months, with over 7 inches of rain each, on average.  In an average year, the July to September period delivers about 40% of annual rainfall. Autumn is also generally humid at the beginning, with the threat from tropical weather systems (hurricanes, tropical storms and tropical depressions) peaking in September. Some of the deciduous trees may lose their leaves; however most trees in the area are evergreens and therefore remain green year-round. Normal January mean temperature: . The coldest month in recorded history was January 1977, averaging . However, January 1981 had a colder average minimum of . Normal July mean temperature: . The hottest month in recorded history was July 2012, averaging . However, July 1993 had a hotter average maximum of . Average nights ≤ : 39 First and last freezes of the season: November 18 and March 20, allowing a growing season of 244 days Average days ≥ : 43, but historically as low as 9 in 1909 and as high as 71 in 1980. First and last 90&nbsp;°F highs: May 15, September 15 Highest recorded temperature:  on June 27, 1952 Lowest daily maximum temperature:  on February 13, 1899 and December 30, 1917 Highest daily minimum temperature:  on August 1, 1999 and August 9, 2007 Lowest recorded temperature:  on December 25, 1989 Normal annual precipitation: , but historically ranging from  in 1909 to  in 1877. Wettest day:  on September 15, 1999 Driest month:  in April 1995 Wettest month:  in September 1999 Winter average snowfall:  (the median amount is 0) Snowiest day (midnight-to-midnight):  on December 18, 1896 Snowiest month:  in December 1989, making the winter of 1989–90 the snowiest University of North Carolina at Wilmington Cape Fear Community College Shaw University satellite campus University of Mount Olive satellite campus Eugene Ashley High School John T. Hoggard High School Isaac Bear Early College High School Emsley A. Laney High School New Hanover High School Mosley Performance Learning Center Wilmington Early College High School Holly Shelter Middle School Murray Middle School. Myrtle Grove Middle School Noble Middle School Roland-Grise Middle School Trask Middle School Williston Middle School Lake Forest Academy School Friends School of Wilmington St. Mark Catholic School (Wilmington, North Carolina) Walter L. Parsley Elementary School Alderman Anderson Bellamy Blair Bradley Creek Castle Hayne Codington College Park Eaton Forest Hills Freeman School of Engineering Gregory School of Science, Mathematics, and Technology Holly Tree Lake Forest Academy Mary C. Williams Murrayville New Horizons Elementary School (private) Ogden Pine Valley Snipes Academy of Arts and Design Sunset Park Winter Park Wrightsboro Wrightsville Beach Friends School of Wilmington St. Mark Catholic School (Wilmington, North Carolina) Cape Fear Academy The Lyceum Academy Wilmington Christian Academy Coastal Christian High School St. Mark Catholic School (Wilmington, North Carolina) St. Mary Catholic Church (Wilmington, North Carolina) Friends School of Wilmington Cape Fear Center for Inquiry Wilmington Preparatory Academy Wilmington Academy of Arts and Sciences Cameron Art Museum The Bellamy Mansion The Confederate Memorial, Wilmington Cape Fear Museum of History and Science The Children's Museum of Wilmington First Baptist Church (founded 1808) Fort Fisher Historic Area Grace United Methodist Church (founded 1797) St. James Episcopal Church - the oldest church in Wilmington St. Mary Catholic Church - historic Roman Catholic church in Wilmington First Presbyterian Church - historic Presbyterian church Latimer House Museum Sunset Park Historic District Temple of Israel - the oldest synagogue in North Carolina USS North Carolina Memorial Wilmington Railroad Museum [ ] Hannah Block Historic USO [ ] WTMV, Channel (29), (Antenna TV) : licensed to Ogden, owned by Tutt Media Group Inc. WWAY, Channel (3), (ABC affiliate): licensed to Wilmington, owned by Morris Multimedia WECT, Channel (6), (NBC affiliate): licensed to Wilmington, owned by Raycom Media WILM-LD, Channel (10), (CBS affiliate): licensed to Wilmington, owned by the Capitol Broadcasting Company WSFX-TV, Channel (26), (Fox affiliate): licensed to Wilmington, owned by Raycom Media WUNJ-TV, Channel (39), (PBS member station, part of the UNC-TV Network) W47CK, Channel (47), (MyNetworkTV affiliate, uses fictional WMYW calls on-air): licensed to Shallotte W51CW-D, Channel (51), (TBN affiliate) 88.1 FM WGHW - Christian Programs from Church Planters Of America 91.3 FM WHQR - Public Radio 93.1 FM WBPL - Wilmington Catholic Radio 88.9 FM WKVC - Contemporary Christian ("K-LOVE") 89.7 FM WDVV - Worship & Praise Music ("The Dove, 89.7") 90.5 FM WWIL - Christian Music ("Life 90.5") 92.3 FM WQSL - Country ("92.3, The Wolf) 93.7 FM WNTB - Country Radio ("The Dude FM") 94.5 FM WKXS - Classic Hits ("94.5, The Hawk") 95.5 FM W238AV - Contemporary Christian ("K-LOVE") 95.9 FM W240AS - Talk Radio  ("Port City Radio"), 97.3 FM WMNX - Hip Hop/R & B ("Coast 97.3") 98.3 FM WUIN - AAA ("The Penguin") 98.7 FM WRMR - Modern Rock 99.9 FM WKXB - Oldies ("Jammin' 99.9") 100.5 FM W263BA - Contemporary Christian ("K-LOVE") 101.3 FM WWQQ- Country ("Double Q, 101") 102.7 FM WGNI - Hot AC ("102.7 GNI") 103.7 FM WILT - Adult Contemporary  ("Sunny 103.7") 104.5 FM WYHW - Christian Talk ("104.5") 105.5 FM WXQR - Rock ("Rock 105") 106.3 FM WUDE - Country Radio ("The Dude FM") 106.7 FM WMYT - Talk Radio ("My Talk 106.7") 107.5 FM WAZO - Top 40 ("Z 107.5") 630 AM WMFD - Sports ("ESPN Radio, AM 630") 980 AM WAAV - News, Talk, Sports ("News, Talk, & Sports 980 The Wave") 1180 AM WLTT - Christian Teaching & Talk ("The Word, 1180 AM") 1340 AM WLSG - Southern Gospel ("God's Country, 1340") 1490 AM WWIL - Urban Gospel ("Gospel Joy, 1490") Independence Mall Cotton Exchange of Wilmington Mayfaire Town Center Hanover Center Shopping Mall Long Leaf Mall Chandler's Wharf Front Street Center  Dandong, Liaoning, China—1986  Doncaster, South Yorkshire, United Kingdom—1989  Bridgetown, Barbados—2004  San Pedro Town, Belize—2007 Airlie Gardens New Hanover County Extension Service Arboretum North Carolina Aquarium at Fort Fisher North Carolina Azalea Festival Screen Gems Studios  Battleship & Museum University of North Carolina at Wilmington Arboretum Cameron Art Museum Cape Fear Museum Carolina Beach Kure Beach Wrightsville Beach Fort Fisher National Battlefield Edwin Anderson, Jr., Medal of Honor recipient Eugene Ashley, Jr., Medal of Honor recipient Arthur Bluethenthal, football player and World War I pilot Jock Brandis, author, co-founder of the Full Belly Project David Brinkley, American television newscaster for NBC and ABC Alge Crumpler, NFL tight end for the Atlanta Falcons, Tennessee Titans and the New England Patriots Kristen Dalton, Miss North Carolina USA 2009, Miss USA 2009 Jeannine Dalton, Miss North Carolina USA 1982 Julia Dalton, Miss North Carolina Teen USA 2008, Miss North Carolina 2015 Charlie Daniels, Country music legend, inducted into the Grand Ole Opry Minnie Evans, folk artist Roman Gabriel, Los Angeles Rams quarterback; 1969 NFL Most Valuable Player Joseph Gallison, actor best known for his role as Dr. Neil Curtis on the daytime drama Days of Our Lives Althea Gibson, Tennis Hall of Famer Andy Griffith, the actor owned a home in the Wilmington area while filming Matlock there Pat Hingle, the actor best known for his role as Commissioner Gordon in the films Batman, Batman Returns and Batman Forever Ed Hinton, actor in television series I Led Three Lives; father of Darby Hinton and Daryn Hinton William Hooper (1742–1790), member Continental Congress; Signer United States Declaration of Independence; Deputy Attorney General, NC; Federal Judge Dennis Hopper, the actor lived in Wilmington for several years after filming multiple movies at Screen Gems Studios Keever Jankovich, NFL player Caterina Jarboro, first black opera singer ever to sing on an opera stage in America. In 1999, she was inducted into the Wilmington Walk of Fame. Sam Jones, American basketball player, 10 time NBA Champion with the Boston Celtics, member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Michael Jordan, American basketball player, 6 time NBA Champion with the Chicago Bulls, member of the Basketball Hall of Fame Sonny Jurgensen, former Washington Redskins quarterback, member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame Charles Kuralt, award-winning American journalist Linda Lavin, actress, singer, and arts patron best known for her title role in the television series Alice Meadowlark Lemon, American basketball player best known for being a member of the Harlem Globetrotters Sugar Ray Leonard, won the gold medal in boxing at the 1976 Olympics Quinton McCracken, former Major League Baseball outfielder Charles P. Murray, Jr., Medal of Honor recipient Trot Nixon, former Major League Baseball outfielder Sam Pellom, former NBA player Thomas Peters, early founder of Sierra Leone, who escaped from slavery in Wilmington at the beginning of the American Revolution. Robert Ruark, sportsman and syndicated writer during the 1940s–1950s Captain William Gordon Rutherfurd, commanded the HMS HMS Swiftsure during the Battle of Trafalgar Willie Stargell, former Pittsburgh Pirates outfielder and 1st baseman, member of the Baseball Hall of Fame John Steele, landed with the 82nd ABN in Normandy during World War II. Made famous in The Longest Day Ralph T. Troy, mayor of Monroe, Louisiana, from 1972 to 1976, former resident of Wilmington and former chairman of the New Hanover County Democratic Party Woodrow Wilson, 28th President of the United States Brittany York, Miss North Carolina USA 2011 Wilmington Directory. 1860, 1865, 1867, 1871, 1879, 1889, 1900, 1911 Official website of Wilmington, NC Official website of New Hanover County, NC
