   WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) is a family of wireless communications standards initially designed to provide 30 to 40 megabit-per-second data rates, with the 2011 update providing up to 1&nbsp;Gbit/s for fixed stations. The name "WiMAX" was created by the WiMAX Forum, which was formed in June 2001 to promote conformity and interoperability of the standard. The forum describes WiMAX as "a standards-based technology enabling the delivery of last mile wireless broadband access as an alternative to cable and DSL". IEEE 802.16m or WirelessMAN-Advanced is a candidate for the 4G, in competition with the LTE Advanced standard. WiMAX refers to interoperable implementations of the IEEE 802.16 family of wireless-networks standards ratified by the WiMAX Forum.  (Similarly, Wi-Fi refers to interoperable implementations of the IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN standards certified by the Wi-Fi Alliance.) WiMAX Forum certification allows vendors to sell fixed or mobile products as WiMAX certified, thus ensuring a level of interoperability with other certified products, as long as they fit the same profile. The original IEEE 802.16 standard (now called "Fixed WiMAX") was published in 2001. WiMAX adopted some of its technology from WiBro, a service marketed in Korea. Mobile WiMAX (originally based on 802.16e-2005) is the revision that was deployed in many countries, and is the basis for future revisions such as 802.16m-2011. WiMAX is sometimes referred to as "Wi-Fi on steroids" and can be used for a number of applications including broadband connections, cellular backhaul, hotspots, etc. It is similar to Wi-Fi, but it can enable usage at much greater distances.Municipal Broadband: Challenges and Perspectives The bandwidth and range of WiMAX make it suitable for the following potential applications: WiMAX can provide at-home or  mobile Internet access across whole cities or countries. In many cases this has resulted in competition in markets which typically only had access through an existing incumbent DSL (or similar) operator. Additionally, given the relatively low costs associated with the deployment of a WiMAX network (in comparison with 3G, HSDPA, xDSL, HFC or FTTx), it is now economically viable to provide last-mile broadband Internet access in remote locations. Mobile WiMAX was a replacement candidate for cellular phone technologies such as GSM and CDMA, or can be used as an overlay to increase capacity.  Fixed WiMAX is also considered as a wireless backhaul technology for 2G, 3G, and 4G networks in both developed and developing nations. In North America, backhaul for urban operations is typically provided via one or more copper wire line connections, whereas remote cellular operations are sometimes backhauled via satellite. In other regions, urban and rural backhaul is usually provided by microwave links. (The exception to this is where the network is operated by an incumbent with ready access to the copper network.) WiMAX has more substantial backhaul bandwidth requirements than legacy cellular applications. Consequently, the use of wireless microwave backhaul is on the rise in North America and existing microwave backhaul links in all regions are being upgraded. Capacities of between 34&nbsp;Mbit/s and 1&nbsp;Gbit/s  are routinely being deployed with latencies in the order of 1&nbsp;ms. In many cases, operators are aggregating sites using wireless technology and then presenting traffic on to fiber networks where convenient.  WiMAX in this application competes with microwave radio, E-line and simple extension of the fiber network itself. WiMAX directly supports the technologies that make triple-play service offerings possible (such as Quality of Service and Multicasting).  These are inherent to the WiMAX standard rather than being added on as Carrier Ethernet is to Ethernet. On May 7, 2008 in the United States, Sprint Nextel, Google, Intel, Comcast, Bright House, and Time Warner announced a pooling of an average of 120&nbsp;MHz of spectrum and merged with Clearwire to market the service.   The new company hopes to benefit from combined services offerings and network resources as a springboard past its competitors.  The cable companies will provide media services to other partners while gaining access to the wireless network as a Mobile virtual network operator to provide triple-play services. Some analysts questioned how the deal will work out: Although fixed-mobile convergence has been a recognized factor in the industry, prior attempts to form partnerships among wireless and cable companies have generally failed to lead to significant benefits to the participants.  Other analysts point out that as wireless progresses to higher bandwidth, it inevitably competes more directly with cable and DSL, inspiring competitors into collaboration.  Also, as wireless broadband networks grow denser and usage habits shift, the need for increased backhaul and media service will accelerate, therefore the opportunity to leverage cable assets is expected to increase.  Devices that provide connectivity to a WiMAX network are known as subscriber stations (SS). Portable units include handsets (similar to cellular smartphones); PC peripherals (PC Cards or USB dongles); and embedded devices in laptops, which are now available for Wi-Fi services. In addition, there is much emphasis by operators on consumer electronics devices such as Gaming consoles, MP3 players and similar devices. WiMAX is more similar to Wi-Fi than to other 3G cellular technologies. The WiMAX Forum website provides a list of certified devices. However, this is not a complete list of devices available as certified modules are embedded into laptops, MIDs (Mobile Internet devices), and other private labeled devices. WiMAX gateway devices are available as both indoor and outdoor versions from several manufacturers including Vecima Networks, Alvarion, Airspan, ZyXEL, Huawei, and Motorola.  The list of deployed WiMAX networks and WiMAX Forum membership list WiMAX Forum Member Companies. Wimaxforum.org. Retrieved on 2013-09-18. provide more links to specific vendors, products and installations.  The list of vendors and networks is not comprehensive and is not intended as an endorsement of these companies above others. Many of the WiMAX gateways that are offered by manufactures such as these are stand-alone self-install indoor units. Such devices typically sit near the customer's window with the best signal, and provide: Indoor gateways are convenient, but radio losses mean that the subscriber may need to be significantly closer to the WiMAX base station than with professionally installed external units. Outdoor units are roughly the size of a laptop PC, and their installation is comparable to the installation of a residential satellite dish. A higher-gain directional outdoor unit will generally result in greatly increased range and throughput but with the obvious loss of practical mobility of the unit. USB can provide connectivity to a WiMAX network through what is called a dongle. Generally these devices are connected to a notebook or net book computer. Dongles typically have omnidirectional antennas which are of lower gain compared to other devices. As such these devices are best used in areas of good coverage. HTC announced the first WiMAX enabled mobile phone, the Max 4G, on November 12, 2008.  The device was only available to certain markets in Russia on the Yota network. HTC and Sprint Nextel released the second WiMAX enabled mobile phone, the EVO 4G, March 23, 2010 at the CTIA conference in Las Vegas. The device, made available on June 4, 2010, is capable of both EV-DO(3G) and WiMAX(pre-4G) as well as simultaneous data & voice sessions. Sprint Nextel announced at CES 2012 that it will no longer be offering devices using the WiMAX technology due to financial circumstances, instead, along with its network partner Clearwire, Sprint Nextel will roll out a 4G network deciding to shift and utilize LTE 4G technology instead. WiMAX is based upon IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, approved in December 2005.  It is a supplement to the IEEE Std 802.16-2004, and so the actual standard is 802.16-2004 as amended by 802.16e-2005. Thus, these specifications need to be considered together. IEEE 802.16e-2005 improves upon IEEE 802.16-2004 by: SOFDMA (used in 802.16e-2005) and OFDM256 (802.16d) are not compatible thus equipment will have to be replaced if an operator is to move to the later standard (e.g., Fixed WiMAX to Mobile WiMAX). The original version of the standard on which WiMAX is based (IEEE 802.16) specified a physical layer operating in the 10 to 66&nbsp;GHz range. 802.16a, updated in 2004 to 802.16-2004, added specifications for the 2 to 11&nbsp;GHz range. 802.16-2004 was updated by 802.16e-2005 in 2005 and uses scalable orthogonal frequency-division multiple accessOrthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) is a method of encoding digital data on multiple carrier frequencies. OFDM has developed into a popular scheme for wideband digital communication, whether wireless or over copper wires, used in applications such as digital television and audio broadcasting. (SOFDMA), as opposed to the fixed orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) version with 256 sub-carriers (of which 200 are used) in 802.16d.  More advanced versions, including 802.16e, also bring multiple antenna support through MIMO. (See WiMAX MIMO) This brings potential benefits in terms of coverage, self installation, power consumption, frequency re-use and bandwidth efficiency. WiMax is the most energy-efficient pre-4G technique among LTE and HSPA+. The WiMAX MAC uses a scheduling algorithm for which the subscriber station needs to compete only once for initial entry into the network. After network entry is allowed, the subscriber station is allocated an access slot by the base station. The time slot can enlarge and contract, but remains assigned to the subscriber station, which means that other subscribers cannot use it.  In addition to being stable under overload and over-subscription, the scheduling algorithm can also be more bandwidth efficient. The scheduling algorithm also allows the base station to control Quality of Service (QoS) parameters by balancing the time-slot assignments among the application needs of the subscriber station. As a standard intended to satisfy needs of next-generation data networks (4G), WiMAX is distinguished by its dynamic burst algorithm modulation adaptive to the physical environment the RF signal travels through. Modulation is chosen to be more spectrally efficient (more bits per OFDM/SOFDMA symbol). That is, when the bursts have a high signal strength and a high carrier to noise plus interference ratio (CINR), they can be more easily decoded using digital signal processing (DSP). In contrast, operating in less favorable environments for RF communication, the system automatically steps down to a more robust mode (burst profile) which means fewer bits per OFDM/SOFDMA symbol; with the advantage that power per bit is higher and therefore simpler accurate signal processing can be performed. Burst profiles are used inverse (algorithmically dynamic) to low signal attenuation; meaning throughput between clients and the base station is determined largely by distance. Maximum distance is achieved by the use of the most robust burst setting; that is, the profile with the largest MAC frame allocation trade-off requiring more symbols (a larger portion of the MAC frame) to be allocated in transmitting a given amount of data than if the client were closer to the base station. The client's MAC frame and their individual burst profiles are defined as well as the specific time allocation. However, even if this is done automatically then the practical deployment should avoid high interference and multipath environments. The reason for which is obviously that too much interference causes the network to function poorly and can also misrepresent the capability of the network. The system is complex to deploy as it is necessary to track not only the signal strength and CINR (as in systems like GSM) but also how the available frequencies will be dynamically assigned (resulting in dynamic changes to the available bandwidth.) This could lead to cluttered frequencies with slow response times or lost frames. As a result, the system has to be initially designed in consensus with the base station product team to accurately project frequency use, interference, and general product functionality. The Asia-Pacific region has surpassed the North American region in terms of 4G broadband wireless subscribers. There were around 1.7 million pre-WiMAX and WiMAX customers in Asia - 29% of the overall market - compared to 1.4 million in the USA and Canada. The WiMAX Forum has proposed an architecture that defines how a WiMAX network can be connected with an IP based core network, which is typically chosen by operators that serve as Internet Service Providers (ISP); Nevertheless, the WiMAX BS provide seamless integration capabilities with other types of architectures as with packet switched Mobile Networks. The WiMAX forum proposal defines a number of components, plus some of the interconnections (or reference points) between these, labeled R1 to R5 and R8: It is important to note that the functional architecture can be designed into various hardware configurations rather than fixed configurations.  For example, the architecture is flexible enough to allow remote/mobile stations of varying scale and functionality and Base Stations of varying size - e.g. femto, pico, and mini BS as well as macros. There is no uniform global licensed spectrum for WiMAX, however the WiMAX Forum has published three licensed spectrum profiles: 2.3&nbsp;GHz, 2.5&nbsp;GHz and 3.5&nbsp;GHz, in an effort to drive standardisation and decrease cost. In the USA, the biggest segment available is around 2.5&nbsp;GHz, and is already assigned, primarily to Sprint Nextel and Clearwire. Elsewhere in the world, the most-likely bands used will be the Forum approved ones, with 2.3&nbsp;GHz probably being most important in Asia. Some countries in Asia like India and Indonesia will use a mix of 2.5&nbsp;GHz, 3.3&nbsp;GHz and other frequencies. Pakistan's Wateen Telecom uses 3.5&nbsp;GHz. Analog TV bands (700&nbsp;MHz) may become available for WiMAX usage, but await the complete roll out of digital TV, and there will be other uses suggested for that spectrum. In the USA the FCC auction for this spectrum began in January 2008 and, as a result, the biggest share of the spectrum went to Verizon Wireless and the next biggest to AT&T. Both of these companies have stated their intention of supporting LTE, a technology which competes directly with WiMAX.  EU commissioner Viviane Reding has suggested re-allocation of 500–800&nbsp;MHz spectrum for wireless communication, including WiMAX. WiMAX profiles define channel size, TDD/FDD and other necessary attributes in order to have inter-operating products.  The current fixed profiles are defined for both TDD and FDD profiles. At this point, all of the mobile profiles are TDD only. The fixed profiles have channel sizes of 3.5&nbsp;MHz, 5&nbsp;MHz, 7&nbsp;MHz and 10&nbsp;MHz. The mobile profiles are 5&nbsp;MHz, 8.75&nbsp;MHz and 10&nbsp;MHz. (Note: the 802.16 standard allows a far wider variety of channels, but only the above subsets are supported as WiMAX profiles.) Since October 2007, the Radio communication Sector of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU-R) has decided to include WiMAX technology in the IMT-2000 set of standards. This enables spectrum owners (specifically in the 2.5-2.69&nbsp;GHz band at this stage) to use WiMAX equipment in any country that recognizes the IMT-2000. One of the significant advantages of advanced wireless systems such as WiMAX is spectral efficiency. For example, 802.16-2004 (fixed) has a spectral efficiency of 3.7 (bit/s)/Hertz, and other 3.5–4G wireless systems offer spectral efficiencies that are similar to within a few tenths of a percent. The notable advantage of WiMAX comes from combining SOFDMA with smart antenna technologies. This multiplies the effective spectral efficiency through multiple reuse and smart network deployment topologies. The direct use of frequency domain organization simplifies designs using MIMO-AAS compared to CDMA/WCDMA methods, resulting in more effective systems. Another advantages of WiMAX, is a relatively new technology that enables communication over a maximum distance of 30 miles – compared to 300 feet for WiFi. Of course, the longer the distance, the slower the speed, but it’s still faster and has a longer range than WiFi. Ideally, speeds of around 10MBps could be achieved with a range of 1 – 6 miles. The reason why some telecommunication providers are quite excited about the prospects for WiMAX is that mobile users could use it as a faster and longer range alternative to WiFi and corporate or home users could use it in a fixed environment as a replacement or backup to DSL. Companies will begin to use WiMAX to communicate from office to office, relatively near to each other and provide campus wide wireless connectivity to employees. Employee’s computers will need to use new WiMAX cards to connect to these new networks. Next, or at the same time, public places such as airports, parks and coffee shops will be outfitted with WiMAX access points. WiMAX has been very successful as it’s easy to use, low cost, and relatively fast. While WiMAX has its benefits, as people download more and larger files, upload more data (such as voice calls, images and videos) and have longer distance needs – the limits of WiFi are apparent. WiMAX cannot deliver 70&nbsp;Mbit/s over .  Like all wireless technologies, WiMAX can operate at higher bitrates or over longer distances but not both. Operating at the maximum range of  increases bit error rate and thus results in a much lower bitrate. Conversely, reducing the range (to under 1&nbsp;km) allows a device to operate at higher bitrates. A city-wide deployment of WiMAX in Perth, Australia demonstrated that customers at the cell-edge with an indoor Customer-premises equipment (CPE) typically obtain speeds of around 1–4&nbsp;Mbit/s, with users closer to the cell site obtaining speeds of up to 30&nbsp;Mbit/s. Like all wireless systems, available bandwidth is shared between users in a given radio sector, so performance could deteriorate in the case of many active users in a single sector. However, with adequate capacity planning and the use of WiMAX's Quality of Service, a minimum guaranteed throughput for each subscriber can be put in place. In practice, most users will have a range of 4-8&nbsp;Mbit/s services and additional radio cards will be added to the base station to increase the number of users that may be served as required. A number of specialized companies produced baseband ICs and integrated RFICs for WiMAX Subscriber Stations in the 2.3, 2.5 and 3.5&nbsp;GHz bands (refer to 'Spectrum allocation' above).  These companies include, but are not limited to, Beceem, Sequans, and PicoChip. Comparisons and confusion between WiMAX and Wi-Fi are frequent, because both are related to wireless connectivity and Internet access.WiMAX vs. WiFi. Circleid.com (2008-02-20). Retrieved on 2013-09-18. Although Wi-Fi and WiMAX are designed for different situations, they are complementary. WiMAX network operators typically provide a WiMAX Subscriber Unit that connects to the metropolitan WiMAX network and provides Wi-Fi  connectivity within the home or business for local devices, e.g., computers, Wi-Fi handsets and smartphones. This enables the user to place the WiMAX Subscriber Unit in the best reception area, such as a window, and still be able to use the WiMAX network from any place within their residence. The local area network inside one's house or business would operate as with any other wired or wireless network. If one were to connect the WiMAX Subscriber Unit directly to a WiMAX-enabled computer, that would limit access to a single device. As an alternative for a LAN, one could purchase a WiMAX modem with a built-in wireless Wi-Fi router, allowing one to connect multiple devices to create a LAN. Using WiMAX could be an advantage, since it is typically faster than most cable modems with download speeds between 3 and 6 Mbit/s, and generally costs less than cable. TTCN-3 test specification language is used for the purposes of specifying conformance tests for WiMAX implementations. The WiMAX test suite is being developed by a Specialist Task Force at ETSI (STF 252). The WiMAX Forum is a non profit organization formed to promote the adoption of WiMAX compatible products and services. A major role for the organization is to certify the interoperability of WiMAX products. Those that pass conformance and interoperability testing achieve the "WiMAX Forum Certified" designation, and can display this mark on their products and marketing materials. Some vendors claim that their equipment is "WiMAX-ready", "WiMAX-compliant", or "pre-WiMAX", if they are not officially WiMAX Forum Certified. Another role of the WiMAX Forum is to promote the spread of knowledge about WiMAX.  In order to do so, it has a certified training program that is currently offered in English and French.  It also offers a series of member events and endorses some industry events. WiSOA was the first global organization composed exclusively of owners of WiMAX spectrum with plans to deploy WiMAX technology in those bands. WiSOA focused on the regulation, commercialisation, and deployment of WiMAX spectrum in the 2.3–2.5&nbsp;GHz and the 3.4–3.5&nbsp;GHz ranges. WiSOA merged with the Wireless Broadband Alliance in April 2008.  In 2011, the Telecommunications Industry Association released three technical standards (TIA-1164, TIA-1143, and TIA-1140) that cover the air interface and core networking aspects of Wi-Max High-Rate Packet Data (HRPD) systems using a Mobile Station/Access Terminal (MS/AT) with a single transmitter.Technical standards Within the marketplace, WiMAX's main competition came from existing, widely deployed wireless systems such as Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS), CDMA2000, existing Wi-Fi and mesh networking.  In the future, competition will be from the evolution of the major cellular standards to 4G, high-bandwidth, low-latency, all-IP networks with voice services built on top. The worldwide move to 4G for GSM/UMTS and AMPS/TIA (including CDMA2000) is the 3GPP Long Term Evolution (LTE) effort. The LTE Standard was finalized in December 2008, with the first commercial deployment of LTE carried out by TeliaSonera in Oslo and Stockholm in December, 2009. Since then, LTE has seen increasing adoption by mobile carriers around the world. In some areas of the world, the wide availability of UMTS and a general desire for standardization has meant spectrum has not been allocated for WiMAX: in July 2005, the EU-wide frequency allocation for WiMAX was blocked. Early WirelessMAN standards, The European standard HiperMAN and Korean standard WiBro were harmonized as part of WiMAX and are no longer seen as competition but as complementary. All networks now being deployed in South Korea, the home of the WiBro standard, are now WiMAX. The following table only shows peak rates which are potentially very misleading. In addition, the comparisons listed are not normalized by physical channel size (i.e., spectrum used to achieve the listed peak rates); this obfuscates spectral efficiency and net through-put capabilities of the different wireless technologies listed below. The IEEE 802.16m-2011 standard was the core technology for WiMAX 2. The IEEE 802.16m standard was submitted to the ITU for IMT-Advanced standardization. IEEE 802.16m is one of the major candidates for IMT-Advanced technologies by ITU. Among many enhancements, IEEE 802.16m systems can provide four times faster data speed than the WiMAX Release 1. WiMAX Release 2 provided backward compatibility with Release 1. WiMAX operators could migrate from release 1 to release 2 by upgrading channel cards or software. The WiMAX 2 Collaboration Initiative was formed to help this transition. It was anticipated that using 4X2 MIMO in the urban microcell scenario with only a single 20&nbsp;MHz TDD channel available system wide, the 802.16m system can support both 120&nbsp;Mbit/s downlink and 60&nbsp;Mbit/s uplink per site simultaneously. It was expected that the WiMAX Release 2 would be available commercially in the 2011–2012 timeframe. A field test conducted in 2007 by SUIRG (Satellite Users Interference Reduction Group) with support from the U.S. Navy, the Global VSAT Forum, and several member organizations yielded results showing interference at 12&nbsp;km when using the same channels for both the WiMAX systems and satellites in C-band.   As of October 2010, the WiMAX Forum claimed over 592 WiMAX (fixed and mobile) networks deployed in over 148 countries, covering over 621 million subscribers. By February 2011, the WiMAX Forum cited coverage of over 823 million people, and estimate over 1 billion subscribers by the end of the year.Wimax Forum Industry Research Report http://www.wimaxforum.org/sites/wimaxforum.org/files/page/2011/03/Monthly_Industry_Report_March2011.pdf South Korea launched a WiMAX network in the 2nd quarter of 2006. By the end of 2008 there were 350,000 WiMAX subscribers in Korea.The rise and rise of HSPA | telecoms.com - telecoms industry news, analysis and opinion http://www.telecoms.com/12573/the-rise-and-rise-of-hspa/ Worldwide, by early 2010 WiMAX seemed to be ramping quickly relative to other available technologies, though access in North America lagged. Yota, the largest WiMAX network operator in the world in 4Q 2009,Maravedis, 4Q 2009, http://www.unova.ru/article/2631, http://www.kommersant.ru/doc.aspx?DocsID=1310343 announced in May 2010 that it will move new network deployments to LTE and, subsequently, change its existing networks as well.Russia Today, May 21, 2010 - Scartel dropping WiMAX, aiming for LTE - RT - [rt.com/Business/2010-05-21/scartel-dropping-wimax-lte.html] A study published September 2010 by Blycroft Publishing estimated 800 management contracts from 364 WiMAX operations worldwide offering active services (launched or still trading as opposed to just licensed and still to launch).       Providing portable mobile broadband connectivity across cities and countries through a variety of devices. Providing a wireless alternative to cable and digital subscriber line (DSL) for "last mile" broadband access. Providing data, telecommunications (VoIP) and IPTV services (triple play). Providing a source of Internet connectivity as part of a business continuity plan. Smart grids and metering An integrated Wi-Fi access point to provide the WiMAX Internet connectivity to multiple devices throughout the home or business. Ethernet ports  to connect directly to a computer, router, printer or DVR on a local wired network. One or two analog telephone jacks to connect a land-line phone and take advantage of VoIP. Adding support for mobility (soft and hard handover between base stations). This is seen as one of the most important aspects of 802.16e-2005, and is the very basis of Mobile WiMAX. Scaling of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) to the channel bandwidth in order to keep the carrier spacing constant across different channel bandwidths (typically 1.25&nbsp;MHz, 5&nbsp;MHz, 10&nbsp;MHz or 20&nbsp;MHz). Constant carrier spacing results in a higher spectrum efficiency in wide channels, and a cost reduction in narrow channels. Also known as scalable OFDMA (SOFDMA). Other bands not multiples of 1.25&nbsp;MHz are defined in the standard, but because the allowed FFT subcarrier numbers are only 128, 512, 1024 and 2048, other frequency bands will not have exactly the same carrier spacing, which might not be optimal for implementations. Carrier spacing is 10.94&nbsp;kHz. Advanced antenna diversity schemes, and hybrid automatic repeat-request (HARQ) Adaptive antenna systems (AAS) and MIMO technology Denser sub-channelization, thereby improving indoor penetration Intro and low-density parity check (LDPC) Introducing downlink sub-channelization, allowing administrators to trade coverage for capacity or vice versa Adding an extra quality of service (QoS) class for VoIP applications. SS/MS: the Subscriber Station/Mobile Station ASN: the Access Service Network BS: Base station, part of the ASN ASN-GW: the ASN Gateway, part of the ASN CSN: the Connectivity Service Network HA: Home Agent, part of the CSN AAA: Authentication, Authorization and Accounting Server, part of the CSN NAP: a Network Access Provider NSP: a Network Service Provider WiMAX is a long range system, covering many kilometres, that uses licensed or unlicensed spectrum to deliver connection to a network, in most cases the Internet. Wi-Fi uses the 2.4&nbsp;GHz, 3&nbsp;GHz, 5&nbsp;GHz, and 60&nbsp;GHz radio frequency bands to provide access to a local network. Wi-Fi is more popular in end-user devices. Wi-Fi runs on the Media Access Control's CSMA/CA protocol, which is connectionless and contention based, whereas WiMAX runs a connection-oriented MAC. WiMAX and Wi-Fi have quite different quality of service (QoS) mechanisms: WiMAX uses a QoS mechanism based on connections between the base station and the user device.  Each connection is based on specific scheduling algorithms. Wi-Fi uses contention access — all subscriber stations that wish to pass data through a wireless access point (AP) are competing for the AP's attention on a random interrupt basis. This can cause subscriber stations distant from the AP to be repeatedly interrupted by closer stations, greatly reducing their throughput. Both IEEE 802.11, which includes Wi-Fi, and IEEE 802.16, which includes WiMAX, define Peer-to-Peer (P2P) and wireless ad hoc networks, where an end user communicates to users or servers on another Local Area Network (LAN) using its access point or base station. However, 802.11 supports also direct ad hoc or peer to peer networking between end user devices without an access point while 802.16 end user devices must be in range of the base station. List of deployed WiMAX networks WiBro (mobile WiMax in Korea) Cognitive radio Category 5 cable Evolved HSPA High-Speed Packet Access Mobile broadband Mobile VoIP Municipal broadband Packet Burst Broadband Super Wi-Fi Switched mesh Yota Egg Wireless bridge Wireless local loop K. Fazel and S. Kaiser, Multi-Carrier and Spread Spectrum Systems: From OFDM and MC-CDMA to LTE and WiMAX, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2008, ISBN 978-0-470-99821-2 M. Ergen, Mobile Broadband - Including WiMAX and LTE, Springer, NY, 2009 ISBN 978-0-387-68189-4 Ramon Ray(2009) WiMax - Your Fast and Longer Distance WiFi has arrived. Personal Technology. Official page of the WiMAX Forum Internet Protocol Journal Overview of Mobile WiMAX Patent alliance formed for WiMAX 4G technology WiMAX vs. LTE Mobile WiMAX Throughput Measurements WiMAX Technical Seminar Report
