   Working time is the period of time that an individual spends at paid occupational labor. Unpaid labors such as personal housework or caring for children/pets are not considered part of the working week. Many countries regulate the work week by law, such as stipulating minimum daily rest periods, annual holidays and a maximum number of working hours per week. Working time may vary from person to person often depending on location, culture, lifestyle choice, and the profitability of the individual's livelihood. For example, someone who is supporting children and paying a large mortgage will need to work more hours to meet a basic cost of living than someone without children of the same earning power. As fewer people than ever are having children choosing part time is becoming more popular. Standard working hours (or normal working hours) refers to the legislation to limit the working hours per day, per week, per month or per year. If an employee needs to work overtime, the employer will need to pay overtime payments to employees as required in the law. Generally speaking, standard working hours of countries worldwide are around 40 to 44 hours per week (but not everywhere: from 35 hours per week in France to up to 112 hours per week in North Korea labour camp  and in the modern tech industry), and the additional overtime payments are around 25% to 50% above the normal hourly payments. Maximum working hours refers to the maximum working hours of an employee. The employee cannot work more than the level specified in the maximum working hours law. Since the 1960s, the consensus among anthropologists, historians, and sociologists has been that early hunter-gatherer societies enjoyed more leisure time than is permitted by capitalist and agrarian societies;Hans-Joachim Voth (2000) Time and work in England 1750–1830, Chapter 5, Comparisons and conclusions pp. 242–5 For instance, one camp of !Kung Bushmen was estimated to work two-and-a-half days per week, at around 6 hours a day. Aggregated comparisons show that on average the working day was less than five hours. Subsequent studies in the 1970s examined the Machiguenga of the Upper Amazon and the Kayapo of northern Brazil. These studies expanded the definition of work beyond purely hunting-gathering activities, but the overall average across the hunter-gatherer societies he studied was still below 4.86, while the maximum was below 8 hours. Popular perception is still aligned with the old academic consensus that hunter-gatherers worked far in excess of modern humans' forty-hour week. The industrial revolution made it possible for a larger segment of the population to work year-round, because this labor was not tied to the season and artificial lighting made it possible to work longer each day. Peasants and farm laborers moved from rural areas to factories, and working time during the year increased significantly.Juliet Schor (1991) The Overworked American, pp. 43–seq, excerpt: Pre-industrial workers had a shorter workweek than today's Before collective bargaining and worker protection laws, there was a financial incentive for a company to maximize the return on expensive machinery by having long hours. Records indicate that work schedules as long as twelve to sixteen hours per day, six to seven days per week were practiced in some industrial sites. The automobile manufacturer, Henry Ford, was an ardent proponent of shorter work hours, which he introduced unilaterally in his own factories. Ford stated that he pursued this policy for business rather than humanitarian reasons. He believed that workers (who were also the main consumers of products) needed adequate leisure time to consume products and thus perceive a need to purchase them. Recent articles supporting a four-day week have argued that reduced work hours would increase consumption and invigorate the economy. However, other articles actually state that consumption would decrease. Other arguments for the four-day week include improvements to worker's level of education (due to having extra time to take classes and courses) and improvements to worker's health (less work-related stress and extra time for exercise). Reduced hours also save money on day care costs and transportation, which in turn helps the environment with less carbon-related emissions. These benefits increase workforce productivity on a per-hour basis.  Over the 20th century, work hours declined by almost half, mostly due to rising wages brought about by renewed economic growth, with a supporting role from trade unions, collective bargaining, and progressive legislation. The workweek, in most of the industrialized world, dropped steadily, to about forty hours after World War II. The limitation of working hours is also proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 24 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Article 7 and European Social Charter.European Social Charter, Article 2 The decline continued at a faster pace in Europe: for example, France adopted a 35-hour workweek in 2000. In 1995, China adopted a 40-hour week, eliminating half-day work on Saturdays (though this is not widely practiced). Working hours in industrializing economies like South Korea, though still much higher than the leading industrial countries, are also declining steadily. Technology has also continued to improve worker productivity, permitting standards of living to rise as hours declined.ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/opt/lpr/histmfgsic.zip  In developed economies, as the time needed to manufacture goods has declined, more working hours have become available to provide services, resulting in a shift of much of the workforce between sectors. Economic growth in monetary terms tends to be concentrated in health care, education, government, criminal justice, corrections, and other activities that are regarded as necessary for society rather than those that contribute directly to the production of material goods. In the mid-2000s, the Netherlands was the first country in the industrialized world where the overall average working week dropped to less than 30 hours. Most countries in the developed world have seen average hours worked decrease significantly. For example, in the U.S in the late 19th century it was estimated that the average work week was over 60 hours per week. Today the average hours worked in the U.S is around 33, with  the average man employed full-time for 8.4 hours per work day, and the average woman employed full-time for 7.7 hours per work day.    The front runners for lowest average weekly work hours are the Netherlands with 27 hours, and France with 30 hours. At current rates the Netherlands is set to become the first country to reach an average work week under 21 hours. In a 2011 report of 26 OECD countries, Germany had the lowest average working hours per week at 25.6 hours. The New Economics Foundation has recommended moving to a 21-hour standard work week to address problems with unemployment, high carbon emissions, low well-being, entrenched inequalities, overworking, family care, and the general lack of free time.Coote, A. et al. (2012) 21 Hours: Why a Shorter Working Week Can Help Us All to Flourish in the 21st Century (London: New Economics Foundation)Stuart, H. (January 7, 2012) "Cut the working week to a maximum of 20 hours, urge top economists" The GuardianSchachter, H. (February 10, 2012) "Save the world with a 3-day work week" Globe and Mail Actual work week lengths have been falling in the developed world.Gapminder Foundation (2011) "Gapminder World" graph of working hours per week plotted against purchasing power- and inflation-adjusted GDP per capita over time gapminder.org Factors that have contributed to lowering average work hours and increasing standard of living have been:   9-to-5 is a phrase used to describe a conventional and possibly tedious job.http://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/nine-to-five+job Negatively used, it connotes a tedious or unremarkable occupation. The phrase also indicates that a person is an employee, usually in a large company, rather than self-employed. More neutrally, it connotes a job with stable hours and low career risk, but still a position of subordinate employment. The phrase is an expression in the United States originating from the traditional American business hours of 9:00&nbsp;a.m. to 5:00&nbsp;p.m., Monday to Friday, representing a workweek of five eight-hour days comprising 40 hours in total. The actual time at work often varies between 35 and 48 hours in practice due to the inclusion, or lack of inclusion, of breaks. In many traditional white collar positions, employees were required to be in the office during these hours to take orders from the bosses, hence the relationship between this phrase and subordination. Workplace hours have become more flexible, but even still the phrase is commonly used.  The structure of the work week varies considerably for different professions and cultures. Among salaried workers in the western world, the work week often consists of Monday to Friday or Saturday with the weekend set aside as a time of personal work and leisure. Sunday is set aside in the western world because it is the Christian sabbath. Several countries have adopted a workweek from Monday morning until Friday noon, either due to religious rules (observation of shabbat in Israel whose workweek is Sunday to Friday afternoon) or the growing predominance of a 35–37.5 hour workweek in continental Europe. Several of the Muslim countries have a standard Sunday through Thursday or Saturday through Wednesday workweek leaving Friday for religious observance, and providing breaks for the daily prayer times. Source: 2014 OECD This table includes only countries in the OECD. South Korea has the fastest declining working time in the OECD, which is the result of the government's proactive move to lower working hours at all levels to increase leisure and relaxation time, which introduced the mandatory forty-hour, five-day working week in 2004 for companies with over 1,000 employees(although, confusingly, total legal working hours is still 68 hours per week: it is legal to demand 12 hours of overtime during the week(often included in the '40-hour contracted salary' for office staff, plus another 16 hours on weekends). This expanded to companies with 300 employees or more in 2005, 100 employees or more in 2006, 50 or more in 2007, 20 or more in 2008 and a full inclusion to all workers nationwide in July 2011. The government has continuously increased public holidays to 16 days in 2013, more than the 10 days of the United States and double that of the United Kingdom's 8 days. Despite those efforts, South Korea's work hours are still relatively long, with an average 2,163 hours per year in 2013.https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS Work hours in Japan are decreasing, but many Japanese still work long hours. Recently, Japan's Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW) issued a draft report recommending major changes to the regulations that govern working hours. The centerpiece of the proposal is an exemption from overtime pay for white-collar workers.Japan has enacted an 8-hour work day and 40-hour work week (44 hours in specified workplaces). The overtime limits are: 15 hours a week, 27 hours over two weeks, 43 hours over four weeks, 45 hours a month, 81 hours over two months and 120 hours over three months; however, some workers get around these restrictions by working several hours a day without 'clocking in' whether physically or metaphorically.Measures for Working Hours – Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, 2012-11-12  The overtime allowance should not be lower than 125% and not more than 150% of the normal hourly rate.Japan– Labour Standards Law ILO, 2012-11-12 In most European Union countries, working time is gradually decreasing. The European Union's working time directive imposes a 48-hour maximum working week that applies to every member state except the United Kingdom  and Malta (which have an opt-out, meaning that UK-based employees may work longer than 48 hours if they wish, but they cannot be forced to do so). France has enacted a 35-hour workweek by law, and similar results have been produced in other countries through collective bargaining. A major reason for the low annual hours worked in Europe is a relatively high amount of paid annual leave. Fixed employment comes with four to six weeks of holiday as standard. In the UK, for example, full-time employees are entitled to 28 days of paid leave a year. It is commonly understood working hours in the UK are 09.30 to 17.30. Mexican laws mandate a maximum of 48 hours of work per week, but they are rarely observed or enforced due to loopholes in the law, the volatility of labor rights in Mexico, and its underdevelopment relative to other members countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development&nbsp;(OECD). Indeed, private sector employees often work overtime without receiving overtime compensation. Fear of unemployment and threats by employers explain in part why the 48-hour work week is disregarded.. Articles 161 to 167 of the Substantive Work Code in Colombia provide for a maximum of 48 hours of work a week. In Australia, between 1974 and 1997 no marked change took place in the average amount of time spent at work by Australians of "prime working age" (that is, between 25 and 54 years of age). Throughout this period, the average time spent at work by prime working-age Australians (including those who did not spend any time at work) remained stable at between 27 and 28 hours per week. This unchanging average, however, masks a significant redistribution of work from men to women. Between 1974 and 1997, the average time spent at work by prime working-age Australian men fell from 45 to 36 hours per week, while the average time spent at work by prime working-age Australian women rose from 12 to 19 hours per week. In the period leading up to 1997, the amount of time Australian workers spent at work outside the hours of 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays also increased.Bittman, Michael & Rice, James Mahmud. (2002). "The spectre of overwork: An analysis of trends between 1974 and 1997 using Australian time-use diaries". Labour and Industry 12 (3), 5–25. (3.4 MB PDF file) In 2009, a rapid increase in the number of working hours was reported in a study by The Australia Institute. The study found the average Australian worked 1855 hours per year at work. According to Clive Hamilton of The Australia Institute, this surpasses even Japan. The Australia Institute believes that Australians work the highest number of hours in the developed world. From January 1, 2010, Australia enacted the new maximum weekly hour regulation under a new system created by the Fair Work Act 2009. Unless the additional hours are reasonable, the maximum weekly hours of work of a full-time employee is 38 hours.National Employment Standards (NES) – Commonwealth of Australia, 2012-05-23 In 2006, the average man employed full-time worked 8.4 hours per work day, and the average woman employed full-time worked 7.7 hours per work day. There is no mandatory minimum amount of paid time off for sickness or holiday.  However, regular full-time workers often have the opportunity to take about nine days off for various holidays, two weeks (10 business days) of sick leave and two weeks (10 business days) of paid holiday time, with some workers receiving additional time after several years. The majority of jobs in America do not offer paid time off.  Because of the pressure of working, time is increasingly viewed as a commodity. By 1946 the United States government had inaugurated the 40-hour work week for all federal employees.California Assembly Concurrent Resolution 11, Cal. Resolutions 1946, Ch. 19 Beginning in 1950, under the Truman Administration, the United States became the first known industrialized nation to explicitly (albeit secretly) and permanently forswear a reduction of working time. Given the military-industrial requirements of the Cold War, the authors of the then secret National Security Council Report 68 (NSC-68) proposed the US government undertake a massive permanent national economic expansion that would let it “siphon off” a part of the economic activity produced to support an ongoing military buildup to contain the Soviet Union. In his 1951 Annual Message to the Congress, President Truman stated:  In terms of manpower, our present defense targets will require an increase of nearly one million men and women in the armed forces within a few months, and probably not less than four million more in defense production by the end of the year. This means that an additional 8 percent of our labor force, and possibly much more, will be required by direct defense needs by the end of the year. These manpower needs will call both for increasing our labor force by reducing unemployment and drawing in women and older workers, and for lengthening hours of work in essential industries.  According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average non-farm private sector employee worked 34.5 hours per week as of June 2012. As President Truman’s 1951 message had predicted, the share of working women rose from 30 percent of the labor force in 1950 to 47 percent by 2000 – growing at a particularly rapid rate during the 1970s. According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report issued May 2002, "In 1950, the overall participation rate of women was 34 percent ...  The rate rose to 38 percent in 1960, 43 percent in 1970, 52 percent in 1980, and 58 percent in 1990 and reached 60 percent by 2000. The overall labor force participation rate of women is projected to attain its highest level in 2010, at 62 percent.” The inclusion of women in the work force can be seen as symbolic of social progress as well as of increasing American productivity and hours worked. Between 1950 and 2007 official price inflation was measured to 861 percent. President Truman, in his 1951 message to Congress, predicted correctly that his military buildup “will cause intense and mounting inflationary pressures.” Using the data provided by the United State Bureau of Labor Statistics, Erik Rauch has estimated productivity to have increased by nearly 400%. According to Rauch, “if productivity means anything at all, a worker should be able to earn the same standard of living as a 1950 worker in only 11 hours per week.” In the United States, the working time for upper-income professionals has increased compared to 1965, while total annual working time for low-skill, low-income workers has decreased.  This effect is sometimes called the "leisure gap". Many professional workers put in longer hours than the forty-hour standard.  In professional industries like investment banking and large law firms, a forty-hour workweek is considered inadequate and may result in job loss or failure to be promoted.California Bar Journal  Medical residents in the United States routinely work long hours as part of their training. Workweek policies are not uniform in the U.S.  Many compensation arrangements are legal, and three of the most common are wage, commission, and salary payment schemes.  Wage earners are compensated on a per-hour basis, whereas salaried workers are compensated on a per-week or per-job basis, and commission workers get paid according to how much they produce or sell. Under most circumstances, wage earners and lower-level employees may be legally required by an employer to work more than forty hours in a week; however, they are paid extra for the additional work.  Many salaried workers and commission-paid sales staff are not covered by overtime laws.  These are generally called "exempt" positions, because they are exempt from federal and state laws that mandate extra pay for extra time worked.  The rules are complex, but generally exempt workers are executives, professionals, or sales staff.  For example, school teachers are not paid extra for working extra hours.  Business owners and independent contractors are considered self-employed, and none of these laws apply to them. Generally, workers are paid time-and-a-half, or 1.5 times the worker's base wage, for each hour of work past forty.  California also applies this rule to work in excess of eight hours per day, but exemptions and exceptions significantly limit the applicability of this law. In some states, firms are required to pay double-time, or twice the base rate, for each hour of work past 60, or each hour of work past 12 in one day in California, also subject to numerous exemptions and exceptions. This provides an incentive for companies to limit working time, but makes these additional hours more desirable for the worker. It is not uncommon for overtime hours to be accepted voluntarily by wage-earning workers. Unions often treat overtime as a desirable commodity when negotiating how these opportunities shall be partitioned among union members. The work time in Brazil is 44 hours per week, usually 8 hours per day and 4 hours on Saturday or 8.8 hours per day. On duty/no meal break jobs are 6 hours per day. Public servants work 40 hours a week. It is worth noting that in Brazil meal time is not usually counted as work. There is a 2-hour break for lunch and work schedule is typically 8h00-noon, 14h00 -18h00. In larger cities people have lunch meal on/near the work site, while in smaller cities a sizable fraction of the employees might go home for lunch. A 30-day vacation is mandatory by law and there are about 13 to 15 holidays a year, depending on the municipality. China adopted a 40-hour week, eliminating half-day work on Saturdays (though this is not widely practiced).  中華人民共和國勞動法 – 中華人民共和國中央人民政府 , 2005-08-05 Commonly misunderstood by the residents, Taiwan has a fake "8 hours working per day" policy that is adopted over the island.  In Taiwan, the definition of 8 hours working time meaning solid 8 hours, excluding lunch break. Hence employees work from either 8 to 5 or 9 to 6 instead of 9 to 5. The working week is therefore 45 hours instead of 40. Until now, Hong Kong has no legislation regarding maximum and normal working hours. The average weekly working hours of full-time employees in Hong Kong is 49 hours. According to the Price and Earnings Report 2012 conducted by UBS, while the global and regional average were 1,915 and 2,154 hours per year respectively, the average working hours in Hong Kong is 2,296 hours per year, which ranked the fifth longest yearly working hours among 72 countries under study.Prices and Earnings UBS, 2012-11-07 In addition, from the survey conducted by the Public Opinion Study Group of the University of Hong Kong, 79% of the respondents agree that the problem of overtime work in Hong Kong is “severe”, and 65% of the respondents support the legislation on the maximum working hours.Oxfam Hong Kong releases survey on Minimum Wage and Standard Working Hours Oxfam Hong Kong, Retrieved on 2012-12-10 In Hong Kong, 70% of surveyed do not receive any overtime remuneration. These show that people in Hong Kong concerns the working time issues. As Hong Kong implemented the minimum wage law in May 2011, the Chief Executive, Donald Tsang, of the Special Administrative Region pledged that the government will standardize working hours in Hong Kong.Standard work hours still years away: Tsang China Daily, 2010-10-15 On 26 November 2012, the Labour Department of the HKSAR released the “Report of the policy study on standard working hours”. The report covers three major areas, including: (1) the regimes and experience of other places in regulating working hours, (2)latest working time situations of employees in different sectors, and (3) estimation of the possible impact of introducing standard working hour in Hong Kong.Policy Study on Standard Working Hours Labour Department, HKSARG, retrieved on 2012-12-10 Under the selected parameters, from most loosen to most stringent, the estimated increase in labour cost vary from 1.1 billion to 55 billion HKD, and affect 957,100 (36.7% of total employees)to 2,378,900 (91.1%of total) employees.Report of the Policy Study on Standard Working Hours Labour Department, HKSARG, retrieved on 2012-12-10 Various sectors of the community show concerns about the standard working hours in Hong Kong. The points are summarized as below:   Hong Kong Catholic Commission For Labour Affairs urges the government to legislate the standard working hours in Hong Kong, and suggests a 44 hours standard, 54 hours maximum working hours in a week. The organization thinks that long working time adversely affects the family and social life and health of employees; it also indicates that the current Employment Ordinance does not regulate overtime pays, working time limits nor rest day pays, which can protect employees rights. Generally, business sector agrees that it is important to achieve work-life balance, but does not support a legislation to regulate working hours limit. They believe “standard working hours” is not the best way to achieve work-life balance and the root cause of the long working hours in Hong Kong is due to insufficient labour supply. The Managing Director of Century Environmental Services Group, Catherine Yan, said Employees may want to work more to obtain a higher salary due to financial reasons. If standard working hour legislation is passed, employers will need to pay a higher salary to employees, and hence the employers may choose to segment work tasks to employer more part time employees instead of providing overtime pay to employees. She thinks this will lead to a situation that the employees may need to find two part-time jobs to earn their living, making them wasting more time on transportation from one job to another. 大失預算-最低工資曾衝擊業界 港股王 – 蘋果日報，2012-10-08 The Chairman of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, Chow Chung-kong believes that it is  so difficult to implement standard working hours that apply “across-the-board”, specifically, to accountants and barristers.Chamber chief suggests labour import SCMP,2012-10-08 In addition, he believes that standard working hours may decrease individual employees' working hours and would not increase their actual income.  It may also lead to an increase of number of part-timers in the labour market. According to a study conducted jointly by the Business, Economic and Public Affairs Research Centre and Enterprise and Social Development Research Centre of Hong Kong Shue Yan University, 16% surveyed companies believe that a standard working hours policy can be considered, and 55% surveyed think that it would be difficult to implement standard working hours in businesses.Investigate choices beyond standard working hours Shu-kam Lee, Cho-yiu Ng, retrieved on 2012-11-30 Employer representative in the Labour Advisory Board, Stanley Lau, said that standard working hours will completely alter the business environment of Hong Kong, affect small and medium enterprise and weaken competitiveness of businesses. He believes that the government can encourage employers to pay overtime salary, and there is no need to regulate standard working hours.working hours could derail Hong Kong's economy, warns government adviser SCMP,2012-12-03 On 17–18 October 2012, the Legislative Council members in Hong Kong debated on the motion  “legislation for the regulation of working hours”. Cheung Kwok-che proposed the motion “That is the Council urges the Government to introduce a bill on the regulation of working hours within this legislative session, the contents of which must include the number of standard weekly hours and overtime pay”.Council Meeting (Agenda) 17 October 2012 Legislative Council Commission, HKSARG, retrieve on 2012-12-10 As the motion was not passed by both functional constituencies and geographical constituencies, it was negatived.Voting Results Legislative Council Commission, HKSARG, retrieve on 2012-12-10 The Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions suggested a standard 44-hour work week with overtime pay of 1.5times the usual pay. It believes the regulation of standard working hour can prevent the employers to force employees to work (overtime) without pay. 工聯會宣布十大工作重點 香港成報，2012-10-10 Elizabeth Quat of Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB), believed that standard working hour was a labor policy and was not related to family-friendly policies. Vice President of Young DAB, Wai-hung Chan, stated that standard working hour would bring limitations to small and medium enterprises. He thought that the government should discuss the topic with public more before legislating the standard working hour. The Democratic Party suggested a 44-hour standard work week and compulsory overtime pay to help achieve the balance between work, rest and entertainment of people in Hong Kong. 民主黨2011/12施政報告建議書 捍衛核心價值 縮窄貧富懸殊 | 民主黨 民主黨，2011-10-11 The Labour Party believed regulating working hours such as standard working hour can help achieving the work-life balance. 勞工 – 工黨 Labour Party 工黨，2012 It suggests an 8-hour work day, a 44-hour standard work week, a 60-hour maximum work week and an overtime pay of 1.5 times the usual pay. 工黨「父親節」工時問卷調查報告 工黨，2012-06-17 Poon Siu-ping of Federation of Hong Kong and Kowloon Labour Unions thought that it is possible to set work hour limit for all industries; and the regulation on working hours can ensure the overtime payment by employers to employees, and protect employees’ health. The Civic party suggests “to actively study setting weekly standard working hours at 44 hours to align with family-friendly policies” in LegCo Election 2012.Social welfare and livelihood Civic Party LegCo Election 2012, retrieved on 2012-11-12  Member of Economic Synergy, Jeffery Lam, believes that standard working hour would adversely affect productivity, tense the employer-employee relationship, and increase the pressure faced by business who suffer from inadequate workers. He does not support the regulation on working hours at the current situation. 盡快落實制訂標準工時 林健鋒，2011-06-23 Matthew Cheung Kin-chung, the Secretary for Labour and Welfare, said the Executive Council has already received the government report on working hours in June, and the Labour Advisory Board and the LegCo’s Manpower Panel will receive the report in late November and December respectively.LegCo rejects standard work hours proposal China Daily, 2012-10-19 On 26 November 2012, the Labour Department released the report, and the report covered the regimes and experience of practicing standard working hours in selected regions, current work hour situations in different industries, and the impact assessment of standard working hours. Also, Matthew Cheung mentioned that the government will form a select committee by first quarter of 2013, which will include government officials, representative of labour unions and employers’ associations, academics and community leaders, to investigate the related issuesHe also said that it is “perhaps be unrealistic” to put forward a bill for standard working hours in the next one to two years.City Digest, October 19,2012 SCMP, 2012-10-19 Yip Siu-fai, Professor of the Department of Social Work and Social Administration of HKU, said that professions such as nurse, accountants, have a long work time, and this may affect their social life. He believes standard working hour can help making Hong Kong to become a family-friendly workplace and increase fertility rate.  Randy Chiu, Professor of Department of Management of HKBU, said that standard working hour could avoid excessively long working hours of employees. 標準工時雖動聽 政治現實恐難容 HKET, 2012-02-27 He also said that nowadays Hong Kong attains almost full employment, has a high rental price and severe inflation, recently implemented minimum wage, and affected by gloomy global economy; he also mentioned that comprehensive considerations on macroeconomic situations  are needed, and pushed to the awareness that  it is perhaps inappropriate to adopt working time regulation examples in other countries to Hong Kong.  Lee Shu-Kam, Associate Professor of the Department of Economics and Finance of HKSYU, believed standard working hours cannot achieve ‘work-life balance’. He referenced the research to the US by the University of California, Los Angeles in 1999 and pointed out that in the industries and regions which the wage elasticity is low, the effects of standard working hours on lowering actual working time and increasing wage is limited: for regions where labor supply is inadequate, standard working hours can protect employees’ benefit yet cause unemployment; but for the regions, such as Japan, where the problem does not exist, standard working hour would only lead to unemployment.Lee, S.K. et al. 2012. Standard Working Hours or Flexible Working Hours – Policy alternatives to facilitate Work-Life Balance, Hong Kong: Ovis Press. In addition, he said the effect of standard working hour is similar to that of giving overtime pay, say, making employees to favor overtime work more. In this sense, standard working hour does not match its principle: to shorten work time and increase recreation time of employees. Standard working hours cannot increase recreation time Shu-kam Lee, Cho-yiu Ng, 2012-10-26 He believed that the key point is to help employees to achieve work-life balance and get a win-win situation of employers and employees. Francis Lui, Head and Professor of the Department of Economics of Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, believed that the standard working hour may not lower work time but increase unemployment. He used Japan as an example to illustrate that the implementation of standard working hours lowered productivity per head and demotivated the economy. He also said that even if the standard working hours can shorten employees’ weekly working hours, they may need to work for more years to earn sufficient amount of money for retirement, i.e. delay their retirement age. The working time in the whole life may not change.「標準工時」會否僵化勞動市場？ 雷鼎鳴，2010-12-08 Lok-sang Ho, Professor of Economics and Director of the Centre for Public Policy Studies of Lingnan University, pointed out that “as different employees perform various jobs and under different degrees of pressures, it may not appropriate to establish standard working hours in Hong Kong; and he proposed 50-hour maximum work week to protect workers health.Business / Opinion Setting maximum work hours first CHINA DAILY USA, 2012-11-20   Singapore enacts an 8-hour normal work day, a 44-hour normal working week, and a maximum 48-hour work week. It is to note that if the employee works no more than five days a week, the employee’s normal working day is 9-hour and the working week is 44 hours. Also, if the number of hours worked of the worker is less than 44 hours every alternate week, the 44-hour weekly limit may be exceeded in the other week. Yet, this is subjected to the pre-specification in the service contract and the maximum should not exceed 48 hours per week or 88 hours in any consecutive two week time. In addition, a shift worker can work up to 12 hours a day, provided that the average working hours per week do not exceed 44 over a consecutive 3-week time. The overtime allowance per overtime hour must not be less than 1.5 times of the employee’s hour basic rates.Hours of Work & Time – Ministry of Manpower – Government of Singapore, 2012-05-04 The Kapauku people of Papua think it is bad luck to work two consecutive days. The !Kung Bushmen work just two-and-a-half days per week, rarely more than six hours per day. The work week in Samoa is approximately 30 hours, and although average annual Samoan cash income is relatively low, by some measures, the Samoan standard of living is quite good. In India, particularly in smaller companies, someone generally works for 11 hours a day and 6 days a week. No Overtime is paid for extra time. Law enforcement is negligible in regulating the working hours. A typical office will open at 09:00 or 09:30 and officially end the work day at about 19:00.  However, many workers and especially managers will stay later in the office due to additional work load. However, large Indian companies and MNC offices located in India tend to follow a 5-day, 8- to 9-hour per day working schedule. The Government of India in some of its offices also follows a 5-day week schedule. Nigeria has public servants that work 35 hours per week. Many modern workplaces are experimenting with accommodating changes in the workforce and the basic structure of scheduled work. Flextime allows office workers to shift their working time away from rush-hour traffic; for example, arriving at 10:00&nbsp;am and leaving at 6:00&nbsp;pm. Telecommuting permits employees to work from their homes or in satellite locations (not owned by the employer), eliminating or reducing long commute times in heavily populated areas. Zero-hour contracts establish work contracts without minimum-hour guarantees; workers are paid only for the hours they work.   Rank !! Country !! Hours Remarks 1 2,228 1 2,245 2 2,216 3 2,124 4 2,042 5 1,990 6 1,985 7 1,938 8 1,923 9 1,864 10 1,859 11 1,858 12 1,857 13 1,853 14 1,834 15 1,832 data in 2013 16 1,821 17 1,789 18 1,776 OECD average 1,770 19 1,763 20 1,762 21 1,734 22 1,729 23 1,704 24 1,689 25 1,677 26 1,664 27 1,645 28 1,643 29 1,629 30 1,609 31 1,576 data in 2013 32 1,568 33 1,561 34 1,473 35 1,436 36 1,427 37 1,425 38 1,371 Points in favor of standard working hours !! Points against standard working hours Technological advances in efficiency such as mechanization, robotics and information technology. The increase of women equally participating in making income as opposed to previously being commonly bound to homemaking and childrearing exclusively. Dropping fertility rates leading to fewer hours needed to be worked to support children. labour organizations Businesses and related organizations Political Parties Government Academics Basic income guarantee Business day Business hours Calendar day Eight-hour Day Hours of Work (Commerce and Offices) Convention, 1930 Hours of Work (Industry) Convention, 1919 Hours of Work and Manning (Sea) Convention, 1936 Human Capital Karoshi Labor market flexibility Leisure Paul Lafargue Saint Monday Short Time (short-time working) Soviet calendar Waiting for the Weekend Work-life balance Workweek Deirdre McCann (2005), Working Time Laws: A global perspective, ILO, ISBN 92-2-117323-2 Sangheon Lee, Deirdre McCann and Jon C. Messenger, Working Time Around the World'. Trends in working hours, laws and policies in a global comparative perspective. London: ILO/Routledge, 2007. Madeleine Bunting (2004), Willing Slaves: How the Overwork Culture is Ruling Our Lives, HarperCollins John de Graaf (2003), Take Back Your Time, Berrett-Koehler, ISBN 1-57675-245-3 Eugene J. McCarthy and William McGaughey (1989), "Nonfinancial Economics: The Case for Shorter Hours of Work", Praeger Heejung Chung, Marcel Kerkhofs and Peter Ester "Working Time Flexibility in European Companies", European Foundation. Colette Fagan, Ariane Hegewisch and Jane Pillinger  "Out of Time: why Britain needs a new approach to working time flexibility", TUC Ute Klammer, Ton Wilthagen, Heejung Chung, Anke Thiel (2008) "Take it or leave it: flexible working-time arrangements and the synchronization of business cycle and life cycle" (as part of the European Foundation project "Flexibility and Security over the lifecourse") Thirsk, Joan (1967) (editor) The agrarian history of England and Wales vol. IV Reduced Work Hours as a Means of Slowing Climate Change, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, February 2013   Hours of Work in U.S. History from EH.NET by Robert Whaples The Guardian, August 20, 2005, "Work until you drop: how the long-hours culture is killing us" (UK focus) Evans, J., D. Lippoldt and P. Marianna(2001), Trends in Working Hours in OECD Countries, OECD Labour Market and Social Policy Occasional Papers n° 45, OECD, Paris. Hart, Bob 'Working time and employment' Routledge Revivals, 2010. Explanation of Working Time Limits (48 hour week) in the UK and how the opt-out works Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) resources on the UK Working Time Regulations OECD Average annual hours actually worked per worker ShorterWorkWeek.com  writings in favor of a shorter workweek
