 
Editorial

 

NOVEMBER 1939 marks the commencement of the second year for the Meher Baba Journal. During this short period of its existence, there has been witnessed a turning point in history and the entering of the world into a new evolutionary cycle. Long ago it was asserted by Omar Khayyam, that, ''Diversity of worship has divided the human race into seventy-two nations, From among all their dogmas I have selected one—Divine Love." It is time that the spiritual forces of the world should be blended into a harmonious whole, rising above the division and separativeness of nationalities and religions, and give expression in calm certain tones that will yet be heard above the storm of events. The import of this our small new “Clarion Call” in the spiritual arena, inspired as it is by a Master of Divine Love and Wisdom, will come to fuller meaning and significance as time unfolds.
Our readers, we presume, have by now become fairly familiar with the modus operandi of the Meher Baba Journal and must have
noticed the following general facts




•
 

concerning this publication.
Our intention through these pages has been to humanize divin- ity and this is only truly possible in the atmosphere of a God- realized Master, like Meher Baba.
Hence, this Journal on spiritual subjects, has an outstanding and unique feature, in that it is under the patronage and guidance of a living Sadguru, or Perfect Master. He is able to translate the essence of all scriptures into real and palp- able spiritual experience.
The Meher Baba Journal is the sole monthly publication contain- ing the Master's original  articles.*
The Meher Editorial Committee heartily welcomes letters and manuscripts from our readers. However we do not invite prolemics, nor are we concerned with the criticisms of doctrinaires who already know so much from the intellectual aspect that this very consciousness in them is prone to develop the knowledge- ego, which in turn clouds the understanding of spiritual exper- ience, and automatica1ly tends to keep them distant from living
 

 
Perfect Masters, who are the actual embodiments of Know- ledge and Truth.
The thoughts and actions depicted by the writings of the Eastern and Western disciples of Meher Baba, are hinged around his divine personality, and their actual experience and inspiration in contact with the Master. Originality is found in their variety of expression, ranging from the mystical, philosophical, poetical, rational and light narrative style. Even the lives of past saints are written with a view to bringing out in bold relief, the modern application and parallel characteristics in the life, training and teaching of the Master of this age. It is affirmed that all the great Spiritual Teachers who have inspired humanity, had the same theme, though adapted to the needs of their times.
We would draw your  atten-  tion to the fact that the principal field of activity of Meher Baba, which for the past fifteen  years has been at Meherabad, has been transferred to Bangalore. While  the old Ashram still remains, its active life in its entirity has been shifted to its new setting, as also, the offices of Meher Baba Journal. During the current year,  on  the six months journey throughout India, when the Master prepared the soil for his great enterprise of Universal Spiritual Centre, he con-
 
templated a number of localities where sites were eagerly proposed. Now definitely he has selected the State of Mysore, that is well known as the most modern and progressive State in India, as the site for his Universal Spiritual Centre and an ideal property has already been deeded outside of Bangalore. This great tableland section of Southern India has a long spiritual history dating back to the Mahabharata, which epic is among the oldest scriptures in the world. Here in this atmosphere of material modernity and ancient spiri- tuality, is a fitting background to bring to fruition through his Universal Spiritual Centre, Meher Baba’s own saying that, ''The Godman teaches us the Truth that to realize the oneness of everything we must realize. . . that the spiritual life and the material life go hand-in-hand." Christ implied the same when He enjoined His disciples, "to be in the world but not of it". The world to-day needs a reappli- cation of spirituality to modern times.
Applied spirituality will come to practical demonstration through the differentiated de- partments of the Spiritual Centre where, under the Master's be- neficent personal guidance, the saint arid the spiritual aspirant will join in his universal spiritual activities. Meher Baba has
 

 
worked out the plans for this great enterprise to the smallest detail and the buildings them- selves will be in accordance with occult measurements. The Centre may well become the spiritual home for human- ity seeking the road back to the one God, Who may be called by many names,
 
but is the sole source of all existence, peace and happi- ness. The positive value of such a unique institution lies in  the  fact  of  the    Master's
authoritative words: “I show
Man how to put spirituality into practice.”
—THE MEHER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
 
