  September 14, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    SMALL GROUP LIFE IN THE POWER OF GOD'S PROMISE  Hebrews 13:1-6   
  Let love of the brethren continue. 2 Do not neglect to showhospitality to strangers, for by this some have entertained angelswithout knowing it. 3 Remember the prisoners, as though in prisonwith them, and those who are ill-treated, since you yourselves alsoare in the body. 4 Let marriage be held in honor among all, and letthe marriage bed be undefiled; for fornicators and adulterers Godwill judge. 5 Let your character be free from the love of money,being content with what you have; for He Himself has said, "I WILLNEVER DESERT YOU, NOR WILL I EVER FORSAKE YOU," 6 so that weconfidently say, "THE LORD IS MY HELPER, I WILL NOT BE AFRAID. WHATSHALL MAN DO TO ME?"  The Hill-and-Valley Landscape of Hebrews  Last week I stressed that the book of Hebrews was like land withbroad, deep valleys of doctrinal foundation and God-centered,Christ-exalting motivation, and periodic peaks of practicalexhortation and living demonstration. Another way to say it is thewriter teaches us about God and what he has done to secure preciousand very great promises for our future, and then he tells us the kindof behavior that grows up from faith in these promises. So the bookis radically, practically calling for outrageous choices and acts ofrisk-taking love, on the basis of promises that God will be all weneed as we run the race for his glory.  We saw this in Hebrews 10:34 "You showed sympathy to theprisoners, and accepted joyfully the seizure of your property,knowing that you have for yourselves a better possession and anabiding one." In other words, the valley of truth concerning theinfinite value of our "better and eternal possession" gives rise tothe peak of love that risks the loss of property for the sake ofprison visitation and does it joyfully - that's what seemsoutrageous.  Or another example is the valley we saw in Hebrews 12:4-11, wherethe doctrine of God's fatherly discipline in our suffering spread outas a valley of motivation leading to the peak of 12:12-14, where weare exhorted to pursue peace and holiness - the very two things thatGod is working in us by his discipline (12:10-11).  Valleys of Doctrinal Foundation Lead to Peaks of Exhortation  And so it goes through the book of Hebrews: valleys of doctrinalfoundation lead to peaks of radical and practical exhortation.  We have it again in today's text. Look at verses 5-6,  "Let your character be free from the love of money, being contentwith what you have [that's the peak of exhortation and radicalfreedom from the love of money. Now here comes the valley offoundation and motivation]; for He Himself has said, "I WILL NEVERDESERT YOU, NOR WILL I EVER FORSAKE YOU," 6 so that we confidentlysay, "THE LORD IS MY HELPER, I WILL NOT BE AFRAID. WHAT SHALL MAN DOTO ME?"  The way to be free from the love of money is to know and believeand be satisfied by the promises of God summed up in "I will neverdesert you nor will I ever forsake you." If God will never leave meor forsake me, I don't need to crave money as the source of mysecurity and happiness; God will be there for me and meet every need.He doesn't promise wealth. He doesn't even promise freedom fromfinancial stress. He promises to be there. "I will never desert youor forsake you."  In verse 6 the writer gives the practical conclusion we can drawfrom this promise: "So that [this is what results form the promise]we confidently say, "THE LORD IS MY HELPER, I WILL NOT BE AFRAID.WHAT SHALL MAN DO TO ME? In other words, if God is really there forme, man is not the decisive shaper of my future, God is. That's whyhe says, "What can man do to me?" To which you might be tempted tosay, "Good grief, man can do a lot to me. He can sue me, evict me,steal from me, slander me, even kill me."  What Can Man Do to Me?  But we have just walked through two chapters of illustrations ofthis sort of ill-treatment - chapter 11:35-38 where saints are"destitute, afflicted, ill-treated" (11:37); chapter 12:4-11 whereChristians suffer painful discipline at the hands of hostile men(12:4). And right here in 13:3, "Remember the prisoners . . . andthose who are ill-treated." So this writer is very aware that man cando plenty to us that hurts.  So when he says in verse 6, "The Lord is my helper, I will not beafraid, what can man do to me?" what does he mean? Man can put me inprison. Man can ill-treat me. Why then does the promise, "I willnever desert you and I will never forsake you" (in verse 5) cause himto feel so confident and fearless in verse 6? The answer is at leastthreefold. 1) Man can do nothing to separate us from the love of God(as Romans 8:35-37 says "Who shall separate us from the love ofChrist? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, ornakedness, or peril, or sword? . . . In all these things weoverwhelmingly conquer."). 2) Man can do nothing that God does notdesign for our holiness and peace (Hebrews 12:9-10). 3) Man cannot doanything to us that, by faith, does not lead to everlasting joy withGod (Hebrews 10:34).  So the way that Hebrews describe the bondage to money being brokenis by the power of truth. We are freed from the love of money bycoming to see and believe that the promises of money cannot comparewith the promises of God. And we come to see this not only becausewhat God promises is superior but also because of the teaching behindthe promises that give them credibility and power - like thesubstitutionary death of Christ for a sinner like me which gives meconfidence that God can treat me with such grace without beingna&iuml;ve and unjust (Hebrews 2:9; 9:26; 10:14).  Connection Between Hebrews' Motivation and Small Groups  Now today is Small Group Sign-Up Sunday. And I want you to see therelationship between small groups and the way the book of Hebrewsmotivates the peaks of practical exhortation - like freedom from thelove of money.  One could say that the way we get free from the love of money andthe way we love each other (verse 1), and show hospitality tostrangers (verse 2), and care for prisoners and wounded (verse 3),and shun adultery and fornication (verse 4) - the way we do all thatis by trusting the promise of God never to leave or forsake us and tobe there for us to take care of us no matter what this lifestyle ofcovenant-keeping love costs.  Yes, that is absolutely right. But what would be missing from thatsimple strategy of becoming like Jesus and being pure and radicallyloving by trusting the promise of God? What would be missing is asmall group of people who help keep you connected with the promisesand the power of God.  In other words, Yes, trusting God's promise in verse 5 is the keyto being freed from the love of money and being liberated fromselfishness to love each other and strangers and prisoners, and tokeep your sexual lives pure. Yes, trusting the promises is the key.Being satisfied with all that God promises to be for you in Jesus isthe power that breaks the bondage of illicit sex, and love of moneyand indifference to the suffering, and fear of strangers.  But the reality is that we are constantly being tempted not to seethe preciousness of the promises of God. We tend to drift away fromthem. That is why this book was written and that is why this book,more than any other, perhaps, urges us toward the kind of small grouprelationships where we can remind each other and exhort each otherabout the promises of God.  Encourage One Another Day After Day  Let me remind you where Hebrews makes this connection between usand the promises of God. One place is Hebrews 3:12-13: "Take care,brethren, lest there should be in any one of you an evil, unbelievingheart, in falling away from the living God. But encourage one anotherday after day, as long as it is still called 'Today,' lest any one ofyou be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin." In other words, Yes, itis the promises of God that are the key to holiness and love andvictory over sin. But we need people in our lives to "encourage usday after day" with those promises. We are not meant to be isolatedpromise lovers.  Remember the old 19th century song:  Standing on the promises that cannot fail, When the howling stormsof doubt and fear assail, By the living Word of God I shall prevail,Standing on the promises of God.  Yes, that is absolutely right. But, the dreadful fact is that thehowling storms sometimes knock us off the promises of God. And thepleasures of the world lure us off the promises of God. And the devilhimself tempts us off the promises of God. And the anxieties andpressures of life wear us out so that we neglect the promises of God.And God's remedy for this is not isolated heroism, but smallgroupings of believers caring for each other's souls and pointingeach other to God 's promises again and again.  Stimulating One Another to Love and Good Deeds  The other place (besides 3:12-13) where the writer tells us to dothis for each other is Hebrews 10:23-25,  Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, forHe who promised is faithful [that's the key! - holding onto our hopein the promises of God will free us from the love of money and fromfearful indifference to strangers and prisoners and hurting, and willkeep us sexually pure] and let us consider how to stimulate oneanother to love and good deeds, not forsaking our own assemblingtogether, as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another; andall the more, as you see the day drawing near.  So you can see there are at least two keys, not just one. One isthat we hold fast to our hope. We must trust the promises of God thathe will never leave us or forsake us. But the other key is that weneed help to do this. And not just Sunday morning. And not just froma pastor. It says in verse 25 "encouraging one another" - this is amutual speaking and helping in some smaller setting. And it is allthe more urgent as the day of God's judgment draws near because thespiritual stresses and temptations are going to be so much greater (2Timothy 3:1).  The Dynamics of Small Group Ministry, According to Hebrews  So let's go back to our text, Hebrews 13:1-6. This text doesn'tmention small groups. What it does is describe the dynamics of howministry can happen in a small group. First it gives some of thepractical nitty-gritty areas of life that small groups should beconcerned about. Verse 1: love for each other. Verse 2: hospitalityto strangers (refugees, homeless, pastors at the pastors' conference,groups that need an overnight place, new people who need a smallgroup and can't find an open one near their home). Verse 3:compassion for prisoners and the ill-treated - that is, anyone whohas hit really hard times in the path of obedience. Verse 4:faithfulness in marriage (no adultery) and chastity outside marriage(no fornication). Verse 5: freedom from the love of money.  This is the stuff of small group life: money, sex, care for thehurting, love of strangers. We believe this is the frontline strategyof spiritual care in our church. The pastoral staff and elders cannotbe all the spiritual influence you need in your life. Our aim is toequip and encourage leaders of small groups that function as groupsthat love each other the way verse 1 says and are there for eachother to fight the fight of faith in very practical and everydayways. To choose not to be in some kind of small group is to choose tobe a step removed from the ordinary caregiving design of our church.  But to be in a group that catches on to the dynamic of living bythe promises of God will put you very much into the stream of careand power that we continually pray God releases among us. And O, howour society needs to see Christians loving each other like this! Itwill be a very powerful witness to the reality of the gospel  A Small Group Encourages One Another's Ministry in Illness  Let's imagine a couple of conversations in a couple of smallgroups that meet weekly on Sunday evenings. This is the way I wouldsee this text working.  A woman in the group gets sick and must be in the hospital for afew weeks. The group meets to pray for the sick one, and someone (intune with what it says here in verse 3b, "since you yourselves alsoare in the body") says, "I can remember what it was like when I wasill, and I loved short frequent visits rather than long infrequentones. So why don't we all agree that a different one of us will go tothe hospital each day so that every day she can be encouraged." Mostof the group agree. But one person gets up the courage to say, "I'venever visited anybody in the hospital and I don't know how to do it.I wouldn't know what to say. I don't even know where to park, or howto find the room, or how you're supposed to act."  Then another person says, "I know exactly how you feel. I canremember the first time I went to visit my grandmother." And he walksthrough what it is like. Then another says, "When I was in thehospital, a couple people came to see me, and you know what they did?They just read me a few verses that they had read that morning indevotions that meant a lot to them. It was not 'a hospital text' - itwas just what helped them through the day. And God used it to help mefocus on him."  And then someone said, "If we're honest, we all feel this way.Even pastors wonder sometimes in difficult cases what they are goingto say. But you know what the bottom line is? Will we believe thepromise of Hebrews 13:5, 'I will never desert you nor ever forsakeyou So we can confidently say, "The Lord is my helper. What can mando to me?"' God is going to be in the elevator with you. He is goingto walk down the hall with you. He is going to enter the room withyou. And when you wonder what to say, he is going to 'be yourhelper.' That's what God promises. Let's trust him and do it. Andlet's share next week what God gave us to give her." Small groupshelp each other to love in the power of God's promise.  A Small Group Encourages One Another Toward Sexual Purity  Or in another group, the men and women might separate to pray, andin the small men's group a guy might say, "How do you guys fightsexual temptation. I'm single. The stimulations to think about thesethings are everywhere. And I don't want to give in. I want to bechaste. I want to be pure for the woman I hope God gives me someday." And back and forth the conversation goes as different onesshare strategies of vigilance that help them triumph, more or less,over sexual sin.  And one of the more mature men says, "You know, one of the thingsthat has helped me over the years - and I don't claim perfection - isthe promise of Hebrews 13:5, 'I will never desert you nor will I everforsake you.'" He pauses a long time, and then says, "If Jesus willnever leave me, it means he would be with me at the bedside when I amcommitting adultery. He would be with me at the computer watchingwhat I download from the Internet. And by the grace of God, I havecome to the place where I love him so much I cannot imagine walkingwith him into that sin. If you really believe his promise - that henever leaves or forsakes - it's going to be really hard to feel hisloving hand on your shoulder while you do the very thing he died tosave you from."  And then the group prays that they would all really believe thepromises of God.  I could recount other conversations about difficulties inhospitality and difficulties in money matters. But the dynamic is thesame. People who know that they too are in the body, and who careabout each other, and who know the promises of God, give practicalcounsel for how to live, and then back it up with the promises ofGod's future grace.  We need each other. I urge you. Move toward small group life inthe power of the promise of God. This is normal and needful radicalChristianity, and all the more as you see the final day drawing near.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
