Sunday, August 19, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  The Dwelling Place of the Image of God's Jealousy  "And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the Spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat ­ (i.e., abode, or dwelling place) ­ of the Image (idol) of Jealousy, WHICH PROVOKETH TO JEALOUSY (I.E., AGITATES GOD ALMIGHTY INTO A JEALOUS RAGE)." Ezek. 8:3.  Remember, Beloved, we serve a God whose very Name is "JEALOUS!" To-wit: "For thou shalt worship no other god; for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God." Ex. 34:14. The essence of idolatry is sodomy, and such is the clearest of DIRECTLY-TAUGHT Bible doctrines, as, for example, in Rom 1. ("Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. WHEREFORE, God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves... who worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator...For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature." Rom. 1:22-26.)  I lay it down as an unassailable ­ yes, an irrefragable proposition ­ that all fags and fag-enablers are ­ ipso facto ­ idolaters. The very existence of sodomy is certain proof of idolatry. And, proposition #2 inevitably follows: to wit: Idolatry is that infidelity to God that provokes Him to raging jealousy. This also is the plainest and clearest of directly-taught Bible doctrines, as, for example, in Ex. 20:3-5; which is the complete version of the Second of the Ten Commandments; to wit: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; FOR I THE LORD THY GOD AM A JEALOUS GOD." (Ex. 20:3-5)  Follow the inescapable logic: Since the very existence of sodomy is proof positive of idolatry, every fag and fag-enabler is in perpetual violation of the Second Commandment. It is amusing that the sodomite-run city of Casper, Wyoming, spent many thousands of tax dollars to try and justify their erection of a Ten Commandments monument on city property, while adamantly rejecting our offer of another monument which actually completes the true meaning of the Second Commandment; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Thus demonstrating that their Ten Commandments monument is idolatry; to wit: "THE IMAGE OF JEALOUSY (I.E., A GRAVEN IMAGE), WHICH PROVOKETH (THE LORD GOD ALMIGHTY) TO (RAGING) JEALOUSY." Ezek. 8:3.  The Bible doctrine I am expounding today goes like this: All fags and fag-enablers are idolaters, continuously violating the First and Second Commandments, and thereby continuously agitating the Lord ­ whose Name is Jealous ­ to hot, raging jealousy. The Bible proof is overwhelming; and, ­ as with all Bible doctrines ­ consists of what I call DIRECTLYTAUGHT doctrine and ABSTRUSELY-TAUGHT doctrine. It has pleased our Heavenly Father often to communicate His precious Truths to His Elect Children, ABSTRUSELY.  Sunday, August 19, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions,  and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. Abstruse means a thing is difficult to understand, hidden, recondite (concerned with or treating something concealed), enigmatic (puzzling, ambiguous, inexplicable), mysterious. Moreover, hieroglyphics, parables, similitudes, metaphors, and other figures of speech are freely utilized by the Lord our God in communicating accurate notions of divine Truth to us. Peter warns us that some things in Paul's epistles and other scriptures "are hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest...unto their own destruction." 2 Pet. 3:16. The Lord Jesus said He spoke in parables, "Because it is given unto you (His disciples) to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given." Mat. 13:11. And even unto His closest followers, the Lord Jesus sometimes said, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken; until He expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself," causing them to exclaim, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" Lk. 24:25-32. And even then, some things remain hidden and mysterious to us all, and some things remain "past finding out;" to wit: "The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law." Deut. 29:29. And, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways PAST FINDING OUT!" Rom. 11:33.  With that background, recall that the Bible doctrine I expound today goes like this: All fags and fag-enablers are idolaters, continuously violating the First and Second Commandments, and thereby continuously agitating the Lord ­ whose Name is Jealous ­ to hot, raging jealousy. Bible proof of this Bible doctrine is overwhelming; and, ­ as with all Bible doctrines ­ consists of what I am calling "Directly-Taught Doctrine" and "Abstrusely-Taught Doctrine." And, that God often comforts His Children by communicating His precious Truths to them, ABSTRUSELY. And that "Abstruse" means a thing is difficult to understand, hidden, recondite (concerned with or treating something concealed), enigmatic (puzzling, ambiguous, inexplicable), mysterious. And, that hieroglyphics, parables, similitudes, metaphors, and other figures of speech are freely utilized by the Lord God in conveying accurate notions of divine Truth to His blessed people.  All of these descriptive words seem to fit the book of Ezekiel in a special way. Indeed, Hosea must have had his fellow-prophet Ezekiel in mind in a special way when he wrote these words from the Mouth of God; to wit: "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. What is DIRECTLY-TAUGHT in Rom. 1, is ABSTRUSELY-TAUGHT in Ezek. 8.  See, the text from Ezek. 8:3 which opened this sermon; to wit: "And brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the Temple, Where was the dwelling place of the graven IMAGE OF JEALOUSY, which provoketh God to jealousy." Proceed to Ezek. 8:5 ­ "So I lifted up mine eyes...and behold northward at the gate of the altar this IMAGE OF JEALOUSY." Proceed to verse 6; to wit: "He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the GREAT ABOMINATIONS that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far  Sunday, August 19, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  off from my sanctuary?" (The graven image of jealousy which provoked God to wrath in a  jealous rage was an altar to sodomy ["even the great abominations that the house of Israel  committeth here"] in the House of God! driving God from His own sanctuary!).  This is bad, exceedingly so, "But turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations!" Proceed to worse and more of it at Ezek. 8:7-12; to wit: "And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door. And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about. And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan (a good man ­ scribe for Josiah, or messenger for Jeremiah ­ whose son went bad), with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up. Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth." Ezek. 8:7-12. "Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" Isa. 29:15.  Beloved, this was the Great Sanhedrin ­ the highest court and the final lawgiver in the land. Gill: "The great court of judicature among the Jews, seventy in number, appointed in Moses' time to be officers over the people, and govern and direct them, Num. 11:16, which shows how sadly depraved and corrupted the state was, that not the common people only, but the civil magistrates, the chief rulers and governors, were given to idolatry." As though we should say, Hast thou seen what the brightest and best ­ the most prestigious and honorable ­ of our whole American society do in the dark, in the chambers of their imagery? Beloved, Hast thou seen? Gill: "Son of man, hast thou seen? Here should be a stop, as the accent segolta shows: hast thou taken notice of, hast thou considered, what thou hast seen; the amazing, shocking abominations, committed by these men... `in the chambers of his imagery?' The Targum is, `in the chamber of the house of his bed;' in his bedchamber; that is, in those chambers of the temple, which belonged to the priests and Levites, on the walls of which were portrayed the images and pictures of their gods.'" And, beyond a doubt, `his bed' was there for filthy, abominable, immoral fag-sex purposes; described like this: "thou shalt see greater abominations" (v. 6), and, "Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here" (v. 9), and, "So I went in and saw" (v. 10). Proceed to Ezek. 8:13,14; to wit: "He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations that they do. Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord's house which was toward the north; and, behold, THERE SAT WOMEN, WEEPING FOR TAMMUZ." Ezek. 8:13,14.  Beloved, I thought it would be impossible to top the sodomite abominations committed by the "seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel," but the Holy Spirit has assured us that these loud-mouth women, sitting around "weeping for Tammuz", do, indeed, constitute "greater abominations." (v. 13). Look around you, Beloved. Does not our experience on the mean streets of sodomite America ­ for 17 years ­ teach us that filthy, pushy, loud-mouth  Sunday, August 19, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  women can be the worst of all? It's a close call; but we will give the Holy Ghost the benefit of  any doubt: These women sitting around weeping for Tammuz are filthier and more abominable  than the seventy sodomite judges of the Sanhedrin.  As I say, I was puzzled, but willing to write it off, as they say, as being just one more holy enigma in a book of holy enigmas. But a certain member of this church ­ who shall remain nameless ­ was quick to retort that it was certainly no enigma to him. Those women sitting in that part of the Temple forbidden to women, and weeping in worshipful adoration to the memory of a filthy pagan Adonis sodomite ­ was only a small part of the abominations of those women. The big part of their abominations was what the small part signaled; to wit: Those women had usurped female authority over the men in all matters of religion, education, and government ­ even as they have today. Those women were the real power behind the throne, so to speak ­ the driving force behind all the vile idolatry and sodomite abominations of the seventy sodomite judges of the Sanhedrin.  Indeed, a verse to throw light on this passage is 2 Kgs. 23:7; to wit: "And he (Josiah) brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by (or, in) the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove (idol, Adonis or Priapus)." "As for my people, women rule over them, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths." Isa. 3:12. "But I suffer not a woman to usurp authority over the man." 1 Tim. 2:12.  Proceed to Ezek. 8:15,16; to wit: "Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these. And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord's house, and behold, at the door of the temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord (the most holy place), and their faces toward the east; and they did worship the sun toward the east." Ezek. 8:15,16. This is a motley group of perverts ­ "about five and twenty men" ­ exactly how many there were, and exactly who they were, is not known ­ the inference being that they are nothing but trash, so who cares. With their "backs (i.e., backsides, butts, hoisted, mooning God, in worshiping the sun) toward the most holy place, they were in effect saying "Kiss my butt" (or worse) to God Almighty, and at the same time pushing their rump-ranger lifestyle in God's Face. Gill: "These men, that they might imitate the Gentiles in their idolatry, turned their backs to the most holy place; which is an aggravation of their impiety; casting the utmost contempt on God, his worship, and the place of it." Moreover, these men spat in God's Face by worshipping the sun, in flagrant violation of an express law of God prohibiting such idolatry. Deut. 4:19 and 17:2,3. And by using God's own house wherein to commit such sun-worshipping idolatry! Incidentally, the word here rendered "worshipped" is compounded of two words; one signifying to "corrupt", the other to "worship"; showing that by worshipping the sun, they did corrupt themselves and the House of God. "Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger; and, lo, they PUT THE BRANCH TO THEIR NOSE. Therefore will I also deal in fury; mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them." Ezek. 8:16,17. Amen.  
