


"Tunes in Words" Inspired by Baba 

BY COUNTESS NANDINE TOLSTOY

    If I am a fading flower dying in thirst for water and light, deprived of pure air and fertilizing substance, should I seek one who will com e and tell me in words what I need and what I lack, then perhaps would point out all m y short≠comings and failings? Should I listen to such advisers who only speak well about things to achieve? How great is the irony of their advice, for they have nothing to give and to show, failing in example and acts. Would you not rather seek regions of all abundance of light and take from One who will spr ead light and vivifying s ubstance, who will feed the very roots as well as all its branches and leaves? 

    Why  waste time on vanity of  empty words I Let us thirst for Him alone who awakens all life. What is the us e of good precepts which com e from a dry heart helpless to fulfil its p romise? Where is the art and the power of 'giving'? 

   It is a day of days when one can meet the awakener who is the source itself and gives from itself. Who is like Him ! Why lose tim e on indirect channels when He is here to give it all Himself!

    So drink, drink! Open your lips to receive the nectar! Still your heart to let His heart in! Still the waves of thoughts and emotions to let th e in-flow make you new, filled with the Divine! What else there is, when one has m et Himselfóthe ever-waited for real Perfect One, the Beloved of all times! 



    Drink, drink, feed your heart and soul on this Source of all life and joy! Who can give 'feed' unless they have it themselves? Give your soul in full emptiness, drink to the point of saturation, and then go and feed others. Make your light bright to radiate it far and around. 

Why gather dry leaves of faded beauty, dropped from a tree into decay, or sleep to dream of the far off spring and a new awakening! W hy not live and rest in cooli ng protection of the Eternal Life-Tree itself! He gives us its sap, its refreshing fragrance, its pro≠tection and quiet, its full beauty. 

    Seek none but Him . Let us walk through life carrying the m ost precious 'gifts ' with care and joy. Sure in divine contentment and calm let those marvellous 'gifts' unfold us and live within till all distinctions are no more. 

Oh, be aware of His soundless whispers, do not let the thought talk so loud. How can you hear His voice when He will ne ed you? Will His call remain then in vain? Still your waves of noise, lest they rais e to chao s and havoc. 

Make the strings ready for His touch! Oh, become His instrument! 

What does it m atter what you do; in doing empty yourselfóthen you m ay be used at the call of His voice. Then you may be at service for the need of His cause! Be in Him until you becom e all His óthen all is One, pure and true! Oh, let Him speak and sing and do through you! Why remain apart! Open all the gates, as He may enter unaware, keep the space free! 

How clear and simple and how beautiful is this Truth, the Truth of all times; cease the troub le and care of yourself; why this delusion! Release the wearing out ties and clasp Him when He comes near! Loosen the strings so they may be tuned to His bow! Let Him play the divine tunes. Be still and let the worship raise your heart to Love. Loveófor this is the o nly ritual of a living God! 

How simple it is, how wonderful are His subtle ways! W ith His breath He blows away unseen th e web of the net in which we are caught living veiled in the twilight. How suddenly He m akes one light and full of new joyóand the whole world is changed around! This is the mystery of His Love, which ' burns all impurities away'. What seemed before so realóis gone, no m ore, a smoke dissolved in pure spheres. Oh, the breath of the true e xistence of the Beloved! What a m iracle and a wonderful mysteryóthe invisible Reality! The invisible Reality unseen, yet manifest in its true creativeness! 



Nothing can equal this power of all existence. What else m atters? Where can our desires turn after we have dis≠covered Him and 'This'?

    Listen! The heart is tappingódo not let other noises overwhelm the voice of the 'new born'. 

Where shall you go now when all barriers have m elted away and all is becoming One? W hen the heart 'speaks', who can remain deaf to its  voice? When the beauty floods the soul, who can rem ain blind to its Radiance and Truth? His Love wins all of the heart and soul. What remains of the old, when new life gives the bloom of eternal youth! Let the dead sleep with the dead if they so choose, why this concern? It is all His Will and His Way. Follow Him in this life; delay not; He alone matters in the whole universe! 

    He brings you nearer and nearer, He 

persists with calls, draws and irresis≠

tibly winds you closer; the m ist of 

separation becomes thin and trans≠

parent. The Rhythm of His Being holds 

you in His enchantment, revealing 

more and more the hidden meaning, the 

sacred beauty of Hi mself in usóthe 

awareness of One Soul! 

This is His Love's work. 

    Love brings to life the ageless (age≠

long) flower to full bloomóthe Soul of 

One God in all! 



ï 