 The longer you meditate on the writings of the apostlePaul the more clearly you see that genuine, deep spiritual experiencedepends on genuine deep Biblical knowledge.  I mean things likefaith and love and peace and joy -- these precious subjectiveexperiences of the heart -- depend on the mind's apprehensionof objective Biblical truth.  From a Biblical standpoint studyingand thinking and knowing are never ends in themselves; they alwaysstand in the service of feeling and willing and doing.  The mindis the servant of the heart.  Knowledge exists for the sake oflove.  And all theology worth its salt produces doxology.  Last week we saw this principle at work.  The churchat Thessalonica was suffering.  To help the church respond tothis suffering in the most profitable way Paul says that it isthe sign of God's righteous judgment (1:5).  Then to explain andsupport this he gives three reasons why it is righteous for Godto ordain persecution as part of his own judgment:     it is righteous because by this suffering theChristians are being made worthy for the kingdom of God (v. 5)-- it aims ultimately not at their harm but at their holiness; it is righteous because those who are afflicting will becomethe afflicted at the Lord's second coming (v. 6) -- the evil willnot always prosper; 3) it is righteous because the Christianswho are being afflicted will be given rest and joy at the comingof the Lord (v. 7) -- faith and patience will be vindicated andrewarded in the end.   So you can see how Paul deals with this crisis offaith: in order to supply their heart with more faith and strengthand peace and love in the midst of suffering, he teaches themthe objective truth about the ways of God.  To help them copein their hearts and bodies with the miseries of suffering, heimparts to their heads the meaning of suffering.    Today we see the same principle at work in 2 Thessalonians2:1-12.  Paul's aim in all this teaching is to solve a practicalemotional problem.  Verses 1-2 tell us what the problem is and what Paulis trying to accomplish:  Now concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christand our assembling to meet him, we beg you, brethren, not to bequickly shaken in mind or excited, either by spirit or by word,or by letter purporting to be from us, to the effect that theday of the Lord has come.  So Paul's aim here is, first, that the Thessaloniansnot be shaken from their senses (v. 2), that they keep their heads,we might say, that they not be thrown off balance or lose theirequilibrium.   He wants to help them be calm and composed andsteady and clear-thinking in all the upheaval around them.  Second, his aim is that they not be excitedin the sense of being disturbed or alarmed (v. 2).  The word isused in Mark 13:7, for example, in the same kind of context: Jesussays, And when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do notbe alarmed; this must take place, but the end is not yet.   So Paul's aim is very practical in this passage:he wants to help Christians experience peace and calm and stabilityand clarity of mind -- Christians who don't get all shookup and agitated and anxious and fretful and confused andoff-balance when crises come to the world.  So his goal is practical. It has to do with the heartand the emotions.  But now what is his approach to this goal? How will he minister to this practical need?    Verse 3 gives the answer: Let no one deceiveyou in any way.  Paul is persuaded that deceit is at theroot of mental and emotional disturbances.  If we are shaken fromour senses and lose our balance and feel alarmed and fretful andbegin to act in ways unworthy of our call, it is because deceithas taken root somewhere in our minds.  So what does Paul aim then to do for the Thessaloniansso that they won't be shaken and alarmed?  He aims to teach thema truth tailored for their specific struggle.  He studies thekind of deceit that is taking root in their minds, and then heloosens the soil around it and digs it up with the spade of Biblicaldoctrine.  Do we follow the apostle in this?   Do we tend thegarden of our emotions with the tools of Biblical truth?  Whenthere is some alien desire or fear do we give ourselves day andnight to searching the Scriptures for that truth that God hasinspired for the undeceiving of our hearts?   Keep in mind that,unlike all the wisdom of men, the word of God is living and active,sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division ofroot and rock and dislodging even the deepest, unconscious deceitsof our minds that yield the alien fruit of fear and desire.    Let no one deceive you in any way! Paulsays.  And then come ten verses of teaching designed to dislodgethe deceit from the minds of the Thessalonians and restore thestability and calmness of their faith.   Before we look at this teaching we need to find outwhat the deceit was that was beginning to root itself in the mindsof the Thessalonians.  Verse 2 tells us fairly plainly.  It saysthat they were starting to believe that the day of the Lord hadalready come: Don't be quickly shaken in mind or excited,either by spirit or by word or by letter purporting to be fromus, to the effect that the day of the Lord has come.  Evidently they think that the second coming of theLord is so near that it is as good as present.  Paul responds,It doesn't matter where this thought came from -- a forged letter,a spoken sermon, a supernatural prophecy -- it is wrong.  Theday of the Lord -- the time of his glorious second coming -- hasnot come.  Then he gives two arguments in verse three whichhe unfolds in verses 4-12.  First, we know the day of the Lordhasn't come because the rebellion, or the apostasy, must comefirst.  And second, the man of lawlessness has to be revealedbefore the day of the Lord arrives: For that day will notcome, unless the rebellion (or: apostasy) comes first, and theman of lawlessness is revealed (verse 3).  Then in verses 4-9 Paul describes the coming of theman of lawlessness and in verses 9-12 he describes the climaxof the great apostasy.  One of the questions that I want to deal with tonightis where the rapture fits in here.  There is a large wing of theevangelical church today that believes the second coming of Christis going to happen in two stages.  First, Christ will come forthe church; they will rise to meet him in the air, return withhim to heaven for a period of seven years, and then after thegreat tribulation is over, return to the earth in judgment.  Thisview of the second coming is called the pre-tribulationalview because it says that Christ comes for the church before thetribulation.    This view has been popularized by the notes in theScofield Reference Bible and by many Bible schools and some seminaries. It was the basis of Hal Lindsay's Late Great Planet Earth, andhas inspired songs and movies about the sudden disappearance ofthe Christians out of the world at the time of rapture.  Tonight I hope to take this issue up in more detail.But for now let me just show you one of several arguments from2 Thessalonians why I cannot follow this interpretation as muchas I love and respect those who do.  Why am I a post-tribulationist,that is, why do I look forward with great anticipation not toa sudden departure from the world for seven years but to a greatgathering to meet the Lord in the air as he comes with his mightyangels in flaming fire to establish his earthly kingdom, givingrest to his people and judgment to his enemies?  The saints at Thessalonica were shaken and alarmedthinking that the day of the Lord is at hand.  Now for the pre-tribulationistthe Day of the Lord is the second half of the secondcoming after the tribulation.  It is described in verse 8: Andthen the lawless one will be revealed, and the Lord Jesus willslay him with the breath of his mouth and destroy him by his appearingand his coming.  This is the day of the Lord -- not the quiet rapturewhen the saints are snatched away, but the glorious and overwhelmingattack from heaven against the man of lawlessness and all evil.   Now the question arises: If the Thessalonians wereoverly excited and shaken, thinking that the day of the Lord hadcome, why didn't Paul simply say, You know it hasn't comebecause you are still here and I'm still here and the rapturehasn't happened yet?  Why did he say in verse 3, Youknow the day of the Lord has not come because the apostasy hasnot come and the man of lawlessness has not been revealed?   All pre-tribulationists believe that the man of lawlessnesswill be revealed after the rapture, during the great tribulation. In fact, they say that according to verses 6-7 the restrainer,that holds back the appearance of the man of lawlessness, is theHoly Spirit in the church, so that when the church is rapturedout of the world the man of lawlessness will be released.  Inother words, the church will not be here, they say, when the manof lawlessness is revealed.  The Thessalonian Christians willnot see the appearance of the man of lawlessness according topre-tribulational teaching.  Why then would Paul try to convince them that theday of the Lord has not come by pointing out that a man of lawlessnesshas not been revealed whom they were never to see anyway?  IfPaul believed in a pre-tribulational rapture, all he had to saywas: the day of the Lord can't have come yet because we are allstill here.   Instead what he does say is exactly what you wouldexpect him to say if he believed in a single post-tribulationalcoming of the Lord.  He says that the day of the Lord can't behere yet because the apostasy and man of lawlessness who appearsduring the tribulation haven't appeared to us yet.  And then Paul goes on to lay out for them a descriptionof the man of lawlessness in verses 4-9.  And the most naturalassumption is that he does this because he wants Christians tobe able to recognize him when he appears.  The point of this passageis not that Christians have gone to haven before the man of lawlessnessappears, but that Christians should recognize him when he comes.  My own conviction is that I would dishonor the wordof God and do you a great disservice if I did not equip you asbest I can from this text to recognize the man of lawlessnessshould he appear in your life-time.  First, from verse 3, simply notice his name, theman of lawlessness.  We may infer from this that heis an individual person and that he embodies the spirit of rebellionagainst God's law -- lawlessness.  Second, from the end of verse 3, notice that he isa son of perdition: just as surely as his characteris lawless, his destiny is destruction.  Perdition clings to hisvery nature.  Let us hear in this an earnest warning to guardourselves from rebellion against God's law, because it leads toperdition (cf. 1:9)  Third, from verse 4, the man of lawlessness willoppose God and all objects of worship except himself.  He willexalt himself, Paul says, and put himself forward as God. Andas a means to that end it says he takes his seat in the templeof God, which may mean the church, since Paul calls the churchthe temple of God (1 Cor. 3:16; 2 Cor. 6:16; Eph. 2:21) -- thatis, he may become some kind of world-church leader.  Or the templehere may refer to the temple in Jerusalem.  Fourth, from verses 6-7, the man of lawlessness isnow being restrained until his appointed time.  He is not in control,God is.  His time is appointed and will be very short.  Who orwhat the restrainer is no one knows for sure today, but ultimatelyit is the power of God that sets the times and seasons for thelast days (Acts 1:7).  Fifth, from verse 8, soon after he appears theLord Jesus will slay him with the breath of his mouth and destroyhim by his appearing and his coming.  One word, one puffof air, from the mouth of Jesus and the man of lawlessness willbe destroyed.  That is meant for our great encouragement.  Hisdoom is sure.  Sixth, from verse 9, the man of lawlessness is notSatan, but comes in the energy and power of Satan with supernaturalsigns and wonders.  This is a warning not to make signs and wondersthe ground of your faith or the criterion of truth.  All thesesigns and wonders are counterfeit not because they aren't miraculous-- they have Satanic power -- but because they don't point totruth.  They lie.  They are no more to be trusted than the spiritof prophecy in verse 2 that said the day of the Lord had come.  So Paul's first tool of truth for digging up theroots of deceit in the minds of the Thessalonians is the teachingthat before the day of the Lord comes the man of lawlessness mustcome first.  The Thessalonians should regain their composure:the end is not yet and when it comes victory will belong to theLord.  (See Daniel 7:8,20f; 8:4, 11f; 11:31-40 for the OT backgroundfor this man of lawlessness.)  Then in verses 9-12 Paul describes how the apostasywill come to a climax.  Remember, he had said in verse 3 thatthe day of the Lord will not come until the apostasy comes first. Apostasy mean a falling away from the truth by those who onceheld it.    Paul is probably reaffirming what Jesus taught aboutthe end time when he said in Matthew 24:10-13,   And then many will fall away (skandalisthesontai),and betray one another, and hate one another.  And many falseprophets will arise and lead many astray.  And because lawlessnessis multiplied, the love of many will grow cold.  But he who enduresto the end will be saved.   Notice the links here: Paul said in verse 7 thatthe mystery of lawlessness is already at work, and Jesus saidthat lawlessness (same word) will be multiplied).  Paul said inverse 3 that there will be a great apostasy, and Jesus said thatthe love of many will grow cold, but that those who endure tothe end (i.e., who don't commit apostasy) will be saved.  So Paulis right in line with Jesus here.  The apostasy comes to a crushing climax in verses9-12 with an incredibly heavy force of delusion and deceit.  Accordingto verse 10 the signs and wonders of the man of lawlessness deceivethose who are perishing.  Why?  Why are they so vulnerable?  Whydo many professing Christians leave the truth and follow falsehood?  Paul's answer at the end of verse 10 is that theyrefuse to love the truth (literally: they did not welcome a lovefor the truth).  Notice: it is not merely an issue of knowingor believing in a merely mental sense: it is an issue of loving.   Look at verse 12: . . . so that all may becondemned who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness. The opposite of believing the truth is delighting in evil.    And this means that saving faith -- faith that willendure to the end through the affliction now and through the apostasyto come is not merely an accepting of truth but a loving of truth. Verse 10:  They perish because they refused to love thetruth.    We can be sure that when the man of lawlessness comeshis signs and wonders will be used to support claims that appealto our natural desires.  Therefore the only defense against thisappeal will be a deeper desire for God.  If Christ is our portionand our treasure, if he satisfies our longings, and if we lovethe glory of his gospel, then the mystery of lawlessness willnot overcome us, and our love will not grow cold and we will endureto the end and be saved.  May the Lord grant us all to receivethe love of the truth.  Amen.   
