 September 3, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    DO NOT SAY "I AM ONLY A YOUTH"    (Jeremiah 1:1-10)    
    
    The words of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were   in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, to whom the word of the Lord   came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the   thirteenth year of his reign. It came also in the days of   Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, and until the end of   the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah,   until the captivity of Jerusalem in the fifth month. Now the word   of the Lord came to me saying, "Before I formed you in the womb I   knew you, and before you were born I consecrated you; I appointed   you a prophet to the nations." Then I said, "Ah, Lord God! Behold,   I do not know how to speak, for I am only a youth." But the Lord   said to me, "Do not say, 'I am only a youth'; for to all to whom I   send you you shall go, and whatever I command you you shall speak.   Be not afraid of them, for I am with you to deliver you, says the   Lord." Then the Lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth; and   the Lord said to me, "Behold, I have put my words in your mouth.   See, I have set you this day over nations and over kingdoms, to   pluck up and to break down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build   and to plant."    
    
    One of the main purposes of SPAN the NINETIES Part II &#151; the   creation of an Institute and Training Center on Wednesday evenings   (Sept. 13), the emphasis on small home groups instead of Sunday   evening services three Sundays a month, the redefinition of staff   responsibilities &#151; one of the main purposes of these changes   is to maximize the equipping and the ministry of lay people; to   mobilize the whole priesthood of believers; to shape the mindset   of the church more and more into a centrifugal   ministry-evangelism-giving mindset and less of a centripetal   gathering-receiving mindset.    
    Gathering and receiving and being strengthened and equipped is   thoroughly Biblical and crucial. That is why we have Sunday   morning worship, Sunday School for all ages, Bethlehem Institute   and Training Center, Monthly All-Church Gatherings on Sunday   evening and other times. But there is a world of unbelievers out   there perishing eternally without Jesus Christ who don't know the   joy of our gatherings. And we can multiply in-house services which   we love and which make us feel very good, but for which they may   never come to in this building. And it may be that in the end our   worship and study gatherings will all be in vain as far as   reaching lost people is concerned.    
    The gatherings here are for the worship of the King, the   strengthening of his loyal subjects and sending them out in the   conquest of love among the rebel subjects of our city. But we   believe that loyal subjects of the King can discover their   spiritual gifts and become more personally active in ministry   through small groups than through an all church gathering here on   Sunday evening. And we believe that many of those rebel subjects   who might respond to the love of the King's amnesty are more   available Sunday evenings than any other time &#151; not to come   here, but to come to your home.    
    The aim of SPAN II is to maximize the equipping and the ministry   of the lay people of this church for the sake of people dying   without Christ, and for the sake of whole peoples who have never   heard the great gospel that Jesus Christ came into the world to   save sinners. And my heart's desire and prayer to God is that he   might bless our imperfect dreams and pour out his Spirit on our   church in awakening power and unprecedented passion for ministry   and love for perishing neighbors. And to that end I am preaching   to younger and older in these three Sundays to inspire you to seek   the kingdom first and make ministry the goal of your life.    
    At both ends of the age spectrum there are special hindrances to   ministry. We talked about some of those last week at the upper end   of the age spectrum &#151; especially the leisure, retirement   mentality that is so foreign to the Scripture. We said that older   people are to be prized (Lev. 19:32) and mobilized and evangelized   (Psalm 71:18). The kind of ministry that you can do will change   with age. But there is no Biblical teaching to suggest that   between 65 and 95 saints should play while the world perishes.    
    Now today I want to focus on the younger end of the spectrum and   simply let Jeremiah express the kind of hindrances there are to   ministry for the young and let God give his three answers to   inspire and encourage all of us.    
    Jeremiah 1:6 gives Jeremiah's response to God's call.    
    "Then I said, 'Ah, Lord God! Behold, I do not know how to speak,   for I am only a youth.'"    
    He feels a sense of incompetency ("I do not know how to speak")   and he says that this incompetency is because he is too young for   the job God is calling him to do ("for I am only a youth") .    
    Now, I realize that God is not calling most people in this room to   the kind of authoritative prophetic ministry Jeremiah was to have.   But I think the principle here will apply to any kind of caring   service or outreach or church ministry the Lord is putting in your   heart to do. There may be some who say, "I do not have the   experience I should," or, "I do not have the maturity needed," or,   "I don't yet have the ability needed." But sometimes our   perceptions about ourselves are wrong. God sees things we don't   see and he creates things in us that we didn't know could be. This   doesn't mean that gifts don't count. It means that when the Holy   Spirit, ordinarilly confirmed by the body of Christ, inclines you   to serve people in a certain way, your objections need to be met   with the encouraging word of God.    
    God gives reasons why Jeremiah's objection shouldn't keep him from   following the call. He says in verse 7, "Do not say, `I am only a   youth.'" Do not use your youth as an excuse not to venture   something great for God. And here are three reasons for why   Jeremiah (and we) should be thrilled and not chilled at the call   to serve the Lord. Let's just take them in the order that they   come in the conversation between God and Jeremiah.    
    1. Verse 5: The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah and said,    "Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,    and before you were born I consecrated you;    I appointed you a prophet to the nations.    
    The first reason Jeremiah should be encouraged to take up the   ministry is that his very life is rooted in the unshakable,   sovereign purposes of God. Notice the four acts of God surrounding   the birth of Jeremiah:    
    1.1 First God knew him: "Before I formed you in the womb I knew   you." God took Jeremiah into his loving acquaintanceship, he set   his caring eye upon him and chose him &#151; that's the Biblical   idea of God's knowing his people (Amos 3:2). This is true for   every child of God according to Romans 8:29.    
    1.2 Second, God consecrated him. "Before you were born I   consecrated you." God set him apart for some special holy purpose.   He destined him for something significant. And that is true for   you too. In giving every Christian grace and gifts, God   consecrated us to be like Jesus and to use our gifts for his   glory.    
    1.3 Third, God formed Jeremiah in the womb. "Before I formed you   in the womb I knew you." What Jeremiah became though the genetic   make up of his mother and his father Hilkiah was no accident. God   shaped and designed him in his mother's womb. The Hebrew word   (tsur) refers to the design of a house or the sculpting of a   statue. The "you" that God has to work with today, minus the   remnants and effects of sin, is a "you" that God designed and   knows very well. If he calls you to something, it is because the   design is right.    
    1.4 Fourth, God appointed Jeremiah to be a prophet. "I appointed   you to be a prophet to the nations." This is why Jeremiah was   born. This is his destiny. And you have one too. No Christian   exists merely to make an honest living, raise a family, enjoy   retirement and die. Every one of you is called to a ministry.    
    So the first great incentive to take up our ministry is that our   life is rooted in the unshakable, sovereign purposes of God. You   are not your own. You are God's .You are not self-made. You are   God-made. You did not first choose him. He first choose you. You   are not an accident. You are a design. Your life is rooted in God   and that is a great source of strength and stability in accepting   God's call.    
    2. The second reason God gives to young Jeremiah that he should   overcome his fearful objection is that God's authority is behind   his going and his speaking. This is found first in verse 7.    
    The Lord said to me,    "Do not say, `I am only a youth';    for to all to whom I send you you shall go,    and whatever I command you you shall speak.    
    The emphasis here is on God's sending where he will, and God's   commanding what he wants said. Jeremiah's youth does not matter if   he is sent by God's commission and if he is speaking what God   commanded.    
    The same point about his speaking is made in verse 9:    
    "The the Lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth; and the   Lord said to me,    `Behold, I have put my words in your mouth.'"    
    And then the power and effectiveness of Jeremiah's word is   described in verse 10:    
    "See, I have set you this day over nations and over kingdoms,    to pluck up and to break down,    to destroy and to overthrow,    to build and to plant."    
    In other words, when Jeremiah speaks the words of God &#151; when   he announces judgment, or when he promises blessing &#151; it will   come to pass. Judgments will break down, and promises will build   up. Not because of young Jeremiah (that's the point!), but because   the word of God is powerful.    
    What all this means for us is this: to the degree that you are led   by God into a path of service today, and to the degree that your   words conform to what the Bible really teaches, to that degree can   you say with Jeremiah: I am not here by my own commission, nor do   I speak with my own authority, but I am sent by God and what he   commands is what I say. I am humbled by my youth, but I am   encouraged that my commission and my word is not my own.    
    3. The third reason God gives Jeremiah not to let his youth deter   him from ministry is that God will be with him to deliver him.   Verse 8:    
    "Be not afraid of them,    for I am with you to deliver you,    says the Lord."    
    A great obstacle to serving the Lord, especially among the young,   is the fear of rejection and opposition. All kinds of thoughts   enter the mind about how some people might not like the way I do   it. People might disagree or be offended. I might make a mistake   and get criticized. The fear of man is a great hindrance to   ministry.    
    So God says, Don't fear, because I will be with you and I will   deliver you. God's presence and approval is more valuable than all   the accolades of men. And God says that in and through all your   troubles, I will deliver you. You will triumph in the end. You   will be more than a conqueror. And the same thing is promised to   all of us in Christ Jesus today:    
    "God has said, `I will never fail you or forsake you.' Therefore   we can confidently say, `The Lord is my helper, I will not be   afraid; what can man do to me?" (Hebrews 13:5-6)    
    "If God is for us who can be against us? (Romans 8:31)    
    So God said to Jeremiah, and God says to younger people today whom   he is calling to serve him, "Do not say, `I am only a youth.'"   Why?    
    Because your life is rooted in the unshakable, sovereign purposes   of God. You have been chosen and consecrated and formed and   appointed for a great purpose.    
    Because God's authority, not your own, is behind your going and   your speaking.    
    And because God himself will be with you to deliver you in all   your trials.    
    Now let me close with an observation that I hope will persuade   every Bible believing person among you that these things have   immediate personal bearing on your life. 1 Peter 2:9 says to all   believers, "You are a chosen race a royal priesthood . . ." All   Christians belong to a priesthood. You are priests. You have the   calling of a priest. You do not have to guess or wonder whether   you are called into the ministry. You are a priest by virtue of   your calling to be a Christian. "You are a chosen race, a royal   priesthood."    
    This great doctrine of the priesthood of all believers was   rediscovered during the Reformation and especially in the wing of   the Reformation called Pietism, of which we are a part. Philip   Jacob Spener described beautifully in 1675 what your priesthood   means:    
    Every Christian is bound not only to offer himself and what he   has, his prayer, thanksgiving, good works, alms, etc., but also   industriously to study in the Word of the Lord, with the grace   that is given him to teach others, especially those under his own   roof, to chastise, exhort, convert and edify them, to observe   their life, pray for all, and insofar as possible be concerned   about their salvation. (Pia Disideria, Fortress Press, 1964, p.   94).    
    Spener is right. There is no question about this. If you are a   Christian this is your priestly calling. The only question is:   what form will my priestly ministry take this fall? Is the High   Priest, Jesus Christ, leading me to be a small group leader? Is he   leading me to nurture the faith of children on Wednesday evenings   or Sunday mornings? Is he leading me into a ministry of personal   one-to-one discipleship of teenagers or new believers? Is he   leading me to train for a Lay Evangelistic Bible Study? Is he   leading me to visit the shut-ins or organize an inner-city soccer   team or invest in pro-life efforts? Is my priestly calling a   ministry of hospitality, or writing or mobilizing prayer or   literature distribution or feeding the hungry or housing the   homeless?    
    That is the question we need to pray about, and so I ask you to   bow with me now and seek the Lord afresh about the great privilege   of ministering with Jesus Christ in the priesthood of all   believers.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
