 1  
 
2007-10-7 Indigenous Liberals
  
Opening Words
  
We are here 

under this high and golden ceiling, 

embraced by windows proclaiming morning, 

our feet on a carpet as colorful as October,  

to worship, to look both into the world 

and into our own gathered and open hearts  

with the wonder and the fearless fidelity  

which might strengthen our lives. So we say: 

 




???
ˆ
?

 
Sequence 

 
A walk down Le Boulevard Des Capuchines in Paris, F
rance, past that trendy pastry shop. 
A walk down a muddy path next to the Alima River in
 the Congo near Okoyo, past that 
spectacular Ana Tree. 

A meal of salted cabbage and beef in that little Ko
rean Restaurant right near La Plaza des Armas 
in Santiago de Chile. 

A meal of fermented mare™s milk in the settlement o
f yurts near the beautiful Lake Uvs 
in Northwest Mongolia. 

The sighting of a hawk above the red sands at the e
dge of the Tanami Desert in Australia™s 
Northern Territory. 

The sighting of a hawk above the dark chimneys  of 
St. Philippe de Neri in Quebec, nestled 
above the St. Lawrence River. 

The sound of a recorded call to prayer from a Minar
et towering above the Arab Quarter in  
Al Quds, or Jerusalem.  

The sound of a favorite recorded song  

 
by Fred Astaire which later today will be played at
 the Memorial Service of man who was a 
beloved member of the Third Unitarian Church in Chi
cago, Illinois. 
The deliberate and tender silence in the house of a
 napping baby in Farafagana, Madagascar. 
The deliberate and tender silence in the Unitarian 
Universalist Church of Columbus Ohio, US of 
A, as one of the ministers strikes a bowl-like gong
 often used in Buddhist ceremonies shaped by 
Japanese culture. 

 
silence 

 
Whether we take a walk, eat a meal, see a hawk, not
ice a song, or fall silent, in one part of the 
world or another, we engage in what is commonly hum
an, no matter what language, no matter 
what culture, no matter what meaning might be found
 there. 

 2 And so now we set aside a moment at the heart of ou
r together-time to name aloud, or to 
remember quietly, or to see with our mind™s eye tho
se we love, and those who love us. 
 
naming 

 
The world™s cultures, all of them, each of them, ar
e as much borne along by music as they are by 
the call of love and the stirrings of beauty. But t
hen again, what™s the difference? 
 
 
The First Reading
 is from the Book of Devarim in the Torah, known oft
en by its Greek name of 
Deuteronomy. Like the rest of the Torah, it was put
 in final edited form about 2500 years ago, 
although most scholars are convinced that many of i
ts passages date back to Josiah/Yosyah™s 
Reform Movement, one hundred twenty years before th
at. 
 
You are the children of the Eternal your God. 

Therefore you shall not ritually cut yourselves, 

nor shave away the forelocks of your hair when 

it comes time to grieve the dead. 

You shall not eat anything which is abhorrent. 

You may eat lamb, beef, goat, antelope, venison 

and the meat of any other animal which has true 

hooves which are cleft in two, and which chews its 
food twice. But you may not eat rabbit, or 
camel, or pork, for although the pig has true hoove
s, it does not chew its food twice, and 
therefore is unclean for you. 

You may eat the meat of clean birds. You may not ea
t eagles, or vultures, or falcons, or ravens, 
or ostriches, or owls or nighthawks or sea gulls, o
r storks or pelicans or herons or cormorants. 
You may not eat any flying insects which swarm. You
 shall not boil a baby goat in its mother™s 
milk. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from Ruth Benedict™s classic Patterns of Cult
ure, written in the 
tough years before WW II. When she speaks of the No
rthwest Coast, she is speaking of what we 
now call the Pacific Northwest. She was an expert i
n the culture of one of the native nations 
there, the Kwakiutl people. 

 
Most people are plastic to the molding force of soc
iety into which they are born. It does not 
matter whether, with the Northwest Coast, it requir
es self-reference, or with our own civilization, 
the amassing of possessions. In any case, the great
 mass of individuals take quite readily to the 
form that is presented them. 

 
Sermon 

 
About 700 Unitarian Universalist ministers gathered
 last June on the day before our annual all-
congregation General Assembly in Portland, Oregon. 
 I always treasure these collegial forums 
where I™m challenged and can deepen my calling. 

 
Dr. Jeremiah Wright led our program this past June.
  Before that day, I only knew of Dr. Wright 
mostly by his connection to a man running for presi
dent of the United States, namely Barack 
Obama. Dr. Wright has been the senior parish minist
er at the church attended by Senator Obama 
for many years. This church, as you may know, consi
sts of some 4000 members. It™s the largest 

 3 congregation among the churches of that other great
 liberal denomination in the US of A, the 
United Church of Christ. 

 
No matter what you personally think of Mr. Obama, I
 assure you that, after hearing Dr. Wright 
hold forth, I now spend my time wondering why we do
n™t go around saying ?Senator Obama is 
Dr. Wright™s parishioner,? instead of the other way
 around. Wright™s presentation was the best I 
have ever heard at one of these Continuing Educatio
n sessions. And I have been going for 30 
years! Many of my colleagues felt that way too. Dr.
 Wright held our rapt attention for over three 
hours. My mind never once wandered. He was nothing 
short of brilliant. 
 
The subject of his presentation? Language. Language
 and cultural assumptions. He himself 
demonstrated fluency in several major European lang
uages. But then he started to talk with us 
about the two American languages. He spoke to us of
 Black English and White English. As a 
trained linguistic scholar, he offered us the stand
ard definitions of an accent, a dialect and a full-
blown language. He convinced us quite handily that 
we are talking about two languages here, not 
two dialects of the same language. He also said tha
t most African Americans are bilingual, and 
most Euro-Americans are not. That in itself rocked 
our boat. 
 
He listed the languages once spoken by the men and 
women brought over to this country as 
chattel slaves. Ashante. Ebo. Yoruba. Twee. And abo
ut fifteen others.  He explained how these 
languages are related, you know, like Italian and S
panish are related, or Dutch and German.   
 
Then he offered us examples of Black English. He no
ted that, in general, the word 
asks
, as in the 
sentence ?The teacher often asks them that,? is oft
en pronounced by African-Americans this 
way, ?The teacher often axe them that.?  But then h
e said, ?Do any of you find it interesting 
when I tell you that in Ashante, Ebo, Yoruba etc., 
there are no consonantal clusters like s-k-s? 
Black English pronunciation is clearly based on the
 culture of the original African languages.?  
Then he spoke to us about the verb ?to be.? In many
 African-American sentences it is not 
conjugated, that is, put into a different form. So 
where an American with European roots might 
say ?He™s over at Easton, shopping,? an American wi
th African roots might say, ?He be over at 
Easton, shopping.? Again, he said to us, ?Do any of
 you find it interesting that in Ashante, Ebo, 
Yoruba etc. the verb ?to be? is never conjugated, a
nd is always kept in its infinitive simple form, 
like the English ‚be™??  He went on for hours like 
this, unpacking the ancient roots of every 
African American pronunciation, grammatical distinc
tion, and vocabulary difference. And you 
have to know that ministers of every color, ethnici
ty, age and gender found almost everything he 
said to be news.   

 
In all honesty, most of us, both Euro-Americans and
 even some ministers of color, admitted that 
we had fallen for the blather that Black English mu
st be the result of poor schooling, or cultural 
isolation. No one imagined it might be because of A
frican cultural realities surviving centuries of 
European intellectual colonization. So most of us d
iscovered that day that WE were the ones 
poorly schooled. About language. About history. And
 most tellingly, about the very nature of 
culture. 

 
Yet European history itself is clearly marked by th
e same dynamic. For example, the pre-
Christian cultures of Northern Europe completely re
sisted the making of images, of 
representational art. Their stance was similar, in 
fact, to the prohibitions found amongst both 
Jews and Muslims to this very day. Abstract designs
 were OK. Drawings were not. Sculpture 
was not. Paintings were not. 

 
 4 When Southern European Catholic Christians imposed 
their theology onto the Northern 
Europeans in the 5
th
 and 6
th
 centuries, they were not, in fact, also able to im
pose their artistic 
culture on the North. For example, there was a deep
 difference between North and South in their 
attitude toward illustrating the Scriptures that th
e monks were copying by hand. The South 
produced elaborate drawings of men in robes and hal
os with gilt edges, depicting the gospel 
writers with splendid human detail. The Northern Eu
ropeans refused to do that, and simply made 
complex designs. Geometric. No faces. No hands. No 
feet. No bodies. Their theology may have 
bent, but their culture did not bend. 

 
And of course you know that the Protestant Reformat
ion largely broke out in Northern Europe, 
not the South. In their most furious stage, the reb
el Protestants entered Catholic churches, and 
broke the stained glass windows there, over-turned 
and burned statues they found, and slashed or 
removed paintings. You see, just as with African cu
lture surviving into English, so the anti-
image culture of North Europe remained strong 1000 
years after their theology changed.  
 
Does this congregation have a culture? Sure. Everyo
ne is part of some culture. What is culture?  
?It™s the way we dress,? says Aime Cesaire. ?It™s t
he way we walk, the way we carry our heads.? 
And Ruth Benedict confirms that ?the great mass of 
individuals take quite readily to the form?--- 
the cultural form she means --- ?that is presented 
them.?   
 
What kind of culture was presented to you when you 
came to this congregation? Quiet or loud?  
Was it respectful of authority or suspicious of it?
 Did you find an expectation of intellectual 
prowess or an expectation of emotional depth? Was t
he culture here conflict-avoidant or conflict-
welcoming? Whatever your answers, I affirm we are, 
each of us, new or long-term members, 
children of a real culture, woven, unconsciously pe
rhaps, in 1940 by our founders. We may not 
always know the structure and form of this culture,
 and we surely blend it with our own 
individual family cultures.  But believe me, cultur
e is the water in which we all swim like so 
many fish. We may not see it, but without it, we™re
 often gasping for life. 
 
How are cultures formed? 

 
The Hebrew scriptures provide one excellent example
. There are, as some of you know, many 
rules in the first five books of those scriptures, 
commonly called The Torah. They are usually 
more cultural than strictly religious rules. These 
rules always seem to separate out and define one 
culture against another. The original reasons for t
hese laws were forgotten after a while, but the 
culture stayed the same in any case. 

 
Originally, the Hebrews defined their culture over 
and against their enemies, the Philistines. 
You don™t eat pork because they sacrifice wild boar
s to their god Dagon. Don™t be like them.  
You don™t eat shellfish because they own the sea co
ast. So eat lake fish instead. When they 
grieve at their funerals, they shave the front of t
heir heads. Don™t do that. Grieve some other 
way. You don™t boil a kid in its mother™s milk beca
use that is a form of sacrificial ritual they use 
to their pestiferous gods. Don™t follow their relig
ious rites either. In fact, the authors of the book
 
of Deuteronomy insist, 
anything
 that smacks of their culture upsets us. We detest 
their cultural 
ways. We want our culture to be the exact opposite 
of theirs. We have come up with a shorthand 
code to separate ourselves entirely from their cult
ure. We call anything they do, by our word, 
to™evah,
 which means, ?We really hate his.?  So we really h
ate it when they use same-sex 
eroticism as a form of worship in their temples, so
 we forbid that. We detest it when their priests 
dress up in certain colors of clothes, so we won™t 
do that either.? The foolish King James 
translators came up with the word ?abomination? to 
translate the Hebrew shorthand word 

 5 ?to™evah.? But the modern preachers who toss this w
ord around are so removed from the cultural 
meaning of this term that their rhetoric is more th
an wrong, it™s embarrassing, and remarkably 
hurtful. Even the authors of the Torah forgot the o
riginal cultural reasons for these laws, and 
invented this business about the shape of hooves an
d the number of times an animal chews its 
food. 

 
But is culture always established by reaction again
st some other culture? Not always. Some 
cultures are born in near isolation. Others are sub
tly influenced and changed by other cultures, 
either neighboring ones or immigrant cultures withi
n the borders.  Or sometimes cultures are 
created by the systemic violence of colonization. 

 
Perhaps many folks here in Columbus Ohio do not kno
w this, but you may find Unitarian 
Universalist movements and communities all around t
he world. From here to the Philippines. 
From the Philippines to India. From India to Africa
. 
 
Their religious affirmations are similar. Liberal, 
we might say, in our shorthand word. But, their 
cultures are different. For example, there is a Uni
tarian movement in Burundi, in Africa. Like us, 
they meet on Sundays. But they do not come out of a
 sermon-centered liberal congregational 
Protestant culture like we do, but rather, out of a
 largely Catholic and Anglican missionary 
culture. They questioned the Anglican theology, but
 not the culture–they still enact some of the 
central practices of their colonial religion. They 
partake of bread and wine each Sunday in a 
ceremony of communion. Do they think of it as an im
age of the body and blood of Christ? Not at 
all. They are Unitarian, after all. But they do see
 it as a profound expression of their community. 
The communion prayers have a great deal of silence 
woven into them too. Still, I think you have 
to admit their culture is quite distinct from ours.
  
On the same continent, in Lagos Nigeria, you will f
ind the Brotherhood Unitarian Church and 
some newer congregations. They come out of the soci
al impossibility that is Lagos Nigeria, a 
city which only a scant 25 years ago was about the 
size of Columbus, but which is now an insane 
urban sprawl with almost 21 million people, and wit
hout the electrical and water structures 
necessary to make something like that work. Lagos h
as over 200 ethnic groups and languages 
within its confines, and many Muslims and Christian
s as well as traditional religious groups. 
 
This Unitarian congregation comes out the indigenou
s Yoruba religious traditions, a noble and 
complex spiritual way of life. By our lights, it™s 
a polytheistic religion, that is, it presents a 
theology which urges folks to call on many divine s
pirits, both close and remote. It™s known for 
its tradition of spirit possession, something expre
ssed in some of our Western Christian traditions 
as  ?charismatic? or ?Pentecostal.? 

 
Their service is in Yoruba, with drums and other lo
cal instruments. Their music is all Yoruba 
music, an example of which you will hear at the end
 of the service. Their service however, like 
ours, is sermon-centered, with readings. This clear
ly reflects a blending of cultures, Christian and 
Yoruba, since the Yoruba religion per se uses no sc
riptures, offers no sermons. And they do not 
use the Flaming Chalice as a uniting symbol, like w
e do. Instead, author Melinda Sayavedra 
proposes that African Unitarianism might be best sy
mbolized by the Ana Tree, a drought-
resistant, erosion-preventive, hearty tree that sur
vives all odds. Like African Unitarians. 
 
Up in the Hungarian-speaking areas of Eastern Europ
e there have been Unitarians since the 
1560s.  These Unitarians clearly come out of, and a
re a reaction to, the Calvinist tradition that 
had spread to Eastern Europe in those years. For ab
out two centuries, they were vaguely known 

 6 to the Unitarians in England and North America with
 the stress on the 
vaguely
. In the last 
century, our cousins were, as it were, rediscovered
. Persecuted by the maniac Communist leader 
Ceaucescu, their plight moved the hearts of many he
re in the States. 
 
Since then, the idea of Partner Churches came to li
fe. Individual congregations, here in the States 
and in Canada, partner with congregations in Transy
lvania, Hungary, the Czech Republic, or the 
Philippines. There are exchanges of culture, mutual
 visits, learning and, sometimes, burgeoning 
friendships. This relationship has proved beneficia
l to both sets of congregations. 
 
But the Hungarian speaking Unitarian churches are n
ot like ours in many ways. We may share 
Unitarian religious sensibility, but our cultures a
re different by far. One, they have bishops. We 
don™t, preferring the congregational system of gove
rnment. Two, women and men sit in separate 
areas of the church. Three, their hymnody is much, 
much slower than ours, and consists of 
utterly different melodies, based on the local cult
ure. Four, they take communion four times a 
year, at a round table, and this is very important 
to them. Like the Unitarians in Burundi, it™s 
more of a communal symbol than a commemoration of t
he death of Jesus, but it™s quite central. 
And fifth, the Unitarians in the Hungarian areas of
 Europe are rarely college educated, upper 
middle class folks like Unitarian Universalists ten
d to be here–at least according to our self-
congratulatory mythology, which in my experience is
 often just that. They, however, are clearly 
mostly farmers. They take care of orchards. They pi
ck plums. They make pork sausages. They 
dry red peppers. They drink 
palinka
, a potent clear brandy that could remove the paint
 from these 
walls in a trice. They have country fairs, country 
dances. But they have a very hard life 
economically, compared to most Unitarian Universali
sts here in the States. 
 
So do the Philippine Unitarian Universalists. A ver
y hard life. Even tougher than the Hungarian 
speaking Unitarians. They are poor, largely uneduca
ted, and barely have enough to eat. These 
people come out of Catholic culture too, with some 
Muslim roots as well. They evolved on the 
island of Negros, where Visayan is spoken instead o
f Tagalog. Their services resemble ours a 
great deal, including the ceremonial use of the cha
lice, and the frequent singing of songs like 
Spirit of Life, although they do have some songs of
 their own tradition. Still, the Philippines 
were colonized by the Spanish for centuries, and we
 have been their de facto colonizers ever 
since, so naturally they look to us for their worsh
ip patterns and sources, 
since colonizing groups largely supplant the local 
cultures. 
 
In this country of 
E Pluribus Unum
, ?one out of many,? Unitarianism has a very Americ
an slant. 
We too, you see, are indigenous liberals. Yes, we a
re far more well-to-do than Unitarians or 
Universalists any place else in the world. But we a
re also creatures of American culture, which 
sometimes we mistake for our religious life.   

 
Jeremiah Wright, you see, was correct. Culture surv
ives even the worst possible attacks and 
attempts to destroy it. It survives in languages, i
n concepts and in practices that may no longer 
be identified by their original purposes. But cultu
re and religion are NOT the same thing, though 
I understand they may sometimes overlap. So I ask y
ou to consider at least a few of these 
questions during the week. Does your understanding 
of Unitarian Universalism as a spiritual way 
of life have an educational component to it? Do you
 think folks need to be school-educated to 
walk in the door? Is there an economic component to
 your understanding of our religious path? 
You can™t be a struggling farmer? You don™t think a
 struggling single mom working two jobs 
could find anything here? Really? Does our religiou
s path mean that music has a certain form for 
you, a certain style? Or is that a cultural stance 
you take?  What 
are
 your cultural stances? Can 
you distinguish them from your spiritual life? If y
ou were invited to sit at the welcome table with 

 7 Unitarians in Lagos, would you think their reverenc
e for Ifa, or God, was cultural or theological? 
Or even experiential in their lives? If you were vi
siting one of our congregations in Transylvania 
and were offered communion, would you accept it? If
 so, why? If not, why not? Is your answer 
culture-based or religion-based? 

 
Yes, I am well aware that this business of religion
 and culture, spirit and tradition, is a very 
complex issue. It demands a lot of both heart and h
ead. But as this congregation begins to 
imagine what it would mean to us if we too might pa
rtner with a Unitarian Universalist 
congregation in another nation with a totally diffe
rent culture and language, these are very 
important considerations to hold close to our cente
r, to face honestly, and yes, to embrace with 
joy. For remember, we, like every other culture in 
the world, are just one small part of the world. 
Hardly, hardly, hardly its main culture, its final 
culture, its best culture, or its most significant 
culture. And such humility marks the beginning for 
me of any spiritual life–or cultural life–
 that grounds my soul and restores my sense of hope 
and health. 
 
Offering 

 
And now some of our members and friends bring a por
tion of the pledges they have promised to 
the church, for the church is the congregation of t
he people who agree to make it. If you are a 
guest this morning, or just visiting, it™s ok to le
t the basket pass you by in peace this morning. 
Should you one day choose to share in the work of t
his good community, we will welcome your 
generous gift with gratitude, for generosity of spi
rit is the power that sustains any community of 
justice, learning and love. 

 
Prayer 

 
Soon, Love, we™re gonna sing a song about sitting a
t the welcome table.  
It says we™re gonna sit at the table, not set it. 

And we™re not gonna build the welcome table– either
, it™s already there.  
Been there for a long time. 

We™re not issuing all the invitations, seems–we™re 
on the guest list ourselves.  
We™ve been invited. I think I might go. 

But who is gonna welcome us? 

Do you know, O Love?  

Don™t tell me if you do. 

I for one, don™t want to know.  

I just want to sit down at that table, join hands f
or a moment,  and begin to eat in thanksgivng 
with everyone who comes. 

 
Offering
  
Closing Prayer 

