[November 16, 2014] I prepared this sermon several weeks ago, well before the recent explosion of activity and words relating to socalled same-sex marriage in Kansas. Yet, it seems well-suited for this occasion. It would appear the out-and-proud sodomites in Kansas are of the impression that if they make lots of noise, conduct numerous ceremonies and recruit enough judges into their corner, that God's word regarding sodomites and marriage will disappear. Stated otherwise, these beasts feign a belief that God will change. But, as we all know, "God won't change, Even if you cry, Even if you want him to." A recent media story out of the Wichita area featured remarks from 3 lesbian so-called "preachers" about tomorrow's "mass wedding ceremony." [Newsflash: No female preachers!]. One said it would be a "huge, huge day." Another said it would be an occasion for the sodomites to be "honored and respected." The third commented being a part of the event "means the world to us, absolutely just means the world to us." In reading all that over-the-top language, it hit me: This is their wedding supper (emphasis on "their"). They are ostensibly happy and rejoice, but theirs is Satan's marriage banquet! And it features misery, sadness, grief, despair and ­ ultimately ­ eternal death. All of which is vis-à-vis the Lamb's marriage supper. "Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. * * * And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God." (Revelation 19:7, 9). And again, blessed is he "that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. * * * A certain man made a great supper, and bade many: And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready." (Luke 14:15-17). 1  Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and forever. Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; . . . . (Hebrews 13:7-9). A primary subject of this passage is that Jesus Christ is the same now that he ever has been and ever will be. But please take note the context of this verse, specifically the exhortation which the apostle gives the Christian Hebrews here is to remember and follow the good instructions and examples of their ministers. "Remember them who have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God; whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation." The last part of this exhortation is to follow their faith. By following their faith, the apostle intends adhering to the Christian faith and those wholesome doctrines which their pastors taught them and not depart from them, as many in that day had done. (If the apostle thought many had departed in that day, imagine what he would say today.) The passage goes on to emphasize why following such faith was wise, in these words, "Considering the end of their conversation, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and forever." Christ is the end of their conversation -- he is the end of their conversation in their office, the end of the doctrines which they taught, and the end of all their administrations, and all their labors in all their work. (And remember, 2  that word "conversation" means behavior or manner of living.) On this, I give you Matthew Henry's observations: The instructions and examples of ministers, who closed their testimony, should be particularly remembered by survivors. And though their ministers were some dead, others dying, yet the great Head and High Priest of the church, the Bishop of their souls, ever lives, and is ever the same. Christ is the same in the Old Testament day, as in the gospel day, and will be so to his people for ever, equally merciful, powerful, and all-sufficient. Still he fills the hungry, encourages the trembling, and welcomes repenting sinners: still he rejects the proud and self-righteous, abhors mere profession, and teaches all whom he saves, to love righteousness, and to hate iniquity. And to look a bit deeper, note that Christ is unchangeable in at least two respects: (1) In his divine nature; and (2) In his offices. Divine Nature: Christ obviously changed during his appearance on earth in the flesh. He grew and developed physically, mentally and spiritually. Indeed, we read in Luke 2:52 that Jesus "increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." In the flesh, Jesus Christ hungered and became thirsty, experienced heat and cold, and suffered dreadful things to his body at the end. But the divine nature of Christ is absolutely unchangeable, and not liable to the least alteration or variation in any respect. It is the same now as it was before the world was created. When Christ was born in a stable, laid in a manger, underwent many changes on earth, suffered 3  that dreadful agony in the garden and died on the cross, it made no real alteration in His divine nature. And afterwards when Christ was glorified, and sat on the right hand of the Majesty of high, it made no alteration in His divine nature. Christ is unchangeable in his offices: The unchangeableness of Christ in his various offices appears in several respects -- First, these offices are exclusively Christ's and never give place to any other. Christ is the only Mediator between God and man that ever has been or ever shall be. He is an everlasting Savior. There have been prophets that have been raised up, and these have died, and others have succeeded them. Moses was not allowed to continue by reason of death. And the dispensation which he introduced was abolished to give place to another which Christ should introduce. Moses gave place to Christ, but Christ never gives place to any other. John the Baptist was a great prophet and preacher. He was Christ's forerunner; like the morning star, the forerunner of the sun, he shone bright a little while, but his ministry by degrees ceased, and gave way to the ministry of Christ, as the morning star by little and little goes out as the sun rises. John the Baptist says of Christ, "He must increase, but I must decrease." (John 3:30). Christ's ministry never ceases. Similarly, there have been many priests throughout history, one after another, but Christ continues as a priest forever. "And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death: But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an 4  unchangeable priesthood." (Hebrews 7:23, 24). And this: "Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually." (Hebrews 7:3). And finally as to his kingly office, David and Solomon were great kings, and eminent types of Christ. But death put an end of their kingdom and greatness. Earthly monarchies that have been, those that have ruled over the bigger part of the known world, particularly the Egyptian, Persian, Greek and Roman monarchies, they have come to an end, but Christ's is an everlasting Kingdom, his throne is forever and ever. "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom." (Hebrews 1:8). Though all other kingdoms shall be demolished, Christ's kingdom "shall not be destroyed." (Daniel 7:14). Second, Christ is at all times equally sufficient for the office he has undertaken. He undertook the office from eternity, and he was sufficient for it to eternity. He has been in the exercise of his office from the fall of man, and remains equally sufficient throughout all ages. Third, he is now, and always will be, the same that he ever has been in the disposition and will which he exercises in his office. He is not changeable in his disposition, as men are that are called to any office or business, which causes them to appear and act very differently in their offices at some times, from what they do at others. But Jesus Christ is also in this respect, the same yesterday, today, and forever. "[H]aving 5  loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end." (John 13:1). Fourth, Christ Jesus is the same yesterday, today and forever as it concerns his ultimate aim or goal. The target does not change with the passage of time or with changes in social mores. And his special end in his undertaking was the salvation and happiness of the elect. Fifth, the rules don't change when it comes to Christ's execution of his roles in the covenant of redemption and the covenant of grace. As to the covenant of redemption, Christ saves those ­ and only those ­ that God the Father gave him in that covenant to save. As to the covenant of grace, Jesus never departs from the promises that he has made to man. There is the same covenant of grace in all ages of the world. That covenant is not essentially different now from what it was under the Old Testament, and even before the flood. And it always will remain the same. It is therefore called an everlasting covenant. "[I] will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David." (Isaiah 55:3). Christ never departs from that covenant in the least jot or tittle. It is especially on account of his unchangeableness with respect to his covenant promises that he styles himself, "[I] am that I am." (Exodus 3:14). Sixth, the unchangeableness of Christ applies to his promised punishments. You may therefore be assured that Christ will fulfill his threatenings that he has denounced against unbelievers. There are many awful threatenings which Christ has denounced against wicked 6  men. For example, Christ has threatened woe to this wicked world and has declared concerning all that do not believe that they shall be damned. This is that which Christ gave in charge to his disciples before his ascension, when he sent them forth to preach and teach all nations: "[G]o ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15, 16). And in the explication of a parable Christ says that, at the day of judgment, "[t]he Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." (Matthew 13:41, 42). And you know there are numerous other such threatenings ­ too many to enumerate here ­ scattered throughout the Bible. Christ has not changed, and will not change, concerning those promised judgments. I love you! Amen. 7  
