  
  
  
  
  
  
MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  
Volume  1,  No.6  
April  1939  
  
A  Monthly  Publication  of  
the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"  
  
  
An  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  eBook  
July  2011  
  
  
All  words  of  Meher  Baba  copyright  ©  2011  Avatar  Meher  Baba    
Perpetual  Public  Charitable  Trust,  Ahmednagar,  India  
  
  
  
  
   Source  and  short  publication  history:  The  Meher  Baba  Journal,  a  monthly   magazine,  was  published  from  1938  to  1942.    This  eBook  reproduces  the  original   edition  of  the  Meher  Baba  Journal  published  by  the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"   (Meherabad,  Ahmednagar,  India).  
                    

   eBooks  
at  the  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  Web  Site  
   The  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust's  online  releases  aspire  to  be  textually  exact  though  non- facsimile  reproductions  of  published  books,  journals  and  articles.  With  the  consent  of  the   copyright  holders,  these  online  editions  are  being  made  available  through  the  Avatar   Meher  Baba  Trust's  web  site,  for  the  research  needs  of  Meher  Baba's  lovers  and  the   general  public  around  the  world.        Again,  the  online  releases  reproduce  the  text,  though  not  the  exact  visual  likeness,  of  the   original  publications.  They  have  been  created  through  a  process  of  scanning  the  original   pages,  running  these  scans  through  optical  character  recognition  (OCR)  software,  reflowing   the  new  text,  and  proofreading  it.  Except  in  rare  cases  where  we  specify  otherwise,  the   texts  that  you  will  find  here  correspond,  page  for  page,  with  those  of  the  original   publications:  in  other  words,  page  citations  reliably  correspond  to  those  of  the  source   books.  But  in  other  respects--such  as  lineation  and  font--the  page  designs  differ.  Our   purpose  is  to  provide  digital  texts  that  are  more  readily  downloadable  and  searchable  than   photo  facsimile  images  of  the  originals  would  have  been.  Moreover,  they  are  often  much   more  readable,  especially  in  the  case  of  older  books,  whose  discoloration  and  deteriorated   condition  often  makes  them  partly  illegible.    Since  all  this  work  of  scanning  and  reflowing   and  proofreading  has  been  accomplished  by  a  team  of  volunteers,  it  is  always  possible  that   errors  have  crept  into  these  online  editions.  If  you  find  any  of  these,  please  let  us  know,  by   emailing  us  at:  frank@ambppct.org   The  aim  of  the  Trust's  online  library  is  to  reproduce  the  original  texts  faithfully.  In  certain   cases,  however--and  this  applies  especially  to  some  of  the  older  books  that  were  never   republished  in  updated  versions--we  have  corrected  certain  small  errors  of  a  typographic   order.  When  this  has  been  done,  all  of  these  corrections  are  listed  in  the  "Register  of   Editorial  Alterations"  that  appears  at  the  end  of  the  digital  book.  If  you  want  the  original   text  in  its  exact  original  form,  warts  and  all,  you  can  reconstruct  this  with  the  aid  of  the   "register."      The  Trust's  Online  Library  remains  very  much  a  work  in  progress.  With  your  help  and  input,   it  will  increase  in  scope  and  improve  in  elegance  and  accuracy  as  the  years  go  by.  In  the   meantime,  we  hope  it  will  serve  the  needs  of  those  seeking  to  deepen  and  broaden  their   own  familiarity  with  Avatar  Meher  Baba's  life  and  message  and  to  disseminate  this  good   news  throughout  the  world.     
  

Contents

SHRI MEHER BABA ON THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS (PART I)

1

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA AND THEIR HAGIOLOGY
SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA
MANZIL-E-MEEM

C. V. Sampath Aiyangar Princess Norina Matchabelli Abdul Kareem Abdulla

16 20 26

AN EXPERIENCE

Walter Mertens

31

QUESTION BABA ANSWERS Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff 32

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING AS THE KERNEL OF UPANISHADIC WISDOM
SUFI THOUGHTS

Dr. C. D. Deshmukh Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff

34 38

INTERVIEW

C. B. Purdom

39

IMPRESSIONS

Will Backett

43

HAZRAT BABA TAJUDDIN OF NAGPUR
NOTES FROM MY DIARY

Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff F. H. Dadachanji

46 55



"I have come not to teach but to awaken" --SHRI MEHER BABA

SHRI MEHER BABA

MEHER BABA
JOURNAL

VOL. 1

APRIL 1939

NO. 6

Shri Meher Baba on The Removal of Sanskaras
(Part I)
THE CESSATION OF SANSKARAS: THEIR WEARING OUT AND UNWINDING

Human beings do not have self-illumination, because

their consciousness is shrouded in sanskaras or the

accumulated imprints of past experience. In them the

SANSKARAS
PREVENT SELFILLUMINATION

will-to-be-conscious with which evolution started has succeeded in creating consciousness. But it does not arrive at the knowledge of the

Oversoul, because the individual soul is impelled to use

consciousness for experiencing sanskaras instead of

utilising it for experiencing its own true nature as the

Oversoul. The experiencing of sanskaras keeps it

confined to the illusion of being a finite body trying to

adjust itself in the world of things and persons.

The individual souls are like the drops in the ocean.

Just as each drop in the ocean is fundamentally identical

with the ocean, the soul which is individualised due to

bhas or illusion is still the

2 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Oversoul, and does not really become separate from

THE PROBLEM OF SECURING
RELEASE FROM SANSKARAS

the Oversoul. And yet the
envelop of sanskaras in which consciousness is covered pre-
vents it from having selfillumination and keeps it within

the domain of maya or duality. In order that the soul

should consciously realize its identity with the

Oversoul, it is necessary that consciousness should be

retained and that sanskaras should be entirely removed.

The sanskaras which are contributory to the evolution of

consciousness themselves become impediments to its efficacy

in illuminating the nature of the Over-soul. Henceforth the

problem with which the will-to-be-conscious is

confronted is not that of evolving consciousness but

that of releasing it from sanskaras.

The release from sanskaras takes place in the following five ways:--
(1) The cessation of new sanskaras.

FIVE WAYS OF SECURING RELEASE FROM SANSKARAS

This consists in putting an end to
the ever-renewing activity of creating fresh sanskaras. If the
formation of sanskaras is compared to the winding of a string

round a stick, this step amounts to the stopping of the

further winding of the string.

(2) The wearing out of old sanskaras.

If sanskaras are withheld from expressing them-

selves in action and experience, they are gradually

worn out. In the analogy of the string, this

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS

3

process is comparable to the wearing out of the string at the
place where it is. (3) The unwinding of past sanskaras.
This process consists in annulling past sanskaras by mentally reversing the process which leads to their
formation. To develop the analogy of the string, it is like the unwinding of the string.
(4) The dispersion and exhaustion of some sanskaras. If the psychic energy which is locked up in sanskaras is
sublimated and diverted to other channels, they get dispersed and heaved and have a tendency to disappear.
(5) The wiping out of sanskaras. This consists in completely annihilating sanskaras. In
the analogy of the string, this is comparable to the cutting of the string by means of a pair of scissors. The final w i p i n g
out of sanskaras can be effected only by the grace of a Perfect Master.
It should be carefully noted that many of the concrete methods of undoing sanskaras are found to be effective in
more than one way, and the five ways mentioned above are not meant to classify these methods into sharply
distinguished types. They rather represent the different principles characterising the psychic processes which take
place while sanskaras are being removed. For the

4 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

past sanskaras). The methods which predominantly

illustrate the last two principles (viz., the dispersion

and sublimation of sanskaras and the wiping out of

sanskaras) will be explained in the next article.

If the mind is to be freed from the bondage of

ever-accumulating sanskaras, it is necessary that

there should be an end to the creation of new sans-

RENUNCIATION

karas. Fresh multiplication of sanskaras can be stopped through renun-
ciation. Renunciation may be external

or internal. External or physical renunciation consists

in giving up everything to which the mind is

attached, viz., home, parents, wife, children, friends,

wealth, comforts and gross enjoyments. Internal or

mental renunciation consists in giving up all crav-

ings, particularly the craving for sensual objects.

Though external renunciation in itself is not

necessarily accompanied by internal renunciation, it

often paves a way for internal renunciation. Spiritual

freedom consists in internal renunciation and not in

external renunciation; but external renunciation is a

great aid in achieving internal renunciation. The

person who renounces his possessions disconnects

himself from everything

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS 5
renouncing of everything he also renounces his past bindings. The old sanskaras connected with his possessions get detached from his mind, and since they are withheld from expressing themselves, they get worn out.
For most persons, external renunciation creates a favourable atmosphere for the wearing out of sanskaras. A man who possesses gold and power is exposed to a life of indulgence and extravagance. His circumstances are more favourable for temptations. Man is mostly what he becomes by being chopped, chisled, and shaped by the sculptor of environment. Whether or not he can surmount his surroundings depends upon his strength of character. If he is strong he remains free in his thought and action, even in the midst of action and reaction with his environment. If he is weak he succumbs to its influence. Even if he is strong he is likely to be swept off his feet by a powerful wave of collective mode of life and thought. It is difficult to withstand the onslaught of a current of ideas and avoid falling a prey to the circumstances. If he resists the circumstances he is likely to be carried away by some wild wave of collective passion and get caught up in modes of thought which he is unable to renounce. But, though it is difficult to resist and overcome the influence and surroundings, it is easier to escape from them. Many persons would live a chaste and a straightforward life if they are not surrounded by luxuries and temptations. The renunciation of all superfluous things helps the wearing

6 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

out of sanskaras, and is, therefore, contributory to the

life of freedom.

The two important forms of external renunciation

which have special spiritual value are (1) solitude

SOLITUDE AND FASTING

and (2) fasting. Withdrawal of
oneself from the storm and stress of the multifarious worl-

dly activities and occasional retirement into solitude

are valuable for wearing out the sanskaras connected

with the gregarious instinct. But this is not to be

looked upon as a goal in itself. Like solitude fasting

has also great spiritual value. Eating is satisfaction:

fasting is denial. Fasting is physical when food is not

taken in spite of the craving for the enjoyment of

eating; and it is mental when food is taken not for its

delights and attachment but merely for the survival of

the body. External fasting consists in avoiding direct

contact with food in order to achieve mental fasting.

Food is a direct necessity of life, and its continued

denial is bound to be disastrous to health. Therefore

external fasting should be periodical and only for a

short time. It has to be continued till there is

complete victory over the craving for food. By

bringing into action all the vital and psychic forces to

withstand the craving for food, it is possible to free

the mind from attachment

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS

7

assertion. In the same way, it should not be carried to

the extreme until the body is reduced to its limits.

Self-mortification through prolonged fasting does not

necessarily promote freedom from the craving for

food. On the contrary it is likely to invite a sub-

sequent reaction to a life of extravagant indulgence

in food. If, however, external fasting is undertaken in

moderation and for spiritual purposes, it facilitates

the achievement of internal fasting; and when

external and internal fasting are whole-hearted and

faithful, they bring about the unwinding of the

sanskaras connected with the craving for food.

The unwinding of many other sanskaras can be

brought about through penance. This consists in

augmenting and expressing the feeling of remorse

which a man feels after realizing that he has done

some wrong act.

Repentance consists in mentally reviving the

wrongs with severe self-condemnation. It is facili-

tated by availing oneself of the different circums-

PENANCE

tances and situations which stir up the penance, or by remaining vulnerable

during periods of emotional outbursts, or by

deliberate efforts to recall the past incidents with a

bleeding heart and acute disapproval. Such penance

unwinds the sanskaras which are responsible for the

action. Self-condemnation accompanied by deep

feeling can

8 MEHER BABA JOURNAL
time or other he is bound to have the reaction of selfkilling remorse and experience the pricks of conscience. If, at this time, he vividly realizes the evil for which he was responsible, the intensity of emotional awareness by which it is accompanied consumes the tendencies for which he stands selfcondemned.
Self-condemnation sometimes expresses itself through different forms of self-mortification. Some saints even inflict wounds on their body when they are in a mood of penitence. But such drastic expression of remorse must be discouraged as a general usage. Some Hindu aspirants try to cultivate humility by making it a rule to fall at the feet of every one whom they meet. To a man of strong will and stable character penance can bring the desired good effect through self-humiliation which unwinds and eradicates the different sanskaras connected with good and bad actions. Others who might be feeble in their will power also derive benefit from penance if they are under sympathetic and loving direction. When penance is carefully nourished and practised, it inevitably results in the psychic revocation of undesirable modes of thought and conduct and makes a man amenable to a life of purity and service.
It should, however, be carefully noted that there is always in penance the danger that the mind might dwell too long upon the wrongs done, and thus develop the morbid habit of wailing and weeping over petty things.

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS

9

and, is in no way, helpful for the wearing out or the

unwinding of sanskaras. Penance should not be like

everyday repentance which follows everyday weak-

nesses. It should not become a tedious and sterile

habit of immoderate and gloomy pondering over one's

own failings. Sincere penance does not consist in

perpetuating grief for the wrongs but in resolving to avoid

in future those deeds which call forth remorse. If it leads

to lack of self-respect or self-confidence, it has not

served its true purpose which is merely to render

impossible the repetition of certain types of actions.

The wearing out and the unwinding of sanskaras

can also be effected by denying to desires their

expression and fulfilment. People differ in their capa-

WITHHOLDING DESIRES FROM
FULFILMENT

city and aptitude for rejecting desires. Those in whom desires
arise with great impulsive velocity are unable to curb them at

their source. But they can refrain from seeking their

fulfilment through action. Even if a man has no

control over the surging of desires, he can prevent

them from being translated into action. Rejection of

desires by controlling actions avoids the possibility of

sowing seeds of future desires. On the other hand, if a

man translates his desires into action, he may spend

up and exhaust some impressions; but he is creating

fresh impressions during the very process of fulfilling

the desires, and is thus sowing seeds for future desires

which, in their turn, are bound to demand their own

10 MEHER BABA JOURNAL
satisfaction. The process of spending up or exhausting impressions through expression and fulfilment does not in itself contribute towards securing release from sanskaras.
When desires arise and their release into action is barred, there is plenty of opportunity for spontaneous cogitation of these desires; and this cogitation results in the wearing out of the corresponding sanskaras. It should, however, be noted that such spontaneous cogitation does not bring about the desired result if it takes the form of mental indulgence in the desires. When there is a deliberate and wanton attempt to welcome and harbour the desires in the mind, such cogitation will not only have no spiritual value but may itself be responsible for creating subtle sanskaras. Mental cogitation should not be accompanied by any conscious sanction for the desires which arise in consciousness; and there should not be any effort to perpetuate the memory of these desires. When desires are denied their expression and fulfilment in action and are allowed to pass through the intensity of the fire of cogitative consciousness which does not sanction them, the seeds of these desires get consumed. The rejection of desires and the inhibition of physical response in time effect an automatic and natural negation of the past sanskaras.
Rejection of desires is a preperaton for desirelessness or the state of non-wanting which alone can bring about true freedom. Wanting is necessarily binding whether it is fulfilled or not. When it is

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS 11

fulfilled, it leads to further wanting, and thus perpetu-

DESIRELESSNESS

ates the bondage of the spirit; and when it is unfulfilled, it

leads to disappointment and suffering which, through

their sanskaras, fetter the freedom of the spirit in

their own way. There is no end to wanting because

the external and internal stimuli of the mind are

constantly alluring it into a state of wanting or

disliking (which is another form of wanting)

something. The external stimuli are the sensations of

sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch; and the internal

stimuli are those that arise in the mind-stuff of man

from the memories of the present life and the totality

of sanskaras gathered by consciousness during the

evolutionary period and human lives. When the mind

is trained to remain unmoved and balanced in the

presence of all external and internal stimuli, it arrives

at the state of non-wanting; and by not wanting

anything (except the Absolute Reality which is

beyond the opposites of stimuli) it is possible to

unwind the sanskaras of wanting.

Wanting is a state of disturbed equilibrium of

THE POISE OF NON-WANTING
IMPLIES THE FACING OF
STIMULI BY "NETI, NETI"

mind; and non-wanting is a state of stable poise. The poise
of non-wanting can only be maintained by an unceasing
disentanglement from all stimuli, whether pleasant or painful,
agreeable or disagreeable. In

order to remain unmoved by the joys and sorrows of

this world, the mind must lie completely detached

from the

12 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

external and internal stimuli. Though the mind is

constantly fortifying itself through its own con-

structive suggestions, there is always the chance of

these outposts of defence being washed away by

some sudden and unexpected wave arising in the

ocean of natural and mental environment. When this

happens, you may for the time feel completely lost,

but the attitude of non-attachment can keep you safe.

This attitude consists in the application of the

principle of 'Neti', 'Neti', 'Not-this', 'Not-this'. It

implies constant effort to maintain watchful detach-

ment in relation to the alluring opposites of limited

experience. It is not possible to deny only the

disagreeable stimuli and remain inwardly attached to

the agreeable stimuli. If the mind is to remain

unmoved by the onslaughts of the opposites, it cannot

continue to be attached to the expression of affection

and be influenced by them. The equipoise consists in

meeting both the alternatives with complete detach-

ment.

The 'yes','yes' meaning of the positive sanskaras

can only be annulled through the negative assertion

of 'no', 'no'. This negative element is necessarily pre-

THE LIMIT OF
THE NEGATIVE ELEMENT IN THE
DIFFERENT FORMS OF ASCETICISM

sent in all the aspects of asceticism, as expressed through renunciation, solitude, fasting, penance, withholding desires from fulfillment and non-want-

ing. The happy blending of all these methods and

attitudes (which have been individually explained in

this article) create a healthy form of asceticism in

which there is no toil or exertion

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS 13
but to ensure all this, the negative element in them must come naturally without giving rise to any perversions or further limitations.
It is no use trying to coerce the mind to a life of asceticism. Any forcible adjustment of life on ascetic lines is likely to stunt the growth of some good qualities. When the healthy qualities of human nature are allowed to develop naturally and slowly, they unfold the knowledge of relative values, and thereby pave a way for a spontaneous life of asceticism. But any attempt to force or hasten the mind towards an ascetic life is likely to invite reaction.
The process of being freed from some attachments is often accompanied by the process of forming some other new attachments. The grossest form of attachment is that which is directed towards the world of objects. But when the mind is being detached from the world of objects, it has a tendency to arrive at some finer attachments of a subjective kind. After the mind has succeeded in cultivating a certain degree of detachment, it might easily develop that subtle form of egoism which expresses itself through aloofness and a superior air. Detachment should not be allowed to form any nucleus for the ego to fasten itself on; and at the same time it should not be an expression of one's inability to cope with the storm and stress of worldly life. The things that condition pure and infinite being should be given up from the attitude of the immense strength which is born of purity and enlightenment and not from a sense

14 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

of helplessness in the face of strife and struggle.

Further, true detachment does not consist in clinging

to the mere formula of 'Neti', 'Neti' which sometimes

becomes an obsession of the mind without any deep-

felt longing for enlightenment. Such interest in the

mere formula of negation often exists side by side

with an inward dwelling on the temptations. Detach-

ment can be integral and whole-hearted only when it

becomes a part and parcel of one's nature.

The negative assertion of 'no', 'no' is the only way

of unwinding the positive sanskaras gathered through

evolution and human lives. But though this process

THE NEGATIVE
SANSKARAS MUST ALSO DISAPPEAR
BEFORE ENLIGHTENMENT

does destroy the positive sanskaras, it results in the formation of the negative sanskaras which, in their own way, condition the mind and create a new

problem. The assertion of 'no', 'no' has to be

sufficiently powerful to effect the eradication of all

the physical, subtle and mental sanskaras; but after it

has served its purpose, it has to be ultimately

abandoned. The finality of spiritual experience does

not consist of a bare negation. To bring it under a

negative formula is to limit it by means of an

intellectual concept. The negative formula has to be

used by the mind to decondition itself, but it must be

renounced before the ultimate goal of life can be

attained. Thought has to be made use of in order to

overcome the limitations set up by its own

movement; but, when this is done, it has to be itself

given up. This

THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS 15
amounts to the process of going beyond the mind; and it becomes possible through non-identification with the mind or its desires. To look upon the body as well as all thoughts and lower impulses objectively is to get established in blissful detachment and to negate all the sanskaras. This means freeing the soul from its self-imposed illusions like 'I am the body', 'I am the mind' or 'I am desire' and gaining ground towards the enlightened state of 'I am God,' 'Anel Haque', or 'Aham Brahmasmi'.
(To be continued)


The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern India and their Hagiology*
THE LIFE OF SAINT ANDAL
BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR

Of the twelve canonized
Saints of the Southern Vaishnavite Church there is the one
blessed woman Saint--Saint Andal.
It is a prevailing notion in the West that women in India
have been treated worse than chattels, and that our sacred
books sanction it. It is far from truth. The great law-giver
Manu has laid down in his wonderful code that women
should be respected. He says: 1 "If the husband does not
please his wife, she being unhappy, the whole family is
unhappy and miserable; but if
the wife be quite contented with her husband, the whole
family enjoys felicity." 2 "Let women be always res-
pected (pujya) by their fathers and brothers, by their husbands
and the brothers of their husbands; in other words, they
should speak sweetly to them and provide them with good
food, nice clothes and orna-

ments, and thereby keep them
happy. Those who seek great prosperity and happiness
should never inflict pain on women."
3 "Where women are honoured, in that family great men
are born; but where they are not honoured, there all acts are
fruitless--where women pass their days in misery and sorrow
because of the misdeeds such as adultery of their husbands,
that family soon entirely perishes, but where they are
happy because of the good conduct of their husbands, the
family continually prospers."
The Upanishads say that the mother is a goddess. In the
Sanskrit literature and all vernaculars that follow it, the
name of the woman always comes before the man. It is
Mata-Pita (mother-father), Sit a-Ram. (Sita is the wife and
Ram is the husband. To say Ram-Sita is wrong.) This cer-
tainly proves beyond all

____________________________________________________________________ *Continued from February 1939 issue.

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA

17

doubt that our forefathers held women in great veneration.
The life of Saint Andal is a most glorious one. Her birth is shrouded in mystery. PeriAzhvar Chittar or Vishnu, our second Saint, who lived in Shri Villiputtur, had a flower garden. (This town is in Tinnevelly District, Southern India. It was a portion of the old Pandyan Kingdom.) This Saint grew the sacred tulasi, and offered it to God Almighty. One day he was digging in his garden, when, to his great surprise, he found a beautiful child, just as King Janaka found Sita (vide the great epic Valmiki Ramayana). We also find such a story in Homer's Iliad about Erectheus.
"Great Erectheus swayed,
That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid.
But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
The mighty offspring of the foodful earth."
The Saint took the holy
child ad brought her up with
much cae and affection. It is
said that she was born in Kali
97, Nala year, Adi month,
Purva-palguni asterism. This
was aout 5000 years ago.

The child was named "Goda". This slender-waisted and fasci-
nating child was certainly a divine one.
Saint Vishnu-Chittar used to prepare daily beautiful wreaths
of flowers and offer them to the idol Vata-patra-Sayin
(name of the God). In the absence of the father the child
Goda used to wear the wreaths intended for the Lord, and
placing herself before a mirror used to admire her own beauty.
One day she was caught redhanded, while she was wearing
the wreath, and the father threw it away as unfit to be
used by the Lord. It is said that the Lord appeared in his dream
and said that He would have only the wreaths worn by his
daughter, and that they were not desecrated but consecrated
by her use. Our Saint rose in astonishment and carried to the
temple, from that date forward, only wreaths worn by his
daughter whom he considered as the Goddess Lakshmi. From
that day Andal was called Sudik-Kodutha Nachiyar mean-
ing the queen that wore and gave garlands.
We now understand what is meant by Motherhood of God
and Fatherhood of God.

18 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

One great bhakta said, referring to God, "As Father, He is
the Judge; as Mother, He is the Forgiver." In the Bhagavad-
gita, Lord Shri Krishna calls Himself Mother. B. B. Nagar-
kar, in his speech delivered in the Chicago Parliament of
Religions, explained clearly this aspect of the question thus: "The first ideal of the Brahma Samaj is the ideal of the
Motherhood of God The world has yet to understand and real-
ize, as it never has in the past, the tender and loving relation-
ship that exists between mankind and their supreme Univer-
sal Divine Mother. O! what a world of thought and feeling is
centred in that one monosyllable word `Ma' (Mother)...
Words cannot des-cribe, hearts cannot conceive of the tender
and self-sacri-ficing love of a human mother. Of all human
relations, that of the mother to her children is the most sacred
and elevating relation, and yet our frail and fickle human
mother is nothing in comparison with the Divine Mother of
the entire humanity who is the primal source of all Love, all Mercy and all Purity." This beautiful spiritual aspect was

clearly explained in his own inimitable way by the late Yogi Partha-sarathy Aiyangar thus: "The Universal Mother Lakshmi, the Shakti or the personal energy of Vishnu (the latter identified with Supreme Deity) is Lady and Goddess of the worlds, and the mediatrix between God and the soul. She checks sin and stirs up Divine Mercy and Love for sinners. In her incarnation as Sita, the bride of Ram, she is especially to be venerated as our Lady of Grace and Mercy. She is the Beloved of the Lord Incarnate in Ram. She converts the soul by her Mercy and the Lord by her Beauty." The same idea is put in terse words by F. R. de Sales: "Strength (Father) is tempered by sweetness (Mother) and sweetness is supported by strength. One stimulates and the other persuades."
The Mother (Lakshmi called Shri) resides in the bosom of the Lord, like Christ the son, in His bosom (John 1. 18). Sage Lokacharya described Lakshmi who represents the Motherhood aspect of the Lord thus: "She is like the Mother

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA

19

who could not leave the cradle of the children on the one side,
nor the bed of the Lord on the other side." This means that she
comforts the souls on the one hand, and pleads for them with
the Lord on the other. St. Andal was the incarna-
tion of Lakshmi herself. The Lord could not be without her,
and she could not be without Him. She came here to redeem
the world. It is only Love-- love that of a mother--that can
redeem the world. It was why it was said that St. Andal's
power of salvation exceeded that of the Lord.
St. Andal became God-- Love-sick; she was pining to
wed the Lord. St. Peri Azhwar was in a fix. He did not know
who, among the mortals, was fit to be her husband. He was
like Janaka. "The father knowing how
I came, No daughter of a mortal
dame, In all the regions failed to
see A bridegroom meet to match
with me." He broached the subject to
her, his darling daughter. She would not wed any man but

her Lord; she consecrated herself to His service. The Fatherhood of God becomes complete only with His Motherhood. St. Andal would wed Him whom she described thus: --
"Judge ye, the beauteous locks and looks
And fruit-red lips, my Rang-Nectars."
--The Ranganatha Swami of Shrirangham (on the river Kaveri in Trichinopally District.) It is said that Vishnu-Chittar had a vision divine, when the Lord agreed to wed his daughter. Azhvar became delighted, and took his holy daughter to Shrirangham. There she became one with her Lord, the God. The father was directed to go to his own town, Shri Villiputtur, and do the Lord's work. Such is the story of the wonderful incarnation of St. Andal.
"Hail Goda sweet; for all
immortal time
Be blessed thou, who roused
of yore
In melting strains--the Vedas' deeper sense,
That soul of ours, for
Him and His
For ever are--a lovely
wreath of lays,

20 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Which when He woke-- Shri Krishna sweet
From beauteous sleep on Nila's breasted slopes,

Did chain him fast in links of gold."
OM: Blessed be St. Andal.

(To be continued)



Shri Meher Baba's Tour
OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA*
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHEBELLI

The last interview this morning before luncheon was with
a Punjabi gentleman who had arrived, and had travelled a
thousand miles to meet Baba. When the aspirant gives evi-
dent sign of the sincerity in longing for the realization of
Truth, Baba at once makes Himself available. Baba was
unusually pleased to see this man. He was one of the rare
and unusual types that have been labouring their way on to
the spiritual path through years and years of strife and study.
To the man who seeks a direct way with open heart, Baba says: "To those who meet me

with open heart I will reveal myself."
The man speaks, "I am the ordinary man with mental tri-
bulations, slave of my own moods and my conflicting
desires. My unsettled mind gives me no peace. I have tried
meditation and concentration, but I have not found in it
peace. I have a wife, children, good service and a happy
home, but I am ready to resign my life and my possessions to
surrender to God. Will you guide me? My coming here
was not a sacrifice, it was the fulfilment of my longing. You are God-man. Do help me." Baba

_________________________________________________________ * Continued from March 1959 issue.

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

21

took in another life. He listens patiently to the outbreak of that
weary heart and said: "All right. You have seen many
teachers, you have read many books--now that you have
seen me, try to read me and you will realize your object.
Follow my advice. For two days, beginning tomorrow, you
shall not eat, nor drink, nor speak. After that you shall
receive certain instructions, and these you will carry out
faithfully. You will find out that by fasting, not speaking
and carrying out my instructions, you will derive the
benefit of an inner experience that you have been longing for.
There is nothing to be drawn from the outside, everything is
there--in your self already. I am in your heart. The only
thing needed is the opening of your heart, and that I will do. If
you follow my instructions implicitly, you will see the
Reality. You will see the Reality right in front of you,
and you will become convinced of its existence beyond
the shadow of doubt." Like a child the man had to repeat
every word Baba had said to him. The man ended by saying,
"I now know my Master,

through Your Grace my life will be fulfilled."
At 3 p. m. Baba gives signal to be ready for the afternoon visits. This time we are driving through the Hindu quarters, and stop at the house of a wealthy merchant, a beautiful
old home decorated with coloured stucco. In the centre of the garden stands a huge Banyan tree, the atmosphere is filled with perfume of scented herbs and the intense odour of small pink roses from which
the famous rose water is drawn. The loyal host stands at the door, putting the customary garland over Baba's head, prostrating his body flat on the ground, passing his forehead
on His holy feet. The reception is unusually solemn and silent. The host, with a few of his men friends, no woman being present, sits in a circle around the August Visitor. A servant
passes a huge silver dish, filled with dried nuts, to Baba and to all present. The breath-taking stillness is lasting for a few minutes...Baba's work is done ...He rises from His seat giving
sign to all to leave. Later when I ask Baba why that man performed a reception for Him in

22 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

such an unusual manner, Baba answers in a very general matter-of-fact way: "The man is seriously ill--I went there to help him."
Our next stop is at the little cottage of the Theosophical Society. We enter the main room which is almost barren except for the rugs and mattresses with a few cushions laid on the floor. A group of women are standing to the right end of the room, and a group of men to the left. Baba's coach is placed in the centre. The reception is very formal. A very old gentleman, with an unusually white and long beard and very white long hair falling over his shoulders, intimated to one woman to speak. A nice woman, sort of a middle class type of mother, with the independent free manners of a suffragette, and who, no doubt, was active also in the National Cause, but no doubt a sincere seeker for Truth, delivers a regular speech. Her inspired words which, unfortunately, I could not understand as spoken in Marathi, led up to the very wonderful statement which Baba made on board in English: "We must long, and long more to finally realize the

Truth--and that through living and experience--and for that I give my blessings." The Perfect Statement is deeply felt by all present, as a reverent stillness follows. Baba takes leave in simple cordial manner.
We return to the home which has become a house of worship. Baba has difficulty to find His way through the pulling and crushing crowd that is filling the garden and barring the doorway. On this day seven thousand people passed. There stands the same pleading martyr of everyday, holding high with his worship the 'vision', that through the holy meeting had become a deeper reality. But, this time, the few moments of communion allowed to them, meant farewell. He embraces them, He holds warm their hearts, He caresses their faces, He pinches their cheeks, He looks deep into their eyes. To some He hands a gift. He takes a handkerchief out of my pocket, holds it for a few seconds in His hands, and passes it on to someone. He takes a child on His lap. He makes no discourse--He gives no advice-- but loves with that love that no

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

23

man can. Baba's suffering to leave behind these helpless children is visible. Suffering is visible in His beautiful face when He takes on to Himself their burdens.
The last Feast in Communion in Love with the Great Giver, before departing, was held in His little room. Again the dear ones of the family including J.., the great loving heart, our small group and the three young women, gather for the last prayer--the Arti--in His august presence.
At 7-30 p. m. we leave the house. The crowd that followed to the station is wonderful in its demonstration of Love, in pain of separation. All are there, all those I have described and many more. When Baba departs, He only apparently leaves, as He makes Himself inwardly alive and ever present. "Shri Sadguru Meher Baba Maharaj ki jai": the echo of these words follows the train which disappears into the night.
At other stations more people arrive who have been informed hurriedly about Baba passing the station at a given hour. Baba's luminous hand reaches out of the window into

the hands of those who were to receive His blessing. We could hardly recognize any, as the station was very dimly lighted. Baba quickly disposes of His men body-guards to one side, and stretches out on the bench on the opposite side, for the night's rest, disappear-ing completely under one of the new blankets given in Nagpur, without giving any sign apparently of sleep, but really to do the work in the spheres unknown to us. By five o'clock the next morning He is up again.
The day is languorously rising in pale grey, faintly disclosing the landscape which, at that early hour, appears similar to the landscapes all over the world. I see in it the Russian Steppes, the barren curves of the melancholy hills of Assisi dry and indescribably holy, here and there some less comfortable habitation still surrounded by some wild blooming hedge. On the deserted roads we see the eternally wandering tribe of souls longing for God, marching on these holy roads that we call dusty and bumpy; but through these bumps and holes the intrepid wanderer

24 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

in search of Truth has laboured into the Indian soil since time immemorial, creating unique atmosphere of India that can in no way be compared with any atmosphere in any part of the world. I here wish to insert a touching story I read in the "Times of India". It is indeed the picture idealizing the martyrdom of the heroic pilgrim searching for God-- labouring his Golgotha through the bumpy and dusty roads of India:
There was a Hindu, no doubt, one of those who are predestined to become saints. His two grown-up sons were taken ill with a dangerous tropical disease, and were in a hospital eighty miles away from their father's home. The father in distress calls on his God who had never failed him, and offers in sacrifice to crawl on his bare knees all the way from his home to the hospital where his sons were waiting for grace. His wife and two smaller children followed, because they wanted to share in his crucial strife. Along the road in untold ordeal of physical stress, through hot days and cold nights, his wife was the first to succumb. Mid-

way the two younger children were taken ill and later died; nevertheless the man undaunted crawled on. Soon his knees began to develop a fatal disease, but even that does not weaken his courage. He stands the untold tortures to the very end. And eventually when he reached the hospital, both his sons had died.
This tragedy of a soul in search for God, because of the simplicity of its facts, is too great to need any commentary. When we told about this man to Baba, He answered: "Good --this will help the man to advance on the spiritual Path." In a few hours we will have reached the end of our nine days journey. It is 7 a. m. We arrive at the station called Manmad where the old faithful Chevrolet is waiting to drive us home. Here we separate from our merry companions, Kaka, Chanji, Raysab who have to return to Bombay by the same train. Baba, Jal, Adi and myself proceed by car to "Meherabad" to reach there not later than noon.
Along the road Baba suddenly feels hungry. We stop under a huge banyan tree: the shadow of a single leaf would

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

25

have been large enough for a bed to rest upon. A delicious luncheon prepared in Nagpur is
unpacked by Adi. After that Baba invites us all for a little siesta which does not last very
long. Baba wants to play. So He invites us all in a humorous mood to play dice, when a man
walks along--apparently very poor--burdened with old bundles. Baba sees the man and
suddenly interrupts the game ordering Adi to give him food. Adi has to unpack the baskets
which he already, and not without difficulty, had carefully packed inside the car. An
excellent luncheon of patties, cheese, bread and fruit are presented to the man with these
words: "Shri Sadguru Meher Baba is the Giver." To this the man answers in a natural
manner," It is my good fate that I should be fed by Him."
A few miles further on Baba
draws to our attention a temple and also the house nearby where Upasni Maharaj is res-
ting. Furthermore Baba explains to us that Narayan Maharaj's home is not far from
here. The fact that appears very

interesting to me is that within an area of four thousand miles,
in Central India, the five Godrealized Men are living and functioning each in His own
individual way; and that in this great spiritual drama, the overemphasized importance of the
Himalayas did have no greater part to play, as Baba Himself often remarks humorously,
than the part of the "stone". We arrive at "Meherabad". It
is noon. Baba in quick manner
disposes of all the ordinary activities that during His absence have accumulated.
The luggage is packed on the strong heads of the tiny servants waiting at the foot of
the Hill. This sweet fold untiring in devotion to serve their Master and us, their
affectionate friends, walk silently ahead.
I walk up to the Ashram on
the Hill. The gate is open. The work in Being is revealing. I pass on into the atmosphere of
life in feeling. The life in feeling in Being we here realize--" Peace that passeth
all understanding reigns in the Ashram on the Hill."

Manzil-E-Meem
BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA

Amidst more than a million citizens of Bombay, there existed, in the thick of the City, in the year 1922, a microscopic group of about two scores of peculiar people who were, at the same time, more than a million miles away from it.
Like the rest of the population, they worked and played, ate and slept, lived and prayed; but they did all that in their own particular way, in their own isolated world which was all the same comprehensive enough to embrace the rest of the world.
They included amongst themselves men grey in years and boys gay in teens, both well-educated and equally illiterate, good artists and not bad artisans, shrewd professsionals and simple students belonging to almost every caste and creed and having rich and influential backgrounds as well as poor and unknown antecedents. In short, the group compared well with the rest of the cosmopolitan inhabitants of

this westernised City in the

East.

They lived in a spacious

bungalow, with a nice big

compound as good as any other

on the Main Road in the grow-

ing suburb of Dadar. But for a

chair or two in the verandah,

every living room in the

bungalow was devoid of any

furniture. All the creature com-

fort that was there in each

room consisted of a couple of

trunks or boxes and the

beddings out of which all

quilts and mattresses had been

scrupulously removed with the

thoroughness of an excise or

customs department.

In line with the other resi-

dential quarters in the line, this

bungalow No. 167 had an usual

name-plate at the entrance with

an unusual legend painted

thereon in English, viz.,

Manzil--e--Meem

(The

Abode of M) visible to all

those who passed by it as well

as to those who saw it in

dreams and visions without

ever before having seen or

heard about it.

The inmates of the Manzil

MANZIL-E-MEEM

27

believed in all Masters, and belonged to all religions. They revered all saviours and respected all saints. They appreciated all viewpoints, but had only one point of view ever before them in everything they did, and that was to follow faithfully and implicitly the one Master amongst them whom they all called Meher Baba.
They were, therefore, as free as all the other free citizens of Bombay without any lock or chain and watch or ward, yet for all practical purposes, they were hardly free to do anything more than breathe as they liked. In almost all other respects everything had to be done at a particular time and on a particular line.
These harmless ascetics not only slept under well-tucked mosquito curtains carefully fixed on the flooring with tapes and tacks to available walls and windows, but were under the spiritual obligation to kill daily with their hands a fixed number of mosquitoes, and no nook or corner was safe enough in the premises for these tiny engines of malarial terror amidst the forty and odd formidable pairs of clapping

hands. On the stroke of nine, all
used to retire for the night to be up and about punctually at four every morning, when the bath-rooms buzzed with the splutter and screams of those not used to cold baths that all had to take daily between the fixed period of 4 and 4-45, irrespective of the season, whether it was wet or cold. The one amongst them suffering with chronic asthma was also no exception to this rule that strangely made him feel all the better for it.
The Manzil dwellers were no doubt mystics, but none of them ever dressed as faqirs and sadhus, nor went through the studies of any sadhana or chilla-kashees. There was no flirting with the sensations or tinkering up of the senses, no acrobatics in breathing nor manipulations of the body. For forty-five minutes each morning they sat in perfect silence and in one fixed position, mentally repeating a name of the Almighty, but the name and the seating posture were left to the choice and selection of the individuals concerned in accordance with the religion that each professed.

28 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

After seven o'clock every morning, they went out in the City, but moved about only according to clear-cut instructions, and had had to be indoors before seven in the evening under equally definite orders. Neither any cause nor any force was good enough to be late even by a single minute. Hours did not matter, if required to be wasted in preparing to save that one scheduled minute. While passing through the streets they had to avoid reading signboards and advertisements as all reading and writing without permission was forbidden. It was strictly restricted to absolutely necessary requirements when out on duty, and rightly censored when allowed to be indulged in indoors.
All of them used to be equally poor in possessing not more than eight pice as their own everyday, and yet sometimes they set out in search of the select from amongst the destitute and disabled to bring them to the Manzil, and bathe, feed and clothe them. If the search led to an unexpectedly long distance, they did not mind making an exhibition of themselves in borrowing the

passage-money from the very beggars to carry the poor people comfortably by tramcars.
Except when occasionally fasting completely for twentyfour hours, specially when feasting the poor, all in the group were not only in duty bound to eat to full satisfaction thrice every day, but sometimes had to go to the other extreme in over-eating as well as at times partaking of food when least inclined or desirous to eat anything. Most of them were born non-vegetarians, and many amongst them had no religious or personal objection to drink, but one and all had to keep strictly away from all meat, fish, eggs and intoxicants. This restriction was respected as much in the premises as outside it. But for this restriction they enjoyed rich meals. In order to ensure fresh and crisp bread for breakfast from one of the best bakeries in the City, it had fallen to the lot of a quadrangular cricketer amongst them to tumble out of bed at three every morning and arrive with a sack full of hot bread slung on his shoulder in time for the tea.

MANZIL-E-MEEM

29

A big black board and a little brass bell played no small part in heralding and recording the spiritual history there in the making. Except when the bell rang at certain fixed hours at regular intervals for prayers, meals and such other daily routine, it was a signal for them to rush to the board with the promptitude of a city fire-engine, and read the instructions and directions as well as messages of hope and cheer that often used to be chalked out thereon at all odd hours of the day and night. In fact one of their foremost duties was to be alert and ready to follow the ominous ring of the bell that generally spelt big news for them.
In spite of all the iron discipline and absolute despotism enjoined upon them collectively and all the rules and regulations imposed upon them individually in the interests of their physical as well as moral and spiritual well-being, they, nonetheless, enjoyed a definite freedom in the field of expression and a distinct freedom in the world of action. They were severely tested, but at the same time they were serenely trusted

Not only opinions were invited from them but the majority view was generally upheld and acted upon. They had their own little parliament which was called the gutta (a retail wine shop). It assembled occasionally in the evening after dinner, and everyone of them was equally entitled to speak, vote and give expression to his views on the subject under discussion. To avoid the gutta getting as noisy as a gutta is in its literal sense, they could speak only one at a time after obtaining permission of the "chair" squatting amongst them on the same carpet. The permission had to be sought by lifting up a hand silently without speaking a word by mouth. If more than one hand shot up at one and the same time, it was left to the presiding authority to decide the precedence.
Just as they did not live merely for the sake of living, or eat purely for the sake of eating, they often went to cinemas and theatres, but not always for the sake of amusement alone. Although they occupied the best of seats in the best of shows, they often had to be

30 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

satisfied in suddenly leaving the programmes unfinished and enjoy an incomplete enjoyment.
They played different games and enjoyed different sports every morning and evening, but all inside the premises on their own limited playground at the back of the bunglaow which was just sufficient for the necessary recreation.
But for all that they worked with a will to their utmost abilities and capabilities in not only running the premises practically without the help of any paid labour, but they also put in regular service for fixed long hours during the rest of the day in different business and public concerns belonging to themselves as well as to others, and whatever was earned and realized did not be-

long to the individual. They were sound in their
intentions and sincere in their activities, they were straight in their dealings and simple in their undertakings. Yet they were sometimes misunderstood, often misjudged and generally ridiculed by people because of the popular misconception under which life is wrongly divided in two different watertight compartments of matter and spirit. Addressing them once Baba said: "Living with me, as you are, you are considered to have discarded the whole world in spite of living in it." This is in short a gist of the collective life lead by them. It would make another story to report the individual life experienced by the different individuals in the Manzil-e-Meem.

(To be continued)


An Experience
BY HERR WALTER MERTENS (Zurich Switz)

During the last days that I was with Shri Baba at Cannes,
in the beginning of my meditation on Baba, I saw first his
different attitudes and ways of working. One moment he was
near, earnest and great; at another working, smiling or
speaking with his eyes and fingers on his blackboard. He
had not, as I generally saw him, one special attitude, but I
saw all the different aspects of his daily working.
Then I saw how things, through his internal and exter-
nal working, had been unfolded, and how all these knots of
the physical, subtle and mental planes which had been mixed
up in my mind for years into a strong net of maya without
distinct form and without beginning or end were now
directed by his gentle hands. I saw how he had worked on
me these days, gay and light as a bird or strong as an elephant,
playing or ordering, controlling or leaving me free. But now all
has become clear, simple and

definite. How could it ever have been anything else? How,
since my childhood, could all these elements have been
mixed up in my mind, bringing me and my nearest ones so
many thousands of troubles and sorrows throughout all
these years? I saw his individual and his
universal game. His work is as high as the Himalayas, as deep
as the ocean, as wide as the world of stars, or as small as
the point of a needle. Whether one sees him as conducting an
orchestra of all instruments, or as himself an instrument, or as
a flower, or as any other created thing, his conscious
spirit pervades everything. I saw Baba, Christ, Buddha as
one, and I myself was powerful with that spirit. I was quite
detached from the normal world, and, at the same time,
absolutely clear and conscious of my body, and of my position
in the room, and of my surroundings. I felt that His
personal conscious spirit (being absolutely of Baba's

32 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

special colour and at the same time Christ's and Buddha's) was One Golden Light consciously working and pervading everything in creation. And my individual spirit became one with this divine power, was one light with Baba's Light, was conscious, seeing and realizing. I had got a glimpse of his infinite state.
Then I had to 'come down' again. Slowly I had to reduce this universal feeling into the narrow confines of my normal state of mind. I was again like

a turtle in his shell, a poor little creature struggling on his way in life bound by his sanskaras, trying to under-stand, to love his fellow creatures.
But there was a great change in me; I shall never forget this experience. I had been, at the same time, a turtle and the Buddha-Christ-Baba spirit riding on the back of a turtle. I am now a 'knowing turtle' because I had a glimpse of Baba's Infinite State.



Question Baba Answers
SERIES BY ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

Question Is 'consciousness' we are
aware of in the human form, the same in all the spiritual planes? Answer
The unfoldment of consciousness in the lower evolutionary stages, mineral, vegetable and animal, is perfected in the human form. The consciousness you have now in the human form continues the same throughout all the spiritual

planes--the subtle, mental and supra-mental. There is this difference. In the lower evolutionary process culminating in the human, the consciousness at various stages differs in point of degree. It is a continuous process of unfoldment, always progressive, resulting in the full and complete consciousness of the human form. In the planes, however, the perfected consciousness of the human remains

QUESTION BABA ANSWERS

33

the same, but its scope or field of play becomes extensively extended.
For instance: you are now conscious only of the gross plane, the subtle and mental worlds you are not aware of. Likewise, one in the subtle plane has consciousness of the subtle world only, and is not conscious of the gross and the mental; also one in the mental plane has the consciousness of the mental plane only, and is not aware of the gross or the subtle; one in the seventh plane--the supra-mental, the plane of perfection--has consciousness of all the planes, the mental, the subtle, the gross.
You can thus see the consciousness of the human form obtains throughout, and the field of play varies not in degree but in depth and extensiveness. In evolution there is a definitely determinable difference in the various stages of consciousness which is an incessant and persistent state of unfoldment resulting in the all complete consciousness of the human form. In the higher planes, although this consciousness remains the same, there is

Infinite difference between the consciousness of the subtle and mental, mental and supramental. This difference is sharp and defined, as there is no point of fusion or expansion as that which exists when consciousness was unfolding. It is on this account that one in the subtle plane identifies himself with that plane and deems this consciousness to be Perfection. Similarly, one in the mental plane identifies himself with the mental plane and the consciousness hereof is considered as Perfection. It is no Perfection at all; it is an illusion, rather self-delusion.
You can now understand why one gets stuck in the plane where one is. It is extremely difficult for such an one to step into the mental plane from the subtle. It is impossible for one to go from the mental into the supra-mental unless helped by a Master.
There is as much difference between the consciousness (in extensiveness) of the sixth and seventh plane, as that between an ant and a human being. The seventh plane connotes Perfection, here one becomes consciousness itself.



Shri Meher Baba's Teaching as the Kernal of Upanishadic Wisdom
BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., PH. D.

In Upanishads, philosophy is not divorced from religion. A
story in Katha Upanishad brings out effectively how the
earlier forms of nature worship and polytheism were super-
ceded by philosophical monism. The gods had won a
victory over demons by virtue of the power which they really
derived from the Brahman; but they thought that it was their
own greatness. So the Brahman appeared before the gods in
order to free them from this illusion. The gods deputed Fire
and Wind to find out the strength of what had appeared
to them. The Brahman presented them with some straw;
but Fire could not burn it, and Wind could not blow it away.
But when Indra who knew the greatness of the Brahman
approached it, it vanished from sight. So the story posits an all-
powerful and unitary cosmic principle which is beyond the
elements or the gods. But poly-

theism is not merely negated. The element of truth in it has
been absorbed in the doctrine of the immanence of the divine
life in all creation. We thus find that the Ishavasya Upan-
ishad begins with the following assertion: "All that has life is
pervaded by the Divine Life." (Isha)
The great regard for truth, in whichever form it may be,
keeps the Upanishadic sages free from sectarian bias even at
the cost of apparent inconsistencies. Thus when Vidag-
dha, the son of Shakala, asks Yadnyavalkya, "How many
gods are there?" he says in the same breath, "Three and three
hundred; three and three thousand." He even says that
the gods might also be said to be one and a half, and cites in
this connection the example of the wind which perceptibly
increases in volume, thus becoming more than one but
remaining less

_________________________________________________________
* Continued from March 1939 issue.

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING

35

than two entities. But he explains
the position by saying that all these are Vibhuties, i. e., mani-
festations of Divinity, and affirms that God is really One. One who
realizes God transcends the manifold nature of the world.
"The Seer goes beyond duality and becomes one. This is his ulti-
mate goal."(Brihadaranyaka) As Shri Meher Baba puts it:
"God-consciousness means to be mentally, emotionally and spiri-
tually conscious of the One Self at all times and in all places."*
Shri Meher Baba does not put forth the idea of the Atman as
some bloodless category which would merely help to solve the
problems of intellectual knowledge. It is true that the ideal of a
comprehensive and unified knowledge, though it is merely intel-
lectual, requires the assump-tion of a basic unity in Reality; but the
Atman is much more than this. Shri Meher Baba has depicted it
as "the real Beloved". We find that this way of looking at reality
has a parallel in the Upanishads, where the Atman is described as
a life principal and regarded as

the Beloved. It should be wor-
shipped as the Beloved. (Brihadaranyaka)
In fact even ordinary love of wife, son, husband, wealth, ani-
mals, people, gods, etc. is in the last analysis found to be for the
sake of the Atman and not for their own sake. "Not for the sake
of the beings are beings dear, but for the sake of the Atman are beings dear." (Brihadaranyaka) In this passage the word Atman is sometimes translated as one's own self; but such selfish hedonism is
far from being consistent with the later contexts where Atman is
described as the object of search. What the sage means is that
although we may not always be conscious of the fact, our love for
another is ultimately based in our fundamental unity with the other
in the Universal Atman. The natural conclusion is that the true
object of love is the Atman and not its manifestations taken in
isolation. The forms are fleeting and elusive; but the Atman is
eternal. Just as the sounds of the drum cannot be caught but only
the drum, the forms of the Atman cannot be grasped but only the

____________________________________________________________
*Sayings

36 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Atman. Atman is, therefore, the
Supreme Beloved. The philosophical monism of the Upanishads
is not so rigid as not to allow room for bhakti or love.
The Mundak Upanishad describes the individual soul and the
universal soul as two birds sitting on the same tree; the former is
attached to the fruit of the tree, while the latter is merely a
detached observer. Caught up in the bewildering and tempting
multiplicity of the world, the individual soul goes through
many joys and sorrows. But it also has the idea of liberation however vague, and it expresses
itself as the following prayer: "Lead me from the unreal to the
Real. Lead me from darkness to Light. Lead me from death to
Immortality." (Brihadaranyaka) The life of prayer is essential.
"The Atman can be obtained only through the Atman itself which is
the object of prayer." (Katha) After attaining the Atman the
individual soul knows itself to be identical with the Universal Soul,
and acquires not only highest knowledge, but also highest bliss.
On one occasion Shri Meher

Baba has said, "If you realize
only a portion of what I call the highest Knowledge you will
experience great bliss. It will bring down heaven into your
heart."* The Upanishads state that the bliss of a realized person is
many times greater than the happiness of a man who is the
lord of others and has at his disposal all the pleasures of life.
Further, he attains to freedom from fear, for fear is rooted in
duality. "Only in Brahman is there freedom from fear." (Brih-
adaranyaka) The religion of the Upanishads
is far more rationalised and evolved than the earlier nature
worship, polytheism or the religion of rituals and sacrifices. The
Brahman is looked upon as a principle which is both immanent
and transcendent; and this truth is made a basis of a very interesting
type of intellectual and emotional mysticism. But this mysticism of
the Upanishads is in no way indifferent to the mundane aspect of
life. It goes hand in hand with active interest in the social
problems. The Upanishadic pantheism is the background of a
moral

____________________________________________________________
*The Perfect Master, p. 288

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING

37

philosophy according to which the highest type of action is in the
spirit of an offering to God. The interest in the social good is also predominant. We have for ex-
ample the following prayer in Katha Upanishad: "Let us join together, enjoy together, reinforce
our mutual strength and shine through our learning. Let us not hate each other." (Katha) The
individual is not thinking in terms of any private or selfish salvation for himself alone, but joins in a
collective prayer for social wellbeing.
We find this active interest in
the collective good of the whole mankind equally pronounced in the life and the teaching of Shri
Meher Baba. His prospectus for the Universal Ashram announces that one of its sections "will pre-
pare mystics of the practical type" and that "these mystics will inspire others to have a life in
which there will be complete detachment side by side with intense creative action". In the
same prospectus another section of the Universal Ashram is described as being meant "to be a
training ground for a band of selfless workers who will learn how

to render real and effective
service". This clearly brings out how the teaching of Shri Meher Baba is not meant to propagate
some barren form of mysticism; his teaching, like that of the Upanishads, is essentially prac-
tical and humanitarian in its effects and objective.
Thus in the teaching of Shri
Meher Baba, as in the main current of Upanishadic philosophy, the mundane and social
aspects of life receive full recognition and attention; but these aspects of life are not looked
upon as all-in-all, and are shown to be ultimately grounded in the Atman which gives to them a
deeper sanctity and meaning. The Upanishads recognize the realization of the Atman as the final
goal of life, and the search for this Ultimate Reality is varied and many-sided. The speculative ap-
proach is superceded by the moral approach; the moral approach is superceded by the psychological
approach; the psychological approach is carried on side by side by the religious approach of
Devotion or Love; and at the end of this long and varied search the individual arrives at his original

38 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

home, which is the "Truth is of truths". Shri Meher Baba and has
come to bring the world closer to this Truth which is infinite: for in

Infinity alone is there final bliss and peace, and freedom from
fear; and in Infinity alone is to be found the final destiny of human
life.



Sufi Thoughts
VERSIFICATION BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF
THE REAL SELF Once again, the tulips have blazoned hill and dale;
The singing birds have fanned my music into gale. Are they flowers or fairies, parading high and low,
Draped in garments colourful--purple, blue and yellow? The morning breeze has adorned the rose with pearly dew;
The solar rays, enhancing their beauty, brilliance anew. Beauty luxuriant and gay goes wild for self-expression;
Which better then, for you, life with nature or the urban? Dive deep into SELF and fish up the life Real;
At least be true to SELF, if not to others loyal. The Kingdom of the SELF, is love, joy and freedom;
The kingdom of the body, is greed, lust and thralldom. The treasures of the SELF, once gained fore'er stay;
The treasures of the body, like shadows, pass away. The Kingdom of the SELF, no foreigner dare rule;
Therein no Shaikh or Brahmin can claim license to fool. I've melted right away, at the words of sage Qalander;
Betrayal by mind and body follows SELF surrender.
--Iqbal.


Interview*
BY C. B. PURDOM (LONDON) (Author of "The Perfect Master)

Shri Meher Baba has been silent for the past fifteen years.
The fact that he does not speak is significant for two reasons. The
first reason is that his silence is symbolical. Baba has not come,
as he says, to teach people, because all the teaching is already
in existence. He has come to awaken people. Therefore, it is
not necessary to speak. There is no more to be said. It is to be
done. The second reason is, that by not speaking, he does not
disperse in the forms of words that essential element of the
human personality--the libido: the power of life, that power by
which we live. Life is expressed in all sorts of
ways. In the growth of our bodies, in action, in thought, and also in
words. We exhaust ourselves in talking. If you don't talk, you
store up vital and soul energy. This is a very difficult thing to do.
Baba uses this energy for his work on spiritual planes.

To come to what has to be done, concretely, it is, you have to do
something to the very next person. It is not some tremendous
plan to be thought out and executed, but very simple thing to a
simple person. Do always the very first thing to the next person,
and keep on doing it and the world would be transformed. This
is not a new idea, but as old as human wisdom. That is putting it
very simply; but constructively, the thing that has to be done is to
realize one's self, to be yourself exactly as you are. That is the last
thing we dare to be; we are all sorts of beings that we imagine
ourselves to be, or that wish others to think we are; but our
real selves--we dare not be ourselves. The meaning of it is that
we should do precisely what we like, which is to be what Baba
wants us to be. But this is not easy, though we wish for nothing
better. When you realize that this is the meaning of life--that you
should do as you

____________________________________________________________ *Notes of a talk given to a group in London.

40 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

like--you usually make this terrible discovery (and here life
begins for many) that when you come to face the possibility that
you can do just as you like, you discover that there is nothing you
want to do. So you do nothing; and this everybody discovers.
The "Self" which Baba has come to awaken is that hidden Self, the Self which we don't realize, which lies dormant,
because this little "I"-self is active which we call ourselves.
All the things we do, the whole of our existence, is a sort of
panorama. It is our own play which we compose, produce and
perform in. Our life in the terms of the world is really no more
than a play. When we begin to look at our own selves so, we
begin to live. Nothing that happens in the life of senses has any
more reality than a play. We have to observe ourselves as spectators
at a play, and not until then do we live according to the spirit and in accordance with Baba's sayings.
Baba's method is simple, so simple that people often don't understand it. When people come
to Baba he says very little. He

will say that he likes you, or that he loves you, or that he is with
you; and he always says: "Don't worry." He never asks any
questions, and if you say nothing to him no more is said. It does not
go beyond that. I know myself that when I have had questions on
my mind, I have never asked them--I have found that it is not
necessary. As soon as you sit down with him you realize it is
not necessary. If you ask him what you should do--and I have
done so--he will answer your question, and he expects you to
carry out what he says. Once I said, "Tell me something to do,"
and he gave me something very simple to do. Twelve months after
he said: "Did I tell you to do something when I saw you last ?"
I said, "Yes, but it is peculiar that I frequently forgot to do it." Baba
frowned and said: "You must do it." When he tells you to do some-
thing, you must do it, especially if you ask him. It is much better not
to ask him. It is very dangerous to ask him for instruction and not to
follow it. In fact, it is very dangerous to meet one like Baba
unless you are prepared to open yourself up to him.

INTERVIEW

41

The effect he has is to drive you still further in the direction of
false life, because until we are living according to the spirit, we
live in the flesh. To meet Baba is to increase the pace of your life in
one direction or the other--it may be to destruction, because the
meaning of the world is death, so that Baba is a very dangerous
person, even to know about, and certainly to be in contact with.
However meaningless may seem what he says to you, you must do
it. And so, unless you are prepared to do what he says, I advise
you not to ask him anything. He says "don't worry" always, to
everyone. If we could stop worrying, our lives would be
entirely different. The difficulty is that we don't trust. We haven't confidence, we don't believe, and all our troubles come from that.
Another question that is often discussed is miracles and mira-
culous events. Of course, Indians write about numerous things that
he has done or is supposed to have done. It is not that miracles don't happen, but that they don't matter. Miracles happen in the
world of mechanics. Miracles,

therefore, from a spiritual point of view, signify nothing whatever,
and if I saw a series of miraculous things in connection with Baba, I
should feel immediately that there was something wrong. A miracle
is a miracle from the standpoint of the world--and that does not
matter. There are miracles in the spiritual world. Ah! that is a
different matter. The miracle in the spiritual world is to be
yourself, and that is the greatest miracle--to be yourself, and only
those people who get above the earth--above the terms of the
world--only those people experience this. So the fact that Baba
does no miracles in the physical sense is the greatest possible
proof of his spiritual being. What he does in secret is his own affair.
It is dangerous to become his disciple, and it is dangerous to
leave him. Yet when you have become a disciple, he will do
everything to make you leave him. He will hold you, but he will
throw you off, if you will let him. Baba wants you to discard him, if
you can. He will do everything to make it hard for you to stay. If
you can be thrown off, you will be thrown off. So, if you read of

42 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

people who once were disciples
and are not now, that is inevitable. Spirit is not inactivity and letting things remain as they are. The essence of Spirit is intense
activity. It is matter that is not active. When you come into contact with Baba, you are coming into contact with tremendous
activity. Part of that activity is to force everything away from itself. But Baba's effort to throw the disciple off is not merely as a test
of his value, it is actually for his supreme good. There is a moment of ripeness. When you are thrown off, in the ripe moment you stand
on the same level as he stands. The whole object of Baba is that you should stand on the same level as he, possessing the same
activity, the same spiritual consciousness, and it is at that moment that the final throw-off takes place.
Otherwise you are thrown off but come back again, and Baba throws you off again and again. But once you become a disciple of Baba's, you must not allow anything to throw you off; however confusing things may become, you must hold on tight.
Not until you are ripe will you be thrown off with gladness. Your

heart pulsates with joy and you
get more and more insight. But you will know the ripe moment.
Finally let me say this, "What have I to do?" Acting on his instruction "don't worry", "I am with you", I suggest this: hope for
the best, the very best that we can do, that we can think of in our best moments, that we can hope
for. We shall get it, for we already have it. In other words, there is not anything in your most
inspired moments which you have not got. All your desires and finest feelings are realized. That
is the meaning of Baba. We have to wake up so that,
instead of finding that we are
wretched characters, we discover that we are divine spirits, having all things, and that, instead of
going about grumbling, we should be rejoicing always, for everything is ours.
That is what I understand the meaning of Baba to be, his announcement of the spiritual
life, not something remote but something immediate, something we have at once, without waiting.
This is so good, that it cannot be true; but the truth is that the very best is true.



Impressions
BY WILL BACKETT (London)

I first heard of Shri Meher
Baba through a chance glance at a copy of "The London Forum" in
the reading room of a Society in London which I happened to be
visiting. This impressed my wife and me so much that we decided
to get into touch with the writer to judge of the extent of his exper-
ience while with Baba. We then determined to meet the Master,
but to guard ourselves from any psychic or hypnotic influence. All
doubts vanished before Baba's pure ineffable radiance, when that
great opportunity arrived, and on looking back we still realize the
wonder of Baba's presence then. I sat quietly holding His hand. He
smiled. The pure radiant Love Divine enfolded my sole being. I
kissed His hand as I rose to go, and then turned again on the way
to the door, to give an Indian salute. Perhaps I did it badly, but
Baba smiled again in His beautiful way as an old old friend.
Awkward and self-conscious one may be in such a Presence for the

first time, that smile put me at
perfect ease. We knew we had met our Master and that a new
life had opened. During the following years, I
had many opportunities of meeting Baba and writing to Him and
also receiving letters from Him in connection with the work He
gave me to do at the London office. Though He was not
present, I would hear His voice speaking to me in tones more
wonderful than any sound I had heard, though I have never heard
His natural voice in this incarnation. On waking from sleep, I
would even feel His physical presence, closer t o me than my
own. Once in particular, I remember, whilst taking a bath, that I
saw His form like a cameo in the distance as if looking through the
"wrong end" of a telescope, and with that came the realization that
the leg I was bathing was actually His and not mine at all. These
psychic experiences brought a great realiza-

44 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

tion of His nearness, and, I now
realize, were in a sense prophetic of the time when by His Grace
the union would be established outwardly as well as within.
Even in the public streets Baba's presence and power would
manifest above the physical conditions of crowded London. After our first visit at Kitty Davy's house, we were mounting the
steps of Charing Cross Station, when one of three out-door ex-
periences occurred to illustrate Baba's constant presence and
power. We passed a railway porter on
the steps approaching Charing Cross Station--just one of the
crowd, but very tall and with his face seared with marks of de-
bauchery. I happened to catch sight of him, and, at that very
moment, his face changed, and for the moment it became the face
of Baba. About two years afterwards, I
passed another man in the street of Leicester Square. He came
upon me suddenly, just in time for me to see that his face was full
of the signs of a loathsome disease, and his eyes filled with

the blackness of despair. It gave
me such a shock that I walked on as if stunned, and then, as if a
wave passed through me without any effort of my own, a great
sense of love flowed out from me to him and through him to all
humanity. It was not just ordinary love for an unfortunate person,
but the love that Baba had given me Himself, the Divine Love
pouring itself out without any effort on my part.
On the third occasion I was watching the crowd disperse after
the Lord Mayor's Show at Northumberland Avenue. As they filled
the roadway where the procession had passed, it seemed as if the
mass of people became each separately connected with me by
an invisible cord from me to each person surging in the great open
space, so that I was connected with all and yet with each one
separately. Now that with which I was connected in each person was
Baba Himself. The office gave opportunity for
successive interviews with many people, sometimes over a period
of more than twelve months and at frequent intervals, so that one
could see

IMPRESSIONS

45

clearly the effect of Baba's Love on the character and consciousness of people, young and old, who came to speak of their troubles and t o whom one could silently pour out His Love and sometimes speak of His Presence, Power and Love. A full record of these would fill volumes.
Some were not without humour, as for example, where members of the same family were concerned, and one inter-view would cease a few minutes before the second called, with-out knowing of the visit of the first one; had they met, complications would have ensued as neither knew that the other was in touch with Baba's office, o n the same subject which interested them both.
Many times He would give guidance through dreams, appearing in person and even in sleep, to give a message to the one who was seeking His help in daily life. They were obviously real experiences as they would record some of Baba's characteristic remarks and actions in ordinary life, such as "Don't worry, I will help you." He would stroke the arm of such a person in a dream, or appear to them, so

that they could observe the char-
acteristics of His face, hands and fingers on waking, and remember them, although they may not have
met Him in real life. One youthful and obstinate
seeker whose visits were spread
over a long period was very argumentative, and although the arguments put forward were de-
feated, that was not sufficient to alter the conduct which was so much against the party's own
interests. As in daily life one could watch Baba's working out for this person allowing the
difficulties to become more acute, until a serious crisis occurred which pulled up this obstinate
seeker when he came into conflict with some of the authorities on the material plane. Even here
Baba manifested His power and guidance in the law courts where the case was tried. And to the
surprise of all concerned, justice was tempered with mercy in the verdict which proved the turning
point in the career of the one who actually became a definite disciple of Baba's through all these
events, before meeting Him.

(To be continued)


Hazrat Baba Tajuddin of Nagpur
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

After God-realization according to Sufis, some saints are endowed with Shane-Nabuwwat (potentiality of Prophethood) and others possess only ShaneWilayat (potentiality of sainthood). The former class of saints owe a duty towards the world and are the real saviours of mankind. They are known as Kutubs or Sadgurus. The latter, though perfect in the enjoyment of Godrealization, have no duty to perform towards humanity. Their bodily presence, however, is a source of divine light and blessing which automatically affects and benefits the whole creation.
The Qutubs or Sadgurus who are the leading lights of the whole hierarchy of saints, are always five in number, and they are referred to by the Sufis as Panjatan (the five bodies), although the laity restrict the usage of the term Panjatan to the Arabian Prophet and his immediate successsors. One amongst these five perfect ones belonging to the first quarter of the present century was

Hazrat BabaTajuddin of Nagpur
whose life sketch is given in the following pages.
Hazrat Baba Tajuddin was the
only child of his parents, born on 27th January 1861 at Kamptee, Central Provinces. At birth he
was silent, practically dead, not showing any signs of life. In order to rouse him to life he was
branded by fire, on the forehead and temples. This silent entry into the world was quite in contrast
with the noise Tajuddin later created therein by the high quality of his saintliness and the quantity
of his miracles. The parents of Baba Tajuddin
originally belonged to the Madras
Presidency, and both the mother and the father were of military extraction. The father--Mahomed
Badruddin--held the military rank of Subedar in the Madras regiment and this military service
brought about a change of abode of the family when the Madras regiment was transferred to

HAZRAT BABA TAJUDDIN OF NAGPUR

47

the British military camp at

Kamptee, and it is here that

Tajuddin first saw the light of

day.

Strange as it may seem, the

inscrutable hand of Providence

seldom allows the parents, wife or

children of Perfect Masters to live

contemporaneously with them or

outlive their spiritual manifes-

tation on earth. Explore the myth-

ology of any religion, and it will

be found that the majority of

Perfect Masters were celibates

and the few that were married left

no progeny behind, except such

ones that enhanced the spiritual

reputation of the parents. The

obvious explanation for this

enigmatic position is that, for

perfection connoting the acme of

renunciation and non-attachment

(Tarko-Tajarrud), even the most

noble and chaste feeling of filial

duty and parental love is an

encumbrance. Hence the divine

arrangement--the

automatic

clearance of the way for the

smooth working of the spiritual

mission one is endowed with.

Baba Tajuddin's case, too, is not

dissimilar. He became an orphan

at a very early age, the father

having died at the age of one and

the mother while he was nine. Even while at school Tajuddin
evinced unmistakable signs of his future spiritual greatness, and the seers of the age could not but
remark about it. Once, the much revered saint of the place, Hazrat Abdulla Shah (whose shrine is at
Kamptee) happened to visit the school which Tajuddin used to attend. The Saint, on seeing
Tajuddin who was six years of age at the time, re-marked, "This boy needs no education; he is
already an Arif (possessed of divine gnosis)." Tajuddin's secular education, however,
continued up to the age of 15 years during which period he became fairly conversant with
Arabic, Persian, Urdu and a little of English.
Like his forebears Tajuddin
also took to a military career, and at the age of 18 years joined the 8th Madras Regiment as a sepoy.
This Regiment was for a time posted to Saugor which place will ever remain associated with the
turning point in his career, ushering in a new era of spiritual bliss and knowledge. One night, while
on guard duty, Tajuddin heard a voice calling

48 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

him by his name. Although it was
past midnight, the eerie stillness of the atmosphere and the inky darkness of the night did not scare
him. He became curious and began to investigate. The more he followed the direction of the
voice, the more it seemed to recede. After a good long trudge in the jungle led by the voice, he
suddenly came upon a small habitation occupied by a venerable looking old man who seemed
to be the only living being in that forlorn and deserted part of the jungle. This old man was none
else but the Saint known as Hazrat Dawood Chisti who, without raising his head, asked
Tajuddin to get a cup of tea. Nothing daunted, he retraced his steps and managed to get the
beverage demanded. When the tea was offered, the Saint sipped it a little and again handed it back
ordering Tajuddin to drink away the remnant. No sooner he did this, the least expected happen-
ed--the greatest miracle that a saint can perform in the life of a human being was achieved--
Tajuddin became God-realized. The suddenness of the spiri-

tual experience left Tajuddin
dazed and stupified. To the world he did not seem to be normal, and the suspicion that he was ment-
ally unhinged grew into conviction when he left the military service for no apparent reason. Tajuddin's grandmother had arranged for a suitable match for him, but the marriage proposition
had to be given up, as being not possible under the circumstances. Everyone around Tajuddin took
him for mad, and no suspicion of his spiritual state ever dawned upon them. The grandmother took
charge of him and brought him down from Saugor to Kamptee for medical treatment. All
indigenous and foreign methods of treatment were tried upon him, but to no purpose. Tajuddin's so-
called madness continued just the same. In time the grandmother also passed away, leaving
Tajuddin alone, uncared for and unattended in this mad frame of mind. Not one from amongst the
relatives was near him at the time, as they all left him to himself finding the malady incurable.
Tajuddin thus passed 4 years at Kamptee suffering great pains,

HAZRAT BABA TAJUDDIN OF NAGPUR

49

privations and hardships. At this stage one maternal
uncle of Tajuddin took pity on him and had him brought over to Chanda where he (uncle) was in
service. Here too the best of medical treatment was given, but to no avail. Finding his condition
hopelessly incurable, the uncle sent Tajuddin back to Kamptee to breathe away his days as best as
he could. On his return to Kamptee
Tajuddin underwent the severest
of ordeals, mental and physical, for nearly two years. He used to pass a good deal of his time in
ravines and valleys indulging in the severest of austerities. It is during this period of self-imposed
asceticism at Kamptee, that the world was accorded the first glimpses as to the real state of
things behind the apparent madness of Tajuddin. Many miraculous incidents happening at this
time dispelled all doubts; and the jeers and the sneers of the people turned into respect and reverence
for his spiritual state. The children of the place,
however, continued pestering him
and pelted him with stones taking him to be a mad man.

But Tajuddin never showed any resentment nor scolded them. On
the contrary he seemed to enjoy the situation by going to the length of collecting the stones
thrown at him into small heaps and piles.
A belief is current in the East
and round which beautiful gems of poetry have been sung by the Sufi poets that the sure sign of
divine madness having reached the summit of its achievement is, when the head becomes the target
for the stones of children. Accept this or reject, Tajuddin surely fulfilled this condition. It is
common knowledge with everyone that children only dare to be mischievous towards a mad
person when they find that the will or power to retaliate is not there. And what better form of
divine blandishment and coquetry would the God-mad (who see their own Self as the self in all)
enjoy than being stoned by the children?
The last four years of Baba Tajuddin's stay at Kamptee are full of miraculous incidents of his spiritual career, and naturally
people began to crowd upon him. Not relishing this worldly gathering which

50 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

somehow he felt was premature
or was interfering with his spiritual work, Tajuddin one day declared to the people around him
that he would very shortly be going to a lunatic asylum. True to his words the next day he
indulged in a strangely unsophisticated spree which succeeded in landing him behind the four walls
of a mad house at Nagpur. The trick that he played was that he walked in a nude condition
straight on to the tennis court of an English club where some ladies were playing tennis. They
immediately got him arrested by the cantonment police, and the local authorities concerned, tak-
ing into consideration his previous abnormal life and living, certified him for admission to an
asylum for lunatics. Thus Baba Tajuddin passed 18 years in the Government lunatic asylum at
Nagpur, and this phase of his spiritual manifestation is replete with happenings of a miraculous
nature. These incidents are very intelligently and faithfully recorded by Dr. Abdul Majid Khan who
was in charge of the asylum for a greater period of Tajuddin's incarceration there.

In the asylum itself Tajuddin
very willingly conformed to the discipline and the rules of the institution, and even when the
officials, becoming aware of his spiritual state, were inclined to giving him a preferential treat-
ment, he would insist on being treated like any one of the other inmates of the place. Manual and
physical labour he would perform along with the other mad people, but the super-natural
phenomenon that was very often witnessed by the officials of the asylum left them dumb-founded.
It is said that while carrying a load of material on the head, Tajuddin's load, unlike others,
seemed to be resting not on his head, but it would hang a few inches above it in the air. The
mad inmates also would be very docile in his presence and would even reverence him. Once a mad
man while out at work absconded and was found missing at the time of the evening roll call. Dr. Abdul
Majid Khan who was in charge of the institution felt very much perturbed and worried. He
approached Baba Tajuddin and related the matter to him who asked him not to worry, as

HAZRAT BABA TAJUDDIN OF NAGPUR

51

the man would return. Surprisingly enough the next morning
the renegade was seen at the gates of the asylum asking to be admitted. When asked as to where
he had gone, he said that he had been to his native place, and when further questioned as to
why he had returned of his own accord, he replied that Tajuddin met him and gave him two slaps
reprimanding him to return immediately.
News of such miraculous hap-
penings reached the outside world, and people from far and near began to pour into the
asylum clamouring for Baba Tajuddin's darshan. The jail authorities were hard put to it to
manage the situation which was daily growing unwieldy. In order to check and curtail the crowd of
daily visitors, Government even went to the length of levying a nominal charge for admission, but
still the number of visitors continued unabated.
One of the most notable visi-
tors to Baba Tajuddin in the asylum was Bi-Amma who needs mention here, as without it this
life sketch would be incomplete. From her childhood she develop-

ed mystical tendencies and was wholly given to very pious and
meditative pursuits which her loving father, himself an unpretentious mystic, helped in foster-
ing and developing. Ultimately it was Hazrat Dawood Shah Chisti, the Murshid (Master) of Baba
Tajuddin, who ordered her to visit the latter in the asylum, and which she did. No sooner Baba
Tajuddin saw her, he flared up and threw a piece of stone at her shattering all the bangles she
wore. After this concrete demonstration signifying the annihilation of all her worldly ties,
Tajuddin addressed her thus: "I have been waiting for you these twelve years and you have come
at last." Bi-Amma continued paying visits to Baba Tajuddin in the asylum and even after his
release from the place. Nothing would so easily succeed in putting Tajuddin into a child-like
happy mood than the presence of Bi-Amma. In matters of food and drink which others had failed in
coaxing him to accept, Bi-Amma would invariably succeed. It was to her only that Tajuddin one day
divulged the name of his PiroMurshid

52 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

(Master), viz., Hazrat Dawood
Shah Chisti which fact the world at large till then never knew anything about.
In spite of Bi-Amma's early life of piety and self-denial, Baba Tajuddin exacted from her the
full prize in the form of suffering prior to teaching her the name of God. She was made to go through
the severest of ordeals in spite of her sex, by being ordered to live in solitude all alone for a number
of years in the densest part of a jungle infested with wild animals. Unflinchingly she went through
all these trials and eventually succeeded in inducing the divine grace of the Master--Baba Tajud-
din. Without detracting from Bi-
Amma's spiritual greatness and
accepting in toto the truism that nothing goes to the undeserving, still one is constrained to say that a Perfect Master's vigilant guidance makes anything and everything possible and easy for the
aspirant, provided the will-to-be obedient and submissive is there. No sooner a disciple luckily
comes in the selection grade, the divine wisdom of the Master lays down the tests and sees to it that

the disciple passes them suc-
cessfully. Some would stretch the point still further and say that even the will to surrender and
submit is a gift from the Master, and who can say it is not so? The fact is that the eligibility of the
disciple and the grace of the Master are compatibles and cannot long resist each other. As
such Bi-Amma became Godrealized, and to this day one cannot speak of Baba Tajuddin
without remembering her. Many miracles are attributed to her, and her shrine at Waki attracts thou-
sands of visitors and pilgrims every year.
The spiritual fame of Baba
Tajuddin was daily spreading far and wide, and with it the number of visitors to the asylum also
increased considerably. Finding the regulations and restrictions of the place entailing a lot of
inconvenience to the visitors, the great admirer of Tajuddin, Raja Raghujirao of Nagpur, appealed
to the Government for his release. The Government agreed to the proposition provided a security of
two thousand rupees was furnished on his behalf. Raja Raghujirao

HAZRAT BABA TAJUDDIN OF NAGPUR

53

willingly gave the security for the requisite amount, and thus Baba Tajuddin's self-invited incarceration of 18 years in the lunatic asylum came to an end in the year
1907. The question must have auto-
matically suggested itself to some
of the readers as to why a Perfect Master like Baba Tajuddin suffered the hardships and dis-
comforts of a lunatic asylum even after God-realization. This is a very interesting point which
needs explanation, as it has given rise under similar circumstances to a good deal of misunder-
standing, and it has led even enlightened people into misinterpreting and ignoring per-
fection when confronted with it. According to Sufis the saints
fall into two distinct catagories,
viz., Kasbi (men-God) and Wahbi (God-men). The former, by their self-exertion, raise themselves to
the state of Godhood, and the latter are born saints--the sure medium for the manifestation of
Divinity in their lifetime. The majority of saints belong to the Kasbi class, and their asceticism
(Fagah) is the means of their spiritual exaltation. This self-

exertion is termed Mujahida which invariably precedes real-
ization. The self-denial (Eesar) of the Wahbi class of saints, whose number is very limited, is meant
for the spiritual uplift of others, which duty is divinely ordained and follows God-realization. This
legacy of self-realization the Sufis term a s Shahadat (crucifixion) and connotes real Faqiri (perfection). Baba Tajuddin's asylum phase, therefore, becomes pregnant with meaning when inter-
preted in the light of the above explanation, and surely the much misunderstood silence of Hazrat
Meher Baba extending into fourteen years now is of a piece with the above.
After his release from the asylum, Baba Tajuddin was removed to the palatial quarters
of Raja Raghujirao at Shakerdara, but he refused to stay there. Although Baba Tajuddin very
much appreciated the concern of the Raja on his account, he preferred to roam about free in
the jungles of Waki all by himself.
After some time Baba Tajuddin
settled down permanently at Waki, a suburb of Nagpur,

54 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

and in due course a small colony grew up there which he named as 'Chhota Nagpur'. This Waki phase really inaugurates the public manifestation of Baba Tajuddin's spiritual mission in life which lasted for nearly eighteen years till his death in the year 1925.
As is usual with such spiritual geniuses, Baba Tajuddin evolved his own peculiar and whimsical ways and means of spiritual dispensation for those approaching him for relief and advice. A few departments and institutions that sprung up around his residence and to which he gave suggestive names significant of the spiritual work enacted there are worth mentioning here:
1 To the west about two furlongs from Baba Tajuddin's seat was a place called 'Hospital' where healing was undertaken. People suffering from physical diseases were asked to attend there.
2 Nearly in the same direction is a mango-tree which was styled as the 'School'. Those desiring success in examinations and educational pursuits were required to report themselves there.

3 Another place in the vicinity
was known as the 'Court of Justice', where questions of worldly life such as finance,
business dealings, breach of law, etc., were dealt with.
4 Spiritual aspirants were
usually granted interviews in the 'Mosque' situated within the precincts of Baba Tajuddin's resi-
dential area. 5 To the north is an open piece
of ground called the 'Parade
Ground', where Baba Tajuddin used to order some visitors to perform drill which had a spiri-
tual significance. This exercise was meant to train people to fight the battle of life and also to
enable them to overcome obstacles standing in the way of their material and spiritual progress.
These are some of the ways and means whereby Baba Tajuddin imparted spiritual and mat-
erial relief to mankind, and, if at all, anything they only substantiate and emphasize the plea that
the spiritual modus operandi of the Perfect Ones is inscrutable even as the lila (divine sport) of
the God they have attained is unfathomable. To really understand them is to become one

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

55

like them.
The physical existence of Baba Tajuddin came to an end on the 17th of August 1925, and even
the elementary world mourned the loss of this spiritual giant of the time. Even such a cynical
paper as "The Times of India", Bombay, could not but take notice of the news that the stone
deity in the household of Raja Raghujirao was seen to shed tears

at the time of Baba Tajuddin's
death. Hazrat Meher Baba is indi-
rectly connected with Baba
Tajuddin, and has physically met him once in his lifetime at Nagpur during his wanderings immed-
iately after attaining realization from Hazrat Babajan.
The miracles of Hazrat Baba
Tajuddin shall form the subject matter of another article later



NOTES FROM MY DIARY
F. H. DADACHANJI

THE MASTER'S SPECIAL WORK IN AJMER
It was from Delhi that the trend of our tour was altered and assumed a different aspect. The Master's mission in life, as he has himself repeatedly declared, is the spiritual upliftment of humanity. Hence all his work, movements, visits, etc. to different places under-taken with whatever external or apparent motives, have

always a spiritual aim and background. Whatever opportunities
his intimate group had in seeing planes of interest during this tour since November last, they all
knew that a different internal object was behind each of these moves in company with Baba.
But in Delhi, the Master's specific object of this tour was more clearly understood when he
explained that instead of going

56 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

North--towards Sind, Punjab and Kashmir as intended--he had decided to go South to a place
where he had important spiritual work, in fact the most important work in this period of his activi-
ties in which he also wanted to have some of the members of the group actively to participate. Any
hopes which he had himself created and engendered in the group accompanying of visiting
Kashmir--the accredited "Paradise on Earth"--was for the time being abandoned.
Baba has always said that he goes wherever there is the greatest need. The Master's selection
for this particular nature of work that he wanted to do fell on Ajmer, the most important city in
Rajputana and a place of historical importance due to its connection with the great king and
warrior Prithviraj Chowhan who for some time had removed his capital here from Delhi. Besides,
it was the seat and centre of one of the most renowned saints of India, the Khwaja Moenuddin
Chisti. Hundreds of thousands of his devotees and even others from all over India visit this place
during the anniversary of the

Khwaja and also throughout the year. The religious significance of the Khwaja's, nazar (tomb), espe-
cially for the Mohamedans, is very great, as this revered Saint who lived here and lies buried
here holds a very high distinction spiritually, and is venerated alike by Hindus, Mohamedans and
even by other communities in India. So great was the importance of pilgrimage to this place
amongst the Mohamedans, that the great Mogul Emperor Shah Jehan had his devout mother's
desire fulfilled, by having his time of arrival at Ajmer and of prostration before the great living
Saint announced in Delhi in a unique manner. The Emperor had small minarets erected at every
mile all the way from Delhi to Ajmer a distance of about 200 miles--and on each of these
minarets, he had special beaters of drums installed who passed on the message from one to another
by the sound of the drums thereby announcing that the emperor had arrived in Ajmer and had
prostrated before the great Saint. Thus it was made possible for the queen-mother to join with her
son, at the

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

57

same time in paying her reverential homage to the great Saint.
Lacs of pilgrims still come today to the sacred tomb to pay their respects to Khwaja Moenuddin. Thousands of others come to Ajmer for sight-seeing--Pushkar, Anna Sagar Lake, the red temple of the Jains, the "Arhai din ki Zhopri" (or the mosque supposed to have been miraculously built in two days and a half) for the saint who is buried there, and the Tara Garha. However, hardly any will have come to seek, amongst the poor, decrepit, spiritually-dazed souls, loitering in these surroundings near the seat of the Khwaja some lovers of Divinity, who, through their intense love and longing for union with the Divine Beloved, are dazed by a flash of Divine Light and have lost themselves on the Path without a Guru to guide them, are oblivious to the outer world and indifferent to their own bodily needs, and as such are taken for mad by a world ignorant of their true condition.
One of Baba's special tasks seems to be the finding of these spiritually-advanced but dazed

souls, and through his per-sonal sahavas and touch, help them
onward in the Path, as well as restore their normal consciousness. This particular phase of his
work, as we know, commenced since the establishment of the special Ashram for the God-mad
at Rahuri in 1936, and continues unbroken till this day. Mahomed, the principal inmate of this Ash-
ram of the God-mad since its beginning, seems to be the connecting link, and is almost always
kept near the Master, even taken to the West, and during the present long tour round India, being
washed and fed personally by the Master, every day. But Baba's work with and through others of
this type during the present tour commenced in Delhi where the first was brought, washed and fed
by him, and from there, Baba seems to have restarted this phase of his work actively again.
For a long stay with a big party of about 30 touring with Baba, also to collect a number of these
God-mad and keep some of them with him, give them bath and food and his personal touch daily,
a big bungalow to accommodate all, in

58 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

a quiet, secluded locality where
he could work undisturbed, is essential. To have one suited for the important work contemplated
would not ordinarily be easy to secure, immediately. But where he wills it everything is possible;
and an ideal bungalow in an ideally suitable locality is found and hired surprisingly within a
few hours. I refer to this to present a vivid contrast between conditions of work when Baba
wills, and otherwise when he leaves things to take their natural course, as experienced during
work under him. Hyderabad, Benares, Agra, Delhi in this respect actually presented and
became problems, and days of hard labour and search throughout these cities for available places of
residence would bring us nowhere until eventually Baba and party would actually be on the spot or
very near, and shove in quarters where it would take time to adjust themselves and which we would
leave just when we feel a bit settled. In short, wherever Baba had just a short stay for his
internal work, incidentally giving the group an opportunity of a little sight-seeing, difficulties of

all sorts presented themselves
during the preliminary search for residential quarters, and everywhere the party had to put up
with some sort of inconvenience due to delays in making these arrangements. But where Baba
wants to work on the gross plane, it is a mere question of the Divine Will. All the imminent difficulties
seem to disappear, the person deputed on duty is internally directed to step into just the right
place, it seems ideal, is easily available, the party concerned (owner or manager) is readily
found, terms are favourable and all the arrangements are made, even coping with a thousand and
one details of peculiar requirements of a party like ours, in a surprisingly short time. To put it
in a nutshell, instead of ourselves trying to find things, things come to us automatically one after the
other. It is one of the most wonderful experiences the Master's disciples have in
working under his directions. In Ajmer, all are enthusiastic
and look forward for some
surprise in this work of Baba's, and they truly had one of the most unusual treats in

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

59

life during their month of stay and work in this new undertaking in
Ajmer. It forms a special chapter in itself, details of which will be given in our next issues from different angles as observed by
different persons. Some striking traits of these masts (God-mad) brought over and treated here, their strangely amusing talks and
murmurs with Baba, like seeming prattle of innocent babes, will provide very interesting reading. Besides it will give our readers an
idea of Baba's work even on this material plane with these peculiar beings: how in their dimly visible perception of things above the
normal and imperceptible to ordinary vision, they see and inwardly recognise the Master (Baba), although faintly, and
allude or refer to these strange experiences and things they see, in a language that is significantly mystical.
The importance of this particular work could be judged from the facts that Baba literally cut himself off to the outside world
during this period, keeping himself entirely occupied with these masts to the exclusion of all else.

In order to avoid all external disturbances, not only from visitors
but also from members of his own group coming from other places, he kept his visit and stay at Ajmer
strictly private and unknown to anyone except those staying with him. And although his contact
with the outside world continued through correspondence, telegrams and cables, etc., these were
also diverted to and from a distant place--about 85 miles away from Ajmer, which would hardly give
clue to anyone about Baba being in Ajmer. None of course knew in Ajmer who Baba was, as also his
party, our identity being kept absolutely undisclosed, and information when necessary was given
out that it was a touring party. Nor did his own mandali know of this at Meherabad, his principal
and original centre, from where all correspondence for Baba and party is redirected to wherever we
are. All mail, wires and cables for the entire party were instructed to be redirected care Station Master,
Marwar Junction, from where these were received and sent out. A member of the party

60 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

was specially deputed for this duty to travel between Ajmer and Marwar every alternate day. This might seem so strange, and it did, but it had to be done. Else there was always a risk of any of his devotees or disciples from other places running up to him, if the place of Baba's residence were known, for darshana, advice and guidance which they all seek from him in all the multifarious problems of life. But at certain times, when the Master wants to do certain important work, undisturbed, he has to keep himself aloof and away and unknown, or has to issue any special instructions forbidding to come to him, for certain periods. This does NOT mean and should not be misunderstood that the Master neglects those who depend on him and need his advice or guidance. His real contact and help is more internal than external. Has he not said that, "Things which are real and lasting are given and taken in silence!" Thus does he help all internally, irrespective of time or space, whenever his help is truly needed. No voice is left unheard with Masters of Perfection who control

the universe internally as well as externally. It is a different mode or method of working that they adopt according to time and circumstances. His dear loving children, especially those who call for his help in their hours of need, cannot be left unheeded. So during Baba's special work at Ajmer with these masts, although he literally kept himself out of all external touch and contact with the outside world, he did this work internally, giving the desired guidance and help wherever needed, as was experienced by so many of his devotees and even others who talked of it later to him and to other members of his mandali.
BABA'S BIRTHDAY
This time, Baba was in the midst of his activities with the God-mad at Ajmer, on his 45th Birthday. It was his own wish that this year there will be no celebration.
It was rather desired and decreed by Baba to be a day of great work that he wished to do. He ordered a specific number of the masts (20) to be brought to him from all around the city, whom he would personally wash and

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

61

feed during this day, and only after finishing work with all these
would he partake of food himself. To collect and bring this required, number took hours for the
mandali whose hard labours could not be left unnoticed. It is easy to find and, feed any number
of vagrants rambling around in streets in India, particularly in the surroundings of the Khwaja's
mosque in Ajmer, but it is very difficult to get hold of masts, to induce them to leave their places
where they have stayed for long years, since they avoid any outer disturbance to their spiritual
ecstasy. They are sensitive to change, lose their moods and sometimes even become enraged,
and if not tackled very tactfully, mildly and lovingly, it may lead to a row in public in their
surroundings where they are so revered. This would spoil the work intended. It needs rather a
special technique of this particular type of work in which the Master's mandali have become
adepts, particularly K.. who might be said to be an expert in this task of bringing the masts after hours
of patient and loving persuassions

in various manners according to their different natures and types.
People who knew these holy men and actually revered them as Valis and Pirs (saints of the 5th
and 6th spiritual planes) would dissuade the Master's mandali from trying to get hold of them,
saying it was impossible, and it actually created a stir when some of these were finally persuaded
and did come out of their dugouts to follow Baba's disciples going over to where Baba wanted
them. The bystanders could not believe their eyes, and huge crowds followed in procession
through the streets of the city as if it were a big festival, when these masts were driven in tongas from
their remote dwelling places to the bungalow where the Master was expecting them. It was still
quite another task of infinite patience and mild loving persuasions for hours to induce them for
a bath, or food, or a shave, as they wouldn't let anyone touch even a hair of their shabby, unclean
beard or on head, nor even would they allow anyone to touch their dirty clothes. One of these would
at times

62 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

take hours to get rid of his clothes and be given the bath and food by the Master. These masts are oblivious to all external surroundings and utterly indifferent even to their own bodily needs for food or clothing, yet remain blissfully happy being all the time engrossed in spiritual ecstasy. What a contrast does this present between our worldly ideas of superficial neatness and cleanliness on the surface and the true inner cleanliness of the heart, drowned in Divinity, ecstatic in Divine intoxication, even with rags and dirt! It is indeed beyond our ordinary intellect to have an idea of their spiritual state.
AN INTERVIEW
On the 18th of March last, Mr. K.., a great Congress worker, visited Shri Baba and had conversation with him also of general interest which we reproduce hereunder:--
When Mr. K.. was introduced to Shri Baba, it was explained that he was an Indian Civil Servant (I. C. S.) and held responsible Government posts, but gave it all up for service to the Country through Congress. Baba

thereupon remarked with regard
to the spirit of true sacrifice: "Sacrifice is sweet when it is for a good cause."
Question Is faith in God essential?
Answer
That depends on how you interpret faith. Some who have faith and believe in God, lead a
life without character and fail to make any spiritual progress, while there are others who do not
even believe in God but lead such a noble life that they automatically come closer to God.
Question What is the goal of creation?
Answer
To know the Self as the infinite eternal existence and to enable others to realize this same Self.
Question How did the Universe come
about?
Answer This needs long explanation.
(In "Philosophy and Teachings" it
is explained.) Universe, if understood as created, has an entirely different meaning from our view-
point that universe does not exist. Actually it is only God who appears as universe. But it is

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

63

necessary to creation to have this dual idea of God and universe.
To know the exact meaning of the "awake" state, one has to experience the "dream" state. Dreams can be good and bad. In dream you can suffer or enjoy. But when you wake up, you find it is all a dream. But this dream should be so adjusted that it awakens you soon. Sacrifice, character and selfless service help in waking you soon. Question
Why do forces of evil predominate over forces of virtue? Answer
It is all in the scope of Universal Law. The suffering that appears so grave is necessary, for happiness, as binding is necessary to experience freedom. Unless evil temporarily triumphs, suffering cannot be experienced. This universe is based on duality. Binding and freedom, bad and good, evil and virtue are interdependent. If only one aspect existed, there would be no meaning or interest in life. For the attainment of ultimate freedom and happiness, temporary victory of evil over virtue is necessary.

Question
Why does God who is so kind and merciful give suffering and
pain to so many? Answer
God has nothing to do with this. God is all One-in-One. He is
aloof and yet so attached that whatever is done is by His Law of
Love and Will. For example, when you sleep you enjoy a
dream, and the enjoyment is so intense that this dream of hap-
piness does not wake you soon. But if in the midst of the dream
you suddenly saw a snake you would at once wake up. This is
the Law of God. God is neither merciful nor cruel in your
"awakened" state. Question
Is renunciation of the world necessary for spiritual attain-
ment? Answer
Internal renunciation is necessary, but not external renun-
ciation. It is not the outward escape from the world that leads
you to God. You have to live in the world, do all your duties, and
yet feel as detached as if you were living in seclusion in the
midst of intense activity. How can you renounce this body and

62 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

mind by retiring into the jungles?
Question In a slavish country like India,
is it not the duty of every Indian
to work for the liberation of his country? Answer
Yes, but the aspect must be from spiritual standpoint. If material freedom binds you to
maya and leads to spiritual avoidance, it is no freedom. You must try heart and soul to have
India free, but it must be the freedom that helps you towards Truth and spirituality.
Question Will India come in the fore-
front, as in days of old, to lead the
world? Answer
It is the duty of India to lead
the world spiritually. Question
When will your Holiness mani-
fest yourself ? Answer
The time is very near.

Question Is the path shown by Gandhiji
the only path to attain India's freedom? Answer
In some respects it is. It depends on the circumstances. If India were not so disunited internally as it is now, the policy of Mr. Gandhi would bring freedom in a few moments, but it is so difficult for the Hindus and Mohammedans to unite. Mr. Gandhi saw me four times and I said the same thing to him that unless the hearts of Hindus and Mohammedans are united, little progress can be expected.
Work with all your heart, with the one motive of making India truly free, but do not think of the results of your work. Men like you can do what millions cannot do, as you have heart, intellect and sincerity. This selfless service of yours in striving for India's freedom will lead you ultimately to God.



MEHER BABA JOURNAL A MONTHLY PUBLICATION Elizabeth O. Patterson, Managing Editor and Publisher for the "Meher Editorial Committee" "Meherabad", Ahmednagar, India
MEHER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE C. V. Sampath Aiyangar,
( Late of Madras Judicial Service ) Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff, Princess Norina Matchabelli, Adi K. Irani,
Elizabeth C_Patterson, Estelle Gayley, F. H. Dadachanji,
Abdul Kareem Abdulla.
Contributions of manuscripts will be welcomed, and it is requested that they should be typed. No manuscript will be returned unless accompanied by a self-addressed stamped envelope. All communications regarding same should be addressed to Princess Norina Matchabelli, Literary Manager, Meher Baba Journal, " Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
Enquiries concerning subscriptions and notice of change of address should be addressed to Estelle Gayley, Secretary, Meher Baba Journal, "Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
Postal Money Orders and cheques should be made payable to Elizabeth C. Patterson, Treasurer, Meher Baba Journal, " Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES Twelve months (including Inland or Foreign postage) India Rs. 3; England sh. 8; U. S. A. $ 2. ( Single copies ; 6 annas, or 1 shilling, or 25 cents. )
Printer:--R. B. Hiray, Mohan Printers, Near Cotton Market, Ahmednagar

MEHER BABA JOURNAL Vol. 1 March 1939 No. 6

NOTE

Mcfeponorileonnlhosuteiewgdrrhiesn,BrigacannebglrdiatscatJitiryonocpfuumercmn-oisassretltrtaaetwknecerctaissesosniw,onsrtehilirgaseeinsnaegnaucolmulatygrisraeetplawnrdkitianedaytsedsfwddinaietitdrinhoeotnIhmmnetdieoinriaowwwrh1iaata9yhnt3di8itnsh-rt4eeoo2mtEh.tahenIrerngkwlaoitibsrhsilheegysiolenfareainewglgaipunrilunaaygblneltdiue.camxayNttbs.iaoetIrnun.rdbTailuhaltnye,

page

ERRATA

col para line

original text

corrections

5

14

witheld

withheld

11

2nd 1

5

'NETI' 'NETI'

"NETI, NETI"

12

nset 1

16

opponents

opposites

22

2 2 19

carresses

caressess

29

12 8

spirtual

spiritual

34

22 9

are there?", he says are there?" he says

38 verse 12 thraldom

46

12 3

heirarchy

thralldom hierarchy

46

21 2

skecth

sketch

47

12 2

unscrutable

inscrutable

47

1 2 10

celebates

celibates

50

1 1 18

cantonement

cantonment

52

12 3

In toto

In toto

56

2 1 21

minarettes

minarets

56

2 1 25

minarettes

minarets

57

22 7

accomodate

accommodate

61

1 1 24

suroundings

surroundings

62

11 5

suroundings

surroundings

