  
  
  
  
  
  
MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  
Volume  1,  No.5  
March  1939  
  
A  Monthly  Publication  of  
the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"  
  
  
An  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  eBook  
July  2011  
  
  
All  words  of  Meher  Baba  copyright  ©  2011  Avatar  Meher  Baba    
Perpetual  Public  Charitable  Trust,  Ahmednagar,  India  
  
  
  
  
   Source  and  short  publication  history:  The  Meher  Baba  Journal,  a  monthly  magazine,  was   published  from  1938  to  1942.    This  eBook  reproduces  the  original  edition  of  the  Meher   Baba  Journal  published  by  the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"  (Meherabad,  Ahmednagar,   India).  
                    

   eBooks  
at  the  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  Web  Site  
   The  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust's  eBooks  aspire  to  be  textually  exact  though  non-facsimile   reproductions  of  published  books,  journals  and  articles.  With  the  consent  of  the  copyright   holders,  these  online  editions  are  being  made  available  through  the  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust's   web  site,  for  the  research  needs  of  Meher  Baba's  lovers  and  the  general  public  around  the  world.        Again,  the  eBooks  reproduce  the  text,  though  not  the  exact  visual  likeness,  of  the  original   publications.  They  have  been  created  through  a  process  of  scanning  the  original  pages,  running   these  scans  through  optical  character  recognition  (OCR)  software,  reflowing  the  new  text,  and   proofreading  it.  Except  in  rare  cases  where  we  specify  otherwise,  the  texts  that  you  will  find  here   correspond,  page  for  page,  with  those  of  the  original  publications:  in  other  words,  page  citations   reliably  correspond  to  those  of  the  source  books.  But  in  other  respects--such  as  lineation  and   font--the  page  designs  differ.  Our  purpose  is  to  provide  digital  texts  that  are  more  readily   downloadable  and  searchable  than  photo  facsimile  images  of  the  originals  would  have  been.   Moreover,  they  are  often  much  more  readable,  especially  in  the  case  of  older  books,  whose   discoloration  and  deteriorated  condition  often  makes  them  partly  illegible.    Since  all  this  work  of   scanning  and  reflowing  and  proofreading  has  been  accomplished  by  a  team  of  volunteers,  it  is   always  possible  that  errors  have  crept  into  these  online  editions.  If  you  find  any  of  these,  please   let  us  know,  by  emailing  us  at  frank@ambppct.org.      The  aim  of  the  Trust's  online  library  is  to  reproduce  the  original  texts  faithfully.  In  certain  cases,   however--and  this  applies  especially  to  some  of  the  older  books  that  were  never  republished  in   updated  versions--we  have  corrected  certain  small  errors  of  a  typographic  order.  When  this  has   been  done,  all  of  these  corrections  are  listed  in  the  "Register  of  Editorial  Alterations"  that  appears   at  the  end  of  the  digital  book.  If  you  want  the  original  text  in  its  exact  original  form,  warts  and  all,   you  can  reconstruct  this  with  the  aid  of  the  "register."      The  Trust's  Online  Library  remains  very  much  a  work  in  progress.  With  your  help  and  input,  it  will   increase  in  scope  and  improve  in  elegance  and  accuracy  as  the  years  go  by.  In  the  meantime,  we   hope  it  will  serve  the  needs  of  those  seeking  to  deepen  and  broaden  their  own  familiarity  with   Avatar  Meher  Baba's  life  and  message  and  to  disseminate  this  good  news  throughout  the  world.        
  

Contents

SHRI MEHER BABA ON
THE FORMATION AND THE FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS

1

I BELIEVE IN GOD
SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR OF NINE DAYS THROUGH INDIA
QUESTION BABA ANSWERS

Jean Schloss (Hollywood)
Princess Norina Matchabelli
Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff

14 18 24

MEETING

Mani Desai

26

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING AS THE KERNAL OF UPANISHADIC WISDOM

Dr. C. D. Deshmukh MA. Phd. (London)

29

"TUNES IN WORDS" INSPIRED BY BABA

Countess Nadine Tolstoy

34

A DREAM

Anonymous

37

SHRI MEHER BABA (Poem) Kemali

39

IMPRESSIONS ON SHRI MEHER BABA

Delia De Leon (London)

41

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff

46

OFFERING TO BABA (Poem)

Malcolm Schloss (Hollywood)

57

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

F. H. Dadachanji

58



"I have come not to teach but to awaken" --SHRI MEHER BABA

VOL. 1

MEHER BABA
JOURNAL
MARCH 1939

NO.5

Shri Meher Baba on the Formation And the Function of Sanskaras

There are two aspects of hum an experience--the subjective

and the ob jective. On the one hand there are m ental

processes which constitute essential ingredients of human

ANALYSIS OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE

experience; and on the other hand there are th ings and objects to which they refer. The m ental processes are partly dependent upon the imm ediately

given objective situation; and they are partly dependent upon

the functioning of the accum ulated sanskaras or impressions

of previous experience. Hum an mind thus finds itself

between a s ea of past sanskaras on the one side and the

whole extensive objective world on the other.

From the psycho-genetic point of view hum an actions are

seen to be based upon the operation of the impressions stored

in the mind through previous experience. Every thought and

emotion and every act is grounded in groups of im pressions

which, when considered objectively, are seen to be m od-

ifications

2 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

of the mind-stuff of man. Thes e impressions are deposits of

previous experience, and become the most important factors

in determining the course of present and future experience.

SANSKARAS ARE ORIGINATED IN EXPERIENCE AND BECOME THE BASIS OF FUTURE EXPERIENCE

The mind is constantly creating and gathering such im pressions in the course of its experience. W hen occupied with the physical objects of this world, such as, body, nature and other things around, the mind is, so to say, externalised, and creates

gross impressions; and when it is busy with its own sub-

jective mental processes (which are the expressions of

already existing sanskaras), it creates subtle and mental

impressions. The question whether sanskaras come first or

experience comes first is like the q uestion whether the hen

comes first or the egg com es first. Both are conditions of

each other and develop side by side. The problem of

understanding the significance of human experience,

therefore, turns round the problem of understanding the

formation and function of sanskaras.

The sanskaras are of two type s--natural and

non-natural--according to the m anner in which they come

into existence. The sanskaras which the soul gathers during

NATURAL AND NON-NATURAL SANSKARAS

the period of organic evolution are natural sanskaras. These sanskaras come into existence and gather round the soul as it success ively takes up and

abandons the various sub-hum an forms, thus gradually

passing from the apparently inanimate state of the stone or

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 3
metal to the human state, where the re is full development of consciousness. All the sanskaras which cluster round the soul before attaining the hum an form are the product of natural evolution and therefore best referred to as nat ural sanskaras. They should be carefully distinguished from the sanskaras which are cultivated by the s oul after the attainment of the human form . The sanskaras which get attached to the soul during the hu man stage are cultivated under the moral freedom of co nsciousness with its accompanying responsibility of choice between good and bad, virtue and vice. They are, therefore, best referred to as nonnatural sanskaras. For, though these post-hum an sanskaras are directly depende nt upon the natural sanskaras, they are created under fundamentally different conditions of life, and are, in their orig in, comparatively more recent than the natural sanskaras. This difference in the length of the periods through which they ha ve gathered and in the conditions under which they are formed is responsible for the difference in the degree of fir mness with which the natural and non-natural sanskaras are respectively attached to the soul. The non-natural sanskaras are no t as difficult to eradicate as the natu ral sanskaras which have an ancien t heritage, and are therefore more firmly rooted. The obliteration of the natural sanskaras is practically impossible unless the neophyte is the re cipient of the grace and intervention of a Sadguru.
As explained above the non-natural sanskaras are dependent upon the natural sanskaras, and the

4 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

natural sanskaras are a result of evolution. The next

important question is, "Why should the manifested life at the

THE MANIFESTED LIFE ARISES OWING TO THE WILL-TO-BECONSCIOUS IN THE ABSOLUTE

different stages of evolution em erge out of the Absolute Rea lity which is infinite?" The need for manifested life arises out of the impetus in the
Absolute to become conscious of
itself. The progressive manifestation of life through evolution is

ultimately brought about by the will-to-be-conscious which

is inherent in the Infinite. In order to understand creation in

terms of thought, it is necessary to posit this will-to-be-

conscious in the Absolu te in an involved state, prior to the

act of manifestation.

But, though for the purposes of an intellectual explanation

of the creation, the impetus in the Absolute has to be

regarded as a will-to-be-conscious; to describe it as a sort of

THE LAHAR WITHIN THE ABSOLUTE MAY BE COMPARED TO A WAVE IN THE OCEAN

inherent desire is to f alsify its true nature. It is bett er described as a lahar or an im pulse which is so inexplicable, spontaneous and sudden that to call it this or that is to have its reality undone. Since all intellectual categories turn out to b e

necessarily inadequate in gr asping the m ystery of creation,

the nearest approach to understanding its nature is not

through an intellectual concept, but through an analogy. Just

as a wave going across the surf ace of a still ocean calls forth

into

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 5

being a wild stir of innum erable bubbles, the lahar creates

myriads of individual souls out of the indivisible infinity of

one Oversoul. But the all a bounding Absolute rem ains the

substratum of all the individua l souls. The individual souls

are the creations of a su dden and spontaneous impulse, and

have, therefore, hardly any an ticipation about their destined

continuity of existence throughout the cyclic period until the

final subsiding of the initial tremor. Within the und if-

ferentiated being of the Absolute is born a m ysterious point

through which com e forth the variegated m anyness of

creation; and the ' vasty' deep which, before a fraction of a

second, was icy-still is astir w ith the life of innum erable

frothy selves who secure their separateness of a definite size

and shape through self-limitation within the foamy surface of

the ocean.

But all this is merely an analogy. It would be a m istake to

imagine that som e real change takes place in the Absolute

when the lahar of the involved will-to-be-conscious makes

THE ABSOLUTE BEING IS UNAFFECTED BY THE BHAS OF MANIFESTATION

itself effective by bringing into existence the world of m anifestation. There can be no act of involution or evolution within the being of the Absolute; and nothing real can be born from the Absolute as any real ch ange

is necessarily a negation of the Absolute. The change

implied in the crea tion of the manifested world is not an

ontological change or a change in the being of the Absolute

6 MEHER BABA JOURNAL
reality; it is only an apparent ch ange. In one sense, the act of manifestation must be regarded as a sort of an expansion of the illimitable being of the Absolute, since through that act the Infinite which is without consciousness seeks to attain its own consciousness. But, since this expansion of Reality is effected through its self-lim itization into vario us forms of life, the act of m anifestation might, with equal aptness, be called the p rocess of tim eless contraction. But, whether the act of manifestation is looked upon as a sort of expansion of reality or as its "tim eless contraction", it is pre ceded by an initial urge or m ovement which might, in terms of thought, be regarded as an inherent and involved desire to be conscious. The manifoldness of creation and separateness of the individual souls exist onl y in imagination. The ve ry existence of the creatio n or the w orld of m anifestation is grounded in bhas or illusion, so that, in spite of the m anifestation of num berless individual souls, the Oversoul remains the sam e without suffe ring any real expansion or contraction, increment or decrem ent. But, though the Oversoul undergoes no m odification due to the bhas or illusion of individuation, there co mes into existen ce its apparent differentiation into many individual souls.
The most original bhas or illusion into which the Oversoul was allured synchronises with the first im pression. It, therefore, marks the beginning of the form ation of sanskaras. The formation of sanskaras starts in the most
finite centre which becomes the first

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 7

focus for the manifestation of the individuality of the soul. In

the gross sphere, this first focus of mainfestation is represen-

THE MOST ORIGINAL BHAS APPEARS IN THE STONE PHASE

ted by the tridimensional and inert stone which has the m ost rudimentary and partial consciousness. This vague and

undeveloped form of c onsciousness is hardly sufficient to

illumine its own shape and form , and is hopeless ly

inadequate to f ulfil the purpose of creation which was to

enable the Oversoul to know its elf. Whatever little capacity

for illumination consciousness has in the s tone phase, is

ultimately derived from the Oversoul and not from the body

of the stone. But consciousness is unable to enlarge its scope

independently of the body of the stone, because the Oversoul

first gets identified with consciousness and then through it to

the stone form . And since al l further developm ent of

consciousness is arrested by th e body of the stone and its

langour, evolution of the high er forms or vehicles of

manifestation becomes indispensable. The developm ent of

consciousness has to proceed side by side with the evolution

of the body by which it is conditioned. Therefore, the will-

to-be-conscious which is inherent in the vastness of the

Oversoul seeks by divine determ ination a progressive

evolution of the vehicles of expression.

Thus the Oversoul forges for itself a new vehicle of

expression in the m ental form in which it becom es slightly

more intensified. But it is ev en at this stage ver y

rudimentary. And so it has to ge t transferred to still high er

forms of vegetation and trees

8 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

in whom there is an appreciab le advance in the d evelopment

of consciousness through the maintenance of the vital pro-

PROGRESSIVE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS AND FORMS

cesses of growth, decay and reproduction. Emergence of a still more developed form of c onsciousness becomes possible when the Oversoul seeks manifestation through the

instinctive life of insects, birds and animals who are fully

aware of their bodies and thei r respective surroundings, and

who develop a sense of self-protection and aim

at

establishing mastery over their env ironment. In the highe r

animals intellect o r reasoning also appears to a certain

extent, but its working is strictly lim ited by the play of their

instincts like the ins tinct of self-protection and the instinct

for the care and preservation of the little ones . So even in

animals consciousness has not had its full developm ent, with

the result that it is unab le to serve the initial pu rpose of the

Oversoul to have self-illumination.

The Oversoul finally takes the human for m in

which consciousness attains to its f ullest development

with complete awareness of the self and the environment. At

HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS

this stage the capacity of reasoning has the widest range of activity and is unlimited in its scop e. But, as the

Oversoul, through its consciousness , gets identified with the

gross body, consciousness does not serve the purpose of

illuminating the na ture of the Oversoul. However, sin ce

consciousness has had its fullest

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 9

development in the hu man form, there is in it a la tent

potentiality for self-realization, and the will-to-be-conscious

with which evolution started becomes fructified in the

Sadgurus or Man-Gods who are the fair flowers of humanity.

The Oversoul cannot attain self-knowledge through the

ordinary consciousness of humanity, because it is env eloped

in a multitude of sanskaras or impressions. As consciousness

THE WINDING OF SANSKARAS

passes from the appare ntly inanimate state of the stone or the metal, then to the vegetative life of the trees, then

onwards to the instinctive state of insects, birds and animals,

and finally to the full consciousne ss of the human state, it is

continually creating new sanskaras and getting enveloped in

them. And t hese natural sanskaras get added to even after

attaining the hum an state by the further creation of non-

natural sanskaras through manifold experience and

multitudinous activities. Thus the acquisition of sanskaras is

unceasingly going on during the process of evolution as well

as during the period of later post-human activities. This

acquisition of the sanskaras may be lik ened to the wind ing

up of a piece of string round a stick , the string represen ting

the sanskaras and the stick represen ting the m ind of the

individual soul. The winding up starts from the beginning of

the creation and persists thr ough all the evolutionary stages

and human form, and the wound string represents all the

positive sanskaras--natural as well as non-natural.

10 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

The fresh sanskaras which are constantly being created in

human life are due to the multifarious objects and ideas with

which consciousness finds itself confronted; and these sans-

SOME EXAMPLES OF THE POTENCY OF IMPRESSIONS

karas bring about im portant transformations in the various states of consciousness. The im pressions created by beautiful objects have the

potency of arousing in conscious ness the innate capacity for

appreciating and enjoying b eauty. When one hears a goo d

piece of music, or sees a beautiful landscape, th e impression

caught from these objects gives him a feeling of exaltation.

In the sam e way, when one contacts the personality of a

thinker, he m ight get interest ed in new avenues of thought

and be inspired with an enthusiasm which was utterly foreign

to his consciousness bef ore contacting the thinker. Not only

the impressions of objects or persons but also the

impressions of ideas and superstitions have great efficacy in

determining the conditions of consciousness.

The power of the impressions of superstitions m ight

be illustrated by m eans of a ghost story. Of the different

realms of human thought there is perhaps none as abounding

THE IMPRESSIONS OF SUPERSTITION

in superstitions as the r ealm which is connected with ghosts who, according to popular ideology, are

supposed to harass and torture their victim in curious ways.

Once upon a time during the Moghul rule in India, a highly

educated man who was very sceptical about the

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 11
stories of ghosts m ade up his m ind to verif y them from personal experience. He had b een warned against vis iting a certain graveyard on the night of amavasya (the darkest night of the m onth), for it was reported to be the habitation of a very dreadful ghost who unfailing ly made his appearance whenever an iron nail was ha mmered into the ground within the limits of the grav eyard. With the hamm er in one h and and the nail in the other he walked straight into the graveyard on the night of amavasya and chose a spot uncovered by grass in order to drive a na il in. T he ground was dark, and equally dark was the cloak he wore hanging loosely. W hen he sat on the ground, trying to hammer the nail, an end of his cloak got between the nail and the ground, and got tied to the nail. He finished hamm ering and felt that he was successful with the experim ent without encountering upon the ghost. But, as he tried to rise in order to depart from the spot, he felt a strong pull towards the ground, and he was panic-stricken. Owing to the operation of previ ous impressions he could not think of anything except the ghost who, he thought, had secured him at last. And the shock of the thought was so great that the poor m an died of heart-failure. This story illustrates the tremendous power which sometimes resides in the impressions created by superstition.
The power and the effect of impressions can hardly be overestimated. An i mpression is solidified m ight, and its inertness makes it immobile and

12 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

durable. It can becom e so engraved upon the m ind of m an

that despite his sincere desire and effort to have it eradicated

FREEDOM FROM SANSKARAS IS THE CONDITION OF HARMONIOUS EXPERIENCE

it takes its own time and has a way of working itself into action directly or indirectly. The mind contains many heterogenous sanskaras, and while seeking expressions in consciousness, they often

clash with each other. T he clash of sanskaras is experienced

in consciousness as a mental conflict. Experience is bound to

be chaotic and enigm atic, full of oscillations, confusion and

complex tangles, until cons ciousness is freed from all

sanskaras good and bad. Experience can become truly

harmonious and integral only when consciousness is

emancipated from the impressions.

The sanskaras can be classified accord ing to the

essential differences in the nature of the spheres to which

THE THREE TYPES OF SANSKARAS GIVE RISE TO THREE DIFFERENT STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS

they refer. As referring to different spheres of existence they are found to be of three kinds: (1) Gross sanskaras which enable the soul to experience the gross world through the gross medium and compel it to identify itself with the gross body.

(2) Subtle sanskaras which enable the soul to experien ce the

subtle world through the subtle m edium and compel the soul

to identify itself with the subtle body. (3) Mental sanskaras

which enable the soul to experience the mental world

through the mental medium

FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF SANSKARAS 13

and compel it to identify itself with the m ental body. The

differences between the states of the individual souls are

entirely due to the d ifferences existing in the kind of

sanskaras with which their consciousness is loaded. Thus the

gross-conscious souls experience only the gross world; the

subtle-conscious souls experience only the subtle world; and

the mental-conscious souls experience only the m ental

world. The qualitative diversity in the experience of these

three types of souls is due to the dif ference in the nature of

their sanskaras.

The self-conscious souls are radically different from all

the other souls, because they experience the Oversoul

through the medium of the self, whereas the other souls ex-

THE SELF-CONSCIOUS SOULS ARE FREE FROM SANSKARAS

perience only their bodies and the
corresponding worlds. And this radical difference in the consciousness of the self-conscious souls and other souls is due to the fact that whereas

the consciousness of other souls is conditioned by some kind

of sanskaras, the consciousness of self-conscious souls is

completely free from all sanskaras. It is only when

consciousness is unobscured and unconditioned by any

sanskaras that the initial will-to-be- conscious arrives at its

final and real fruition, and th e infinity and the indivisible

unity of the absolute is c onsciously realized. The problem of

deconditioning the m ind through the rem oval of sanskaras

is, therefore, extremely important.

I Believe in God
BY JEAN SCHLOSS (Hollywood)

In these troubled days, it seems to me to be incum bent upon everyone who believes in God and in His supreme omnipotence, to reaffirm that faith and to surrender more deeply to His guidance. In so doing, we shall not only strengthen and fortify our own souls against the onslaught of doubt and despair which, in many parts of the world, is, even now, rampant; but we shall also be conscious co-operators in God's plan for the world.
We have heard so much of man 's plans and ideas for nations and peoples, and have seen so m uch of their failure, that perhaps the tim e has com e when, not only a stray individual here and there is willing to surrender himself to a higher mind than his own, but when vast numbers of people m ay call upon God for guidance, and, having called, be willing to carry out His orders.
In spite of the fact that the forces of greed, cruelty and dishonour seem, at

the hand, I believe that God perm its these things merely to show m an how small and inef fective is his own sufficiency, and that wh en the lesson is deeply learned, He will turn the key by injecting into the lif e stream a new consciousness of Him self and His power.
Thus, when we hear of innocent people being persecuted; of s mall but honourable nations bein g sacrificed to the force and greed of unscrupulous leaders; of peace-lovin g people b eing forced against their wishes into war; let us not despair, or feel that God has forsaken His creation. Such are the times when we should look up and even rejoice; for always, without fail, God permits the darkest night to precede the most radiant dawn. W ith confidence, we may know that His hour draws near. What we are witn essing to-day is simply the logical outcom e of m an's attempt to organize him self and his world

I BELIEVE IN GOD

15

on a purely m aterialistic basis. In the material world, intellect is God, and the laws of the spiritual world, such as love and faith, are denied and scorned. God, we are told, is a rem nant of the race 's childhood, when it w as not strong enough to stand on its own feet, or when it had no highly developed intellect to guide it.
Well, presumably, the race can now stand alone, since so m any reject the idea of God, and the enthroned intellect rules man's activities with such re sults as we have only to read the daily newspapers to see. Does it encourage us to continue to base our lives on this hypothesis? Or, have we com e to the place where we are willing to try another way of life--God' s way--in which we, as individuals and nations, surrender our wills, our lives to Him?
Certainly the need at this time is for people whose intensity of spirit is gr eat enough to com pel their unqualified surrender. But this k ind of capitulation cannot be m ade to an Im personal Principle. It must be made to that Divine Incarnation, whose "glory the heaven of heavens cannot contain", yet

whose love may dwell in every humble heart. An abstract principle n ever turned a self-centred m an into a Godfilled one. For this kind of transformation, man's heart must be awakened by deep inner experience with the personal aspect of God, that four dimensional personality inherent in all life, yet at the sam e time transcending it; that personality which, from time to time throughout the ages, takes form as perfect man, and through that for m makes himself the Way by which others may find liberation.
Some there are who, in com ing into physical life, never com pletely lose their contact with this personal God. For them, whether He is incarnate or not, He is the great R eality of their lives. But others need to contact Him in the flesh in order to h ave their lives attuned to His. This Holy One m any of us now recognize in our beloved Master, Baba.
He comes, as He has always come, to free man from his bonda ge to self, and through this freedom to lift him to a higher plane of being. He com es to demonstrate anew God 's love for His children by

16 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

making Himself the Living W ay. He comes as the great Awakener of m an's heart, and through the love that is thereby quickened, He binds the souls which He redeem s fast to His own heart.
And probably He comes to the world as a whole, because its belief in the personal God has grown faint or become overlaid with encrustations of formalism and conventional religion.
Being what He is, His powe r in human lives who place their trus t in Him is lim itless. But, just as we h ave always been taught, it is m ost effective in those liv es who seek nothing, ask nothing, but His will. T here are so me who have com e to Him asking for certain spiritual graces. Perhaps He has vouchsafed them glimpses of these things, or perhaps He has not. But often it is jus t these people who eventually turn from Him, with their sense of justice outraged, that He does not fulfil their requests in the way they think best.
Though our desires maybe of the highest, spiritually, yet when He proceeds to clear away just those thing s in us which impede our spiritual free-

dom, how often we cry, "Not this Lord, not this!" It is a hum an cry and one which was f elt even in the hear t of Jesus, as He hung upon the cross. But it is important for us also to remember the cry which f ollowed it. "Nevertheless, not my will but Thine be done!"
Until we have this kind of faith in God, we cannot get very far as individuals or as nations. Im posing upon God our idea of what is best for us is a bastard kind of fait h. Yet we see today whole systems of religion and philosophy based on this principle of im pressing upon the m ind of God our needs, our desires. Physical well-being, material prosperity and our idea of personal happiness is assum ed as our right, and God is worked upon to produce these things for us. And often He does, for this m ethod can be made to produce the desired results. But does it necessarily follow that these things are what we need to lib erate our souls? And can we honestly believe that God is interested in anyth ing but tha t one supreme objective? Can we seriously think that God who has created the wonders of this universe, who has given to man the form of

I BELIEVE IN GOD

17

Himself and the capacity to realize in his soul the fullness of God, is really concerned with our desire for a new car, or relief from that pain ? The pain may, in fact, be an evidence of God working in us to ef fect in His own way our greater freedom.
Just as th e intellect will never o pen the door to the kingdom of the spirit, so will this self-seeking kind of faith never bring to our eart h the kingdom of heaven. For that we need an unquestioning faith which asks nothing, yet receives everything, for in abandoning ourselves wholly to God we m ake it possible for Hi m, not only to bestow upon us the lesser gifts of the spirit, but to give to us the suprem e gift of Himself.
It is very sim ple, yet very profound, this yoga of God surrender, this ultimate in f aith. It brin gs into play in our lives the highest protection, the wisest guidance and the m ost amazing working out of any problem or question which confronts us. It operates in ways which would confound the rational mind, but its results are sure and farReaching.

Not in a m oment shall we ach ieve this complete surrender, but, as we advance towards it, we have increasing confirmations that our f aith is not misplaced or misguided. In fact, the more we exercise this spiritual sinew of faith, the more speedily we carve our way on the road to Reality. Life now becomes a glorious thing, a superb adventure which offers us the utmost of joy and complete satisfaction. The sen ses, which normally contact but the surf ace of things, now pe netrate to the inwardness of life, to the essence of the rose's fragrance, the joy within the song, the light beyond the sunset. Nor are the confirm ations we receive merely of a subjective order. W e see human relationships harm onized; conflicts resolved; problems untangled; love awakened or reborn.
Now that He dwells with us again in human form, the m agic of His love is vastly accelerated. One need no t meet Him outwardly to f eel deeply the contact with His spir it and to experience in one 's life the tra nsformations He makes possible, if we

18 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

surrender our lives to Him. It is b elief in this One which I
proclaim, that lovely One whom I have known for m any years, and whom I now serve in the human form of my

Master, Baba. It is be lief in th is One which I would have others share in order that the day of His manifestation may be has tened and that the world 's misery may be turned into spiritual joy.



Shri Meher Baba's Tour
OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA*
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

The 27th of Decem ber. The s econd day's performance begins with the usual duties. Washing of the m ad-child. Answering of the mail. Interviews. Tea in the afternoon at the poetess ' home. Open darshana in the evening and concert.
A peculiar incident happens during the hours of the m orning. A woman, speaking broken English, looking the real type of the Indian soil, walks up to me. She tells m e this m ost extraordinary story I here repeat in the same naive style it was told to me.

This child of nature, crude in 'I' but real in Being, all her life has been seeking for God. She had a daughter who, impatient to see God, committed suicide. Before dying she gave her mother the solemn promise that she would send down God to her... Adorable fool, sweet ignorant child! No doubt her unconscious act God has forgiven--no one dies for Him in vain! This wonderful wom an whose truthful story I took into m y heart, led by the spirit of her visionary daughter, com es to Nagpur where she finds the God. All

___________________________________________________________________________________ * Continued from February 1939 issue

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

19

day I saw her standing as close as she

could to where Baba was, silently

taking in the sweetness of His presence.

Her own sister, a sim ilar type, solid,

staunch, peasant-like wom an with a

heart of gold, arrive s in the afternoon.

She asks to m eet me; no doubt she

wants to convey to Baba that

she

believes He is the right One. She said:

"I have recognized Him . He is the

Avatar. I do not need to ask Hi m any

questions. I do not need to touch Him. I

hear His V oice. I s ee Him within m y heart."

In the afternoon we are expected at

the home of D.., the young poetess.

Baba is received in a beautiful clean

bright room which serves also as a

bedroom. Her own bed was prepared

like a throne for Baba to sit upon. O ver

the immaculate white em broidered

bedspread she had placed flowers and

fruits. At the end of the bed stood a

small table which had been m ade into

an altar at Baba 's feet, and on it are the

shiny silver vessels tha t serve f or the

ceremony--a candle is burning dim and

sweet and incense forms a blue spiral

around Baba's feet. After th ese holy offerings Baba asks her to read som e of her poems. She reads with a loud voice and with the authority of a strong personality which af firms itself in art. She becomes a different wom an. Baba greatly admires the depth and beauty of her thought. W ith unexpected simplicity which was prompted f rom the sincerity of her spiritual longing, she implores Baba that He would reveal to her Divine Love. The solem nity of her request creates a m oment of suspense. ...Baba, taking her arm s into His, gives the promise. Present at this initiation, performed in a hum an free manner, are all of us who form Baba's party.
Baba leaves, and with Him , in His car, are B.. and J. K., Baba 's brother Jal and myself. B.. drives in serpentines on perfectly paved asphalt roads, betw een lovely gardens, bungalows with Eastern facades, palaces for th e official o rdinances and so forth. We see many elegant and good looking wom en wearing bright coloured saris, promenading babies in go -carts of English make through the neat ly planted public gardens.

20 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

We drive out of town, pass the beautiful summer swi mming-pool, no doubt a club for the fashionable world. At this m oment, Baba, who so often uses humour to attenuate outwardly the inner shock of His word in Truth, turns abruptly to J. B. w ho is sitting at His feet, "Do you swi m?" "Yes," he answers. "Well," con tinues Baba, "one day you will swim in the infinite ocean of Love--I am the Ocean of Love."
Later on, passing by the house of one of the foreign m agnates, Baba again remarks: "Lust wants possessions. Love gives possessions."
We return hom e to find new people standing, waiting in rows. Baba retires to His roo m for a few m oments. The police are at the gate to m ake clear the way. The doors have to be kept shut to hold back the people who had been untiring in waiting during the afternoon. Special precau tions are taken to prevent the overflow from breaking in. B..'s son and a few of the devotees have to form a chain with their strong arm s to give free passage to a few to enter at one time.

It is 7-30 p. m . The hall is already packed when Baba walks in to take His seat on the beautiful couch richly decorated with pillows, shawls, car pets, representing the donations of the day. The feast of Love is in full swing. The music begins to storm: the Indian music is like natu re, it swing s, it thrills in forms of all rhythms; it is a bird song; it is the human sigh, the exode of the soul; it contains the echo of life itself.
A remarkable individual suddenly enters the r oom, drawing the atten tion of the entire audience. Huge in stature, young, powerful in appearance, loud in manners, this m an seems to be wellknown, as m any cheer at his com ing. When he laughs his m outh opens like a huge crevice in crude dark earth. But visible in his expression is the inner divine child that m akes his eyes glow with joy unfathomable. " Who is he?" we were bound to ask. Som eone whispers, "He is a sa int." With the unself conscious attitude of a child, he pla ces himself at Baba's feet. He does not ask for Baba's darshana, but, unconventional and free, releases

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

21

with loud voice sentences that must have been prom pted from within, swinging in subtler rhythm . Baba, who was working, doing, form ing, acting, unendingly bending in Mercy over the perpetual streaming flow of huma nity who came to call for the Divine Gift, knew this ' passer-by'. He indulges his presence for a short while, giving hi m time and s pace to react in his o wn individual way to the ' Truth-shock' that unconditionally had to strike this personality, too, who was hailed as a saint, but whom Baba knew to be o nly midway. ...At a due moment Baba makes him feel that he should change his place and sit at the other end of the hal1. The m an responds instantaneously, and withdraws, taking his seat near the orchestra. The breeze of Love that Baba arouses in that sou l works like storm, giving vent to his spiritual emotion: he takes one of the drum s and begins to beat. Fiery, like a volcano in eruption, he throws off into space his ringing voice. Afte r a while Baba passes another intuition order which makes him stop and leave. Calm and peace reign again after the exciting in-

terlude which is balm to all.

On the 28th of December the

expected telegram from Navsari arrives

giving the announcem ent of Sorabji

Desai's death on the 27th of December,

twenty minutes after the m arriage

ceremony, precisely timed by Baba as

the cause of events proved. None of us

feel surprised, as, on the p rescribed

day, Baba in His executive way

persistently kept i nquiring about news

from Naysari. His m ind was visibly set

upon this work. The work was

to

suspend death 'at will'. The day is spent

in apparent excitement of external

action. To serve Him , in these exe-

cutive moments of His work, we

practise continuous concentration and

attention, we cons ciously keep vigil

upon the point on which He is

focussing. At different occasions we

may have to travel. W e may be ordered

to run back and forth between His place

and the spot or the form on which He

directs His divine spark. W e have to

speak to people on the subject He will

design. Baba directs the dram a of life

and death using His unfathomable

humour! Sorabji Desai's death had to be

timed to conform

22 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

also with external circumstances. The ceremony should he perform ed at the ordained hour and have the natural course of events without interruption by external shocks; the fam ily should be satisfied and the gue sts should rejoice. For this the miracle of suspending death 'at will' had to be perform ed with subtle tact and discretion. While reading the telegram Baba appeared very satisfied, and said, "Well done."
During the intense working hours of the morning an in teresting incident happens. From the other side of the city of Nagpur, cam e a man who is the guardian of Baba Tajuddin 's resting place. Tajuddin Baba was one of the five Perfect Masters who belonged to the powerful hierarchy that governs the inner affairs of m ankind on our m aterial plane. He is acco mpanied by a young Parsi of prom inent family who, in his li fe of affai rs, tries to fight for honesty and justice but whose life is utter misery and unhappiness. T his young man has become a fervent seeker of Truth. Every morning at four o'clock he would take his car and drive to the tomb of Baba Tajuddin. The young

man, who is used to prayer, loves these hours of worship and holds to it with unusual steadfastness and determination; but thinking practically he realized that he was speculating on the Unseen, and, one day, questioned the guardian whether it would not be wiser for hi m to meet the alive Perfect Master. This pleased the guardian to a cer tain point only, as he did not lik e to see the g rave of his Bel oved Saduru deserted. He advised the young m an not to let his mind swerve with unnecessary considerations, but go on with his regular routine of worship for th e Great Master who, in consciousness, is always present.
A peculiar uncertainty and inner restlessness brought a decision in a moment of desperation. The young man made up his m ind to challenge the power of Tajuddin. He placed his wish before the still m onument which so f ar had revealed very little to him , and said: "If you are who you are, you will make it true that I m eet the aliv e Master."
The guardian did not want his Beloved Sadguru to disappoint the young worshipper

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

23

of Truth, so he, too, joined in his w ish. With persistent prayers he invoked the Beloved One to dem onstrate and fulfil the young m an's wish. So it happens one morning the guardian hears the Voice of Tajuddin, speaking through intuition, that with in three m onths a living Sadguru would he in Nagpur. Three months later Shri Sadguru Meher Baba arrives in Nagpur. W hile the young Parsi stood before the holy monument, he was s ure that T ruth really is this Im personal Being who in Him gives the sign to react, but, through the inner order in intuition, is calling to purer order in conscience. He believes that it is the Voice of the same Pure Order in Being, as the Im personal One that ga ve the s ignal within to the guardian who is to lead the young m an to meet Shri Meher Baba, the personification of the Impersonal One. We are all present in the room when the young Parsi and the guardian call on Baba 's Grace. The young m an now knows that Truth is re ality which becom es a f act and takes f orm in the alive person ified Impersonal One. He knows that God is

consciousness in Being; and when he sees Baba he knows that Tajuddin, or Baba, is the sam e Truth, the sam e Power, the sam e Life in conscious order in Pure Sub-stance.
The young man realizes that the lives of these Pure Beings are One Life in perpetual will-function, creating perpetual attraction to Light of Life unconscious. The fact to have met Shri Meher Baba becom es, for the young man, an event of great importance. No doubt this Parsi wi ll experience in himself the way to Truth and, in himself, become conscious of the unconditional importance to be a subordinate in Being of one who is the Divine personified Pure Existence, as is Shri Meher Baba.
To be the disciple of a Perfect Master means to have in life no desire to satisfy the 'I' ; to have no want in Being but the prof ound longing to expand in Him as the Beloved and to exist and serve Him as His subject. To be or not to be--therein lies all the dif ficult question. It is hard to learn to live in subordination, but it is suprem e experience to

24 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

realize resurrection of the Divine P art in Being as the want unfathom able that marks time in spiritual evolution. Life in selfless subordination in Him, the

Beloved, is the wish of all who dedicate their very lives to him , ready to accept any challenge for the f ulfilment of the long-lived dream to unite in Him with Life Eternal.

(To be continued)



Question Baba Answers
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

Question
What is the propriety and significance of worldly activities in the presence of a Spiritual Master--such as schools. hospitals, asylum s, etc. which already are numerous in the world?
Answer
It is true the world abounds in similar institutions, but they are invariably philanthropically inspired. Institutions under my care have a spiritual purpose to serve. Worldly ben-

efactions are dem anded and created solely by society. My activities are nothing if not an objective m anifestation of that divine dispensation which sustains the phenomenal world. Divine wisdom full of love and com passion has been known to incarnate from time to time in answer to the call of humanity when faced with hopeless unredeemable bankruptcy in all departments of life--moral, material and spiritual.
For eyes that can discern clearly unmistakable signs of

QUESTION BABA ANSWERS

25

disintegration, social and econom ical, usually preceding the advent of divine manifestation, are in evidence all around. Rehabilitation of the world morally and spiritually, with the automatic readjustment of econom ic and social structure, is the av owed mission of divine manifestation on earth. To achieve th is, universal m ind and infinite consciousness does universal work in infinite w ays. Whatever objective work is done by one of universal m ind and infinite consciousness, affects the whole scope of his working. If he fasts, the result of fasting is felt by the whole universe spiritually; if he o bserves silence, characteristic spiritual benefit accrues to the universe. Just as f asting and silence by an individual results in spiritual gain to the indiv idual concerned, likewise fast and silence by one of universal mind and infinite consciousness amounts to an ordeal or penance

suffered by the universe itself, resulting spiritual betterment of the whole.
Besides moral and spiritual disruption, the world today is experiencing terrible economic chaos. To invite or tempt the world to things spiritual, the material needs (individual or collective) must be satisfied before the m ind can dispassionately accept the sp iritual. When I give food and clothing with my own hands, it will re sult in the wo rld gaining its econom ic and m aterial welfare. When I wash the God-mad and the lepers, the effect will be that th ose of sub-normal or abnorm al consciousness will be resto red to normal or subnormal consciousness; while the lepers will either be cured, or the ir future embodiments will be considerably minimized.
Accept it as a spiritual fact that ev ery living spiritual Master, charged with duty, affects his surroundings according to the scope of his work. As the Master, so the atmosphere around.



Meeting
BY MANI DESAI

To realize God, to know Hi m and to have knowledge of His Divine Power is the aim, the chief aim of every human being; therefore in our search for the Light we m ust come in contact with a Perfect Master. For example: a stud ent wants to learn the French language; he searches for that p erson who has complete knowledge and mastery of the language to instruct him ; so if one wants to obtain knowledge of God it is necessary to search for that Master who, through His experience of the Light, has attained knowledge of God.
It depends upon the intensity of our desire for Divine knowledge that will eventually lead us to the Master. To crave, to yearn, to long, to feel the union with one who ha s perfect understanding leads us to the experience of Oneness and is the first s tep of a student of spirituality in attain ing his chief aim in life.
This is a sign that the time of 'meeting' is near.
Often a scholar is not pleased to meet

a spiritual Master, because the poor soul is not yet ready to do so. If a soul is ready f or 'meeting' and if its time is near, the soul goes automatically to the Master. Again we find the soul, although fit f or the 'm eeting', is careless and procrastinates in postponem ent to procure this Divine knowledge.
I will no w try to inf orm my readers how the soul draws near to God. Even though the soul is care less, it is the Supreme Light which, regardless of everything, eventually draws the soul to the ultimate Goal.
I will explain through a very interesting incident. Some of m y readers may have been acquainted with the late Sorabji Muncherji Desai, the devotee of Shreeji Meher Baba S ahib, who was most fortunate in having the holy visit of Shreeji in his last m oments on earth. From early youth he w as a seeker of Truth and always s earching for a Master. In this e ra it is not easy to find a Perfect M aster, as so m any claim to be; so this quest became the problem of his life.

MEETINGS

27

And just as I have said before, if the time of 'meeting' is n ear, then a utomatically the soul finds the right Path.
Sorabji Desai had never seen Baba or even heard the nam e "Meher Baba". But always in his heart was th is keen desire that the knowledge of God would be unfolded to him, and now his answer was already on its way.
One day Shri Meher Baba sent His disciples to see Sorab ji Desai w ith definite instructions that he was to write a book about the life of Shreeji Upasni Maharaj of Sakori, and Shri Baba had provided him with the necessary information for this work.
When the discip les first went to Navsari, to the hom e of Sorabji De sai, he answered them rudely: "Why should I trouble m yself for him whom I have never known? Go back with all your papers and tell your Master that I do not want to do this and I am not bound to do his work."
Reluctantly the disciples returned to the Master and related what had happened. Thereupon the Master again sent them to Mr. Desai with His strict orders, "Go and tell him that he must

do my work and only he, himself, can

do this. If he refuses again, do not

return to tell m e, but leave the pap ers with him."

Once more the disciples went to

Sorabji Desai and gave him

the

Master's order. This time he agreed to

do the work but quite unwillingly.

The disciples then described the

mission of their Master and exemplified

the strange ways of Saints which, they

said, he must not impute nor be wrath-

ful against. Saints always have their

reasons for the neces sity and con-

formity of their comm ands, and w hen

the Master reprim ands or chides

anyone, it is always to im prove their

ignorant souls. Mr. Desai replied: "If he

is a Master, he is yours and not m ine;

so why must I bear a stranger 's pre-

sumptuous tyranny? If he would write

me one ins ult (offence) I would use

four words for it! "Finally it became his

good fortune to write the fa mous book

entitled "Sakorina Sadguru" (Saint of

Sakori), and all this was due to the

Beloved Babaji.

It is a fact that whenever Mr. D esai

found difficulty in writing the book he

would

28 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

always receive help fro m Shri Meher Baba: either in le tters, or Baba would send his disciples to him on the sam e day when his difficulty would be most severe. Gradually through his earnestness he gained the understanding of the Divine Power of Shreeji Meher B aba Sahib. Since this tim e Mr. Desai and his family have had m any wonderful experiences which th ey attribute to their Beloved Babaji in sweet remem brance.
It is a truth that in the beginning Mr. Desai found difficulty in writing. One day while he sat concentrating over his manuscript, a huge crow (the largest he had ever seen in hi s life) came into his room. Mr. Desai stared at the crow quite unconsciously, being oblivious of all except his work. The crow advanced dancing and jum ping into the room , utterly without fear, and soon began to dance on his bed. Mr. Desai tried to make the crow go out, but the fearless crow continued his dancing steps and then flew away. The sam e moment as the crow disappeared Mr. Desai felt it was no ordinary crow, and there must be some motive for its call. Later he

was told that if a huge crow, such as the one who went to Mr. Desai, should come into a house, it is certain that good luck will follow and bring to that home the august visit of Sainath Baba (the Master of Shreeji Upasni Maharaj).
From now on all dif ficulties concerning the work of Mr. Desai were removed, and the way was m ade clear for his pen.
Here let me persuade all my wise and prudent readers to wake up and prepare their soul f or the 'meeting' , the everlasting meeting with our Lord whom we have forgotten in our eagerness for the false pleasures and joys of the world. Do not follow the shadow, but find the reality which casts the shadow of your hope fulfilled. Forget the dreamland and go into your own unexplored land. Polish up yourself, your inner self, for within lies the value of this priceless jewel--your soul. As the goldsmith knows how to polish gold and a blacksm ith to clean iron, so the soul needs th e cleansing and purifying of a Perfect Master. May S hri Meher Baba help us to see His Divine Light.

Shri Meher Baba's Teaching as the Kernel of Upanishadic Wisdom
BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., PH. D.

Of the Bhagwadgita it is said that its teaching is the m ilk gathered from the cows in th e form of the Upanisha ds. We can also say abo ut Shri Meher Baba's teaching, that it represents the kernel of Upanishadic wisdom . Shri Meher Baba is the Ancient One and his teaching reveals the Tru th which is as old as the cosm os. The spiritual wisdom which he brings has had its echoes even in the hoary past of the Upanishadic times. The supe rficial trend in modernism would seem to require that the Truth should be new. But Truth does not change from time to time like the fashions of the day. The unspeakable grandeur with which it is hallo wed does not fade with the rolling of years. That which is eternal cannot becom e stale with tim e. In Shri Meher Baba' s teaching the kernel o f the ancient wisdom of the Upanishads is being presented to the world again, with di-

vine authority. India is a land of philosophers and
seers, and the place of the Upanish ads in Indian philosophy is unique. F rom the historical point of view the brilliant and imposing systems of the later periods had their roo ts in th e Upanishads, and almost all of them derive their inspiration from the wisdom treasured in them . The important position which the Upanishads have in Indian philosophy an d also in the philosophical thought of the world is due to the fact that they are a fruit of an age which is vib rant with the m ost earnest and critical search for the Truth. They are not the product of ar m-chair speculation. The sages and the seers of the Upanishads are wrestling with problems which are as real to them as the problem of bread is to the masses in modern times. We have striking examples of wisdom -loving kings like Janak who were

30 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

willing to sacrifice all their possessions for the sake of the highest knowledge. Even ladies had caught the enthusiasm for philosophy as is shown by the example of Gargi and Maitreyee. Further the spirit of the pe riod is not dogmatic but rational. No philosopher could hope to receive recognition or becom e preeminent without answ ering the criticism of rival thinkers. He had to give the exposition of his views in assem blies which were re sonant with k een controversies.
The Upanishadic thinkers have seriously tried all the avenues of the Truth. There are questions which cannot be conclusively decided except by means of t he scientific m ethod. For example, knowledge about pre-existence or re-incarnation, or about the conditions of existe nce in life after death, can be based, not on speculation, but on direct inform ation or inference from the fa cts of experience. In this connection the m ethod of psychical research which is es sentially scientific in spirit was not unknown to the U panishadic thinkers. Attempt to establish contact with the other world through

mediums is re ferred to in the Brihadaranyaka in the story of the lady possessed by a Gandharva.
Such problems were attacked through the scientific m ethod. For many persons, accep tance of the testimony of experts can be the only available method in certain fields. As Shri Meher Baba once told his disciples, the knowledge of the hidden side of life has to be gathered by "believing those who know the secrets of life and death". U nless there is a general unfoldment of occult powers, the testimony of experts will have to be accepted as the best scien tific data available.
While problems of the nature and the laws of the other world are to be tackled through the scientific m ethod, there are many m etaphysical and ontological problems which require to be approached through methods which are essentially philosophic. In Upanishads, these important problems are attacked along four distinct lines: (1) S peculative, (2) Ethical, (3) Psychological and (4) Religious.
There are two main speculative queries in the Upanishadic

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING

31

literature: (1) What is the inner most principle in m an? (2) W hat is th e ultimate nature of Reality? With regard to the first qu ery they so on came to the conclusion that the soul is neither the body nor the m ind but som e principle which transcends both. Those who in modern psychology identify the soul with the m ind will be star tled by the penetration of their initial question, "By whose inspiration does the incited mind go to its object?" (Kena). And in reply to this question the ultimate principle in human life is descri bed as "som ething which is incomprehensible to the mind but which at the sam e time comprehends the m ind". (Kena). The second query was about that prim ary and unitary principle of the cosm os by knowing which everything else w hich is not known becom es known , just as by knowing the earth in one earthen pot we know the essence of all the earthen pots, since earth is the only true substance, and its various forms are merely distinctions of speech . (Chandogya). The conclusion of the second query that the "pure being alone existed in the

beginning, one without the second", and that the world with its multiplicity and differentiation came into existe nce because "it desired to c reate itself and become many". ( Chandogya). The source of individuation is thus not to be found in any other foreign principle. It is in the original principle itself.
The next important question which naturally confronted the Upanishadic thinkers was, "What exactly is the relation of this cosm ic principle to the innermost principle in m an?" And it is at this point that they have taken the boldest and the m ost unique step of identifying the two principles. "O child! All creations are roote d in the Tr uth. The Truth is their hom e and in the Truth they abide. That Truth, that Atman thou art--O Swetaketo!" (Chandogya). This basic Truth is given to the world in a new for m when Shri Meher Baba proclaims that "you not only possess but actually are Soul, which is but one Param atman", or when he declares that "to realize the Supreme
Being as your own self is to realize the
Truth" .*
The question of explaining

___________________________________________________________________________________ * Sayings.

32 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

the nature of the identity between the individual soul and Universal Atm an is not capable of be ing tackled through the intellect alone. At this critic al point the Upanishadic sages deliberately give up ratiocination, and have no shadow of regret in doing so. The hum an soul seems to have a separate and selfsufficient unity and independence of its own. How exactly is it m erged or swallowed up in the Abso lute? Here the Upanishadic thinkers openly and clearly give up the attempt to explain the fact b y means of ratiocin ative thought. All that we get from them as an aid to our im agination is a f ew brilliant analogies. Just as all th e juices of flowers lose their distinc tiveness in the honey stored by the bees in the honey-comb, and the rivers have no separate existence when they pour themselves in the o cean, the creatures in the Absolute can have no private and limited self-consciousness. And this all devouring Absolute Truth is not m erely transcendent or isolated from the creation, but is imm anent in it like the vital juice which nourishes the leaves, the branches, the fruit and the flo wers of a living tree, or like the salt when

dissolved in water pervades it in a ll the

parts. (Chandogya).

The Upanishads clearly and openly

recognize that there are many inevitable

and insuperable difficulties in the atte-

mpt to und erstand the Infinite Atman

through the m ind. Shri Meher B aba

brings out this point unambiguously

when he says "intellect is the lowes t

form of understanding...", and that

therefore "you m ust surrender yourself

to a Sadguru if you want G

od-

realization." We find this doctrine

anticipated by the Up anishadic seer when he says, "This knowledge cannot

be obtained through reasoning. O be-

loved one! Only when it is told by another is it really understood."

(Katha). The master of wisdom is thus

indispensable for arriving at this

supreme understanding. Hence the

clarion call of the sages is, "Arise!

Awaken! Obtain understanding by approaching the Supreme Teachers!"

The wise m en say that "the Path is

difficult like walking on the edge of a

knife". (Katha).

Before, however, the disciple can

derive any benefit from the Master, he

has to undergo

_______________________________________________________________________

*Message 1932.

 Sayings.

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TEACHING

33

certain moral discipline. As emphasised by Shri Meher Baba, the way to realization is "from God to God".* The Upanishadic sages also required m oral preparation of the aspirant before they considered him fit for highest knowledge. At tim es they enjoined c elibacy as a precondition of the suprem e knowledge of the Atman. Som etimes moral precepts are given to th e disciples, e. g., "Speak the truth. Follow religion. Do not be negligent in your studies." (Taittiriya). This was th eir clear commandment. A high degree of moral attainment is, according to th em, absolutely necessary to m ake a person fit for receiving the knowledge of the Atman. Thus in Katha Upanishad the god of Death tests Nachiketas by making him tempting offers, and c ongratulates him for choosing the good in preference to the tem pting; and says, "The courageous one accepts the good rather than the tempting." (Katha).
The moral life in itself is not sufficient. It has to be further supplemented by a life of psychological discipline and religious devotion. In his dis-

course on repeating God 's name Shri Meher Baba says, "C oncentrate your mind on the repetition alone, and breathe regularly while doing so." He often indicates for his disciples different forms of m editation, and in his pamphlet on "Meditation" recommends concentration on "the m ere form of a God-man, or some simple formula such as 'I am neither sharir (gross body) nor prana (the subtle body which is the seat of desires and vital forces), nor manas (mental body which is the seat of the mind): I am Atman (Soul)' ".
This emphasis on the need f or a lif e of meditation and co nstant search is prominent in the Upa nishadic philosophy as will be seen from the enjoinment, "The Atm an should be seen, heard of, thought and m editated upon." (Brihadaranyaka). The psychological discipline is not to be looked upon as a kind of mechanical psychic exercise on the analogy of physical exercise which is wholesome for physical culture, but it is meant to bring out and illumine the hidden possibilities in the hum an hearts. Thus we are gradually

_______________________________________________________________________ *My Master and His Teaching. P. 23.

34 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Led to the life of religion as a necessary supplement.

For the other approaches to the truth.

(to be continued)



"Tunes in Words" Inspired by Baba
BY COUNTESS NANDINE TOLSTOY

If I am a fading flower dying in thirst for water and light, deprived of pure air and fertilizing substance, should I seek one who will com e and tell me in words what I need and what I lack, then perhaps would point out all m y shortcomings and failings? Should I listen to such advisers who only speak well about things to achieve? How great is the irony of their advice, for they have nothing to give and to show, failing in example and acts. Would you not rather seek regions of all abundance of light and take from One who will spr ead light and vivifying s ubstance, who will feed the very roots as well as all its branches and leaves?
Why waste time on vanity of empty

words I Let us thirst for Him alone who

awakens all life. What is the us e of

good precepts which com e from a dry

heart helpless to fulfil its p romise?

Where is the art and the power of

'giving'?

It is a day of days when one can meet

the awakener who is the source itself

and gives from itself. Who is like Him !

Why lose tim e on indirect channels

when He is here to give it all Himself!

So drink, drink! Open your lips to

receive the nectar! Still your heart to let

His heart in! Still the waves of thoughts

and emotions to let th e in-flow make

you new, filled with the Divine! What

else there is, when one has m

et

Himself--the ever-waited for real

Perfect One, the Beloved of all times!

"TUNES IN WORDS" INSPIRED BY MEHER BABA

35

Drink, drink, feed your heart and soul on this Source of all life and joy! Who can give 'feed' unless they have it themselves? Give your soul in full emptiness, drink to the point of saturation, and then go and feed others. Make your light bright to radiate it far and around.
Why gather dry leaves of faded beauty, dropped from a tree into decay, or sleep to dream of the far off spring and a new awakening! W hy not live and rest in cooli ng protection of the Eternal Life-Tree itself! He gives us its sap, its refreshing fragrance, its protection and quiet, its full beauty.
Seek none but Him . Let us walk through life carrying the m ost precious 'gifts' with care and joy. Sure in divine contentment and calm let those marvellous 'gifts' unfold us and live within till all distinctions are no more.
Oh, be aware of His soundless whispers, do not let the thought talk so loud. How can you hear His voice when He will ne ed you? Will His call remain then in vain? Still your waves of noise, lest they rais e to chao s and havoc.

Make the strings ready for His touch! Oh, become His instrument!
What does it m atter what you do; in doing empty yourself--then you m ay be used at the call of His voice. Then you may be at service for the need of His cause! Be in Him until you becom e all His --then all is One, pure and true! Oh, let Him speak and sing and do through you! W hy remain apart! Open all the gates, as He m ay enter unaware, keep the space free!
How clear and simple and how beautiful is this Truth, the Truth of all times; cease the troub le and care of yourself; why this delusion! Release the wearing out ties and clasp Him when He comes near! Loosen the strings so they may be tuned to His bow! Let Him play the divine tunes. Be still and let the worship raise your heart to Love. Love--for this is the o nly ritual of a living God!
How simple it is, how wonderful are His subtle ways! W ith His breath He blows away unseen th e web of the net in which we are caught living veiled in the twilight. How suddenly He m akes one

36 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

light and full of new joy--and the whole world is changed around! This is the mystery of His Love, which ' burns all impurities away'. What seemed before so real--is gone, no m ore, a smoke dissolved in pure spheres. Oh, the breath of the true e xistence of the Beloved! What a m iracle and a wonderful mystery--the invisible Reality! The invisible Reality unseen, yet manifest in its true creativeness!
Nothing can equal this power of all existence. What else m atters? Where can our desires turn after we have discovered Him and 'This'?
Listen! The heart is tapping--do not let other noises overwhelm the voice of the 'new born'.
Where shall you go now when all barriers have m elted away and all is becoming One? W hen the heart 'speaks', who can remain deaf to its

voice? When the beauty floods the soul, who can rem ain blind to its Radiance and Truth? His Love wins all of the heart and soul. What remains of the old, when new life gives the bloom of eternal youth! Let the dead sleep with the dead if they so choose, why this concern? It is all His Will and His Way. Follow Him in this life; delay not; He alone matters in the whole universe!
He brings you nearer and nearer, He persists with calls, draws and irresistibly winds you closer; the m ist of separation becomes thin and transparent. The Rhythm of His Being holds you in His enchantment, revealing more and more the hidden meaning, the sacred beauty of Hi mself in us--the awareness of One Soul!
This is His Love's work. Love brings to life th e ageless (agelong) flower to full bloom--the Soul of One God in all!



A DREAM*

I was dream ing. I wa s lost in some wild mountains in a strange country. Mysterious, silent and terrifying rocks fantastically shaped surrounded m e from everywhere. I clim bed and laboured from rock to rock, slipping and falling and getting up again, jumping and crawling higher and higher. I ignored m y destination. To move further and further seem ed to be the only object. At last I came to a stop. I was on a narrow sort of ledge, and a tremendous high wall of a solid rock was facing m e, and behind m e was a drop of many hundred feet...There was nowhere to go...But suddenly I saw that on the face of that rock there was a small iron door...I was stretching my hand to open it, but bef ore I could do so, it swung open, and a blazing light poured out of it. A m an was standing there and smiling at me. I could not see the features of the m an, because they were drowned in light. But I saw a pair of eyes sparkling like black diamonds.

His hands were sm all and th in with long fingers. He held a short stick in one of his hands, while the other was slightly raised with lon g fingers apart. He was so calm that it was terrifying.
"Who are you?" I asked. "I am Shri Meher Baba," he answered. "You can 't go through that door--not yet." "Why not?" "Because you have to clim b a little longer." "But I tried; I want to rest," I exclaimed. "Don't worry. You will rest when the time comes. You remember, when you left Sais in a hurry, I prom ised you would rest for 1000 years; and then, do you remember what you did in Rom?" "No, I do not. But tell me where does that door lead to?" "It leads to a place from where people do not com e out but are sent out." You seem to know a lot. If so, will you tell me, Shri Meher Baba, what is a man and

______________________________________________________________________
* This dream appeared to Mme. X in England before she met Shri Meher Baba personally. It was written in a letter to one of the disciples of the Master.

38 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

where does he come from?" "Man is one of the results of the
Universal Mind. He com es from the same source of all that exists."
"You mean that I--a human being-- I come from the sam e source as my dog?"
"Yes. When in primitive state of larva in its origin al form, you not only come from the same source, but you are alike."
"And then?" "Then the evolution is operated, each in its destined cir cle. You rem ember that design of Amon," and here the man of light tra ced with his little stic k a design on the rock. He drew a circle, and wrote within it "U niversal Mind", round it drew another circle in which he inserted three words, "Consciousness", "Love" and "Creative Power". Then from that circle he drew lines going out like sun rays. He wr ote at the end of each a word, but as he was writing very quickly, the words were obliterated. I could hardly follow. I rem ember "Air", "Matter", "Minerals", "Animals", "Man"... "And who made the soul?" I asked.

"It was not made--it was given," came the answer.
"And where does evil come from?" "There is no place for ev il in the circle--it comes from freedom of action. There is a clash in the evolution of mind, as air, fire, water and earth clash in the evolution of matter." "Yes. I understand. But now tell m e one more thing--is there anything I ought to do?" "Yes. Though since I saw you last, you have progressed and you have mastered your m ind by capacity of concentration, and you have awakened your spiritual self; however you are standing now in front of a blank wall. From that spiritual consciousness which you have attained you have still to go further. To climb this wall higher up to the Ultimate Reality is the highest consciousness. You have m astered many of the sanskaras, but not all--not all..." The door closed, the light vanished; but it seem ed to m e that high, high up above my head and above the rock, a gleaming hand was waiving to m e pointing upwards!



Shri Meher Baba
BY KEMALI
To paint a picture of this Man Divine lies but through inspiration sent from God.
"This is My beloved son in whom I am well pleased." Could colours blend as words
Which, voiced through God, descend into our hearts, Thus would I take my pen, and,
With God's guidance, paint Him in the glory of the sunrise. The dew on verdant grass
Absorbed in adoration; and the chorus of the birds Hosannahs sing. The day dawns in ecstasy To rise again from death.
Behold and see, through thine own eyes, the glory that doth here abound. The ocean deep,
The sea, resound in colours and reflect His promise in the rainbow. In the sky,
The meadows vast of heaven, are strewn forget-me-nots. The angels there abide
To sing Him praise. The sun and moon He set in motion. In all of these He reigns supreme
To keep it pure. He is in all--all is in Him as One. His blessing gave The world was perfected.
The shadows fall across my pen. In humbleness I kneel. There on the horizon the setting sun
Proclaims the end of day. The pantomime of colours enhance in brilliancy; and in the clouds
I see His face--Baba the Man is God. The tide of the sea swells in exultation and throws
From waters deep its foam upon the sand. Slowly The moon sheds its pure silver light.

40 MEHER BABA JOURNAL
Which, cast in shadows through the leafy trees, forming God's lace, Envelopes us in bliss.
Unlatch thy shoes and kneel in gratitude to be alive and know this perfect man of God.
I am in all, in every blade of grass; in burning bush aflame with love, we find Him there.
On the crest of the mountains from which the waterfalls, made by melting snows, rest in the valleys--
There in the brooks He dwells to feed His sheep. In jungle and in forest, where animals are wild and fierce
They, too, are His. No spot on earth but it is filled with creeping things To praise Him and adore.
"Remember," He said, "should you in anger be, or fear, or hate engage in discord--
See me in all as Love. I am in them even as in thee," and verily thou shalt the truth behold.
Such Baba is. In silence and benevolence He lifts the veil to clear our blinded eyes.
Bewildered, bound to earth, enslaved, His hand all souls will free. Though every moment
Crucified for us who, in His fold, He bathes in bliss and says in love: "I promise you the goal.


Impressions on Shri Meher Baba
BY DELIA DE LEON (London)

All my life I have had two intense desires--the first came to m e when I was very young (abou t nine). I was then at a b oarding school in the West Indies; so perhaps it was the beauty of a warm tropical star-spangled night that stirred my imagination to wonder what was beyond, and m y childish f ancy picturing God as sitting on a throne just behind the stars started a train of thoughts in m e that, though often dimmed, still persisted and gathered force and intensity as I grew older--to know and understand about God.
The second desire came later. I wanted to act--to be a great actress. Both desires ran parallel and were the pivot of my life. The first haunted me; I could not escape it. Not being attracted by conventional form s of religion, I investigated all the ' isms' and strange cults. I read avidly books and poem s that told of mystical and spir itual experiences. Jesus especially attracted me but quite outside the Church. I

travelled a great de al, and although I enjoyed life with its many experiences, deep down I was restless and dissatisfied. I mostly did as I liked, for I was spoilt and self-willed.
The second desire led me through various channels to becom e part proprietor of a little expe rimental theatre. Strange fact that it was in a theatre that the event took place which was to change the whole current of my life, for I only started to be alive from that moment.
In the theatre work I was happy and busy; after m any ups and downs success came, but it lasted only a short while; suddenly everything started to go wrong. I lost practically all m y money, and I eventually reached a period when I was at a low ebb, physically, mentally and spiritually. It was just at that psychological m oment, though what at the tim e seemed a mere chance--the reading of a letter in a weekly paper--that I was

42 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

drawn to a place where people told me of a great Spiritual Teacher and of His impending visit to the W est. My instinct to go to th is place had b een so strong that I knew nothing could prevent it. As I clim bed up the hill at the top of which stood East Challacombe, I felt very exhilarated. Was I not on the threshold of a strange and thrilling adventure?
While I was ther e came a wire that He was already on His way. He arrived in September 1931, and it was at the Coliseum during a perform ance of "White Horse Inn" tha t I first met Shri Meher Baba. I was to have seen Hi m the following day, but it was suggested that I should com e that evening. S ome friends took me into the box. I felt shy and nervous. He looked at m e kindly and made me sit next to Hi m. I had seen His face before in my dream s; the eyes were s tartling in their be auty, the face seemed of luminous honey-colour, framed by a halo of long dark hair. The hands were most noticeable--they kept up an incessant pantom ime, and were strong, slim and sensitive.
Someone said, "This is your surprise,

Baba." He patted m y hand, and I think from that mom ent I must have intuitively recognized Him as m y Master, for I suddenly wanted to cry. I felt stunned. The stage, the actors seem ed to recede and to become vague and far away.
At the end of the performance I knew I must see Hi m again, and He nodded to my request. I went hom e as if in a dream. That night I slept very little. I kept thinking of Hi m, and next m orning, much to the astonishm ent of my family, I rushed off at an incredibly early hour for me.
During the week of His stay in London I saw Him every day. Time and place seemed not to exist. Everyone and everything faded from my m ind except Baba. He alone seem ed real-- the Perfect Human Being. Compared to Him everyone else was like a shadow. He drew m e irresistibly, His love melted me, and His humour and charm attracted me. His silence was more potent than words. It is not what a Master says but what He is ab le to convey of Truth and Love that is im portant, what He is Himself--the fact

IMPRESSIONS ON SHRI MEHER BABA

43

that He embodies in Himself the Christ qualities.
In a world where everyone is shouting and talking, what we need is example. Something deep within me recognized these qualities in Baba--I could not explain or analyse it. I just knew (for myself) wi th certainty. I had nothing to say to Hi m. I felt I loved Him and had faith in Him , and kne w I could not be disappointed.
When I looked at the people passing in the streets, I thought Baba is in the world and they do not know it, and it seemed strange that it should be happening to m e. As the poor barber said of his meeting with the Buddha:
The Blessed One passed by my house,
My house, the barber's. I ran, and he turned and awaited me,
Me, the barber. I said, "May I speak, O Lord, with thee?"
And He said, "Yes." Yes, to me, the barber!
And I said, "Is the Peace for such as I?"
And he said, " Yes." Even for me, the Barber!

And I said, "May I follow after thee?" And he said, "Yes." Even I, the barber! And I said,"May I stay,
O Lord, near Thee?" And He said, "Thou mayest." Even to me, the poor
barber. During the tim e I have followed
Baba, I have been asked m any questions about Hi m from people who are curious, antagonistic, interested or friendly. They want to know why I follow Him, what does He teach and what does He intend doing for hum anity, etc. I can only answer from my own understanding which is naturally very limited, for how can anyone understand a Perfect Master? But if people ask out of antagonism or interest, they have a right to be answered. Baba definitely claims to b e a Perfect Master. So the approach to Him should not be along conventional lines or preconceived ideas as to how He should carry on His work. Those who turn against Hi m usually do s o because He does not act according to their id eas of right and wrong. They cannot stand the pace or the tests He sets, and fall away blam ing Him for

44 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

the weakness that is inheren t in themselves.
Pipa says, "When the true Master in the world appeareth He shows Himself to man as m an." It is Baba 's humanity that makes Him come down to our level to raise us up to His. He gives to each individual according to one 's needs. So the ordinary m odern man coming to Him gets practical common-sense advice; for what would be the use of a Divine Being so rem ote as not to be able to help us to live our everyday life;
He says that He has com e to give a Spiritual Push to hum anity and to awaken the individu al to his real S elf, that is, to reach the sam e state of consciousness that He has attained; this He will do, not by teaching new dogmas and creeds, but by the inspiration of His Love.
He brings Peace, but it is edged w ith a sword. For this process of "dying " or the elimination of the "ego" is pa inful, and He has often to destroy before He can rebuild. He works through maya (illusion) to overcom e maya and uses our vices and virtues to get us to that

state which is beyond all duality. Most people, not understanding this, expect an immediate outward change in Baba 's disciples. They do not realize th at, although at one's first meeting the change is definite and fundamental, it has to be worked out in life along normal lines.
In the sam e way that a sculptor chisels at his stone and knocks off all knocks and excrescences until he gets the likeness he requires, so Baba seems to do the sam e with human beings. He breaks down all attach ments, even of ideas--He tests in all sorts of ways. He makes promises and breaks them , and will go on breaking them, until you can stand on your own f eet and not ask for anything. For a Master will make use of even lies if it is necessary for your ultimate good. Som etimes He will blame you for som ething you have not done before the guilty person, just to see how you react. He expects you, when He asks, to be prepared to give up all ties and material considerations for Him. He uses your strength and attacks your weakness.
One of the main faults of the

IMPRESSIONS ON MEHER BABA

45

West and the cause o f most of its troubles is the greed for wealth and possessions. So Baba m akes it one of His chief points of attack. Most people are full of fears and am ass money for their future safety and security; so Baba by releasing this fear does what all the psychologists cannot do, however much they stir up the sub-conscious. For He helps people to transm ute their baser desires through love w hich alone can free. I have watched this happen over and over again, and seen people give up the habits a nd desires o f a lif etime. So when people ask m e about miracles, I tell them that Baba's greatest miracle is to change the hum an heart. This H e is doing, and as He does it in individuals, so will the world gradually experience a change in consciousness.

For even if Baba speaks or does some-thing startling to dr aw the world--or whether He is rejected as most Avatars --it is really His work on the individual whic h is enduring and permanent.
What is there about Him that not only holds me, but so m any other men and women of various types, som e for more than fifteen yea rs? For myself I would say, His hum aneness, His power to transform the m ost common-place things of life with beauty--and above all His Love, and the Love that through Him I am able to feel and which has made me more of a human being.
All these things bind me to Baba, but the deepest experiences are beyo nd words, for as Baba says: "Things that are real are always given and received in silence."



Hazrat Sai Baba of Shirdi*
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

Hazrat Sai Baba (1856-1918), although an outstanding figure of the saintly hierarchy of th e last and the present century, like the majority of his kind, leaves behind no authentic record of his antecedents and early h istory. This may sound strange to historians of this our age who allow no unique incident or a great personage to pass away unrecorded. But s aints are a class by themselves, and baffle both the historian and the biographer who naturally wonder at the paucity of personal information to be gleaned about saintly personalities like Sai Baba, in spite of their spiritual reputation and large following. In order to understand this seeming anomaly, the conditions governing the m utual approach of a saint and a devotee m ust be borne in mind. In the eyes of a devotee a saint:
Is not a person but a personality; Is not a preacher but a teacher;

Is not what he was but what he is; Is not one who hopes for but achieves; Is not one who promises but gives. The saint also typifies a st ate of spiritual being that: Is never concerned with the past or future, but lives and works in the active present; Is not concerned with the problems of the hereaf ter, but is f or the solution of the riddle of life here and now; Is not concerned with what a disciple possesses, but is alive to what he surrenders; Is not concerned with the seeker 's impersonal faith and belief, but takes cognisance of his pe rsonal actions and motives. Thus it is tha t a saint is inv ariably never communicative with regard to his personal antecedents, and the devotee is less inquisitive in such matters,

____________________________________________________________________________________ *Shirdi is a village in Koperagaon Taluka of Ahmednagar District, Bombay Presidency

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

47

feeling convinced that the grace of a saint is to be induced by service and love alone and not by knowledge of personal facts and history concerning him. This state of affairs is particularly true of Muslim saints, and the only personal information that is d eemed worthwhile knowing is th e saint's spiritual lineage, the Murshid ( M a s t e r ) and his Order of Sufis m, which details greatly help in determining the quality and pote ntiality of his gnosis (Irfan).
Like others of hi s class, the birth and parentage of Ha zrat Sai Baba also is lost in obscurity and has g i v e n rise to conflicting conjectures in this respect, particularly so amongst his Hindu adm irers and devotees. One sect ion* considers him to be born of B rahmin parents brought up by a Muslim faqir, and another affirms unequivocally that he was Muslim born. The fact, however, is that Sai Baba w as a Muslim by birth, and the presence of a temple near to a m osque at Shirdi, brought into being by S ai Baba, was out of deference to his

Hindu Guru (Master) Gopalrao Deshmukh.
Hazrat Sai Baba hails from Selu, a village in Jan tur Pargana, Nizam's Dominions, and passed his early childhood ne ar about Aurangabad. Sai Baba's parents were very poor, and the cruel hand of death having removed the paternal protection, the m other took to m endicancy for a livelihood. W hile begging her way through life, she (the mother) happened to come to Shelwadi to the hou se of Gopalrao Deshmukh with her son, aged f ive years, who wa s destined to be our future Sai Baba. Gopalrao, the renowned saint of the place, was at once struck by the s piritual potentiality of the child, and very lovingly offered both the m other and the son pr otection and shel ter which they sorely needed.
A short account of the antecedents of Gopalrao who initiated Sai Baba into the spiritual path would not be am iss here. Gopalrao's father, Kesh avpant, was extraordinarily religious-minded, and, as is usu al with suc h beings, penury and want dogged his

___________________________________________________________________
*"Sai Baba of Shirdi" by B. V. Narasimhaswami. "Bhakta-Lilamrut" (in Marathi) by Das Ganu

48 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

footsteps. The only valuable property which he w as proud to possess in the world was the household deity, Shri Vyankatesh, whom he worshipped very regularly and devoutly. When Gopalrao grew up, h is birthplace, Jamb, offered no prospects of a decent and honourable living, and the chronic poverty of the family compelled him to migrate to a nearby d istrict where he selected the village Shelwadi as the venue of his future enterprise.
Religiosity being in his blood, Gopalrao soon estab lished his reputation as a very high-m inded and spiritually attuned soul. In course of tim e, the Government, also in recognition of his humanitarian activities, gifted him the village of Shelwadi as Jahagir (hereditary tenure of land). The severity of his asceticism may be gauged from the following incident related about him : Once, when having an outing, his eyes fell on a beautiful woman, giving rise to evil thoughts in his mind. He at once retraced his steps hom e, and, standing before the deity Shri Vyankatesh, pierced both the eyes blind with an iron

poker. This incident, w hen it cam e to be known, enhanced considerably his inner light and also his outer reputation in the world. It is said of him, that after this self-inflicted blindness, Bhagwan (Shri Vyankatesh) would him self arrange for him the cerem onial paraphernelia of worship at puja (prayer) time. Such miraculous incidents carried Gopalrao's spiritual rep utation far and wide, and Shelwadi becam e a place of pilgrimage for people high and low.
The loving care of a Master like Gopalrao is the on ly solace-giving factor left to Sai Baba, when at the age of 12 the mother also departs from the world, leaving him a complete orphan. This last link with the material world having been snappe d, the orphan boy was unconsciously drawn m ore and more close towards Gopalrao who made no s ecret of his special predilection for him . This unreserved love and attraction towards Sai Baba rou sed the ire and jealousy o f the Brah min followers of Gopalrao, and they all resented in no unm istakable terms the preferential treatment accorded

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

49

to a Muslim boy by their Master who was a Brahmin. An innocent creature of the situation, Sai Baba cam e in for a good deal of persecution and harassment by the local populace.
The Guru (Master) and the chela (disciple) went about their work unperturbed, and adopted a very tolerant attitude towards the m isguided malefactors of the village. Matters came to a head when a few fanatics decided to do away with the Mus lim disciple who, as they thought, monopolised the favours of the Brahmin Master. With that end in v iew some fire-brands of the place follow ed Gopalrao and Sai Baba into th e jungle outside Shelwadi which both of t hem used to frequent very often in each other's company. Finding them asleep underneath a shady tree, they approached them stealthily, and one of them aimed a big piece of stone at the sleeping boy's head. Happily the deadly missile missed its mark, and instead of hurting Sai Baba , it hit the Ma ster Gopalrao Deshmukh resting by his side.
This was too much for Sai Baba to

put up with, and out of sheer love for his Master who had to suffer so much for his sake, he begged perm ission of Gopalrao to be allowed to leav e him and go elsewhere. Gopalrao, however, would hear of no such thing, and pacified the loving disciple by saying, "I have this day decided upon you as my sole chargem an, and one day you will succeed to my spiritual heritage."
It is universally admitted that spiritual personages never have recourse to retaliation or revenge, either physically or even m entally, for whatever persecution they undergo at the hands of ignorant people. Prophet Moham ed prayed for more light to the enem y responsible for the loss of his tooth in one of his early conflic ts with his pe rsecutors, and Lord J esus, while being crucified, said: "O Lo rd, forgive them; they know not what they do." And yet there are numerous instances of people coming to harm as a result of th eir misbehaviour towards saints and prophets. Why is this so when the light of spirituality bears no ill-will towar ds the darkness of ignorance? The reason is not far to seek. The physical presence

50 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

of a Perfect Master is the focal point round which divine powers-- shaktis-- (which the orthodox personify as angels) are very active, and react v ery forcibly to good or bad thoughts and deeds. It is these div ine entities rou nd the personality of a saint that respond very quickly and ruthlessly, yielding results good or bad according to the stimulous imparted. Such results, good or bad, accrue to people oftentim es unknown to the saint him self, and the laity term these as m iracles. To this effect there is a dictum among Sufis which says: "With God (impersonal) do what you dare; but with saints forsooth beware. "
This dictum stands verified In the case of the m iscreant who threw the stone at Gopalrao with m urderous intent. The man was taken ill, and a fter a few days died. The people of the town were awe-stricken, and the death of the man under the circumstances was interpreted as a m iracle in vindication of Gopalrao's spiritual status. The relations of the deceased approached Gopalrao, and prostrating before him begged to be forgiven for misunderstanding his

saintliness. Furthermore all of them invoked Gopalrao's divine m ercy for restoring the dead culprit to lif e. Gopalrao very benignly evaded this request by saying, "I am one like any of you, and have no such divine powers that you attribute to m e," and pointing towards Sai Baba suggestively added, "That Muslim boy may perhaps do something in the matter." Sai Baba, finding the question being referred to him by the Maste r, confidently took a little dust off the f eet of Gopalrao a nd applied it to the dead body, and m iraculously the man came to lif e. This incident greatly impressed the populace and brought to light the true spiritual relationship between the Brahm in Master and the Muslim disciple. In token of their regenerated bhakti and faith in Gopalrao the people arranged a great ceremonial function. The Guru and the chela were taken out in a procession, and thousands paid hom age to them.
The death of Gopalrao took place under circumstances strangely touching. Although he had declared it off and on that he would soon be discarding

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

51

his earthly existence, nobody took him very seriously. One day he gathered the mandali round him and declared it was time for him to go. Having finished his daily bath, sandhya (prayers) and the recital of Gita, he beckoned to Sai Baba to approach him . When the latter went near him, Gopalrao presented him his wearing apparel (dhotar), and delivering his last serm on to those around gave up the ghost.
The gift of clothing by Gopalrao was symbolic of the transference of spiritual charge to Sai Baba. The old and w orn out clothing, the sp iritual significance of which only Sai Baba new, he tailored it into a wrapper for the head an d an apron (kafni) to drape the body.
Soon after the dem ise of Gopralrao, Sai Baba who was now s ixteen years of age left Shelwadi with the m arriage party of a Moham edan Patel bound for Shirdi. He did not stay here for long, and again took to a wandering life of a faqir (mendicant). In th is itinerary Sai Baba retired into a cave in a mountain

near Aurangabad (Nizam's Dominions), and p ractised severe asceticism, going without food a nd water for a number of years. Thereafter he contacted another saint* near Akkalkot who helped him to regain norm al consciousness.
At the age of twenty Sai baba once again returned to Sh irdi, this time to stay permanently. He w as very ascetic in his habits, and was extrem ely indifferent to bodily requirem ents and comforts. For a period he passed his nights underneath a m argosa (neam) tree, but later took up his residence in the local mosgue. In the beginning he led a very secluded life and avoided com pany, only emerging now and then to play the Samaritan amongst the poor villagers whose bodily ailm ents he tried to cure without remuneration, with a working knowledge of Indian herbs and drugs that he possessed. The necess ary but meager food for the sustenance of the body he sought by daily begging at only five different houses by uttering in

____________________________________________________________________________________
*The renowned Swami of Akkalkot was Sai Baba's contemporary, and though the latter was spiritually connected with him, no other relationship as that of a Master or disciple existed between them.

52 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

the Marathi language the words "mai bhakar wadha" (mother, give a little bread), as most of the villagers were Hindus.
This daily programme of begging at five different houses with the peculiar slogan, "mother, give a little bread", Sai Baba kept up to the end of his days, and this, according to Hazrat Meher Baba, possessed deeper sig nificance than what meets the ey e from the outward act characteristic of a m endicant. Sai Baba's every act and move ment possessed a spiritual significance depicted in numbers, and here the five houses he made a poi nt of visiting daily were symbolic of the five Perfect Mas ters (Sadgurus) of all tim es at whose doors the whole u niverse is s upplicating for spiritual salvation or material welfare.
Whilst begging for food as stated above, Sai Baba would very often stop for urination anywhere, oblivious to the people and surroundings, and the most awkward and funny part thereof was that he would invariably give seven jerks to the genitals during the ac t of micturition, thereby indicating that the

seven spiritual planes were com pletely under his control and command.
Whilst answering the call of nature, he would spend several hours in the lavatory. When later his saintly reputation was f irmly established and attracted a la rge following of adm irers and devotees, the daily visit to the lavatory became quite a ce remonial affair. At a fixed hour daily Sai Baba used to visit the "Lendi" as the lavatory was called by him , accompanied by a few people, with the village band playing music as loud as possible. Explaining this apparently eccentric vein in Sai Baba, Hazrat Meher Baba gave a very illuminating explanation: "Perfect Masters who control and direct the spiritual and material welfare of the universe, usually do so through their agents who are scattered in different parts of the world and who hold different spiritual jurisdictions in accordance with their s piritual status. Some of these agen ts from the higher planes are vaguely conscious of the source of directions and orders that they carry out, but the

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

53

majority of those from the lower planes are unaware of the s ource of the orders from which they im plicitly and a utomatically carry out. It is for this reason that many of those from the diffe rent planes who are known and worshipped as saints cannot and do not recognise the Sadgurus or Perfect Masters who direct and control the affairs of the universe. To come to the point under discussion, Perfect Masters lik e Sai Baba, whilst engaged in the act of evacuating the bowels, at such a tim e dispense altogether with the ag ency of saints and directly control the universe. Believe it or not, it is possible for Sadgurus, while thus engaged, to determine and c alculate numerically all the forms and stages of the evolving creation in detail."
Because of his wandering habits and baffling moods Sai Baba cam e to be known at Shirdi as a "m ad faqir". He was chary of com pany, and the only people whom he contacted were of a saintly character. At first the people of Shirdi found it difficult to understand him, and treated him indifferently. But

a few incidents of a m iraculous nature dispelled all doubts as to Sai Baba 's spiritual greatness. On one occasion the villagers who used to supply oil for the Masjid lamps refused to provide the daily quota. Sai Baba that night filled the lamps with water and kept th em burning the whole night, thus supporting the Sufi belief that "even if the winds from the worlds assail, the light of saints will never f ail". This incid ent afforded the villagers a glim pse as to what Sai Baba rea lly was, and thereafter they were all eyes and ears to all his behests. Once som e people saw Sai Baba lying in a field outside the village with all the lim bs of the body--head, trunk, arms and legs--all detached and separate. When he returned to norm al consciousness, his apparently severed limbs got automatically assembled once again, and h e became his original self. This is a rare phenom enon of spiritual ecstacy to be witnessed in s aintly personages, and connotes, according to Sufis, a certa in stage of spirituality (Ghousiyat) wherein the divine aspect of love is so very intense and over-

54 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

powering as to affect visibly even the

physical form as stated above. Saints

having this state of spiritual ecstasy do

not long remain in it; they even tually

outgrow this experience.

Almost all Perfect M asters more or

less adopt shock tactics whenever they

condescend to bestow their divine grace

materially or spiritually on

their

devotees. By imparting such shocks,

physical or m ental, to the recipients of

their grace, the Masters very subtly and

cleverly try to weaken their ego for

them. The spiritual ben efit accruing to

an aspirant of the Path, approaching a

spiritual Master, is in direct proportion

to the weak ening or elim ination of the

ego. Many instances are on record

which go to illus trate how spiritual

Masters have imparted spirituality to

aspirants by asking them to do j ust

those things which th eir very nature

would revolt against. Shams-e-Tabriz

asked Moulana Rum i, the well-known

Muslim divine, to fetch wine for him ,

and Junaid of Baghdad induced con-

firmed drunkards to offer

namaz

(prayers) in the hope of developing

powers which would import wine for

them by merely wishing f or it; als o Nizamuddin of Delhi gave a spiritual push to a Hindu yogi stranded on the Path by asking him to em brace Islam which was re-pugnant to him ; and Ghousali Shah Qalander enjoined a Muslim devotee to give up all namaz before conferring upon hi m the vision of Prophet Moham ed. This peculiar attitude of imparting spirituality in certain saints is evidently anticipated by the Persian poet Hafiz when he says:
"Hesitate not to soak with wine
The carpet of your prayers: The Master orders not
in vain, He knows the Path and all
its snares." This tendency to s hock tactics is remarkably prominent in Sai Baba. He would always have by his side heaps of stones which he would very of ten throw deliberately at people approaching him for his darshana. Lucky indeed were those who refused to be scared by such a concrete m anifestation of his annoyance and displeasure. He w ould unblushingly demand money of

HAZRAT SAI BABA OF SHIRDI

55

newcomers, and would uncannily name the exact am ount possessed by the party, and which, when parted w ith, would create a serious problem for the return journey. Not that Sai Baba had any attraction for lucre, but this was one of his ways by which he contacted to himself the evil sanskaras of people coming to him . He would very often confound the parents by asking them all innocently if the baby was a boy or a girl even when the sex organs were visible to him . The typical Hindu ceremonies like arti and puja Sai Baba would have them performed in the mosque, and the recitation of Quran by Muslims he would listen to in the Hindu temple.
Those familiar with matters spiritual will read a world of meaning in some of the utterances of Sai Baba given below, and they would thereby be able to gauge the standard of his gnosis and the height of his sp iritual perfection. Sai Baba on different occasions has been heard to say:
"Those who see Baba in Shirdi have not seen him at all."
"I am formless and every-where."

"I am not this three cubits and a half height of the body that is called `Sai'".
"I am God and the Brahanand (universe)."
"I am all and in all--saints, criminals, animals, etc. I pervade the u niverse. I created Brahma or Khuda (God)."
"Nothing moves but by my grace." "My race is that of Parvardigar (God), my religion is Kabiri (after the saint Kabir) and m y profession is to bestow blessings." Sai Baba, as stated in the beginning, was one of the five Perfect Ones of the time, and p ossessed all the characteristics of a Qalander. His spirituality was that of Salik-Majzoob which is a state of realization wherein the aspect of divinity predominates over th e aspect of gnosis. Like all P erfect Masters (Sadgurus) he had a circle of twelve disciples, and his successor, th e spiritual chargeman, is Shri Sadguru Upasani Maharaj of Sakori in Ahm ednagar District. Hazrat Meher Baba once stated that as a m atter of fact he was directly connected with Sai Baba spiritually and indirectly with Upasani Maharaj.

56 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

The fact of his (Meher Baba 's) being

brought to norm al consciousness by

Upasani Maharaj was d ue to Sai Baba 's

earthly mission approaching its end,

and hence Upasani Maharaj performed

the duty towards him on behalf of Sai

Baba.

Another duty of a most outstanding

character that Sai Baba perform ed at

the fag end of his earthly m ission was

the conduct and the term ination of the

Great European W ar of 1914. The

scientific Western mind would laugh at

this fantastic claim, but to th e spiri-

tually minded East there is nothing new

about it. Perfect Saints known and un-

known do and have perform ed duties

which have oftentim es changed the

map of the world and shaped

the

destinies of m ankind in general and

nations in particular, although the latter

are ignorant about it. While delving

into the domain of spirituality the West

has yet to learn and unlearn m any

things. Whenever Sai Baba used to

leave the mosque for going to the

temple, his arti was usually performed

midway between the two places; and on such occasions Sai Bab a's face alw ays shone with a peculiar lustre and radiance which was noticeable to all. In this condition he used to m ake signs in the air with his fingers, and this unique and strange feature of his behaviour continued regularly throughout the period that the European W ar lasted. In this respect it is also significant that the end of Sai Baba 's physical existence on earth synchronises with the term ination of the War in 1918.
Conclusively, Hazrat Sai Baba was the Qutub (Sadguru) of his tim e, and amongst the hierarchy of saints of the period he was the accredited presiding authority of their conferences. Such meetings of saints are very often held at a moment's notice in different parts of the world. Another sp ecial feature with Sai Baba was his ability to appear sim ultaneously at different places in the same gross for m. Numerous miracles are attributed to him , and it is hoped to recount a few most unique and interesting ones in a future issue of this Journal.



Offering to Baba
BY MALCOLM SCHLOSS (Hollywood)
I am in spirit on my knees before Thee, Though outwardly I tend to many things. They are one way of proving I adore Thee; I offer them to Thee as my heart sings.
Sings with a love that will not be forgotten ; Flames with a love that will not be denied. Though I perform the tasks which lie before me. My spirit wings like incense to Thy side.
And, in the flames of this great conflagration, I am consumed; there only doth remain That which can serve Thee, praise
Thee and adore Thee; Thy kingdom, now made worthy of Thy reign.

Nores from my Diary
F. H. DADACHANJI

BENARES
From Jubbulpore, in Central Provinces, our big bus wended its way towards the holy city of the Hindus -- Benares--on the river Ganges which is one of the largest rivers in India, besides for untold centuries considered very sacred. The highly reverential feeling for the sacredn ess of both the river and the city ri sing above its bank could be judged from the fact that throughout the year hundreds of thousands of pilgrim s come here from every part of India 's great continent to bathe in its holy waters, and, at certain times in th e year during festivals, the number of these pilgrim s goes be yond count.
The live desire of every religiousminded Hindu is to visit this sac red place and h ave a b ath in its purifying waters, at least once if not every y ear. There is s till a be lief among the religious masses of the Hindus that dying and being burnt on the ghauts

(river banks) of the Holy Ganges wipes

out one's sanskaras (impressions) of

lives, and the soul gets

Mukti

(liberation from the chain of births and

deaths). If for want of m eans or for any

other unavoidable reasons, going to

Benares and dying there is not possible,

the ashes of thousands of Hindus who

die elsewhere, even in the rem otest

parts of the country, are, whenever

possible, brought ove r great distances

to be th rown into th e holy water s of

Ganga Mayya (the mother Ganges who

liberates). A fresh incident m ay be

worth mentioning. H. H. the Maharaja

Gaikwad of Baroda recently died in

Bombay, and his body was taken to his

capital (Baroda) to lie in state for the

last homage of his subjects, and after-

wards burnt there. The ashes, however,

were taken by a special train to a

distance of over a t housand miles to be

interned into the sac red waters of the

Ganges, at Allahabad, a city situated on

the junction of the two rivers--the

Ganges and the Jumna--both of which

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

59

have their sources in the Hi malayas. (A junction of two rivers is considered very sacred by the Hindus, this particular junction of two of the m ost important rivers being considered highly sacred.)
It is for reasons of such life offerings that numerous shrines and te mples, dedicated to various gods and goddesses of the Hindus, have been built there by the Rajas and Maharajas (Indian princes) as well as by other wealthy Hindus who, on several occasions in their lifetime, visit Benares on pilgrimage. Some make this pilgrimage almost every year, and have their palaces built there overhanging the ghauts where they s tay during the sojourn. It is custom ary that after these rulers of Indian States and other wellto-do Hindus complete their r itual of purification in th e holy waters, free distribution of sweets and food, especially to the poor, is m ade in their names. Some rulers have erected resting houses for their poor subjects to stay during their pilgrim age, so have other Hindus built many sarais (resting

houses) for pilgrims. Benares has thus become the greatest place of pilgrimage for millions of Hindus every year. Yet for each w ho comes here, there are many who, for som e reason or another, are unable to m ake the journey. T hey have the holy waters brought over, at times even hundreds of m iles, by a returning pilgrim from the holy place, and these less fortunate ones thus have the consolation and satisfaction at least of having tasted the holy waters of Gangaji (Ganges) that wash off their sanskaras or sins and purify their souls. This general description is m eant to give our readers, esp ecially the W esterners, an idea of the highly sanctif ied environments of this place which is mostly included in all itin eraries of India for its great religious im portance. A few words, however, related from Baba's explanation regarding the spiritual significance of such a place w hich is held so sacred by m illions, are worth mentioning. Asked as to the spiritual significance behind this religious im portance given by millions of Hindus to the shrines and tem ples erected in Benares, Baba explained that:

60 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

"Since times of old, there have been endless numbers of Rishis and Tapaswis (ascetics) who have lived there for years, practised penan ces, meditated and were in high states of Samadhi (spiritual trance)." Baba also added that "GREAT SOULS SUCH AS RAMA, KRISHNA. BUDDHA AND EVEN JESUS HAD BEEN HERE DURING CERTAIN PERIODS OF THEIR LIVES. It is due to these highly evolved souls and Masters of their age that the pla ce is su rcharged with s piritual atmosphere. True sanctity does not lie in the dead walls of brick and stone or even the waters, but it is in the great living beings who stayed here and filled the environment with the fire of their devotion, love and worship, and in the great spiritual forces released by the Masters during their stay here..."
Baba and party stayed at Benares for some days, and visited places chosen by him. One of these was a short ride in a sailing boat on the Ganges. Those of the group who accompanied the Master on this trip along the river bank at an early-hour of the da y felt that though Baba was physically with them, he

seemed to be away elsewhere spiritually working. Another interesting place to which Baba to ok his disc iples was Sarnath, a few m iles away, where are preserved interesting Buddhistic remains. It is here that Buddha had his first centre with his disciples around him.
Baba also went around the city in a tonga (horse-carriage) with two of us driving through the busiest thoroughfares, streets and lanes thickly inhabited by the natives, espe cially the po or. During the drive, we would come across certain types of faqirs (Godintoxicated souls) and such other persons in beggarly attire. Baba would just cast a glance at particular ones am ongst these, would order a coin or m ore to be given in certain cases, thus establishing an inner contact which they would faintly feel conscious of in their spiritually-dazed state. No words would pass, and the m eeting would be in passing for only a moment in silent recognition between the two. It is a privilege to watch the Master work thus, in a most wonderfully subtle way, in which he would contact them,

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

61

instructing us to driv e in certain directions, and spotting ou t of the crowds the right person on whom he would bestow a mom entary yet signif icant glance--all too subtle for description.
From here, we m ove on to our next halt, Agra, the city of immortal Taj. En route, Baba and party pass through Allahabad, the capita l of the United Provinces. Here, the Master got out alone and looked upon the junction of the two rivers, the Ganges and the Jumna.
AGRA One of the world's most beautiful and inspiring sites is the "Taj Maha l", that "dream in m arble" which, f or its exquisite symmetry and grace and for its marvellous richness and beauty of its materials, is unequalled. It is th e tomb of Mumtaz Mahal, wife of the great Moghul Emperor Shah Jehan, by whom it was raised in memorial and tribute of their love. The following lines give one an idea of this gre at love that inspired an Emperor to erec t this world-famed mausoleum which perpetuates the memory of his beloved queen: That great tomb, rising
prodigious still,

Matchless, perfect in form, a miracle
Of grace, and tenderness, and symmetry.
Pearl pure against the sapphire sky,
The proud passion of an Emperor's love
Wrought into living stone which gleams and soars
With body of beauty, shining soul and thought.
So is the Taj. While one greatly appreciates and admires the love aspect of this inspiring monument that needed enormous wealth and resources of a great Emperor. one cannot but pause to wonder why humanity is so indifferent towards the greater and deeper aspect of love--the L ove Divine--that needs no we alth or riches of the world b ut the sim plest dedication of one's self to the Divine Beloved! Of what use would all the wealth of the world be if it but creates a cu rtain of delusion that keeps one away from Divinity that is everyone's birthright! If Maya's hold is so strong, w hy not shake it off with the aid of a Spiritual Master?

62 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Our stay at Ag ra was for about a week during which the ancient Fort was visited besides the Taj. Fatehpur Sikri (the city of ruins), about 20 miles away, was also amongst the historical places viewed by the group.
After summary glances at all these century-old monum ents of history and works of art, when the presence of Baba would m ake one feel the transient aspect of t hings of matter, however great, grand or beautiful, Baba would just touch the point with his ty pical gesture and words: "It is al l a big zero--a dream." These words, uttered at the right moment, would touch the tenderest chords of each heart, and everyone would realize the g reat difference of the life of matter from the life of spirit. All the feeling of appreciation of th e greatness of th e Emperors who fl ourished in their times would fade away, and a true feeling of appreciati on of things of eternal value in life --the life of the spirit--would hold. And it is for this particular reason that a spiritual Master like Baba takes his closest group of disciples even to these

places of im portance in history, splendour and glamour to give them a clear contrast between life of matter and life of the spirit.
A whole day was specially given to visiting places d irectly connected with the life of Lord Krishna; Muttra where he w as born; Gokul where he was taken to save his l ife directly after his birth in prison and where he spent part of hi s early childhood; and Brindaban which is the sacred scene of his life and play with his gopies and where h e drew towards himself even the cow-herds with the melody of his flute. A great spiritual significance is attac hed to these places because of t he name and work of the Great Lord w ho lived there and re deemed humanity in his time.
DELHI
Delhi, the Imperial Capital, was the next place we moved to stay. No other city, it is said, has seen so many ups and downs and ravages of time, of bloodshed in furious battles that decided the destinies of so many dynasties ever s ince the times of Rama, Pandavas and Kauravas. It is said to be built out of "seven cities" and has numerous

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

63

buildings of historical im portance in an area of about 45 square m iles, which the ruins of t he ancient cities cover.
But Baba took the party to only a few of the m onuments of outstanding importance--the Jumma Masjid, the Fort, and the Qutub Minar which, according to Baba, has importance even in the subtle world. One of the most inspiring of all is the famous t omb of Hazr at Nizamuddin, the Qutub, who lived here centuries ago. Fuller details of this visit, in th e words of a W esterner, are given at th e end of this in stalment.
Baba's special work with the God-
mad continued.
It must be remembered that Mahomed, the principal inmate of the Master's Ashram of the God-mad at Meherabad, has also been accompanying us since th e beginning, and even during the tour, Baba gives him his daily bath, food and personal treatment as usual, thus keeping in touch and maintaining the link of this special work he has been doing through the God-m ad ever since the establishment of the Ashram at

Rahuri in 1936. An d it is this particular work, we noted, that, even during our constant m ovements, seems to be his preferred work in consideration of it s special importance as he alo ne knows. He spends about two hours almost every day with Mahomed who has now form ed the habit of constantly calling for "Dada", as he calls Baba. A lthough, as Baba stated, he is between the 3rd and 4th stage of spiritual advancement in the planes, and his normal consciousness is not properly balanced, Baba's contact and his personal touch gr adually restores him to norm ality. His progress in coming down to this normal consciousness is very r emarkable. With it also unfolds his unique love for the Master.
But in Delhi, Baba wants some other God-mad to wash and f eed. Our mandali, therefore, start the search for these der elicts of humanity in this Imperial Capital City of India. Baba says there are many here, and c onfident in his words the disciples m ove about particular spots where these peculiar types of God-m ad gather and are found loitering. T hey manage to bring one,

64 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

though with great difficulty. To get hold of such apparently crazed lovers of God m oving about in ra gs in a big city like Delhi a nd to persuade them to come with us to our place is a job indeed, known only to those who do it. And in this city, where we are q uite new, our talks with these peculiar types of humanity do certainly create a curiosity for the regular residents of this place, many of w hom gather around and inquire as to why and where we are taking these people. It becomes a task indeed when we have to explain to them vaguely, keeping Baba 's identity undisclosed. But any w ay, when Baba wants a thing done, his inner guidance and help com e and enable the workers to accomplish at times the impossible. Baba felt very happy when he washed and f ed the one who proved to be the exact type he wanted and who needed a Master's touch and treatm ent most. Apart from the internal benefit he derived with the spiritual push he got through this personal contact and touch of the Master, his external transformation was also remarkable. Washed, cleaned, and shaved with a

new white kafni (long robe) on, changed him entirely into a new being from what he appeared a f ew hours ago. W ith a blank expression he meekly submitted to a ll the loving care bestowed on him , and appeared blissfully happy when he walked out. Tear s however were seen in his eyes when he was lef t at the place from where th e mandali had brought him.
On the day of Baba's arrival with his party to India 's Capital, and in the very proximity of th e place where he put up during his short stay in Delhi, a new temple was inaugurated and opened for the public. Apart from the beauty and grandeur of its structure combining modern art with the ancient, t he special significance of this temple lies in its very cosmopolitan and universal outlook being lef t open to A LL classes, the highest and the lowest, including even the unt ouchables. It seems thus to m ark the adv ent of a new era of religious tolerance that breaks all the rigid barriers of caste and creed, admitting the right of every human being to enter the House of God.

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

65

Although not having any external connection with Baba, the inauguration and openin g of such an unique temple at th e exact tim e of the appearance of a Sp iritual Master on the spot, whose gospel of teaching imbibes the sam e underlying principle of a brotherhood of humanity irrespective of caste, colour or creed, connotes, if anything, the subtle working and influence of the powers that m ould the destinies of mankind in thes e times--example again of the tim ely and significant movements of Baba.
We finish this instalment with a description of our group's visit to the tomb of H azrat Nizamuddin, in the words of an Am erican lady who accompanied the party:
"An example of the Master, Meher Baba's spiritual way of working while on this tour, was witnessed during our visit to the tomb of Hazrat Nizamuddin, a great Saint who has been buried outside of Delhi, which ostens ibly might seem like the visit of thousands of other travellers to th is holy shrine, but turned out to be most unusual due to Baba's presence.

A young man of studious appearance and f ine features, who seemed to be the attendant in this holy place, show ed us around. W e noticed that his demeanor was not like the ordinary attendant, for he had such true feeling for the sanctity of this spiritual environment which conveyed a li ving quality instead of the reliquary of a de ad saint. As we passed by a pool within the enclosure, a num ber of ascetics were seen seated on the terraces above the water, and one or two of them asked us for alm s. Baba, however, singled out a m an, clad in rags, who evidently was n ot privileged to be seated among the ascetics. He stayed most inconspicuously in a ra ther dark corner, yet one would have thought him a begga r; but, as we passed, he did not ask for m oney. Baba bestowed upon him a glance, such as we who are wit h the Master know so well its regenerating effect. When we cam e to the gateway on our way out, this lone m an was standing a little distance away and rapture was in his eyes as he gazed at Baba; it was a spiritual understanding which needed no words. Baba,

66 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

in gesture to one of the gate-keepers, inquired who this man was. And the reply came, "He is o nly a m endicant." But I could not but feel that Baba perceived the soul of this m an beneath his ragged exterior. Just as we were returning to the bus, the young attendant inqu ired of one of Baba's disciples who Baba was, as evidently he could feel that Baba was not like the many other visitors to the place. Although on this part of the trip, B aba's identity was not to be revealed to outsiders, the disciple was surprised to see th e Master nodding to him in a ssent; so it was told that he was Hazrat Meher Baba. Soon the reason for this departure from the otherwise strict injunction, came to light. This young m an was the son of a sain t who is acknowledged by m any, who lives a completely secluded life, and sees few. What was so extraordinary was that, due to Baba 's presence, all twenty of us w ere permitted to se e the saint in his cell-like chamber. He seldom eats o r sleeps, and his only garment was a blanket.

In the semi-darkness with light seeming to shine u pon his face, we could see his noble features with grey beard and eyes that appeared to gaze transcendentally on paradise. To me who had come from the West his counterpart had been only seen in the inspired Russian icons and Italian paintings of the Prophets of old. Why should one believe, however, that such great souls lived only in the centuries past?
The recollection came swiftly to my mind that Baba had foretold us, before starting, that we might meet a saint that day, but we had no idea when or where, and our driving around Delhi was rather extensive. Later Baba informed us th at this evolved soul was on the fifth plane of consciousness and did great spiritual work in c onnection with Baba's own. I could not help but f eel that the silent interchange that passed between the Master an d the saint as w e stood for a m oment in the secluded stone-chamber, was one of the underlying reasons w hy Baba passed through Delhi."

MEHER BABA JOURNAL
A MONTHLY PUBLICATION
Elizabeth C. Patterson, Managing Editor and Publisher
for the "Meher Editorial Committee " "Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India
MEHER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
C. V. Sampath Aiyangar, ( Late of Madras Judicial Service ) Dr. Abdul
Ghani Munsiff, Princess Norina Matchabelli, Adi K. Irani, Elizabeth C. Patterson, Estelle Gayley, F. H. Dadachanji, Abdul Kareem Abdulla.
Contributions of manuscripts will be welcomed, and it is requested that they should be typed. No m anuscript will be returned unless accompanied by a selfaddressed stamped envelope. All communications regarding sam e should be addressed to Princess Norina Matchabelli, Literary Manager, Meher Baba Journal, " Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
Enquiries concerning subscriptions and notice of change of address should he addressed to Estelle Gay ley, Secretary, Meher Baba Journal, "Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
Postal Money Orders and cheques shoul d be m ade payable t o Elizabeth C. Patterson, Treasurer, Meher Baba Journal, " Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
SUBSCRIPTION R A T E S Twelve months ( including Inland or Foreign postage ) India Rs. 3; England sh. 8; U. S. A. $ 2. ( Single copies ; 6 annas, or 1 shilling, or 25 cents. )
______________________________________________________________________________________________________ Printer:--R. B. Hiray, Mohan Printers. Near Cotton Market, Ahmednagar

MEHER BABA JOURNAL Vol 1 March 1939 No.5 Register of Editorial Alterations:

Page Col. Para. line Original text

Corrections

6

1 17 oversoul

Oversoul

6

1

2 Expansion

expansion

10 2 5 idealogy ideology

10

2nd inset 1

TEH

THE

20 2 1

3 coach

couch

21 1

25 erruption

eruption

22 1 1

5 family be

family should be

26 1 1

4 therfore

therefore

27 2 3

2 misson

mission

28 1 2

7 obvious

oblivious

34 2 1

4 helplese

helpless

34 1 1

7 failings.

failings?

36 2 4

1 (agelong)

(age-long)

39 2 10 bessing

blessing

42 1 1

8 exhilerated

exhilarated

44 1 2

11 live

life

44 1 1

3 excresences

excrescences

44 1 4

5 maya,

maya

46 1 1

3 heirarchy

hierarchy

46 1 1

18 anamoly

anomaly

49 1 2

5 malfactors

malefactors

52 2 2

13 aparently

apparently

53 1 1

2 source the orders source of the orders

54 1 1

3 ecstacy

ecstasy

56 2 2

3 heirarchy

hierarchy

61 1 2

2-3 Enroute

En route

61 2 1

6 saphire

sapphire

62 1 1

1 Agra for

Agra was for

63 1 4

2 principle

principal

63 2 1

1 1936

1936.

64 1 1

15-16 explain them

explain to them

